![](banner.gif)

### Graduate Courses in European History

  
_Fall Semester, 2001_

  

**HIEU 507 MODERN THEORY: MARX, ARENDT, FOUCAULT, SARTRE**

Mr. Allan Megill

In this course we shall examine four major "modern" theorists. These include
Hannah Arendt, Jean-Paul Sartre, and Michel Foucault. At this point I have not
yet decided whether the fourth thinker will be Martin Heidegger or Karl Marx,
although I am leaning to Marx. There is an interesting contrast between Marx
and the others, and one focus of the course will be on exploring that
contrast. Marx was still a believer in progress: Arendt, Sartre, and Foucault,
on the other hand, were "crisis thinkers," who could no longer rely on "the
firm basis of traditional values" (as Arendt put it in 1946). Our modus
operandi will be to combine a _very_ selective reading in the secondary
literature with readings of major works by each writer. Characteristically,
each week I shall begin by speaking for 20 minutes or so, in an attempt to
situate the reading for that week and to pose some interesting issues. We
shall then engage in discussion of the reading. Students should have some
background in political theory, intellectual history, philosophy, or
philosophically-oriented religious studies.

The syllabus for this offering of the course has not yet been set up, although
you can find the fall 2000 version in the syllabi section of my personal home
page, which is most easily found by searching "Allan Megill" in
www.altavista.com. There is not yet a definitive reading list, but works from
which we shall likely read include Marx, _Early Writings_ , Arendt, _Eichmann
in Jerusalem_ and _The Human Condition_ ; Foucault, _Essential Works_ , vol.
1; and Sartre, _Being and Nothingness_. Students who are interested in the
class might consider approaching me before August (megill@virginia.edu); their
conversations with me might well have some effect on the syllabus, which I
expect to revise in early August. As an interim measure, I recommend four very
interesting biographies: Elisabeth Young-Bruehl, _Hannah Arendt: For Love of
the World_ ; Francis Wheen, _Karl Marx_ ; Annie Cohen-Solal, _Sartre: A Life_
; and David Macey, _The Lives of Michel Foucault_. (Should you be interested
in Heidegger, try Rudiger Safranski's _Martin Heidegger: Between Good and
Evil_.) Note also that there exists a _Cambridge Companion to..._ for Marx,
Sartre, and Foucault (and Heidegger). These volumes give some entry to
philosophical discussion of the writers in question.

The course is intended to provide an opportunity for graduate students and
advanced undergraduates to explore one or another of these thinkers in depth.
Characteristically, the class is taken by students who would like to write a
fairly substantial paper on one of the four thinkers, or on some theme that
was important for one or more of them. Students write a 20-25 page paper; they
are also expected to do the reading, to contribute to discussion, to write up
class minutes on occasion, and to offer reports on their reading on occasion.

  

**HIEU 519 WAR AND SOCIETY IN THE MIDDLE AGES**

Mr. Everett U. Crosby

  
War was endemic in medieval Europe. It drew participants from every social
group, and it affected every part of the population from the princely court to
the peasant village. It is a subject rich in source materials and topics for
study, and which has important implications for the modern world. The basis of
this course is a documentary history of warfare mainly from the eleventh
century to the sixteenth which will be organized to illustrate such key
elements as arms and armor, fortifications, sieges and battles, recruitment
and service, finance and supply, booty and ransom, strategy and tactics, the
laws of war, and the representation of military scenes in medieval
manuscripts.

There will be required one term paper and a final examination.

This course is open to undergraduates, as well as to graduate students. There
are no requisites, although some exposure to European history in general, and
to medieval history in particular, would be useful.

  

**HIEU 522 MERRY OLDE ENGLAND? ENGLISH SOCIAL** **HISTORY, 1500-1800**

Mr. Paul Halliday



This course provides a survey of the major themes in English social history.
Overall, we will want to understand common people's everyday lives. What kinds
of work did they do? Who prospered and why; who didn't? We will look at
agriculture, rural community structures, demography, urban life, religious,
political, and legal practices, popular culture, and relations between men and
women. We will conclude the course by looking at how the various social
structures and cultural norms we have studied were or were not affected by the
two greatest upheavals of the age: the Protestant Reformation of the 16th
century and the civil wars and revolutions of the 17th. We will thus take what
we have learned from our structural analysis of English society and use it to
explore the meaning of such cataclysms in the lives of ordinary people and
communities.

Undergraduate student requirements: Each student will write three essays
(4-5pp each) analyzing readings and sources. There will also be a take-home
final (10-15pp). Readings will cover approximately 200-250 pages per week.

Graduate student requirements: See Mr. Halliday.

Assigned books may include:

Ann Kussmaul, _A General View of the Rural Economy of England, 1538-1840_

Ronald Hutton, _The Rise and Fall of Merry England: The Ritual Year,
1400-1700_

Keith Wrightson, _English Society, 1580-1680_

Keith Wrightson and David Levine, _Poverty and Piety in an English Village:
Terling, 1525-1700_

Richard Gough, _The History of Myddl_ e

Tim Harris, ed., _Popular Culture in England, 1500-1850_

  

**HIEU 530 NATIONALITY, ETHNICITY, AND RACE IN MODERN EUROPE**

Mr. Robert Geraci

  

In this seminar we will explore how Europeans have conceived, reified,
managed, and experienced categories of human identity from 1789 to the
present. Insofar as we will be viewing these categories as originally
"imagined" or "constructed" we will examine the various materials that have
been used to define them and to bring them to life, including not only
politics but also the sciences and culture. In turn, we will also be concerned
with the substantial power wielded by these categories in modern Europe \-- in
the internal affairs of particular European societies, in relations and
rivalries among them, and in the management of multi-ethnic empires that
extended beyond Europe.

Though we will focus primarily on England, France, Germany, and Russia, we
will also include readings on other countries of Europe when possible. We will
attempt to establish patterns of difference and commonality across Europe in
the position and treatment of indigenous ethnic and confessional minorities
and of groups of non-European origin (as colonial subjects, immigrants, or
domestic minorities). We will address the latest historical scholarship and
conclude the seminar with material on the present-day and the effects of the
European Union. The syllabus will include several of the following: Benedict
Anderson, Imagined Communities; Liah Greenfeld, Nationalism; Ivan Hannaford,
Race: The History of an Idea in the West; George Stocking, Jr., Victorian
Anthropology; Edward Said, Orientalism; Rogers Brubaker, Citizenship and
Nationhood in France and Germany; Robert Proctor, Racial Hygiene: Medicine
under the Nazis; Kathleen Paul, Whitewashing Britain; Branimir Anzulovic,
Heavenly Serbia: From Myth to Genocide; and Alice Conklin, Mission to
Civilize: The Republican Idea of Empire in France and West Africa.

Upperclass undergraduates as well as graduate students in history, the
humanities, and the social sciences are encouraged to enroll. A basic
knowledge of European history is desirable but not required. Each student will
be required to submit several one- to two-page papers summarizing readings,
and to produce a historiographical essay of 15-20 pages.

  
  

**HIEU 572 GERMAN HISTORY 1500-2000**

Mr. H. C. Erik Midelfort

Mr. Alon Confino

Although there was no "Germany" in the political sense before the nineteenth
century, Germany has a long history. In this experimental course, two
professors undertake to bridge what is becoming an unacceptable gap between
the early modern history of "the Germanies" and the modern history of Germany.
This course will suggest connections, continuities, and ruptures across 500
years by means of selected topics. Some of the topics are: war, death,
politics, purification of the body politic (witchcraft and the Holocaust),
madness and  sexuality, memory, religion, everyday life, and others. Many of
the topics will be presented by means of two books, one A treatment of the
early modern, the other an examination of the late modern topic. The class
will proceed mainly by discussion, and graduate students should be able to use
it for colloquium credit. Written assignments will concentrate on the assigned
and collateral reading, so that no research paper is contemplated. Our
ultimate purpose is to call into question some of the established modes of
historical thinking about the past.

  
  

**HIEU 702 COLLOQUIUM ON EARLY MODERN EUROPE**

Ms. Anne J. Schutte

This course offers a rigorous and reasonably comprehensive examination of
important topics in the history of early modern Europe, circa 1350 to 1750.
Each week we will read and discuss a book in English by a modern scholar. Our
discussions will be shaped at least in part by e-mail messages from all
members of the class sent in advance of our meetings. Each student will write
five reviews (about 1,000 words each) of books not on the common reading list
and send them to other members of the group.

No later than 4 May 2001, you will find the definitive syllabus posted on my
office door (Randall 110).

  
  

**HIEU 750 READINGS ON MODERN FRANCE**

Mr. Lenard R. Berlanstein

This course will cover, as comprehensively as we can, the recent
historiography of France since the late eighteenth century. Gender, collective
memory, national identity, state development, colony-metropole inter-face, and
visual culture are some of the themes that drive the recent literature.

In the typical class, we will cover a common reading, and then students will
report on related chapters and articles they read individually.

This class is designed for students preparing for a Modern Europe field and
for those who want to gain insight into new directions in cultural history.

  
  

**HIEU 802 INTERMEDIATE RESEARCH SEMINAR**

Mr. Jon E. Lendon

This course is designed especially for second-year students in European
history, who need guidance, discipline, and time in which to finish their
Masters' Theses. The class meets regularly to discuss research strategies, to
master electronic search engines, to hone writing skills, and to learn the
useful art of mutual criticism. The successful student will finish the thesis
by the end of this semester.

Return to Graduate Course Listings

