
    ![
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
    HHHHHHHHHHH HH H EEEE TTTTT     Humanities
    HHHHHH    H  H H E      T       OnLine
    HHHHHH    H H  H EEE    T       Web Site
    HHHHHH    H HH H E      T       
    HHHHHH    H HH H EEEE   T       H-OIEAHC](/graphics/Logo.H-NetBare.GIF)

## American Colonial History

    
    
                                   DICKINSON COLLEGE                                
                                 Department of History                              
                                                                                    
    History 247                                           Prof. Daniel K. Richter   
    American Colonial History                             Denny 122, x1206          
    MWF, 10:00 a.m.                                       VAX e-mail: "RICHTER_D"   
    Fall 1993                                             Office Hrs.: MW 4:15-5:15 
                                                            and by appointment      
                                                                                    
                                  Course Description                                
    

History 247 explores North American history from the earliest contacts between
Europeans and natives to 1763, the eve of the American Revolution. Particular
attention is devoted to the interaction of Indian, European, and African
peoples and cultures, to the rise of the British to a position of dominance,
to the internal development of the Anglo-American colonies, and to the
everyday lives of colonial Americans. Our goal is to understand the colonial
period on its own terms, rather than as a mere prelude to "real" American
history.

Format

Ordinarily, Mondays and Wednesdays will be devoted primarily to lectures and
Fridays primarily to informal discussions. Apart from possible minor
variations announced in advance, the schedule outlined below will be followed
rigorously. You are responsible for completing assignments as listed.

Requirements and Grading Criteria

A mid-term exam on October 18 determines approximately 25% of your semester
grade; a comprehensive final accounts for about 30%. Exams will include some
"objective" items but consist mainly of broad essay questions that will give
you an opportunity to pull together material from the lectures, readings, and
discussions in an attempt to make some sense of North American colonial
history.

You will write two 5-7 page reaction papers, worth about 15% each, on
specified assigned readings. You may choose from several options for due dates
and subjects for these assignments (see the attached schedule); if you write
three papers, the lowest grade will be dropped. Papers must be typed or word-
processed, double-spaced. Careful attention to scholarly standards of
quotation and citation and to basic rules of grammar, spelling, and
proofreading is essential. More specific instructions for these papers will be
distributed early in the semester.

Participation in discussion determines the remaining 15% of your grade.
Quality, not quantity, is the key factor in evaluation of your participation,
and quality is difficult to achieve without regular attendance and active
involvement. Active involvement requires proper preparation: you are expected
to complete readings on time, to develop your own questions and comments prior
to class, and to be ready to share your observations with your classmates.

Late Work

Except in cases of extreme hardship and by prior arrangement, extensions will
not be granted for exams or paper assignments. Athletic contests, social
events, Greek functions, work for other classes, travel plans, and romantic
interludes do not constitute cases of extreme hardship. For late papers,
penalties are assessed cumulatively as follows: same day, after class time:
one-third letter grade; next day: one-third letter grade; each day thereafter:
two-thirds letter grade. Penalties cease when the score reaches 50 points;
thus it is always in your best interest to turn in an assignment, no matter
how late.

Readings

The following are available in the College Store and are on reserve in Spahr
Library. In these days of obscene book prices, students are particularly
encouraged to use the latter resource.

    
    
          Gary B. Nash, Red, White, and Black:  The Peoples of Early North          
                America, 3d ed. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 1991 [1974]).              
                      (Earlier editions may be on library reserve; for specific     
                      assignments, see the notes attached to the volumes.)          
          Readings in North American Colonial History (a collection of photocopies  
                of book chapters and journal articles).                             
          Karen Ordahl Kupperman, Roanoke:  The Abandoned Colony (Totowa,           
                N.J., 1984).                                                        
          Virginia DeJohn Anderson, New England's Generation:  The Great Migration  
                and the Formation of Society and Culture in the Seventeenth Century 
                (Cambridge, 1991).                                                  
          T.H. Breen and Stephen Innes, "Myne Owne Ground":  Race and Freedom on    
                Virginia's Eastern Shore, 1640-1676 (New York, 1980).               
          Robert C. Ritchie, Captain Kidd and the War against the Pirates           
                (Cambridge, Mass., 1986).                                           
          Sally Schwartz, "A Mixed Multitude":  The Struggle for Toleration in      
                Colonial Pennsylvania (New York, 1988).                             
    

The specific assignments listed in the attached schedule are of two types.
Readings for discussion will be the focus of an entire class meeting; you
should be prepared to participate actively in an informal conversation about
the material. Background readings, while the subject of less intense in-class
discussion, will be important for understanding the lectures and quite
relevant at exam time.

**SCHEDULE OF LECTURE TOPICS AND READING ASSIGNMENTS**

W. September 1: Introduction: Whose Colonial History?

I. THE INVASION OF AMERICA, c.1492-c.1630

F. September 3: North America, B.C.

Background reading: Nash, Red, White, and Black, Intro., Ch.1

M. September 6: The Native Peoples of 16th-Century North America W. September
8: The Native Peoples of Europe Seek "New Worlds" F. September 10: Spaniards
and Indians in North America

    
    
                      Reading for discussion: David J. Weber, The Spanish Frontier  
                            in North America (1992), pp. 14-106, 122-133, in        
                            Readings collection                                     
    

M. September 13: The Native Peoples of 16th-Century Britain

Background reading: Nash, Ch. 2 W. September 15: England Follows the Spanish
Leader F. September 17: The Roanoke Colony Fiasco

    
    
                      Reading for discussion:  Kupperman, Roanoke, entire           
                      PAPER OPPORTUNITY 1 (due at class time)                       
    

M. September 20: The English Try Virginia Again

Background reading: Nash, Ch. 3 W. September 22: English and Indians at
Jamestown F. September 24: Life and Death in the Jamestown Swamps

    
    
                      Readings for discussion: Edmund S. Morgan, "The Labor Problem 
                            at Jamestown, 1607-1618" (1971); Carville Earle,        
                            "Environment, Disease, and Mortality in Early Virginia" 
                            (1979); T.H. Breen, "Looking out for Number One"        
                            (1979), all in Readings collection                      
    

M. September 27: Swarms of English, Dutch, Swedes, and Finns

Background reading: Nash, pp. 87-95, 104-111 W. September 29: France Enters
the Fray

    
    
    F. October 1:     The Europeans' Contest for Indian Hearts and Minds            
                      Reading for discussion: James Axtell, "The Invasion Within:   
                            The Contest of Cultures in Colonial North America"      
                            (1981), in Readings collection                          
    

**II. NORTH AMERICA IN TURMOIL, 1630-1713**

    
    
    M. October 4:     Indians and Europeans in the Northeast                        
                      Background reading:  Nash, Ch. 4, pp. 239-250                 
    W. October 6:     The English Puritans in This World and the Next               
    F. October 8:     The Puritans:  From Old England to New England                
                      Reading for discussion:  Anderson, New England's Generation,  
                            entire;                                                 
                      PAPER OPPORTUNITY 2 (due at class time)                       
    

M. October 11: Transatlantic Turbulence for the Puritans

Background reading: Nash, pp. 117-128 W. October 13: The Reinvention of
Virginia F. October 15: Race and Society in Late-17th-Century Virginia

Reading for discussion: Breen and Innes, "Myne Own," entire

M. October 18: MID-TERM EXAM W. October 20: The Proliferation of English
Colonies

Background reading: Nash, pp. 95-104, 128-143 F. October 22: MID-TERM PAUSE

M. October 25: Struggles for Control of the Continent

Background reading: Nash, pp. 226-238 W. October 27: War, Trade, Politics, and
a New British Empire F. October 29: Imperialism at Sea: No More the Pirate
Life for Me

    
    
                      Reading for discussion:  Ritchie, Captain Kidd, entire        
                      PAPER OPPORTUNITY 3 (due at class time)                       
    

**III. ANGLO-AMERICA IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY, 1713-1763**

M. November 1: Growth and Diversity in the 18th Century

Background reading: Nash, Ch. 9 W. November 3: The Efflorescence of British
Provincial Culture F. November 5: Change and Continuity in Provincial Women's
Lives

    
    
                      Readings for discussion:  Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, Good Wives  
                            (1980), pp. 11-50, 68-86; and Daniel Blake Smith,       
                            Inside the Great House (1980), pp. 25-81, both in       
                            Readings collection.                                    
    

M. November 8: Changing Patterns of European Emigration W. November 10: Free
and Unfree White Labor in the 18th Century F. November 12: Pluralism and
Community in the Pa. Melting Pot

    
    
                      Reading for discussion:  Schwartz, "Mixed Multitude,"         
                            pp. vii-204, 292-302 (remainder optional).              
                      PAPER OPPORTUNITY 4 (due at class time)                       
    

M. November 15: Patterns of 18th-Century Anglo-American Rural Life W. November
17: The Great Awakening of Religion F. November 19: FIELD TRIP TO EPHRATA
CLOISTER, Details T.B.A.

M. November 22: Patterns of 18th-Century Afro-American Life

Background reading: Nash, Chs. 7-8

W. November 24: THANKSGIVING F. November 26: VACATION

M. November 29: The Struggle for Control of the Continent Resumes

Background reading: Nash, pp. 251-269 W. December 1: The Seven Years War and
the Triumph of the British F. December 3: The Seven Years War and Anglo-
American Society

    
    
                      Reading for discussion: Nash, pp. 269-277; Alan Tully,        
                            "Politics and Peace Testimony in Mid-Eighteenth-Century 
                            Pennsylvania" (1982), in Readings collection; Fred      
                            Anderson, "Why Did Colonial New Englanders Make Bad     
                            Soldiers?" (1981), in Readings collection               
    

M. December 6: Wealth and Poverty in the Late Colonial Era W. December 8:
Recurrent Themes in American Colonial History F. December 10: Legacies of
Colonial America

Reading for discussion: Nash, Ch. 12

F. December 17: FINAL EXAM, 9:00 a.m.

Information provider:  
Unit: H-Net program at UIC History Department Email: H-Net@uicvm.uic.edu  
Posted: 12 Jul 1994

* * *

  
![H-Net Humanities & Social Sciences OnLine](/footers/graphics/logosmall.gif)  
Contact Us  
Copyright  (C) 1995-2002, H-Net, Humanities & Social Sciences OnLine  
Click Here for an Internet Citation Guide.  
---

