## Civil Rights and Liberties  
POLS 254 --Spring 2001  
Dr. Evan McKenzie

* * *

### General Information

_Call number:_ 15025_  
 _Room:_ BSB 381  
 _Time:_ 10:00-10:50am MWF  
 _Instructor:_ Evan McKenzie  
 _Contact Information:_ I am located in BSB 1122-D. My officer hours are MW
12-1 and by appointment. My office direct line is 312-413-3782. My internet
address is mckenzie@uic.edu

* * *

### Required Readings

These materials have been ordered through the UIC Bookstore:

  * David O'Brien, _Constitutional Law and Politics, Volume Two: Civil Rights and Civil Liberties_ (New York: Norton, 2000) 
  * Peter Irons, _The Courage of Their Convictions_ (New York: Penguin, 1990) 

* * *

### Course Description

In this course we read the major opinions of the United States Supreme Court
that determine the contours of the relationship between the individual and the
state. These opinions are interpretations of the United States Constitution.
The Bill of Rights (the first ten amendments to the Constitution) is the focus
of most of these opinions, and you will see that the First Amendment receives
more attention than any other. The Fourteenth Amendment also has special
significance for this course. The course begins with about two weeks of
historical and social scientific background aimed at helping you understand
the nature of the USSC as a political institution. We will discuss what a
constitution is, how ours came to be adopted as the outcome of political
struggles, and how the role of the judiciary came to be defined within our
constitutional system. We will also consider alternative versions of the
proper judicial role in constitutional interpretation. For example, you may
have heard the term "strict constructionism." This is one view of the way
judges should interpret a constitution. We will evaluate that approach and a
number of others. We will also look at the way constitutional doctrines have
evolved and sometimes changed radically over time and in the eyes of different
judges.

We will spend a good deal of time reading and talking about freedom of speech
and of the press, the freedom to associate with others, religious freedoms and
the prohibition on state establishment of religion. We will also talk about
property rights. In all these areas, questions arise concerning when and how
government can intervene by legislation or other action in areas of our lives
to which the constitution has given special protection. Judges, and
particularly those on the USSC, are given enormous power to make decisions
about where to draw the limits on government power. We will be learning a good
deal about how they have done that, and critically evaluating their
performance as well.

The reading load in this course is substantial. You cannot to do well in the
course if you do not read the cases and come to class prepared. Most students
who take this course are at least considering law school as an option. If so,
all the more reason to work hard. I will take roll, and attendance is part of
your participation grade. But attendance is even more significant, because you
cannot hope to understand the course material unless you come to class
prepared, hear me explain the cases and doctrines, and participate in class
discussions.

I would advise you to brief the cases you read, but I won't require it. You
can show me a sample of your briefs any time. Appendix B of the O'Brien book
(p. 1545) tells you how to do it, and I'll discuss it in class as well. Please
keep in mind that you are always welcome to visit my office during office
hours, by appointment, or if you just happen to stop by and see me there. I
won't always be available for impromptu visits, but we can at least set up a
time to talk. I believe talking with students one-on-one is critical to the
educational process. Don't be discouraged by the size of this university and
the abysmal environment of BSB. I am here to help you learn, graduate, and
succeed in whatever you choose to do, so please take advantage of what I can
offer you.

* * *

### Course Requirements

  * Midterm examination: 30%. This will be an essay exam using a combination of two sorts of questions. Some will ask you to explain doctrines in their political and historical context. Others will be hypothetical questions (i.e., cases that I make up) that ask you to apply what you have learned about doctrines to specific situations. We wil speak more about how much time you will have, the number of questions, etc. 
  * Final examination: 30%. Same format as midterm. 
  * Paper on Peter Irons book: 20%. We will speak more about this later, but we will read and discuss this book after the midterm and everybody will write a paper on it. 
  * Participation: 20%. I will take roll at the start of every class session, so be on time. I will grade you on attendance as well as the quantity and quality of your participation in class discussions. 

* * *

### Schedule of Readings and Assignments

Each week is identified by the Monday of that week. Please note that all
reading assignments listed here, which are from the O'Brien book, are to be
completed _before_ the first class meeting of the week indicated. Sometimes we
may get behind, but the reading schedule always remains the same unless I
specifically state otherwise (and I won't).

_WEEK:_

  1. January 8: The Supreme Court, judicial review, and constitutional politics. Read Preface, US Constitution, and Chapter 1. 
  2. January 15: (Monday 1/15 is a holiday.) Law and politics in the Supreme Court: jurisdiction and decision making processes. Read ch. 2. 
  3. January 22: Economic rights and American capitalism. Read ch. 3 
  4. January 29: Nationalization of the Bill of Rights. Read ch. 4 pp. 299-348 
  5. February 5: Nationalization, cont. Read ch. 4 to end 
  6. February 12: Freedom of expression and association. Judicial approaches to the first amendment; obscenity and pornography. Read ch. 5, parts A and B 
  7. February 19: Freedom of expression and association, cont. Libel, commercial speech, and freedom of the press. Read ch. 5, parts C, D, and E 
  8. February 26: Freedom of expression and association, cont. Regulating the broadcast media, fair trial/free speech controversies, and symbolic speech/"speech plus." Read ch. 5, parts F, G, H, and I. 
  9. March 5: **Midterm examination on Monday, March 5**. Begin Freedom of religion--the establishment clause. Read ch. 5 pp. 655-759 
  10. March 12: Spring Break. No classes. 
  11. March 19: Freedom of religion, cont. Free exercise clause. Read ch. 5 pp. 759 to end. 
  12. March 26: Search and seizure. Read ch. 7 
  13. April 2: Self incrimination. Read ch. 8. 
  14. April 9: The right to counsel and other procedural guarantees. Read ch. 9. 
  15. April 16: Cruel and unusual punishment. Read ch. 10. Irons paper due Friday, April 23. 
  16. April 23: Privacy. Read ch. 11. 
  17. April 30: Finals Week. Our final examination will be on Wednesday from 8:00 to 10:00am in BSB 381.

* * *

### Miscellaneous

Probably it is unnecessary to say this, but just in case...many of the issues
we will be discussing are controversial, and civil potical discussion is in
short supply these days. We need to have some clear ground rules for
discussion in order to avoid succumbing to "Jerry Springer Syndrome." Here
they are: I guarantee that you can express any opinion you like on the subject
matter of this course without fearing that it will adversely affect your
grade. I will not hold the _content_ of your views against you in any way. In
fact, I think controversy is good for class discussion in general,
particularly a course like this. There is no "correct" answer or "right" way
to think about these issues, and the whole subject matter is ripe for
interpretation and disagreement. I don't care if you are a liberal,
conservative, anarchist, or whatever. But as to the _manner_ of expression,
the story is different. We are all going to exercise our civil liberties in a
respectful and intelligent way. We are all going to listen to others express
their views, even when we are convinced that they must have been recently
deposited on this planet by an alien spacecraft. Simply put, you are free as
to the content of your views, but you are restricted in the manner of your
expression of those views as I deem necessary to maintain a civil and orderly
classroom. OK? Also, please do not allow your pagers or cell phones to ring,
eat your lunch, sacrifice small animals, or otherwise distract or horrify your
classmates.

* * *

### Internet Links

There are many fantastic web sites available to help you study any aspect of
the law. See the O'Brien book, Appendix A, p 1537, for a list of some of the
main ones. Or, if you go to the POLS department home page, using the link
below, and then click the "Internet Resources" button at the top of the page,
you will go to a page that contains many link to legal sources. But for now,
try the Legal Information Institute at Cornell University. You can also go to
the web site of the United States Supreme Court itself and read opinions.

I will post other links on this web page from time to time.

Back to UIC Political Science Home Page

Back to Evan McKenzie's Home Page

