**_Advanced Placement Summer Institute Descriptions_**

* * *

PD APFA 690 | **AP Teacher: Art Studio** | Syllabus  
---|---|---  
  
An institute designed to prepare high school teachers to develop a curriculum
that will prepare their students to take the Advanced Placement Language and
composition examination and to discuss and develop effective pedagogical
techniques that address the different aspects of Studio Art. Instructional
goals are to encourage creative as well as systematic investigation of formal
and conceptual issues; emphasize making art as an ongoing process that
involves the student in formed and critical decision-making; and develop
technical skills and familiarize students with the functions of the visual
elements. This institute requires participants to develop an AP curriculum
individualized for his/her school teaching situation.  
  
* * *  
  
PD APSC 690 | **AP Teacher: Biology** | Syllabus  
  
An institute designed to prepare high school biology teachers to teach AP
Biology n their high schools. The institute will focus on the review and
reinforcement of basic concepts and principles in the field of biology,
including biological chemistry, cells, energy flow, molecular genetics,
heredity, evolution, ecology, taxonomy, and biological diversity, especially
in the plant and animal kingdoms. This institute requires participants to
develop an AP curriculum individualized for his/her school teaching situation.  
  
* * *  
  
PD APMT 690 | **AP Teacher: Calculus AB** | Syllabus  
  
An institute designed to prepare high school mathematics teachers to teach AP
Calculus courses in their highs schools, to review and reinforce calculus
methods, to help the teachers to understand and to teach the non-routine and
abstract problems of calculus, and to integrate graphing calculators in the
teaching of calculus. This institute requires participants to develop an AP
curriculum individualized for his/her school teaching situation.  
  
* * *  
  
PD APSC 690 | **AP Teacher: Chemistry** | Syllabus  
  
An institute designed to prepare high school teachers to develop a curriculum
that will prepare their students to take the Advanced Placement Language and
Composition examination and to discuss and develop effective pedagogical
techniques for teaching various types of prose passages, and to practice
evaluation of student writing. This institute requires participants to develop
an AP curriculum individualized for his/her school teaching situation.  
  
* * *  
  
PD APLL 690 | **AP Teacher: English Language & Comp** | Syllabus  
  
An institute designed to prepare high school teachers to develop a curriculum
that will prepare their students to take the Advanced Placement Language and
Composition examination and to discuss and develop effective pedagogical
techniques for teaching various types of prose passages, and to practice
evaluation of student writing. This institute requires participants to develop
an AP curriculum individualized for his/her school teaching situation.  
  
* * *  
  
PD APLL 690 | **AP Teacher: English Literature & Comp** | Syllabus  
  
An institute designed to prepare high school teachers to develop a curriculum
that will prepare their students to take the Advanced Placement Literature and
Composition examination and to discuss and develop effectively pedagogical
techniques for teaching poetry, fiction, and drama, and to practice evaluation
of student writing. This institute requires participants to develop an AP
curriculum individualized for his/her school teaching situation.  
  
* * *  
  
PD APLL 690 | **AP Teacher: Foreign Language** | Syllabus  
  
An institute designed to prepare high school teachers of French, German, and
Spanish I implementing a curriculum that will prepare their students for the
Advanced Placement French, German, Latin or Spanish examinations and to
discuss and develop pedagogical methods and techniques for teaching specific
skills. This institute requires participants to develop an AP curriculum
individualized for his/her school teaching situation.  
  
* * *  
  
PD APSS 690 | **AP Teacher: U.S. History** | Syllabus  
  
An institute designed to prepare high school United States History teachers to
teach AP United States History in their high schools and to provide students
with (a) the analytical skills and factual knowledge necessary to deal
critically with the problems and materials in United State History. The
institute will also focus on helping students develop the skills necessary to
arrive at conclusions on the basis of an informed judgment, and the skills to
present and reasons and evidence clearly and persuasively in essay format.
This institute requires participants to develop an AP curriculum
individualized for his/her school teaching situation.  
  
* * *  
  
PD APSC 690 | **AP Teacher: Physics B** | Syllabus  
  
An institute designed to prepare high school physics teachers to teach AP
Physics in their high schools and to review and reinforce the basic concepts
and principles of physics, including mechanics, heat, kinetic theory,
thermodynamics, electricity, magnetism, waves, geometric optics and modern
physics. Laboratories and student projects will be emphasized. This institute
requires participants to develop an AP curriculum individualized for his/her
school teaching situation.  
  
* * *  
  
PD APSS 690 | **AP Teacher: Psychology** | Syllabus  
  
An institute designed to prepare high school psychology teachers to teach AP
Psychology in their high schools. This institute will teach teachers how to
introduce students to the discipline of psychology by emphasizing the history
of psychology as a science, the different theoretical approaches that underlie
explanations of behavior, and the contemporary research methods used the
psychologists. This institute requires participants to develop an AP
curriculum individualized for his/her school teaching situation.  
  
* * *

Direct questions and comments to profdev@truman.edu.

Copyright (C) 1999 by Truman State University, Kirksville, Missouri. All
Rights Reserved.

