###  SYLLABUS--HIST 1011/RELGST 1010

###  RELIGION AND THE EVOLUTION OF AMERICAN SOCIETY, 1492-1850

####  Monday and Wednesday, 1-2:20 Krebs 124

  WARNING!  
This syllabus is currently under revision for the Autumn 2001 term.  
Check back later for the official syllabus.  
You'll know it's official when the warning label has been removed.  
---  
  
    


###  Instructor

Paul Douglas Newman H. 535-3176 Krebs 123 O. 269-2987 Office Hours: Tues and
Thurs 11-12 and by appointment

  

###  Aims of History 1011/Relgst 1010

In spite of its cross-listing as a Religious Studies course, this will be a
history class. We will explore the effects of religion, in all of its cultural
and denominational guises, on the development and evolution of an American
people. We will examine Religion and spiritual beliefs as agents of social
change, and as such, we will be less concerned about the significance of a
religion's peculiarities to its practitioners than its broader implications
for the society in which it operates. Therefore, we will discuss theology and
belief systems only in the broadest of contexts. We will use the lens of
religion to investigate the contact of native and western cultures, western
schemes for American development, transatlantic migration, social development,
American political autonomy, defending and attacking slavery, living with and
dispossessing Native Americans, the legacy of religious pluralism and
religious liberty in America, and many other topics. Finally, I have been
using the first person plural throughout this paragraph because I do not
intend to stand before you and pontificate my own ideas for three hours a
week. You will form your own opinions by reading books, articles, and primary
resources and we will meet three times a week to discuss our informed opinions
and attempt to reach consensus when possible or at least a clearer
understanding of the problem at hand. The reading load for this seminar is
extremely heavy. You will be required to read approximately 100 pages per week
from the book and the packet of articles assigned for this class, on top of
outside reading for other assignments. There is also a substantial writing
requirement for this class. This class is not for the faint of heart. If you
doubt in any way your ability to handle this workload over a fourteen week
semester please inform me of your decision to withdraw as soon as possible--
there are several people who would like to add this class. And to those of you
who have decided to stay, "Welcome!" You will work hard this semester, trust
me, and at times you may find yourself resenting me, believe me, but when it
is all said and done you will leave this class a better student, have faith in
me.  
    


###  The Course

####  Required Reading

Jon Butler, Awash in a Sea of Faith: Christianizing the American People
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1990). Paul Douglas Newman, ed.,
"Religion and the Evolution of American Society,"packet on sale at UPJ
bookstore.  
    


####  Attendance

You should attend all classes, however, I am not going to baby you with an
attendance policy. None of you are freshman so I do not feel the need to hold
your hands. I will call the roll each class an keep a record for myself but
this will not be used either against you or in your favor--it will just help
me to better understand your performance at term's end.  
    


####  Reading

As mentioned above, there will be an extremely heavy reading load in this
course, and each class will serve as a discussion that will revolve around
that reading. Therefore, you must read the assignments in order for this class
to work. If you fail to complete a reading assignment there is little reason
for you to come to that class.  
    


####  Grading

Grading for this class will be based on a point system: a 500 point scale.
900-999=A, 800-899=B, 700-799=C, 600-699=D, 000-599=F  
    


####  Quizzes

There will be periodic, unannounced quizzes on the reading assignments--some
open book and some not. They will account for 100 points (20%).  
    


####  Class Participation

You will be expected to participate in every class discussion. Participation
will account for 100 points (20%).  
    


####  Analytical Essays

1\. You will be responsible for one analytical essay in which you will analyze
the various historical arguments made in one weeks' readings (I will
distribute a hand-out on the particulars separately). Two people will be
assigned to each week. Their essays will be due on the Monday following "their
week." They will be expected to be particularly knowledgeable in discussion
during "their week." Those essays will account for 50 points (10%). I will
then mark the exam and offer instructions for revision and turn the paper back
to you. You then have one week to make the instructed revisions and return the
revision to me for 25 points (5%)

 2\. The second assignment will be just another analytical essay with an
outside book thrown in for good measure. We will again assign two people per
week and they will choose an appropriate book to read in conjunction with the
scheduled readings and to include in their essay. The book should be read by
the beginning of "their week" and they should be prepared to give a brief oral
report to the class at some point during that week. The paper will again be
due on the Monday following "their week," and it will account for 50 points
(10%). I will then mark the exam and offer instructions for revision and turn
the paper back to you. You then have one week to make the instructed revisions
and return the revision to me for 25 points (5%). The oral report will
comprise 50 points (10%).

 All written assignments--analytical essays and term papers--will be graded on
the "Total Package," that is grammar, organization, style and composition in
addition to content.  
    


####  Final Exam

On Tuesday, April 21, 1997, we will have a final exam from 12:30-2:30 in Krebs
124. The final will consist of an in-class essay for which you will be allowed
to use your notes from the various readings you have completed over the course
of the semester. Those notes MUST be taken on 5x8 inched ruled index cards and
nothing else. One card per chapter from Butler and one card for each article
in the packet will be allowed. One week before the final I will distribute a
list possible questions for the final exam, from which I will choose one or
two to be answered for the exam. The final will account for 100 points (20%).  
    


####  Disabilities

Students with disabilities who require special testing accommodations or other
classroom modifications should notify the Director of Disability Resources and
Services (Diane Van Blerkom) no later than the fourth week of the term.
Documentation of a disability may be needed to determine the appropriate
accommodations or classroom modifications. To schedule an appointment, call
extension 7107 or come to the Learning Resource Center, 133 Biddle Hall.

###  Course Outline

January 5--Introduction and other pleasantries

 Topic One--"Western Origins."  
Jan 7: Lecture. Read: Butler, 1-36

 Jan 12: Lecture, discuss Butler 1-36

 Jan 14: Packet--Morgan, "Dreams of Liberation  
Topic Two--"Natives and Newcomers: Early Contact and Conversion."

 Jan 21: Packet--John, Bowden

 Jan 26: Packet--Morgan, "Idle Indian..." and "Jamestown Fiasco," and Richter

 Jan 28: Packet: Morrison, Ronda

 Feb 2: MOVIE "Black Robe" viewed in AV lab, Blackington Hall--will run until
5:30pm

 Feb 4: Discussion of "Black Robe"  
Topic Three--"Puritan Migrants and Motives"

 Feb 9: Packet--Miller, Walzer

 Feb 11: Breen, "Persistent Localism," Anderson  
Topic Four--"Puritan Settlement versus Virginia Settlement"

 Feb 16: Packet--Lockridge, "Policies of Perfection," "Heart of Perfection"

 Feb 18: Packet--Butler Chapter 2, Breen "Looking Out for Number One"  
Topic Five--"Social Development in Puritan New England, the First Hundred
Years."

 Feb 23: Packet--Greven, Mintz & Kellogg

 Feb 25: Packet--Ulrich, Dayton  
Topic Six--"Declension and Witchcraft."

 March 9: Butler Chapter 3, Packet--Demos, "Role of Witchcraft..."

 March 11: Packet--Karlsen, Demos, "Poor and Powerless..."  
Topic Seven--"Middle Colony Pluralism"

 March 16: Butler Chapter 4, Packet--Lodge

 March 18: Packet--Newman, Levy  
Week Eight--"The Great Awakening."

 March 23: Butler Chapter 6, Packet--Stout

 March 25: Packet--Merrit, Isaac  
Week Nine--"Religion and Revolutionary America."

 March 30: Butler 7, Packet--McGloughlin

 April 1: Packet--Isaac, Curry, Loof  
Week Ten--"Slaves, Slavery, Free Blacks and Religion."

 April 6: Butler Chapter 6, Packet--Joyner

 April 8: Butler 247-252, Packet--Blassingame, Berlin  
Week Eleven--"The Second Great Awakening and the Antebellum Reform Movement."

 April 13: Butler Chapter 8, Packet--Hatch, Bonomi

 April 15: Packet--Johnson, Abzug  
    


###  Supplementary Reading List for RELGST 1010

Topic Two: Ruth M. Underhill, Red Man's Religion: Beliefs and Practices of the
Indians North of Mexico; Henry Warner Bowden, American Indians and Christian
Missions; Kenneth M. Morrison, The Embattled Northeast: The Elusive Ideal of
Alliance in Abenaki-Euramerican Relations; Francis Jennings, The Invasion of
America: Indians, Colonialism and the Cant of Conquest; Bernard Sheehan,
Savagism and Civility: Indians and Englishmen in Colonial Virginia; Karen
Ordahl Kupperman, Settling with the Indians: The Meeting of English and Indian
Cultures in America, 1580-1640

 Topic Three: David D. Hall, World of Wonders, Days of Judgement: Popular
Religious Belief in Early New England; Lloyd Cohen, God's Caress: The
Psychology of the Puritan Religious Experience; Edmund S. Morgan, The Puritan
Dilemma: The Story of John Winthrop

 Topic Four: Kenneth Lockridge, A New England Town: The First Hundred Years;
Paul R. Lucas, Valley of Discord: Church and Society Along the Connecticut
River, 1636-1725

 Topic Five: John Demos, A Little Commonwealth: Family Life in Plymouth
Colony; Laura Thatcher Ulrich, Good Wives: Image and Reality in the Lives of
Women in Northern New England, 1650-1750

 Topic Six: Carol Karlsen, The Devil in the Shape of a Woman; Paul Boyer and
Stephen Nissenbaum, Salem Possessed; John Demos, Entertaining Satan; Marion
Starkey, The Devil in Massachusetts: A Modern Enquiry into the Salem Witch-
Trials

 Topic Seven: Barry Levy, Quakers and the American Family: British Settlement
in the Delaware Valley; Michael Zuckerman, Friends and Neighbors: Group Life
in America's First Plural Society; Sally Schwartz, a Mixed Multitude': The
Struggle for Toleration in Colonial Pennsylvania

 TopicEight: Rhys Isaac, The Transformation of Virginia; Patricia Bonomi,
Under the Cope of Heaven: Religion, Society, and Politics in Colonial America;
Edwin Scott Gaustad, The Great Awakening in New England

 TopicNine: Nathan O. Hatch, The Sacred Cause of Liberty; Alan Heimert,
Religion and the American Mind from the Great Awakening to the Revolution;
Ruth H. Bloch, Visionary Republic: Millennial Themes in American Thought,
1756-1800; Thomas J. Curry, The First Freedoms: Church and State in America to
the Passage of the First Amendment

 Topic Ten: Albert Raboteau, Slave Religion: The Invisible Institution in the
Antebellum South; Alfloyd Butler, The Africanization of American Christianity;
Eugene D. Genovese, Roll Jordan, Roll

 Topic Eleven: Nathan O. Hatch, The Democratization of American Christianity;
Paul E. Johnson, Shopkeeper's Millennium; T.L. Smith, Revivalism and Social
Reform in Mid-Nineteenth Century America; Robert Abzug, Passionate Liberator:
Theodore Dwight Weld and the Dilemma of Reform; Donald Matthews, Religion and
the Old South; Larry E. Tise, Pro-Slavery: A History of the defense of Slavery
in America, 1701-1840; James Brewer Stewart, Holy Warriors: The Abolitionists
and American Slavery; Louis S. Gerteis, Morality and Utility in American Anti-
Slavery Reform  
    


####  PURPOSE

This analytical essay will serve as a summary and comparison exercise. It is
designed to enable students to develop depth in a specific subject area and to
reflect that depth in written form. Writing provides us with perhaps the most
precise way we have of expressing our thoughts, of revealing what it is that
is on our minds. This exercise, then, moves beyond the course in its intent to
assist you in refining your basic writing skills so that your papers will
reflect clear thinking, cogent arguments, and an understanding of the use of
evidence.  
    


####  SUMMARY

You have been assigned two sets of reading material that will serve as the
basis for your essays. Your fist objective will be to summarize the authors
various theses and the evidence they use to sustain their arguments.  
    


####  ANALYTIC COMPARISON

There are two objectives within the analytic portion of the assignment:
historiographic comparison and thematic analysis.

 1\. First, the comparison is that part of the essay which moves beyond the
summary, concentrating on the meaning extracted from the various readings. The
comparison itself should consider the different interpretations the historians
have advanced regarding the historical topic under study. How do the
historians' arguments differ and why? Which interpretations appear more valid
and why? What evidence do they use and how well do they use their evidence? Is
that evidence reliable? Why are some interpretations less valid? Do the
authors appear to have a particular bias created by the times in which they
live that tints their objectivity? These are just a sampling of the kinds of
questions you should address in your essay and which will raise the
intellectual levels of your papers far above mere summary. Your content grade
for these assignments will be based primarily on how well you move beyond
summary. At times, some of the reading selections may not focus on precisely
the same topic--in those instances you will have to evaluate the excerpt on
its own merit without comparison.

 2\. Second, the thematic analysis will be that portion of the essay that
attempts to make some sense out of the various interpretations of the various
subjects--where you will try to bring some order to the confusion by
discerning a common thread, or a theme, that defines perhaps not only the
subject you are studying, but also the manner in which historians have treated
that topic. You should use all of the readings in your selections to form and
attempt to answer such questions as: What were the central religious
motivations behind exploration and colonization and were those motives really
central? How did religion taint the character of "contact" between Europeans
and Native Americans? What was the legacy of religion for the American
Revolution and the era of the "Founding"? What role did religion play in the
enslavement and liberation of African-Americans? And about the authors, is
there any uniformity or central theme about the manner in which they
approached their subject? For example: Do scholars of the "contact" period all
tend to dwell on the Native Americans as victims and the colonizers as
villains? and so forth.  
    


####  METHODOLOGY

The guidelines above specify only areas which each paper must address; they do
not, however, restrict your conceptual approach to addressing those areas. You
may summarize first, compare second, and analyze third. You may summarize,
compare, and analyze all at the same time--whichever you feel is the clearest,
most efficient, and aesthetically pleasing mode of delivery. However, any good
history paper should at least begin with an introduction that clearly spells
out your thesis. In other words, begin with your conclusions! You are not
Agatha Christie--there should be no mystery here. Tell me what you are going
to tell me, and then go ahead and tell me!

 About quoting: if you plan to use portions of sentences, sentences, or
strings of sentences that are the words of a writer other than yourself, "you
must give that person credit, like so"(Newman, 463). Just like that. You
should avoid extensive quoting--simply paraphrase the authors idea. Use
specific quotes only when necessary to prove a specific point about an
author's argument.  
    


####  FORMAT and DUE DATE

The essays will be two to four pages long, and certainly not longer than five.
They will be typed or word-processed, double-spaced, and free of typos,
grammatical and spelling errors. They will be due at 3:30 pm on the Wednesday
following the week in which your reading assignments were covered in
discussion. Late work will not be accepted.  
    


####  GRADING

The essays will be worth 75 points each. The first draft will account for 50
points--15 for writing mechanics, 15 for summary, and 20 for analytic
comparison. The revision will account for 25 points and all points will be
accorded on the basis of how well you have implemented my instructions.
![](malden.jpg)  
Back

