# Latin American Politics Syllabus

  
  

## LATIN AMERICAN POLITICS

  
  

## PS 25

  
  

## Fall, 1996

  
  

## Instructor: Matt Davies

  
  

##### [Description] [Goals][Texts] [Reading Schedule] [Project]

  

##### [Electronic Resources]

  
  
Phone: (317) 361-6031

E-mail: DaviesJ@wabash.edu

Office hours: TBA

Office: Baxter Hall, Rm. 205

**Course Description**

This course will explore a variety of issues in Latin American politics,
especially the role of the political economic forces of market reform and
civilian rule in the region, but also examining themes such as urbanization
and popular protest, environmental degradation, the drug trade, and
corruption, and attempt to identify the forces, both internal and external,
which shape these political issues. Chile and Mexico will be the countries
examined most thoroughly in the readings; however, we will examine most of the
other Latin American nations and students will be encouraged to discuss and
investigate other countries from the region.

**Course Goals**

These are the basic course objectives:

(1) to appreciate some of the contemporary political problems affecting the
region while gaining Latin American perspectives on political trends and
movements;

(2) to analyze certain political, social and economic trends that affect the
region as a whole;

(3) to examine the particular ways that some of these issues manifest
themselves within specific countries;

(4) to investigate and to write a term paper on a political issue affecting
the region or a particular country; to improve your research and writing
skills.

**Texts**

The following texts are required for this course and should be available in
the Bookstore:

(1) _Modern Latin America, Third Edition_ , by Thomas E. Skidmore and Peter H.
Smith.

(2) _Capital, Power, and Inequality in Latin America_ , edited by Sandor
Halebsky and Richard L. Harris.

(3) _The Latin American City_ , by Alan Gilbert.

(4) _The Heart That Bleeds: Latin America Now_ , by Alma Guillermoprieto.

(5) _Chile's Free Market Miracle: A Second Look_ , by Joseph Collins and John
Lear.

(6) _The Paradox of Revolution: Labor, The State, and Authoritarianism in
Mexico_ , by Kevin J. Middlebrook.

There will also be a few other readings on reserve, which will be indicated in
the course schedule.

**Evaluation.**

Class discussions provide an opportunity not only to explain or expand on
questions raised by the readings, but also to explore other points of view and
issues or experiences not covered in the readings. Plan to attend each class
prepared to discuss the readings and to analyze politics in the region on the
basis of the perspectives discussed or criticized in class. Participation will
constitute 10% of your final grade. There will be a take-home mid-term exam
distributed in class on September 28. A final exam is scheduled for December
14. The remainder of your grade will be based on a research project, which is
explained at the end of the syllabus. Your final grade will be broken down
thus:

Class participation: 20%

Mid-Term Exam (October 7): 10%

Final Exam (TBA): 20%

Research design (September 27): 10%

First draft of research paper (November 11): 10%

Final draft (December 4): 30%

* * *

**Assigned Readings**

Week 1

September 2 **Introductory Lecture**. Read in class: Alma Guillermoprieto,
_The Heart That Bleeds_ , "Introduction."

September 4 **The Making of Latin America**. _How did the experience of
colonialism shape Latin American politics and economics? How did it shape the
region demographically?_ Skidmore and Smith, _Modern Latin America_ ,
"Prologue" and Ch. 1, "The Colonial Foundations, 1492-1880s."

September 6 Skidmore and Smith, Ch. 2, "The Transformation of Modern Latin
America, 1880s-1990s."

Week 2

September 9 **Latin America in the World**. _How has the international context
affected Latin American politics? Is Latin America developing under
"neocolonialism?" How should we characterize the relations between the United
States and Latin America?_ Skidmore and Smith, Ch. 11, "Latin America, The
United States, and the World."

September 11 Richard L. Harris, "The Global Context of Contemporary Latin
American Affairs," in Halebsky and Harris, eds., _Capital, Power, and
Inequality in Latin America_.

September 13 **The Caribbean and Central America**. _How has being located in
the U.S.'s "back yard" affected these regions? What are the obstacles to
peace, democracy, or development in these regions? Can the experiences of
Central America or the Caribbean be applied to other parts of Latin America?_
Skidmore and Smith, Ch. 8, "Cuba: Late Colony, First Socialist State," and Ch.
9, "The Caribbean: Colonies and Mini-States."

Week 3

September 16 Skidmore and Smith, Ch. 10, "Central America: Colonialism,
Dictatorship, and Revolution."

September 18 Alma Guillermoprieto, ""Managua, 1990," and "Panama City, 1992."

September 20 **Peru: Poverty and Political Violence**. _What are the causes of
poverty in Peru? What are the prospects for reducing the levels of violence?_
Skidmore and Smith, Ch. 6, "Peru: Soldiers, Oligarchs, and Indians."

Week 4

September 23 Alma Guillermoprieto, "Lima, 1993."

September 25 **Transitions from military rule**. _What have been the various
ways that the military has withdrawn from government in Latin America? Has the
military surrendered power? What are the implications of impunity for building
democratic governments in the region? Are the post-military states strong or
weak? How did the experience of military rule shape the political economy of
the region?_ Jorge Nef, "Demilitarization and Democratic Transition in Latin
America," in Halebsky and Harris.

September 27 RESEARCH DESIGN DUE AT THE BEGINNING OF CLASS. Skidmore and
Smith, Ch. 3, "Argentina: From Prosperity to Deadlock."

Week 5

September 30 Alma Guillermoprieto, "Buenos Aires, 1991."

October 2 Skidmore and Smith, Ch. 5, "Brazil: Development for Whom?"

October 4 Alma Guillermoprieto, "Rio, 1993." MID-TERM DISTRIBUTED.

Week 6

October 7 MID-TERM DUE AT THE BEGINNING OF CLASS. **Rural Latin America**.
_How is life in the countryside changing in Latin America? Why? What political
and economic forces affect rural life? How are people responding?_ Crist obal
Kay, "Rural Latin America: Exclusionary and Uneven Agricultural Development,"
in Halebsky and Harris.

October 9 **Urban Latin America**. _How is life in the city changing in Latin
America? What political, economic, and social forces affect urban life?_ Alan
Gilbert, _The Latin American City_ , Ch. 1,and Sandor Halebsky, "Urban
Transformation and Survival Strategies," in Halebsky and Harris.

October 11 Gilbert, Chs. 2-3, and Alma Guillermoprieto, "Bogota, 1989."

Week 7

October 14 Gilbert, Ch. 4, Lourdes Beneria, "Subcontracting and Employment
Dynamics in Mexico City" (on reserve), and Alma Guillermoprieto, "Mexico City,
1990."

October 16 Gilbert, Chs. 5-6.

October 18 Gilbert, Chs. 7-8.

Week 8

October 21 MIDSEMESTER BREAK

October 23 **Neoliberalism**. _Why have most Latin American economies become
market-oriented? Does increasing reliance on the market to regulate economic
relations contribute to democracy in the region? How do particular countries
differ in the means by which they adapt to market conditions and in the ends
they pursue? Does market liberalization necessarily bring political
democratization?_ John Weeks, "The Contemporary Latin American Economies:
Neoliberal Reconstruction," in Halebsky and Harris, and Alma Guillermoprieto,
"La Paz, 1992."

October 25 John Williamson, "What Washington Means by Policy Reform" (on
reserve), and Alma Guillermoprieto, "Lima, 1990."

Week 9

October 28 **The Chilean Experience**. Skidmore and Smith, Ch. 4, "Chile:
Socialism, Repression, and Democracy."

October 30 Collins and Lear, _Chile's Free Market Miracle: A Second Look_ ,
Part One: "Chile and Neo-Liberalism."

November 1 Collins and Lear, Part Two: "Neo-Liberalism and the Economy."

Week 10

November 4 Collins and Lear, Part Three: "Social Policy."

November 6 Collins and Lear, Part Four: "Land and the Environment."

November 8 Collins and Lear, Part Five: "Conclusion," and the Epilogue by
Stephanie Rosenfeld.

Week 11

November 11 FIRST DRAFT OF PAPER DUE AT THE BEGINNING OF CLASS. Carlos M.
Vilas, "Economic Restructuring, Neoliberal Reforms, and the Working Class in
Latin America," in Halebsky and Harris.

November 13 **The Mexican experience**. Skidmore and Smith, Ch. 7, "Mexico:
The Taming of a Revolution," and Alma Guillermoprieto, "Mexico City, 1990."
(Recommended, but not required: Kevin Middlebrook, _The Paradox of Revolution_
, Ch. 1.)

November 15 Middlebrook, Chs. 2-3

Week 12

November 18 Middlebrook, Chs. 4-5.

November 20 Middlebrook, Ch. 6.

November 22 Middlebrook, Ch. 7.

Week 13

November 25 Middlebrook, Ch. 8.

November 27 THANKSGIVING BREAK

November 29 THANKSGIVING BREAK

Week 14

December 2 **Drugs and Politics in Colombia**. Alma Guillermoprieto, "Medell
in, 1991," and "Bogota, 1993."

December 4 FINAL DRAFT OF PAPER DUE AT THE BEGINNING OF CLASS. **Civil society
in Latin America**. _What new political forces in Latin America emerged in the
period of military rule? Why? Will they retain their autonomy under civilian
governments? What are the prospects for democracy in the region?_ Judith Alder
Hellman, "The Riddle of New Social Movements: Who They Are and What They Do,"
in Halebsky and Harris.

December 6 Francesca Miller, "Latin American Women and the Search for Social,
Political and Economic Transformation," in Halebsky and Harris.

Week 15

December 9 Michael Kearney and Stefano Varese, "Latin America's Indigenous
Peoples: Changing Identities and Forms of Resistance," in Halebsky and Harris.

December 11 John M. Kirk, "Whither the Catholic Church in the 1990s?" in
Halebsky and Harris, and Alma Guillermoprieto, "Rio, 1991."

December 13 Elizabeth W. Dore, "Latin America and the Social Ecology of
Capitalism," in Halebsky and Harris.

FINAL EXAM: To Be Announced.

* * *

**RESEARCH PROJECT **

As indicated at the beginning of the syllabus, 50% of your grade will be based
on a research paper to be written for the class. The final paper should be
10-15 pages, typed and double spaced. You must include references to at least
8 resources.

The project is broken down into four stages. First, you should write a
research design, which will be worth 10% of your grade and is due on September
27. The research design allows you to define your topic and to explain how you
intend to research it. You should write two or three pages, in which you tell
us what your topic is, why you think it is important, define your terms, and
specify the research questions you will need to answer in order to address
your topic. You should also include a preliminary reference list, with at
least 3 resources. Next, on October 18, you will give an oral progress report
on your research. This presentation will be evaluated as part of your class
participation grade. Be prepared to explain your topic and your research
strategy, and to summarize your findings to date. The third stage of the
project is your first draft, due on November 11 and worth 10% of your grade.
The _revised_ and final draft of the paper will be due on December 4, and will
be worth 30% of your grade. Please note that the revisions you make will be
considered when grading the final draft. In other words, a "B" on the first
draft does not guarantee a "B" on the final draft; if you turn in an unrevised
draft, your grade will reflect the effort you put into improving your work.

TOPICS: It will be impossible to cover every issue of interest in the 15 weeks
of this course, and there are likely to be many issues that you are interested
in that we will not be able to examine in class. You may therefore choose any
topic that interests you. Our requirements will be that you choose a topic on
Latin America that is sufficiently focussed to fit into a paper of only 10-15
pages, that it be about contemporary Latin American politics, and that it is
doable. The following are intended as suggestions or guidelines for you,
although you may certainly choose from this list.

1\. What were the origins of the Women's movement in Chile, and how did it
affect the transition to democracy?

2\. How influential is the Protestant Church in Brazilian politics (or in
Guatemala, or Ecuador, or whatever country interests you)?

3\. What were the causes and consequences of the cholera epidemic for Peru (or
another Latin American country)?

4\. What have been the consequences of the "Drug War" (perhaps especially U.S.
participation in the Drug War) for Colombia (or Peru, or Ecuador)?

5\. What were the "IMF riots"? How do economic stabilization programs help
Latin American countries, and how do they harm them?

6\. Why have the large debtor nations of the region failed to coordinate their
policies before their creditors? Or what are the obstacles to economic
integration in the region?

7\. Has the era of Latin American dictatorships come to an end? You may wish
to compare two countries to answer this, such as Brazil and Paraguay, Chile
and Argentina, Haiti and El Salvador, or Peru and Panama. Or alternatively,
has the era of Latin American guerrillas come to an end? Again comparing two
countries, such as Guatemala and El Salvador, Peru and Colombia, or Mexico and
Uruguay.

**ELECTRONIC RESOURCES**

Some of you may find using the World Wide Web or the Internet useful in your
research. Included here are a few resources which may be useful. Some of them
are in Spanish, but not all. More links will be added here as I come across
them. (Thanks are due to Pavel Kislitsyn for finding many of these sources.)
Please bear in mind that almost _anyone_ can publish on the Internet, so there
is no quality control there; you must consider the reliability of the source
when you cite Internet or Web sources. Because of this issue, for each
electronic resource you use in your paper, you must also use one scholarly
resource, i.e., an article from a scholarly journal such as _Latin American
Research Review_ or _Comparative Politics_.

Chilean Government

http://www.segegob.cl/secregob_english/text/pcch/index.html

La Epoca, a Chilean newspaper

http://www.reuna.cl/laepoca/

Uruguay's academic network

http://www.rau.edu.uy/

Government of Argentina, Executive Branch

http://www.presidencia.ar/admin.html

Latin American research database at UT Austin

http://lanic.utexas.edu/la/region/arl/

Amnesty International

http://www.amnesty.org/

WWW Virtual Library: Latin American Studies

Armando F. MastrapaHome Page

JOINT LIBRARY HOME PAGE

Ejercito Zapatista de Liberacion Nacional

Latin American Resources at UT

Latin America on the Net - Government and Politics

spec0317.html

FirstNews - Internet in Spanish - Culture and Contemporary Society

CubaWeb

Ejercito Zapatista de Liberacion Nacional

Latin American Resources at UT

Latin America on the Net - Government and Politics

Chiapas Para el Mundo...

Harry Cleaver's Chiapas Page

Gabriel Garcia Marquez

