#  POLITICAL SCIENCE COURSE DESCRIPTIONS

  

Click here to see Political Science B.A. and B.S. Degree Requirements  
Click here to see Political Science B.A. and B.S., Pre-Law Concentration
Degree Requirements

*General Education Courses 

**Writing Intensive Courses

*Political Science 150. **AMERICAN GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS**. An introduction to the American political system, with an emphasis upon the national political institutions, processes, groups, public behavior, and issues which shape contemporary society. 3 credits.   
CLICK HERE TO VIEW A RECENT POSC 150 SYLLABUS (Harbour)

*Political Science 245. **GENDER AND POLITICS**. An examination of gender as a socio-political construct within a global context, including an analysis of both feminist and masculinist theories of politics. An in-depth study of the gender who, what, and how of world politics. 3 credits. TLOU

*Political Science 255. **INTRODUCTION TO COMPARATIVE POLITICS**. A survey of political systems, and a consideration of the meaning of concepts and themes, such as states, political systems, nationalism, ethnicity, ideologies, racial politics, and political change. Students will become familiarized with both mainstream and alternative approaches to studying political phenomena within a comparative framework. Africa, Asia, Latin America, and Europe will provide the framework. 3 credits. TLOU

*Political Science 331. **POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY**. Survey of the principal political theories and philosophies from ancient Greece through the Middle Ages, including the contributions of Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, St. Augustine, and St. Thomas Aquinas. 3 credits. HARBOUR   
CLICK HERE TO VIEW A RECENT POSC 331 SYLLABUS

*Political Science 332. **POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY**. Survey of modern political theories and philosophies, including the contributions of Machiavelli, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Burke, and Marx. 3 credits. HARBOUR   
CLICK _HERE_ TO VIEW A RECENT POSC 332 SYLLABUS

**Political Science 216. **AMERICAN STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT**. A study of
American state and local political institutions and processes, and of related
current issues and problems. 3 credits. CALIHAN

Political Science 230. **ADMINISTRATION OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE**. Survey of the
operations of institutions which compose our system for administering criminal
justice, including police administration, premises and politics of court
procedures and management, and corrections. 3 credits. CALIHAN

Political Science 295. **SPECIAL TOPICS**. Offered on demand. 3 credits.

Political Science 300 (History 300). **TEACHING HISTORY AND THE SOCIAL
SCIENCES IN THE SECONDARY SCHOOL**. A study of the nature of disciplines from
which content in the social sciences in drawn for instruction at the secondary
level and of the relationship between the nature of these disciplines and the
planning of instruction. Observation and participation in the work of selected
secondary school classrooms is required. This course does not count toward the
completion of the 43 credits stipulated under Section D, Political Science
Major, B.A. Degree, or of the credits designated as major requirements for the
B.A./B.S. Pre-Law concentrations. Prerequisites: Education 245 and 260. 3
credits. WELCH

**Political Science 314 (History 314). **POLITICAL HISTORY OF AFRICA**. A
survey of the political landscape of African history. A major portion of the
course examines the significance of precolonial kingdoms, assesses the growth
of the "slave trade", analyzes African intellectual history, and explores the
"eve of colonialism" in Africa. 3 credits. TLOU

**Political Science 335. **WESTERN EUROPEAN POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT**. An
examination of the political systems of Western Europe, with in-depth analysis
of Great Britain, France, and Germany. Issues like social democracy, gendered
politics, right-wing extremism, and the European Union are explored as causes
of political change and continuity in Europe. 3 credits. TLOU

**Political Science 336. **RUSSIAN AND EASTERN EUROPEAN GOVERNMENT AND
POLITICS**. Study of the governments and politics of Russia and Eastern
Europe. Special attention is given to the rise and fall of Communism and to
the challenges of building democratis institutions and market oriented
economic systems. 3 credits. TLOU

**Political Science 337. **ASIAN GOVERNMENTS AND POLITICS**. A study of the
political systems and foreign policies of the major Asian powers, with
emphasis on China and Japan. 3 credits. Staff

**Political Science 341, 342. **AMERICAN POLITICAL THOUGHT**. (Political
Science 341 -- to the Civil War; Political Science 342 -- 1860 to the
Present). An introduction to the principal thinkers and the central themes in
American political thought. 3 credits. HARBOUR

**Political Science 343. **AMERICAN FOREIGN POLICY**. A study of U.S. foreign
policy with special attention to the policy-making process, current problems
in foreign affairs, and the development of long-range foreign policy. 3
credits. Staff

**Political Science 350. **THE AMERICAN PRESIDENCY**. The modern presidency
and its role in contemporary politics, emphasizing the constitutional
background of the office, the evolution of presidential powers, relationships
between the presidency and the Congress and bureaucracy, the presidential
election process, and the role of the presidency in policy making. 3 credits.
HARBOUR  
CLICK HERE TO VIEW A RECENT POSC 350 SYLLABUS

Political Science 355. **CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES (I)**. Study of
prominent Constitutional principles, issues, and practices pertaining to
persons accused or convicted of crime. Particular focus on the ideas of the
Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Eighth Amendments. Extensive use of Supreme Court
decisions. 3 credits. CALIHAN

Political Science 356. **CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS AND LIBERTIES (II)**. Study of
prominent Constitutional principles, issues, and practices concerning
government-private individual relations, with particular emphasis upon
freedoms of speech, press, religion; privacy; and social and economic
discrimination. Extensive use of Supreme Court decisions. 3 credits. CALIHAN

**Political Science 360. **POLITICAL PARTIES**. Comparison of two-party
systems with one-party and multi-party systems around the world; study of the
nature, advantages, and disadvantages of political party systems, with an
emphasis upon the development of the two-party system in the U.S. 3 credits.
Staff

Political Science 370. **PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION**. Survey of the premises and
issues of public bureaucracies, and of principal activities of policy
administrators, including personnel management, budgeting, decision-making,
intergovernmental relations, and relations with courts, elected officials, and
private organizations. 3 credits. CALIHAN

**Political Science 390. **POLITICAL LEADERSHIP**. The course investigates the
diverse nature of leadership and the place of leadership in modern society.
While the main emphasis is on political leadership, a strong interdisciplinary
approach will be employed. Students will be required to think about various
needs, origins, moral dilemmas, requirements, and techniques of leadership in
a wide variety of differing circumstances. 3 credits. HARBOUR  
CLICK HERE TO VIEW A RECENT POSC 390 SYLLABUS

Political Science 400. **WASHINGTON INTERNSHIP PROGRAM.** Department-sponsored
internship in association with the Washington Center Internship Program. The
internship combines intensive on-the-job training with academic seminars,
lectures, and research. Prerequisites: Political Science 150, and 6 additional
hours in Political Science; second-semester sophomore to senior standing; 2.5
cumulative GPA; permission of department head. 16 credits. Staff

Political Science 401. **THE POLITICAL SCIENCE SEMESTER INTERNSHIP**. Work in
residence with the Virginia General Assembly for a complete session, the
balance of the semester to be spent in directed study on a topic or topics
approved by the department. Open to qualified juniors and seniors.
Prerequisites: Political Science 150; 216; 341 or 342; and permission of
instructor. 16 credits. Staff

Political Science 402. **POLITICAL SCIENCE INTERNSHIP**. Department sponsored
internship in association with appropriate public or private agency. This
program of work and study must be approved by the advising departmental
instructor, with the credit assigned being tied to the nature of the project.
Prerequisites: Political Science 150 and 216; six additional hours of
political science; and permission of instructor. 1-16 credits. Staff

**Political Science 441. **INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS**. Study of the factors
conditioning international politics, with emphasis upon the foreign policies
of major powers. 3 credits. Staff

Political Science 442. **INTERNATIONAL LAW AND ORGANIZATIONS**. A study of
international law and organizations, with emphasis upon the principles of
international law. Additional consideration of the policies of the United
Nations. 3 credits. CALIHAN

Political Science 443. **UNITED STATES FOREIGN POLICY AND NATIONAL SECURITY:
1990-2000**. This course represents an endeavor to identify and analyze major
US foreign policy and national security issues and threats likely facing the
United States both externally and internally in the closing decade of the
Twentieth Century. Major attention is devoted to the continuing dynamics in
Russo-American relations and to problems of a politico-economic nature posed
by nations of the developing or Third World. Additionally, discussions focus
on various response options potentially applicable to the resolution of
current issues. 3 credits. Staff

Political Science 455 (History 455). **CONSTITUTIONAL HISTORY OF THE UNITED
STATES**. Intensive case-study examination of the continuing development of
the Constitution. Emphasis on judiciary, presidency, federalism, commerce, and
due process problems. 3 credits. CALIHAN

Political Science 460, 461, 462. **POLITICAL SCIENCE SEMINAR**. Open to
juniors and seniors. Offered on demand; 1 credit. Staff

Political Science 461. **SENIOR SEMINAR**. Capstone course in Political
Science. Research, writing, and assessment of student outcomes. Required of
majors in Political Science. 1 credit. HARBOUR  
CLICK HERE TO VIEW A RECENT POSC 461 SYLLABUS

Political Science 463, 464. **WASHINGTON SYMPOSIA**. Symposium programs
sponsored by the Washington Center. 40 to 60 hours of lectures, panel
discussions, workshops, site visits, and bi-weekly discussion groups over a 2
to 3 week period in Washington, D.C. Prerequisites: Political Science 150, 2.5
cumulative GPA, approval of department head. 2 or 3 credits. Staff

Political Science 465. **THE ROLE OF US NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE IN FOREIGN
POLICY**. This course provides a basic overview of the history, current
organization and missions of the US Foreign intelligence establishment ("the
Intelligence Community") and its various programs and activities in support of
US foreign policy and national security objectives in the closing years of the
20th century. 3 credits. Staff

Political Science 469 (History 469). **SOVIET DIPLOMACY**. An analysis of the
diplomacy and foreign policy of Soviet Russia, 1917 to 1991, with emphasis
upon the political machinery and motivating forces which determine foreign
policy. 3 credits. CROWL

Political Science 490, 491. **POLITICAL SCIENCE SEMINAR**. Open to juniors and
seniors; offered on demand. 3 credits.

Political Science 495. **SPECIAL TOPICS**. 1-3 credits.

* * *

  
Return to Political Science Program Page  
Return to History and Political Science Homepage  

* * *

