# The "Media-Lab-For-The-Rest-Of-Us"

### \- A Design for Technology Education in the 21st Century

by John Murray, University of Michigan, MI 48109-2117  
Email: jxm@acm.org. Copyright 1995 John Murray

### Contents

  * Overview
  * A Challenge for Piaget
  * Appropriate Learning Environments
  * A Tool-Rich Arena
  * Exploration as Education
  * Revisiting an Old Paradigm
  * Conclusion
  * Bibliography 

* * *

### Overview

This short paper examines the rAnge of applicability of Swiss psychologist
Jean Piaget's theory of learning when applied to curriculum design in
technology education. In particular, I focus upon the influence of Piaget's
concept of transition from a concrete operational mode of thinking to a formal
operational one. It appears to me that Piaget fails to address certain aspects
of this transition, which results in their perhaps inappropriate use in the
technology education arena. To address this problem, I propose a radical
improvement to the educational environment for technologists. I use as a
precedent the marked success of MIT's Media Lab, an environment which
fanatically encourages creativity and exploration, and draw upon Norbert
Wiener's original genesis of cybernetics as an inter- disciplinary vanguard
and guiding light.

### A Challenge for Piaget

Jean Piaget's theory of learning is sometimes criticized for its strong focus
on the inherent technical or logical complexity of the material to be
assimilated. It appears to be a basic tenet of Piaget's that learners
essentially reject problems which are viewed as being too complicated. I
suggest that this outlook tends to ignore curiosity - something which seems to
me to be a fundamental human characteristic. Given a supportive environment,
the desire to know simple causes and reasons behind things seems to be
extremely common if not universal.

This natural curiosity is related to what William James calls the 'theoretic
instinct' - a willingness to grapple with and accept abstraction at all levels
of development. He points out that this is noticeable in early stages when
young children ask very innocent but quite metaphysical questions, for example
If God made everything, then who made God? The point is that nobody has
defined this problem as too esoteric or complex yet, so the question is still
'askable'.

In another arena, one encounters students who have significant difficulty
grappling with chance and probability in the abstract sense, yet who can
instantly assess the betting odds on horse- racing or blackjack. The
underlying thought seems to be that people encounter fewer obstacles when
figuring out complexity in the context of a relevant application. It's not
simply a motivational issue, that is one that impels the individual to learn
because of the apparent benefits involved. Rather, it relates to a mental
block based on lack of practical stimuli.

Educational theorist Seymour Papert adopts a similar line on this issue of
contextual learning. He attributes 'math-phobia' and other blocks to
understanding supposedly-complex notions to a general paucity of environmental
stimuli. Papert identifies this lack of realistic context or application as
the critical function influencing progress through the stages of intellectual
development, rather than Piaget's emphasis on the inbuilt complexity of the
concept. The basic ideas of curiosity and realistic context are the foundation
for Papert's studies of young children's learning behavior while using the
Logo computer language. This introduces them to simple geometry and the laws
of motion in a practical rather than abstract way.

Researchers in the field of linguistics and the learning of language also have
noted this difficulty with Piaget's strictness about the stages of
development. For example, Noam Chomsky presents the view that environmental
influence is the crucial factor; there is no stage transition per se, but
rather the interaction of the environment with a relatively simple 'language
system'. The individual builds up a knowledge structure which provides
essentially an adequate explanation of the world and, inherently, an adequate
way of expressing the explanation as well. Such concepts of course directly
lead into the notions behind constructivism and the scientific learning cycle.

### Appropriate Learning Environments

Now where does all of this discussion carry one's thoughts on education? My
contention is that the effect of environment on learning is just as important
at the so-called higher levels as at the earlier stages. It is suggested that
the transition from concrete to formal operational mode is quite domain-
specific, fragmented as it were. People may be able to work with the abstract
in one knowledge region, but are rather concretely-rooted in another. Since
the formal operational mode is the predominant one in scientific and technical
practice, it appears to me to be essential that educators accomplish as
complete a mode transition as is possible.

I suggest that the development of appropriate learning environments be the
driving factor behind a world-class policy on technology education and
curriculum. This translates into a much stronger focus on relevant
applications of technical theory, and extends well beyond assigning simplistic
problems which have a practical cloak on them. It means enriching the
individual's analysis and synthesis skills very early on in the curriculum
and, most importantly, it means following through with that process in a
coordinated manner from one semester to the next.

As an example from my own field, the US National Research Council issued a
policy document in 1991 on the future of computer science and engineering. The
major message articulated by the Council was that the CS&E; discipline was
becoming too introspective and was lacking a 'broader agenda'. The report
repeatedly emphasized the need to structure CS&E; education and research in
the context of applicability and relevance to other domains. I interpret that
as a mandate to scrutinize carefully what we teach about computers, to whom we
teach it, and how we do so.

### A Tool-Rich Arena

One of the problems encountered in both industry and education is the gulf
between the technical experts, those who design the tools and systems, and
everyone else. Cognitive scientist Don Norman adopts this viewpoint, and urges
engineers and designers to look beyond the boundary of technology and be
confronted with real users in the real world. This is exactly the focus of the
study of human-computer interaction, but it extends far beyond the study of
buttons and menus into the larger context of modeling total human- machine
systems. A basic objective of any undergraduate curriculum must be to ensure
that the participants have ample opportunity to reach a level of comfort and
'fulfillment' with technology. That means exposing them to the systems and
tools, and nurturing an strongly exploratory and creative atmosphere.

Such a setting relies of course on having a high level of stimuli by being in
tool-rich surroundings. In the computer arena specifically, it means an
environment which goes well beyond many of the more typical drill-and-practice
educational computing applications. Access to systems, machines and
information needs to be ubiquitous. But this does not automatically mean that
they should disappear into the woodwork so to speak. Quite the contrary. The
type of environment we seek to create is one where the tools and instruments
are accessible and obvious, or ready-to-hand as the philosopher Martin
Heidegger expresses it. But since we consciously assert a atmosphere of
creation and exploration, the bounds and limitations of the equipment and
methods are unveiled \- they become unready-to-hand in Heideggerian terms. I
claim that this is precisely the circumstance where the most powerful learning
takes place.

Piaget refers to this type of condition as disequilibrium and uses it to
explain how stage transitions are triggered. However, as discussed earlier,
there is a common perception that he downplays the influence of environment in
introducing disequilibrium. In the learning atmosphere proposed here, the goal
is to elevate this emotion in order to encourage a strong feeling of curiosity
and a questioning outlook. Neil Postman, a media ecologist at NYU, takes this
view a step further by asserting that all learning is remedial, in the sense
that discovery proceeds as we make errors, correct them, make more mistakes,
etc.

### Exploration as Education

The impact of this approach on technical program design and curriculum
development is that everything needs to be presented as a 'tool' - something
to be used in a readily-accessible context. This translates into more than
just additional practical courses, though that may be a side-effect. Consider
for example an engineering lab assignment which involves using an oscilloscope
to understand the behavior of a simple electrical circuit. In many such cases,
it's not at all unusual for students to end up learning more about how
oscilloscopes work than about the assigned circuits. Thus, the stated goal of
the activity and its actual effect were not matched. The tool, with all its
confusing features, its limitations and shortcomings, became the focus of
attention and learning precisely because of its unreadiness-to-hand. A similar
experience is encountered when an operator of a complex system moves from
'traditional' supervisory control to the more difficult conditions of
hortatory operations.

Educational theorist Benjamin Bloom provides us with the appropriate
nomenclature to structure such a curriculum design. Each major concept in the
curriculum - each tool, method, instrument, facility, etc. to be explored -
has features and attributes which are relevant in each of Bloom's six
taxonomic divisions (knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis,
synthesis, and evaluation). In the process of unfolding every feature of the
overall field, the primary task of the educator is to provide the student with
ample opportunity to develop some competence in each division. It is quite
insufficient merely to structure the overall four-year syllabus as a movement
through the six types of capability, starting with rote learning and
culminating in a so-called capstone design course.

The whole process of teaching, exploration, and discovery in a tool- rich
environment tends to blur the boundary between learning the topic and learning
how to learn. Encouraging the student to learn how to learn is often mentioned
as being the major strength of participatory design courses. It is indeed a
vital skill for technologists and designers because of rapidly changing work
environments and the speed with which technical skills can become outdated in
the profession. However, many design courses are criticized for the lack of
direction and the level of chaos and confusion which can occur. What then
should one do to address this issue in a proposal where such design courses
might become the norm? I contend that a meticulous use of Bloom's divisions in
all aspects of a creative technology curriculum will provide the necessary
framework for designing the syllabus and content.

Bloom's taxonomy may also provide us with a means of structuring appropriate
methods of student evaluation and review. On a 21st century campus which is
totally wired, the paucity of using the 'traditional' methods of assessment
will very quickly become evident. Today's problems of posting homework
questions to the Internet and getting answers within hours will become mundane
compared to what's coming down the 'pike. For example, intelligent agents and
gopher searches could be invoked from a handheld terminal while the lecture
was still in progress - or the exam for that matter! A well-designed
educational program should assess utilization of the technology, rather than
abjure access to it.

### Revisiting An Old Paradigm

In the early 1950s, scientist Norbert Wiener foresaw the extent to which
control and communication would become vital in science and society. His
suggestion was a new grouping of subjects - one which transcends the
traditional academic boundaries and focuses upon the acquisition of
information, its processing, communication, and useful application. Wiener
called it 'cybernetics', derived from the Greek word for steersman. I believe
it is exactly this grouping of topics which is required in present-day
industry and society. Although many parts of technology change rapidly, the
underlying systems principles do not, and it is specifically those system-
level principles and methodologies which need to be emphasized in an
exploratory environment like the one I am proposing here.

I envision such a program would incorporate a mix of specialties which might
currently be found lurking under some of the following headings: information
science, robotics & automation, human factors, computer science, technology
management, cognitive psychology, software engineering, and industrial design.
A fairly eclectic program certainly - in short, a kind of "Media-Lab-For-The-
Rest-Of-Us". The trick is to design a solidly integrated curriculum which
builds an applications-level familiarity with the tools of the trade alongside
an appreciation of the potential capabilities of technical systems. The intent
is to articulate plausible and achievable goals which motivate the students
into accomplishing the Piagetian transition into formal operation.

Undoubtedly, some students in such a program will apply their creativity to
figuring out how to connect Coke machines and Christmas trees to the Internet
- or whatever the latest fad happened to be. But what's important is to ensure
that the participants also develop the competence to understand how the same
networks and systems can help people hunt down literary, philosophical, and
historical material. And to encourage them in exploring their artistic
talents, in examining how to deploy technology on inner city streets or for
third world development, and so on.

### Conclusion

In summary, a world-class technology curriculum must focus on the student's
ability to understand and synthesize knowledge solidly from a number of
backgrounds. In the 21st century, simply accumulating a bunch of disjointed
courses to satisfy some bean- counter's breadth requirements really will not
cut it. The major challenge for university departments will be to adapt to
working in such a framework, to ensure they understand the frequently-
changing information environment, and to re-invent their programs
appropriately.

### Bibliography

"Manufacturing Consent" - Noam Chomsky  
"Computing The Future" - National Research Council  
"Talks to Teachers" - William James  
"Cybernetics" - Norbert Wiener  
"Being and Time" - Martin Heidegger  
"The Design of Everyday Things" - Don Norman  
"Mindstorms" - Seymour Papert  
"Teaching as a Conserving Activity" - Neil Postman  
"Teaching Engineering" - Philip Wankat & Frank Oreovicz  

