## Mus 81: Introduction to Music  
Syllabus

### Dr. Bill Alves \- Spring 2002

#### Scripps Humanities Auditorium, Mon/Wed 1:15-2:30

#### Office: Parsons 1278 - Phone: x74170

This document includes class description, goals, and policies.  
Click here for the course schedule.  
Click here for the contents of the supplemental CDs.  
Click here to go to my list of courses.

* * *

### Class Goals and Background

"Introduction to Music" is perhaps an ambitious name for a course, given the
extreme variety of music now available to us every day, each with its own
history, culture, and theory. Perhaps a more descriptive title would be
"Introduction to Listening," because, while a selection of certain kinds of
music and their background will be introduced, the emphasis will be on
learning to listen.

In today's world we hear music every day: in our homes, in our cars, the
dentist's office, on television, in elevators, and so on. We hear so much
music that we often do not _listen_ , or, at best, we listen passively. In
fact, just by the ubiquitous atmosphere of such music, our society teaches us
that music is a passive experience. At the risk of sounding too sentimental,
learning to listen actively to music and learning more about the music we do
listen to can make the experience of music a profound one.

While listening can be practiced with virtually any kind of music, in this
course we will look specifically at music of fine arts traditions, that is to
say "classical" music, mostly from Europe, but also from a selection of the
other classical traditions around the world. This selection was made not to
imply that these musics are better or more worthy of study than folk, popular,
or other traditions. However, they do have a depth of sophistication, a long,
written tradition, and are often unfamiliar to non-music majors.

For this course, I have the following goals:

  * A familiarity with a few of the most important terms, forms, instruments, and composers from the fine arts music that we will cover; 
  * A basic vocabulary that can be used to describe music of all kinds; 
  * To give you enough familiarity with the styles that we cover that you will be able to place an unknown piece in a particular tradition and period; 
  * A basic understanding of the cultural and historical background to the styles of music we will cover; 
  * Most of all, the enthusiasm to listen, enjoy, and discover new music of all kinds. 
There are **no prerequisites** for this course. I will NOT expect that you
have had any practical experience with music nor that you are able to read
music.

### Required Materials for this Course

  * Kerman, Joseph. _Listen_. Fourth edition. New York: Worth Publishers, 1999. Available at the Huntley Bookstore.

  * _Listen_. Set of 6 CDs. Available at the Huntley Bookstore.

  * A xerox packet to be sold in class and at the Humanities and Social Sciences department office (Parsons 1267).

  * 2 supplemental CDs on reserve in Sprague and Caster Music Room. 

### Office hours

Currently I have set aside MTWF 10:30-11:30 as office hours. However, these
hours will probably change early in the semester, so you may want check the
schedule on the door of my office or contact me first. If you cannot make it
at those times, I would be happy to arrange an appointment at another time. I
also welcome your email (alves@hmc.edu).

### Internet Resources

There are web pages on music fundamentals for this class, as well as quizzes
for self-evaluation. The details of how these pages will be used for the music
fundamentals assignment will be discussed in class. Note that these pages are
not available from clients off the Claremont Colleges campuses.

There are many other resources available on the internet, and I encourage you
to explore on your own.

Discussions, questions, and updates on assignments between classes will be
made through the class electronic mailing list: Mus-81-L. If you are a
preregistered HMC student, you are already subscribed. Otherwise, you will
need to send email to listkeeper@hmc.edu with the following message:

subscribe mus-81-l (The subject line should be blank.) You can get more
information about the mailing list by sending the message "help" (without
quotes) to the same address or by going to the mailing list web gateway. To
distribute your message to this list, send mail to mus-81-l@hmc.edu. Keep in
mind that your message will be distributed to the entire class, not just me.

The schedule and contents of the supplemental CDs for this course are
available on the web, and these documents have extensive links to other
internet resources that I encourage you to exploit. I hope you will also
explore the web on your own, but not to the exclusion of the print resources
available in Caster Music Room and Honnold Library.

### Course Assignments

#### Evaluation

Three exams| 45%  
---|---  
Fundamentals assignment| 10%  
Four concert reports| 16%  
Presentation| 10%  
Final| 15%  
Class participation| 4%  
  
#### Exams

There will be three exams plus a final exam. The final exam will have some
comprehensive components, but it will not be any longer than the other three
exams. Each exam will cover several periods or regions and will include 1)
short answers and term identifications, 2) listening, 3) a short essay. I will
discuss the format and expectations in more detail before the first exam.

#### Fundamentals assignment

As I noted above, there is a set of on-line quizzes of music fundamentals.
Before the first exam, you will complete each of these quizzes. You can take
each quiz as many times as you like, but only the last one will count. There
is also an on-line version of the fundamentals section of your xerox text with
musical examples to help you with this assignment.

#### Concert reports

You will attend at least four concerts during the course of this semester. You
turn in a two page report about the concert along with the concert's program,
two due by spring break (March 15) and two due by the time of the final exam
(May 11 for seniors, May 13 for all others). This report will mention each of
the pieces on the concert and will offer some interpretive analysis of the
pieces according to the parameters we will have discussed in the fundamentals
section of this class. Concerts which are NOT acceptable include:

    * Concerts not heard this semester; 
    * Concerts in which you perform; 
    * Jazz, rock, country, or other popular forms that we will not be covering as much in this class; 
    * Concerts that last less than 45 minutes, such as noon concerts, though in some cases I will allow two such concerts to count as one report; 
    * Musicals, though opera or other forms in which the music is more integral and constant are OK; 
    * Dance recitals in which the music is recorded (unless it was written to be performed that way); 
    * Informal concerts that do not have a program, such as club gigs.  There are plenty of gray areas in the above list. If you are at all in doubt as to whether a concert is appropriate for this assignment, come see me BEFORE you attend the concert. Non-Western concerts are acceptable as long as they meet the above criteria.

#### Presentations

Towards the beginning of the semester you will be assigned to a group to do a
presentation on the works of a classical music composer. The assignment will
be random, though if there is a particular composer you want to do, please let
me know. Each person in the group will do an individual presentation of a
"listening guide" of a particular piece by the composer not on the class CDs.
The presentations of a group should be coordinated so that they complement one
another with a minimum of overlap. Presenters will be evaluated by both myself
and the rest of the class.

#### Class Participation

Because the success of this class and what you get out of it depends very much
on you and your classmates' conscientious participation, you will be graded on
class participation. This includes: regular attendance, keeping up with
assigned readings and listening, contributing to class discussion, and fairly
evaluating your peers' class presentations.

#### Late Assignments

Late assignments will normally be penalized one letter grade per class meeting
late. Because they are a group project, presentations cannot be presented
late. I normally do not allow late exams because of the difficulty of
arranging the listening component, but if a student has a valid, documented
excuse (such as illness with a note from a doctor), then something can usually
be worked out.

* * *

Back to my **list of courses**

Back to my **Home Page**

* * *

Updated on January 18, 2002 by Bill Alves (alves@hmc.edu).

