**Historiography of Communication  
** Comm 3326 - Spring 2000  
Tuesdays 5:20-7:50pm, 1128 CL

Jonathan Sterne  
Office: 1130 CL (mailbox in 1117 CL)  
Office Phone: 624-6797 (I check once a day MTW)  
Email: jsterne+@pitt.edu (I check at least once daily when I'm in town)  
Office hours: by appointment

**Required Books** (available for this course at the Pitt bookstore):

C. Wright Mills. 1959. _The Sociological Imagination_. New York: Oxford.  
John Durham Peters. 1999. _Speaking Into the Air: A History of the Idea of
Communication_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  
Michel Foucault. 1978. _The History of Sexuality, Volume I: An Introduction_
(trans. Robert Hurley). New York: Vintage Books.

**Recommended Books** (sizable chunks are assigned and will be available as
photocopies; you should consider seeking out and purchasing your own copy):

Bonnie Smith. 1998. _The Gender of History_. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.  
Karl Marx, et. al. 1992. _Capital Volume 1: A Critique of Political Economy_.
New York: Penguin Classics.  
Carlo Ginzburg. 1980. _The Cheese and the Worms: The Cosmos of a Sixteenth-
Century Miller_ (trans. John and Anne Tedeschi). Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
University Press.  
Jacques Derrida. 1976. _Of Grammatology_ (trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak).
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.  
Michel Foucault 1980. _Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings
1972-1977_ (ed. Colin Gordon, trans. Colin Gordon, Leo Marshall, John Mepham,
Kate Soper). New York: Pantheon.

**Prospectus**

"Historiography" traditionally denotes three related fields of inquiry: the
philosophy of history, the writing of history, and the history of history.
This course will apply these concerns specifically to the problem of studying
communication and especially media history. How and why would we write
histories of communication? Can we study a single medium or mode of
interaction? How can we usefully delimit historical context? What is
historical context and why should we care, anyway? How can we treat historical
documents as evidence of the past without falling into naive positivism? How
can we consider historical documents as texts without losing the ability to
make claims on reality? Recurring course themes will include the construction
of historical problems and objects; forms and conceptualizations of time and
historical continuity and change; modes of historical description; the
epistemology of archives, documents, and memories; and the state of the fields
of communication historiography.

This course is designed to cultivate a particular orientation toward the task
of writing history and to offer an occasion to reflect upon the writing of
history. It is a not a survey of all major schools of historical or
historiographic thought, or even the major works of communication history.
Though it is concerned with method, it is not a methodology course. As a
consequence, you will not become a communication historian simply by virtue of
completing the readings on the syllabus. Nor will you become a philosopher of
history. This course _will_ trouble both of those mystified positions by
demanding the simultaneous engagement with philosophical and historical
thought and refusing the separation between  "history" and "the philosophy of
history." Too often we hear and read of philosophical reflection "paralyzing"
research, of being somehow above, outside, or up against the work involved in
the crafting of knowledge. Yet sustained, systematic reflection drives the
writing of history; the horizon of all historical claims is ultimately
philosophical. Thus the originality of much historical work is not simply in
the encounter with a unique or arresting document in the archives; it is in
the very questions that drive the writing of history and the ways in which
people seek to answer those questions.



**Requirements**

Etiquette:

1\. Full and complete attendance, attention, participation, listening and
reading.  
2\. Participation in a course mailing list.  
3\. Good faith and good humor toward your colleagues in the classroom and on
the mailing list. For both: disagreements are expected and encouraged, but
please keep nitpicking to a minimum; personal attacks are not acceptable under
any circumstance.

**Product:**

1\. **Public Journals**

I expect a minimal level of extended public reflection on readings and class
discussions in the form of two long (approximately 500 word) posts to the
discussion list over the course of the semester. These can come at any time
(though I will suggest times for those of you who need a little motivation),
and they should not simply be responses to others' messages on the list.
Rather, journals should simply reflect upon a small point raised in the
readings and class discussion, and thereby provide the raw material for a new
discussion thread, should others choose to respond.

2\. **Project Proposal**

No later than mid-way through the semester (though proposals will be accepted
as early as the third week of the course), you will turn in a proposal for
your final project. The proposal should be at least 5 pages and provide a
detailed enough description of the work you plan to do that we can meet and
talk about it. You are welcome to meet with me prior to writing your proposal
as well. The exact nature of the proposal will depend on the option you choose
for your final project; the details are below.

3\. **Final Project**

There are a number of options available. The earlier you commit to one, the
better. All papers should be at least 25 pages (6250 words) in length, conform
to a known academic reference system, and be carefully crafted, formal pieces
of writing. Grades of incomplete are strongly discouraged as they generally
have a negative effect on the quality of the final product.

a) _The Standard Seminar Paper._

This paper will be the result of original, searching, creative, and sustained
thought applied to materials discussed in the course. Additional outside
reading is emphatically encouraged, though it should not substitute for
substantive discussion of significant issues covered in the course.
Advancement of a cogent thesis is also of paramount importance.

Proposals for this option should include a clearly stated hypothesis, a
rationale for your object of inquiry, a discussion of approach, and a line of
reading that will facilitate further development and refinement of your ideas.

b) _Historical Revision:_

Revision is not a skill often taught in graduate school, but it should be.
This is your chance to take a piece of historical writing you've already begun
and revise it, using the course to refine your thinking about the material and
develop your historiographic personality. Keep in mind that the purpose of
this option is to facilitate extended reflection upon research you have
already undertaken; it is not simply to facilitate further research.

Proposals for this option should include a discussion of the project as it
currently stands; a substantive plan for further revision - especially in
terms of philosophical, critical, stylistic, and interpretive issues; a
discussion of other work that you need to do in order to be able to rewrite
the paper (such as additional outside reading or revisiting source materials).
You should also append a copy of the current version of the paper to the
proposal.

c) _Mapping a trajectory:_

This is the standard "literature review" option with a few twists. In addition
to characterizing the subfield that you wish to pursue (note that this does
not mean simply summarizing others' work), this project should include a
discussion of how you intend to situate yourself in this field and how the
range of philosophical positions it deploys relates to the philosophical
stance you hope to embody or articulate in your own project (the latter should
be defined _positively_ ). You may also wish to devote a section of this paper
to the practical side of research: the mechanics of the research process as
you imagine it, possible sites, collections, archives that will facilitate
your research, grant monies available, etc.

Proposals for this option should include a description of your chosen
subfield, a planned line of reading, and initial impressions of
characteristics and problems in your chosen subfield or hypotheses that you
want to advance.

d) _Metahistoriography:_

This is the "application" paper, similar to the seminar paper in style,
similar in the trajectory paper in direction, but differing in consistency.
Here, you will focus on the characterization and critique of a very small
sample of historical or historiographic writing - ranging from a single work
(book, article) to a very few - as the substance of your analysis, rather than
surveying a larger field as a prelude to analysis (in contrast to option {c}
above). Here the task is not merely a "close reading" of historical writing,
but a vigorous and thorough analysis of it through some of the protocols you
will have developed over the course of the semester.

Proposals for this option should include a discussion of what documents will
be examined, their significance, a planned line of reading, a discussion of
your planned approach and any hypotheses you have.

e) I am open to other approaches. Please discuss your ideas with me prior to
the fourth week of class if you plan to do something other than one of the
four above papers.

  
**Course Outline**

All readings required [except for recommended readings, which are in
brackets]. Additional recommended readings may be announced.

**I. Fundamentals**

11 January: **Apologia**

> On **** the history of communication history and its relation to the history
of history; on the course; on the relationship of theory and history; on
research; on documents.

18 January: **Subjects and Objects of History**

> Mills, C. Wright. 1959. _The Sociological Imagination._ New York: Oxford
University Press. (Save the appendix for next week.)

>

> Smith, Bonnie. 1998. "The Practices of Scientific History," in _The Gender
of History_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, pp. 103-129.

>

> [Smith, Bonnie. 1998. "Introduction: Gender and the Mirror of History," in
_The Gender of History_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, pp. 1-13.]

25 January: **Creativity - and the Banality of Method**

> Mills, C. Wright. 1959. "Appendix: On Intellectual Craftsmanship," in _The
Sociological Imagination._ New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 195-226.

>

> Bourdieu, Pierre. 1993. "The Practice of Reflexive Sociology (The Paris
Seminar)," in Pierre Bourdieu and Loic J.D. Wacquant, _An Invitation to
Reflexive Sociology_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 217-253.

>

> Smith, Bonnie. 1998. "The Narcotic Road to the Past," in _The Gender of
History_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, pp. 14-36.

>

> Deleuze, Gilles and Felix Guattari. 1994. "Conclusion: From Chaos to the
Brain" in _What is Philosophy?_ (trans. Hugh Tomlinson and Graham Burchell).
New York: Cornell University Press, pp. 201-218.

>

> [Deleuze, Gilles. 1977. "I Have Nothing to Admit," _Semiotext(e)_ 2:3, pp.
110-116.]

1 February: **Historical Time**

> Braudel, Fernand. 1972. "History and Social Science _,_ " in _Economy and
Society in Early Modern Europe_ (ed. Peter Burke). London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul, pp. 11-42.

>

> Williams, Raymond. 1977. "Hegemony," "Traditions, Institutions, and
Formations," "Dominant, Residual and Emergent," and "Structures of Feeling" in
_Marxism and Literature_. New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 108-135.

>

> Benjamin, Walter. 1968/1950. "Theses on the Philosophy of History,"
_Illuminations: Essays and Reflections_ (trans. Harry Zohn, ed. Hannah
Arendt). New York: Schocken, pp. 253-264.

>

> Fabian, Johannes. 1983. "Time and the Emerging Other," in _Time and the
Other: How Anthropology Makes Its Object_. New York: Columbia University
Press, pp. 1-36.

>

> [Marx, Karl. 1990/1867. Introduction to "The Process of Accumulation of
Capital" and "Simple Reproduction" in _Capital, Vol I_ : _A Critique of
Political Economy_ (trans. Ben Fowkes, intro. Ernest Mandel). New York:
Penguin Classics, pp. 709-724.]

8 February: **Communication as a Variable in and Object of Historiography**

> Peters, John Durham. 1999. _Speaking Into Air: A History of the Idea of
Communication_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.



**II. Critical Realism**

15 February: **The Practice of Historical Materialism**

> Marx, Karl. 1990/1867. "The So-Called Primitive Accumulation" in _Capital,
Vol 1_ : _A Critique of Political Economy_ (trans. Ben Fowkes, intro. Ernest
Mandel). New York: Penguin Classics, pp. 873-940.

>

> [The introductory theoretical section of _Capital_ is recommended:  "The
Commodity," "The Process of Exchange," and "Money, Or the Circulation of
Commodities," pp. 125-244.]

>

> McChesney, Robert. 1993. "Conflict, Not Consensus: The Debate Over Broadcast
Communication Policy, 1930-1935," in _Ruthless Criticism: New Perspectives in
U.S. Communication History_ , eds. William S. Solomon and Robert W. McChesney.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, pp. 222-258.

>

> Martin, Michele. 1991. "Introduction" pp. 3-14 and "The Culture of the
Telephone" in _'Hello, Central?'' Gender, Technology and Culture in the
Formation of Telephone Systems_. Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press,
pp. 3-14, 140-166.

22 February: **Cultural History I: How to Do Things With Experience**

> Ginzburg, Carlo. 1980. "Preface to the English Edition," "Preface to the
Italian Edition," Sections 1-29 in _The Cheese and the Worms: The Cosmos of a
Sixteenth-Century Miller_ (trans. John and Anne Tedeschi). Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins University Press, pp. xi-61.

>

> [The rest of the book is recommended and is available from the reserve desk
at Hillman library.]

>

> Douglas, Susan. 1987. "Introduction," _Inventing American Broadcasting
1899-1922_. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, pp. xv-xxix.

>

> Cohen, Lizabeth. 1990. "Introduction" and "Encountering Mass Culture" in
_Making a New Deal: Industrial Workers in Chicago, 1919-1939_. New York:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 1-9, 99-158.

>

> Chartier, Roger. 1997. "Introduction: An Ordinary Kind of Writing: Model
Letters and the Ancien Regime in France" in Roger Chartier, Alain Boureau, and
Cecile Dauphin, _Correspondence: Models of Letter-Writing from the Middle Ages
to the Nineteenth Century_ (trans. Christopher Wendell). Princeton: Princeton
University Press, pp. 1-23.

29 February: **Cultural History II: The Problem of Context**

> Anderson, Benedict. 1991. "Introduction," "Cultural Roots," "The Origins of
National Consciousness," "Creole Pioneers" in _Imagined Communities:
Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (Revised Edition)_. New
York: Verso, pp. 1-65.

>

> Gilroy, Paul. 1993. "The Black Atlantic as a Counterculture of Modernity" in
_The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness_. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, pp. 1-40.

>

> Wallerstein, Immanuel. 1994. "Historical Systems as Complex Systems," and
"Call for a Debate about the Paradigm" in _Unthinking Social Science: The
Limits of Nineteenth-Century Paradigms_. Cambridge: Polity Press, pp. 229-256.



7 March **Spring Break 2000!**



**III. Textuality**

14 March: **Textual Dimensions of Historical Documents and Writing**

> White, Hayden. 1978/1966. "The Burden of History" in _Tropics of Discourse:
Essays in Cultural Criticism_. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press,
pp. 27-50.

>

> ______. 1973. "Preface," "Introduction: The Poetics of History" and
"Conclusion" in _Metahistory: The Historical Imagination in Nineteenth-Century
Europe_. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, pp. ix-42, 426-434.

>

> ______. 1987. "The Question of Narrative in Contemporary Historical Theory,"
in _the Content of the Form: Narrative Discourse and Historical
Representation._ Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, pp. 26-57.

>

> LaCapra, Dominick. 1985. "Rhetoric and History" in _History and Criticism_.
New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 15-44.

21 March: **Deconstruction as Historiographic Stance**

> Derrida, Jacques. 1976. "Preface" and "Writing Before the Letter" in _Of
Grammatology_ (trans. Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak). Baltimore: The Johns
Hopkins University Press, pp. lxxxix-93.

>

> [Spivak's "Translator's Preface," pp. ix-lxxxvii, is recommended]

>

> [Derrida, Jacques. 1981. "Implications: An Interview with Henri Ronse" in
_Positions_ (trans. Alan Bass). Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.
3-14]

28 March: **How to Happily Write History While Living With Deconstruction**

> Derrida, Jacques. 1986. "Declarations of Independence," _New Political
Science_ 15 (Summer), pp. 7-15.

>

> Scott, Joan. 1988. "Introduction" and "Gender: A Useful Category for
Historical Analysis" in _Gender and the Politics of History_. New York:
Columbia University Press, pp. 1-11 and 28-52.

>

> Warner, Michael. 1990. "The Cultural Mediation of the Print Medium" and "The
_Res Publica_ of Letters" in _the Letters of the Republic: Publication and the
Public Sphere in Eighteenth-Century America_. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, pp. 1-72.



**IV. Genealogy**

4 April: **Genealogy at Work**

> Foucault, Michel. 1978. _The History of Sexuality Volume I: An Introduction_
(trans. Robert Hurley). New York: Vintage Books.

>

> ______. 1985. "Introduction: Modifications," in _The History of Sexuality
Volume 2: The Use of Pleasure_ (trans. Robert Hurley). New York: Vintage
Books, pp. 1-13.

>

> [______. 1980. "The History of Sexuality" and "The Confession of the Flesh"
in _Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972-1977_ (ed.
Colin Gordon, trans. Colin Gordon, Leo Marshall, John Mepham, Kate Soper). New
York: Pantheon, pp. 183-228.]

11 April: **Genealogy as Historiographic Stance**

> Nietzsche, Freidrich. 1967/1887. "Preface" and "'Good and Evil,' 'Good and
Bad,'" in _On the Genealogy of Morals and Ecce Homo_ (ed. Walter Kauffman,
trans. Walter Kauffman and R.J. Hollingdale). New York: Vintage, pp. 15-56.

>

> Foucault, Michel. 1972. "Appendix: The Discourse on Language" in _The
Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language_ (trans. A.M. Sheridan
Smith). New York: Pantheon Books, pp. 215-237.

>

> ______. 1977. "Nietzsche, Genealogy, History" and "History of Systems of
Thought" in _Language, Counter-Memory, Practice: Selected Essays and
Interviews_ (ed. Donald F. Bouchard, trans. Donald F. Bouchard and Sherry
Simon). Ithaca: Cornell University Press, __ pp. 139-164, 199-204.

>

> ______. 1991. "Questions of Method" in _The Foucault Effect: Studies in
Governmentality with Two Lectures and an Interview with Michel Foucault_ (ed.
Graham Burchell, Colin Gordon, and Peter Miller). Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press, pp. 73-86.

>

> [_____. 1998. "Foucault" in _Michel Foucault: Aesthetics, Method, and
Epistemology, Essential Works of Foucault 1954-1984 Volume 2_ (ed. James
Faubion, trans. Robert Hurley and others). New York: The New Press, pp.
459-464.]

>

> [_____. 1980. "Two Lectures," "Truth and Power," and "The Eye of Power" in
_Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings 1972-1977_ (ed. Colin
Gordon, trans. Colin Gordon, Leo Marshall, John Mepham, Kate Soper). New York:
Pantheon, pp. 78-133, 146-165.]

18 April: **Media Genealogies**

> Tagg, John. 1988. "A Means of Surveillance: The Photograph as Evidence in
Law," in _The Burden of Representation: Essays on Photographies and
Histories._ Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, __ pp. 66-103.

>

> Hunter, Ian, David Saunders and Dugald Williamson. 1993. "Preface,"
"Introduction" and "The Pornographic Field" in _On Pornography: Literature,
Sexuality and Obscenity Law_. London: Macmillan, pp. vii-56.

>

> Bolter, Jay David and Richard Grusin. 1996. "Remediation" _Configurations_
4:3 (Fall), pp. 311-358.

25 April: **Unravelling or Resolution, depending. . . .**

> The fundamental problems of communication historiography, revisited.

[Back]

Copyright 2000 Jonathan Sterne  

