##  World Environmental History

####  HST 421

**Dr Todd.F. Carney** **** Office: 118 Taylor 552-6646 Email: tcarney@sou.edu
Office Hours: M,W 10a-12p; T,R 9-10a

* * *

_Course Description_ : HST 421 will be an exploration into the historical
relationship between human society and the Earth in Europe, Africa, Asia, and
the Americas. Themes to be explored include human ecology in history, nature
and state power, traditional versus modern land use, human culture and
environment, industrial transformation, capitalist development, conservation
and environmentalism, religion and nature, and historians and the environment.
This will be a combination lecture and discussion course.

The course has been designed for upper-division students of all majors.
Freshmen should see the instructor before remaining in the class. Students
with weak backgrounds in world history would benefit from keeping a few survey
textbooks available for consultation.

* * *

Course Materials:

  * _Environmental History Review_ articles packet. These articles will acquaint you with environmental history around the world. The professor will announce the reading schedule each week in class.

In addition to specific materials assigned in this syllabus or in class
meetings, you are encouraged to make use of the SOU library. Of particular
value are the following reference items:

  * _Encyclopedia of Environmental Biology_ , 3 Vols., Ref. QH540.4.E52
  * _Environmental Encyclopedia_ (Ref. GE10.E57)
  * _Harper Collins Dictionary of Environmental Science_
  * _The Environmentalists: A Biographical Encyclopedia from the 17th Century to the Present_ (Ref. S926.A2A94)
  * _Chronology of World History_ (Ref. D11.F75 1975b)
  * _Hutchison Dictionary of World History_ (Ref. D9H87x 1993)
  * _The Times Atlas of World History_ (Ref. G1030.T54 1979)
  * _Dictionary of American History_ (8 Vols, 1978) (Ref. E174.D52)
  * _Encyclopedia of American History_ , ed. Richard B. Morris (1982) (Ref. E174.5.E52)
  * _The National Atlas_ (1973) (Ref. atlas case)

Items of interest can also be found on RogueLinx under the headings
"Environment" and "Human Ecology."  

* * *

**_Course Requirements_**

**_Monograph and Interpretive Book Review_** : Each student will select a
substantive monographic book in environmental history from a list to be
distributed later, read it, and write a 1500 - 2000 word interpretive review
(the meaning of this will be explained in detail). Papers must be typed,
double-spaced, with one-inch margins on all sides. Two copies of each paper
must be submitted as one will be placed on library reserve (without instructor
comments or grades) for other class members to read.

All papers must be properly spell-checked and proof-read. Papers with more
than three spelling or typographical errors will be returned, ungraded, for
correction. 100 points.

**_Exams_** : There will be one midterm examination and a final. Both will be
of the take-home essay type. Because of the nature of the subject, the final
examination will be comprehensive.

**_Attendance_** : Since class meetings will often deal with material not
found in assigned materials, and since discussion sessions will be frequent,
attendance is mandatory. Students are expected to arrive prepared for
discussions or other class activity as scheduled. Participation will count for
10% of your total grade.

**_Grading_** : Final letter grades will be based on a percentage of the total
points possible. No curve will be used, but overall class scores will be
considered in determining final letter grades.

Please keep in mind the meaning of those letters as indicated in the Class
Schedule :

  * A = Exceptional accomplishment
  * B = Superior
  * C = Average
  * D = Inferior
  * F = Failed

Pluses and minuses will be used to further refine the grading. Please
understand that high grades are earned, not given. You build your grade from
the bottom up rather than being "marked-off" from the top down. Your "usual"
grades in other courses have no bearing on your grades in this course. No
grade better than a "B" will be given for work that does not represent
exceptional scholarly accomplishment.

**_Office Hours_** : Office hour times are listed at the top of the first page
of this syllabus. If you cannot meet during posted times, see the instructor
for an appointment. Please note: In order to avoid interrupting students who
come during office hours, the instructor will not receive phone calls during
those times. You can leave a message at any time by phoning and waiting for
the voice mail system to activate. Be sure to leave your phone number so your
call may be returned if necessary.

* * *

**_Other Items of Note_** :

  * 1\. Lectures and other course meetings are open only to students who are properly registered in Hst 421. It is the responsibility of each student to verify such registration. No unregistered person will be allowed to attend lectures or other course meetings without the consent or invitation of the instructor.
  * 2\. Lectures are provided for instructional purposes only and remain the intellectual property of the instructor. Other uses are prohibited. Lecture material is covered by copyright (Title 17 U.S. Code).
  * 3\. Lectures and other course meetings may not be tape recorded without the instructor's written consent. Consent will be granted only in cases where the student is physically unable to take notes by hand.
  * 4\. Students are expected to adhere to all the rules and regulations of Southern Oregon University regarding conduct and academic honesty.
  * 5\. The professor reserves the right to make changes to this syllabus that will become effective when announced in class meetings.

* * *

###  Packet Readings

**Specific reading assignments will be made weekly in class.**  

Conceptualizing Nature, Culture, and History

  * Braudel, _The Mediterranean_ , Preface and Table of Contents.

East and South Asia

  * McKean, "The Japanese Experience with Scarcity: Management of Traditional Common Lands."
  * Hughes, "Mencius' Prescriptions for Ancient Chinese Environmental Problems."
  * Hou, "The Environmental Crisis in China and the Case for Environmental History Studies."
  * Pyne, "Nataraja: India's Cycle of Fire."
  * Hill, "Riparian Legislation and Agrarian Control in Colonial Bengal."

Anglo South Pacific and Africa

  * Dunlap, "Australian Nature, European Culture."
  * Crosby, "Biotic Change in Nineteenth-Century New Zealand."
  * Olson, "Environments as Shock Absorbers, Examples from Madagascar."
  * Hackel and Carruthers, "Swaziland's Twentieth Century Wildlife Preservation Efforts."
  * Somma, "Ecological Flight: Explaining the Move From Country to City in Developing Nations."

Ancient and Medieval Europe

  * Vest, "Wilderness Among Primal Indo-Europeans."
  * Rubner, "Greek Thought and Forest Science."
  * TeBrake, "Land Drainage and Public Environmental Policy in Medieval Holland."

Early-Modern and Modern Europe

  * Crosby, "A Renaissance Change in European Cognition."
  * Crosby, "An Ecohistory of the Canary Islands."
  * Steinberg, "An Ecological Perspective on the Origins of Industrialization."
  * Bruggemeier, "The Environmental History of the Ruhr Basin."
  * Simmons, "The Earliest Cultural Landscapes of England."
  * Merchant, "Hydraulic Technologies and the Agricultural Transformation of the English Fens."

Latin and Native America

  * McNeill, "Agriculture, Forests, and Ecological History: Brazil, 1500-1984."
  * MacCameron, "Environmental Change in Colonial New Mexico."

* * *

###  Go to History Department Home Page

###  Go to Prof. Carney's Home Page

* * *

###  Go to SOU Home Page

