![\[Back\]](../graphics/back.gif)![\[Home\]](../graphics/home.gif)![\[Syllabus\]](../graphics/syllabus.gif)![\[Forward\]](../graphics/forward.gif)

* * *

## The Legal Basis for Fish and Wildlife Management in the U.S.



Erik Fritzell, Department of Fisheries and Wildlife,

Oregon State University



There is little doubt that wild, free-ranging populations of wildlife species
have significant value to people. Depending on a diversity of personal and
social perspectives and situations, the values can be positive or negative.
But many people just dont care even though wildlife has much to do with the
planets ability to sustain their lives. Whose responsibility is it to watch
out for wildlife to balance the needs of humans with the long-term stewardship
of this resource?

One hopes that all citizens accept some responsibility for ensuring the future
for wildlife, yet we (society) have assigned leadership for its conservation
to governments through a long, evolving legal history. To understand ones
personal responsibilities toward wildlife, it is useful to know who is in
charge. If one is involved professionally, it is essential to know what you
can do, what you should do, and what you must do in relation to wildlife. The
purpose of this section is to describe the legal status of wildlife in the
United States and how it has developed over the decades.

[The background for this chapter is drawn heavily from the work of Michael
Bean, _The Evolution of Wildlife Law_ and some of his more recent writings]

**Wildlife law in the United States is derived from British common law.**
Legal authority for wildlife in the United States is a shared responsibility.
The federal government, state governments and, in some cases, tribal
governments carry the ultimate say in issues relating to fish and wildlife.
That is why, for example, one needs a federal permit to construct a building
near a nest of an endangered speciesor a state permit to hunt deer. How did
such a division of authority come about?

As is the case with many of our laws, the foundation of wildlife law is found
in Greek and Roman law. In ancient Rome, things took on various legal
classifications relative to the citizenry. Wildlife was considered _res
nullius-_ the property of no one. It had the same status as air and the waters
of the seas. Yet, unlike air, when animals were killed or captured they could
become property of the individual doing so. Through the centuries of the
Middle Ages control of wildlife evolved variously throughout Europe, but the
legal heritage of the United States is traced by British traditions. In
England, the changes usually consisted of the ruling class assuming greater
and greater control. By the 12th century, the king had assumed authority over
wildlife and often used access to his wildlife as favors to his supporters in
the form of franchises. For example, the king may have issued the franchise of
park to certain individuals to pursue red deer, foxes, or martens on their own
land, or the franchise of chase to hunt them on other people,s lands. It may
be useful to recall the legend of Robin Hood in this regard
![---](../graphics/emdash.gif) and the severe penalties invoked for killing
"the Kings Deer."

When King John signed the Magna Charta in 1215, he gave up Royal ownership of
wildlife and certain classes of lands and waters. But this was not simple
conveyance of property. Wildlife was to be held in public trust by the Crown
for the people of England. As we will see, this Public Trust Doctrine is the
basis for how wildlife conservation is carried out today-government does not
own wildlife as one would own a book or bicycle, but it has the responsibility
to care for wildlife for the benefit of the citizens. Deciding "which
government" is an evolving theme in our history.

**Martin vs. Waddell (1842) established public trust authority.** The
important legal relationship between private and public interests in wildlife
was formally established in 1842. Martin was seeking to claim exclusive
ownership of oysters from beds adjacent to his land along Raritan River in New
Jersey. He traced his title to a land grant from King Charles II to the Duke
of York during the 17th century. In those documents, the granted property
included land, water, and the fish and wildlife residing there. U.S. Supreme
Court Justice Roger Taney, however, declared that  "dominion and property" in
the lands and waters were not the Kings to give away in the first place. Taney
declared that the Magna Charta had settled the ownership question, and that
since the American Revolution, the people of New Jersey held the public trust
responsibilities for fish and wildlife![---](../graphics/emdash.gif)except for
those rights specified in the U.S. Constitution.



**Ineffective state control led to federal initiatives involving specific
Constitutional powers during the early 20th century.** Martin vs. Waddell laid
the groundwork for states to carry out the trust responsibilities relative to
fish and wildlife. Their effectiveness in doing so, however, was mixed at
best. The latter half of the 19th century was characterized by
overexploitation of resources never seen before or since. Decimation of bison,
elk, pronghorn, and deer herds; extermination of the passenger pigeon,
Carolina parakeet, and heath hen; and abuse of the nations land and water left
fish and wildlife with a grim future. Even though game laws were enacted in
all states by the 1880s, efforts to enforce them and establish conservation
programs within individual states were overwhelmed by greed and corrupt
politicians.

The 10th Amendment of the Constitution appeared to give states jurisdiction
over wildlife![---](../graphics/emdash.gif)a view confirmed in _Geer vs.
Connecticut_ (1896). At the time, some states were trying to halt the
commercial exploitation of game by outlawing its sale on the open market.
Edgar Geer had killed some game birds in Connecticut where sale was outlawed,
but was trying to ship them to New York where sale of game was still legal.
Geer maintained that Connecticut was impeding his ability to conduct
_interstate commerce_ , a role reserved for the federal government. The
Supreme Court ruled against Geer, and declared that the states property right
in game was to be exercised as a trust for the benefit of the people of the
state. _Geer vs. Connecticut_ is considered the bulwark of states authority
over wildlife, but it remains controversial because it does so in terms of
ownership.



**The Lacey Act (1900) begins federal involvement in wildlife conservation.**
By the turn of the century, mounting pressure on Congress from newly formed
conservation groups, such as the Boone and Crockett Club and the Audubon
Society, demanded that the federal government become involved in wildlife
conservation. Despite growing national awareness, however, legal action needed
to have constitutional authority. The power of Congress to control interstate
commerce was used to initiate federal involvement in wildlife conservation.
The Lacey Act prohibits transportation across state lines of wildlife killed
in violation of state laws. This first federal wildlife law has been amended
(and expanded in scope) and is significant in controlling transportation of
illegally taken wildlife today.

Treaty-making power of the Constitution provides the authority for federal
jurisdiction over migratory birds. Continued ineffectual state efforts seemed
to call for better federal legislation. In 1913, Congress passed the Migratory
Bird Act, declaring that migratory game and insectivorous birds were within
the custody and protection of the federal government. The courts soon found
the act unconstitutional, largely because the federal government based their
case on the interstate commerce power. (They apparently rationalized that if
birds migrated across state borders they then constituted "commerce"). Then,
in 1916, the government concluded a treaty with Great Britain (on behalf of
Canada). The two countries agreed to cooperate in the conservation of birds
that migrated across their common borders. Congress implemented the treaty in
the Migratory Bird Treaty Act in 1918. A variety of restrictions were
included, such as prohibition on taking migratory birds during spring. States
soon challenged the Act. When Ray Holland, a well-known federal game warden,
arrested the attorney general of Missouri for spring duck shooting, the state
sued to have the Act declared unconstitutional. Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes
issued the supreme court decision in _Missouri vs. Holland_. He emphatically
upheld the Treaty and the Act, giving the federal government a strong basis
for leading the conservation and management of migratory birds. In subsequent
years, many treaties were established for migratory birds (with such as
countries as Mexico and the Soviet Union) and for other purposes in which the
common interests of diverse countries is significant.

**Property power provides authority for some kinds of wildlife management on
federal lands**. The constitution provides that Congress can make rules
regarding the territory and property belonging to the United States. But how
far can it go? Certainly rules restricting hunting on wildlife refuges were
considered valid, just as private landowners can restrict activity on their
property. But can the federal government remove wildlife without respect to
state law? Several court cases have established the authority of the federal
government to remove wildlife to protect government property from damage.
_Kleppe vs. New Mexico_ (1976) opened the door for federal action on federal
lands without regard for state laws. State officials removed protected wild
burros at the request of a grazing permittee, but the Bureau of Land
Management demanded that they be brought back. The federal court decreed that
federal authority _may_ be superior to that of the states in some situations
but the extent of the authority is far from clear.

**The states public trust authority for fish and wildlife has expanded in
recent decades.** Although the preceding may suggest that states have "lost"
authority to the federal government during much of the 20th century, the role
of states in carrying out public trust responsibilities has expanded. State
responsibilities are apparent especially in the civil courts where states have
sued for damages incurred by private individuals and businesses. The states
continue to retain primary authority over resident wildlife (most mammals,
reptiles, amphibians, fish etc.).

**Only recently have courts recognized the primacy of treaty rights retained
by Indian tribes.** During the 1970s and 80s, many tribes sought resolution of
treaty claims. As a result, many tribal governments have become equal partners
with state and federal governments in the conservation of fish and wildlife.
Although every treaty is different and the details vary considerably, two
general types of responsibilities are involved: rights to take wildlife on
reservation lands and rights to take wildlife on "ceded
lands"![---](../graphics/emdash.gif)lands given up by the tribes, but where
hunting, fishing, and other practices were specifically protected by treaty.
Tribal authority for wildlife conservation on reservation lands has usually
been considered paramount to state authority, but the relationship between
federal government and tribal governments is less clear. Somewhat ironically,
the federal government also has a public trust relationship to the tribes.
Federal conservation authority may supersede that of tribal authority in most
cases, but in practice, tribal governments have assumed increasing
responsibilities.

**Legal status of wildlife in other countries contrasts to the legal system in
the United States.** Although highly variable around the world, wildlife does
not always enjoy status as a public trust resource. For example, in many
European countries, wildlife is the property of the landowner. Landowners may
do whatever they please with wildlife![---](../graphics/emdash.gif) including
killing game and selling it. (But they may also be liable for damages caused
by depredations.) Economic incentives for conservation have been more
prominent, and the role of governments much less, than in the United States.

### Recommended Readings

Adams, D.A. 1993. _Renewable resource policy_. Island Press, Washington, D.C.
557pp.

Bean, M. J. 1977. _The evolution of wildlife law_. Council of Environmental
Quality, Washington DC. 485 pp.

Trefethen, J. B. 1975. _An American crusade for wildlife_. Boone and Crockett
Club/Winchester Press, NY. 409 pp.



### Discussion Questions

(1) What is the Public Trust? Identify other trust relationships within human
institutions. What is a trustee?



(2) Discuss why so much of the legal basis for wildlife management has been
based on game and hunting?



(3) Identify 510 species for which federal authority is paramount and 510
species for which state authority is paramount.



(4) Investigate and discuss the legal status of wildlife in another country.
How does it differ from that in the U.S.?



(5) Why is the Magna Charta so important to U.S. legal history? Review how it
relates to legal status of wildlife.



(6) The U.S. Constitution does not mention wildlife. So why is it so
important? What specific parts of it are key to an understanding of wildlife
conservation?



(7) Compare and contrast the key elements of two important Supreme Court
casesMartin vs. Waddell and Missouri vs. Holland.







* * *

![\[Back\]](../graphics/back.gif)![\[Home\]](../graphics/home.gif)![\[Syllabus\]](../graphics/syllabus.gif)![\[Forward\]](../graphics/forward.gif)

