**PHM 3100, Freedom and Justice (Social Philosophy),   Fall, 2000
Dr. Nancy Stanlick**  
**University of Central Florida
Office:  HFA 411-I**  
**MWF, 12:00-12:50, COMM 110              Office Hours:  MWF 11-11:45, M
4-5:00, W 3:30-4:15 & by appt.**  
**Phone:   407-823-5459
E-mail:   stanlick@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu**  
**Dept. Phone:   407-823-2273**  

* * *

**On-Line Syllabus**

* * *

  
_It is not required that you use this on-line syllabus beyond copying it for
general reference, but it is strongly suggested that you do.   Announcements,
links, review questions (if applicable), and other information relevant to
this course will appear here.  If you need copies of review questions or this
syllabus, computer labs may be used, or you can use your own computer and
printer._  

* * *

**Quick Links (some are under construction - in red):** **Academic Integrity**
| **Message Board: For on-line review& discussion** | **Electronic Books** |
**Return to My Home Page** | **Go to Dept. of Philosophy Web-site**  
---|---|---|---|---  
**Lecture Notes** | **Review Questions** | **Paper Requirements** |    |  
  |   |   |   |  
  
* * *

  
**General Course Description and Objective:**   PHM 3100, Freedom and Justice,
is a course in Social Philosophy,  a philosophical inquiry into the nature of
individual rights and the concept of justice, whether for the individual or
for the society in which one lives.   It is often difficult to define exactly
the term 'Social Philosophy' - it concerns most issues found in ethics and
many from political philosophy, but it transcends both of them.  It concerns
the place of the individual in society, as well as the place of society and
the individual in a political context.   In this semester, we will focus
primarily on the issues of **EQUALITY, RIGHTS (FREEDOM), AUTHORITY, AND
JUSTICE**.   The objective of this course is to provide a comprehensive view
of some of the perennial questions of social philosophy, to increase one's
appreciation and understanding of the nature of philosophical inquiry and
reasoning,  and to provide significant development and exercise of critical
and analytical ability.

**Text** :  There are 6 books required for the course (all of them are very
reasonably priced) and there may be additional information provided on-line or
on reserve as needed.  The books are:

1\. **_Equality_ ,** ed. David Johnston, Hackett Publishing Company, 2000.  An
anthology of works on the issues of human and political equality.

2\. **_Theories of Rights_** , ed. Jeremy Waldron, Oxford UP, 1984.  Another
anthology, this one dealing with absolute rights, natural rights, and the
relationship between ethics and rights.

3.  Thomas Paine, **_The Rights of Man_** , ed. Gregory Claeys, Hackett Publishing Co., 1992.  This is a classic, original work published in 1791-92 as a response to Edmund Burke's _Reflections on the Revolution in France_ (1790) and is now recognized generally as an important defense of universal natural (human) rights.

4.  John Stuart Mill, **_On Liberty_** , ed. Elizabeth Rapaport, Hackett Publishing Company, 1978.  Another classic original work, published for the first time in 1859 and remains an enduring and important work on censorship, paternalism, and the autonomy and integrity of the individual.

5\. **_Authority_** , ed. Joseph Raz, New York UP, 1990.  Another anthology,
this one on the authority of government and law, and the place of the
individual in a larger political and moral context.

6\. **_Justice_** , ed. Jonathan Westphal, Hackett Publishing Company, 1996.
Finally, another anthology, this time on the closing (of this course) theme of
justice.  Works range from the period of Ancient Greece to the present,
dealing with issues relating justice to equality, to authority, to economic
systems, to political representation, and the distribution of natural and
social resources.

**A note about this course** :  Sometimes it is useful to know the structure
of a course you are taking, and how it is intended by the instructor to play
itself out.  Suppose that the following things are true.  A person's autonomy,
integrity and dignity are to be upheld, protected and respected by others and
no government, no society, no religious institution, and no other person has
any legitimate right to interfere with the actions, beliefs, or ways of life
of others EXCEPT in cases in which the actions of a person or group pose a
definite, immediate, or imminent danger to others.  Suppose that Mill is right
that over his own body and mind, the individual is sovereign.  Suppose that
human beings are fundamentally equal in a moral, social and political sense,
and that as intelligent, rational beings, we are capable of understanding that
all human beings possess rights (or ought to possess them) that are
inalienable.  Suppose that we set up governmental and social institutions
rightly for the purpose of protecting and upholding our individual rights,
dignity, humanity, and autonomy.  Suppose, at same time, that those
institutions, as well as individuals, may pose a threat to those things we
hold most valuable even though government and the social institutions created
by government are ideally designed to ensure against abuses.  Further, assume
that a conception of justice that does not manifest itself in protection of
the individual from insidious forces that would violate his rights is not a
true conception of justice at all.  If you suppose and assume these things,
just for the sake of argument, just for the sake of understanding the
structure of the course, you will see why the course is organized around the
themes of EQUALITY, RIGHTS, AUTHORITY AND JUSTICE; you will see how these
themes are related; and you will be armed with the information not only to
understand the world in which we live and our relations with others, but also,
perhaps, you will be able to take this information, these theories, these
arguments about our relations with each other, and apply them also to other
animals, the environment, and the world as a whole.  Our knowledge of these
things may illuminate our responsibilities to ourselves, to others, and to
other beings, institutions, and living things, and help us all to understand
how this knowledge is applicable to the personal and social realms in which we
live.

**Course Requirements, Grades, Attendance Policy, and Related Issues:**

**Requirements:** Two examinations/tests and two short papers are required and
determine your grade for the course.  Tests will be primarily essay-based,
though some questions may be in "objective" format.  Tests will be announced
prior to their administration (as well as listed in the syllabus schedule,
below).  Tests will be based on readings and lectures completed or assigned
prior to the date of their administration.  Both tests are sectional tests.
Tests and papers count equally in determining your final grade.

Click here for important information about academic integrity.

**Grades and Grading Scale:** A, 90-100; B, 80-89; C, 70-79; D, 60-69.

**Attendance Policy:** Attendance is strongly encouraged and expected but it
is not considered in determining your grade for the course.  You do not get
"credit" for showing up for class - being in class is (one would think) a
given.  Much of the material covered in class may not appear in the text.
Though I will not take attendance on a regular basis (or at all), your
participation in class and your attentive presence can and will make a very
significant difference in your appreciation of the issues, problems, theories
and subject-matter we will discuss - and in your grade.  If you miss a class,
you are responsible for obtaining notes and any other information or
assignments you missed.  Office hours are held to clarify issues, to provide
assistance, and otherwise attend to academic matters relevant to this course.
They are not held to repeat a lecture already given in class.

**Missed Tests:** If you are not present on a day on which the first test is
administered and if you have missed class for a good, legitimate, and
_verifiable_ reason, you may make it up within 2 class meeting days of its
initial administration.   Be aware that a test taken late may be in a
different format from the one given on the original test date.  After 2 class
meeting days, you may not take the test and must either forfeit the grade (in
other words, you will receive a "0" for that test) OR you must write a 15-page
paper due no later than 1 week after the administration of the test you missed
to replace the missing test grade.  Exam replacement paper topics must be
approved by the instructor and the finalized paper must be typed and double
spaced, containing appropriate references, ordinary font size, and substantial
content.  If you miss the first test without a good, legitimate and verifiable
reason, your only options are to write a paper (described above) or receive no
credit.  There is no provision for making up the last examination.  Don't miss
it.

The 2 short papers are described in the following link.  Go to paper
requirements.

**Extra Credit:   **Extra credit is **NOT** available.

**_Note 2_** :  The schedule below is meant only as a guide.  Changes and
alterations in the schedule, scheduled topics, or test dates may be necessary
to facilitate completion of all major sections listed below.  Also note that
additional material may be added from time to time, either through lectures,
Internet sources (such as additions and links within this syllabus), journal
articles, or any other appropriate sources.  If they are to be added, they
will be announced in class or noted in this syllabus as needed.

**Schedule:**  
**      _     Review Questions are listed in links, below.  They will be added
from time to time._**  
**_     Note on Review Questions:  Review questions are designed for review of
major concepts presented throughout the course and do not necessarily reflect
actual content, format, number or sort of questions that will appear on
examinations._**  
**_     The link below was created for use in this course and others as an on-
line forum for discussion of review questions between and among people
registered for this course and the others I am teaching in the fall term.  I
occasionally check the message board and perform maintenance on it, but do not
necessarily contribute to your on-line discussions.  When you use the board,
use your REAL NAME and put your e-mail address in the appropriate field.
Anonymous postings or notes posted with the use of an alias should not be used
on the board and will be deleted by the board's administrator.  Please do not
use any person's name but your own when you post messages, answers to review
questions, questions of your own, or any comments._**

**_     Message Board Link_**

**PART ONE:   EQUALITY**

8/23:  First class meeting; overview of requirements, readings; general
background

8/25:  In _Equality_ , Plato and Aristotle from _Republic_ and _Politics_.

8/28:  In _Equality_ , The Levellers from "An Agreement of the People" and
Thomas Hobbes, from _Leviathan_.

8/30:  In _Equality_ , Rousseau, from _Discourse on the Origin and Foundations
of Inequality Among Men_ and Edmund Burke, from _Reflections on the Revolution
in France_.

9/1:  In _Equality_ , de Toqueville, from _Democracy in America_ and Marx,
from _Critique of the Gotha Programme_.

9/4:  LABOR DAY HOLIDAY

9/6:  In _Equality_ , Tawney, from "Equality in Historical Perspective," and
von Hayek, "Equality, Value and Merit," from _The Constitution of Liberty._

9/8:  In _Equality_ , Rawls, from _A Theory of Justice_ and Nozick, from
_Anarchy, State, and Utopia_.

9/11:  In _Equality_ , Sen, "Equality of What?" and Dworkin, "Equality of
Resources."

9/13:  In _Equality_ , Walzer, from _Spheres of Justice_ , and Young, from
_Justice and the Politics of Difference_.

**PART TWO:   RIGHTS**

9/15:  Introductory Discussion on the Background of the Concept of Rights.

9/18:  Thomas Paine, _The Rights of Man_ , Part One, "Rights of Man," pp.
12-77.

9/20:  Thomas Paine, _The Rights of Man_ , Part One, "Declaration of the
Rights of Man and of Citizens...,"  "Observations on the Declaration of
Rights," "Miscellaneous Chapter," and "Conclusion," pp. 78-80, 81-83, 84-105,
and 106-113.

9/22:  Thomas Paine, _The Rights of Man_ , Part Second, pp. 113-228.

9/25:  Thomas Paine, continued.

9/27: John Stuart Mill, _On Liberty,_ pp. 1-113.

9/29:   Mill, continued.

10/2:  Mill, continued.

10/4:  In _Theories of Rights_ , "Natural Rights," by Margaret McDonald, and
"Are There Any Natural Rights?" by H.L.A. Hart.

10/6:  In _Theories of Rights_ ,  "Are There Any Absolute Rights?" by Alan
Gewirth.

10/9:   In _Theories of Rights_ , "Utility and Rights," by David Lyons, and
"Rights, Goals and Fairness," by T.M. Scanlon.

10/11:  In _Theories of Rights_ , "Can There be a Right-Based Moral Theory?"
by J.L. Mackie and "Right-Based Moralities" by J. Raz.

**10/13:   Mid-Term Examination**

10/16:   Review of Major Concepts

**PART THREE:   AUTHORITY**

10/18: First Paper is Due.  Lecture:  A Hobbesian Concept of Authority and
Persons.

10/20:  In _Authority_ , Wolff's "The Conflict Between Authority and
Autonomy."

10/23:  In _Authority_ , Ladenson's "In Defense of a Hobbesian Conception of
Law."

10/25:  In _Authority_ , Friedman's "On the Concept of Authority in Political
Philosophy."

10/27:  In _Authority_ , Hart's "Commands and Authoritative Legal Reasons."

10/30:  In _Authority_ , Raz's "Authority and Justification."

11/1:  In _Authority_ , Anscombe's "On the Source of the Authority of the
State."

11/3:   In _Authority_ , "Finnis' "Authority,"  and Lukes' "Perspectives on
Authority."

11/6:  In _Authority_ , Dworkin's "Obligations of Community" and Green's
"Commitment and Community."

11/8:  In _Authority_ , Greenawalt's "Promissory Obligation:  The Theme of the
Social Contract" and Nagel's "Moral Conflict and Political Legitimacy."

11/10:  VETERAN'S DAY HOLIDAY

**PART FOUR:   JUSTICE**

11/13:  In _Equality_ , Kymlicka, from "Justice and Minority Rights,"

11/15:  In _Theories of Rights_ , Vlastos' "Justice and Equality."

11/17:  In _Justice_ , Plato from _Republic_.

11/20:  In _Justice_ , Aristotle from _Nicomachean Ethics_

11/22:  In _Justice_ , Aquinas from _Summa Theologica_

11/24:  THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY

11/27:  In _Justice_ , Hume from _An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of
Morals_.

11/29:  In _Justice_ , Kant, from _The Metaphysical Elements of Justice._

12/1:  In _Justice_ , Mill, from _Utilitarianism_

12/4:  In _Justice_ , Marx, from _Critique of the Gotha Programme_ and Kelson
from _What is Justice?_

Final Exam Week:

This page was last updated on 08/11/2000.

