Geoffrey de Villehardouin
![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif)  
** Geoffrey de Villehardouin  
Chronicle of The Fourth Crusade and The Conquest of Constantinople  
Excerpts from the Original Electronic Text at the web site of the Internet
Medieval Sourcebook.
![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif)  

### CONFLICT BETWEEN THE GREEKS AND LATINS IN CONSTANTINOPLE-BURNING OF THE
CITY

While the Emperor Alexius was away on this progress, there befell a very
grievous misadventure; for a conflict arose between the Greeks and the Latins
who inhabited Constantinople, and of these last there were many. And certain
people-who they were I know not-out of malice, set fire to the city; and the
fire waxed so great and horrible that no man could put it out or abate it. And
when the barons of the host, who were quartered on the other side of the port,
saw this, they were sore grieved and filled with pity-seeing the great
churches and the rich palaces melting and falling in, and the great streets
filled with merchandise burning in the flames; but they could do nothing.

Thus did the fire prevail, and win across the port, even to the densest part
of the city, and to the sea on the other side, quite near to the church of St.
Sophia. It lasted two days and two nights, nor could it be put out by the hand
of man. And the front of the fire, as it went flaming, was well over half a
league broad. What was the damage then done, what the possessions and riches
swallowed up, could no man tell-nor what the number of men and women and
children who perished-for many were burned.

All the Latins, to whatever land they might belong, who were lodged in
Constantinople, dared no longer to remain therein; but they took their wives
and their children, and such of their possessions as they could save from the
fire, and entered into boats and vessels, and passed over the port and came to
the camp of the pilgrims. Nor were they few in number, for there were of them
some fifteen thousand, small

52

and great; and afterwards it proved to be of advantage to the pilgrims that
these should have crossed over to them. Thus was there division between the
Greeks and the Franks; nor were they ever again as much at one as they had
been before, for neither side knew on whom to cast the blame for the fire; and
this rankled in men's hearts upon either side.

At that time did a thing befall whereby the barons and those of the host were
greatly saddened; for the Abbot of Loos died, who was a holy man and a worthy,
and had wished well to the host. He was a monk of the order of the
Cistercians.

### THE YOUNG ALEXIUS RETURNS TO CONSTANTINOPLIZHE FAILS IN HIS PROMISES TO
THE CRUSADERS

The Emperor Alexius remained for a long time on progress, till St. Martin's
Day, and then he returned to Constantinople. Great was the joy at his home-
coming, and the Greeks and ladies of Constantinople went out to meet their
friends in great cavalcades, and the pilgrims went out to meet their friends,
and had great joy of them. So did the emperor re-enter Constantinople and the
palace of Blachernae; and the Marquis of Montferrat and the other barons
returned to the camp.

The emperor, who had managed his affairs right well and thought he had now the
upper hand, was filled with arrogance towards the barons and those who had
done so much for him, and never came to see them in the camp, as he had done
aforetime. And they sent to him and begged him to pay them the moneys due, as
he had covenanted. But he led them on from delay to delay, making them, at one
time and another, payments small and poor; and in the end the payments ceased
and came to naught.

The Marquis Boniface of Montferrat, who had done more for him than any other,
and stood better in his regard, went to him oftentimes, and showed him what
great services the Crusaders had rendered him, and that greater services had
never been rendered to any one. And the emperor still entertained them with
delays, and never carried out such things as he had promised, so that at last
they saw and knew clearly that his intent was wholly evil.

Then the barons of the host held a parliament with the

53

Doge of Venice, and they said that they now knew that the emperor would fulfil
no covenant, nor ever speak sooth to them; and they decided to send good
envoys to demand the fulfilment of their covenant, and to show what services
they had done him; and if he would now do what was required, they were to be
satisfied; but, if not, they were to defy him, and right well might he rest
assured that the barons would by all means recover their due.

### THE CRUSADERS DEFY THE EMPERORS

For this embassy were chosen Conon of Bethune and Geoffry of Villehardouin,
the Marshal of Champagne, and Miles the Brabant of Provins; and the Doge also
sent three chief men of his council. So these envoys mounted their horses,
and, with swords girt, rode together till they came to the palace of
Blachernae. And be it known to you that, by reason of the treachery of the
Greeks, they went in great peril, and on a hard adventure.

They dismounted at the gate and entered the palace, and found the Emperor
Alexius and the Emperor Isaac seated on two thrones, side by side. And near
them was seated the empress, who was the wife of the father, and stepmother of
the son, and sister to the King of Hungary-a lady both fair and good. And
there were with them a great company of people of note and rank, so that well
did the court seem the court of a rich and mighty prince.

By desire of the other envoys Conon of Bethune, who was very wise and eloquent
of speech, acted as spokesman: "Sire, we have come to thee on the part of the
barons of the host and of the Doge of Venice. They would put thee in mind of
the great service they have done to thee-a service known to the people and
manifest to all men. Thou hast swom, thou and thy father, to fulfil the
promised covenants, and they have your charters in hand. But you have not
fulfilled those covenants well, as you should have done. Many times have they
called upon you to do so, and now again we call upon you, in the presence of
all your barons, to fulfil the covenants that are between you and them. Should
you do so, it shall be well. If not, be it known to you that from this day
forth they will not hold you as lord or friend, but will endeavour to obtain
their due by all the means in their

54

Power. And of this they now give you warning, seeing that they would not
injure you, nor any one, without first defiance given; for never have they
acted treacherously, nor in their land is it customary to do so. You have
heard what we have said. It is for you to take counsel thereon according to
your pleasure."

Much were the Greeks amazed and greatly outraged by this open defiance; and
they said that never had any one been so hardy as to dare defy the Emperor of
Constantinople in his own hall. Very evil were the looks now cast on the
envoys by the Emperor Alexius and by all the Greeks, who aforetime were wont
to regard them very favourably.

Great was the tumult there within, and the envoys turned about and came to the
gate and mounted their horses. When they got outside the gate, there was not
one of them but felt glad at heart; nor is that to be marvelled at, for they
had escaped from very great peril, and it held to very little that they were
not all killed or taken. So they returned to the camp, and told the barons how
they had fared.

### THE WAR BEGINS - THE GREEKS ENDEAVOUR TO SET FIRE TO THE FLEET OF THE
CRUSADERS

Thus did the war begin; and each side did to the other as much harm as they
could, by sea and by land. The Franks and the Greeks fought often; but never
did they fight, let God be praised therefore that the Greeks did not lose more
than the Franks. So the war lasted a long space, till the heart of the winter.

Then the Greeks bethought themselves of a very great device, for they took
seven large ships, and filled them full of big logs, and shavings, and tow,
and resin, and barrels, and then waited until such time as the wind should
blow strongly from their side of the straits. And one night, at midnight, they
set fire to the ships, and unfurled their sails to the wind. And the flames
blazed up high, so that it seemed as if the whole world were a-fire. Thus did
the burning ships come towards the fleet of the pilgrims; and a great cry
arose in the host, and all sprang to arms on every side. The Venetians ran to
their ships, and so did all those who had ships in possession, and they began
to draw them away out of the flames very vigorously.

55

And to this bears witness Geoffry the Marshal of Champagne, who dictates this
work, that never did people help themselves better at sea than the Venetians
did that night; for they sprang into the galleys and boats belonging to the
ships, and seized upon the fire ships, all burning as they were, with hooks,
and dragged them by main force before their enemies, outside the port, and set
them into the current of the straits, and left them to go burning down the
straits. So many of the Greeks had come down to the shore that they were
without end and innumerable, and their cries were so great that it seemed as
if the earth and sea would melt together. They got into barges and boats, and
shot at those on our side who were battling with the flames, so that some were
wounded.

All the knights of the host, as soon as they heard the clamour, armed
themselves; and the battalions marched out into the plain, each according to
the order in which they had been quartered, for they feared lest the Greeks
should also attack them on land.

They endured thus in labour and anguish till daylight; but by God's help those
on our side lost nothing, save a Pisan ship, which was full of merchandise,
and was burned with fire. Deadly was the peril in which we stood that night,
for if the fleet had been consumed, all would have been lost, and we should
never have been able to get away by land or sea. Such was the guerdon which
the Emperor Alexius would have bestowed upon us in return for our services. .
. .

### THE CRUSADERS OCCUPY THE CITY

The Marquis Boniface of Montferrat rode all along the shore to the palace of
Bucoleon, and when he arrived there it surrendered, on condition that the
lives of all therein should be spared. At Bucoleon were found the larger
number of the great ladies who had fled to the castle, for there were found
the sister _[Agnes, sister of Philip Augustus, married successively to Alexius
II., to Andronicus, and to Theodore Branas]_ of the King of France, who had
been empress, and the sister _[Margaret, sister of Emeric, King of Hungary,
married to the Emperor Isaac, and afterwards to the Marquis of Montferrat.]_
of the King of Hungary, who

65

had also been empress, and other ladies very many. Of the treasure that was
found in that palace I cannot well speak, for there was so much that it was
beyond end or counting.

At the same time that this palace was surrendered to the Marquis Boniface of
Montferrat, did the palace of Blachernae surrender to Henry, the brother of
Count Baldwin of Flanders, on condition that no hurt should be done to the
bodies of those who were therein. There too was found much treasure, not less
than in the palace of Bucoleon. Each garrisoned with his own people the castle
that had been surrendered to him, and set a auard over the treasure. And the
other people, spread abroad throughout the city, also gained much booty. The
booty gained was so great that none could tell you the end of it: gold and
silver, and vessels and precious stones, and samite, and cloth of silk, and
robes vair and grey, and ermine, and every choicest thing found upon the
earth. And well does Geoffry of Villehardouin the Marshal of Champagne, bear
witness, that never, since the world was created, had so much booty been won
in any city.

Every one took quarters where he pleased and of lodgings there was no stint.
So the host of the pilgrims and of the Venetians found quarters, and greatly
did they rejoice and give thanks because of the victory God had vouchsafed to
them-for those who before had been poor were now in wealth and luxury. Thus
they celebrated Palm Sunday and the Easter Day following (25th April 1204) in
the joy and honour that God had bestowed upon them. And well miaht they praise
our Lord, since in all the host there were no more than twenty thousand armed
men, one with another, and with the help of God they had conquered four
hundred thousand men, or more, and in the strongest city in all the world -
yea, a great city \- and very well fortified.

### DIVISION OF THE SPOIL

Then was it proclaimed throughout the host by the Marquis Boniface of
Montferrat, who was lord of the host, and by the barons, and by the Doge of
Venice, that all the booty should be collected and brou-ht together, as had
been covenanted under oath and pain of excommunication. Three churches were
appointed for the receiving of the

66

spoils, and guards were set to have them in charge, both Franks and Venetians,
the most upright that could be found.

Then each began to bring in such booty as he had taken, and to collect it
together. And some brought in loyally, and some in evil sort, because
covetousness, which is the root of all evil, let and hindered them. So from
that time forth the covetous began to keep things back, and our Lord began to
love them less. Ah God! how loyally they had borne themselves up to now! And
well had the Lord God shown them that in all things He was ready to honour and
exalt them above all people. But full oft do the good suffer for the sins of
the wicked.

The spoils and booty were collected together, and you must know that all was
not brought into the common stock, for not a few kept thin-s back, maugre the
excommunication of the Pope. That which was brought to the churches was
collected together and divided, in equal parts, between the Franks and the
Venetians, according to the sworn covenant. And you must know further that the
pilgrims, after the division had been made, paid out of their share fifty
thousand marks of silver to the Venetians, and then divided at least one
hundred thousand marks between themselves, among their own people. And shall I
tell you in what wise? Two sergeants on foot counted as one mounted, and two
sergeants mounted as one knight. And you must know that no man received more,
either on account of his rank or because of his deeds, than that which had
been so settled and orderedsave in so far as he may have stolen it.

And as to theft, and those who were convicted thereof, you must know that stem
justice was meted out to such as were found guilty, and not a few were hung.
The Count of St. Paul hung one of his knights, who had kept back certain
spoils, with his shield to his neck; but many there were, both great and
small, who kept back part of the spoils, and it was never known. Well may you
be assured that the spoil wa- very great, for if it had not been for what was
stolet- and for the part given to the Venetians, there would if have been at
least four hundred thousand marks of silver and at least ten thousand horses-
one with another. Thus were divided the spoils of Constantinople, as you have
heard.

67

### BALDWIN, COUNT OF FLANDERS, ELECTED EMPEROR

Then a parliament assembled, and the commons of the host declared that an
emperor must be elected, as had been settled aforetime. And they parliamented
so long that the matter was adjourned to another day, and on that day would
they choose the twelve electors who were to make the election. Nor was it
possible that there should be lack of candidates, or of men covetous, seeing
that so great an honour was in question as the imperial throne of
Constantinople. But the greatest discord that arose was the discord concerning
Count Baldwin of Flanders and Hainault and the Marquis Boniface of Montferrat;
for all the people said that either of those two should be elected.

And when the chief men of the host saw that all held either for Count Baldwin
or for the Marquis of Montferrat, they conferred together and said:  " Lords,
if we elect one of these two great men, the other will be so filled with envy
that he will take away with him all his people. And then the land that we have
won may be lost, just as the land of Jerusalem came nigh to be lost when,
after it had been conquered, Godfrey of Bouillon was elected king, and the
Count of St. Giles became so fulfilled with envy that he enticed the other
barons, and whomsoever he could, to abandon the host. Then did many people
depart, and there remained so few that, if God had not sustained them, the
land of Jerusalem wouldhavebeenlost. Letusthereforebewarelestthesame mischance
befall us also, and rather bethink ourselves how we may keep both these lords
in the host. Let the one on whom God shall bestow the empire so devise that
the other is well content; let him grant to that other all the land on the
further side of the straits, towards Turkey, and the Isle of Greece, and that
other shall be his liegeman. Thus shall we keep both lords in the host."

As had been proposed, so was it settled, and both consented right willingly.
Then came the day for the parliament, and the parliament assembled. And the
twelve electors were chosen, six on one side and six on the other; and they
swore on holy relics to elect, duly, and in good faith, whomsoever would best
meet the needs of the host, and bear rule over the empire most worthily.

68

Thus were the twelve chosen, and a day appointed for the election of the
emperor; and on the appointed day the twelve electors met at a rich palace,
one of the fairest in the world, where the Doge of Venice had his quarters.
Great and marvellous was the concourse, for every one wished to see who should
be elected. Then were the twelve electors called, and set in a very rich
chapel within the palace, and the door was shut, so that no one remained with
them. The barons and knights stayed without in a great palace.

The council lasted till they were agreed; and by consent' of all they
appointed Nevelon, Bishop of Soissons, who was one of the twelve, to act as
spokesman. Then they came out to the place where all the barons were
assembled, and the Doge of Venice. Now you must know that many set eyes upon
them, to know how the election had turned. And the bishop, lifting up his
voice-while all listened intentlyspoke as he had been charged, and said: "
Lords, we are agreed, let God be thanked! upon the choice of an emperor; and
you have all sworn that he whom we shall elect as ern,,)eror shall be held by
you to be emperor indeed, and that it any one gainsay him, you will be his
helpers. And we name him now at the self-same hour when God was born, THE
COUNT BALDWIN OF FLANDERS AND HAINAULT! "

A cry of joy was raised in the palace, and they bore the count out of the
palace, and the Marquis Boniface of Montferrat bore him on one side to the
church, and showed him all the honour he could. So was the Count Baldwin of
Flanders and Hainault elected emperor, and a day appointed for his coronation,
three weeks after Easter (16th May 1204). And you must know that many a rich
robe was made for the coronation; nor did they want for the wherewithal.

Geoffrey de Villehardouin [b.c.1160-d.c.1213]: Memoirs or Chronicle of The
Fourth Crusade and The Conquest of Constantinople, trans. Frank T. Marzials,
(London: J.M. Dent, 1908)

NOTES The notes are adapted from those provided by Marzials, unless otherwise
indicated. The pagination of Dent edition is preserved The divisions in text
as provided by Marzials A few archaic words used by Marzials have been changed
- see list at end

This text is part of the Internet Medieval Source Book. The Sourcebook is a
collection of public domain and copy-permitted texts related to medieval and
Byzantine history. Unless otherwise indicated the specific electronic form of
the document is copyright. Permission is granted for electronic copying,
distribution in print form for educational purposes and personal use. If you
do reduplicate the document, indicate the source. No permission is granted for
commercial use. (c)Paul Halsall Apr 1996 halsall@murray.fordham.edu  
![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif)  
Return to the syllabus.  
Return to the History Department.  
![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif)  
**

