#  Syllabus for Spring 1997, Folklore and Anthropology

(ANTH-400-001, Spring 1997)

**Meeting time** :Monday and Wednesday, 5:30-7:10 pm, SA 34.

![](visuals/jadebar1.gif)

**Nathan Light** (office: 530-2382, home: 539-7336)

**Office Hours** : Monday and Wednesday, 3:30-5:30 pm and by appointment, SA
12.

**Web Page** :  http://www.utoledo.edu/~NLIGHT/mainpage.htm#folk

**E-mail me** (Please put ANTH 400 on the subject line.)

**E-mail class discussion list** :  ANTH400-001@uoft02.utoledo.edu

![](visuals/jadebar1.gif)

## Some web preliminaries: What can you do with folklore and why study it?

  * Teach 
  * Learn to teach using Folklore in Education: The Humanities in Everyday Life 
  * Do fieldwork on folklore and folklife
  * Check out this Australian folklife research project!
  * Explore the riches of the WPA Life Histories Collection 
  * Search for a song you can't quite remember
  * Browse some jumprope rhymes 
  * The Smithsonian Center for Folklife 
  * National Folk Festival in Dayton, Ohio, June 21-23, 1997
  * A great list of mythology links organized by culture area
  * A smaller list of folklore links 
  * My very limited list of links  
![](visuals/jadebar1.gif)

**READINGS** (average 80-100 pages a week, much of which will be folklore
examples.)

Course Packet on reserve in Carlson library. (PKT)

Edward Bruner and Victor Turner, eds. _Anthropology of Experience_. ( _AOE_ )

Bruce Jackson and Edward Ives, eds. _The World Observed: Reflections on the
Fieldwork Process._ ( _WO_ )

C. Kurt Dewhurst, Yvonne Lockwood, eds. _Michigan Folklife Reader_. ( _MFR_ )

**WHAT IS FOLKLORE?**

Folklore includes people's arts of living, their artistic ways of interacting
with other people and creating skillful forms in talk, work, food, play,
dance, song, and so on. The study of folklore explores artistic performance
within its social, historical, and political contexts, and shows how shared
creative activity generates meaningful relationships and community ties.
Anthropologists usually neglect creative and artistic activity because they
seek the typical forms and patterns of cultural expression. Folklorists
explore how individuals create their own folklore from tradition, experience,
and imagination, and make unique contributions to the shared culture of their
folk groups.

**COURSE GOALS**

This class will connect anthropology's concern with socio-cultural order with
folklore's stress on the inventive and emergent aspects of individual
expression. We will attain this overall goal through:

  * exploring current debates about performance, experience, cultural politics and meaning by reading and discussing recent articles by major folklorists and anthropologists

  * exploring the genres and contexts of folklore performances, and the methods, problems and benefits of using ethnographic fieldwork to study them

  * doing fieldwork projects for direct experience with ethnographic methods and in-depth knowledge of folklore performers

  * reading narratives about fieldwork that show it is similar to learning how to participate in a folk group

  * exposure to a variety of folklore both nearby and in other countries

  * class discussion that explores the rich folklore in your own experience and the ways you use it to create a meaningful community and identity for yourself

  * recognition of folklore as self-expression that is often publically devalued or manipulated. Studying folklore will help you cultivate your own self-expression and appreciate it in others.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

This course depends on you to make it interesting. I offer readings, but they
will only be useful if you read and respond to them. Class discussion and
written responses are essential for making this a productive class for
everyone. Office hours and the class e-mail listserver are important ways to
continue discussion: please take advantage of them.

_Attendance and Discussion_

Attendance and participation are required. I expect everyone to make
thoughtful contributions to discussion. _This is your class, and your presence
will only matter if you participate_. If I feel people are not participating I
will find other ways to include your voices and experiences, such as calling
on people at random and giving in- class writing assignments.

_Reading Analyses and Commentaries_

Students will write weekly commentaries on the reading assignments and class
discussion (hand in a total of 5 out of the 7 assigned). These will be an
opportunity to make connections between the materials we study in class and
your own experience and research in folklore. These 3-6 page typed discussions
are due in class during the week for which the readings are assigned.

Each reading analysis should try to integrate the concerns of the readings for
the week in terms of the authors' PURPOSE, METHODS, MATERIALS, ARGUMENTS and
THEORIES, and the USEFULNESS for your own interests and research or
CONNECTIONS to your experience. This is not a checklist, but a guide to a
thorough understanding of the articles, the connections among them, and their
relevance to class discussion and your own experience. For each week I also
give questions to guide your reading and help you recognize what you should
understand for commentaries and class participation.

In writing commentaries, think about the dominant issues that we consider for
folklore: folk genres, tradition and change, the relation of experience and
meaning to folklore performance, ethnic and cultural identity, the politics of
culture, the interaction of oral and literate expressive culture, fieldwork
issues, and so on. Taking notes of examples that occur to you both in and
outside of class will also help you write the weekly commentaries.

_Library Research_

In the first three weeks of class, you should choose a folklorist who
interests you and research his or her work, theories and methods. Based on
this, write a 5-8 page typed discussion of the folklorist's work. I include a
handout describing this assignment and listing folklorists to work on.

Field Research_

The fieldwork project will consist of interview and observation research with
folklore performers. This could be anyone with knowledge and expressive skills
that you want to understand. I will give a comprehensive description of how to
do this assignment soon, but we will be reading about fieldwork so you should
be thinking about project ideas. This will be an 8-12 page paper, with
additional documentation. In-class presentation of results from your fieldwork
is worth up to 8 points of extra credit.

**GRADING**

In grading written assignments I will be looking for: 1) Careful description
of folklore performers and their performances. 2) Good use of examples in
support of clear well-reasoned arguments. 3) Understanding of the issues we
discuss in class. 4) Avoidance of unsupported generalizations.

Papers should be written according to these guidelines: 1) You should
acknowledge and document your use of others' ideas whether as paraphrases or
exact quotes by giving citations **including page numbers**. Quotation marks
must be used around any verbatim text. 2) Papers must be typed in 12 point or
10 pitch font, with one inch margins and **left justification**. 3) No plastic
bindings or paper clips. 4) All final projects must be in envelopes, with
tapes and other documentation clearly labelled.

I grade by accumulating points towards 100%. This will be converted to a
letter grade on the scale: 96.7-100 = A+, 93.4-96.6 = A, 90-93.3 = A-, and so
on.

_Attendance_ : if you miss more than 4 classes, I subtract 4 points for each
additional absence.

_In-class work_ : 10 points (cannot be made up)

_Reading analyses_ : 30 points (6 points each, turn in on Wednesdays, not
accepted late)

_Library research_ : 20 points

_Field research_ : 40 points, up to 5 points extra credit for in-class
presentation

**RESPECT**

This class depends on our respect for one another. This means arriving on
time, not getting ready to go until the class is over, and listening to each
other. It means you need to speak up and respond to each other, not just to
me. I try to respect people's opinions and offer facts that help you think
about issues. You should all do the same.

Above all, respect means that you are fully here and alert and participate
thoughtfully so that everyone can gain from this class. It means that everyone
take responsibility for making this a class that contributes to their own
lives and those of others.

Respect your consultants in fieldwork: do not betray their trust. Respect
other users of the library: do not damage or highlight library materials when
doing research.

_Special needs and abilities are respected_

Students with disabilities and those for whom course requirements pose
difficulties should discuss their situation with me as soon as possible.
Anyone who needs additional help with any requirements in this course should
take advantage of the resources available from the Office of Accessibility,
530-4981, the Reading Center, 530-3105, the Study Skills Center, 530-2426, or
the Writing Center, 530-4939.

_Plagiarism and cheating are failures to respect yourself and others_

Plagiarism is the use of another person's work without stating the source.
Cheating is the use of unauthorized materials or copying another's work during
a quiz, test or other assignment. I will give an F for the course to any
student who participates in cheating or plagiarism. If you have to copy
someone's words or ideas give a proper citation with page numbers and
quotation marks and you won't flunk.

![](visuals/jadebar1.gif)

**INTRODUCTION TO SOME BASIC CONCEPTS FOR THE STUDY OF FOLKLORE**

There are many approaches to the study of folklore. Many scholars have studied
the changes that occur when jokes, songs, dances, stories, or proverbs are
performed in different cultures and historical contexts. Others study the ways
people use riddles, legends, or games to entertain, teach or persuade others
in the many _folk groups_ they join. The study of _folklife_ includes crafts,
foodways, farming, fishing, hunting, economic and social exchange, holidays,
clothing, building designs and construction methods, and so on. Medical
beliefs, home remedies, and healing practices are studied to understand
community and family ideas about medicine and the body.

Folklorists stress the importance of understanding the local and particular,
rather than generalizing about cultural practices. In recent decades folklore
study has paid more attention to the place of folklore in the lives of the
people who perform it, and the place of their performances within their folk
groups. In this kind of study, folklorists agree that to understand folklore
one must understand the people who perform it and the _social and cultural
contexts_ in which they perform it.

Folklore items that are collected and published without information about how
and when it is used, and by whom, may be interesting but they are devoid of
life. Folklore should be understood as people create it in their lives, and
change it for new purposes and to fit new situations. The _transmission_ of
folklore is an active process, in which both performer and audience
participate. _Tradition_ is not fixed, but actively made, creating endless
possibilities. All people live within traditions, and all people use and
recreate them in their own daily activities, especially for audiences who
appreciate their skills. Folklore consists of both these artistic skills and
the forms that are created.

Folklore performance and folklife practices are closely tied to _social
identities_ : people constantly define themselves in terms of their skills,
beliefs, language, dress, food, and amusements. These are important ways that
they create shared understandings. People do not simply find others who are
like them: they make a community in which they share ideas and culture and
expectations through shared experience. One must spend time together to form
close friendships and family ties, and folklore includes many of the ways
people make this time rewarding and memorable.

The social identities created by participating in cultural communities shape
how people relate to the larger society. Culture becomes a social and
political issue in many public contexts. Many folklorists (including myself)
concentrate on how folklore performances are used as signs of the past, and as
practices that create or resist _dominant culture_ of a nation. Germany,
Finland, Greece, Turkey and many other _nation-states_ have organized their
national cultures around certain ideas about pure and original folk culture,
and reject much cultural variation as contamination. On the other hand, in
consciously _multi-ethnic societies_ such as the United States, India or
Yugoslavia, ethnic cultures become the focus of political contests over what
should be the dominant culture, and what are the cultural rights of minority
groups. The problems of defining political autonomy in federations--called
"state's rights" in the U.S.--also arise around questions of _cultural
autonomy_ and rights, but are more complex because even the meaning of
"culture" is often contested.

In the larger society, the folklore forms that are part of a community's
shared life and culture can take on new meaning as political markers of
socially defined identities such as race, ethnicity, class, gender, age,
profession, sexual identity and so on. The expressive culture or folklore
learned in community experience takes on ideological meanings in contests in
the larger society, and can be a way to display connections to those
communities, as well as to histories, beliefs, practices and so on. A person's
culture is how she makes himself comfortable in the communities where she
spends time. But when there are economic and political pressures to change a
community's culture, people tend to protect it from this outside invasion.

Political scientists, sociologists and anthropologists tend to study
generalized cultural structures and institutional control over economic and
political resources, and how these patterns are learned and resisted,
perpetuated and changed, in short, how society is organized and how social
order is imposed on individuals. In contrast, folklorists pay more attention
to creative individuals and communicative processes. People are not assumed to
share a culture or identity from birth: they share in making the cultures of
their folk groups. Unlike schools, people learn folklore in participation and
creating their own. Each participant in a folk group brings and explores their
own creative resources. Each member of a folk group is different, but actively
participates in creating a shared social order.

Folklore shapes social order because it appeals to people, draws them into
participation and belief, and can be a persuasive argument to change. Art is
more powerful than rules. Creative expression in artistic forms invents or
recreates order, and often displaces rules about order. By being vital in the
communities where people live, where they spend the most time together and
form the closest bonds, folklore subverts institutional structures and
challenges the top-down cultural hierarchy of schooling and mass media by
validating personal experience and creative skills.

Jokes, songs and urban legends criticize the flawed political, social and
technological world we live in. Family and community life gives us a center of
personal strength away from anonymous political and economic forces. Folklore
creates powerful ties that do not depend on hierarchical structures. The
institutional power of the laws, media and schools is often directed at
modifying and suppressing folklore to gain ideological, social and political
power and to undermine community identities that can resist centralized
political, cultural and social control. Much public and political discourse
describes folk groups (usually people without political and economic power)
and their folk culture as pure but simple, backwards, uneducated, vulgar
(literally "common"), marginal, irrational and dependent on tradition for
guidance, and so on. The study of folklore works against these dominant ideas
about folk groups by revealing the intellect and skill of folk performers.

* * *

**FOLKLORE AND ANTHROPOLOGY, SPRING 1997.**

**COURSE CALENDAR** (readings to be done for the day assigned. _HAF_ =
_Handbook of American Folklore_.) (opt. = optional)

**Mar. 31-Apr. 2**. Folklore forms and performances.

_Mon.:_ Items, genres, events, contexts, and meanings. How to describe
folklore.

_Wed.:_ Group work on versions of ballads and Native American trickster myths.
Read:

Toelken. "From Entertainment to Realization in Navajo Fieldwork" _WO_ , pp.
1-17

Ives. "Oral and Written Tradition..." _WO_ , pp. 159-170

Singer. "Paul Bunyan and Hiawatha" _MFR_ , pp. 3-5, 121-148

Dorson. "Paul Bunyan in the News." _Folklore and Fakelore_. 291-295, 309-317,
334-36 (PKT, opt.)

**Apr. 7-9**. Folklore genres and social activity. READING QUESTIONS FOR APRIL
2-9:

  * Discuss the ways that written forms influence oral folklore. 
  * How do performer's ideas relate to folklore genres and performance contexts? 
  * What are folklore genres and how should they be studied? 
  * How do oral genres become part of social activities? 
  * Discuss some of the reasons that folklore changes from performance to performance. 
  * How do folklore and relationships become linked in both families and fieldwork? 
_Mon.:_ Read:

Ben-Amos. "Introduction" _Folklore Genres_. pp. x-xvii, xxxvi-xxxix. (PKT)

Dundes. "Texture, Text, and Context." pp. 20-23, 30-32. (PKT)

Bauman. "The Field Study of Folklore in Context." _HAF_ 362-367. (PKT)

McDowell. "A symposium on locomotion" _Children's Riddling_. 136-139. (PKT)

Dolby-Stahl. "Personal Experience Stories." _HAF_ , 268-276. (PKT)

_Wed.:_ Family, community, self. Read:

Kotkin and Zeitlin. "In the Family Tradition." _HAF_ , 90-99. (PKT)

Reynolds. "Crossing and recrossing the line..." _WO_ , 100-117.

Montell. "Absorbed in Gospel Music" _WO_ , 118-127.

Stekert. "On Time, Truth, and Epiphanies." _WO_ , pp. 128-43.

**Apr. 14-16**. Legends, Beliefs, and Identities. _Library research paper due
by Friday._

_Mon.:_ Read:

D egh. "The Legend Teller" _Narratives in Society_ , 79-89 (PKT)

Jackson. "The Perfect Informant" _WO_ , 206-226

Dorson. "Black Legends of Calvin" _MFR_ , 149-167

_Wed.:_ Ethnicity and Identity in Detroit. Film: _Tales from Arab Detroit_.

D egh. "Satanic Child Abuse in a Blue House" _Narratives in Society_ , 358-368
(PKT)

Reuss. "Suburban Folklore." _HAF_ , 172-177 (PKT)

Langlois. "Urban Legends and the Faces of Detroit" _MFR_ , 107-119

**Apr. 21-23**. Communities, identities, folk culture and history.

READING QUESTIONS FOR APRIL 14-23:

  * What are legends, who tells them, and why? How do they relate to identity? 
  * Discuss how legends reflect and shape cultural and social history. 
  * How does folklore relate to social power and the difference between public and private behavior? 
  * What does oral history discover that is missed when studying of written documents? 
  * What effect does immigration have on people's folklore? 
  * Discuss how the different historical and geographic routes of immigration and social situations immigrants end up in affect their folklore. 
  * Discuss the ways that folklore is used to comment on, reinforce, or bridge social boundaries. 
_Mon.:_ Identity, social status, history and performance. Read:

Lim on. "Folklore, Social Conflict and the U.S.-Mexico Border" _HAF_ , 216-223
(PKT)

Levine. "How to Interpret American Folklore Historically" _HAF_ , 338-343
(PKT)

Green. "Magnolias Grow in Dirt" 29-33 (PKT)

Portelli. "I'm Going to Say it Now: Interviewing the Movement" _WO_ , 44-59

Rosenberg. "Strategy and Tactics in Fieldwork: The Whole Don Messer Show" _WO_
, 144-158

_Wed.:_ History, ethnic identity, immigration, and cultural boundaries. Film:
_J'ai ete au bal_. Read:

Kirshenblatt- Gimblett. "Studying Immigrant and Ethnic Folklore" _HAF_ , 39-47
(PKT)

Barrand. "Stumbling Upon Lancashire Mill Culture in New England" _WO_ ,
171-184 (skim)

Dewhurst, et al.  "Michigan Hmong Textiles"  _MFR_ , 57-70

Cochrane. "Commercial Fishermen and Isle Royale" _MFR_ , 89-91, 98-104

Au and Brode. "The Lingering Shadow of New France" _MFR_ , 321-345

**Apr. 28-30**. The politics of ethnic, minority and folk cultures.
Stereotypes, typifications, generalization, purity, and allochrony.
**Fieldwork project plans due this week**.

READING QUESTIONS FOR THIS WEEK:

  * Discuss the ways people claim and keep possession of customs and traditions. 
  * Can you think of examples of debates over origins from your own experience? What is at stake in such debates? 
  * Why are origins so important to people, and how do people work to preserve original culture? 
  * Do we owe a debt when we borrow cultural forms? 
  * How do folklore forms change as they are transmitted from one society to another? 
_Mon.:_ Origins, authority, authenticity and performance. Read:

Leary. "Reading 'The Newspaper Dress'..." _MFR_ , 205-223

Lockwood. "The Sauna..." _MFR_ , 307-320

Lockwood and Lockwood. "The Cornish Pasty..." _MFR_ , 359-374

Dewhurst and MacDowell. "A Fantastic Tradition..." _MFR_ , 47-56 (opt)

_Wed.:_ Secular and sacred mythology. Diffusion. Film: _Tigertown_ (sport as
ideology)

Light. "Pizza in Thirty Minutes" (PKT)

Slater. "Four Moments" _WO_ , pp. 18-31

Jarring. "Muslim Tales of Noah's Ark" _Literary Texts From Kashghar_. pp.
30-34. (PKT)

Rabghuzi. "On the Birth of the Prophet Jesus" _The Stories of the Prophets_.
pp. 484-495. (PKT)

Hollis. _The Ancient Egyptian "Tale of Two Brothers"_. pp. 5-15 and 182. (PKT)

Ranelagh. "Joseph and Potiphar's Wife" _The Past We Share_ pp. 2-3, 9-16.
(PKT)

**May 5-7**. Ideology and the construction of national origins and dominant
culture. Finding folk roots and controlling multi-culturalism. Time's pyramid.
READING QUESTIONS FOR THIS WEEK:

  * Why is shared national culture and language important to people, and how do they create them? 
  * What methods and arguments are used to create good and pure folk traditions? 
  * How have Native Americans become part of American mythology? 
  * Discuss the ways that ideas about time are central to the concept of culture and social order. 
  * How does narrative shape time and contribute to ideas about culture and social order? 
_Mon. and Wed.:_ Read:

Wilson. "The _Kalevala_ and Finnish Politics." _Folklore, Nationalism and
Politics_ pp. 51-72 (PKT)

Whisnant. _All that is Native and Fine_. pp. 44-57, 218-223, 237-247. (PKT)

Schwartz. "Henry Ford's Melting Pot." _Ethnic Groups in the City_. pp. 191-198
(PKT)

Washburn. "The Noble and Ignoble Savage." _HAF_ , 60-65 (PKT)

Bruner. "Ethnography as Narrative" _AOE_ , 139-155

F. Turner. "Reflexivity as Evolution in Thoreau's _Walden_ " _AOE_ , pp. 73-93

**May 12-14** : Material culture, migration and diffusion. National culture
and local expression (popular and folk traditions). Cultural geography. Folk
architecture, the Greek Revival, and classicism.

Examples of vernacular architecture  and some  less vernacular  and a
discussion of  studying vernacular architecture.

READING QUESTIONS FOR THIS WEEK:

* What can artifacts and names reveal that other historical sources cannot?

* What was the  Greek Revival , and why did people participate in it? 

Another Greek Revival example and  another  and  a discussion of Greek Revival
in New England

* Discuss the relationship of personal expression and national culture, or folk and popular culture. How do they influence each other?

* How do crafts, symbolic forms and verbal lore connect in folk life?

_Mon. and Wed.:_ Film: _Around Round Barns_. Read:

McLennan. "Vernacular Architecture..." _MFR_ , pp. 15-42

Glassie. _Pattern in the Material Folk Culture of the Eastern United States_.
124-133, 184-220 (PKT)

Glassie "Folkloristic Study of the American Artifact: Objects and Objectives."
_HAF_ , 376-383 (PKT)

Toelken. "Aesthetics and Repertoire." _The Dynamics of Folklore_. 183-209
(PKT)

Zelinsky. "Names and National Heroes" _Nation into State_. 32-37, 126-131,
136-139 (PKT)

Zelinsky. "Flag and Eagle" and "The Buildings Speak" _Nation into State._
196-213. (PKT, opt)

**May 19-21**. Public Displays, Celebrations, Festivals and the Politics of
Identity.

READING QUESTIONS FOR THIS WEEK:

  * How and why do public performances become political events? 
  * How do political and historical changes affect festivals? 
  * How do social tensions and frustrations find release in public festivals? 
  * Discuss the ways people represent themselves through objects and performances, and the changes in meaning and audience that take place for political, historical and economic reasons. 
_Mon.:_ Events and the question of collective action, descriptions of the
whole. Film: _Carnival del Pueblo_.

Myerhoff. "Life Not Death in Venice..." _AOE_ , 261-286

Stewart. "Patronage and Control in the Trinidad Carnival" _AOE_ , 289-314

Moe. "Meaning in Community Events." _MFR_ , 347-357

_Wed.:_ Modes of self-representation.

Babcock. "Modeled Selves..." _AOE_ , 316-343

Dewhurst. "Museums for the People..." _MFR_ , 71-83

**May 28 (no class Monday)**. Stories and the discovery of meaning.
Representing events, performances, meaning and identity. Skills for analyzing
and presenting fieldwork.

_Wed.:_ Documenting and retelling stories and events. Developing cultural
understanding and social rapport. Read:

E. Fine. _The Folklore Text_ pp. 182-195 (PKT)

Becker. "How I Learned What a Crock Was" _WO_ , 185-191

Silverman. "Who's Gypsy Here?..." _WO_ , 193-201

Rosaldo. "Ilongot Hunting as Story and Experience" _AOE_ , 97-121 and 133-134

**June 2-4**. Occupational lore and project presentations.

READING QUESTIONS FOR MAY 28-JUNE 2 (DUE JUNE 2):

  * Discuss the possibilities and problems involved in making written representation of oral performance. 
  * How do stories differ from other ways of describing social processes and activities? 
  * Discuss how we learn from stories, and how this differs from learning from other representations. 
  * Why is it important to study the folklore of people at work? 
  * Discuss the ways folklore is part of contests over power in the workplace. 
_Mon.:_ Occupational Life and Lore. Film: _Miles of Smiles, Years of
Struggle_. Read:

Dewhurst and MacDowell. "The Pottery and the People..." _MFR_ , 245-261.

Lockwood. "The Joy of Labor" _MFR_ , 263-273.

Workman. "A Bean on the Table..." _MFR_ , 275-288.

_Wed.:_ Project presentations.

**Exam week**.

June 9. Fieldwork projects due. Additional presentations if there are still
people who want to do them.

![](visuals/jadebar1.gif)

.

