**ANDERSON COLLEGE - SPRING 2002**

** **

Syllabus for HIS 322:  History of England Since 1688





1.   **Course description:   **HIS 322 is a survey of the political, social, economic, and cultural development of England from the Glorious Revolution of 1688 to the present.  The course gives 3 semester hours credit and is offered only once every two years.  Prerequisite:  completion of two 3-semester hour 100- or 200-level history courses or permission of the instructor.



      HIS 322 is designed for juniors and seniors majoring in History, though interested students from other majors are welcome.  For the course to count towards the B.A. degree in History, the student must earn a grade of **_C_** or better.



2.   **Instructor:**   Dr. John Lassiter, Professor of History

      Office:  219 Watkins Teaching Center; telephone:  231-2096

      E-mail:  lassiter@anderson-college.edu    

Office hours: 11:00-11:50 MWF; 3:45-5:00 MWTh; other times by appointment



3.   **Course objectives:   **Upon successful completion of the course, students will have demonstrated knowledge of key events, personalities, institutions and ideas that have shaped the development of England from the seventeenth century to the present, and the underlying environmental, social, economic political, religious, intellectual and cultural forces that gave rise to them.  They will have also shown the ability to read and interpret historical sources intelligently, to engage in college-level historical research, and to express themselves effectively orally and in writing.



4.   **Assessment:   **The grade a student receives at the end of the semester will be based on the following means of assessment (percentage of course grade shown in parentheses): 

a.   _Class attendance and participation_ (10%).  A daily grade based on class
attendance, evidence of preparation, and participation in discussion.  Ten
points will be deducted for each unexcused absence.  History majors are
required to attend a minimum of two meetings of the Anderson College History
Club.

b.   _Quizzes_ (10%).  Short (10-15 minute) announced or unannounced quizzes
on the current lecture topic and/or reading assignment are possible at any
class meeting.

c.   _Oral reports_ (10%).  Each student will present a 15-20 minute oral
report on a selection from Blakeley & Collins, _Documents in British History_.
Each report will be accompanied by a typewritten outline and bibliography
distributed to class members prior to the presentation.

d.   _Two unit tests_ (15% each).  Twice during the semester, there will be a
75-minute test covering a five-week unit of study.  Tests will typically
consist of (1) a group of no more than five questions that can each be
answered in one paragraph and   (2) a single question which calls for an essay
several pages long.

  

e.   _Paper_ (20%).  Students will submit a paper, at least 1500 words in
length, typewritten, and with complete MLA documentation; topic TBA

f.    _Final exam_ (20%).  At the end of the semester there will be a two-hour
final exam consisting of a third unit test and a comprehensive essay.



5.   **Grading policies and student feedback:**

a.   In all history courses at Anderson College, letter grades are assigned on
the following numerical scale:  A=90-100; B=80-89; C=70-79; D=60-69; F=0-59.

b.   Students are encouraged to schedule a personal conference with the
instructor prior to mid-term to assess their progress and discuss any problems
they may be experiencing in the course.



6.   **Content outline:   **HIS 322 is organized into three five-week units of study:    

       I.   From the Glorious Revolution to the Industrial Revolution, 1689-1820    (weeks 1-5):  Roberts & Roberts, chapters 16-21; Blakeley & Collins, documents 1-28 __

      II.  From the Napoleonic Wars to the Great War, 1815-1914 (weeks 6-11):  Roberts & Roberts, chapters 22-26; Blakeley & Collins, documents 29-56

     III.  From the Great War to the Present, 1914-2002 (weeks 12-16):  Roberts & Roberts, chapters 27-31; Blakeley & Collins, documents 57-78



7.   **Method of instruction:   **HIS 322 combines lecture, student reports, and discussion. 



8.   **Calendar of topics and assignments:**



Week 1 (Jan. 15/17)                Topic:  The Legacy of Revolution, 1689-1714

                                                Reading:  R&R chap. 16; B&C docs. 1-3



Week 2 (Jan. 22/24)                **MLK Service Day - Tu. Jan. 22 (no
class)**

Topic:  Early Georgian England, 1714-1760

                                                Reading:  R&R chap. 17; B&C docs. 4-12



Week 3 (Jan. 29/31)                Topic:  Early Georgian England, 1714-1760
(cont'd.)

                                                Reading:  same as Week 2



Week 4 (Feb. 5/7)                   Topic:  The Age of George III

                                                Reading:  R&R chaps 18-21; B&C docs 13-28

                                               

Week 5 (Feb. 12/14)               Topic:  The Age of George III (cont'd)

                                                Reading:  same as Week 4 



Week 6 (Feb. 19/21)               **First Unit Test - Tu. Feb. 19**

Topic:  The Age of Reform, 1815-1846

                                                Reading:  R&R chap. 22; B&C docs. 29-34



Week 7 (Feb. 26/28)               Topic:  The Age of Reform, 1815-1846
(cont'd.)

                                                Reading:  same as Week 6



  

Week 8 (Mar. 5/7)                  Topic:  The Victorian Age

                                                Reading:  R&R chaps. 23-25; B&C docs. 35-49 



Week 9 (Mar. 12/14)              Topic:  The Victorian Age (cont'd.)

                                                Reading:  same as Week 8 ****



Week 10 (Mar. 19/21)            **Spring Break**

** **

Week 11 (Mar. 26/28)            Topic:  Late Victorian & Edwardian Britain,
1886-1914

                                                Reading:  R&R chap. 26; B&C docs. 50-56

                                                **Second Unit Test - Th. Mar. 28**

** **

Week 12 (Apr. 2/4)                 Topic:  World War I and its Aftermath,
1914-1921

                                                Reading:  R&R chap. 27; B&C doc. 57 __

_ _

Week 13 (Apr. 9/11)               Topic:  Between the Wars, the 1920s and 30s

                                                Reading:  R&R chap. 28; B&C docs. 58-66



Week 14 (Apr. 16/18)             **Paper due - Tu. Apr. 16**

Topic:  World War II, 1939-1945

                                                      Reading:  R&R chap. 29; B&C docs. 67-69



Week 15 (Apr. 23/25)             Topic:  Britain Since 1945  

                                                      Reading:  R&R chaps. 30-31; B&C 70-78



Week 16 (Apr. 30/May 2)      Topic:  Britain Since 1945 (cont'd.)

                                                Reading:  same as Week 15

**Final Exam - Thurs. May 2, 12-2 pm**



9.   **Books:   **Students should purchase the following titles.  (Prices quoted are for new copies; cheaper used copies are sometimes available.) 

a.   Clayton Roberts & David Roberts, _A History of England. Volume II:   1688
to the Present.  _Fourth edition.  Prentice Hall.  $50.75.

b.   Brian Blakeley & Jacquelin Collins, _Documents in British History.
Volume II:  1688 to the Present.  _Second edition.  McGraw-Hill.  $42.75.



10.   **Computer usage:   **All written work prepared outside of class must be produced by means of computerized word processing.  Students are also encouraged to make use of scholarly resources accessible by computer.



11.   **Course policies:**

a.   _Attendance_.   Attendance will be recorded at the beginning of each
class meeting.  To be counted present each day, a student must arrive at class
on time and remain for the entire period.  In keeping with College policy,
absence from more than three times the number of scheduled class sessions per
week, whether excused or unexcused, will result in a grade of **_F_** unless
the student withdraws from the course or requests an incomplete.

  

b.   _Make-ups_.   Students are responsible for arranging to make up work
missed on account of absence from class.  Make-ups for unit tests must be
taken within one week of the test date.  Unit tests missed on account of
excused absences may be made up without penalty; those missed on account of
unexcused absences may be made up but will be penalized by a 30% deduction of
points the first time, and a 40% deduction the second time.  Make-ups will not
be given for quizzes: if the absence was excused, a later quiz grade
(designated by the instructor) will be counted twice; if the absence was
unexcused, the grade will be recorded as a zero.

c.   _Excused absences_.   An excused absence is one which results from a
verifiable debilitating illness or injury, a death in the immediate family,
participation in a college-sponsored activity documented by a memo from the
appropriate Anderson College faculty or staff member, or any other
circumstances judged by the instructor to have been beyond the student's
control.

d.   _Academic dishonesty_.   The College's policies on academic dishonesty,
outlined in the Student Handbook, will be strictly enforced.  Students should
be especially aware of what constitutes plagiarism.  "When a student submits
work for credit that includes the words, ideas or data belonging to or
produced by others, the source of that information must be acknowledged
through complete, accurate, and specific footnote or in-text references, and,
if verbatim statements are included, through quotation marks as well"
(Handbook).  Failure to make such acknowledgment, whether intentional or not,
will be construed as plagiarism.



12.   **Learning facilities and resources:**

a.   Johnston Memorial Library:  location of reserve reading materials,
reference works, periodicals, circulating general collection; access to online
resources; photocopiers available.

b.   Academic Services Center (Watkins 102):  location of writing and tutoring
labs.

c.   Academic Computing Center (Watkins 104):  location of computers with
printer and access to the Internet.

d.   Vandiver Multimedia Lab (Vandiver 001):  location of computers with
access to the Internet.



        



** **

     

