# East European Cinema

# Spring 1997

## Film List

**UMBC**

**DEPARTMENT OF MODERN LANGUAGES AND LINGUISTICS**

**SPRING 1997 FILM SERIES:

EAST EUROPEAN CINEMA**

**FREE AND OPEN TO THE PUBLIC**

**ALL SCREENINGS AT 7:30 P.M.

LECTURE HALL IV

**

February 3 **THE BATTLESHIP POTEMKIN** , directed by Sergei Eisenstein, USSR,
1925, b/w, 75 minutes, silent, with musical score by Edmund Meisel.

Eisenstein's most successful film, **POTEMKIN** has often been voted one of a
few all-time masterpieces of cinema. In brilliant black and white photography,
and with breathtaking editing, it tells the story of the 1905 unsuccessful
riot in the Black Sea port of Odessa.

February 10 **MOTHER** , directed by Vsevolod Pudovkin, USSR, 1926, b/w, 90
minutes, silent with music track.

Based on Gorki's novel, Pudovkin has created a stirring film on the education
of an exemplary Russian mother, Pelageya Vlasova, during the unsuccessful
uprisings of 1905. Beautiful black and white photography, and strong emotional
editing.

February 17 **EARTH** , directed by Alexander Dovzhenko, USSR, 1930, b/w, 90
minutes, silent.

A masterpiece by Russian film maker Dovzhenko, **EARTH** portrays the
conflicts in farming communities as they changed from private to collective
ownership. The Russian landscape and its people are shown with great visual
beauty.

February 24 **THE MAN WITH THE MOVIE CAMERA** , directed by Dziga Vertov,
USSR, 1929, b/w, 90 minutes, silent.

Another classic of the Russian silent cinema, **THE MAN WITH THE MOVIE
CAMERA** is a brilliant formal experiment, highlighting camera work and
editing through a montage of documentary shots.

March 3 **BALLAD OF A SOLDIER** , directed by Grigori Chuchrai, USSR, 1959, 87
minutes, in Russian, with English subtitles.

An award-winning feature of the late fifties, this film tells of the
adventures of a young soldier on a brief leave from the fighting lines of
World War II. The film is noted for its visual poetry.

March 10 **MY NAME IS IVAN** , directed by Andrei Tarkovsky, USSR, b/w, 1962,
84 minutes, in Russian, with English subtitles.

The first feature by Andrei Tarkovsky, whom many consider one of the greatest
filmmakers of all times. The film shared the grand prize of the 1962 Venice
Film Festival. In beautiful black and white photography, it tells how a young
child gets mixed up in the fighting of World War II. The film constitutes a
remarkable break with the bland and simplistic style of socialist realism of
films from the Stalinist era.

March 17 **ANDREI RUBLEV** , directed by Andrei Tarkovsky, USSR, b/w and
color, 1966, 146 minutes, in Russian, with English subtitles.

Tarkovsky's early master work, originally released only for the foreign
festival circuit and not shown in the USSR until 1971, is a reflection on art
and society, based on the life story of the historical figure Andrei Rublev,
the 15th century icon painter. In eight episodes, spanning the period 1400 to
1423, the film tells of the journey of three artists, all monks, from their
monestary towards Moscow, and of the conflicts they encounter.

March 31 **SHADOWS OF FORGOTTEN ANCESTORS** , directed by Sergei Paradzahnov,
USSR, 1964, color, 99 minutes, in Ukranian with English subtitles.

Paradzhanov is the most spectacular representative of regional filmmaking
which has played a major role in Soviet cinema. **SHADOWS** is a film about
Ukrainian folk life and folk art. Some say that its great beauty and appeal
place it second only to **POTEMKIN**.

April 7 **ASHES AND DIAMONDS** , directed by Andrzej Wajda, Poland, 1958, b/w,
108 minutes, in Polish with English subtitles.

**ASHES** is Wajda's most famous film of the fifties. In brilliant black and
white photography, it tells the story of a young man in search of his identity
during the first days following World War II. Starring Zbigniew Cybulski, one
of the most popular actors of Polish cinema until his tragic death in 1967.

April 14 **THE KNIFE IN THE WATER** , directed by Roman Polanski, Poland,
1962, b/w, 90 minutes, in Polish with English subtitles.

Polanski's first feature film, **THE KNIFE IN THE WATER** was an immediate
popular and critical success. A somewhat morbid love story, it thematically
hints at the rottenness of Poland's party elite, and contains all the elements
of Polanski's later style, above all his skill in building suspense stories.

April 21 **WALKOVER** , directed by Jerzy Skolimovski, Poland, 1965, b/w, 77
minutes, in Polish with English subtitles.

Skolimovski himself plays the lead in his second feature of largely
biographical overtones. He portrays a young boxer who, on his return from the
military, has trouble with his identity, refuses a job in a factory and spends
his time as a boxing hustler. The film suggests that social ills are at the
root of the young man's problems.

April 28 **DAISIES** **(SEDMIKRASKY)** , by Vera Chytilova, Czechoslovakia,
1966, 76 minutes.

One of the major works of the Czech New Wave and a radical experiment in
feminist humor, **DAISIES** has held cult status ever since. In Czech with
English sub-titles.

**NOTE** : We will be screening a video copy of this film.

May 5 **BLACK PETER** ( **CERNY PETR** ), directed by Milos Forman,
Czechoslovakia, 1963, black and white, 89 minutes.

The first feature by Milos Forman who in 1969 emigrated to the United States
where he directed such classics as **ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST** and
**AMADEUS**. A critical look at the conflicts young people experienced during
communist Czechoslovakia, especially as they related to work and the
relationship with older people. The film met with the displeasure of the
communist authorities but was released and won the 1963 Czech Critic's Prize.

May 12 **SHOP ON MAIN STREET** ( **OBCHOD NA KORZE** ), directed by Jan Kadar
and Elmar Klos, Czechoslovakia, 1965, 124 minutes, in Czech with English
subtitles.

The first Czech film to win an academy award as best foreign film, this film
tells of the persecution of Jews under Slovakian fascism in World War II. With
outstanding performances by Ida Kaminska, Hana Slivkova, and Jozef Kroner.

For more information, call 455-2109 or 455-2003, or write fischett@umbc.edu

## Syllabus

**

MLL 212: EAST EUROPEAN CINEMA **

Spring 1997

Instructor: Dr. Renate Fischetti

Office Hours: Mon 3-5, or by appointment

Office: AC 138

Tel.: 455-2003/2109

E-Mail: fischett@umbc.edu

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

The course is an introduction to the major schools of East European Cinema,
including classical and contemporary Soviet cinema, the Polish School, and the
Czech New Wave.

The course is structured around an introductory lecture, a discussion of the
readings, the screening of the film, and a discussion of the film. The
discussions will focus on close readings of the films in cultural contexts.
Guidelines for this analysis will be issued by the instructor. A handout with
such guidelines, and an additional handout listing basic film terms will be
issued to all students.

*********

**NOTE TO STUDENTS WHO ARE NEW TO FILM ANALYSIS**

**

** Film analysis is not difficult. It requires careful watching and
familiarity with basic film terms. To facilitate this process, students who
are new to film analysis may want to read chapter III, "The Language of Film:
Signs and Syntax," in **HOW TO READ A FILM** by James Monaco ( **on reserve in
the Library** ). In addition, new students may wish to view a video copy of
**BASIC FILM TERMS: A VISUAL DICTIONARY** which has been placed on reserve
with AV Services (ACIV, Room 114. ext. 2461). The film is 15 minutes long, a
bit outdated, but still quite useful in illustrating the basic film terms. **

*****

IMPORTANT NOTE TO ALL STUDENTS

YOU ARE EXPECTED TO SCREEN ALL FILMS AND TO PARTICIPATE IN THE DISCUSSIONS.
SOME OF THE FILMS ARE VERY HARD TO OBTAIN ELSEWHERE AND ARE BEING RENTED FOR A
ONE-TIME SCREENING HERE AT UMBC. YOU SHOULD THEREFORE MAKE EVERY EFFORT NOT TO
MISS ANY SCREENINGS.

*****

** **REQUIRED TEXTS**

Mira and Antonin J. Liehm. **THE MOST IMPORTANT ART: SOVIET AND EAST EUROPEAN
FILM AFTER 1945**. Univ. of California Press, 1977

Sergei Eisenstein. **FILM SENSE**. Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1974

*********

**RESERVES**

I. The following items are on two-hour reserve in the Library:

1\. Monaco, James. **HOW TO READ A FILM**

2\. Eisenstein, Sergei. **FILM SENSE**

3\. Liehm and Liehm. **THE MOST IMPORTANT ART**

4\. Leyda, Jay. **KINO**. **A HISTORY OF THE RUSSIAN AND SOVIET FILM**.

5\. Vertov-Readings

6\. Tarkovskij-Readings

II. The following item is on reserve at AV Services:

**BASIC FILM TERMS: A VISUAL DICTIONARY**

**

***********

**FILM LIST**

A list of the films is attached, with brief descriptions and dates. Feel free
to invite guests. All screenings will be in Lecture Hall IV.

*********

**GRADING**

Take-Home Midterm, **due** **March 31**.......35%

Take-Home Final, **due May 12..**...........35% **

** Panel participation*..............................................10% **

Class participation ** (discussion of readings and films)......20% ******

***Each student is expected to participate in at least one panel to discuss a
film. See the attached "Guidelines for Critiquing a Film". Your grade will be
determined on how well you prepared for this panel and how well you present
your observations. A sign-up sheet will be distributed on the first day of
class.

**Please note that the discussions are a very important part of the course.
You are required to stay for the discussions after the screenings and to
participate! **

**READING ASSIGNMENTS**

A schedule for the reading assignments is attached

****

**FILM LIST**

A list of the films is attached, with brief descriptions and dates. Feel free
to invite guests. All screenings will be in Lecture Hall IV.

*****

**ELECTRONIC CLASS LIST

A list by the name of mll212 was established for this course. Make sure you
subscribe. The process is as follows: 1. Write to majordomo@lists.umbc.edu; 2.
In the body of the message, type  <subscribe mll212>. I will be sending you
messages on this list, so it's important you check periodically.

**

*****

**HOME PAGE

This course also has a home page where you can find the syllabus and the class
list.

**

*****

**Questions? Feel free to ask Renate - write her an e-mail message, call or
leave a note, or see her in her office hour.

** **

*********

READING ASSIGNMENTS

(IT IS IMPORTANT TO DO THE READINGS BEFORE THE DUE DATE)

**

February 10 : "Word and Image," in: **FILM SENSE** , pp. 3-65, and

"Synchronization of the Senses," in: **FILM SENSE** , pp. 69-109.

February 17: "Montage of Attractions," in: **FILM SENSE** , pp. 230- 233, and
"A Statement," (Eisenstein, Pudovkin, Alexandrov) (hand-out)

February 24: Reserve readings of texts by Dziga Vertov: "We: Variant of a
Manifesto,", "The Fifth Issue of Kino Pravda," "Kinoks: A Revolution," "The
Man with a Movie Camera," "On Editing," and "The Man with a Movie Camera (A
Visual Symphony)."

March 3: "The Soviet Union: From Avant-Garde to Socialist Realism," pp. 34-43,
and "The Zhdanov Years," pp. 47-50, and pp. 64-75, as well as

"Where Did the Cranes Fly," in: **THE MOST IMPORTANT ART** , pp. 199-210.

March 10: "Reasons for Optimism," pp. 210-212, in: **THE MOST IMPORTANT ART**
, as well as "Tarkovskij on Film," (hand-out).

March 17: "Far from Mosfilm," pp. 306-309 in: **THE MOST IMPORTANT ART** ,
**** as well as "Tarkovskij-Readings" (on reserve in Library)

March 31: "Paradzhanov," pp. 218-219, and "The Ukraine," pp. 326- 327, in:
**THE MOST IMPORTANT ART

**

April 7: "The Polish School," in: **THE MOST IMPORTANT ART** , pp. 174-187

April 14: "Innocent Sorcerers and Knife in the Water," in: **THE MOST
IMPORTANT ART** , pp. 193-196.

April 21: "Silence and Cry: Poland after 1963," pp. 371-373.

April 28: "The Miracle and the Young Wave: Czechoslovakia after 1963," pp.
275-277, "Through Women's Eyes," pp. 285-287.

May 5: "Forman, Passer, Papousek," pp. 281-284

May 12: "Preceding Generations," pp. 277-280

GUIDELINES FOR CRITIQUING A FILM

(in preparation for the panel)

1\. Inform yourself of the historical context of the film - when and where was
the film made, what can you find out about the film maker?

2\. Screen the film once before our scheduled screening at night - make an
arrangement with AV Services or the Library to do so.

3\. Guide yourself by the following general questions during the screening and
take a few notes, if possible:

a. Is the film telling a story, if so, what story does it tell? (Be brief!)

b. What is the setting for the film (time and place)?

c. Who are the protagonists?

d. Do we identify with anyone? If so, with whom and why?

e. Are there different points of view, or does a single point of view
dominate, if so, whose?

f. What can you observe about the film's structure - is it conventional linear
narrative? or is it open, non-linear? Is it difficult to follow, if so, why?

g. What are some of the most striking signifiers of the films, or, in plain
English, what is most noticeable about the looks and the sound of the film?

h. What did you like/dislike about the looks/sounds of the film? Can you give
reasons?

i. What themes does the film deal with? Are these films of any importance to
your personal existence? Anywhere?

