|

**Courses**  
  
---  
  
**Administration& General Information**  
  
**Undergraduate  
Program **  
**Graduate Program **  
**Faculty& Staff**  
**History Home **  
  
![](../images/smallhistorybanner.jpg)  

Courses Home | Graduate Student Courses HIST 200-400 |  
Undergraduate Courses HIST 100-199

### Courses for Undergraduate Students: History 01-99

This is a listing of all the courses offered by the UNC-CH History Department
that are open to undergraduate students __only__ (numbers  0-99). These are
possible courses; for a listing of actual courses being taught in a current or
upcoming semester, please consult the  University Registrar.

* * *

**6 FIRST YEAR SEMINARS (3).** The seminars are designed to enable first-year
students to work closely with top professors in classes that enroll twenty
students or fewer. See the directory of classes for specific offerings. Staff.

**6 FIRST YEAR SEMINAR (3). LIVING IN A DREAM WORLD: LITERARY EXPLORATIONS
INTO TRADITIONAL CHINESE SOCIETY. KESSLER.** An examination of the inner
workings of traditional China, its social and cultural dimensions, through a
close reading of several literary works. The central work to be examined is
_Dream of the Red Chamber_ , considered China's greatest novel. It is a story
of manners set within an extended elite family -- what one critic has dubbed
an eighteenth-century Chinese soap opera. Themes to be explored include family
life, gender relations, marriage patterns, religious rituals, popular beliefs,
class distinctions, social mobility, ruling class life-styles and the
interactions between state and society. Kessler.

**6 FIRST YEAR SEMINAR (3). BOOKS. PFAFF.** As well as reading books,
civilized people value them and not infrequently own them. This seminar will
aim to explore some of the fascinating aspects of the book -- here regarded
largely apart from its contents -- as an object worth considering in itself.
This may involve such activities as scrutinizing very early printed books in
the Rare Books Collection, making field trips to secondhand bookshops (as well
as to the inevitable Amazon.com), talking with preservation officers in Davis
Library, comparing different book-versions of the same work, and selecting a
book for purchase as a prized possession. Pfaff.

**10 CULTURES AND HISTORIES OF NATIVE NORTH AMERICA: AN INTRODUCTION (AMST 10)
(3).** History 10/American Studies 10 is an interdisciplinary introduction to
Native American history and studies. Utilizing an integration of art,
literature, history, cultural studies, and ethnology, History 10/American
Studies 10 introduces students to Native American cultures from the earliest
times to the present with a focus on the period after 1500. As an
interdisciplinary introduction to Native American studies, History 10/American
Studies 10 will serve as a foundation for additional courses in Native
American history and studies. This course will address cultural and historic
themes in the native history of the Southeast, Northeast, the Midwest, the
Great Plains, and the Southwest. It will explore Native American resistance to
non-Indian encroachment on Indian cultures and lands, and it will introduce
the trust relationship between the federal government and many American Indian
tribes. This is a significant theme that differentiates the cultures and
histories of federally recognized tribes from those of many North Carolina
Indians. Many cultural issues persist in Native North America, and this course
will examine these issues in their twentieth century context. This course
emphasizes Native American cultures making their own histories and shaping
their own cultural universes. After an introduction of general themes, the
instructor will use specific case studies or microcosms to examine how
individuals and tribes confronted more general themes and issues that affected
all Native Americans. Native American art and literature (short stories  &
novels) add Native American perspectives and voices to this introduction of
the American Indian cultural and historic experience. The readings are
especially important because they represent different, interdisciplinary
methodologies pertinent to Native American cultural studies; therefore, the
assigned readings complement but do not duplicate the lectures. Students are
warned that there is a much reading in this course because of the great number
of tribes and interdisciplinary methodologies pertinent to Native North
America. Porter.

>  

> "This class was really great! I learned about things that are incredibly
_important_ to my perception of history and its role in the present day, and
the things we learned in this class are not in history books!"

>

> "Every student should try to take History 10 -- it's an important part of
our heritage as Americans and human beings."

>

> "Most interesting course and professor that I had this semester."

**11 HISTORY OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION TO 1650 (3).** The emergence of western
civilization from Greek antiquity to the mid-seventeenth century. Fall and
spring. Staff.

**11 HISTORY OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION TO 1650 (3). BENNETT.** Western
Civilization is an old-fashioned course rooted in nineteenth-century ideas
about the United States, Europe, and the rest of the world, but I try to
approach it in ways suitable to the twenty-first century. First, I spend a
fair amount of time teaching about history itself: about how history is
composed of interpretation and argument, as well as facts. Second, I critique
the concept of Western Civilization; I hope that at the very time that we
study "Western Civ.," we can also see it is an *imagined* unity that somehow
links vastly separate civilizations \-- ancient Greece & Rome --> the Frankish
kingdom of Charlemagne \--> the Europe of Martin Luther --> the pilgrims at
Plymouth Rock \--> even (if we like) to Chapel Hill today. Third, in our trek
through the earliest of these 'Western' societies, I focus on social history.
Battles, philosophic ideas, and scientific discoveries are important parts of
Western Civilization, and they are treated in our textbook, but in lectures
and discussion sections, we'll focus mostly on family life, religious beliefs,
social relations, sexual practices, gender roles, class tensions, and the
like. As to more mundane matters: I divide the course into three segments
(ancient, medieval, early modern); I administer weekly quizzes on the assigned
readings; I have students meet in small discussion sections almost every week;
and I tend to assign more essays or take-home exams than in-class exams. This
is a large class (usually 300 students), but I'm usually assisted by 7-8 very
able Teaching Assistants. Bennett.

**11 HISTORY OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION TO 1650 (3). BULLARD.** Why study Western
Civ. in today's diverse world driven by a global economy? Good question!! Take
this course and find out if those DWMs and DWFs (Dead White Males and Dead
White Females) from the past have anything to tell us today. I think they do.
Furthermore, it is fascinating to study ancient, medieval, and early modern
peoples as they faced diversity, struggled with questions of identity and
meaning, gave shape to political society, survived sweeping economic and
social change, and in the process developed the self-critical tools to examine
their lives. What does it mean today as Americans to be associated with the
Western world and its traditions? Another good questions! But first, what are
those traditions and how were they shaped? What do the political experiments
of Athens and Rome have to do with Washington D.C.? A lot. How was Plato's
thought foundational for Western notions of individual and society? How did
contacts and conflicts with non-European peoples during the Crusades and
Discoveries of the New World influence modern identities? How were gender
roles defined back then? What does capitalism have to do with the economic
flowering of the Middle Ages? What was the Renaissance and how did it
determined our current university curriculum at UNC? How did Christianity
including the Protestant Reformation mold Western modes of representation in
art and culture? These are some of the themes and issues were engage in my
course to understand what "Western" means and what the perspective of history
can offer us today. I use lectures, readings, and discussions. Course
mechanics include regular quizzes, essay topics given in advance, and T.A.-led
discussion sections organized around source readings and guided by study
questions, all posted on the course web page. I use lots of images and maps in
lecture, even some music, to set the mood and to illustrate European art and
culture. The course web page includes a mini art gallery and links to other
interesting sites. Bullard.

**11 HISTORY OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION TO 1650 (3). FRANKEL.** Western
civilization has produced glorious and wondrous works of art, literature, and
architecture. Through its science it has conquered diseases, ensured a steady
and bountiful food supply, and produced countless technological marvels.
Through its religion and philosophy it has sought answers to life's most
perplexing questions, often producing works of unrivaled intellectual
sophistication, while proclaiming the most noble of ideals. At the same time,
in the name of some of those same ideals, and with ever more effective tools
produced by that same wondrous science, this civilization has fought frequent
and bloody wars both at home and abroad, perpetrating heinous acts of violence
and persecution. The world we are living in today is a product of both of
these sides of what has come to be known as Western civilization.

This class will look at the rise of the West from the classical civilizations
of Greece and Rome, to Europe from the Middle Ages and through the Early
Modern period. A course that covers this immense space of time must, by
necessity, paint the picture of Western civilization with broad strokes. In
doing so, though, I hope to present you with some of the most important trends
and issues in the history of the West in order to get a sense of just what has
gone into producing the world in which we live. Through lectures, discussion,
and a variety of readings, we will explore the various dimensions of Western
civilization, from the political to the social and the cultural. Papers,
quizzes, and exams will serve to make sure you are grasping the material while
at the same time they will help you develop critical, analytical skills.
Frankel.

**11 HISTORY OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION TO 1650 (3). MORROW.** The course surveys
the peoples and the cultures of Western Europe from 5th century BCE to the
17th century CE. Themes include: the meanings of citizenship in ancient Greece
and Rome; the development of and relationships between Christianity, Judaism,
and Islam; the place and power of learning and literacy; and the evolution of
urban and rural communities. The course's assignments, discussions, and
lectures will require students to develop interpretations of historical
problems by thinking through their understandings of historical sources,
contexts and aspects of human nature. Primary emphasis is upon family
structure, forms of governance, and facets of ideological/spiritual beliefs.
Morrow.

**11 HISTORY OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION TO 1650 (3). SMITH.** My presentation of
the history of western civilization focuses on several of the ongoing problems
and recurring themes that marked western history from classical Greece to the
early seventeenth century. Through lectures, textbook reading, and historical
documents, the class explores changing definitions and conceptions of
authority, evolving ideals of exemplary behavior, and the tension between
humanistic and other-worldly perspectives in the course of early European
history. In most weeks, students hear two lectures and attend one discussion
meeting led by a teaching assistant. The reading load averages about 80 pages
per week. There are two take-home midterm exams, weekly quizzes, and a non-
cumulative final exam. Lecture outlines, study questions, quizzes, exam
questions, and interesting links are posted to the course's web page each
week. Smith.

> "History 11 with Dr. Smith involves not only the historical events that
shaped western society, but (just as important) the social, religious,
aesthetic, and philosophic environments that make history come alive."

>

> "I am not much of a history person, but compared to the other pre-1700
courses, this one would be the best. I did not enjoy the outside texts very
much, but the lectures are very good. The outlines are easy to follow."

>

> "Western Civ under Jay Smith is a class that was interesting enough to keep
me awake. And it actually made me learn and think a little; it made me decide
to major in History."

>

> "This course helped me to understand that knighthood was an honor, the Dark
Ages were not always dark, and the Renaissance was a wonderful period of
enlightenment."

**12 HISTORY OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION SINCE 1650 (3).** The development of
western civilization from the middle of the seventeenth century to the
present. Fall and spring. Staff.

**12 HISTORY OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION SINCE 1650 (3). FRANKEL.** Ever wonder
how a civilization that could produce a Mozart, a Renoir, a Marie Curie, and a
Martin Luther King, could also produce a Robespierre, a Hitler, a Stalin, and
a Milosevic? Find out as we trace the development of the West from the
mid-17th century to the present. Using the process of modernization as our
theme we will see how its various features came about and how they developed
over time: from Absolutism to the Enlightenment; from the French Revolution to
Industrialization; from Liberalism and Socialism to nationalism; from total
war to the dictatorships of Fascism, Nazism and Soviet Communism; from the
Holocaust to the atomic bomb; from the Cold War to a new unified Europe (or a
Europe torn asunder by renewed ethnic and nationalist conflict?). Through
lectures and a series of readings we will examine these components that have
combined to produce some of mankind's most positive and uplifting
achievements, and at the same time have led to instances of the most horrific
human suffering. You will be required to take periodic quizzes, a midterm and
a final, and write two papers based on the readings. Frankel.

**14 ANCIENT HISTORY (3).** A topical survey of the ancient world, especially
the civilization of the Near East, Greece, and Rome. Fall. McCoy.

**14 ANCIENT HISTORY (3). TALBERT.** This course is designed to be a
compendium of ancient history, covering in outline format the rise and decline
of the major civilizations of the ancient world, including Egypt, the
Mesopotamian empires, Greece, and Rome. We shall examine the important
political, social, and economic events and institutions of each civilization
and their influence on Western thought and experience in both the ancient and
modern worlds. Thus, two important themes will be cultural exchange among
ancient civilizations and the relevance of ancient history for our modern
world. Lectures, presentations and class discussions will be both
chronological and topical, covering for example government, military
campaigns, religion, education, slavery, and the role of women to name a few.
While the textbook and ancient sourcebook will be our main references, we
shall also look at the primary source materials available to the historian and
examine how they are manipulated to piece together the historical record of
the civilizations we are studying. In addition we shall touch on the subject
of historiography, i.e. the history of historical writing, and investigate how
the methodology and biases of the historian and his times influence the
presentation of events. Talbert.

**15 MEDIEVAL HISTORY (3).** A survey of western Europe and the Mediterranean
World, 300-1400. Spring. McVaugh

>  

> "Good course, reasonable expectations. With a little effort lots of reward."

>

> "It's interesting learning how what is considered the 'western world' has
come to be."

>

> "Even though 8 am is early, the class was worth it. I loved it and I thought
that the professor was really good."

**16 EARLY MODERN EUROPEAN HISTORY, 1450-1815 (3).** Intellectual and social
structures, dynamics of social and political change, principles of authority
and bases of revolution from the Reformation to the French Revolutionary and
Napoleonic period. Fall. McIntosh.

**17 TWENTIETH CENTURY EUROPE (3).** A critical overview of twentieth-century
European history, with particular attention to the constant ethnic, religious,
social, economic, and cultural struggles (including Holocaust, Cold War) in
various sub-units of the old continent. Spring. Jarausch.

**18 THE CONTEMPORARY WORLD IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE: THE WORLD SINCE 1945
(3).** Analyzes the Cold War, the challenge of decolonization, America's role
in international politics, the world as an economic and political unit, the
multipolar diplomacy of the 1970s. Fall and spring. Cannot receive credit for
both History 18 and 19. Staff.

**18 THE WORLD SINCE 1945 (3). ANDERSON.** This course surveys world history
from 1945 to the present day. Through weekly readings, lectures, and other
media, students will be introduced to broad forces that confronted large
numbers of the world's population and to more narrow case studies of specific
regions or countries, including Eastern Europe, South Africa, Vietnam,
Guatemala, the Middle East, Iran, China, and the USA.   Over the course of the
semester we will cover such topics as the Holocaust, the Cold War, global
migration, women's history, decolonization, racial apartheid, economic
development, and globalization. Anderson.

**18 THE WORLD SINCE 1945 (3). FLETCHER.** This course examines important
events and developments in world history since 1945. We cover significant
trends both within nations and in international relations. Although a semester
permits coverage of only a few topics, we can gain an understanding of some
major forces that have shaped the post-1945 world and that continue to
influence our lives today. The course topics include the Cold War and its
legacy; the sources of tension in the Middle East; the struggles of developing
nations to attain independence, stability, and prosperity; the rise, fall, and
persistence of communism; the "rise"? of Asia; the post-Cold War world; and
international intervention in local conflicts. Some important themes that
pertain to many of the subjects that we will study are the sources of
international conflicts  & their resolution; continuity and change in society,
culture, & gender roles; and the complex interaction of ethnic rivalries,
state-centered nationalism, and supra-national cooperation. Assignments will
include a mid-term examination, two short (3-4-page) papers, and a final
examination. The reading consists of five-six paperbacks. The class format
will feature lectures and discussion sections. Fall. Fletcher.

**18 THE WORLD SINCE 1945 (3). FRANKEL.** The world since 1945 marks the
second half of history's bloodiest, most destructive century. Two world wars
brought home the reality of industrialized killing, first in the trench
warfare of World War One and then in the killing centers of the Nazi-inspired
Holocaust. Tyrannies of an unprecedented magnitude also emerged from this
time. Behind all of this were ideologies such as nationalism that were capable
of driving human beings to the depths of barbarity. At the same time,
nationalism, as well as other ideologies, such as capitalism, liberalism,
socialism, or communism, could also have positive, liberating effects on
peoples around the world. The technology, too, that produced so much pain and
suffering has also served to benefit humanity through improved health care,
transportation , and transfer of information. We are living with the legacies
of this pre-1945 period to this day.

In this class we will look at the world that emerged from the cauldron of the
first half of this century and try to gain a better understanding of the
forces at work around us. Naturally, in a class that covers such a broad area,
there is a limit to just how much we can cover as well as how deeply we can
delve into any one subject. Nevertheless, I hope to present you with some of
the most important trends and issues of the world since 1945. Through lectures
and a variety of readings we will explore issues such as the Cold War,
nationalism, religion, ethnic conflict, and economic development and see the
ways in which they interact. Papers, quizzes, an exams will serve to make sure
you are grasping the material while at the same time will help you develop
critical, analytical skills. Frankel.

**18 THE WORLD SINCE 1945 (3). HUNT.** This course is offered as an
introduction to the contemporary world. At the forefront of our concerns will
be the rivalry between the Soviet and American superpowers and their
respective systems; decolonization, nationalism, and revolution m the "third
world"; and changes in the international economy. The preponderance of our
attention will be devoted to the third world, and it is for this reason that
the course fulfills the non-Western historical perspective requirement. While
aimed at improving understanding of the world since 1945, the course is also
concerned with building skills. You will be introduced to the critical use of
evidence and to ways of building generalizations from that evidence and
articulating your views m clear, concise terms. The discussions, examinations,
and assigned papers have been designed to help you m this process. Hunt.

**18 THE WORLD SINCE 1945 (3). SAIKIA.** This course will present an overview
of world history since 1945 with special emphasis on freedom struggles,
resistance movements and decolonization in non-western and developing nations.
Saikia.

**19 DIVERSITY AND POST-1945 WORLD HISTORY (3).** Staff.

**19 DIVERSITY AND POST-1945 WORLD HISTORY (3). JACOBS.** This class serves as
an introduction to the contemporary world, while also trying to promote an
awareness of the striking diversity of views that both characterize and shape
that world. The class looks from multiple perspectives at the major themes of
the post-1945 world: the Cold War; colonialism, decolonization, and the
struggle for national independence; the international economy and different
economic cultures; ethnic, gender, racial, and religious differences; and the
changing nature of humans' relationship to the world around them (in both
environmental and technological terms). Using a variety of case studies
developed through lectures, small discussion groups, a class textbook, and the
close reading of primary sources, we will see how different historical actors
have constructed their own understandings of and visions for the post-1945
world. Assignments include a midterm and final exam, short 2-3 page papers,
map quizzes, and active participation in small discussion groups, and are
designed to help students develop critical oral and written communication
skills. Jacobs.

**19 DIVERSITY AND POST-1945 WORLD HISTORY (3). REID.** This course begins
with a review of the historical memory of the Holocaust. Throughout the
semester, we examine how the historical memory and interpretation of the past
contributes to the making of personal, social and national identities. Among
subjects given significant coverage are the Cold War; the rise and fall of
state socialism; colonialism, decolonization and wars of national liberation;
and race, ethnicity, religion and gender in a number of historical situations,
including the United States. We conclude with an analysis of the history of
the environment since 1945. Each week there are two lectures and one small
group discussion. Students are expected to do the reading and writing
assignments for discussion sections and to write one research paper, the
midterm, and the final. Fall and spring. Reid.

>  

> "If you're ever planning to work or travel in a foreign country, I would
recommend it highly."

>

> "History 19 is an eye-opening view of post-'45 world history. It raises big
questions that continue to be asked even as the countries in focus change. If
you want to think, to challenge your view of the world and America's role in
it, I highly recommend this class. Be ready to read quickly."

>

> "The class focused on more than historical events and dates; it went beyond
that to look at how these events really transpired and affected those people
involved. We got an insideras view of Vietnam, China, South Africa that we
donat get in other courses."

>

> "Lectures are focused on answering a question that makes a person think
about how history relates to their lives and the connections between
historical experiences in various countries. An eye-opening course."

**21 UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1865 (3).** A survey of various aspects of
American development during the colonial, revolutionary, and national periods,
with stress upon major themes and interpretations. Fall and spring. Staff.

**21 UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1865 (3). BARNEY.** The main focus of this
course in the interaction between social and political developments in
American history from the arrival of the Europeans in the wake of Columbus's
voyage down through the fighting of the Civil War. Three interrelated themes
will structure this process of interaction: 1) the dynamics of colonial
society and the preconditions for the American Revolution; 2) the contested
meaning of the American Revolution and the factors behind continued American
expansion; and 3) the flaws within the American empire and the comimng of the
Civil War. Reading, discussing, and thinking about these themes constitute the
heart of the course. The usual class schedule will consist of lectures on
Monday and Wednesday and weekly section meetings for the third hour. Barney.

**21 UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1865 (3). HALL.** The objective of the course is
to introduce students to selected themes in American history. Major topics
include the confrontation between European and Native Americans; the Puritan
quest for community; the origins of slavery and racism; the world the slaves
and slaveholders made; nineteenth-century reform (abolition and feminism); and
the coming of the Civil War. Teaching methods include lectures, small group
discussions, debates, slides, and films. Students write brief response papers
based on their reactions to the readings and films and sit for a mid-term and
a final exam. The instructor is especially interested in women's history,
labor history, and southern history. Fall and Spring. Hall.

**21 UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1865 (3). HIGGINBOTHAM.** The course will deal
with broad themes from the Age of Exploration through the Civil War.   The
course will look at colonial America as a multi-cultural, multi-racial
society, followed by treatment of the origins and course of the American
Revolution.  Post-1790 themes include the growth of political parties, reform
movements, nationalism, westward expansion, sectionalism and slavery, and the
American Civil War. Higginbotham.

**21 UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1865 (3). PERDUE.** This survey focuses on the
diversity of the people who inhabit the American past, the decisions that
those people made about their future, and the often unanticipated consequences
of those decisions. Because my research and writing focus on Native Americans,
I do not treat North America as a wilderness that people of European and
African descent settled. The cultures and histories of Native people are an
integral part of this course. By the same token, I recognize that emigrants
brought with them their own cultural baggage, and we explore how the American
experience altered beliefs, social relations, and lifestyles. I assign a
textbook, which helps students follow the chronological narrative, but my
lectures are topical. Students attend the lectures, which are held in a large
hall, but four times during the term, they meet in smaller groups to discuss
assigned books. At each meeting, students turn in three-page papers on a
particular book. A previous student described the reading as "compelling."
Each book deals with a relatively narrow topic -- Indian captivity, a
religious cult, a slave trial, and a war crime -- and students connect each
topic to broader issues and national events. Participation in these
discussions contributes to students' final grades. In addition to these
papers, the course has two exams and a final. Perdue.

>  

> "I truly enjoyed this class! Dr. Perdue's first lecture was the force that
made me become a history major! She was so excited about history and her
excitement carried on throughout each class period. I am extremely happy that
I took this course."

>

> "It is an amazing learning experience that I would recommend to anyone."

>

> "I would suggest this class to anyone having to fulfill a history
perspective; lectures are informative and tests are straightforward."

>

> "This course has helped me understand my family's attitudes and beliefs."

Final note: It's safe and legal, and you get three hours credit!

**21 UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1865 (3). PORTER.** The purpose of this course
is to introduce students to the general contours of American History before
1865 and to different approaches to contemplating the past. This course is a
basis for more specialized historical topics and courses within this period of
American History. This is a lecture course which focuses on the years between
1500 and 1865. About 1/3 of the course is devoted to the years between 1500
and 1763 and 1/3 of the course to the years between 1765 and 1824. The course
will examine the contact between Old World and New World, between Indians,
Europeans, and Africans in the area that becomes the United States. Students
will study the development of colonial society, religion, culture, race
relations, politics, and the growing rupture between the thirteen colonies and
Great Britain. The emergence of the United States system of government and
politics is addressed. The lives of historic individuals are often used to
study the larger themes of the course. The remainder of the course focuses on
the years between 1828 and 1865 and emerging sectional crisis over slavery.
Readings and lectures address the culture, society, politics, economics, and
individuals that form the matrix of the intense debate over slavery prior to
1860. Two lectures are devoted to the Civil War. The readings complement but
do not duplicate the lectures; therefore, the students are responsible for
material from lectures and from readings on all examinations and written
assignments. Historians employ different methods and use various materials to
study the past. The lectures and the assigned readings underscore the
different approaches to comprehending the past. The required readings change
every semester, but past books included biographies such as Edmund Morgan's
_The Puritan Dilemma_ and Charles Akers' _Abigail Adams_. Monographic
overviews have included Donald R. Wright, _African Americans In the Early
Republic_ and Robert Heilbroner and Aaron Singer, _The Economic Transformation
of America to 1865_. The autobiographical memoir, _Frederick Douglass,
Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass_ has been frequently assigned as a
required text. Past students of History 21 have enjoyed Michael Shaara's _The
Killer Angels_ , a novel about the Battle of Gettysburg. The textbook for
History 21 is James West Davidson and others, _Nation of Nations, Volume I_.
Fall. Porter.

**21 UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1865 (3). WATSON. Themes**. This course is an
introduction to American history from the original Indian settlement to the
end of the Civil War. We will examine a number of different events and
developments which have shaped the American past and which you may wish to
explore further in more advanced courses. Important themes will include the
confrontation of European and Native American cultures, the growth of national
identity among whites, the creation of African-American culture under slavery,
the experience of the American Revolution, conflicting efforts to shape the
early republic, contrasts in the experience of American women and men, and the
eruption of the Civil War. **Format.** There will be two lectures in most
weeks and one discussion section. Lectures will normally be on Mondays and
Fridays and discussion sections will be on Wednesdays. Students will be
assigned to discussion sections after drop-add. In lecturing, I will assume
that you have already read the textbook chapter assigned for that week. Other
reading and writing assignments should be completed before the discussion
section. **Requirements.** There will be two midterm tests, two short papers
(about 5 pages) based on the reading, and a comprehensive final examination.
An assignment sheet for the short papers will be handed out in class. It will
contain three topics, and everyone is required to write the first one. You
must write on one of the two remaining topics, but if you write on them both,
we will count your two highest grades. Grading will be based on a ten-point
scale and all tests will consist of essay-type questions and a short
identification section. The papers and midterms will each count fifteen
percent of the final grade, class participation will count ten percent, and
the final exam will count thirty percent. Fall. Watson.

**21 UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1865 (3). WILLIAMSON.** This course surveys
early American history through the Civil War. It is designed especially to
meet the academic and scholarly needs of first semester freshmen. It includes
training in improving the students' skills in mastering factual information,
in writing descriptive essays, and in analyzing and interpreting large bodies
of information relating to large issues in American history--such as the
causes of the American Revolution and the Civil War, the Industrial
Revolution, and slavery. The course also treats America as a branch of Western
civilization both in its inception and in its development. Thus elements of
American history are woven into the broad fabric of economics, religion,
ideas, politics? and society (race, class, and gender) in the Western world.
In this sense, the approach to American history is global and a preparation
for undertaking a Liberal Arts education in the university. Fall. Williamson.

**22 UNITED STATES HISTORY SINCE 1865 (3).** A survey of various aspects of
American development during a century of rapid industrial, social, political,
and international change, with stress upon major themes and interpretations.
Fall and spring. Staff.

**22 UNITED STATES HISTORY SINCE 1865 (3). BARNEY.** The main focus of the
course will be on the process and patterns of American history from
Reconstruction to the present. Three main themes structure the course: 1) the
reunion and renewed expansion of the U.S. from 1865-1900; 2) the need for, and
the limits of, reform in the twentieth century; and 3) the maturation of
corporate America from World War II to the present. Close to half of the
material will cover the emergence of the U.S. as a global power. This is a
course that emphasizes critical thinking and writing. The usual class schedule
will consist of lectures on Monday and Wednesday and weekly section meetings.
Barney.

**22 UNITED STATES HISTORY SINCE 1865 (3). FILENE.** I have three major
purposes for this introduction to American history since the Civil War. First,
I want you to learn about people who have had experiences and ideas veyr
different from most of us today. We study, for example, newly freed slaves,
Russian Jewish immigrants, Andrew Carnegie, Theodore Roosevelt, New Deal
reformers, and student radicals in the 1960s. As compared to traditional
history courses, we spend less time on party politics and military events, and
more time on reform movements, cultural trends, and social values. Second, I
want you to wrestly with some thorny social, economic and moral questions.
What do we mean by "the American Dream"? Who has succeeded and who has not?
Why? What has been the effect of government reform and wars? Third, I want you
to learn how to express your ideas more effectively in writing. You write
three short (5 pages maximum) out-of-class essays in response to my questions,
plus a final in-class exam. You also perform a few experimental exercises in
which you dig into primary sources (newspapers from the 1890s, 1920s and
1950s, plus an oral history interview with your parents) and make sense of
what you find. "The past is a foreign country," a novelist has said. "They do
things differently there." With this in mind, I offer you two perspectives. On
the one hand, you look back at the past via my lectures as well as historians'
books and articles. On the other hand, you enter the past directly via
letters, newspaper articles, novels and photographs. Although the class
includes c. 100 students, I encourage and expect you to participate actively
rather than sit back, listen and take notes. During my lectures I ask you to
discuss questions, join "buzz groups" and enter class debates. And on eight
class days, you meet with 15 other students to discuss assigned readings and
your research. Filene.

**22 UNITED STATES HISTORY SINCE 1865 (3). JACKSON.** This course covers major
themes and issues in American history since 1865. We will pay particular
attention to the social and cultural transformations that occurred between
1865 and the 1980's. More specifically, we will examine different ways
Americans adjusted to, understood and made sense of these changes. We will
also take a look at those moments when these different perspectives and
experiences emerged as the subject of public conflict and debate. Readings for
the course consist of a textbook as well as a variety of different historical
documents including speeches, newspaper articles, memoirs. The course includes
a midterm and final as well as several papers, all of which are designed to
enhance critical thinking skills. Jackson.

**22 UNITED STATES HISTORY SINCE 1865 (3). LOTCHIN.** History 22 is an
introduction to general American history from 1865 to the present. The course
includes some social history, but is heavily weighted toward politics and
foreign relations. Therefore, History 22 stresses those matters which
Americans have in common rather than what divides them, or in other words
national history. The course includes the topics usual to surveys, including
the Civil War, Reconstruction, Labor, the Industrial Revolution, the Gilded
Age, the Progressive Era, World War I, the twenties, the New Deal, World War
II, the Cold War, and postwar politics. Race, women, Prohibition and American
cities are also included. Lotchin.

**22 UNITED STATES HISTORY SINCE 1865 (3). PORTER.** The purpose of this
course is to introduce students to the general themes of American History
since 1865 and to different ways historians approach the past. This course can
be a foundation for students who wish to pursue more specialized historical
topics and courses within this period of American History. The course centers
on the emergence of the industrial corporate economy after 1865 and the
significant effect of this new economy on the development of politics,
governance, business organization, society, and culture in the United States
after the Civil War. These economic, social, and cultural ramifications are
followed into the areas of race relations from Reconstruction through the
twentieth century Civil Rights movement, the changing status of women in
American society, the expanding role of the United States on the world stage,
and American popular culture. Historic individuals are often used to study the
larger themes of the course. Historians work in different ways and use
different materials. This will be obvious from the lectures and the assigned
readings. The required titles change every semester, but in the past have
included a wide range of materials in Course Packs, essays, and books. Books
have included as C. Vann Woodward, _The Strange Career of Jim Crow_ , Glenn
Porter, _The Rise of Big Business_ , Robert Heilbroner and Aaron Singer, _The
Economic Transformation of America Since 1865_ , Allan M. Winkler, _Home Front
USA_ , Stephen Ambrose, _Rise to Globalism_ , and Ralph B. Levering, _The Cold
War: A Post-Cold War History_ ; and historical fiction, Upton Sinclair, _The
Jungle_ and Ralph Ellison, _Invisible Man_. Personal memoirs are included in
the Course Packs and in such books as James McDonough's _Platoon Leader_ or
Quincy Trouppe, _20 Years Too Soon: Prelude to Major-League Integrated
Baseball_. The current textbook is Neil R. McMillen, _A Synopsis of American
History Volume II: Since the Civil War_ , but it will be dropped for a
different text when I next teach History 22. In class during week 12 students
are required to listen to Elvis Presley, Chuck Berry, the Beatles, and Aretha
Franklin. Spring. Porter.

>  

> "The way Professor Porter describes history makes you want to stay in the
room and listen forever."

>

> "Take it."

>

> "History 22 with Doctor Porter is one of the most interesting and
straightforward classes at this university."

>

> "It was a privilege to be instructed by such an amiable and seasoned
professor."

**22 UNITED STATES HISTORY SINCE 1865 (3). SEMONCHE.** This course spans the
history of the United States from the end of the Civil War up to the present,
and presents through lectures, discussion and reading an overview of the main
themes and events that have shaped the world in which we live. Although the
lectures emphasize the creation of an industrial and post-industrial society
in which the role of government expands in its relationship to the individual,
the course deals with all aspects of the past, including popular culture. The
main goal of the course is to engage the interest of students so that they can
see themselves as part of the historical picture. From the multimedia lecture
outlines, that combine bits of music and video with other pictorial elements,
to the computer simulations that make each student a determining participant
in three historical episodes, through the paper assignment and tests, the
course is designed for maximum interaction of the student with the stuff of
history. A text and sourcebook are used, and students will need to do
additional reading for the paper required in the course. The paper asks
students to do some oral history by interviewing a person and putting that
person in a historical context. In addition to the paper, there will be two
hour exams and a final. The course will have a web page to which students can
go to review the lecture outlines and obtain other relevant course material.
Semonche.

**22 UNITED STATES HISTORY SINCE 1865 (3). WATSON. Themes.** This course is an
introduction to U.S. history from the end of the Civil War to the present. We
will deal with the issues of Reconstruction, the nation's ongoing racial,
gender, and ethnic differences, the industrialization of America, changes in
U.S. government and culture in response to industrialization, America's rise
to world power, the Cold War struggle with the Soviet Union, the changing
status of women and racial minorities, and the modern transformation of the
American economy. We will also be looking at the ways historians examine
evidence, form conclusions, and put their thoughts into writing. **Class
format.** There will usually be two lectures and one discussion section every
week, with lectures on Wednesdays and Fridays and discussions on Mondays or
Tuesdays. Students w

