#### Mississippi State University

#### Department of History

#### History 3903 Syllabus

## HISTORIOGRAPHY AND HISTORICAL METHOD

Time: 2:00-4:30 p.m., Mondays

Room: 253 Allen Hall

Instructor: Dr. Richard V. Damms

Office: 234 Allen Hall

Office Telephone: 325-7086 (Voice Mail)

Office Hours: MWF, 10:00-10:50 a.m., and by appointment ( **unavailable
Tuesdays and Thursdays** )

E-Mail: rdamms@ra.msstate.edu

Course Web Page: www2.msstate.edu/~rdamms/historiography.htm

  
  

COURSE DESCRIPTION

History 3903 is an introduction to historiography (the history of history) and
historical writing. It is designed to introduce students to a wide variety of
historians and their approaches, and to give students practice in the analysis
of historical sources and researching and writing historical papers. The
course will be conducted as a seminar. There will be a minimum of lecturing by
the instructor. Rather, the emphasis will be on **class discussion** and
**independent work** by each student. On certain days, we will have guest
speakers from the History Department who will talk about their respective
fields of research.

  
  

COURSE REQUIREMENTS

1\. Students are required to complete each reading assignment by the date that
it is assigned, and should be prepared to discuss it in class. Class
attendance, participation, critiques, and short quizzes or written assignments
will count 30% toward the course grade. More than one unexcused absence will
result in a one letter grade reduction of the participation grade for each
absence. Persistent tardiness and failure to observe established classroom
etiquette will not be tolerated.

2\. Students will write a critical book review on a book chosen in
consultation with the instructor. Ideally, the book will address the topic of
the student's larger research paper. The book review will count 10% toward the
course grade.

3\. Students will produce an annotated bibliography of at least 20 items
(books, articles, essays, etc.) on the topic of their research paper. The
annotated bibliography will count 10% toward the course grade.

4\. Students will write a major research paper of approximately 20 pages on a
topic chosen in consultation with the instructor. The paper must be based on
primary source material. All paper topics must be cleared in advance with the
instructor. Papers on unapproved topics will not be accepted. The research
paper (and a complete first draft) will count 50% toward the course grade.

  
  

REQUIRED READINGS

There are four required books, all of which are available at the University
Bookstore.

Turabian, _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations_ ,
6th ed.

Benjamin, _A Student's Guide to History_ , 7th ed.

Spickard, et al., _World History by the World's Historians_.

Storey, _Writing History_

  
  

GRADING

Each course assignment will be graded according to the following scale:

A, 90-100; B, 80-89; C, 70-79; D, 60-69; F, 0-59.

  
  

SCHEDULE OF ASSIGNMENTS

(Please note that the schedule of guest speakers is still tentative and
subject to change.)

1/8 Introduction: Course Goals and Requirements.

  
  

1/15 NO CLASS: Martin Luther King, Jr. Holiday.

  
  

1/22 What Is History and Why Study It?

Introduction to Mitchell Memorial Library and its History Resources by Dr.
David Nowak.

**Readings** : Benjamin, chs. 1-3; Spickard, ix-xv; Storey, ch. 1.

  
  

1/29 Historical Method: Researching and Writing a History Paper.

**Readings** : Benjamin, chs. 4-5, Appendix A; Turabian, chs. 1-5; Storey,
chs. 2-10.

**Assignment** : One-page paper proposal due in class (make copies for
everyone).

  
  

2/5 Historical Documentation: Footnotes, Endnotes, and Bibliographies. Oral
Traditions.

__**Readings** : Turabian, chs. 8-9, 12; Spickard, chs. 1-7.

**Assignment** : Critical Book Reviews (one copy) and Oral Reports due in
class.

  
  

2/12 Guest Speaker: Professor Robert Willman on Greek and Roman Historians.

**Readings** : Spickard, chs. 8-9, 12-16; Gilderhus, ch. 2.

**Assignment** : Footnote and Bibliography Exercise due in class (one copy).

  
  

2/19 Guest Speaker: Professor Godfrey Uzoigwe on African Historiography.

**Readings** : Spickard, chs. 23, 35, 44, 56.

**Assignment** : Preliminary Bibliography of at least 20 items due (copies for
everyone).

  
  

2/26 Guest Speaker: Professor Shu-hui Wu on Chinese Historiography.

**Readings** : Spickard, chs. 10, 11, 22, 37. .

  
  

3/6 Philosphies of History: Growth of the West. NO CLASS: Spring Break.

**Readings** : Spickard, chs. 27-34.

**Assignment** : Annotated Bibliography Due (one copy). Oral progress reports
on rsearch papers.

  
  

3/12 NO CLASS: Spring Break.

  
  

3/19 Philosophies of History: Scientific History.

**Readings** : Spickard, chs. 38-43; 45-46; Gilderhus, ch. 3-5.

**Assignment** : Oral Progress Reports on Papers. Detailed Outline and Updated
Bibliography due in class (copies for everyone).

  
  

3/26 Philosophies of History: Recent Trends.

**Readings** : Spickard, chs. 48-55; Gilderhus, ch. 7, postscript.

**Assignment** : Oral Critiques of Outlines and Bibliographies.

  
  

4/2 Paper First Draft. __

**Assignment** : Group I distributes first complete drafts (copies for
everyone).

  
  

4/9 Papers.

**Readings** : Group I Papers

**Assignment** : Written (two copies) and Oral Critiques of Group I Papers.
Group II distributes first complete drafts (copies for everyone).

  
  

4/16 Papers.

**Readings** : Group II Papers

**Assignment** : Written (two copies) and Oral Critiques of Group II Papers.
Student course evaluation.

  
  

4/23 No Class Meeting: Individual Conferences by Appointment.

  
  

4/30 Final Draft Paper.

**Assignment** : Final Paper due in my mailbox in 214 Allen Hall **by 5:00
P.M.**

  
  

* * *

Last updated: 11 January 2001

Return to Mississippi State University Home Page

Return to History Department Home Page

