**SPRING 1998**

**ENG 701: SEMINAR IN MEDIEVAL LITERATURE  
  
**

  * Professor: Fidel Fajardo-Acosta 
  * Course: ENG 701 
  * Class Time: Wednesdays, 5:00-7:30 PM 
  * Classroom: Instructional Technology Classroom, Reinert Alumni Library Building (UL), Lower Level, Room L02 
  * Course Dates: Wednesday, January 14-Monday, May 4, 1998 
  * Office Hours: Mondays and Wednesdays 11:00 AM-12:00 PM, and by appointment 
  * Office: Hitchcock Communication Arts Building (CA) Room 304 A 
  * Office Telephone: (402) 280-2522 
  * email: fajardo@creighton.edu
  * Web Home Page: http://mockingbird.creighton.edu/english/worldlit/fajardo.htm   

**STUDENTS AND STUDENT PROJECTS**

**TARA KNAPP**

**JULIE MULLANY**

**NORAH SWARTZ**



**COURSE DESCRIPTION  
**

This course offers a study of medieval English literature from its beginnings
in the Anglo-Saxon (Old English) period through the 15th century. Texts and
authors studied include _Beowulf_ , _Sir Gawain and the Green Knight_ ,
Chaucer's _Canterbury Tales_ , Langland's _Piers Plowman_ , Malory's _Morte
Darthur_ , as well as lyrics and drama. The course emphasizes reading and
discussion of the texts, examination and assessment of current scholarship and
bibliography as well as the writing of a seminar paper.  
  

**TEXTS  
**

**_Anglo-Saxon Poetry_ , trans. & ed. S. A. J. Bradley, Everyman  
**

**_Medieval English Literature_ , ed. Thomas J. Garbaty, Waveland**  
  
  

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS  
**

**1) Seminar Paper (30%)**

All students will be required to undertake and complete the writing of an
original seminar paper (10-15 pages) offering personal analysis of as well as
discussion of scholarship on one or more of the texts studied. Papers may
offer personal interpretations based on close, attentive reading of a specific
and well-defined aspect of a text. Such interpretations however must always be
presented and discussed in the context of the scholarship. Possible subjects
for papers include consideration of the significance of themes, situations,
passages, images, characters, symbols, motifs, language, structure, etc. of
the chosen text(s). Papers must provide evidence for all their claims in the
form of extended discussion and explanation of relevant textual and contextual
features as well as references to the work of other scholars. In addition to
logical thought, reading comprehension and writing skill, papers should
feature independent thinking, originality, precise and detailed analysis, as
well as understanding of the complexities of meaning in literary texts. Papers
must also show awareness and accurate use of primary and secondary sources,
relevant facts, historical information, cultural/intellectual backgrounds,
different interpretations, and literary terminology and concepts. It is
strongly recommended that students consult with the instructor, well in
advance of the deadline, concerning the topic and progress of the paper. **The
paper in final form is due Monday, May 4 by 12:00 noon in the instructor's
office or mailbox.  
**

**2) Bibliography and Medieval English Literature Web Site (40%)**

Students in the class will work together in the compilation of bibliography,
annotation of current scholarship and development of a web site featuring
information on the texts studied as well as links to other resources.

For each work in the syllabus, students will compile a list of 10-20 books or
articles (this should include the most important standard or critical editions
of the work as well as influential commentaries or interpretations). At least
3 of those items should be annotated to include not only full bibliographical
information but also a summary/description of contents. Items to be annotated
should be chosen from the most recent scholarship. Each annotated entry should
be no longer than a page in length.

Students in the class will work together in the building a World Wide Web site
offering a summary of basic facts (authorship, summary of content,
cultural/historical background, textual history and features, etc), links to
other relevant sites, as well as the bibliographical entries and annotations
for each one of the works in the syllabus.  

**3) Attendance and Class Participation (30%)**

All students in the class are required to do the assigned reading, prepare for
and attend class regularly and actively and constructively participate in
class discussions and other activities.  
  

**COURSE SCHEDULE  
**

Wed Jan 14

> Introduction (no reading required)

Wed Jan 21

> Anglo-Saxon (Old English) Period.

>

> Anglo-Saxon Poetry (The Wanderer, The Seafarer, The Dream of the Rood)

Wed Jan 28

> The Battle of Maldon, The Battle of Brunanburg

Wed Feb 04

> Beowulf

Wed Feb 11

> Beowulf

Wed Feb 18

> Middle English Period: Outline and Chronology

>

> Robert Biket's The Lay of the Horn, Marie de France's Lanval

Wed Feb 25

> Geoffrey of Monmouth's _History of the Kings of Britain_

Wed March 04

> Sir Gawain and the Green Knight  
>

Wed Mar 11

> **SPRING BREAK  
>  **

Wed Mar 18

> Geoffrey Chaucer's __ Canterbury Tales __ (The Miller's Tale)

Wed Mar 25

> William Langland's Piers Plowman

Wed Apr 01

> Middle English Lyrics (Sumer is, Mirie it is, Foweles, Alysoun, Lenten is
Come, When the Nightingale, Irish Dancer, All Night by the Rose, Maiden in the
Moor, I Sing of a Maiden)

Wed Apr 08

> Sir Thomas Malory's Morte Darthur

Wed Apr 15

> The Second Shepherds' Play

Wed Apr 22

> Everyman

Wed Apr 29

> Conclusion. Course Evaluations (bring a #2 pencil)

Mon May 04

> **Paper Due in Instructor's Office or Mailbox by 12:00 Noon**



