# Arts of China

# Spring 2001

Victoria Weston

Office: M-4-458B

Office Phone: 287-5742, 287-5730 for messages

Office Hours: M/W 8:00-8:30 and 1:00-2:00, and by appointment

This course surveys China's major artistic traditions, beginning with its
earliest history. Topics will include ritual bronzes, sculpture, ceramics, and
major genres of painting. The course material will be focused on the central
problem of culture and class identity: how culture, and more specifically art
objects and style, are used to shape class identity and power. To look at
objects more profitably, we will discuss the religious and cultural beliefs
that help shape the making of art objects. This course satisfies the
international  diversity requirement.

I assume no background in art history or Chinese history. I do expect,
however, that you do all of the readings, attend class lecture and take notes,
participate in discussion, and that you ask questions in class if something is
not clear. This will be a difficult class if you do not keep up with the
course material, and I urge you to review your notes periodically.



### Grading:

Student evaluation will be based upon three exams, one 5-minute presentation,
a few  ungraded homework assignments, and class participation. For the exams,
you will be asked to identify slides of art objects, giving the artist's name,
site name, dating information, and so forth, as well as discuss the objects in
a meaningful way. I will expect that you have both done the reading and taken
notes from class lectures. Exam questions will address both the visual
qualities of art objects and their social context. In general,  there are no
make-up exams (given the complexity of slide exams, you really must be there
for the exam.) If you should have some insurmountable problem, I will need a
written explanation plus documentation such as a doctor's note.  Students must
take the exams and do the presentation to pass this course.

Class participation comprises one ungraded group presentation, several
ungraded homework assignments, and in-class discussions based upon readings.
While the homework and presentation are not graded, I will assign them a point
value. You must get 23 of 28 points to pass the course, and the group
presentation is mandatory.

As part of your class participation, I take attendance daily. This policy is
not meant to penalize students in times of illness or family crisis: please
see me or telephone to alert me  to a problem. I take attendance at the
beginning of the class period; if you arrive late, you should come tell me at
the end of the period. More than six absences will result in failing the
class. Students must take the exams and do the presentation to pass this
course.



### Grade Composition:

Exam #l 20%

Exam #2 25%

Exam#3 35%

Presentation/Debate 10%

Class Participation 10%



### Course Materials

Craig Clunas. _Art in China._

Michael Sullivan. _The Arts of China._

Robert van Gulik. _The Chinese Nail Murders_

Reading Packet

In addition, you will need an Asian brush of any sort, a can or cup, a section
of newspaper, I or 2 sheets of Asian paper and some liquid sumi ink.

Books are sold in the Book Store, Quinn Administration Building.

Reading Packets are sold at the Copy Store, Wheatley Building 01/078.

You have two textbooks on Chinese art in order to bring out the diversity
content of this  course. Clunas's book is organized to highlight social
features in the making and consumption of art objects. This book thus
foregrounds issues of class, gender, and culture. It does little, however, to
discuss the aesthetic qualities of art objects. It is also not in
chronological order, which makes this book difficult for students first
encountering Chinese art. Sullivan is the more traditional survey book. It is
arranged chronologically, and it talks about the visual qualities of art
objects as its primary theme. When reading for this class, read the Sullivan
selection first, then the Clunas. You will find that they differ in their
opinions about what is important about an art object, how to interpret certain
famous works, and why we should be studying art objects. We will not explore
all of the objects discussed in the readings, but how the two authors discuss
each object will broaden your understanding of the objects we do discuss.



### Incompletes

These are only allowed under exceptional circumstances, and they are never
granted automatically. This means that if you think you qualify for an
incomplete, you must  request one from me. The basic requirements for an
incomplete are: 1) you must be passing the course, 2) there must be only one
significant assignment outstanding, and 3) you must have an insurmountable
problem that prevents you from completing the course.



### Classroom Etiquette

This class begins promptly, though some allowance is made for severely
inclement weather. Students should be on time, or they will miss announcements
and course material. (If there is a problem, please come see me.) Please do
not bring food to class, as  this is distracting to me and fellow students. If
you wish to bring something, bring enough for everyone in the class. Beverages
are fine.



### Pointers for this Class

Class lectures tend to have a lot of information, some of which is not
repeated in the textbooks. I urge you to take notes during lecture, and it may
help to also draw yourself quick sketches of the images you see in order to
jog your memory later. Non-native speakers of English may find using a tape
recorder to tape the lectures helpful. You should keep up with the work
assigned, especially the reading. I expect that you have done the reading for
the class period in which it is assigned.



# Three Kingdoms and Six Dynasties Period

#  (Period of Disunity)

### 2/16. Foreign Rulers, Patronage, and Cultural Adaptation

Reading:

Sullivan, Arts of China, Chapter 6; Clunas, Art in China: pp. 89-97.

In Photocopy Packet: E. Dale Saunders, Buddhism in Japan, With an Outline of
its Origins in India (University of Pennsylvania Press, 1964), pp. 18-30.

2/19. President's Day

### 2/21. Discussion: Buddhist sculpture

*ln the reading you did for 2/19, look particularly at how the two authors explain the changes in style that occur at Yungang (Yun-kang).

### 2/23. Figure Painting

*Read in your textbooks about the Six Principles of Painting formulated by Xie He (Hsieh Ho) (Sullivan, p. 88; Clunas, p. 46). What are they and what do they

mean?

### 2/26. Discussion: The Chinese Nail Murders

**Homework #t and #2 due

### 2/28. Exam Review

### 3/2. Exam



# Sui and Tang (T'ang) Dynasty

### 3/5. Empire and Culture

Reading: Sullivan, Arts of China: Chapter 7, pp. 114-128; Clunas, Art in
China, pp. 103-112.

### 3/7. Development of the Handscroll Format

Reading: Clunas, Art in China, pp. 45-53 (top).

### 3/9. Discussion: Emperor Minghuang's Flight to Shu and Visual Analysis

Reading, in Photocopy Packet: Jerome Silbergeld, Chinese Painting Style,
(University of Washington Press, 1982), p. 5-19, 24 (wash)-39. *Bring this to
class.



# Five Dynasties and the Northern Song (Sung) Dynasty

### 3/12. The Great Mountain Landscape

Reading: Sullivan, Arts of China: Chapter 8, to page 163; Clunas, Art in
China, p.  53-58.

*Homework #3 handed out

### 3/14. Sung Empiricism and Landscape

### 3/16 have one day to cancel

### 3/19-3/23. Spring Break

### 3/26. Huizong' s (Hui-tsung' s) Court and Bird-and-Flower Painting

Reading: Arts of China, Chapter 8, pp. 163-166; Clunas, Art in China, pp.
57-58.

### 3/28. Discussion: Guo Xi' s (Kuo Hsi' s) Early Spring

Reading, in Photocopy Packet: Kuo Ssu, "Comments on Landscapes," excerpts,

from Osvald Siren, Chinese Painting: Leading Masters and Principles, Part I

Volume I (New York: The Ronald Press, 1956), 220-226.

*Homework #3 due



# Southern Song (Sung) Dynasty

### 3/30. The Lyrical Landscape

Reading: Sullivan, Arts of China: pp. 167-169; Clunas, Art in China: pp.
58-63.

### 4/2. * *Paint in class.

Goal: develop familiarity with Sung Dynasty texture strokes.

Ungraded, and no talent or experience necessary. You do, however, need to
bring the art supplies listed at the beginning of this syllabus.

### 4/4. Exam #2

Yuan Dynasty

### 4/6. Mongol Adaptations to Chinese Culture

Reading: Sullivan, Arts of China: pp. 177-189: Clunas, Art in China: pp.
63-66.

### 4/9. Painting as Political Protest

Reading: Sullivan, Arts of China: pp. 184-185, 188-189; Clunas, Art in China:
pp. 145 (lower paragraph)-149.

### 4/11. Confucian Duty Versus Taoist Retreat: the Case of Zhao Mengfu (Chao
Meng-fu)

Reading, in photocopy packet: **Brmg photocopy packet to class

Max Loehr, The Great Painters of China. (New York: Harper and Row, 1980), pp.
233-239;

James Cahill, Hills Beyond a River: Chinese Painting of the Yuan Dynasty.
1279-1368 (New York and Tokyo: Weatherhill, 1976), pp. 38-43;

Michael Sullivan, Symbols of Eternity: the Art of Landscape Painting in China
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1979), pp. 94-8.



### 4/18. The "Four Great Masters of the Yuan Dynasty "

Reading: Sullivan, Arts of China: pp. 189-193; Clunas, Art in China: pp.
150-153.

Reading, in photocopy packet: Bush, Susan, and Shih, Hsio-yen, Early Chinese
Texts on Painting (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1985), pp. 269-70,

280, 285-6. (Comments on painting by Ni Zan [Ni Tsan] and Wu Zhen [Wu Chen])

Yuan Presentations Assignments Handed Out: Students will work in teams

to present a formal analysis of a Yuan painting. * * *You must attend 4/20 in

order to work out your presentation with your partner, and attend both

presentation days.



# Ming Dynasty

### 4/27. Native Rule and Court Painters

Reading: Sullivan, Arts of China: Chapter 10, to p. 206; Clunas, Art in China:
pp. 66-72

### 4/30. Ming Literati

Reading: Sullivan, Arts of China: p. 206-209; Clunas, Art in China: pp.
153-160 *Homework #4 and #5 handed out

### 5/2. Town Professionals

Reading: Sullivan, Arts of China: pp. 209; Clunas, Art in China: pp. 175-181

### 5/4. Dong Qichang (Tung Ch' i-ch' ang) and the Codification of Traditions

Reading: Sullivan, Arts of China: p. 209-212; Clunas, Art in China: pp.
160-162

Reading: In Photocopy Packet: James Cahill, The Painter's Practice: How
Artists Lived and Worked in Traditional China (Columbia University Press,
1994), pp. 33-50.

**Class trip to the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. Meet in the West Lobby at

2:00.



# Qing (Ch'ing) Dynasty

### 5/7, 5/9. Foreign Rulers and Painted Protest, Revisited

Reading: Sullivan, Arts of China, 223-226, 230-235; Clunas, Art in China, pp.
162-165

### 5/11. Orthodoxy, the Marketplace, and Western Techniques

Reading: Sullivan, Arts of China, 228-229, 236-228; Clunas, Art in China, pp.
72-87,165-169

### 5/16. Debate: Literati Painters Versus the Professionals

Final Exam: during Final exam period

