### ![Asian Studies Development Program](/Images/lions.jpeg)

* * *

[About] [Index] [Search] [Other Links] [Comments/Submissions]

## Report for 1995 Asian Studies Development Program and NEH Institute on
Japanese Culture and Civilization

EAST-WEST CENTER AND THE UNIVERSITY OF HAWAII (5 JUNE - 7 JULY)

Submitted By

**Dr. Alison McNeal**  
Department of English  
Slippery Rock University  

My project's primary purpose is to support and broaden Slippery Rock
University's on-going curriculum development of Asian Studies. In 1990 and
1991 Dr. Peggy Denning drew together courses that were already being taught
into a curriculum proposal for an Asian Studies Minor. By 1992, the minor was
in place in the curriculum. Now the job is to develop the faculty, such as
myself, who are not Asian Studies experts and who may not be familiar with the
cultures, languages, and literatures they are expected to teach. Therefore,
the nature of intended curricular changes must be in the context of limited
staffing, budget cost cuts, and students who often must be guided out of a
narrow, parochial focus.  

Nevertheless, I believe that I will be able to develop Slippery Rock
University's curriculum in at least three areas, SRU's 56 credit hour Liberal
Studies program required of all graduates, the programs in the Department of
English including the B.A. in English, and the Asian Studies Minor. The
following report will highlight those projected curricular changes with the
largest emphasis on the course that I currently have been teaching: English
248 or "Eastern Literature." The proposed changes involve a change in the
emphasis and direction in classes that already exist and that I teach or will
teach such as English 101--College Writing I, introductory level literature
courses, and English 248--Eastern Literature. This report also will explore
some ideas for brand new

courses as part of the over_hauling of our B.A. in English. These courses
would also fit into the Asia Studies Minor and one would also mesh with the
Women's Studies Minor. The attached bibliography in Japanese Literature,
besides being a helpful classroom tool in the classes that I already teach,
will be particularly useful in developing these courses since the form used by
the Curriculum Committee requires an attached bibliography.  

**Liberal Studies  
**

Introductory English Department writing and literature courses are required of
every SRU student. Each student must take College Writing I and II (or exempt
from them) as well as one literature class selected from a group of four
designated literature classes: Introduction to Fiction, Introduction to Poetry
and Drama, Modern English and American Literature, and Contemporary English
and American Literature.

The college writing classes are the traditional general introduction to
college writing followed by a class in research paper writing. Given the
freedom that each member of our department has to select texts and course
focus, I plan to offer Japanese topics via the use of the following text:
White, Merry and Sylvan Barnet, eds. _Comparing Cultures: Readings on
Contemporary Japan for American Writers._ Boston: Bedford Books of St.
Martin's Press, 1995. Simultaneously, using the curricular practice already
established in the Women's Studies Minor, I can have the college writing
classes that I teach with a focus on Japan or other Asian countries to be
included as credit in our Asia Studies Minor.

For the literature classes there are two easily available ways of changing
them to include more works by Japanese authors. The first and most obvious way
is

to include a Japanese unit in each course. I have taught three out of the four
available classes, and with the wealth of suggestions I have gathered as a
student in this Institute, I will very easily be able to construct a five week
module of Japanese literature.

Secondly, the list of four introductory literature classes is going to be
modified. Since I am on the department Curriculum Committee, I have
volunteered to propose a new course to be substituted for either all four
courses or for only the Modernism class with its focus on such writers as
Eliot, Hemingway, Cather, and Fitzgerald. I can either propose a fairly
standard "Introduction to Literature" class with a large multi_cultural
component consisting of in part, Asian literatures and themes, or I can
propose an "Introduction to World Literature," designed specifically to
include Asian literatures. In fact, it may be more appropriate to propose both
an Introduction to Literature as well as an upper_division Introduction to
World Literature that could possibly prepare some students of our department's
graduate level World Literature class.  

**B.** **A. in English and the Asian Studies Minor  
**

The Department of English Curriculum Committee is beginning its re_thinking of
its B. A. program. My primary work and concern will be with English 248 which
I started to teach in the Spring of 1992. My work with it involves a three-
fold plan. First, working with Dr. Roger Ames' suggestion when he came to
SRU's campus for a workshop, I have attempted to make the class more
restrictive in its scope. To that end, next fall, I plan to include a sampling
of literature from China and Japan only. Second, I plan to propose a change in
the the catalog description from one that emphasizes only the ancient,
classical texts of a large number of "Eastern"

countries to one that permits study of recent or contemporary literatures of a
smaller number of countries.

Third, English 248 is a class that is marginalized within my department
because it is listed only as an elective which means that it is rarely taken
as a course by any of the English majors whether they are taking the B.A., the
B.S. or the B.S. Ed. I plan to begin by moving its position in the B.A. to a
"slot" where it is at least listed in a block of choices of one of the
degree's requirements.

Finally, looking ahead into the future development of the Asian Studies Minor
at Slippery Rock as well as the on_going evolution of the Department of
English's programs, I can think of a number of classes that I could design and
teach besides Introduction to Literature or Introduction to World Literature
that would have a very specific Japanese focus. One would be "Classic Japanese
Literature," and it could focus on a variety of topics or texts from the Heian
to the Medieval period. Another could be "Contemporary Japanese Novels" and
might use a variety of authors such as Kawabata, Tanizaki, Soseki, and Oe.
Finally, another class might be "Contemporary Japanese Female Writers" which
could mesh with Department of English programs, the Asian Studies Minor, and
the Women's Studies Minor as well.

Thus, the impact of my participation in this NEH Institute on Japanese
Civilization and Culture will be immediately felt in the classes already in
the curriculum that I teach, namely College Writing I, College Writing II,
Introduction to Fiction, Contemporary English and American Fiction, and
Eastern Literature. However, in the more distant future (1996 and 1997), I
plan to propose a number of new courses and use the attached bibliography in
part as support for the following courses:

Introduction to Literature

Introduction to World Literature

Classic Japanese Literature

Contemporary Japanese Novels

(Contemporary) Japanese Female Writers  

**Attachments**

What follows is a list of attachments to show the changes in my English 248,
Eastern Literature class. First, there is a list of works chosen the first
time I taught Eastern Literature. Second, the Eastern Literature syllabus with
the works selected for the fall 1995 semester follows. Finally, there is a
brief bibliography that I can use in all of the above instances to support all
of classes and the proposals for new ones. It is also extremely useful because
I can update it and shape it over the course of time that I teach.

**COURSE SYLLABUS**

# **EASTERN LITERATURE, ENGLISH 248 AA**

**SPRING 1991  
**

DR . BARBARA WILLIAMS OFFICE 312 A (SWC)

311 E. Falls St. OFFICE PHONE:738-2373

New Castle, PA 1610 OFFICE HOURS: T 4:00-6:00 M 10:00-1:00  

Note: This is an important document which can help the student throughout the
course.  

**_COURSE DESCRIPTION:  
_**

This is an introductory level reading course that serves to introduce the
student to selected texts of world_wide importance that were written in what
we now geographically refer to as "The East," in countries such as but not
limited to Arabia, China, Eqypt, Japan, India, Iran, and Israel. Each country
has its own distinctive literature which both embodies and reflects the deep
structure of the culture. Students will be expected to read these texts for
their literary, spiritual, philosophical, and cultural merit.  

**_COURSE OBJECTIVES  
_**

By the end of the semester, the student will be expected to know or do the
following:  

a. discover what the apparent fundamental imperatives are for each culture;  

b. appreciate the cultural differences;  

c. _make meaning_ (in Bleich's sense) of the text;  

d. appreciate the difficulties involved in adequately translating these texts;  

e. understand the vastness of this area;  

f. express and support verbally or in writing possible interpretations.  

**_REQUIRED TEXTS  
_**

These texts are listed here in alphabetical order, not necessarily in the
order in which they will be read. Students are encouraged to purchase these
editions to facilitate classroom discussion.

Easwaran, Keknath, ed _The Upanishads: A Selection for the Modern Reader.  
_

Chen, Ellen, trans. _The Tao Te Ching: A New Translation with Commentarv_.  

Haddaway, Husain, trans. _The Arabian Niqhts_.  

Miller, Barbara S., ed. _The Bhagavad-Gita_.  

Radice, William, ed. _Selected Poems_ (of Rabindranth Tagore).  

Satchidananda, Sri S. trans. _The Yoga Sutras of Pataniali_.  

Waley, Arthur, trans. _Analects of Confucius_.  

Waley, Arthur, ed. _The No Plays of Japan.  
_

**_MATERIALS NEEDED:_** _  

1\. one three ring binder  

2\. college-ruled notebook paper  

3\. one folder with pockets  

**_COURSE REQUIREMENTS:  
_**

1\. _Essays_ : Students will be expected to write a number of short research
essays on the texts studied this semester usinq appropriate MLA guidelines for
intext citations where needed and attached bibliography. Class time will be
allotted to these projects so that students can polish rough drafts.  

Note: a) Students will type their final drafts

b) NO LATE ASSIGNMENTS WILL BE ACCEPTED INCLUDING JOURNALS  

2\. _Dialogic iournal_ : Students will keep a journal that records their
thoughts on what they read, their notes to themselves about what they plan to
do in their essays, their reactions to class discussion, ideas for their
essays, and assigned entries that will be given to them in class.  

**_FORMAT OF JOURNAL  
_**

A. All entries for the journals should be labeled with the _time_ and _date_.  

B. They should be single-spaced except for one line between separate entries.  

C. Use 8 1/2" x 11" college ruled paper  

D. Divide each sheet in half vertically and write only in the left_hand
column, single spacing.  

E. Write front and back on each sheet of paper and number the pages just like
a book.  

F. Use black ink.  

G. Create a table of contents for the journal.  
  

**_CONTENTS OF JOURNAL  
_**

The_contents of the journal will fall into the following three section which
students will CLEARLY DIVIDE

AND LABEL:  

Section I: This part will consist of a full and detailed response or report to
EACH class and will be no less than two full columns (no less than the
equivalent of one full page).  

Section II: This section contains a detailed responses to EACH item students
read. Students are required to write extensively about each text read for the
courses recording their emotional reactions, their intellectual guesses, or
their simple appreciation for the language of the texts. Students can also
record their problems or frustrations in reading and interpreting.  

Section III: This section contains in_class entries as well as out-of-class
notes students make to themselves about their research projects.  

**_USE OF JOURNAL AND JOURNAL GROUPS  
_**

Students are expected to meet with each other in their journal groups _outside
of class for at least one hour twice a month in Feb, March, and April and once
a month in Jan. and Mav_ for a total of eight times.  

Each student will pass his or her journal around the group unti it has been
read by all of the members of the group.  

Each student reader will comment, add to, question, or discuss the entries by
writing in the right-hand column. _Each student reader must initial his or her
comments_.  

Students must have written responses from each group member for each of their
entries.  

The score on the journal is determined by the total number of pages, the total
number of students' comments, the quality of the entries, and the quality of
the comment.  

3\. _Panel Presentations_ : All students must prepare a panel presentation to
the class. The panel of students will be considered "experts" on the text
under discussion and will conduct and monitor all classroom discussions of
their text, fielding questions and performing simple out of class research on
any perplexing textual issues that might develop. Students may use
audio/visual aids to enhance their presentation.  

EACH PANEL MEMBER WILL TURN IN A ONE PAGE DOUBLE SPACED, TYPED NARRATIVE
DESCRIBING THE ACTIVITIES OF THE GROUP IN PREPARING THIS PRESENTATION.  

The panel's presentation can consist of but not be limited to the following:  

a. A written summary and discussion of one scholarly article about the work.
The panel can use this material as a point of departure for discussion.  

b. Hand-outs (typed, spelled correctly) which will enhance or direct classroom
discussion; this could include **** a list of __ study questions, a catalogue
of page numbers where certain images or scenes occur, an outline of the main
points of the work, or historical background on the work.  

c. Activities related to the work and involving the whole class such as a
questionnaire polling the class's opinion about the theme of the book. If __
the theme involves the supernatural, for example, the panel might present a 20
item survey asking people their opinion of various aspects of the
supernatural.  

4\. _Class Participation_ All students are expected to come to class prepared
and ready to discuss the assigned text.

**_GRADING AND EVALUATION:  
_**

Final grades for the course will be based on the following formula:  

First paper 20 pts.

Following papers 40 pts. 90-100% = A

Panel 40 pts. 80-91% = B

Class participation 20 pts. 65-79% = C

Journal 100 pts. 55-64% = D

O-54% = F  

Total pts: Depends on final number of papers  

YOUR ASSIGNMENTS MUST BE TURNED IN ON TIME AND WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED WITHOUT A
MEDICAL EXCUSE.  

**_ATTENDANCE POLICY  
_**

If students miss more than two times throughout the semester, their final
grade will be lowered 1/2 letter grade for each additional absence. It is the
student's responsibility to be prepared for class and to make up all missed
assignments.

DRAFT OF REVISED SYLLABUS  

ENGLISH 248, EASTERN LITERATURE  

FALL 1995  

Dr. Alison Mc Neal Office--312 A

0--738-2373 Office Hours--

H--658-6143  

_COURSE DESCRIPTION:  
_

This is a course in literature that serves to introduce you to selected works
of literature in translation from the area generally referred to
geographically as the "Far East" or the "Asian Rim." This semester we will
focus on a comparison and/or contrast of examples of literature from two major
countries and cultures, China and Japan.

As in most literature classes, we will use various tools of literary analysis
to construct assorted interpretations of the pieces. We will also read a range
of genres, from poetry, short stories, a novel, to perhaps a play.

Throughout our study we will look for the universals in the human condition in
China and Japan as expressed in the works that we will read this semester. We
also will examinine the particular  

cultural and social contexts of the works that situate them in a particular
time and place. Each country has its own distinctive literature which both
embodies and reflects the deep structure of the culture. You will be expected
to read these works for their literary and cultural merit.

Eastern Literature is one of a group of courses offered at SRU in its Asian
Studies Minor.  

COURSE OBJECTIVES:  

If we focus on the idea of this being a _literature_ course, then, by the end
of the semester you should have greater facility in interpreting texts and
creating meaning from them via the tools of literary analysis such as formal,
subjective, mythic or psychological criticism. You will also learn to express
verbally or in writing a variety of possible interpretations.

But since this literature is from two very different cultures, another goal is
that you learn to appreciate the differences, not only between your culture
and China's or Japan's, but also the cultural, social and historical
differences between them suggested by the readings. _REQUIRED TEXTS:  
_

These texts are listed in alphabetical order, not in the chronological order
in which they will be read.

Chin, Frank _The Chinaman Pacific & Frisco R R Co _Minneapolis, Coffee House
Press  

Keene, Donald, ed _Anthology of Japanese Literature_ Grove Press, 1955  

Ma, Y W and Joseph Lau _Traditional Chinese Stories_ Cheng & Tsui Company,
1991  

Mitsios, Helen, ed New Japanese Voices: The Best Contemporary Fiction From
Japan The Atlantic Monthly Press (Grove/Atlantic), 1991  

Tanaka, Yukio, ed To Live and to Write: Selections by Japanese Women Writers,
1913-1938  

Wang, Ping _American Visa_ Minneapolis, Coffee House Press  

White and Barnet, eds _Comparing_ _Cultures_ Boston St Martin's Press, 1995  

_MATERIALS NEEDED:  
_

1 One three ring binder which you will use for your journal and as a
collection point for any class hand outs  

2 8 1/2" x 11" **college ruled** loose leaf notebook paper for your journal  

3 One folder with pockets that you will use to turn your journal in to me  

_COURSE ASSIGNMENTS:  
_

1\. _Dialogic journal_ : You will keep a journal to record your responses to
what you read and to discussions in class about the readings. Your responses
may range from comments about the language of a piece, the situation, perhaps
the characterization, things that you find paradoxical, amusing, or
frustrating. The idea is for you to discover what you find somehow interesting
in the piece.  

A. FORMAT OF JOURNAL  

1 All entries for the journals should be labeled with the _time_ and _date  
_

2 Single space entries except for one line between separate entries

3 Use 8 1/2" x 11" **college-ruled** white paper  

4 Divide each sheet in half vertically and write only in the left-hand column,
single spacing

5\. Write front and back on each sheet of paper and number the pages just like
a book.  

6\. Use black ink.  

7\. Create a table of contents for your journal.  

B. CONTENTS OF JOURNAL  

Divide your journal with two clearly labeled sections and create a table of
contents for each section.  

**Section I:** This part contains your response to each class. In it you may
continue speculating on class discussions, or you may want to comment on other
aspects of the class that you observed.  

**Section II:** In this section you write your first thoughts about the
selections that you read. You need to pursue your thoughts into some depth
here. For example, it is not enough to say only that you do not understand a
piece. If that is the case, you need to go into detail using passages of the
text to explain what it is that you are having trouble with. Not understanding
is very typical when we read something for the first time. Part of our job as
readers is to construct the meanings, and the journal is the first place where
you are encouraged to do this.  

C. JOURNAL GROUPS  

You will be in groups of three or four individuals, and you will read and
comment on each other's entries. Your responses to the journal entries are an
important part of the journal experience in this class, and you will learn to
provide each other with thoughtful and thought-provoking commentary.  

Each reader will sign or initial the comments made. (The comments are located
on the right sided columns in the journals.)  

Scores for the journals are assigned on the basis of criteria that you will
decide. Other classes have usually developed a list of criteria that addressed
length, completeness, and originality of expression in the journals. Half of
each journal score will be based on your journal production and half on your
responding to other journals. Be prepared to discuss the journal criteria at
the next class meeting.  

2\. **Panel Presentation:** For a classroom presentation you may go together
with one or two (at most) other people. You will be considered "experts" on
the text under discussion and will

conduct and monitor all classroom discussions of the text you are presenting.
You will field classroom questions and before the presentation perform simple
out of class research on the author or on any perplexing textual issues that
might crop up. You also will outline any historical or social background that
may be helpful in reading the text for appreciation and understanding.  

Your presentation can include but not be limited to the following materials or
activities:  

a. A written summary and discussion of one scholarly article about the work
that includes a complete bibliographic reference to the article being used.  

b. Hand_outs (typed and spelled correctly) which will enhance or direct
classroom discussion. Such a hand-out could include a list of study questions,
a catalog of page numbers where certain scenes or images occur, an outline of
the main points of the work, or social, political, or historical facts that
form a contextual background for the work.  

c. Directions for an activity related to the work that would involve the whole
class. Check with me for individual suggestions for various texts.  

On the day of the presentation turn in a one page double spaced typed
narrative describing the activities you or the group in preparing this
presentation.  

3\. Annotated bibliography: This assignment asks that you do a modest amount
of out-of-class reading about the literature of China or Japan. You can focus
your bibliography on any aspect of those literatures that you want to,
including authors and periods not mentioned in our class readings.  

The final document will be a ten item bibliography using MLA format. Each bib.
item will have a brief paragraph that decribes the article's main point and
contents. Xerox the article and attach it to the bibliography.  

4\. Class participation: You are expected to come to class prepared and ready
to discuss the text that has been assigned for that day. Your journal should
be prepared ahead of time so that it is ready to share with members of your
journal group.  

_COURSE EVALUATION  
_

This course offers you the option to select the grade that you want to aim for
in the following fashion: v

For a "C" you must complete a journal with a minimum of a "C" score and attend
class regularly.  

For a "B" you must complete a journal with a minimum of a "B" score, do a
presentation, and attend class regularly.  

For an "A" you must complete a journal with a minimum of a "B+" score, do a
presentation, develop an annotated bibliography, and attend class regularly.  

The journal grade is based on the following scale:  

A = 100-92% v

B = 91-80%

C = 79-65%

D = 64-55%

F = 0-54%  

NOTE: YOUR ASSIGNMENTS MUST BE TURNED IN ON TIME AND WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED LATE
WITHOUT A MEDICAL EXCUSE  

**_ATTENDANCE POLICY  
_**

If you miss more than three classes throughout the semester for ANY reason,
your final grade will be lowered 1/2 letter grade for each additional absence.

**BIBLIOGRAPHY TO SUPPORT  
**

**DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT  
**

**IN ASIAN LITERATURE  
**

**JAPAN  
**

**_GENERAL BACKGROUND AND CRITICISM  
_**

Bowring, R _Mori Ogai and the Modernization of Japanese Culture_

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979  

Brandon, James R _Chushingura: Studies in Kabuki and the Puppet_

_Theater_ Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1982  

Brower, Robert H and Earl Miner _Japanese Court Poetry_

Stanford Stanford University Press, 1961  

Ernst, Earle _The Kabuki Theater_ Honolulu University of

Hawaii Press, 1974  

Field, Norma _The Splendor of Longing in "The Tale of Genli_"

Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1987  

Hare, T B _Zeami's Style: The No Plays of Zeami Motokiyo_

Stanford Stanford University Press, 1986  

Hibbett, Howard _The Floating World in Japanese Fiction_ New

York: Oxford University Press, 1959  

Kamens, Edward _Approaches to Teaching Muraski Shikibu's The_

_Tale of Genji_ New York MLA, 1993  

Karatani Kojin _Origins of Modern Japanese Literature_ Durham

Duke University Press, 1993  

Kato Shuichi _A History of Japanese Literature_ 3 vols Tokyo

Kodansha International, 1983

Keene, Donald _Landscapes and Portraits: Appreciations of_

_Japanese Culture_ Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1971  

________ _The Pleasures of Japanese Literature_ New York

Columbia University Press, 1988

________ _Seeds in the Heart: Japanese Literature form Earliest_

_Times to the Late Sixteenth Century_ New York: Holt, 1993  

________ _Travelers of A Hundred Ages_ New York: Holt, 1989  

________ _World Within Walls Japanese Literature of the_

_Pre-Modern Era_ , 1600_1867. New York: Holt, 1976  

Knapp, Bettina Liebowitz _Images of Japanese Women: A Westerner's View_ Troy:
Whitston Publishing Co., 1992  

Komparu, K _The Noh Theatre Principles and Perspectives_ Tokyo: Tokyo
University Press, 1983  

Konishi Jin'ichi _A History of Japanese Literature The Archaic and Ancient
Ages_ Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984  

________ _A History of Japanese Literature: The Early & Middle Ages_
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1986  

La Fleur, William R _The Karma of Words Buddhism and the Literary Arts in
Medieval Japan_ Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983  

Lee, Peter _Celebration of Continuity: Themes in Classic East Asian Poetry_
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1979  

Levy, Ian Hideao _Hitomaro and the Birth of Japanese Lyricism_ Princeton, NJ :
Princeton University Press, 1984  

Marcus, Marvin _Paragons of the Ordinary: The Biographical Literature of Mori
Ogai_ Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1993  

Miner, Earl _Japanese Linked Poetry An Account with Translations of Renga and
Haiku Sequences_ Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979  

________ _Japanese Poetic Diaries_ Berkeley: University of California Press,
1969  

Miner, Earl, Hiroko Odagiri, and Robert Morell _The Princeton Companion to
Japanese Classical Literature_ Princeton, N J : Princeton University Press,
1986  

Miyoshi M _Accomplices of Silence the Modern Japanese Novel_ Berkeley
University of California Press, 1974  

Murase Miyeko _Tales of Japan: Scrolls and Prints from the New York Public
Library_ Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986  

Pekarol Andrew, ed. _Ukifune: Love in the Tale of Genji_ New York Columbia
University Press, 1982  

Pollack D _Fracture of Meaning: Japan's Synthesis of China from the Eighth
throuqh the Eighteeenth Centuries_ Princeton: Princeton University Press,
19860  

Puette William J _Guide to the Tale of Genji_ Rutland: Tuttle,

1983  

Rimer, J Thomas _Modern Japanese Fiction and Its Traditions_ Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1978  

Schalow, Paul and Janet Walker, eds _The Woman's Hand_ Bibiliography of
Writing By and About Japanese Women (in Press)  

Shirane Haruo _The Bridge of Dreams: A Poetics of "The Tale of Genii _"
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1987  

Singer, Kurt _Mirror, Sword, and Jewel: The Geometry of Japanese Life_ Tokyo:
Kodansha International, 1981  

Tsunoda Ryusaku, Wm Theodore de Bary, and Donald Kenne _Sources of Japanese
Tradition_ New York: Columbia University Press, 1958  

Ueda Makoto _Literary and Art Theories in Japan_ Cleveland: Case Western
Reserve University Press, 1967  

________ _Modern Japanese Writers and the Nature of Literature_ Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1976  

Walker, Janet _The Japanese Novel of the Meiji Period and the Ideal of
Individualism_ Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979  

Webb, Herschel _Research in Japanese Sources A Guide_ Ann Arbor: University of
Michigan Center for Japanese Studies, 1994  

Yamanouchi H _The Search for Authenticity in Modern Japanese_ Literature
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978  

**_ANTHOLOGIES  
_**

Anderson, G L , ed _Masterpieces of the Orient_ New York Norton, 1977  

Birnbaum, Phyllis, trans _Rabbits, Crabs, etc : Stories by Japanese Women_
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1982  

Keene, Donald, ed _Anthology of Japanese Literature_ _From the Earliest Era to
the Mid_Nineteenth Century_ New York: Grove Press, 1955  

_______, ed _Modern Japanese Literature_ New York: Grove Press, 1956

Lippit, Noriko Mizuta and Kyoro Iriye Selden, trans and eds _Japanese Women
Writers Twentieth Century Short Fiction_ New York: M E Sharpe, 1991  

McCullough, Helen _Classical Japanese Prose: An Anthology_ Stanford Stanford
University Press, 1990  

Morris, Ivan _Modern Japanese Stories__An Anthology_ Tokyo: Tuttle, 1962  

Sato Hiroaki and Burton Watson, trans _From the Country of Eiqht Islands: An
Anthology of Japanese Poetry_ Garden City, N Y : Columbia University Press,
1986  

Shiffert, E and Y Sawa, eds _Anthology of Modern Japanese Poetry_ Tokyo:
Tuttle, 1972  

Takaya, Ted T , ed and trans _Modern Japanese Drama: An Anthology_ New York:
Columbia University Press, 1979  

Tanaka Yukiko and Elizabeth Hanson, eds _This Kind of Woman Ten Stories by
Japanese Women Writers, 1960_1976_ Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1982.  

_______, ed _To Live and To Write: Selections by Japanese Women Writers,
1913_1938_ Seattle: Seal Press, 1987  

_______, ed _Unmapped Territories: New Women's Fiction From Japan_ Seattle:
Women in Translation, 1991  

Tansman, Alan _The Writings of Koda Aya, A Japanese Literary Dauqhter_ New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1993  

Ury, M , trans _Tales of Times Now Past Sixty_two Stories from a Medieval
Japanese Collection_ Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979  

**_PRE-HEIAN (Before 794 A.D.) LITERATURE  
_**

Cranston, Edwin A _A Waka Anthology: Vol 1 The Gem-Glistening Cup_. Stanford
Stanford University Press, 1993  

Doe, Paula _A Warbler's Song in the Dusk: The Life and Work of Otomo
Yakamochi_ Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982  

Levy, Ian Hideo _Hitomaro and the Birth of Japanese Lyricism_ Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1984  

_The Manyoshu_ The Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai Translation New York Columbia
University Press, 1965 (New edition by Cranston)

Miller, Roy Andrew, trans _" The Footprints of the Buddha_" _An Eighth_Century
Old Japanese Poetic Sequence_ New Haven American Oriental Society, 1975  

Philippi, Donald L , trans _Koliki_ Tokyo Tokyo University Press, 1968  

Rodd, Laurel Rasplica, trans - _kinshu_ Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1984  

**_HEIAN LITERATURE 794-1185  
_**

Bowring, R _Murasaki Shikibu Her Diary and Poetic Memoirs_ Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1982  

Bower, Robert H and Earl Miner, _Japanese Court Poetry_ Stanford Stanford
University Press, 1961  

Field, N _The Splendor of Longing in the Tale of Genji_

Princeton Princeton University Press, 1987  

Harris, P T , trans _The Poetic Memoirs of Lady Daibu_ Stanford Stanford
University Press, 1980  

Harris, E G , trans _The Tales of Ise_ Tokyo Tuttle Press, 1972  

McCullough, Helen Craig _Brocade by Niqht: "Kokin Wakashu" and the Court Style
in Japanese Classical Poetry_ Stanford Stanford University Press, 1985  

________, trans _Kokin Wakashu: The First_ _Imperial Anthology of Japanese
Poetry_ Stanford Stanford University Press, 1985  

________ and W H McCullough, trans _A Tale of Flowerinq Fortunes_ (Eiga
Monogatari) Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1979  

________ _Tales of Ise: Lyrical Episodes from Tenth-Century_

_Japan_ Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1968  

Miner, Earl _Japanese Poetic Diaries_ Berkeley University of California Press,
1969  

Morris, Ivan, trans _As I Crossed a Bridge of Dreams: Recollections of a Woman
in 11th Century Japan_ New York Dial Press, 1971  

______, trans _The Pillow Book of Sei Shonaqon_ New York Columbia University
Press, 1967

______, trans _The Tale of Genji Scroll_ Tokyo: International, 1971  

Murasaki Shikibu _The Tale of Genji_ Trans Edward Seidensticker New York:
Knopf, 1976  

Seidensticker, E G , trans _The Gossamer Years: the Diary of a Noblewoman of
Heian Japan (Kaqero Nikki)_ Tokyo: Tuttle Press, 1964  

**_MEDIEVAL LITERATURE, 1185-1603  
_**

Brazell, K , trans _The Confessions of Lady Nilo_ New York Doubleday Anchor,
1973  

Carter, Steven D _Waitinq for the Wind: Thirty-six Poets of Japan's Late
Medieval Age_ New York: Columbia University Press, 1989  

Chomei Kamo no _The Ten Foot Square Hut_ Trans A L Sadler Tokyo Tuttle, 1971  

Harries, Phillip T , trans _The Poetic Memoirs of Lady Daibu_ Stanford
Stanford University Press, 1970  

Keene, Donald, ed _Twenty Plays of the No Theater_ New York Columbia
University Press, 1970  

Keene, Donald, trans Essays in Idleness, the Tzurezurequsa of _Kenko_ New York
Columbia University Press, 1967  

Kitagawa Hiroshi and Bruce Tsuchida, trans _The Tale of the Heike_ Tokyo:
Tokyo University Press/ 1975  

McCullough, Helen, trans _Yoshitsune--A Fifteenth Century Chronicle_.
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1971  

Tyler, Royall, ed and trans _Japanese No Dramas_ New York: Penguin Books, 1992  

Ury, Marion, trans. Tales of Times Past: Sixty-two Stories from _a Medieval
Japanese Collection_ Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979  

Zeami _On the Art of the No Drama The Malor Treatises of Zeami_ Trans J Thomas
Rimer Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984  

**_TOKUGAWA (Edo Period) LITERATURE, 1603_1868_**

Brandon, James R , trans _Kabuki: Five Classic Plays_ Honolulu: University of
Hawaii Press, 1992  

Chikamatsu, Monzaemon _Major Plays of Chikamatsu_ Trans Donald Keene Tokyo:
Kodansha International, 1961  

_Chushingura._ Trans. Donald Keene New York: Columbia University Press, 1971  

Kobayashi, Issa _Issa: Cup_of_Tea Poems: Selected Haiku of KobaYashi Issa_
1763_1827 Trans David G Lanoue Berkley: Asian Humanities Press, 1991  

Matsuo Basho _The Narrow Road to the Deep North and Other Travel Sketches_
Trans Nobuyuki Yuasa London Penguin, 1966  

Saikadu Ihara _Five Women Who Loved Love_ Trans William Theodore deBary.
Rutland: Tuttle, 1956.  

_______ _The Life of an Amorous Woman and Other Writings_ Trans Ivan Morris
New York: New Directions, 1963  

_______ _Some Final Words of Advice_ Trans Peter Nosco Rutland Tuttle, 1980  

Ueda Akinari _Ugetsu Monogatari: Tales of Moonlight and Rain_ Trans Leon
Zolbrod. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1974  

**_EARLY MODERN LITERATURE, 1868_1926  
_**

Akutagawa Ryunosuke _Japanese Short Stories_ Trans Takashi Kojima. New York:
Liveright, 1961  

________ _Kappa_ Trans Seiichi Shiojiri Osaka: Akitaya, 1947  

Danly, Robert Lyons In the Shade of Spring Leaves: The Life of

_Higuchi Ichiyo, A Woman of Letters in Meiji Japan_ New

Haven Yale University Press, 1981  

Hori Tatsuo _Wind Has Risen  
_

Koda, Rohan _Pagoda, Skull, and Samurai 3 Stories_ Trans Chieko Irie Mulhern
Rutland: Tuttle, 1985  

Miayamoto Yuriko Nobuko Tokyo Kaizosha, 1928  

Mori Ogai _The Incident at Sakai and Other Stories_ Ed by David Dilworth and J
Thomas Rmer Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1977

________ _The Wild Geese_ Trans Kingo Ochiai and Sanford Goldstein Rutland
Tuttle Co, 1959  

Natsume Soseki _Kokoro_ Trans Edwin McClellan Chicago: H Regnery, 1967  

________ _Mon_ Trans F Mathy London: Owen, 1967  

Shiga Naoya _A Dark Night's Passing_ Trans Edwin McClellan Tokyo: Kodansha
International, 1976  

**_CONTEMPORARY LITERATURE, 1926  
_**

Abe Kobo _The Woman in the Dunes_ 1964 Trans E DaleSaunders New York Vintage
Books, 1991  

Ariyoshi Sawako _The Doctor's Wife_ Trans Wakako Hironaka and

Ann Kostant Tokyo: Kodansha International Press, 1978  

_______ Kabuki Dancer _A Novel of the Woman Who Founded Kabuki_ 1972 Trans
James R Brandon Honolulu Unversity of Hawaii Press, 1992  

_______ _The River Ki_ Trans Mildred Tahara Tokyo: Kodansha, 1980  

Dazai Osamu _Crackling Mountain and Other Stories_ Trans James O'Brien Tokyo
Tuttle Company, 1989  

_______ _The Setting Sun_ Trans Donald Keene New York: New Directions, 1968  

Enchi Fumiko _Masks_ Trans Juliet Winters Carpenter New York Knopf, 1983  

_______ _The Waiting Years_ Trans John Bester Tokyo: Kodamsa International,
1971  

Futabatei Shimei. _An Adopted Husband_ Trans Buchachiro Mitsue

and Gregg Sinclair New York Greenwood Press, 1969  

Ibuse Masuji _Black Rain_ Trans John Bester Tokyo: Kodansha International
Press, 1969  

________ _Lieutenant Look East and Other Stories_ Trans John Bester Tokyo:
Kodansha International, 1971  

________ _Waves Two Short Novels_ Trans David Aylward and Anthony Liman Tokyo
Kodensha International Press, 1986  

Kawabata Yaunari _Snow Country_ Trans Edward Seidensticker New York: Knopf,
1970

Matsubara Hisako. _Cranes at Dusk_ Trans. Leila Vennewitz. Garden City Dial
Press, 1984.  

Mishima Yukio. _Death In Midsummer and Other Stories_ Trans. Seidensticker New
York: Knopf, 1966  

_________ _ _The Sailor Who Fell From Grace With the Sea_ 1963\. Trans. John
Nathan New York: Vintage International 1994 .  

________ _ _The Temple of the Golden Pavillion_ Trans. Ivan Morris New York:
Knopf 1956  
A

Mukoda Kuniko. _The Name of the Flower_ Trans. Tomone Matsumoto Berkley: Stone
Bridge Press, 1993  

Nobukc Albery. _The House of Kanze: A Saga of Fourteenth Century Japan_ New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1986.  

Ota Yoko. _City of Corpses in Hiroshima: Three Witnesses_ , ed. Richard
Minear. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990.  

Seidensticker, E. trans _Kafu the_Scribbler, the Life and Writings of Nagai
Kafu, 1879_1959_. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1965.  

Tanizaki Junichiro. _Diary of a Mad Old Man_ Trans. H. Hibbett New York:
Knopf, 1965.  

_______. _The Makioka Sisters_ Trans. E Seidensticker New York: Knopf, 1957.  

_______. _Some Prefer Nettles_ Trans E Seidensticker New York: Knopf, 1955.  

Uno Chiyo. _Confessions of_Love_ Trans. Phyllis Birnbaurr Honolulu University
of Hawaii Press, 1989.  

[About] [Index] [Search] [Other Links] [Comments/Submissions]

* * *

ASDP Curriculum Online Project < ASDP@lama.kcc.Hawaii.Edu>

