### _University of Pennsylvania_

##  THE UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAM IN PHILOSOPHY

* * *

  * The Major
  * Honors
  * The Minor
  * The Curriculum
  * Administrative Miscellany 

* * *

Introduction

    Philosophy seeks to illuminate fundamental aspects of the world, of our relation to and knowledge of the world, and of our own nature as rational, purposive, and social beings. The study of philosophy aims at an appreciation of the ways this enterprise has been, is, and might be approached. Such approaches are many and varied. They differ not merely in the accounts they offer but, more importantly, in the questions they deem significant and the terms in which their answers are couched. A philosophical education is in large measure intended to furnish some grasp of what is involved in developing and defending questions and positions of a general and fundamental nature.

    Philosophy is not then a practical subject; philosophical expertise does not especially suit one for any particular office or occupation. Nonetheless, a number of generally applicable intellectual skills and habits are cultivated through its study. A student of philosophy is practiced in the close reading of texts, in the extraction from them of positions and arguments, and in the construction and criticism of lines of reasoning. While the chief value of studying philosophy is intrinsic, the development of these skills helps equip one for any profession in which creative thought and critical discrimination are called for. Penn's philosophy majors have gone on to advanced study and careers in any number of areas, including medicine, business, journalism, and government. A major in philosophy provides particularly good preparation for law school. 

* * *

Major Requirements

    The Philosophy Department offers Majors, A General Major in Philosophy, a Major in Humanistic Philosophy, and a Major in Philosophy and Science. Philosophy divides into a number of areas--epistemology and philosophy of science, logic, metaphysics, moral and political philosophy, and aesthetics. None of these areas of philosophy can be pursued in complete isolation from the others. Thus all three Majors include a distribution requirement satisfaction of which ensures familiarity with central issues from different areas of philosophy. Philosophy is not a cumulatively obtained body of knowledge. Philosophers of each generation continue to learn from the classical works of older philosophical traditions. Thus each of the three Majors includes a distribution requirement in the history of philosophy. Questions concerning what courses meet which distribution requirements should be addressed to the Undergraduate Chairperson. Finally, all three Majors include a level requirement to guarantee that students do not confine their studies to introductory courses. Transfer students especially should note that at least eight courses toward any of the Majors, including all the distribution requirements and the 300-level course requirements, must be taken from regular or vising members of the Philosophy Department at the University.

* * *

The General Major in Philosophy  
12 courses in Philosophy

**Distribution Requirements:**



  * Phil 3 - History of Ancient Philosophy 
  * Phil 4 - History of Modern Philosophy 
  * Phil 5 - Logic 
  * One course in epistemology 
  * One course in metaphysics 
  * One course in ethics or political philosophy 

**Level Requirements:**

     At least four (4) courses above 201 including two (2) courses at (not above) the 300-level.

    General majors may petition the Department through the Undergraduate Chairperson to count as many as two courses offered outside of the Philosophy Department toward twelve courses of the General Major. These courses should be related to the student's philosophical interests and may not be used to satisfy either the distribution or the level requirements.



* * *

The Major in Humanistic Philosophy  
16 Courses: 8 courses in philosophy and 8 courses in other humanities.

**Distribution Requirements in Philosophy:**

  * Phil 3 - History of Ancient Philosophy 
  * Phil 4 - History of Modern Philosophy 
  * Phil 5- Logic 
  * Two courses in ethics or political philosophy 
  * One course in epistemology or metaphysics 

**Level Requirements in Philosophy:**

     At least three (3) courses above 201, including one (1) at (not above) the 300-level.

    The eight course units outside of the Philosophy Department should include at least 4 courses in a single department. The courses outside of philosophy should complement the student's work philosophy. Courses commonly selected for this purposes include political theory courses and constitutional law courses from the Political Science Department, intellectual history courses from the History Department, and religious thought courses from the Religious Studies Department.. The selection of the eight courses outside of philosophy must be approved by the Undergraduate Chairperson in Philosophy.



* * *

The Major in Philosophy and Science  
16 Courses: 8 courses in Philosophy and 8 courses (course units) in science,
mathematics, or history of science.

**Distribution Requirement in Philosophy:**



  * Phil 4 - History of Modern Philosophy 
  * Phil 5 - Logic 
  * One course in ethics and political philosophy 
  * Two courses in philosophy of science or philosophy of mathematics 
  * One course in metaphysics or epistemology 

**Level Requirement in Philosophy:**

     At least three (3) courses above 201, including one at (not above) the 300-level.

    The eight courses outside of philosophy may be either the social sciences, the natural sciences, mathematics, or history and sociology of science. At least four of these courses should be in a single department. The selection of these courses must be approved by the Undergraduate Chairperson in Philosophy.



* * *

The Honors Program

**Eligibility**

To be eligible for the honors program a student must:

* be a senior major in philosophy; 
* have a B+ (3.33) average in courses being counted toward the major; 
* have complete the distribution requirements for the major and two course above 201, including one course above 301. 

**Application**

     Eligible students apply for admission to the honors program at the beginning of the term they plan to write their senior thesis. Application is made to the Undergraduate Chair in philosophy by submitting a written prospectus of 500-750 words. Students are encouraged to consult with any member of the Philosophy Department in developing a prospectus. However, thesis advisors are assigned by the Undergraduate Chair in consultation with the members of the Department. No one may enroll in Phil. 301 without the signature of the Undergraduate Chair. Phil. 301 does count toward the completion of the major but may not be used to satisfy distribution or level requirements. Students enrolled in 301 are urged to work out a schedule for consultation and a timetable for completion o the thesis with their advisors.

**The Thesis**

     The senior thesis is an essay which is normally around 6,000-7,500 words in length (25-30 double-spaced pages). Both the thesis advisor and the Undergraduate Chair must receive copies of a typed final draft of the thesis at least ten days prior to the final examination period. At this time the Undergraduate Chair in consultation with the thesis advisor appoints another member of the Department to be a second reader. The second reader and the advisor conduct an oral examination of the honors candidate on the thesis. On the basis of the thesis and the examination, the advisor and the second reader decide whether to award honors. The advisor alone decides the grade for 301. These will be evaluated for clarity of expression, cogency of argument, scholarship, and originality. SUBMISSION OF A THESIS DOES NOT GUARANTEE THE AWARD OF HONORS.

* * *

The Minor in Philosophy  
6 courses in Philosophy

**Distribution Requirements:**

     One course in three of the following four areas:

  * logic/philosophy of science 
  * epistemology/metaphysics 
  * ethics/political philosophy/aesthetics 
  * history of philosophy 

**Level Requirements:**

     At least two philosophy courses above 201.

    A course may simultaneously satisfy a level and a distribution requirement. 

* * *

The Curriculum

    A few words of explanation concerning the Philosophy's Department's courses are in order. Some disciplines--mathematics and physics are the clearest and most extreme examples--are mastered in an orderly, sequential manner. Advanced courses presuppose knowledge, methods, results, and techniques presented in more discipline. Apart from advanced logic courses, advanced philosophy courses tend not to assume much by way of prior knowledge. Such prerequisites as there are can usually be readily acquired by dint of some extra reading. Advanced philosophy courses do presuppose possession in some measure of the intellectual skills mentioned in the Introduction. Your study of philosophy will be enhanced if you do not delay plunging into advanced courses after completing two or three introductory courses. Philosophy majors and prospective majors are urged to complete Phil. 4 and Phil. 5 early in their studies. These two courses are required by all three Major Programs and present material frequently drawn on and elaborated in advanced courses.

    Courses numbered 00001 through 0199 are introductory courses. Apart from Phil. 6, none of these course assumes any prior acquaintance with philosophy. Courses numbered 200-3999 are advanced undergraduate courses. They have a prerequisite of two introductory courses in philosophy, a prerequisite which may be waived by the instructor. Courses numbered 302-399 are especially designed fro philosophy majors. These topical courses cover in depth important issues which arise in central areas of philosophy and are often taught in a seminar format. One 300-level course is offered every term; they have been rotating among the areas of ethics, epistemology, and metaphysics. Courses numbered 400-499 are courses for undergraduate and graduate students. Generally speaking, completion of three undergraduate courses with a grade of B or better should prepare you for these courses. You may, however, wish to consult with the instructor of a 400-level course before enrolling in it. 500-level courses are graduate seminars. Undergraduates must obtain the instructor's permission before registering for these courses. Such permission is routinely and enthusiastically granted to advanced undergraduates.

    Phil 201 is the Department's directed reading course. Students wishing to undertake individually supervised study should make arrangements directly with a faculty member or consult with the Undergraduate Chairperson concerning the choice of a supervisor for a project.

    The Philosophy department offers a number of course in the College of General Studies in addition to regular course offerings in the School of Arts & Sciences. CGS courses carry regular SAS credit and may be used to satisfy the distribution requirement of the Majors. Most CGS courses in philosophy are taught by the Department's graduate students.

    Some philosophy courses also contribute to the new undergraduate major, PPE: Philosophy, Politics, and Economics.

    A description of the Department's course for the succeeding term is available in the Department office by pre-registration period of the preceding term. 

* * *

Administrative Miscellany

**Majoring in Philosophy** Application for the Major is made on forms
available in the student's school office (CAS Advising or CGS). After applying
for admission to one of the philosophy Majors, applicants must make an
appointment with the Undergraduate Chairperson. Students will not be admitted
to a Major in philosophy in the absence of this consultation. While the
Undergraduate Chairperson is the official advisor for all philosophy majors,
majors, are encouraged to consult with any member of the Department they
choose for academic advising.

**Keeping in touch** Philosophy majors are urged each September to report
their current campus address, local phone number, and intended year and term
of graduation to the Department office. Each term majors are advised to
consult with the Undergraduate Chairperson concerning changes in their
proposed plan of study. It is particularly important that the Undergraduate
Chairperson be informed of changes of Philosophy Majors, e.g., a switch from
General Major to Philosophy and Science. Should you transfer from Philosophy
to another major field, take a leave of absence, or withdraw from CAS, we
would appreciate your informing the Department office.

**Graduation** Graduating seniors are strongly urged to complete the
Certification for Graduation form with the Undergraduate Chairperson early in
the term in which they plan to graduate. Early consultation eliminates
unpleasant, disconcerting, and expensive surprises later.

**Problems and Petitions** Philosophy majors may petition the Department for
exemption from any of the requirements of a Major. Petition forms are
available in the Department office. Petitions should be submitted to the
Undergraduate Chairperson. The Undergraduate Chairperson is authorized to act
on routine petitions. Examples of routinely granted petitions include
petitions to count a course outside of philosophy toward the General Major and
petitions to replace one 300-level course with a 400-level course toward
satisfaction of the level requirement. Examples of routinely denied petitions
include petitions for exemption from the logic requirement and petitions to
count courses outside of philosophy toward the distribution requirements. A
student may appeal any decision of the Undergraduate Chairperson to the entire
Department. A written record is kept of petitions and the action taken on
them. Only written records of agreements made with students concerning their
Major Program will be honored. Any suggestions, commendations, complaints, or
grievances concerning the Department's undergraduate program should be
addressed to either the Chairperson or the Undergraduate Chairperson.

**Submatriculation** Submatriculation in Philosophy enables students to earn
an M.A. in Philosophy while completing a B.A. Application for submatriculation
should be filed by mid-January in the year prior to the year one expects to
receive the submatriculation, a student must have completed at the time of
application at least two philosophy courses above 301, and must have a grade
point average of 3.5 in all completed philosophy courses above 301. The
application for this submatriculation program should include two letters of
recommendation from faculty members who have instructed the applicant in
philosophy courses above 301. Applications for submatriculation are carefully
scrutinized by the Philosophy Department. Students interested in
submatriculation should see the Undergraduate Chairperson for further details
concerning application to the program.

**Graduate School** Our undergraduate Major Programs are not designed as
preparation for graduate study in philosophy, but any of them can serve that
end. The best preparation for graduate study in philosophy is a well-rounded
liberal arts education with significant concentration of work outside of
philosophy. Students considering graduate study in philosophy are advised to
consult with the Undergraduate Chairperson or any faculty member about a
course of studies suitable for that purpose.

**Clusters** For purposes of meeting the cluster requirement, philosophy
courses numbered above 201 are non-introductory courses. Phil. 5 and Phil. 6
may be used to meet the natural science cluster requirement. With occasional
exceptions, other philosophy courses may be used only toward a humanities
cluster.

**Transfer Credit** The Philosophy Department routinely grants transfer credit
for equivalents of Phil. 1 (Introduction to Philosophy), Phil. 7 (Critical
Thinking), Phil 73 (Applied Ethics), and Phil. 72 (Biomedical Ethics).
Frequently transfer credit is also given for Phil 2 (Ethics), Phil. 3 (Ancient
Philosophy), Phil. 4 (Modern Philosophy), and Phil. 5 (Logic). Transfer Credit
is rarely given for intermediate or advanced philosophy courses, those numbers
above 201.

     Students should apply to the Undergraduate Chair for transfer credit. Applicants should provide as much information about the course as possible, at minimum a catalog description. A syllabus is particularly helpful. Examinations, assignments, texts, and class notes are also helpful. Examinations, assignments, texts, and class notes are also useful. Normally, transfer credit will be given only for courses instructed by someone with a Ph.D. in philosophy.

    Students planning to transfer summer school courses from other institutions should apply for transfer credit before enrolling in the course. The same applies to students studying abroad, especially in programs not sponsored by the University. Transfer credit is given at the discretion of the Department and is NOT automatic. Copies of Transfer Credit Application Procedures are available in the Philosophy Department office.

**Who and Where** The Philosophy Department Office is located at 433 Logan
Hall, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19104. All faculty members and teaching
assistants associated with the Department have mailboxes there. The members of
the Department and the graduate student instructors all have offices on the
fourth floor. Office telephone numbers and office hours are posted in the
Department Office. So are announcements of special Department sponsored
Department lectures. The current Chairperson of the Department is Professor
Scott Weinstein. The current Undergraduate Chairperson is Professor Zoltan
Domotor. The current Graduate Chairperson is Professor Gary Hatfield.

* * *

![](http://www.sas.upenn.edu/Icons/back_button.gif) Back to the Department of
Philosophy Homepage

_Last Modified 1999.11.29_

