* * *

![](Stoa_Attalus3.GIF)

![](ancient_technology.GIF)

    
    
    **Art History and Archaeology 222, Winter 2000
    TR 9.30-10.45 AM
    Pickard 106
    Prof. William Biers**
    

* * *

> ### Course Description:

>

> This course is a survey of engineering, architecture, military technology
and astronomy in the ancient world.

>

> * * *

>

> ###  How to reach the instructor:

>

>> Office Hours are Tuesday and Thursday, 10.45-12.00, or by appointment.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ### Texts:

>>

>>> **Required:** J.G. Landels, _Engineering in the Ancient World_ (U. Cal.
1980) PB and readings on reserve (see below).

>>>

>>> Humphrey/Oleson, _Sourcebook of Greek and Roman Technology_ (1998)

>>>

>>> **Suggested:** White, K.D., _Greek and Roman Technology_ (Cornell 1984).

>>>

>>> **For Background Reading:** "Greek and Roman Society," Chapter 2 in
Burford, _Craftsmen in Greek and Roman Society_ (on reserve).

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ### Requirements and Grading:

>>

>>   * Mid-term (approximately 20% of final grade)

>>   * Paper or model with description and presentation (approximately 35%)

>>   * Final Exam (approximately 45%)

>>

>>> Papers are due on April 30 in order to avoid an "I".

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ### Syllabus:

>>

>> (dates are approximate)

>>  
>>  
>>     January 11:                      Introduction

>>  
>>  
>>     January 13:                      Early Technology and the Pyramids

>>  
>>  
>>     January 18:                      Movie: "This Old Pyramid" (Starts at

>>                              9.15)

>>  
>>  
>>     January 20 - February 8: Engineering and Architecture in the Greek

>>                                     World

>>  
>>  
>>     February 10 - March 7:   Engineering and Architecture in the Roman

>>                                     World

>>  
>>  
>>     February 24:                     Movie "Roman City"

>>     March 9:                 MIDTERM HOUR EXAM

>>  
>>  
>>     March 14,16:                     Power and Pumps

>>  
>>  
>>     March 28,30:                     Spring Break

>>  
>>  
>>     March 21 - April 6               Military and Naval Technology

>>  
>>  
>>     April 11:                        Movie: "The Athenian Trireme"

>>  
>>  
>>     April 13,18:                     Gadgets, Time; Greek and Roman Crafts

>>  
>>  
>>     April 20:                        Movie: "Myth, Man, and Metal"

>>  
>>  
>>     April 25,27:                     Presentation of Models and discussion

>>  
>>  
>>     April 26 (at 12:15):             Mid-day Gallery Talk (with models if

>>                                     possible)

>>  
>>  
>>     April 30:                        Final papers are due to avoid an "I".

>>  
>>  
>>     May 5, 10:30-12:30 PM:           FINAL EXAM

>>  
>>  
>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ### First Reading Assignment:

>>

>>> By the Mid-term hour exam, students need to have read:

>>

>> **1.** Briggs, M., Chapter 12 in the _Oxford History of Technology_ ,
"Building Construction, Greek Period," pp. 397-404 (on reserve).

>>

>> **or**

>>

>> Roebuck, _The Muses at Work_ , Chapters 1 and 2, pp. 2-59.

>>

>> **2.** "Roman Hypocausts," in Forbes, _Studies in Ancient Technology_ Vol.
VI (on reserve).

>>

>> **3.** Landels, _Engineering in the Ancient World_ , Chapters 2, pp. 34-57,
Chapter 4, pp. 84-132.

>>

>> **4.** _Sourcebook_ ,Chapters 7 and 8.

>>

>> **Suggested:** Hill, D., _A History of Engineering in Classical and
Medieval Times_ , Part One, pp. 17-116.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ### Handouts:

>>

>>   * General Chronology

>>   * The Pyramids

>>   * Greek Construction

>>   * Greek Construction II

>>   * Greek Construction III

>>   * Roman Architecture I

>>   * Roman Architecture II

>>   * Roman Architecture III

>>   * Power and Pumps

>>   * Military Technology

>>   * Ships and Sailing I

>>   * Ships and Sailing II

>>   * Time and Inventions

>>   * Greek & Roman Crafts I: Metal Work & Minting

>>   * Greek & Roman Crafts II: Pottery

>>   * Greek & Roman (& Egyptian) Crafts III: Weaving

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ### Books on Reserve:

>>

>>   * Brumbaugh, R.S., _Ancient Greek Gadgets and Machines__ (Thomas Y.
Crowell Co. 1966) [Ellis T 16 .B87].

>>   * Burford, A., _Craftsmen in Greek and Roman Society__ (Cornell U. Press
1972) [Ellis HD 4844 .B85].

>>   * Crouch, D.C., _Water Management in Ancient Greek Cities__ (Oxford U.
Press 1993) [Ellis TD 275 .A1 C76].

>>   * Dilke, O.A.W., _Mathematics and Measurement__ (British Museum 1981) [On
order].

>>   * Forbes, R.J., _Studies in Ancient Technology__ VI, heat and heating,
refrigeration, light (F.J. Brill 1966) [Ellis T 15 .F728].

>>   * Hill, D., _A History of Engineering in Classical and Medieval Times__
(Open Court Publishing Co. 1984) [Ellis TA 16 .H55].

>>   * A.Y.al-Hassan, _Islamic Technology__ (Cambridge 1986) [Ellis T27.3.175
H37 1986]

>>   * Hodge, A.T., _Roman Aqueducts and Water Supply__ (Duckworth 1992)
[Ellis TD .H3].

>>   * Humphrey,J. _Greek and Roman Technology: A Sourcebook_ (Routledge 1998)
[Ellis T16 G74 1998]

>>   * James, P., and N. Thorpe, _Ancient Inventions__ (Ballantine Books 1994)
[Ellis T16 J36 1994].

>>   * Landels, J.C., _Engineering in the Ancient World__ (U. of California
Press 1978) [ENGR TI 16 .L36].

>>   * Roebuck, C., ed., _The Muses at Work__ (MIT Press 1969) [Ellis DF 78
.IM84].

>>   * Singer, C., et. al., _Oxford History of Technology__ vol. 2, _The
Mediterranean Civilization and the Middle Ages c. 700 B.C. to c A.D. 1500__
(Oxford University Press 1957) [Ellis T 15 .S53 2].

>>   * Vitruvius, Pollio, _Vitruvius, the Ten Books on Architecture__
translated by Hicky, M. (Harvard U. Press 1914) [Ellis NA 2515.V73].

>>   * White, K.D., _Greek and Roman Technology__ (Cornell U. Press 1984)
[Ellis T 16 .W5].

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ### Departmental and University Policies; Students with Disabilities:

>>

>> **"Make-Up" Examinations:**

>>

>>> If you miss an announced quiz or examination, you will be allowed to take
a make-up examination only after presenting a written excuse, signed by a
medical doctor, to your instructor. No other excuse will be accepted. Excuses
must be submitted to your i nstructor no later than 24 hours after the time of
the examination.

>>

>> **Academic Dishonesty:**

>>

>>> All students are responsible for acquainting themselves with the
University guidelines on Academic Discipline in the M-Book under "Student
Conduct Regulations." on p.3.

>>>

>>> In AHA 222, each student should be particularly aware of the rules
regarding plagiarism and cheating. Plagiarism is the submission of another
person's work or thought as one's own, either by direct copying or by
insufficient acknowledgment of the source. Cheating is the use of any form of
assistance while taking a quiz or examination. The Department of Art History
and Archaeology takes the infringement of these rules very seriously and
carries out the appropriate academic and disciplinary actions.

>>>

>>> During an examination, silence is required from the moment a test paper is
handed our until it has been handed in. No books or written material of any
kind should be in your sight once the examination has begun, and you should
keep your eyes on your own paper. If you have a question during an
examination, raise your hand and an instructor will come to you.

>>

>> **Students with Disabilities:**

>>

>>> Students who have special conditions as addressed by the Americans with
Disabilities Act, and who need any test or course materials to be furnished in
an alternative format, should notify the Access Office and the instructor
**immediately**. Reasonabl e efforts will be made to accommodate the needs of
these students.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> ![](ToolsFinalB.GIF)

>>

>> ###  Interested in Archaeology? Check out some of these sights.

>>

>>     * ARCHNET

>>     * ROMARCH \- Roman Archaeology

>>     * The Ancient City of Athens \- lots of pictures!

>>     * Archaeology Magazine

>>     * The University of Michigan's Classics and Mediterranean Archaeology
Homepage \- very extensive.

>>     * Underwater Archaeology

>>

>> ![](mast.gif)

