![UIC Undergraduate Catalog](http://www.uic.edu/~cmsmcq/uic/ucat.gif)

# UIC (The University of Illinois at Chicago)

# Undergraduate Catalog 1995-97

#

This document was generated from the 1995-97 UIC Undergraduate Catalog. It is
for informational purposes only and does not constitute a contract. Every
effort has been made to insure accuracy, but be advised that requirements may
have changed since this book was published. Errors may have also been
introduced in the conversion to a WWW document. Thus for items of importance,
it might be wise to seek confirmation in the paper version or directly from
the appropriate campus office.

* * *

## Table of Contents

  * Office of Admissions and Records
    * How to Use This Catalog
    * Visiting Campus
    * Admission Requirements and Application Procedures
      * English Competency Requirement for All Applicants
      * Undergraduate Applications and Credentials Deadlines
      * Beginning Freshman Applicant
        * Beginning Freshman Admission Requirements
        * General Educational Development Tests.
      * Transfer Applicant
        * Acceptance of Traditional Transfer Credit
        * Transfer Student Admission Requirements.
      * Intercampus Transfer Applicant
      * Readmission Applicant
    * Nondegree Applicant
      * "Summer Session Only" Applicant
    * International/Immigrant Applicant
      * Admission Requirements
      * Academic Records
      * English Competency Requirements.
      * Financial Resources Requirement
      * Verification of Immigrant Status
    * Alternative Admission Programs
      * Talented Student Program for Illinois High School Seniors
      * Early Admission Applicant
      * Admission by Special Action
    * Alternative Sources of Credit
      * Credit Through ACT or SAT
      * Credit for Military Service
      * General Educational Development Tests (GED)
      * Correspondence Study
      * Proficiency Examinations for Enrolled Students
      * College Level Examination Program (CLEP) Credits
        * Students with CLEP Credit from Other Institutions.
        * Credit Through CLEP for Current UIC Students.
        * CLEP Credits Accepted.
      * Credit Through Advanced Placement Program (AP)
        * ART
        * HUMANITIES
        * SOCIAL STUDIES
        * NATURAL SCIENCES AND MATHEMATICS
        * MATHEMATICS
      * Credit Through the International Baccalaureate Program (IB)
    * After Admission
      * Registration Procedures
        * Pre-enrollment Evaluation Program/Placement Tests/PEP Tests.
        * Academic Advising.
      * Special Enrollment Categories
        * Visitors/Auditors.
    * Other Information
      * Falsification of Documents
      * Admission or Readmission Denied Because of Misconduct
      * Transcripts
      * Campus Policy on the Release of Information Pertaining to Students
      * Medical Immunization Requirements
      * Eligibility to Register: University Policy on Continuing Student Status
      * Change of College/Major/Curriculum for Current Students

* * *

# Office of Admissions and Records

  
Office of Admissions and Records  
Box 5220  
Chicago, Illinois 60680-5220  
Student Services Building (M/C 018)  
1200 West Harrison Street  
Chicago, Illinois 60607-7161  
(312) 996-4350

* * *

## How to Use This Catalog

This catalog provides general information about the University of Illinois at
Chicago and detailed information about the programs of study offered by its
eight undergraduate colleges.

This catalog has two major parts. The first part provides information about
admission, special opportunities and programs, student services,  student
costs, financial aid, the grading system and  academic regulations, graduation
requirements, and  honors.The second part has separate sections for each of
the undergraduate colleges, which detail their curricula, special academic
programs, specific requirements for graduation, honors programs, course
descriptions, and other information.

To find specific information use the table of contents at the front of the
catalog or the index at the back.

Additional information about the University is available by telephoning the
campus at (312) 996-7000 or the Student Information Network Center at (312)
996-5000.

As a state-supported, comprehensive, Research I university, UIC seeks to
provide higher education for those who will profit from an intellectually
challenging program. The admission requirements are designed to identify those
who possess the scholastic ability and the maturity needed to succeed in and
to benefit from such a program. The policy of the University is to comply
fully with applicable federal and state nondiscrimination and equal
opportunity laws, orders, and regulations.

Since the information in this two-year catalog is subject to change,
prospective applicants should contact the Office of Admissions and Records at
the address above for admission requirements and application deadlines for
specific terms. A listing of fields of study and their admission requirements
are provided in the "Prospective Student Information" booklet available with
application materials from the Office of Admissions and Records. Current
Illinois high school and community college students may also obtain these
materials from their school counselors.

## Visiting Campus

UIC encourages prospective students to visit the campus. Preadmission
counselors in the Office of Admissions are available for consultation on
weekdays, excluding campus holidays, from 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Appointments
are recommended. In addition, campus visit coordinators, with enough advance
notice, can arrange for interested students to attend class, speak with a
faculty member, or experience a campus tour. The Office of Admissions is also
open for preadmission counseling and tours on select Saturdays throughout the
year. Because space at these weekend programs is limited, reservations are
required.

Students interested in visiting campus should call in advance (312) 996-4350
to schedule a visit. Refer to the  Campus Map and Travel Directions on the
inside back cover of this catalog for instructions on how to reach the UIC
campus.

UIC Preview Days for prospective students are scheduled several mornings each
semester. These events include a tour of campus and a residence hall, general
information about campus housing, financial aid, etc., and sessions with
academic advisers from each of UIC's undergraduate programs. Call (312)
996-4350 for dates and reservations.

## Admission Requirements and Application Procedures

All students who wish to take courses for credit at UIC, whether as degree or
nondegree candidates, must submit an application, supporting documents, and
the required nonrefundable application fee within specified deadlines. (For
information about registration as a visitor/auditor, see  Special Enrollment
Categories . After an application has been submitted, any changes to the
application must be submitted to the Office of Admissions in writing and must
be dated, signed, and include the term applied for and the applicant's social
security number.

### English Competency Requirement for All Applicants

Minimum requirements for competence in English apply to all applicants. An
applicant may establish competence in English by certifying that the following
requirements have been fulfilled in a country where English is the
official/native language and in a school where English is the primary language
of instruction: (1) graduation from a secondary school with three units, or
the equivalent, of English; or (2) successful completion of a minimum of two
academic years of full-time study at the secondary school or college level
immediately prior to the proposed date of enrollment in the University.

Applicants who do not meet the above requirement may provide sufficient
evidence by achieving a minimum score of 480 on the Test of English as a
Foreign Language (TOEFL), which is administered by the Educational Testing
Service, Box 899, Princeton, New Jersey 08540. As an alternative to the TOEFL
examination, students may submit a score of 80 on the Michigan English
Language Assessment Battery (MELAB) offered by the University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109. Higher scores are required for some programs and
colleges. This requirement may be waived by the director of the Office of
Admissions and the dean of the college concerned if the applicant can provide
evidence of competence in English that will clearly justify a waiver.

### Undergraduate Applications and Credentials Deadlines

The number of admissions to each undergraduate program is monitored to ensure
that no more students are enrolled than the faculty and facilities can
support. If programs begin to fill, it may be necessary to limit admission to
more highly qualified students or to students who have submitted earlier
applications.

Students are strongly encouraged to apply within the filing period in the
chart following. While applications submitted before the filing period will be
accepted, processing for the term will begin at the start of the filing
period. A rolling admissions system is followed with decisions mailed to
students as their applications are processed. While a final application
deadline is established for each term (and is listed in the application
packet), students who apply close to the final deadline may find programs
filled and, if admitted, may have difficulty scheduling classes.

Most upper division and health sciences programs have special deadline dates
that may be different from the chart. Refer to the application packet or the
Office of Admissions for current dates.  **Filing Period for Applications and
Credentials ** Term in which applicant wishes to enter |  International
Applicants Filing Period | Domestic/Immigrant Applicants Filing Period  
---|---|---  
Spring| June 1-August 1| July 1-October 1*  
Summer| November 1-January 1| February 1-April 1*  
Fall| October 1-March 1| September 1-February 1*  
| |  * It is recommended that domestic and immigrant applicants with credits
from foreign institutions observe the international application/credential
filing periods.  
  
### Beginning Freshman Applicant

A beginning freshman applicant is either (1) one who applies for admission
while attending high school, regardless of the amount of college credit earned
or (2) one who has graduated from high school but completed fewer than 12
semester hours or 18 quarter hours of transferable college classroom credit at
the time of application. High school midyear graduates planning to attend
another collegiate institution before admission to UIC for the fall term
should apply as a beginning freshman during their last fall term in high
school. Such applicants are admitted primarily on the basis of high school
credentials and admission test score and may complete more than 12 semester
hours of transferable college classroom credit at another institution before
enrollment at UIC.

Advanced Placement (AP) credit is granted to students who have successfully
completed AP courses in high school and received a satisfactory test score.
Credit is also available through the  International Baccalaureate Program,
ACT/SAT English/Verbal subscores, and the  College Level Examination Program
(CLEP). See the appropriate section elsewhere in this section for specific
credits.

High school seniors who wish to enter the fall term immediately following
their graduation from high school are encouraged to submit their applications
as early as possible after September 1 of their senior year. By so doing, they
have an opportunity to participate in advance enrollment during the summer
months prior to the fall term. When ample space is available, action is taken
on individual applications in the order in which they are completed. A
beginning freshman application is considered complete and ready for evaluation
when official high school transcripts and official test scores are on file in
the Office of Admissions along with the application and application fee.

#### Beginning Freshman Admission Requirements

A beginning freshman applicant at UIC must meet the following requirements:

  1. Be at least 16 years of age. A 15-year-old applicant who meets all other admission requirements may petition for admission.
  2. Submit evidence of graduation from an accredited high school or submit passing scores on the General Educational Development (GED) test. Graduates of unaccredited high schools must submit passing GED scores. Official transcripts must be sent directly to UIC from all high schools attended. Faxed or unofficial documents are not acceptable. If still in school, courses in progress should be listed.
  3. Complete the American College Test (ACT). The College Board SAT I: Reasoning Test is also acceptable. If the test is taken more than once, the higher score will be used.
  4. Present a satisfactory combination of class rank and test score.
  5. 5\. Satisfy the high school subject pattern requirements for the chosen UIC college as shown in the following chart. These subjects help ensure that the beginning freshman is best prepared to enroll in required courses. Students who do not meet these course pattern requirements but meet all other requirements will have their applications reviewed. 

A unit represents one academic year of high school work that consists of 120
sixty-minute periods in the classroom. Two hours of work requiring little or
no preparation outside the classroom are considered as having the same value
as one hour of prepared classroom work. Fractional credits of less than one-
half unit are not accepted.

Credit for work completed prior to the ninth grade is accepted by the
University if it appears on the transcript of an accredited high school. Such
credit usually applies to elementary algebra and foreign languages; however,
it may apply to any subject.

**High School Course Patterns Required for Beginning Freshmen 1 **
Architecture and the Arts  
---  
Architectural Studies| Pattern II  
Art and Design| Pattern I  
History of Architecture and Art| Pattern I  
Performing Arts| Pattern I  
Business Administration| Pattern II  
Engineering| Pattern II  
Kinesiology| Pattern I  
Liberal Arts and Sciences  
Arts and Humanities| Pattern I  
Math and Science (recommended)| Pattern II  
**High School Subject Patterns 2 ** SUBJECTS| PATTERN I| PATTERN II  
---|---|---  
English 3| 4| 4  
Algebra| 1| 2  
Geometry| 1| 1  
Trigonometry| \--| 1/2  
Lab sciences **_Note:_** not including general science|  2| 2  
Social studies 4| 2| 2  
Electives 5| 2| 2  
Flexible Academic Units 6| 3| 1 1/2  
Other| 1| 1  
TOTAL| 16| 16  
  
**_1 Note:_** The subject pattern requirements are in compliance with Public
Act 86-0954, which defines the minimum high school requirements for admission
to public colleges and universities in the State of Illinois.

**_2 Note:_** GED scores do not atisfy these requirements. GED graduates
should also submit transcripts for any high school studies completed.

**_3 Note:_** ESL courses that appear on high school transcripts will be
accepted only if the high school identifies ESL courses as equivalent to
standard high school English courses. Applicants whose ESL courses are not
considered by their high schools to be equivalent to standard English courses
will have their applications reviewed by the college of their choice provided
they present the minimum acceptable test score and class rank.

**_4 Note:_** One unit must be American History plus one unit of history,
government, psychology, economics, or geography.

**_5 Note:_** Foreign language, music, vocational education, and/or art. Four
years of one foreign language in high school is recommended for Liberal Arts
and Sciences; two years for Business, Architectural Studies, Art History, and
Music.

**_6 Note:_** Additional English, math, laboratory science, social studies,
foreign language, music and/or art. Four years of college prep mathematics
will satisfy the graduation requirement in this area for the College of
Liberal Arts and Sciences.

#### General Educational Development Tests.

A person who has successfully completed the General Educational Development
(GED) Tests may apply for admission. These high school level tests cover the
following subjects: English, general mathematics, social studies, and natural
science. Successful completion of these tests satisfies the following
admission requirements:

  1. Sixteen high school units, including four units of English. Please see the admission requirements table for the specific subject pattern requirements for each college. Only the English requirement can be satisfied by GED scores.
  2. High school graduation.

The GED tests may be taken by persons in these categories:

  1. Persons 19 years or older who have not graduated from high school.
  2. Persons regardless of age who have not graduated from high school, whose high school class has been graduated for over one year, and who have written approval of the director of the Office of Admissions.

Applicants submitting GED scores must also submit official high school
transcripts and ACT scores. UIC does not accept credit granted through the GED
college-level examinations.

### Transfer Applicant

A transfer applicant is one who (1) has completed a minimum of 12 semester or
18 quarter hours (24 semester or 36 quarter hours beginning Fall 1996) of
transferable college classroom credit by the time of application and (2) does
not meet the definition of a beginning freshman or a readmission applicant.

#### Acceptance of Traditional Transfer Credit

  1. Admission of transfer students to UIC is based only on the transfer course work that is similar in nature, content, and level to that offered by UIC. Such courses are normally referred to as transfer or college parallel work. Other course work completed, such as technical courses similar in content and level to courses taught at the University, will be used in evaluation for admission only upon the request of the dean of the college to which the student seeks admission. 
  2. Transfer credit, as defined above, will be accepted at full value for admission purposes on transfer to the University if earned in: 
    1. Colleges and universities that offer degree programs comparable to programs offered by UIC and are (1) members of, or hold Candidate for Accreditation status from, the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools or other regional accrediting associations, or (2) accredited by another accrediting agency that is a member of the Commission on Recognition of Postsecondary Accreditation.
    2. Illinois public community colleges that are neither members of nor holders of Candidate for Accreditation status from the North Central Association of Colleges and Schools but that are approved and recognized by the Illinois Community College Board (ICCB) for a period of time not to exceed five years from the date on which the college registers its first class after achieving ICCB recognition.
  3. Certain colleges and universities do not meet the specifications in II above but have been assigned a status by the University Committee on Admissions that permits credit to be accepted on a provisional basis for admission purposes on transfer to UIC. Transfer credit, as defined in I above, from such colleges and universities is accepted on a deferred basis to be validated by satisfactory completion of additional work in residence. Validation through satisfactory work in residence may be accomplished by earning at UIC or another fully accredited [1] college or university, at least a 3.00 (A=5.00) grade point average (higher if prescribed by the curriculum the student wishes to enter) in the first 12 to 30 semester hours completed following transfer.
  4. Credit, as specified in I above, transferred from an approved community or junior college is limited only by the provision that the student must earn at least 60 semester or 90 quarter hours required for the degree at the University or at any other approved  [1] four-year college or university after attaining junior standing, except that the student must meet the residence requirements that apply to all students for a degree from the University. When a school or college within the University requires three years of preprofessional college credit for admission, at least the last 30 semester or 45 quarter hours must be taken in an approved  [1] four-year collegiate institution.
  5. In all cases, the precise amount of transfer credit applicable toward a particular degree will be determined by the University college and department concerned. 

#### Transfer Student Admission Requirements.

  1. To be admitted a transfer applicant must have achieved a minimum transfer grade point average of 3.00 (A = 5.00) on the basis of all transferable work attempted (minimum: 12 semester or 18 quarter hours--24 semester or 36 quarter hours beginning Fall 1996). See  Grading and Grade Point Systems . Some colleges and curricula require a higher minimum grade point average and additional credit hours (consult individual college and curricula listings).
  2. For admission purposes only, transfer grades for _all_ baccalaureate-oriented course work attempted and accepted are used in computing the transfer student's average. However, a particular UIC college or school may not accept all courses toward degree requirements.
  3. A student transferring to the University who was previously dropped from a collegiate institution for disciplinary or academic reasons must submit a petition to the director of the Office of Admissions, who will forward the petition to the appropriate committee.
  4. When a course is repeated the grade point average is computed using both grades and all hours for the course. However, credit for the course is only awarded once.
  5. Incomplete grades more than one year old are considered as failing grades in computing the grade point average.
  6. Only course work that is similar in nature, content, and level to that offered by UIC is acceptable.
  7. Technical, vocational, developmental, and remedial course work generally is not transferable.
  8. Courses from other postsecondary institutions must have been completed at the appropriate level to be transferable.
  9. Credit for nontraditional experiential prior learning is not transferable. 

Applicants enrolled in another college at the time they plan to apply to UIC
should not wait until completing this final term to apply. These applicants
should request a transcript from their current institution including a list of
the courses they are taking at the beginning of the last term they are
enrolled. (Fall applicants currently attending a quarter-based school should
apply at the beginning of their winter term). A final transcript should be
sent to UIC as soon as possible after the final term is completed.

### Intercampus Transfer Applicant

Undergraduate intercampus transfers between the University of Illinois at
Chicago and at Urbana-Champaign may be admitted to the opposite campus
provided (1) they meet the requirements of the program, (2) there is space
available in the program, and (3) they submit the application within the
application deadline.

Students who are currently enrolled and who are applying to the opposite
campus for the immediately succeeding semester do not pay an application fee.
Intercampus transfers must submit regular application forms and credentials
within the term deadlines.

**_Note:_** "Immediately succeeding semester" above may mean either the spring
semester if the applicant completed the fall semester at the other campus, or
it may mean the summer or fall term, provided the applicant completed the
spring semester at the other campus.

Applicants are encouraged to go to their campus Office of Admissions and
Records where copies of official credentials will be enclosed with their
application and where current enrollment can be verified to permit waiving of
the application fee.

### Readmission Applicant

Readmission applicants are former students at UIC who were registered as
degree-seeking undergraduates. Readmission applicants are considered for
readmission on the basis of their status at the time they left the University,
any college work they have completed elsewhere since their last attendance at
the University, and the availability of space in the chosen program. Degree-
seeking readmission applicants do not pay the application fee.

Students who interrupt their UIC enrollment by two or more semesters in
succession (summer session excluded) must reapply. See Eligibility to
Register: University Policy on Continuing Student Status

Students must clear any encumbrances before they may register for classes.

Former UIC students who left the University on academic drop status,
regardless of whether they have attended another collegiate institution in the
interval, must submit a petition with an application when they apply for
readmission. Admission is granted upon approval of the dean of the college
concerned and of the director of the Office of Admissions.

Former UIC students who left the University on clear status or on probation
but have attended another collegiate institution where they have earned a
scholastic average below 3.00 may be readmitted to the University only with a
petition approved by the dean of the college concerned.

A former UIC student who was dropped for disciplinary reasons must submit a
petition to the director of the Office of Admissions, who will forward it to
the appropriate committee.

Applicants for readmission to any of the health professional programs should
contact the program or department for instructions.

## Nondegree Applicant

A nondegree applicant is a student who wishes to take courses for credit but
does not presently wish to enroll in a degree program. Nondegree applicants
must meet regular admission requirements and follow regular application
procedures as well as secure the approval of the dean of the college to which
they are applying.

Nondegree students are not eligible for most financial aid. International
students may be admitted as nondegree students depending on the type of visa
they hold.

Priority in admission and registration is given to degree students.

### "Summer Session Only" Applicant

A student who plans to take courses during the summer only and does not intend
to enroll in the fall is considered a nondegree `summer session only'
applicant.

Prospective `summer session only' students must submit an application for
admission along with the application fee, and qualify under one of the
following conditions:

  1. For beginning freshman applicants, one of the following is required: (a) a statement from the high school that the student has been graduated or will be by the first day of instruction, (b) passing scores from the General Educational Development Test, or (c) official high school transcript showing graduation.
  2. For transfer applicants, eligibility consists of (a) a statement from the last college or university attended that the student is eligible to return to that institution either on clear or probationary status (Statement of Good Standing) or (b) an official transcript showing eligibility to return.
  3. Any student on `summer session only' status who wishes to continue in the fall semester must reapply and submit all necessary credentials within established deadlines.

## International/Immigrant Applicant

An international student is a person who is a citizen or permanent resident
alien of a country or political area other than the United States and who has
a residence outside the United States to which he or she expects to return and
either is, or proposes to be, a temporary alien in the United States for
educational purposes. The University is authorized under federal law to enroll
nonimmigrant alien students.

International students on visas must register as full-time degree students and
are not eligible for financial aid.

Unless noted, all requirements below apply both to U. S. citizens and
permanent immigrants who have completed their education outside the United
States as well as to international applicants.

### Admission Requirements

Admission is competitive, and preference is given to those applicants judged
to have the best potential for academic success at UIC. The minimum
requirements for admission are:

  1. Satisfaction of University minimum requirements in terms of age, high school graduation, high school units, SAT I: Reasoning Test or the American College Test (ACT), or grade point average and credits earned.
  2. Satisfaction of minimum requirements of the college and curriculum of choice in terms of high school subjects and any additional requirements prescribed for admission.
  3. Satisfaction of the University requirement of competence in English.
  4. Adequate financial resources (for international applicants only).
  5. Verification of immigrant status (for immigrant applicants only).

### Academic Records

All credentials presented for admission or readmission become the permanent
property of the University, cannot be subsequently released to the student or
to another individual or institution, and cannot be held for reconsideration
of admission to subsequent terms. An international student applicant for
admission must submit the following:

  1. An application for undergraduate admission.
  2. The nonrefundable international application processing fee in the form of a check or money order in U.S. dollars payable to the University of Illinois. The University is not responsible for cash sent through the mail.
  3. Official records for at least the last four years of secondary school study and any postsecondary or university-level work completed or attempted. Records must be sent directly from the issuing institution to the UIC Office of Admissions and Records.

All records from other countries must list subjects taken, descriptions of
subjects studied, length of school year, grades earned (with maximum and
minimum grades obtainable), or examination results (including those passed or
failed in each subject); and all diplomas and certificates awarded. An
official syllabus, course catalog or detailed program description is required.
_Official_ translations must be attached to these records if they are in a
language other than English. For a list of agencies authorized to provide
official translations of foreign documents, please call or write the UIC
Office of Admissions. All credentials must be certified by an officer of the
educational institution attended or by the U.S. embassy or consulate.
Notarized copies of credentials do not fulfill official certification
requirements.

A list of all courses in progress, including recently completed course work
that is not listed on the transcript, must also be included on the
application. When possible, an applicant must have a school official provide a
statement of the applicant's rank in class. This statement should indicate the
applicant's performance relative to the performance of other members of the
secondary or postsecondary school class. Applicants to some fields may be
required to submit additional materials.

Students applying for admission after completing secondary school only must
also submit scores on the College Board SAT I: Reasoning Test. Write to the
Educational Testing Service, Box 899, Princeton, New Jersey 08540. Students in
the United States should write to the American College Testing Program (ACT),
ACT Registration, Box 414, Iowa City, Iowa 52240.

### English Competency Requirements.

See the previous section on  English Competency Requirement for All Applicants
.

If the international applicant is admissible, performance on the English test
either (1) qualifies the student to register for English 160 and 161 or (2)
indicates the need for additional study of noncredit courses in English. The
results of the placement test determine whether the student is required to
register for one or more zero credit courses in English. If so, the program of
credit courses is reduced accordingly, and a longer time may be necessary for
completion of degree requirements.

### Financial Resources Requirement

In order for international students to enter or remain in the United States
for educational purposes, evidence of adequate financial resources must be
provided before visa documents can be issued. Acceptable documentation of
adequate financial resources include a certified UIC Declaration and
Certification of Finances or INS (U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service)
Affidavit of Support. Either of these documents must be accompanied by a
certified letter from a bank showing evidence of adequate funds in U.S.
dollars. Applicants unable to provide satisfactory evidence of adequate
finances will not be granted admission. _There are no scholarships or other
types of financial assistance available to international undergraduate
students from the University of Illinois at Chicago._ Student visas (F-1 and
J-1) normally do not permit a student to work.

### Verification of Immigrant Status

Immigrant applicants (permanent residents, temporary residents, refugees-
parolees, conditional entrants) must provide proof of immigration status by
submitting a notarized Certification of Immigration Status form (available
from the Office of Admissions) or a copy of both sides of their Alien
Registration Receipt Card, Temporary Resident Card, or other document.

## Alternative Admission Programs

### Talented Student Program for Illinois High School Seniors

Upon completion of the junior year in high school, superior students in
Illinois who can meet University requirements may attend University classes
for college credit in one or more of the three terms at UIC. To qualify as a
talented student, seniors should be in the upper 10 percent of their class,
have a minimum ACT score of 25 (or SAT score of 1010), and be at least 16
years old.

Ordinarily, such work taken at UIC should not be used to accelerate the high
school work of a secondary school student but should be used as a means of
broadening and enriching the student's educational program. These students are
expected to complete all high school courses required for graduation. The
courses taken at the University by superior high school seniors are over and
above the regular secondary school curriculum.

Grades and course credits are recorded on the student's permanent UIC record
and appear on any official transcript issued to or for the student. If the
student enters the University after graduation from high school, the courses
are credited toward University graduation if they are applicable to the chosen
degree program.

Students applying for admission to the Talented High School Senior Program
should arrange for the following materials to reach the UIC Honors College
within the deadline periods established for regular admissions:

  1. A completed UIC application for admission, including the nonrefundable application fee.
  2. A recommendation from the high school principal specifically endorsing the superior student for admission to a particular course or courses during the time the student is continuing high school studies.
  3. An official copy of the high school transcript covering all work thus far completed in high school, including a record of courses in progress (if applicable) and the most recent rank in class.
  4. Test scores on the American College Testing Program (ACT). (SAT I: Reasoning Test is acceptable.)
  5. The applicant's own statement of personal qualifications for undertaking college-level work and an indication of the specific course or courses in which enrollment is desired.

Each application is considered on an individual basis. High school seniors
wishing to enroll in a course in mathematics, composition, foreign language,
physics, and/or chemistry may be required to take a preliminary placement test
after acceptance.

For application and information, inquiries should be made to the  Honors
College ,(M/C 204), The University of Illinois at Chicago, 851 South Morgan
Street, Chicago, Illinois 60607-7044; (312) 413-2260.

### Early Admission Applicant

An early admission applicant is a superior high school student who wishes to
enter UIC at the completion of the junior year in high school. The program is
designed to permit the particularly able and mature student to begin an
academic career at the university level prior to high school graduation,
provided that all the other requirements for a beginning freshman applicant
are met.

High test scores on ACT (at least 25 or 1010 on the SAT) as well as a superior
high school record are prerequisites for admission to this program. Students
should rank in the upper 10 percent of their high school class.

Each case is considered on an individual basis by the director of the Office
of Admissions and the dean of the college concerned. Inquiries may be directed
to the Office of Admissions, (312) 996-4350. .cc;

Students wishing to apply for early admission should submit the following
credentials to the Office of Admissions (M/C 018), The University of Illinois
at Chicago, Box 5220, Chicago, Illinois 60680-5220.

  1. Application for admission and the nonrefundable application fee.
  2. Official copy of high school transcript, reflecting the most recent class rank and all courses completed or in progress.
  3. A letter of recommendation from the high school principal.
  4. American College Test (ACT) or SAT I: Reasoning Test scores.
  5. A letter from the parents or guardians stating why they believe the student should be granted early admission.
  6. A recommendation from the Counseling Center at UIC indicating chances for scholastic success. 
  7. A written statement from the applicant explaining the objective in seeking early admission.
  8. The successful completion of any University subject examinations that may be necessary in order to meet admission requirements.

### Admission by Special Action

A student not otherwise eligible for admission may be admitted, with the
approval of the director of the Office of Admissions and the dean of the
chosen college, provided evidence is submitted that clearly establishes
ability to do satisfactory work in the curriculum or the courses in which
enrollment is desired. The appropriate petition form should be requested from
the Office of Admissions.

## Alternative Sources of Credit

### Credit Through ACT or SAT

A student whose American College Test (ACT) subscore in English is 29 or
higher or whose verbal subscore on the SAT I: Reasoning Test is 560 (630 on
the recentered scale) or higher is awarded 3 hours of credit in English 160.

Those whose ACT subscore in English is 26 or higher, or whose verbal subscore
on the SAT I: Reasoning Test is 510 (590 on the recentered scale) or higher,
may register for English 114 and 115 (Freshman Colloquium I and II).

Completion of these two courses with a grade of C or higher results in a
waiver of English 160 and 161.

### Credit for Military Service

Completion of not less than six months of extended active duty in any branch
of the armed forces of the United States entitles an applicant to 4 semester
hours in basic military science. These four hours will not be used in
determining grade point average for transfer admission.

Credit is also allowed for those United States Armed Forces Institute (USAFI)
courses for which the American Council on Education recommends credit at the
baccalaureate level, provided the student has passed the appropriate USAFI
end-of-course test or examination.

Credit for service school courses successfully completed and for other courses
taken while the student was in service may be allowed after the applicant is
approved for admission. It is the enrolled student's responsibility to consult
an admissions officer in the Office of Admissions for an evaluation of service
courses for which transcripts are presented.

### General Educational Development Tests (GED)

No credit is allowed for the college-level GED tests.

### Correspondence Study

Correspondence courses taken through the University of Illinois may be
accepted by the University for credit. After matriculation, students may count
toward the degree as many as 60 semester hours of credit earned in
correspondence study. Students currently in residence on a University of
Illinois campus must have the approval of the dean of their college to enroll
in any correspondence courses.

The final 30 semester hours of work toward a degree must be earned in
residence at the University of Illinois, unless students have previously
completed three full years of resident work here. Credit earned through
correspondence study neither interrupts nor counts toward fulfillment of the
residency requirement for graduation.

Students, including those in high school, who wish to pursue correspondence
study should write directly to Correspondence Courses, University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign, 202 University Inn, 302 East John Street, Champaign,
Illinois 61820\.

### Proficiency Examinations for Enrolled Students

Each term the University gives proficiency examinations, similar to regular
term examinations, in courses ordinarily open to freshmen and sophomores.
Proficiency examinations for English 160 and English 161 are scheduled
regularly. In other subjects the student must obtain the consent of the
college dean as well as the head or chairperson of the department concerned.
Proficiency examinations in more advanced undergraduate subjects may also be
given if the head or chairperson of the department recommends and the dean of
the college concerned approves. There is no fee for these examinations.

The grade given in proficiency examinations is either "pass" or "fail" but a
student does not receive a "pass" unless at least the equivalent of a "C" is
earned. Neither grade is included in the computation of the student's average
and no official record is made of a "fail."

A student who passes a proficiency examination is given the amount of credit
toward graduation regularly allowed in the course if the course is acceptable
in the curriculum. However, if such credit duplicates credit counted for
admission to the University, it is not given.

Proficiency examinations are given only to:

  1. Persons who are in residence at UIC.
  2. Persons who, after having been in residence, are currently registered in a correspondence course at the University of Illinois.
  3. Persons who, though not currently enrolled, are degree candidates at the University and need no more than 10 semester hours to complete their degree requirements.
  4. Persons enrolled at one University of Illinois campus who wish to take an examination being given at another campus. They must secure an Application for Concurrent Registration from the Office of Records and Registration.

Proficiency examination may _not_ be taken:

  1. By students who have received credit for more than one term of work in the subject in advance of the course in which the examination is requested.
  2. To raise grades or to improve failures in courses.
  3. In a course the student has attended as a listener or as a visitor.

Proficiency and CLEP examinations are not considered an interruption of
residence for graduation, and credit earned in such examinations is not
counted toward satisfying the minimum requirement toward the degree if the
last 30 semester hours must be earned in residence.

### College Level Examination Program (CLEP) Credits

The College Level Examination Program (CLEP) administered by the College
Entrance Examination Board is designed to award credit to students who
demonstrate a high level of proficiency in college level work. It is the
student's responsibility to have official score reports sent from the College
Entrance Examination Board to the Office of Admissions and request the Office
of Admissions to evaluate for advanced standing before credit can be awarded.
CLEP examinations are not considered an interruption of residence for
graduation, and credit earned in such examinations is not counted toward
satisfying the minimum requirement toward the degree if the last 30 semester
hours must be earned in residence.

#### Students with CLEP Credit from Other Institutions.

If credits have been awarded by other accredited institutions on the basis of
CLEP examination test scores, equivalent credit will be granted by the
University to those students who present on their transcript, exclusive of the
CLEP credit, course work from that institution sufficient to qualify the
student for transfer student status (12 semester or 18 quarter hours; 24
semester or 36 quarter hours beginning Fall 1996). Transfer credits based upon
CLEP examinations placed upon the student's UIC transcript apply toward degree
requirements only after review by the UIC college in which the student wishes
to earn the degree. Students enrolling at UIC without transfer student status
may forward CLEP examination scores to the Office of Admissions for possible
credit in terms of the cut-off scores applicable to all presently enrolled
students.

#### Credit Through CLEP for Current UIC Students.

Students may earn proficiency credit at UIC by achieving satisfactory scores
on those examinations regularly administered by the Office of Testing
Services. A maximum of 30 semester hours of credit on the basis of CLEP
examination scores may be applied toward degree requirements. Students who
wish to attempt any CLEP examination should consult the UIC Testing Service,
(312) 996-3477, before registering for any CLEP subject or general
examination. The CLEP general and subject examinations are given once each
month and a fee is charged.

#### CLEP Credits Accepted.

  1. **General Examinations**

Students may establish credit in semester hours (SH) toward meeting general
education graduation requirements based upon performance on one or more of the
following CLEP General Examinations.

Colleges at UIC with general education requirements of less than 8 semester
hours require students to take at least 3 semester hours of classroom credit
in each general education area. Note: The College of Liberal Arts and Sciences
does not accept CLEP examination credit in Natural Sciences.

  2. **Subject Examinations**

Students are advised to consult the appropriate department after enrollment to
determine whether a given CLEP subject examination is offered, what level of
competency is required, and whether the credit is counted toward graduation
requirements.

**Credit Awarded for CLEP Examinations ** |  Scores (Credit)| Scores (Credit)  
---|---|---  
Humanities| 542-603 (3 SH)| Above 603 (6 SH)  
Natural Sciences| 592-661 (3 SH)| Above 661 (6 SH)  
Social Sciences--History| 498-564 (3 SH)| Above 564 (6 SH)  
  
### Credit Through Advanced Placement Program (AP)

This program, administered by the College Board, is designed for those high
school students about to enter college who wish to demonstrate their readiness
for courses more advanced than those ordinarily studied during the freshman
year. College credit is awarded to those students who earn sufficiently high
grades on the examinations covering basic freshman-course subject matter. The
University encourages able high school students to enroll in these courses and
to write the examinations in one or more of the subjects below. The
examinations are prepared by joint national committees of high school and
college teachers and are administered by the Educational Testing Service.

These examinations, graded by other national committees, have the following
values: _5=extremely well qualified, 4=well qualified, 3=qualified, 2=possibly
qualified, 1=no recommendation._ It is the student's responsibility to have
official grade reports sent from the College Board Advanced Placement
Examination Program to the Office of Admissions before credit can be awarded.

UIC makes these specific credit recommendations:

#### ART

**Studio Art**

     Elective credit is given only after portfolio review by the School of Art and Design Evaluation Committee.

#### HUMANITIES

**Classics-Vergil**

     Grades of 5, 4, and 3: 3 semester hours of credit in Latin 295 (Topic: Vergil).
 **Classics-Latin lyric**

     Grades of 5, 4, and 3: 3 semester hours of credit in Latin 295 (Topic: Latin Lyric Poetry).
 **English-Literature and Composition**

     Grades 5 and 4: 3 semester hours of credit in English 101.
 **English-Language and Composition**

     Grades 5 and 4: 3 semester hours of credit in English 160.
 **European History**

     Grades of 5 and 4: 6 semester hours of credit at the lower-division level. 

**_Note:_** No more than six semester hours of advanced placement credit may
be counted toward the major in history. All history majors are required to
take three hours of 100-level history at UIC.

 **French**

    
    1. Grades of 5 and 4: 8 semester hours of credit in French 103 and 104.
    2. Grade of 3: 4 semester hours of credit in French 103.
**German**

    
    1. Grades of 5 and 4: 8 semester hours of credit in German 103 and 104.
    2. Grade of 3: 4 semester hours of credit in German 103.
**Music-Theory**

     Grades of 5, 4, and 3: 8 semester hours of credit in Music 101, 102, 103, 104.
 **Music-Listening and Literature**

     Grades of 5, 4, and 3: 6 semester hours of credit in Music 100 and 131.
 **Spanish-Language**

    
    1. Grade of 5: 6 semester hours of credit in Spanish 200 and 201.
    2. Grade of 4: 3 semester hours of credit in Spanish 200.
    3. Grade of 3: 4 semester hours of credit in Spanish 107 or 114. 
**Spanish-Literature**

    
    1. Grade of 5: 6 semester hours of credit in Spanish 210 and 211.
    2. Grade of 4: 3 semester hours of credit in Spanish 210.
    3. Grade of 3: 4 semester hours of credit in Spanish 105 or 114. 

#### SOCIAL STUDIES

**American History**

     Grades of 5 and 4: 6 semester hours of credit at the lower-division level.
 **Psychology**

     Grades of 5 and 4: 3 semester hours in Psychology 100.
 **Comparative Government**

     Grades of 5 and 4: 3 semester hours credit in Political Science 130.
 **Micro-Economics**

     Grades of 5 or 4: 3 semester hours credit in Economics 120.
 **Macro-Economics**

     Grades of 5 or 4: 3 semester hours credit in Economics 121.
 **American Government and Politics**

     Grades of 5 or 4: 3 semester hours of credit in Political Science 101.

#### NATURAL SCIENCES AND MATHEMATICS

**Biology**

     Grades of 5, 4, and 3: 10 semester hours credit for Biological Sciences 100, 101.
 **Chemistry**

     Grades of 5 and 4: 10 semester hours credit for Chemistry 112, 114, and permission to enroll in Chemistry 222.
 **Physics**

    
    1. Grades of 5 or 4 on the B examination: 10 semester hours credit in Physics 101, 102.
    2. Grade of 3 on the B examination: automatic admission to proficiency examinations in Physics 101, 102.
    3. Grades of 5 or 4 on the C examination, Part I Mechanics: 5 or 4 semester hours credit in Physics 101 or 141.
    4. Grades of 5 and 4 on the C examination, Part II Electricity and Magnetism: 5 or 4 semester hours credit in Physics 102 or 142.
    5. Grade of 3 on the C examination: automatic admission to proficiency examinations in Physics 101 and 102 or Physics 141 and 142.

#### MATHEMATICS

  1. Grades of 5, 4, or 3 on the BC examination: 10 semester hours credit in Mathematics 180, 181 and advanced placement in any course for which Mathematics 181 is a prerequisite.
  2. Grades of 5, 4, or 3 on the AB examination, or grade of 2 on the BC examination: 5 semester hours credit in Mathematics 180 and advanced placement in Mathematics 181.
  3. Grades of 2 or 1 on the AB examination, or grade of 1 on the BC examination: students in this category are invited to take a proficiency examination in Mathematics 180. Passing this examination gives 5 semester hours of credit in Mathematics 180 and advanced placement in Mathematics 181.

**Computer Science**

    
    1. Grades of 5 and 4 on the AB examination: 8 semester hours credit in Mathematical Computer Science 260 and 360 and advanced placement in any course for which Mathematical Computer Science 360 is a prerequisite.
    2. Grades of 5 and 4 on the A examination or a grade of 3 on the AB examination: 4 semester hours credit in Mathematical Computer Science 260 and advanced placement in Mathematical Computer Science 360.

### Credit Through the International Baccalaureate Program (IB)

The University of Illinois at Chicago will award credit on the basis of scores
from several International Baccalaureate examinations: anthropology,
biological sciences, chemistry, classics (Latin), economics, English, French,
geography, German, history, mathematics, music, philosophy, physics,
psychology, and Spanish. Students who wish to have such examination scores
evaluated should request an official transcript from the International
Baccalaureate program, or request their high school to forward an official
score transcript, to the Office of Admissions (M/C 018), The University of
Illinois at Chicago, Box 5220, Chicago, Illinois 60680.

UIC makes the following specific credit recommendations:

**Anthropology**

     Credit for Anth 160 for scores of 6 or 7 (higher and subsidiary levels)
 **Biological Sciences**

     Credit for Bios 100 and 101 for scores of 6 or 7 (higher level only)
 **Chemistry**

     Credit for Chem 112 and 114 for scores of 6 or 7 (higher level only)
 **Classics**

     **Higher level:**
     Credit for Lat 101-104 and Lat 299 for scores of 6 or 7
 **Subsidiary level:**

     Credit for Lat 101-104 for scores of 6 or 7
**Economics**

     Credit for Econ 120 and 121 for scores of 6 or 7 (higher level only)
 **English**

     Credit for either Engl 101 or Engl 102 for scores of 6 or 7
 **French**

     **Language B, higher level:**
     Credit for Fr 201 and Fr 231 for scores of 5, 6 or 7; personal interview with department for possibility of credit for Fr 202 and 232.
 **Language B, subsidiary level:**

     Credit for Fr 201 and Fr 231 for scores of 5, 6, or 7
 **Language A, higher and subsidiary levels:**

     Students should consult with department for interview and special advanced placement similar to that accorded native speakers
**Geography**

     **Higher level:**
     Credit for Geog 121, Geog 131, Geog 101, and Geog 151 for scores of 6 or 7
 **Subsidiary level:**

     Credit for Geog 100 and Geog 141 for scores of 6 or 7
**German**

     Credit for Ger 211 and Ger 318 for scores of 6 or 7; credit for Ger 211 for scores of 4 and 5; students with scores of 1, 2, or 3 should take the German placement exam
 **History**

     Credit for Hist 101, Hist 103, and Hist 104 for scores of 6 or 7 (higher level only)
 **Mathematics**

     Credit to be determined on an individual basis for scores of 5 or higher (higher level only)
 **Management**

     No credit
 **Music**

     **Higher level:**
     Credit for Mus 100, Mus 101, Mus 103, Mus 107
 **Subsidiary level, option X:**

     Credit for Mus 100, Mus 107, and Mus 103
 **Subsidiary level, option Y:**

     Credit for Mus 100, Mus 101, Mus 107
**Philosophy**

     Credit for Phil 100 for scores of 6 or 7 (higher level only)
 **Physics**

     **Higher level:**
     Credit for non-calculus sequence (Phys 101 and 102) or calculus sequence (Phys 141 and 142) for scores of 5 or better
 **Subsidiary level:**

     Credit for NatS 101/Phys 121 for scores of 5 or better
**Psychology**

     Credit for Psch 100 for scores of 5, 6, or 7
 **Spanish**

     **Spanish A, higher level:**
     Credit for Span 210 for scores of 6 or 7
 **Spanish B, higher level:**

     Credit for Span 201 for scores of 6 or 7

## After Admission

After a student has been admitted, a Letter of Admission is sent. Enclosed are
the instructions for placement tests, registration, medical immunization and
housing. Admission is valid only for the term stated and may not be used for
subsequent terms. Transfer credit deta

