![Mankato State University](MSULogo.gif)



### ACCOMMODATING STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES

### FACULTY / STAFF HANDBOOK

  
****

* * *

****

### _**TABLE OF CONTENTS**_



> Foreword

>

> Definitions

>

> General Requirements

>

> Campus Resources

>

> Disability Services Office

>

> Accommodations

>

> Alternative Testing

>

> Texts on Tape

>

> Notetaking Services

>

> Interpreter Services

>

> Word Processing/Scribe

>

> Assistive Technology

>

> Learning Center

>

> Ex.C.E.L. Student Support Services

>

> Syllabus Announcement

>

> Acknowledgment

>

> ADA Bulletin: MnSCU Supplement, Tips for Academic Programs

>

> Curriculum Requirements

>

> Academic Modifications

>

> Support Services

>

> Acknowledgment

>

> Key Points in Relating to Students with Disabilities--  
>  What Professors Can Do

>

> Before Classes Start/Early in Term

>

> During the Term

>

> Students with Visual Impairments

>

> Students with Hearing and Speech Impairments

>

> Students with Mobility Impairments

>

> Students with Attention Deficit Disorder

>

> General

>

> Acknowledgment

>

> Types of Learning Disabilities

>

> Abstract Reasoning

>

> Arithmetic Deficit

>

> Auditory Processing

>

> Constructional Dyspraxia

>

> Dyscalculia

>

> Dysgraphia/Visuo-Graphic Disorder

>

> Dyslexia

>

> Language Comprehension

>

> Long-Term Memory Deficit

>

> Long-Term Retrieval

>

> Processing Speed

>

> Reading Deficit

>

> Reasoning Deficit

>

> Short-Term Memory Deficit

>

> Short-Term Retrieval

>

> Spatial Organization

>

> Spelling Dyspraxia

>

> Visual Processing

>

> Writing Deficit

>

> Related Disabilities

>

> Attention Deficit

>

> Hyperactivity

>

> Hypoactivity

>

> Social Skills and Study Skills

>

> Possible Accommodations

>

> Abstract Reasoning Deficit

>

> Arithmetic Deficit

>

> Auditory Processing Deficit

>

> Constructional Dyspraxia

>

> Dyscalculia

>

> Dysgraphia

>

> Dyslexia

>

> Language Comprehension Deficit

>

> Long-Term Memory Deficit

>

> Long-Term Retrieval Deficit

>

> Processing Speech Deficit

>

> Reading Deficit

>

> Reasoning Deficit

>

> Short-Term Memory Deficit

>

> Short-Term Retrieval Deficit

>

> Spatial Organization Deficit

>

> Spelling Dyspraxia

>

> Visual Processing Deficit

>

> Writing Deficit

>

> Hypoactivity

>

> Attention Deficit Disorder/Attention Deficit with Hyperactivity

>

> Social Skills and/or Study Skills Deficit

>

> Suggestions for Working with Adults with Learning Disabilities

>

> Instructional Strategies for Reading

>

> Instructional Strategies for Mathematics

>

> Instructional Strategies for Written Language

* * *

**FOREWORD**

Mankato State University affirms that it will provide access to programs,
services and activities to qualified individuals with known disabilities as
required by Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Title II of the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) unless doing so poses an undue
hardship or fundamentally alters the nature of the program or activity. When
an individual asks for an accommodation, the University will require the
individual to provide recent documentation of the disability.



Information in this guide will be made available in alternative format, such
as large print or cassette tape, upon request.

6/3/97

* * *

**DEFINITIONS**

Disability means, with respect to individuals:

A. A physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of
the major life activities of such individuals;

B. A record of such an impairment; or

C. Being regarding as having such an impairment.

If an individual meets any one of these three tests (A or B or C above), he or
she is considered to be an individual with a disability for purposes of
coverage under Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Title II of
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA).

Major life activities means functions such as caring for one's self,
performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing,
learning, and working.

Record of such an impairment includes those individuals who have recovered
from a physical or mental impairment that previously substantially limited
them in a major life activity, or who have been misclassified as having a
mental or physical impairment.

Being regarded as having such an impairment applies when individuals are
treated as if they have an impairment that substantially limits a major life
activity, regardless of whether they, in fact, do have an impairment.

Qualified individual with a disability means an individual with a disability
who, with or without reasonable modifications to rules, policies, or
practices, the removal of architectural, communication, or transportation
barriers, or the provision of auxiliary aids and services, meets the essential
eligibility requirements for the receipt of services or the participation in
programs or activities provided by Mankato State University.

Documented disability means the disability has been verified by an appropriate
source and documentation has been provided to the Disabilities Services Office
as part of the process of self-identification.

Self-identification means students identify themselves as having a disability,
provide documentation, and make arrangements for appropriate accommodations.

Auxiliary aids or services include, but are not limited to, note takers,
interpreters, assistive devices such as FM listening systems, taped textbooks,
captioned videos, Brailled material, large print material, etc.

Learning disabilities is a catchall term for a heterogeneous group of
impairments that are hidden and involve significant problems in receiving,
processing, transmitting or sequencing information. A learning disability is
not mental retardation; a person with a learning disability is of average or
above average intelligence.

6/3/97

* * *

**GENERAL REQUIREMENTS**

No qualified individual with a disability shall, on the basis of disability,
be excluded from participation in or be denied the benefits of any academic,
research, occupational training, housing, health insurance, counseling,
financial aid, physical education, athletics, recreation, transportation,
other extra-curricular, or other program or activity at Mankato State
University. Qualified individuals with a disability shall be given an
opportunity to participate in or benefit from our services, programs, and
activities on a footing equal to that afforded others so as to gain the same
opportunity as that given to others. The services, programs, and activities
shall be administered in the most integrated setting possible and appropriate
to the needs of qualified individuals with disabilities.

The University is not required to provide to individuals with disabilities
personal devices, such as eyeglasses or hearing aids; wheelchairs; readers for
personal use; or services of a personal nature including assistance in eating,
toileting, or dressing.



****Academic Adjustments****

Programs shall make modifications to academic requirements as accommodation
for qualified students with documented disabilities as necessary to assure
that requirements do not discriminate against students with disabilities or
have the effect of excluding students solely because of disability. Programs
are not required to make modifications to academic requirements if it can be
shown the modification would result in a substantial change in an essential
element of the program. Examples of modifications include substitution of
degree requirements and adaptation of the manner in which specific courses are
taught.



****Accommodations****

Students with disabilities shall be provided with appropriate accommodations
to assure that their evaluations represent their achievement in the course of
study rather than reflecting the effects of their disability. Examples of
accommodations include extended time on tests, readers, note takers, use of
adaptive equipment, interpreters, etc. Accommodations do not give students
with disabilities an unfair advantage over non-disabled students, but minimize
the effects of their disabilities to the greatest degree possible. Faculty
members receiving requests from students for accommodation are encouraged to
contact the Disabilities Service Office for assistance.



****Communications****

All programs shall take appropriate steps to ensure that communications with
students and members of the public with disabilities are as effective as
communications with others.

In some instances, a notepad, note taker, and written materials may be
sufficient to permit effective communications; however, in other circumstances
they may not be sufficient. A qualified interpreter may be necessary, or an
auxiliary aid from the Disabilities Services Office may be needed. Deference
to the request of the individual with a disability is desirable because of the
range of disabilities, the variety of auxiliary aids and services, and
different circumstances requiring effective communication.

Where a program communicates by telephone with students and/or members of the
public, TTY's or equally effective telecommunication systems shall be used to
communicate with individuals with hearing or speech impairments. (TTY's are
teletypewriters that are used by individuals who are deaf or have speech
impairments.)

Those programs not having a TTY may use the Minnesota Relay Service. The Relay
Service is a telephone service that connects individuals who are deaf, who
have speech impairments, or who are hard of hearing with individuals who are
able to hear. To access the Relay Service, dial 1-800-627-3529, and tell the
communications assistant what type of call you wish to make (collect, calling
card, third party billing). Give your number and the number you are calling.
The communications assistant will relay your messages to the person whom you
are calling via a TTY and relay responses back to you verbally. You should
speak as though speaking directly to the person whom you are calling. The
Minnesota Relay Service is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week.

Offices having TTY's shall train staff in how to receive and place calls using
it.

Contracting with External Organizations

Programs contracting with other organizations to provide services and
activities to program participants retain responsibility for assuring that the
contractor provides services and activities in a nondiscriminatory manner.



****Media Relations****

All publicity regarding campus-sponsored events shall contain statements that:
(1) auxiliary aids and services will be provided upon request, (2) a date by
which requests for accommodations must be made, and (3) the telephone number
and name of person to contact to request accommodation. The following is the
suggested statement: "To request accommodation of a disability, please contact
(name, department, address, phone number) at least 72 hours prior to the day
of the event."



****Medical Inquiries****

As a general rule, programs may not make medical inquiries of students or
members of the public as a condition of eligibility for or participation in
any program, activity, or service. Programs that believe medical inquiries are
necessary are encouraged to contact either the Disability Services Office or
the ADA Coordinator's Office.



****Off-Campus Events****

Individuals with disabilities may not be denied the opportunity to participate
in an off-campus service, program, or activity because of their disability.
The services, programs, and activities shall be administered in the most
integrated setting possible and appropriate to the needs of qualified
individuals with disabilities. Reasonable modifications in policies, practices
and procedures that deny equal access to people with disabilities must be made
unless those modifications result in a fundamental alteration in the program.



****Printed Materials****

All printed materials (catalogs, program brochures, course syllabi, etc.)
shall be accessible to students with disabilities, i.e., they must be
available in alternative format such as large print, audio tape, etc. The
following notice shall be printed on all materials, "Information in this
publication (or brochure) will be made available in alternative format, such
as large print or cassette tape, upon request." Programs receiving requests
for materials in alternative format shall immediately contact the Disabilities
Services Office for assistance.



****Public Events****

Announcements of public events shall contain this statement, "To request
accommodation of a disability, please contact (name, department, address,
phone number) at least 72 hours prior to the day of the event." Programs
receiving requests are encouraged to contact the Disabilities Service Office
for assistance.

Events shall be scheduled in a setting that provides accessible seating in an
integrated setting to accommodate wheelchair users, persons with other
mobility impairments, and persons with vision or hearing impairments.



****Transportation****

Programs arranging transportation for students and members of the public to
attend off-campus services, programs, and activities shall arrange for
transportation that is accessible to individuals with disabilities when
needed. Announcements of off-campus activities shall contain this statement,
"To request accommodation of a disability, please contact (name, department,
address, phone number) at least 72 hours prior to the day of the event."
Programs receiving requests for accessible transportation shall contact the
Disabilities Service Office for assistance.



****Videos and Films****

Minnesota Statute requires that all videos or films purchased, including
educational videos and films, must be either open- or closed-captioned. (Open-
captions are similar to subtitles used in foreign films; the captions are
permanently displayed on the tape. Closed-captions are subtitles that can only
be received by a television having a special chip that receives the closed-
caption signal. All televisions 13 inches or larger manufactured after July,
1993, feature built-in decoders.) MSU has three televisions with built-in
decoders available in the Educational Resource Center in the Library.

It is not financially feasible to retrofit the videos already on-hand in the
library and in the departments, but the University must provide accommodation
to students who are deaf or hard-of-hearing upon request. Departments and/or
faculty members receiving requests from students for accommodation for showing
of videos shall contact the Disabilities Service Office for assistance.

As programs order new videos for their collections, they shall request videos
with captioning. Not all production companies will be able to comply with the
request; however, that shall first be determined before ordering a video
without captioning.

6/11/97

* * *

#### **CAMPUS RESOURCES**

**Disability Services Office (DSO)**

The Disability Services Office is located in Armstrong Hall 117 and can be
reached at #2825. This office houses documentation of disability for students,
provides verification of disability for faculty, provides accommodations,
offers direct services to students such as taped texts, notetakers,
interpreters, technology access, acts as a liaison to other offices, issues
temporary handicapped parking permits, submits requests for waivers and
substitutions of classes, issues permission for early registration and
generally coordinates services for students with disabilities.



**Accommodations**

Common accommodations include:

> **testing accommodations (alternative testing)**

>

> **extra time**

>

> **quiet room**

>

> **test read to the student**

>

> **scribe provided for the student**

>

> **taped tests**

>

> **taped text books**

>

> **either taped on campus or through Reading for the Blind and Dyslexic**

>

> **notetakers**

>

> **early registration**

>

> **interpreter services**

>

> **word processing/scribing**

>

> **verification of eligibility for handicapped parking permits**



**Alternative Testing**

A three part NCR form is available in either the Learning Center (LC) or the
Disability Services Office for implementing testing accommodations. The
student has the responsibility for getting the form, filling out the top part
and giving it to the faculty member for approval and signature. One part is
returned to the Alternative Testing Coordinator in the Learning Center at
least 3 days before the test. The faculty member should keep a copy of the
form and the third part is kept by the student. The procedures agreed upon on
the form will be carried out under the direction of the test coordinator.



**Texts on Tape**

Students with disabilities that make it difficult for them to comprehend what
they are reading can get textbooks on tape. Professionally read textbooks are
available through Reading for the Blind and Dyslexic, but when a book is
unavailable through this source, it is taped in the DSO by student workers.

When a book is taped locally, it is necessary to have an extra copy of the
book and an accurate syllabus, so the student will receive the tapes in a
timely manner. The DSO will contact the bookstore to borrow a copy of the book
to be taped and, if it is unavailable there, will contact the instructor for
help in obtaining a copy.



**Notetaking Services**

A student who qualifies can access notetaking services by applying for a
notetaker in the DSO. Information will then be communicated to the faculty
member who is teaching the class and he/she will be asked to announce that a
notetaker is needed. Students interested in being notetakers should go to the
DSO to fill out the appropriate forms. Notetakers are student employees and
are paid for the time they are taking class notes. The DSO provides NCR paper
for the notetaker. Students for whom notes are being taken are expected to
attend class and take notes to the best of their ability.



**Interpreter Services**

The sign language interpreter will accompany deaf students to class. The
interpreter will introduce himself/herself to the instructor at the first
class meeting and discuss classroom routines. The interpreter will be seated
in the front of the classroom so the student has a clear view of the
instructor and interpreter. The interpreter's job is to facilitate
communication between student and instructor. The interpreter is not a class
member. Speak to the interpreter as if you were speaking directly to the
student.



**Word Processing/Scribe**

Students who are unable to write or type their own material may use the
services of a scribe/word processor. The scribe/word processor will transcribe
what the student says to written form as it is dictated.



**Assistive Technology**

In recent years, the Disability Services Office has acquired equipment
specifically for the use of students with disabilities. Most of this equipment
is located in the DSO office and may be checked out for student use.

**The equipment, its location and use includes:**

**Portable FM systems:**  
Students with hearing impairments may check a system out to take to class. The
instructor is asked to wear a small battery pack and microphone when
lecturing. The amplified sound then goes directly into the earphones of the
student. Located in DSO AH 117.

**4-track tape players:**  
These players are used to play the special DSO books on tape from Reading for
the Blind Learning and Dyslexic and can be checked out by the quarter. Located
in DSO, and Learning Center ML 0132.

**Talking calculator:**  
For use of students with low vision or who are blind. Located in DSO.

**Large number calculator:**  
For use of students with low vision. Located in DSO.

**Franklin Speller:**  
Used to spell check words and hear Learning the correct pronunciation. Located
in Learning Center.

**Arkenstone Reader:**  
Used by students with low vision or who are blind. The Arkenstone will
Learning scan and read back text. Located in the Library Learning Center.

**Omni 3000:**  
Used by students with print disability. Learning (primarily learning
disabilities). The Omni 3000 will scan and read text but requires more vision
to access and is not suitable for students with low vision. Located in the
Learning Center.

**Dragon Dictate:**  
Voice recognition software. A user can dictate to the machine which will then
print what has been dictated. Located in the Learning Center.

**Jaws:**  
A speech synthesis program that works with text only. Installed with other
equipment in the Library and the Learning Center.



Equipment is added and upgraded on a continuing basis. If you have questions
about what is available or if you have suggestions for assistive technology to
be purchased, please contact the DSO.



**Learning Center**

Located in the lower level of Memorial Library (ML 0132) the Learning Center
(LC) serves as a central resource to all students. While its primary function
is to provide tutoring for MSU students, the Center also conducts study
skills, evaluations and workshops, specialized tutoring for standardized
tests, advising and is staffed with trained and certified peer tutors. The
Center also provides special support to students with disabilities. As noted
above, some assistive technology is available in the LC and most of the
alternative testing is provided through the Center. The services provided by
the Learning Center are free to students.



**Ex.C.E.L. Student Support Services**

Ex.C.E.L. Student Support Services (WI 355) is a federally funded program that
is part of TRIO and has disability as one of its eligibility criteria.
Students who qualify may receive services through this office. It is the
intent of this office to retain and graduate students and foster a campus
climate conducive for learning. Services include tutoring, advising,
counseling, registration information and other activities designed to assist
students.

* * *

**SYLLABUS ANNOUNCEMENT**

On the first day of class each quarter, faculty members are urged to invite
students who may need accommodations because of a disability to visit them in
their offices to discuss their instructional needs. Too often students wait
until they are in academic trouble before seeking assistance; more students
may seek help if the first gesture comes from the professor. The invitation
should be issued carefully so that a disabled student does not feel he/she
must identify his or her needs in front of the class, or, in the case of an
apparent disabled student, she/he is suddenly conspicuous to the whole class.
The announcement might be a general invitation extended to the class as a
whole; possibly as part of the announcement of office location and office
hours. Then, the decision of whether or not to self-identify and to seek
assistance is left to the individual student.

An alternative to a general announcement in class is to put a written
invitation to visit with the professor regarding accommodations of
disabilities in the course syllabus. Suggested language is:

If you are a student with a documented disability who will need academic
accommodations, please see me as early in the quarter as possible to discuss
what is appropriate.

* * *

**ACKNOWLEDGMENT**

The following section "ADA Bulletin: MNSCU Supplement" has been prepared by
the ADA/Disability Office in the Department of Employee Relations for MnSCU.
It will provide guidance in meeting ADA requirements in the curriculum,
providing academic modifications, and in providing support services for
students with disabilities.

* * *

**ADA BULLETIN**

**MNSCU SUPPLEMENT**

**December, 1996**

> **TIPS: ACADEMIC PROGRAMS**

**CURRICULUM REQUIREMENTS:**

1\. Reasonable modifications to an academic program must be made for students
with disabilities under the ADA. For example, if you require two years of a
foreign language for all bachelor's degrees, you must provide an alternative
for persons who are hearing impaired or who have auditory processing
disabilities. You might consider offering computer languages or American Sign
Language as substitutes. You may also consider a course on the history of a
foreign country as a substitute for a language course, particularly for
someone with a speech impairment.

2\. Some degree programs require at least one class in physical education.
This would create a barrier for persons with limited mobility or use of their
upper limbs, and would be discriminatory. (Please note that we are not talking
about a student with a disability majoring in physical education, but a
student in another field who is required by the college to fulfill a general
requirement for physical education.) In this instance, you may consider
exempting the student from the course, or offering an adaptive course such as
aquatics.

3\. If a student with a disability will be taking courses requiring the use of
a computer, you may have to provide adaptive equipment to overcome a barrier.
For example, a visually impaired student may not be able to access or
transcribe information via computer unless that computer is equipped with a
Braille keyboard and a voice response system. A person who has limited or no
use of the upper limbs may need a more sensitive keyboard or a voice-activated
computer.

4\. For students with speech impairments or who do not speak because of a
disability, courses that require oral presentations are an obstacle. See if
written or visual presentations can be substituted.

5\. Information regarding accommodations must be accessible to persons who are
hearing impaired, visually impaired and even those with mobility impairments
who may not have access to information bulletin boards.

6\. One of the most difficult things for students with disabilities to
accomplish is going through a bureaucratic maze. The more people, locations,
complex communication and paperwork involved, the more likely it is that a
person with a disability will be confronted with barriers. While one office
may have forms in Braille, or someone who can provide direct assistance,
another may not. While you may have a TTY line for general information or
registration, various academic offices may not. Reducing the bureaucracy may
help eliminate unforeseen barriers.

* * *

**ACADEMIC MODIFICATIONS:**

1\. When you offer students the opportunity to add/drop courses, it is often
done within a narrow time frame. Students with disabilities must not only have
access to this timely information, but must be able to negotiate the process.
It may be the case that a faculty member, whose signature is required for
add/drop, may have an inaccessible office, or a student with a visual
impairment may need assistance to receive and complete the forms. If it does
not impose an undue administrative burden, it may be necessary to extend
add/drop deadlines for students with disabilities who encounter barriers in
the process.

2\. Time limits for completing courses for graduation (e.g., five years) may
pose an obstacle to students with disabilities. Some disabling conditions may
require a student to be hospitalized for periods of time. Some conditions may
be exacerbated by fatigue or stress. In both of these instances, a student may
have to take longer to complete a course of study. You are required under the
ADA to modify your policies to ensure they do not discriminate on the basis of
disability. Granting an extension of time to complete studies may be a
reasonable modification to your policy, as is extending time to complete a
given course for a student who has been ill due to a disability, or unable to
attend classes in inclement weather. However, you are not required to take any
action that would fundamentally alter the nature of your program.

3\. Often, faculty will establish a maximum number of classes per course that
can be missed before a student receives a failing or lowered grade. This is
reasonable for the majority of the student body, but may not be for some
individuals with disabilities. Some students may require bed rest or
hospitalization during a semester. Others may be ready to attend classes but
unable to use transportation routes in severely inclement weather. You are
required under the ADA to make reasonable modifications to these standards for
students with disabilities on a case by case basis. Some individuals would
qualify, others would not. Again, modifications that fundamentally alter the
nature of a program are not required.

4\. When providing general information on academic policies and procedures,
you must ensure that the information is accessible to persons with a wide
range of disabilities. Besides posting these standards, you should consider
having copies available in large print, Braille or on audio tape. Information
should be posted in a wheelchair accessible area. Some individuals with
hearing impairments may need to have a session with faculty at which a sign
language interpreter is present, to ensure a clear understanding of these
complex issues.

Remember that the ADA's nondiscrimination mandate extends to all faculty and
staff at your college or university. Everyone needs to be informed of the
requirements of the law, as well as the specific efforts you have made to
ensure compliance. People in positions of authority need to be as well
informed as administrative staff.

* * *

**SUPPORT SERVICES:**

1\. Sometimes standards need to be modified to fit the needs of students with
disabilities. Generally, the grade point average expected of other students
should be expected of students with disabilities. The ADA is not designed to
ensure equal results but to provide equal opportunities of access. Some
obstacles to access programs and services may be the academic standards
established within each course. If you require written papers, you may need to
modify this for certain students with severe learning disabilities. These
students may better be able to express a theme and discuss issues in an oral
presentation.

2\. Some courses require concise and accurate notetaking, for which a student
receives a portion of the full course grade. Students with auditory processing
problems and students with hearing impairments may not be able to meet this
standard. Similarly, they, along with students with speech impairments, may be
unable to make oral presentations. A reasonable modification could be to write
an additional essay on a topic, or to present a model, drawing, etc., based on
the subject matter covered.

3\. For students with impaired hearing (including those who need the services
of an in-class sign language interpreter) providing a notetaker may also be a
necessary modification to the academic expectations. Some schools do provide
notetakers to individual students; others offer copies of the instructor's
notes. Remember, whatever additional services you decide to provide, you may
not pass the cost along to the person with a disability.

4\. Some colleges use student volunteers or work-study students as in-class
interpreters. This is perfectly acceptable under the ADA. However, you must
ensure that these students are qualified sign language interpreters - a person
who knows "some" ASL is not a qualified interpreter.

5\. Both multiple choice and essay exams may impose a burden on students with
specific disabilities, and may have to be modified. Some individuals with
visual impairments, and some with learning disabilities, are unable to track
answers from a test paper to an answer sheet. Others are unable to write
extensive essays. In addition, without adaptive equipment, some persons with
limited upper body movement may not be able to write responses. Lastly, many
individuals require time extensions to complete exams.

Here is a list of some of the most frequent modifications and support services
you may have to make to your academic program:

> **Oral presentations**

>

> **Tape recorded classes**

>

> **Notetakers**

>

> **Sign language interpreters**

>

> **Extended timed exams**

>

> **Additional instruction time**

>

> **Readers**

* * *

**ACKNOWLEDGMENT**

This is to acknowledge that some of the material in the following section was
taken from "What Professors Can Do" from the manual Teaching College Students
with Disabilities: A Guide for Professors by Dr. Catherine S. Fichten,
Gabrielle Goodrick, Rhonda Amsel, and Dr. Eva Libman. Where appropriate, this
material has been adjusted and/or other information added to make the section
more applicable to the Mankato State environment.

The entire manual, Teaching College Students with Disabilities: A Guide for
Professors, is in the Affirmative Action/ADA Coordinator's Office and is
available for review upon request.

* * *

**KEY POINTS IN RELATING TO STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES**

> > > **WHAT PROFESSORS CAN DO**

**Before Classes Start/Early in Term**

1\. Put a statement in your syllabus inviting students with disabilities to
meet with you concerning appropriate accommodations and/or during the first
class invite any students who may need accommodations because of a disability
to visit you in your office to discuss individual instructional needs.

2\. Encourage students with disabilities to be in contact with the Disability
Services Office.

3\. Become familiar with the services and technology available to students
with disabilities and give them the appropriate information.

4\. If requested, help find a notetaker for the student as early in the term
as possible.

5\. Be sure the student knows what is expected of him/her with reading,
written assignments and tests.

6\. Make appropriate individual adjustments such as alternative assignments,
seating, testing accommodations, etc.

7\. Discuss available resources. (such as notetakers, FM System, texts on
tape)



**During the Term**

1\. Be flexible with the content and format of tests. Be willing to allow
alternative testing  
arrangements if documentation indicates this is appropriate. Forms for
alternative testing are available through the Disability Services Office or
the Learning Center.

2\. Encourage the student to stay in contact with you.

3\. Arrange for other students in the class to help, or refer the student to
the Learning Center or the Disability Services Office for tutoring, texts on
tape, notetakers, etc.

4\. Allow special seating for students with disabilities if it is indicated.

5\. Let students with disabilities know it is acceptable to tape lectures.

6\. Discuss problems with the student such as frequent absences, work not
turned in on time, inappropriate behavior, etc.

7\. Be supportive and encouraging. Let students know you are willing to talk
with them about their progress.



**Students with Visual Impairments**

1\. Make sure required materials can be made available in large print, on tape
or in Braille.

2\. State aloud what you write on the board or show on the overhead projector.



**Students with Hearing and Speech Impairments**

1\. Give lectures loudly and slowly making sure your mouth is not covered when
you speak. Face the class as much as possible. Try not to stand behind the
student or walk back and forth in front of the class.

2\. Write all important material on the board or overhead and be sure it is
written clearly. If you have a beard or mustache, be sensitive to students who
may not understand you because they read lips.

3\. Be patient. Check privately with the student about whether she/he has
understood you if you are in doubt.

4\. Hand out typed or printed notes.

5\. If asked, use an amplification system.

6\. Repeat classmates' questions if the student can not hear them.

7\. If the interpreter is in your class, discuss the way your class is
conducted with her . The interpreter is in class to facilitate communication
between professor and student.



**Students with Mobility Impairments**

1\. Ensure that the class, lab, building, field trip, etc. is in an accessible
location.

2\. Make sure that classroom and lab furniture are appropriate for wheel chair
users. If not, call the Disability Services Office to help facilitate finding
appropriate accommodations.

3\. Admit students with mobility impairments to class with no penalty if they
are occasionally late.



**Students with Attention Deficit Disorder**

1\. Although not always students with learning disabilities, many of the
strategies used for those students work with students with attention deficit
disorder.

2\. Ensuring the student understands the requirements of the course is very
helpful since organization is often a problem.

3\. Allow alternative testing in a quiet room whenever possible. This service
is available through the Disability Services Office and the Learning Center.

4\. Discussing deadlines and flexibility in meeting deadlines is appropriate
for students with attention deficit disorder.



**General**

1\. Be supportive of students with disabilities but, when possible, treat them
as you would any other student.

2\. Make adjustments to allow the student an equal opportunity to learn.
Remember, identical treatment is not "equal" treatment.

3\. Make adjustments in your evaluation of students with disabilities, by
giving them a chance to demonstrate that they have mastered the material. Do
not, however, accept work of lower quality or give unearned grades based only
on effort.

4\. Avoid doing things for students they can and want to do on their own.

5\. Do not ask for documentation. Documentation is confidential material and
is on file in the Disability Services Office. Confirmation of the
appropriateness of accommodations asked for can be sent to you from the
Disabilities Services Office upon request.

6\. Do not single out students with disabilities for special attention during
class.

7\. Do not avoid everyday words such as "see", "hear" and "walk" with students
with disabilities.

8\. If students with disabilities come to talk to you about taking your class,
do not discourage them but be forthright about your expectations. Let the
students use that information to make up their own minds - they usually know
their own strengths and limitations.

9\. Discuss possible accommodations with the student. He/she will know what
accommodations work. If you have concerns or questions about what is asked
for, call the Disability Services Office and ask for verification of the
appropriateness of the accommodation.

* * *

**ACKNOWLEDGMENT**

The following section on learning disabilities is reprinted with permission
and is taken from a training program "Accommodations for Students with
Learning Disabilities: A Training Program" by Rhonda H. Rapp and Patricia P.
Candia of St. Philip's College in San Antonio, Texas.

The entire training package is in the Disabilities Services Office and
available for review upon request.

* * *

**TYPES OF LEARNING DISABILITIES**

Below is a list of specific learning disabilities and many of their functional
limitations. Although the lists are extensive, they are by no means the only
functional limitations that students with a specific learning disability will
exhibit. Thus, it should be remembered that no two students with the same
disability will exhibit the same functional limitations.

**DISABILITY:**

> **Abstract Reasoning**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Difficulty/Inability to make inferences;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to generate creative solutions to problems;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to transfer generalizations;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to understand relationships.

>

>  

**DISABILITY:**

> **Arithmetic Deficit **

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Difficulty with mathematical reasoning;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to understand numerical concepts;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to read and comprehend math word problems;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to understand math terminology (vocabulary);

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to align numbers;

>>

>> Number reversals;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to process math facts rapidly;

>>

>> Difficulty with concepts of time and money.

>

>  

**DISABILITY:**

> **Auditory Processing**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Difficulty/Inability to take information in through the sense of hearing
and/or in processing this information;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to discriminate between similar sounds;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to spell; Difficulty/Inability to take notes;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability in listening and remembering instructions;
Trouble/Inability to hear sounds over background noise; Difficulty/Inability
to learn foreign languages;

>>

>> Fatigue when trying to listen to a talk or lecture;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to hear sounds in the correct order;

>>

>> Has problems taking phone messages.



**DISABILITY:**

> **Constructional Dyspraxia**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Difficulty/Inability to sequence letters, numbers, words, sentences,
paragraphs, steps, etc.;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to work math problems in correct order;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to tell a story or joke in the proper sequence;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to construct written papers in correct order; Poor
speller.



**DISABILITY:**

> **Dyscalculia (math)**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Lack of any inherent ability to understand and perform mathematical
functions.

>

>  

**DISABILITY:**

> **Dysgraphia/Visuo-Graphic Disorder (writing)**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Extremely poor handwriting; handwriting frequently appears to be very
immature;

>>

>> Difficulty with the physical act of writing;

>>

>> Will almost always print, since cursive writing requires a great deal more
eye - hand coordination.



**DISABILITY:**

> **Dyslexia (reading)**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > A secondary disability connected to a visual or auditory processing
disorder;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to perform any task in which reading is an essential
component (such as reading textbooks, articles, exams, notes etc.);

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to interpret charts, graphs, and other visual aids;  
>  Slow reading rate;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to read new words;

>>

>> Poor comprehension and retention of reading material.



**DISABILITY:**

> **Language Comprehension**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Difficulty with vocabulary;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to answer factual questions;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to concentrate during lectures;

>>

>> Poor or low reading comprehension;

>>

>> Difficulty with oral language;

>>

>> Low knowledge in content areas;

>>

>> Poor written expression;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to use prior knowledge to perform activities;

>>

>> Understands what he/she hears, not necessarily what was said.

>>

>>  

**DISABILITY:**

> **Long-Term Memory Deficit**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Inconsistent when learning new information/facts (might remember one day
and not the next);

>>

>> Difficulty remembering rote facts.

>>

>>  

**DISABILITY:**

> **Long-Term Retrieval**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Difficulty/Inability to process and recall information through
associations (events, related ideas and concepts and names);

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to recall information on tests;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to pair and retain visual and/or auditory information;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to retrieve words;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to memorize poems, speeches, parts of plays.

>>

>>  

**DISABILITY:**

> **Processing Speed**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Slow and/or uneven automatic processing speed;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to complete assignments within imposed time
constraints;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to take timed tests;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to make comparisons rapidly between and among bits of
information.



**DISABILITY:**

> **Reading Deficit**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Slow or uneven reading rate;

>>

>> Difficulty/inability to read new words;

>>

>> Poor comprehension and retention of reading material.



**DISABILITY:**

> **Reasoning Deficit**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Trouble thinking in an orderly, logical way;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to prioritize and sequence tasks;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to apply a learned skill to a new task.

>>

>>  

**DISABILITY:**

> **Short-Term Memory Deficit**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Difficulty/Inability to remember steps, in sequential order;

>>

>> Difficulty/inability to retain information and/or concepts long enough to
understand;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to remember problems and retain numerical information
(such as - multiplication tables, dates, etc.);

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to follow directions;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to take notes;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to answer oral questions.



**DISABILITY:**

> **Short-Term Retrieval**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Difficulty/Inability to repeat back auditory information immediately after
hearing the information;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to re- create visual information immediately after
presentation of the information;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to remember directions long enough to complete tasks;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to retrieve information read at the beginning of a
reading assignment (even reading assignments as short as a math word problem);

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to retrieve information long enough to take notes on
the subject being presented.



**DISABILITY:**

> **Spatial Organization **

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Problems perceiving the dimensions of space;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to see things in right order;

>>

>> Trouble distinguishing left from right, north from south, up from down,
ahead from behind.



**DISABILITY:**

> **Spelling Dyspraxia**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > A secondary disability connected to a visual or auditory processing
disorder;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to spell words correctly on a consistent basis.

>>

>>  

**DISABILITY:**

> **Visual Processing**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Difficulty/Inability to take in information through the sense of sight;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to process visual information;

>>

>> Trouble/Inability to see a specific image within a competing background,
such as picking a sentence out of a page of text;

>>

>> Trouble/Inability to see the difference between two objects;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to "fill-in" computerized exam forms;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to copy information from the board;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to comprehend maps, charts, graphs;

>>

>> Difficulty with geometry;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to "see" mistakes;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to align numbers on paper;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to work math problems on scrap paper and then to
transfer the numbers accurately to exam sheet;

>>

>> Trouble/Inability to see how far away or near an object might be;

>>

>> Fatigue when trying to read.

>>

>>  

**DISABILITY:**

> **Writing Deficit **

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Difficulty/Inability to get thoughts on paper;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to write sentences, paragraphs, and/or papers;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to take notes in class;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to spell words correctly on a consistent basis;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to sequence sentences and paragraphs.



**This handout includes essential information from Project T.A.P.E. College of
Education, Northern Illinois University.**

* * *

**RELATED DISABILITIES**

Although the following disabilities interfere with the learning process, they
are not in and of themselves learning disabilities. However, they are
disabilities that frequently occur concomitantly with learning disabilities
and they too require accommodations under the law.



**DISABILITY:**

> **Attention Deficit**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Difficulty/Inability to concentrate for long periods of time;

>>

>> Easily distracted;

>>

>> Difficulty/Inability to organize work and/or budget time;

>>

>> Problems staying at a desk or task for long periods of time.



**DISABILITY:**

> **Hyperactivity**

**FUNCTIONAL LIMITATION(S):**

> > Constantly in motion;

>>

>> Inability to attend to anythi

