#  CS 1321 (Principles of Algorithm Design II):  
Syllabus

##  Prerequisites

CS 1320, or consent of instructor.

##  Course description

This course is the second course for computer science majors, following the
guidelines established by the Association for Computing Machinery. This course
also partially satisfies the requirements for _Understanding the World Through
Science_ of the common curriculum. The course content will include defining
data types including singly-linked lists, doubly-linked lists, stacks, queues,
and trees; recursion; use of libraries; pointers; dynamic memory; type-
independent programming; and program implementation strategies.

##  Course goals and objectives

The objectives of this course include, but are not limited to, the following:

  * learning fundamental problem-solving methodology 
  * implementing algorithms using a programming language 
  * dealing with complex systems 
  * development and analysis of algorithms 
  * introduction to the basic topics in data structures 

##  Instructor

**Instructor:**      Dr. Berna Massingill **E-mail:**
bmassing@cs.trinity.edu **Web page:**
http://www.cs.trinity.edu/~bmassing/ **Office:**      Halsell 201L **Office
hours:**      See my Web page. **Office phone:**      (210) 999-8138

##  Textbook

_Data Structures and Other Objects Using C++_ ; Michael Main and Walter
Savitch; Addison-Wesley; 1997.

##  Other references

(This list of references graciously provided by Drs. Oldham and Eggen.)

  * Cormen, Leiserson and Rivest, _Introduction to Algorithms_ , McGraw Hill, 1990. Emphasizes algorithms, not programming. 
  * Cygnus, The ISO/ANSI C++ Draft Standard. If you want to know about some obscure C++ rule and have lots of hours to understand the terminology. 
  * Daniel P. Friedman and Matthias Felleisen,  _The Little LISPer_, MIT Press, 1987, Trade Edition. A good book on recursion. 
  * Daniel P. Friedman and Matthias Felleisen,  _The Little Schemer_, MIT Press, 1995, Fourth Edition. A good book on recursion. 
  * Nicolai M. Josuttis,  _The C++ Standard Library: A Tutorial and Reference_, Addison Wesley, 1999. A good STL reference book. 
  * Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M. Ritchie,  _The C Programming Language_, Prentice Hall, 1989, Second Edition. _The_ reference for C, written by its creators. 
  * Andrew Koenig and Barbara Moo,  _Ruminations on C++_, Addison Wesley, 1997. A great but advanced book on C++ programming. 
  * Stanley B. Lippman and Josee Lajoie,  _C++ Primer_, Addison Wesley, 1998. A lengthy book introducing C++ language features. 
  * Stanley B. Lippman,  _Essential C++_, Addison Wesley, 2000. A very short, not-yet-published book covering C++ essentials. 
  * P.J. Plauger, Alexander A. Stepanov, and Meng Lee, _Standard Template Library: A Definitive Approach to C++ Programming_ , Prentice Hall, 1996. Presumably authoritative, since one of the authors wrote the STL. 
  * Bjarne Stroustrup,  _The C++ Programming Language_, Addison Wesley, 1997. The creator of the C++ programming language introduces its features. 

##  Grades

The grades in this course will be determined by the results of

  * three exams, two in class and one during the scheduled final-exam period, 
  * several homework assignments, and 
  * class participation. 
Averages will be calculated as a simple percentage, i.e., points earned
divided by points possible. Exams will account for approximately 50 percent of
the total points (with the two in-class exams equally weighted and the final
worth twice that much); homeworks will account for about another 40 percent;
class participation will account for the remaining 10 percent (possibly less).
Letter grades will be assigned according to the following scale

  * 90-100: A 
  * 80-89: B 
  * 70-79: C 
  * 60-69: D 
with plus and minus grades assigned in marginal cases.

##  Exams

Exams are comprehensive but will emphasize the most recent material. They are
scheduled as follows. Please plan accordingly.

  * Examination 1: February 16, in class 
  * Examination 2: March 22, in class 
  * Final Examination: 
    * For CS1321-3 (MWF 10:30am): May 9, 2pm 
    * For CS1321-4 (MWF 11:30am): May 5, 6:30pm  

##  Homeworks

Several homework assignments will be required for successful completion of
this class. Each assignment will be due at the _beginning of the period_ on
the day assigned.

Most homeworks will be laboratory problems, which will be coded in a suitable
programming language. You are encouraged to use the department's network of
Unix machines, but unless otherwise specified for individual assignments, you
may use any other system that provides a suitable environment. Detailed
requirements for problem submission will be provided with each assignment.

##  Class participation

Class participation points will be assigned on the basis of both attendance
and contribution to class discussion.

##  Attendance

Regular class attendance is strongly encouraged.

##  Class Web page

Much course-related information (this syllabus, homework assignments and
sample solutions, example programs, and so forth) will be made available via
the World Wide Web. You can find the home page for the course at
http://www.cs.trinity.edu/~bmassing/CS1320_2000spring/info.html. This page is
not only a starting point for Web-accessible course material but will also be
used for course-related announcements, so you should plan to check it
frequently.

##  Late and missed work

Exams can be made up only in cases of documented conflict with a university-
sponsored activity or documented medical emergency. The former requires prior
notice.

Homework will normally be accepted up to five days late, at a penalty of 10
percent off per day. More stringent deadlines may be imposed for individual
assignments.

##  Collaboration and academic integrity

Unless otherwise specified, all work submitted for a grade (exams, quizzes,
and homeworks) must represent the student's own individual effort. Discussion
of homework assignments among students is encouraged, but not to the point
where the actual program code is being written collectively. Programs that are
identical beyond coincidence are in violation of the Academic Integrity policy
of the university and will result in disciplinary action, including, but not
limited to, a failing grade on that assignment for all parties involved. You
are responsible for the security of your work, both electronic and hard copy.

