# Human Rights as Moral History



Draft Syllabus

Samuel Moyn



This European history course provides a basic undergraduate introduction to
the post-1945 regime of humanitarian norms and law. But, more fundamentally,
it aims to take a step back and to place that system of belief in historical,
ideological, and moral context. The emphasis is on analysis rather than on
advocacy. The course is therefore dedicated to four main topics: 1) long-term
origins; 2) short-term origins; 3) evolution through the present; and 4) moral
defenses and ideological criticisms. The first three topics structure the
course and the fourth arises throughout. Thematically, the course is meant to
consider rival candidates for the historical roots of human rights, with
special focus on the religious background; competing proposals to secure a
philosophical justification for the emerging body of norms; and the moral
and/or ideological purposes that the movement may serve. Where did it come
from? Where is it going?



**Course Requirements** :

Attendance and Participation (10%)

Two 5-6 pp. papers (25% each)

Final Examination (40%)

                  

Papers handed in after the due date will be graded down by one letter grade
per day.





# Assigned Texts



The essential and mandatory course text is



Henry J. Steiner and Philip Alston, _International Human Rights in Context_ ,
2nd ed. (2000).



This is supplemented by many other readings. The following books are available
for purchase.



David Brion Davis, _The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture_ (1966)

Jurgen Habermas, _The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere_ (1962)

Mark Mazower, _Dark Continent: Europe 's Twentieth Century_ (1998)



The other texts (noted with an asterisk below) are available in the course
sourcebook.

All readings are also on reserve.





**Schedule of Lectures and Readings** :



Introduction



1                Premises of the Course



*W.E.H. Lecky, _A History of European Morals_ , excerpts

*Paul W. Kahn, _The Cultural Study of Law_ , excerpts





## PART I:

## PREHISTORY OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS MOVEMENT



The Origins of Universalism and the Notion of Humanity



2                Judeo-Christianity and the Value of the Human Person

3                The Enlightenment and Cosmopolitanism



*Ernst Troeltsch, "The Ideas of Natural Law and Humanity in World Politics"

Jurgen Habermas, _The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere_ ,
selections



The Immorality of Cruelty and the Protection of Bodies



4                How Cruelty Became Wrong and the Body Became Sacrosanct



*Judith Shklar, _Ordinary Vices,_ chap. 1, "Putting cruelty first" __

*Thomas Laqueur, "Bodies, Details, and the Humanitarian Narrative"

*Michel Foucault, _Discipline and Punish_ , sections



                                                                                                                                     The Origins of the Concept of Rights



5                Medieval and Early Modern Political Theories



*Richard Tuck, "The 'Modern' Theory of Natural Law" __



                                                                                                                                     Rights in Modern Liberalism

                                                                                                                                    

6                Democratic Revolutions and the Rights of Man

7                The Problematic Distinction between Political and Social
Rights



*U.S. Constitution, "Bill of Rights" __

*"Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen"

*Olympe de Gouges, "Declaration of the Rights of Woman and Citizen"

*Constant, "Ancient and Modern Liberty"



Humanitarianism in the Nineteenth Century: Ideology and the Case of
Antislavery



8                Abolitionism: Religious Origins and Political Effects

9                The Underside of the Humanitarian Defense of Rights



David Brion Davis, _The Problem of Slavery_ , excerpts

*Karl Marx, "On the Jewish Question"

*Thomas Haskell, "Capitalism and the Origins of Humanitarian Sentiment" __



The Later Nineteenth Century



10              The Law of War as Catalyst

11              The Hague Regulations and the International Committee of the
Red Cross



*The Hague Regulations for the Conduct of War

*Caroline Moorehead, _Dunant 's Dream_, excerpts

*Kenneth Anderson, "First in the Field"





## PART II:

## INTERWAR, WARTIME, AND POSTWAR

## ORIGINS OF HUMAN RIGHTS





The Interwar Collapse of Liberalism



12              The Contest of Ideologies and the Interwar Minorities Regime

_ _

Mark Mazower, _Dark Continent_ , begin



Wartime



13              The Holocaust

14              The Wartime Revival of Rights Talk

                  

Mark Mazower, _Dark Continent_ , finish

*Jacques Maritain, _The Rights of Man and Natural Law_ , sections

*Jacques Maritain, ed., _Human Rights: An Int 'l Symposium_, sections, esp. B. Croce essay



Postwar Justice



15                     The Origins of the Concept of Crimes against Humanity
and the Nuremberg Trials



*Arieh Kochavi, _Prelude to Nuremberg_ , excerpts

*Robert H. Jackson, "Opening Address for the United States"

FILM: _Judgment at Nuremberg_



Founding Documents



16              Origins of the Universal Declaration

17              Raphael Lemkin and the Genocide Convention



# *"Universal Declaration of Human Rights" __

*"Convention for the Prevention of Genocide"

*Michael Ignatieff, "Lemkin's Word"

*Geneva Conventions

*Hannah Arendt, "The Perplexities of the Rights of Man"





## PART III:

## THE  HUMAN RIGHTS REGIME





Human Rights in the United Nations



17              The Covenants and the U.N. Bureaucracy

18              The Cold War and Human Rights



Henry J. Steiner, _International Human Rights_ , relevant sections



The Rise of NGOs



19              Amnesty International

20              Others



Steiner, relevant sections

*Margaret Keck and Kathryn J. Sikkink, _Activists beyond Borders_ , sections



The Erosion of Sovereignty?



21              The Implications of Human Rights for Sovereignty and Realism

22              Humanitarian Intervention



Steiner, relevant sections

*Additional Protocols to Geneva Conventions



International Justice



23             The History of International Jurisdiction

24              ICTY, ICTR, ICC: The Emergence of International Tribunals



Steiner, relevant sections

*Stephen J. Krasner, "A World Court that Could Backfire"



Present and Future



25              Rights and the Ideological Politics of Neo-Liberalism



Steiner, relevant sections

*Michael Ignatieff, "Human Rights: The Midlife Crisis?"

