**UNDERGRADUATE SEMINAR ON IMMIGRATION AND POLITICS IN**

**WESTERN EUROPE**

  
Fall, 2001  

V42.0300  
V53.0595

Martin A. Schain  
Professor of Politics  
Office: 58 W. 10th St. (CES)  
Office Hrs: Wed 1:00-2:30  
998-2609 998 3838 (CES)/998 8531(Politics)  
e-mail: ms5@nyu.edu

Ann Snoeyenbos  
Librarian for West European and Social Studies  
Bobst, Rm. 610  
e-mail: ann.snoeyenbos@nyu.edu  
  

The purpose of this course is to train undergraduates who are interested in
European studies in approaches to research, and in the sources and uses of
research materials on Europe. The theme "Immigration and Immigrants in Western
Europe" will provide the framework around which the readings and discussion
will center. Focusing on a common theme will help reveal the range of research
questions and strategies pursued by scholars from diverse disciplines in the
social sciences and humanities while also allowing for substantive exploration
of an issue that has become central to social relations and political
competition in contemporary Western Europe. This focus will provide us with
abundant material that is both cross-disciplinary and comparative. Class-time
will be divided between the discussion of assigned readings intended to
introduce interesting methodological and substantive examples of research on a
series of subjects within the literature on immigrants and the introduction of
library resources available to help conduct such research.

In this seminar we will explore immigration and patterns of immigrant
incorporation in Western Europe. Since the early 1960s immigration has
transformed European countries into a multi-racial and multi-ethnic societies.
We will first explore how public policy contributed to this transformation,
how it was structured by different concepts, traditions and laws on
citizenship, and how it was related to transformation of the party system and
the emergence of the extreme right in Western Europe. We will then analyze the
impact of this transformation on attempts by European states first to maintain
control of their frontiers, and then to incorporate immigrants into the
national community. Finally, we will analyze the emergence of "identity
politics" in Western Europe. We will explore the impact of immigration on a
wide range of public policies, as well as society and identity.



**Course Requirements**

Students are expected to cover all assigned readings in advance of class and
be prepared to discuss them during the seminar. For Weeks
II,V,VII,VIII,IX,X,XII two students will be responsible for acting as
discussion-leaders. By the Monday before each of these classes **_each_**
member of the seminar must transmit to each of the discussion-leaders-- via
e-mail/news-group-- their reactions, comments and questions about the reading.
The essay should also relate these comments to the student's own research
interests. Each student should focus on one or two articles and/or book-
chapters, and post their comments and reviews on the "newsgroup" site. Each
essay should be about 500 words (two double-spaced pages). Each essay will be
worth 15 points, and the total number of points will become part of each
student's grade at the end of the semester. The discussion-leaders will then
be responsible for synthesizing, summarizing and presenting these comments
around the following questions:

(a) What is/are the central question(s) addressed by the authors?

(b) What, if any, hypotheses are explored in this research?

(c) What are the main argument(s) developed by the authors?

(d) On the basis of what kinds of research and evidence have the authors
developed their studies? (e) What do you see as the strengths and shortcomings
of this research?

(f) What conclusions would you reach about the subject for this week on the
basis of these studies.

The principal requirement of this course will be a research paper due on
Wednesday, December 19th. A two-page outline of the research paper must be
submitted to the instructors by October 3rd. Papers (20-25 pages in length--
including bibliography and footnotes ) will be evaluated in terms of 1) the
research question(s) posed; 2) the relationship between the research question
and the research process; 3) evidence of the research process as demonstrated
through the literature review, bibliography, and notes (MLA citation style;
and 4) the insights produced by the entire process.

  

The final grade will be based on the final research paper (70%) and on written
comments reported on the "newsgroup" site, as well as on class discussion.
(30%).

  

**Outline of the Semester**

(*AFC is on the second floor of Bobst/ ERC is on the B level computer center
of Bobst.)

  

**I. September 5** Schain and Snoeyenbos

Welcome, Introduction

  

**II. September 12** Schain

Formulating research questions on immigration and the transformation of West
European politics: migration and incorporation-- how the issues have been
formulated.

Readings:

>Leedy and Ormrod, Practical Research, 7th Edition, Chs. 1-3.

>Baily, "Cross-Cultural Comparison and the Writings of Migration History: Some
Thoughts on How to Study Italians in the New World".

>Hansen, Citizenship and Immigration in Post-War Britain, Ch. 1

>Joppke, "Immigration Challenges to the Nation-State," in Joppke, Challenge to
the Nation-State, Chapter 1.

>Schain, review of Joppke, Challenge to the Nation-State.

>Sassen, Guests and Aliens, Introduction

  

**III. September 19** Snoeyenbos ( **Bobst: AFC West*** )

Questions of researchable topics -- how to choose/develop a suitable topic \--
and introduction to research methods

>Introduction to library research: BobCat, Library of Congress Subject
Headings (LCSH), introduction to print periodical indexes, primary vs
secondary sources

>Introduction to electronic library research: RLIN bibliographic file and
citation databases, CD-ROM searching

  
  

**IV. September 26** Snoeyenbos ( **Bobst: AFC Seminar Room** )

Introduction to electronic library research: CD-ROM, RLIN, DIALOG training

  
  

**V. October 3** Schain ( ** _Outline due_** )

Analyzing the problem and refining the question: Why are there changing
patterns of migration?

Readings:

>Leedy and Ormrod, Ch. 4.

>Tilly, "Migration in Modern European History"

>Moch, Moving Europeans, ch. 1; chs. 4-5 (excerpts)

>Noiriel, "Difficulties in French Historical Research on Immigration" in
Horowitz and Noiriel, Immigrants in Two Democracies

>Miles and Kay, "The Politics of Immigration to Britain: East-West Migrations
in the Twentieth Century," in Baldwin-Edwards and Schain, The Politics of
Immigration in Western Europe

>Jeannette Money, Fences and Neighbors, Chs. 1 and 2.

>Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of
Nationalism, pp. 9-21

>Zolberg, "Contemporary Transnational Migrations in Historical Perspective,"
in Mary Kritz, editor, US Immigration and Refugee Policy **.**

  
  

**VI. October 10** Snoeyenbos ( **Bobst: ERC Room*** )

Scholarly research on the Internet.

  
  

**VII. October 17** Schain ( ** _Preliminary bibliography due, not less than
20 items_** )

The Politics of Migration and research design: Interpreting the role of the
state, patterns of immigrant integration and the political impact of
immigration

Readings:

>Leedy and Ormrod, Ch. 5 and 6.

>Fuchs, American Kaleidoscope, Introduction and Chs. 1-3.

>Hargreaves, Chapter 5.

>King, Making Americans: Immigration, Race and the Origins of the Diverse
Democracy, Ch. 2

>Miller, "The Political Impact of Foreign Labor: A Re-evaluation of the
Western European Experience"

>Body-Gendrot and Schain, "National and Local Politics and the Development of
Immigration Policy in the United States and France," In Horowitz and Noiriel.

>Zolberg, "Matters of State: Theorizing Immigration Policy"

  
  

**VIII. October 24** Snoeyenbos ( **Bobst: ERC Room** )

A. Documents: US, UN, IGO/NGO, EU--visit to NYU Law Library

B. Research within the disciplines: History and Politics--all formats, History
vs Politics



**IX. October 31** Schain

Analyzing the impact of immigration-- quantitative methodologies: Racism,
anti-racism and Racialization of the Immigration Issue

Readings:

>Leedy and Ormrod, Chs. 9-11

>Money, Fences and Neighbors..., Chs. 4 and 5

>Nelkin and Michaels, "Biological Categories and Border Controls: The Revival
of Eugenics in Anti-Immigration Rhetoric"

>King, Making Americans, Ch. 3

>Kincheloe, Steinberg and Gresson III, Measured Lies: The Bell Curve Examined,
Chs. 1, 16 and17

>Lamont, "The Rhetorics of Racism and Anti-Racism in France and the United
States"

  

**X. November 7** Schain

Immigration and multiculturalism: a Focus on qualitative methodologies

Readings:

>Leedy and Ormrod, Chs. 7 and 8.

>Adrian Favell, "How can we be European? Multicultural questions in
transatlantic perspective"

>Huntington, "The Erosion of American National Interests," Foreign Affairs,
October, 1997

>Schain, "The Politics of Multiculturalism in France and the United States"

>Sassen, "The de facto Transnationalizing of Immigration Policy," in Joppke,
Challenge to the Nation-State, Ch. 2

>Hollifield, Immigrants, Markets, and States, Ch. 2.

  
  

**XI. November 14** Schain and Snoeyenbos ( **Bobst: AFC Seminar Room** )



A. Immigration and the rise of the Extreme Right in Western Europe: What can
we conclude from scholarly work.

Reading:

> Leedy and Ormrod, Ch. 12.

>Schain, Zolberg and Hossay, "The Radical Right in Western Europe: A Framework
Essay"

>Kitschelt, The Radical Right in Western Europe, Ch. 1.

>Schain, "The Immigration Debate and the National Front," in Keeler and
Schain, Chirac's Challenge

>Schain, Review of Kitschelt The Radical Right in Western Europe in
Comparative Political Studies, June, 1997

>Betz, Radical Right-Wing Populism in Western Europe, Chs. 1,3,6.

>Minkenberg, The New Right in Comparative Perspecive: the USA and Germany,
Chs. II and IV.

>Judt, "The Social Question Redivivus," Foreign Affairs, September-October,
1997

  

B. Doing research on the extreme right --history and politics

  
  

**XII. November 21** Special Luncheon Meeting Schain and Snoeyenbos



A. Immigration and new understandings of Citizenship

Readings:

>Soysal, Limits of Citizenship, Chs 8 and 9.

>Brubaker, Citizenship and Nationhood in France and Germany, Introduction and
Conclusion.

>Feldman, "Reconfiguring Citizenship in Western Europe" in Joppke, Challenge
to the Nation-State, Ch. 7.

>Schuck, "The Re-Evaluation of American Citizenship,"in Joppke, Challenge to
the Nation-State, Ch. 6.

>Rey Koslowski, Migrants and Citizens: Demographic Change in the European
State System, Ch. 6

>Examination questions from the Naturalization Study Guide (distributed in
class)

  

B. Anthropology and Religion resources--all formats

  

**XIII. November 28** Schain and Snoeyenbos

Presentations: Students will present first drafts of their research paper to
the group for discussion and commentary. Copies of the paper should be made
available to everyone by Monday morning.

**XIV. December 5** Schain and Snoeyenbos

Presentations: Students will present first drafts of their research paper to
the group for discussion and commentary. Copies of the paper should be made
available to everyone by Monday morning.

  
  

**XV. December 12** Schain and Snoeyenbos

Presentations: Students will present first drafts of their research paper to
the group for discussion and commentary. Copies of the paper should be made
available to everyone by Monday morning.

  
  

**December 19** (Wednesday) **Papers are due!!!**

