![TAMU-CC](tamuhome.gif)![Syllabus](syl5302.gif)

![](redrule.gif)

## Playing the Policy Game  
by Matthew A. Cahn

## An Article Review by Sonia Noyola & Melanie Montez

##### Last Update: December 14, 1998

From the onset of the article Cahn makes reference to "the game analogy" and
destroys the myth surrounding its assumed triviality. In today's policy game a
"player" must have a unique blend of charisma and knowledge, if she/he wishes
to capitalize on their chance of winning. The author points to several key
facets that must be in order to ensure success: 1.) bureaucratic knowledge,
2.) networking, 3.) constituency backing, 4.) money for political
contributions, 5.) understanding the rules and culture of the policy
environment, and 6.)resources for media campaigns. Cahn indicates in his
introduction that his article will explore " the context and environment of
the policy game ". (Cahn, 333)

**The Constitutional Basis of Public Policy**

Cahn believes the foundation of policy lies in its constitutional base. It is
further noted that policy observers must keep a watchful eye on constitutional
law as a whole.

Charles Beard argues that the Constitution was created to favor only the
economic elite "at the expense of the debtor classes". (Cahn. 334) Convention
delegates shared common economic interests separate from the agrarian
interests.

Forrest Mc Donald and Robert Brown argue that Beard's economic interpretation
is "factually flawed". Mc Donald and Brown point out that the middle class and
the majority of society gained from the ratification of the Constitution.
Today's contemporary scholars analyze how public law has been structured and
has come to accommodate specific sectors.

Even though the delegates of the convention were economically diverse, they
had key interests in mind such as: 1. in a strong central government that
could protect commerce across state boundaries and control the "passions" of
the masses; 2. in the creation of a central currency, 3. in creating
protection to creditors for monies loaned at interest.

The Federalist Papers was one form of major propaganda discussed by Brown and
McDonald. The papers focused on the structural changes the constitution would
bring and how the framers were the most likely to benefit from the adoption of
the constitution. Richard Hofstadter, author of The American Political
Traditions, states that the framers were less concerned in providing democracy
for the people and more for concerned in associating property to liberty.

Cahn states that the citizen participation was limited and "an insulated
relationship between elected officials and the populace" existed in the
republican government.

Even though the policy process has evolved since the 18th century, the
constitution's "framework has had serious policy consequences for those
classes who were excluded"(Cahn, 335). Minority groups such as , African
Americans, people of color, women, the poor, gays and lesbians have struggled
to gain equality in a society that caters to the majority and the wealthy.

**Political Culture and Public Policy**

Cahn remarks that the political culture in the United States is one of
"property-oriented legacy". What this proposes is that those who in the past
held positions of power not only maintained those positions but also continued
the cycle of passing it on to predecessors. The overall statement made by
these arguments is that certain elites (those with cold hard cash/credit) have
great control over the discourse of public policy. Public policy however, has
some inherent problems of its own beyond that of the economic elite.

The United States was founded on goals that often are in opposition. Since
American political culture has a basis in natural and "inalienable" rights of
individuals, public policy many times is at odds with Lockean individualism.
This country wishes to promote communal good but has too strong a base in
individual property rights that often times contradict communal good.

Samuel Bowles and Herbert Gintis give credence to the belief that because
American political culture sees people as mere labor commodities, a true sense
of democratic values is limited if at all probable. "The economy produces
people." (Cahn, 335) This phrase describes the process of how American
political culture is produced by the economic system. A prime example of this
would be the recent scandal involving President Clinton and Monica Lewinsky.
Many pundits believe that had our economy not been as hearty the President
Clinton's approval rating would not have stayed at such a high level.

Michael Rogin believes that a primary function of the American political
culture is exclusion. Rogin argues that American political culture feeds off
of the social contract theory. This theory is based on the notion of a society
that bonds through a single set of cultural and political values. Those groups
that do not follow the social and cultural norm are singled out and are the
recipients of discrimination. Some examples of include those cited in the
article: the enslavement of African-Americans, the dislocation of the Native
Americans, the incarceration of Japanese Americans and the exclusion of gay
and lesbian Americans.

**Maximizing Policy Strategies**

Cahn states that the one must control her/his political destiny by
manipulating human circumstances. The use of and understanding of
sociology/psychology can certainly help a political figure maximize political
strategies. The Prince, by Machiavelli, and the Presidential Power, by
Neustadt illustrates how a president must be deceitful and gain favorable
public opinion at the same time to maintain and expand power.

A president's public perception and reputation, which includes image and
charisma, can influence the power game and the policy process. The president
must react quickly to both a positive or negative type of political climate to
produce wanted policy outcomes.

**The Problem of Policy Resources**

Since Robert Dahl has always recognized the influence of economic elites on
policy processes, his argument in "A Preface to Economic Democracy",Dahl
argued that economic elites do not compete rather they unite in specific
areas. This directly contradicted his earlier work in which he stated that
elites competed with one another thus creating a balance, which allowed for
the representation of varying interests. This redefinition by Dahl allows for
one to conclude that the power and influence of economic elites, primarily
corporate elites, dictate the resulting democratic processes. In laymen's
terms, those without a voice in the policy debate are more than likely those
without strong economic resources and clout.

**Analysis**

The contents of this article give an extensive overview into the policy game
and how it is played. In order to fully understand the many facets that make
up the policy game an individual should explore other sources of information.
This article, while useful in its references, is but a mere introduction to
the world of "playing the policy game". A more in depth analysis of America's
history would be the link that allows for a more pristine vision of how policy
is truly decided and later implemented.

**Works Cited**

Cahn, Matthew A.1995. "The Policy Game." In _Public Policy: The Essential
Readings_. Theodoulou, Stella Z. and Matthew A. Cahn.1995. Prentice Hall:
Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

