### ![Asian Studies Development Program](/Images/lions.jpeg)

* * *

[About] [Index] [Search] [Other Links] [Comments/Submissions]

# Modern China

Syllabus

History 346



#### Prof. Dian Murray

Office: 457 Decio

Phone: 239-7693; 232-2642  

Course Description: The course will provide a general survey of Chinese
history from 1644 (the establishment of the Ch'ing dynasty) to the present. It
will highlight China's evolution from a period of strength and unity during
the last dynasty to a period of disunity and weakness during the revolutionary
period 1911-1949, back to a period of strength under the Communist government
from 1949 to the present. Special attention will be given to the problems of
economic modernization, the role that foreigners have played in this process,
and the relationship of both to cultural development.  

Requirements: Two midterms, a final, and a short essay. For the essay
assignment, please turn to last page of syllabus.  

For your own security, please make photocopies of all essays handed in. That
way if loss occurs for whatever reason, you will not have to endure the agony
of a rewrite. Also, keep all essays and exams until the end of the course.  

Be aware that I despise makeup exams and late papers. Makeup exams will not be
given without your having given me a PRIOR notification of your reason for
missing the examination and will not be given until appropriate corroborative
notification from infirmy, funeral home etc. has been received. I basically do
not accept late papers, but if I do, the grades on them will drop by the hours
that they are late. Papers should be turned in at the beginning of the class
session for which they are due and should not be slipped under my door or into
a mailbox on campus. (There is too much danger of loss that way). No fancy
folders, covers, etc. -Just a typed title page which is stapled to the body
will suffice. Also, be aware that there are NO options for extra credit, so
don't even ask about it. Instead, think, read and plan ahead in handling the
assigned material.  

To do well in the course, it is necessary first of all that you attend class
and it is therefore assumed that you will attend class regularly, attentively,
and punctually. (More than three unexcused absences constitute forfeiture of
your participation grade). It is also assumed that you will come to class
prepared to discuss the material assigned. Study suggestions for success:

1\. It is assumed that by the end of the course you will be as familiar with
K'ang-hsi and Yuan Shih-k'ai as with Napoleon or George Washington. The only
way this will happen is if you spend some active study time each day working
on Chinese names. Practice writing them over and over or make yourself flash
cards and review frequently. Study them and learn them as you go because the
night before the exam they will all begin looking the same. If asked to do so
on an exam, you should be able to produce these names and spell them correctly
from the top of your head.

2\. 1 1/2 hours of study each and every day, seven days a week, is far
preferable to 40 or 50 hours the week before the exam. Text book materials
should probably be read two or three times: Once before they are to be
discussed in class, once in review for the mid-term (an in conjunction with
the study sheets) and once in preparation for the final

3\. Your final exam will be comprehensive so start preparing for it from the
first day of class. Spend a portion at least 20 minutes or 1/2 hour of each of
your DAILY study sessions in review. Keep abreast of what you have learned and
what you are in the process of learning with each passing day and finally,
think about what you read. Be an active studier who engages the material as
you go.  

All problems with regard to the scheduling of the final exam must be resolved
by Easter. I need a written petition of your problem and how you want it to be
solved.  

Grades: Grades will be based 30% on the essay, 40% on the midterms, and 30% on
the final.  

Texts: Those of you who took the pre-modern segment of the course may continue
to use the Fairbank, Resichauer, Craig, _East Asia: Tradition and
Transformation_ as your text. Those of you new to the course at this point,
please use Wakeman, _Fall of Imperial China_ as your first text and Sheridan's
_China In Disintegration_ as your second. You will all probably want to
purchase, Moise, _Modern China_. All of the materials, except those
specifically indicated to be in the Kinko's packet, have been place on two-
hour reserve in the library so do not feel compelled to buy every book listed
below. The following are available in the bookstore as well as library
reserve:

Frederick Wakeman, Jr. _The Fall of Imperial China_

James Sheridan, _China in Disintegration_

Edwin Moise, _Modern China_

Jonathan Spence, _Emperor of China_

Jonathan Spence, _The Death of Woman Wang_

Gao Yuan, _Born Red_ , (Stanford 0-8047-1369-3)  

Calendar:  

January 19: Introduction  

**January 24 & 26: The Ch'ing Dynasty from the Top  
**

Reading Assignment:

1\. Fairbank, Reischauer, Craig, _East Asian Tradition_ _Transformation_
(hereafter: FRC), pp. 211-257

2\. Wakeman, _Fall of Imperial China_ , pp. 1-109

3\. Jonathan Spence, _Emperor of China_ , pp. 25-90, 115-140.  

Recommended:

Frederic Wakeman, Jr., _The Great Enterprise, The Manchu Reconstruction of
Imperial Order in 17th -Century China  
_

Question:

1\. Was K'ang-hsi an absolute despot? Why or Why not?

2\. What problems did K'ang-hsi face in governing China?  

**Jan. 31 and Feb. 2: Chinese Society from the Bottom  
**

Reading Assignment:

1\. FRC, pp. 211-257 (complete)

2\. Wakeman, _Fall_ , pp. 1-109 (complete)

3\. Jonathan Spence, _The Death of Woman Wang._ pp. 1-58, 99-139.

4\. "The Yellow Millet Dream", from _China Yesterday and Today_ , p. 46-47
(Kinkos packet)  

Question:

1\. How did life at the bottom of Chinese Society contrast with that of the
emperor at the top? What were the dangers, both environmental and man-made? Of
what did the spiritual or ideological realm of these individuals consist? How
did they interact with the gentry?  

**Feb. 7, 9, 14: Crises from Without and Within  
**

Reading Assignment:

1\. FRC, pp. 435-483

2\. Wakeman, _Fall_ , pp. 131-162

3\. Lin Tse-hsu's letter to Queen Victoria - (Kinkos packet)

4\. The Treaty of Nanking - (Kinkos packet)

5\. Elizabeth Perry, _Rebels and Revolutionaries_ , pp. 1-9, 48-95 - (Kinkos)

6\. Dian Murray, "One Woman's Rise to Power: Cheng I's Wife and the Pirates."
in Richard W. Guisso, ed., _Women in China_ pp. 147-162. -kinkos

7\. Dian Murray, _Pirates of the South China Coast. 1790-1810._ pp. 1-5,
151-158 - Kinkos

7\. "From the Water Margin" in CHINA Yesterday and Today, pp. 100-102 -(Kinkos
packet)

8\. "Swearing of brotherhood" from Romance of Three Kingdoms (Kinkos packet)  

Recommended: Rudolf Wagner, _Reenacting the Heavenly Vision:_ The Role of
Religion in the Taiping Rebellion. (Berkeley: China Research Monograph 25,
1982).

Robert Jenks. "The Miao Rebellion 1854-72: Insurgency and the Social Disorder
in Kweichow during the Taiping Era." Ph. D Diss. Harvard U.  

Questions:

1\. Analyze Lin's letter to Queen Victoria. What is he asking? On what grounds
is he appealing to her?

2\. According to Perry, what is an ecological approach to rebellion and of
what use is it?

3\. What accounts for the prevalence of social disturbances during this
period?

4\. What enabled pirates to survive along the Coast of China for nearly a
decade?

5\. From where did 19th century rebels draw much of their inspiration?

6\. Are troublemakers always rebels?  

**Feb. 16, 21: Reform and Revolution  
**

Reading Assignment:

1\. FRC, pp. 558-598, 619-647, 726-57

2\. Wakeman, _Fall_ , pp. 163-256

3\. Mary Rankin, "The Emergence of Women at the End of the Ch'ing: The Case of
Ch'iu Chin, pp. 39-66, 283-288 in _Women_ _in Chinese Society_ by Margery Wolf
and Roxanne Witke- Kinkos

4\. "The Movement against Footbinding," pp. 245-248 in _Chinese Civilization
and Society,_ ed. Patricia Ebrey- Kinkos

5\. "Kang Yu-wei's Conversation with the Emperor, June 1898," in Teng and
Fairbank, _China's Response to the West,_ pp. 177-179 (Kinkos)

6\. "The Manifesto of the Tungmenghui, "Ibid., pp. 227-228, (Kinkos)  

Joseph Esherick, _The Origins of the Boxer Uprising  
_

Question:

1\. What role did women play in the reforms of the late 1800's and early
1900's?

2\. How was the position of women affected by these reforms?

3\. How did K'ang Yu-wei argue his case before the emperor; what was the
emperor's response; how was this conversation influenced by Confucianism?

4\. What were the arguments for the abolition of foot binding?  

**Feb. 23: First Midterm Examination  
**

**Feb. 28: Warlords  
**

Reading Assignment:

1\. James Sheridan, _China in Disintegration,_ pp. 3-106. Skim the section
that describes the various warlords. Don't memorize every name, just get a
feeling for what kind of people they were.

2\. FCR, pp. 757-762

3\. "The Dog Meat General, " in Ebrey, pp. 277-281 - (Kinkos)  

Question:

1\. Of what significance was the warlord era?

2\. What were the common goals of warlords, how did they differ from one
another?  

**March 2: May Fourth Movement  
**

Reading Assignment:

1\. FRC, pp. 763-774

2\. Sheridan, pp. 107-139

3\. _Selected Stories of Lu Hsun:_ "A Madman's Diary," and "The True Story of
Ah Q", pp. 7-18, 65-112 - Kinkos  

Recommended:

Vera Schwarcz, _The Chinese Enlightenment, Intellectuals and the Legacy of the
May Fourth Movement  
_

Question:

1\. What social criticisms did Lu Hsun make in his writing?

2\. In what ways did the May 4th Movement advance China on the road to
revolution; in what way did it not advance the cause of revolution within
China?  

SPRING BREAK MARCH 7 AND 9  

**March 14, 16, 21, 23: Nationalists, Communists, Japanese, and War  
**

Reading Assignment:

1\. FCR, 797-807

2\. Sheridan, pp. 141-294 (Read quickly for main ideas)

3\. "Spring Silkworms," by Mao Dun, in Ebrey, pp. 309-320 (Kinkos)

4\. "The Maoist Phase of the Revolution and the Yenan Legacy," pp. 31-51 from
_Mao's China_ , by Maurice Meisner. (Kinkos)

4\. Edgar Snow, _Red Star Over China_ , pp. 222-238, 252-256, 264-270,
282-288, Optional: "Genesis of a Communist" [This is the most official
biography of Mao Tse-tung every produced], pp. 112-154 (Kinkos)  

March 16 Movie: Enemies Within and Without  

Question:

1\. What was partisan war? Why were the Communists so skilled at it and the
Nationalists so inept?

2\. What measures did the Communists take to overcome the kind of peasant
ignorance manifested in "Spring Silkworms?"

3\. What was the Yenan way and the Yenan legacy? How will it subsequently by
used as a kind of modernization theory for the industrialization of the PRC?  

**March 28: Land Reform and the Establishment of the PRC  
**

Reading Assignment:

1\. Edwin Moise, _Modern China_ , pp. 124-150

2\. William Hinton, _Fanshen_ , pp. 103-117, 124-38, 157-78. (Kinkos)

3\. Perry, _Rebels and Revolutionaries_ , pp. 202-262. (Kinkos)

5\. "The Marriage Law of the PRC" in CHINA Yesterday and Today, pp. 309-311
(Kinkos)  

Questions:

1\. According to Perry, do rebels make good revolutionaries?

2\. By what processes was land reform carried out?

3\. How did the Communists gain control of China?

4\. What are the provisions of the marriage law and of what significance is
it?

5\. What is the "mass line"?  

**March 30 and Ap. 4: The PRC prior to the Cultural Revolution  
**

Reading Assignment:

1\. Moise, _Modern China_ , pp. 151-168

2\. Wang Meng, "A New Young Man at the Organization Dept.", in Patricia Ebrey,
_Chinese Civilization and Society_ , pp. 348- 368. (Kinkos)

3\. Mao Tse-tung, "The Yenan Forum on Art and Literature," _Selected Readings
from the Works of Mao Tsetung_ , pp. 250-286 (Kinkos)  

Question:

1\. What criticism of Life under the PRC did Wang Meng raise in the story?

2\. How did Wang Meng's story conform or not conform to the guidelines set
down in the Yenan Forum?  

**April 6 & 11: The Cultural Revolution  
**

Reading Assignment:

1\. Moise, _Modern China,_ pp. 169-211

2\. Gao Yuan, _Born Red  
_

Recommended: Richard Madsen, _Morality and Power in a Chinese_ _village_
(stresses moral reasons for the Cultural Revolution) Anne Thurston, _Enemies
of the People  
_

Question:

1\. What did the Cultural Revolution mean to Gao Yuan?  

**April 13 Second Examination  
**

**April 18, 20, 25, 27: Recovery and Reform: China in the Age of** **Deng
Xiaoping  
**

Recovery and succession

The Four Modernization

China's International Relations

Film: Small Happiness  

Reading Assignment"

1\. Moise, _Modern China,_ pp. 212-243

2\. A. Doak Barnett, "10 Years After Mao,", from _Foreign_ _Affairs, 1986, pp.
37-65,_ in Kinkos packet

3\. Zhang Xinxin and Sang Ye, _Chinese Lives,_ pp. 8-13, 51- 54, 62-64,
135-139 (Kinkos)

4\. Find at least one article about China in the popular press during the last
year or two. Read it and come to class prepared to describe one aspect or
facet of change in China since the cultural revolution.  

Recommended:

Tang Tsou, _The Cultural Revolution and Post-Mao Reforms_ , _A_ _Historical
Perspective_

Immanuel Hsu, _China Without Mao_

Andrew Nathan, _Chinese Democracy_

Orville Schell, _Discos and Democracy_ , _China in the Throes of_ _Reform_

Paul Theroux, _Riding the Iron Rooster_

Shapiro/ Heng, _Cold Winds, Warm Winds_

**May 2: Taiwan since 1949**

Reading Assignment:

1\. Immanuel Hsu, _The Rise of Modern China_ , 3rd ed., pp. 759-- 771, 888-900
(Kinkos)

2\. "Reclaiming," by Ian Buruma, _New York Times,_ Sept. 18, 1988

Recommended:

Thomas B. Gold, _State and Society in the Taiwan Miracle_ (Sharpe, 1986)

Ralph Clough, _Island China_

Tsai, George. "The Taiwan Straits Crises: Analysis of the China,

Taiwan, U.S. Relationship, 1949-1983." Ph.D. diss. Northern

Arizona University. 1985  

**May 4 - Review  
**

Essay Assignment  

Instead of one date on which essays from each member of the class will be due,
I will accept a few essays each week and ask you to sign up for the time that
best suits your schedule. In nearly every unit of the course, some primary
source material (or the closest material to it that I can find) has been
assigned. These items will form the basis of your essay or if appropriate,
your review. Essays will be due on the class session following the class
completion of the respective unit so due dates might vary a day or two form
those appearing below depending upon our progress. Below find the various
units and the anticipated due dates for the papers written for each. Early in
the course, I will pass out a sign-up sheet and ask that you sign up for one
essay in one of the slots thereon. Then I will make the final list available
to all.  

1\. The Ch'ing dynasty from the top - Tues., Jan 31

2\. Chinese Society from the bottom - Tues., Feb. 7

3\. Crises from Without and Within - Thurs., Feb. 16

4\. Reform and Revolution, - Tues. Feb. 28

(Owing to exam on Feb. 23)

5\. Warlords - Thurs. March 2

6\. May 4th - Tues. March 14 (owing to break)

7\. Nationalists, Communists, Japanese, - Tues. March 28

8\. Land Reform - Thurs. March 30

9\. PRC prior to Cultural Revolution - Thurs. Ap. 6

10\. Cultural Revolution - Tues. Ap. 18 (owing to second exam)  

You are not required to go beyond the regular reading assigned for the course
in the preparation of this essay. This is Not designed to be a term paper but
rather it is to provide a chance for you to reflect upon and come to grips
with some aspect of Chinese civilization covered in this course.  

The bottom line, however, is that your essays must by ANALYTICAL. They must
have point of view or a line of argument that you are going to develop. You
must therefore not only figure out what you are going to discuss, but also
what is significant about it. You must figure out what it is you want to say
about your topic. Or, in other words, your essay must have both a theme and a
thesis.  

Because there is no such thing as a clear thought unclearly expressed, these
essays will be graded as a total product: style, grammar, organization, and
content will all be taken into account for the final grade.  

Some tips for successful essay writing:

1\. The first time any personal name is mentioned, give the full name and a
brief phrase of identification. For all but the most widely known Chinese such
as Mao Tse-tung or Chiang k'ai-shek, full name citations should be used on all
occasions.  

2\. Write your essays in past tense, active voice.  

3\. When recounting incidents of either fact or fiction, tell enough so that
the reader can follow what is going on without having read the book or piece
himself. Yet, don't simply recount plots in and of themselves.  

4\. Quotations break up the flow of a narrative, so keep[ quoted material to a
minimum and make quotations as short as possible. Whenever possible,
paraphrase and give proper citation.  

5\. Avoid weak adjectives and adverbs, especially vague modifers that do not
lend specificity to your meaning - words such as quite, very, a great deal,
much more, extremely, really.  

6\. Avoid the expression "due to" which should be "owing to" or "because."  

[About] [Index] [Search] [Other Links] [Comments/Submissions]

* * *

ASDP Curriculum Online Project < ASDP@lama.kcc.Hawaii.Edu>

