### ![Asian Studies Development Program](/Images/lions.jpeg)

* * *

[About] [Index] [Search] [Other Links] [Comments/Submissions]

# China from Differing Perspectives

Syllabus for Freshman Seminar:



Prof: Dian Murray

Office: 457 Decio

Phone: 239-7693  

Purpose: The goal of this course is to explore China through the differing
perspectives of the contemporary observer (in this case, the journalist,
novelist, or resident scholar) and the historian in order to understand how
each has experienced. perceived, and portrayed his experience of China.
Besides discussing what each author has to say about China, our investigation
will also focus upon the strengths and weaknesses of each type of writing and
the kinds of source materials employed by each author. Films will constitute a
part of the discussion as well. The purpose is to create a setting wherein
both literary analysis and critical skills can be sharpened.  
Format: The course will meet on Tuesday and Thursday from 1:15 to 2:30 p.m.
and will be run primarily as a discussion session. Therefore, completion of
the reading; assignments before the session during which they are to be
discussed is crucial to your success in the course. The course in divided into
6 units with the first unit consisting of two parts and two essay
possibilities. Short essays of between 4 and 6 pages will be assigned at the
end of each. You are to write essays on your choice of 4 out of the first 5
suggested possibilities. Everyone is required to complete the essay project
for the fifth unit and everyone is required to submit a final paper at the end
of the sixth unit. In most instances a unit will end with our class discussion
during the Thursday session. Essays for a given unit will be due the following
day and are to be slipped under my office door no later than 5:00 p.m. on
Friday afternoon.  

Periodically, in class quizzes or essays will also be required. There will,
however, be no make-ups allowed on the in class activities, so class
attendance is of vital importance to your overall success in the course.  

Your grade will be based 25 percent upon the final paper, 50% upon the written
essays, and 25% upon class discussion, participation, and in class
assignments. All written work must be handed in on time. Later papers will NOT
be accepted (unless in cases of extreme exigency, and the professor's prior
approval has been secured). So think, read, and plan ahead.  

Essays are to reflect your own synthesis of and response to the course. The
penalty for plagiarism is an "F" in the course. Essays should be double-spaced
and written on one side only of a standard sized sheet of paper. Follow the
format used in one of the style and writing manuals such as _The Little Brown
Handbook_ or Strunk and White's _Elements of Style_ , but instead of binding
your essays into a folder or cover, simply staple them in the  
upper left hand corner. Avoid all purchased folders or covers.  

Accidents can happen and losses do occur. To insure your safety in the course,
photocopy every essay before turning it in to avoid problems should the loss
of an essay occur. Also, save all class materials until the end of the course
and the receipt of your final grade.  

Cooking. This year we will experience the food of China firsthand as we as a
class prepare and eat a Chinese meal. You will be asked to round up the
cooking utensils needed for your particular assigned dish and to share the
cost of the meal. We will start out on the basis of a $5.00 contribution due
during the next class. If, the cost of the meal turns out to be less than that
amount, you will receive a refund.  

Texts: Each of the readings for the course has been placed on library reserve.
Those pieces still in print are available in the campus store and are listed
below. All other materials no longer available in print and not available in
the bookstore must be obtained from the reserve section of the library.  

Pearl Buck. _The Good Earth_

Pa Chin, _The Family_

John Hersey, _A Single Pebble_ (Knopf)

Jonathan Spence, _To Change China_ (Penguin)

Edgar Snow _Red Star Over China_ (Bantam)

Liang Heng, _Son of the Revolution_ (Random)

William Hinton, _Fanshen_ (Random)  
  

Calendar:  

Aug. 26, 28: Introduction  

Aug. 26 Introduction and first reel of film "Misunderstanding China"  

Aug. 28: Second half of movie "Misunderstanding China"

Discussion about how one understands a foreign culture.  

Assignment: Begin reading _The Good Earth_.  

UNIT I: Peasants and the Staff of Life  

Sept. 2 and 4: Peasants as viewed by the foreign author Pearl Buck  

Assignment: By Tuesday, Sept. 2, have read at least the first half of _the
Good Earth_ and more if possible. Come to class on Sept. 2 with a one to two
paragraph description of one of the customs or practices described in the
novel that shocked or surprised you. Describe what the practice was, why it
shocked you, and why this might have been acceptable or natural within a
Chinese context. Be prepared to read your paragraph out loud to the class.  

Sept. 4 - Tour of the Library: Report directly to the Library  

Sept. 9 and 11: Peasant Life as Viewed from the Inside  

Assignment: William Hinton, _Fanshen_ , pp. 103-117, 124- 138, 157-178.  

Sept. 11: Film Small Happiness  

Sept. 12: First Essay due at 5:00 in room 457 Decio  

Unit I: Part 2 The Staff of Life  

Sept. 16 - discussion of the characteristics of Chinese food and explanations
of how each dish is to be prepared.  

Sept. 18 - Meal Preparation  

Sept. 19 - Second Essay due in 457 Decio  

UNIT : The Elites and the Arts of the Brush

Sept. 23 and 25; Writing and Painting as Twin Arts

Sept. 23 - Lecture on Chinese Painting

Sept. 25 -Movie "City of Cathay, Kaifeng"  

Assignment: Begin reading _The Family_ by Pa Chin.

For Background information for historical context of novel, _China_ _in
Disintegration_ , pp. 107-139.  

Sept. 30 and Oct. 2: Gentry Culture.  

Discussion of _The Family_. Class reports on which character elicited your
greatest sympathy and why.  

Assignment: _The Family_

Oct. 3 - Essay due

UNIT III: China and the West

OCT. 7 and 9: The Novelist's Perspective

Assignment: John Hersey, _A Single Pebble  
_

Oct. 14 and 16: The Historian's View

Assignment: In Jonathan Spence, _To Change China_ , read "Todd and Bethume:
Overcome all Terrors", pp. 205-277.

"Opening China for 'Gas Wagons'" by Joseph Stilwell, in _Asia_ 24: 548-551
(1924). This will be distributed in class  

Oct. 18; Essay Due. Essay must have been written on computer  

Fall Break  

UNIT IV: China at War  

Oct. 28 and 30: War from the Eyes of General Joseph Stilwell

Oct. 28 - Background to the War in China  

Oct. 30 - Movie "Enemies Within and Without"  

Assignment: _The Stilwell Papers_ by Joseph Stilwell, ed. by Theodore White,
(excerpts will be handed out in class).

Jonathan Spence, _To Change China_ , article "Chennault, Stilwell, Wedemeyer:
A compass for Shangri-la," pp. 228-278

James Sheridan, _China in Disintegration_ , pp. 57-65, 107-138 (background
information)  

Nov. 4 and 6: The War form the Eyes of the Historian  

Nov. 6: Prof. Ed Fischer on the Burma Road  

Assignment; Edgar Snow, "China's Flying Freighters", _Sat. Evening Post_ ,
Aug. 1, 1942 (It will be distributed in class).  

Nov. 7 - Essay due  

UNIT V; The Kuomintang, the Communists, and the Journalists  

Nov. 11 - Edgar Snow on the CCP  

Nov. 13 - Agnes Smedley on the CCP  

Assignment: Edgar Snow, _Red Star Over China_ , pp. 264-303

Agnes Smedley, _China Fights Back_ , pp- 150-201  

Nov. 18 and 20: Critiquing the critics

EVERYONE MUST DO THIS EXERCISE  

Assignment: This week you are to go to the library, find an article by one of
the wartime correspondents or journalists listed below, that was written
between 1937 and 1947. You are to photocopy the article and to write a three
to four page critical analysis of it in which you inform the reader of what
the article is about, to whom it was written, and what the author's
perspective on the subject is. You will be asked to make in class reports on
your findings. The photocopied article must be submitted along with your
essay.  

List of Journalists:

Theodore White

Edgar Snow

Harold Isaacs

Graham Peck

Nym Wales (Helen Foster Snow)

John Hersey

Freda Utley

Agnes Smedley

Anna Louise Strong

Mark Gayn  

Nov. 21 - Essay due. In class reports will be given on Nov. 18 and 20.  

UNIT VI: China Today - Understood or Misunderstood?  

Nov. 25 and Dec. 2 - A Contemporary Perspective on the Cultural Revolution  

Assignment: Liang Heng, _Son of the Revoution_ , pp. 40-80, 101-208  

Dec. 4,9, 11 - Perspectives on China Today  

Assignment: To Be Announced  

EVERYONE MUST DO THIS EXERCISE. Your final project is to be an interview with
one of the Chinese teachers or students on campus. Your purpose will be to
ascertain what life in China is like today or what life in America is like for
a Chinese. More details will be provided in class.  

Questions to bear in mind: How do the accounts of journalists contribute to
both the understanding and the misunderstanding of China?  
  

[About] [Index] [Search] [Other Links] [Comments/Submissions]

* * *

ASDP Curriculum Online Project < ASDP@lama.kcc.Hawaii.Edu>

