

## Western Civilization Since 1660

  
History 101, Spring 2002  
Wed./Fri. 12:30

|

Joy Wiltenburg  
256-4500 x 3992  
Office hours W 2-4, F 9:30-11:30, or other times by appointment  
  
---|---  
  
This course is an introduction to history, with a twofold aim: first, to
examine the most significant developments of the last three centuries in the
West; and second, to introduce the methods of historical analysis.

Our approach to historical analysis in this course will center on the document
collection by Wiesner, Ruff, and Wheeler, _Discovering the Western Past_. The
textbook, Perry, _Western Civilization_ , will provide background information
for making sense of the source documents, which form the building blocks for
historians' reconstructions of the past. Our efforts will be concentrated on
interpretation of the sources, not on memorization of facts; yet we will need
a solid grasp of the facts in order to interpret the texts intelligently. In
addition to these two books, which we will use throughout the semester, we
will be reading a novel, Erich Maria Remarque's _All Quiet on the Western
Front_.

_Written Requirements_ : We will have a series of three exams during the
semester, while the final exam will build on the work we have done in these
essays. In addition to occasional ungraded assignments, there will be one
graded paper (4-6 pp.) to be written outside class and handed in typed.

_Classroom Requirements_ : Reading assignments are due by the first date
listed on the syllabus. I expect students to come to class prepared to
participate actively in learning. Regular attendance and participation are
required. Unless otherwise specified, please bring the Wiesner book to class,
as we will often be referring to it.

Some class meetings will involve student work in groups. I expect serious
preparation and engagement from every student and will base my assessment of
participation on how well each student contributes to the group effort.
Students may rotate different tasks within groups, but each student must serve
as group spokesperson at least once during the semester.

Note that students at the college level are responsible for mastering textbook
material on their own; classes will not duplicate or substitute for the
required reading. Rather, classes will make use of the readings to explore
issues in more depth. Students cannot succeed in this course by coming to
class without doing the reading, or by doing the reading but not coming to
class.

_Grades_ : Grades will be assigned on a scale of A, A-, B+, etc., and will be
based on the in-class exams (40%), paper (20%), final exam (20%), and class
participation (20%).

For the series of exams, I will drop the lowest grade from the final grade
computation. Students who miss an exam will receive an 'F' for that one; I
will not give make-ups except in highly unusual circumstances (e.g. medically-
documented illness that causes a student to miss two of the three exams). Thus
a student who misses one exam will miss the full benefit of the low-grade-
dropping policy; a student who misses more than one will have an 'F' figured
in. (Note: the dates for these are tentatively marked on the syllabus, but
they may change, so you will need to listen for announcements.)

#### Books for purchase at bookstore:

  * Perry, _Western Civilization: A Brief Survey. Volume II: From the 1400s_
  * Wiesner, Ruff, and Wheeler, _Discovering the Western Past: A Look at the Evidence. Volume II: Since 1500_
  * Remarque, _All Quiet on the Western Front_

### Tentative semester schedule:

**_  
Dates  
_**

|

**_  
Topic  
_**

|

**_  
Readings  
_**  
  
---|---|---  
  
Jan. 23-25

|

Introduction

|

Perry, 244-46,  
  
Jan. 30-Feb. 1

|

Politics of Absolutism

|

Wiesner, Chap. 2  
Perry, 251-57  
  
Feb. 5-8

|

Enlightenment

|

Wiesner, Chap. 3  
Perry, Chap. 10, 278-310  
  
Feb. 13-15

|

Economy of the Old Regime

|

Wiesner, Chap. 4  
Perry, 269-76  
  
FEB. 20

|

FIRST EXAM

|  
  
Feb. 22-27

|

Age of Revolutions

|

Wiesner, Chap. 5  
Perry, Chap. 11, 316-46  
Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen  
  
Mar. 1

|

Industrial Revolution

|

Wiesner, Chap. 6  
Perry, Chap. 12, 349-66  
  
Mar. 6-8

|

Liberalism & Socialism

|

Wiesner, Chap. 7  
Perry, 378-85, 388-402, 421-27  
  
Mar. 13

|

Art and Ideas

|

Wiesner, Chap. 10  
Perry, Chap. 17, 474-97  
  
Mar. 15

|

2D EXAM

|  
  
|

SPRING BREAK

|

NO CLASS  
  
Mar. 27-Apr. 3

|

Rise of Imperialism  
Mar. 27 Last date to hand in paper as draft  
[Mar. 29 Good Friday no class]

|

Wiesner, Chap. 9  
Perry, 402-411, 417-21, 435-49, 457-71  
  
Apr. 5-10

|

World War I

|

Perry, Chap. 18  
Remarque, _All Quiet on the Western Front_  
  
APRIL 12

|

3D EXAM

|  
  
Apr. 17-19

|

The New Woman: A Case Study in 20th-Century Society

|

Wiesner, Chap. 12  
Perry, 541-54  
  
Apr. 24-26

|

Nazi Politics and World War II  
April 26 _PAPERS DUE_

|

Wiesner, Chap. 13  
Perry, 450-57, 554-73, 595-615  
  
May 1-3

|

 Cold War and Beyond

|

Perry, 621-55  
handouts  
  
### Paper assignment:

Choose one of these chapters from the Wiesner collection that we have not
worked with in class:

  * Chapter 1, Peasant Violence
  * Chapter 8, Development of the Modern City
  * Chapter 14, The Perils of Prosperity

Write a paper addressing the historical questions posed in the "Problem"
section of the chapter, using the sources for evidence to support your
discussion. The "Questions to Consider" section will be helpful to you in
thinking about how to apply the evidence to the questions you want to answer.
You should also draw on background knowledge drawn from your textbook where
you need it (you may need to read sections of the textbook that have not been
assigned for the regular course readings). For additional guidelines, click
here.

This paper should be 4-6 pages typed, double-spaced. You may use either
footnotes or parenthetical references (MLA style), as long as each reference
clearly indicates the book and page. For this paper you are not required to
use sources outside the course reading; you may refer to our course books by
the author's name, Wiesner or Perry. In some cases you may find it helpful to
supplement these with other sources; if so you will need to give full
references, including publisher and date.

_AVOID PLAGIARISM LIKE THE PLAGUE IT IS_ : Be careful that every quotation is
properly marked with quotation marks and a reference to the source and page.
Anything that is not marked as a quotation must be your own original writing.
Students should download the plagiarism sheet
(http://www.rowan.edu/history/plagiarism.html) from the history department's
website and will be asked to sign a statement that they understand and are
adhering to accepted rules.

If you hand in this paper by _March 27_ I will return it with comments and you
may revise it to improve your grade. Note that simply correcting minor errors
such as typos will not result in a higher grade; the revisions must be
substantive and must respond in a thoughtful way to my comments about ways to
improve the paper. _The original paper with my comments must be handed in with
any revised version._

_ALL PAPERS ARE DUE BY APRIL 26_.



