**AFRICA AND LATIN AMERICA**

**Spring, 2001**

**First Study Guide**

**For the Exam on**

**February 23rd 2001**

 ** _DISCLAIMERS_ :  **

 **This study guide is _NOT_ intended to be exhaustive.   Some of the exam
questions may come from material that has (inadvertently) been left off of
this guide.  **

 **Furthermore, the following guide is _NOT_ a list of sample questions.   The
following points and questions are merely designed to provide study
assistance.  I do _not_ intend to ask questions directly from this guide
(although that may happen).   Many of the questions below are far too sweeping
to serve as good (or fair) exam questions.  Nevertheless, I will draft my
questions from the points below, as well as directly from the texts, and will
take the short completion part of the exam from the same sources.  As you
already know, I do not expect you to memorize the minutiae of the texts,
although when information is repeated, or when it serves to provide large
explanations, you should be attentive.**

 **Introduction and Overview:**

 **What is _cynicism_?   How does it limit our understanding of things?**

 **What are some of the primary _MYTHS_ of Africa?**

  * **Myth of "savage Africa"**
  * **Myth of "race"**
  * **The _foreign policy myth_ \--that African countries are either "with us" or "against us"**

**What are some of the primary (and, often, misleading) IMAGES of Africa?**

  * **The image of _anarchy_ and _political dysfunction_**
  * **The image of Africa as a _destitute region_**

**Defining several key concepts:**

  * **What is _politics_?**
  * **What is _power_?**
  * **What is _authority_?**
  * **What is _the state_?**
  * **What is _democracy_?**
  * **What is "high politics"?  What is "deep politics"?**
  * **What is a "kleptocaracy"?**

**African Geography, Geology and Climate:**

 **Geologically (and very briefly!), how would you characterize the African
continent?**

  * **Land mass and size**
  * **Rivers**
  * **Climates and Vegetation**
  * **Rainfall**
  * **Soils**
  * **Agricultural patterns**

**How have sub-Saharan African countries done in _per capita food
production_?**

**What is _transhumance_?**

**How has the tsetse fly affected settlement patterns in sub-Saharan Africa?
Why?**

**What are some of the major _minerals_ produced in Africa, and what (briefly)
are their respective impacts on the economies of sub-Saharan Africa?**

  * **Gold**
  * **Copper**
  * **Iron ore**
  * **Diamonds**
  * **Oil**
  * **Others?**

**What are some of the major _diseases_ in sub-Saharan Africa, and what is
their impact on health?**

  * **Yaws**
  * **River blindness**
  * **Schistosomiasis**
  * **Yellow Fever**
  * **Malaria**
  * **Dengue Fever**
  * **Ebola Zaire**
  * **Sleeping Sickness**
  * **AIDS**
  * **Others?**

**What are some of the problems with _drawing maps_?   What are some of the
key problems with the political maps of Africa?**

**What are the major sub-Saharan African "races"?**

**What is the _African language_ spoken by the most people?**

**What _other languages_ are most widely spoken in Africa?**

**What are the key _subsistence_ types in Africa (you should be able to
describe them)?**

  * **Foraging**
  * **Herding**
  * **Planting-- "agriculture"**

**What are some of the key _agricultural crops_ used for subsistence?**

**Material Raised in the Slide Presentation:**

 **Where is Dar es Salaam?   What sort of City is it?  What major cultural
influences does it evince?**

 **Who was Julius Nyerere?   What did he stress in his attempts at nation
building?**

 **Briefly describe the appearance (as you saw in the slides) of Nairobi?
Where is it?  How does it compare with Dar es Salaam?**

 **What are some of the key political problems (very briefly stated) of Kenya?
Tanzania?**

 **Who was Jomo Kenyata?**

 **Who was Julius Nyerere?**

 **Who is Daniel arap Moi?**

 **How does Harare compare with Dar es Salaam and Nairobi?**

 **Who is Robert Mugabe?   Briefly characterize his politics.**

 **Where is the _Serengeti_?**

 **What sorts of _animals_ are found on the _Serengeti_?**

 **What is the _Ngorongoro Crater_?**

 ** _Describe the_ Great Rift Valley?  **

 **What special adaptation have _lions_ made near _Lake Manyara_ , in the
Great Rift Valley?**

 **African Arts:**

 **According to the text, what are the _two_ "sweeping characteristics" of
art?**

 **What is unique about African dance?**

 **What is the _most popular style of "pop music_" in sub-Saharan Africa
today?**

 **What are the _two primary African sculpture techniques_?   What are some of
the materials used?**

 **How do _masks_ relate to African art?**

 **What is the role of the _dramatic tale_ in African culture?   How has it
come to be known in North America?**

 **Why is it, according to the Bohannan and Curtin text, that some Africans do
_not_ appreciate African art?**

 **How can it be said that _African art has deeply affected Western art_?
Examples?**

 **African Families:**

 **Why do families exist?   What purpose (according to the text) do they
accomplish?**

 **What is polygyny?   **

  * **What affect is it said to have on birth rates?**
  * **Does it necessarily denigrate the status of women?**
  * **What are some of the key problems that it is said to cause?**
  * **How does it differ from concubinage?**
  * **How does polygyny affect the age at which people marry?   Explain?**

**What is _bridewealth_?**

  * **How does it differ from dowry?**
  * **How might it be said to support the rights of women?**

**What is _widow inheritance_?   **

  * **How might it be said to be positive?**
  * **What is a "true levirate"?**

**African Land and Labor:**

**What has traditionally been the _fundamental characteristic of land
ownershi_ p in sub-Saharan Africa?  In other words, what single
characteristic, more than any other, has determined land tenure patterns?**

**What factors have determined _land use_ by individuals in most sub-Saharan
African cultures?**

**What _chronic shortage_ in sub-Saharan Africa, more than any other,
ultimately determined land use patterns?**

**According to our class discussion, what is the _chief motivating factor_ for
individuals in a subsistance economy?   What about in a modern, industrialized
(merit-based) economy?**

**Why has it been said by some Western managers that Africans are not, all
other things being equal, dependable workers?**

**African Politics:**

**Who was Alice Lakwena, and with what phenomenon was she associated?   Where?
When?**

**What is millenarianism?   Messianism?**

**What was the cult of Mumbo?   The Maji-Maji Rebellion?  The Mau-Mau
Uprising?**

**What were some of the deep colonial legacies that affected subsequent
African politics?**

  * **" Westminster" vs. French models**
  * **Strong presidencies**
  * **Single-party**
  * **Military dictatorships**
  * **Breakdown of state structures and the advent of "stateless societies."**

**" High politics" vs. "deep politics."**

**Background to the African state**

  * **" Royal" kingdoms with strong kings and lineage-based systems**
  * **Age sets**
  * **Use of tribute and taxation**

**Background to the African stateless society**

  * **Two authority centers in opposition or cooperation**
  * **The establishment of a _modus vivendi_ and the use of  "moots."**
  * **The tendency to reach compromises rather than make decisions.**

**How does the African stateless society resemble international law?**

**What problems were created when colonial authorities appointed traditional
African leaders as colonial leaders?**

**Use of oracles, ordeals and contests in traditional African law.   How were
these used in Western systems?**

**What is the role of "self-help" in traditional sub-Saharan African law?
What was the problem that this invited?**

**African Trade:**

**What are some of the primary problems associated with a "subsistence
economy?"**

**What was the role of trade in traditional African societies prior to
colonization?**

**What are trade diasporas, and how have they affected Africa?**

**What are some of the primary roles of market places in sub-Saharan Africa?**

**How are market places organized and scheduled in many sub-Saharan African
societies?**

**How did colonial control initially impact market places in Africa?**

**What were some of the media of exchange (kinds of "money") in pre-colonial
Africa?**

**What is meant by "reciprocity" in the market place?**

**African Religion:**

**Most African religions have a monotheistic character.   What does this
mean?**

**What were/are the "Zionist Churches?"**

**What do we mean when we say that most Western religions in Africa are
syncretic?**

**In African religions, what is the usual source (or cause) of evil?   How is
it addressed?**

**What question immediately occurs, in a religious vein, to a traditional
African when something undesirable happens to him/her?**

**What is the "flawed premise" in the belief of witchcraft?**

**What sorts of positive things can be stimulated by allegations of
witchcraft?**

**To repeat...what are messianism and millenarianism?   Chiliasm?**

**Time in an African Context:**

**What is subjective about the passage of time?**

**How might we say that African concepts of time differ from Western
concepts?**

**How do different concepts of time differentially affect societies?**

**African History (A Brief Overview):**

**What are the distinctions between "high" and "low" conceptions of culture,
and how might these impact our Western view of African culture?**

 **Is technology a clear basis for comparing African and European societies in
historical perspective?   Why, or why not?**

 **Where did the earliest African states appear, and why?**

 **What is said to be the basis of the age-old confrontation between nomads
and sedentary peoples?**

 **Owen Lattimore described the "pure nomad" as...?**

 **What advantage did nomads have over sedentary peoples?   How did they tend
to lose it?**

 **How did the rise of Islam affect the history of sub-Saharan Africa?**

  * **Trade and military conquest**
  * **The creation of intense "zones of inter-communication"**
  * **Settlement (Northeast Africa)**

**Where did early African empires tend to be located?   Why?**

**What were some of the early African empires?**

**What were some of the reasons that Spain and Portugal were such aggressive
traders and colonizers after 1500?**

**What maritime developments affected the "opening" of the African coast to
trade during this period?**

**How did traditional African slavery differ from the seizing, transport and
use of African slaves in the Western Hemisphere?**

**Why were African slaves seen as useful in the Western Hemisphere?**

**How was the slave trade sustained in Africa?   What economic mechanisms were
used?  What was the gun-slave cycle?**

**What was meant by the term manumission?**

**What was meant by the term miscegenation?**

**Why might there have been more miscegenation and manumission (and less
racism) in Brazil than in the United States?**

**How did the slave trade impact the socio-economic development of Africa?
Why?**

**What was the primary motive of the European colonial powers as regarded
their African colonies?**

**What is meant by the term metropole?**

**Explain the two primary presumptions regarding the management of the
European colonies, conversionism and trusteeship.**

**What were some of the different European patterns of governance?**

**What were some of the problems with the infrastructure (road networks, rail
lines, etc.) that was built in sub-Saharan Africa by the colonial powers?**

**How did the shifting nature of European demand for commodities affect the
African colonies?**

 **How did migratory labor change traditional African social patterns?**

 **What are the four periods after independence discussed in the text?**

 **What is nationalism?**

  * **What are some of its positive (or developmental) elements?**
  * **What are some of its negative elements?**
  * **How is nationalism very different in post-independence Africa?**

**What is the population of Africa, and how is it affected by AIDS?**

**Was sub-Saharan Africa adequately prepared for political independence?
Why, or why not?**

 **What are some of the key causes in the rise of political violence in
contemporary sub-Saharan Africa?**

 **How did the end of the Cold War affect sub-Saharan Africa?**

  * **Single-party state**
  * **Economy and foreign aid**
  * **Health of some of the states**

**What was the premise of "African socialism," and how has it fared?**

**_East along the Equator_ :**

**The discussion questions and notes are sufficient.   To see them, click
Here**

 **Kiswahili Vocabulary:**

 **Habari?     "News?"  This is a basic greeting, asked like making a
statement.**

 **Twende     "Let's go!"**

 **Hatari         "Danger"**

 **Asante   (and...Asante sana)    "Thank you."  "Thank you very much."**

 **Jambo, Hujambo, Sijambo       A basic greeting: "Bad news?"  "No bad
news.**

 **Haba na haba hujaza kibaba     "Little by little the kibab bowl will fill,"
or "don't rush things, they will happen all in good time."**

 **Ujamaa**



To return to the syllabus, click Here

![Hit
Counter](_vti_bin/fpcount.exe/dzirker/?Page=AfLat%20Study%20Guide1.html|Image=4)

