His 2243 Syllabus  
Gary D. McElhany

**Southwestern Assemblies of God University  
HIS 2243-00 Western Civilization II**

**Professor Gary D. McElhany, Ph.D. Spring 2001**

**Course Syllabus**

Course Objectives:

Upon Completion of the course, students should be able to:  
1\. Trace the development of absolutism and constitutionalism, the American
and French Revolutions, the Napoleonic Wars, the growth of nationalism and
socialism, World War I and World War II, the Cold War and recent developments.  
2\. Describe the impact of the scientific revolution and the Enlightenment on
Western though, the rise of republican governments, the Industrial revolution
and its impact, European imperialism, the Victorian era and the Interwar
period.  
3\. Identify selected individuals, concepts, terms, and events significant to
Western Civilization.

Textbook:  
Spielvogel, Jackson J. Western Civilization a Brief History.  
West Wadsworth: International Thompson Publishing Co., 1999

Course Plan

Western Civilization will be divided into three general sections: Early Modern
Europe; The Revolutionary and Napoleonic Period; Industrialization,
Imperialism, and World War I; and 1920 to the present.

Class lecture combined with reading assignments and audio-visual presentations
will provide the information for which students will be responsible.

Course Requirements  
  
1\. Three Exams covering material in the textbook, films, and class lectures  
2\. Book Review  
3\. Quizzes and Class Participation

The professor reserves the right to change assignments and assignments dates
contingent upon the needs of the class.

Course Evaluation

Exam 1 25%  
Exam 2 25%  
Final 25%  
Book Review or Project 20%  
Quizzes & Participation 05%

Exam Dates

Exam 1 2/9/01  
Exam 2 4/6/01  
Exam 3 Finals Week  
  
Class Policies

Attendance:  
Southwestern's on-campus academic program is designed as an in-class learning
experience. In this type of instructional setting, the ability to pass
examinations and complete outside projects is only a partial measure of the
student's knowledge, skills, understanding, and appreciation of the subject
matter. Therefore, students are required to maintain regular and punctual
class attendance.

Absences which exceed twenty percent (20%) of the number of times that a class
meets per semester, (9 absences for classes meeting 3 times per week; 6
absences for classes meeting 2 times per week; and 3 absences for classes
meeting 1 time per week), regardless of the nature or reason for the absences,
will result in the student being administratively dropped automatically from
the course, receiving a grade of "W". The student will be assessed the
established course withdrawal fee.

A student who is absent from a class is totally responsible to make the
appropriate advanced arrangements with the faculty member for possible make up
work. The faculty member will have the prerogative to determine if a student
may make up any examinations or outside assignments based upon the reason for
a student's absence and when the make up work must be completed. However, no
point reduction will be assessed to a student's final grade for absenteeism.

Tardy  
Student's missing fifteen minutes of a class will be counted absent for that
session. Every three tardies acquired in classes that meet three times a week
and every two tardies acquired in classes that meet twice a week will be
considered as an absence. The student is responsible, at the end of class, to
identify his/her tardiness to the professor.

NOTE: the assessment of a tardy also applies to students who leave class
early.

Assignments  
All class assignments should be completed with due consideration for the
professional work expected of students of this university. Work should be
neat, organized, typewritten (when appropriate) with double line spacing,
pages properly joined and numbered, and an appropriate title page. Students
should as a matter of course proofread their work prior to turning it in to
the instructor so that typographical, grammatical, and syntactical errors may
be corrected. It is also advisable that students make a photocopy of work
being turned in to provide for coverage of potential error in processing.

Late Work  
Late work will be accepted, but the grade will be lowered by ten percent for
each class day the assignment is late.

Academic Dishonesty and Cheating  
Students are expected to be honest in fulfilling all academic requirements and
assignments. This pertains to examinations, themes, book critiques, reading
reports, etc. A student will not be allowed to withdraw from a course if
he/she is under investigation for academic dishonesty. In the event that the
students is determined guilty of academic dishonesty, then the student will
not be allowed to withdraw from the course and will receive the grade
determined by the faculty member, either "F" for the assignment and/or and "F"
for the course. Dishonesty could possibly result in further disciplinary
action. Refer to Major infractions in the Student Handbook.

Plagiarism, the use of another's uncited material, as one's own, is not
permissible. Reproducing material from other students by photocopy, computer
media transfer or by rewriting or cheating.

Miscellaneous  
Students must wait 15 minutes for a faculty member before leaving class unless
they have been notified otherwise.

Study Tips

Take careful notes in class. Set aside uninterrupted time to regularly review
your notes. Type your lecture notes while they are fresh. Note area that are
incomplete and use your textbook to fill in the gaps. If you are unable to
find the answer, ask the professor. Complete all reading assignments and study
helps as scheduled. The process of reading, applying, and review will enhance
your ability to retain the material. Do not wait until test time to prepare.
This adds pressure and seldom results in long-term memory. Be prepared for
matching, multiple choice, and completion.

Office Hours (A113-D)

MWF 10:00-11:00, 2:00-3:00; Th 9:15-11:00, or by appointment.

E-mail is the best means of contact (gmcelhany@sagu.edu) or
(gdm@cyberramp.net)  
Students may call via 1-888-937-7248.

History | Government | Geography | Economics | Social Sciences

