# ![Other Team Projects](_derived/other.htm_cmp_canvas110_bnr.gif)

![](_themes/canvas/acnvrule.gif)  
  
---  
  


| |



**1999 Summer Academy  
Team Projects**

**Babson College**

Richard Voos; voos@babson.edu

The Babson team at the AAHE Summer Academy will plan Babson's effort to
improve undergraduate writing -- including proposing a working team and
designing a process to facilitate faculty and student peer sharing within and
across institutions, to share rubrics, to improve assessment of writing, to
increase the use of portfolios, and to contribute to developing baseline
standards for undergraduate writing.

  
**California State University, Stanislaus**

Mary Cullinan; mcullinan@stan.csustan.edu

In summer 1999, we wish to develop the learning goals and a curricular outline
for a new Honors program, Honors 2000. During the planning processes over the
past two years, we concluded that our current honors program does not meet the
needs of the students, nor does it have sufficient academic rigor. Moreover,
we are committed to a program being accessible and of interest to students in
all majors, to students of varying ages and levels of experience, and to
students taking courses at our off-campus centers. We wish to design Honors
2000 as a centerpiece of our academic programs, founded on the values of
academic excellence and our commitment to students working with faculty and
with each other to explore and share ideas as a community of scholars. We want
Honors 2000 students to participate in high-level coursework that helps them
develop skills in information competence, research, critical thinking,
academic writing, and other areas central to their individual major or
discipline. We also want students to participate in co-curricular activities
that enrich their academic experience and the life of the campus. This year's
Summer Academy will enable our team to design the program that meets these
goals.

  
**C entral Michigan University**

Richard Davenport; Richard.W.Davenport@cmich.edu

Our primary objective is to learn from other institutions about how they
systematically address faculty development activities and objectives, and to
gain information regarding the construction and implementation of their
faculty development centers. At CMU we have long discussed the need for a
faculty development center to help meet the needs of our faculty both in the
classroom and in their research and creative activities. We have numerous on-
going faculty development activities, but there is very little coordination
and continuity. A number of the topics listed for consideration at the Fourth
Annual Summer Academy are also of interest to our faculty and administration
and relate to the topic of a faculty development center. Some of the suggested
topics that have particular relevance include outcomes assessment, teaching
portfolios, learning communities, problem-based learning, service-learning,
faculty reward systems, and technology-based instruction. The primary focus of
our project is to develop a faculty development plan that will help sustain
faculty creativity in the classroom and in the area of scholarship. We hope to
create a plan that helps faculty increase their activity with individual
students, e.g. expanded faculty-student research, incorporating service-
learning into student programs, authentic outcomes assessment. We need a plan
that provides an appropriate faculty reward system that recognizes
contributions to undergraduate education.

  
**Concordia College**

Charles Paulson; paulson@cord.edu

Concordia College has initiated a curriculum review to ensure that the college
is still succeeding with our institutional mission in the face of a changing
world and changing student needs. There is a consensus that our community
could benefit from this process to build ownership in the curriculum. The
faculty has designed a two-year review process, facilitated by five
"leadership teams." Each team includes an administrator, seven faculty
members, and two students. The task of the first leadership team was to study
"who are our students, and what should they know?", and to clarify the vision
of how our mission statement is carried out in the educational program. We,
the second leadership team, are charged with examining assessment results from
our institution and exploring curricular models from other institutions. Our
findings will then be shared and used to sketch out an outline for the
college's curriculum. Our group proposes to use the Summer Academy to explore
a variety of curricular models and components and identify which ones should
be considered for Concordia's curriculum. We feel that we could both benefit
from the interaction with the Summer Academy participants and from the
opportunity to work on our project as a team.

  
**Del Mar College**

Cheryl Pfoff; cpfoff@delmar.edu

While at the Summer Academy, we plan to explore the theories and practices
concerning learning communities and develop a plan for encouraging and
implementing them at Del Mar College. Our first priority is to investigate
types and models of learning communities. We will also want to spend time
delineating the roles of those who will be involved in this project, from
faculty to student service personnel and administrators. In addition, we will
need to devise methods of educating faculty and staff and generating
enthusiasm and support for the development of learning communities. We will
then need a scheme for implementing these communities, including plans for
assessment measures, faculty development, and administrative support.

  
**DePaul University**

Susan Leigh; sleigh@wppost.depaul.edu and Brian Spittle;
bspittle@wppost.depaul.edu

One part of DePaul's five-year U.S. Department of Education Title III grant is
devoted to advising issues. In October 1998, the DePaul Advising Project was
formed, comprising 38 faculty, staff, and students. That group is working
through six subcommittees, which are charged to produce reports by June 1999
(holistic advising, technology, first-year programs, assessment and
evaluation, advisor development and rewards, and communication).
Representatives of the Project will be part of our team. The recommendations
of those subcommittees will form the core of the charge to this summer's
Academy team from DePaul.

  
**George Mason University**

Joseph S. Wood; jwood@gmu.edu

The George Mason team is composed of faculty members who teach in either its
integrative studies program in New Century College or its new general
education honors program in the College of Arts and Sciences. The primary
objective of the project is to develop a cross-unit team that will build an
inter-unit working relationship. The goals of the inter-unit relationship will
be to share faculty and student development opportunities, exchange learning
experiences and learning initiatives, and undertake curricular development and
quality enhancements. Both programs are instrumental in building student
community at George Mason University as well, and team members will develop
ideas for enhancing such community. The long-term goal of the project is to
use the inter-unit team as means for continued sharing and exchange, as well
as for undertaking faculty development initiatives university-wide.

  
**Georgia State University**

Timothy Crimmins; histjc@langate.gsu.edu

The Summer Academy team proposes that the University consider modifying its
core curriculum by structuring elements of computer-based instruction into
courses for all students. Furthermore, the team recommends that the University
consider requiring that all majors have a course, or sequence of courses, that
provide computer instruction appropriate to its discipline. These structural
changes should satisfy Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS)
requirements and help to advance student learning. The Georgia State team will
return to campus with the following implementation plan. First, we will have
identified departments whose courses could be structured for computer-based
instruction. We will provide to the curriculum committees of these departments
a request to consider having their faculty provide computer-based instruction
in their required core courses. To assist this process we will prepare
supporting grants for instructional technology and faculty development for use
in the 2000-2001 academic year

  
**Indiana University - Purdue University \- Indianapolis (IUPUI)**

Scott E. Evenbeck; evenbeck@iupui.edu

This project would link two important initiatives - first semester learning
communities and the connection between student life and academic affairs. We
have clearly articulated the major learning outcomes for the seminars and we
have made excellent progress to date on incorporating campus academic
resources (resident faculty, librarians, academic advisors, peer mentor
program, and information technology) in support of the seminar which
introduces entering students to the expectations and opportunities of
university learning. The goal for this project is to identify ways to connect
the resources and personnel of student life in direct support of the learning
outcomes of the first year seminar

  
**The Metropolitan Community Colleges**

Fred L. Grogan; grogan@longview.cc.mo.us

The Metropolitan Community Colleges' 1999 Summer Academy Team, building upon
the work begun by the 1997 and 1998 teams, will develop an overall strategy
and specific plan for internalizing the vision statement. 1) Identify
conditions necessary for institutionalizing the vision, revisiting last
summer's work and addressing enablers and barriers. 2) Revise the proposed
vision statement based on feedback from the district leaders we have
identified as our resource group, from the district Strategic Planning
Committee, and from the district General Education Task Force. 3) Obtain
feedback on the revised vision statement from AAHE advisors and other colleges
attending the Summer Academy. 4) Review and revise the vision statement
approval process. 5) Plan fall 1999 inservice session. 6) Develop a strategy
for creating a web page to communicate current progress on district
initiatives.

  
**Missouri General Education Steering Committee**

Tim Gilmour; Gilmour@mail.nwmissouri.edu

At the 1998 Summer Academy, four institutions from Missouri came to define a
common set of general education outcomes. These outcomes could build on sets
already defined at their institutions and hopefully serve as a starting point
for the development of a core set for the state's general education transfer
core to be revised in the 1998-99 Academic Year. While the team's work was not
directly embraced by the General Education Steering Committee created to
develop the general education core, four of its members were asked to join the
Steering Committee, with two of these being named co-chairs. In the
intervening year, the Steering Committee has accomplished a great deal. It
has: 1) surveyed the state's institutions to ascertain problems with the
current general education transfer core, 2) benchmarked other statewide
transfer core curricula, 3) developed a rationale for general education, 4)
defined a set of good practice principles for general education, 5) begun work
on goals for general education and broad competencies for the achievement of
those goals. The General Education Steering Committee proposes to undertake
several challenging tasks at the Summer Academy: 1) complete work on the
statewide general education goals and competencies, 2) define a process for
validating that each Missouri institution's general education program meets
the statewide goals and competencies, 3) perfect the Committee's general
education transfer core and assessment methodology proposal, 4) finalize the
design of a statewide student/faculty conference to be convened in the fall of
1999 to consider the Committee's proposal.

  
**Mount St. Mary's College**

Pam Haldeman; phaldeman@msmc.la.edu

We would very much benefit from coming together in the Academy format to
receive expert input and guidance on how to infuse service-learning components
into each of our respective courses. The group is interdisciplinary, but share
the common interest and desire to accomplish this course redesign. As much as
possible, we would like this intensive experience to significantly take us
toward a maximally completed product (short of actual community site
selection, although with urban partnership center representation, this may
also be discussed). Syllabus design is therefore a forefront in our minds as a
task to accomplish. As a team, we would also like to examine previous work in
the field that supports the value of service-learning as a teaching-learning
process. And, because the participating faculty are quite varied in their
level of prior experience in service-learning, a review and discussion of its
merits and application would be helpful.

  
**Northwest Missouri State University**

Kent Porterfield; kporter@mail.nwmissouri.edu

For two years now, Northwest's Student Success Task Force has worked hard to
build a comprehensive and coherent system of processes that orient, place, and
mentor undergraduate students to enhance their success. (Success is defined as
timely graduation or transfer to a specialized program at another institution
with maximum intellectual and personal development.) The Task Force, with over
40 members, draws together students, faculty, and staff from virtually every
University process with a stake in student success. What is unique about this
effort is that it brings together in one cross-functional team all of the
players who figure in success of undergraduate students. For the first time,
University community members are able to see how their part of the process
fits with the others and to shape what they do to complement better the
efforts of other units. In addition, they are able to identify opportunities
for improvement and work together to bring them about.

  
**Pennsylvania State University**

Jeremy Cohen; jxc45@psu.edu

After listening to a description of service-learning and public scholarship a
reporter for the school newspaper asked, "how can students get involved?" That
is our question. Our goal is to develop a shared understanding of the many
means by which students at Penn State can become involved in public
scholarship. We define public scholarship as the application of discovery in
the arts and sciences, which comprise the foundation of the academic
community, to issues of consequence in the lives of people-both within the
campus environment and beyond. Our project will focus on the development of
campus wide, local and community structures to support faculty, staff, student
and community development in public scholarship and that will identify and
nurture collaborative efforts among public scholarship stakeholders.

  
**Rowan University**

Carol Sharp; sharp@rowan.edu

A team representing five of Rowan's six colleges, the Executive Vice
President/Provost and the Director of the Faculty Center propose to work on a
faculty development process to facilitate the development and delivery of more
interdisciplinary courses and programs. This faculty development process will
focus on the examination of interdisciplinary curriculum planning, student-
centered instructional strategies and colleague coaching. This team will also
serve as a pilot group that will use identified student-centered instructional
strategies in the courses they currently teach and will employ colleague
coaching to provide one another support as they explore and implement the new
student-centered strategies. At the end of the pilot period, the individuals
in the pilot group will identify a colleague to add to the group. The
additional participants will then study interdisciplinary curriculum planning,
student-centered instructional strategies and coaching processes having the
pilot group members as mentors.

  
**Sinclair Community College**

Tom Huguley; thuguley@sinclair.edu

The overall goal of Sinclair's Parallel College project is to better align the
services of the college with the needs of the community it serves. During the
past two years, a team known as the Pathfinders has been working to support
the goal of alignment. As the college enters the third year of it's NSF
Institution-wide Reform grant, the Pathfinders team will work to systematize
an enabling process. This work will be accomplished by integrating a number of
institutional change drivers into a comprehensive Parallel College Process
that will enable Sinclair to respond to the rapidly changing requirements of
students, employers, and the community at large. The results of the
Institution-wide Reform initiative will be higher-quality educational
services, in less time, and at a lower cost. Specifically, during the Summer
Academy, the team will focus on three objectives: 1) determine how the
Parallel College Process can be fully integrated into the organizational
structure at Sinclair; 2) develop a systematic way to identify, classify, and
address barriers to innovation; 3) provide input to the team plans for the
coming academic year.

  
**Towson University**

M.J. McMahon; mj@towson.edu

Given the projected enrollment growth for Towson University and program
expansion that has already occurred and will continue into the next three to
five years, the university is focusing on the new faculty of the future.
Towson University expects 25% of the current tenured faculty to retire in the
next five years. Out of a total 464 tenured faculty, 45 have already retired
in the last two years. As retirements occur, the university is reexamining the
type of faculty it will need in the future based on its reexamination of the
undergraduate curriculum in many disciplines. New program initiatives at
graduate and undergraduate levels are moving toward an interdisciplinary
focus. This calls for faculty with different expertise and competencies. Some
professionals in the field are looking for career changes and are interested
in teaching in higher education institutions, but do not see it as a lifelong
career, and thus have expressed interest in full-time teaching, but in
nontenure-track positions. With few new state positions available, it will be
necessary to convert part time faculty positions to full time nontenure track
so as not to further exacerbate the imbalance of full time to part time
faculty.

The university will be engaged in new ways to hire qualified faculty for the
next decade. This project will help to:

-redefine and rationalize faculty teaching loads  
-create new types of faculty contracts and positions  
-reduce the ratio of part-time to full-time faculty.

What roles should full-time nontenure track faculty play in the governance
structure of the university? In what responsibilities other than teaching
should they be participating?

  
**University of Cincinnati**

Terry Bullock; Terry.Bullock@uc.edu

Since 1819, UC has grown from a small medical college to a Research I
university. That growth has come in part through planned expansion of programs
and faculties, but it has also come through the amalgamation of UC with
previously independent colleges in the area. In its present form, the
university has multiple missions, from open access to doctoral education to
community outreach. The results of those origins and of our diverse missions
are that 1) organizationally we are more a loose confederation of units than a
coherent whole; 2) we often compete against each other for scarce resources
instead of collaborating; 3) we often present intercollegiate barriers to our
own students; and 4) our culture works against our changing that organization
in ways that will better serve students. Four of the university's colleges
recently accomplished a breakthrough in establishing a "dual admission" policy
in which access students admitted to the three two-year colleges are
guaranteed later matriculation in the College of Arts and Sciences if they
achieve certain academic goals in their first two years. But that is just the
beginning.

he proposed project would bring together deans from several of the
undergraduate colleges, a representative from our enrollment management
division, and a representative from the faculty senate to try to expand this
breakthrough in a politically palatable way. Ultimately, we would like to
create an institution that is better integrated in its organization, culture,
academic vision, and overall mission.

  
**University of Maryland**

Robert L. Hampton; rhampton@deans.umd.edu

We have been working hard to enhance undergraduate education for all students
at the University of Maryland and believe the next set of tasks we need to
address are ways to more actively involve undergraduates as researchers and
teachers. We have several programs that promote undergraduate research-Senior
Summer Scholars, Undergraduate Research Assistant Program, Ronald P. McNair
Scholars, and Gemstone-and some departmental/investigator initiatives. Our
Summer Academy team will explore how the University of Maryland can do more
than just talk about involving increasing numbers of undergraduates in
research and as creators of knowledge. We agree with the assertion in the
Boyer report that "the ecology of the university depends on a deep and abiding
understanding that inquiry, investigation, and discovery are the heart of the
enterprise, whether in funded research projects or in undergraduate
classrooms." Undergraduates can also play an important role as facilitators of
learning and transmitters of knowledge in a variety of ways. In discussions in
the office of Undergraduate Studies, glimmers of a five-part model have
emerged that might conceivably be a useful starting point for our exploration
and development of undergraduate teaching opportunities. We envision some
structure for undergraduate teaching being implemented and presented to
undergraduates early in their careers. This structure could complement our
enhanced work with undergraduate research.

Our work at Summer Academy IV will involve further refining our ideas for
expanding research and teaching opportunities for undergraduates. We will also
formulate plans for assessing the effectiveness of the various programs and
interventions, and for disseminating them much more widely to the campus
community so that more students and faculty/staff can be well-informed about
opportunities for participation.

  
**University of Michigan - Dearborn**

Charlotte A. Otto; cotto@umich.edu

Background: A team of faculty from the Department of Natural Science and the
School of Education have planned to offer a sequence of science courses for
elementary education teachers. The objective is to teach science as it should
be/must be taught in Michigan public schools. A local school district has
requested that we offer such a sequence based on the science modules they use.
The request is also to start this offering beginning this coming Fall term.

Project: Using the modules for 5th and 6th grade science, we will develop a
sequence of 6 courses (2 life science, 2 planetary/earth science, 2 physical
science) to complement already existing introductory courses on methods. We
also plan to consider how this sequence for in-service teachers can be
modified for our pre-service teachers. At a minimum, we plan to develop course
syllabi for the first course in each sequence. We hope to discuss specific
lessons and to identify additional supporting information for the in- and pre-
service teachers. Related tasks such as sequence of course offering, space
considerations, teaching assignments, etc. will be part of the project.

  
**Valdosta State University**

Lloyd Benjamin; lbenjami@valdosta.edu

Our goal this year will be to focus upon the freshman-year experience within
the context of the learning community. Student orientation should serve as an
immediate introduction to this community and we are currently working toward a
radical transformation of traditional practices. The freshman-year experience
is being constructed around two newly developed freshman-level courses, a
proactive program of learning support intervention, and a greatly increased
use of technology to enhance learning and improve communication within the
learning community.

  
**Weber State University**

David Eisler; deisler@weber.edu

In 1996 Weber State University became an open access institution with the
creation of two tiers, university (students meeting entrance requirements) and
college (students who do not). While we have experienced success with college
tier students, we have concerns regarding our support for these students. The
transition to semesters included a new, higher mathematics requirement
increasing the number of college tier students significantly. Statistics show
that many students electing developmental mathematics withdraw or fail from
Math 0960, First-Course in Algebra.

Despite our efforts with Orientation and First-Year experience, we believe
that many college tier students do not avail themselves of the support
available through tutoring, SSI, academic advising, and other structures. We
plan to create a four-pronged support mechanism for college tier students.
This will combine the efforts of Tutoring, Developmental Education in Math and
English, and Academic Advising with a Mentoring Program we will design. We are
hopeful the close interaction of these four entities can create a support
structure for student success. This effort will be an excellent opportunity
for Student Affairs and Academic Affairs to join in an effective, ongoing
partnership.



**Youngstown State University**

Charles Singler; c.singler@ysu.edu

Youngstown State's mission will be to continue working on the development and
implementation of "Investigative Approaches in the Natural Sciences" (NSF SMET
grant). Our specific objectives for the Summer Academy are the following:
complete a formal assessment/evaluation of the first pilot section (AS 600-
Explorations in the Sciences) offered in Spring 1999 by Biology and
Environmental Sciences; integrate the pedagogy for the Biology and Chemistry
modules to be used in the second pilot section this Fall (1999); integrate the
pedagogy for the Geology and Physical Geography modules to be used in the
third pilot section to be offered in the Winter 2000 term; develop an
implementation plan for the three module system when the university converts
to semesters in Fall 2000.

![](_themes/canvas/acnvrule.gif)

![Team Members](_derived/newpage1.htm_cmp_canvas110_hbtn.gif)
![Application](_derived/applicat.htm_cmp_canvas110_hbtn.gif)
![Schedule](_derived/schedule.htm_cmp_canvas110_hbtn.gif)
![Presentation](_derived/presenta.htm_cmp_canvas110_hbtn.gif)
![Assignments](_derived/assignments.htm_cmp_canvas110_hbtn.gif) ![Other Team
Projects](_derived/other.htm_cmp_canvas110_hbtn_p.gif)
![Links](_derived/links.htm_cmp_canvas110_hbtn.gif)
![Search](_derived/search.htm_cmp_canvas110_hbtn.gif)
![Discussions](_derived/discuss.htm_cmp_canvas110_hbtn.gif)

  
---|---|---  
  
For questions or comments contact David Eisler  
Last updated: July 03, 1999.  
  
---

