**Political Science 178 R. G. C. Thomas**

Spring 2002 Room: WW-409; Ph: 288-6840

TuTh 11:00-12:15 Office Hours: TuTh: 9:45 - 10:45; 12:45 - 1:45

Room: WW-153 3:45 \- 4:45; and by appointment

Email: gcthomas@ameritech.net



**WORLD CONFLICT AND SECURITY**





**COURSE OBJECTIVES** :



This course is intended to introduce the student to the theories, concepts,
and issues underlying conflict and security in the contemporary world. The
course will examine classical and modern perspectives on war and peace, the
sources and causes of civil wars and regional conflict, and the prospects for
arms control and world peace-keeping operations.





**COURSE REQUIREMENTS** :



Attendance is required. Points will be deducted for failure to attend on a
regular basis. There will be a Midterm Examination (30 points), a Final
Examination (40 points), and two Tests (15 points each). The Midterm and Final
will consist of analytical essay questions. The Tests will consist of
True/False, Multiple Choice, and short questions based on the readings. Test
dates are provided below:



Test One: Tuesday, February 26 Test Two: Tuesday, April 23

Midterm: Tuesday, March 5 Final: Tuesday, May 7, 1 \- 3 PM



[ _Note_ : Tests dates are subject to change. Make-up tests may involve
penalties and will be given only under exceptional circumstances.]





**GRADING SYSTEM** :



A = 94-100 C = 74-78

AB = 89-93 CD = 69-73

B = 84-88 D = 64-68

BC = 79-83 F = below 64





**BOOKS** :



\- Richard K. Betts, Editor, _Conflict After the Cold War_ , Macmillan 1994.
[RB]

\- Michael Klare & Y. Chandrani, Editors, _World Security_ , St. Martins Press
(3rd Edition) 1998 [K&C]

\- Joseph Nye, _Understanding International Conflicts_ , Addison Wesley
Longman (3rd Edition) 2000 [JN]

\- Bruce Hoffmann, _Inside Terrorism_ , Columbia University Press, 1998 [BH}

\- Randall Forsberg, et al, _Nonproliferation Primer_ , M.I.T. Press, 1995
[RF]



  









**COURSE SYLLABUS & READINGS**



**I \- THEORIES OF CONFLICT & SECURITY**



** **

**1. The New World of Conflict & Security**

AIs There an Eduring Logic of Conflict in World Politics?@ JN: 1-11

Seyom Brown, "World Interests and the Changing Dimensions of Security," K&C:
1-17

Francis Fukuyama, "The End of History?" RB: 5-16

John Mueller, AThe Obsolescence of Major War,@ RB: 128-139

John J. Mearsheimer, "Why We Will Soon Miss the Cold War," RB: 17-32



**2. Classical Perspectives on War and Peace**

AThe Peloponnesian War@ JN: 11-19

Thucydides, "The Melian Dialogue," RB: 37-41

Niccolo Machiavelli, ADoing Evil in Order to Do Good,@ RB: 42-46

Hedley Bull, "Society and Anarchy in International Relations," RB: 110-120



**3. Realist and Idealist Perspectives**

Edward Carr, "Realism and Idealism," RB: 51-67

Kenneth Waltz, "The Origins of War in Neorealist Theory," RB: 68-74

Robert Gilpin, "Hegemonic War and International Change," RB: 75-86

Geoffrey Blainey, "Power, Culprits and Arms," RB: 87-98

Robert Keohane and Joseph Nye, "Power and Interdependence," RB: 121-127



**4. Defense, Deterrence and Collective Security**

ABalance of Power and World War I@ JN: 54-77

AThe Failure of Collective Security and World War II@ JN: 81-104

AThe Role of Nuclear Weapons@ JN: 131-140



**5. The Morality and Laws of War**

AEthical Questions and International Politics@ JN: 19-26

AMoral Issues@ JN: 140-143









**II. CIVIL WARS AND REGIONAL CONFLICT ISSUES**



**1. Ethnicity, Nationalism and Civil War**

Michael E. Brown, "The Causes of Internal Conflict," K&C: 180-199

Ernest Gellner, "Nations and Nationalism," RB: 324-334

Chaim Kaufmann, APossible and Impossible Solutions to Ethnic Civil Wars,@ RB:
348-365

Radha Kumar, AThe Troubled History of Partition,@ RB: 366-374

Raju G. C. Thomas, "Competing Nationalisms: Secessionist Movements and the
State," in _Harvard_

_International Review_ , Summer 1997. [Handout]



** **

** **

**  
**

** **

** **

**2. International Intervention and New Age Conflict**

ASovereignty and Intervention@ JN: 147-155

Richard Betts, AThe Delusion of Impartial Intervention,@ RB: 537-547

Karen Dawisha, "The Imperial Impulse: Russia and the Near Abroad," K&C: 78-95

Samuel Huntington, AThe Clash of Civilizations,@ RB: 207-224

Benjamin R. Barber, AJihad Vs. McWorld,@ RB: 558-567



**3\. Low Intensity Conflcts: Insurgency, Terrorism, Proxy Wars**

Bruce Hoffman, _Inside Terrorism_ , BH: Selected sections

Lectures/Handouts







**III. ARMS CONTROL, PEACE-KEEPING & ENVIRONMENTAL SECURITY**



**1. Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction**

Randall Forsberg, _Non-Proliferation Primer_ , 1-125

Zachary Davis, "Nuclear Proliferation and Nonproliferation in the 1990s," K&C:
135-159

Kenneth Waltz, "The Spread of Nuclear Weapons: More May be Better,@ RB:
451-462



**2. The International Trade in Arms**

Michael Klare & Lora Lumpe, "Fanning the Flames of War: Conventional Arms
Transfers in the 1990s,"

K&C: 160-179



**4. The United Nations and Peace-Keeping Forces**

Margaret Karns and Karen Mingst, "Evolution of UN Peacekeeping and
Peacemaking," K&C: 200-228



**5. Environmental & Demographic Security**

Janet Welsh Brown, "International Environmental Cooperation as a Contribution
to World Security,"

K&C, 317-341

John Cooley, "The War Over Water," RB: 483-492

Charlotte Bunch & Roxanna Carrillo, "Global Violence Against Women," K&C:
229-248

Thomas Homer-Dixon, "Environmental Changes as Causes of Acute Conflict," RB:
493-508

Dennis Pirages, "Demographic Challenges to World Security," K&C: 366-385

  





**GRADE SCALE**





The following chart indicates approximately how **Letter Grades** correspond
to the **Numerical Range of Points** obtained in the individual and cumulative
examinations and quizzes.







**Letter Out of Out of Out of Out of Out of  Out of**

**Grade 15 30 45 60 75 100**





** A** 14.5 - 15 28.5 \- 30 42.5 - 45 56.5 - 60 70.5 - 75 **94 - 100**





** AB** 13.5 - 14 27 - 28 40 \- 42 53.5 \- 56 66.5 - 70 ** 89 - 93**





** B** 12.5 - 13 25 \- 26.5 37.5 - 39.5 50.5 - 53 63 - 66 ** 84 - 88**





** BC** 11.5 - 12 23.5 \- 24.5 35.5 - 37 47.5 - 50 59 - 62.5 ** 79 - 83**





** C** 11 22 - 23 33.5 \- 35 44.5 - 47 55.5 - 58.5 **74 - 78**





** CD** 10 - 10.5 20.5 \- 21.5 31 - 33 41.5 \- 44 51.5 - 55 **69 - 73**





** D** 9.5 19 - 20 28.5 \- 30.5 38.5 - 41 48 - 51 **64 - 68**





** F** Below 9 Below 18 Below 28 Below 38 Below 47 **Below 63**









