**Human Impacts on the Environment:  
an Archaeological Perspective**

**ASB 326 - Fall 2000 1:40-2:55 MW Nursing 15**

Instructor: Michael Barton, PhD  
Office: Anthropology Bldg C26; Email:
[michael.barton@asu.edu](mailto:%20michael.barton@asu.edu)



Teaching Associate: Bulent Arikan, MA  
Office: Anthropology Bldg C7: Email:
[barikan@imap1.asu.edu](mailto:%20barikan@imap1.asu.edu)

[return to home page](index.htm)

**_Course Overview_**

As we begin the 21st Century, it is increasingly apparent that human society
is profoundly altering the world around us. More and more frequently we find
public constituencies and private interest groups debating the nature of human
impact on the environment and the best ways to minimize potentially harmful
consequences of human activities.

Unfortunately for those who would shape environmental policy, the present
condition of earth's ecosystems is the result of a long history of
human/environmental interactions, and not simply a product of recent a
activities. Similarly, many of the effects of our actions today will not be
felt for many years or perhaps even centuries. Furthermore, the links between
human actions and environmental consequences are often indirect, 'non-linear'
ones that are difficult to predict. It is even difficult to agree on what the
'natural' environment is (or was) in many cases, much less what it should be.

Modern ecosystems are not static communities to be maintained or repaired, but
are only the current manifestation of continuous and complex interactions
among living and acting organisms&emdash;including humans&emdash;and between
organisms and the abiotic (i.e., non-living) parts of their surroundings.
These interactions stretch far back into antiquity, and the state of modern
ecosystems is as much a product of their histories as it is current
conditions. As you will see in this course, there is a long record of
interaction between humans and their environment, with both beneficial and
deleterious results.

Archaeologists (and others interested in ecology of the past such as
historical geographers, geomorphologists, paleontologists, and
paleobotantists) are playing an increasingly important role in understanding
the effects of humans on the earth. Only through studying the past of our
planet's ecosystems can we begin to understand what their future might hold.
By learning the lessons of past human impacts, we gain a better appreciation
of the potential effects of our own activities today. Humans have always had
an impact on their surroundings. The critical question facing us today is not
whether we can avoid affecting our environment, but whether we can direct our
impacts in ways that that permit us as a species survive and assure that earth
will remain a planet worth living on.

Summary texts on archaeological perspectives on human impact&emdash;or what
some are calling historical ecology&emdash;are still very limited. In addition
to a single textbook, Human Impacts on Ancient Environments by Charles Redman,
I have assigned sections from two other related books, and a number of
articles from journals and edited books written by scientists currently
involved in research on this topic. Some may be more difficult than others,
but as experienced college students you should be able to follow the general
gist of even the most difficult. I am more interested that you grasp the
concepts involved rather than memorize the details of each research project.
My goal is that you gain a solid understanding of both the long history of
human/environment interaction, and of the way archaeologists and other
scientists go about learning about this history. These readings for the course
are in the form of a packet of photocopies available at the Althernative Copy
Shop. Because a number of readings are assigned from two books Archaeology as
Human Ecology , by Karl Butzer, and The Holocene, by Neil Roberts, both of
these books are available for you to buy as texts. Copies also are on reserve
in Hayden Library. Both are useful references&emdash;including the sections
not assigned&emdash;for anyone interested in the long history of interaction
between humans and the environment. If you have any questions over the
material presented, please ask me or Bulent in class or during office hours.

**EXPECTATIONS AND GRADING**

This course is billed as a lecture course and I can and will certainly do
that. However, it will be more interesting if you and the other students ask
questions and offer your thoughts on the readings and my comments. I encourage
you to do this, and to do it in a professional and scholarly manner so that
others in the class can benefit as well. This means that you will need to read
the assigned articles and book chapters BEFORE coming to class; this will make
the class a more valuable experience for you. It is probably unnecessary to
mention this to most of you, but during in-class discussion&emdash;as well as
at other times&emdash;I expect students to act professionally and with
consideration toward other members of the class. Those enrolled in this class
did so because they want to learn about archaeological perspectives on human
impacts on the environment. They have a right to the opportunity to do so.

You are responsible for the material in the readings and in lectures. Lectures
may amplify the readings or present different material. There will be two
exams, a midterm and a final. There will also be two short written
assignments.

If you have any questions, need help in understanding a topic or reading, or
would like to discuss some aspect of the course, please come and see me or
Bulent. If you are unable to come to our regular office hours, you can talk to
either of us after class to schedule another time.



**_Course Outline and Syllabus_**

**Aug. 21, Introduction**

**BACKGROUND**

**Aug. 23 Archaeological perspectives on human impacts**

  * Redman, C.L. (1999). Human Impact on Ancient Environments. University of Arizona Press, Tucson. Chapter 1, pp. 3-14.
  * Roberts, N. (1998). The Holocene: an Environmental History, 2nd Edition. Blackwell, Oxford. Chapter 1, pp. 1-7.

**Aug. 28, Perspectives on humans and the environmen** t

  * Redman, C.L. (1999). Human Impact on Ancient Environments. University of Arizona Press, Tucson. Chapter 2, pp. 15-34.
  * *Kline, B. (1997). First Along the River Chapters 1-2.

**Aug. 30, Sept. 6 Conceptual approaches:**[ **session
1**](HI_lect/04_ecosystems.htm) **,**[ **session
2**](HI_lect/05_ecology%26anthro.htm)

  * Butzer, K.W. (1982). Archaeology as Human Ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Chapters 2 & 3, pp. 14-42.
  * *Kelly, R. (1995). The Foraging Spectrum. Chapter 2, pp. 39-64.
  * Redman, C.L. (1999). Human Impact on Ancient Environments. University of Arizona Press, Tucson. Chapter 3, pp. 35-52.

**Sept.** **11 & 13, Studying past environments: **[**session
1**](HI_lect/06_paleoenviroments1.htm) **,**[ **session
2**](HI_lect/07_paleoenvironments2.htm)

  * Butzer, K.W. (1982). Archaeology as Human Ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Chapters 4 & 11, pp. 43-66; 191-208. (Chapter 10 also recommended for non-majors)
  * Roberts, N. (1998). The Holocene: an Environmental History, 2nd Edition. Blackwell, Oxford. Chapter 2, pp. 8-26.

**Sept. 18,**[ **Studying past societies**](HI_lect/08_archaeology1.htm)

  * Butzer, K.W. (1982). Archaeology as Human Ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Chapters 5-6, pp. 67-97.

**Sept. 20,**[ **Reconstructing human impacts on
ecosystems**](HI_lect/09_archaeology2_impacts.htm)

  * Butzer, K.W. (1982). Archaeology as Human Ecology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Chapter 8, pp. 123-156.
  * Roberts, N. (1998). The Holocene: an Environmental History, 2nd Edition. Blackwell, Oxford. Chapter 2 pp. 51-54 "Models of environmental reconstruction",
  * *Taylor, K. (1999). Rapid climate change. American Scientist, 87: 320-327.

**CASE STUDIES: HUNTERS AND GATHERERS**

**Sept. 25,**[ **The first human impacts**](HI_lect/10_earliest_impacts.htm)

  * Redman, C.L. (1999). Human Impact on Ancient Environments. University of Arizona Press, Tucson. Chapter 4, pp. 53-68.
  * *Pyne, S.J. (1998). Forged in fire: history, land, and anthropogenic fire. In Advances in Historical Ecology, edited by W. Balee, pp. 64-103. Columbia University Press, NY.

**Sept. 27,**[ **Human expansion in the late
Pleistocene**](HI_lect/11_colonization.htm)

  * *Webb, R.E. (1998). Megamarsupial extinction: the carrying capacity argument. Antiquity, 72(275): 46-55.
  * Roberts, N. (1998). The Holocene: an Environmental History, 2nd Edition. Blackwell, Oxford. Chapter 3, pp. 56-68 & pp. 81-86 .

**Oct. 2,**[ **Holocene hunter/gatherers in temperate
Europe**](HI_lect/12_holocene_foragers.htm)

  * *Moore, P.D. (1993). The origin of blanket mire, revisited. In Climate Change and Human Impact on the Landscape, edited by F.M. Chambers, pp. 217-224. Chapman & Hall, London.
  * Roberts, N. (1998). The Holocene: an Environmental History, 2nd Edition. Blackwell, Oxford. Chapter 4, pp. 99-112.

**CASE STUDIES: AGRICULTURAL ECOLOGIES**

**Oct. 4,**[ **Human ecology and the beginning of food
production**](HI_lect/13_ecology_of_agric.htm)

  * *Rindos, David 1980. Symbiosis, instability, and the origins and spread of agriculture: a new model. Current Anthropology, 21: 751-772.
  * Redman, C.L. (1999). Human Impact on Ancient Environments. University of Arizona Press, Tucson. Chapter 5, pp. 81-117
  * [recommended for non-majors] Roberts, N. (1998). The Holocene: an Environmental History, 2nd Edition. Blackwell, Oxford. Chapter 5, pp. 128-142 "Agricultural origins".
  * [recommended] Diamond, Jared (1997). Guns, Germs, and Steel: the Fates of Human Societies, W.W. Norton, New York. Chapters 6 & 7, pp. 114-130, " To farm or not to farm" and "How to make an almond"

**Oct. 9, The first farmers of southwest Asia:** **guest lecture by Brett
Hill**

  * *Rollefson. G. & I. Kohler-Rollefson (1992). Early Neolithic exploitation patterns in the Levant: cultural impact on the environment. Population and Environment 13(4): 243-254.
  * Roberts, N. (1998). The Holocene: an Environmental History, 2nd Edition. Blackwell, Oxford. Chapter 6, 186-192.

**Oct. 11,**[ **Farming in the arid Southwest of North
America**](HI_lect/15_southwest_us.htm)

  * Redman, C.L. (1999). Human Impact on Ancient Environments. University of Arizona Press, Tucson. Chapter 5, pp. 117-126; Chapter 6, pp. 148-156.

**Oct. 16 & 18, Farming in temperate environments: **[**session
1**](HI_lect/16_neol_europe.htm) **,**[ **session
2**](HI_lect/17_e_woodlands_us.htm)

  * *Edwards, K.J. (1993). Models of mid-Holocene forest farming for northwest Europe. . In Climate Change and Human Impact on the Landscape, edited by F.M. Chambers, pp132-145. Chapman & Hall, London.
  * *Kidder, T.R. (1998). The rat that ate Louisiana: aspects of historical ecology in the Mississippi River delta. In Advances in Historical Ecology, edited by W. Balee, pp. 141-168. Columbia University Press, NY.

**Oct. 23 Midterm review:**[ **study guide**](HI_lect/midterm_review.htm)

**Oct. 25 MIDTERM EXAM IN CLASS**  
---  
  
**CASE STUDIES: COMPLEX SOCIETY AND URBANISM**

**Oct. 30,**[ **The causes and consequences of
complexity**](HI_lect/18_ecol_of_civilization.htm)

  * Redman, C.L. (1999). Human Impact on Ancient Environments. University of Arizona Press, Tucson. Chapter 6, pp. 127-139; Chapter 7, pp. 160-164.

**Nov. 1 & 6, Mediterranean civilizations: **[**session
1**](HI_lect/19_aegean_civ.htm) **,**[ **session
2**](HI_lect/20_NearEastCiv.htm)

  * *Falconer, S. and P. Fall (1995). Human impacts on the environment during the rise and collapse of civilization in the eastern Mediterranean. In Late Quaternary Environments and Deep History, edited by D. Steadman and J. Mead, pp. 84-101.
  * *Van Andel, T.H. & E. Zanagger (1990). Landscape stability and destabilization in the prehistory of Greece. In Man's Role in the Shaping of the Eastern Mediterranean Landscape, edited by S. Bottema, G. Entjes-Nieborg, & W. van Zeist, pp. 139-157. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam.

**Nov. 8, New World civilizations:** **guest lecture by Chris Fisher**

  * Redman, C.L. (1999). Human Impact on Ancient Environments. University of Arizona Press, Tucson. Chapter 6, pp. 139-14
  * *O'Hara, S.L., F.A. Street-Perrott, & T.P. Burt (1993). Accelerated soil erosion around a Mexican highland lake caused by prehispanic agriculture. Nature 362:48-51.
  * *Rice, D. (1996). Population historical ecology in the lowland neotropical forests: a look back at the future. Ms. at ASU.

**Nov. 13, Pacific islands:** **guest lecture by Pat Fall**

  * Redman, C.L. (1999). Human Impact on Ancient Environments. University of Arizona Press, Tucson. Chapter 7, pp. 178-191.  

**CASE STUDIES: ISLAND ECOSYSTEMS**

**Nov. 15,**[ **Other consequences of
complexity**](HI_lect/22_civ_overview.htm)

  * *Kirch, P.V. (1996). Oceanic islands: microcosms of global change. MS at ASU.
  * Roberts, N. (1998). The Holocene: an Environmental History, 2nd Edition. Blackwell, Oxford. Chapter 6, 180-186 "The Pacific".

**Nov. 20,**[ **Arctic islands**](HI_lect/24_NorseGreenland.htm)

  * *McGovern, T.H. (1994). Management for extinction in Norse Greenland. In Historical Ecology: Cultural Knowledge and Changing Landscapes, edited by C.L. Crumley, pp. 127-154. School of American Research Press, Santa Fe.

**GENERAL ISSUES**

**Nov. 22,**[ **Demographic change**](HI_lect/25_population.htm)

  * *Cowgill, G.L. (1975). On causes and consequences of ancient and modern population changes. American Anthropologist 77: 505-525.
  * Redman, C.L. (1999). Human Impact on Ancient Environments. University of Arizona Press, Tucson. Chapter 7, pp. 164-173.

**Nov. 27,**[ **Health and society**](HI_lect/26_disease.htm)

  * *Cohen, M.N. (1992). The epidemiology of civilization. In Human Impact on the Environment: Ancient Roots, Current Challenges, edited by J.E. Jacobson & J. Firor, pp. 51-70. Westview Press, Boulder
  * *Diamond, Jared (1997). Guns, Germs, and Steel: the Fates of Human Societies, W.W. Norton, New York. Chapter 11, pp. 195-2149, "The lethal gift of livestock"

**Nov. 29, Lessons from the past**

  * *Butzer, K.W. (1996). Ecology in the long view: settlement histories, agrosystemic strategies, and ecological performance. Journal of Field Archaeology 23: 141-150.
  * Redman, C.L. (1999). Human Impact on Ancient Environments. University of Arizona Press, Tucson. Chapter 8, pp. 195-219

**Dec. 4, Final review:**[ **study guide**](HI_lect/final_review.htm)

  **Dec. 13, FINAL EXAM, Wednesday, 2:40-4:30 pm**  
---  
  


