**Accepted as Departmental Policy by Unanimous Vote on May 3, 2000**

Department of History, Rutgers University-New Brunswick

**Policy on Mutual Responsibilities and Classroom Etiquette**

The Department of History is committed to teaching excellence.We believe that
the study of history is important and deserves respect both from those who
teach history and from students who enroll in history courses.We all have an
obligation to cultivate an environment for learning that enhances the ability
of all of us to pursue our shared interest in history.Respect for one another
and for the ideas and values of others are essential for a strong environment
for learning history.[1]

Our commitments to a strong learning community are expressed in many
ways.Respectful professors convey their commitment to the discipline of
history and their desire to share its delights and challenges.They are well
prepared for class, provide students with clear goals and expectations, listen
carefully to student questions and comments, and conscientiously evaluate
their students' work.Respectful students bring a strong work ethic to the
history courses that they select.They expect to attend the scheduled classes,
to be on time, to be prepared for class, and to be attentive during class.A
shared respect for the discipline of history and for one another as teachers
and students of history is essential to the academic integrity of our
program.We must all do our part to maintain an environment of openness and
civility that encourages and honors the intellectual achievement represented
by the discipline of history.

The common interests of the history community are reflected in the following
policies and standards:

**The syllabus:  **A good syllabus serves as a guide to the mutual
responsibilities of the instructor and the students and makes clear to
students the instructor's expectations of them.It will provide a calendar of
course events that will help students to plan their semester's work.It might
include:

Information:Who is teaching and how the instructor can be contacted

Which texts are used and where they can be purchased or consulted

Anything additional that is recommended to purchase for the course

Course structure; a schedule of topics or lectures

Where to get help

Assignments for the entire semester

Dates and times of all exams (including finals) and review sessions

Goals of the course



Policy:

Attendance

Tardiness and Leaving Early

Grading

Makeup exams/dates

T grade deadline

Cheating

Exam protocol

Grievance procedures

  


Students have a right to an adequate syllabus in any course and may appeal to
the Vice Chair for Undergraduate Education if they think that a course lacks
one.

**Attendance:** By registering in a history course, a student incurs the
obligation to attend class and to complete assignments (just as the instructor
has a comparable responsibility to attend, to be prepared for class, to meet
with students when appropriate, and to grade examinations promptly).These
mutual responsibilities in part define the nature of education, and they are
binding on students and faculty alike.

The syllabus for each History course should provide an attendance
policy.Students need to know how many absences will be permitted.Instructors
may impose penalties for unexcused absences, including grade reductions that
might lead to failure in a course.

Falsification of an attendance record by signing another student's name or
signing one's own name and then leaving class is a serious breach of academic
integrity, for which an offender may be punished by the instructor.If a
student cannot attend a class or must leave early, the ethical solution is to
inform the instructor of the situation and to ask to be excused.

**Tardiness:** Our university is geographically challenged.Students must
commute considerable distances between classes, and the university's
transportation systems sometimes fail us.Instructors should be aware of the
difficulties that conscientious students encounter both in scheduling courses
and in commuting.Students should schedule their courses wisely so that their
normal expectation of being seated before the beginning of class can be
met.When possible, they should anticipate late arrival and inform the
instructor.Instructors may exclude students who are habitually tardy because
late arrivals can disrupt classes in a way that is unfair to other class
members, especially the instructor, whose attention should be focused on
leading a challenging and successful meeting.Instructors may count tardy
students as absent and impose penalties as outlined in the course syllabus.

**Leaving Class before Conclusion:**

All class members should expect to remain in class and attentive until the
instructor indicates that the class session is over.Instructors should
recognize that compelling personal needs might force a student to leave the
room during class.If possible, students should inform instructors of any
personal difficulties that might lead them to leave the room during
class.Students who need to leave the room should make every effort to leave
and return with as little disruption as possible.Habitual and unexcused
movement during class sessions may be prohibited by the instructor.

**Cell Phones and Beepers:**

Students should deactivate signals from cell phones and beepers that can be
heard by others during class.Instructors may forbid cell phone use during
class.

**Personal Conversation:**

It is rude and disruptive to engage in personal conversation during
class.Students who persist in this disruptive behavior may be asked to leave
the class and may be penalized by the instructor, who might, for example,
count them as absent.Reading newspapers, doing crossword puzzles, or engaging
in other personal diversions unrelated to class activity is equivalent to
"personal conversation."

**Academic Integrity:**

Students have an obligation to be informed of university and college policies
on academic integrity.Instructors should give clear guidelines concerning the
kind of sources that may be used in examinations and papers and the proper way
to cite sources.Instructors may penalize students for failing to cite sources
or for improperly citing sources.Plagiarism or other blatant violations of
academic integrity policies may be referred to the college deans who are
authorized to handle student judicial cases.

**Teaching Assistants:**

The Department of History makes every effort to insure that teaching
assistants and graders are well qualified and properly trained.They deserve
the same respect and good will as other members of the academic community and
are protected from harassment and abusive behavior by university policies that
provide for judicial procedures and strong penalties whenever members of the
university community are abused or harassed.



**Appeal of Grade:**

  

Instructors have an obligation to provide clear standards of evaluation and to
review their evaluations of examinations and papers with students who seek
them. Students have the right to appeal a course grade.The Department of
History has a procedure for reviewing appeals of course grades that may lead
to the grade being changed if the student=s appeal is successful.The student
may request a copy of the appeal of grade policy from the Vice Chair for
Undergraduate Education, who will review the procedure with the student.The
first stage in the appeal procedure is a meeting with the instructor in which
a mutual effort should be made to resolve conflicting opinions concerning the
merit of the student=s work.If the conference between the instructor and
student does not resolve the conflict, then the student may pursue the next
step in the appeal process with the assistance of the Vice Chair for
Undergraduate Education.



Codes of conduct and declarations of mutual responsibilities can never serve
as adequate substitutes for mutual respect and good will.Learning, like
teaching, is an active rather than a passive process. At Rutgers, a class is
not a commodity to be "taken" but a productive process with a highly desirable
end result, namely a better informed, educated person. To the degree that the
policies and standards outlined above enhance the active process of learning,
they are consistent with the highest purposes of university education and
should be honored as such.

  

* * *

[1] The university has strong policies that prohibit verbal assault,
defamation, and harassment.See University Policies and Procedures in the _New
Brunswick Undergraduate Catalog_ and "The University's Policy Prohibiting
Harassment" at http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/~msgriff.

