  **COMPARATIVE RELIGIONS PAGE **

>  
>  This page is maintained primarily as a resource for and on-going project of
the  "Comparative Religions" course at Milligan College.

>

> **  
> General Resources and Multi-Resource Sites**

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Academic
Info: Religion](http://www.academicinfo.net/religindex.html)  An Annotated
Directory of Internet Resources for the Academic Study of Religion.

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Virtual
Religion Index](http://religion.rutgers.edu/vri/index.html)  A very helpful
site maintained at Rutgers University.

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Facets of
Religion](http://www.bcca.org/~cvoogt/Religion/) Part of the WWW Virtual
Library

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Finding God
In Cyberspace (by John
Gresham)](http://www.fontbonne.edu/libserv/fgic/fgic.htm)  A guide to
religious studies resources on the internet.

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Religion
News Service](http://www.religionnews.com/)  News on religion, ethics,
spirituality, and moral issues.

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [WORLD
SCRIPTURE](http://www.tparents.org/Library/Unification/Books/World-S/0-Toc.htm)
A Comparative Anthology of Sacred Texts.

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif)
[Adherents.com](http://www.adherents.com) "Adherents.com is a growing
collection of over 44,000 adherent statistics and religious geography
citations -- references to published membership/adherent statistics and
congregation statistics for over 4,000 religions, churches, denominations,
religious bodies, faith groups, tribes, cultures, movements, ultimate
concerns, etc."  
>  
>  ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif)
[About.com.](http://about.com/culture)  "Although there are several different
subject areas on the culture page, the one for "Religion/Spirituality" is the
one that is of great use to our class. The section has a fair, unbiased
informational approach to more than a dozen different major religious groups
in the world today, along with some humor and general encouragement. The areas
on the different religious entities are all fair, balanced, and informative,
covering the formation, history, primary beliefs, traditions, size, sacred
texts and other teaching tools" [Louis Anderson].

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Religious
Tolerance](http://religioustolerance.org/)  "This site sets itself apart from
most that one will find on the web where religious sites are concerned. This
is a site devoted to a nonjudgemental, pragmatic approach to dozens of major
religions, & pseudo-religions, around the world. They make no judgements about
any of the organizations they examine, they simply present the teachings,
history, supporting and problematic "situations" and thoughts for each."
[Louis Anderson]

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [North
American Interfaith Network](http://www.nain.org/index.html) "The web site of
an organization working to promote understanding and discussion among the the
various religious traditions within the North American landscape.  The site
offers links to a large number of religious traditions in North America, news
on discussion and work among various traditions, and a library of essays on
interfaith dialogue."  [Wes Jamison]

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Interfaith
Calendar](http://interfaithcalendar.org/)  "This site is one with a different
approach to religious study, but one which can certainly serve to stimulate
the interest of the visitor. This site contains calendars for the current
year, as well as several years to come, that have the "Primary Sacred Times"
for many religions around the world. A nice, unique approach to introducing
students to other religious organizations."  [Louis Anderson]

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [The American
Religious Experience](http://are.as.wvu.edu/) "This website offers an overview
of the American religious landscape.  Articles and essays examine the role
that religion has played in shaping American life.  Specific attention is
given to the roles of women and ethnic minorities in American religious
history." [Wes Jamison]

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif)
[Beliefnet:Spirituality, Religion, Morality, Faith, Belief,
Community](http://beliefnet.com/)

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Religion,
Religions, Religious Studies
Page](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/gthursby/rel/)

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Religious
Resources on the Net](http://www.aphids.com/relres/)

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Voice of the
Shuttle: Religious Studies Page](http://vos.ucsb.edu/shuttle/religion.html)

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Internet
Resources for Religious Studies](http://gort.ucsd.edu/ds/sophia/religion.html)

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Britannica
Internet Guide: Religion](http://www.eblast.com/bcom/religion/)

>

> **Specific Traditions**

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Primal
Traditions](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/primal.htm)

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Native
American Traditions](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/natamr.htm)

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Hindu
Traditions](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/hindu.htm)

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Buddhist
Traditions](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/buddh.htm)

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Jewish
Traditions](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/jewish.htm)

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Roman
Catholic Traditions](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/romcath.htm)

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Orthodox
Traditions](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/orthodx.htm)

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Islamic
Traditions](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/islamic.htm)

>

> ![](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/images/bludot.gif) [Other
Traditions](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/other.htm)  
>  
>  
>  
>

>

> ###### [Return to Comparative Religions
Syllabus](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/cprsyla.htm) | [Return to
Kenneson Home Page](http://www.milligan.edu/bible/pkenneson/kenneson.htm)

>

>  
>  
>

