Gay & Lesbian Philosophy Course, University of Maryland at College Park

![](symbol-pinktriangle.gif)

# Gay & Lesbian Philosophy

## Phil 407, Fall, 1999

### University of Maryland, College Park

This web site contains course information and links to lesbian and gay
archives and other resources on the Web.

##  Menu

* _Class Time and Place_
* _Instructor_
* _Catalog Course Description_
* _CORE Cultural Diversity Requirement_
* _Course Content_
* _Disclaimer_
* _Textbooks_
* _Course Work_
* _Electronic Submission of Papers and Examinations_
* _E-Mail and Listservs_
* _Educational Philosophy and Grading_
* _[Course Syllabus](syllabus.html)_
* _[Audio-Visual Assignments](AV.html)_
* _[Further Readings](Bibliography.html)_
* _[Queer Film Directory](http://www.popcornq.com)_
* _[Building a Queer Film Collection at UMCP](GL_Film_Collection_UMCP.html)_
* [_Links to other Gay/Lesbian web sites_](Queer_links.html)
* _Class Lecture Notes_
* [Fall 1999 Lectures](F1999Lectures.html)
* [Spring 1997 Lectures](S1997Lectures.html)
* [Fall 1996 Lectures](F1996Lectures.html)
* [Fall 1995 Lectures](1995Lectures.html)
* _[Archive of Examinations, Assignments, and Study Guides](Archive.html)_
* [Exemplary Solved Midterm](SolvedMT407F99.html)
* [Exemplary Solved Final Exam](SolvedFinalF99.html) NEW
* _[Queer Picture Gallery](picture_gallery/picture_index.html)_

In addition you can find _special or urgent announcements_ concerning the
course.

![](rainbow.gif)

The Rainbow flag has become a recognized symbol of the Gay  & Lesbian
Community, expressing its pride. "The six colors of the rainbow represent the
diversity of the lesbian and gay community, a community that encompasses
people from all backgrounds, races, and national origins and that spans the
panopoly of faiths and experience." The Rainbow flag also has come to be known
as the Diversity flag--one around which all people can rally who prize and
celebrate the rich and wonderful diversity humanity presents.

**Class Meeting Location and Times**

Tu-Th 12:30-1:45 P.M.

1115 Skinner

[ **Note that this is a change from that listed in the "Fall Schedule of
Classes", Second Edition.** ]

_Return to Main menu_

**Instructor:** [Dr. Frederick Suppe,](fred.jpeg) Professor of Philosophy and
Distinguished Scholar-Teacher

1102-B Skinner

301-405-5696 (Office)

540-477-2492 (Home)

suppe@carnap.umd.edu

Office Hours: Tuesdays 2-3 P.M., Thursdays 11:15 A.M.-12:15 P.M.; and by
appointment. I usually am around on Wednesdays.

My Program Administrator, Eugen Kim ( _hp26 &umail.umd.edu;_; 301-405-5691),
keeps my calendar when I am unavailable. Appointments can be scheduled with
him.

_Return to Main menu_

**Catalog Description:**

An examination in historical and social context of personal, cultural and
political aspects of gay and lesbian life, paying particular attention to
conceptual, ontological, epistemological, and social justice issues.

_Return to Main menu_

**CORE Diversity Credit:**

PHIL 407 is approved as a CORE Human Cultural Diversity Course. CORE Diversity
Courses have been requested to incorporate the following notice into course
syllabuses:

> You [may] have chosen this course as part of your CORE Liberal Arts and
Sciences Studies Program, the general education portion of your degree
program. CORE Human Cultural Diversity courses are designed to ensure that you
will examine experiences, perspectives, and values different from those that
are dominant in the United States or Europe. A faculty and student committee
approved this CORE Human Cultural Diversity course because it will introduce
you to ideas and human experiences often overlooked in the curriculum. Please
take advantage of the opportunities this course offers you."

_Return to Main menu_

**Course Content:**

The course is organized around two axes: (i) The history of gays and lesbians
in 20th Century America, focusing on the changing social circumstances gays
and lesbians have faced. (ii) Examination of the ontological thesis made
prominent by Foucault that homosexuality is a social construct rather than an
independent essence. Differing views on, and the epistemological implications
of, this controversial thesis will be examined. But the thesis is an instance
of a much more general thesis of social constructivism as a replacement for
essentialist notions of objectivity and associated views about knowledge
(epistemology). Thus the course constitutes a sustained philosophical case-
study examination of these overarching social constructivist ontological and
epistemological theses.

Within these two organizing axes, the course has three main foci: (a) To
expose students to the history, subculture, status, treatment, and
accomplishments of gays and lesbians, including an appreciation of the
distinctive contributions gays and lesbians have made to the larger
heterosexual cultural milieu. (b) To examine philosophical issues surrounding
gays and lesbians in our culture. These include the ontological status of
homosexuality and of gay and lesbian identities; the epistemologies of
stereotyping and of the closet; philosophies of sexual dissidence; social
dimensions of knowledge including the role of subcultures; the objectivity of
psychiatric classifications of sexual disorders; hermeneutical aspects of
religious condemnation of homosexuality; issues of social justice raised by
gay liberation and AIDS; and the extent to which the gay/lesbian subculture
can serve as a role model for the moral and aesthetic improvement of the
dominant heterosexual culture. (c) To explore implications of the social
constructivist thesis such as whether acceptance of gays and lesbians
threatens the continuation of distinctive gay and lesbian subcultures and
identities and whether such "mainstreaming" is worth the resulting loss in
diversity and associated costs to either gays and lesbians or the larger
society.

_Return to Main menu_

**Disclaimer**

Gays and lesbians are sexual minorities stigmatized for their sexual behaviors
and orientations and for their nonconformity to gender-role stereotypes.
Minority subcultures tend to be defined around the basis for stigmatization
and discrimination, and many of the characteristic features of stigmatized
subcultures center round the focus of stigmatization. This is so in the case
of gays and lesbians: The characteristic institutions of the Gay subculture
and Gay subcultural identities tend to center on matters of sexuality. The
characteristic institutions of the Lesbian subculture and Lesbian cultural
identities tend to center round issues of gender including gender roles and
traditional gender-based power inequities. (These are the dominant foci of the
two related subcultures; both subcultures are concerned, with different
priorities, with sexuality and gender.)

This means that any course on Gay and Lesbian culture and history must focus
extensively on issues of sex and gender. As Andrew Holleran says, "Gay life
without the sex is just a themepark." Any attempt to minimize these two
aspects does violence to the Gay and Lesbian subcultures and is inappropriate
in a CORE Diversity course whose focus is understanding the history and
culture of Gays and Lesbians.

Some of the readings for the course have sexually explicit materials. Sexual
behavior will be discussed in class. On occasion sexually explicit materials
may be used in class sessions. In all such cases, the use is never gratuitous
and I attempt to be explicit what the educational motive and purpose of the
material is.

Also, an important aspect of Gay subculture has been the redefinition of
sexuality and its relationships to love, emotional attachment, etc. Thus for
Gays many sexual activities have nothing to do with "making love." Euphemisms
such as "making love" have built-in heterosexual biases that many Gays reject.
Instead gays tend to use sexually explicit terms such as "cock-sucking" since
that language has no connotation of sex being associated with love or
emotional bonding or of heterosexist notions about sexuality or reproductive
associations. Similarly, many Gays reject the use of clinical terms such as
"fellatio" since these terms come from a medical/psychiatric literature that
has been used to marginalize and stigmatize Gays sexually. It has become
standard practice in the academic discipline known as _Queer Studies_ to use
standard gay sexual terminology as technical vocabulary (just as "queer"
itself is used as a technical term to include gays, lesbians, bisexuals,
trans-gendereds, etc.). Within the Lesbian community there also is concern
with what terms are most appropriate for describing lesbian sexual activity
(see, for example, the terminology group discussion in the Lesbian film _Go
Fish_ ). These practices from Queer Studies will be followed in the course.

Some students initially may be uncomfortable with the extent to which sex is
considered in the course or to the use of sexually-explicit terminology
(including words some view as "vulgar") in class discussions. Most students
quickly become comfortable as they see that the subject matter demands it and
that one cannot understand Gay history and culture otherwise. This is very
much in keeping with the goals of the CORE Diversity program which is to
"examine experiences, perspectives, and values different from those that are
dominant in the United States or Europe" [see "Core Diversity Credit" above].
However, occasional enrolled students are not able to make the accommodation.
Such students probably should not take the course.

_Return to Main menu_

**Textbooks:**

_Required:_

George Chauncey, _Gay New York: Gender, Urban Culture, and the Making of the
Male Gay World 1890-1940_ (New York: Basic Books, 1994)

Jonathan Dollimore, _Sexual Dissidence_ (New York : Oxford University Press,
1991).

Richard Dyer, _The Matter of Images: Essays on Representations_ (London:
Routledge, 1993)

Derek Jarman, _At Your Own Risk: A Saint's Testimony_ (Woodstock, NY: Overlook
Press, 1991)

Wayne Koestenbaum, _The Opera Queen: Opera, Homosexuality, and the Mystery of
Desire_ (New York: Vantage Books, 1993)

Elizabeth Lapovsky Kennedy  & Madeline D. Davis, _Boots of Leather, Slippers
of Gold: The History of a Lesbian Community_ (New York: Penguin, 1993)

Richard Mohr, _Gay Ideas_ (Boston: Beacon, 1992)

Eric Rofes, _Reviving the Tribe: Sexuality and Culture in the Ongoing
Epidemic_ (New York: Harrington Park Press, 1996).

_Recommended:_

Richard Mohr, _Gays/Justice: A Study of Ethics, Society, and Law_ (New York:
Columbia, 1988)

Additional selections are from materials on reserve in McKeldin Library,
materials available via computer, and some handouts. Films are available at
Non-Print Media Services in Hornbake Library, 4th floor.

Duplicate copies of McKeldin reserve materials are in the CHPS Office, 1102
Skinner, and may be checked out for 2 hours.

_Return to Main menu_

**Course work:**

_Timely reading of assignments_ My lecture notes for this and earlier versions
for other semesters are archived on the class web site. These contain detailed
discussions of the readings emphasizing key themes and ideas and showing how
they relate to each other. They are intended to be a study-guide and should be
read along with the assigned readings. Often in class I will use film clips
and class discussion based on them as vehicles for bringing out the same ideas
and connections in a manner that is more engaging than mere lecture. The
archived notes are an alternative presentation, indicating how I would have
presented things in a traditional lecture format.

_Keep a journal_ of how course materials affects your understanding,
perception, and appreciation of gays and lesbians, their sub-culture and their
history. The journal will be submitted to make sure you are journaling
conscientiously. But since its purpose is to help you in your exploration of
gay and lesbian culture it will be more valuable if you feel free to be candid
in expression of your reactions and feelings. Thus its contents will not be
graded. Think of it as a diary of your interaction with gay and lesbian
culture this semester. The journal must be submitted to pass the course.

_AudioVisual Reports:_ There is one film that will be viewed in class which
you must view on your own if you miss that class:

* Before Stonewall  There are two films all students must view outside of class:

* The Celluloid Closet 
* The Gang's All Here.  In addition you are required to view four other films of your own choosing ouside of class:

* a film focusing on gays 
* a film focusing on lesbians 
* a film focusing on minority gays or lesbians 
* a film focusing on the Gay/Lesbian AIDS experience. 

A number of recommended films are listed in the Syllabus. _The Celluloid
Closet_ book (PN 1995.9 H55R8 1987) and movie (PN 1995.9 H55C4 1986) are full
of suggestions. Raymond Murray, _Images in the Dark: An Encyclopedia of Gay
and Lesbian Film and Video_ (Philadelphia: TLA Publications, 1994) is the best
guide to Queer Filmography. A more recent source is Jeani Olson, _The Ultimate
Guide to Lesbian & Gay Film & Video _ (New York: Serpant's Tail, 1996).
Neither are in the library but copies may be consulted in Dr. Suppe's office
(1102 Skinner). A comprehensive guide to gay and lesbian films is to be found
at

[http://www.popcornq.com ](http://www.popcornq.com)

Another excellent source is <http://www.reel.com/reel.asp> (under browse by
category, select "gay/lesbian), which will take you to a gay/lesbian page with
a variety of sub-category links on the upper right-hand corner of the page).

and a number of reviews of gay and lesbian films are at

[
http://www.inform.umd.edu/EdRes/Topic/Diversity/Specific/Sexual_Orientation/FilmReviews/](http://www.inform.umd.edu/EdRes/Topic/Diversity/Specific/Sexual_Orientation/FilmReviews/)

With special grants from the Vice President's Office and the Campus Diversity
Initiative, the Nonprint Media Center at Hornbake and I have been developing
an extensive collection of Gay and & Lesbian feature films. It is the most
extensive such film collection at any university or college. Check out the
collection's Web Site:

[http://carnap.umd.edu/queer/GL_Film_Collection_UMCP.html.](http://carnap.umd.edu/queer/GL_Film_Collection_UMCP.html)

You are to write brief summaries of each film you watch and discuss the
relevance of the film to course themes and content. (Maximum 500 words per
entry.) One of the reports is to be given as a 5 minute oral report, the rest
to be handed in. See the [Syllabus](syllabus.html) for specific deadlines.

You also are required to _listen to/watch an opera_ (see Syllabus Week 6 for
details). As an alternative, you may attend a live performance of an opera
such as the [Washington Opera](http://www.dc-opera.org/) or a [Maryland Opera
Studio
](http://www.inform.umd.edu/ARHU/Depts/Music/ensembles/voice/opera.html)
performance of "Postcard from Morocco" (October 8, 10, 13, 15) on campus. A
brief report of your opera experience should be included with the film reports
that are handed in.

_Regular attendance and participation in class discussions_ : In particular,
there is very extensive use of film clips and audio visuals during class.
These often serve as the basis for class discussions. Although my lecture
notes are archived on the web site, the film clips used in class cannot
readily be made up.

_Midterm exam_ \--open-book, open-note, take-home

_One 10 page term paper._ [The term paper is an opportunity for you to explore
some aspect of course material or Gay and Lesbian culture that you are
especially interested in. Consulting with the instructor (in person or via
e-mail) about your topic well in advance of the due date is strongly
recommended.]

_Final examination_ \--open book, open note, take-home

_Extra Credit:_ A paper analyzing a book on gays/lesbians/bisexuals or by a
gay or lesbian or bisexual person. Your analysis should summarize the main
foci and themes of the book and discuss how it relates to the main themes in
PHIL 407. Suggested length: 1000 words.

The course has been planned on the standard collegiate assumption that _in 400
level courses_ students with average reading abilities should expect to spend
2-3 hours out of class _for each credit hour_ per week. Viewing/listening to
audio-visuals are likely to increase the time required for the course.

A note on the Exams: Since all exams are take-home open-note, open-neighbor,
memorizing material is unimportant. Also, the exams will be designed as study-
review vehicles for helping you synthesize and understand course material.
Thus if you are up on the readings and assignments, there is no need to
prepare additionally for the exam.

_[Click here for detailed instructions for optional and required written
course assignments.](Archive.html)_

_Return to Main menu_

**Electronic Submission of Papers:**

_Papers and exams_ are to be submitted in both hard copy and on a 3.5" High
Density disk. The idea is that I will add my comments to the file version on
disk, and then you can read or print out a version of the paper containing my
comments. I am equipped to handle just about any standard word processors in
Macintosh, Windows, or DOS formats including the following: _AmiPro,
AppleWorks, Claris Works, Framemaker (MIF), MacWrite, Microsoft Word,
Microsoft Works, MultiMate, Nisus, OfficeWriter, Professional Write, RTF,
SunWrite, WordPerfect., WordStar, WriteNow_ -even _XYwrite_. If you plan to
use a word processors not listed here check with me first.

The exams and assignments will be available on the course web site. That means
that you can download them as manipulable text into your own wordprocessor,
then do the exam or assignement without recopying any thing.

A number of computers are located in the west-wing hallway in the Philosophy
Department. As a student enrolled in PHIL 407 you are entitled to use those
computers for e-mail, web use, and word-processing.

**Whatever your word-processor and computer platform you must use a HIGH-
DENSITY disk.**

_Return to Main menu_

**E-mail and Listervs:**

There is a Web Site for the course. The site will be accessed through

http://carnap.umd.edu/queer/GL_Home_page.html

Some course materials will be available on it. In addition it will have links
to various Gay and Lesbian archives, web sites sites and data bases around the
world. You can access it through Web browsers such as Netscape or Mosaic from
any networked computer in the world. This can be done in WAM Labs or from your
own machine if it has a direct or modem connection to the net. You may either
read the materials on a computer screen or download them for reading on your
own computer or from hard copies you print out Exams and assignments will be
down-loadable from the class web site.

All students are eligible to have e-mail accounts and are required to do so.
Instructions for obtaining a free WAM account are at
[http://www.helpdesk.umd.edu/faqs/unix/wam/wam-acct-signup.shtml](
http://www.helpdesk.umd.edu/faqs/unix/wam/wam-acct-signup.shtml).
Alternatively, Take a photo-ID and proof of current connection to the
University ( registration card) to room1400 in the Computer and Space Sciences
Building on a weekday between 8 and 6.

A listserv for PHIL 407 has been established. This will allow students in the
class an opportunity to exchange ideas about course material, have
discussions, seek help, etc. It functions very much like an Internet newsgroup
or electronic bulletin board, although it is restricted to just members of
this class. You will receive all posts to the listserv as e-mail, and when you
post (send e-mail) to the listserv group all members of the class having
e-mail will receive your post as e-mail. You will be asked to supply me with
your e-mail address. Detailed instructions how to use the listserv will be
handed out in class.

Important course information will be disseminated via the listserv. Thus
students are responsible for regularly reading its messages. You will find the
listserv especially valuable when I am out of town and during take-home exams.

Finally, you can use e-mail to contact the instructor with questions, etc.
pertaining to the course or course materials, outside of class and office
hours.

AT UMCP there is an undergraduate lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgendered
(LGBT) student organization. _Information is available at[
http://www.inform.umd.edu/StudentOrg/lgba.](http://www.inform.umd.edu/StudentOrg/lgba)_
Contact them to learn how to get on their Listserv. Information about the UMCP
Graduate Lambda Coalition (GLC) is available at
<http://www.inform.umd.edu/Student/Campus_Activities/StudentOrg/glc/>. They,
too, have a Listserv that can be joined.

_Return to Main menu_

**Some comments on Educational Philosophy and Grading**.

In my opinion there is no place for busy work in a university course. All work
requested of students should have a pedagogical or learning pay off. This
includes examinations. In my opinion it is never justified to give an exam or
quiz solely for the purpose of determining a grade. Rather exams should be
vehicles for learning and providing students with personalized feedback. A
good exam is itself a vehicle for learning (that is why I give open-book,
open-note, take-home exams), for diagnosis of what the student does and does
not understand, and providing useful feedback, clarification, and comments
that further facilitate learning.

A course grade should reflect the ultimate mastery of course material,
concepts, and intellectual skills, rather than being some commentary on the
process whereby one came to such learning. Thus if a student makes lots of
errors on exams, but effectively uses the feedback on the exams to master the
material, and that mastery manifests itself in end-of-semester performance,
then it seems to me the grade should reflect that level of mastery rather than
be downgraded because the path to mastery involved mediocre performance on the
earlier exams.

Practically this means the following: If the final exam and term paper are
superior to the midterm, the midterm grade will be thrown out. On the other
hand, if there is a drop in performance at the end of the semester with no
clear pattern of growing mastery over the semester, your grade will be an
average of the midterm, final, and term paper, each counting a third of the
grade.

Under most realistic circumstances grading on the basis of curves or
predetermined quotas for the numbers of As, Bs, etc. is both statistically
invalid and pedagogically unjustified. In many respects the distribution of As
and Bs should be a reflection of the quality of teaching. Gifted students who
try tend to do well regardless of the quality of teaching whereas for most
students the quality of teaching should affect the distribution of grades. I
like to teach and my goal is to get each student to overachieve. Thus I am
happiest when lots of students earn high grades in my classes. There is no
grade inflation when excellent effort by students and outstanding teaching
combine to produce real mastery of course material and the distribution of
grades reflects that mastery.

Grades will be assigned on the basis of A "excellent" mastery of the material,
B "good" mastery, C "basic understanding", D "marginal understanding", and F
general lack of understanding. The final course grade will be my best
determination of your mastery of course material on this scale, though failure
to make a good-faith effort on your journal (but not evaluation of its
content) could lower your grade and the journal must be submitted to pass the
course.

Some students may have learning disabilities or special circumstances that
interfere with learning. I am happy to spend lots of time helping students who
need special attention. For me, the most rewarding aspect of teaching is
making a difference in individual student's learning and university
experience. Don't hesitate to give me that opportunity.

_Return to Main menu_

**Urgent Course Announcements**

The mid-term exam has been postponed one week from what originally was
scheduled. It will be distributed Thursday, October 7 and due Tuesday, October
12.

In-class film reports on one of the four discretionary films will be given
Tuesday, October 5, and Thursday, October 14.

_Return to Main menu_

