  [![Crossroads
logo](../logo_sm.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/index.html) |   |
[![Technology &
Learning](../tech_sm.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/innovation.html)
[![Reference &
Research](../ref_sm.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/reference.html)
[![Communities](../com_sm.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/curriculum.html)

 ![horizontal red rule](../redrule.gif)
[![Curriculum](../cur.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/community.html)

  
---|---|---  
  
##  Douglas Baynton

##  **University of Iowa**

###  Course Syllabus Integrated with the American Studies Crossroads Project

* * *

#### History of Disability

Douglas Baynton  
[douglas-baynton@uiowa.edu](mailto:douglas-baynton@uiowa.edu)

Graduate Seminar  
Spring, 1998

  
The primary purpose of this course is to assist you in carrying out a research
project in the history of disability. To begin, we will read some of the major
texts in disability studies and discuss the central propositions of this new
field: that disabled people form a minority group which faces pervasive
discrimination; that disability is socially and culturally constructed and
changes over time; and that disability is a primary signifier of relations of
power. We will discuss the common representational uses of disability, and we
will consider how a disability analysis challenges our understanding of key
aspects of American history, such as (to name just a few) nativism and
immigration restriction, citizenship and civil rights, evolutionary theory and
eugenics, and the interrelated ideas of nature, normality, and progress.

After this introduction to the field, which is designed to introduce you to a
range of topics and methodological approaches, you will pursue an individually
designed research project. This may be a new project or a continuation of
previous work (but do let me know if it is the latter). Final papers will be
20 to 30 pages and based on research in both primary and secondary sources.

The reading schedule is very heavy early in the semester. You are expected to
come to class prepared to critically analyze the assigned readings. _In
addition, for each class during weeks 2-7_ , you will write a 1-2 page
description of a potential research project related to the topic under
discussion that week, appropriately limited and defined for a semester
project, as well as the types of source material that might be available
locally.

All books and most articles are on reserve at the library. The following are
also available at Prairie Lights:

    
    
    Shapiro, Joseph, _No Pity: People with Disabilities Forging a New Civil Rights Movement_
              	(Times Books/Random House, 1993). 
     Thomson, Rosemarie Garland, _Extraordinary Bodies: Figuring Physical Disability in American Culture and Literature_ 
    	(Columbia University Press, 1997).   
     Thomson, Rosemarie Garland, _Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary Body_   
    	(New York University Press, 1996).   
     Mitchell, David T., and Sharon L. Snyder, eds., _The Body and Physical Difference: Discourses of Disability_   
    	(University of Michigan Press, 1997).   
     Baynton, Douglas C., _Forbidden Signs: American Culture and the Campaign Against Sign Language_   
    	(University of Chicago Press, 1996).   
     Davis, Lennard, _Enforcing Normalcy: Disability, Deafness, and the Body_   
    	(Verso Press, 1995).   
     Norden, Martin F., _The Cinema of Isolation: A History of Physical Disability in the Movies_   
    		(Rutgers University Press, 1994).        

**Reading Schedule:**

> **Week 1, 1/20: Introduction.**

>  
>  
>     **Week 2, 1/27: Disability studies: an introduction to the field.**  
>     >  Joseph Shapiro, No Pity, pp 1-73.  
>     > Rosemarie Thomson, _Extraordinary Bodies_ , pp 6-51.

>     Harlan Hahn, "Antidiscrimination laws and Social research on Disability:
The Minority Group Perspective."

>     _Behavioral Sciences and the Law_ 14 (1996): 41-59.

>     Michael Oliver, _Politics of Disablement_ , pp 1-11 and 25-42.

>  
>  
>

>     **Week 3, 2/3:** **The cultural construction of deafness.**

>     Harlan Lane, _Mask of Benevolence_ , pp 1-49 (reserved reading list
under 158:101).

>     Douglas Baynton, _Forbidden Signs_ , pp 1-55 (introduction, chapters
1-2) (reserved list 158:101).

>     Nora Groce, _Everyone Here Spoke Sign Language_ , pp 50-67, 75-94.

>     Carol Padden, _Deaf in America_ , pp 1-55.

>

>     **Week 4, 2/10: Lives less valued: eugenics, euthanasia, assisted
suicide.**

>     Philip Reilly, _The Surgical Solution_ , pp 30-127 (chapters 3-8).

>     Stephen Jay Gould, "Carrie Buck's Daughter," in _The Flamingo's Smile_ ,
pp306-316.

>     Martin Pernick, "Defining the Defective: Eugenics, Aesthetics, and Mass
Culture in Early-Twentieth Century America,"

>               in Mitchell, _Discourses of Disability_ , pp 89-101.

>     Joseph Shapiro, "No Less Worthy a Life," _No Pity_ , pp 258-288.

>     Ruth Hubbard, "Abortion and Disability: Who Should and Who Should Not
Inhabit the World," in Davis,

>               _The Disability Studies Reader_ , pp 187-200.

>     Paul Longmore, "Elizabeth Bouvia, Assisted Suicide and Social
Prejudice," _Issues in Law and Medicine_ 3 (1987): 141-168.

>

>     **Week 5, 2/17: The concept of normality.**

>     Lennard Davis, _Enforcing Normalcy_ , pp 1-49 (chapters 1-2).

>     Douglas Baynton, _Forbidden Signs_ , pp 108-148 (chapters 4-5).

>     Francois Ewald, "Norms, Discipline, and the Law," _Representations_ 30
(Spring 1990): 138-161.

>     Ian Hacking, _The Taming of Chance_ , pp 1-10, 160-179 (chapters 1,
19-20).

>     Vonnegut, Kurt, "Harrison Bergeron," in Donley and Buckley, _The Tyranny
of the Normal: An Anthology_ , pp 356-61.

>

>     **Week 6, 2/24: Freakery.**

>     Rosemarie Thomson,  _Extraordinary Bodies_ , pp 55-80 (chapter 3).

>     In Thomson, _Freakery_ :

>     Robert Bogdan, "The Social Construction of Freaks," pp 23-37.

>     David Gerber, "The Careers of People Exhibited in Freak Shows," pp
38-54.

>     James Cook, "Of Men, Missing Links, and Non-Descripts," pp 139-157.

>     Trent, "Defectives at the World's Fair" (handout - 10 pages).

>     Leslie Fiedler, _Freaks: Myths and Images of the Secret Self_.  NY:
Simon and Schuster, 1978.  (pages TBA).

>     Lois Bragg, "Planet of the Normates," book review essay in _American
Anthropologist_ 100 (March 1998): 177-180.

>

>     **Week 7, 3/3: Policy studies.**

>     Edward Berkowitz, _Disabled Policy_ , pp 1-78.

>     Claire Liachowitz, _Disability as a Social Construct: Legislative Roots_
, all read introduction, plus one other chapter to

>               report on to the group.

>     Edward Berkowitz, "A Historical Preface to the Americans with
Disabilities Act," _Journal of Policy History_ 6, No. 1 (1994), 96-119.

>

>     Preliminary proposals due (2 pgs).

>

>     **Week 8, 3/10: Representations of Disability in film.**

>     Paul Longmore, "Screening Stereotypes: Images of Disabled People,"
_Social Policy_ 16 (1985): 31-37.

>     Martin Norden, _The Cinema of Isolation_.  All read introduction, plus
one other chapter to report on to the group.  Watch

>     one of the movies described in the chapter you read.  Optional: if you
wish to bring a video to class to show a five minute

>     excerpt, I will bring a VCR.

>     I encourage you to attend at least part of the conference on cinema and
disability to be held on campus March 26-28.

>

>     Preliminary bibliography of primary and secondary sources due.

>

>     **Spring Break**

>

>     **Week 9, 3/24:** Revised proposals with annotated bibliography of
primary and secondary sources due.

>     Discussion of sample documents: each student will distribute copies of a
document that presents an interesting question of

>     interpretation, to be read and discussed by the group.

>

>     **Week 10, 3/31:** No class: individual conferences as needed.

>

>     **Week 11, 4/7:** Progress reports and problem solving.  Discussion of
sample documents (see week 9 above).

>

>     **Week 12, 4/14:** No class: individual conferences as needed.

>

>     **Week 13, 4/21:** Presentations.  First drafts due -- bring a copy to
exchange with another student for  
>     >

>     critique, and a copy for the instructor.

>

>     **Week 14, 4/28:** Critiques of drafts due - bring two copies.
Discussion of critiques.

>     Presentations.

>

>     **Week 15, 5/5:** Presentations.

>

>     Final papers due Wednesday 5:00 PM of finals week.  
  
---  
  
* * *

[Communities](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/community.html) |
[Curriculum](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/curriculum.html) | [Technology &
Learning](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/innovation.html) | [Reference &
Research](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/reference.html) [Crossroads home
page](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/index.html) | [About
Crossroads](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/about.html) | [What's
New](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/new.html) | [Visitors'
Book](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/visitor.html)   This section last
updated August 2000. Please send comments to [Crossroads
Webstaff](mailto:cepacs@gusun.georgetown.edu).

