| This Page *Bottom | *[Keas Home Page](../../../keas.htm) |
*[Planetarium](../../../planet/index.htm) *[Development](../grow/dev_plan.htm)
*[WWW Road Kill](../road_kill.htm) |

# History of Science 2103  
History of Science and Technology

# Instructor: Michael N. Keas



### Course Readings

  * Textbook: John Marks, _Science and the Making of the Modern World_
  * Source Book: John Burke, _Science and Culture in the Western Tradition_
  * Reading Packet: Available at AVA Copy in the Student Union 

### Quizzes and Examinations

  * Pop Quizzes: 20% 
  * First Exam: 20% 
  * Second Exam: 20% 
  * Final Exam: 40% 

Completion of all three exams is required for a passing grade. Make-up exams
will be permitted only in cases of serious illness, or emergency (such as a
death in the family); approval of such a make-up exam should be obtained in
advance if possible.

### Course Objective

This course traces significant episodes in the historical development of
science and its relations with technology. One of the course's main aims is to
inquire into the formation of science-based technology as an important
cultural and institutional force that shapes modern life.

### Class Discussions

On days when reading assignments are due specifically for the purpose of class
discussion, students should bring the book or books to class in which those
readings are found or notes from those readings. Discussion days are indicated
on the reading schedule.

### Lecture, Discussion, and Reading Schedule

  * TB = Textbook by John Marks 
  * SB = Source book edited by John G. Burke 
  * RP = Reading packet available at AVA Copy in the Student Union 
  * Discuss = we will use the Socratic method and discuss the readings that are due 

#### THE ORIGINS AND GROWTH OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

> ##### JANUARY

16 Class Introduction

18 Definition of Science vs. Definition of Technology

TB 0-8; SB 0-5: Discuss

23 Greek Science: Platonism and Aristotelianism

TB 9-17; SB 7-12

25 The Middle Ages: the Christian and Islamic Contexts of Science

SB 23-44: Discuss  

#### SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY DURING THE SCIENTIFIC REVOLUTION

30 The Renaissance and Copernicus: Rebirth, Revolution, or Neither?  TB 18-25;
SB 45-48

##### FEBRUARY

1 Copernicus, Brahe, and Kepler: Reformers or Revolutionists?

TB 25-31; SB 80-84, 89-107

6 Galileo and the Church: the Boundaries of Science and Theology.

TB 32-43; SB 107-111

8 Science and Technology: what Kind of Relation up Through 17th Century?

TB 44-57, 78-86; SB 59-66, 72-80, 85-87: Discuss

13 Descartes, Huygens, and Newton: Mechanical and Mathematical Models.

TB 58-64; SB 115-119

15 The Newtonian Synthesis: the Climax of the Scientific Revolution.

TB 65-77; SB 136-138

20 Exam #1

#### 18TH-CENTURY SCIENCE, IDEOLOGY, TECHNOLOGY, AND SOCIETY

22 Newton and the Enlightenment: Science, Culture, and the Social Sciences  TB
87-116; SB 139-150

27 Science and Ideology: The Social Sciences and Political Revolution

TB 117-128; SB 150-154

##### MARCH

1 The Early Industrial Revolution: What Was the Role of Science?

TB 129-143; SB 155-162: Discuss

6 18th-Century Metallurgy and Steam Power: A Closer Look

RP 1-24: Discuss  

#### THE ORIGINS OF 3 MODERN DISCIPLINES OF SCIENCE: LATE 18TH and 19TH
CENTURY

8 Chemistry: The Elemental Constitution of Nature  TB 144-155

##### SPRING BREAK: MARCH 10-18

20 Geology: The First "Historical" Science

TB 156-164

22 Biology: Darwinism as Science and Ideology

TB 174-185; SB 199-231  

#### 19TH-CENTURY SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

27 Medicine on a New Scientific Foundation  TB 294-310; SB 163-197: Discuss

29 Science and 19th-Century Technology

TB 186-212

##### APRIL

3 Industrialization, New Ideologies, and European Expansion

TB 212-239

5 Exam #2

#### INTERPRETATIONS OF THE HISTORY OF TECHNOLOGY: REVOLUTION OR EVOLUTION?

10 Continuity and Discontinuity in the History of Technology  TB 165-173; RP
25-44: Discuss

12 Sources of New Technology and the Notion of Human Progress

RP 44-50  

#### 20TH-CENTURY SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND WORLD VIEW

17 Albert Einstein, the New Physics, and the Bomb  TB 240-275

19 Modern Uncertainty in Physics and Society

SB 235-239, 244-261: Discuss

24 Scientific Progress and the Rationality of Science: Pre-20th Century

TB 357-367; SB 263-282: Discuss

26 Scientific Progress and the Rationality of Science: 20th Century

##### MAY

1 Science and Technology in the Context of Political Systems

TB 368-428: Discuss

3 Science, Technology, and the Modern World: Conclusion and Review TB 490-498;
SB 283-290

9 Final Cumulative Examination, Wednesday 10:30-12:30



| This Page *Top | Bottom Navigation Tools | **

* * *

Mike Keas** , **** Assistant Professor of Natural Science, Unified Studies
Natural Science Coordinator  
PhD *[History of Science](http://www.ou.edu/cas/hsci/), *[University of
Oklahoma](http://www.ou.edu/). At *Oklahoma Baptist University since 1993  
Courses: *[US Natural Science](../../../us/index.htm)
*[311](../../../us/311/pack.html) & *[312](../../../us/312/index.htm) &
*[History/Philosophy of Science](../../../histsci/index.htm)  
Director: *[Planetarium's](../../../planet/index.htm) Cosmology and Cultures
Project (1997-2001)  
Email: *[mike_keas@mail.okbu.edu](mailto:mike_keas@mail.okbu.edu), Internet:
*[Vita-Home](../../../keas.htm)  
*[Division of Sciences & Math](../../../index.htm)[emathics](http://www.okbu.edu/)

![](../../../images/bison.gif)**(C) 1998**

Welcome to the Science website provided by Oklahoma Baptist University. These
pages have been written by the faculty and students of the Division of Natural
Sciences and Mathematics. These web pages may be printed, copied, and
distributed for educational use by any non-profit educational group, so long
as they are not edited or altered in any way, nor distributed for profit, nor
repackaged or incorporated into any other medium or product, and so long as
full credit is given to the OBU Science Program.

* * *

[![](../../../images/netscape3.gif)](http://home.netscape.com/comprod/mirror/index.html)Our
web pages are never finished, but always under construction! The formatting of
our web pages may be unintelligible if you are not using [Netscape
2.0+](http://home.netscape.com/comprod/mirror/index.html). If you find a link
that does not work, please [Email](mailto:mike_keas@mail.okbu.edu) us.

* * *





