![](../../../graphics/banners/reg_temp2.gif)  
![](../page-banner-aci.gif)  
  
**WINTER 2001**  
  
This information effective for Winter 2001.  
Check with instructor the first day of class for any changes.

* * *

# History

**[** **HIS-025B** **] [** **HIS-080C** **] [** **HIS-134A** **] [**
**HIS-147A** **] [** **HIS-182** **] [** **HIS-196M** **] [** **HIS-196Y**
**]**

##

* * *

25B. United States History 1877 to Present

Winter 2001  
Instructor: Alexandra Minna Stern

Go to: <http://ic.ucsc.edu/~amstern/hist25b>

[top of page]

##

* * *

80C. The Making of the Modern Middle East

Winter 2001  
Instructor: Edmund ("Terry") Burke, III

I have been teaching modern Middle Eastern history and World History at UCSC
since 1968. My research specialty is the colonial and post-colonial history of
the Arab world, especially Arab North Africa. I have written on social
movements (urban protests, peasant movements, anti-colonial movements) in the
modern Middle East, ordinary people's lives, and questions of representation
of Middle Easterners in Western discourse. I have traveled extensively in
North Africa and visited Egypt, Turkey, Jordan, Israel and Palestine. I speak
Arabic and French. I enjoy teaching this course.

### Course Aims and Objectives

The "Making of the Modern Middle East" is an introduction to the history of
the Middle East from the rise of Islam to 1980. It provides a basic overview
of the development of Islamic civilization and origins of modern Middle East
in the 19th and 20th centuries - including Ottoman self-strengthening,
nationalism, imperialism and modern politics. Approximately seven weeks are
devoted to the post-1800 Middle East.

#### Required Written Work

Two short papers on topics to be assigned, plus a final exam (in class). There
will also be weekly quizzes on the readings and a map quiz.

#### Required Reading

The following required books have been ordered by the Bay Tree Bookstore. All
are in paperback. There may also be a required course reader (stay tuned).

William Cleveland, _A History of the Modern Middle East_ (Westview) ISBN:
0-8133-0563-2.

Edmund Burke, III, _Struggle and Survival in the Modern Middle East_
(University of California Press) ISBN: 0-520-07988-4.

October 24, 2000

[top of page]

##

* * *

134A. The Ancient Regime and Revolution

Instructor: Philip Whalen

### Course Description

This course provides an overview of French history from the late Middle Ages
through the French Revolution. Themes and topics addressed will include
enduring political and social structures, the daily life of different social
classes, traditions of popular and elite revolt, the rise and fall of absolute
monarchy, patterns of consumption, the impact of Enlightenment thought, the
nature of early colonial interests, the relations between Paris and the
provinces as well as the colonial empire, and the origins and significance of
the French Revolution. This will be accomplished through a collection of
lectures, readings and discussions that focus on the political, social,
economic, gender and cultural history of France during this period. Some
additional readings are provided in the reader for the purpose of helping
students get oriented for their research assignment.

**Course Requirements:** regular attendance; close reading skills; write 2
two-page book reviews; complete take-home midterm essay exam; write a 10-12
page research paper on a theme or topic addressed in this course; and - for
those who miss 3 or more lectures - complete a take home final exam as
scheduled.

### Schedule of Lectures and Readings

#### 1: The Medieval Legacy

**Lectures:**

|

**Tues.**

|

Royal Structures and Institutions  
**Musical Offering:** Guillaume Machaut, 14th c. "Ballade"  
  
---|---|---  
  


|

**Thur.**

|

The Manorial and Seigniorial Systems  
  
  
**Readings:** James Collins, "Introduction" and ch. 1; Robin Briggs, Chapter
1; Goubert, "A bird's-eye view;" Villon's "Legacy;" and begin Davis, _The
Return of Martin Guerre._ Also look at Burgui ere and Lebrun, "Priest, Prince,
and Family."  

**2: Human Geography**

**Lectures:**

|

**Tues.**

|

Towns and Villages  
  
---|---|---  
  


|

**Thur.**

|

Peasant Society and Culture  
**Musical Offering:** Court of Burgundy, 1454  
  
  
**Reading:** Robin Briggs, Chapter 2; "A world of Insecurity and Fears;"
Davis, "Women on Top;" La Fontaine, poems; and continue _The Return of Martin
Guerre.  
_

**3: Worlds of Privilege**

**Lectures:**

|

**Tues.**

|

The Nobility  
**Musical Offering:** Lully, music for royal processions  
  
---|---|---  
  


|

**Thur.**

|

The Bourgeoisie. **Book reviews due today!**  
  
  
**Reading:** Collins, ch. 2; and finish Davis, _The Return of Martin Guerre;_
Beik,"The Culture of Protest;" Goubert, "The Nobility;" and La Bruy ere,
_Characters._

  
**4: The Early-Modern State**

**Lectures:**

|

**Tues.**

|

The Wars of Religion. ( **film clip** \- "Queen Margot")  
  
---|---|---  
  


|

**Thur.**

|

The Revolt of the Nobility: The Fronde  
  
  
Reading: Muchembled, "New Mechanisms of Power;" Carroll, "The Revolt of
Paris;" and Roche, _The People of Paris,_ ch. 2. Also look at Collins, _The
State in Early-Modern France,_ ch. 3.

  
**5: Colonialism and Trade**

**Lectures:**

|

**Tues.**

|

New France and Colonies  
**Musical Offering:** Rameau, "Les Indes gallantes," 1735  
  
---|---|---  
  


|

**Thur.**

|

Slavery and Trade. **Mid-term handed out today.**  
  
  
Reading: Lestringant, "Brazil, land of Cannibals;" "Le Code Noir" and related
documents; Gwendolyn Hall, "The Chaos of French Rule;" Roche, _The People of
Paris,_ ch. 3; Lach, "Narai and the French;" Quinn, "The Settler's Empire."
Also: Cohen, "The Establishment of Slave Societies;" and Eccles, "The Fur
Trade Frontier."

  
**6: Urban Popular Culture**

**Lectures:**

|

**Tues.**

|

Artisans and Workers. **Mid-term essays due today.**  
  
---|---|---  
  


|

**Thur.**

|

Popular Beliefs and Resistance  
**Musical Offering:** TBA  
  
  
Reading: Bouton, "Gendered Behavior in Subsistence Riots;" Farge, "At the
Workshop Door;" and Darnton, "The Great Cat Massacre." Also see Collins, ch.
4.

  
**7: Literature, Arts, and Propaganda**

**Lectures:**

|

**Tues.**

|

**Film,** "Beaumarchais"  
  
---|---|---  
  


|

**Thur.**

|

Street Theatre and Grub Street  
  
  
**Reading:** Beaumarchais' _The Barber of Seville;_ Isherwood, "Streets of the
People;" Popkin, _The Panorama of Paris_ (slctd) and Roche, _The People of
Paris,_ chs. 4-6.

  
**8: Enlightenment and Reform**

**Lectures:**

|

**Tues.**

|

Philosophes and Physiocrats  
  
---|---|---  
  


|

**Thur.**

|

Economy and Political Crises  
**Musical Offering:** TBA  
  
  
**Reading:** Briggs, ch. 4; Roche, _The People of Paris,_ chs. 7-8; Popkin,
_The Panorama of Paris_ (selections); and selections from _The Persian
Letters._ Also see Mercier, "The Year 2440" and Norberg, "The Libertine
Whore." Consider Collins, ch. 5.

  
**9: The French Revolution I**

**Lectures:**

|

**Tues.**

|

The Causes of the French Revolution  
  
---|---|---  
  


|

**Thur.**

|

From Constitutional Monarchy to Republic  
  
  
**Reading:** Popkin, chs. 1-4; "1789 D eclaration;" Rude, "The Anatomy of the
Revolutionary Crowd;" Popkin, _The Panorama of Paris_ (selections); Cobb,
"Provincial Terrorist" or Godineau, "Portraits of Militant Women;" and Hufton,
"The Woman Rioter." Consider James Collins, ch. 6.

  
**10: The French Revolution II**

**Lectures:**

|

**Tues.**

|

Revolutionary Dictatorship and Terror  
**Final essay questions handed out**  
  
---|---|---  
  


|

**Thur.**

|

Napoleon and the Legacy of the French Revolution  
  
  
**Reading:** de Gouges, "D eclaration;" George Rude, Popkin, chs. 5-9; and
Hufton, "The Woman Rioter."Consider: de la Bretonne, _The Nights of Paris,_
and Collins, ch. 7.

[top of page]

##

* * *

147A. California Environmental History

Winter 2001  
Instructor: Willie Yaryan

### Course Description

Thirty-five years ago, Raymond Dasmann, professor emeritus of environmental
studies at UCSC, wrote that "in California one sees not only the consequence
of unplanned, careless, or deliberately destructive past activity; one also
gets the feelings that the worst is yet to come." Dasmann's classic book, _The
Destruction of California,_ is more relevant today than in 1965. Then the
population was 19 million; today it stands at 34 million. The state's air,
soil, and water resources are polluted, degraded, or in short supply; plant
and animal biodiversity is declining at an alarming rate; toxic waste dumps
are sited in the back yards of the poor and people of color; farms are paved
over for housing developments; and old-growth trees are cut and milled for
overseas consumption. The war between nature and culture in California is
claiming casualties on both sides.

This course will make use of the insights and methodology of environmental
historians, who study the changing relationship between humans and their
environment, to help understood the roots and history of our present
environmental crisis. It was in California where the 19th century "wild west"
economy of resource extraction produced its worst abuses, and it was in
California that the early conservation movement achieved its first successes
in Yosemite and Big Basin, as well as its first failure at Hetch Hetchy. Smog
in Los Angeles exemplifies the worst pollutive effects of urbanism, and the
battles to stop the Diablo Canyon nuclear power plant and to preserve Mono
Lake were high points in the early environmental movement. We will examine a
variety of primary and secondary documents, read critical essays, and view
videos on California's diverse and spectacular environment in order to develop
an informed perspective on the history of its use and misuse.

### Course Requirements

Regular attendance in class and informed participation in discussions, careful
reading of the course materials, one critical book review (a list of books
will be provided), a take-home midterm to test comprehension of the reading,
and a 10-12 page research paper on the history of a California environmental
problem.

### Required Texts

Carolyn Merchant, ed., _Green Versus Gold: Sources in California's
Environmental History_ (Island Press, 1998)

Robert Dawson and Gray Brechin, _Farewell, Promised Land: Waking from the
California Dream_ (University of California Press, 1999)

Steven Gilbar, ed., _Natural State: A Literary Anthology of California Nature
Writing_ (University of California Press, 1998)

### Syllabus:

Go to: <http://ic.ucsc.edu/~wyaryan/hist147a/syllabus.html>

November 6, 2000

[top of page]

##

* * *

182\. The Civil War and Reconstruction, 1861-1877

Instructor: Bruce Levine  
Office: Stevenson 278

### Course Description

This course treats the period of civil war and reconstruction as the United
States' second revolution. Much about the country's history for the next
century and beyond was decided during these decisive years. We will begin by
tracing how the decades-long political struggle over slavery during the first
half of the nineteenth century erupted into military conflict in 1861. In the
course of studying the war, three related themes will be emphasized: (1) what
factors determined the war's outcome; (2) how the methods and goals of both
sides changed in the course of the fighting; and (3) how the war altered life
in both the North and the South. Although the Confederacy's defeat ended the
war, the struggle over the shape of the post-slavery South continued long
after Appomattox. In studying this subject, we will focus on the distinct and
conflicting ways in which different groups of Americans approached the issues
of reconstructing the South and the nation during the war and postwar years.

### Required Texts

James M. McPherson, _Battle Cry of Freedom_ (Oxford, 1988)

Eric Foner, _A Short History of Reconstruction_ (HarperCollins, 1990)

Michael Perman, ed., _Major Problems in the Civil War and Reconstruction_
(Heath, 2d ed., 1998)

Ira Berlin, et al., eds., _Free at Last: A Documentary History of Slavery,
Freedom, and the Civil War_ (The New Press, 1992)

Faust, _Mothers of Invention: Women of the Slaveholding South in the American
Civil War_ (Vintage, 1996)

### Course Requirements

All students are expected to attend all lectures and to complete all reading
and writing assignments on schedule. Attendance and active participation in
section meetings is also mandatory. There will be three two essay-type exams,
each of which will be based upon both readings and lectures. Each exam will be
given as a take-home assignment.

[ top of page]

##

* * *

196M. The End Of Slavery and Serfdom

Instructor: Bruce Levine  
Office: Stevenson 278  
Winter 2001

### Course Description

This course sets the United States' experience with slavery and its
elimination in comparative perspective. More specifically, it compares the
historical trajectory of slavery in the United States with the rise and
decline of this and other forms of bound labor elsewhere in the western
hemisphere, Europe, and southern Africa. Class discussion will focus upon
readings that address one or another general or locally specific aspect of the
international comparison.

Among other subjects, we will investigate the origins of and differences
between serfdom and slavery. We will inquire into the relationship between
rights and power in slave societies, on the one hand, and differences in
national origin and race, on the other. We will ask why in some cases
emancipation occurred in a violent and revolutionary manner,but, in others,
occurred peacefully and gradually. We will ask how the experience of
emancipation in one country influenced developments in others. Finally, we
will inquire into the long-term impact that different types of emancipation
had on upon post-emancipation life in different countries.

### Course Requirements

Each student will write one short paper (approx. 5-8 pages) every other week
discussing the readings assigned for that week. Students will be graded and/or
evaluated on the basis of these essays and their contribution to classroom
discussion. Readings will include selections from works such as the following:
Raymond Grew, "The Case for Comparing Histories;" Evsey D. Domar, "The Causes
of Slavery or Serfdom: A Hypothesis;" Barrington Moore, Jr., _Social Origins
of Dictatorship and Democracy;_ Robin Blackburn, _The Overthrow of Colonial
Slavery, 1776-1848;_ George M. Fredrickson, _White Supremacy: A Comparative
Study of American and South African History;_ Herbert S. Klein, _African
Slavery in Latin America and the Caribbean; Thomas C. Holt,_ "'An Empire Over
the Mind': Emancipation, Race, and Ideology in the British West Indies and the
American South;" Eric Foner, "The Anatomy of Emancipation;" Barbara J. Field,
"Who Freed the Slaves?" Barbara Jeanne Fields, "The Advent of Capitalist
Agriculture: The New South in a Bourgeois World"; George Lefebvre, _The Coming
of the French Revolution;_ Hans Rosenberg, _Bureaucracy, Aristocracy and
Autocracy: The Prussian Experience, 1660-1815;_ Theodore S. Hamerow,
_Restoration, Revolution, Reaction: Economics and Politics in Germany,
1815-1871;_ Jerome Blum, _The End of the Old Order in Rural Europe._

[ top of page]

##

* * *

196Y. Research Seminar on Memories of World War II in the US and Japan

Instructor: Alice Yang Murray  
Call number: 60508  
Meetings: Thursdays 4-7 PM; Social Science 2 Room 171  
Winter 2001

For more information on this class, please go to [
http://humwww.ucsc.edu/history/history196y](http://humwww.ucsc.edu/history/history196y)

[ top of page]

