**HIS 202 SYLLABUS, ANDERSON COLLEGE**

**Section A, Spring 2002**

** **

**_Course Information_**



HIS 202 - United States History 2 - American political and social development
from the Reconstruction Era to the present.  Continuation of HIS 201.
Lectures, readings, class discussion.  3 semester hours.  Meets MWF,
1:00-1:50, in Watkins Teaching Center, Room 214



**_ _**

**_Instructor Information_**

**_ _**

Lewie Reece, Ph.D. ****

Assistant Professor of History

Office: 119 Watkins Teaching Center ****

Office Hours: MW 3:30-5, TTH 12:30-1:30, 3:30-4:30, or by appointment

Office Phone: (864) 231-5796

Home Phone: (864) 261-8668 (Please do not call before 9 a.m. or after 9 p.m.)

Email: **** lreece@ac.edu





**_Course Objectives_**



The purpose of the Modern America survey course is to present the complex
story of the American people from the Reconstruction Era to the present.  One
cannot hope to do justice to all of the subjects of such a body of knowledge
in just one semester.  Nonetheless, one can, at the least, provide students
with a foundation of basic knowledge about the American past.  Students will
also be given an opportunity to learn the craft of historians.  They will be
asked to critically read material, to analyze the historical period we study,
and to produce history themselves in the form of a researched term paper.



This is a lecture and class discussion course.  Class discussion will be an
important component of the course, and the instructor will periodically ask
questions which will invite student participation.  The lectures will be
informative and thoughtful and will encourage introspection and discussion
among students attending the class.  Students may wish to form small informal
study groups outside of class to provide further opportunities for discussion
and study.  Students should feel free to ask questions during class.  Such
questions will help us provide more detail and understanding about the topics
being examined.



Upon completion of this course, the student should be able to:



1.              Articulate the basic chronology of Modern American History.



2.              Demonstrate an understanding of important themes in Modern American History and their significance for the period.



3.              Demonstrate library and/or archival research skills for conducting historical study.



4.              Develop written critical analyses of historical material through essays and a term paper.

** **

**  
**

**_Course Expectations and Grading Criteria_**

** **

Grading will be based upon four elements: class attendance and participation,
in class examinations and a term paper based on original research by the
student.  These components will be weighted as follows:



Class Attendance and Participation    10%                             Grading
Scale: A = 90 - 100

Midterm Exam **             **                                    30 %
B = 80 - 89

Term Paper **                  **                        30 %
C = 70 - 79

Final Exam **                   **                        _30 %_
D = 60 - 69

                                    100%                                                   F = 59 or less



1.              **_Attendance_** will be taken regularly and you must attend class unless you have a compelling excuse which you discuss with the instructor before your absence.   The instructor will follow the college=s attendance policy as described in _Anderson College Academic Catalog, 2001 - 2002_ (p. 130).   Students who have more than nine absences will automatically receive an _F_ grade for the course.   Each class session will be **_interactive_**.   You must read and think before you come to class, then **_participate_** in class discussions.   A list of assigned readings for each week of the semester is included in this syllabus.  Students are expected to read the materials assigned for each class date before coming to class.  These readings, along with class lectures, activities, and discussions, will be important for developing the foundation students will need to successfully demonstrate mastery of course material.  This being the case, it behooves students to keep up with assigned readings and to attend class regularly.



2.              **_Two examinations_** **** will be given during the semester, a midterm exam and a final exam.  The exams will be comprised of several short answer questions and one long essay question.  Through these exams, students will demonstrate mastery of the course material by identifying and explaining the larger significance of important themes in American history.  Students will never be asked to memorize dates, nor to simply recall memorable facts about selected people from America=s past.  Rather, students will be asked to demonstrate a base of knowledge regarding important themes or events in Modern American History.  For the essay question on each exam, students will be expected to choose one of four broad questions related to an important part of the American experience and develop a well written essay.  The midterm examination will be given on **Friday, Feb. 22 nd **during the regular class period, while the final exam will be given on the date assigned for this class by the college, **Thursday, May 2 nd, 3-5 p.m.**  If students are unable to attend an examination it is their responsibility to contact the instructor to make arrangements to satisfy the exam requirement.



3.              Students are also expected to write a **_term paper_** during the semester.   The paper topic is to be selected from a list of suggested themes that can be found later in the syllabus.  Students are expected to use original sources, that is, materials written by people who actually participated in an event at the time it occurred.  Students are also be expected to read scholarly sources that should be cited in footnotes or endnotes.  These sources can be discovered by drawing upon your textbooks= bibliographies, the ASuggestions for Further Reading@ found at the conclusion of each chapter of the course=s core text, _American Passages_ , through library research, and by consulting the instructor.  Internet sources, while useful for finding historical information, often lack the detail necessary for scholarly work and are not an adequate substitute for reading scholarly books and journal articles.  Therefore, students should not rely solely on internet sites as references for this paper.  Again, references should include original documents, books and journal articles.  **The paper topic should be selected by Monday, Feb. 11th.   **At that time students will hand in a one or two page abstract of what they propose to write about, along with a preliminary bibliography.  The final paper will be a minimum of five pages, maximum of ten pages in length, typed and double-spaced.  The paper will be due on **Friday, April 5th** , and while papers will be accepted after the due date they will be reduced one letter grade.





  

**_Required Textbooks_** __

_ _

Edward L. Ayers et. al.  _American Passages: A History of the United States,
Volume II_. (New York: Harcourt College Publishers, 2000). __



Michal Belknap.  _Federal Law and Southern Order: Racial Violence and
Constitutional Conflict in the Post-Brown South_.   (Athens: University of
Georgia Press, 1992).



Nancy MacLean.  _Behind the Mask of Chivalry: The Making of the Second Ku Klux
Klan_. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1995).



Howard N. Rabinowitz.  _Race Relations in the Urban South, 1865-1890_.
(Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1996).

_ _

Willie L. Rose.  _Rehearsal for Reconstruction: The Port Royal Experiment_.
(Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1999). __

_ _

_ _

**_Class Schedule and Readings_**

** **

Please note that the number of pages of required reading vary somewhat each
week.  The schedule given alerts students to the dates on which the instructor
will cover material related to particular sections of the course texts.
Students may wish to Aread ahead@.  It is advisable that students consider
their overall workload and pace their reading accordingly to assure that they
have completed the appropriate readings before coming to class ****

** **

**Week 1 - Jan. 11**        **_                Introduction to the Course_**





**Week 2 - Jan. 14, 16, & 18**      **_                      Reconstruction
Era_**

**_ _**

Readings:          Ayers, 518-531, 535-566

Rose, Read two chapters for the period after 1865



** **

**Week 3 - Jan. 21, 23, & 25**                           **_Gilded Age_**



Readings:          Ayers, 575-608

Rabinowitz, read Part 1 B pay attention to chapter 1



** **

**Week 4 - Jan. 28, 30, & Feb. 1**                     **_Urban Growth and
Expansion_**



Readings:          Ayers, 611-642, 645-676



** **

**Week 5 - Feb. 4, 6, & 8**            **_Progressivism in the Era of Theodore
Roosevelt_**

**_ _**

Readings:          Ayers, 679-706

Rabinowitz, read Part 2 B pay attention to the two chapters which discuss the
development of segregation and disfranchisement

  

**Week 6 - Feb. 11, 13, & 15      _Progressivism and the Origins of World War
I_**

**_ _**

**Paper Abstract & Preliminary Bibliography Due Monday, Feb. 11th __**

**_ _**

Readings:          Ayers, 715-746, 749-762 ****

** **

** **

**Week 7 - Feb. 18, 20, & 22      _World War I and the 1920s_**

**_ _**

**Midterm Exam - Friday, Feb. 22 __**

**_ _**

Readings:          Ayers, 762-786  



** **

**Week 8 - Feb. 25, 27, & Mar. 1                    _Twenties and the Ku Klux
Klan_** ****

** **

Readings:          Ayers, 789-820

Read MacLean, paying attention to the opening two chapters which discuss the
growth and

organization of the Athens, Georgia Ku Klux Klan.  ****

** **

** **

**Week 9 - Mar. 4, 6, & 8           _Great Depression and New Deal_**

**_ _**

Readings:          Ayers, 823-852, 861-894 ****

** **

** **

**Week 10 - Mar. 11, 13, & 15   _World War II_**

**_ _**

Readings:          Ayers, 897-928 ****

** **

** **

**No Class Mar. 16-24 - Spring Break**

** **

** **

**Week 11 - Mar. 25 & 27**          **_Postwar America_**



**No Class Friday, Mar. 29 (Good Friday)**



Readings:          Ayers, 931-960  





**Week 12 - Apr. 1, 3, & 5          _Eisenhower Years_**

**_ _**

**Term Paper Due Friday, April 5th __**

**_ _**

Readings:          Ayers, 962-994

Belknap, read section on Eisenhower, paying attention to the chapter on the
Little Rock Crisis **     **

** **

**  

