![](af_glbe.gif) |

# HST 3357 AFRICAN HISTORY TO 1880  
  
---|---  
**

Instructor: Dr. Nema Blyden  
Office: JO 4.208  
Office Hours: Tu/Th 8:30-9:30; Th. 6-7 p.m. and by appointment  
Email: [nblyden@utdallas.edu](mailto:nblyden@utdallas.edu)  
Home page: [http:www.utdallas.edu/~nblyden](http://www.utdallas.edu/~nblyden)  
Phone: 972-883-6354



Course Outline and Format**

This course will introduce students to the history of Africa , concentrating
on Sub-Saharan Africa, and will serve as a survey. During the course of the
semester several themes will be explored, examined and discussed. Each student
should come out of this course having a general background to African history,
and with some knowledge of issues they might further want to explore. Among
the issues and themes to be encountered, will be diversity of African culture,
medieval African empires, African contact with Europe, slavery and the slave
trade, and New World settlements in Africa. The course will take a thematic
and chronological approach and students will be exposed to different
viewpoints. Though the course will be biased in favor of Sub-Saharan Africa,
the history of other parts of Africa will also be touched upon.



**

Course Requirements**

A midterm paper (30%), final paper (30%), quizzes (20%), and weekly class
participation and attendance (20%) will make up the course grade. Late papers
will not be accepted without a valid excuse (documented illness or death).
Make up quizzes will not be allowed. We will have structured discussion
sections where students will be expected to raise questions and issues on the
reading material, as well as analyze the documents. Each student will be
required to do all the readings for the course, attend class regularly and
participate in class discussions.



**

Texts**

The following are the required texts for the course. Other supplementary
readings of both primary and secondary readings will be assigned as necessary.



Achebe, Chinua, _Things Fall Apart_

Collins, Robert _Problems in African History_

Davidson, Basil _African Civilization Revisited_

McEvedy, Colin, _The Penguin Atlas of African History_

Niane, D.T. _Sundiata: An epic of Old Mali_

Reynolds, Edward, _Stand the Storm: A History of the Atlantic Slave Trade_



**



COURSE SYLLABUS



August 26: Introductions and introduction to course

FILM:** AFRICA: A VOYAGE OF DISCOVERY, Part 1 "Different but equal"

**

August 30: Africa and African History**

Basil Davidson, _African Civilization Revisited,_ Introduction

Colin McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of African History_ , p. 16-23



**

September 2: Africa and Egypt (discussion)**

Robert Collins, _Problems in African Histor_ _y_ Problem I (pp. 1-19, 32-52)



**

September 7:Ancient Africa**

Davidson, pp. 47-69

Colin McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of African History,_ p. 24 -32



**

September 9: Ancient Africa**

Colin McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of African History,_ p. 34-39

**

FILM** : AFRICA, Part 2: "Mastering a Continent"

**

September 14 : Bantu QUIZ 1 Map Quiz: _The Penguin Atlas of African History,_
p. 131**

Robert Collins, _Problems in African History_ _,_ Problem II (pp. 55-85,
95-98)

**

(discussion)



September 16 NO CLASS**

**

September 21:Early West African cultures**

Colin McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of African History,_ p. 44-55

Davidson, pp. 75-80

**

FILM:** AFRICA: Part 3  "Caravans of Gold" **



September 23: Medieval empires: Ghana**

Davidson, pp. 85-87

Colin McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of African History,_ p. 44-55

**

September 28:** **Medieval empires: Kingdom of Mali** **QUIZ 2 (discussion)**
_

__Sundiata:An epic of old Mali_ (entire book)

Colin McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of African History_ , p. 56, 60-65



**

September 30: :**

Basil Davidson, pp. 88-102

**

FILM:** Keita: Heritage of a griot

**

October 5: Early Civilizations: **

Colin McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of African History,_ p. 80, 84-87

Davidson, pp. 103-124

**

FILM:** AFRICA: Part 4  "Kings and Cities"

**



October 7: **

Basil Davidson, pp. 75-85

Robert Collins, _Problems in African History,_ Problem III (pp. 135-142)

**



October 12: Slavery in Africa Give Midterm Topics**

Edward Reynolds, _Stand the Storm: A History of the Atlantic Slave Trade_ ,
Intro. & Ch. 1

**

October 14: (discussion)**

Robert Collins, _Problems in African History,_ Problem VI (253-295) **



October 19: Women in slavery**

Robert Collins, _Problems in African History,_ Problem V (183-186,194-212)

**



October 21: The Coming of Europe** **MID-TERM PAPER DUE**

Colin McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of African History,_ p. 66-77

Basil Davidson, pp. 201-232

**

FILM:** Black Sugar: Slavery from an African Perspective

**

October 26: Slavery and the slave trade**

Edward Reynolds, _Stand the Storm: A History of the Atlantic Slave Trade,_ Ch.
2 & 3

Basil Davidson, pp. 232-236

**

October 28: The Atlantic Slave trade** **QUIZ 3 (discussion)**

Edward Reynolds, _Stand the Storm: A History of the Atlantic Slave Trade,_ Ch.
4

Basil Davidson, pp. 237-241

Robert Collins, _Problems in African History,_ Problem V (187-193)

**



November 2 :The Atlantic Slave trade: Antislavery and abolition**

Edward Reynolds, _Stand the Storm: A History of the Atlantic Slave Trade,_
Ch.5 & 6

**



November 4: Return to Africa**:

"Freed slave colonies in West Africa" in _The Cambridge History of Africa,_
Vol. 5 John Flint **(handout)**

Davidson, pp. 410-412



**

November 9: Impact of the Slave Trade** **(discussion)**

Edward Reynolds, _Stand the Storm: A History of the Atlantic Slave Trade_ ,
Ch.6 & 7

**

November 11: East Africa**

Colin McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of African History,_ pp. 62, 102-109

Davidson, pp. 125-146

**



November 16: East Africa**

Davidson, pp. 146-166, 352-357

**

FILM:** The Africans: Part 1

**

November 18: Southern Africa (discussion)**

Colin McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of African History,_ p. 98-101

Davidson, pp. 167-194, 326-339

**



November 23:** **19th Century Africa Give final topics**

Colin McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of African History,_ p. 88-97

Davidson, pp. 361-409

**

FILM:** AFRICA, Part 5:  "The Bible and the Gun"



**

NOVEMBER 25 - 27 THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY



November 30: Europe in Africa** **QUIZ 4** **(discussion)**

Chinua Achebe, _Things Fall Apart_ **



December 2: Partition of Africa **

Colin McEvedy, _The Penguin Atlas of African History,_ p. 110-119

**

FILM:** AFRICA; Part 6  "This Magnificent African Cake"



**December 6: FINAL PAPER DUE**

