* * *

**W4211.001**|  **Spring 1995**|  **Ira Katznelson**  
---|---|---  
**Liberalism in America**  
PoliSci Homepage | PoliSci Courses| Undergrad info| Grad info  
  
* * *

[Discussion section with Sayres Rudy, Thursday, 6-7.30PM, 902IAB]

Liberalism is a term that soaks up a great deal of meaning. The course will
seek to clarify relationships among: (1) liberalism as a doctrine created in
early modern Europe to tame religious passions and restrain unbridled
sovereignty; (2) the liberal tradition in America, which, variously, has been
represented either as the hegemonic organizing principle of the American
regime or as one among other contested organizing themes for more than two
centuries; and (3) liberalism as a political position and policy repertoire in
the give and take of American politics, with a primary home in the Democratic
party, especially since the New Deal. The class seeks to integrate these foci
by exploring liberalism's shifting boundary between the included and excluded
and by examining the extent to which liberalism can be made sufficiently
social to embrace group as well as individual units of agency.

In so doing, the course will bring together literatures often kept apart. We
will read some basic texts in the development of liberalism, recent
considerations on liberalism by political theorists and philosophers,
scholarship on American political thought, and work on Democratic party
liberalism. The (perhaps not so) hidden aim is to encourage trespassing across
boundaries dividing history from political science, theory from empirical
work, and the study of American politics from the other subdisciplines in
political science.

There will be an in- class midterm and a take- home final.

All the materials for the course have been placed on reserve in Lehman
Library. A packet of readings, not including materials from the books
recommended for purchase, is available at CopyQuick, on Amsterdam Avenue
between 119th and 120th Streets. All course books in print have been ordered
by the Barnard Bookforum; I suggest you buy the following:

Steve Fraser and Gary Gerstle, eds., _The Rise and Fall of the New Deal Order,
1930- 1980_. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989

Richard Hofstadter, _The American Political Tradition_ , New York: Knopf, 1948
(Vintage paperback)

John Locke, _Two Treatises of Government_. edited by Peter Laslett. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1990

Theodore J. Lowi, _The End of Liberalism_. 2nd edition. New York: Norton, 1979

John Rawls, _A Theory of Justice_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1971

Alexis de Tocqueville, _Democracy in America_. translated by George Lawrence.
New York: Doubleday Anchor, 1969

***

_Part One_

Ronald Dworkin, "Liberalism," in Stuart Hampshire, ed., _Public and Private
Morality_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978

Charles Larmore, "Political Liberalism," _Political Theory_ , 18 (August 1990)

Jeremy Waldron, "Theoretical Foundations of Liberalism," _The Philosophical
Quarterly_ , 37 (April 1987)

Uday Mehta, "Liberal Strategies of Exclusion," _Politics and Society_ , 18
(December 1990)

Kirstie McClure, "Difference, Diversity, and the Limits of Toleration,"
_Political Theory_ , 18 (August 1990)

Rogers M. Smith, "Beyond Tocqueville, Myrdal, and Hartz: The Multiple
Traditions in America," _American Political Science Review_ , 87 (September
1993)

_Part Two_

John Locke, _Second Treatise_ , 1- 9, in _Two Treatises of Government_. edited
by Peter Laslett. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990

John Stuart Mill, _On Liberty_ , chapters 1- 3

L.T. Hobhouse, _Liberalism_ , chapters 4, 6, 7

_Part Three_

John Rawls, _A Theory of Justice_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1971,
chapter 1, sections 1- 5; chapter 2, sections 11- 14, 17; chapter 3, sections
20- 25, 26, 29; chapter 4, sections 32, 33, 36, 37; chapter five, sections 42,
43; chapter 6, sections 67; chapter 9, sections 78, 79, 82.

Joseph Raz, _The Morality of Freedom_. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986, chapters
1, 5, 14, 15.

Steven Lukes, _Moral Conflict and Politics_. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991,
chapters 1, 4.

Will Kymlicka, _Liberalism, Community, and Culture_. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1991, chapters 1, 2, 7- 10.

John Rawls, _Political Liberalism_. Columbia: Columbia University Press, 1993,
introduction, lecture 1 (parts 1- 7); lecture 2 (parts 2- 6); lecture 4.

_Part Four_

Isaac Kramnick, "The 'Great National Discussion': The Discourse of Politics in
1787," _William and Mary Quarterly_ , XLV (January 1988)

Joyce Appleby, _Liberalism and Republicanism in the Historical Imagination_.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992, chapter 1 (pp.1- 33).

Alexis de Tocqueville, _Democracy in America_. translated by George Lawrence.
New York: Doubleday Anchor, 1969, introduction, Volume One, part one, chapters
3, 4; part two, chapters 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 10; Volume Two, part 2, chapters 1- 3,
20.

Richard Hofstadter, _The American Political Tradition_. New York: Knopf, 1948,
introduction, chapters 1, 5, 12.

Louis Hartz, _The Liberal Tradition in America_. New York: Harcourt Brace and
World, 1955, chapters 1, 10.

James Oakes, _Slavery and Freedom: An Interpretation of the Old South_ ,
chapter 2, epilogue.

J. David Greenstone, _The Lincoln Persuasion: Remaking American Liberalism_.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993, chapter 2.

Michael Walzer, "What Does it Mean to be an American?," _Social Research_ , 57
(Fall 1990)

_Part Five_

Theodore J. Lowi, _The End of Liberalism_. 2nd edition. New York: Norton,
1979, prefaces to second edition and first edition, chapters 10, 11.

Steve Fraser and Gary Gerstle, eds., _The Rise and Fall of the New Deal Order,
1930- 1980_. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1989, introduction,
chapters 3- 5, 7, 10.

Thomas Byrne Edsall and Mary D. Edsall, _Chain Reaction: The Impact of Race,
Rights, and Taxes on American Politics_. New York: Norton, 1991, chapters 1,
12\.

_Part Six_

Gunnar Myrdal's _An American Dilemma_. New York: Harper and Row, 1944,
introduction, chapters 1- 3, 21, 45.

Katherine Van Wezel Stone, "The Post- War Paradigm in American Labor Law,"
_Yale Law Journal_ , 90 (June 1981)

Jean L. Cohen, "Redescribing Privacy: Identity, Difference and the Abortion
Controversy," _Columbia Journal of Gender and Law_ , 3 (#1, 1993)

***

