### The University of Florida  
Fredric G. Levin College of Law

# Comparative Law

# Spring 2002

### (Updated: January 22, 2002)

### Professor Pedro A. Malavet

**The Course.** An introduction to the comparative method from the perspective
of an American lawyer, focusing on methodology, rather than on substantive
matters. Starts with a survey of Comparative Law, its history, current
definition and scope, followed by practical uses of Comparative legal analysis
in United States courts. The more substantial part of the semester studies the
Civil Law tradition, the most common legal system in our world today.
Naturally, this course can only provide a general overview of the large number
of Civil Law nations. It starts with foreign legal education and the legal
professions. Then the Civil law system is placed in its proper context:
historical roots; structure; approach to judicial review; judicial
organization. **This is not Trade Law.** While comparative methodology is
helpful and often even essential for lawyers engaged in international business
transactions, this class is neither International Trade Law nor International
Business Law. We have wonderful courses elsewhere in our curriculum that cover
those subjects.

**Our class materials will consist of:** Merryman, Clark & Haley, The Civil
Law Tradition: Europe, Latin America & East Asia (The Michie Company 1994).
Required. I will also prepare handouts as needed. This is a difficult and
demanding casebook, but I believe that you all have the capacity to use it
successfully. It is, on balance, a really fun book; it includes an excellent
selection of material and approaches the course in a manner consistent with my
teaching goals. However, some of the material is dated, and many selections
are translations of foreign original works which and can be difficult to read.
**Recommended Reading:** Merryman, John Henry, The Civil Law Tradition
(Stanford 1987).

**Office Hours** : I will have regular office hours Wednesdays and Fridays
from 3:00 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. My office is in Room 337. My office telephone
number is 392-2234. You may also send e-mail to MALAVET@LAW.UFL.EDU. If you
feel lost, or if you have doubts that cannot be resolved during class or
during the period immediately following it, please do not hesitate to come and
see me. Office time is also a good opportunity to explore matters that are not
directly related to the material being discussed in class.

**Testing Score** : **(1) One short essay project.** This work will count for
10% of your testing score and will be graded on a pass/fail basis. I will meet
individually with students to discuss your projects and will provide feedback
on your performance. In order to make this administratively manageable, the
class will be divided into several groups. Although students will work
individually, the particular assignment, and the deadline applicable thereto,
will be set for each group at different times during the semester. This
project is just a creative-writing exercise. In the past, students have had a
lot of fun with it, and I have greatly enjoyed reading them. **(2) An open-
book, take-home, written final exam,** this will cover the remaining 90% of
your testing score. The exam will be due on the date now scheduled for our
exam : **Wednesday, May 8, 2002.**

**Class Participation** : When determining your final grades, I will consider
class participation to adjust your testing score in two ways: **(1)  Minimum
participation **(20% of the overall grade). Each student will be required to
participate in class discussion a specified number of times during the
semester in order to meet _**minimum**_ participation requirements, the exact
minimum number will depend on the size of the class and will be announced in
class. Class participation can occur in several ways: (a) I may call upon
students at random during class; and (b) each student must sign-up to
participate in class discussion; a set number of students will be allowed to
sign up for each class session; each student must sign-up for the number of
classes set for the minimum participation requirement; students who sign-up,
are called upon, and answer correctly, get a participation credit, if they are
unprepared, they will suffer a deduction. (2)   **Quality of Participation**.
I will consider the quality of student participation and conduct to further
adjust final grades, as I deem appropriate, accordingly, you are encouraged to
volunteer to answer questions at any time, i.e., class discussion should not
be limited to persons who have signed up or are called-on at random.

**Web Page.** A very complete set of class materials (syllabus, notes or
highlights for each subject we discuss, past examinations, feedback memoranda
related to each exam, practical projects and feedback memos for them, and
other useful information related to our course) is already posted to my web
site at http://nersp.nerdc.ufl.edu/~malavet. I will update the site during the
semester as I deem appropriate. I do not place materials on reserve in the
library and I will not print out the material posted on the web site. It is
your responsibility to review it. I will assume that you are familiar with the
contents of the web site in our class discussion and in writing your
examination.

**Class Attendance and Conduct** : Attendance is mandatory. Additionally,
students arriving late or leaving the room during class are an undue
distraction. I will take roll daily by passing around a sign up sheet. It is
the student's responsibility to initial the sign-up sheet in the appropriate
place whenever they are in class, i.e., the roll does not have to come to you,
you must come to the roll. I will allow three (3) unexcused absences per
semester on a no-questions-asked basis (provided however that none of them may
occur during the last eight sessions of the semester). Additionally, I am
willing to be flexible about allowing a few excused absences, late arrivals or
early departures, for good cause -such as a doctor's appointment, child-care
problem or job interview- _provided_ that the good cause is brought to my
attention beforehand or as soon as possible thereafter in the case of
unanticipated occurrences (excuses must be submitted in writing or via
e-mail). Students will have no more than seven days after the time of the
unanticipated occurrence to bring excuses to my attention, provided however
that I will not accept any excuses offered after our last session of the
semester.

**Professionalism in the Classroom**. Maintaining a professional classroom
atmosphere is the responsibility of both faculty and students. Students can
-and in my view should- be the first line of defense. If you see conduct in
that is unprofessional and that affects your quality of life in the classroom,
you should privately approach the offending student and ask that they modify
their behavior, if that is possible and practical. If private discussion is
impractical or unsuccessful, you should bring it to the attention of the
instructor. You may do so privately, if you wish, but you are strongly
encouraged to bring serious matters to my attention as soon as possible, so
that I may take appropriate measures.

> 1\. Students speaking loudly in private conversations during class (such
conversations are disruptive, distracting, and have a negative effect on
classroom atmosphere).  
>  2\. Laptop misuse. Laptop computers are wonderful tools for student note-
taking and reference, however, during class time it is inappropriate to use
laptops for any other purpose (e.g., to download from Napster, to play games,
to watch DVDs, to access inappropriate web sites -such as sexually-explicit
web sites-, or to write notes in large type that is visible to students
sitting behind the computer user). However, I wish to note that I know that
the majority of students using laptops are not misusing them.

This message is a way of giving voice to the "silent majority" of students who
behave properly. Proper discipline in the classroom is intended to encourage
everyone to participate in, to derive benefit from, and ultimately to enjoy
the class. Be well aware that it is perfectly acceptable, and indeed
professionally required, that you demand professional behavior of your
classmates in and out of class. In fact, the Syllabus and Rules of
Professional Conduct require that you report serious misconduct to the proper
authorities.  

**Sanctions**.  Absences, tardiness and any other unprofessional conduct will
be dealt with on a case-by-case basis; excessive absences -even if an excuse
is offered- tardiness or any undue conduct in the classroom may result in
administrative removal of the offending student from the course or in a
reduction of his/her grade.

* * *

# Syllabus

### (Updated: January 22, 2002)

### Session

|

### I. Introduction to Comparative Law  
  
---|---  
Friday, January 11  
Session 1 |

> A. Overview of the Civil Law system, 1-27  
  
Wednesday, January 16  
Session 2 |

> B. What _is_ Comparative Law?, 28-54  
  
Thursday, January 17  
Session 3 |

> C. Case Illustration of the Comparative Method, 54-69  
  
|  
|

### II. Using the Comparative Method in  
American Law Practice  
  
|

> A. Case Illustrations:  
  
Friday, January 18(a)  
Session 4(a) |

> > 1\. _L esion Corporelle, _Eastern Airlines v. Floyd, 171-179  
  
Friday, January 18(b)  
Session 4(b) |

> > 2\. _Shubun_ in Japanese Law, 179-182  
  
|  
|

### III. Foreign Legal Education  
  
|

> A. Legal Education in Europe  
  
Session 5-6 |

> > 1\. Introduction, France, 841-862  
  
Session 6 |

> > 2\. Germany, Italy, Spain, 863-872  
  
Session 7 |

> B. Legal Education in Latin America &East Asia, 872-892  
  
|  
|

### IV. The Legal Professions in the Civil Law World  
  
Session 8(a) |

> A. Overview, 892-901  
  
|

> B. Europe  
  
Sessions 8(b)-9(a) |

> > 1\. France, 902-908  
  
Sessions 9(b) |

> > 2\. Germany, 908-917  
  
Session 9(c) |

> > 3\. Italy & Spain, 917-920, 925-928  
  
Session 10 |

> C. Latin America and East Asia, 920-925, 928-935  
  
|  
|

### V. Historical basis: Europe  
  
|

> A. Roman Law  
  
Session 11 |

> > 1\. Introduction, 213-227  
  
Session 12 |

> > 2\. Sources of Law, A Roman law case, 227-238, 242-244  
  
Session 13 |

> > 3\. Family Law: _Patria Potestas_ , 238-242, 255-265  
  
Session 14 |

> > 4\. Sources of law, Tort, Inheritance, 245-255  
  
Session 15(a) |

> B. Transition between Roman and Customary Law, 265-281  
>  (Skim this reading as background for the comeback. I will lecture on it,
you should focus on the Comeback materials).  
  
Session 15(b) |

> C. Roman Law Makes A Comeback, 281-294  
  
|

> D. Canon Law:  
  
Session 16 |

> > 1\. History and Development, 294-308  
  
Session 17 |

> > 2\. The Code of Canon Law, A Canon Law case, 308-316  
  
|

> E. The Reception of the _Jus Commune_ in Europe  
  
Session 18 |

> > 1\. Italy, France and Germany, 325-339  
  
Session 19 |

> > 2\. Spain, Portugal, etc., 340-350  
  
|  
|

### VI. Revolutions And Codes  
  
Session 20 |

> A. Europe (1), 435-449  
  
Session 21 |

> B Europe (2), 449-458  
  
|  
|

### VII. Legal Interpretation  
  
Session 22 |

> A. Hierarchy of Legal Sources, 937-953  
  
Session 23 |

> B. Interpretation Methodology (1), 975-989  
  
Session 24 |

> C. Interpretation Methodology (2), 989-1004  
  
|  
|

### VIII. Substantive Rules  
  
Session 25 |

> A. Legal Categories, 1127-1149  
  
|

> B. Codification and Codes  
  
Session 26 |

> > 1\. France, 1149-1163  
  
Session 27 |

> > 2\. Germany and Mexico, 1156-1175, 1184-1187  
  
Session 28 |

> C. General Principles of Law, 1227-1240  
  
|  
|

### IX. Structure of the civil law Systems  
  
Session 29 |

> A. France, 535-553  
  
Session 30 |

> B. Germany, 553-569  
  
Session 31 |

> C. Spain, 585-604  
  
|  
|

### X. Judicial Review  
  
Session 32 |

> A. Overview, 705-719, 720-727 (Skip the Japanese case)  
  
Session 33 |

> B. Judicial Review of Executive Acts: In General, 729-740  
  
|

> C. Judicial Review of Legislative Enactments  
  
Session 34 |

> > 1\. France, 757-768, 770-771  
  
Session 35 |

> > 2\. Germany, 771-795  
  
|  
|

### XI. Procedure  
  
|

> A. Civil  
  
Session 36 |

> > 1\. In General, 1013-1029  
  
Session 37 |

> > 2\. Germany & France, 1029-1045  
  
|

> B. Criminal  
  
Session 38 |

> > 1\. In General, 1060-1074  
  
Session 39 |

> > 2\. Germany & France, 1074-1091  
  
|  
Session 40 |

### XII. The Future of the Civil Law, 1241-1247  
  
Session 41 | **Exam review**  
|  
  
/

