# Shooting Reconstruction vs Shooting Reenactment

## by D. H. Garrison, Jr.

Forensic Services Unit  
Grand Rapids Police Department  
Grand Rapids, Michigan

* * *

[Originally published in the Association of Firearm & Toolmark Examiners
Journal, April 1993.]

* * *

"This reconstruction appeared on the face of it to be not only highly
ingenious but practically flawless; and it was conclusively proven to be
completely wrong."

\- Henry Rhodes, CRIME AND CLUES

In a sense, all areas of criminalistics and investigation are geared to the
reconstruction of the criminal act. The latent print examiner can
"reconstruct" the position of a suspect's hand on a door; the serologist can
sometimes "reconstruct" the stabbing victim's position from stain patterns on
clothing; the medical examiner can "reconstruct" the wounding of a human body.
A more precise look at reconstruction, however, requires that we distinguish
between the terms reconstruction, re-creation, and reenactment.

We can easily dispose of the term "re-creation," as it is sometimes misused in
reference to reconstruction. The word re-creation means to form anew,
especially in the imagination, to recollect and reform in the mind. This might
be what advocates do in the courtroom with the spinning of tales and flights
of fancy, but re-creation is not the turf of the criminalist[1].

The term "reconstruction" indicates the reassembling (as from remaining parts)
of an item's original form, a putting together again. If a vase is broken into
many small pieces, a craftsman would try to gather as many pieces as possible
and attempt to fit them properly back together again. Some pieces might be
missing; some fragments might fit together in more than one way. The final
form of the repaired vase would, of course, depend heavily on the number of
recovered fragments and the skill and experience of the assembler.

In crime reconstruction, the vase is a criminal event that has been shattered
into numerous small pieces called "evidence." Given enough pieces, a
reconstruction can determine which witness statements agree with the final
shape of the reassembled facts and which are inconsistent with the result. As
defined by the California Department of Justice, homicide reconstruction is
"the process of utilizing information derived from physical evidence at the
scene, from analyses of physical evidence, and from inferences drawn from such
analyses to test various theories of the occurence of prior events"[2].

As defined by accident investigators, reconstruction is "the effort to
determine, from whatever information is available, how the accident happened.
. .It involves studying the results of the accident, considering other
circumstances, and applying scientific principles to form opinions relative to
events of the accident which are otherwise unknown or are the matter of
dispute"[3].

A simple description might define shooting reconstruction as: an examination
of the circumstances and physical evidence at the scene of a shooting to
establish how the incident occurred. This covers both the accidental and the
criminal shooting event. Note that all of these statements describe the scene
(or "results") of the event. This is the difference between scene
reconstruction and laboratory criminalistics, the former is generally
performed in the field, whereas the latter is generally bench work.

The key, of course, is the application of scientific principles, which is (one
hopes) common to both scene reconstruction and laboratory examination. The
practitioner, as any good scientist, must be cautious and conservative,
relying on the physical evidence when possible and verifying or rejecting the
input of interested human parties, be they witnesses, participants, or
lawyers. Reconstruction by its nature involves a process of elimination, where
what is purported to have happened is measured against the story told by the
items of evidence[4]. With insufficient information, the investigator may not
be able to determine what actually occurred; however, even with a few clues,
he may be able to say what did NOT occur. This is often the framework on which
a reconstruction hangs--a series of answers that eliminate those events that
did not happen.

This brings us to the subject of reenactment. The word "reenactment" means to
act out or perform again. It has nothing whatsoever to do with scientific
principles. The distinction between reconstruction and reenactment is a
critical one. To confuse the two is to confuse crime scene analysis with a
puppet show. Originally criminal reenactments by police investigators were
performed in the presence of suspects in an effort to encourage confessions
[5]. Today, a reenactment, whether it is two role-players in front of a jury
box or an elaborate video simulation of digitalized human figures repeating
programmed movements, is but a demonstration of a previously existing
reconstruction.

Without a reconstruction, competent or not, there can be no reenactment. The
exception, of course, is a reenactment of an event as it was seen by a
participant or witness. This brings us back to the human element, the hearsay,
upon which a reconstruction cannot solely rely. These sorts of reenactments
are, at best, just re-creations of recollections, and have nothing to do with
criminalistics or scientific principles. Reenactment producers are but skilled
cartoonists, not analyzers of physical evidence. It is dangerous for the
members of a jury to confuse the two terms.

The time element is important. The shooting reconstruction may be able to
determine where the victim was seated and approximately where the shooter was
standing at a given moment in time when the shot and the trajectory happened.
The reenactment artist pretends to know the shooter's furtive steps
approaching the scene, the movements of the victim's panicked head and face as
he meets the shot, and the likely instant reactions of both participants
during the shooting. This all-seeing, all- knowing attitude on the part of the
reenactor is somewhat mysterious, because no one knows exactly what these
things were like, often not even the participants. These things cannot be
scientifically calculated or estimated, but the reenactor would have the jury
believe that he knows, that this is how it looked and this is how it happened.
The reenactment is less than bad science, it's non-science masquerading as
science.

The shooting reconstruction completed by a knowledgeable investigator may take
into account that Shooter X was standing in a certain area and that Victim Y
was struck by a certain number of shotshell pellets from his waist to his
upper back while running away at about the south edge of a parking lot; the
investigator can then estimate with a fair amount of precision, given the
pellet- count per load of the shotshell and the tested pattern of the shotgun,
that the weapon was pointed (intentionally or not) within a couple feet to the
left or right of the victim, but only at that instant in time. The events and
actions leading up to and following the shooting are unknown to the
investigator, except for the statements of possibly biased participants. This
instant in time may be presented to the court as a diagram or model, but will
only show the moment as ascertained by the trajectory reconstruction, not some
imagined scenario.

The reconstruction of an automobile accident can give one a good idea about
the motions of the vehicles just before and just after a collision, because
these are based on speed calculations worked out from marks on the roadway,
crush damage, post-impact travel, and a multitude of other items of true
physical evidence. This sort of incident might become the subject of an
animated reenactment, after a competent reconstruction, of course. A shooting
incident, on the other hand, is seldom the valid subject of such display. No
one, especially the investigator, knows for certain what the whole incident
looked like from the shooter's point-of-view, the victim's point-of-view, or
the viewpoint of any interested bystander. No qualified investigator would lay
claim to such omniscience. The reenactor, however, seems to know it all.

The use of "virtual reality," or VR, computer simulations to reenact crimes in
the courtroom has stirred up controversy in the legal community. This
dissention is not so much due to the non-scientific basis of such video
treatments, but mostly because the VR-programmed details so readily reflect
the particular slant of the lawyer's side that produced the reenactment[6].
The VR marionettes can be made to move, dodge bullets, shoot (maliciously or
accidentally, depending if it's a prosecutor's or defense attorney's program),
fall down, die, or do whatever else the programmer desires. The facts, as
revealed by an examination of physical evidence, are seldom as pliable and
all-encompassing as the virtual treatment. True reconstruction seldom provides
all the answers to all the questions.

This, finally, is the crux of the problem. Are jurors to believe that there is
a real scientific basis for a computer- animated version of a shooting? Will
they be instructed by the judge that the reenacted treatment is but one
possible explanation for the incident? Or will the cautious jurist not allow
the reenactor's video into evidence in the first place, based on its lack of
scientific foundation, its editorializing of the known facts, and its
propensity to fill in the blanks that cannot really be known?

NOTES

1\. Chisum, W.J., "Crime Scene Reconstruction," California Department of
Justice Firearm/Toolmark Training Syllabus, reprinted Association of Firearm &
Toolmark Examiners Journal, Vol. 23, No. 2, April 1991,

pp. 745-51.

2\. Bell, W.P., "A Proposed Definition of Homicide Reconstruction," California
DOJ Firearm/Toolmark Training Syllabus, reprinted AFTE Journal, Vol. 23, No.
2, April 1991, pp. 740-44.

3\. Baker, J.S., Traffic Accident Investigation Manual, 2nd ed., Northwestern
University Traffic Institute: Evanston, Illinois, 1975, p. 319.

4\. Gross, H., Criminal Investigation, 4th ed., Ed. R. Howe, Sweet & Maxwell:
London, 1950, p. 14.

5\. Rhodes, H., Clues and Crime, Murray: London, 1936, p. 56.

6\. Homilton, J., "Is VR Real Enough for the Courtroom?" Business Week, Oct.
5, 1992, pp. 96-105.

* * *

Send questions or comments about this essay to: Dean H. Garrison, Jr.,
[Gunhand@aol.com](mailto:Gunhand@aol.com)

* * *

  * [Ethics in Science Page](/chem-ed/ethics/index.html) at Va Tech.

* * *
    
    
    Version: 1.1, last updated: 12/18/1996

