****IDEA 305 American Indian World Views**  
**To be announced**  
**Tuesday, 1600 - 1800 PM** | ![Oscar Howe designed
logo](../iais/ohowelogo2.gif) [ **Logo
history**](http://www.usd.edu/iais/iais/histlogo.html) | **Fall 2002**  
**Leonard Bruguier**  
[**bruguier@usd.edu**](mailto:bruguier@usd.edu)  
---|---|---  
  
**My office is located in _Dakota_ Hall, Room 18, on the lower level. Office
hours are one hour prior to each class meeting. If additional time is needed,
my normal working hours are 8:00A through 5:00P, unless other business
intervenes. Call 605.677.5209 to make an appointment. You are encouraged to
visit the Institute offices. While here, you may use the materials found in
the South _Dakota_ Oral History Center (appointments appreciated), or browse
the Joseph H. Cash Memorial Library. Specific information about the
Institute's resources are available on our [website](http://www.usd.edu/iais).

If you have a disability for which you are or may be requesting an
accomodation, you are encouraged to contact both your instructor and Dr.
Elaine Pearson, Director of Disability Services, (Service Center, 119;
677-6389) as early as possible in the semester.

COURSE DESCRIPTION

This course is an introductory survey of the content, concepts, and methods of
studying, learning, and practicing American Indian history and culture.
Exposure to the diverse American Indian cultures, political systems, and
social organizations inhabiting North America from time immemorial to the
present are explored through the use of oral traditions, written literature,
and art forms.

COURSE PHILOSOPHY

A University classroom is one of the few places left on mother earth where
students have total intellectual freedom. We are all students (albeit with
varying levels of sophistication and development). Therefore, do not be
hesitant to express yourself through oral and written exercises. Dialogue is
an important part of the learning process, especially in societies that are
historically based on oral traditions. We will in effect use dialogue to
reinforce other learning activities. I prefer that you share your thoughts
with the class.

COURSE OBJECTIVE

This course enhances your chosen career because it presents a multicultural
view of today's society. Exposure to another's cultural viewpoint gives you a
better understanding of its intrinsic values and how it works. This enables
you to have a clearer interpretation of how it affects people's interactions.

ATTENDANCE

Class attendance is mandatory. You are accountable for ideas, dialogue,
visuals, and discussions from assigned readings that will be shared only in
the classroom.

COMPUTER LITERACY

Please gain access to and develop your computer skills with the University of
South Dakota's computer network. Periodically, cyberspace smokesignals is used
to provide updates on events, readings, and other pertinent matters. You are
responsible for maintaining your [Electronic
Portfolio](http://www.usd.edu/admin/vpaa/themes/EP's/electronicportfolios.htm).
Please go to this page and review the requirements and take the necessary
steps to establish your account. Those who are not familiar with computers
please visit with me for alternative solutions.

ASSESSMENT

Assignments for grade this semester: each student is responsible for
maintaining his journal/portfolio. We will review these documents periodically
through the semester. This is the only assignment for the course.

Each absence without sufficient reason causes your grade to drop one 100-93=A,
92-85=B, 84-76=C, 75-68=D, 67-00=failed to meet minimum standards..

CLASS MEETING DATES, LECTURE TOPICS

We will meet on Tuesdays at a site yet to named in accordance with the
University Fall Semester 2002 Calendar.

  * September 10: general informational meeting. Meet with coordinator, Meg Quintal, American Indian World Views program, Karen Olmstead, IdEA program director.

  * September 17: visit Oscar Howe Art Gallery, Old Main. Discussion of Indian art and its impact on culture. Discussant Dean John Day or his designated respresentative.

  * September 24: Visit with Gene Thin Elk, Doyle Pipe On Head, and _Tiospaye_ Council officers at the Native American Cultural Center. Discussion of Indian spirituality and medicines, set up field trip to USD spiritual grounds. Discussion of Indian activities on campus, upcoming events, and services available on campus. _Tiospaye_ Council officers for briefing on their activities.

  * October 1: Visit American Indian World Views librarian [Tess Gibson](mailto:tgibson@usd.edu) at I. D. Weeks Library for introduction to accessing materials related to the theme.

  * October 8: meeting with available American Indian Studies major faculty and interested personnel at Oscar Howe Art Gallery. Discuss areas of studies with relevent faculty.

  * October 15: Open date for implementation student input.

  * October 22: Discussions on the course content, student aspirations, and future endeavors, review journals/electronic portfolios.

BOOKS:

To be announced.

**[Return](fall02crs.html) to Fall 2002 Courses  
[Return](indexa.html) to Courses, Schedules, and Calendar  
[Return](../index.html) to Institute mainpage  
[Return](http://www.usd.edu) to University of South _Dakota_ mainpage

13 August 2002, lrb  

