**JOURNAL OF THE FACULTY SENATE** The University of Oklahoma (Norman
campus)Regular session - May 5, 1997 - 3:30 p.m. - Jacobson Faculty Hall 102

office: Jacobson Faculty Hall 206 phone: 325-6789 FAX: 325-6782e-mail:
facsen@ou.edu web site: http://www.ou.edu/admin/facsen/

The Faculty Senate was called to order by Professor Rick Tepker, Chair.

PRESENT: Albert (1), Baker (3), Benson (0), Blank (1), Bremer (1), Civan (2),
Dillon (1), Durica (0), Egle (3), Elisens (3), Emery (0), Fiedler (0), Fung
(0), Gana (0), Gilje(0), B.Greene (3), E.Greene (3), Harris (1), Holmes (0),
Horrell (2), Hughes (1), Hutchison (0), Kinzie (2), Konopak (1), Laird (2),
Lancaster (1), Murphy (1), Norwood (0), Patten (0), Patterson (0), Reynolds
(1), St.John (2), Sipes (1), Tepker (0), VanGundy (2), Wenk (0), Williams (3)

Provost's office representative: Mergler

PSA representatives: Iselin, Spencer

ABSENT: Gupta (3), Hillyer (3), Hobbs (1), Joyce (2), C.Knapp (2), F. Lee (3),
Palmer (2), Ramsey (2), Shaughnessy (2), Smith (4), Stoltenberg (1),
Thulasiraman (2), Wahl(2), Wallach(4)

[NOTE: During the period June 1996 to May 1997, the Senate held 9 regular
sessions and no special sessions. The figures in parentheses above indicate
the number of absences.]

__________________________________________________________________________

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Announcements:

Schedule of Senate meetings for 1997-98 and list of new senators 2

Summary of Speakers Service program 2

Faculty retirees 2

Regent Stephen Bentley 2

Library journal subscriptions 2

Senate Chair's Report: Senate accomplishments 4

Election, councils/committees/boards 5

Committee revisions 5

Student jury duty 5

Day care center 6

Election, Senate Secretary and Chair-Elect 7

Election, Senate standing committees 7

Presentation of Certificates of Appreciation 8

Resolution of Appreciation to Prof. Rick Tepker 8

__________________________________________________________________________

**APPROVAL OF JOURNAL**

The Senate Journal for the regular session of April 14, 1997, was approved.

**Announcements**

The regular meetings of the Faculty Senate for 1997-98 will be held at
3:30p.m. in Jacobson Faculty Hall 102 on the following Mondays: September 8,
October 13, November 10, December8, January 12, February 9, March 16, April
13, and May 4.

Summary of the activities of the Speakers Service for the past year:

The Faculty Senate office assumed responsibility for coordinating the program
for 1996-97 and arranged a record number of programs. From May 1996 to April
1997, 57 faculty and staff were scheduled for 84 programs to 42 organizations
throughout the state. These speakers from OU gave programs to groups such as
high school honors classes, business and civic clubs, and church discussion
groups in communities ranging from Walters to Pryor. The Faculty Senate and
the University sincerely appreciate the members of the Speakers Service who
share their expertise and knowledge with the people of Oklahoma.

The Faculty Senate thanks the following faculty who retired during the past
academic year for their dedication and contribution to our community: Marvin
Baker (Geography), Tom Boyd (Philosophy), Bob Foote (Industrial Engineering),
Arnulf Hagen (Chemistry  & Biochemistry), Howard Haines (Zoology), David Jaffe
(Journalism & Mass Communication), Paul Kleine (Educational Psychology),
Thomas Miller (Psychology), and David Stearns (Geology & Geophysics).

Prof. Tepker introduced Mr. Stephen Bentley, Chair of the OU Board of Regents,
and welcomed him to the meeting.

**Library journal subscriptions

** Professors Pat Weaver-Meyers, Acting Director of Information Management and
Delivery (Library), Joe Rodgers (Psychology), Chair of the University
Libraries Committee, and Wilbur Stolt, Director of Access Services (Library),
were present to answer questions about library journal subscriptions (see 4/97
Senate Journal, page 3).

Prof. Weaver-Meyers reported that in the last ten years, serials prices have
gone up 138%, but the library budget has not kept pace. The library has been
able to keep from cutting serials titles by spending less money on books. Many
other libraries have been cutting serials titles in recent years. The cost of
serials has increased from $1.8 million in 1992/93 to $2.6 million in 1996/97.
Next year, the cost would be $3 million if we continue the current
subscriptions. The library is trying to solve the problem by substituting
electronic access. Chemistry and Engineering have been asked to substitute
electronic formats for titles that cost over $2000. Site licenses will be
purchased to various document delivery vendors, and users will be provided
free access. Other universities that have undertaken this have found costs run
one-third to one-half the subscription cost. Some advantages of electronic
access are that it provides access to more titles for less money, allows
access from home or office, is becoming more available and will be the common
future format, and the cost is based on usage, not time on the shelf. Next
year, Zoology, Mathematics, Physics & Astronomy, and Botany & Microbiology
will be targeted. Areas selected are those with a substantial number of titles
priced at $2000 or more and can be provided cost effectively through
electronic format. Some of the disadvantage of electronic access are the
potential loss of archival access and lack of on-site paper format,
particularly for undergraduates. In addition, it is not cost effective for
reasonably priced titles and may be subject to cost increases for copyright.
This is a temporary solution to escalating serials prices because the cost
savings probably will not continue. Some of the savings will be applied to the
continuing subscription increases.

Prof. Egle asked whether journals can be purchased individually or whether the
subscription is for a package. Prof. Weaver-Meyers said any article in any
journal can be purchased, but some publishers are limiting electronic access
to some titles. Prof. Holmes said he thought the question was whether we have
to buy a package of journals from a vendor or could request only certain
journals when we hire a document delivery vendor. Prof. Weaver-Meyers answered
that a site license gives us a negotiated reduced rate on articles. We pay a
set rate for gateway access and a pre-negotiated $6.50 per article for the
copyright. Prof. Patten asked whether it was possible to block access to
journals that are not cost-effective. He commented that some faculty think the
data being collected on journal usage are skewed. Prof. Weaver-Meyers said
there are ways to block access. Within the current time frame, there is no
practical way to de-skew the data being collected. The longer the library
compiles information, the better the data will be.

Prof. Sipes noted the large access charges for some articles. He asked about a
way to control how many times a journal is accessed. Prof. Weaver-Meyers said
she is checking with vendors to find out what kind of blocking software they
are developing. Prof. Sipes said he is concerned what the budget would look
like without a cap. Prof. Weaver-Meyers said it is possible to spend more for
document delivery than paper formats, but other universities have found that
is not the situation. Prof. Blank asked how many other universities are
collecting data. Prof. Weaver-Meyers said Louisiana State University is the
only one with long-term data (since 1992). The University of Kansas and the
University of Nebraska are embarking on this kind of project. Noting that the
data are not statistically valid, Prof. Sipes asked about monitoring
provisions. Prof. Weaver-Meyers said the library has been looking at jounal
usage just since October, and extensive information is being collected. Prof.
Stolt pointed out that until recently, there was no other option when the
paper subscription was cut. When asked about text documents, Prof. Weaver-
Meyers said they are delivered by facsimile right now; by fall the library
hopes to be able to provide those documents electronically. Prof. Lancaster
asked about the FAX resolution. Prof. Weaver-Meyers said the library is
getting some new high resolution FAX machines. Prof. Hutchison explained that
certain fields will need high resolution color printers. Prof. Weaver-Meyers
pointed out that one of the physics professors prefers electronic format for
some journals because it provides access to full data bases. Prof. Durica said
electronic format does not provide access to the whole journal, just subject
headings or abstracts. Prof. Weaver-Meyers mentioned that some journals will
only be available in electronic format in the future. Prof. Patten asked
whether we need more money to subsidize our holdings. He suggested that this
is only a temporary panacea because publishers will respond by increasing
costs. Prof. Weaver-Meyers proposed some other strategies: faculty could
refuse to sign over the copyright to the publisher and could quit publishing
articles in expensive journals. Prof. Patten said he has to publish in certain
journals, and they demand that he sign over his copyright. Prof. Weaver-Meyers
said all faculty could refuse to sign over the copyright, go to publishers who
guarantee low prices, and set up a board to take control.

Prof. Albert asked for further information about the funding problem. Prof.
Weaver-Meyers said it is a cumulative problem. For the last two years, the
library received an increase of about $400,000 each year. If the library
continues to ask for enough to sustain current subscription prices, it will be
asking for an annual increase of over $1 million. Provost Mergler said she had
given the library permission to run a deficit this year. The library has had a
15-20% increase each year for the past five years. Prof. Blank said it is
ironic that OU is spending millions of dollars to help the Athletic
Department, while our library is ranked 64th out of 65 research libraries in
terms of library expenditures.

Prof. Murphy asked about the fraction of subscriptions that would go
electronic and whether cost was the major factor. Prof. Weaver-Meyers answered
that the library is targeting departments that have expensive titles. About
10% of the titles, which represents about 60% of the funds, will be
electronic. Chemistry and Engineering were asked to review the list of
expensive titles and recommend which ones could be provided electronically.
Prof. Lancaster explained that in biological sciences, the expensive journals
contain a lot of photos that cannot be delivered well electronically. Prof.
Weaver-Meyers responded that Physics & Astronomy, Zoology, Mathematics, and
Botany & Microbiology should experiment for a year. As of January, electronic
access will be substituted for the journals Chemistry and Engineering have
identified. The other four units will formulate a list of journals to be
canceled as of January 1999. Prof. Durica pointed out that some journals fall
under the Chemistry budget but are used by other units. He asked whether there
would be any attempt to poll other departments. Prof. Weaver-Meyers answered
no, but they will have electronic access. It is not the library's aim to make
it harder for faculty to get research done, but there is a limit to what we
can afford.

**Senate Chair's Report,** **by Prof. Rick Tepker** **

**

Prof. Tepker summarized the year by saying the Faculty Senate is a highly
productive and professional organization. This year, the Senate undertook the
Conflict of Interest policy and came up with a better balance between
University and individual interests. The Senate also voted in new standards
for faculty evaluation. Some sensitive, important discussions were begun on
the post-tenure review issue. Several computer issues were examined: Internet,
e-mail, campus rights and responsibilities, and dual news feeds. To a great
extent, a balance was struck between faculty and administrative interests. In
the case of e-mail, the decision was made to wait to adopt a policy and
request further study by General Counsel. The Senate addressed committee
charges like Equal Opportunity, Environmental Concerns, and Goddard. The
Faculty Senate Executive Committee had candid discussions with the
administration and spoke for the primacy of the academic mission. In the first
joint meeting of the Executive Committee, President and Athletic Director, the
Executive Committee emphasized that the Athletic Department cannot continue to
take money from the general budget. The Senate stood for academics in the
endorsement of pre-finals week and the syllabus requirement. Finally, the
Senate's recommendation that the mission statement be optional on business
cards was approved. Prof. Tepker said he was closing out this year with some
degree of pride and relief.

**ELECTION, UNIVERSITY AND CAMPUS COUNCILS, COMMITTEES, BOARDS

**

The Senate approved the Senate Committee on Committees' nominations for end-
of-the-year vacancies on university and campus councils, committees, and
boards (Appendix I). A number of vacancies also will be filled by the
President's office.

**COMMITTEE REVISIONS

**

The Senate Committee on Committees proposed some revisions in committees at
last month's meeting (see 4/97 Senate Journal, page 2 and Appendix I). Prof.
Dillon explained that the Committee on Committees was trying to streamline the
committee structure. The Equal Opportunity Committee would be replaced by a
joint Faculty Senate/Presidential task force. Parallel changes would be made
in the Athletics Council and Budget Council concerning the review of the
Athletic Department budget, and gender equity would be added to the Athletics
Council charge. Faculty for the Campus Disciplinary Council would come from a
committee instead of being drawn from the Faculty Appeal Board. The Film
Review Committee and Recreational Services Advisory Committee would be
collapsed into the Council on Campus Life.

Prof. Fiedler proposed that the first paragraph read as follows (additions in
bold; deletions in italics):

Eliminate the EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMITTEE and recommend a joint Faculty
Senate/Presidential task force to study the status of recruitment and
retention of women and minorities and **the compliance of the recruitment and
retention procedures with the Equal Opportunity Policy of the University of
Oklahoma. The task force will give a report to the Faculty Senate** _to make
recommendations_ during the 1997-98 academic year.

He remarked that the Committee on Committees' recommendation was too vague,
would give too much power to the task force, and would not make the task force
accountable to the Faculty Senate. He read some news releases from the web
about affirmative action policies and said the Faculty Senate should not
relinquish control. Prof. Van Gundy said he believes we should give the same
due consideration to equal opportunity as we do to gender equity in sports.
Prof. Tepker remarked that before the Senate assumes there is a divisive
issue, the body should pay attention to the words. There is nothing in the
committee recommendation that commits us to affirmative action policies, and
there is nothing in Prof. Fiedler's motion to abolish affirmative action
policies. There is a certain symbolic importance to the issue, but there are
no words that are binding or enforceable. Prof. Fiedler's amendment was
approved on a voice vote. The committee recommendations as amended were
approved on a voice vote.

**STUDENT JURY DUTY

**

Prof. Tepker explained that the proposed revisions in the _Faculty Handbook_
concerning student jury duty would include language that would comply with a
recently passed statute (see 4/97 Senate Journal, page 2 and Appendix II). The
Senate Executive Committee recommended approval but intended to ask General
Counsel to clarify certain details. For example, what accommodation would be
required for a long four-month trial. The revisions were approved on a voice
vote.

**DAY care center

** Prof. Tepker explained that some concerns had been expressed about the
difficulty of getting enrollment in the OU day care center. About 30% of the
children are members of the Norman community. The Faculty Welfare Committee
recommended a proposal, which the Executive Committee modified slightly.

**

**_Background_ :

The University of Oklahoma built its day care center, Children's World, and
then leased it to a private contractor to operate for twenty years. Since it
opened, Children's World has accepted children of OU faculty, staff, and
students and of the Norman community. As of February 1997, 30% of the children
enrolled were members of the Norman community, 38% were children of OU
students, 17% were children of OU staff, and only 14% were of OU faculty.

At this time, Children's World has a waiting list hundreds of names long. Some
OU faculty and staff members have had their children's names on the waiting
list for more than a year and not succeeded in getting them enrolled.

_Proposal_ :

Children's World shall notify members of the Norman community who have
children enrolled at Children's World, but who are not employed by the
University of Oklahoma, that as of August 1, 1997, Children's World will begin
to give priority to the children of OU employees and students. To the extent
necessary to provide care for those OU faculty, staff, and student children on
the waiting list, members of the Norman community who are not employed by or
enrolled at the University will have lower priority on an annual basis at the
time of enrollment.

Prof. Tepker said the proposal was designed to require the center to give
notice that a child may have lower priority for the next year; it does not
mean bumping a child mid-year. Prof. Benson asked why the center was opened up
to the community originally. Prof. Tepker said there was a concern about
filling the center. When asked about protecting student priority, Prof. Fran
Ayres, Faculty Welfare Committee Chair, said students, faculty, and staff have
equal priority. The intent of the proposal is to give priority to people
affiliated with the University. Prof. Sipes asked about the possibility of
expanding the center and determining how many on the waiting list were
affiliated with OU. Prof. Kinzie asked for more information about the 20-year
lease. Prof. Tepker said it was his understanding that the lease was up for
re-negotiation this year. Prof. Ayres said the University is the governing
body and re-negotiates certain aspects of the lease each year, but the center
is managed by a private business. Prof. Van Gundy questioned whether the
University could be subject to a lawsuit. Prof. Tepker said he viewed this as
an expression of Senate sentiment; General Counsel will have to take into
account any prospective liability.

Prof. St. John asked how employed or enrolled OU employees and students would
have to be to have priority. Prof. Ayres said she did not know those details.
Prof. Durica pointed out that the non-profit center is also full, so there is
a need for more day care. Prof. Patten noted that the Campus Planning Council
is looking at the safety of that non-profit facility. If it is shut down, the
pressure will grow on the University's center. Prof. Hutchison recommended
approval of the proposal and requested the Faculty Welfare Committee to look
into these questions, so issues could be addressed with facts in hand in the
future. Prof. Benson urged the Senate to vote against the proposal. He said it
is not clear whose interests we are taking into account. Children who already
are in the center should retain their priority; the cap should be for any new
children. Prof. Ayres commented that under the current policy, if a child is
enrolled in the center, subsequent children in the family have priority. Prof.
Dillon said the Executive Committee was concerned about bumping children
already in the center. Prof. Ayres said another concern was that the Norman
community should not be allowed enrollment for an indefinite number of years
when there is a waiting list for the OU community. Prof. Holmes commented that
the center could be considered a part of the benefits package for OU
employees. Prof. Benson said his concern was how to bring it about. Prof.
Williams asked if there had been any discussion about how to expand the
facility, given it is self-supporting. Prof. St. John observed that it is not
self-supporting because the tuition does not pay for the cost of the building.
The recommendation was approved on a voice vote.

**Election of Senate Secretary and Chair-Elect for 1997-98**

Prof. Trent Gabert (Health and Sport Sciences) was elected Secretary, and
Prof. Lex Holmes (Economics) was elected Chair-Elect of the Senate for
1997-98.

**ELECTION TO SENATE STANDING COMMITTEES**

Prof. Fiedler asked how the names are picked for the Executive Committee.
Prof. Tepker said by custom, the chair-elect selects the slate. Prof. Dillon
said she asked the current Executive Committee and Committee on Committees for
input. Prof. Fiedler asked whether the nominees could say what they think is
important to do next year. Prof. Dillon responded that the issues that will
come before the Executive Committee next year are post-tenure review, funding
of athletics, faculty evaluation, and conflict of interest, so she put
together a slate of people who are knowledgeable in those issues. She also
tried to get a diverse committee and people with different perspectives. Prof.
Fung said he had suggested that she have representation from engineering and
law because of the issues coming up. Prof. Tepker thanked the outgoing
Executive Committee members for their contributions and suggestions.

The following faculty were elected to fill vacancies on Senate standing
committees:

**_Executive Committee**_

To replace Bing Fung, Paul Gilje, and DeeAnn Wenk, 1997-98 term.

Hugh Benson (Associate Professor and Chair of Philosophy)

Ruth Gana (Associate Professor of Law)

William Patten (Associate Professor of Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering)

**_Committee on Committees**_ **

** Continuing members: Michelle Hanna (Chemistry and Biochemistry) and Roy
Knapp (Petroleum and Geological Engineering).

To replace Drew Kershen and Eleanor Weinel, 1997-00 term:

Victor Hutchison (George Lynn Cross Research Professor of Zoology)

Susan Laird (Associate Professor of Educational Leadership and Policy Studies)

To complete E. L. Lancaster's 1997-99 term:

Richard Gipson (Professor and Director of Music)

**_Committee on Faculty Compensation**_ **

** Continuing members: Gary Emery (Finance), Susan Vehik (Anthropology), and
Lee Willinger (Accounting).

To replace Andy Magid and Robert Smith, 1997-00 term:

J. R. Cruz (Professor of Electrical Engineering)

Andy Magid (George Lynn Cross Research Professor of Mathematics)

**_Committee on Faculty Welfare**_ **

** Continuing members: Fran Ayres (Accounting), Donald Pisani (History), and
Kenneth Wedel (Social Work).

To replace Joyce Palomar and Kay Womack, 1997-00 term:

Joyce Palomar (Professor of Law) _

_ Duane Stock (Professor and Director of Finance) _

_

**Presentation of Certificates of Appreciation

**

Certificates of Appreciation were presented to the following outgoing senators
who completed full three-year terms (1994-97): Donald Baker, Carolyn Bremer,
Ellen Greene, James Horrell, Victor Hutchison, Susan Laird, Fred Lee, Lotsee
Patterson, Bret Wallach, DeeAnn Wenk, and T.H. Lee Williams. Certificates were
also presented to the other senators whose terms were expiring and to the
outgoing members of the Senate Executive Committee.

**RESOLUTION OF APPRECIATION TO PROFESSOR RICK TEPKER

**

The Faculty Senate unanimously approved the following resolution of
appreciation to Prof. Rick Tepker, outgoing Senate Chair:

WHEREAS:

__

  * California had actor John Wayne standing tall for freedom of speech, Oklahoma has constitutionalist Rick Pilgrim' Tepker standing tall for Internet free for all; __
  * Conventioneer Tepker recognizes that simple, when it comes to business cards, is indeed better; __
  * Sports fan Tepker understands that just as the NIKE logo belongs to NIKE, not the shoe salesman, the OU logo belongs to OU, not the Athletic Department; __
  * Baseball fan Tepker tirelessly lobbied to move the faculty staff picnic from football day to baseball day; __
  * Mediator Tepker negotiated the treacherous waters of the Faculty Senate minutes;
 __

  * Legislator Tepker conflicted the administration on conflict of interest;
 __

  * Lawyer Tepker never came to conclusions but never failed to give us citations on both sides; __
  * Professor Tepker showed his devotion to the classroom by teaching a full load during his term as chair; __
  * Legal scholar Tepker flawlessly negotiated the Latinesque verbiage of the symbiotic relationship between Ultrastructural and Physiological Symbiosis Between Gymnodinium Acidotum Dinophysceae and Chroomonas Sp. (Cryptophyceae); __
  * Leader Tepker conducted the Faculty Senate as an open forum, fostering debate and allowing consensus to emerge from within us; __
  * Orator Tepker advocated faculty governance with eloquence, passion and zeal.
BE IT RESOLVED

  * The University of Oklahoma Faculty Senate expresses its appreciation to Professor Rick Tepker for his dedication to the ideal of governance, for his commitment to the freedom of inquiry, and for his belief in the worth of the individual and the value of the collective. 

Prof. Connie Dillon presented a certificate of appreciation and an engraved
clock to Prof. Tepker. Prof. Dillon then assumed the office of 1997-98 Senate
Chair.

**ADJOURNMENT**

The meeting adjourned at 5:05 p.m. The next regular session of the Senate will
be held at 3:30p.m. on Monday, September 8, 1997, in Jacobson Faculty Hall
102.

____________________________________

Alexander Holmes, Secretary

____________________________________

Sonya Fallgatter, Administrative Coordinator

\--------------

Appendix I

FACULTY SENATE NOMINEES FOR END-OF-YEAR VACANCIES ONCOUNCILS/COMMITTEES/BOARDS
(SPRING 1997)

ACADEMIC PROGRAMS COUNCIL (three-year term):

Katharine Leigh (Interior Design)

Susan Postawko (Meteorology)

ACADEMIC REGULATIONS COMMITTEE (three-year term):

Gordon Uno (Botany & Microbiology)

Gerard Walschap (Mathematics)

ATHLETICS COUNCIL (three-year term):

Richard Marshment (Regional & City Planning)

Craig St. John (Sociolgy)

BASS MEMORIAL SCHOLARSHIP COMMITTEE (two-year term):

Lex Holmes (Economics)

BUDGET COUNCIL (three-year term):

Gwenn Davis (English)

Roger Rideout (Music)

CAMPUS DISCIPLINARY COUNCILS (two-year term):

Sally Faulconer (Music)

Ronald Keith Gaddie (Political Science)

Mack Reynolds (Law)

David Swank (Law)

Laurette Taylor (Health & Sport Sciences)

Cameron Wesson (Anthropology)

CAMPUS PLANNING COUNCIL (three-year term):

Penny Hopkins (Zoology)

Claren Kidd (Univ. Libraries)

CAMPUS TENURE COMMITTEE (three-year term):

Susan Caldwell (Art)

Joanna Rapf (English)

CONFLICT OF INTEREST ADVISORY COMMITTEE:

Ronald Keith Gaddie (Political Science) to complete Bob Foote's 1996-12/97
term

CONTINUING EDUCATION AND PUBLIC SERVICE COUNCIL (three-year term):

Karen Rupp-Serrano (Univ. Libraries)

Russell Usnick (Regional & City Planning)

COUNCIL ON CAMPUS LIFE (three-year term):

Susan Marcus-Mendoza (Human Relations)

EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS COMMITTEE (four-year term):

John Skvarla (Botany & Microbiology)

ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS COMMITTEE (three-year term):

Anne Reynolds (Instr. Lead. & Acad. Curr.)

EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMITTEE (three-year term):

Virginia Milhouse (Human Relations)

FACULTY APPEALS BOARD (four-year term):

Robert Cox (Political Science)

Herman Curiel (Social Work)

Ola Fincke (Zoology)

Gus Friedrich (Communication)

Heidi Karriker (Modern Lang., Lit. & Ling.)

Peter Lamb (Meteorology)

David London (Geology & Geophysics)

Michael Mares (Zoology)

FACULTY APPEALS BOARD (four-year term) [continued]:

Virginia Milhouse (Human Relations)

Mark Morrissey (Geography)

Dan O'Hair (Communication)

Joanna Rapf (English)

Jerry Weber (Educ. Lead. & Pol. St.) to complete David Jaffe's 1995-99 term

FACULTY AWARDS AND HONORS COUNCIL (three-year term):

Jane Magrath (Music)

FILM REVIEW COMMITTEE (two-year term):

Neera Badhwar (Philosophy)

GODDARD HEALTH CENTER ADVISORY BOARD (three-year term):

Lotsee Patterson (Library & Info. St.)

Regina Sullivan (Zoology)

HONORS COUNCIL (three-year term):

Bret Wallach (Geography)

INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL (three-year term):

Tim Ragan (Educ. Psychology)

Wilbur Stolt (Univ. Libraries)

LEGAL PANEL (three-year term):

Jerry Parkinson (Law)

David Swank (Law)

PARKING VIOLATION APPEALS COMMITTEE (three-year term):

Richard Resco (Mathematics)

PATENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE (three-year term):

Drew Kershen (Law)

PUBLICATIONS BOARD (three-year term):

John Konopak (Instr. Lead. & Acad. Curr.)

RESEARCH COUNCIL (three-year term):

Kelvin Droegemeier (Meteorology) [physical sciences]

John Fletcher (Botany & Microbiology) [biological sciences]

Dipankar Ghosh (Accounting) [other]

Daniel Resasco (Chem. Engr. & Matr. Sci.) [engineering]

RITA LOTTINVILLE PRIZE FOR FRESHMEN COMMITTEE (three-year term):

Pam Fry (ILAC)

Ken Stephenson (Music)

ROTC ADVISORY COMMITTEE (three-year term):

Stephen Sloan (Political Science)

Deborah Trytten (Computer Science)

SPEAKERS BUREAU (three-year term):

Theodore Drab (Interior Design)

STUDENT CODE REVISION COMMITTEE (one-year term):

Allan Kinzie (Dance)

UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES COMMITTEE (three-year term):

David Durica (Zoology)

William Ortiz-Leduc (Botany & Microbiology)

UNIVERSITY RECREATIONAL SERVICES ADVISORY COMMITTEE (two-year term):

Valerie Watts (Music)

UNIVERSITY SCHOLARS SELECTION COMMITTEE (three-year term):

Andy Miller (Mathematics)

