##  **WebCT Pilot Participants and their Projects**

##  **(in alphabetical order by last name)**

###  **November 17, 1998**

  
**NOTE: IAT Services is thrilled to have the following excellent teachers
involved in our efforts to evaluate WebCT software, and measure the resources
necessary to provide a campus-wide service to support the faculty's use of
WebCT. In addition to interest in various features and capabilities of WebCT,
many of these faculty have expressed the value, to students, of having a
consistent interface - especially students who may be taking a number of
classes that utilize email, the web, etc.**  
    |  **Name** |  **Department**  
---|---|---  
  | Bob Bender | English and Special Degree Programs  
  | Sherry Borcherding | Occupational Therapy  
  | Sarah Bush | Biological Sciences  
  | Meera Chandrasekhar | Physics  
  | Richard (Dick) Dowdy | Food Science & Human Nutrition  
  | Charles (Chuck) Franz | Management  
  | Charles Geiss | Economics  
  | William (Bill) Hawk | Art  
  | Ed Kaiser | Chemistry  
  | Virginia Peterson | Biochemistry (Ag.)  
  | Dennis Sentilles | Mathematics  
  | Dennis Wright | Psychology  
  
* * *

**Bob Bender - English and Special Degree Programs**

**Interdisc 290 Senior Seminar (18 students)**

Bob Bender has been influential in the adoption and use of technology for
teaching, and promoting active learning for a number of years. He was one of
the original "instigators" behind the formation of MU's Institute for
Instructional Technology (MUIIT), and was instrumental in the creation the
Writing With Computers Project, a joint venture of the English Department, the
Campus Writing Program, and Campus Computing (now IATS), that introduced the
"Turbo" versions of English 20. He's been using email to enhance his teaching
for six years, and using the web for teaching for four years. As indicated on
his survey: "I use web-based teaching in all courses I presently teach
(English 135, 215, and 370). Students submit, review each other's work and
receive graded work on-line.

In WS98, he'll be using WebCT to enhance his teaching of the Interdisciplinary
Studies Senior Seminar (Interdisciplinary Studies is part of Special Degree
Programs, of which he is he director). He hopes

WebCT will be better able to facilitate on-line peer reviews than Eudora. He
plans to use WebCT to facilitate group projects, and is interested in the
capacity for tracking student use. He plans to move  
his existing web site from showme to WebCT. He will not be using the either
the glossary or quiz features of WebCT.

Questions raised:

  * Can students easily author a document in a word processor and upload to WebCT space?
  * Can changes to written materials be highlighted in color?
  * Can WebCT replace Mhonarch for archiving and threading email discussions?
  * Will the content of WebCT classes be searchable via the Internet? Can he have older versions of courses linked and accessible via WebCT?
  * Will WebCT or other things prompt changes in the computer sites to restore the ability to email via Netscape? Restrictions imposed to prevent spoofed email have inhibited his teaching.

* * *

**Sherry Borcherding \- Occupational Therapy**

**OT205 "Loss and Disability" (approximately 33 students)**

Sherry attended the summer, 1997 MUIIT institute, and will be presenting at a
MUIIT colloquium in December.

Her class, Loss & Disability, is a course in the psycho-social aspects of
disability conditions that meets the criteria for both a writing intensive
class and a computing & information proficiency class in the general education
architecture. OT majors take it - second semester juniors. In addition to the
"standard" class, some professional therapists enroll in the course, through
extension teaching, to meet their continuing education requirements, etc.. For
more info, see: http://www.outreach.missouri.edu/otsherry.

Sherry has used email as a part of her teaching for five years, has used
listproc for three years, and has been using web sites to support her teaching
for three years. Microsoft's Front Page is her preferred HTML editor. She
would like to teach this class almost completely online in WS99.

Sherry has release time this semester (FS98) to enhance her curriculum
materials for this course and hopes to have the WebCT course done by the end
of this semester. So, she is serving as an "early adopter" for WebCT, helping
IAT services staff by testing and providing valuable feedback on the
instructions and various materials being developed.

Sherry is considering moving her entire existing course web site into WebCT,
and wants to take advantage of these capabilities:

Email and chat rooms - to enhance and support collaborative learning. In the
past she used a listserv to which students posted their required journal
entries. However, students complained about this mail being co-mingled with
their personal email.

Group learning features (trying to do a group web site on showme was a hassle
since only individual accounts existed and passwords had to be shared, etc.)

Sign-ups for selecting a culture to study death and dying in that culture.

Chat rooms will be used around four times the semester in place of face-to-
face classroom meetings, and to enable the exchange of information regarding a
particular disability area on which they'll be submitting a paper.

The quiz features will be used to deliver electronically graded exams -
students will be required to take the exam in a proctored computer lab.

Electronic grade book - one of several new adventures in the use of technology
for this 'go getter'.

Issues/Concerns:

  * She's set aside the first week of class to help students acquire the necessary proficiency in the technology, but will need assistance during this time.

  * Part of the teaching involves people with disabilities who come and speak. Over the last year, much of this has been captured on video, and Sherry sends videotapes to off-campus students. It would be nice to allow one to access this video via the Internet, however since the speaker has a disability, loss of quality would be an important issue. She may eventually convert the video to CD-ROM. She'd like to try quick time videos and has thought about learning tool book through MUIIT.
  * This is a writing intensive course- what about grading papers online? Is that possible, convenient? ? Can one annotate the graded paper online?
  * What about availability of the modem pool? For chat, she believes 4 PM is the best time for her students, but will they be able to get into the modem pool at that time?
  * It's hard to effectively guard against plagiarism when students are creating web-based presentations.
  * Maintaining security of tests, etc. administered via webCT when a student can print and retain a copy.
  * Effectively using a web site to support both face to face and distance learning when they're happening simultaneously in the same course.

* * *

**Sarah Bush - Biology**

**Biology 1 (900 students in FS98 - 475 in WS99)**

As a non-regular member of the faculty for the last two years, Sarah's
affiliation with MU is uncertain, so she's opted for a limited use of WebCT.
She's hopeful WebCT will overcome a frustration she faces given the huge
number of students she's teaching - not being able to assign & grade homework.
Beginning with a fall, 1998 optional (extra credit) use of the electronic quiz
features, Sarah will evaluate WebCT's capacity to allow students to accomplish
out-of-class homework assignments. Performance on the assignments will be
collected by WebCT and recorded in WebCT's electronic grade book. At the end
of the semester she'll combine the accumulated homework points with her other
scores in the grade book she's historically kept in Excel. (Note: both the
Excel & WebCT grade books will be loaded automatically using data available
through the web-based electronic class roster application.)

Sarah's support requirements:

  * Documentation & assistance in uploading quiz questions into the electronic quiz feature, and how to set up a quiz
  * Testing of the student access to quiz features in fall 1998 (set up course, passwords based on showme, etc.)
  * (Possibly) assistance at end of semester to combine the WebCT scores with her excel grade book.

* * *

**Meera Chandrasekhar \- Physics**

**Physics 210 Modern physics (writing intensive) 10 students.**

Dr. Chandrasekhar has received numerous recognitions for excellence in
teaching (including the William T. Kemper fellowship in 1997). She has been
using the web to enhance her teaching for two years (see
http://www.missouri.edu/~physwww/phys21.html) and to support her service and
outreach activities to K-12 teachers (see http://www.missouri.edu/~wwwepic).
She's been using Adobe Pagemill as her HTML editor.

As indicated on her survey, when adopting technology she prefers to explore
the technology on her own. So far, she's been investigating and exploiting
technology with little or no support. While Meera teaches a large lecture
class in the fall, the class she'll be exploring WebCT with is a small (10
students), writing-intensive course for physics majors.

This is the first time she'll have taught this class which will be taught
primarily via the blackboard. She will be putting the class syllabus on the
web and developing web-based supplementary materials. She does not plan to
post lecture outlines or notes, and will not be using the web inside the
classroom.

She feels it is important to get students started using the web-based
materials immediately, and will require some use of the site the first week of
class.

WebCT's ability to track student usage of the web site is important to Dr.
Chandrasekhar and she plans to use the WebCT to help student share and
critique each others abstracts before their major writing assignments
(comment/critique of the abstracts should go only to that author and to the
instructor not accessible by everyone). In addition, she's interested in
exploring the capabilities of the electronic grade book.

Success? Success will be measured by whether students can easily use WebCT
without a lot of complaints.

Desired Support? Assistance in the mechanics of setting up the site (2nd week
of Nov.)

Questions Raised:

  * What do students need to know to be successful?
  * Where can one get a copy of Internet Explorer?

* * *

**Dick Dowdy - Food Science and Human Nutrition**

**FSHN34 "Nutrition: Current Concepts and Controversies" (250 students)**

Dr. Dowdy is the self-professed "newbie" in the group. This is his first foray
into the use of technology to enhance his teaching. He's interested, and
willing to invest the necessary time to be successful. In keeping with his
field of study, he's hopeful we'll be able to equip him with the "right
recipe." One challenge of nutrition teaching is that the material is dynamic.
Much of it has a 1.5 to 2 year life. Dr. Dowdy is hopeful that in addition to
enhanced student learning, the administrative time required for the class will
be reduced through the electronic grade book and quiz scoring. Historically,
the class involves four major in-class exams and 2-5 quizzes (which he'll
likely increase).

He plans to use WebCT to:

  * place his course syllabus on the web, and his lecture outlines (now stored in word). He uses (and will continue to use) overheads for lecture -- he won't have a computer in the classroom.

  * place specific assignments on the web (adding to those as the semester progresses)
  * grade book (including having students query their grades)
  * email with his students
  * quiz features to achieve a more frequent and periodic review of the students' knowledge base. quiz questions will be created in word and uploaded.
  * student tracking data to better assess a student's participation. He does not take attendance, and attendance often falls to 70-75% between major exams.

Other issues:

One challenge will be recreating the content of his lecture materials since
he's been through a series of PC failures over the last couple of years. He
will have to rekey this material, so is planning to go ahead and
improve/update the course (something he'd planned to not do until summer 99).
He plans to scan and upload a limited number of graphics, and will link to a
variety of external web resources.

Dr. Dowdy also uses dietary analysis software assignments in his class. For
this, students must visit the Stanley Hall computer lab. That will remain
unchanged as he moves to WebCT.

* * *

**Chuck Franz**

**Management 202 (approximately 600 students in WS99)**

Dr. Franz has used email to enhance his teaching for over five years, and uses
EDOG to distribute his students' grades via email. He was a fellow of the
first MUIIT institute in summer, 1995 and has been using Powerpoint
presentations, and a web-site to enhance his teaching for two years. He
writes: "Since Fall 1997, the course has been paperless, i.e., the syllabus,
the writing assignments, the learning objectives, sample exams. Viewing PPT
through the web after the lecture, viewing the video clips from class over the
web after class. Everything." Management 202 is "team taught" by three members
of the management faculty who each take a sequential portion of the course. A
graduate student serves as "course coordinator."

Dr. Franz, assisted by his graduate student Yosa, will be approaching the use
of WebCT in this way (in priority order):

  1. Yosa will move the existing web site (approximately 1,700 files counting his power point presentations) from the business school web server into WebCT in order to take advantage of the student-tracking features of WebCT (knowing what pages students have accessed, etc.).
  2. Dr. Franz will use the electronic grade book features and is very interested in assuring machine-graded exams (scantron) can be easily merged into WebCT's grade book.
  3. Quizzes may be used, if WebCT can assign a point value for participation regardless of the score a student receives on the quiz.

Support issues/questions:

  * Will WebCT correctly handle his .avi files and overcome the single-platform (Intel) limitation he now encounters?
  * Integrating scantron test results in WebCT's electronic grade book.

* * *

**Charles Geiss**

**Economics 4 "Introduction t Micro Economics" (1000 students)**

Charles Geiss has been using email and Powerpoint in hsi teaching for five and
six years, respectively. He will be teaching Economics 4 for the first time in
ten years. The course offers several challenges from a WebCT perspective. It
is large (1000 students) with 17 teaching assistants and 35 sections. As such,
it will provide a powerful test of the grade book and grader tools. Dr. Geiss
is especially interested in how the capabilities of WebCT can be used to
leverage his teaching assistants, many of whom are non-native speakers with a
better command of written than spoken English. He would like to experiment
with having TAs hold virtual office hours through chat and through the
bulletin board. As such he will be creating separate fora for each section in
the bulletin board. The main forum of the bulletin board will be used
primarily for announcements. He does not feel that the internal email system
will meet his needs for private communication with students; therefore he will
continue to use the external email systems on campus for this purpose.

In addition to the communications facilities, Dr. Geiss will be using WebCT
primarily to post course and lecture materials. These exist primarily in Word
Perfect and will be converted to HTML. (Conversion of Word Perfect graphics in
an efficient manner is a concern because of the graphics formats available.)
The other essential tool for Dr. Geiss is the grade book. as noted, the
flexibility and power of the grade book and grader tools will be of the utmost
importance given the size of this course. As have some of the other faculty,
he has expressed concerns about being able to adjust grades for bad questions
in tests or due to other circumstances.

He is also considering putting up a FAQ regarding some aspects of the course.

Issues:

  * Flexibility of grade book
  * How to best use teaching assistants with WebCT.
  * Ensure good feedback from those students using WebCT to evaluate the product.
  * Identify the strengths and weaknesses of the learning system
  * How WebCT may influence the role of international TA's (especially those with weaknesses in speaking English)
  * What role WebCT may play in Provost Office efforts at increasing student retention (early warning systems, more student feedback, etc.)

* * *

****

**William Hawk**

**Art 277 "Intermediate Painting"/Art 377 "Advanced Painting" (20-30 Students
- combined enrollment)**

Bill Hawk has been teaching painting at MU for (4.5) years. His works have won
several national and regional awards. Hawk has been using both the web and
email for 5 years and currently makes use of EDOG for grade distribution. He
has also been responsible for the Art Department web site for the past few
years. He teaches Art 277 twice each year in conjunction with Art 377
"Advanced Painting." There is considerable overlap between the structure of
the two courses, and he plans to use some aspects of WebCT with both courses.

The features of WebCT of most interest to Mr. Hawk are quizzes, both for self-
testing on art safety knowledge and for regular quizzes. The grade book is
also of great importance, both to reduce administrative overhead and to
replace EDOG. In addition to posting his own course materials, he plans to use
WebCT to complement the regular showing and critiquing of work in class by
having students post photographs and statements about the work. He will also
make use of the internal email system for written critiques. Likewise, the
bulletin board presents itself to Mr. Hawk as an excellent means for
discussions of theory.

In the future, he would like to expand on these uses. Since one of his
concerns is the ability of his students to promote and sell their work when
they leave school, he is considering turning these courses into CIP courses in
which the students learn to digitize their work and create strong promotional
web sites. Hawk also sees potential in developing Quick Time movie to
demonstrate painting techniques.

Issues:

  * The flexibility of the grade book in allowing him to weight grades and include a diversity of types of assignments is extremely important. Also, given the size and similarity of the two courses, it would be advantageous for him to be able to keep one grade book covering both, even though there are some differences in assignments.
  * The ease with which students can use the site, and particularly post their assignments is critical to the success of his use of WebCT.

* * *

****

**Ed Kaiser - Chemistry**

**Chemistry 31 (more than 600 students in WS99)**

Dr. Kaiser has a long (32 years) career of excellence in teaching, research &
service including directing MU's Honor's College for a number of years. Among
his numerous recognitions for excellence in teaching is the $10,000 Kemper
Teaching Award and his appointment as a Curator's Distinguished Teaching
Professor of Chemistry.

For several years, Dr. Kaiser has used email lists to enhance classroom
communications. Ed participated in MUIIT's first "Winter Webland" in January,
1998, and has used Net Objects Fusion to support his teaching in Chem 15 in
WS98, Chem 210 in WS98 and SS98, and Chem 212 currently (FS98). His experience
has indicated that students benefit from lecture outlines in Chem 15 and from
old exams in all three courses. Especially helpful to students in Chem 210-212
is the use of the web site rather than the chalkboard for long, cumbersome
flow diagrams. He's found that He

Dr. Kaiser will be teaching Chemistry 31 for the very first time in WS99, and
so will be "starting from scratch" using WebCT (rather than adapting existing
web-based materials). Chem 31 is the first class for chemistry majors. The
text which has been selected, _Chemistry the Central Science_ , is published
by Prentice Hall, one of the publishers that's made a commitment to making
their text materials accessible via WebCT. We'll explore whether the content
can be acquired in this way, and at what price. The classrooms (Waters Aud.
and Physics 114) in which he'll be teaching have computer capabilities. (?
Instructor display or computers for students?).

The features of WebCT Dr. Kaiser is interested in are: bulletin boards (which
if organized for each of the 24 sections, may take the place of listproc lists
which he's used in the past). He will use WebCT's grade book including
distribution of student grades. Note: hourly exams (approx one-half are
multiple choice questions) and papers are graded by hand. He may use WebCT's
quiz features for trial exams and he'll be exploring the use of chat rooms. He
will use the site to publish not only lecture outlines but also to achieve
common recitation exercizes to be answered in each of the sections of the
course.

Questions raised include:

  * How does the grader feature work?
  * Can the TA's who grade lab assignments enter these scores into the grade book and be restricted to only the students in his/her section?

* * *

****

**Virginia Peterson - Biochemistry**

**Biochemistry 100 "The Living World: Molecular Scale" (100 students)**

Virginia Peterson has been teaching at MU since 1981, is a member of the first
CAFNR Teaching Scholars group. Biochemistry 100 is devoted to teaching
biochemistry concepts to non-majors. Dr. Peterson participated in MUIIT's
first "Winter Webland" in January, 1998. She has been using the web and email
in her teaching since then.

Dr. Peterson is interested in several facets of WebCT. In addition to posting
basic course information, she is looking at uses for the grade book, quiz
features, and bulletin board. She sees the quiz feature as a vehicle for both
sample quizzes and for generating study questions in conjunction with group
learning. Currently her students are required to hand in daily responses in
class. The bulletin board may be able to subsume this function.

As a heavy user of overheads in the classroom, she is looking at ways to
effectively transfer content from her overheads to WebCT. Given the reliance
on molecular models, the ability to transfer graphics, as well as notes, in an
efficient manner is important.

In addition to materials in WebCT, Dr. Peterson is exploring links out to web
materials appropriate to her course. Building a library of links may become a
key part of her use of WebCT.

* * *

**Dennis Sentilles - Mathematics**

**Math 108/208 (Calculus - for non-math majors approximately 50 students)**

Writing Intensive, and seeking certification as a Computing & Information
Proficiency Course).

Over the past several years, Dr. Sentilles has developed, and directed the
development of materials by the Advanced Technology Center staff, a number of
multimedia materials that effectively convey the concepts of calculus to non-
majors (who often approach mathematics with some hesitation & worry). Dr.
Sentilles uses Maple for virtually all of his computing (including word
processing.) Dr. Sentilles uses a variety of the materials within his
classroom presentations (carries his laptop computer to class), and these and
other materials and assignments are available for out-of-class learning. These
materials are well received by students, and have enhanced student learning
and mastery of the concepts. However, the distribution of these resources is
limited. Students must physically check the CD ROM out and the files are
Macintosh dependent, so access is limited to either the Stanley or ?? computer
labs, which requires they schedule their learning at a convenient time for
their lab partner.

In addition to increasing the convenience to students here in Columbia, Dr.
Sentilles is interested in exploring distance learning opportunities. Dr.
Sentilles is interested in adding voice-overs which students can use to hear a
verbal explanation of the material being presented.

Through the WebCT pilot study, Dr. Sentilles, and IAT Services staff, will be
exploring whether these materials can be efficiently and effectively moved to
the web. Currently many of the graphics are Maple screen shots that have been
moved into Director, and other Director-generated files. Initially, the
thinking is that some could be quick-time movies, some stand-along html files,
and others as shock wave files. Dr. Sentilles will explore the enhanced
capabilities of Version 5 of Maple (existing work was done in ver. 3)
especially those related to HTML creation.

* * *

**Dennis Wright - Psychology**

**Psychology 1 "Introduction to Psychology" (700 students)**

Dr. Wright, has been teaching Psychology at MU for many years. He has been
using the web to enhance teaching for one semester, and email for one year. He
participated in MUIIT "Bits and Bytes" institute in Summer, 1998. He has a web
site on showme and uses Net Objects Fusion as his HTML editor.

Dennis Wright and his PhD candidate Danna Vessell, will be using WebCT to
teach one section of Psyc 1 while they also teach another section that will be
used as a control group to measure the effectiveness of instructional
technology to enhance the teaching of Psychology. The most important feature
for this study is the capacity to track student use.

The class will be team taught by Dr. Wright and Tom Dilorenzo (Dept. Chair).
They will be developing web-based content (Tom has taught this class in the
past and may have bits and pieces of content on the web). The class meets
three times per week in a lecture format. Students of both the technology-
enhanced and regular sections will be taking the same exam at the same place
and time. He will also try to compare the difference in time spent on
administrative overhead between the two sections.

In addition to the student tracking features, they plan to use:

  * Quiz features for practice exams (including feedback)
  * Chat rooms - especially as an option to enhance student/teacher interaction through virtual office hours.
  * Bulletin Boards

