****

**__**

##  **_Gender and Judaism_**

**__**CAS-RN337/637

Last offered: Spring 2000 ****

**Michael Zank, Ph.D.**

****Assistant Professor of Religion ****

****Boston University

****

**Course Description**

****_1\. Background_ ****

> ****Over the past 20 years feminism and gender studies have given rise to
reexaminations of our common assumptions about social, cultural, and political
modes of expression such as religion, art, and philosophy. The character of
seemingly universal means of ordering the phenomena we perceive, the very "we"
or "I" of perception, is revealed in its gendered perspective. Gender (along
with race and class) belong to the material conditions of our respective world
views. Even the standard of objectivity of historiography and critical
philosophy has come under attack as a form of "male gaze."

>

>  
>

> Religion, as a traditional form of social ordering, is a pertinent subject
for gender critique. They enforce different roles for men and women in the
ritual, mythological, and socio-political order as well as provide an agency
of perpetuation of power relationships. At the same time, revolution and
change in the self-determination of men and women can likewise be justified
from religious sources, religion thus harboring the potential for both
continuity and transformation.

>

>  
>

> In particular, the monotheistic tradition of Israel, a formative element of
Western culture, provides a fertile area for the study of gender relations.
Monotheism itself is a critical statement against the gendered deities of the
Ancient Near East and thus deeply involved and implicated in the making of
gender identity in the West. Furthermore, Judaism in its various stages of
development, Jewish literature, and Jewish societies provide an interesting
case for the complexities of gender, especially in light of recent revisionary
studies informed by feminism and gender theory.

_2\. Course Objective_

> __"Gender and Judaism" introduces to the interface between the biblical
monotheistic revolution (often cast as a revolt of patriarchy against
preceding matriarchal societies), its subsequent Judaic interpretations (where
tension exists between the image projected by religious literature composed by
male authorships and the often matriarchal social reality), and modern
critical approaches to the historiography and practice of Judaism. The latter
aspects (historiography and liturgical practice) speak to the current cultural
debate of modernism _vs._ postmodernism. The course also serves the interest
of introducing to strategies of text interpretation that are generally
relevant to an understanding of Judaism and other scripture based traditions.

_3\. Teaching Style_

> __The class is run as a seminar. Readings must be completed in advance of
the relevant session so students' participation will not only be lively but
also based on sound information.

_3\. Prerequisites_

> __One of the following or equivalent courses: RN101, RN216, AN260

_4\. Grading_

> __One report on a general work of literature on gender not discussed in
class (3-5pp) due by the end of of the third week of classes (25%). One
discussion of a primary text in its history of traditional and critical
interpretation (8-10pp) due by the end of the term or an in-class presentation
related to one of the course units (25%). Midterm (25%) and final exam (25%)
will test general ability to keep up with and process the information given in
reading and lectures.

_5\. Readings/Course Material_

> __Assigned readings and additional related works will be made available on
reserve (see attached bibliography).

>

> The following title is recommended for purchase: David Biale, _Eros and the
Jews. From Biblical Israel to Contemporary America_ (New York, Basic Books,
1992)

**Please make sure to own an edition of the Hebrew Bible.**

> ****Recommended edition: _Tanakh. A New Translation of the Holy Scriptures
According to the Traditional Hebrew Text_ (ed. Jewish Publication Society,
1985) ****

****

****

**Course Schedule**

****

**I. How it all begins:** **The Absence of the Goddess and the Worship of One
God Alone**

**_(Week 1-2)_** __

> __Texts: Gen 1; selections from Psalms and Job;

>

> Ancient Near Eastern parallel traditions: Mesopotamian, Canaanite, and
Egyptian myths of creation

>

> Lit: Caroline Walker Bynum, "Introduction" in: _Gender and Religion: On the
Complexity of Symbols_ (Boston: Beacon Press) 1-20

>

> Phyllis Trible, "Depatrializing in Biblical Interpretation" in Koltun, pp.
217-240

>

> Tikva Frymer Kensky, _In the Wake of the Goddess,_ pp. 81-117 ****

>

> ****Jon D. Levenson, _Creation and the Persistence of Evil_

>

> __David Biale, _Eros_ Ch. 1 ****

****

**II. The Female Voice as a Male Invention**

**_(Week 3)_**

> **__**Adam and Eve

>

>> Texts: Gen 2:4b-4

>>

>> Lit: Reuven Kimelman, "The Seduction of Eve and the Exegetical Politics of
Gender" (handout, 39pp)

**_(Week 4)_**

> **__**Women in the Bible ****

>

>> ****Texts: selections (The Patriarchal stories in Genesis, the Book Ruth,
selections from Judges, the Books of Samuel and Kings)

>>

>> Lit: Frymer Kensky, "Gender and Its Image: Women in the Bible" in _In the
Wake,_ pp. 118-143

**_(Weeks 5-6)_**

> Covenant and the Male Imagery of Love

>

>> 1\. _Da'at and Ma'at:_ The Carnality of Knowledge as a Topos

>>

>>> Texts: Gilgamesh, Greek lit. on male homoeroticism and initiation, Books
of Samuel and Kings (David, Solomon: wisdom and male prowess), Egyptian
_ma'at_ literature

>

>  
>

>> 2\. _B'rith:_ Covenant and Love

>>

>>> Texts: Hosea, The Book of Deuteronomy,

>>>

>>> Lit: Frymer Kensky, _In the Wake,_ ch. 12 "The Wanton Wife of God" pp.
144-161

>>>

>>> Yochanan Muffs, _Love and Joy: Law. Language and Religion in Ancient
Israel,_ selections

>

>  
>

>> 3\. Taboo: Licit and Illicit Sexual Relationships in Biblical Law

>>

>>> Texts: selections from Exodus, Numbers, and Leviticus

>>>

>>> Lit: Rachel Biale, _Women and Jewish Law_ (NY: Schocken, 1984), ch. 7
"Sexuality Outside of Marriage" pp. 175-197

**_(Week 7-8)_**

> The Judaism of the Male Householder: Women in the Mishnah

>

>> Text: selections from the Mishnah ****

>>

>> ****Lit: J. Neusner, _The Way of Torah,_ selections

>>

>> Judith Romney Wegner, _Chattel or Person,_ ch. I, pp. 10-19

>>

>> Rachel Adler, "Tumah and Taharah: Ends and Beginnings" in Koltun, 63-71 **
__**

>>

>> **__**Rachel Biale, _Women and Jewish Law,_ ch. 1 "Women and the Mitzvot",
ch. 6 "Niddah" __

>>

>> __David Biale, _Eros,_ Ch. 2

**__**

**_(Week 9)_**

> Mythological Woman as a threat to (male) order: Lilith, Eve and Satan

>

>> Texts: Selections from Midrash literature and _Vita Adam et Evae_

>>

>> __Lit: Aviva Cantor, "The Lilith Question" in S. Heschel (ed.), _On Being a
Jewish Feminist. A Reader_ (Schocken Books, 1983), pp. 40-50

**_(Week 10)_**

> **__**The Male Brotherhood: From Pharisees to Kabbalists

>

>> Texts: Serekh ha Yahad (1QS), the Zaddokite Document, selections from rabb.
lit.

>>

>> Lit: Elliot Wolfson, _Circle in the Square. Studies in the Use of Gender in
Kabbalistic Symbolism_ (SUNY Press, 1995)

>>

>> David Biale, _Eros,_ ch. 3 and 5

**_(Week 11)_**

> "Feminine" traits of the Israelite Male (as defined by the Israelite Male)

>

>> Lit: Daniel Boyarin, _Unheroic Conduct. The Rise of Heterosexuality and the
Invention of the Jewish Man_

>>

>> David Biale, _Eros,_ ch 7 and 8

**_(Week 12)_**

> The Colonized Female: Women Adopting Male Views of Women

>

>> Text: _Memoirs of Glueckel of Hameln_ (Schocken 1988)

>>

>> Lit: Natalie Z. Davis, _Women on the Margins_

>>

>> __Ruth Wisse, "Women as Conservative Rabbis?" in _Commentary_ 68/4 (Oct.
1979), p. 59

**_(Week 13)_**

> The Gender of Desire: Platonism and its (ill) effects (From Philo to
Maimonides)

>

>> Lit: Daniel Boyarin, _Carnal Israel. Reading Sex in Talmudic Culture_
(UCPress, 1993)

>>

>> Susan Shapiro, "A Matter of Discipline: Reading for Gender in Jewish
Philosophy" in: Naomi Zack (et al.), _Race, Class, Gender, and Sexuality: The
Big Questions_ (Blackwell, 1998), pp. 212-226

>>

>> Frymer Kensky, "Gifts of the Greeks" in: _Wake of the Goddess,_ 203-212

>>

>> David Biale, _Eros,_ ch. 4

****

**III. Recovering the Female Voice**

**_(Week 14-16)_**

> **__**1\. Stating the Problem

>

>> Lit: Cynthia Ozick, "Notes Towards Finding the Right Question" in S.
Heschel (ed), 120-151

>>

>> David Biale, _Eros,_ ch. 9

>>

>>  

> 2\. Biblical heroines, women, prophetesses, female companionship

>

>> Lit: Plaskow, _Standing Again at Sinai_ (Harper, 1991), ch. 4 "Reimaging
the Unthinkable" pp. 120-151

>>

>>  

> 3\. Women at the Margins of the Rabbinic Canon

>

>> Lit: Judith Hauptmann, _Rereading the Rabbis_ (Westview Pr, 1998) __

__****

> ****4\. Contemporary Spirituality

>

>> Lit: Ellen Umansky, _Four Centuries of Jewish Women's Spirituality_
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1992)

****

> ****5\. Women amongst Themselves: Female Homoeroticism in the Ancient World
and Today

>

>> Lit: Evelyn Torton Beck (ed.) _Nice Jewish Girls. A Lesbian Anthology._
Watertown/MA: Persephone Press, 1982. Second Edition Trumansburg/NY: Crossing
Press, 1984. Third ed. Boston: Beacon Press, 1989

>>

>> Batya Baumann, "Women-Identified Women in Male-Identified Judaism" in
Heschel, pp. 88-95

[HOME](index.html)

