

**Resources on Race, Ethnicity, and Class and the Internet**

The following list was prepared by Dr. Kali Tal of the University of Arizona
in Tuscon.

* * *

**The Unbearable Whiteness of Being: African American Critical Theory and
Cyberculture**

http://www.kalital.com/Text/Writing/Whitenes.html



**Cultural Uses of New, Networked Internet Information and Communication
Technologies: Implications for US Latino Identities**

http://sunsite.unc.edu/jlillie/thesis.html



**Bridging the Digital Divide: The Impact of Race on Computer Access and
Internet Use**

http://www2000.ogsm.vanderbilt.edu/papers/race/science.html



**What it Means to be Black in Cyberspace**

http://www.panix.com/~mbowen/cz/identity/blakCMC.html



**Cyborg Diaspora: Virtual Imagined Community**

http://ernie.bgsu.edu/~radhik/sanov.html



**Race In/For Cyberspace: Identity Tourism and Racial Passing on the
Internet**

http://acorn.grove.iup.edu/en/workdays/Nakamura.html



**American Emissaries to Africa: From John Barlow via James Bond to James
Baldwin and Back**

http://www.factory.org/nettime/archive/1292.html



**What Color is the Net?**

http://www.hotwired.com/netizen/97/11/index2a.html



**WIRED 3.12: Idees Fortes - Race in Cyberspace?**

http://www.wired.com/wired/3.12/departments/berger.if.html



**Book Review: The African-American Resource Guide to the Internet**

http://www.otal.umd.edu/~rccs/books/battle.html



**Black Pioneers of the Internet**

http://www.delphi.com/blackpioneers/



**Forsaken Geographies: Cyberspace and the New World 'Other'**

http://eng.hss.cmu.edu/internet/oguibe/

http://arts.usf.edu/~ooguibe/madrid.htm



**On Digital 'Third Worlds': An interview with Olu Oguibe**

http://arts.usf.edu/~ooguibe/springer.htm



**The Virtual Barrio @ The Other Frontier (or the Chicano inerneta)**

http://www.telefonica.es/fat/egomez.html



**Cultural Survival Quarterly: The Internet and Indigenous Communities**

http://www.cs.org/csq/csqinternet.html



**Buying into the Computer Age: A Look at Hispanic Families**

http://www.cgu.edu/inst/aw1-1.html



**AFROAM-L Archives - February 1995: Race, Ethnicity, Culture, and
Cyberspace**

http://www.afrinet.net/~hallh/afrotalk/afrofeb95/0796.html



**Possible Roles for Electronic Community Networks and Participatory
Development Strategies in Access Programs for Poor Neighborhoods**

http://www.unc.edu/~jlillie/310.html



**High Technology and Low-Income Communities: Prospects for the Positive Use
of Advanced Information Technology**

http://web.mit.edu/sap/www/high-low/



**Losing Ground Bit by Bit: Low-Income Communities in the Information Age**

http://www.benton.org/Library/Low-Income/



**Falling Through the Net II: New Data on the Digital Divide**

http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/net2/



**Impact of CTCnet Affiliates: Findings from a National Survey of Users of
Community Technology Centers**

http://www.ctcnet.org/impact98.htm



**Cybersociology Magazine: Issue 3 - Digital Third Worlds**

http://members.aol.com/Cybersoc/issue3.html



* * *

  
From Kali Tal:

Lastly, in case you're wondering why I even bothered to put this list
together, one of my "white" colleagues said it better than I ever could:

> "We're resisting the tired-but-still-commonly-accepted idea that the virtual
world provides a somehow "level" playing field, in which race, gender, [and]
culture(s) no longer matter. We think that such ideas are based on the false
notion that there's a normative white male middle-class culture to which all
folks can gain access, now that the barriers imposed by the physical body have
been miraculously removed. We want [to see] essays, articles, and examples of
work which show that the "politics of identity" is alive and well on the
internet, and that instead of regressing to a sort of Eisenhowerian procession
of the bland leading the bland, there are people out there using electronic
technology to emphasize and celebrate and motivate and defend their own
communities and cultural ideals.

>

> "There's been a lot of talk (mostly by white men) about the "liberating"
potential of the internet and of virtual spaces. What they usually mean is a
liberation *from* the body, to some kind of higher plane. But we're interested
in how folks whose bodies are usually threatened by the power structure
(nonwhite folks, women, poor people, queer folks) are using the internet as a
platform for making themselves more visible (a liberation *of* the body), and
how that connects to other contemporary activist movements."

Kali Tal  
Lecturer, University of Arizona

* * *



**RETURN TO THE 21ST CENTURY PROJECT HOME PAGE**

**RETURN TO THE LBJ SCHOOL COURSE SYLLABUS, "PUBLIC POLICY AND THE INTERNET"**

**MAIL GARY CHAPMAN BY CLICKING HERE**

![](21CP.GIF)

