# A WWW Starter kit for learning about the West Bank

[**Syllabus**](Syllabus.html) |  [Middle East Links](MElinks.html) |  [The
Negotiation Project](project.html) |  [The Negotiation
Documents](documents.html) |  [**Levels of Analysis**](analysis.html) |
[**The A paper**](Apaper.html) |  [Class Main Page](index.html)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
I hope these links will help you begin your exploration of your clients in the
social conflict class. There is certainly a lot of information on the web
about the Middle East, and particularly about the West Bank. I try to make the
most useful of that information available here. In addition to this
information, you will need to consult the [ list of reference
material](http://www.stolaf.edu/library/BIGUIDES/psych3~1.htm) the Rolvaag
LIbrary has available.

However, don't make the mistake of using the web as your primary resource. For
some things, it's great; for other things, you are better off spending some
time in the reference room. For example, for late breaking news, some of the
news sites on the web are excellent (e.g. CNN, ABC). But for a sense of the
history of the conflict, you will need to read a few encyclopedia articles,
Almanacs, or State Department reports. For a sense of the religious
commitments of the various sides in the conflict, you are also better off
looking in encyclopedias or other reference works. If you want an already
gathered set of arguments for "your side" the Web is fine, but be sure to
_check those facts_ that are crucial to your argument by looking elsewhere. If
you want thoughtful critique of those arguments, you are better off going to
current political science journals or opinion magazines.

So, now that you've been warned, here are the links:

#### Compilations of Links and News etc.

These sites are set up to link you with recent news wire reports, various
newspapers and online newsletters on the issues, sites maintained by interest
groups or organizations, and some audio and video files ( _RealAudio_ is
useful here). These and the news sites are worth checking regularly.

  * [Political Resources on the Net](http://www.stm.it/politic/). A useful listing of poitical sites, by country.
  * A compilation of links on the [Middle East Peace Process](http://www.arts.mcgill.ca/MEPP/meppnet.html).
  * [_Yahoo!_ Israeli - Palestinian Conflict](http://headlines.yahoo.com/Full_Coverage/World/Israeli___Palestinian_Conflict/)
  * [_Excite's_ Middle East Update](http://nt.excite.com/222/225/page.html)
  * [_Lycos_ Middle East](http://www.lycos.com/wguide/network/net_484547.html)

#### History & Information

  * [Reference Documents (maintained by Israel)](http://www.israel.org/peace/basicref.html) This site is courtesy of the Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. It contains the full text, along with appendices and maps, of agreements, treaties, important letters and memoranda, etc. from both sides. All the relevant UN documents are here, the Balfour Declaration, the Camp David Accords, the Oslo Accords, etc. Quite impressive.
  * [Palestine: Home of History](http://www.toptown.com/office/holyland/) This site has extensive short historical essays, biographies, etc. taken from encyclopedias. It also has a comprehensive list of links related to Israel and Palestine. I have wondered about copyright issues associated with this site.
  * The 1998 version of the [CIA World factbook](http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/index.html). All the basic statistics on countries in the world. Look for the Palestine National Authority in the country lists under the West Bank and under Gaza.

#### Sites from Major News Providers

Start here. These sites will provide you with some background information on
Israel, the Palestinian National Authority, the PLO, Hamas, the issues
dividing the sides, etc. They are not "history" sites, they are journalism.
But they are certainly good enough for you to get a start in seeing the larger
picture of the conflict.

  * [_CNN_ Struggle for Peace](http://www.cnn.com/WORLD/struggle_for_peace/index.html)
  * [_ABC News_ Middle East Peace Mired in Complications](http://www.abcnews.com/sections/world/mideast_index/index.html)

#### Organizations on some of the sides of the conflict

Be most wary here, but this is certainly the place to go to find out what
folks on _your_ side of the issue are saying. Remember that the authors of
these sites have a clear agenda. They are not writing a balanced, textbook-
style presentation of the issues from various perspectives. So, _check the
facts_ you get from these folks. But they are also persuasive advocates for
their cause, and valuable for that very reason.

##### Israel

  * [Official Israeli Sites](http://www.pmo.gov.il/english/websites/index.html). A list of links to various agencies of the Israeli government.
  * [IRIS: Information Regarding Israel's Security](http://www.netaxs.com/~iris/). Lots of maps and diagrams. Clearly an advocacy site.
  * [The Israel Labor Party](http://www.inter.net.il/~avoda/enghome.html). The English language home page of the Labor Party.
  * [Likud](http://www.likud.org.il/). The English language home page of the Likud Party.

##### Palestine

  * [Palestinian National Authority](http://www.pna.org/). The offical site of the governing body for Palestinians in the West Bank.
  * The [Ministry of Information](http://www.pna.org/mininfo/) of the PNA has a useful site.
  * [Islamic Association for Palestine Home Page](http://www.iap.org/). Another clear advocacy site, but well put together.
  * An unofficial site for [Hamas](http://www.hamas.org/). More detail here than one is likely to get from official sources. Also, the [Hamas GateWay ](http://msanews.mynet.net/gateway/hamas/)is an excellent site with materials from many sides writing on Hamas. 
  * [Fatah](http://www.fateh.org/). A major Palestinian Political Party
  * The English homepage of the [Palestinian Legislative Council](http://www.pal-plc.org/english/english.htm), the PNA's elected legislative body.

##### United States

  * [Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs](http://www.state.gov/www/regions/nea/index.html), US State Department.
  * [White House](http://www.whitehouse.gov/WH/html/library.html) search engine for Presidential statements etc.

#### Online Newspapers and Opinion

  * [Haaretz Daily](http://www3.haaretz.co.il/eng/htmls/1_1.htm). A somewhat liberal Israeli paper.
  * [The Jerusalem Post](http://www.jpost.com/). An English language paper from Jerusalem. 



  * [Arabic News](http://www.arabicnews.com/ansub/index.html). A broader topic area, but much about Palestine. This source seems most focussed on news, with less editorial intrusion than some other sources.
  * [Palestine Times](http://www.ptimes.com/). Mostly about Palestine from the Arab viewpoint.
  * [Arab View](http://www.arab.net/arabview/). A monthly opinion magazine.

[St. Olaf College](http://www.stolaf.edu/) |  [Psychology
Department](http://www.stolaf.edu/depts/psych/) |  [My Main  
Page](../index.html) |  [Research Projects](../info/Research.html) |
[Classes](../classes/Classes.html) |  [Essays  
and  
Poetry](../prose/essays.html) |  [Links](links.html) |  [SPSP  
List  
Search](../SPSP/SPSPsearch.html)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
[_Disclaimer_](/cwis_policies/personal_disclaimer.html)

