**Professor Christine Worobec
Spring 2002**

**HIST 434-1: Russian Revolution**

  

Meeting time and place: MW 3:30-4:45 p.m. DU 418  
Office address/phone: Zulauf 702, 753-6821 (voice mail)  
Office hours: MW 1:00-3:00 p.m.;TH 1:30-3:00 p.m.; F 11:30 a.m. - 1:00 p.m.;
and by appt.  
Email: [worobec@niu.edu](mailto:worobec@niu.edu)

**_CourseDescription:_**

This course looks at Revolutionary Russia over the course of a couple decades,
beginning in 1900 with the twilight of the Old Regime and ending in 1932 with
the conclusion of the First Five-Year Plan. Students will study the 1905
Revolution, the two revolutions of 1917, the Civil War, and the revolutionary
experiments of Bolshevism in the 1920s and early Stalinism from 1927 to 1932.
Emphasis will be placed on gender, class, and culture. Students will learn
about the gendered language of war, revolution, and experimental socialism,
the roles that peasants, workers, soldiers, and women of various classes
played in the revolutionary period as well as the major changes that these
groups experienced. They will also be introduced to cultural expressions of
revolutionary change.

**_Formal Requirements and Procedures:_**  
There will be an "in-class" midterm examination ( **March 6** ) and a take-
home final essay examination due at 6:00 p.m. on **May 6** (the final will be
comprehensive). Students are also required to write three short papers of
approximately 1,500 words each (see description below). They will be expected
to do their readings faithfully and to participate in class discussions, which
will be a regular feature of the course. Oral participation is the only way
that the professor can gauge whether a student has done the reading and
comprehended it.

**_Assigned Readings_** (in chronological rather than alphabetical order)
**:**

  * Figes, Orlando. _A People's Tragedy: A History of the Russian Revolution_. ISBN 014024364x.
  * _The Portable Twentieth-Century Russian Reader_. ISBN 0140151079.
  * Steinberg, Mark D., ed. _Voices of Revolution, 1917_. ISBN 0300090161.
  * Fitzpatrick, Sheila, and Yuri Slezkine, eds. _In the Shadow of Revolution: Life Stories of Russian Women from 1917 to the Second World War_. ISBN 0691019495.
  * Wood, Elizabeth A. _The Baba and the Comrade: Gender and Politics in Revolutionary Russia_. ISBN 0253214300.
  * Viola, Lynne. _Peasant Rebels under Stalin: Collectivization and the Culture of Peasant Resistance_. ISBN 0195131045.

**_Writing Assignments:_**  
The first writing assignment ( **due February 27** ) requires students to
write an analytical essay based on the Introduction and Part 1 of Mark D.
Steinberg, ed. _Voices of Revolution, 1917_. Students are asked to reconstruct
the ways in which various lower-class groups - peasants, workers, and soldiers
- expressed their differing notions of revolution \- social, political, and
economic change -, values, and desires for the future. How did they use
language? What did they mean by freedom, tyranny, state authority, democracy,
class, citizenship, and socialism? Did women express themselves differently
from men? What role did religion play in their world view? Can you discern
differences in tone of language?

The second and third writing assignments are conventional book reviews, one of
Elizabeth A. Wood, _The Baba and the Comrade_ ( **due April 15** ), and the
other of Lynne Viola, _Peasant Rebels under Stalin_ ( **due April 29** ). A
review presents a critical overview of the book, detailing its main arguments,
methodological approaches, use of sources, structure, contribution to the
field, and weaknesses/strengths in argumentation and evidence. The
introduction to a book is critical in providing information about many of
these items, including the book's contribution to the field, although you need
to read the entire book to get at all the main arguments, including sub-
arguments, as well as any problems with evidence and argument.

Papers will be graded on both content and style. They are to be approximately
1,500 words (double spaced) each and are due at class time on the specified
day unless the paper is early or the instructor, in being notified in advance
of the deadline, has authorized a late submission. In all other cases,
assignments received within one week of the deadline will be penalized one
letter grade. Assignments received two weeks late will be penalized two letter
grades.

The first page of the paper should have the student's **ID** **number**
**rather** **than** **name** in the top right hand corner followed two lines
below by the paper's title (in the case of the first assignment) or a full
bibliographic citation of the book (in the case of a book review). The title
or bibliographic citation should be centered on the page. All pages must be
numbered.

**Plagiarism,** the representation of the words or ideas of others as one's
own, is fraud. To avoid plagiarism writers are obliged to give credit to
others consulted. In a discussion of a section of a book or a book review page
numbers from the book under review must follow direct quotations (the latter
are identified by quotation marks) in parentheses. Any words borrowed from the
text, even if they are few in number, must be enclosed in quotation marks. If
other sources are consulted and ideas borrowed from those sources, either
footnotes or endnotes must be used to acknowledge both direct quotations and
paraphrases of the ideas of other authors. Page citations and notes not only
protect against charges of plagiarism, they also demonstrate that additional
support exists for the argument being presented and thus make the work more
convincing. If there is any question about how to handle borrowed words or
ideas, it is the student's responsibility to seek the professor's guidance.

**_Grading:_**  
The short papers are worth15 percent each (for a total of 45 percent), the
midterm 15 percent, and the final examination 20 percent of the final grade.
The remaining 20 percent will derive from class participation.

**_Class Schedule:_**

January 14 Introduction: Handouts

January 16 The Old Regime

January 21 Martin Luther King Day - no class

January 23 The Old Regime continued  
                  Figes, Preface, Chapters 1 & 2; Brown: Chekhov, "The Bishop" 

January 28 Russian Peasantry  
                  Figes, Chapter 3; Brown: Tolstoy "Alyosha the Pot;" Gorky, "Recollections of Leo Tolstoy" 

January 30 Revolutionary Tradition  
                   Figes, Chapter 4 

February 4 1905 Revolution  
                    Figes, Chapter 5 

February 6 1905 Revolution continued

February 11 Constitutional Experiment and Political Retrenchment  
                    Figes, Chapter 6; Brown: Bely, "From Petersburg" 

February 13 Stolypin Reforms

February 18 World War I  
                    Figes, Chapter 7 

February 20 February 1917  
                    Figes, Chapter 8 

February 25 Provisional Government (to June)  
                    Figes, Chapter 9 

February 27 Discussion of Steinberg, Introduction and Part 1 (including
photographs)  
**                     Paper on Steinberg, Part I, due**

March 4 Provisional Government (June-October)  
                Figes, Chapter 10 

March 6 **Midterm Exam**

March 9-17 **Spring Break**

March 18 Discussion of Steinberg, Part 2

March 20 October Revolution  
                Figes, Chapter 11 

March 25 Discussion of Steinberg, Part 3

March 27 Civil War  
                Figes, Chapters 13 & 14 

April 1 Civil War in Autobiography  
                Discussion of Fitzpatrick and Slezkine, Introduction and Part I 

April 3 Civil War in Literature  
            Discussion of Brown: Mandelshtam, "Theodosia;" Babel, "My First Goose,"   
            "How it was Done in Odessa," "My First Fee;" Platonov, "The Potudan River" 

April 8 New Economic Policy  
            Figes, Chapters 15, 16, & Conclusion 

April 10 Power Struggle  
                Brown: Olesha, "Envy" 

April 15 Discussion of Wood, _The Baba and the Comrade_  
**              Review of Wood due**

April 17 Nationality Policy

April 22 Stalinism and First Five-Year Plan

April 24 Fitzpatrick and Slezkine, Part II

April 29 Discussion of Viola, _Peasant Rebels under Stalin_  
**               Review of Viola due**

May 1 The End of the Revolution

May 6 **Final Exam: The take-home exam is due by 6:00 p.m.** **in Zulauf
702.**

