##  Karcher (Temple University)

### General Information

### Abstract

The syllabus is designed to take full advantage of the multicultural resources
offered by the **Heath Anthology.** Beginning with Native American Traditions
and ending with Whitman and Dickinson, reading assignments have been grouped
together in a dialogic format to allow for comparing the divergent cultural
values, experiences, and perspectives of Native Americans and Europeans;
Spanish and English colonizers; Puritan, Spanish, and African captives;
Catholics, Puritans, Quakers, and Enlightenment philosophes; African Americans
and whites; abolitionists and non-abolitionists; men and women. The syllabus
also invites comparisons among various art forms (Native American ritual
poetry, slave songs, and Anglo- American formal poetry from the Puritan era
through Dickinson; Native American and Mexican American oral tales and Anglo-
American short stories in the legendary, romantic, and realistic modes;
sermons, essays, autobiographies, captivity narratives, slave narratives, and
orations).

### Population

Discussion (mostly), with occasional lectures (e.g. at important historical
turning points where new concepts have to be introduced, or when dropped
threads from the previous week's discussion need to be picked uP) Class size:
35 students; Class level: sophomore to senior (the course is required for
English majors and is supposed to be a prerequisite to higher-level literature
courses, but due to schedules and availability, many end up taking it late in
their course work; the course is also required for education majors and is
taken by many others as a humanities elective; in general about 50% of the
class consists of English majors)

### Bibliography

Required Text: **Heath Anthology of American Literature, I**

Bibliography of useful texts : On the Zuni, I have used Ruth Benedict's
**Patterns of Culture** (besides Chapter 4 on the Zuni, her discussion of the
Kwakiutl potlatch in Chapter 6 is useful for illuminating aspects of the
Tlingit and Tsimshian trickster tales, since all three are Pacific Northwest
cultures with similar features). Also helpful on the Tlingit is the essay by
Laura F. Klein, "Contending with Colonization: Tlingit Men and Women in
Change," in Eleanor Leacock and Mona Etienne, eds., **Women and Colonization:
Anthropological Perspectives.** On the Navajo Changing Woman story, Raymond
Friday Locke's T **he Book of the Navajo** is helpful. On Native American
traditional literature in general, Paula Gunn Allen's essay "The Sacred Hoop"
(available both in her book by that title and in her MLA volume (Studies in
American Indian Literature) provides a very useful framework.

On the trickster tales, Barbara Babcock-Abrahams's "'A Tolerated Margin of
Mess': The Trickster and His Tales Reconsidered," and the extract from Levi-
Strauss, both reprinted in Andrew Wiget, ed., **Critical Essays on Native
American Literature** , are almost indispensable.

On the slave songs, H. Bruce Franklin's **The Victim as Criminal and Artist,**
Chapter 3, provides an excellent starting point. See also Lawrence Levine's
chapter on the spirituals in **Black Culture and Black Consciousness**.

On Caroline Kirkland and Alice Cary, the excellent introductions by Sandra
Zagarell and Judith Fetterley are very helpful.

### General Pedagogy:

For this course, students are required to write two papers of 5-7 pages each.
In addition, they are assigned five or six take-home quizzes in which they are
to explicate three pre-selected passages from the readings for the coming
class period; on the last of these quizzes, they are free to choose either a
poem by Dickinson or a comparable section of a poem by Whitman to explicate.
There is also a final essay examination.

### Readings & Pedagogy

### Introduction

A lecture providing an overview of the course, a review of the debates over
the canon that culminated in the Heath Anthology, and a discussion of the
attacks on so-called "PC" (on which I invite comments by students)

### Unit #1

Native American Traditions (2 sessions):

Readings for Unit #1: Native American Traditions-- Winnebago, Pima, Zuni:  pp.
3-7 ("Colonial Period"), 22-40 ("Native American Traditions," "This Newly
Created World," "Emergence Song," "Talk Concerning the First Beginning");
2641-63 ("Native American Oral Poetry," "Sayatasha's Night Chant"); Native
American Traditions-- Navajo, Tlingit, Tsimshian : pp. 40-52 ("Changing Woman
and the Hero Twins"); 59-66 ("Raven and Marriage," "Raven Makes a Girl Sick")

|  |  
---|---  
  
Writing and Pedagogy for Unit #1: See the attached list of quizzes and paper
topics for the first half of the semester.

### Unit #2

Spanish Colonizers and Native Americans (2 sessions): Readings for Unit#2:
Spanish Explorers, Captives, Conquerors: pp. 7-10 ("Colonial Period"); 67-69
("Literature of Discovery"); 69-80 (Columbus: Journal of the First Voyage to
America), 89-99 (Cabeza de Vaca: Relation); 120-31 (Villagra: History of New
Mexico) ; Spanish Colonizers and Native Americans: 52-55 ("Coming of the
Spanish and Pueblo Revolt," Hopi); 431-32 ("Pueblo Revolt and Spanish
Reconquest"); 433-40 (Otermin, "Letter on Pueblo Revolt") ; 756-61  (Report by
Delgado) ; 80-88 ("Virgin of Guadalupe")

|  
---|---  
  
Writing and Pedagogy for Unit #2: See the attached list of quizzes and paper
topics for the first half of the semester.

###  Unit #3

English Colonists in Virginia and New England: (3 sessions)

Readings for Unit #3: English Colonists in Virginia and the Puritan Mission in
New England: pp. 10-21 ("Colonial Period"); 146-59 Smith : **True Relation,
General Historie** , "Description of New England," "Advertisements"); 172-76
(Frethorne, Letters) ; 188-99 (Winthrop: "Modell of Christian Charity");
Puritan Colonists and Native Americans: pp. 210-32 Bradford : **Of Plymouth
Plantation** ); 317-42 Rowlandson : Narrative of Captivity); Puritan Poetry:
256-60, 272-73, 276 Bradstreet : "Prologue," "Author to Her Book, "Before the
Birth," "To My Dear Husband," "Letter to Her Husband," In Memory of My
Grandchild"); 295-97 "Bay Psalm Book" and "New-England Primer" ), 304 (Psalm
23); 308, 309 (New England Primer: Alphabet, Verse) Edward Taylor  342-46,
363-65, 366-67, 373-74 ("Huswifery," "Upon Wedlock," "Prologue," "Meditation
26")

|  
---|---  
  
Writing and Pedagogy for Unit #3: See the attached list of quizzes and paper
topics for the first half of the semester.

### Unit #4

Colonial Period (5 sessions) Readings for Unit#4: Colonial Period 1700-1800--
Varieties of Eighteenth-Century Religious Experience, Puritan and Quaker: 448-
69 ("Colonial Period); 512-16, 545-66 Edwards : "Personal Narrative," "Sinners
in the Hands of an Angry God"); 604-10 Woolman : "Some Considerations on the
Keeping of Negroes"); Who (What) Are Americans?--Revolutionary Ideals and
their Contradictions: 890-91, 895-907 Crevecoeur : "Letters from an American
Farmer" #3, #9); 957-64, 965-71 Jefferson : **Declaration of Independence** ;
**Notes on the State of Virginia** , Queries 6, 11, 14 [xerox handout], 18);
1042-43, 1059-61, 1067-68 Freneau : "To Sir Toby," "The Indian Burying
Ground"; Who (What) Are Americans?--African American Voices: 694- 712
Vassa/Equiano : Interesting Narrative); 712-15, 718, 720-24, 727- 28 Wheatley
: "On Whitefield," "On Being Brought from Africa," "To University of
Cambridge," "Phillis's Reply," "To Washington," Letter to Occom), 685-94
Prince Hall : "Petition," "Charge to African Lodge"); Who (What) Are
Americans?--Native American Voices: 728-35 Occom : "Short Narrative"); 1752-53
("Issues and Visions"); 1753-60 Apes : "An Indian's Looking-Glass for the
White Man"); 1760-69 Boudinot : "Address to the Whites"), 1769-72
**Seattle/Suquamish:** Speech); Who (What) Are Americans?--Benjamin Franklin,
Embodiment of the American Dream: 776-80, 823-81 Franklin , **Autobiography**
)

|  
---|---  
  
Writing and Pedagogy for Unit #4: See the attached list of quizzes and paper
topics for the first half of the semester.

### Unit #5

Transition to the Nineteenth Century (1 session)

Readings for Unit#5: Myths, Tales, and Legends: 1214-16 ("Myths, Tales, and
Legends"); 1216-22 Schoolcraft : "Mishosha"); 1228-36 (Hispanic Cuentos: "La
comadre Sebastiani," "Los tres hermanos"); 1238-39, 1248-60 Irving : "Rip Van
Winkle")

|  
---|---  
  
Writing and Pedagogy for Unit #5: See the attached list of quizzes and paper
topics for the first half of the semester. The first paper is due after this
session.

### Unit #6

Versions of Transcendentalism (2 sessions)

|  
---|---  
  
Writing and Pedagogy for Unit #6: See the attached list of quizzes and paper
topics for the second half of the semester.

### Unit#7

Women's Rights and Representations of Women (5 sessions)

Readings for Unit#7: Women's Rights: 1825-26, 1886-90 (S. Grimke : Letters on
the Equality of the Sexes, #8); 1580-82, 1604-26 Fuller : Woman in the 19th
Century); 1893-95, 1897-99 (Stanton: "Declaration of Sentiments"); 1899-1902,
1903-1904, 1907-1908 Fern : "Hints to Young Wives," "Soliloquy of a
Housemaid," "Working- Girls of NY"); 1908-13 Sojourner Truth ); Varieties of
Narrative and Representations of Women: 2063-65 ("The Flowering of
Narrative"); 1322-25, 1333-44, 1362-64 Poe : "Ligeia,""Oval Portrait");
Varieties of Narrative and Representations of Women: 2065-69, 2101-2132
Hawthorne : "The Birth-mark," "Rappaccini's Daughter"); Varieties of Narrative
and Representations of Women: 2286-2307 Kirkland : A New Home); 2596-2613 Cary
: "Uncle Christopher's"); Varieties of Narrative and Representations of Women:
2400-2404, 2431 note 1, 2438-64 Melville : Encantadas Sketch #8, "Paradise of
Bachelors and Tartarus of Maids")

|  
---|---  
  
Writing and Pedagogy for Unit #7: See the attached list of quizzes and paper
topics for the second half of the semester.

###  Unit #8

Multiple Perspectives on Slavery (4 sessions)

Readings for Unit #8: Slavery and Rebellion: 1781-91 Walker , **Appeal to the
Colored Citizens of the World)** ; 1858-71 Higginson , "Nat Turner's
Insurrection"); Slavery through the Eyes of Slaves: 1637-1704 Douglass :
Narrative); 2671-74, 2676-79 (Slave Songs: "Lay Dis Body Down," "Steal Away,"
"There's a Meeting," "Many Thousand Go," "Go Down, Moses," "Didn't My Lord");
Women and Slavery : 1723-50 Jacobs , **Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl**
); 1795-98, 1809-12 Child : "Preface" to Appeal, "Slavery's Pleasant Homes");
A Fictional Perspective on Slavery: 2464- 2522 Melville : "Benito Cereno")

|  
---|---  
  
Writing and Pedagogy for Unit #8: See the attached list of quizzes and paper
topics for the second half of the semester.

### Unit #9

The Emergence of American Poetic Voices (2 sessions)

Readings for Unit #9: Emergence of American Poetic Voices- \- Whitman :
2638-40 ("Emergence"); 2709-12, 2778-88, 2790-91, 2793- 98, 2810-17 (Whitman,
"Sleepers," "There Was Child," "In Paths Untrodden," "Out of the Cradle,"
"When Lilacs Last"); Emergence of American Poetic Voices-- Dickinson : 2838-44
and Poems # 219, 258, 280, 315, 328, 341, 435, 465, 520, 569, 632, 712, 754,
1129

|  
---|---  
  
Writing and Pedagogy for Unit #9: Students must choose either a poem by
Dickinson or a section of a poem by Whitman to explicate in a mini-paper of
1-2 pages.

### Quizzes

### Quiz #1

(Take Home) Carefully analyze THREE of the following passages. I do not want
you merely to paraphrase them, but rather to explain their significance as key
statements of personal or cultural beliefs or as key passages for
understanding the meaning or function of the work. Pay close attention to the
language and imagery. Where appropriate, comment on the cultural information
embedded in these quotations. You may also comment on the relationships you
see between the texts represented here. Be sure to identify each passage and
to relate it to the work's main themes.

1\. "'Although I knew very well that the hilltop was not a place for flowers,
since it is a place of thorns, cactuses, caves and mezquites, I was not
confused and did not doubt Her. When I reached the summit I saw there was a
garden there of flowers with quantities of the fragrant flowers which are
found in Castile; I took them and carried them to the Queen of Heaven and She
told me that I must bring them to you, and now I have done it, so that you may
see the sign that you ask for in order to do Her bidding, and so that you will
see that my word is true.'"

2\. "The missionary did not like the ceremonies. He did not like the Kachinas
and he destroyed the altars and the customs. He called it idol worship and
burned up all the ceremonial things in the plaza."

3\. "What grieved us most were the dreadful flames from the church and the
scoffing and ridicule which the wretched and miserable Indian rebels made of
the sacred things, intoning the alabado and the other prayers of the church
with jeers."

4\. "Finally, to such an extreme do the iniquities reach that are practiced
against the Indians by governors and alcades mayores, as well as by the judges
of residencia, that, losing patience and possessed by fear, they turn their
backs to our holy mother, the Church, abandon their pueblos and missions, and
flee to the heathen, there to worship the devil, and most lamentable of all,
to confirm in idolatries those who have never been illumined by the light of
our holy faith, so that they will never give ear or credit to the preaching of
the gospel. Because of all this, every day new conversions become more
difficult, and the zealous missionaries who in the service of both Majesties
are anxiously seeking the propagation of the gospel, most often see their work
wasted and do [not] accomplish the purpose of their extended wanderings."

### Quiz #2

(Take-Home)

Carefully analyze THREE of the following passages. I do not want you merely to
paraphrase them, but rather to explain their significance as key statements of
personal or cultural beliefs or as key passages for understanding the meaning
or function of the work. Pay close attention to the language and imagery.
Where appropriate, comment on the cultural information embedded in these
quotations. You may also comment on the relationships you see between the
texts represented here. Be sure to identify each passage and to relate it to
the work's main themes.

1\. "God's excellency, his wisdom, his purity and love, seemed to appear in
every thing; in the sun, moon and stars; in the clouds and blue sky; in the
grass, flowers, trees; in the water, and all nature; which used greatly to fix
my mind. I often used to sit and view the moon, for a long time; and so in the
day time, spent much time in viewing the clouds and sky, to behold the sweet
glory of God in these things: in the mean time, singing foth with a low voice,
my contemplations of the Creator and Redeemer. And scarce any thing, among all
the works of nature, was so sweet to me as thunder and lightning. Formerly,
nothing had been so terrible to me. I used to be a person uncommonly terrified
with thunder: and it used to strike me with terror, when I saw a thunder-storm
rising. But now, on the contrary, it rejoiced me. I felt God at the first
appearance of a thunder-storm."

2\. "The use of this awful subject may be for awakening unconverted persons in
this congregation. This that you have heard is the case of every one of you
that are out of Christ. That world of misery, that lake of burning brimstone
is extended abrod under you. There is the dreadful pit of the glowing flames
of the wrath of God; there is hell's wide-gaping mouth open; and you have
nothing to stand upon, nor any thing to take hold of; there is nothing between
you and hell but the air; it is only the power and mere pleasure of God that
holds you up."

3\. "To consider mankind otherwise than brethren, to think favours are
peculiar to one nation and exclude others, plainly supposes a darkness in the
understanding. For as God's love is universal, so where the mind is
sufficiently influenced by it, it begets a likeness of itself and the heart is
enlarged towards all men. Again, to conclude a people froward, perverse, and
worse by nature than others (who ungratefully receive favours and apply them
to bad ends), this will excite a behavior toward them unbecoming the
excellence of true religion."

4\. "Brother, you say there is but one way to worship and serve the Great
Spirit. If there is but one religion, why do you white people differ so much
about it? Why not all agreed, as you can all read the book? "Brother, we do
not understand these things. We are told that your religion was given to your
forefathers and has been handed down from father to son. We also have a
religion which was given to our forefathers and has been handed down to us,
their children. We worship in that way. It teaches us to be thankful for all
the favors we receive, to love each other, and to be united. We never quarrel
about religion."

### Quiz #3

(Take-Home)

Carefully analyze THREE of the following passages. I do not want you merely to
paraphrase them, but rather to explain their significance as key statements of
personal or cultural beliefs or as key passages for understanding the meaning
or function of the work. Pay close attention to the language and imagery.
Where appropriate, comment on the cultural information embedded in these
quotations. You may also wish to draw comparisons with earlier readings for
the course. Be sure to identify each passage and to relate it to the work's
main themes.

1\. "Having emerg'd from the Poverty and Obscurity in which I was born and
bred, to a State of Affluence and some Degree of Reputation in the World, and
having gone so far thro' Life with a considerable share of Felicity, the
conducing Means I made use of, which, with the Blessing of God, so well
succeeded, my Posterity may like to know, as they may find some of them
suitable to their Situations, and therefore fit to be imitated. That Felicity,
when I reflected on it, has induc'd me sometimes to say, that were it offer'd
to my Choice, I should have no Objection to a Repetition of the same Life from
its Beginning, only asking the Advantage Authors have in a second Edition to
correct some Faults of the first."

2\. "Revelation had indeed no weight with me as such; but I entertain'd an
Opinion, that tho' certain Actions might not be bad because they were
forbidden by it, or good because it commanded them; yet probably those Actions
might be forbidden because they were bad for us, or commanded because they
were beneficial to us, in their own Natures, all the Circumstances of things
considered. And this Persuasion, with the kind hand of Providence, or some
guardian angel, or accidental favourable Circumstances and Situations, or all
together, preserved me (thro' this dangerous Time of Youth and the hazardous
Situations I was sometimes in among Strangers, remote from the Eye and Advice
of my Father), without any wilful gross Immorality or Injustice that might
have been expected from my Want of Religion."

3\. "In order to secure my Credit and Character as a Tradesman, I took care
not only to be in Reality Industrious and frugal, but to avoid all Appearances
of the contrary. I dressed plainly; I was seen at no Places of idle Diversion;
I never went out a-fishing or shooting; a Book, indeed, sometimes debauch'd me
from my Work; but that was seldom, snug, and gave no Scandal; and to show that
I was not above my Business, I sometimes brought home the Paper I purchas'd at
the Stores, thro' the Streets on a Wheelbarrow. Thus being esteem'd an
industrious thriving young Man, and paying duly for what I bought, the
Merchants who imported Stationery solicited my Custom, others propos'd
supplying me with Books, and I went on swimmingly."

4\. "It was about this time that I conceiv'd the bold and arduous Project of
arriving at moral Perfection. I wish'd to live without committing any Fault at
any time; I would conquer all that either Natural Inclination, Custom, or
Company might lead me into. As I knew, or thought I knew, what was right and
wrong, I did not see why I might not always do the one and avoid the other.
But I soon found I had undertaken a Task of more Difficulty than I had
imagined: While my Care was employ'd in guarding against one Fault, I was
often surpriz'd by another. Habit took the Advantage of Inattention.
Inclination was sometimes too strong for Reason. I concluded at length, that
the mere speculative Conviction that it was our Interest to be compleatly
virtuous, was not sufficient to prevent our Slipping, and that the contrary
Habits must be broken and good Ones acquired and established, before we can
have any Dependance on a steady uniform Rectitude of Conduct. For this purpose
I therefore contriv'd the following Method."

### Quiz #4

(Take-Home)

Carefully analyze THREE of the following passages. I do not want you merely to
paraphrase them, but rather to explain their significance as key statements of
personal or cultural beliefs or as key passages for understanding the meaning
or function of the work. Pay close attention to the language and imagery. Be
sure to identify the context and to relate each passage to the work's main
themes.

1\. "I remember the first time I ever witnessed this horrible exhibition. I
was quite a child, but I well remember it. I shall never forget it whilst I
remember any thing. It was the first of a long series of such outrages, of
which I was doomed to be a witness and a participant. It struck me with awful
force. It was the blood-stained gate, the entrance to the hell of slavery,
through which I was about to pass."

2\. "Slavery proved as injurious to her as it did to me. When I went there,
she was a pious, warm, and tender-hearted woman. There was no sorrow or
suffering for which she had not a tear. She had bread for the hungry, clothes
for the naked, and comfort for every mourner that came within her reach.
Slavery soon proved its ability to divest her of these heavenly qualities.
Under its influence, the tender heart became stone, and the lamblike
disposition gave way to one of tigerlike fierceness."

3\. "These words sank deep into my heart, stirred up sentiments within that
lay slumbering, and called into existence an entirely new train of thought. It
was a new and special revelation, explaining dark and mysterious things, with
which my youthful understanding had struggled, but struggled in vain. I now
understood what had been to me a most perplexing difficulty--to wit, the white
man's power to enlave the black man. It was a grand achievement, and I prized
it highly. From that moment, I understood the pathway from slavery to
freedom."

4\. "This battle with Mr. Covey was the turning-point in my career as a slave.
It rekindled the few expiring embers of freedom, and revived within me a sense
of my own manhood. It recalled the departed self- confidence, and inspired me
again with a determination to be free. The gratification afforded by the
triumph was a full compensation for whatever else might follow, even death
itself. He only can understand tht deep satisfaction which I experienced, who
has himself repelled by force the bloody arm of slavery. I felt as I never
felt before. It was a glorious resurrection, from the tomb of slavery, to the
heaven of freedom."

5\. "We were linked and interlinked with each other. I loved them with a love
stronger than any thing I have experienced since. It is sometimes said that we
slaves do not love and confide in each other. In answer to this assertion, I
can say, I never loved any or confided in any people more than my fellow-
slaves, and especially those with whom I lived at Mr. Freeland's. I believe we
would have died for each other. We never undertook to do any thing, of any
importance, without a mutual consultation. We never moved separately. We were
one; and as much so by our tempers and dispositions, as by the mutual
hardships to which we were necessarily subjected by our condition as slaves."

6\. "I was afraid to speak to any one for fear of speaking to the wrong one,
and thereby falling into the hands of money-loving kidnappers, whose business
it was to lie in wait for the panting fugitive, as the ferocious beasts of the
forest lie in wait for their prey.... It was a most painful situation, and, to
understand it, one must needs experience it, or imagine himself in similar
circumstances. Let him be a fugitive slave in a strange land--a land given up
to be the hunting- ground for slave-holders--whose inhabitants are legalized
kidnappers--where he is every moment subjected to the terrible liability of
being seized upon by his fellowmen, as the hideous crocodile seizes upon his
prey!--I say ... let him feel that he is pursued by merciless men-hunters ...
in the midst of plenty, yet suffering the terrible gnawings of hunger,--in the
midst of houses, yet having no home,--among fellow-men, yet feeling as if in
the midst of wild beasts, whose greediness to swallow up the trembling and
half-famished fugitive is only equalled by that with which the monsters of the
deep swallow up the helpless fish upon which they subsist,--I say let him be
placed in this most trying situation,--the situation in which I was placed,--
then, and not till then, will he fully appreciate the hardships of, and know
how to sympathize with, the toil-worn and whip-scarred fugitive slave."

### Quiz #5

Carefully analyze THREE of the following passages. I do not want you merely to
paraphrase them, but rather to explain how they illuminate the meaning of the
work. Pay close attention to the language and imagery. Be sure to identify the
context and to relate each passage to the work's main themes.

1\. "As master and man stood before him, the black upholding the white,
Captain Delano could not but bethink him of the beauty of that relationship
which could present such a spectacle of fidelity on the one hand and
confidence on the other. The scene was heightened by the contrast in dress,
denoting their relative positions. The Spaniard wore a loose Chili jacket of
dark velvet; white small clothes and stockings, with silver buckles at the
knee and instep; a high-crowned sombrero, of fine grass; a slender sword,
silver mounted, hung from a knot in his sash; the last being an almost
invariable adjunct, more for utility than ornament, of a South American
gentleman's dress to this hour. Excepting when his occasional nervous
contortions brought about disarray, there was a certain precision in his
attire, curiously at variance with the unsightly disorder around; especially
in the belittered Ghetto, forward of the main-mast, wholly occupied by the
blacks. "The servant wore nothing but wide trowsers, apparently, from their
coarseness and patches, made out of some old topsail; they were clean, and
confined at the waist by a bit of unstranded rope, which, with his composed,
deprecatory air at times, made him look something like a begging friar of St.
Francis."

2\. "His attention had been drawn to a slumbering negress, partly disclosed
through the lace-work of some rigging, lying, with youthful limbs carelessly
disposed, under the lee of the bulwarks, like a doe in the shade of a woodland
rock. Sprawling at her lapped breasts was her wide-awake fawn, stark naked,
its black little body half lifted from the deck, crosswise with its dam's; its
hands, like two paws, clambering upon her, its mouth and nose ineffectually
rooting to get at the mark; and meantime giving a vexatious half-grunt,
blending with the composed snore of the negress. "The uncommon vigor of the
child at length roused the mother. She started up, a distance facing Captain
Delano. But as if not at all concerned at the attitude in which she had been
caught, delightedly she caught the child up, with maternal transports,
covering it with kisses."

3\. "Among other things, he was amused with an odd instance of the African
love of bright colors and fine shows, in the black's informally taking from
the flag-locker a great piece of bunting of all hues, and lavishly tucking it
under his master's chin for an apron."

4\. "As he saw his trim ship lying peacefully at her anchor, and almost within
ordinary call; as he saw his household boat, with familiar faces in it,
patiently rising and falling on the short waves by the San Dominick's side;
and then, glancing about the decks where he stood, saw the oakum-pickers still
gravely plying their fingers; and heard the low, buzzing whistle of the
hatchet polishers, still bestirring themselves over their endless occupation;
and more than all, as he saw the benign aspect of nature, taking her innocent
repose in the evening; the screened sun in the quiet camp of the west shining
out like the mild light from Abraham's tent; as charmed eye and ear took in
all these, with the chained figure of the black, clenched jaw and hand
relaxed. Once again he smiled at the phantoms which had mocked him, and felt
something like a tinge of remorse, that, by harboring them even for a moment,
he should, by implication, have betrayed an almost atheist doubt of the ever-
watchful Providence above."

5\. "But to kill or maim the negroes was not the object. To take them, with
the ship, was the object."

6\. ". . . the negro Babo showed him a skeleton, which had been substituted
for the ship's proper figure-head, the image of Christopher Colon, the
discoverer of the New World; . . . the negro Babo asked him whose skeleton it
was, and whether, from its whiteness, he should not think it a white's. . . ."

7\. "As for the black--whose brain, not body, had schemed and led the revolt,
with the plot--his slight frame, inadequate to that which it held, had at once
yielded to the superior muscular strength of his captor, in the boat. Seeing
all was over, he uttered no sound, and could not be forced to. His aspect
seemed to say, since I cannot do deeds, I will not speak words. Put in irons
in the hold, with the rest, he was carried to Lima. During the passage Don
Benito did not visit him. Nor then, nor at any time after, would he look at
him. Before the tribunal he refused, When pressed by the judges he fainted. On
the testimony of the sailors alone rested the legal identity of Babo. "Some
months after, dragged to the gibbet at the tail of a mule, the black met his
voiceless end. The body was burned to ashes; but for many days, the head, that
hive of subtlety, fixed on a pole in the Plaza, met, unabashed, the gaze of
the whites; and across the Plaza looked towards St. Bartholomew's church, in
whose vaults slept then, as now, the recovered bones of Aranda; and across the
Rimac bridge looked towards the monastery, on Mount Agonia without; where,
three months after being dismissed by the court, Benito Cereno, borne on the
bier, did, indeed, follow his leader."

### Quiz #3a

Carefully analyze THREE of the following passages, paying close attention to
the language and imagery. I do not want you merely to paraphrase them, but
rather to explain their significance as key statements for understanding the
meaning of the work as a whole. Be sure to identify each passage and to set it
in its context. If you wish, you may also draw comparisons with previous
readings.

1\. "It was the fatal flaw of humanity, which Nature, in one shape or another,
stamps ineffaceably on all her productions, either to imply that they are
temporary and finite, or that their perfection must be wrought by toil and
pain. The Crimson Hand expressed the ineludible gripe, in which mortality
clutches the highest and purest of earthly mould, degrading them into kindred
with the lowest, and even with the very brutes, like whom their visible frames
return to dust. In this manner, selecting it as the symbol of his wife's
liability to sin, sorrow, decay, and death, Aylmer's sombre imagination was
not long in rendering the birth-mark a frightful object, causing him more
trouble and horror than ever Georgiana's beauty, whether of soul or sense, had
given him delight."

2\. "What mean you, foolish girl? Dost thou deem it misery to be endowed with
marvellous gifts, against which no power nor strength could avail an enemy?
Misery, to be able to quell the mightiest with a breath? Misery, to be as
terrible as thou art beautiful? Wouldst thou, then, have preferred the
condition of a weak woman, exposed to all evil, and capable of none?"

3\. "But at length, as the labor drew nearer to its conclusion, there were
admitted none into the turret; for the painter had grown wild with the ardor
of his work, and turned his eyes from the canvas rarely, even to regard the
countenance of his wife. And he would not see that the tints which he spread
upon the canvas were drawn from the cheeks of her who sate beside him."

4\. "There was blood upon her white robes, and the evidence of some bitter
struggle upon every portion of her emaciated frame. For a moment she remained
trembling and reeling to and fro upon the threshold, then, with a low moaning
cry, fell heavily inward upon the person of her brother, and in her violent
and now final death-agonies, bore him to the floor a corpse, and a victim to
the terrors he had anticipated."

### Exams

### Final Examination

This exam will consist of TWO ESSAY QUESTIONS, to be chosen from the following
list. Try to show as much breadth as possible in your choice of questions. In
questions that involve comparisons, choose texts that allow you to draw
contrasts as well as comparisons (e.g. across cultures or historical periods,
between races or genders, between different literary forms). You should
discuss a total of SEVEN different authors or texts between the two essay
questions. At least TWO of your authors or texts should be from the first half
of the course. Be specific in supporting your generalizations with references
to texts, though not of course quotations.

1\. Choosing FOUR representative texts, two of which should be Native American
and two of which should be Spanish and/or English, compare and contrast the
religious and cultural values they reflect.

2\. Choose FOUR of the following, and compare and contrast the perspectives
they offer on what Christianity has meant to different peoples at particular
historical moments. Be as specific as possible in your references to the
relevant texts: the Hopi; the Virgin of Guadalupe; Father Carlos Jose Delgado;
the Hispanic "cuentos"; John Winthrop; Mary Rowlandson; Jonathan Edwards; John
Woolman; Phillis Wheatley; Gustavus Vassa/Olaudah Equiano; Samson Occom; Elias
Boudinot; Chief Seattle; David Walker; Frederick Douglass; the slave
spirituals.

3\. "What is an American?" Choose FOUR authors representing different answers
to this question. One of your authors should be Crevecoeur. Refer to specific
texts, and discuss them in as much detail as possible.

4\. From the beginning the "American dream" (or the dream of a "New World")
has been articulated and experienced very differently by different classes and
ethnic groups, and sometimes within the same ethnic group by men and women, or
by those who celebrated and those who questioned the dominant view. Choose
FOUR authors or texts to illustrate these differences.

5\. In 1845 Margaret Fuller wrote, "Though . . . freedom and equality have
been proclaimed only to leave room for a monstrous display of slave-dealing
and slave-keeping; . . . still it is not in vain that the verbal statement has
been made, 'All men are born free and equal.'" Do you agree? Choose at least
THREE writers, including Jefferson, and discuss the uses to which they have
put the Declaration of Independence.

6\. Benjamin Franklin's ideal of the self-made man and Emerson's ideal of
self-reliance have been central to American ideology. Explain how Franklin and
Emerson defined these concepts, and discuss the ways in which they have been
applied or redefined by TWO of the following: Thoreau, Fuller, Douglass,
Jacobs, Whitman, Dickinson.

7\. Compare and contrast the cultural purposes and literary styles of FOUR of
the following: (1) a Native American trickster tale; (2) a Hispanic "cuento";
(3) a story by Irving, Poe, or Hawthorne; (4) any of the three Melville
stories we have read; (5) either Cary's "Uncle Christopher's" or Kirkland's "A
New Home--Who'll Follow?"

8\. Compare and contrast the narrative point of view used in THREE of the
following: (1) "The Birth-mark" OR "Rappaccini's Daughter"; (2) "Benito
Cereno"; (3) "Ligeia" OR A New Home--Who'll Follow OR "Uncle Christopher's."
What effect does the narrative point of view have on the reader in each case?
How does each author use point of view to influence the reader's
interpretation of the story?

9\. Compare and contrast the poetry of FOUR of the following: Anne Bradstreet,
Edward Taylor, Phillis Wheatley, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Walt Whitman, Emily
Dickinson. You should consider such points as: the subject matter and purpose
of the poetry; the verse form; the language and imagery used; the way in which
the poet presents herself/himself (i.e. the poetic persona). You will not be
able to do justice to this question unless you remember specific poems well
enough to illustrate your generalizations with quotations. [If you have read
other poets in the anthology besides the ones listed you may include ONE
example from these poets among your four choices.] 10\. Compare and contrast
the perspectives on slavery provided by FOUR of the following: Thomas
Jefferson; Hector St. John de Crevecoeur; John Woolman; Gustavus Vassa/Olaudah
Equiano; David Walker; Thomas Wentworth Higginson; Frederick Douglass; Harriet
Jacobs; "Slavery's Pleasant Homes"; "Benito Cereno."

11\. Compare and contrast the perspectives on women's lives or on the issue of
women's rights provided by FOUR of the following: Anne Bradstreet; Sarah
Grimke; Margaret Fuller; Fanny Fern; Sojourner Truth; Harriet Jacobs; "The
Birth-mark" OR "Rappaccini's Daughter"; A New Home--Who'll Follow?; "Uncle
Christopher's"; "The Paradise of Bachelors and the Tartarus of Maids" OR the
"Hunilla" sketch from The Encantadas.

12\. Compare and contrast the attitudes toward nature displayed by Hawthorne's
scientist characters in "Rappaccini's Daughter" and "The Birth-mark" with
those reflected in the Navajo "Changing Woman" story and the Zuni "Talk
Concerning the First Beginning."

### Instructions for Final

This exam will consist of TWO ESSAY QUESTIONS, to be chosen from a list of 10
to 12 possibilities. Try to show as much breadth as possible in your choice of
questions. You should use the examination as an opportunity to demonstrate the
extent to which you have conscientiously read and digested the assigned works.
If you have missed or done badly on any quizzes, you may significantly improve
your grade by demonstrating mastery on the exam of the texts covered by those
quizzes. (Conversely, if your exam merely rehashes your papers and makes no
attempt to discuss works on which you have missed quizzes, it will exhibit the
gaps in your class preparation.)

In questions that involve comparisons, choose texts that allow you to draw
contrasts as well as comparisons (e.g. across cultures or historical periods,
between races or genders, between different literary forms). You should
discuss a total of SEVEN different authors or texts between the two essay
questions. At least TWO of your authors or texts should be from the first half
of the course. Be specific in supporting your generalizations with references
to texts, though not of course quotations. (If you plan to discuss poetry on
your exam, however, it would be a good idea to memorize some lines, since it
is difficult to be specific about poetry without quoting it.)

Remember that the principles for writing a good essay exam are the same as for
writing any other paper. An introduction should set up your essay and
formulate its thesis, a conclusion should wrap it up, and your thesis should
guide the development of your argument throughout. Obviously stylistic
elegance cannot be expected on an exam, but your essays should still be clear,
focused, and properly organized.

The best way to study for this exam is to reflect on what have been the main
themes we have pursued in class discussions, or the kinds of linkages we have
noted among groups of texts; to make up questions for yourselves along the
same lines; and to note which texts (and within the texts, which incidents or
examples) would be appropriate to discuss in answer to each question. If you
find yourselves unable to recall the details of a text that would be an
important one to include in answering a particular question, reread it.

Plan to spend approximately two hours writing your exam. A hastily written
exam is nearly always superficial. If necessary, you will be allowed some
extra time to finish, but do not count on being able to stay all day. Good
luck!

### Paper Topics

### Paper #1

Write a coherent, insightful paper taking a comparative approach to the
authors we have covered through Schoolcraft and Irving. This assignment
requires no extra research; instead it enables you to reflect more deeply on
the material we have covered and to explore texts and issues that interest you
in more depth than we have been able to do in class. It also allows you to
sample other selections in the Heath, if you so desire.

Be as SPECIFIC as possible: focus on specific texts, and illustrate your
generalizations with examples or quotations. When you use quotations,
introduce them with proper transitions, and analyze them as you do on quizzes
in order to make your interpretations of them clear; do not regard quotations
as self-explanatory. Orient your paper toward an audience of reasonably
intelligent strangers who have not sat in on class discussions or read the
assigned works.

Depth and originality of analysis, organization, coherence, clarity, stylistic
smoothness, and mechanics will all be factors in determining the grade. (See
the accompanying Checklist of Criteria for Evaluating Papers).

Here are some possible topics. You do not have to confine yourselves to the
ones listed but should consult with me beforehand about alternatives.

1\. Compare and contrast Anglo-American (or European) with Native American
value systems; and/or compare and contrast the "history" each group tells of
how it came to settle the land. Possible comparisons might be:

\--the Zuni "Talk Concerning the First Beginning" or the Navajo "Changing
Woman" story with Bradford's Of Plymouth Plantation or Rowlandson's Captivity
Narrative or Cotton Mather's "Life of John Eliot" (from the Magnalia) or
Edwards's "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God" and "Personal Narrative"

\--the Hopi, Villagra, and Otermin versions of the Pueblos' conquest and
subsequent revolt (if you choose this, be prepared to add significantly to
what was said in class discussion)

\--the Hopi "Coming of the Spanish" with Rowlandson's Captivity Narrative or
Bradford's accounts of the Plymouth colony's relations with Native Americans
or Smith's and Frethorne's accounts of Indian attacks in Virginia.

2\. Choosing particular poems by Native Americans, African Americans,
Puritans, and 18th-century whites (e.g. Philip Freneau or the women poets of
the era), compare and contrast the functions poetry fulfilled for each and the
relationship in each case between cultural function and literary form and
language.

3\. Compare and contrast the Spanish and English conquerors' aims, ideologies,
religious beliefs or motivations, and relations with Native Americans.
Possible comparisons might be:

\--De Vaca's and Rowlandson's narratives of captivity (you may also wish to
use the "Gentleman from Elvas" and the Roger Williams or John Williams
selections)

\--De Vaca's, Thomas Morton's, and Bradford's narratives

\--Columbus' Journal and John Smith's various writings or Bradford's Of
Plymouth Plantation

\--Fray Carlos Jose Delgado's "Report" or Francisco Palou's Life of Junipera
Serra and Cotton Mather's "Triumphs of Reformed Religion: Or, The Life of John
Eliot" from the Magnalia Christi Americana

4\. The Tlingit and Tsimshian tricksters, the Virgin of Guadalupe, Pocahontas,
Catharine Sedgwick's Magawisca in the Hope Leslie selection, Cooper's Natty
Bumppo in the selections from The Pioneers and The Last of the Mohicans, and
historical whites who have "gone Indian" (e.g. de Vaca) can be seen as
different kinds of mediating figures, existing "betwixt and between"
categories. Choose three or more from this list and explore the similarities
and differences among them. You should also consider the cultural functions
and purposes each of these mediating figures might serve.

5\. Who (What) Are Americans? Write a different version of Crevecoeur's
letter, taking into account some of the readings by Native, African, and
Hispanic Americans and by women (if you are looking for other examples of
women's voices besides Bradstreet, Wheatley, and Rowlandson, you may wish to
sample the writings of Abigail Adams, Judith Sargent Murray, or the women
poets of the Revolutionary era).

6\. Using several of the following, discuss the contradiction slavery posed to
the ideals of the American Revolution and/or of Christianity: Jefferson,
Crevecoeur, Woolman, Franklin's "On the Slave Trade," Vassa, Wheatley, and
Prince Hall.

7\. Using some of the following, discuss the contradiction that Indian wars
and the seizure of Native American land posed to the ideals of the American
Revolution: Jefferson, Franklin's "Remarks Concerning the Savages of North
America" or his "Narrative of the Late Massacres," Irving's "History of New
York," and the selections by Willam Apes, Elias Boudinot, and Chief Seattle.

8\. What is the American Dream? Drawing on some of the following, trace the
changes this dream has undergone over time and suggest who may have been left
out of the dream at various points: Smith, Frethorne, Thomas Morton, Winthrop,
Bradford, Crevecoeur, Jefferson, Woolman, Franklin, Occom, Thomas Paine,
Judith Sargent Murray, Juan Nepomuceno Seguin, Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo.

9\. Compare and contrast the versions of Christianity represented in several
of the following: the Virgin of Guadalupe story, Rowlandson's Captivity,
Edwards's "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God" or "Personal Narrative,"
Woolman's Journal or "Considerations on the Keeping of Negroes," Elizabeth
Ashbridge's "Some Account" of her life, Occom's "Short Narrative of My Life,"
Wheatley's or Jupiter Hammon's poems, Delgado's "Report," Francisco Palou's
Life of Junipero Serra.

10\. Compare and contrast Schoolcraft's "Mishosha" or "The Forsaken Brother,"
one of the Hispanic cuentos, and Irving's "Rip Van Winkle" or "The Legend of
Sleepy Hollow." Be sure to consider the different cultural purposes served by
each, including the differences between an orally transmitted folk tale, a
literary version of a folk tale, and a short story drawing on "folk"
traditions.

LENGTH: 5-7 pp. (longer papers will be acceptable)

### Paper #2

Write a coherent, insightful paper taking a comparative approach to the
authors we have covered from Emerson through Dickinson. This assignment
requires no extra research; instead it enables you to reflect more deeply on
the material we have covered and to explore texts and issues that interest you
in more depth than we have been able to do in class. It also allows you to
sample other selections in the Heath, if you so desire.

Be as SPECIFIC as possible: focus on specific texts, and illustrate your
generalizations with examples or quotations. When you use quotations,
introduce them with proper transitions, and analyze them as you do on quizzes
in order to make your interpretations of them clear; do not regard quotations
as self-explanatory. Orient your paper toward an audience of reasonably
intelligent strangers who have not sat in on class discussions or read the
assigned works, but avoid extensive plot summary.

Depth and originality of analysis, organization, coherence, clarity, stylistic
smoothness, and mechanics will all be factors in determining the grade. (See
my Checklist of Criteria for Evaluating Papers).

Here are some possible topics. You do not have to confine yourselves to the
ones listed but should consult with me beforehand about alternatives.

1\. Examine Emerson's doctrine of "Self-Reliance" in relation to one or more
of the following, and evaluate its strengths and limitations:

\--Thoreau's "Resistance to Civil Government"

\--Fuller's **Woman in the Nineteenth Century**

\--Sarah Grimke's Letters on the Equality of the Sexes

\--Fanny Fern's "Soliloquy of a Housemaid" and "Working-Girls of NY"

\--David Walker's Appeal

\--Douglass's **Narrative**

\--Harriet Jacobs's **Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl**

2\. Choose three writers from the following list, and compare and contrast
their perceptions of the relationship between the individual and society:
Emerson, Thoreau, Fuller, Sarah Grimke, Walker, Douglass, Jacobs.

3\. Apply Sarah Grimke's and/or Margaret Fuller's analysis of "the woman
question" to one or more of the following:

\--Hawthorne's "The Birth-mark" and/or "Rappaccini's Daughter"

\--Poe's "The Oval Portrait" and/or "Ligeia"

\--Melville's "The Paradise of Bachelors and The Tartarus of Maids" and/or the
Hunilla Sketch from The Encantadas

\--Elizabeth Stoddard's "The Prescription"

\--Caroline Kirkland's A New Home--Who'll Follow

\--Alice Cary's "Uncle Christopher's"

\--Harriet Jacobs's Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl

\--Lydia Maria Child's "Slavery's Pleasant Homes"

\--Emily Dickinson's poems (selections of your choice)

4\. Compare and contrast the perspectives that two or three of the following
provide on the relationship between privileged women and their marginalized or
ostracized counterparts (prostitutes, workers, slaves):

\--Sarah Grimke's **Letters on the Equality of the Sexes**

\--Angelina Grimke's **Appeal to the Christian Women of the South**

\--Margaret Fuller's **Woman in the Nineteenth Century**

\--Fanny Fern's "Soliloquy of a Housemaid" and "Working Girls of NY"

\--Lydia Maria Child's "Slavery's Pleasant Homes"

\--Harriet Beecher Stowe's **Uncle Tom's Cabin**

\--Harriet Jacobs's **Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl**

\--Harriet Wilson's **Our Nig: Or, Sketches from the Life of a Free Black**

5\. Compare and contrast the perspectives that Douglass and Jacobs provide on
the institution of slavery, as it affected men and women.

6\. Compare and contrast the rhetorical styles of Frederick Douglass and David
Walker, the audience(s) each is addressing, and the messages each is offering.
OR compare and contrast the perspectives on slave rebellion offered by
Douglass's Narrative, Walker's Appeal, and Thomas Wentworth Higginson's
account of "Nat Turner's Insurrection."

7\. Apply one or more of the following works to an analysis of Melville's
"Benito Cereno":

\--David Walker's Appeal

\--Douglass's Narrative

\--Henry Highland Garnet's "Address to the Slaves of the USA"

\--Wendell Phillips's "Toussaint L'Ouverture"

\--Thomas Wentworth Higginson's "Nat Turner's Insurrection"

8\. Compare and contrast the perspectives that Child's "Slavery's Pleasant
Homes" and Melville's "Benito Cereno" provide on slavery. You may wish to
consider the different literary techniques each story uses (including
narrative point of view), the purposes these techniques serve, and the
audience(s) to which each is addressed.

9\. Compare and contrast Poe's "Ligeia" (or any Poe story of your choice) and
Cary's "Uncle Christopher's" as horror stories. You should include some
discussion of the way in which each author creates atmosphere and mood, and
some analysis of what makes each a horror story according to your definition
of the genre. If you wish, you may include Hawthorne's "Young Goodman Brown"
in the comparison, or substitute it for one of the others.

10\. Compare and contrast Melville's "The Paradise of Bachelors and The
Tartarus of Maids" and Cary's "Uncle Christopher's," focusing on some of the
following points: the perspective each provides on the effects of patriarchal
(and/or capitalist) ideology; the causes to which each story attributes the
dehumanization and sterility it depicts; the kinds of contrasts each story
sets up between oppressor and oppressed; the narrative point of view; the role
of landscape and setting; the use of symbolism and metaphor.

11\. Choose two or three works from the following list, and compare and
contrast their literary styles: Hawthorne's "The Birth-mark" OR "Rappaccini's
Daughter" (OR another Hawthorne story of your choice); Poe's "Ligeia" (OR
another Poe story of your choice); Kirkland's A New Home--Who'll Follow?;
Cary's "Uncle Christopher's"; Melville's "The Paradise of Bachelors and The
Tartarus of Maids" OR "Benito Cereno" OR the Hunilla Sketch from The
Encantadas

12\. Compare and contrast Whitman and Dickinson as poets, focusing on one or
more of the following: their poetic styles (including imagery); their creation
of a distinctively American poetic style and language; their poetic personas
(including the relationship between gender and persona); their treatment of
death or of grief and loss; their treatment of sexuality (this is a complex
subject and demands sensitivity to the covert sexual imagery in Dickinson as
well as to the interplay between overt sexuality and coverty homosexuality in
Whitman). You should feel free to sample the rich selection of Whitman and
Dickinson poems in the anthology.

13\. In the section "The Emergence of American Poetic Voices," the Heath
includes Native American oral poetry, slave songs, folk songs of different
white communities, and formal poems by Bryant, Longfellow, Whitman, and
Dickinson. You may also wish to sample the poems by Emerson, Poe, Whittier,
and Frances Ellen Watkins Harper in earlier sections. Choosing particular
poems or songs by Native Americans, African Americans, white communities, and
poets in the formal tradition, compare and contrast the functions poetry
fulfilled for each group and the relationship in each case between cultural
function and literary form and language.

