![Crossroads logo](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/logo_sm.gif) |   |

![Curriculum](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/cur_sm.gif) ![Technology &
Learning](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/tech_sm.gif) ![Reference &
Research](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/ref_sm.gif)

![horizontal red rule](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/redrule.gif)  
![Communities](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/com.gif)

**Interroads Discussion List**  
---|---|---  
  
**A Question about Methodology**

**Essay by Vernon Pedersen, American University of Bulgaria**

Interroads Table of Contents

**3\. This thread contains an essay by Vernon Pedersen**

**Invited Responses from:**

**Blair** **Budianta** **Mintz** **Stowe**

**List Responses from:**

**Carner** **Finlay** **Stowe** **Zwick** **Linke** **Lauter** **Horwitz**
**Lauter** **(2)** **Kaenel**

**Counterresponse fromVernon Pedersen**

**Postscripts from:**

**Lauter** **Horwitz** **Stowe** **Morreale**

**Addenda:**

Syllabus, **The Americas: Identity, Culture and Power (** Mintz **)**

Syllabus, **Introduction to American Studies** (Lauter) |

The American University in Bulgaria (AUBG) was founded five years ago to bring
an American style liberal arts education to central and south eastern Europe
and the countries emerging from the breakup of the Soviet Union. It currently
enrolls nearly 600 students from over a dozen countries and offers majors in
Business Administration, Economics, Political Science, Journalism and Mass
Communication, Computer Science, English, History, and South East European
studies.

Vernon L. Pedersen received his PhD in American and Soviet history from
Georgetown University in 1993 and began teaching at AUBG in the fall of 1994\.
His first book, on the Communist party in the state of Maryland, is
forthcoming from the University of Illinois press and he is currently working
on the history of Comintern organizing in the maritime industries. He is also
the chair of the American Studies committee which was created to design and
(pending University approval) implement an American Studies major for AUBG.

**A Question about Methodology**

In the course of creating an American Studies program my committee and I
considered such questions as the credit hours needed for a new venture, the
cost of library materials, available faculty, and compatibility of American
Studies with AUBG's primary mission. Most of these questions had relatively
easy answers, one question which did not was the need to articulate a guiding
methodology for the new major. Early discussions of the subject were not
encouraging and at one point the committee even came close to convincing
itself that crafting an interdisciplinary major was impossible. Once past this
impasse, however, the committee decided on the following solution to the
problem which appears below incorporated into the description of the
introductory class. AMS 234 Introduction to American Studies - Introduces the
student to the interdisciplinary study of the United States by exploring a
single theme, or era, in American history from a wide range of perspectives.
The introductory course will be structured as a series of mini-courses, each
taught by a separate faculty with independent tests and assignments.

The introductory course takes its shape from the methodology to be applied to
American studies at AUBG. Rather than borrowing specialized methodologies from
the social sciences or literary criticism, as is common practice in the United
States, American Studies at AUBG will focus on comparison of form and pattern.
All methods of study - history, literature, rhetoric, economics - seek to find
patterns in human behavior and culture to render the subject understandable.
Each mini-course will use the specific techniques and methodology of its
particular discipline to reveal part of the pattern of American life; the
students, with the assistance of the instructors will look at the ways each
separate pattern overlaps, complements, or extends the other discrete
patterns. By comparing the patterns that each perspective reveals the students
will gain a much broader perspective and understanding of America than is
possible by studying a single subject area.

The proposed methodology may appear somewhat old fashioned but this is, in
part, deliberate. The primary purpose of American Studies at AUBG will be to
enhance our students' understanding of American culture and society and to
serve as second or "double major." Given this mission and our resource base we
decided to structure the major around history, literature and language study,
in keeping with the structure of American Studies in the 1950s. Considering
the current questions surrounding the nature of American studies in the United
States some of us here wonder if the discipline as a whole might not profit by
a return to its roots.

The committee and I would be very interested in any comments or advice that
the subscribers to Interroads would be willing to offer.

Below are two examples of how the introductory course could be structured.

**America and the Civil War**

Section One - History of the Civil war, exploration of the main causes, events
and consequences of the war. Vernon Pedersen

Section Two - The Civil War and American literature, a discussion of the shift
of American literature away from its European influences into the modern era,
with attention to such writers as Washington Irving, Nathaniel Hawthorne,
Edgar Allen Poe, Henry David Thoreau, Walt Whitman, and Emily Dickinson. Dana
Wilde

Section Three - Abraham Lincoln and American Rhetoric, examines the ways
Americans communicate with each other and how the war profoundly shifted those
techniques. Tony Osborne

Section Four - Business development and the War, consideration of how American
business entered the take-off stage of economic development shortly after the
end of the war and reflects on 19th century business ethics as an extension of
combat. Kate Wilkinson

**Religion and Its Impact on American Life**

Section One - A brief survey of the religious foundations of American society
and the history of the diverse religions which exist in America. Vernon
Pedersen

Section Two - The Effect of Faith on American Literature. Section considers
the writings of Cotton Mather, Jonathan Edwards, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Henry
David Thoreau, Walt Whitman, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and others. Jonathan
Fairbanks

Section Three - Religion as Business, discussion of the laws concerning
religious establishments and the use of religion to generate profits. Kate
Wilkinson

Section Four - Biblical influences in 19th and 20th century American rhetoric
and political discourse. Included will be Sumner, Russell Conwell, Henry
George, Eugene Debs, Malcom X, Martin Luther King and the discursive practice
known as "signifying." Tony Osborne

Vernon Pederson American University of Bulgaria Email: VERN@nws.aubg.bg |  
---|---|---  
  
* * *

Communities | Curriculum | Technology & Learning | Reference & Research  
Crossroads home page | About Crossroads | What's New | Visitors' Book

This section last updated September 1997. Please send comments to Crossroads
Webstaff.  

