#  AN 371 Peoples and Cultures of Mexico and Central America  
Fall Term 1999

Updated 11/16/99 - 4:58 p.m.

#  Syllabus and Reading List

##  Method of reading and taking notes

Readings should be done regularly. They are marked with the book symbol
![](book.gif). The reading assignments should be completed up to but not
beyond the week indicated for discussion that week. By the beginning of week
_x_ , you should have completed all assignments before the **WEEK _x_**
indicator seen on the left of the page. Please email the instructor if
something on this web page does not work or if there are any questions.

Readings on reserve are marked "( **reserve** )". To save students time coming
into the library. I will color the "reserve" mark **red** if the reading is
not yet ready and **green** when it is ready. There should be three copies
available for people to read. After some of the readings there are comments,
marked with a  " , that we may take up in class as possible interpretations of
the data. You do not have to be able to answer the questions in the comments,
but you should be able to discuss the subject.

###  Abbreviations:

FF

     Oscar Lewis. (1975). Five Families: Mexican Case Studies in the Culture of Poverty Basic Books.
BFM

     Iglesias Prieto, Norma. (1997). Beautiful Flowers of the Maquiladora: Life Histories of Women Workers in Tijuana University of Texas Press

##  Introduction

![](book.gif) Rosset, Peter and Shea Cunningham. Understanding Chiapas.

![](book.gif) Dow, James. (1995). The Mexican Political System and the Promise
of Reform

**WEEK 2** \- 9/14

![](film.gif) Todos Somos Marcos.

##  Geographic and cultural variations

![](book.gif) Dow, James. (1999). The Cultural Anthropology of Middle America.

![](book.gif) West, Robert, and John P. Augelli. (1989). Cultural
Characteristics and Diversity of Middle America, Chapter 1 in Middle America:
Its. Lands and Peoples. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.  (reserve)

##  Historical antecedents to Modern Middle America

###  The Precolumbian cultures

![](book.gif) Carmack, Robert, Janine Gasco, and Gary H. Gossen. (1996).
Chapter 2, Origins and Development of Mesoamerican Civilization. In The Legacy
of Mesoamerica. Simon and Schuster. (reserve)

**WEEK 3** \- 9/21

###  The Conquest and colonial period

![](book.gif) Pp. 94-118, Ch. 10, Work in Utopia in _Many Mexicos_ by Lesley
Byrd Simpson. (University of California Press, 1963) ( reserve)

**WEEK 4** \- 9/28

![](book.gif) Revised culture area maps

###  19th century exploitation

![](book.gif) Pp. 120-137 in _Barbarous Mexico_ by John Kenneth Turner
(Chicago: Charles H. Kerr  & Company, 1910)  
Note that this was written in 1910. The reign of Porfiro Diaz, which led up to
the Mexican Revolution in 1910 is known to historians as the Porfiriato. After
looking at the results of this reign in the forgoing text, look at the public
front that it put forth, seen in ![](book.gif)James Creelman's interview with
the generalwhich was written before 1910. You may notice some similarity
between the approach to development then and the approach seen recently during
the Salinas presidency. The new approach is called by its critics
"neoliberalism," which refers back to the nineteenth century economic
liberalism, of which Diaz was Mexico's final proponent.

###  The Revolution

![](book.gif) Mexican Revolution by Eric Meyer.

**WEEK 5** \- 10/5

![](book.gif) Pedro: Fighting with Zapata, Chapter 7 in _Pedro Mart inez: A
Mexican Peasant and his Family_. by Oscar Lewis. (1964) (reserve)

![](film.gif) Mexico: From Boom to Bust, 1940-1982

##  Modern People

![](book.gif) The Setting in FF.

##  Indians

![](book.gif) James Dow. (1994). Sierra Otomi. Discovering Religion in a
Mexican Indian Society.

![](film.gif)The Highland Maya

##  Non-Indians

###  Rural

![](book.gif) Schryer, Frans. (1995). Cattle Ranchers of the Huasteca. Pp.
40-44 in Middle America and the Caribbean, Volume 8 of the Encyclopedia of
World Cultures. James W. Dow, Editor. Boston: G. K. Hall. (reserve)

**WEEK 6** \- 10/12

![](book.gif) The Martinez Family in FF.

![](film.gif) Little Injustices, Part I

###  Lower class urban

![](book.gif) The Gomez Family in FF.

**WEEK 7** \- 10/19

![](book.gif) The Gutierrez Family in FF.

**WEEK 8** \- 10/26

  
While reading this chapter look at the ![](book.gif)Gutierrez kin diagram to
see a diagram of the kinship relationships.

![](book.gif) The Sanchez Family in FF.

**WEEK 9** \- 11/2

###  Middle and upper class

![](book.gif) The Castro Family in FF.

**WEEK 10** \- 11/9

###  Border

![](book.gif) Introduction in BFM.

![](book.gif) Meeting the Demand, Ch. 1 in BFM.

**WEEK 11** \- 11/16

![](book.gif) The Realm of Work, Ch 2 in BFM.

![](book.gif) We Women are More Responsible, Ch 3 in BFM.

![](book.gif) Maquila Muchachas: Pretty Young Maids, ch 4 in BFM.

![](book.gif) Most Beautiful Flower of the Maquiladora, Ch. 6 in BFM.

![](book.gif) Solidev: An Embattled Maquiladora, Ch. 7 in BFM.

**WEEK 12** \- 11/23

##  Political and economic problems

###  Migration

![](book.gif) Who I Am, Where I Come From, and Where I'm Going, Ch 5 in BFM.

###  Mexico and the United States

![](book.gif) Chomsky, Noam. (1993). The Clinton Vision. ( reserve)

**WEEK 13** \- 11/30

![](book.gif) Mexico in 1994: Politics and Public Life

![](film.gif) The exile of Carlos Salinas on the MacNeil News hour.

![](book.gif) Mexican Economic Crisis Read all the linked pages too.

![](book.gif) By Way of Conclusion, Ch. 8 in BFM.

###  Is democracy possible?

![](book.gif) Lewis, Tom. (1996). Breaking the State-Society Bargain:
Neoliberal Market Reforms and Resistance in Mexico.

![](film.gif) Mexican opposition to economic reform. C-span.

![](book.gif) Otero, Gerardo. (1996). Pp. 1-16 in Neoliberal Reform and
Politics in Mexico: An Overview. _In_ Gerardo Otero, ed. Neoliberalism
Revisited. Westview Press. ( reserve)

**WEEK 14** \- 12/7

