# JUDAIC STUDIES COURSE OFFERINGS  
Winter 1999

The following list includes courses offered by faculty associated with the
Center for Judaic Studies as well as other courses of interest to Judaic
Studies students. We try to make this list as accurate as possible, but if
there are questions about offerings or times, you should check with the
department in which the course is listed for the latest information, or view
the winter LS&A; Course Guide or Time Schedule on-line at:
http://www.lsa.umich.edu/saa/publications..**  

### ANCIENT CIVILIZATIONS AND BIBLICAL STUDIES (ACABS) (DIVISION 314)

**102\. Elementary Biblical Hebrew II. (3).**  
Continuation of ACABS 102 with increased emphasis on the Biblical Hebrew
verbal system and syntax as presented in Seow's A Grammar for Biblical Hebrew.
Additionally, students will be introduced to select readings from the Hebrew
Bible/Old Testament. Final grades will be based upon daily class performance
and homework assignments, quizzes, and three exams.(TBA) MWF 9:00-10:00 a.m.,
3508 FB.

**202\. Intermediate Biblical Hebrew, II. (3).**  
The student will be introduced to the elements of Biblical Hebrew syntax and
other aspects of advanced grammar. Selected Biblical texts will be read, and
their historical and literary backgrounds analyzed and discussed. (Krahmalkov)
TTh 10:00-12:00 a.m., 3301 MLB.

**582\. Ugaritic, II. (3).**  
Readings in the Ras Shamra texts, with emphasis on the development of the
Canaanite languages. (Krahmalkov) TBA.

**592 Section 001. Seminar in Ancient Civilizations and Biblical Studies:
Mesopotamian Economic Systems. (3).**  
This seminar will survey major aspects of Mesopotamian economy from the end of
the Uruk period through the Hellenistic period. The first part of the seminar
will consist of readings about economic systems in the various periods of
Mesopotamian history. We shall consider especially the nature of economic
"embeddedness" in Mesopotamian society and the effects of political systems on
production, consumption, and exchange in Mesopotamia. The last part of the
seminar will consist of student presentations. Participants in the seminar are
expected to have advanced knowledge of Mesopotamian history/archaeology.
(Yoffee) Th 3:00-6:00 p.m. 3522 FB.

### ENGLISH (DIVISION 361)

**313 Section 011. Literature of the Holocaust. (4).**  
This course will consider how writers have confronted the Holocaust in fiction
and poetry. We will consider literature produced during and since the
Holocaust, in ghettos, concentration camps, hiding places and the secure
locations of life after the War, by survivors and those more remote in time
and place. How is imaginative literature produced during or in response to
such historical events? What happens to our understanding of Holocaust
literature as we move further from those events? How does poetic language
function? How does this literature affect our understanding of such familiar
terms as exile, home, memory, public and private? We will read English
translations of German, Yiddish, Hebrew, French, Polish, and Italian works
(there are no language requirements for this course). Requirements include
active participation in discussion and lecture, two shorter (3-5 page) papers,
one longer essay (8-10 pp.), and periodic in-class written responses to the
material we read. (Norich) MW 11:30-1:00 p.m., 170 DENN.

**383 Section 001. Topics in Jewish Literature: Constructing American Jewish
Literature (3).**  
This new course will use a comparative approach to constructing a tradition of
Jewish literature in our country during the last century. We will study the
literature both in itself and as a paradigm for contemporary debates about
cultural hybridity, assimilation, and ethnicity. Our reading will mix familiar
and unfamiliar names (and why so many Jewish writers remain outside the canon
will be one question we shall ask). We begin with neglected authors of late
19th century such as Emma Lazarus, use Israel Zangwill (author of the play The
Melting Pot, which made that phrase popular) as our transition point, and turn
to successive generations of Jewish-American authors, such as Abraham Cahan,
Anzia Yezierska, Henry Roth, Arthur Miller, Saul Bellow, Philip Roth, Cynthia
Ozick, Allen Ginsberg, and Wendy Wasserstein. Contemporary readings on Anti-
Semitism, economic and educational history, and cultural theory will help us
explore the problematic nature of group identity within a complex society.
Written work will include weekly response paragraphs, a midterm, a term paper
(8 to 10 pages), and a final examination. This course meets the American
Literature requirement for English concentrators. (Bornstein) TTh 1:00-2:30
p.m., 2402 MH.

### HEBREW AND JEWISH CULTURAL STUDIES (HJCS) (DIVISION 389)

**302\. Advanced Hebrew, II. (3).**  
This course is a continuation of the Hebrew sequence comprising the second
term of the third year Hebrew class. (Participation in Hebrew 301 offered in
the previous term is not required if the student is at the advanced level.)
The focus will be on developing proficiency in all five languages skills.
Student participation is an essential part of the course. Readings will
include short works of fiction as well as journalistic pieces. This will be
supplemented by other media including music, video, recordings, readings, etc.
Students' grades will be determined on the basis of assignments, participation
(including in-class presentations), and a final exam. (Bernstein) TTh
10:00-11:30 a.m., 3520 FB.

**379/Judaic Studies 379. Jewish Civilization. (4).**  
Lectures on topics in Jewish Intellectual History, with emphasis on historical
processes. Some of the topics are: Monotheism, the Origin of Evil, the
Covenant, the Oral and the Written Torah, the Canon, the Calendar,
Universalism, Messianism. Students are evaluated on the basis of two exams.
(Boccaccini) MWF 2:00-3:00 p.m., MLB AUD 3.

**402 Section 001. Hebrew of the Communications Media, II: Advanced Modern
Hebrew. (3).**  
Emphasis is on reading and listening and viewing comprehension. There is a
particular emphasis on the expansion of vocabulary in the domain of current
events and the development of discussion skills. Course materials are based on
the social genre of the communications media (newspapers and television).
Unedited newspaper selections will be read, and news broadcasts and television
programs will be used in the class in the language laboratory. Grades will be
based on two exams and special projects. (Coffin) MW 11:30-1:00 p.m., 3518 FB.

**471\. Introduction to Modern Hebrew Literature, I. (3).**  
This course offers students the opportunity to read a wide range of unabridged
literary texts from a variety of genres - children's literature, poetry,
drama, short stories, journalism. Students will acquire the vocabulary
necessary for analysis of the texts. The course will be run on a seminar basis
with student participation comprising an important component. There will be
short assignments in which students will work on improving their written and
oral communication skills. The course will incorporate other communications
media, and guest lecturers. An advanced knowledge of Hebrew required
(completion of Hebrew 302 or Hebrew 402 or equivalent). (Bernstein) TTh
1:00-2:30 p.m., 4070 FB.

**478/Judaic Studies 468/Rel. 469. Jewish Mysticism. (3).**  
A study of the historical development of Jewish mysticism, its symbolic
universe, meditational practices, and social ramifications. While we will
survey mystical traditions from the late second Temple period through
modernity, the central focus will be on the rich medieval stream known as
kabbalah. Among the issues to be explored are: the nature of mystical
experience; images of God, world, and Person; sexual and gender symbolism
(images of the male and female); the problem of evil; mysticism, language, and
silence; mysticism and the law; mysticism and community; meditative and
ecstatic practices (ranging from visualization to chant, letter combination,
and modulated breathing); kabbalistic myth and ritual innovation; and
kabbalistic interpretations of history. Modern interpretations of mysticism
will also be considered. Readings for the course consist of secondary sources
from the history of Judaism and comparative religion, and selected primary
texts (in translation). Requirements include two exams and a research paper.
Class lectures will be supplemented by discussion, contemplative exercises,
and on occasion, music and other media. (Ginsburg) TTh 10:00-11:30 a.m., 2011
MLB.

**489/Judaic Studies 489. The Cycle of the Jewish Year. (3).**  
A description of the Jewish calendar and its history as the basis for the
Jewish yearly cycle will be followed by a short history of the major elements
of each special day of the year, beginning with Biblical origins (where
appropriate) and showing, through textual study, how these days have been
interpreted and reinterpreted through the ages. (Tabory) MW 1:00-2:30 p.m.,
3012 FB.

**HJCS 491 Section 001. Topics in Hebrew and Jewish Cultural Studies: Aggadic
Literature. (3).**  
Aggadic literature consists of all Rabbinic literature other than the legal
(halakhic) literature. Thus, it contains not only Rabbinic commentaries on the
Bible, but also Rabbinic ethnics and beliefs, folk literature, stories, and
legends. This course will attempt to understand the genre and methodology of
each one. Texts will be studied in translation and the general survey will be
followed by in-depth analysis of one midrash. (Tabory) W 3:00-6:00 p.m.,
3004FB.

**572 Section 001. Israeli Literature, II: Sefer va-seret: Book and Film.
(3).**  
This course is run on a seminar basis and is based on a selection of
contemporary Israeli works of fiction, films, and plays. Emphasis is on
readings, discussion, and analyses. Contemporary short stories, novels, poems,
and plays serve as the basis for discussion. Grades will be based on written
and oral assignments and two examinations. Advanced knowledge of Hebrew is
required for the course. (Coffin) MW 2:30-4:00 p.m., 3508 FB.

**577 Section 001/Judaic Studies 467/Rel. 471. Seminar: Topics in the Study of
Judaism: Models of Jewish Renewal. (3).**  
This seminar explores several key examples of Jewish spiritual questing and
renewal in the 20th century. Among the sources to be explored are Martin Buber
and this theology of the holiness of relationship (pan-sacramental urge); the
communitarian "religion of labor" and longing for wholeness developed by early
Zionist writers and kibbutzniks; the intentional community around Kalonymous
Kalman Shapira, the rebbe of the Warsaw ghetto, who developed a mystical
fellowship and practice of soul-quieting/silence that bears interesting
parallels to Vipassana mediation. Over half the course will be devoted to
works (texts, memoirs, theology, devotional music) emerging from the so-called
"Jewish renewal movement," which seeks sources as diverse as feminism, deep
ecology, East Asian contemplative traditions, and "the politics of meaning."
Authors to read include Arthur Green, Arthur Waskow, Zalman Schachter-Shalomi,
Judith Plaskow, Tikkun magazine editor Michael Lerner, Tirzah Firestone,
Sylvia Boorstein, and Rodger Kamenetz. (These latter figures explore the
growing contemporary interchange between certain Buddhist and Jewish
practices). We ask: how do these experiments alter/depart from/up-end/deepen
traditional Jewish practices and spiritual direction? In so doing we raise
questions regarding the multi-form shape and volatile nature of "Judaism" at
the turn of the 21st century. As a final counterpart (or exclamation point),
we will explore examples of engaged Orthodox renewal, and the spiritual
skepticism and quest of Leon Wieseltier. The course is conducted as a seminar,
with a good deal of give-and-take. It calls for both intellectual rigor and
engagement: to understand Judaism not only as "argument" but as "deep song".
Occasional film, music, and examples of contemplative practice will deepen our
inquiry. Background in Judaic Studies or the study of Religion (including
contemplative practice) will deepen our inquiry. Background in Judaic Studies
or the study of Religion (including contemplative traditions) is helpful.
Short essays, term paper. (Ginsburg) T 3:00-5:00 p.m., 2106 MLB.

### HISTORY (DIVISION 390)

**382\. History of the Jews from the Spanish Expulsion to the Eve of
Enlightenment. (3).**  
This course will survey major trends in Jewish history in European and
Mediterranean lands from c. 1450 to c. 1700. The themes of this course
include: developments in Jewish communal structure, familial structure; the
question of "marrano" or converso identity; the relationship of Jews and
Judaism to the Catholic Church and to the events and ideas of the Reformation;
the economic, political, and theoretical relationship between the Jews and
developing European states and the Ottoman empire. Specific topics to be
addressed include: the impact of the expulsion of the Jews from Spain and
Portugal; the emergence and spread of Lurianic Kabbalah; the development of
the ghetto in the Italian states; the emergence of Jewish mercantile
communities in Northern Europe and in the "New World"; the "court Jews"; male
and female expressions of Jewish piety and folk-religion; the Sabbatian
movement; and rabbinic authority. Texts will include Jonathan Israel's
European Jewry in the Age of Mercantilism, 1550-1750; Jacob Katz's Tradition
and Crisis: Jewish Society at the End of the Middle Ages; autobiographies of
Leone Modena (a Venetian Rabbi) and of Gluckl of Hameln (a Jewish merchant
woman of Hamburg); many additional primary sources and selections from recent
scholarship. The course will be taught by lecture and discussion. Requirements
for the course will very likely be a midterm and a final essay exam, one short
paper, and a term paper of ten pages, which will be submitted in stages. Cost:
2 or 3. History 381 is useful background, as are other courses in European
history. (Siegmund) TTh 11:30-1:00 p.m., 3410 MH.

**591 Section 002. Topics in European History. Jews and Christians in Early
Modern Italy. (3).**  
In this course we will examine a variety of primary and secondary sources to
explore the construction of Jewish and of Christian identities in the Italian
states in the late Renaissance and early modern period (c. 1400-1700). To what
extent did Christians and Jews define themselves in "opposition" to a
religious "other", Jewish or Christian? At a time when the peninsula was still
subdivided into numerous principates, duchies and republics, to what extent
did Jews and Christians share a sense of "Italianess"? Can an analysis of
Christianity in early modern Italy help us interpret the policy of Italian
states toward the Jews (ghettoization)? Our sources will include
autobiography, letters, archival documents, sermons, and religious art as well
as scholarship both on Jewish and Christian history and on Jewish-Christian
relations. This course will be run mainly as a seminar, with occasional
lectures. Requirements: a series of short papers and a term paper. Some
background in the history of Italy, Jewish history, the history of the Church,
or in early modern Europe is recommended. Cost: 2 Upper-level students.
(Siegmund) MW 4:00-5:30 p.m., 2419 MH.

### JUDAIC STUDIES (DIVISION 407)

**102\. Elementary Yiddish. Yiddish 101. (3).**  
This is the second of a two-term sequence designed to develop basic skills in
speaking, understanding, reading, and writing Yiddish. Active class
participation is required as are periodic quizzes, exams, a midterm and final.
(Nysenholc) MWF 10:00-11:00 a.m., 3528 FB.

**202\. Intermediate Yiddish. Yiddish 201. (3).**  
This is the fourth term of a language sequence in Yiddish. The course is
designed to develop fluency in oral and written comprehension, and to offer a
further understanding of the culture within which Yiddish has developed.
Special emphasis will be devoted to reading material. Course grade will be
based on exams, quizzes, written work, and oral class participation.
(Nysenholc) MWF 9:00-10:00 a.m., 3518FB.

**379/HJCS 379. Jewish Civilization. (4).**  
Lectures on topics in Jewish Intellectual History, with emphasis on historical
processes. Some of the topics are: Monotheism, the Origin of Evil, the
Covenant, the Oral and the Written Torah, the Canon, the Calendar,
Universalism, Messianism. Students are evaluated on the basis of two exams.
(Boccaccini) MWF 2:00-3:00 p.m., MLB AUD 3.

**468/HJCS 478/ Rel. 469. Jewish Mysticism. (3).**  
A study of the historical development of Jewish mysticism, its symbolic
universe, meditational practices, and social ramifications. While we will
survey mystical traditions from the late second Temple period through
modernity, the central focus will be on the rich medieval stream known as
kabbalah. Among the issues to be explored are: the nature of mystical
experience; images of God, world, and Person; sexual and gender symbolism
(images of the male and female); the problem of evil; mysticism, language, and
silence; mysticism and the law; mysticism and community; meditative and
ecstatic practices (ranging from visualization to chant, letter combination,
and modulated breathing); kabbalistic myth and ritual innovation; and
kabbalistic interpretations of history. Modern interpretations of mysticism
will also be considered. Readings for the course consist of secondary sources
from the history of Judaism and comparative religion, and selected primary
texts (in translation). Requirements include two exams and a research paper.
Class lectures will be supplemented by discussion, contemplative exercises,
and on occasion, music and other media. (Ginsburg) TTh 10:00-11:30 a.m., 2011
MLB.

**489/HJCS 489. The Cycle of the Jewish Year. (3).**  
A description of the Jewish calendar and its history as the basis for the
Jewish yearly cycle will be followed by a short history of the major elements
of each special day of the year, beginning with Biblical origins (where
appropriate) and showing, through textual study, how these days have been
interpreted and reinterpreted through the ages. (Tabory) MW 1:00-2:30 p.m.,
3012 FB.

**467/HJCS 577-001/Rel. 471. Seminar: Topics in the Study of Judaism: Models
of Jewish Renewal. (3).**  
This seminar explores several key examples of Jewish spiritual questing and
renewal in the 20th century. Among the sources to be explored are Martin Buber
and this theology of the holiness of relationship (pan-sacramental urge); the
communitarian "religion of labor" and longing for wholeness developed by early
Zionist writers and kibbutzniks; the intentional community around Kalonymous
Kalman Shapira, the rebbe of the Warsaw ghetto, who developed a mystical
fellowship and practice of soul-quieting/silence that bears interesting
parallels to Vipassana mediation. Over half the course will be devoted to
works (texts, memoirs, theology, devotional music) emerging from the so-called
"Jewish renewal movement," which seeks sources as diverse as feminism, deep
ecology, East Asian contemplative traditions, and "the politics of meaning."
Authors to read include Arthur Green, Arthur Waskow, Zalman Schachter-Shalomi,
Judith Plaskow, Tikkun magazine editor Michael Lerner, Tirzah Firestone,
Sylvia Boorstein, and Rodger Kamenetz. (These latter figures explore the
growing contemporary interchange between certain Buddhist and Jewish
practices). We ask: how do these experiments alter/depart from/up-end/deepen
traditional Jewish practices and spiritual direction? In so doing we raise
questions regarding the multi-form shape and volatile nature of "Judaism" at
the turn of the 21st century. As a final counterpart (or exclamation point),
we will explore examples of engaged Orthodox renewal, and the spiritual
skepticism and quest of Leon Wieseltier. The course is conducted as a seminar,
with a good deal of give-and-take. It calls for both intellectual rigor and
engagement: to understand Judaism not only as "argument" but as "deep song".
Occasional film, music, and examples of contemplative practice will deepen our
inquiry. Background in Judaic Studies or the study of Religion (including
contemplative practice) will deepen our inquiry. Background in Judaic Studies
or the study of Religion (including contemplative traditions) is helpful.
Short essays, term paper. (Ginsburg) T 3:00-5:00 p.m., 2106 MLB.

### POLITICAL SCIENCE (DIVISION 450)

**353\. The Arab-Israeli Conflict. (4).**  
Knowledge about Arab-Israeli conflicts is the focus of the course. Although
there are lectures on the origins of the conflicts, they do not lay blame on
any of the parties: The course is not about who is right or wrong but why
there are conflicts in the Arab-Israeli zone, and what are the scenarios of
their futures. Lectures address the history of the conflicts from the
perspective of general social science theory. Discussion sections give
students a forum for assessing the relationship between events and ideas. Core
theoretical concepts include bargaining and negotiation; crisis as an
opportunity for diplomacy; how global, regional, and domestic factors explain
conflict and cooperation; the relation of force to diplomacy; the effect of
threat on deterrence, coercion, and escalation; as well as incremental versus
comprehensive approaches to the peace process. The course discusses the
Arab/Persian Gulf as it bears on Arab-Israeli zone. There are no
prerequisites. There are a midterm exam and a final. There is extensive use of
conferencing on the web, COW, in order to make use of the Internet to explore
war and peace scenarios in the Arab-Israeli and Gulf zones. The course meets
in a room with an ethernet connection in order for the instructor to have
online access to the syllabus, lecture notes, research sites, and papers
written by former participants in this course. Laboratory fee ($30) required.
(Tanter) TTh 11:00-12:00 a.m., 1360 EH.

### RELIGION (DIVISION 457)

**469/HJCS 478/Judaic Studies 468. Jewish Mysticism. (3).**  
See Hebrew and Jewish Cultural Studies 478.001. (Ginsburg) TTh 10:00-11:30
a.m., 2011 MLB.

**471 Section 001/HJCS 577/Judaic Studies 467. Seminar: Topics in the Study of
Judaism: Models of Jewish Renewal. (3).**  
See Hebrew and Jewish Cultural Studies 577.001. (Ginsburg) T 3:00-5:00 p.m.,
2106 MLB.

### SOCIAL WORK

**600 (777). Contemporary Issues in the American Jewish Community (HBSE
3-credits).**  
Students identify critical issues facing the American Jewish community at the
national and local levels, aided by resource people from local and national
agencies. The Jewish community's experience serves as a case-study for
understanding the dynamics of intergroup relations, ethnically-based self-help
and the challenges to leadership facing other racial, ethnic and sectarian
communities in the U.S.

**645 (790). Jewish Communal Services in the United States and Abroad (SWPS
3-credits).**  
Introduces the origins, current programs, and anticipated changes in major
Jewish communal service institutions. Emphasizes the relationship of the human
services to community building and maintenance. Although American Jewish
communal service is the focus, an underlying theme is the contributions of
ethnic groups to the growth of social welfare and community self-help in a
multicultural society.

Back to the [ Judaic Studies Course Guide Archive
](http://www.umich.edu/~judstud/crstbl.htm).

Back to the [Frankel Center for Judaic
Studies](http://www.umich.edu/~judstud/).

Back to the [Frankel Center for Judaic Studies Text
Page](http://www.umich.edu/~judstud/tof.htm).

