**

HIST 435  
READINGS IN AMERICAN CULTURAL AND INTELLECTUAL HISTORY:**  
**RELIGION IN AMERICAN HISTORY:  
MAINSTREAM AND PERIPHERY

**

  
**Spring Semester 2001  
Dr. Gregory Holmes Singleton  
E-MAIL: ****G-Singleton@neiu.edu** **PHONE: (773)794-2805 FAX: (773) 794-6243  
****http://www.neiu.edu/~ghsingle/** **  
Office: 4-085 Hours: T 5-7 p.m., Th F 9-11 a.m., and by appointment

**



  
Through a consideration of representative scholarship, we will explore the
complex and fascinating world at the intersection of religion and public life
in American history. We will particularly probe the "mainstream" and the
"periphery" in the public asp ects of religious life in the United States in
order to **a)** determine if these two general categories have any useful
meaning and, if so, **b)** to learn what that might tell us about public life
in the United States generally.  
  
I am assuming that most students have had little, if any, previous work in
religion in American history. Therefore, we will deal with the broad sweep of
the subject matter primarily through lecture with supplemental discussions
initiated by students who h ave carefully read the assigned material and have
a desire to push beyond the surface issues. For all class sessions, students
should bring the assigned reading for that week. We will be equally concerned
with both substantive and historiographical consid erations for each week's
topic, and for the course as a whole.

Students will write a take-home midterm examination and submit a final
analytical and interpretive synthesis of the course materials. ( **NB:** In
addition to the assigned reading, "course materials" include the lectures,
discussions, and Internet re sources.)



  
**REQUIRED READING

  
  
Philip R. Vandermeer and Robert P. Swierenga (eds.), **_Belief and Behavior:
Essays in the New Religious History.**_ Paperback. Rutgers University Press
0813516722

Mark A. Noll (ed.), **_Religion and American Politics: From the Colonial
Period to the 1980s.**_ Paperback. Oxford University Press 019505881X

Jon Butler and Harry S. Stout (eds.) **_Religion in American History: A
Reader.**_ Paperback. Oxford University Press 0195097769

Albert J. Raboteau, **_Slave Religion: The Invisible Institution in the
Antebellum South.**_ Paperback. Oxford University Press 0195027051

Robert T. Handy, **_Christian America: Protestant Hopes and Historical
Realities.**_ Paperback. Oxford University Press 0195033876

Ernest Lee Tuveson, **_Redeemer Nation.**_ Paperback. University of Chicago
Press 0226819213

**_

INTERNET RESOURCES:

**_

You will find these at http://www.neiu.edu/~ghsingle/435.htm



  
**SCHEDULE OF TOPICS AND ASSIGNED READINGS:



_

January 9 INTRODUCTION

_



_

January 16 RELIGION AND HISTORICAL INQUIRY

__

Belief and Behavior** :

_

Philip Vandermeer and Robert Swierenga, Preface and "Introduction: Progress
and Prospects in the 'New Religious History'"

**_

Religion in American History:

**_

Jon Butler and Harry Stout, "Introduction"

**_

Religion and American Politics:

**_

Mark Noll, "Introduction"

**_

January 23 CENTRIST INTERPRETATIONS: CULTURAL

**_

Robert Handy, **_Christian America

**_



**_

January 30 CENTRIST INTERPRETATIONS: IDEOLOGICAL

**_

Ernest Tuveson, **_Redeemer Nation

**_



**_

February 2 PERIPHERALIST INTERPRETATIONS

**_

Albert J. Raboteau, **_Slave Religion

Religion in American History:

**_

R. Laurence Moor, "Insiders and Outsiders in American Historical Narrative and
American History"

Mary Bednarowski, "Women in Occult America"

Raymond DeMallie, "The Lakota Ghost Dance: An Ethnohistorical Account"

**_

February 13 17TH AND 18TH CENTURY THEMES AND VARIATIONS

__

Belief and Behavior:

**_

Harry Stout and Catherine Brekus, "Declension, Gender, and the 'New Religious
History'"

Gerald Moran, "'Sinners Are Turned into Saints in Numbers': Puritanism and
Revivalism in Colonial Connecticut"

**_

Religion in American History:

**_

Perry Miller, "Errand Into the Wilderness"

Edmund S. Morgan, "William Penn and the English Origins of American Religious
Pluralism"

**_

Religion and American Politics:

**_

John Murrin, "Religion and Politics in America from the first Settlements to
the Civil War"



**_

February 20 AWAKENING: EVENT OR CREATION?

__

Behavior and Belief:

**_

Marilyn Westerkamp, "Enthusiastic Piety--From Scots-Irish Revivals to the
Great Awakening"

**_

Religion in American History:

**_

Harry Stout, "Communications and the Ideological Origins of the American
Revolution"

Jon Butler, "Enthusiasm Described and Decried: The Great Awakening as
Interpretative Fiction"

**_

Religion and American Politics:

**_

Ruth Bloch, "Religion and Ideological Change in the American Revolution"



**_

February 27 RELIGION AND GENDER

__

Belief and Behavior:

**_

Terry Bilhartz, "Sex and the Second Great Awakening: The Feminization of
American Religion Reconsidered"

Margaret Thompson, "Women, Feminism, and the New Religious History: Catholic
Sisters as a Case Study"

**_

Religion in American History:

**_

Barbara Welter, "The Feminization of American Religion: 1800-1860"

Robert Orsi, "'He Keeps Me Going': Women's Devotion to Saint Jude Thaddeus and
the Dialectics of Gender in American Catholicism, 1929-1965"



**_

March 6 ANTE-BELLUM COMPLEXITY

__

Belief and Behavior:

**_

Linda Pritchard, "The Spirit in the Flesh: Religion and Regional Economic
Development"

**_

Religion in American History:

**_

Gordon Wood, "Evangelical America and Early Mormonism"

**_

Religion and American Politics:

**_

Harry Stout, "Rhetoric and Reality in the Early Republic: The Case of the
Federalist Clergy"

John Wilson, "Religion, Government, and Power in the New American Nation"

Nathan Hatch, "The Democratization of Christianity and the Character of
American Politics"

Daniel Howe, "Religion and Politics in the Antebellum North"

Bertram Wyatt-Brown, "Religion and the 'Civilizing Process' in the Early
American South, 1600-1860"



**_

March 13 IMMIGRANT/ETHNIC EXPERIENCES

__

Belief and Behavior:

**_

Robert Swierenga, "Religion and Immigration Behavior: The Dutch Experience"

Jonathan Sarna, "Seating and the American Synagogue"

**_

Religion in American History:

**_

Jay Dolan, "The Immigrants and Their Gods: A New Perspective in American
Religious History"

Leonard Dinnerstein, "Antisemitism in the Depression Era (1933-1939)"

**_

Religion in American Politics:

**_

Robert Swierenga, "Ethnoreligious Political Behavior in Mid-Nineteenth
Century" Voting, Values, Cultures"

James Hennesey, "Roman Catholics and American Politics, 1900-1960: Altered
Circumstances, Continuing Patterns"



**_

March 20 BREAK: A PAGAN PRIMAVERA OBSERVANCE

**_



**_

March 27 THE HEGEMONY QUESTION IN COMPARATIVE DIMENSION

__

Belief and Behavior:

**_

Philip Vandermeer, "Religious Divisions and Political Roles: Midwestern
Episcopalians, 1860-1920"

**_

Religion in American History"

**_

Robert Handy, "The American Religious Depression, 1925-1935"

**_

Religion and American Politics:

**_

Richard Carwardine, "Religion and Politics in Nineteenth-Century Britain: The
Case Against American Exceptionalism"

George Rawlyk, "Politics, Religion, and the Canadian Experience: A Preliminary
Probe"

Robert Handy, "Protestant Theological Tensions and Political Styles in the
Progressive Period"



**_

April 3 THE AFRICAN-AMERICAN FACTOR

__

Religion in American History:

**_

William Montgomery, "The Preachers"

Hortense Spillers, "Martin Luther King and the Style of the Black Sermon"

**_

Religion and American Politics:

**_

David Wills, "Beyond Commonality and Plurality: Persistent Racial Polarity in
American Religion and Politics"

**_

April 10 THE FUNDAMENTALIST FACTOR

__

Religion in American History:

**_

George Marsden, "Fundamentalism as an American Phenomenon, A Comparison with
English Evangelicanism"

Joel Carpenter, "Fundamentalist Institutions and the Rise of Evangelical
Protestantism, 1925-1942"



**_

April 17 RELIGION, SOCIETY, AND POPULAR CULTURE

__

Religion in American History:

**_

Bryan Wilson. "Secularization: The Inherited Model"

Leigh Schmidt, "The Easter Parade: Piety, Fashion, Display"



**_

April 24 CONSENSUS, PLURALISM, AND MULTIFORMITY

__

Religion in American Politics:

**_

Martin Marty, "The Twentieth Century: Protestants and Others"

Robert Wuthnow, " _Quid Obscurum_ : The Changing Terrain of Church-State
Relations"

Lyman Kellstedt and Mark Noll, "Religion, Voting for President, and Party
Identification, 1948-1984"

George Marsden, "Afterword: Religion, Politics, and the Search for an American
Consensus"





**

INTERNET RESOURCES FOR THIS COURSE

**

The web site for this course is:

http://www.neiu.edu/~ghsingle/435.htm

Either write this URL down, or add it as a bookmark (for Netscape) or favorite
(for Internet Explorer). You will find a copy of this syllabus on this web
site (which is where you go for a new copy). You will also find new material
posted by Thursday of each week. The constant parts of the material will be
bibliographies relevant to the topic for the upcoming week and a set of
questions to assist you in thinking through the assigned reading for the next
class session. In addition I will post news items, notices of conferences and
lectures, and other material relevant to the course.

I have also established an e-mail discussion list for this course. I will
subscribe each of you after the first meeting of class. If you already have an
e-mail address, please give me that information on the course form that you
will return at the end of the class session. If you do not have an e-mail
address, we will take care of that on the first night of class (the university
provides this service free of charge).

The university has numerous stations for internet access in the Library (4th
floor), the Science Building (2nd floor), and the Classroom Building (Lower
Level and 2nd floor).



**

WRITTEN ASSIGNMENTS

MID-TERM EXAMINATION:

**

For the mid-term examination, write an essay on the following topic:  
  
Enter into an historiographical discussion of the assigned reading material up
to February 20 (inclusive), keeping in mind dates of publication, subject
matter, articulated and unarticulated ( _i.e.,_ inferred) assumptions in the
writings, and methods of analysis.

**

This assignment is due at the start of class on February 27**. You are
encouraged to read ahead, write the essay early, and receive a critical
evaluation well before the due date.

**

COURSE PAPER:

**

The course paper should reflect your most rigorous and sophisticated thinking
about the course materials and the themes of the course. It should not be an
encyclopedic recitation of information, but it should demonstrate a broad
mastery of the mate rials. I will be reading the paper for evidence of your
ability to integrate complex material, sustain an analysis, and yield an
interpretation of a theme derived from the analysis of the material.

Your work on this paper should begin as soon as you leave the first class
session. As you read, attend class, and think about the issues raised, what
theme or cluster of themes emerges? Once you identify your organizing
theme(s), begin to work on nuanc e and subtlety.

You should feel free to consult with me in all stages of the development of
this paper.

**

This assignment is due on May 4 by 4:00 p.m.

THE ABOVE DUE DATES** **ARE FIRM AND FINAL.** I will grant deadline extensions
only in cases of extreme emergency (determined at the discretion of the
professor), and only if you have contacted me before the deadline.



**

GRADES

**

Every student will receive a letter grade at the end of the course (except for
extreme emergencies which clearly call for a grade of Incomplete: note,
identity crises, failing the course, not being able to get one's whatever
together are not extreme emergencies). If one encounters extreme emergencies
in time to drop the course, that is the action that should be taken. If the
emergency arises after the final drop date, we can probably negotiate an
incomplete. I NEVER, EVER USE THE GRADE OF IN COMPLETE AS AN ESCAPE-HATCH FOR
A STUDENT WHO IS EARNING A LOW GRADE. STUDENTS MAY BE TOLD BY FUNCTIONARIES IN
THE RECORDS OFFICE TO SEEK THIS RELIEF, BUT THESE FUNCTIONARIES HAVE NEITHER
THE COMPETENCE NOR THE AUTHORITY TO MAKE SUCH A SUGGESTION.  
  
The grade assigned for the course will be determined by the formula:

(midterm grade x .333) + (course paper grade x .667)

I reserve the right to assign a higher grade than the calculation indicates in
cases of marked improvement, but in no case will a student receive a lower
grade, with the exception of a lower grade assigned for poor attendance (see
below, p. 10). There will be no "extra credit" possibilities (a dubious
practice, at best, and a stupid practice, most likely).

  
The following are the criteria for grades on the two assignments:

**

A** = You have written an essay in which you clearly state your thesis in the
first paragraph, demonstrate a clear understanding of the material throughout,
subject the material to a logical analysis in conformity with the thesis, and
render an in terpretation of the material which flows logically from the
analysis.

**

B** = You have written an essay in which you clearly state your thesis in the
first paragraph, demonstrate a clear understanding of the material throughout,
and subject the material to a logical analysis in conformity with the thesis.

**

C** = You have written an essay in which you clearly state your thesis in the
first paragraph, and demonstrate a clear understanding of the material
throughout.

**

D** = You have demonstrated familiarity with the material.

**

F** = You have demonstrated minimal familiarity with the material.  
  
An essay is a specific form of writing. It is not a description, nor is it a
report. It is the formal presentation of analysis and interpretation. Analysis
is the systematic and logical thought process in which the essayist arranges
the information in a w ay that demonstrates an understanding of the phenomenon
under investigation beyond mere description. Interpretation is the logical,
systematic, and creative thought process in which the essayist discusses the
significance of the information s/he has analy zed.  
  
Every essay should have an introduction, a body, and a conclusion. The
introduction should contain an introduction of the issue(s) to be discussed
and a thesis statement that prepares the reader for the analysis and
interpretation which follow (which is w hy the introduction is best written
after you have written a draft of the body and conclusion). The body contains
the analysis and the conclusion contains the interpretation. The conclusion,
therefore, should never be a brief paragraph that simply present s a summary.
It should be a well-developed section (which most likely will take several
paragraphs) which presents a logical and creative perspective on the issue(s)
resulting from your original thought.  
  
For some suggestions on writing essays, you can consult my web page at
http://www.neiu.edu/~ghsingle/ and follow the For Students link.  
  
The most frequently asked question about essays (alas) is "How long should it
be?" Writing styles vary. Some topics and issues can be dealt with more
concisely than others. A MUCH BETTER INDEX THAN LENGTH IS TO DETERMINE IF YOU
HAVE REALLY

DEMONSTRATED THE POINT YOU ARE TRYING TO MAKE, AND IF THE POINT IS ONE WORTH
MAKING.

**

ATTENDANCE:

**

Attendance is required, and absences beyond three class hours will result in
incrementally lower grades. (Please note: three class hours equals one class
session in a course that meets once a week.) In addition, you are responsible
for all material covered in class whether you are there or not.

I do not distinguish between an excused and an unexcused absence. There may be
necessary reasons for missing a class session, but the session is still
missed. When we award 3 credit units we are not simply stipulating that you
have done a specified num ber of written assignments or examinations. We are
also certifying that you have been exposed to a sustained series of class
sessions designed and delivered by a scholar who knows the field well and has
done sufficient secondary reading and primary resear ch to present a cogent
set of analyses of important issues in the subject matter of the course. Thus,
if you are not there for a significant portion of the course, it reduces the
value of that certification.

The current University Catalog (p. 29) specifies that if a student is absent
more than three hours the instructor may lower the student grades. In my
classes the may should be read "will." No one should expect to earn a grade of
higher than: **B** w ith 4 to 5 hours of absence; **C** with 6 to 7 hours of
absence; **D** with 8 to 9 hours of absence; **F** with 10 or more hours of
absence. No, that does not mean that if you attend all but 4 or 5 hours of
class you are guaranteed a B.

I am often asked if students can make up missed class sessions with additional
reading. The answer is yes, BUT. . .In every class session I present a
synthesis of anywhere between 20 and

50 scholarly articles, 15 and 30 scholarly books, several dozen primary
documents, and over thirty years of study and reflection. If you wish, you may
do the same for each class period missed, but attending class is by far the
easier route to go.

**

OTHER CLASS POLICIES:

**

  
  
CELL PHONES AND BEEPERS: Turn them off during class. Repeated infractions will
be reported to the Dean of Students as disruptive behavior.  
  
RECORDING DEVICES: Students may record class sessions.  
  
DISCUSSION: I encourage discussion in class, BOUNDED ONLY BY RELEVANCE TO THE
ASSIGNED TOPIC, KNOWLEDGE OF THE ASSIGNED MATERIAL, ADHERENCE TO LOGICAL
DISCOURSE, AND RESPECT FOR OTHER CLASS MEMBERS.  
  
GUESTS: The category "Guests" includes anyone who is not registered for the
course, or has not been approved as an auditor. If you wish to invite a guest
to class, you must receive permission from the professor at least twenty-four
hours in advance. Permi ssion will not be granted merely for the sake of
convenience.



**

SOME PICKY, BUT IMPORTANT, RULES ABOUT THE EXAMINATIONS:

**



All examinations must be submitted on 8.5"x 11" white paper typed or printed
off a computer using black ink.

All examinations must use 12 or 10 cpi fonts and standard margins.

All examinations must be paginated.

All examinations must be submitted **_without**_ folder or covers and must be
stapled (paper-clips will not suffice).

All examinations must be submitted with the author's name, social security
number, and telephone number on the cover page or the header of the first page
of text.

Students are responsible for keeping copies (hard copy, disk copy, or both) of
all work submitted.

