  |  |  |  |  **ENGLISH 2403  ** |  **CREATIVE WRITING**  
---  
  
  
**Dr. Ingrid Shafer**  


**English 2403, Creative Writing** , is a highly flexible course generally
taught on an individual basis to accommodate student needs and prior
experience. During the first week of each term, students will be assigned to
Level I (Beginning), Level II (Intermediate), or Level III (Advanced)
categories. In addition, for level II and III the main area of interest, i.e.,
narrative fiction or poetry will be determined.  


**LEVEL ONE OBJECTIVES** :

A) Rediscovery of an almost child-like delight in using words to reflect one's
inner and outer worlds by tapping into the productive, creative, pre-conscious
mind (generally identified with the non-dominant brain hemisphere) with its
aesthetic talent for wonder, wholeness, subtlety, metaphor, natural rhythm,
and the ability to reconcile and juxtapose opposites.

B) Practice in joining this primal kind of natural, dynamic, metaphoric,
playful, imaginative, intuitive expression with the conscious, critical,
analytic, syntactic, formal and grammatical abilities of the dominant brain
hemisphere in order to produce simple vignettes, short stories, one-act plays,
and poems.

C) Introduction to the methods of getting writings published, such as
surveying the potential market and proper manuscript preparation.  


**LEVEL TWO OBJECTIVES** :

Continuation and intensification of Level One objectives with increasing
emphasis on specialization in the student's area of particular interest,
leading to an appropriate work or works in publishable form.

**LEVEL THREE OBJECTIVES** :

Continuation and intensification of Level Two objectives for potentially
serious writers and/or poets.  


**EVALUATION** :

The course grade will be based on the extent to which students complete
assignments as well as the quality of their work in light of their individual
abilities and initial level of accomplishment.

This Guestbook is a way for members of this course to communicate with one
another. At least once a week, post personal reactions and reflections related
to the chapter(s) you are currently reading and the execises in that chapter
or chapters. If there is a relatively brief piece you want to share with
others, make it part of your message.  If you don't want the whole world to
read your comments, be sure to use the private option.

8 January, 1998

Sign My Guestbook View My Guestbook ![Guestbook by
GuestWorld](lpagebutton.gif)  
    
  **COURSE SYLLABUS**

**LEVEL I:**  

**A) Completion of all the exercises in the text, Gabrielle Lusser Rico's
Writing the Natural Way: Using Right-Brain Techniques to Release Your
Expressive Powers. B) Completion of your individual writing project.**  

You should expect to spend considerably more time on assignments than
suggested in the text. Stop only when you feel that you have accomplished what
you set out to do. Revise until you feel you have done your best, but be sure
to bring all rough drafts to your weekly meetings. You should expect to spend
at least nine hours per week writing.  


**Topics include the following:  **



      * 1.  Making contact with the secret writer within
      * 2.  Clustering: doorway to your intuitive mind
      * 3.  Becoming a child once more
      * 4.  Words and the brain
      * 5.  Discovering patterns: the trial web
      * 6.  Recurrences: the unifying thread
      * 7.  Rhythm, melody, and harmony in language 
      * 8.  Images and archetypes 
      * 9.   Metaphor 
      * 10\. Creative tension: juxtaposition of opposites 
      * 11\. Re-vision: the art of revising 
      * 12\. Completing the circle 
      * 13\. Personal project: a short story, a little play, a series of poems 
      * 14\. Personal project 
      * 15\. Personal project

You need to complete all the assignments of at least one new chapter per week.
If you want to get started in a hurry, go through several chapters in the
first few weeks, and slow down as the exercises get more complex and time-
consuming. We'll use the final two to four weeks of the term for exploring
individual areas of interest and writing the final project.

Except for your own  rough drafts, all work must be typed or word-processed.
If you compose at the computer, be sure to save your work in progress under
different file names regularly, otherwise you'll overwrite the drafts. At the
end of the term, please hand in clean typed or word-processed copies of ALL
your revised writings plus your personal project.  


**CLASS ATTENDANCE FOR ALL LEVELS :**

This course is taught on an individual basis. Please put your full name into
one of the time slots on the sign-up sheet. I expect to meet with you (and
your writings!) every week. In addition, I hope to schedule a couple of week
end/evening/late afternoon group meetings. I'll let you know in advance. You
should do your best to attend at least one of those meetings.  


**TEXT BOOK :**  Gabrielle Lusser-Rico, _Writing the Natural Way: Using Right
Brain Techniques to Release your Expressive Power_. ** **   **E-mail Dr.
Shafer**  
---  
Copyright   Ingrid Shafer 1998  
  
     


