#  PS146, The US Congress, Spring 1996 Syllabus

Paul Gronke  
Box 90204  
660-4311  
Office hrs: Monday, 2-4 pm  

**Course Description:** The popular picture of large social institutions might
be faceless, static organizations, inscrutable to outside observers. The
seismic shift in Congress since 1994 explodes this view. Social institutions
are, in some degree or another, constantly changing in response to their
environment. This course will examine the development and current state of
America's preeminent political institution: the U.S. Congress. I will talk
about the ``environment " of Congress in two main ways: external (mainly
electoral) and internal (institutional procedures and inertia). The carriers
of Congressional change turn out to be, not surprisingly, the members. Since
Congress makes its own rules, we can talk about the _institution_ of Congress
as a product of the _goals and motivations_ of the members. These two views of
Congress \--- a 200 year old institution, and a noisy aggregate of members ---
are the centerpiece of this course.

We examine Congress in four steps. First, we look at how members get to
Congress, and what we expect them to do once they get there. What is the ``job
" of a member of Congress? What do we mean by ``representation?" How are
members elected, and has the electoral formula changed in the last few years?
Next, we turn to Congressional decision--making, first in committees, then on
the floor. Who matters in Congressional decision--making? Where are decisions
_really_ made? Third, we trace changes in Congress since the early 1970's, the
so--called post--reform Congress, and try to link these changes with
significant rules changes instituted in the 104th Congress. In tandem with the
nation, Congress experienced seismic shifts in its membership and internal
rules and procedures. These changes played themselves out through Ronald
Reagan's administration in the 1980's, and explain a lot about the discontent
we feel with Congress in the 1990's. Can Congress govern? And what
alternatives are there? Finally, we attempt to address the changing Congress
in the post 1994 era. Are the old theories lacking? What can we learn from the
new Republican Congress? As a guide to our study, we examine two case studies
in depth, the 1986 Tax Bill and the 1995 Budget Crisis.

**Requirements:**

  * Section assignments (30%) 
  * Two short in-class midterms (30%) 
  * A final paper (40%) 

**Readings:** The following books are on order at the Duke University
Bookstore:

  * Douglas Arnold, _The Logic of Congressional Action_
  * Birnbaum and Murray. _Showdown at Gucci Gulch_
  * Dodd and Oppenheimer. _Congress Reconsidered, 5th Edition_
  * Fiorina. _Congress: Keystone of the Washington Establishment, 2nd Edition_
  * Jacobson. _The Politics of Congressional Elections 3rd Edition_
  * Kettl, _Deficit Politics_
  * Rohde. _Parties and Leaders in the Postreform House_
  * There is a bound set of materials on reserve at Perkins. You will need to photocopy these materials. They are lengthier than previous years in order to include material on the new Congress. 

There will be a _current events_ portion to each midterm examination. You are
expected to read a quality daily newspaper. It is impossible to track Congress
on a regular basis without one, and this is even more true during this
historic period. I strongly recommend a subscription to the New York Times,
and will pass out subscription sheets in class. For $25.00 a term, this is one
of the best bargains around. You may also be able to satisfy this requirement
by watching CNN's ``Inside Politics'' and ``Capitol Gang'' or CSPAN on a
regular basis.

If you have not taken PS91 or feel that your knowledge of basic Congressional
structure is lacking, you should supplement the readings here. A text by
Oleszek, _Congressional Procedures and Policymaking_ to be a very useful
reference source. A simpler, basic review of Congressional procedures can be
obtained from _How Congress Works_ , published by CQ Press. Both are non
circulating and can be read in the Public Documents room in Perkins. Finally,
there is an online guide to ``How Are Laws are Made'' available at

    
    
              http://www.house.gov/HOLAM.TXT
    

or through this class's home page at

    
    
              http://www.duke.edu/~gronke/congress.html.
    

I _strongly_ encourage you to refer to them if you are weak on fundamentals.
Otherwise, you will get lost.

All readings are required. DODD means from the Dodd and Oppenheimer reader. CP
means from the coursepack in the reserve room. HCW means a chapter from the
_How Congress Works_ text in the public documents room.

  1. 15 Jan -- 15 Jan _Intro, MLK Lecture_
    * MLK Lecture: Minority Majority Districts? What is congressional representation? 

  2. 17 Jan -- 17 Jan _What is the ``Job " of Congress? Of Members of Congress?_
    * Ornstein, Peabody, and Rohde, ``The U.S. Senate in an Era of Change" (DODD) 
    * Dodd and Oppenheimer "Maintaining Order in the House" (DODD) 
    * Arnold, ``Can Inattentive Citizens Control Their Elected Representatives?" (DODD) 
    * _REC: HCW, ``The Legislative Process ", ``Pressures on Congress"; Oleszek, Chs. 1--2._

  3. 22 Jan -- 24 Jan _A Digression: Budget Politics_
    * Kettl, _Deficit Politics_ , all 
    * Thurber and Durston, ``The 1990 Budget Enforcement Act'' (DODD) 

  4. 29 Jan -- 31 Jan _Congressional Elections I: Context, Candidates, Campaigns_
    * Jacobson, Chs. 1--4 
    * Jacobson, ``The Misallocation of Resources in House Campaigns 

  5. 5 Feb -- 7 Feb _Congressional Elections II: What is the Constituency?_
    * Fenno, ``U.S. House Members in Their Constituencies: An Exploration " (RES) 
    * Arnold, Chs. 1, 3 

  6. 12 Feb -- 14 Feb _Congressional Elections III: Voter Choice, Incumbency Advantage_
    * Erikson and Wright, ``Voters, Candidates, and Issues in Congressional Elections " (DODD) 
    * Alford and Brady, ``Personal and Partisan Advantage in U.S. Congressional Elections, 1846--1990" (DODD) 
    * Fiorina, 1--66 

  7. 19 Feb -- 21 Feb _Models of the Congressional Vote, Looking Back at the Incumbency Advantage_
    * Jacobson, Ch. 5--6 
    * Fiorina, 67--141 

  8. February 26 **Midterm**

  9. 28 Feb--4 Mar _Consequences of the Congressional Elections System, Reflecting on 1994_
    * Jacobson, Chs. 7--8 
    * Hibbing, ``Careerism in Congress: For Better or Worse'' (DODD) 
    * Jacobson, ``The 1994 House Elections in Perspective'' (CP) 
    * Brady, Cogan, and Rivers, ``How the Republicans Captured the House'' (CP) 
    * ``Freshman Class Boasts Resume's to Back Up 'Outsider' Image'' (CP) 
    * Steeper, ``This Swing is Different: Analysis of 1994 Election Exit Polls'' (CP) 

  10. 6 Mar -- 18 Mar _Where Does Policy Come From? Rational Choice and Agenda Setting_
    * Arnold, Chs. 2, 4--6 
    * Birnbaum and Murray, Chs. 1--4 

  11. BREAK: Read Birnbaum and Murray? 

  12. 20 Mar -- 25 Mar _Congressional Committees: Assignment, Jurisdiction, Participation_
    * Hall, ``Participation, Abdication, and Representation in Congressional Committees "; Strahan, ``Dan Rostenkowski: A Study in Congressional Power"; and Young and Cooper, ``Multiple Referral and the Transformation of House Decision Making" (ALL IN DODD) 
    * ``A Republican Designed House Won't Please All Occupants'' (CP) 
    * _REC: CQP, ``The Committee System''; Oleszek, Ch. 4 and pgs. 118--138_

  13. 27 Mar _Congress In Action_
    * Birnbaum and Murray, Chs. 5--9 
    * Arnold, Chs. 7--8 

  14. 1 Apr -- 3 Apr _The Changing Congress I: A Revival of Parties?_
    * Rohde, Ch. 1--4 
    * Sinclair, ``House Party Leadership in an Era of Divided Control " (DODD) 
    * Smith, ``Forces of Change in the Senate'' (DODD) 

  15. 8 Apr -- 8 Apr _Floor Procedures, Conference Committees_
    * Birnbaum and Murray, 10--11 and Epilogue 
    * Kingdon, ``The Consensus Mode of Decision Making'' and ``Stuctural Decision Features'', Chs. 10 and 12 from _Congressmen's Voting Decisions_ , in (CP) 

  16. 10 Apr--15 Apr _The Changing Congress II: Perspectives on The Republican Revolution_
    * Rohde, Ch. 5--6 
    * Aldrich and Rohde, ``Theories of the Party in the Legislature and the Transition to Republican Rule in the House'' (CP) 
    * Bader and Jones, ``The Republican Parties in Congress: Bicameral Differences " (DODD) 

  17. 17 Apr **Midterm 2**

  18. 22 Apr -- 24 Apr _Evaluating Congressional Decision--Making, Consequences of 1994_
    * Connor and Oppenheimer, ``Deliberation: An Untimed Value in a Timed Game " (ALL DODD) 
    * Rudder, ``Can Congress Govern?"
    * Arnold, ``Citizens' Control of Government'' (Part III) 
    * Dodd, ``Congress and the Politics of Renewal: Redressing the Crisis of Legitimation"

  

* * *

_Paul Gronke  
Sun Feb 4 14:42:17 EST 1996_

