  
  
  
---  
| |

**Home Page**

_

_ Frank James Smith  
Professor of Psychology  
North Carolina State University  
Raleigh, North Carolina 27695  
[fjsmith@ncsu.edu](mailto:fjsmith@ncsu.edu)  
(919) 515-1723

**Biographical Summary** _

_

A native of Iowa, Professor Smith received a B.S. and M.S. in Psychology from
Iowa State University and a Ph.D. in Psychology from Michigan State
University.  In 1972 he joined the faculty at North Carolina State University
where he has helped build the graduate programs of Industrial/Organizational
Psychology and an innovative program, Psychology in the Public Interest.   His
teaching and research is concerned with individual and organizational
adaptation to changing social,  technological and market conditions.    He has
worked extensively with U.S. and international development organizations to
help develop human resources, improve organizational capacities, and measure
program performance.

**Courses:**

Click on the following links to access course materials saved in pdf format.  
You will need to use Adobe Acrobat to open these files!!!  
[  
Psy 312, Applied Psychology
](http://courses.ncsu.edu/classes/psy312001/312.pdf) (Syllabus for Spring
2001)  
[Psy 714, The Social Psychology of
Groups](http://courses.ncsu.edu/psy714/lec/002/714.pdf) (Syllabus for Spring
2001)  
[Psy 751, Human Resource Planning and
Evaluation](http://courses.ncsu.edu/classes/psy%20751001) (Syllabus for Fall
2000)  
[Psy 755,  Cross-cultural Research and
Development](http://courses.ncsu.edu/classes/psy755001/755.pdf) (Syllabus for
Fall 2000)  
Psy 756,  Consumer Research (Syllabus for Spring 2000)

**Current Research Projects:**

Develop, disseminate and evaluate decision aids for integrated soil nutrient
management. The project involves close collaboration between biological and
social scientists working with client groups including national and
international research organizations, universities, non-government
organizations to develop, desseminate and evaluate new tools and technology
for integration of diverse information for decision-making. Program impact
assessments in intensive testing areas in Costa Rica, Mali and the Philippines
will measure changes including: 1) awareness and familiarity with various
decision support products; 2) the capacities of users to use the decion tools
to simulate different agronomic, social and economic conditions; and 3)
changes in farming practices, policies, diagnosis and planning methods. The
work is funded in part by a contract from the U.S. Agency for International
Development and collaborating institutions.

Evaluate research and extension systems for farmers in the Chapare region of
Bolivia who have been forced out of coca production and are attempting to
establish legitimate farming systems.  In cooperation with the Government of
Bolivia and with funds from the U.S. Agency for International Development,
research and extension services are being restructure to better assist farmers
and farmer organizations to overcome their technical and organization
problems.   Social science research has developed indicators that are being
used to monitor and evaluate the program's social and economic impacts.

**

Professional Experience:**

Professor of Psychology,  North Carolina State University, Raleigh, N.C.  
Industrial/Organizational Psychology  
Psychology in the Public Interest

Coordinator, 17-country APEC/USAID/Industry funded project entitled, Human
resource development for the food industry in the Asian-Pacific region: A need
assessment and policy review. (1994-1997).

Principal Investigator, USAID funded project entitled, Socio-economic impact
analysis of technologies generated by the Soil Management and other CRSPs in
the humid tropics of Bolivia, Brazil, Columbia, Costa Rica, Indonesia, Peru,
Philippines, and Thailand. (1990 - 1993).

Principal Investigator, USAID funded project, Socio-economic impact analyses
of technologies generated by the Soil Management and other CRSPs for the
savannas of Brazil, Kenya, Paraguay and Zambia. (1991 - 1992).

Education Advisor, USAID/North Carolina State University REE Project, and
Honorary Professor of Economics and Planning, Universidad Nacional Agraria,
Lima, Peru. 1984-1986.,

**Selected Publications:** **

**

Bhandari, R. & Smith, F. (2000) Education and food consumption behavior in
China: Household analysis and policy implication. _Journal of Nutrition
Education_. _32_ ,(4), 214-224.

Smith, F.J. & Schwartz, S.J. Eds. (2001, in press _) Human Resource
Development for the Food Industry in Asia and the Pacific_. Conference report
for United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific.

Smith, F.J. (2000) Analysis and design of systems for monitoring and
evaluation of research and extension services and impacts. Report prepared for
the USAID/Bolivia, CONCADE project.

Bhandari, Rajika & Smith, Frank (1997). Rural women in India: Assessment of
educational constraints and the need for new educational approaches. _Journal
of Research in Rural Education_. _13_ (3), 183-197.

Sturm, L. and Smith, F. J. (1993). Bolivian farmers and alternative crops:
Some insights into innovation adoption. _Journal of Rural Studies_. _9_ (2),
141-151.

Smith, F. & Estrada, J. (1993). _The revitalization of universities in
developing countries: The case of research management at the National
Agricultural University, La Molina, Peru_. Prepared for the International
Institute for Educational Planning. UNESCO: Paris.

Pomareda, C. & Smith, F. J. (1985). Returns to investments in human capital in
Peruvian agriculture. _Proceedings of the 5th. World Congress of the
Econometric Society_ , MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Smith, F. J. & Hester, R. (1982). _Community Goal-Setting_. Stroudsburg, Pa.:
Hutchinson Ross Publishing Div., Van Nostrand Reinhold Company Inc., New York.

Smith, F. J. & Crano, W. D. (1977). Cultural dimensions reconsidered: Global
and regional analyses of the Ethnographic Atlas. _American Anthropologist_ ,
_79_ (2), 364-387.

Smith, F. J. & Crano, W. D. (1977). Patterns of cultural diffusion: Analyses
of trait associations across societies by content and geographical proximity.
_Behavior Science Research_ , _12_ (3), 145-167.

  
[![](images/frontpag.gif)](http://www.microsoft.com/frontpage/)  
---|---|---

