Social Studies Links ![](spacer.gif) |  ![](ssmlogo.gif)  
---|---  
  
|  |

###  Social Studies Methods Homepage  
  
---  
**Course Syllabus** | **Lesson Outlines** | **Readings**  
**Lecture Notes** | **Assignments** | **Subject Links**  
  
###  This page links to numerous social studies sites  
and webliographies of social studies sites. Choose  
the subject area of interest to you.

###  **Geography** | **History** | **Civics**  
---|---|---  
**Economics** | **General** | **Methods**  
  
**E-Mail:Christy Keeler  
Homepage: Christy Keeler  
(Updated 3/19/98)  
**

You are visitor number **![many](http://darkwing.uoregon.edu/~jqj/cgi-
bin/counter.cgi?http://darkwing.uoregon.edu/~christyk/linksct.html)  
---  
  


















  
  
|

### Geography

USGS: What Do Maps Show? (http://info.er.usgs.gov/education/teacher/what-do-
maps-show/index.html#intro)     This site is a good introduction to maps and
map reading, but lacks the appeal to alternative learning styles. It would
work well for a student engaged in independent study, but not necessarily for
a classroom-led lesson. "One World, Our World"
(http://www.entecheng.com/1wow.html)     This site advertizes an assembly
program designed by the Peace Corps to teach children about differences and
similarities between people around the world. The base price is about $650 for
one day. KidNews (http://www.vsa.cape.com/~powens/Kidnews.html)     This site
provides a forum for students to post their written work on the World Wide Web
for international review by other student authors. Email pals may also be
matched. KIDLINK: Global Networking
(http://www.kidlink.org/english/index.html)     Students are provided a forum
for communicating with others around the world. This site is designed for ages
10-15 and helps find email pals and coordinates international projects. The
United Nations CyberSchoolBus (http://www.un.org/Pubs/CyberSchoolBus/)
This site, developed by the UN, includes links to a peace poem, data about
countries, quizzes, puzzles, and animations, UN school kits, and good UN
sites. Non-Electronic Geography Bibliography
(http://darkwing.uoregon.edu/~christyk/Geogbib.html)     A bibliography of
geography books, videos, games, videos, etc. Where on the Globe is Roger?
(http://www.gsn.org/roger/index.html)     A retired marine travels around the
world telling stories about his experiences. Students/classes may correspond
with him directly. Tale of Two Rivers
(http://cyberschool.4j.lane.edu/ttr/ttr.home.html)     A site designed for and
by middle school students engaged in outdoor research. This site focusses
specifically on the activities done on one specific land parcel and gives
ideas of ways community involvement in such projects can be achieved. K-12
Africa Guide
(http://www.sas.upenn.edu/African_Studies/Home_Page/AFR_GIDE.html)     A guide
to K-12 resources available on the Internet. Some of the links include
country-specific information, a multimedia archive, African languages,
information regarding the African environment, and African-American resources.
Amigo! Mexico Art & Culture Directory (http://www.mexonline.com/culture.htm)
A photo gallery of items important to Mexican culture. Items such as pottery,
folk dancing, art, Mardi Gras, and bullfighting are included. Golden Legacy
Curriculum (http://ericir.syr.edu/Projects/CHCP/)     Lesson plans developed
for the Chinese Historical and Cultural Project. TALES
(http://www.wested.org/tales/00contents.html)     Stories of projects
undertaken by classroom teachers. Not all projects are geography-based, but
many are. Earth science/climatology projects are the most prevalent.
GlobaLearn! (http://www.globalearn.org/)     GlobalLearn takes expeditions
around the globe and invites students and classrooms to join. The third
journey will be to Brazil. Participation requires registration. EnviroNet at
Simmons College (http://earth.simmons.edu/)     Students at Simmons College in
Boston assist educators in projects relating to ecosystems, animals, and other
earth science-related items. This site allows registration and participation
in a myriad of global research projects. Creativity Cafe
(http://creativity.net/kidcast2.html)     Students create artistic projects
for presentation over the Internet. The Project takes place during one day of
the year and includes CU-SeeMe technology to allow the artists to interact
with viewers of their work. Anti-Racism Boat Tour
(http://www.magenta.nl/boat/info-e.html)     Students in the Netherlands and
South Africa collaborated on a boat tour teaching about issues of racism. The
project has concluded, but the site is still active. Intercultural E-Mail
Classroom Connections (http://www.stolaf.edu/network/iecc/)     Allows
teachers easy access to email pals from other cultural regions around the
world. Earth Day Groceries Project
(http://www.halcyon.com/arborhts/earthday.html)     Students decorate grocery
bags for local food stores who then distribute the bags on Earth Day. Explains
the project and how to become involved. SS CENTRAL AMERICA
(http://web.infoave.net/~wilkerson/shipwreck.html)     A site created by an
elementary class about shipwrecks around Central America. Lesson plans and
activities are included. Help Build a Better Theme Park
(http://www.itp.tsoa.nyu.edu/~alumni/dlasday/xx/intro.chall.html)     This
site sponsors a contest to see who can build the best theme park. Technology
innovation is a key feature. The KIE Curriculum
(http://www.itp.tsoa.nyu.edu/~alumni/dlasday/xx/intro.chall.html)     A group
of curricular activities encouraging individual and group design work. Some
projects include houses in the desert, dinosaur extinction, aliens on tour,
life in the solar system, how far does light go, sunlight/SunHEAT!, and in the
news. Hunt for Country Capitals Game
(http://www.kidlink.org/KIDPROJ/Capitals/)     Students create a trivia game
about country capitals for inclusion on the site. The games then become
interactive and students are challenged to identify capitals described by
other students/schools. The project takes place during a specified period.
GeoGame Project (http://www.gsn.org/project/gg/index.html)     Students submit
information regarding their location. This information is sent to a general
manager who scrambles all the information from all respondents. Classes must
then use geographic resources to solve the puzzles. Virtual China Project '97
(http://www.kidlink.org/KIDPROJ/VChina97/)     A week-long bike trip through
Southern China is followed and there is a virtual field trip of Xi'an. Virtual
Trek in a Sumatran Rainforest (http://www.kidlink.org/KIDPROJ/Sumatra/)     A
site designed by a miidle school class after their trek to Sumatra. Includes
pictures and information about the region. Project Central America
(http://www.adventureonline.com/pca/index.html)     Students/classes follow a
team of mountain bikers through Central America. Running the Nile
(http://www.adventureonline.com/nile/index.html)     The outcome of a kayaking
adventure on the Nile. Is complete with journal logs, pictures, and teachers
resources. The project has concluded but the site remains available. 23 Peaks
(http://www.23peaks.com/)     A site that recounts the experiences of mountain
climbers as they ascended 23 pes throughout North, Central, and South America.
Jounral entries, curriculum ideas, questions/answers, background information,
and pictures are include. MayaQuest '97
(http://www.mecc.com/ies/maya/maya.html)     Follows the Mayan biking
expedition of the Mayan culture. Backlogs and pictures are included and future
expeditions are planned. Projecto Magellan
(http://www.adventureonline.com/magellan/index.html)     A family, the
Schurmann's, share their experiences as they sail the route of Magellan. Live
from Antarctica 2 (http://quest.arc.nasa.gov/antarctica2/index.html)     An
electronic field trip to Antarctica that took place in February of 1997. JASON
Project (http://www.jasonproject.org/)     The JASON Project annually engages
in scientific exploration in different areas of the world. The two-week
research is preceeded by classroom activities available at this site.
International Greenland Expedition
(http://www.adventureonline.com/ige/index.html)     Students follow the trek
of two explorers as they attempt to circumnavigate Greenland. A curriculum is
available for about $100. Everest KidsPeak
(http://www.gsn.org/past/kidspeak/index.html)     Students follow as an
attempt is made to reach the peak of Mount Everest. The site includes links to
loads of information about the region and supporting graphics. Wetlands
Visited '96 (http://www.kidlink.org/KIDPROJ/Wetlands/)     Students
partticipate in wetlands projects focussing on conservation. Information about
the participating class/school is included on the site for comparison
purposes. Weather Folklore (http://www-kgs.colorado.edu/weather_folklore.html)
This lesson has students investigate weather folklore origins and write about
weather folklore in their area. Clouds/Humidity (http://www-
kgs.colorado.edu/rt_clouds.html)     A lesson plan for students to explore
features of a map and write two messages to on-line peers to gain a deeper
understanding of the concepts of humidity and relative humidity, and the
factors that influence them. A Day In The Life Of News
(http://www.kidlink.org/KIDPROJ/Journalism/)     On one day, students from
around the world post the headlines from their local newspapers. These may
then be compared for similarities and differences. GLOBE - International
Hands-On Science and Education (http://www.globe.gov/)     Classes/schools
link with research scientists and other schools to engage in real-life
scientific experiements (e.g., water quality testing). Desert and
Desertification Project (http://environment.negev.k12.il/desert/desert.htm)
This site contain the archives of a worldwide project led by schools to learn
more about deserts and desertification. Students engaged in their own
projects. Lessons and general desert/desertification information is included.
How People Live (http://www.kidlink.org/KIDPROJ/Euro/)     A project designed
by European and udents to learn about the lives of people of various careers
within their regions. STudents submit descriptions of how fictitious people
would live (given an occupation) for comparison purposes.

### Geography Webliographies

Area and Regional Studies Webliography
(http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/shuttle/area.html)     Voice of the Shuttle's
webliography of politics and government sites. Cultural Studies Webliography
(http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/shuttle/cultural.html)     Voice of the Shuttle's
webliography of cultural studies sites. Geography Webliography
(http://www.studyweb.com/geo/toc.htm)     StudyWeb's webliography of geography
sites. Teachers Resources: Earth Science Webliography
(http://www.studyweb.com/teach/tcethsci.htm)     StudyWeb's webliography of
earth science teaching resources.

* * *

### History

World War I - Trenches on the Web (http://www.worldwar1.com/)     This is an
excellent site that serves as a collection of background information about
World War I. Students are encouraged to submit information (e.g., biographies
of war heroes) for inclusion). American History LiveText
(http://www.ilt.columbia.edu/k12/history/aha.html)     Developed via a
collabration of several schools, grades, and classrooms, this site combines
information about American history andstudent projects relating to the topic.
American Immigration (http://www.bergen.org/AAST/Projects/Immigration/)
Created by 10th grade students, this site gives general information about
American immigration. Questions such as who came to American, when, and why
are answered in a chronological design. Hunt for Famous Explorers
(http://www.kidlink.org/KIDPROJ/Explorers/)     Students create a trivia game
about famous explorers for inclusion on the site. The games then become
interactive and students are challenged to identify explorers described by
other students/schools. The project takes place during a specified period.
From Revolution to Reconstruction
(http://grid.let.rug.nl/~welling/usa/usa.html)     A study environment for
U.S. history. It reads much like a textbook, and includes links to original
documents, essays, biographies, and presidential information. Dead Sea Scrolls
(http://sunsite.unc.edu/expo/deadsea.scrolls.exhibit/intro.html)     A
learning environment of the Dead Sea Scrolls; based on the exhibit at the
Library of Congress. Past Forward Limited (http://www.pastforward.co.uk/)
The homepage for PastForward, a company that aids in the development of web
pages for historical sites or organizations. Crossroads
(http://ericir.syr.edu/Virtual/Lessons/crossroads/)     A complete K-16
American History curriculum. Holocaust/Genocide Project
(http://www.igc.apc.org/iearn/hgp/)     An international project focusing on
genocides. The purpose is to increase knowledge in a way which makes a
positive difference in the world. Designed for teachers and students in grades
7-12. Oregon Trail Online (http://www.mecc.com/ies/oto/oto.html)     An
interactive online Oregon Trail experience. Classes must register to
participate. Edison's Greatest Invention
(http://www.hmco.com/hmco/school/projects/edison.html)     Students learn
about Edison's inventions and determine which they believe was his greatest.
This project has concluded, but the project coordinator is identified. I Have
A Dream (http://www.kidlink.org/KIDPROJ/Dream/)     A collaborative free verse
poem experience on the Martin Luther King, Jr. theme. Discover Virginia!
(http://pen.k12.va.us/Anthology/Pav/SocStudies/DiscVa/discva.html)     An
interactive adventure in discovery of Virginia's impact on American history.
Paintbrush Diplomacy (http://www.icamsf.com/diplomacy/default.htm)     Working
within an assigned theme, students research and prepare a picture to describe
the theme. They then deliver their picture to a cooperating school from
another country. History Webliography (http://www.studyweb.com/his/toc.htm)
StudyWeb's webliography of history sites. History Webliography
(http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/shuttle/history.html)     Voice of the Shuttle's
webliography of history sites.

* * *

### Civics

Digital Democracy Project (http://www.landmark-project.com/PowerVote.html)
This project assists students in better understanding demographic issues
relating to the 1996 U.S. Presidential Campaign. A Geopolitical Survey of the
United States (http://www.fred.net/nhhs/html2/otr.htm)     Students/schools
from around the country submit information about their states and can review
geopolitical information submitted by other students/schools. From Congress to
the President (http://www.fred.net/nhhs/html2/otr.htm)     An on-line project
where students role-play a simulation of the U.S. Congress. The project has
concluded, but there is a link to the project's coordinator. Electronic
Emissary Home Page (http://www.tapr.org/emissary/)     Teachers can be
assigned "emissaries," subject matter experts, to correspond with classes on a
regular basis. Politics & Government Webliography
(http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/shuttle/politics.html)     Voice of the Shuttle's
webliography of politics and government sites.

* * *

### Economics

Social Security And You (http://www.ssa.gov/teacher/teacher.html)     A
teacher's kit for teaching about social security. Global Grocery List Project
(http://www.landmark-project.com/ggl.html)     Students submit the prices of
certain items on a given day. The prices from the various regions are then
posted for comparison purposes are shown. Landmark Project
(http://www.landmark-project.com/eco-market/)     Students design an item to
market and learn to be entrepreneurs. TV AD-venture
(http://www.hmco.com/hmco/school/projects/tv.html)     Students review
television advertisements around the country and make observations about how
advertisements are reflective of the regions in which they are shown. Taking
Stock (http://www.santacruz.k12.ca.us/~jpost/projects/TS/TS.html)     A stock-
market simulation is presented for grades 5-12. Registration for the program
is required. Money Project (http://www.kidlink.org/KIDPROJ/Money/)
Schools/students from around the world register costs of specific items for
comparison. Registration for the program is required.

* * *

### General

    These sites cover either general, cross-disicplinary subject-areas or social studies sub-areas (e.g., anthropology, archeology). 

Multicultural Pavilion
(http://curry.edschool.Virginia.EDU/go/multicultural/teachers.html)     A
resource for teachers teaching about multicultural issues. Lessons, archives,
and many, many ideas are included. Multicultural Book Review
(http://www.isomedia.com/homes/jmele/homepage.html)     This site has
multicultural book reviews for middle and high school students. The user
interface stinks, but the information is good. Envisioning the Future
(http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~envision/)     This site was prepared for the
National Endowment of Humanities to support the teaching of the social
studies. It links to teacher materials for all academic levels. Project Center
(http://www.hmco.com/hmco/school/projects/index.html)     Tells of upcoming
on-line activities. Social Studies Webliography
(http://www.state.wi.us/agencies/dpi/www/ed_ss.html)     From the Wisconsin
Department of Public Instruction. Social Studies & Culture Webliography
(http://www.studyweb.com/culture/toc.htm)     StudyWeb's webliography of
social studies and culture sites. Religion Webliography
(http://www.studyweb.com/rel/toc.htm)     StudyWeb's webliography of religion
sites. Gender Studies Webliography
(http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/shuttle/gender.html)     Voice of the Shuttle's
webliography of gender studies sites. Minority Studies Webliography
(http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/shuttle/minority.html)     Voice of the Shuttle's
webliography of minority studies sites. Archaeology Webliography
(http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/shuttle/archaeol.html)     Voice of the Shuttle's
webliography of archeology sites. Anthropology Webliography
(http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/shuttle/anthro.html)     Voice of the Shuttle's
webliography of anthropology sites. Social Studies Webliography
(http://www.mtjeff.com/~bodenst/socialst.html)     From Carrie's Crazy Quilt,
this site separates sites by social studies area specialty (e.g., government,
history).

* * *

### Methods

    Sites relating to the teaching of social studies. Particularly suited for the higher education methods instructor. 

NCSS Information Request: Methods Teachers
(http://www.ncss.org/about/materialsreq.html)     Provides a form for methods
teachers to register for NCSS information. DRAFT Teacher Education Standards:
February, 1997 (http://www.ncss.org/online/standards/teacherprepdraft.html)
A draft of the teacher education standards for social studies teachers
designed by the National Council for the Social Studies. A Social Studies
Methods Course Site
(http://www.valdosta.peachnet.edu/coe/coed/courses/MGE430.html)     An example
on an online middle level social studies methods course syllabus. Oregon
Education Resources (http://www.mtjeff.com/~bodenst/oregon.html)     Resources
available on the Internet for Oregon educators. Social Studies Methods Links
(http://www.usd.edu/intec/socstudelem.html)     A webliography of sites
relating to social studies education.

### Potential Readings

    Readings for review for inclusion in the course. 

"Social Studies Technology Trainers Join I*EARN"
(http://www.newhorizons.org/iearnanderson.html)     An article to read.
"Preservice Teachers Develop Multimedia Social Studies Presentations for
Elementary Grades" (http://www.coe.uh.edu/insite/elec_pub/html1995/044.htm)
An article to read. Helping Your Child Learn History - Parents and the Schools
Helping Your Child Learn History ED309134 Sep 89 World History in the
Secondary School Curriculum. ERIC Digest. ED335283 Jul 91 Teaching the 20th-
Century History of the United States. ERIC Digest. ED360220 Apr 93 Geography
in History: A Necessary Connection in the School Curriculum. ERIC Digest.
ED393781 Mar 96 Oral History in the Teaching of U.S. History. ERIC Digest.
ED346016 Mar 92 The Core Ideas of "CIVITAS: A Framework for Civic Education."
ERIC Digest. ED301531 Dec 88 Civic Education in Schools. ERIC Digest. ED370882
Apr 94 Civic Education for Global Understanding. ERIC Digest. ED332929 Apr 91
Teaching the Responsibilities of Citizenship. ERIC Digest. ED390781 Dec 95
Civic Education for Constitutional Democracy: An International Perspective.
ERIC Digest. ED380401 Apr 95 National Standards for Civics and Government.
ERIC Digest. Teaching Geography: A Model For Action In Grades 4-12 ED381480
Mar 95 The National Geography Content Standards. ERIC Digest. ED277601 Nov 86
The Nature of Geographic Literacy. ERIC Digest No. 35. ED335284 Jun 91
Teaching Geography at School and Home. ERIC Digest. ED WWW Search Results: all
documents ED393786 Feb 96 Using Literature To Teach Geography in High Schools.
ERIC Digest. ED304396 Mar 89 Teaching and Learning Economics. ERIC Digest.
Economic Understanding for Democratic Transformation Improving the Economics
Curriculum with Laboratory Experiments ED284823 Aug 87 The Nature of Economic
Literacy: ERIC Digest No. 41. Goal 2 High School Completion - The Need for
Theory ED393787 Nov 95 Art Education in the Social Studies. ERIC Digest.
ED296950 Jun 88 Computers in Social Studies Classrooms. ERIC Digest. ED351278
Oct 92 Trends in K-12 Social Studies. ERIC Digest. ED285829 Jul 87 Improving
Writing Skills through Social Studies. ERIC Digest No. 40. Social Decision
Making and Problem Solving ED253468 Sep 84 Active Learning. ERIC Digest No. 17
ED329484 Nov 90 Social Studies for the 21st Century: Recommendations of the
National Commission on Social Studies in the Schools. ERIC Digest. ED268065
Dec 85 Community Study. ERIC Digest No. 28. ED322021 Apr 90 Social Studies
Curriculum Reform Reports. ERIC Digest. ED360219 Mar 93 Alternative
Assessment: Implications for Social Studies. ERIC Digest. ED322080 Jul 90
Social Studies and the Disabled Reader. ERIC Digest.

