## UNIVERSITY OF RICHMOND

**![](../images/UR_logo_tiny.gif)**



**COURSE INFORMATION**



**History 327-01 (Undergraduate Credit)** Spring, 2000, MW 2:45 to 4:00 p.m.,
Ryland Hall 215. This class meets from January 10 through April 19; the final
examination is on April 29. Graduate students should request the graduate
student version of the syllabus for information about additional requirements.

Instructor: Ernest C. Bolt, Jr., Professor of History

Office: Ryland Hall 107, 289-8334

Office Hours: 11:15 to Noon, M, T, W,TH, and other times by appointment

E-mail: ebolt@richmond.edu Homepage: http://www.richmond.edu/~ebolt



**AMERICAN DIPLOMATIC HISTORY SINCE 1945**

This course is the third part of a three-semester sequence on the diplomatic
history of the United States. All three courses offer a topical and
international approach to American history, emphasizing the history of our
foreign relations. Students examine American diplomacy in this course as
historians, starting with the impact of World War II and emphasizing such
topics as containment, the national security state, the Cold War and detente,
and Third World challenges to our global interests. Attention will also be
given to the ending of the Cold War and to recent changes in world order since
1989.

Class sessions will feature lectures, discussion of common readings, and some
use of non-print media. Students are introduced to documents and other primary
sources through common reading of documents and use of the library. Students
will read scholarly articles in _Diplomatic History_ and will be introduced to
new reference sources in the library. Critiques are required after the reading
of one common book (Immerman) and one approved self-selected book available in
the library. Students will be introduced to and encouraged to utilize relevant
sources on the Internet. Additional instructions will be furnished for all
assignments noted above and in the following paragraphs.

**Purchase the following texts from the University Bookstore; they will be
used as common reading and for discussion and analysis in the order in which
they are listed.**

Melvyn P. Leffler, _The Specter of Communism: The United States and the
Origins of the Cold War, 1917-1953_ (1994)

Michael L. Krenn, _Black Diplomacy: African Americans and the State
Department, 1945-1969_ (1999)

Richard H. Immerman, _John Foster Dulles: Piety, Pragmatism, and Power in U.S.
Foreign Policy_ (1999)

David L. Anderson, editor, _Shadow on the White House: Presidents and the
Vietnam War, 1945-1975_ (1993)

There will be a mid-term examination and a final exam, each of which will
include essay/discussion and identification questions. The final exam will be
comprehensive, covering the entire course, but it will emphasize material
since the mid-term exam. All students will demonstrate critical thinking in
written critiques of Richard Immerman's book and a self-selected book from
bibliographies to be furnished on my homepage.

The **final course grade** for undergraduates is the result of averaging
grades earned on the mid-term exam (25%), the final exam (30%), the two book
critiques (15% each), and on one additional paper (15%). In the additional
paper, the student will critically compare two scholarly articles in
_Diplomatic History_ or review, summarize, and comment on one self-selected
section of _Foreign Relations of the United States_.

A ten-point scale is used in evaluating your work. Below are the numerical
ranges and grade point values for each letter grade used.



 97-100 A+ 4.0 |    93-96 A 4.0 |   90-92 A- 3.7  
---|---|---  
 87-89 B+ 3.3 |    83-86 B 3.0 |   80-82 B- 2.7  
 77-79 C+ 2.3 |    73-76 C 2.0 |   70-72 C- 1.7  
 67-69 D+ 1.3 |   63-66 D 1.0 |   60-62 D- 0.7  
  


_Each student is expected to attend all meetings of this class. Absence from
more than three classes will adversely impact upon the course grade_. Students
are not excused from the mid-term exam except in case of personal illness or
death in the immediate family. Excuse from the final exam, under University
regulations, is handled only by your dean.

_The instructor joins the Honor Councils in calling attention to two
concerns._ First, the official pledge shall be used on all forms of testing
and written/oral work. You are expected to write the following pledge in full
and to sign your name:  "I pledge that I have neither received nor given
unauthorized assistance during the completion of this work." _Unpledged exams
will not be evaluated._ Secondly, the following definition of plagiarism is
contained in the Honor Code:  "the deliberate presentation, oral and/or
written, of word, facts, or ideas belonging to another source without proper
acknowledgement." _Unpledged reviews will not be evaluated._

Students are encouraged to request a conference with the instructor in regard
to any aspect of the course. Office location, phone number, and regular office
hours are indicated above. If you need to contact me at home, please call
288-7581. You may leave a message on either phone, or when phoning the office,
you may speak directly with one of the History Department secretaries. I am
normally available for conferences at times other than the scheduled office
hours. You may find that using e-mail is the most effective means of contact.

**PLEASE NOTE: This course is NOT a Field-of-Studies: Historical Studies
(FSHT) course in the University of Richmond's General Education curriculum.  
  
**

**Return to Course Index Page**

**Go to Schedule of Classes and Assignments**

