General Archival Files ![](/e/images/spcl/simple.gif) |  catalog | worldcat |
using the library | electronic resources | libraries, collections & subjects  

  
  

**Special Collections Research Center** | **General Archival Files**  

* * *

Headings A-F | Headings G-L | Headings M-R | Headings S-Z

* * *

#### General Archival Files

The General Archival Files were established to provide a means of collecting
general information and ephemeral materials related to the history of
administrative units, organizations, and activities at the University of
Chicago. The General Archival Files include a wide variety of items such as
documents, brochures, pamphlets, clippings, programs, invitations, press
releases, advertisements, and recollections of the history of academic
departments by former faculty members. The arrangement of the files is
alphabetical by the name of the administratrive unit, organization, or
activity.

The University of Chicago Archives has other resources for obtaining in
formation on individual administrative units, faculty members, and student and
community life. Depending on the topic, these may include official
publications such as course announcements, the administrative records of
departments and offices, and professional papers of individuals. Researchers
should also be aware of related documentary material on the University of
Chicago in the Archival Biographical File, the Archival Buildings File, the
Guide to Archival Serials, and the Archival Photographic Files.

* * *

  
Academic Cooperation, Committee on (Hyde Park theological schools)

Academies and high schools affiliating with the U. of C., conference
proceedings, l896- 1927

Adler Planetarium Committee

Administration, organization charts

Admissions, entrance examinations for 1892-1894

Admissions Office, applications, 1948-1953

Admissions and Aid, Office of (College)

African Studies, Committee on

AIDS, Task Force on

Aims of Education Lectures

Alliance Francaise, Chicago Chapter

ALUMNI (2 BOXES)

_____, REUNIONS (1 BOX)

_____, REUNIONS, CLASS BOOKS (2 BOXES)

American Academy of Arts and Sciences

_____, annual meeting in Chicago, 1970

American Foreign and Military Policy, Center for the Study of, est. 1950

American Indian Chicago Conference, 1961

American Institute of Indian Studies

American Meat Institute Foundation

American Round Table, "People's Capitalism," Part III, held at University of
Chicago, October 22, 1958

American School of Classical Studies (Athens & Rome)

Anatomy Department

Anthropology Department

Anti-vivisection issue, 1928-1956

Arabic Program

Archeological Field School, Kampsville, IL

Archeological Institute of America, Chicago Society

Archeology (classical) at U. of C.

Argonne National Laboratory, general

_____, ARGONNE RADIUM STUDIES, REPORTS, 1969 (1 BOX)

_____, Atomic Energy Institute for Teachers, 1949-1950

_____, employees

_____, Fuel Fabrication Facility

_____, "Industry, Innovation, & Technology Transfer," Lectures at Director's
Special Colloquium, 1985

_____, Life Sciences

_____, NEWS CLIPPINGS, 1982-1985 (2 BOXES)

_____, press releases and clippings, 1956-1963

_____, "Proposal for an Argonne Development Corporation," 1984

_____, Statement on Fast Breeder Reactors for 202 Hearing of the Joint
Committee on Atomic Energy, 1963

Argonne National Laboratory-University of Chicago Development Corporation
(ARCH)

Argonne Universities Association

Arms Control and Foreign Policy Seminar

Art at the University

Art Department

ARTICLES AND PAMPHLETS ABOUT THE UNIVERSITY (2 BOXES)

_____, NEWSPAPERS, 1991-1994 (2 OVERSIZE BOXES)

_____, PRESS CLIPPINGS (5 BOXES)

Arts and Sciences Basic to Human Biology and Medicine (ASHUM program)

Asian Studies

Astronomy and Astrophysics Department, general

_____, biographical sketches of professors

_____, Columbus Project

_____, press releases, 1937-1948

Astrophysical Journal

Atomic Energy Anniversary Celebrations, 1946-1947

_____, 1952

_____, 1955-1958

_____, 1962

_____, 1967

_____, 1972-

Atomic Energy Control Conference, 1945

AWARDS AND PRIZES (6 BOXES)

Bacteriology Department

BAND, UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO (1 BOX)

Baptist Theological Union

Behavioral Sciences Department

Ben May Laboratory for Cancer Research

Benton, William, Broadcast Project

_____, conferences

_____, Fellowships in Broadcast Journalism

_____, Medal

_____, National Lecture

Bergman Gallery (Cobb Hall)

Biochemistry Department

Biological Sciences Division, general

_____, "The Biological Sciences Division, the University of Chicago,
1949-1962," by Lowett T. Coggeshall

_____, faculty meeting minutes, 1944-1958

Biological Sciences Division and Pritzker School of Medicine, Council for

Biological Sciences Student Advisory Committee

Biophysics Department

Board of Examinations (new plan examination reports 1935-1938)

Bookstore

Botany Department

Brain Research Foundation, est. 1964

Brooks, Gwendolyn, Poet Laureate's contest

Broyles Investigation, 1949

Budget, University

Buildings and Grounds (1950 strike)

Business Manager

Business Office, handbook, 1922

Business Problems Bureau, est. 1942

BUSINESS SCHOOL (4 BOXES)

_____, DEVELOPMENT (1 BOX)

_____, EXECUTIVE PROGRAM (1 BOX)

_____, HOSPITAL ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM (1 BOX)

CALENDARS, UNIVERSITY (1 BOX)

Campus Bus Service

Campus Committee for Childcare

CANCER RESEARCH FOUNDATION, PROPOSAL TO NATIONAL CANCER INSTITUTE, JOHN E.
ULTMANN, PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR, SUBMITTED 1972 (1 BOX)

_____, fund-raising materials

_____, pamphlets

_____, press releases and news clippings

_____, programs and membership lists

_____, Women's Board

Cardiology Center (proposed 1969)

Career and Placement Services

Catholic Theological Union

CENTENNIAL CELEBRATION (2 BOXES)

Chandler, H. P., "Business Principles in the University of Chicago," ca. 1906

Change Ringing Society

Chaos Club (physical & biological sciences faculty club)

Chautauqua

Chemistry Department, general

_____, histories

_____, press releases and clippings

Chicago, general, ephemera

Chicago Academy of Sciences

Chicago Day

Chicago Humanities Institute

Chicago Linguistic Society, Comparative Syntax Festival, papers, 1973

Chicago Manual Training School

Chicago Plan Commission

Chicago Review (and Big Table controversy)

Chicago Teaching Program

Chicago Theological Seminary, general

_____, Ministers' Week

Children's Books, Center for

Citizens Board of the University

Classics Department

Clinical Pharmacology Committee

Coat of Arms and Motto, U. of C.

College, general

_____, advertisements, 1948

_____, application forms for admission and financial aid

_____, articles by Chauncey S. Boucher about the College

_____, articles by faculty members about the College

_____, "Attitudes to the College: The Opinions of 55 Seniors," by Mary Alice
Newman, 1963

_____, class profiles

_____, College Booklet, draft, 1948

_____, Commission on the Future of the Colleges, 1924

_____, Committee on Policy and Personnel, "Review of the Curriculum of the
College," 1948

_____, Council

_____, Curriculum Committee, 1930s

_____, "Documents Pertaining to the College Proposal of February 6, 1946"

_____, Evaluation Committee

_____, Faculty minutes, 1946-1949

_____, _____, 1959-1961

_____, _____, 1962-1964

_____, General Courses, description

_____, Humanities 1 course at Aspen

_____, news clippings

_____, PAMPHLETS AND BROCHURES (2 BOXES)

_____, Physical Sciences Committee on the Bachelor's Degree, minutes and
report, 1953

_____, Placement Testing Program

_____, press releases, general

_____, _____, organization and curriculum

_____, _____, placement examinations

_____, Proceedings of the Chicago Conferences on Liberal Education,
Undergraduate Education in Chemistry and Physics, 1985

_____, Small School Talent Search

_____, "A Survey of the Graduate Study Plans of the University of Chicago
Class of June 1961," NORC, 1962

_____, Teaching by Discussion in the College Program, 1949

_____, Visiting Committee

College for Teachers, 1898

Colors, U. of C.

Colver-Rosenberger Lectures, 1950-

Colvin, William H., Research Professorship in the Humanities, est. 1960

Commemorative dinner plates

COMMERCE AND ADMINISTRATION, COLLEGE AND SCHOOL OF (1 BOX)

Committee to Defend Labor Victims of Franco, 1953

Communication, Committee on

Community and Family Study Center, general

_____, PUBLICATIONS (1 BOX)

Community-Civic Funds, 1947

Comparative Education Center, est. 1958

Comparative Study of New Nations, Committee for, ca. 1959

COMPTROLLER'S OFFICE (2 BOXES)

_____, ACCOUNTING PRACTICE INSTRUCTIONS, 1962 (1 BINDER)

_____, ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY MANUAL, 1967 (1 BINDER)

_____, _____, 1972 (1 BINDER)

_____, _____, FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING SYSTEM, USER'S MANUAL, 1984 (1 BINDER)

Computation Center

Computer Research, Institute for

Computing Organizations

Conceptual Foundations of Science, Committee on the

CONTINUING EDUCATION, CENTER FOR (1 BOX)

_____, Office of

Convocation, general

_____, addresses, miscellaneous

_____, Convocation Week programs

_____, invitations

_____, press releases and clippings

_____, procedures at U. of C. and elsewhere

_____, tickets

_____, vesper and prayer services

Coordinating Council for Minority Issues

Corporate Open House

Corporate Support, Committee on

Cosmic Radiation Laboratory

Costume, academic

Counseling Center, est. 1945 (Carl Rogers)

Country Home for Convalescent Children

Court Theatre

Cowles Commission for Research in Economics

Crane, Charles R., Russian Foundation & Lectureship, 1900-

Criteria of Academic Appointment, Committee on, report, 1972

Dean of Students in the University

Defense Analysis, Institute for (U. of C. member, 1960-?)

Denison Club, U. of C. Chapter

DEVELOPMENT, GENERAL (2 BOXES)

_____, Alumni Fund

_____, Annual Fund

_____, Association of Friends

_____, CAMPAIGN FOR CHICAGO (2 BOXES)

_____, Campaign for the Arts and Sciences

_____, Campaign for the Next Century

_____, College Fund

_____, Graduate Fund

_____, list of publications

_____, Parents Fund

_____, President's Fund

Developmental Biology, Interdepartmental Training Program in

Diploma, sample, 1917

Disciples Divinity House

Disciplinary Procedures at the University of Chicago, Subcommittee on, report,
1969

Disruptive Conduct, Board of Trustees' ruling, May 12, 1970

Dissertation regulations and manuals

Distribution of Student's Time, Faculty-Student Committee on, 1925

Divinity School, general

_____, New Testament manuscripts, 1948-1950

_____, press releases

Documentary Film Group (DOC Films)

Drama School of the Art Institute, 1925

Dudley, Gertrude, Lectureship, est. 1947 (outstanding women)

Early Christian Literature Department

East Asian Studies, Center for

Eclectic Ed

Economics Department, general

_____, items 1-75 (list in folder)

_____. Chile Project

_____, course reading lists

_____, Ph.D. degrees awarded

_____, Ph.D. examinations, 1940-1947

_____, press releases

_____, program of courses

_____, WORKSHOP PAPERS (1 BOX)

[see also Political Economy Department]

Economic Development and Cultural Change, Research Center in

Economic Policy for American Agriculture, Conference on, 1931

Economy and the State, Center for the Study of the

EDUCATION, SCHOOL AND DEPARTMENT (2 BOXES)

_____, _____, CONFERENCES (1 BOX)

Education and Industry, Conference on, 1927

Education, Institute on General, 1948-1949

Emergency Medicine Department

Employees, general

_____, benefit plans

_____, group insurance plans

_____, hospitals and clinics

_____, retirement income plans

_____, UNIONS, GENERAL (1 BOX)

_____, _____, labor agreements

_____, women employees annual Christmas party

Encyclopaedia Britannica, general

_____, Britannica Lecture Series, 1967

Engineering, School of (proposed)

English Department, general

_____, Chaucer research

_____, course reading lists

_____, PhD's in English

_____, "Recollections of the Department of English," by Donald F. Bond

_____, Requirements for Degrees in English, 1937, 1939

Environment, Committee on the

European Studies, Committee on

Examinations

Examiner's Office

Experimental College

Extension Division

Eye Research Laboratories

Faculty, general

_____, Committee on Rental Policies, report, 1962

_____, Committee to Aid California Faculty Members, 1950-1951

_____, Distinguished Service Professorships

_____, housing

_____, 4E contract dispute

_____, National Academy of Sciences members

_____, Nobel laureates

_____, Society for the Promotion of Publication

_____, Starred Men of Science

Faculty-Student Committee on the Distribution of Students' Time, report, 1925

Faculty Wives' Show, January 9, 1974

Family Study Center

Far Eastern Civilizations, Committee on (and Center for Far Eastern Studies)

Federal Grants and Contracts, Report to the Committee on, 1969

Federated Theological Faculty

Federation of Independent Illinois Colleges and Universities

FERMI INSTITUTE FOR NUCLEAR STUDIES (2 BOXES)

Fermilab

Festival of the Arts

Field Museum of Natural History

FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY CELEBRATION (1 BOX)

Film Studies Center

Fishbein, Morris, Center for the Study of the History of Science and Medicine

Folklore Society and Folk Festival

Food Research Institute, est. 1945

Football

Ford Foundation, Non-Western Area Programs and Other International Studies,
reports

_____, profile of University of Chicago

_____, proposals

FORMS, SAMPLES [from Harold Swift Papers] (1 BOX)

Franck, James, Institute

Frankfurt University, 1948-1949

French Contemporary Art Festival, 1976

Friends of European Scholarship

Fundamentalism Project

* * *

Gays, Lesbians, and Bisexuals at the University

General Education Board

General Studies in the Humanities, Committee on

Geography Department

Geology & Paleontology Department

Geophysical Sciences Department

German Faculty Exchange Programs

Germanic Languages and Literatures Department

Gifts

Goldblatt Cytology Award

Goldstine, Dora, Memorial Lectureship of the Social Service Administration

Government Funding of Research and Education, Ad Hoc Committee, report, 1980

Graduate Divisions

Graduate Education, Commission on, report, 1982

Graduate Schools, Commission on the, 1925

Grants

_____, Carnegie Corporation

_____, Ford Foundation

_____, government

_____, Howard Hughes Medical Institute

_____, NASA

_____, National Institutes of Health

_____, Shell

_____, A. P. Sloan Foundation

_____, Douglas Smith Foundation

_____, U. S. Public Health Service

Grass, 1963 Proclamation on

Great Books of the Western World

Greek Languages and Literature Department

Greeting cards, from U. of C. presidents and others

_____, from others

Harkins, William D., Memorial Lectureship, est. 1952 (physical chemistry)

Harper, William Rainey, Professorship (in the College), est. 1950

Harper, Paul Vincent, Visiting Scholar, est. 1962 (educational psychology)

Harris, Norman Wait, Memorial Foundation

Haskell Lectures in Comparative Religion, est. 1894

Health Administration Studies, Center for

Hilleman, M. R., Lecture

History Department, general

_____, "The Department of History in Retrospect" by William T. Hutchinson,
1956

_____, "Report on the State of the Department of History," 1973

_____, Visiting Committee Report, 1974

History of Culture, Institute for Study of

Home Economics Department

Home for Incurables

Homecoming

Honorary degrees

Honors Award Assemblies

Hoover, William H., Lectureship on Christian Unity

HOSPITALS AND CLINICS (4 BOXES)

_____, ARGONNE CANCER RESEARCH HOSPITAL (1 BOX)

_____, CHICAGO LYING-IN HOSPITAL (2 BOXES)

Household Administration Department

Hull-House

Human Abilities, Institute for Study of, proposal by L. L. Thurstone, 1941

Human Development, Committee on, general

_____, Annual Symposium

_____, Executive Committee minutes, 1946-1947

_____, Program of Studies, 1948

Human Relations in Industry, Committee on

Human Resources Management

Human Understanding, Center for, Washington, D.C., est. 1964

Humanities Division, general

_____, FACULTY MINUTES, 1943-1959 (1 BOX)

_____, Public Courses

_____, Research in the Humanities series, 1928

Humanities Open House

HYDE PARK NEIGHBORHOOD AND COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS (3 BOXES)

HYDE PARK HIGH SCHOOL

IBM Computer 7090 Dedication, 1962

Illinois State Academy of Science

Imaging Science, Center for

Independence Day Exercises, 1898

INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS CENTER

Industrial Societies, Center for the Study of

Information Science Year, 1968

Institute for Religious Studies, Chicago Institute

Institutional Cooperation, Committee on, ca. 1963

Inter-Group Relations, Center for Study of, 1948

International Congress of Human Genetics, Chicago, 1966

International Harvester Training Program, 1945-1950

International House

_____, fiftieth anniversary, 1982

_____, Film Society

International Relations, Committee on

INTERNATIONAL STUDIES, CENTER FOR (1 BOX)

International University of Chicago Day

Intramural Carnival

Invitations and programs, miscellaneous

Jefferson Lecture

Johnson, Earl S., Colloquium on Social Science and Society

Journal of Law & Economics

Journal of Near Eastern Studies

Junior College, separate instruction for men and women, letters from faculty,
1902

Junior Day

Kahan, Arcadius, Fund for Modern Jewish Social Studies

Know Your Chicago Committee

Laboratories for Applied Sciences

Laboratory for Astrophysics and Space Research (LASR)

Laboratory Schools

Language Laboratory

La Rabida Sanitarium

Lascivious Costume Ball

Latin American Studies, Center for

Latke-Hamentasch Symposium

LAW SCHOOL (1 BOX)

_____, CONFERENCES (1 BOX)

Law School Films

Lectures, general

Lectureships, endowed

Legal Office

Liberal Arts Conferences, 1966

Liberal Education for Adults, Center for the Study of

Librarians' Association

Library, general

_____, Center for Children's Books

_____, handbooks

_____, John Crerar Library

Library Quarterly

Library School, Graduate, general

_____, conferences

_____, Graduate Library School Club

Library Society

Linguistics Department

Local Community Research Committee

Lurcy, Georges, Lecture

* * *

MacDonald Observatory (at the University of Texas)

Manhattan Project

_____, Smyth Report, 1945

Manual of Examination Methods

Maroon

Maroon Key Society

Martyn's Maroon Studio

Mathematical Biology, Committee on

Mathematical Studies in Business and Economics, Center for

Mathematics Department

McCormick, John Rockefeller, Memorial Institute for Infectious Diseases

Meadville/Lombard Theological School

Medical Alumni Association

Medical and Biological Research, Council on

Medical School, general

_____, Frontiers of Medicine series

_____, press clippings

_____, _____, 1970-1971

Medicine Department

Medieval Studies, Committee on

Metals, Institute for Study of

Meteorology, Institute and Department

Microbiology and Bacteriology Department

Middle Eastern Studies, Center for

Midway Gardens, 1914-1929, 1961 exhibit

Midway Studios

Midwest Administration Center

Military Ball

Military Science and Tactics Department

Military Studies, Institute of

Mill Road Farm

Milton Celebration, 1908

Minority Students

MODEL UNITED NATIONS OF THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO (1 BOX)

Moody, William Vaughn, Lectures

Morgan Park Academy

Museum of Science and Industry, 1st and 2nd annual reports, 1929-1930

MUSIC AND MUSIC DEPARTMENT (3 BOXES)

National Defense Education Act of 1958

National Development Council, 1970

National Historical Landmarks at U. of C.

NATIONAL OPINION RESEARCH CENTER (NORC) (2 BOXES)

_____, bibliographies

National Volunteer Leadership Conference

Neurobiology, Committee on

Neurology, Department of

New Plan

New Testament Club

New Testament and Early Christian Literature Department

New Testament Manuscript Study, Conference on, 1948

Newberry Library Center for University Extension

Northern Baptist Convention

Northwestern University merger, proposed 1933

Norwegian Studies

Nursery School of the U. of C.

Nurses Home, proposed 1930

Nursing Education

Nuveen, John, Lecture

Obstetrics and Gynecology Department

Ogden Scientific School

Official Publications

Old Age, Insitute on Problems of, 1949

Old University of Chicago

Olin, John M., Center for Inquiry into the Theory and Practice of Democracy

Ombudsman

Oneida National Forest, proposed retreat

Operations Analysis Laboratory

Opthalmology Department

Oriental Institute, general

_____, Handbook

_____, press clippings

_____, PUBLICATIONS (2 BOXES)

_____, "Report of the Director ... on the Expedition to Egypt, Mesopotamia,
Arabia, and Palestine," 1920

_____, Treasures of Tutankhamun exhibit

Orthogenic School, Sonia Shankman

Palmer, Walter L., Visiting Professorship

Parking

Pathology Department

Pharmacology Department

Phemister, Dallas B., Lectureship (medicine)

Phi Beta Kappa, U. of C. Chapter

Phi Kappa Psi

Philippine Studies Program

Philippine Women's University Library Sponsor Committee, 1946

Philosophy & Mankind Conference, 1959

Philosophy Department

Phoenix

Physical Education and Athletics Department, general

_____, basketball programs

_____, football programs

Physical Planning and Construction, Office of

Physical Sciences Division, general

_____, faculty minutes, 1946-1949

_____, Industrial Sponsors Program

_____, materials sciences research

Physics Department

Physiology Department

Pick, Albert Jr., Award and Lecture

Plutonium, Anniversary and 1963 Symposium on Plutonium Chemistry

Policy Study, Center for

Political Economy Department

Political Science Department

POLITICS AND PROTEST MOVEMENTS (4 BOXES)

Population Research and Training Center

POST-WAR INTERNATIONAL PROBLEMS, COMMITTEE ON (1 BOX)

President's Report

President's Report, Advisory Committee on Economy, 1933

Printing Department

Project 1984

Psychiatric Research Unit

Psychiatry Department

Psychology Department

Psychology, Interdepartmental Committee on

Public Administration, courses in

Public Administration and Industry, Committee on Relationship between, 1934

PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION CLEARING HOUSE, PUBLICATIONS (1 BOX)

Public Affairs Conference Center, est. 1960

Public Policy Studies, Graduate School of

Public Relations Department

Public Speaking Department, 1890s

Publishing Program

Purchasing Department

Quantrell Award for Excellence in Undergraduate Teaching

Race Relations, Committee on Education, Training, and Research in

Racial discrimination

RADIO AND TELEVISION OFFICE (1 BOX)

Radiology Department

Railway Education, courses in, 1906-1907

Reavis, William C., Professorship in Educational Administration

REGISTRAR'S OFFICE (1 BOX)

Regulations, U. of C., 1903

RELIGION AND RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATIONS (2 BOXES)

Religion and Social Studies, Institute for (Institute for Religious Studies),
Chicago Chapter

RENAISSANCE SOCIETY (2 BOXES)

Rental Policies, Report of the Faculty Committee, 1962

Research Administration

_____, GUIDELINES FOR GRANT AND CONTRACT MANAGEMENT, 1991 (1 BINDER)

Research and Development brochure, 1963 (Industrial Research Magazine)

Research Institutes

Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC)

Restaurant Administration Center, est. 1943

Ricketts, H. T., Memorial Award and Lecture, 1913-

Riding Club

Rifle Club

ROCKEFELLER MEMORIAL CHAPEL, SERVICES AND PROGRAMS (2 BOXES)

Romance Languages and Literatures Department

Rosenberger Medal

Round Table

Ruml, Beardsley, Colloquium, est. 1969

Rush Medical College

Russian and Soviet Studies

Ryerson, Nora and Edward, Lectures

* * *

Saturday Seminars

SCHOLARSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS (2 BOXES)

SCHOOL MATHEMATICS PROJECT, PUBLICATIONS (1 BOX)

School of Church and Economic Life, 1950 conference

Science Open House

SCRAPBOOKS, 1891-1904 (3 BOXES)

Secretary of the University

Security

Seminary Co-operative Bookstore

Seventy-Fifth Anniversary Celebration

Sexual Violence Prevention Resource Center

Shapiro, Joseph R., "Art to Live With" Collection

Sharpe, D. R., Lectures on Social Ethics

Shimer College

Slavic Languages and Literatures Department

SMART MUSEUM (2 BOXES)

Smith-Goodspeed Bible Translation Project

Social Science Collegiate Division

Social Science Research Building, 25th Anniversary, programs

_____, _____, speeches

Social Science Research Committee

Social Science Research Council, "Graduate Training in the Social Sciences,"
by Carl C. Brigham, 1938

Social Sciences Division, general

_____, Conference for Teachers of Social Science

_____, press releases and news clippings

_____, PUBLIC LECTURES (1 BOX)

Social Service Administration, School of, general

_____, alumni

_____, anniversaries

_____, histories

_____, summer programs

Social Service Review

Social Services Center

Social Thought, Committee on, est. 1942

Society for Social Research

Sociology Department

_____, degrees granted

_____, Interuniversity Study of Ethnic Relations in Chicago

_____, Social Organization field, syllabus

Songs and Yells of U. of C.

SOUTH ASIA LANGUAGE AND AREA CENTER (2 BOXES)

SOUTHERN ASIAN STUDIES, COMMITTEE ON (1 BOX)

_____, REPRINT SERIES (1 BOX)

South East Chicago Commission

Space and the University, 1963 Space-Month Program, etc.

Spanish-American War, University participation

Special Events, Office of

Special Programs, Office of, general

_____, Annual Banquet programs

_____, Upward Bound Project

Spectroscopy, Conference on, 1942

Staff Benefits, Office of

Statistics Department

Statistics, Institute of

Statutes of the University

Stevenson, Adlai E., Institute of International Affairs, est. 1968

Strategic and Foreign Policy Studies, Center for

STUDENT ACTIVITIES, GENERAL (1 BOX)

_____, FRATERNITIES AND INTER-FRATERNITY COUNCIL (2 BOXES)

_____, INTER-DORM COUNCIL (1 BOX)

_____, MINUTE BOOKS AND RECORDS OF STUDENT GROUPS (2 BOXES)

_____, POSTERS, 1968 (1 BOX)

_____, REYNOLDS CLUB (1 BOX)

_____, STUDENT GOVERNMENT (1 BOX)

_____, STUDENT PUBLICATIONS FINANCIAL REPORTS (1 BOX)

_____, STUDENT UNION (3 BOXES)

Student employees

STUDENT HOUSING (1 BOX)

Student Housing Assistants' Association

Student Mental Health Clinic

Summer Nights concert series

Summer Quarter

Surgery Department

Swift and Co.

Tagore, Rabindranath, Memorial Lectures

Teacher Education, University Council on

Teachers List (students recommended for teaching posts, 1896)

Teaching, Council on

Television

THEATER AND THEATER GROUPS (2 BOXES)

Thomas, Hiram W., Foundation Lectures

Training of Teacher Trainers Program

TRUSTEES, BOARD OF (2 BOXES)

Tuition

Universities Research Association

_____, Appraising the Ring: Statements in Support of the Superconducting Super
Collider, 1988

University Athletic Association

University Banquet, 1893-1903

University Congregation (faculty ruling body)

University Emergency Relief Committee (for former associates), est. 1930

University Health Service

University of Chicago Directory

University of Chicago Press

UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO SETTLEMENT (1 BOX)

University of Chicago Survey, vol. II, The Organization and Administration of
the University, draft and comments

University Record, 1945 (proposed resumption)

University-School Relations, Office of

University Senate, general

_____, Committee on the Undergraduate Colleges, report, 1928

_____, Committee on Graduate Study and Graduate Degrees, reports, 1930

_____, reorganization, 1944

_____, Subcommittee on Pensions, report, 1953

_____, Subcommittee on Retirement Policy, report, 1950

University Union, 1893

Urban and Minority Problems, Survey of Activities, 1967 report

Urban Research and Policy Studies, Center for

Urban Studies, Center for, est. 1963

Virology, Committee on

Visiting Committees

Visiting professors

Vocational Guidance and Placement, Board of, general

_____, Vocational Guidance Series

_____, Vocational Opportunities

Voice of America

Washington Prom

Washington's Birthday Exercises, 1890s-ca. 1906

WBKB, 1958 science course on TV

White, Alexander, Visiting Professorship (Committee on Social Thought)

White, Leonard D., Award (political science dissertation)

WHPK (campus radio station)

Wieboldt Foundation Report, 1925

Wilson, Woodrow, Centennial, 1956

Wirszup Lecture

Wirth, Louis, Memorial Fund, 1952

WOMEN AND WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS (2 BOXES)

WOMEN AT THE UNIVERSITY (2 BOXES)

Women's Board

Wood, Elizabeth, Lectureship, est. 1961 (housing and urban affairs)

WOODLAWN COMMUNITY (1 BOX)

Woodward Court Lectures

Works Progress Administration (Adult Education Project)

World Tensions, Conference on, 1960

World War I

World War II

WORLD'S COLUMBIAN EXPOSITION, 1892-1893 (1 BOX)

_____, centennial, 1993

World's Fair, 1933 (A Century of Progress)

WUCB (campus radio station)

Yerkes Observatory

Young Presidents' Organization

Youth Studies Program

Zoology Department

Headings A-F | Headings G-L | headings M-R | headings S-Z | Back to top

  
  

Return to: Special Collections Research Center  

This page was last generated on 16 January 2002 at 3:04 PM CST by
specialcollections@lib.uchicago.edu  
The URL of this page is: http://www.lib.uchicago.edu/e/spcl/gaf.html

