![](earth3.gif)

**

## Peoples and Cultures of the East

**

  
  

IS 324, 001-- Spring 1998 --Monday and Wednesday, 1:30 to 2:45 --Peck Building
2304

  
  

**Course Description**

  
  

Over time our world has become less clearly divided by geo-political
boundaries; and disparate peoples and cultures have found themselves
participating in the same political, social, and economic institutions. The
geographical situation of the United States makes it quite as much a
participant in the Pacific Rim as in the Atlantic community. Yet history,
language, and culture have inclined Americans to look eastward rather than
westward. The result has been widespread ignorance of and indifference toward
Asia. As understandable as this tendency may have been in the past, it is no
longer appropriate for a nation that seeks to participate fully in the
developing economy of Asia or for individuals commencing careers that will
inevitably compel them to think in terms of a global society and economy.

  
  

This course is designed to offer an introductory inquiry into the roots and
manifestations of Asian cultures. It can assist students in understanding
their contemporaries from the East and in identifying concerns other than
those that have been emphasized in the West. A goal of this course is greater
understanding that may lead to more effective communication across cultural
boundaries.

  
  

Comprehensive coverage of Eastern cultures is no more possible in a single
course than would be comprehensive coverage of Western cultures. This semester
major emphasis is given to the cultures of East Asia because of the interests
and expertise of the participating faculty. However, the course will also
examine India as a significant source of Asian ideas. The course covers
historical, philosophical, and religious foundations of Asian civilizations
and examines products of those foundations in areas such as ethics, politics,
medicine, and music.

  
  

**Participating Faculty**

  
  

Professor Sang-ki Kim, Department of Philosophical Studies

PB 2207, tel.: 692-2257, e-mail: skim@siue.edu

Office hours:

  
  

Professor Samuel Pearson, Department of Historical Studies

PB 2336, tel.: 692-3685, e-mail: spearso@siue.edu

Office hours: 9:00 to 10:30, M W and F and by appointment

  
  

**Textbooks**

_East Asia: A New History_ by Rhoads Murphy **[EA]** , available in Textbook
Rental.

_Eastern Ways to the Center: An Introduction to the Religions of Asia_ by
Denise L. Carmody and John T. Carmody **[EWC]** , available in Textbook
Rental.

_The Analects of Confucius_ **[C]** , available for purchase in the Bookstore.

  
  

**Course Requirements**

  
  

Students are expected to attend class and to complete reading assignments.
Readings and lectures are complementary, and students should give attention to
both. Grades will be based on a map examination (10%), the mid-term and final
examinations (30% each), the paper (20%), and two unannounced quizzes (5%
each). Excessive absences (three or more) will be considered in calculating
course grades. Quizzes and examinations may be made up only if a student is
hospitalized, has a death in the immediate family, or is authorized to be off
campus for a University-scheduled event. Head colds, preparation for other
classes, or anxiety attacks do not justify make up exams. The faculty will
give students suggestions regarding the two major examinations to assist in
preparation.

  
  

The paper is to be an analysis of _The Analects_ of Confucius as a foundation
of East Asian culture. Read the book carefully early in the term. It is a
short transcription of some of the sayings of Confucius and addresses moral
conduct as the basis of political and social harmony. The paper should focus
on one of the following themes: (1) the extent to which contemporary East
Asian culture is appropriately described as Confucian, (2) a comparison of
Confucian ideas and teaching methods with those of Socrates, or (3) a
comparison and contrast of Asian and Occidental cultures and an assessment of
the importance of Confucianism in explaining differences. The paper must be
typed, double-spaced. It should be no less than five and no more than seven
pages in length. The paper will be graded on the basis of the clarity and
accuracy of your analysis of Confucius and the perceptiveness of your
comparisons. Your paper should be checked for spelling and grammar, elements
that will be considered in assigning a grade to the paper. Students who have
concerns regarding their writing skills are urged to seek help in the Writing
Center on the first floor of the Peck Building. A good manual of style that
includes rules of punctuation is _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses,
and Dissertations_ by Kate L. Turabian. Copies are available in the Bookstore.

  
  

A copy of this syllabus is posted on Professor Pearson's web page at
<http://www.siue.edu/~spearso.> Necessary changes in the schedule and
additional materials may be posted there through the semester, but they will
also be distributed in class. Each student is responsible for information,
handouts, and assignments made in class.

  
  

Schedule of Classes, Lectures, Assignments, Examinations, etc.

  
  

Monday, January 12 (Professor Pearson)

Introduction to the course; distribution of syllabi; checking enrollments

Geographical and historical framework

  
  

Wednesday, January 14 (Professor Pearson)

South Asia: an overview

Monsoonal Asia

Prehistoric Asia

Assigned readings: **EA** , ch. 1; **EWC** , Introduction

  
  

Monday, January 19

No class; Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Holiday

  
  

Wednesday, January 21 (Professor Kim)

Ancient India

Hinduism

film: Religion in India

Assigned reading: **EWC,** ch. 1

  
  

Monday, January 26 (Professor Kim)

Indian Buddhism

Assigned reading: **EWC** , ch. 2

  
  

Wednesday, January 28 (Professors Pearson and Kim)

Medieval India

Islam in Asia

Assigned reading: **C** (read entire text in preparation for paper)

  
  

Monday, February 2 (Professor Pearson)

Mughal India

India under British rule

  
  

Wednesday, February 4 (Professor Pearson)

**MAP EXAMINATION**

Indian Independence

  
  

Monday, February 9 (Professor Pearson)

Gandhi

Indian Subcontinent since independence

Film: Gandhi

  
  

Wednesday, February 11 (Professor Pearson)

Contemporary South Asia

  
  

Monday, February 16 (Professor Pearson)

Introduction to East Asia

China's geography

History of ancient China

Assigned reading: **EA** , chs. 2-3

  
  

Wednesday, February 18 (Professor Pearson)

Tang Dynasty China

Ming and Qing Dynasty China

Assigned reading: **EA** , chs. 4-5

  
  

Monday, February 23 (Professor Pearson)

Confucianism

Assigned reading: **C** and **EWC** , ch. 3

  
  

Wednesday, February 25 (Professor Pearson)

Daoism and other philosophies

  
  

Monday, March 2 (Professor Pearson)

Chinese Medicine

film: The Mystery of Qi

  
  

Wednesday, March 4

**MID-TERM EXAMINATION**

  
  

Monday, March 9 (Professor Pearson)

China and the West in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries

Nationalism, Guomindang, and Sino-Japanese War

Assigned reading: **EA** , CHS. 8, 14, 17

  
  

Wednesday, March 11 (Professor Pearson)

Mao Zedong and the People's Republic

film: The Mao Years

Assigned reading: **EA** , ch. 20

  
  

Monday and Wednesday, March 16 and 18

**SPRING BREAK; NO CLASSES**

  
  

Monday, March 23 (Professors Kim and Pearson)

China since Mao

Socialism with Chinese Characteristics

  
  

Wednesday, March 25 (Professor Kim)

History of Japan to 1840: I

film: Japan: the Electronic Tribe

Assigned readings: **EWC** , ch. 4 and **EA** , chs. 10-11

  
  

Monday, March 30 (Professor Kim)

History of Japan to 1840: II

film: Japan: the Legacy of Shogun

Assigned reading: **EA** , ch. 12

  
  

Wednesday, April 1 (Professor Kim)

Japan's response to the West

Assigned reading: **EA** , chs. 13, 15

  
  

Monday, April 6 (Professor Kim)

Film: Japan: the Sword and the Chrysanthemum

  
  

Wednesday, April 8 (Professor Kim)

Japanese thought and life

  
  

Monday, April 13 (Professor Kim)

Film: Japan 2000

  
  

Wednesday, April 15 (Professor Kim)

Post-World War II Japan

Assigned reading: **EA** , ch. 21

  
  

Monday, April 20 (Professor Kim)

**PAPER DUE**

Asia's newly industrialized countries

  
  

Wednesday, April 22 (Professor Kim)

Film: Big Business and the Ghost of Confucius

  
  

Monday, April 27 (Professor Kim)

Southeast Asia's emerging economies

  
  

Wednesday, April 29 (Professor Kim)

The United States and Asia

Assigned reading: **EWC** , Conclusion

  
  

**Thursday, May 7, 12:00 to 1:40**

**FINAL EXAMINATION

![](wan2.jpg) [**Now relax and visit the Beijing Museum of
Art**](http://china-window.com/beijing/tour/museum/wanshou/index.html)

