**Economics 361, George Mason University, Dr. Carrie Meyer**  
**Economic Development of Latin America**  
**Spring 2002, Ent 174 MWF 8:30-9:30AM**  
[cmeyer@gmu.edu](mailto:cmeyer@gmu.edu) , tel: 703-993-1143,  
webpage: //mason.gmu.edu/~cmeyer/  
Office Hours 9:30-10:30 MWF

**Course Goals:**

By the end of the semester students should be familiar with the economic
history and institutions of Latin America and key development issues such as
industrialization, inflation, trade, privatization, foreign investment, the
agricultural sector. The course will approach topics from the perspectives of
both economic history and development theory, with an eye toward the
institutions and cultural norms specific to Latin America.

**Skill requirements and prerequisites:**

Economics 103 and 104 are prerequisites to the course, but economics majors
may also want to complete their intermediate theory courses before taking this
course.  Students from outside of economics who have more background in Latin
America may take get permission to take the course without the prerequisites.
.

All students should have an email account.  Accounts are available to all GMU
students.  Email is the best way to contact your instructor.

Familiarity with the World Wide Web will also be necessary to complete the
course -- particularly to conduct research for the term paper.  The
professor's webpage contains links to assist you in that research. (See term
paper below.)

**Required Texts:**

Cardosa, Eliana and Ann Helwege. _Latin America's Economy: Diversity, Trends,
and Conflicts_. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1995. (paper)

Franko, Patrice. _The Puzzle of Latin American Economic Development_. Rowman
and Littlefield, 1999.   (paper)  
    


**Course Requirements:**

2 Midterms @ 20% each, Essay type  
Final @ 30% Essay type  
Paper @ 20% 10-15 typed pages of text.  
Participation 10%

We will have 2 in-class midterms and the final will be held at the regularly
scheduled time.

**Term Paper (10-15 pages, 2500 words of text minimum):**

For the term paper you should choose a country in Latin America and a
particular issue to study for that country; for example: "Privatization in
Brazil," "The Agricultural Sector in Mexico," "Trade Policies in Chile,"
"Inflation in Argentina," "Capital Markets in Chile," "Stabilization
experience in Bolivia," "Mexico and NAFTA," "The Role of Oil in the Venezuelan
Economy," "The Steel Industry in Brazil."

The paper must include relevant background on the country as well as economic
history of the issue you are studying. If your topic is trade - review the
history of trade; if your topic is inflation - review the financial history;
etc. Additionally, you must find a recent newspaper or magazine article (dated
after the beginning of the semester) that relates to your country and topic in
some way. See _Wall Street Journal, Christian Science Monitor, New York Times,
The Economist, U.S. News and World Report_ , or LANIC on the Web for articles
by country.  Integrate the article into your report and **turn the article in
with the paper**.

Wiarda and Cline (on reserve) is a collection of country studies. Although
they focus on politics, check the references for good historical sources. For-
up-to date information on your country, check the links on my homepage. In
particular the Economist Intelligence Unit should be very useful. Many other
useful links are included on my homepage.  Your textbooks and the books
recommended on the syllabus should also be useful sources.

Your paper should include an introduction that indicates where the paper is
going and a conclusion that summarizes major points. Please try to make your
paper well organized and clear. Graphs and tables may be included in the 10-15
pages, but you need at least 2500 words of text.

The paper should also include a title page and an outline in pre-text matter.
(Please staple or clip your paper in the upper left hand corner. _Please don't
use plastic covers or folders._

Proper referencing will be an important criteria for your grade.  **You must
cite your sources throughout your paper with the author, copyright date and
page number, for example: (Baer 1989: 120-24).** You must also include a list
of references at the end in alphabetical order. The Chicago Manual of Style is
a good standard to follow -- and available on line.  See:
http://wac.gmu.edu/students/style.html.  When you quote directly from your
source the quotation must appear in quotation marks with the page number
indicated.  Whenever you are paraphrasing and use more than 6-8 words in a row
identical to your referenced author you should be using quotation marks. When
you paraphrase an authors words and ideas you should, whether or not you are
citing specific facts, cite the author.

A proposal for your paper in the form of a brief outline must be submitted
immediately following spring break. I will OK this and/or make comments and
return it to you. **Please save this proposal, with my comments and resubmit
it with your final paper.** Your paper topic must be approved.

Papers are due on or before the last day of class.

**Class Participation**

You are expected to keep up with the reading and participate in discussions.
There may also be some optional student presentations. The participation grade
is not necessarily related to how much you talk in class. However, relevant
questions, constructive comments, and alternative points of view are
appreciated -- so is attendance and reflections relating readings to class
discussion.

**Topics**

1\. Latin America in the World Economy: An Overview  
    Cardoso and Helwege Ch1; Franko Ch1, Meyer (on reserve), pp. 17-24

2\. What is Development?  Measuring Development and Theories of Development  
    Cardoso and Helwege Ch3; Franko Ch1

3\. Historical Roots  
    Cardoso and Helwege Ch2; Franko Ch2

4\. International Trade and Development in Latin America  
    Franko Ch 3 pp 52-55; Ch8, pp. 212-215, Todaro Ch12

5\. Import Substitution Industrialization and State Enterprise  
    Cardoso and Helwege Ch4, Sections 1-5; Franko Ch3

6\. The Debt Crisis and Muddling Through  
    Cardoso and Helwege Chs5, 7, Franko, Ch4

7\. International Finance and Inflation Theory  
    Cardoso and Helwege Chs 6; Franko, Ch5

8\. The Liberalization of Trade and Export Promotion  
    Franko Ch8 

9\. Privatization, Deregulation, and Globalization  
    Franko Ch 6, Ch7; Webpage: Economic Globalization in Latin America

10\. The Mexican Crisis of 1994  
    Franko, Ch7

11.  Poverty and Inequality, Social Indicators   
    Cardoso and Helwege Ch 9, Franko Ch 11; Webpage: Globalization & Inequality in Latin America

12\. Agriculture, Rural Development and Agrarian Reform  
    Cardoso and Helwege Ch10 (Land Reform);  Franko Ch10   
    


**Additional Useful Texts:**

**General**

Edwards, Sebastian.  _Crisis and Reform in Latin America_ , Oxford, 1995.

Meyer, Carrie.  _The Economics and Politics of NGOs in Latin America_. 1999.
**(on reserve)**

Todaro, Michael. _Economics Development._ **(on reserve)**

Meier, Gerald. _Leading Issues in Economic Development._

Bauer, P. T. _Dissent on Development_ (Harvard, 1979).

Lewis, Oscar. _Five Families._ Harper  & Row (paper)

**Latin America - Economic History**

Bulmer-Thomas. _Economic History of Latin America,_ Cambridge U. Press, 1994
ISBN: 0-521-368723

Thorp, Rosemary. _Progress, Poverty and Exclusion: An Economic History of
Latin America in the 20th Century_ , Johns Hopkins Press for the IDB, 1998\.

Furtado, Celso. _Economic Development of Latin America._

Frank, Andre Gunder, _Capitalism and Underdevelopment of Latin America_
Cambridge, 1970.

Glade, William P. _The Latin American Economies_

**Country Studies**

Wiarda, Howard J. and Harvey F. Kline. Latin American Politics and
Development, Westview, 1990. ( **on reserve** )

_Economic and Social Progress in Latin America, Yearly Report._   IDB, Johns
Hopkins U. Press.

Baer, Werner. _The Brazilian Economy: Growth and Development_ 3rd ed. Praeger,
1989. (paper) **(on reserve)**

**Informal Sector**

DeSoto, Hernando. _The Other Path_ 1989.

Portes, Alejandro; M. Castells; and L. Benton. _The Informal Economy._
Baltimore, Johns Hopkins, 1989.

**Macro Policy- Stabilization**

Dornbusch, Rudiger and Helmers, F. L. _The Open Economy: Tools for
Policymakers in Developing Countries_ (The World Bank with Oxford University
Press, 1988).

McKinnon, _Money and Capital in Economic Development_

Nazmi, Nader _Economic policy and stabilization in Latin America,_ 1996\.

Sachs, Jeffrey. _Developing Country Debt and the World Economy_

**Trade**

Grinspun, Ricardo and Maxwell Cameron. _The Political Economy of the North
American Free Trade._ St Martin's press 1993.

Bhagwati, Jagdish. _Protectionism_. MIT press, 1989.

Krueger, Anne O. _Trade and Employment in Developing Countries: Synthesis and
Conclusions._ U. of Chicago, 1983.

**Agricultural Development**

Eicher, Carl K. and Staatz, John M. _Agricultural Development in the Third
World_. 2nd edition, Johns Hopkins U. Press, 1990.

Meyer, Carrie A. _Land Reform in Latin America_ , Praeger, 1989.

Ruttan, Vernon. _Why Food Aid?_ Johns Hopkin's paperback, 1993.

Schultz, T.W., _Transforming Traditional Agriculture_

**Environment and Natural Resources**

Maguire and Brown, _Bordering on Trouble_ , Adler and Adler for WRI, 1986.

Meyer, Carrie A. _Environmental and Natural Resource Accounting: Where to
Begin?_ Washington, D.C.: World Resources Institute, 1993.

Panayotou, Theodore, _Green Markets: The Economics of Sustainable Development_
, 1993.

World Bank. _World Development Report 1992: Development and the Environment._
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 1992.

**Foreign Aid**

Cassen, Robert.  1994.  _Does Aid Work?_ 2nd Edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Meyer, Carrie A. _The Economics and Politics of NGOs in Latin America_.
Westport, CN: Praeger, 1999.  
    


