The World Lecture Hall

# The World Lecture Hall

This page of UT Austin Web Central contains links to pages created by faculty
worldwide who are using the Web to deliver class materials. For example, you
will find course syllabi, assignments, lecture notes, exams, class calendars,
multimedia textbooks, etc.

Here's a form to [add your materials.](/world/lecture/forms/addcourse.html) To
keep up with changes to the World Lecture Hall, check [What's
New](/world/lecture/new/) regularly.

* * *

## Contents

  1. Accounting
  2. Agricultural Engineering
  3. Anatomy
  4. Anthropology
  5. Archaeology
  6. Architecture
  7. Art and Art History
  8. Astronomy
  9. Biochemistry
  10. Biology and Botany
  11. Biomedical Engineering
  12. Chemical Engineering
  13. Chemistry
  14. Civil Engineering
  15. Communication
  16. Computer Science
  17. Cultural Studies
  18. Economics
  19. Education
  20. Electrical and Computer Engineering
  21. English and Technical Writing
  22. Finance
  23. Geology
  24. Geography
  25. History
  26. Humanities
  27. Journalism
  28. Language
  29. Library and Information Science
  30. Management
  31. Management Information Systems
  32. Marketing
  33. Mathematics
  34. Medicine
  35. Microbiology
  36. Music
  37. Neuroscience
  38. Nuclear Engineering and Engineering Physics
  39. Physics
  40. Psychology
  41. Political Science
  42. Religious Studies
  43. Sociology
  44. Statistics
  45. Virology 

* * *

## Accounting

#### [ Accounting Information
Systems](http://cscmosaic.albany.edu/~gangolly/a681s93s.html)

> Principles of systems analysis and design as related to accounting
information systems. A basic discussion of the various methodologies for the
development of accounting information systems. Description of information
systems and their components. Elements of PROLOG programming language and its
use in systems analysis and design. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes,
assignments. By Jagdish S. Gangolly, State University of New York at Albany.

#### [ Advanced
Accounting](http://www.mcl.ucsb.edu/classes/econ139/139home.html)

> Course information, readings, projects, lecture notes, exams, and resouces.
By Glenn Owen, UC Santa Barbara.

#### [ Cost Accounting](http://darkwing.uoregon.edu:80/~nfargher/)

> Contains syllabus, notes, and examples Accounting. By Neil Fargher,
University of Oregon at Eugene.

#### [ Intermediate Accounting
I](http://www.mcl.ucsb.edu/classes/econ136a/136ahome.html)

> Course information, readings, projects, lecture notes, exams, and resouces.
By Glenn Owen, UC Santa Barbara.

#### [ Intermediate Accounting
II](http://www.mcl.ucsb.edu/classes/econ136b/136bhome.html)

> Course information, readings, projects, lecture notes, exams, and resouces.
By Glenn Owen, UC Santa Barbara.

#### [ Introduction to Management
Accounting](http://www.biz.uiowa.edu/class/6A002/)

> Introduction to the concepts and practices underlying firms' internal
management accounting information systems. The course emphasizes a user
perspective. Syllabus, lecture notes, assignments, and links to related
materials. By Joyce Berg, University of Iowa.

#### [ Introductory Management
Accounting](http://www.abdn.ac.uk/~acc025/ma1notes1.html)

> Course notes, syllabus, assigments, tutorial groups, etc. By Alan Sangster,
Aberdeen University.

#### [ Managerial Cost
Accounting](http://spot.colorado.edu/~selto/acct3320.html)

> Second course in managerial (or cost) accounting that uses activity-based
management as an organizing theme. Focus is on supporting strategic decision
making, though financial reporting issues are covered. Requires significant
group work, presentations, and written analyses of cases and issues. Class
PowerPoint presentations, exams, and supplements available via FTP. Syllabus,
calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, and links to related materials.
By Frank H. Selto, University of Colorado at Boulder.

#### [ Seminar in Accounting Information
Systems](http://cscmosaic.albany.edu/~gangolly/a507s95s.html)

> Systems analysis and design as related to accounting information systems.
Systems Development Life Cycle. Description of systems in terms of their
structure, function, behavior and data. Use of Computer Aided Software
Engineering tools in design. A very brief introduction to Object-Oriented
Systems Analysis and design. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, and links to
related materials. By Jagdish S. Gangolly, State University of New York at
Albany.

* * *

## Agricultural Engineering

#### [ Soil and Water Conservation
Management](http://pasture.ecn.purdue.edu/agen521/)

> Designed for seniors and graduate students in a science-based curriculum,
this course emphasizes analytical methods to plan how to utilize soil and
water resources in an environmentally responsible manner. Calculus is not
required. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, and links to related
materials. By Larry F. Huggins, Purdue University.

* * *

## Anatomy

#### [ Anatomy Teaching
Modules](http://www.rad.washington.edu/AnatomyModuleList.html)

> Currently contains the normal knee and the normal distal thigh. By Michael
L. Richardson, University of Washington Department of Radiology.

#### [ Human Anatomy](http://www.cc.emory.edu/ANATOMY/EMORY.CLASS.MENU.HTML)

> Course schedule, format, objectives, and other materials. By various
faculty, Emory University.

* * *

## Anthropology

#### [ Social
Anthropology](http://spirit.lib.uconn.edu/ArchNet/Topical/Educat/anth220/anth01.htm)

> Contains course abstract, exam schedules, and a weekly outline. By Jonathan
M. Lizee, University of Connecticut.

* * *

## Archaeology

#### [ GIS in
Archaeology](http://abacus.bates.edu/~nsmith/Curricular/curric_intro.html)

> Contains course syllabus, requirements, exam schedule, and list of readings.
By Neel Smith, Bowdoin College.

* * *

## Architecture

#### [ Building Systems
I](http://www.cc.columbia.edu/courses/a4125y/a4125-top.html)

> Course syllabus, homework assignments, slides, and essays. By Anthony
Webster, Columbia University.

#### [ Digital Communities: Urban Planning and Design in
Cyberspace](http://alberti.mit.edu/arch/4.207/homepage.html)

> Schedule, assignments, lecture notes, student work, and links to related
materials. By William J. Mitchell and Mitchell Kapor, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.

#### [ Enclosures and Environments
I](http://www.cc.columbia.edu/courses/a4220y/a4220-top.html)

> Course syllabus. By Anthony Webster and Jackie Welch, Columbia University.

#### [ Introduction to Computer-Aided
Design](http://www.arch.columbia.edu/DDL/cad/A4535/info.html)

> An Introduction to 3-D CAD using Macintosh-based software, with emphasis on
rendering, digital image processing, and electronic publication on the Web.
Syllabus, assignments, student work, and links to related materials. By Eden
Greig Muir & Rory O'Neill, Columbia University.

#### [ Introduction to the History, Theory and Design of
Structures](http://darkwing.uoregon.edu:80/~struct/courseware/461/461_index.html)

> Investigates basic structural behaviour, simple structures, and how an
understanding of basic structural behaviour can be utilized in architectural
design. Syllabus, lecture notes, assignments. By Chris H. Luebkeman and Donald
Peting, University of Oregon.

#### [ Renaissance and Baroque
Architecture](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/dic/colls/arh102/index.html)

> The architecture of Italy in the 15th, 16th, and 17th centuries. Loads of
excellent images from scanned slides taken by the instructor. By C. W.
Westfall, University of Virginia.

#### [ The Text of the City](http://mirror.syr.edu/analcity.html)

> An analysis of space, form, and information in the city. Syllabus, class
calendar, lecture notes, assignments, student work, and links to related
materials. By Timothy Swischuk, Syracuse University.

* * *

## Art and Art History

#### [ Art in the Age of Digital
Dissemination](http://info.cern.ch/hypertext/DataSources/bySubject/Litterature/art_in_the_age.html)

> Class essays of students enrolled in a Fine Arts course taught at the
University of Victoria.

#### [ Commentary on
Art](http://salazar.aa.psu.edu/courses/art122w/122WHomepage.html)

> An introduction to writing about art. Assignments, readings, and other
information. By Jerrold Maddox, Penn State Univerity.

#### [ Mosaic and Art
211](http://www.princeton.edu/~lieske/art211/art211-help.html)

> Lots of screen shots and a thorough tutorial on using Mac Mosaic to study
art. By Jay Lieske, Princeton University.

#### [ Visual Information in Art](http://psych.hanover.edu/Krantz/art/)

> Tutorial to demonstrate how visual information is used in art. By John H.
Krantz, Hanover College.

* * *

## Astronomy

#### [ Astronomy 1](http://mcl.mcl.ucsb.edu/classes/astro1/astro1_home.html)

> Course syllabus, assignments and solutions, and a movie. By Roger Freedman,
University of California at Santa Barbara.

#### [ Astronomy](http://www.phy.utulsa.edu/)

> A survey course in Astronomy for non-science majors. Syllabus, class
calendar, assignments, and links to related materials. By Dr Brian Monson, the
University of Tulsa.

#### [ Astronomy HyperText Animation
Resource](http://zebu.uoregon.edu/text.html)

> Resource that attempts to animate several key concepts in astronomy.
Animation is done in MPEG and there is sound narration. Lecture notes. By The
Web, University of Oregon.

* * *

## Biochemistry

#### [ Medical Biochemistry](http://ubu.hahnemann.edu/Heme-
Iron/NetWelcome.html)

> Currently contains a section on heme and iron. By James Baggot, Hahnemann
University School of Medicine and Sharon E. Dennis, University of Utah.

#### [ Scatchard Plot (Interactive
Simulation)](http://131.183.61.190/eqDial/Intro)

> An interactive simulation of an important classical experiment in
immunology. Lecture notes and assignments. By Charles Creutz, University of
Toledo.

* * *

## Biology and Botany

#### [ Botany](http://130.17.2.215/)

> Collection of pointers to biology-related Web and Gopher servers. By Steve
Wolf, California State University Stanislaus.

#### [ Cell Biology and Histology Laboratory
Manual](http://www.cc.emory.edu/EMORY_CLASS/CELL_BIOLOGY/CBH.html)

> Laboratory exercises and slides on the digestive tract, connective tissue,
muscles, the circulatory system, and more From Emory University.

#### [ Principles of Protein Structure](http://www.cryst.bbk.ac.uk/PPS/)

> It is multimedia, with several new technologies for communicating molecular
information and running a hypercourse. Syllabus, lecture notes, assignments,
student work, and links to related materials. Coordinated by Peter Murray-Rust
and Alan Mills, Globewide Network Academy and Birkbeck College, London, UK.

#### [ Taxonomy of Flowering
Plants](http://www.isc.tamu.edu/FLORA/tfphome1.html)

> Introduction to flowering plant systematics. Information online includes
base course data, student information, exam keys, and a developing base of
tutorials for both lecture and laboratory. Links are provided for access to
plant biodiversity data available on the Web. The system carries an evolving
suite of Web pages representing experimental efforts to present information
relevant to course objectives. By Hugh D. Wilson, Texas A&M; University.

* * *

## Biomedical Engineering

#### [ Biomedical Engineering
Applications](http://www2.ncsu.edu/bae/courses/bae465/home_page.html)

> Course description, syllabus, and links to student projects that utilize
links to medical images and movies. By Susan M. Blanchard, North Carolina
State University.

* * *

## Chemical Engineering

#### [ Over a dozen classes](http://www.che.ufl.edu/courses/che-
undergrad.html)

> Links to over a dozen classes, including Elements of Chemical Engineering,
Reactor Dynamics and Design, and Process Design. Course pages can list credits
and prerequisites and contain course outline, assignments, projects, problems,
and more. By the Chemical Engineering Department, University of Florida.

#### [ Several classes](http://www.nd.edu/Courses/kantor/index.html)

> Links to several classes, including Computer Methods for Chemical Engineers
and Process Control. Course pages can contain the course syllabus, office
hours, class notes, a clickable calendar of assignment due dates, exam
solutions, and more. By Jeffrey Kantor, University of Notre Dame.

* * *

## Chemistry

#### [ Chemistry in Context](http://www.inform.umd.edu/UofMd-
System_and_State_of_Maryland/UMD-
Projects/MCTP/Courses/PhysicalScience/Chem121HomePage.html

)

> Introductory Chemistry for non-science majors, taught with a
"constructivist" flavor, as part of the Maryland Collaborative for Teacher
Preparation. Syllabus, calendar, assignments, exams,. By T. C. O'Haver, U. of
Maryland at College Park.

#### [ General, Organic and Biochemistry](http://odin.chemistry.uakron.edu)

> Freshman-level introduction to General, Organic and Biochemistry for Nursing
students. Syllabus, chapter overviews and copies of the lecture slides. By
James K. Hardy, The University of Akron.

#### [ Organic Chemistry Laboratory](http://www-
unix.umbc.edu/~perks/course351l/)

> Syllabus, policies, previous exams, and links to chemistry resources. By H.
Mark Perks, University of Maryland, Baltimore County

#### [ Several classes](http://www.chem.vt.edu/chem-ed/vt-chem-ed.html)

> Resources for undergraduates studies of analytical, physical, and organic
chemistry. Includes course syllabi, calendars, lecture notes, and lab manuals.
By Brian Tissue and others, Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University,
Blacksburg.

* * *

## Civil Engineering

#### [ Engineering Hydrology](http://grumpy.usu.edu/~FALALL/cee343.html)

> Introduction to hydrology. Quantitative aspects of processes relating to
precipitation, runoff and groundwater flow are reviewed with simple
applications to water resource problems. The emphasis is on the basic
scientific aspects, rather than on design. Syllabus, calendar, assignments,
and links to related materials. By Upmanu Lall, Utah State University.

#### [ Project Management and
Economics](http://mosaic.ce.utexas.edu/docs/personalpages/haas/ARE323K/ARE323K.html)

> Students are acquainted with the principles of engineering economics and
construction management. Syllabus, homework assignments, exams, and lecture
notes. By Carl Haas, University of Texas at Austin.

#### [ Structural
Engineering](http://www.lafayette.edu/kayserj/structures.html)

> Compilation of syllabi and homework assignments for undergraduate classes
related to structural engineering. By Jack Kayser, Lafayette College.

* * *

## Communication

#### [ Communication Technology and
Society](http://actlab.rtf.utexas.edu/~aviva/rtf309.html)

> Course syllabus. By Aviva Rosenstein, University of Texas at Austin.

#### [ Computer-Mediated
Communication](http://www.rpi.edu/Internet/Guides/decemj/course/cmc.html)

> Study of the nature of computer-mediated communication, focusing on its
social aspects. Includes links to course syllabus, online [Internet Web
Text](http://www.rpi.edu/Internet/Guides/decemj/text.html), and practicum
lessons. By Teresa Harrison, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.

* * *

## Computer Science

#### [ Accelerated Computer Science
II](http://www.cs.montana.edu/~starkey/254.html)

> A laboratory-based accelerated introduction to Computer Science for students
with degrees in other disciplines. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes,
assignments, exams, student work, and links to related materials. By Denbigh
Starkey and Ray Babcock, Montana State University.

#### [ Advanced Object
Technology](http://repository.gmu.edu:80/bcox/LRNG731/00LRNG731.html)

> Syllabus, readings, By Brad Cox, George Mason University.

#### [ Algorithms and Data
Structures](http://www.cec.wustl.edu/~cs241/home.html)

> Course overview, schedule, quizzes, assignments, and study guides. By Diana
Moore, Washington University.

#### [ Computer Applications for the Liberal
Arts](http://milkman.cac.psu.edu/~santoro/la283.html)

> Course description, readings, pictures, programs, and other materials. By
Gerry Santoro, Pennsylvania State University.

#### [ Computer
Graphics](http://www.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/local_interest/class_info/)

> Links to several computer graphics classes. Materials can include syllabus,
grading policies, and assignments. By various professors, University of
Calgary.

#### [ Computer Science: A Liberal Arts
Approach](http://ei.cs.vt.edu/~masc1044/MaSc1044TOC.html)

> Syllabus, calendar, and assignments. By Mary Beth Rosson and John A. N. Lee,
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University.

#### [ Computer Systems
Verification](http://lal.cs.byu.edu/cs501/homepage.html)

> Class policies, syllabus, assignments, lecture notes, and more. By Phil
Windley, Brigham Young University.

#### [ Computers, Ethics, and Society](http://icg.stwing.upenn.edu/cis590/)

> Readings, class notes, links to related materials. University of
Pennsylvania.

#### [ Concepts of Programming
Languages](http://lal.cs.byu.edu/cs330/homepage.html)

> Class policies, syllabus, assignments, lecture notes, and much more. By Phil
Windley and Paul Black, Brigham Young University.

#### [ CS Seminar](http://www.cs.montana.edu/~starkey/500.html)

> A 1-credit seminar course that all CS graduate students must take at least
once. Weekly presentations by students, faculty, or outside speakers.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, student work. By
Denbigh Starkey, Montana State University.

#### [ Digital Image Processing (DIP) with Khoros
2.0](http://www.khoros.unm.edu/dip/html/dip.html)

> Hands-on approach to Image Processing through an extensive number of
experiments. Syllabus, outline, and more. By Ramiro Jordan and Roberto de
Alencar Lotufo, University of New Mexico.

#### [ Ethics and Law on the Electronic Frontier](http://www-
swiss.ai.mit.edu/6095)

> Syllabus, assignments, class notes, student work. By Hal Abelson,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

#### [ Graphics and Scientific
Visualization](http://www.cs.montana.edu/~starkey/525.html)

> A second, graduate-level, course in computer graphics taught in seminar
format. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, student work,
and links to related materials. By Denbigh Starkey and Ray Babcock, Montana
State University.

#### [ Introduction to Computer Graphics](http://www.cgl.uwaterloo.ca/~cs488/)

> Introduces students to interactive 3-D computer graphics with OpenGL. The
course concludes with an individual project. Syllabus, calendar, lecture
notes, assignments, past exams, gallery of past projects, and links to other
materials. By Michael D. McCool, University of Waterloo.

#### [ Introduction to Computers and
Computing](http://cs.indiana.edu/classes/a106/a106.home.html)

> Syllabus, grades, and other course materials, including the complete text to
Bruce Sterlings's [_The Hacker
Crackdown_](http://www.scrg.cs.tcd.ie/scrg/u/bos/hacker/hacker.html). By Bill
Dueber, Indiana University.

#### [ Introduction to FORTRAN for
Engineers](http://phoenix.csc.calpoly.edu/~dbutler/csc251/csc251.html)

> Course description, objective, outline, and assignments. By Dennis W.
Butler, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo.

#### [ Introduction to Object-Oriented
Programming](http://cs.indiana.edu/classes/c304/oop-intro.html)

> Introductory information, example files, discussions of Makefiles, and
pointers to additional resources. By Michael Chui, Indiana University.

#### [ Lisp programming (Common Lisp) for Artificial
Intelligence](http://kmi.open.ac.uk/courses/dmzx863.html)

> A 100-hour distance education introduction to this popular AI programming
language. Registrants accepted from anywhere on the Internet. Syllabus and
links to related materials. By Marc Eisenstadt, The Open University, UK.

#### [ Macintosh Computer
Applications](http://phoenix.csc.calpoly.edu/~dbutler/csc113/csc113.html)

> Course description, objective, and outline. By Dennis W. Butler, California
Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo.

#### [ Mobile Computing and
Intelligence](http://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/joshi/courses/mobile/info.html)

> Introduction to mobile computing and the use of intelligent agents.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, student work, and links to
related materials. By Anupam Joshi, Purdue University.

#### [ Operating Systems](http://www.comp.vuw.ac.nz/Courses/305/)

> A first course in operating systems for computer science majors. Syllabus,
calendar, lecture notes, assignments. By John H. Hine, Victoria University of
Wellington.

#### [ Operating Systems Organization](http://www.cec.wustl.edu/~cs422/)

> Course syllabus, assignments, lecture slides, and other handouts. By Douglas
C. Schmidt, Washington University.

#### [ Proficient use of the World-Wide
Web](http://www.cs.purdue.edu/homes/vanecek/cs490w/homepage.html)

> Learn about the Web, servers, Perl, and server administration. Syllabus,
lecture notes, and more. By George Vanecek, Jr and Buster Dunsmore, Purdue
University.

#### [ Prolog programming for Artificial
Intelligence](http://kmi.open.ac.uk/courses/dmzx862.html)

> Syllabus and links to related materials. "Intensive Prolog" is a 100-hour
distance education intro to this popular AI programming language. Registrants
accepted from anywhere on the Internet. By Marc Eisenstadt, The Open
University, UK.

#### [ Professionalism in Computing](http://ei.cs.vt.edu/~cs3604/fall.94/)

> Effects of computers on society. Syllabus, calendar, assignments, and
lecture notes. By John A. N. Lee, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University.

#### [ Software Engineering
I](http://phoenix.csc.calpoly.edu/~dbutler/csc440/policy/policy.html)

> Course description, objective, outline, and assignments. By Dennis W.
Butler, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo.

#### [ Software Engineering
II](http://phoenix.csc.calpoly.edu/~dbutler/csc441/csc441.html)

> Course descriptions, objectives, outlines, and assignments. By Dennis W.
Butler, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo.

#### [ Systems Analysis and
Design](http://www.cba.uh.edu/inetcrse/disc4370/disc4370.html)

> Course syllabus, schedule, and readings. This course is taught primarily via
the Web. Classroom attendance is required only for exams. By Michael Walters,
University of Houston.

#### [ Translation of Computer
Languages](http://www.cec.wustl.edu/~cs431/home.html)

> Course overview, schedule, quizzes, and assignments. By Laura McCarthy,
Washington University.

#### [ List of classes](http://www.cs.purdue.edu/courses.html)

> List of all Computer Science classes, some with links to a course syllabus.
Syllabus can include course description, grading policy, assignments, and
texts. By various professors at Purdue University.

#### [ Several classes](http://www.cs.ucdavis.edu/online_courses.html)

> Links to several classes, including Data Structures and Programming,
Computer Architecture, and Computer Graphics. Course pages can include class
schedule, texts and readings, grades, policies, projects, and lecture notes.
Some [Class notes](http://www.cs.ucdavis.edu/peoples_stuff/index.html) are
published separately. By various professors, University of California, Davis.

#### [ Over 25 classes](http://www.cs.unc.edu/syllabi.html)

> Course syllabi to over 25 classes. A syllabus usually contains course goals,
prerequisites, readings, and a course outline of topics to be covered. From
the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.

#### [ Various Courses](http://das-www.harvard.edu/courses.html)

> Links to several classes, including Great Ideas in Computer Science,
Networks, A Systems Approach, Advanced Computer Architecture, By various
professors, Harvard University.

#### [ Various classes](http://www.cs.cmu.edu:8001/Web/classes.html)

> Links to several classes, including Introduction to Artificial Intelligence,
Computer Graphics, Introduction to Parallel Computer Architecture, and
Programming Languages. Materials can include syllabus, class notes and
handouts, and assignments. By various professors, Carnegie Mellon University.

#### [ Various classes](http://www.cm.cf.ac.uk:/Teaching/)

> Links of several classes, including C, X Windows, Image Processing, and
Computer Graphics. Materials include searchable course notes, program
listings, and more. By various professors, University of Cardiff, Wales, UK.

* * *

## Cultural Studies

#### [ Youth Music/Youth
Culture](http://www.drake.edu/univannounce/thomas/honors123.html)

> Includes course description, syllabus, bibliography, and links to related
materials. By Thomas Swiss, English Department, Drake University.

* * *

## Economics

#### [ Economic, Social, and Legal
Environment](http://www.vanderbilt.edu/Owen/froeb/mgt352/mgt352.html)

> An applied microeconomics class that covers regulation, antitrust, and the
law. Syllabus, lecture notes, assignments. By Luke Froeb, Owen School of
Managment, Vanderbilt.

#### [ Intermediate Macroeconomics](http://bobbyorr.gsia.cmu.edu/macro/)

> Understanding the global economy, with special emphasis on the impact of
international macroeconomic developments on financial markets and business.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, and links to related
materials. By Stanley E. Zin, Carnegie Mellon University.

#### [ Introduction to Economic Analysis](http://www.uakron.edu/econ/e244/)

> Covers both microeconomics and macroeconomics. The concentration is on
analysis. Students are primarily in engineering, mathematics and computer
science. Syllabus, lecture notes, and links to related materials. By Dr.
Steven C. Myers, The University of Akron.

#### [ Introductory Econometrics](http://qed.econ.queensu.ca/pub/econ351/)

> Develops tools for analyzing economic data and for estimating and properly
interpreting econometric models. Interactive computer tutorials designed for
undergraduate econometrics help teach both the software pacakage and the
statistical methods. By Christopher Ferrall, Queen's University.

* * *

## Education

#### [ Educational Policy Advocacy](http://www.ilstu.edu/depts/coe/eaf228.htm)

> A doctoral course that satisfies a social foundations requirement for
educational administration majors. Computer slideshows, assignments, grading
policies, course objectives, and schedules. By Rodney P. Riegle, Illinois
State University.

#### [ Resources for
Teaching](http://www.usca.scarolina.edu/academic/AEDC442.html)

> An undergraduate course introducing computer applications in the classroom.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, and links to related
materials. By Thomas J. C. Smyth, University of South Carolina - Aiken.

#### [ Social Foundations of
Education](http://www.ilstu.edu/depts/coe/eaf228.htm)

> An undergraduate course for teacher education majors. Computer slideshows,
assignments, grading policies, course objectives, and schedules. By Rodney P.
Riegle, Illinois State University.

* * *

## Electrical and Computer Engineering

#### [ Digital Filters](http://www-
mddsp.enel.ucalgary.ca/People/bruton/enel593/dfilters.html)

> Complete set of laboratory material and class problems. By Len Bruton, The
University of Calgary.

#### [ Digital Logic
Design](http://tempest.ecn.purdue.edu:8001/~taylor/ee266/)

> A sophomore-level introduction to digital logic design with an emphasis on
practical design techniques and circuit implementations. Lecture notes,
assignments, and exams. By Chris Taylor, Purdue University.

#### [ Practical Software
Engineering](http://nyquist.ee.ualberta.ca/~wjoerg/SE/)

> Covers the classic elements of a life cycle and techniques common in
industry. The top layers of the electronic course notes are used for
presentation in lectures. The remainder is for exploration and review by
students. Lab activities are coordinated through the Feedback area. Syllabus,
calendar, lecture notes, assignments, and links to related materials. By
Werner B. Joerg, University of Alberta.

* * *

## English

#### [ American Literature: Crane through
Present](http://www.ucet.ufl.edu/~beavis/1303.html)

> This class is an experiment. We will be reading various texts--poems, short
stories, novels, films--and trying to generate ideas from these texts.
Syllabus, calendar, and assignments. By David Russell, University of Florida.

#### [ American Literature
Survey](http://www.en.utexas.edu/~daniel/amlit/amlit.html)

> An American Literature Survey Site featuring interactive online texts,
student discussions, analyses and projects. Syllabus, calendar, student work,
and links to related materials. By Daniel Anderson, University of Texas at
Austin.

#### [ Computer-Assisted
Composition](http://www.en.utexas.edu/~daniel/syllabus/syl.html)

> Course syllabus, assignments, transcripts of online discussions, weekly
class summaries, and student work. By Daniel Anderson and students, University
of Texas at Austin.

#### [ English Composition
II](http://mosquito.frcc.cccoes.edu/faculty/cgermann/www/homepage.html)

> Emphasizes critical/logical thinking and reading, problem definition,
research strategies, and writing analytical, evaluative, and/or persuasive
papers that incorporate research. Syllabus, calendar, and student work. By Dr.
Clark Germann, Front Range Community College.

#### [ Introduction to
Poetry](http://www.cc.emory.edu/ENGLISH/Handbook/Handbook.html)

> A handbook of terms for discussing poetry. Covers figurative language,
rhythm and meter, and other topics. By Harry Rusche and students, Emory
University.

#### [ Shakespeare
Illustrated](http://www.cc.emory.edu/ENGLISH/Shakespeare_Illustrated/Introduction.html)

> Illustrations and explanations of scenes from Shakespeare's plays. By Harry
Rusche, Emory University.

#### [ Writing About Literature](http://www.ucet.ufl.edu/~bruegg/3762.html)

> Working both with hypertext and a MOO, students experiment develop their own
writing as models of literary texts. Syllabus, calendar, assignments, student
work. By Bill Ruegg, University of Florida.

#### [ Writing About Modern Technology](http://uu-gna.mit.edu:8001/uu-
gna/text/wamt/wamt.html)

> An introductory, college-level technical-writing course taught over the
Internet, using an online textbook, E-mail, and a LISTSERV classroom.
Syllabus, calendar, assignments, and links to related materials. By David A.
McMurrey, Austin Community College.

#### [ Writing the Information
Superhighway](http://www.umich.edu/~wbutler/UC153Syl.html)

> Opportunity to explore and create the textual universe of cyberspace.
Syllabus, calendar, assignments, student work, and links to related materials.
By Wayne Butler, University of Michigan.

#### [ Writing through Media](http://www.ucet.ufl.edu/~gulmer/)

> Group self-portraits of education students. Syllabus, assignments, student
work, and links to related materials. By Gregory L. Ulmer, University of
Florida.

* * *

## Finance

#### [ Basic Financial Management](http://www.biz.uiowa.edu/class/6F100/)

> An introduction to finance that focuses on basic paradigms, such as Net
Present Value, Capital Asset Pricing Theory, and Market Efficiency taught in
the context of valuation of risky assets. Syllabus, assignments, exams,
student work, and links to related materials. By Puneet Handa, University of
Iowa.

#### [ Business Finance](http://riskweb.bus.utexas.edu/class.htm)

> Course syllabus, class schedule and handouts, sample data for assignments,
grade distribution, and pointers to various Web and Internet guides. By James
Garven, University of Texas at Austin.

####  [ Business
Finance](http://kiwiclub.bus.utexas.edu/finance/kiwiserver/fin357m/fin357m.html)

> Course syllabus, class schedule and handouts, lecture notes, assignments,
grade distribution, and more. By Richard MacMinn, University of Texas at
Austin.

#### [ Corporate
Finance](http://kiwiclub.bus.utexas.edu/finance/kiwiserver/fin374c/fin374c-syllabus.html)

> The lectures are in portable document format (pdf) and are being linked
together. Sample test questions and a formula sheet are also provided with
links to the lecture notes that are relevant. Syllabus, lecture notes, exams,
and links to related materials. By Richard MacMinn, University of Texas at
Austin.

#### [ Financial Management (Principles of
Finance)](http://www.finance.fac.marist.edu/)

> Introductory course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams,
student work, and links to related materials. By Dan Cooper, Marist College.

#### [ Investments Analysis](http://www.finance.fac.marist.edu/)

> Introductory investments course. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes,
assignments, exams, student work, and links to related materials. By Dr. Dan
Cooper, Marist Collge.

#### [ Uncertainty in Economics and
Finance](http://kiwiclub.bus.utexas.edu/uncertainty/uncertainty.html)

> This is a Ph. D. course that develops the notions of risk and risk aversion
in a financial market setting. The topics covered include portfolio theory,
corporate risk management, corporate finance, principal/agent theory, and game
theory. Syllabus, lecture notes, assignments, and links to related materials.
By Richard MacMinn, University of Texas at Austin.

* * *

## Geography

#### [ Geographer's
Craft](http://www.utexas.edu/depts/grg/gcraft/contents.html)

> An introduction to modern geographical research techniques. General
information, course schedule, lecture and discussion notes, exercises, tip
sheets, a glossary, and pointer to various resources. By Kenneth E. Foote and
staff, University of Texas at Austin.

* * *

## Geology

#### [ Submarine
Geology](http://imager.ldeo.columbia.edu/courses/subgeol/index.html)

> Course syllabus, calendar, and reading assignments. By William B. F. Ryan
and Walter C. Ptman III, Columbia University.

* * *

## History

#### [ Augustine on the
Internet](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/jod/augustine.html)

> Study of Augustine of Hippo, conducted via the Internet only. Contains a
syllabus, Augustine's _Confessions_ , and messages from participants. By James
J. O'Donnell, University of Pennsylvania.

#### [ Electric Renaissance](http://www.idbsu.edu/courses/hy309/)

> Renaissance history taught via the Web. Syllabus, class calendar, lecture
notes, assignments, and links to related materials. Class discussion is run
from a listserver. By E.L. Skip Knox, Boise State University.

#### [ The First Palaces in the
Aegean](http://rome.classics.lsa.umich.edu/11.FirstPalaces.0393.html)

> Study of appearance of Minoan palaces in Crete beginning around 2,000 B.C.
Bibliography included. By Jeremy Rutter, Dartmouth College.

* * *

## Humanities

#### [ Great Ideas](http://www.bgsu.edu/~skrause/Great_Ideas.html)

> Course description, schedule, and pointers to related-readings. By Steve
Krause, Bowling Green University.

#### [ Taming the Electronic
Frontier](http://gopher.gmu.edu/bcox/LRNG572/00LRNG572.html)

> Technical and social issues of taming the electronic frontier. Syllabus,
calendar, assignments, exams, grades, student work, and links to related
materials. By Brad Cox, George Mason University.

#### [ Narrative Matters: Introduction to
Narrative](http://www.georgetown.edu/irvinemj/english016/016.html)

> Introduction to narrative in novels and film. Links to texts ranging from
Beowulf to Neuromancer and films from Star Wars to Chinatown. We trace the
narrative form of the "quest romance" from early medieval narratives to
Frankenstein and Blade Runner. Many resources are contributed by students.
Syllabus, calendar, assignments, student work, and links to related materials.
By Martin Irvine, Georgetown University.

#### [ World Cultures to 1500](http://www.wsu.edu:8080/~dee/)

> A survey of history, ideas, and cultures from antiquity to the Italian
Renaissance. Extensive archive of texts and articles used in the course along
with student work. By Richard Hooker, Washington State University.

* * *

## Journalism

#### [ Feature Writing](/courses/tankard/j327.html)

> Course syllabus, class schedule, course requirements and other information.
By James Tankard, UT Austin.

#### [ Writing for the Mass Media](/courses/tankard/j312.html)

> Course syllabus, class schedule, course requirements and other information.
By James Tankard, UT Austin.

* * *

## Language

#### [ Hwaet! Old English in
Context](http://www.georgetown.edu/cball/hwaet/hwaet06.html)

> Learn basic Old English by reading short passages from the Old English
Corpus, with links to sound and images and an audio-visual glossary. Links to
related materials. By Catherine N. Ball, Georgetown University.

#### [ Introduction to Medieval
Latin](http://www.georgetown.edu/irvinemj/classics203/domus.html)

> Introduction to the Latin language and literature, c. 350 - c.1500. Course
involves a Web computing component and student experience in using Internet
resources. Extensive Web resources are provided, with links to many of the
resources in the Labyrinth project, a Web server for medieval studies, of
which the professor is co-director. Syllabus, calendar, assignments, student
work, and links to related materials. By Martin Irvine, Georgetown University.

#### [ Let's Learn Arabic](http://philae.sas.upenn.edu/Arabic/arabic.html)

> A map of the Middle East and ten audio lessons for learning Modern Standard
Arabic. For the serious student only, since the audio files are very large. By
Roger Allen and Adel Allouche, University of Pennsylvania. Part of [ The
Virtual Language Lab](http://philae.sas.upenn.edu/).

#### [ The French Page](http://philae.sas.upenn.edu/French/french.html)

> Over 60 slides of French history and civilization with clickable audio
captions. By Michelle Caroly-Alter, University of Pennsylvania. Part of [ The
Virtual Language Lab](http://philae.sas.upenn.edu/).

#### [ Hindi Program at Penn](http://philae.sas.upenn.edu/Hindi/hindi.html)

> Slides of Northern India with clickable audio captions. By Surendra Gambhir
and Swagata Altekar, University of Pennsylvania. Part of [ The Virtual
Language Lab](http://philae.sas.upenn.edu/).

#### [ Serbian Language
Lab](http://www.umiacs.umd.edu/research/lpv/YU/HTML/jezik.html)

> Learn and hear the Serbian alphabet and simple phrases in Serbian. From the
University of Maryland.

#### [ Travelers' Japanese](http://www.ntt.jp/japan/japanese/)

> Hear and learn basic pronunciation and phrases for travelers in Japan.
Phrases cover, asking directions, eating in restaurants, and other essential
expressions. By TAKADA Toshihiro, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone.

* * *

## Library and Information Science

#### [ Introduction to Internet Resources and
Services](http://fiat.gslis.utexas.edu/~marylynn/LIS341.html)

> Introduces students to networked options for information, research, and
communication. Course syllabus, readings, guides and handouts. By Mary Moore
and Mary Lynn Rice-Lively, University of Texas at Austin.

#### [ The Making of Digital
Libraries](http://http2.sils.umich.edu/ILS605/DLHome.html)

> Understanding the nature of digital libraries. Syllabus, course essays, and
links to related materials. By David L. Rodgers, University of Michigan.

* * *

## Mathematics

#### [ Several classes](http://www.math.clemson.edu/course_materials/)

> Links to several classes, including Advanced Engineering Mathematics and
Introduction to Numerical Analysis I. Course pages can contain a syllabus,
topic outline, projects, and information on tools to be used in class. By
various professors, Clemson University.

* * *

## Management

#### [ Economics of the
Firm](http://www.vanderbilt.edu/Owen/froeb/mgt322/mgt322.html)

> Syllabus, lecture notes, and assignments. By Luke Froeb, Vanderbilt
University.

* * *

## Management Information Systems

#### [ Business Data
Communications](http://milkman.cac.psu.edu/~aav/497sp95_syllabus.html)

> Business data communications for non-technical majors. Covers basic
technical concepts, understandings of the strategic use of telecommunication
in business, and a review of managerial issues surrounding the development and
operation of such facilities. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments,
grades, student work, and links to related materials. By Anthony A.
Verstraete, Penn State University.

#### [ Business Information
Systems](http://milkman.cac.psu.edu/~aav/204_syl.html)

> Sophmore-level introduction to basic information systems concepts. No
computer lab. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, grades,
and links to related materials. By Anthony A. Verstraete, Penn State.

#### [ Commerce on the Web](http://www.biz.uiowa.edu/class/6A170/)

> A hands-on course in which students work in groups exploring the way
businesses and communities interact on the Web, propose a design for a local
commerce Web, and begin to execute this design. Syllabus, assignments, and
links to related materials. By Joyce Berg and Puneet Handa, University of
Iowa.

#### [ Electronic Commerce](http://www.cox.smu.edu/mis/ecommcourse.html)

> Introduction to electronic commerce and the emerging global information
highway. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, student work, and
links to related materials. By Blake Ives, Southern Methodist Univeristy.

#### [ Impact of New Information Resources: Multimedia and
Networks](http://bliss.berkeley.edu/impact/main.html)

> Social impact of technology. Syllabus, assignments, student work, and links
to related materials. By Howard Bresser, University of California, Berkeley.

#### [ The Information Society](http://www.lamp.ac.uk/~ewan/InfSoc/)

> Gives students in the Arts and Humanities an understanding of the issues
which arise from the use of information technology. Syllabus, calendar,
lecture notes, assignments, exams, and links to related materials. By Ewan
Sutherland, University of Wales, Lampeter.

#### [ Introduction to Management Information
Systems](http://cac.psu.edu/~aav/301sp95_syllabus.html)

> Junior- and senior-level introduction to basic management information
systems concepts. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams,
grades, and links to related materials. By Anthony A. Verstraete, Penn State
University.

#### [ Leveraging the Information Superhighway--A Business
Perspective](http://www.site.gmu.edu/~sruth/491home.html)

> Syllabus, assignments, readings, and lecture notes. By Stephen Ruth, George
Mason University.

#### [ Management Information
Systems](http://www.gsia.cmu.edu/bb26/70-451/home.html)

> Lecture notes, assignments, exams (after the students take them), and
supplemental readings for a course that investigates the interaction of
information technology and management. By Brian Butler (bb26@andrew.cmu.edu),
Carnegie Mellon University.

#### [ Management of Information
Technology](http://www.cox.smu.edu/mis/talks/emba/index.html)

> Course syllabus, overview, and assignments. By Blake Ives, Southern
Methodist University.

#### [ Riding the Information
Superhighway](http://www.csusm.edu/public/jankowski/superhighway/syllabus.html)

> Introduction to the Information Superhighway. Students learn all of the
Internet tools, with an emphasis on their access through a graphical browser
and through a UNIX shell. The Internet then becomes a tool used to research
the technological, social, and business implications of the Superhighway.
Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments. By Dr. David Jankowski,
California State University, San Marcos.

#### [ Strategic Information Systems
Management](http://www.cs.tcd.ie/www/dalgeo/sism/sism.html)

> Provides students with a computing background with an executive perspective
on the strategic management of IS in an organisation. It does not address the
internal management of the IS function. Syllabus, calendar, assignments. By
David Algeo, The University of Dublin, Trinity College.

#### [ Systems Analysis and
Design](http://www.csusm.edu/public/jankowski/sand/syllabus.html)

> Introduction to the principles of information systems development, with an
emphasis on management's role in the development process. For business
management majors interested in MIS. Emphasis is placed on the initial stages
of the systems development life cycle. Web development (using HTML) is used to
give the students a taste for the development process. Syllabus, calendar,
lecture notes, assignments, exams. By David Jankowski, California State
University, San Marcos.

#### [ Systems Design and
Implementation](http://www.colorado.edu/infs/jcb/class/syll4130.html)

> A second-semester, undergraduate course focusing on the design and
implementation of responsive and long lasting software. Syllabus, calendar,
lecture notes, assignments, exams, and student work. By James C. Brancheau,
University of Colorado at Boulder.

#### [ Teaching MIS with
Cases](http://www.business.uwo.ca/~isworld/iscases.html)

> Information about the development, availability, and use of business cases
for teaching MIS. By Sid L. Huff, University of Western Ontario.

#### [
Telecommunications](http://www.sangamon.edu/~hadidi/MIS564syllabus.s95.html)

> Syllabus, calendar, assignments, grades, student work, and links to related
materials. By Rassule Hadidi, Sangamon State University.

#### [ Various Case Studies](http://www.cox.smu.edu/mis/cases/home.html)

> Case studies on innovation and project management, commerce on the Web, and
other topics. By various professors, Southern Methodist University.

* * *

## Marketing

#### [ New Product and Service Development in
Marketing](http://colette.ogsm.vanderbilt.edu/product.development/syllabus.html)

> Course syllabus, overview, assignments, calendar, etc. By Donna L. Hoffman,
Vanderbilt University.

#### [ Marketing
Research](http://www.vanderbilt.edu/Owen/novak/marketing.research/syllabus.html)

> Course syllabus, overview, outline, readings, etc. By Thomas P. Novak,
Vanderbilt University.

#### [ Seminar on Marketing in Computer-Mediated
Environments](http://www.vanderbilt.edu/Owen/novak/seminar/homepage.html)

> Course topics, assignments, and readings. By Thomas P. Novak, Vanderbilt
University.

* * *

## Medicine

#### [ Multimedia
Textbooks](http://indy.radiology.uiowa.edu/MultimediaTextbooks.html)

> Several multimedia medical textbooks on topics such as pediatric airway
disease, lung anatomy, pulmonary embolus, and diffuse lung disease. These
textbooks are part of [The Virtual
Hospital](http://indy.radiology.uiowa.edu/VirtualHospital.html), a project of
the University of Iowa College of Medicine, Department of Radiology.

#### [ Miscellaneous Teaching
Files](http://www.rad.washington.edu/OtherMaterialList.html)

> Currently contains an exhibit on fractal analysis of trabecular bone. By
Michael L. Richardson and others, University of Washington Department of
Radiology.

* * *

## Microbiology

#### [ Fundamentals of
Microbiology](http://mmedia.ucc.uconn.edu/VirtualClass/MCB/MCB229/home_page.html)

> Introductory course with laboratory in microbiology for sophomore-junior
level students. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, interactive practice exams,
and links to related materials. By Thomas M. Terry, The University of
Connecticut.

#### [
Microbiology](http://www.mcl.tulane.edu/student/1997/kenb/readme_micro.html)

> Download several charts (Microsoft Word 5.1) that present basic information
about various bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites covered in the Medical
Microbiology course at Tulane University School of Medicine. By Ken Bookstein
(medical student), Tulane University School of Medicine.

* * *

## Music

#### [ Computer
Music](http://www.vanderbilt.edu/Blair/Courses/MUSC216/MUSC216.html)

> Basic course information, pointers to Web sites of interest to students of
computer music, and sound and graphics files pertinent to the course. By Brian
Evans, Vanderbilt University.

#### [ Jazz Improvisation](http://www.wisc.edu/jazz/)

> Course description, articles, and pointers to related readings. By Joan
Wildman, the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

#### [ Music in World
Cultures](http://http.ecn.bgu.edu/users/mfjpm/class/394.guide.html)

> Contains syllabi, study guides, listening quizzes, and links to other Net
resources. By John Murphy, Western Illinois University.

#### [ Women in Music](http://music.acu.edu/WWW/IAWM/plautsyllabus.html)

> Study of lives and work of women composers and of women's involvement in
other aspects of musical creativity in classical, jazz, pop, and folk music.
Syllabus, and links to related materials. By Linda Burian Plaut, Virginia
Tech.

* * *

## Neuroscience

#### [
Neuroscience](http://www.mcl.tulane.edu/classware/neuroanatomy/readme_neuro.html)

> Access to a set of JPEG images that help medical students learn the cross-
sectional anatomy of the human brain stem. By Ken Bookstein (medical student),
Tulane University School of Medicine.

* * *

## Nuclear Engineering and Engineering Physics

#### [ Engineering Problem Solving
I](http://trans4.neep.wisc.edu/class.distrib/)

> Link to course materials. By Jake Blanchard, University of Wisconsin.

* * *

## Physics

#### [ Alternative Energies](http://zebu.uoregon.edu/phys162.html)

> Physics of energy generation via Alternative Energy Sources. Syllabus,
calendar, lecture notes, assignments, exams, student work, and links to
related materials. By Greg Bothun, University of Oregon.

#### [ Electricity and Magnetism](http://132.241.70.202/kagan/home_page.html)

> A calculus-level E&M class for scientists and engineers. Syllabus, calendar,
and exams. By David Kagan, California State University, Chico.

#### [ FORTRAN Programming for Physics and
Astronomy](http://noether.vassar.edu/~myers/Fortran.html)

> An independent-study reading course consisting of a series of exercises
designed to teach the student FORTRAN programming for scientific use, while
also introducing UNIX, EMACS, RCS and computer graphics. Syllabus,
assignments, and links to related materials. By Eric Myers, Vassar College.

#### [ Honors Introductory Physics: Electricity and
Magnetism](http://www.udel.edu/mvb/ps208hp.html)

> Honors section of introductory physics for Physical Science and Engineering
Majors II. Covers electricity and magnetism. Syllabus, calendar, assignments,
exams, grades, and links to related materials. By Maurice Barnhill, University
of Delaware.

#### [ Several classes](http://zebu.uoregon.edu/uop.html)

> Syllabi, exams, homework, and lecture notes for several classes, including
Physics of Energy and the Environment, The Scientific Basis for the Man-Nature
Partnerhip, and General Physics. By various professors, University of Oregon.

#### [ Several classes](http://dept.physics.upenn.edu/courses)

> Links to several classes. Course pages can contain assignments, quizzes, a
database of several years' worth of old exams, and more. By various
professors, University of Pennsylvania.

#### [ Several classes](http://www.physics.carleton.ca/courses/)

> Links to several undergraduate and graduate classes, including Science for
Survival, Electromagnetism, and Computational Physics. Course pages can
contain syllabus, lecture notes, and assignments. By various professors,
Carleton University.

#### [ Modern Physics](http://140.198.129.30/ModernPhysics/modernphysicshtml)

> Introduction to relativity, cosmology, particle physics, and other topics.
By four student teams led by David Weaver, Chandler-Gilbert Community College.

#### [ Physics Homework Service](http://hw.ph.utexas.edu/)

> Course syllabi, first-day handouts, and instructions for using computerized
homework service for various physics courses. Can also submit homework and
check grades. By various professors, University of Texas at Austin.

* * *

## Political Science

#### [ American
Politics](http://fang.sunyit.edu/Home/Steve/POS310.syllabus.html)

> Basic introduction to American political institutions and culture. Syllabus,
readings, course assignments, lecture notes, and pointers to related
materials. Includes series of assignments requiring use of the Web. By Steven
M. Schneider, SUNY Institute of Technology at Utica/Rome.

#### [ Politics of International Oil](http://menic.utexas.edu/menic/oil/)

> Analyzes the national and international structures of the petroleum
industry. Changing trends in industrial structures are related to
international political alignments, focusing on the Middle East. Materials
include world oil data and mail archives about oil producing countries.
Syllabus, calendar, assignments, and links to related materials. By Clement M.
Henry, University of Texas at Austin.

#### [ Virtual Seminar in Global Political
Economy](http://csf.colorado.edu/gpe/)

> The Virtual Seminar in GPE is offered over the Internet and facilitated by
Dr. Gonick in collaboration with 24 other faculty members around the world.
Students can enroll online. Faculty who want to "sit-in" can also enroll
online. Syllabus, calendar, assignments, student work, and links to related
materials. By Lev S. Gonick, Arizona State University West and University of
Guelph.

* * *

## Psychology

#### [ Sensation and Perception
Tutorials](http://psych.hanover.edu/Krantz/sen_tut.html)

> Learn the fundamentals of sensory processes, used in several classes in
psychology. By John H. Krantz, Hanover College.

* * *

## Religious Studies

#### [ The Bible: Wisdom, Poetry and
Apocalyptic](http://www.umn.edu/nlhome/m204/maic/1003.html)

> Study of the Ketuvim, the third division of the Tanakh. Syllabus, class
calendar, and links to related materials. By Tzvee Zahavy, University of
Minnesota.

#### [ Foundations of Theology](http://www.nd.edu/~ktrembat/www-class/)

> Course description, syllabus, exam, and pointers to various resources. By
Kern R Trembath and Jeffrey VanderWilt, University of Notre Dame.

#### [ Introduction to
Judaism](http://pubweb.ucdavis.edu/Documents/RST23/infordir.html)

> Course description, syllabus, readings, and pointers to various resources
for Judaic studies. By Bruce Rosenstock, University of California, Davis.

* * *

## Sociology

#### [ Sociology of Cyberspace](http://lydia.bradley.edu:80/las/soc/syl/391/)

> Examines the contemporary revolution in human interaction via computer.
Syllabus, calendar, assignments, student work, and links to related materials.
By Leonardo Salamini, Bradley University.

* * *

## Statistics

#### [ Graphical Data
Analysis](http://www.math.montana.edu/~umsfjban/STAT438/Stat438.html)

> Discusses how to use graphical techniques to find patterns in data and
present results to others. The course explores topics ranging from human
visual perception and computer vision to conditional expectation and empirical
distributions. There is a special off-campus page to help Internet visitors
get started. Syllabus, calendar, lecture notes, assignments, and links to
related materials. By Jeff Banfield, Montana State University.

* * *

## Virology

#### [ Various Virology Courses](http://www.bocklabs.wisc.edu/)

> Tutorials, course notes, educational materials, animations, interactive
models, and color images of viruses. By Stephan Spencer and others, University
of Wisconsin-Madison.

* * *

## Zoology

#### [ Conservation Biology](http://www.utexas.edu/depts/conbio370c/)

> Students will emerge with training in practical aspects of ecology, b

