# A HISTORY OF WORLD CIVILIZATIONS (HIST 101) SYLLABUS

Winter Quarter, 2002

Section 02 10:00-10:50 MWThF

Teacher: K. A. Francis

### A. OFFICE HOURS

|

Monday |

Tuesday |

Wednesday |

Thursday |

Friday  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
8:00 |   |

|   |

|  
  
9:00 |

  |

  |

  |

Chapel |

  
  
10:00 |

Office |

  |

Office |

Office |

Office  
  
11:00 |

Office |   |

Office |

Office | Office  
  
12:00 |

|

  |

|

|  
  
1:00 |

Office |

  |

Office |

Office |  
  
2:00 |

|

  |

|

|

  
  
3:00 |

|

  |

|

Meetings |

  
  
4:00 |

|   |

|

Meeting |

  
  
5:00 |

|   |

|

|

  
  
Office Address: Irwin Hall 209B

Telephone: 6302 [On Campus]; (707) 942-1518 [Off Campus]

E-mail Address: kfrancis@puc.edu



### B. COURSE OBJECTIVES

  
1\. To acquaint students with the main developments in the major civilizations
of the world from their beginnings to the fifteenth century. (Readings from
political, philosophical and religious writing will supplement the textbook
and provide practical examples of how some people have dealt with the
perennial problems facing humankind.)

2\. To draw attention to the main characteristics of the major world
civilizations--in areas of culture such as art, philosophy, religion, and
government--and the factors which contributed to their uniqueness.

3\. To address some of the perennial questions humankind has asked and analyze
the implications of the answers to these questions.

4\. To acquaint students with the way historians work, the importance of the
methodologies used, how these methodologies are similar and different to other
disciplines in the social sciences, and ways in which the telling or writing
of history is affected by the approaches and methods historians use.

5\. To develop the following skills:

  * a. The ability to gather information efficiently and critically; 
  * b. The ability to think critically about what is heard or read; 
  * c. The ability to form judgments which are consistent with the evidence; 
  * d. The ability to communicate those judgments clearly and cogently in spoken and written form.

### C. METHODS

1\. Lectures and/or discussions, normally four times a week.

2\. Reading and note-making by the student: Lectures are a guide to, rather
than an exhaustive analysis of, a topic. Wide and intelligent reading is
necessary if the student is to be well-informed.

3\. Tests and Quizzes: These will give students an opportunity to see how well
they are meeting the course objectives.

4\. Essays: These will allow the student to analyze and discuss specific
topics or questions in a more detailed manner.

5\. Final examination: A final demonstration of the student's progress.

### D. REQUIREMENTS

1\. Reading: You should aim to spend at least six hours each week reading and
making notes. Some of this time should be spent reading the books mentioned in
the next section.

2\. Tests: lasting one hour on October 23 and November 17 (worth 20% of the
grade).

3\. Quizzes, usually given on a Friday (worth 10% of the grade). The quizzes
will be taken in groups .Rules: the members of the groups should remain the
same for the whole quarter; the group may discuss the answers to the quiz
question and come to a consensus but each individual is responsible for his or
her own answers; students who 'coast' -- i.e. do no prepare for the quiz and
rely on the other members of the group -- will have the score for the
particular quiz discounted.

4\. Primary Source Reading: Seven times during the quarter 'problems' in
history based on primary texts--mainly from the books _Sources of World
History_ , Volume 1 and _Discovering the Global Past_ , Volume 1--will be
discussed in class. Essays will be set based on the class discussion and the
reading. (Worth 30% of the grade.)

5\. Final Examination: Monday, December 10, 9:45-11:45

REQUIRED READING

Albert M. Craig et al., _The Heritage of World Civilizations_ , 5th edition,
Macmillan. Cited below as 'Craig'

Mark A Kishlansky, _Sources of World History_ , 2d edition, Volume 1, West.
Cited below as 'Kishlansky'

Merry E. Wiesner et al., _Discovering the Global Past_ , Volume 1, Houghton
Mifflin. Cited below as 'Wiesner'

### F. GRADING

Students may choose to have their grade calculated in either of the following
ways:

1.  
---  
  
Best Three Essays |

30%  
  
Best Two Quizzes |

10%  
  
Best Test |

20%  
  
Final Examination |

40%  
  


2\. Solely on the basis of the final examination (provided all course work is
completed).

Students should note that essays may not be handed in late nor the test or
examination taken at an alternative time without a valid excuse; no form of
cheating will be excused either. The penalty for lateness is a 25% reduction
of the grade given; cheating will result in an 'F' for the particular
assignment (and, possibly, the whole course).

|

A |

91-100 |

B- |

70-75 |

D+ |

50-55  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
|

A- |

85-91 |

C+ |

65-70 |

D |

45-50  
  
|

B+ |

80-85 |

C |

60-65 |

D- |

40-45  
  
|

B |

75-80 |

C- |

55-60 |

F |

Under 40  
  
### G. CLASS SCHEDULE

### Section A: INTRODUCTION

7 January Introduction to the Course: Why Study History?

9 What is 'World Civilization'? _Craig, pp.1-4 & 32-35; 684-687_;

10 Essay Writing for the Social Sciences _Kishlansky, pp.xiii-xx

_

### Section B: THE BEGINNINGS OF CIVILIZATION

11 The Civilizations of the Ancient Near East _Craig, pp.4-14 & Kishlansky,
pp.2-18

_

14 The Civilizations of India and China _Craig, pp.15-27

_

16 Reassessing 'Civilization': Africa and America _Craig, pp.27-30, 172-178

_

17 Discussion--The Role of Law in a Civilization: Hammurabi and Moses

18 How To (The Methodology of History and the Social Sciences)

### Section C: THE MAJOR PHILOSOPHIES OF THE ANCIENT WORLD

23 Chinese Philosophy _Craig, pp.36-45_

24 Indian Philosophy _Craig, pp.45-51, 132-133, 276-277_

25 The Hebrews, the Israelites, the Jews: Monotheism _Craig, pp.51-56, 66-67

_

28 Greek Philosophy _Craig, pp.56-64

_

30 Discussion--Explaining Suffering and Evil: The Upanishads, the Buddha, Job,
and Zoroaster

### Section D: THE PERIOD OF EMPIRES IN THE ANCIENT WORLD

31 The Origins of Greek Civilization _Craig, pp. 72-78

_

1 Feb. Greece: The Helladic and Hellenistic Periods _Craig, pp. 78-109

_

4 From Roman Republic to Roman Empire _Craig, pp. 134-152

_

6 **TEST

**

7 Rome: Empire, Christianity, Decline _Craig, pp. 152-171

_

11 Discussion--The 'Rise' of Christianity: Jesus, Paul, 'Heretics',
Constantine, Augustine, Benedict of Nursia, and the Scandinavians

13 The Persian Empire: Iran, India and 'Inner Asia' _Craig, Chapter 4

_

14 The Diversity of African Civilization _Craig, pp. 176-197

_

15 China: Empire and Dynasties _Craig, Chapter 7

_

18 Discussion--What is Good Government? Aesop, Aristotle, Sun-tzu, Ssu-ma
Ch'ien, and Asoka

### Section E: THE INTERACTION OF THE WORLD'S CIVILIZATIONS

20 China: Imperial Culture and the Mongol Empire _Craig, Chapter 8

_

21 Discussion--The Role of Women in Society: Plato, Irene of Byzantium, Lady
Murasaki, and Catherine of Siena

22 Japan: Feudalism, Buddhism and the 'Middle Ages' _Craig, Chapter 9

_

25 The Impact of Islam: 'Iran' and India in the Pre-Islamic Age _Craig,
Chapter 10_

27 The Impact of Islam: The Creation of an Islamic Empire _Craig, pp. 294-307_

28 The Birth of 'Europe': Invasion, Feudalism, and Settlement _Craig, Chapter
12_

1 Mar. Discussion--Characteristics of a Good Ruler: Augustus, Charlemagne,
Genghis Khan, and Timur-i-Lang

4 **TEST

**

6 The Culture of Islamic Civilization _Craig, pp. 307-313, Chapter 14, pp.
878-879

_

7 The 'Middle Ages' in Europe: The Problem with Definitions

8 The High Middle Ages in Europe: Culture _Craig, Chapter 13_ ; _Wiesner,
Chapters 11 & 14

_

11 Discussion--Travel, Discovery, and Culture: Fa-hsien, Ibn Battuta, and
Marco Polo

13 Sub-Saharan Africa up to European Contact _Craig, Chapter 18

_

14 Mesoamerica and 'South' America Just Before the Europeans, _Craig, Chapter
15_ ; _Wiesner, Chapter 8

_

15 The Story So Far: A Comparative Perspective

        Review Session



* * *

Back to: Index of Links for HIST 101 Page

