![](http://www.ncsu.edu/images/red_strip.gif)  
![](http://www.physics.ncsu.edu/courses/pylabs/ban_logo.gif)

# PY 124: SOLAR SYSTEM ASTRONOMY

## Syllabus, Fall Semester 2002

![](http://www.physics.ncsu.edu/courses/astron/ln02.gif)

![](mars1.gif) |  **

Instructor:**R. A. Egler , **Office** : Cox Hall 110

**

Phone** : 515-7842, **E-mail:**robert_egler@ncsu.edu

**

Office hours** : T, Th. 1:30 - 2:30 PM  
(and by appointment)

**

Class Room:** Cox 206

**

Class Days / Time:** T, Th, 2:35 to 3:50 PM

**

Textbook:** Michael A. Seeds; _The Solar System_ (Current edition),  
(Wadsworth Publishing, Belmont, CA.)

![](hline.gif)

  * **Course Goals, Requirements, and Grading** **
**

  * Order of Topics Covered
  * Clarification of Some Points
  * Make-up Test Policy
  * How to Pass This Course
  * Some Other Interesting Web Sites
  * **Answers to the most recent test**
  * **Glossary of Terms for Solar System Astronomy  
**

  * Explanation of Orbital Terms
**

  * Sample Tests for this section
**

    * Sample Test 1
    * Sample Test 2
    * Sample Test 3
  * **Answers to homework 1 and sample test 1  
**

  * **Answers to homework 2 and sample test 2  
**

  * **Answers to homework 3 and sample test 3  
**

  * Reedy Creek Obsevatory
  * Official course description 
  
---|---  
  
  
(NASA Photo: Launch of the Mars Observer spacecraft on a Titan III rocket from
Kennedy Space Center.)

![](http://www.ncsu.edu/images/red_strip.gif)

![](Earth.gif) |

## Course Goals, Requirements, and Grading:  
  
---|---  
  
(NASA Photo: The Earth from the Galileo Spacecraft)

**

Students should review the University Policy on Academic Integrity found in
the Code of Student Conduct. In this class, your name on any assignment, test,
paper, or quiz, will be taken as your certification that you have neither
given nor received unauthorized aid with the project. All assignments, tests,
papers, or quizzes are expected to be entirely your own work unless I
specifically state otherwise.



GOALS IN THIS CLASS:

**

My goals in teaching this class are to have you understand the spatial and
temporal relationships of objects in the solar system, particularly the
movements of the common objects visible in the sky with minimal optical aid;
to understand the historical development of astronomy; to understand the
basics of the philosophical underpinnings of scientific research; and to
understand the properties of the major solar system bodies, both in the large
collective groupings by which they are classified, and individually; and how
we acquire knowledge concerning these objects.

**

This class is NOT available for Scholar's Credit

**

* * *

There will be three tests during the semester, and a comprehensive final
examination. You will be graded on the basis of:

**

75%** of final grade: Average of the three tests.

**

25%** of final grade: Comprehensive final exam.

**

Extra Credit:** An 8 to 10 page term paper may be submitted to replace your
lowest test score (not the final exam). **The paper is due NO LATER THAN
November 21.** There are specific acceptable topics and additional
requirements that are handed out in class with the printed syllabus. Please
see me if you need another copy of the term paper requirements.

This class is **NOT** available for Scholar's Credit.

* * *

**Sample Tests**are available via the World Wide Web.

![](caution1.gif) ; **NOTE: The Final Exam is scheduled Tuesday, December 17,
at 1:00 PM.**

Students will **not** generally be permitted to take the exam early, so please
**do not** make arrangements to go home before this date.

**

*** Homework: Homework will be assigned and reviewed in class (time
permitting), but will not be collected or graded. I assign homework to assist
in your learning the material. It is certainly to your advantage to do the
homework, but if you don't, it will show up in your test scores.

**

Final Grades will be on the Plus/Minus system. The grading scale is as
follows:

A+ = 98.0 to 100.0%  
A = 92.0 to 97.9%  
A- = 90.0 to 91.9%

B+ = 88.0 to 89.9%  
B = 82.0 to 87.9%  
B- = 80.0 to 81.9%

C+ = 78.0 to 79.9%  
C = 72.0 to 77.9%  
C- = 70.0 to 71.9%

D+ = 68.0 to 69.9%  
D = 60.0 to 67.9%

F = 59.9% or lower**

**

Extra Credit:** An 8 to 10 page term paper may be submitted to replace your
lowest test score (not the final exam). **The paper is due NO LATER THAN
November 21.** There are specific acceptable topics and additional
requirements that are handed out in class with the printed syllabus. Please
see me if you need another copy of the term paper requirements.

![](caution1.gif)  **NOTE: Repeated disruptions of the class (e.g. talking,
etc) may result in the lowering of the student's grade by up to one full
letter grade.

**



**Return to beginning of syllabus**

![](http://www.ncsu.edu/images/blue2green.gif)

**

** NO "makeup" tests will be given for ANY reason.**

**

Under **unusual** circumstances that would cause you to miss a test (for
instance, a death in the family, a scheduled University event, etc..) ,
arrangements **_may**_ be made to take a test at something other than the
scheduled time, **provided that such arrangements are made before the regular
test is given**. Such "Alternate" tests **WILL be of a different format,** for
example a verbal test, or an essay test, or a combination essay - multiple
choice test.

**

The material on the tests will be drawn from the lectures,** therefore regular
class attendance is expected. Attendance will be recorded, but does **not**
directly affect your grade.

**

However, keep in mind that several years experience shows that your final
grade will likely be reduced one or more letter grades if you miss 5 or more
classes.

I consider your name on the test as your certification that you did not give
or receive unauthorized assistance with the test.

**

**Return to beginning of syllabus**

  

![](http://www.ncsu.edu/images/blue2green.gif)

### Syllabus:

**

NOTE: There WILL BE material presented in class that is not covered in the
textbook. You WILL be tested on the material _presented in class_ , whether or
not it is in the textbook. There MAY ALSO be material in the textbook that is
not discussed in class that will be on the test.

**

This is the order of the topics to be covered. The time of the final exam is
stated in the TRACS schedule. This syllabus is not set in stone, and may be
modified during the semester.

Please do not ask me what chapters a test covers; it covers all material
**discussed in class** after the previous test. Therefore regular class
attendance is important and expected!

**

NOTE: No class on the following dates:**

Tuesday, October 15

Tuesday, November 26 and Thursday, November 28

**

TOPICS and CHAPTERS

**

Introduction, the sky, history, eclipses, gravity, "applied" astronomy,
gravitation and orbits

Chapters: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5

**

** TEST 1 ** _Approx._ Thursday, September 19

**

Optics and telescopes, light and matter, overview of the solar system, Earth
in detail, the inner planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars).

Chapters: 6, 7 (thru 7-2), 20, 21, 22, 23

**

** TEST 2 ** _Approx._ Thursday, October 24

**

The outer planets (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, Pluto), asteroids,
comets, an introduction to the sun, the search for other planetary systems.

Chapters: 24, 25, 26, 8

**

** TEST 3 ** Thursday, November 21

**

The history of space exploration, Life in the universe, or other assorted
topics.

**

*** FINAL EXAM: Tuesday, December 17, 1:00 to 4:00 PM ***

**

**Return to beginning of syllabus**

![](http://www.ncsu.edu/images/blue2green.gif)

### Clarification of a Few Points.

1) There are no prerequisites for this course. This course is not intended to
provide a mathematical background for more advanced study in astronomy,
therefore the solving of mathematical problems is not the primary emphasis.
**Some mathematical terms and equations are used, however, and a familiarity
with high school algebra and geometry at the level officially required for
admission to the university is assumed**.

2) This course will NOT teach you much about astronomical observing (that's
taught in PY 125, the companion laboratory to this course). You will not learn
the constellations, or how to use a telescope, etc. We will be looking at what
we know about astronomical objects, _and how we know it_.

3)In accordance with university policy, students who elect the S/U grading
system will receive an 'S' **only** if their course grade would be 'C-' or
better on the letter grade system.

There is **NO** "Extra Credit" of ANY SORT available for this class. Please
don't ask.

4) **No makeup tests will be given.** If you miss a test, you get a zero on
that test. In **rare** cases, arrangements may be made to take the test at a
time other that the normal class time, but these arrangements **absolutely
must** be made before the normal test date. Such arrangements are not usually
made; you will need a very good reason if you wish to take the test at any
time other than with the rest of the class. ( **Note** : Calling my secretary
or my office and leaving a message that you are going to miss the test DOES
NOT constitute making prior arrangements!)

5) University policy **prohibits** the recording of lectures without the
instructor's permission. Please ask if you wish to record the lectures.

6) Policy on **IN (Incomplete) grades** (from the Faculty Handbook): IN is a
temporary grade. At the discretion of the instructor, students may be assigned
an IN grade for work not completed **because of a serious interruption** in
their work **not** caused by their own negligence. **An IN must not be used as
a substitute for an F when a student's performance in the course is deserving
of an F**. An IN is only appropriate when the student's record in the course
is such that successful completion of assignments, projects, or tests (missed
as a result of a documented serious event) would enable that student to pass
the course. **Work undertaken to make up the IN grade should be limited to the
completion of missed work.

**



**Return to beginning of syllabus**

![](http://www.ncsu.edu/images/blue2green.gif)

![](saturn.GIF) |

## "I'm not good at science. How can I pass this course?"  
  
---|---  
  
(NASA Photo: Saturn from the Voyager II Spacecraft)

I hear this question from a few students every semester, and I sympathize. (No
one's good at everything. I like science, but I'm not good at economics, for
instance. I can't understand how the government can be in debt when _they_
print the money. If I could print money I wouldn't be in debt!)

If you are generally a good student, but just seem to have trouble with
science, it may help to remember that a study method that works well for a
humanities course will not necessarily work well for a science course (and
vise versa.)

**

First, and most importantly, remember that passing the course is really not
the point. Learning astronomy is the point.** If you concentrate on learning
astronomy, passing the course will come naturally.

Second, it is important to keep up with the lecture material. We have all had
classes where you could take out your notes and the textbook for the first
time the day before the test and still get an A. This class is _not_ one of
those. **At least once a week** you need to spend some time going over the
class notes. Write down the important ideas from each lecture. Actually write
them down, don't just look over your notes. You remember things that you write
much better than things that you just read. Pay particular attention to
understanding the concepts rather than memorizing facts. (For example, it is
more important to know what a class G star is than it is to remember that the
sun is a class G star.) There are, of course, some facts that you will just
have to remember, but in general it is the concepts that are important.
Anything that you don't understand, look up in the textbook. If you still
don't understand, write down the questions you have and ask me.

Third, read the related material in the textbook. Take notes on the textbook,
again trying to see which points are most basic.

Fourth, if you feel that you need help, see me before you become totally lost.
If you can't make my office hours, I will be glad to set up an appointment to
see you. All I ask is that you either show up for the appointment or call and
cancel it. I never mind seeing students, but I do mind setting aside time to
see someone who never shows up.

"How much time will I have to spend on this class?" is another question I get
asked. The answer depends on several things. If you are a senior Aerospace
Engineering major, and have been an amateur astronomer for years (there's
usually one in every class), you will probably find that you don't need to
spend much time at all. If, on the other hand, you have virtually no exposure
to physics and astronomy, you will need to devote a good deal of time. That's
assuming that you want an A. If all you really want to do is just pass (D),
your time requirements will be considerably less. I don't have a nice round
number to give you, but a rule of thumb is that you should spend at least
**3** hours of study time for each **1** hour of class time. In other words a
"full time" student should be just that; spending around 40 hours a week
studying. The distribution of this time among your classes will vary,
depending on your course load.

I teach astronomy because I like astronomy. I don't view the class as a
contest between the students and the professor. I **want** you to learn
astronomy, so please do not hesitate to ask me if you have any questions.

**Return to beginning of syllabus**

  
![](http://www.ncsu.edu/images/red_strip.gif)

## Other Astronomy Related Web Sites

**

DISCLAIMER:** The links below are to sites **not** under the control of NC
State University. NC State University and the Department of Physics are not
responsible for the content of these sites. Any opinions or policies stated on
these sites do not necessarily represent the policies or opinions of any
person or Academic Unit at NC State University. None of the sites below are
commercial- all are University or Government Agency sites - and the Department
of Physics does not endorse or promote any commercial enterprise to which
these sites may link.

**

  * Current Satellite Views of Earth from Space** (updated every couple of hours) 
    * Latest Satellite Image (Visible), East Coast (Satellite GOES 8) 
    * Latest Satellite Image (Visible), West Coast (Satellite GOES 9) 
    * Latest Satellite Image (Infrared) (Satellite GOES 8)
**

  * Other Sites
**

    * Global Positioning System (GPS) Information
    * [Japan] National Space Development Agency, Earth Observation Center
    * European Space Agency
    * Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics
    * Mount Wilson Observatory
    * NASA Home Page
    * NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)
    * NASA: Kennedy Space Center
    * Space Telescope Science Institute (Hubble Space Telescope)
    * U.S. Naval Observatory
    * University of North Carolina - Chapel Hill, Physics and Astronomy

**Return to beginning of syllabus**

![](treeline.gif)

* * *

### Back to Physics Home Page

### Back to NC State Home Page

Last updated: 25 June 2002

