![UIC Undergraduate Catalog](http://www.uic.edu/~cmsmcq/uic/ucat.gif)

# UIC (The University of Illinois at Chicago)

# Undergraduate Catalog 1995-97

#

This document was generated from the 1995-97 UIC Undergraduate Catalog. It is
for informational purposes only and does not constitute a contract. Every
effort has been made to insure accuracy, but be advised that requirements may
have changed since this book was published. Errors may have also been
introduced in the conversion to a WWW document. Thus for items of importance,
it might be wise to seek confirmation in the paper version or directly from
the appropriate campus office.

* * *

## Table of Contents

  * College of Business Administration
    * Accreditation
    * Departments of the College and Degree Programs
    * Degree Programs Affiliated with Other Colleges
    * Admission Requirements
      * Freshman Admission Requirements
      * Transfer Student Admission Requirements
      * Placement Tests
        * Freshmen Students
        * Transfer Students
    * Academic Advising and Course Selection
    * Graduation Requirements
      * General Requirements (60 hours)
        * Basic Education Requirements
        * Other General Requirements
        * Nonbusiness Electives
      * Business Courses (60 Hours)
        * Business Core
        * The Major and Business Electives (27 Hours)
      * Curriculum Notes and Other Graduation Requirements
        * Cultural Diversity
        * Basic Education
        * English
        * Mathematics and Natural Sciences
        * Other General Requirements
        * Foreign Language
        * Nonbusiness Electives
        * Course Level Requirement
        * Courses that Do Not Count Toward the Bachelor of Science Degree Offered by the College of Business Administration
      * Additional Graduation Requirements
        * College Residence Requirement
        * Department Residence Requirement
        * Sixty-hour Rule
        * Grade Point Average
        * Graduation Declaration
    * Course Selection Chart for College of Business Administration Students
      * Social Sciences
      * Modern History and Philosophy
        * List A. Humanities
        * List B.
      * Literature
      * Advanced Quantitative Skills
      * Natural Sciences
    * Special Programs and Opportunities
      * Dual Major
      * Second Bachelor's Degree
      * CBA Career Center
      * Institute for Entrepreneurial Studies
      * Office of Minority Affairs
      * Proficiency Examinations
    * Academic Honors
      * Dean's List
      * College Honors
      * Department Honors
    * Scholarships, Prizes, and Recognition
      * Beta Gamma Sigma
    * College Policies, Rules, and Regulations
      * Full-Time Program
      * Program Changes
      * Repeating a Course
      * Class Attendance
      * Closed Courses
      * Independent Study Course
      * Credit for Course Work Taken Outside the College
      * Declaration of Major
      * Change of College
      * Academic Probation and Drop Rules
        * Probation Rules
        * Drop Rules
      * Pass/Fail Regulations
    * Sample Four-Year Program
  * Accounting
    * Curriculum in Accounting
      * Requirements for the Major 
      * Business Electives
  * Economics
    * Curriculum in Economics
      * Requirements for the Major
      * Business Electives
  * Finance
    * Curriculum in Finance
      * Requirements for the Major
      * Business Electives
  * Information and Decision Sciences
    * Curriculum in Information and Decision Sciences
      * Requirements for the Major
      * Business Electives
  * Management
    * Curriculum in Management
      * Requirements for the Major
      * Business Electives
      * Specialized Programs
      * Double Majors
  * Marketing
    * Curriculum in Marketing
      * Requirements for the Major
      * Business Electives

* * *

# College of Business Administration

  
106 Grant Hall  
996-2700  
  
**Dean of the College:**  
Paul Uselding.  
**Associate Dean for Academic Affairs:**  
Lawrence H. Officer.  
**Executive Director, External Affairs:**  
J. Fred McLimore.  
**Assistant Dean, Academic Administration:**  
Barbara Peck.  
**Assistant Dean and Director, Graduate Professional Business Programs:**  
Shari Holmer Lewis.  
**Assistant Dean and Director, Undergraduate Student Affairs:**  
Walter Washington.  
**Director, CBA Career Center:**  
Nancy Butler.

* * *

Continuing students and those whose attendance at UIC has been interrupted for
no more than two years may complete the graduation requirements in effect at
the time of initial registration, or the new requirements indicated in this
catalog. Students returning to UIC in the fall of 1995 after an absence of
more than two years and students who will begin the program in the fall of
1995 must meet the graduation requirements specified here.

The College of Business Administration offers a wide range of programs to
prepare students for careers in business and management. These programs
provide a broad-based background of skills needed to meet the challenges of
today's rapidly changing business environment. The curriculum includes
specialized courses in the student's major, core courses in all the functional
areas of business, and supporting course work in mathematics, the behavioral
sciences, written communications, statistics, and computer information
systems. In addition to preparation for a career in business, the program
provides an excellent background for graduate training in business, law, or
any of the business-oriented academic disciplines.

The faculty of the College of Business Administration is heavily involved in
research as well as instruction. Research supports the teaching mission of the
college, extends the frontiers of knowledge in the business-related areas, and
ensures that the curriculum is based on the latest development of business
disciplines.

## Accreditation

The College of Business Administration is a full member of the American
Assembly of Collegiate Schools of Business. This association is recognized by
the National Commission on Accrediting as the highest official collegiate
accrediting agency for business education at the undergraduate and master's
levels. Membership in the association is open only to schools and colleges
whose intellectual climate insures the offering of programs of high academic
quality and whose teaching and administrative staff possesses the
qualifications, experience, professional interests, and scholarly productivity
essential for the successful conduct of a broad and liberal baccalaureate
curriculum in business administration.

## Departments of the College and Degree Programs

The College of Business Administration is comprised of six departments: [
Accounting ](./BA.html#BAACCOUNTING), [ Economics ](./BA.html#BAECONOMICS), [
Finance ](./BA.html#BAFINANCE), [ Information and Decision Sciences
](./BA.html#BAINFODECSCI), [ Management ](./BA.html#BAMANAGEMENT), and [
Marketing ](./BA.html#BAMARKETING). Each of these departments offers the
Bachelor of Science degree, which requires 120 semester hours of credit for
completion.

## Degree Programs Affiliated with Other Colleges

The College of Business Administration offers joint programs with other
colleges on the campus. The College of Engineering coordinates the joint
program for the degree of [ Bachelor of Science in Engineering
Management](./EG.html#EGMEENGR). Details of this program are described in the
_College of Engineering_ section of this catalog.

The College of Liberal Arts and Sciences offers two joint programs with the
College of Business Administration: the [ Bachelor of Science in Statistics
and Operations Research](./LA.html#LASTATORCURR) and the [ Bachelor of Arts in
French Business Studies.](./LA.html#LASFIP) Details of these programs are
described in the _College of Liberal Arts and Sciences_ section of this
catalog.

## Admission Requirements

### Freshman Admission Requirements

Students seeking admission to the College of Business Administration who are
recent high school graduates or who have earned less than 12 semester hours
(18 quarter hours) of credit at another collegiate institution are classified
as new freshmen and must meet the entrance requirements to the college that
are specified for beginning freshmen. (See [ Admission Requirements and
Application Procedures ](./AR.html#ARADMISSION).) The college recommends that
each freshman complete a strong high school mathematics curriculum that
includes college algebra and trigonometry. Students are also required to have
at least two years of a single foreign language in high school (with grades of
C or better). Students with a deficiency in this area will be required, after
admission to UIC, to take two semesters of a single foreign language at the
college level, with grades of C or better, at UIC or elsewhere.

### Transfer Student Admission Requirements

Transfer students who have a minimum transfer grade point average of 3.00
(A=5.00) from an accredited community or four-year college or university _may_
be considered for admission. However, admission to the College of Business
Administration is selective and competitive and admission standards are
typically higher than the minimum. It is recommended that students interested
in applying to the College of Business Administration call the Office of
Admissions (996-4350) for the current minimum transfer grade point average.

An evaluation of the transferability of course work from other institutions
will be done when a student is admitted to the college. Guides listing
recommended courses for transfer from Chicago-area community colleges are
available through community college advisers or by calling the Undergraduate
Student Affairs Office (996-2700).

### Placement Tests

#### Freshmen Students

The College of Business Administration requires all new students, classified
as freshmen, to participate in the Pre-Enrollment Evaluation Program. This
program is a series of five tests (mathematics, reading, English composition,
academic skills, and career interests) designed to help the student select the
appropriate level English composition and mathematics courses and to make the
proper educational choices and career plans. Other placement tests in
chemistry and foreign language are optional and should be taken only if
students plan to enroll in these courses.

#### Transfer Students

The College of Business Administration requires its transfer students to take
the mathematics and English composition placement tests in the Pre-Enrollment
Evaluation Program. However, transfer students need not take the mathematics
test if they have earned college credit in calculus with a grade of "C" or
higher. Also, transfer students need not take the English composition test if
they already have college credit in English 160 or an equivalent first course
in English composition from another institution. Other placement tests in
chemistry and foreign language are optional and should be taken only if
students plan to enroll in these courses.

Contact the Testing Service (996-0919) or the Undergraduate Student Affairs
Office in the College of Business Administration (996-2700) for further
information.

## Academic Advising and Course Selection

The Undergraduate Student Affairs Office provides academic advising regarding
course selection, registration, transfer credit, academic probation, and
progress made towards a degree. Advising on course selection and registration
is optional, but the college strongly recommends a credit evaluation for all
continuing students each semester. Individual academic advising is by
appointment. Advisers are available to answer general questions by phone
during most office hours. Students faced with emergency situations should
contact the assistant director.

All graduating seniors are required to meet with an adviser for a graduation
check no later than the semester in which they plan to graduate. It is
recommended that students complete a graduation check the semester before they
plan to graduate.

All continuing students are given the opportunity to register in advance for
the next semester. Appointment letters for priority registration are sent by
mail. Approval by the college is not required for registration. The student
should consult this catalog and the [ Timetable
](http://www.uic.edu/classes/timetable/)for guidance in program planning.
Special note should be taken of the course descriptions, prerequisites, and
other restrictions listed in the [
Timetable.](http://www.uic.edu/classes/timetable/)

The responsibility for course selection rests with the student. Satisfactory
progress toward the degree is defined as progressive fulfillment of all the
requirements listed below:

  1. Students cannot enroll for more than 18 hours in any semester (9 hours during the summer session).
  2. Every student must enroll in mathematics every term, beginning with the first term at UIC, until the Mathematics 160, 165 sequence or its equivalent is completed. Finance and Information and Decision Sciences majors should enroll in Math 205 immediately after successfully completing the Math 160, 165 sequence.
  3. Students must enroll in Information and Decision Sciences 270, as soon as Mathematics 160, 165 have beem completed.
  4. Economics 130 and 218, Accounting 110 and 111, and IDS 100 should be completed before the end of the sophomore year.
  5. English 160, 161 must be completed by the end of the freshman year. Students who pass English 150, 151, or 152 will receive 3 hours of graduation credit and a waiver of English 160 if written authorization is received from the Department of English.

A student who fails to show reasonable progress toward the degree, as defined
above, may be placed on progress probation for the following term. A student
on progress probation who fails to make satisfactory progress toward the
degree may be dropped from the University.

UIC students who seek information regarding transfer to the College of
Business Administration should report to the Undergraduate Student Affairs
Office to obtain a petition for intercollege transfer.

The Undergraduate Admissions Office sponsors Preview Days for prospective
students. More information on specific dates and times can be obtained from
the Office of Admissions and Records (996-4350).

## Graduation Requirements

Students will be required to complete 120 semester hours for the Bachelor of
Science degree offered by the College of Business Administration. These hours
must be distributed as indicated below.

### General Requirements (60 hours)

#### Basic Education Requirements

  * **English**
  * Engl 160--English Composition I (3 hrs) 
  * Engl 161--English Composition II (3 hrs) 
  * Choose one from: (3 hrs) 
    * Engl 310--Writing for Corporate Organizations (3 hrs) 
    * BA 200--Managerial Communication (3 hrs)  

  * **Mathematics**
  * Math 160--Finite Mathematics for Business (5 hrs) 
  * Math 165--Business Calculus (5 hrs)  
Math 180 may be taken in place of Math 165.

  * **Economics**
  * Econ 130--Principles of Economics for Business (5 hrs) 
  * Econ 218--Microeconomics: Theory and Business Applications (4 hrs) 
  * **Total: (28 hrs)** 

#### Other General Requirements

  * [ Social Sciences ](./BA.html#BASOCSCI) (6 hrs) 
  * [ Modern History and Philosophy ](./BA.html#BAHISTPHIL) (6 hrs) 
  * [ Literature ](./BA.html#BALIT) (3 hrs) 
  * [ Advanced Quantitative Skills ](./BA.html#BAADVQUANT) (3 hrs) 
  * [ Natural Sciences ](./BA.html#BANATS) (5 hrs) 
  * **Total: to be chosen from the CBA Course Selection Chart (23 hrs)** 

#### Nonbusiness Electives

9 hours of electives outside the College of Business Administration must raise
the general requirements hours to a total of at least 60.

### Business Courses (60 Hours)

#### Business Core

  * **Accounting**
  * Actg 110--Introduction to Financial Accounting (3 hrs) 
  * Actg 111--Introduction to Managerial Accounting (3 hrs)

  * **Finance**
  * Fin 300--Introduction to Managerial Finance (3 hrs)

  * **Information and Decision Sciences**
  * IDS 100--Management Information Systems (4 hrs) 
  * IDS 270--Business Statistics I (4 hrs) 
  * IDS 355--Operations and Systems Management (3 hrs)

  * **Management**
  * Mgmt 340--Introduction to Organizations (3 hrs) 
  * Mgmt 350--Business and Its External Environment (3 hrs)

  * **Marketing**
  * Mktg 360--Principles of Marketing (3 hrs)

  * **Integrative Course**
  * All students must also take a 4-hour integrative course. This requirement may be satisfied by taking one of the following courses: Econ 495, IDS 495, or Mgmt 495. Note that all of these courses have the same prerequisites (senior standing and completion of all the other CBA core courses). Students may take the integrative course in any department, not necessarily in their major. (4 hrs) 
  * **Total: (33 hrs)** 

#### The Major and Business Electives (27 Hours)

Students must choose a major from the following areas: [ Accounting
](./BA.html#BAACCOUNTING), [ Economics ](./BA.html#BAECONOMICS), [ Finance
](./BA.html#BAFINANCE), [ Information and Decision Sciences
](./BA.html#BAINFODECSCI), [ Management ](./BA.html#BAMANAGEMENT), and [
Marketing ](./BA.html#BAMARKETING). The major consists of at least 18 hours;
the exact number varies across departments. Electives chosen from courses in
the College of Business Administration must raise the total number of hours in
this section to 27.

### Curriculum Notes and Other Graduation Requirements

#### Cultural Diversity

All students at UIC are expected to study a culture different from the
dominant American culture. To fulfill this requirement, at least one course
from [ UIC'sCultural Diversity List](./LA.html#LACULTDIVERS) must be chosen.
This course may be one of those used to satisfy distribution requirements, it
may be taken as one of the electives, or as part of the major (if a major
course in included in the list).

#### Basic Education

Students should take English 160 and 161, Mathematics 160 and 165, and
Economics 130 and 218 as early as possible, since these courses are
prerequisites for most of the business core courses.

#### English

A grade of C or better in English 160 and 161 is a graduation requirement.
Transfer students who have taken the equivalent of English 160 and/or 161 at
other institutions will only receive transfer credit for these courses if they
earned a grade of C or better. Students who take these courses at UIC must
retake them if less than a C is earned. Students may substitute a course with
an important writing component for BA 200 or English 310 with written
authorization from the CBA Office of Undergraduate Student Affairs.

#### Mathematics and Natural Sciences

All entering students, except those with transfer credit in calculus, must
take the mathematics placement test. The student's score on the test
determines whether enrollment should be in Mathematics 020, 070, 120, or in
the regular mathematics sequence. Placement in Mathematics 020 or 070 requires
subsequent completion of Mathematics 120, since 120 is a prerequisite for the
regular mathematics sequence. If the student's test score indicates enrollment
in Mathematics 120, this course must be satisfactorily completed as a
prerequisite to the regular mathematics sequence. _Mathematics 020, 070, 120,
121, 125, 140, and 141 do not carry credit toward the bachelor of science
degree in the College of Business Administration._ A student who is required
to take Mathematics 020, 070, and/or 121 may not be able to complete
graduation requirements in eight semesters and should plan for one or more
additional terms.

Placement in Mathematics 160 indicates that the student is prepared to begin
the regular mathematics sequence. The regular sequence (Math 160, 165) may
begin with either Math 160 or Math 165, since Math 160 is not a prerequisite
for Math 165. The regular mathematics sequence should be completed as early as
possible since many sophomore and junior courses require knowledge of the
content of these courses.

_Students who plan to go on to graduate school in a program that emphasizes
quantitative skills are strongly encouraged to take Math 180 and 181, and if
possible, Math 210 also._ Math 180 may be taken in place of the required Math
165. Students planning to take Math 180 may be required to take a trigonometry
course as a prerequisite depending on their performance on the placement test.

#### Other General Requirements

Courses for the social sciences, history and philosophy, literature, advanced
quantitative skills, and natural sciences requirements must be chosen from the
list of courses included in the [ Course Selection Chart for College of
Business Administration Students ](./BA.html#BACOURSCHART). This chart may be
found in this chapter, following the list of graduation requirements.

#### Foreign Language

The College of Business Administration requires at least two years of a single
foreign language in high school (with grades of C or better) as a criterion
for admission. Students with a deficiency in this area must take, after
admission to UIC, two semesters of a single foreign language at the college
level, with grades of C or better, at UIC or elsewhere.

#### Nonbusiness Electives

Nonbusiness electives must be taken outside the College of Business
Administration. Dance, health, kinesiology, military science, and music skills
courses are excluded.

#### Course Level Requirement

At least 12 of the 32 hours in [ Other General Requirements
](./BA.html#BAGENREQ) and [ Nonbusiness Electives ](./BA.html#BANONBUSELEC)
must be taken at the 200 level or above.

#### Courses that Do Not Count Toward the Bachelor of Science Degree Offered
by the College of Business Administration

Courses that duplicate previous work do not count toward graduation, and no
credit is given for a course in which a failing grade is received. Further,
credit earned in the following courses will _not_ count toward graduation: (a)
English 150, 151, and 152; (b) Mathematics 020, 070, 120, 121, 125, 140, and
141; and (c) foreign language courses taken because of failure to meet CBA
admission standards. (The only exception is that students may earn 3 semester
hours of credit in English 150, 151, or 152 and a waiver of English 160 if
written authorization is received from the English Department.) Math 020 and
070 do not carry academic credit and will not be used in computing the grade
point average, but will be used for the purpose of determining full- or part-
time status and for financial aid eligibility.

### Additional Graduation Requirements

#### College Residence Requirement

The last 30 semester hours of work must be taken in residence at the
University of Illinois at Chicago. Furthermore, at least 30 of the 60 semester
hours in the Business Section of the curriculum must be taken in residence at
the University of Illinois at Chicago.

#### Department Residence Requirement

Each department in the College of Business Administration has a department
residency requirement that must be met in order to qualify for a degree in
that department. To fulfill the department residency requirement, two-thirds
of the major must be completed at the University of Illinois at Chicago in the
department in which the student is majoring, exclusive of courses offered by
that department in the Business Core.

#### Sixty-hour Rule

Students transferring from community colleges must, _after attaining junior
status,_ earn at least 60 of the required semester hours either at the
University of Illinois at Chicago or at any other accredited four-year
institution. The CBA residence requirements listed above must also be met.

#### Grade Point Average

In addition to meeting all University requirements for the degree as stated in
this catalog, a student must earn a grade point average of at least 3.00
(A=5.00) in each of the following to qualify for graduation:

  * All courses taken at the UIC
  * All UIC courses counted toward the degree
  * All courses (UIC and transfer) counted in the major toward the degree
  * All courses (UIC and transfer) counted toward the degree
  * All courses taken at UIC counted in the major toward the degree

#### Graduation Declaration

Within two semesters prior to graduation, students are required to report to
the college office, 106 Grant Hall, to declare their intent to graduate and to
have an official graduation check. _All graduation checks must be completed by
the end of the term in which the student plans to complete his or her degree._
A diploma cannot be ordered until the student has completed this graduation
check.

## Course Selection Chart for College of Business Administration Students

Business Administration students must complete course work in social sciences,
modern history and philosophy, literature, advanced quantitative skills, and
natural sciences. The options for satisfying these requirements are indicated
below. _Some of these courses have prerequisites,_ and students should make
sure that they have satisfied them before enrolling. It is also important to
note that many 200-level courses have no prerequisites.

### Social Sciences

Six hours to be chosen from the following list.

**Anthropology (Anth)**

  * 100.--The Human Adventure (3 hrs) 
  * 101.--World Cultures: Introduction to Social Anthropology (3 hrs) 
  * 102.--Introduction to Archaeology (3 hrs) 
  * 110.--Cybernetic Systems (3 hrs) 
  * 214.--Sex and Gender in World Cultures (3 hrs)
**Political Science (PolS)**

  * 101.--Introduction to American Government and Politics (3 hrs) 
  * 103.--Who Rules? Introduction to the Study of Politics (3 hrs) 
  * 111.--United States--Current Problems and Controversies (3 hrs) 
  * 130.--Introduction to Comparative Politics (3 hrs) 
  * 184.--Introduction to International Relations (3 hrs) 
  * 185.--The Global Community: Social Sciences Perspectives (3 hrs)
**Psychology (Psch)**

  * 100.--Introduction to Psychology (4 hrs) 
  * 210.--Theories of Personality (3 hrs) 
  * 231.--Community Psychology (3 hrs)
**Sociology (Soc)**

  * 100.--Introduction to Sociology (3 hrs) 
  * 105.--Social Problems (3 hrs) 
  * 110.--Introduction to Social Psychology (3 hrs) 
  * 216.--Social Movements (3 hrs) 
  * 223.--Youth and Society (3 hrs) 
  * 224.--Gender and Society (3 hrs) 
  * 225.--Racial and Ethnic Group Relations (3 hrs) 
  * 241.--Social Inequalities (3 hrs) 
  * 244.--Work in a Changing Society (3 hrs) 
  * 245.--Marriage and Family (3 hrs) 
  * 246.--Sociology of Religion (3 hrs) 
  * 268.--Introduction to Comparative Sociology (3 hrs) 
  * 276.--Urban Sociology (3 hrs) 
  * 285.--Explaining Social Life (3 hrs) 

### Modern History and Philosophy

Six hours to be chosen from the following list; at least one must be from List
A.

#### List A. Humanities

**History (Hist)**

  * 101.--Western Civilization Since 1648 (3 hrs) 
  * 109.--East Asian Civilization: China (3 hrs) 
  * 110.--East Asian Civilization: Japan (3 hrs) 
  * 114.--World History (3 hrs) 
  * 141.--African Civilization (3 hrs) 
  * 161.--Introduction to Latin American History (3 hrs) 
  * 214.--Europe: 1914 to 1945 (3 hrs) 
  * 220.--Modern Germany Since 1848 (3 hrs) 
  * 223.--Modern Britain Since 1689 (3 hrs) 
  * 226.--France Since 1848 (3 hrs) 
  * 228.--Spain Since 1808 (3 hrs) 
  * 233.--History of East Central Europe and the Balkans (3 hrs) 
  * 234.--History of Poland (3 hrs) 
  * 237.--Modern Russia and the Soviet Union Since 1700 (3 hrs) 
  * 242.--Modern Africa (3 hrs) 
  * 266.--Mexico Since 1850 (3 hrs) 
  * 272.--China Since 1911 (3 hrs) 
  * 274.--Japan Since 1600 (3 hrs) 
  * 278.--The Middle East Since 1258 (3 hrs)
**Philosophy (Phil)**

  * 100.--Introduction to Philosophy (3 hrs) 
  * 103.--Introduction to Ethics (3 hrs) 
  * 104.--Introduction to Social/Political Philosophy (3 hrs) 
  * 112.--Morality and the Law (3 hrs) 

#### List B.

**Economics (Econ)**

  * 224.--Introduction to American Economic History (3 hrs)
**History (Hist)**

  * 104.--American Civilization Since the Late 19th Century (3 hrs) 
  * 248.--African-American History Since 1877 (3 hrs) 
  * 262.--Latin America Since 1850 (3 hrs) 
  * 291.--American Business History (3 hrs) 

### Literature

Three hours to be chosen from the following list.

**Classics(Cl)**

  * 102.--Introduction to Classical Literature (3 hrs) 
  * 106.--Myths and Legends of the Ancient World (3 hrs) 
  * 208.--Greek Mythology (3 hrs) 
  * 250.--Greek and Roman Epic Poetry (3 hrs) 
  * 251.--Greek Tragedy (3 hrs) 
  * 252.--Greek and Roman Comedy (3 hrs) 
  * 253.--Roman Satire and Rhetoric (3 hrs)
**English (Engl)**

  * 101.--Understanding Literature (3 hrs) 
  * 102.--Introduction to Film Narrative (3 hrs) 
  * 103.--English and American Poetry (3 hrs) 
  * 104.--English and American Drama (3 hrs) 
  * 105.--English and American Fiction (3 hrs) 
  * 106.--English and American Prose (3 hrs) 
  * 107.--Introduction to Shakespeare (3 hrs) 
  * 108.--British Literature and British Culture (3 hrs) 
  * 109.--American Literature and American Culture (3 hrs) 
  * 110.--English and American Popular Genres (3 hrs) 
  * 111.--Women and Literature (Same as Women's Studies 111) (3 hrs) 
  * 112.--Introduction to Native American Literature (3 hrs) 
  * 113.--Introduction to Multi-Ethnic Literature in the United States (3 hrs) 
  * 170.--Freshman Colloquium I (3 hrs) 
  * 171.--Freshman Colloquium II (3 hrs)
**French (Fr)**

  * 201.--Introduction to French Literature I (3 hrs) 
  * 202.--Introduction to French Literature II (3 hrs)
**German (Ger)**

  * 100.--Introduction to German Literature in English Translation (3 hrs) 
  * 120.--Gender, Class, and Politics in German Literature in Translation (3 hrs)
**Italian (Ital)**

  * 210.--Introduction to Reading and Analysis of Italian Literary Texts (3 hrs)
**Polish (Pol)**

  * 120.--The Polish Short Story in Translation (3 hrs) 
  * 130.--Masterworks of Polish Literature in Translation (3 hrs) 
  * 140.--Polish Drama in Translation (3 hrs) 
  * 241.--Mickiewicz and Sienkiewicz: Polish Romanticism and Realism (3 hrs)
**Russian (Russ)**

  * 120.--The Russian Short Story in Translation (3 hrs) 
  * 130.--Masterpieces of Russian Literature in Translation (3 hrs) 
  * 241.--Dostoevsky (3 hrs) 
  * 242.--Tolstoy (3 hrs) 
  * 244.--Women in Russian Literature (Same as Women's Studies 244) (3 hrs)
**Slavic (Slav)**

  * 116.--Old Slavic and Ukrainian Folklore and Mythology (3 hrs) 
  * 219.--Serbian Folklore and Folk Mythology (3 hrs) 
  * 222.--Modern Serbian Literature (3 hrs)
**Spanish (Span)**

  * 190.--Contemporary Spanish Literature in Translation (3 hrs) 
  * 191.--Don Quixote in Translation (3 hrs) 
  * 210.--Introduction to the Reading of Hispanic Texts (3 hrs) 
  * 211.--Introduction to the Analysis of Hispanic Texts (3 hrs) 
  * 260.--Meso-American Literature and Culture (3 hrs) 
  * 261.--South American Literature and Culture (3 hrs)
**Women's Studies (WS)**

  * 103.--Women in U.S. History, Literature, and the Arts (3 hrs) 

### Advanced Quantitative Skills

At least 3 hours to be chosen from the following list (Finance and IDS majors
must take Math 205; Economics majors must take Econ 346).

**Economics(Econ)**

  * 346.--Econometrics (3 hrs)
**Information and Decision Sciences (IDS)**

  * 371.--Business Statistics II (3 hrs)
**Mathematics (Math)**

  * 205.--Advanced Mathematics for Business (5 hrs)
**Philosophy (Phil)**

  * 102.--Introductory Logic (3 hrs) 
  * 210.--Symbolic Logic (3 hrs) 
  * 211.--Inductive Logic and Decision Making (3 hrs)
**Psychology**

  * 343.--Statistical Methods in the Behavioral Sciences (3 hrs)
**Sociology (Soc)**

  * 201.--Introductory Sociological Statistics (4 hrs) 

### Natural Sciences

At least 5 hours must be chosen from the following list.

**Anthropology (Anth)**

  * 105.--Human Evolution (Same as Natural Science 105 (5 hrs)
**Biological Sciences (BioS)**

  * 100.--Biology of Cells and Organisms (5 hrs) 
  * 101.--Biology of Populations and Communities (5 hrs) 
  * 104.--Life Evolving (Same as Natural Science 104) (5 hrs)
**Chemistry (Chem)**

  * 100.--Chemistry and Life (Same as Natural Science 100) (5 hrs) 
  * 112.--General College Chemistry I (5 hrs) 
  * 116.--General and Analytical Chemistry I (6 hrs)
**Geological Sciences (Geol)**

  * 101.--Principles of Physical Geology (5 hrs) 
  * 102.--Principles of Historical Geology (5 hrs) 
  * 107.--The Evolving Earth (Same as Natural Science 107) (5 hrs)
**Physics**

  * 101.--Introductory Physic I (5 hrs) 
  * 111.--Physics of Weather (4 hrs) 
  * 112.--Astronomy and the Universe (4 hrs) 
  * 121.--Natural Sciences--the Physical Universe (Same as Natural Science 101) (4 hrs) 

## Special Programs and Opportunities

### Dual Major

A dual major may be earned by fulfilling the degree requirements in two
departments, as well as those for the University and college. The extra
credits required for such a degree depend upon the department involved. The
designation of the dual major does not appear on the diploma, but it is noted
on the student's official transcript.

### Second Bachelor's Degree

A student may earn a second bachelor's degree in the College of Business
Administration either concurrent with, or subsequent to, the first bachelor's
degree. When a student requests permission to earn a second bachelor's degree
in the College of Business Administration, the admission decision will be
based upon the normal requirements of the college. When capacity is limited,
admission priority will be granted to those not holding a first degree.

### CBA Career Center

The CBA Career Center exposes students to leading professional organizations
through the Corporate Intern Program. This program offers full- and part-time
paid internships. Students benefit by having "hands-on" experience with
corporate, nonprofit, and governmental clients in their major.

To qualify, students must be enrolled full time and in good academic standing.
While no one is guaranteed an internship, resume development and job interview
preparation are provided to maximize each student's opportunity. Interested
students can pick up an application in Room 724 UH, or call (312) 996-0255.

### Institute for Entrepreneurial Studies

The College of Business Administration offers a certificate in Entrepreneurial
Studies for students interested in starting their own business or working in a
smaller firm. Entrepre- neurship is interdepartmental, drawing from expertise
in accounting, finance, management, and marketing to provide a solid
theoretical background and a practical experience base. The emphasis in the
course work required for the certificate is on identifying business
opportunities, evaluating potential markets, and planning for financial and
organizational needs at different stages of growth. For specific certificate
requirements, contact either the Undergraduate Student Affairs Office, 106
Grant Hall, or phone (312) 996-2700; or the Institute for Entrepreneurial
Studies, 626 University Hall, phone (312) 996-2670.

### Office of Minority Affairs

The Office of Minority Affairs is a student assistance program providing a
variety of services to the college's underrepresented minorities (i.e.,
African Americans, Latinos, and Native Americans). Academic advising,
tutoring, scholarship and internship assistance are some of the services
provided. Minority students seeking assistance and additional information
about the College of Business Administration should contact the Office of
Minority Affairs (M/C 068), UIC College of Business Administration, 601 South
Morgan Street, Chicago, Illinois 60607-7107 or phone (312) 996-9548.

### Proficiency Examinations

With the exception of foreign language, a student may earn credit through [
proficiency examinations](./SP.html#SPPROFEXAM) as described in this catalog.

The college accepts CLEP (College Level Examination Program) credit in general
examinations (humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences) provided it
does not duplicate credit previously earned.

## Academic Honors

### Dean's List

Students are eligible for the Dean's List who have completed a minimum of 12
graded hours, or 6 graded hours during the summer term and who earn a term
grade point average of 4.50 or better. Although the grade point average is
exclusive of courses taken Pass/Fail, a student who fails a course taken under
this option is ineligible for the Dean's List.

### College Honors

To qualify for college honors the students must:

  1. Meet the college and University requirements for graduation.
  2. Earn a minimum of 60 semester hours credit at UIC.
  3. Achieve a minimum cumulative grade point average of 4.50 in UIC courses.

### Department Honors

Department honors may be awarded if the student meets the grade point average
criteria listed below: Distinction:| 4.25 overall| 4.25 department  
---|---|---  
High Distinction:| 4.50 overall| 4.50 department  
Highest Distinction:| 4.75 overall| 4.75 department  
  
## Scholarships, Prizes, and Recognition

Students in the College of Business Administration may be eligible for special
awards and scholarships in addition to those available through the Office of
Student Financial Aid. For more detailed information consult [ Scholarships
Administered by Colleges and Departments ](./FA.html#FASCHOLUNITS) and [
Prizes and Recognition ](./FA.html#FAPRIZERECOG) in the _Financial Aid_
chapter of this catalog. Information is also available in the College of
Business Administration monthly publication  On-Line, which can be found
outside of Room 106 Grant Hall.

### Beta Gamma Sigma

The College of Business Administration annually invites the upper 7 percent of
the junior class and the upper 10 percent of the senior class to accept
membership in Beta Gamma Sigma, the national scholastic honor society in the
field of business administration. Inductees must have completed at least 30
semester hours at UIC and are chosen on the basis of their UIC and cumulative
grade point averages. Detailed information can be obtained from the college
office.

## College Policies, Rules, and Regulations

### Full-Time Program

During the fall and spring semesters, a full-time program is 12 to 18 semester
hours. Students in the College of Business Administration may _not_ enroll for
more than 18 hours in any one semester. For the summer session a full-time
program is 6 semester hours. Students may _not_ enroll for more than 9 hours
during the summer.

### Program Changes

A student may add a course during the first two weeks of the semester (first
week of the summer session) without the instructor's approval. A student may
drop a nonbusiness or nonengineering course until the end of the sixth week of
the semester (fifth week of the summer session). The deadline to drop business
and engineering courses or change sections in any course is the tenth day of
the semester (fifth day of the summer session).

### Repeating a Course

Each failed _required_ course must be repeated until the student earns a
passing grade. All failing grades will be included in the cumulative grade
point average.

Repeating a course in which credit was earned requires approval from the
assistant dean. Credit will not be awarded for courses repeated to earn a
higher grade.

### Class Attendance

Specific policy on class attendance is determined by the course instructor and
will be noted on the course syllabus.

### Closed Courses

A maximum enrollment capacity is placed on each course in the College of
Business Administration. This limit cannot be exceeded. The instructor of the
course determines the priority in which students can be added to a closed
course when and if it reopens.

### Independent Study Course

A Request for Independent Study form must be completed and approved before
registering for an independent study course. Students should consult the
department for specific procedures regarding independent study courses.

### Credit for Course Work Taken Outside the College

Continuing students in the College of Business Administration must receive
approval from the assistant dean prior to enrolling for courses at other
institutions.

### Declaration of Major

A student must declare a major before enrolling in any 300-level course
offered by the College of Business Administration. The college offers six
majors: [ Accounting ](./BA.html#BAACCOUNTING), [ Economics
](./BA.html#BAECONOMICS), [ Finance ](./BA.html#BAFINANCE), [ Information and
Decision Sciences ](./BA.html#BAINFODECSCI), [ Management
](./BA.html#BAMANAGEMENT), and [ Marketing ](./BA.html#BAMARKETING). The
specific requirements for each major follow.

Each student should verify that he or she has an approved major. Curriculum
code numbers appear on several documents. These codes are:  Accounting| 03  
---|---  
Economics| 16  
Finance| 20  
Information and Decision Sciences| 44  
Management| 28  
Marketing| 32  
  
If a student has a curriculum code of 01, he or she does not have a declared
major. A student who has not declared a major may be dropped from 300-level
business administration courses beyond the core if shortages of space occur
during the first week of class. To declare or change a major, a student should
go to the college office.

### Change of College

Registered students who desire to transfer from another college at UIC to the
College of Business Administration may petition for intercollege transfer any
time during the semester. Petitions are available in 106 Grant Hall.
Nonbusiness students may register for most business courses, if space permits,
beginning the second day of instruction with departmental aproval.

### Academic Probation and Drop Rules

Academic probation and drop decisions are made on the basis of University of
Illinois at Chicago averages as well as the student's cumulative averages.

#### Probation Rules

  1. A student not currently on probation is placed on academic probation in any term in which less than a 3.00 average is earned. 
  2. A student currently on academic probation is continued on academic probation (unless dropped) until both the cumulative average and the University of Illinois at Chicago average are raised to 3.00. 
  3. A student is placed on progress probation who does not make satisfactory progress toward the degree as defined in [ Academic Advising and Course Selection ](./BA.html#BAACADADVIS) in this chapter.

#### Drop Rules

  1. A student on academic probation who fails to earn a 3.00 average in any term may be dropped unless both the cumulative average and the University of Illinois at Chicago average are 3.00 or higher. 
  2. A student who fails to earn at least a 2.00 average in any term may be dropped. 
  3. A student on progress probation who fails to make satisfactory progress toward the degree as defined in [ Academic Advising and Course Selection ](./BA.html#BAACADADVIS) may be dropped.

### Pass/Fail Regulations

Students in the College of Business Administration may elect to take courses
on a pass/fail option in accordance with campus policy under the following
conditions:

  1. Only students on clear status may elect to take a course on the pass/fail option. Students on probation or on undetermined status are not eligible. 
  2. Only full-time students enrolled in a minimum of 12 hours (6 hours during the summer session) are eligible. 
  3. Courses that may _not_ be taken on pass/fail option include: 
    1. Engl 160, 161
    2. Written Communications: Engl 310 or BA 200
    3. Econ 130, 218
    4. Math 160, 165, 180, 205
    5. Courses used to fulfill major requirements
    6. Business core courses
  4. Students may elect the pass/fail option only during the first ten days of class. 

## Sample Four-Year Program

A sample four-year program in the College of Business Administration (Check
individual major requirements for variations; some departments have fewer
business electives and more required courses)

**Freshman Requirements**  
**FIRST SEMESTER**

  * Engl 160 (3 hrs) 
  * Math 160 (5 hrs) 
  * Econ 130 (5 hrs) 
  * Social Sciences (3 hrs) 
  
**SECOND SEMESTER**

  * Engl 161 (3 hrs) 
  * Math 165 (5 hrs) 
  * Philosophy/History (3 hrs) 
  * Literature (3 hrs) 

**Sophomore Requirements**  
**FIRST SEMESTER**

  * Econ 218 (4 hrs) 
  * Actg 110 (3 hrs) 
  * IDS 100 (4 hrs) 
  * IDS 270 (4 hrs) 
  
**SECOND SEMESTER**

  * Actg 111 (3 hrs) 
  * Advanced Quantitative Skills (3 hrs) 
  * Philosophy/History (3 hrs) 
  * Social Sciences (3 hrs) 
  * Written Communications (3 hrs) 

**Junior Requirements**  
**FIRST SEMESTER**

  * Mgmt 340 (3 hrs) 
  * Mktg 360 (3 hrs) 
  * Fin 300 (3 hrs) 
  * Natural Sciences (5 hrs) 
  
**SECOND SEMESTER**

  * IDS 355 (3 hrs) 
  * Mgmt 350 (3 hrs) 
  * Major Course (3 hrs) 
  * Major Course (3 hrs) 
  * Nonbusiness elective (3 hrs) 

**Senior Requirements**  
**FIRST SEMESTER**

  * Major Course (3 hrs) 
  * Major Course (3 hrs) 
  * Major Course (3 hrs) 
  * Integrative course (4 hrs) 
  * Business elective or major course (3 hrs) 
  
**SECOND SEMESTER**

  * Major course (3 hrs) 
  * Business elective or major course (3 hrs) 
  * Business elective or major course (3 hrs) 
  * Nonbusiness elective (3 hrs) 
  * Nonbusiness elective (3 hrs) 

* * *

# Accounting

* Curriculum in Accounting

  
2305 University Hall  
996-2650  
  
**Head of the Department:**  
Ronald D. Picur.

* * *

It is the mission of the Department of Accounting to: (1) provide high quality
accounting educational programs that prepare students with knowledge and
professional skills necessary for a successful career and a lifelong
appreciation for learning; (2) publish quality accounting and related
research, and secure external research funding; and (3) interact with,
support, and assist professional and academic organizations, and the community
at large.

Accounting is a system for measuring and reporting the financial position and
performance of a variety of entities to interested parties. These
organizations include business firms, governmental units and nonprofit
organizations. Users of financial information include management,
stockholders, and creditors. The scope of the accounting discipline is broad
and varied. Specific functional areas are: financial accounting, managerial
accounting, governmental and nonprofit accounting, international accounting,
auditing, information systems, and taxation. Business law courses are also
offered by the department.

## Curriculum in Accounting

In addition to the specific coursework below, the student must fulfill certain
other course requirements to be awarded the Bachelor of Science in Accounting.
For additional graduation requirements, information on admission, and academic
regulations in the College, see [ College of Business Administration
](./BA.html#BA).

### Requirements for the Major [1]

  * Actg 315--Intermediate Financial Accounting I (3 hrs) 
  * Actg 316--Intermediate Financial Accounting II (3 hrs) 
  * Actg 326--Cost Accounting (3 hrs) 
  * Actg 335--Auditing (4 hrs) 
  * Actg 345--Federal Income Tax I (3 hrs) 
  * One 3-hour accounting course at the 300 or 400 level. (3 hrs) 
  * **Total: (19 hrs)** 

### Business Electives

  * At least 8 semester hours must be taken from the following list: (8 hrs) 
    * Actg 355--Business Law I (3 hrs) 
    * Actg 417--Advanced Financial Accounting (3 hrs) 
    * Actg 427--Management Planning and Control (3 hrs) 
    * Actg 446--Federal Income Tax II (3 hrs) 
    * Actg 448--Advanced Tax (3 hrs) 
    * Actg 456--Business Law II (3 hrs) 
    * Actg 474--Accounting Information Systems (3 hrs) 
    * Actg 484--International Accounting (3 hrs) 
    * Actg 494--Special Topics in Accounting (3 hrs) 
  * **Total: (8 hrs)** 

**_Note:_** It is recommended that students who intend to sit for the CPA exam
take Actg 355, 417, 446, and 456. Furthermore, before they take 300-level
accounting courses, students should have completed IDS 100 and 270, as well as
Econ 130.

* * *

# Economics

* Curriculum in Economics

  
2103 University Hall  
996-2683  
  
**Head of the Department:**  
Barry R. Chiswick.

* * *

Economics is the study of the allocation of resources among competing
objectives. While economics is a social science, it also shares common
interests with the business-oriented disciplines and relies on mathematical
and statistical techniques. The curriculum provides a solid foundation in the
analytical tools of economics. Students learn how the price system operates,
how consumers, firms, and government institutions face choices and make
decisions, and the determinants of national output, inflation, unemployment,
economic growth, and international trade. Laws, regulations and institutions
that influence economic activity are also studied.

## Curriculum in Economics

In addition to the specific coursework below, the student must fulfill certain
other course requirements to be awarded the Bachelor of Science in Economics.
For additional graduation requirements, information on admission, and academic
regulations in the College, see [ College of Business Administration
](./BA.html#BA).

### Requirements for the Major

  * Econ 221--Macroeconomics in the World Economy: Theory and Applications (3 hrs) 
  * One of the following: (3 hrs) 
    * Econ 322--Managerial Economics (3 hrs) 
    * Econ 323--Business Conditions Analysis (3 hrs) 
  * An additional 12 hours of 300- or 400-level economics courses. (12 hrs) 
  * **Total: (18 hrs)** 

**_Note:_** Economics majors are required to take Econ 346 (Econometrics) in
the [ Advanced Quantitative Skills ](./BA.html#BAADVQUANT) section, and this
course does not count as one of the four elective 300- or 400-level courses.
Economics majors may take Econ 495 to satisfy the integrative course
requirement in the [ Business Core ](./BA.html#BABUSCORE), but this course
will not count as one of the four elective 300- or 400-level courses.

### Business Electives

  * Nine hours at the 300- or 400-level chosen from courses in the College of Business Administration. (9 hrs) 
  * **Total: (9 hrs)** 

* * *

# Finance

* Curriculum in Finance

  
2431 University Hall  
996-2980  
  
**Acting Head of the Department:**  
Ronald D. Picur.

* * *

The finance curriculum explores the principles of financial analysis and
control of individual business firms. It applies these principles to financial
management, the valuation and selection of securities, and the influence of
the monetary and banking system on economic activity.

## Curriculum in Finance

In addition to the specific coursework below, the student must fulfill certain
other course requirements to be awarded the Bachelor of Science in Finance.
For additional graduation requirements, information on admission, and academic
regulations in the College, see [ College of Business Administration
](./BA.html#BA).

### Requirements for the Major

  * Fin 310--Investments (3 hrs) 
  * Fin 320--Managerial Finance (3 hrs) 
  * An additional 12 hours of 400-level courses in the Department of Finance. (12 hrs) 
  * **Total: (18 hrs)** 

### Business Electives

  * Nine hours at the 300- or 400-level chosen from courses in the College of Business Administration. (9 hrs) 
  * **Total: (9 hrs)** 

Finance majors should pass Fin 300 with a grade of "C" or better no later than
fall semester of their junior year in order to complete the department courses
required for the major. Accordingly, the prerequisites of Fin 300 should be
completed by the end of the sophomore year.

Finance majors are required to take Math 205 (Advanced Mathematics for
Business) in the [ Advanced Quantitative Skills ](./BA.html#BAADVQUANT)
Section.

* * *

# Information and Decision Sciences

* Curriculum in Information and Decision Sciences

  
2402-04 University Hall  
996-2676  
  
**Head of the Department:**  
Robert Abrams.

* * *

The Department of Information and Decision Sciences offers instruction in the
application of mathematical and computer techniques to the analysis of
problems of business and management. This involves three major interrelated
disciplines: (1) computer information systems, (2) operations management and
research, and (3) statistics.

Majors in information and decision sciences take courses that give a thorough
background in basic mathematics and an up-to-date knowledge of each of the
three disciplines. This will enable a graduate of this program to bring an
analytical approach to the solution of management problems and to find
employment in fields such as systems analysis, operations and production
management, computer center operations, and data analysis. The program also
provides ideal preparation for graduate study leading to the MBA and other
advanced degrees.

Students are also referred to [ Statistics and Operations
Research](./LA.html#LASTATORCURR) in the _College of Liberal Arts and
Sciences._

Students majoring in information and decision sciences are required to take
Math 205 in the [ Advanced Quantitative Skills ](./BA.html#BAADVQUANT)
Section.

## Curriculum in Information and Decision Sciences

In addition to the specific coursework below, the student must fulfill certain
other course requirements to be awarded the Bachelor of Science in Information
and Decision Sciences. For additional graduation requirements, information on
admission, and academic regulations in the College, see [ College of Business
Administration ](./BA.html#BA).

### Requirements for the Major

  * IDS 201--Business Computing I (3 hrs) 
  * One of the following computing courses: (3 hrs) 
    * IDS 400--Advanced Business Programming (3 hrs) 
    * IDS 420--Business Systems Simulation (3 hrs) 
    * EECS 270--Introdu

