Textbooks | Course Requirements | Weekly Schedule **Chinese 325--Fall 1999**
**ADVANCED CHINESE GRAMMAR** **_Course Information and Syllabus_**

Instructor: **R.VanNess Simmons** [[back to main
page](http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/~rsimmon/)]

  * Office: Scott Hall 327
  * Office Phone: 932-5597
  * Email: rsimmon@rci.rutgers.edu
  * Office Hours: TTh 11:15-12:15
  * Class meeting times: Tuesdays and Thursdays, 5th period--2:50-4:10pm in Murray 111

This is a course in Chinese grammar. The goal of the course is to increase
your understanding of Chinese grammar in order to improve your mastery of
Chinese. A secondary goal is to explore the nature of Standard Chinese
grammatical structure in general and learn how and where it differs from the
grammars of other languages, such as English and Chinese dialects. The course
will be heavily discussion oriented; we will approach our topic through
analysis and dialogue. We will look at Chinese sounds, word structure and
formation, sentence grammar, and paragraph structure, using a variety of
techniques, from analysis to problem solving. This course will demand that
students actively participate; and you will be expected to frequently present
your own ideas and understand all examples in Chinese. Hence to take this
course, students must have studied Chinese up through the level of 132 or the
equivalent. (Others may be allowed to take the course with special permission
from the instructor.) **_Textbooks_** **Required:**

**1** Yip Po-Ching and Don Rimmington. _Basic Chinese: A Grammar and
Workbook_. New York: Routledge, 1998.

**2** Yip Po-Ching and Don Rimmington. _Intermediate Chinese: A Grammar and
Workbook_. New York: Routledge, 1998.

**3** Yip Po-Ching and Don Rimmington. _Chinese: An Essential Grammar_. New
York: Routledge, 1997.

The above texts should be available from the University Bookstore at One Penn
Plaza, opposite the New Brunswick train station, and from New Jersey Books,
108 Somerset St.

**Optional** (if available) **:**

Li Dejin and Cheng Meizhen. _A Practical Chinese Grammar for Foreigners_.
Beijing: Sinolingua, 1988.

Li, Charles N. and Sandra A Thompson. _Mandarin Chinese: A Functional
Reference Grammar_. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981.

**To be on reserve** at the library for supplementary reading and reports
**:**

Boltz, William G. _The Origin and Development of the Chinese Writing System_.
Indiana: Eisenbrauns, 1994. ISBN: 0-940490-78-1

Chao, Yuen Ren. _A Grammar of Spoken Chinese_. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1968. ISBN: 0-520-00219-9. {ALEX PL1137.S6C5 1968}

Chao, Yuen Ren. _Language and Symbolic Systems_. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1968. ISBN 0-521-09457-7. {ALEX P106.C5}

Chao, Yuen Ren. _Mandarin Primer_. Cambridge, 1961. {EASIA PL1125.E6C45}

DeFrancis, John. _The Chinese Language: Fact And Fantasy_. Honolulu:
University of Hawaii Press, 1984. Paper. ISBN: 0-8248-1068-6 {ALEX PL1171.D38}

Eccles, Lance. _Shanghai Dialect: An Introduction to Speaking the Contemporary
Language_. Maryland: Dunwoody Press, 1993. {ALEX PL1940.S53E33 1993}

Kratochvil, P. _The Chinese Language Today_. {ALEX PL1087.K7}

Li, Charles N. & Sandra A. Thompson. _Mandarin Chinese: A Functional Reference
Grammar_. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981. ISBN: 0-520-04286-7
{ALEX PL1107.L5}

Newnham, Richard. _About Chinese_. Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1971. ISBN:
0-14-02.1131-4 {ALEX PL1111.N4}

Norman, Jerry. _Chinese_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988\. Paper.
ISBN 0-521-29653-6 {ALEX PL1075.N67}

Pullum, Geoffrey K. & William A. Ladusaw. _Phonetic Symbol Guide_. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1986. ISBN: 0-226-68532-2. {ALEX P221.P85 1986}

Ramsey, S. Robert. _The Languages of China_. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1987. Paper. ISBN: 0-691-01468-X {ALEX PL1071.R34}

Wang, W. S-Y. _Languages and Dialects of China_. Journal of Chinese
Linguistics Monograph Series No. 3. Berkeley: Journal of Chinese Linguistics,
1991\. **_General Requirements_**

_Attendance_ : Attendance is of utmost importance and you are expected to come
to every class. Beginning with the second class you miss, your final grade
will be lowered by of a grade for each day you are absent without bona fide
medical or religious cause.

_Assignments_ : In addition to the readings, you will be required to write one
short report (a minimum of eight to a maximum of twelve typed, double-spaced
pages), due Tuesday, December 2nd. The report must follow normal conventions
of style for college term papers and must include a bibliography. Below is a
list of suggested topics; if you wish to write on another topic, please first
check with the professor:

  * Chinese romanization systems
  * The nature of Chinese writing and how it affects Chinese grammar
  * Chinese and English grammar compared
  * The grammatical differences between standard Chinese and one or more dialects
  * The history and development of the Mandarin based standard
  * Some interesting features of Chinese grammar
  * Different ways to analyze features of Chinese grammar

In addition, there will be occasional other written assignments. Assignments
must be handed in on time; late papers will not receive full credit.

_Quizzes_ : There will be two quizzes. The first will be on the sound system
of modern standard Chinese and two romanization systems -- _Pinyin_ and Gwoyeu
Romatzyh. The second will be on Chinese grammatical terminology (in Chinese
and English). I will provide you with further information on these quizzes
later. No make-ups will be given for missed quizzes.

_Exams_ : There will be a midterm and a final exam covering the material
presented in class and the readings.

_Grading_ : Final grades will be based on attendance and participation in
class, written assignments and the report, quiz results, the midterm, and the
final. Your final grade will be calculated approximately as follows (subject
to revision):

  1. attendance/participation 10% (or more)
  2. assignments/report 20%
  3. quizzes 10%
  4. midterm 30%
  5. final 30%

**Chinese 325--Fall 1999** **_WEEKLY SCHEDULE_** _Week 1--Th9/2_ **++** _Week
2--T9/7 & Th9/9_

**1\. Sounds of the modern standard language, _pinyin_ & other romanizations**

**_Readings:_**

  * 3 Yip, pp. 1-4
  * Li and Thompson, pp. 1-9   (on reserve)
  * Norman _Chinese_ , pp. 138-151, 257-263 (on reserve)
  * Chao, Yuen Ren, _A Grammar of Spoken Chinese_ , pp. 18-56 (on reserve)

_Week 3--T9/14 & **Th9/16**_ ++ _Week 4--T9/21 & Th9/23_

**2\. The structure of words and parts of speech**

**_Readings:_**

  * 1 Yip, Units 1-6, 24-25
  * 2 Yip, Unit 17
  * 3 Yip, pp. 4-29  & Chapter III.19
  * Li and Cheng, Chapters 1& 2
  * Li and Thompson, pp. 10-44, and Chapters 5, 7, 8 & 9   (on reserve)

**Quiz 1:** Th9/16--the sound system of modern standard Chinese and
romanization systems.

_Week 5--T9/28 & Th 9/30_

**3\. Phrases and their structures**

**_Readings:_**

  * 1 Yip, Units 7-10
  * 2 Yip, Units 4-6
  * Li and Cheng, Chapter 3
  * Li and Thompson, pp. 45-84, and Chapters 10, 11  & 20

_Week 6--T10/5 & Th10/7_

**4\. Sentence elements**

**_Readings:_**

  * 1 Yip, Units 17, 21-23
  * 2 Yip, Units 3  & 7
  * 3 Yip, p. 93 and Chapters II.13 & III.18
  * Li and Cheng, Chapter 4
  * Li and Thompson, Chapters 4, 13 & 22

_Week 7--T10/12 & Th10/14_

**5\. Simple sentences**

**_Readings:_**

  * 1 Yip, Units 13-14, 16, 18-19
  * 3 Yip, Chapters II.9-12, II.14-15,  & III.17
  * Li and Cheng, Chapter 5
  * Li and Thompson, Chapters 4, 12, 14, 17, 18

_Week 8-- **T10/19** & Th10/21_ ++ _Week 9--T10/26_

**6\. Verbal aspect**

**_Readings:_**

  * 1 Yip, Unit 15
  * 2 Yip, Units 8  & 21-22
  * 3 Yip, Chapter II.8
  * Li and Cheng, Chapter 6
  * Li and Thompson, Chapter 6

**Midterm:** T10/19

_Week 9--Th10/28_ ++ _Week 10--T11/2 & Th11/4_

**7\. Special predicate constructions**

**_Readings:_**

  * 1 Yip Unit 11
  * 2 Yip Units 1-2  & 19
  * 3 Yip, Chapters II.6-7 & III.20-21
  * Li and Cheng, Chapter 7
  * Li and Thompson, Chapters 15, 16, 17 & 21

_Week 11--T11/9 & Th11/11_

**8\. Expressing comparison**

**_Readings:_**

  * 1 Yip, Unit 12
  * 2 Yip, Unit 18
  * Li and Cheng, Chapter 8
  * Li and Thompson, Chapter 19

_Week 12-- **T11/16** & Th11/18_

**9\. Expressing emphasis**

**_Readings:_**

  * 1 Yip, Unit 20
  * 2 Yip, Unit 20
  * 3 Yip, Chapter III.22
  * Li and Cheng, Chapter 9

**Quiz 2:** Th11/16--Chinese grammatical terminology (in Chinese and English)

_Week 13--T11/23_ ++ _Week 14-- **T11/30** & Th12/2_

**10\. Complex sentences**

**_Readings:_**

  * 2 Yip, Units 9-16
  * 3 Yip, Chapter III.23-25
  * Li and Cheng, Chapter 10
  * Li and Thompson, Chapter 23

**Report due:** T11/30

_Week 15--T12/7 & Th 12/9_

**Catch-up and Review**

**Final: Friday 12/17, 12:00-3:00pm**

[back to top]  
[[back to R. VanNess Simmons' main
page](http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/~rsimmon/)]

