## **CULTURE AND SOCIAL LIFE IN THE AMERICAN CITY, 1800-2000**

HIST 450-30-804, Fall 1999, 238 Dumbach

Timothy J. Gilfoyle, Associate Professor of American History  
  
(773) 508-2232  
Office hours: Monday, 8 a.m. - Noon  
  

* * *

The "United States was born in the country and has moved to the city." Richard
Hofstadter, _The Age of Reform_ (1955), 23.

This course examines that social movement and the evolution of the United
States from a rural and small-town society to an urban and suburban nation.
Cities, and especially Chicago, have long offered some of the best
laboratories for the study of American history, social structure, economic
development and cultural change. Certain problems and themes recur throughout
the course of American urban and cultural history which will be focal points
of this seminar: the interaction of private commerce with cultural change; the
rise of distinctive working and middle classes; the segregation of public and
private space; the formation of new and distinctive urban subcultures
organized by gender, work, race, religion, ethnicity, and sexuality; problems
of health and housing resulting from congestion; and blatant social divisions
between the rich and poor, the native-born and immigrant, and blacks and
whites. This colloquium will thus provide a historiographical introduction to
the major questions and issues in the culture and social life of American
cities.

The course requirements include one 15-20 page typewritten essay (50%), an
oral report (25%) and class participation (25%). Essay guidelines can be found
at the end of this syllabus. A primary responsibility of students is to
complete the weekly reading **before** the date of the scheduled class and
**contribute** their thoughtful, reflective opinions in class discussion. The
readings can be interpreted in a variety of ways and students should formulate
some initial positions and questions to offer in the class discussion. For
every article or book, students should be prepared to answery **all** of the
questions found in the "Critical Reading" section of the syllabus below. All
required readings may be purchased at Beck's Bookstore in the Granada Center
on Sheridan Road. Students do not have to buy any of the books since each one
has been placed on reserve at Cudahy Library.

Students who are disabled or impaired should meet with the professor within
the first two weeks of the semester to discuss the need for any special
arrangements.  
  
  

* * *

**

### CLASS MEETING DATES AND ASSIGNMENTS**

1 Sept. - Introduction

8 Sept.: The Forces of Urbanization

William Cronon, _Nature's Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West_ (New York:
W.W. Norton, 1991).

Oral Report: "William Cronon's _Nature's Metropolis_ : A Symposium,"
_Antipode_ , 26 (1994), 113-76.  
Peter A. Coclanis, "Urbs in Horto," _Reviews in American History_ , 20 (1992),
14-20.

15 Sept.: Class and Culture in the 19th-Century City

David Schuyler, _The New Urban Landscape: The Redefinition of City Form in
Nineteenth-Century America_ (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press 1986).

Oral Report: Roy Rosenzweig and Elizabeth Blackmar, _The Park and the People:
A History of Central Park_ (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1992).

16 Sept.: MIDNIGHT BIKE RIDE - Urban and Social History in Chicago (Rain Date:
23 Sept. 1999)

22 Sept.: Sexuality and Nightlife

Preliminary bibliographies due.

Timothy J. Gilfoyle, _City of Eros: New York City, Prostitution, and the
Commercialization of Sex, 1790-1920_ (New York: W.W. Norton, 1992).  
Timothy J. Gilfoyle, "Prostitutes in History: From Parables of Pornography to
Metaphors of Modernity," _American Historical Review_ , 104 (Feb. 1999),
117-41.

Oral Report: George Chauncey, _Gay New York: Gender, Urban Culture, and the
Making of the Gay Male World_ (New York: Basic Books, 1994).

29 Sept.: The Origins of Urban Popular Culture

William R. Leach, _Land of Desire: Merchants, Power and the Rise of New
American Culture_ (New York: Random House, 1993).

Oral Report: Lawrence Levine, _Highbrow/Lowbrow: The Emergence of Cultural
Hierarchy in America_ (Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press, 1988, pp. 1-82, 219-42.  
OR  
Richard Bushman, _The Refinement of America_ (New York: Knopf, 1991), pp. xi-
xix, 353-447.

6 Oct.: Urban Political Culture

William Riordan, _Plunkitt of Tammany Hall_ , introduction by Terrence
McDonald (New York: Bedford/St. Martin's, 1992), orig. 1905), esp. "How George
Washington Plunkitt Became _Plunkitt of Tammany Hall_."

Oral Report: Philip J. Ethington, _The Public City: The Political Construction
of Urban Life in San Francisco, 1850-1900_ (New York: Cambridge Univ. Press,
1994), pp. 1-42, 345-418.  
OR  
Terrence J. McDonald, _The Parameters of Urban Fiscal Policy: Socioeconomic
Change and Political Culture in San Francisco, 1860 - 1906_ (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1986), ix-xii, 1-18, 85-115, 262-82.  
Terrence J. McDonald, "The Problem of the Political in Recent American Urban
History: Liberal Pluralism and the Rise of Functionalism," _Social History_ ,
10 (1985), 324-45.

13 Oct.: Religion and 20th-Century Popular Culture

Robert A. Orsi, _The Madonna of 115th Street: Faith and Community in Italian
Harlem, 1880-1950_ (New Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1985).

Oral Report: Robert A. Orsi, "The Religious Boundaries of an Inbetween People:
Street _Feste_ and the Problem of the Dark-Skinned Other in Italian Harlem,
1920-1990," _American Quarterly_ , 44 (1992), 313-47.  
Clifford Geertz, _The Interpretation of Cultures_ (New York: Basic Books,
1973), pp. 3-32, 87-141.

20 Oct.: The Physical City

Carol Willis, _Form Follows Finance: Skyscrapers and Skylines in New York and
Chicago_ (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1995).

Oral Report: Daniel Bluestone, _Constructing Chicago_ (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1991).  
OR  
Stanley K. Schultz, _Constructing Urban Culture: American Cities and City
Planning, 1800-1920_ (Philadelphia: Temple Univ. Press, 1989).

27 Oct.: Work and 20th-Century Popular Culture

Lizabeth Cohen, _Making a New Deal: Industrial Workers in Chicago, 1919-1939_
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990).

Oral Report: "Symposium on _Making a New Deal_ by Lizabeth Cohen," _Labor
History_ , 32 (1991), 562-598.  
Kathleen Neils Conzen, David A. Gerber, Ewa Morawska, George Pozzetta, Rudolph
J. Vecoli, "The Invention of Ethnicity: A Prespective from the U.S.A.,"
_Journal of American Ethnic History_ , 12 (1992), 3-63.  
OR  
Olivier Zunz, _The Changing Face of Inequality: Urbanization, Industrial
Development, and Immigrants in Detroit, 1880-1920_ (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago
Press, 1982).

3 Nov.: Papers Due

Movie: _The City_ (1939).

  
Recommended: Lewis Mumford, _The Culture of Cities_ (New York, 1938), esp.
3-12, 143-299, 392-421, 486-93; idem, _The City in History_ (New York:
Harcourt, 1961), esp. 3-54, 119-182, 205-314, 410-578.

10 Nov.: Suburban Culture

Kenneth T. Jackson, _Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United
States_ (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985).

Oral Report: Robert Bruegmann, "Schaumburg, Oak Brook, Rosemont, and the
Recentering of the Chicago Metropolitan Area," in John Zukowsky, ed., _Chicago
Architecture, 1923-1993: Reconfiguration of an American Metropolis_ (Chicago:
Art Institute of Chicago, 1993), 159-77.  
James L. Wunsch, "The Suburban Cliche," _Journal of Social History_ , 28
(1995), 643-58.  
Andrew Wiese, "The Other Suburbanites: African American Suburbanization in the
North before 1950," _Journal of American History_ (March 1999).  
Lizabeth Cohen, "From Town Center to Shopping Center: The Reconfiguration of
Community Marketplaces in Postwar America."  
Thomas W. Hanchett, "U.S. Tax Policy and the Shopping Center Boom of the 1950s
and 1960s."  
Kenneth T. Jackson, "All the World's a Mall: Reflections on the Social and
Econmic Consequences of the American Shopping Center," all in _American
Historical Review_ , 101 (1996), 1050-1121.

17 Nov.: Urban Crises

Thomas J. Sugrue, _The Origins of the Urban Crisis: Race and Inequality in
Postwar Detroit_ (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996).

Oral Report: "Symposium on Thomas J. Sugrue: _The Origins of the Urban Crisis_
," _Labor History_ , 39 (1998), 43-69.  
OR  
Arnold Hirsch, _Making the Second Ghetto: Race and Housing in Chicago,
1940-1960_ (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983).

24 Nov.: The Postindustrial City

John Findlay, _Magic Lands: Western Cityscapes and American Culture After
1940_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993), esp. 1-116.  
Mike Davis, _Ecology of Fear: Los Angeles and the Imagination of Disaster_
(New York: Metropolitan, 1998), esp. 3-194, 357-422.  
Allen J. Scott and Edward W. Soja, "Introduction to Los Angeles: City and
Region."  
Richard Weinstein, "The First American City."  
Harvey Molotch, "L.A. as Design Product: How Art Works in a Regional Economy,"
all in Scott and Soja, eds., _The City: Los Angeles and Urban Theory at the
End of the Twentieth Century_ (Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1996),
1-46, 225-75.

Oral Report: Mike Davis, _City of Quartz: Excavating the Future in Los
Angeles_ (London: Verso, 1990).  
Ted Rohrlich, "Seer of L.A. or Blinded by Its Light?" _Los Angeles Times_ , 13
April 1999.  
Veronique de Turenne, "Is Mike Davis' Los Angeles All in His Head?" _Salon_ (7
Dec. 1998):http://www.salonmagazine.com/it/feature/1998/12/cov_07feature.htm  
OR  
Roger W. Lotchin, _Fortress California, 1910-1961: From Warfare to Welfare_
(New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1992).

1 Dec.: Final Papers Due

Timothy J. Gilfoyle, "White Cities, Linguistic Turns, and Disneylands: Recent
Paradigms in Urban History," _Reviews in American History_ , 26 (March 1998):
175-204; reprinted in Louis P. Masur, ed. _The Challenge of American History_
(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1999), 175-204.

Movie: _Bladerunner_ (1991).  
  
  

* * *

### **DISCUSSIONS AND CRITICAL READING**

Discussion and class participation is an important part of student evaluation
(25 percent). Incisive, imaginative and thoughtful comments that generate and
facilitate discussion are weighed heavily in final grades. Asking questions,
responding to student questions and contributing to an ongoing discussion are
a necessary part of the learning experience. Failure to speak in class only
lowers a student's final grade. Discussions take place in every class period,
each worth 2 "points." Students will receive 0 points for nonparticipation, 1
point for minimal participation, and 2 points for active participation.
Students who raise questions that generate discussion will earn extra points.

The best ways to prepare for and contribute to class discussion are: 1)
complete the reading on time, and 2) critically analyze the reading. The
primary goal of critical reading is to find the author's interpretation and
what evidence and influences led to that conclusion. Never assume a "passive"
position when reading a text. If students ask and attempt to answer the
following questions, they will more fully comprehend and understand any
reading.

1\. What is the thesis of the author?

2\. Does the author have a particular stated or unstated point of view? How
does the author construct their argument? Are the author's goals, viewpoints,
or agendas revealed in the introduction or preface? Does the author provide
evidence to support the argument? Is it the right evidence? In the final
analysis, do you think the author proves the argument or does the author rely
on preconceived views or personal ideology? Why do you think that?

3\. Does the author have a moral or political posture? Is it made explicit or
implicit in the way the story is told? What is the author's view of human
nature? Does change come from human agency and "free will" or broad socio-
economic forces?

4\. What assumptions does the author hold about society? Does the author see
society as hierarchical, pluralistic, democratic or elitist? Does the author
present convincing evidence to support this view?

5\. How is the narrative constructed or organized? Does the author present the
story from the viewpoint of a certain character or group? Why does the author
begin and end at certain points? Is the story one of progress or decline? Why
does the author write this way?

6\. What issues and events does the author **ignore**? Why? Can you think of
alternative interpretations or stories that might present a different
interpretation? Why does the author ignore certain events or facts?  
  
  

* * *

**ORAL REPORTS**

The oral report constitutes 25 percent of the final grade. The purpose of the
assignment is to facilitate and broaden class discussion by comparing another
historical writing with the required class reading. Each week, one student
will be responsible for reading and reporting on a selection of articles
and/or books. The oral report should: 1) BRIEFLY summarize the author's
thesis, and 2) critically examine the sources, methodology, and strengths and
weaknesses of the thesis or theses, and 3) compare the work or works to the
required reading for that week. The questions employed in the critical reading
section above should be applied to in the oral report assignment. Students
will present the report in the beginning or early in the class, whenever it
facilitates discussion. The report should take approximately 10 to 15 minutes.
UNDER NO CIRCUMSTANCES SHOULD THE REPORT EXCEED 15 MINUTES. Oral report
assignments will be made in the introductory class.  
  
  

* * *

**ESSAYS**

The essay requirement serves several purposes. First, good, thoughtful writing
disciplines and educates the mind. To write well, one must think well. If
one's writing improves, so does their thinking and intelligence. Second,
students personally experience on a first-hand basis some form of historical
writing. A research paper relying on primary sources exposes students to the
challenges, difficulties and even contradictions of analyzing historical
events. Ideally, students will think more "historically" as a result of the
exercise. Third, the essay can later function as a writing sample for students
applying for future employment positions as well as to graduate or
professional school.

Two types of long essays are acceptable for this course: research and
historiographical. Research essays analyze a specific topic using **primary**
or **original sources**. Examples of primary sources include (but are not
limited to) newspapers, diaries, letters, oral interviews, books published
during the period under study, manuscript collections, and old maps. A
research essay relies on source material produced by the subject or by
institutions and individuals associated in some capacity with the subject. The
use and immersion of the writer/researcher in such primary and original
sources is often labelled "doing history." Most of the articles and books
assigned for class discussion represent this type of historical writing.

Historiographical essays are based upon at least **ten** different secondary
sources, or what **historians** have written about a subject. Such a paper
examines how historians' interpretations have differed and evolved over time
regarding a specific topic or theme. The major focus of a historiographical
essay are the **ideas** of historians, how they compare with each other and
how they have changed over time. Examples and models for such essays can be
found in the following collections:

Louis Masur, ed., _The Challenge of American History (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
Univ. Press, 1999); originally_ Reviews in American History, vol. 26, no. 1
(March 1998).

Eric Foner, ed., _The New American History_ (Philadelphia: Temple Univ. Press,
1990), especially essays in part II.

Both types of assignments should be the length of a standard scholarly article
(approximately 15-20 typewritten pages of text, plus notes). Students should
select a topic as soon as possible, in consultation with the instructor. A
preliminary bibliography which includes books, articles, oral interviews, or
other possible sources should be completed and handed in by **2 p.m.,
Wednesday, 22 Sept. 1999**.

All essays should be typed. Students who complete the essay **early** have the
option to rewrite the paper upon its evaluation and return (remember - the
only good writing is good rewriting). For students who wish to have the option
of rewriting the essay, **TWO** copies of the first draft of the essay should
be in the professor's possession by **2 p.m., Wednesday, 3 November 1999**.
All other and rewritten essays are due at the final class meeting on **1
December 1999**. On both dates, students should submit **TWO** copies of the
essay. Students who rewrite the essay should also include **the corrected
first draft**.

All final papers should be free of typographical errors, misspellings and
grammatical miscues. For every eight such mistakes, the essay's grade will be
reduced by a fraction (A to A-, A- to B+, etc.). Essays are to be written for
this class ONLY. No essay used to fulfill the requirements of a past or
current course may be submitted. Failure to follow this rule will result in an
automatic grade of F for the assignment. Extensions are granted automatically.
However, grades on essays handed in 48 hours (or more late) will be reduced by
a fraction (A to A-, A- to B+, etc.). Every three days thereafter another
fraction will be dropped from the paper's final grade.

Students in search of a paper topic can begin their investigation with a
cursory reading of any published overview on urban history. Examples include:

Raymond Mohl, ed. _The Making of Urban America_ , second edition (Wilmington,
Del.: SR Books, 1997).

Eric H. Monkkonen, _America Becomes Urban: The Development of U.S. Cities and
Towns, 1780-1980_ (Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1988).

John Reps, _The Making of Urban America_ (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1965).

Sam Bass Warner, Jr., _The Urban Wilderness: A History of the American City_
(New York: Harper and Row, 1972)

The following journals are also useful: _Journal of Urban History_ , _Urban
History Yearbook_ , _Urban Affairs Quarterly_ , _Urban Affairs Review_ , and
_Journal of Social History_.

Back to Timothy Gilfoyle

