**HIEU 380 ORIGINS OF CONTEMPORARY THOUGHT**

Allan Megill, University of Virginia, Spring 2001

Cabell Hall 311, 2:00-3:15 pm Tuesdays and Thursdays
c:\wpdocs\0syllabi\38001des.yes



**COURSE DESCRIPTION AND REQUIREMENTS**

**_ _**

Note: For full information about this course, you need to have in your
possession both this handout and the handout headed "Syllabus." **You should
read both handouts carefully.**



**INSTRUCTOR CONTACT INFORMATION** : _Office Location_ : 221 Randall Hall.



_Office Hours_ : Tu Th 3:30-4:30, **and by arrangement**. You should not feel
confined to my scheduled office hours. An efficient means of arranging
appointment times is by e-mailing me, at _megill@virginia.edu_ ; it is best to
e-mail me a day or two in advance. Often, I can arrange meetings at other
times than the official hours (often, Wednesday and Friday afternoons are good
times to see me, but check in advance). **Note:** On occasion I shall have to
cancel office hours because of other obligations. It is helpful, therefore, to
contact me ahead of time even if you plan to come during regularly scheduled
hours. I cannot _guarantee_ my presence at any particular scheduled office
hour, unless you have alerted me that you will be coming to see me then. __

_ _

_Telephone Numbers_ : _Office_ : 924-6414 (voicemail after several rings if
there is no answer). _Home_ : 971-8744 (answering machine after several
rings). You shouldn't hesitate to phone me at home: I prefer working there to
working in Randall Hall. If we are otherwise occupied we generally don't
answer the phone; but avoid 5 pm-8 pm, and don't phone later than midnight
(although, if you do, it doesn't matter, since the phone won't be heard
anyway).

_E-mail_ : megill@virginia.edu. _Instructor home page_ :
http://www.people.virginia.edu/~adm9e

_ _

_Course home page_ : http:/toolkit.virginia.edu/HIEU380. Some class handouts
will be available via the toolkit (and via my personal home page). But you
should not expect to pick up _all_ class handouts in that way.



**SUBJECT MATTER:** The course examines some important topics in intellectual
history from Darwin's _Origin of Species_ (1859) onward. The course does not
claim to survey the intellectual history of the period in question. Instead it
focuses on a few important themes--themes that I take to be important for
understanding the historical background to current theoretical reflection. The
themes that we consider include: (1) the decline of belief in the notion of a
single, progressive historical process, a notion that dominated much of
nineteenth-century thought; (2) the rise of the notion of a pre-rational or
irrational unconscious, which paralleled doubts concerning the rational
ordering of the world in general; (3) the emergence of  "aestheticism" and of
"crisis thought"; and (4) the emergence of new views of interpretation and of
science. The overall theme is the presence of, and challenges to, the notion
that there is a rationality embedded in the world.



  

**Aim and Style:** The primary aim of the course is to impart some
understanding of the intellectual positions advanced by the thinkers whom we
shall be reading. A lesser aim is to explain why they arrived at those
positions. The explanations that I offer will usually be rather  "internalist"
in character, emphasizing dialogue and conflict within intellectual
traditions. I shall also take note of "externalist" explanations for
intellectual persistence and change, pointing, for example, to sociological
and psychological influences, although I often find such explanations trivial.
I am interested in describing contexts external to texts or intellectual
traditions only insofar as those contexts are relevant to understanding the
texts that we shall be directly reading. I do not deal with the texts as a
means of illuminating non-intellectual contexts.



**COURSE REQUIREMENTS IN GENERAL:** Emphasis will be on the student's own
reading of the works with which we shall be dealing. The idea is that by the
end of the semester you should be able to present, and argue the case for,
your own well-considered ideas concerning the thinkers and themes covered,
instead of simply regurgitating lecture notes. So, you will need to (a) read
carefully and attentively; (b) correct your initial understanding of the
reading in the light of what is said in class; (c) revise and review; and (d)
come up with some ideas of your own concerning the material. I want to have
the sense, when I read what you write for me, that you have read the material
and _thought it out for yourselves_ (with whatever assistance you can get from
lectures, discussion with other students, and the like). You should not assume
that the course will resemble in its approach other courses you may have taken
in the history department, or elsewhere at UVa.



**COURSE REQUIREMENTS IN DETAIL:**



(1) To give a focus to the reading and to stimulate intelligent comments and
questions, I assign weekly "think" questions (TQs) during most of the
semester. These are based on the reading and require informal one-paragraph
answers. They are marked on a pass-fail basis. **_It is absolutely crucial
that the reading be done on time, so that you read it before I explicate it in
class._** If you do the reading only after I have discussed it, you will never
know the material _for yourself_ , and it will show.



**Note** : I shall normally _not_ accept substitute TQs more than one (1)
lecture period past the time when the skipped TQ was supposed to be handed in.

(2) There will be a **midterm test** , 50 minutes long, which will be given in
class period 14, on **Tuesday, March 6, 2001**. Consider it as counting for
15% of the grade. However, in fact the midterm is likely to be decisive for
your grade only in cases of ambiguity. For example, if at the end I have given
you a B/B+ as a tentative grade (based on an equal weighting of requirements
[3] and [4]), your midterm grade may come into play in helping me to decide
which of those two grades to give.



(3) **_This is an important class requirement:_** The following assignment
serves as a substitute for the traditional "term paper" requirement. Toward
the end of the semester students will make up a "restricted term paper" for
the course, of not more than six single-spaced typewritten pages. Pages should
be numbered. Turn off right-justification. (By a "restricted term paper" I
mean a term paper that does not require new reading or research, but instead
requires you to reflect more deeply on what you have already read.)
_Requirement (c), and (d), below, are far weightier than (a) and (b) in
determining the final grade; (c) and (d), further, are about equal in
importance._ You are to pose a question or questions (most likely only one)
designed to cover the material of the course, and answer the question or
questions in as concise, integrated, and original a way as possible. The
question or questions chosen should provide an opportunity for displaying an
understanding of the course as a whole. The "restricted term paper" will be
marked on a letter-grade basis. I consider this paper to be about as important
as the final exam in determining the grade: that is, very important. _To allow
the marking and return of these papers before the end of classes_ , **the due
date is Wednesday, April 18, 2001, by noon, under the door of my office, 221
Randall Hall.** For reasons of fairness, this is a _rigid_ deadline, and
exceptions will be granted only under unusual circumstances. Also, _students
are expected to retain a copy of their paper, and of their working notes and
drafts, until the middle of next semester_. ** __**



**Note** : A few students with prior background may wish to write a
traditional term paper (focusing on a specialized topic) instead of the
"restricted term paper." Any such student should discuss the matter with the
instructor. Topics need to be cleared in advance. However, the vast majority
of students find that the "restricted term paper" requirement better suits
their needs and time constraints.



(4) There will be a 2 1/2-hour closed-book closed-notes examination; it will
be held on **Saturday, May 5, 2001, from 2 to 4:30 pm.** **_This is_** _**an
important class requirement. Thus, a pretty good term paper followed by a
messed-up final will have consequences for the grade.**_



(5) The "restricted term paper" and the final exam count about equally for the
final grade. The midterm test may marginally influence the grade when there is
some doubt in my mind as to what, exactly, it should be. The number and
quality of the "think questions" also have some marginal influence on the
grade. __

_ _

_Graduate Students_ : Graduate students are very welcome to sit in on the
class (if there is space), but they are generally not supposed to say anything
during the class. Sometimes graduate students audit the class, while pursuing
some well defined term paper project under a graduate number.



**CONCERNING PREREQUISITES:** After taking a 300-level course taught by me,
sometimes students have complained because I did not set any prerequisites for
the course. In fact, _no specific prerequisite courses_ are needed: people who
are entirely ignorant of the subject matter can do very well in it, as long as
they can write reasonably well and think in a precise and critical way. (For
example, chemistry majors, math majors, engineers, and others who don't know
the subject matter can do quite well in the course, as long as they can write
reasonably well and aren't under the misapprehension that this is a gutless
humanities course that does not require systematic effort.) Needed are: (a)
the ability to discern the argument or arguments in what one is reading; (b)
the ability to read critically; (c) diligence; and (d) attention to detail.



**HONOR REQUIREMENT:** It is acceptable, and is in fact encouraged, for
students to discuss course material among themselves. It is also acceptable
for students to discuss possible topics for the  "restricted term paper" among
themselves. I do not consider such discussion to constitute an honor
violation, even though it may well aid you in your work. In cases of doubt you
should ask, and in general you should follow a policy of full disclosure. (Of
course, I urge you _very strongly_ to discuss with me your ideas for a
restricted term paper topic: I can often provide good advice.)

  

**BOOKS** (available at UVa Bookstore; copies will also be on reserve in
Clemons):



Charles Darwin, _The Origin of Species_ (Penguin) [There is also a Mentor
paperback of the book. The Penguin edition is preferred, but other editions
are acceptable.]



Friedrich Nietzsche, _The Birth of Tragedy_ (Penguin). Other editions are
acceptable. Walter Kaufmann's translation of _BT_ is good. Golffing's
translation, in _" The Birth of Tragedy" and "The Genealogy of_ _Morals "_
(Doubleday) sometimes diverges seriously from the original.



Allan Megill, _Prophets of Extremity: Nietzsche, Heidegger, Foucault, Derrida_
(California)



Friedrich Nietzsche, _The Portable Nietzsche_ , ed. and trans. Kaufmann
(Penguin)



Friedrich Nietzsche, _On the Genealogy of Morals_ (Hackett). This is a new
edition, and it appears to be superior to all previous English versions of
_GM_. But Kaufmann's translation is also good, and, once again, one can live
with Golffing's translation if you have it already.



Sigmund Freud, _The Interpretation of Dreams_ (Discus Avon)



Sigmund Freud, _Civilization and Its Discontents_ (Norton)



Martin Heidegger, _Basic Writings_ , revised and expanded ed. (Harper
Collins). Note that this is the revised and expanded edition, not the first
edition.



Thomas S. Kuhn, _The Structure of Scientific Revolutions_ (Chicago). Chicago
has recently published a new edition, with an index, but the 2d, rev. enl.
edition of 1970 remains perfectly acceptable. (Note that we may not be able to
devote much time to this book.)



The books have been ordered at the University of Virginia Bookstore. Most are
also being placed on reserve in Clemons Library for your convenience.

** **

**OTHER READING:**



Class Packet, The Copy Shop, 5-B Elliewood Avenue, 295-8337. [The packet costs
$17.50. For your convenience one copy will be placed on reserve in Clemons.]



In addition, there is a relatively small amount of in-copyright material that
students will have to photocopy for themselves, from Mandelbaum, _History,
Man, and Reason_ , Nietzsche, _The Will to Power_ , Sigmund Freud, _Standard
Edition_ , vol. 2 ("Anna O."), and Heidegger, _Being and Time_. I list the
specific pages in a separate handout headed  "Additional Reading."

