# _Northwestern University_

#  English 270-2, American Literary Traditions, Winter 2001-2

#  Course Description and Requirements

[Syllabus](syllabus.html)

Carl Smith, assisted by [Ashley Byock, Coleman Hutchison, and Melinda
Wilson](sectionleaders.html)  
306 University Hall  
491-7136, cjsmith@northwestern.edu  
Hours: TTh 10:45-11:45, and by appointment

This is the second quarter of a survey of significant writers and themes in
American literature. This quarter covers from the Civil War to the turn of the
twentieth century. While the course is part of the English 270-1,2 sequence
that is a prerequisite for English majors, one does not need to have taken
English 270-1 or any other literature class in order to enroll or understand
the material. The literature will be examined partly in terms of the history
of the arts in America and in relation to social and intellectual history.
Some attention will be paid to popular forms, and a portion of the lectures
will be devoted to the visual arts and material culture. English 270-2
fulfills an Area VI Distribution Requirement in Weinberg College of Arts and
Sciences.

This readings have been selected for this course with three purposes in mind:

> 1\. To offer an overview of American literature in the period covered.
Please keep in mind that these readings are a tiny sampling of an enormous
range of work. The ways in which they are representative and not
representative of this range will be discussed in class.

>

> 2\. To examine a major cultural phenomenon in this period, the rise of the
aesthetic and philosophical movement known as realism. In one way or another,
all the authors we examine were realists in the sense that they were engaged
in telling what they thought was important truth about life in their times. As
we approach their works, we shall be asking just what truth were they trying
to tell, how were they trying to tell it, and how their efforts related to the
development of an imaginative understanding of the nature of reality in
America.

>

> 3\. To investigate the timeless issue of human identity and conceptions of
the self in the particular context of late-nineteenth-century America as it
was explored in different ways by the authors we read. As we shall see, the
question of identity was a particularly rich and complicated one in this
period, which was one reason it was such an important subject.

The class will meet as a group on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 9:00 to 10:20
a.m., with sections on Thursday afternoons. The presentations at the group
meetings will do several things. They will provide a broader cultural context,
an introduction to particular authors and works, and, most of all, an
opportunity to analyze individual works. The sections will be devoted to
discussions of particular works, usually emphasizing things not dealt with in
the group presentations.

[Students are required to have registered for a discussion
section](discussionsections.html) at the same time that they registered for
the course. If this is not the case, they **must** register for a section
immediately in the English Department Office, 215 University Hall. **Failure
to register for and attend discussions will result in failing the course**.
For some students, there may be a changes in their original section
assignments (though not discussion times). If anyone wishes to transfer from
one discussion group to another, he or she must speak with the instructor.

There will be three required writing assignments, which are accessible through
links in the [Syllabus](syllabus.html).. In the course of the quarter, there
will be two short (1500-1800 words) essays on the assigned readings.
Assignments will be distributed at least a week before they are due. No late
work will be accepted without approval in advance. The third essay will be
written at the time of the final examination (12-2 p.m., Thursday, March 21).
The format of this examination will be described in advance. **There will be
no other time at which to take the final examination.**

Note: No student can pass the course without completing and passing all the
writing assignments (i.e., one cannot pass the course with a failing grade on
any of the three assignments) and attending the discussion sections on a
regular basis. Beginning with the second discussion section (January 17),
there will be brief quizzes on the week's lectures and reading at the outset
of each of section meetings.

Final grades will be based on the written work and on active, intelligent
participation in the discussion sections. While there may be some adjustment
to recognize distinguished achievement in one area, the essays and final will
generally count for 60% of the grade, the quizzes 20%, and participation in
sections 20%. The lowest quiz grade will be disregarded. Non-attendance at a
section will earn a zero on the quiz for that day.

All students are expected to have active e-mail accounts and basic Internet
skills. If this presents any difficulties, they should inform the instructor
immediately. All course information, including assignments, lecture outlines,
digitized versions of some of the readings, updates, and links to relevant web
sites, will be posted on the English 270-2 website, whose URL is
http://faculty-web.at.nwu.edu/english/csmith/b70-2.[ Students in the course
are also required to subscribe to horatio, the electronic listserv for the
course](getting_started.html), which will also be used to distribute important
course information and additional commentary regarding the readings and
lectures that may arise during the quarter. More information on horatio, as
well as on papers, sections, and related issues, is described elsewhere on
this website. Students are responsible for being away of all information
distributed through horatio.

Students are strongly urged to bring their books to class (this is a
requirement for section meetings).

Students are encouraged at all times, including during class, to ask questions
and to see the instructors after class and during office hours.  



[Syllabus](syllabus.html)

