# Advanced Placement Biology

![](Pics/Electrophoresis.jpg) | AP Biology is designed to be the equivalent of
a college introductory course for biology majors. It is a rigorous,
comprehensive course that provides the conceptual framework, factual
knowledge, and analytical skills necessary to deal critically with this
rapidly changing science. As outlined by the College Board (see below), the
course is divided into three major units: Molecules and Cells (25%), Heredity
and Evolution (25%), and Organisms and Populations (50%).  
---|---  
  
Requirements    Syllabus    Assignments
[Index](http://www.fvs.edu/faculty/jmariner/jmariner-science.html)

![](http://www.fvs.edu/faculty/jmariner/swline.jpg)

**_Graded Course Requirements_**

  
Students' semester grades are based on the total number of points accumulated
relative to the total possible points that could have been earned.   Points
are earned in the following ways:

  * 6 Major tests (100 pts each); these will be modeled after the CEEB's AP Biology Examination in both format and scoring. 
  * 2-3 Formal [ Laboratory Reports](labrpt.8.htm) (50 pts each). 
  * Periodic homework assignments (10-25 pts each). 
  * Fall semester Final exam (25% of semester grade). 

An automatic "late credit" grade (maximum of 60%) will be awarded to assigned
homework that is completed after the due date except in cases of timely
completion of work missed unexpectedly as for illness.  Otherwise, it should
be noted that assignments are due on the date assigned and that when planned
absences (athletic trips, early departures for or late returns from vacations
or breaks, etc.) cause a student to miss class when the assignment is due, the
assigned work is still due on the due date (or before) to avoid the late
penalty. Late major assignments (papers, etc.) will be penalized 10% per
calendar day.

Students taking a test after it has been marked and returned to the class will
not benefit from any scaling adjustment that might have applied to that test.
Students knowing in advance that they will miss a test (for athletic trips,
doctors appointments, etc.) should make arrangements to complete the test
before the absence occurs or before the tests have been scored and returned.
**_Do not_** expect or depend on opportunities for  "extra credit," although
there may be a few opportunities of this nature from time to time.  

For additional details, please see the course _Handbook_ that you received at
the beginning of the year.

[Top of Page](file:///I:/jmariner/APBio.htm)   Requirements     Syllabus
Assignments   [Index](http://www.fvs.edu/faculty/jmariner/jmariner-
science.html)

![](http://www.fvs.edu/faculty/jmariner/swline.jpg)

# Generalized A.P. Biology Syllabus

**  I.  Molecules and Cells** ****   (25%)

         A.  Biological Chemistry     (7%) 

>   1. review of atoms, molecules, bonding, pH, water

>   2. chemistry of carbon and functional groups

>   3. biological molecules: carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, nucleic acids

>   4. chemical reactions, free-energy changes, equilibrium

>   5. enzymes: coenzymes, cofactors, activity rates, regulation

>

         B.  Cells     (10%)

>   1. prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells

>   2. plant and animal cells

>   3. structure and function of cell membranes

>   4. structure and function of organelles, subcellular components of
motility  cytoskeleton

>   5. cell cycle: mitosis and cytokinesis

>

         C.  Cellular Energetics (8%)

>   1.  coupled reactions

>   2.  glycolysis, fermentation, aerobic respiration

>   3.  photosynthesis

>

  **   II.  Genetics and Evolution**   (25%)

         A.  Heredity     (8%)

>   1. meiosis and gametogenesis

>   2. eukaryotic chromosomes

>   3. inheritance patterns

>

        B.  Molecular Genetics     (9%)

>   1. RNA and DNA: structure and function

>   2. regulation of gene expression

>   3. mutation

>   4. nucleic acid technology and applications

>

        C.  Evolutionary Biology     (8%)

>   1. early evolution of life

>   2. evidence for evolution

>   3. mechanisms of evolution

>

**  III.   Organisms and Populations** ****   (50%)

         A. Diversity of Organisms  (8%)

>   1. evolutionary patterns

>   2. survey of the diversity of life

>   3. phylogenetic classification

>   4. evolutionary relationships

>

         B.  Structure and Function of Plants and Animals    (32%)

>   1.  reproduction, growth, and development

>   2. structural, physiological and behavioral adaptations

>   3. response to the environment

>

        C.  Ecology    (10%)

>   1. population dynamics, biotic potential, limiting factors

>   2. ecosystem and community dynamics: energy flow, productivity, species
interactions

>   3. succession, biomes

>   4. biogeochemical cycles

>

>

> [Top of Page](file:///I:/jmariner/APBio.htm)   Requirements    Syllabus
Assignments   [Index](http://www.fvs.edu/faculty/jmariner/jmariner-
science.html)

![](http://www.fvs.edu/faculty/jmariner/swline.jpg)

Assignments for AP Biology

**Office Hours are by appointment, but generally occur period 1 (odd days) and
period 2 (even days).   Extra help is available during the evening study hall
Mondays and alternate Wednesdays, 7-10 pm.**

Text:  **Biology, 6th ed.** by Raven and Johnson (McGraw-Hill) Study Aid:
**Essential Study Partner** , CD-ROM for Biology, 5e (McGraw-Hill)   **Date**
|

**Day** |

**Day**

|

**Assignment**  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
May  6

|

2  |

Monday

|

No Class  
  
May  7

|

3  |

Tuesday

|

PP: Ch 59 (Reproductive, Patel)  
  
May  8

|

4  |

Wednesday

|

PP: Ch 60 (Development, Knowlton)  
  
May  9

|

5  |

Thursday

|  Test (Ch 56-60)  
  
May 10

|

6  |

Friday

|

Review Day  
  
May 13  |

1  |  Monday  |  Review Day  
  
May 14

|

2  |

Tuesday

|

**APBio Exam (8:00 am)**  
  
May 15  |

3  |

Wednesday |

TBA  
May 16  |

4 |

Thursday |  TBA  
May 17  |

5 |

Friday |  **NO Class for all who took AP Exam; Final Exam for others**  
[ ](file:///H:/Jim's%20Page/astronomy.htm)

[Top of Page ](APBio.htm)
[Index](http://www.fvs.edu/faculty/jmariner/jmariner-science.html)



_Last Update: 07 May, 2002 _





##  

