### ![](http://www.nyu.edu/webguide/images/torch.gif)  

[New York University](http://www.nyu.edu)

[Department of History](http://www.nyu.edu/cas/dept/hist.htm)

Fall 1997

## WOMEN IN AMERICAN SOCIETY

## V57.0635

![](women.gif)  
Mon, Wed., 2:50-4:05

### **Professor Esther Katz**

  
Office Hours:  
Mon  & Wed, 1:30-2:30  
or by appointment (998-8620)

## Course Description:

This course will explore the diversity of women's lives and the evolution of
women's role in American society from colonial times to the present. Using
both primary and secondary source readings and films, we will examine the
transformations and continuities in women's lives, and explore the political,
social, economic, and cultural factors that induced and inhibited role changes
for women.

_

### Requirements

_

  1. **Lectures and Class Discussion**
  

Students will be required to attend all lectures and discussion. Student
participation in classes will be encouraged.

  2. **

Required Readings**

_Required Books_ :

    * Mary Beth Norton, _Major Problems in American Women's History_ , 2nd ed. (1996) 
    * Nancy Woloch, _Women and the American Experience_ , 2nd ed. (1994) 
    * Louisa May Alcott, _Little Women_ (Penguin edition, 1989)
    * Aileen Kraditor, _The Ideas of the Woman Suffrage Movement_ (1981) 
    * Amy Tan, _The Joy Luck Club_ (1989) 

All required books are in paperback and available for purchase at the [NYU
Book Center](http://www.bookc.nyu.edu/main/). Copies are also on reserve in
Bobst Library.

_Other Readings:_

All other required readings (articles and documents) are available On Reserve
at [Bobst Library](http://www.nyu.edu/library/bobst/).

  3. **Films**

The following films will be screened in class:

**Hester Street** or **Heaven Will Protect the Working Girl** **Wild Women
Don't Sing the Blues** **Margaret Sanger: A Public Nuisance** **The Life and
Times of Rosie the Riveter**  

  4. **Midterm**

There will be a midterm examination given in class. All questions are to be
answered in essay form.

  5. **Term Paper**

Students will be required to submit an 8-10 page paper comparing the lives of
immigrant women as portrayed in novels, autobiographies, or two biographies.
More detailed instructions will be given in class.

****PLEASE NOTE** : Late submissions without an authorized excuse (doctor's
note or other authorized reason) will be penalized.

  6. **Final Examination**

There will be a final take-home examination covering all the issues and
readings discussed during the course of the semseter. Final questions will be
handed out in class.

******PLEASE NOTE:** FAILURE TO COMPLETE ANY OF THESE REQUIREMENTS WILL BE
MEAN AN "F" FOR THAT PORTION OF YOUR GRADE. NO LATE MAKE-UPS AND NO
INCOMPLETES WILL BE GIVEN WITHOUT A VALID NOTE FROM YOUR PHYSICIAN OR ANOTHER
VERIFIED EXCUSE.

* **Grades**

Class participation: 10%

Midterm: 25%

Term Paper: 25%

Final Exam : 40%  

## Class Syllabus

  

  1. **Defining Women's History**
    * Required Readings
      * Norton, Chap. 1
  

  2. **First American Women: Natives, Immigrants and Slaves**
    * Required Readings
      * Norton, Chap. 2
      * Woloch, Chap. 1
  

  3. **White Women in 17th-Century America**
    * Required Readings
      * Woloch, Chap. 2
      * Laurel Ulrich, _Good Wives: Image and Reality in the Lives of Women in Northern New England, 1650-1750_ , chap. 1
      * Documents: Poems by Anne Bradstreet and John Winthrop & Cotton Mather: Writings on Women (class hand-outs)
  

  4. **Dissent and Witchcraft in 17th-Century America**
    * Required Readings
      * Norton, chap. 3
      * Document: "The Trial of Anne Hutchinson" in Linda Kerber and Jane DeHart, _Women's America_ , 3rd ed. (Oxford University Press, 1991), pp. 53-56.
  

  5. **The Revolution and the Rise of the Republican Mother**
    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chap. 4
      * Woloch, chap. 3 & 4
  

  6. **The Cult of Domesticity**
    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chap. 5
      * Woloch, chaps. 5 & 6
  

  7. **Women in the Old South**
    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chap. 6
      * Deborah Gray White, "Female Slaves: Sex Roles and Status in the Antebellum South," _Journal of Family History_ , vol 8 (Fall 1983): 248-261

**No Class**

  

  8. **Women's Work and Protest in the 19th Century**
    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chaps. 7
      * Woloch, chaps. 7 & 8

****Hand in term paper topics**

  9. **Discussion: Representations of Women**
    * Required Reading
      * Louisa May Alcott, _Little Women_ (entire)
  

  10. **Women in the West**
    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chap. 8
  

  11. **Victorian Sexuality**
    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chap. 9
      * Ellen DuBois and Linda Gordon, "Seeking Ecstasy on the Battlefield: Danger and Pleasure in 19th century Feminist Sexual Thought," _Feminist Studies_ 9:1 (Spring 1983): 7-25.
  

  12. **The New Woman**

**Screening: MARGARET SANGER: A PUBLIC NUISANCE**

    * Required Reading
      * Woloch, chap. 15
      * D'Emilio and Freedman, _Intimate Matters: A History of Sexuality in America_ , chaps. 8 and 10
  

  13. **Discussion: Woman's Suffrage**
    * Required Reading
      * Woloch, chaps. 13 & 14
      * Aileen Kraditor, _The Ideas of the Woman Suffrage Movement_ (entire)
  
**MIDTERM**  
  

  14. **The New Woman: Feminism and Social Reform**
    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chap. 10
      * Woloch, chap. 12
  

  15. **The New Immigrant**

**Screening: HESTER STREET**

    * Required Reading
      * Paula E. Hyman, "Immigrant Women, Community Networks and Consumer Protest: The New York City Kosher Meat Boycott of 1902."
      * Evelyn Nakano Glenn, "The Dialectics of Wage Work: Japanese American Women and Domestic Service, 1905-1940," in Ellen DuBois and Vicki Ruiz, eds., _Unequal Sisters: A Multicultural Reader_ , 1st ed. (Routledge, 1990).
      * Rosalinda M. Gonzalez, "Chicana and Mexican Immigrant Families, 1920-1940: Women's Subordination and Family Exploitation," in Lois Scharf and Joan Jensen, _Decades of Discontent: The Women's Movement, 1920-1940_ (Greenwood Press, 1983).
  

  16. **Work Culture in the Early 20th Century**
    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chap. 11
      * Woloch, chaps. 9-10
      * Kathy Peiss, _Cheap Amusements: Working Women and Leisure in Turn-of-the-Century New York_ (Temple University Press, 1986), chaps. 2-3
  

  17. **Wild Women**

**Screening: WILD WOMEN DON'T SING THE BLUES**

    * Required Reading
      * Hazel V. Carby, "'It Jus Be's Dat Way Sometime': The Sexual Politics of Women's Blues," in DuBois and Ruiz, _Unequal Sisters_ (1990).
  

  18. **After Suffrage -- Women in the 1920s**
    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chap. 12
      * Woloch, chap. 16
  

  19. **Women and the Great Depression**
    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chap. 13 (Depression-era material)
      * Woloch, chap. 17 & 18 (Depression-Era Material)
      * Barbara J. Nelson, "The Origins of the Two-Channel Welfare State: Workman's Compensation and Mother's Aid," in Linda Gordon, ed., _Women, The State and Welfare_ (1990), pp. 123-151.
      * Virginia Sapiro, "The Gender Basis of American Social Policy," _Political Science Quarterly_ , 101:2 (Summer 1986): 221-238.
  

  20. **Impact of World War II**
  

**Screening: THE LIFE AND TIMES OF ROSIE THE RIVETER**

    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chap. 13 (WW II material)
      * Woloch, chap. 18 (WW II material)
  

  21. **The 1950s and the Feminine Mystique**
    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chap. 14
      * Elaine Tyler May, _Homeward Bound: American Families in the Cold War_ (Basic Books, 1988), chap. 4  

*****Term papers to be handed in**

  22. **The Rebirth of Feminism**
    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chap. 15
      * Paula Giddings, _When and Where I Enter: The Impact of Black Women on Race and Sex in America_ , (Morrow, 1984), chap. 17
  

  23. **Discussion: Varieties of Feminism**
    * Required Reading
      * Tan, _The Joy Luck Club_ (entire)
  

  24. **Backlash --American Women in the 1970s & 1980s**
    * Required Reading
      * Norton, chap. 16
      * Woloch, chap. 22
      * Susan Faludi, _Backlash_ ( Crown, 1991), chaps 12  & 14
  

****Final examination questions handed out in class.**

  25. **American Women in the 90s**

