# Political Science Department

![ph03349i.jpg \(54381 bytes\)](images/ph03349i.jpg)



  1. Program Description
  2. [Program Requirements](requirements.htm) (Major, Minor, Certificates)
  3. Faculty Members (Information about the members of the Political Science Department at Siena: Office location and phone number, office hours, direct e-mail access, HOME PAGES of some members, SYLLABI for some courses)
  4. Course Offerings (Organized by sub-field)
  5. [Internship Opportunities](ftp://web:siena@siena.edu/acadprog/ps/int.html) (Washington Semester Program, Legislative Process, Public Service Studies)
  6. [Washington Semester Program.](http://www.american.edu/other.depts/washsem_worldcaps/washsem.htm) Please contact[ Prof. Leon Halpert](mailto:Halpert@Siena.edu) (518/783-2373) for information about this program. 
  7. [Careers for Political Science Majors](Careers.htm)
  8. WEB RESOURCES:[On-line library catalogs](ftp://web:siena@siena.edu/acadprog/ps/library.html), Political Science professional organizations, Political Science departments, Web resources organized by political science sub-field)
  9. [Membership in ICPSR](ftp://web:siena@siena.edu/acadprog/ps/sl/consortium.html)
  10. [Pi Gamma Mu](http://www.sckans.edu/~pgm/home.html): International Social Science Honorary
  11. [Current Issues in America Syllabus](Stars%20on%20Ice%20Syll.htm)

## **Program Description**

The Political Science curriculum provides students with a comprehensive
understanding and appreciation of the study of politics. Students will obtain
basic knowledge within and across the principal fields of the discipline;
think critically about the enduring issues of politics while studying
political institutions, processes, behavior and value systems; and develop a
variety of research skills.

Students who major in Political Science or who complete substantial coursework
in the department will have a foundation for future careers or graduate study
in such areas as law, government service, public policy and administration,
international affairs, teaching, journalism and community or private sector
service. Internships, independent study projects, and honors courses provide
students with in-depth learning opportunities. The program also serves as a
basis for knowledgeable and concerned citizenship for those who choose not to
concentrate in political science.

## **Program Requirements**

Requirements for the Major: 36 hours in Political Science, including POSC-100
through POSC-180.

Requirements for the Minor: 2 courses at the introductory level from POSC-100
through POSC-180; 4 courses at the elective level from POSC-205, through
POSC-378. A student may substitute one Political Science internship (POSC-470,
POSC-485 or POSC-489 for one course at the elective level. A student choosing
the Washington Semester may substitute POSC-790 through POSC-797 for up to two
courses at the elective level.

Education Certification: Political Science majors seeking provisional
certification in social studies need 30 hours in Political Science, including
POSC-100 through POSC-180. Also required are: 3 hours in Economics, 3 hours in
Sociology and 21 hours in History. The History requirement must include the 3
hour College core requirement and the 21 hours must be distributed across four
areas: 6 hours in European history (includes HIST-101 or HIST-190) of which at
least 3 must be in pre-nineteenth century European history; HIST-203 and
HIST-204; 6 hours in non-Western history; and 3 hours in HIST-327 New York
State History.  Students must take 6 hours of college level language other
than English.  To be considered for the Education program, students must have
an overall GPA of 2.90, with a 3.00 in Political Science.

## **Faculty Members**

Here is where you find information about the members of our department.

  * Leonard Cutler, Ph.D.
  * [Kate Langdon Forhan, Ph.D](http://www.siena.edu/forhan).
  * [Leon Halpert, Ph.D. ](http://www.siena.edu/halpert/)
  * [Matthew Lindstrom, Ph.D](http://www.siena.edu/lindstrom).
  * [Salvatore Lombardo, Ph.D.](http://www.siena.edu/lombardo/main.htm)
  * Euclid Rose, Ph.D.
  * [Jean Stern, Ph.D.](http://www.siena.edu/stern/)

## **Course Offerings**

  * [Core Courses](core.htm)
  * [American Politics](american.htm)
  * [Comparative Politics](comparative.htm)
  * [International Relations](internat.htm)
  * [Internships](intern.htm)
  * [Political Theory](theory.html)
  * [Public Administration and Public Policy](policy.htm)
  * [Public Law](law.htm)

## **Web Resources**

This section contains World Wide Web links to:

  * [On-Line Library Catalogs](libraries.htm)
  * [Colleges and Universities](http://dir.yahoo.com/Education/Higher_Education/Colleges_and_Universities/)
  * [On-line Newspapers and Magazines](http://www.siena.edu/foundations/Papers.html)



  

* * *

This page is maintained by:[ Jean Stern](mailto:stern@siena.edu)  
This page last updated on: Thursday, September 06, 2001 |

[![\[Siena's Home
Page\]](http://www.siena.edu/graphics/go2home.gif)](http://www.siena.edu/)  
---|---

