#  ASTRONOMY 236 - A Brief History of Matter in the Universe

**SPRING 2002**

**_Time and Place_** : T, Th 9:30-10:45 in 6515 Sterling Hall

**_Web Page_** : www.astro.wisc.edu/~ewilcots/astro236

**_Instructor_** : Professor Eric M. Wilcots

5524 Sterling Hall

262-2364

[ewilcots@astro.wisc.edu](mailto:ewilcots@astro.wisc.edu)

**_Office Hours_** : T,Th 11-12, or by appointment

**_Texts_** : The only required text is _Galileo's Commandment: An Anthology
of Great Science Writing_ , editied by Edmund Blair Bolles.I will also hand
out a number of articles in class throughout the semester, and these will also
be required reading.There will be a number of supplementary texts held on
reserve in the Astronomy library and/or in the Physics library (the Astronomy
library has limited hours).These include: _Geochemistry_ (Arthur H. Brownlow),
_Astronomy & Astrophysics_ (Michael Zeilik & Stephen A. Gregory), _Moons and
Planets_ (William K. Hartmann), and _Introduction to Geochemistry_ (Konrad B.
Krauskopf  & Dennis K. Bird).You should consider these texts to be resources
to get a bit more information or at least a different perspective from what is
presented in class.They may also serve as reference material for some of the
writing assignments.The course content will largely be contained in lecture
material, the Bolles book, and the articles handed out in class.

**_Writing in Astronomy 236:_**

As you know this course fulfills the University's Communications-B
requirement.The rules and regulations of such courses are that the students
turn in at least 30 pages of writing over the course of the semester.This
includes drafts that get reviewed by the instructor.The course assignments are
designed to fulfill the requirements of the Comm-B designation while improving
your compositional skills and enhancing your knowledge of the history of
matter in the Universe.The readings and writing assignments are also designed
to introduce you to a variety of different styles of scientific writing.There
will be four major writing assignments

**_Writing Fellows:_**

This course takes advantage of the Student Writing Fellow Program.Writing
Fellows are competitively chosen undergraduates who help students develop
their writing skills.They are trained in how to critically evaluate writing
and respond helpfully, and they will work with you individually outside of
class to help you improve the clarity and effectiveness of your writing.But,
Writing Fellows **_do not_** grade your papers or teach you course-specific
content.

Here?s how it works.The Writing Fellows will work with you on two different
assignments.In each case you will submit a polished draft of your paper to me
on the assigned due date.I will pass it along to the Writing Fellows who will
carefully read your paper, make comments on your draft, and then meet with you
individually for a conference to discuss your writing and suggestions for
revision.These conferences are required.You will then revise your paper and
submit both the original draft and the revised version on the specified
revision due date.Please include a cover letter briefly explaining how you
responded to each of your Writing Fellow?s comments.

A ?polished draft? represents your best effort at the assignment.They should
be double-spaced and **_have a complete set of references_**. It is of quality
comparable to what you would turn in for grading.Polished drafts are not
outlines, rough drafts, or even a first draft.Proofread carefully to remove
any grammatical errors.

We?ll be using the writing fellows on the 1st and 4th assignments of the
semester.

**_Writing Assignments:_**

_Writing Assignment #1_ \- "Public Opinion". This assignment is based (in
part) on a true story.Assume that the State Board of Education votes that
students will no longer be responsible for learning about the Big Bang because
"its not real science" and its "just a theory."Your job is to write an op-ed
piece for the newspaper arguing for or against the Board's position.Your
response should clearly state what science is, how the development of our
understanding of the Big Bang fits or does not fit that definition.You should
also review the body of knowledge and how it either does or does not support
the Big Bang.Your positions should be clearly supported with
references.Remember that your audience is the general public that would read
the newspaper and you don't know whether or not they will support the Board's
decision.

Your paper should be 3-4 pages long.

_Writing Assignment #2_ \- "Writing for non-Scientists". Pick a topic covered
in this course an write an article on the topic for a popular magazine.Feel
free to pick a topic we have not yet discussed.Assume your audience to be
college-educated, but not scientific (all those English majors running around
out there).You will be assessed on the content and the effectiveness of
reaching the targeted audience.The length should be 5 pages.If you?ve written
less than 4, you need more content.If you've written more than 6, you're
probably be too verbose.I'll have a list of suggested topics once the time
gets closer.

_Writing Assignment #3_ \- "Writing for the Journals". We have a week long lab
exercise in this course which will probably concentrate on the analysis of the
composition of a sample of rocks and minerals.Your assignment is to do the lab
and write up your results as if you were writing for a scientific journal such
as _Science_ or _Nature_. Remember that your audience will be other
scientists.The paper should about 3-4 pages long.

_Writing Assignment #4_ \- "The Proposal". Academics spend huge amounts of
time writing proposals, the most significant of which request funding from the
Federal government to support our scientific research.Astronomers, geologists,
physicists, and chemists get a good deal of their support from the National
Science Foundation.The heart of any proposal is the research statement, a
document that effectively demonstrates the author?s familiarity with their
area of research, and poses and justifies, in a persuasive manner, a question
or series of questions to be answered by the funded research.The questions
should, of course, be important to furthering our understanding of the
specific field.The statement then goes on to clearly explain how the research
will answer the questions raised in the proposal.Your assignment is to write
the research statement of a proposal to the National Science Foundation.You
may chose your own topic, but it must be closely related to the course content
and it must be approved by me in advance.You are limited to 8 pages, and keep
in mind that it will be difficult to write a good proposal in less than 5-6
pages.You should concentrate on: demonstrating your knowledge of the subject
(call this part review), understanding what the important unanswered questions
are and why they are important, and giving an overview of how we might go
about answering the questions.About half of the paper should be review,
another third should be the identification of the unanswered questions and the
last bit should be how you?d try to answer the questions.  
  

**_Exams:_**

There will be an in-class midterm on March 14 and a comprehensive final
schedule for Sunday May 12 at 2:45pm.

**_Grading:_**

Midterm: 10%

Final Exam: 15%

Paper #1: 20%

Paper #2: 15%

Paper #3: 15%

Paper #4: 20%

Miscellaneous: 5%

**_Syllabus:_**

Reading assignments for each week are listed in italics.All selections are
from _Galileo's Commandment_ unless otherwise noted.A (p) indicates a paper to
be distributed in class.Parentheses indicate reading that is optional but
recommended.

##  Part One - The Atom & The Elements

###  Week 1-Reading: Lucretius, Butterfield, Boyle, Lavoisier, (Brownlow
Chapter 1)

Jan 22 (1) - Introductions/Overview

Jan 24 (2) - Historical Perspective: Lucretius to Quantum Mechanics

_Week 2 - Reading: Duncan, Curie, Oppenheimer, Levi_

Jan 29 (3) - Structure of the Atom: The Nucleus

Jan 31 (4) - Structure of the Atom & The Definition of the Elements

##  Part Two - Origin of the Elements

Week 3 - Reading: [Hubble & Humason(p)](hubblehumason.pdf), Penzias &
Wilson(p), Hoyle, Smoot, Galileo (Silk Chapters 3-8, Ferris Chapters 8-11)

Feb 5 (5) - The Size and Expansion of the Universe

Feb 7 (6) - The Big Bang

Week 4 - Reading: Hoyle, [Bania et al. (p)](baniaetal.pdf),
[Hogan(p)](hogan.deuterium.pdf), [Bahcall(p)](bahcall.pdf), [Srianand et
al.(p)](srianand.pdf), Hogan(p), (Silk Chapter 3-8, Ferris Chapters 8-11)

Feb 12 (7) - The Big Bang continued

Feb 14 (8) - The Origin of H & He

_Week 5 - Reading: Cannon, (Brownlow Chapter 1)  _

Feb19 (9) - Tests of Big Bang Nucleosynthesis

Feb21 (10) - Galaxy Formation

##  Polshed Draft of Paper #1 Due in class on February 21

###

###  Week 6 - Reading: Rutherford, Heisenberg, (Zeilek & Gregory Ch 13, 16,
17)

Feb 26 (11) - Nucleosynthesis and Stellar Evolution

Feb 28 (12) - Nucleosynthesis and Stellar Evolution

  

##  Part Three - From There to Here

###

###  Week 7 - Reading: [Arnett & Bazan(p)](arnett+bazan.pdf),[Henning &
Salama(p) ](henning+salama.pdf), (Zeilik & Gregory Ch 16-17,20)

Mar5 (13) - Nucleosynthesis and Stellar Evolution

Mar7 (14) - The History of the Milky Way

##  Revised Version of Paper #1 Due in class on March 7

###

###  Week 8 - Reading: Maxwell, Henning & Salama(p), Gilmore & Wyse(p)

Mar 12 (15) - The History of the Milky Way

Mar 14 (16) - Midterm Exam (in class)

###  Week 9 - Reading: TBD

Mar 19 (17) - Molecules in Space

Mar 21 (18) - Star Formation

###  Week 10 - Reading: McPhee, [Cameron(p)](cameron.taf),
[Russell(p)](russell.pdf), [Thommes et al.(p)](thommes.etal.pdf),
[Chapman(p)](chapman.pdf), [Tegler & Romanishin(p)](teglerandromanishin.pdf),
(Brownlow Ch 7-9), (Hartmann Ch 10)

Apr2 (19) - Molecules and Star Formation

Apr4 (20) - Formation of the Solar System

##  Paper #2 Due in class on April 2

###  Week 11 - Reading: [Schonbachler(p)](schonbachler.etal.pdf),
[Sephton(p)](sephton.pdf), [McSween(p)](mcsween.pdf), [Cooper et
al.(p)](cooper.etal.pdf), [ Nicolussi et al ](nicolussi.etal.pdf), [ Drake &
Richter(p) ](drakeandrichter.pdf), (Hartmann Ch 4-5)

Apr9 (21) - Meteorites

Apr 11(22) - The Outer Solar System

###  Week 12 - Reading: None!

Apr 16 (23) - Rock Lab

Apr 18 (24) - Rock Lab

###  Week 13 - Reading: [Moon Origin(p)](moonorigin.canup.pdf),
[Melosh(p)](melosh.pdf),

Apr 23 (25) - Formation of the Moon

Apr 25 (26) - Composition of the Inner Solar System

##  Paper #3 (Rock Lab Write-Up) Due in class on April 23

Polished Draft of Paper #4 Due in class on April 25

###  Week 14 - Reading: da Vinci, Sullivan, Wegener,
[Argon(p)](argoninmantle.pdf), [Wedding Ring(p)](walker.pdf),
[Perfit(p)](perfit.pdf), (Brownlow Ch 7-9), Krauskopf & Bird Ch 17, 18)

Apr 30 (27) - Origin of Igneous Rocks

May 2 (28) - Evolution of Mantle and Crust

###  Week 15 - Reading: Herodotus, (Krauskopf & Bird Ch 17, 18, 21), (Brownlow
Ch 7-9)

May 7 (29) - Evolution of the Earth?s Mantle and Crust

May 9 (30) -- Overview

  


###  May 12 (31) - Final Exam - **Revised Version of Paper #4 Due**

