    
  **Columbia University** | **Department of East Asian Languages and Culture**  
---|---  
**Professor Henry Smith** | **412 Kent**  
**Spring 1988** | **Office Hours:   Th  12:00-1:30 **  
  
  **EAAS V3613** **Buildings and Cities in Japanese History**

* * *

**TIME:   Tu/Th 10:35-11:50 Spring 1998**

**PLACE:   Kress Room, Starr East Asian Library**

**TA: Kerry Ross**

**_Course Description_**

**This course has two purposes. The first is to give you a basic acquaintance
with Japanese practices of architecture and city-building from their
beginnings until the 17th century, by which time they had pretty much assumed
the stable forms that in the modern period would come to be known as
"traditional." This aim will be accomplished in the first eight weeks of the
course, up until the spring break. The format of this part of the course will
be of the usual sort, with assigned readings that we will discuss each
session, plus two quizzes and a midterm exam.**

**The second purpose of the course is to work as a group to create a Web site
on "traditional" Japanese architecture as it evolved in the 16th and 17th
centuries. This will occupy us for the remaining six weeks of the course. I
have no idea yet exactly how we will do this, and assume that the project will
evolve as we work at it; it will be a group effort.**

**_Prerequisites_**

**There are no formal prerequisites for the course, but I would hope that each
of you come with either some background in Japan and its history, or some
background in architecture or urban history.**

**_Requirements_**

**For the period before spring break, there will be quizzes and a midterm exam
to test your mastery of the facts of Japanese architectural and urban history.
For the creation of the Web site after the spring break, you will be expected
to be an active participant in the design of the site, and in the research and
writing of the material for it.**

**_Readings_**

**The basic background textbook for the course is Paul Varley, _Japanese
Culture: A Short History_ , which is available for purchase at Labyrinth
Bookstore. Kazuo Nishi and Kazuo Hozumi, _What is Japanese Architecture?_ ,
has also been ordered, but appears to be temporarily out of stock at the
publisher. Xerox copies of the assignments from this work will be provided
until it arrives.**

**All assigned readings are available on reserve in the East Asian Library in
Kent Hall. In addition to the reading assignments, there will be slide-tape
presentations that you can view on your own in the East Asian Library.**

* * *

**SYLLABUS**  

* * *

**#1. Tu, Jan. 20. The Geographical Determinants of Japanese Building**

**No assignment.**

* * *

**#2. Th, Jan. 22. The Earliest Japanese Buildings**

**READING: Varley, Japanese Culture, ch. 1.**

**Nishi, _What Is Japanese Architecture?_ , pp. 54-55**

**MAP QUIZ: Be prepared to draw a map of Japan and identify the following: the
four main islands (Hokkaido,** **Honshu, Shikoku, Kyushu); the cities of Nara,
Heian (Kyoto), Kamakura, Edo (Tokyo), Osaka, and Nagasaki; and Mt. Fuji.**

* * *

**#3. Tu, Jan. 27. The Primal Act of Building in Japan**

**READING: G unter Nitschke, _From Shinto to Ando: Studies in Architectural_**

**_Anthropology in Japan_ (Academy Editions, 1993), pp. 95-103. Starr reserve
NA1555 .N587 1993**

* * *

**#4. Th, Jan. 29. The Pattern of Ritual Renewal**

**SLIDE-TAPE MODULE: "The Grand Shrine of Ise: Shinto Takes Shape"(Also
available in text version from Smith home page.)**

**READING: Varley, ch. 2.**

**Tsunoda, _Sources of Japanese Tradition_ , 23-32 (pb, I / 21-30).**

**Nishi, pp. 40-41.**

* * *

**#5. Tu, Feb. 3. Buddhist Architecture on Japanese Soil**

**SLIDE-TAPE MODULE: "Prince Shtoku's Temple: The Riddles of Horyuji"**

**READING: Nishi, pp. 12-15.**

**Nishioka Tsunekazu, "The Lessons of Horyuji," _Japan Echo_ , 13/1 (Spring
1986), pp. 8-15. [FOLDER]**

* * *

**#6. Th, Feb. 5. Todaiji and the Shosoin**

**READING: Nishi, pp. 16-17, 20-21.**

**Tsunoda, _Sources of Japanese Tradition_ , I / 91-105.**

* * *

**#7. Tu, Feb. 10. The Capitals of Nara and Heian**

**READING: Varley, ch. 3**

**Nishi, pp. 56-59**

**John W. Hall, "Kyoto as Historical Background," in John W. Hall and Jeffrey
P. Mass, eds., _Medieval Japan:_** _**Essays in Institutional History**_
**(Yale Univ. Press, 1974), pp. 3-38.**

**QUIZ: ID questions on Varley, chs. 1-3.**

* * *

**#8. Th, Feb. 12. Living Space in the World of Genji**

**READING: Varley, ch. 4**

**Nishi, pp. 64-67**

**Ivan Morris, _The World of the Shining Prince_ , ch. II ("The Setting"),
esp. pp. 44-50.**

* * *

**#9. Tu, Feb. 17. Medieval Ideas of Dwelling and Landscape**

**READING: Varley, ch. 5**

**"An Account of My Hut" [ _Hojoki_ ], in Donald Keene, comp., _Anthology of
Japanese Literature_ , pp. 197-212.**

**Mitchell Bring and Josse Wayembergh, _Japanese Gardens_ (McGraw-Hill, 1981),
pp. 151-171.**

**ASSIGNMENT: Draw as detailed a plan as possible of Kamo no Chomei's ten-foot
square hut as described in the _Hojoki_ , labelling it with your thoughts on
the significance of the various elements.**

* * *

**#10. Th, Feb. 19. The Japanese Garden**

**READING: Mitchell Bring and Josse Wayembergh, _Japanese Gardens_ (McGraw-
Hill, 1981), pp. 55-77, 172-189.**

* * *

**#11. Tu, Feb. 24. Samurai Culture**

**READING: Varley, ch. 6**

**QUIZ: ID questions on Varley, chs. 3-6.**

* * *

**#12. Th, Feb. 26. The Shoin "Style"**

**READING: Nishi, pp. 70-77**

**Ito Teiji, "The Development of Shoin-Style Architecture," in John Hall and
Toyoda Takeshi, eds., _Japan in the_** _**Muromachi Age**_ **(Univ. of
California Press, 1977), pp. 227-39. [FOLDER]**

* * *

**#13. Tu, March 3. The Teahouse and Sukiya Design**

**READING: Nishi, pp. 78-81, 105-119**

**EXERCISE: Construct a paper model of the Taian Teahouse (for which materials
will be handed out), then study** **the model carefully to see how the
teahouse actually works.**

* * *

**#14. Th, March 5. The Age of the Castle**

**READING: Michael Cooper, ed., They Came to Japan--An Anthology of European
Reports on Japan, 1543-1640, pp. 131-141, 260-268.**

**John W. Hall, "The Castle Town and Japan's Modern Urbanization," in John W.
Hall and Marius Jansen, eds., _Studies in the Institutional History of Early
Modern Japan_ (Princeton UP, 1968), pp. 169-188. Starr reserve DS871 .H29**

**Nishi, pp. 94-101.**

* * *

**#15. Tu, March 10. To be announced: probably Review Session**

* * *

**#16. Th, March 12. MIDTERM EXAM**

**MIDTERM: The midterm will cover all the material assigned in the course so
far, and will include identification questions on basic terms of Japanese
history and architecture, plus slide identifications from the slide modules.**

* * *

**The remainder of the course after the Spring Break will be devoted to the
construction of a WWW site on classical Japanese architecture by the members
of the course. Stay tuned for details.**  


