Last Update: Sep. 22, 1998  
Electronic address of this document:
http://zippy.ph.utexas.edu/~rcorrado/survival/  
How to contribute to this document.

* * *

# Survival Guide to Physics at UTAustin

If your first few days here have left you feeling herded like a longhorn,
you're not alone, we still feel that way. What's the inside scoop? This guide
sets out to expose a bit of it. The guide consists of the collected opinions
of many grad students and of course we're right about everything.

We've left our names off the document for the simple reason that many more
people than just the authors themselves contributed the opinions written here.
We're also afraid that we'll be hunted down, chained to our desks and never
allowed to graduate.

This guide depends on you to provide feedback and make sure it's accurate and
up to date. If you thought it was a good idea, then congratulations, you have
inherited ownership of the project. It is the effort of a handful of
individuals, not any organization, which means it won't happen again next year
unless someone new decides to pick it up. If something about UT physics bugs
you, then make a note of it and pass it on to us.

If all this seems like too much to think about in this heat then go over to
the Crown & Anchor or the Posse East for a few cold ones. It helps and surely
much of this document was conceived over quite a number of pitchers.

In the words of the almighty telephone enrollment exchange (TEX), "Good bye,
and good luck."

## This Guide has been organized into the following sections:

##

  1. Survey of UT Grad Physics.

    * Course Load
    * Teaching Assistantships
    * Degree Requirements
    * Getting into a Research Program
    * Advice (and where to get it)

##

  2. Core Classes and Your Best Bets for Fall 1998.

    * Classical Mechanics
    * Quantum Mechanics I
    * Classical Electrodynamics I
    * Statistical Mechanics

##

  3. Professors.

##

  4. Research Groups.

* * *

* * *

# 1\. Survey of UT Grad Physics

Now that you're a grad student here, what does that mean? We'll try to give a
time-worn interpretation of all of the rules and bureaucracy you're quickly
being hit by.

## Course Load

The university requires you to be registered for three courses (9 credit
hours), but two real physics classes really are quite enough, especially if
they're core classes and you're teaching three sections of a lab at the same
time. So how do you fill up the rest of your schedule? Take a "seminar course"
(nudge nudge, wink wink, he says knowingly). These are worth 3 credits (but
not much else) and give you a chance to find out what research is being done
these days. Attendance is quite optional (the prof in charge just gives
everyone credit anyway), so you don't really even have to go to a seminar if
you don't want to. We suggest that you do go to a few seminars (at least the
colloquium) each week, even if they're not the one you registered for.

Two seminars worth registering for are the 398T course (Supervised Teaching,
which you'll have to take at some point your first year here) and the
Technical Seminar (taught under 392T). These require more work than the other
seminars: 398T requires attendance and participation, but again, you have to
take it anyway, and you'll meet people in it; the Technical Seminar requires
attendance, but you get a letter grade (an A could be nicer than a CR to you).

Good luck getting past Udagawa if a surge in your adrenaline level has
compelled you to sign up for three meaty courses. In fact he's right - you
shouldn't take three real classes. It's a good idea to make your two classes
cores the first semester, though. You don't want to have a full schedule later
on, when you're trying to do research and prepare your qualifying seminar. If
you feel that you'd benefit from it and decide to take it, register for the
381M, Mathematical Methods I course with the CAM unique number. You'll see why
when we discuss the degree requirements.

## Teaching Assistantships

So not only are you in a precarious academic situation, but now you have to
(Aaarggggghhhhh!) get up in front of a class of (occasional) adolescents and
teach them some physics. Our advice: take things wisely and not too seriously.
It's alright to feel a sense of duty to be a successful teacher; it's also a
rewarding occupation, mentally, if not financially. You also wouldn't want to
deny your students the same quality of education you hope to receive yourself
here at UT. However, the reality is, you are being paid for 20 hours/week and
you have your own classes to worry about. The only way to make the best of
this situation without shortchanging either yourself, your students, or the
department, is to keep a firm perspective and plan your duties ahead. Oh yeah,
the document that spells out your duties as a Teaching Assistant here at UT is
the Manual for TAs & AIs.

Some helpful practices:

  * If you are a lab TA, go to the weekly TA meeting. If you don't, you'll probably be fired, but you also want to make sure you understand what is going on in the lab. Your extensive physics background may not have prepared you for some of the peculiarities of the equipment that you may find. Read the lab manual and learn how to do each experiment; it doesn't take that long. Your students will be impressed when your mere presence causes their experiment to work. 
  * While you're at the TA meeting, make sure that you discuss grading methodology with the more experienced TAs. Your head TA and faculty supervisor are assigned to help you and can be useful as mentors. We've estimated that, in just about every case, new TAs spend about 20-25% more time doing their job than does a TA with just a year of experience. Find out what grading methods work and which ones don't and you might save yourself several hours each week. 
  * Keep up with your grading! The department suggests practicing a one-week turnaround time for lab reports (prompt grading of other types of assignments is also desirable), doing this will benefit you as well. Be advised that most laboratory grades are due _before_ finals week. You do not want to have to grade several hundred lab reports while you're studying for your own finals. 
  * On the other hand, don't be afraid to put your own work ahead of your grading once in a while. If you're been assigned all of the problems in the current chapter of Jackson, then do your grading after you've turned the problem set in. Just be smart: don't make a habit of doing this and make sure you catch up with the grading quickly. 
  * The 20 hour workload assigned to you is definitively accurate. If you are spending more time than this on your TA appointment, then you need to re-evaluate your methods. Consult your fellow TAs on the issue for guidance. 
  * **DO NOT COUNT ON SUMMER APPOINTMENTS!** Make sure you've put that application in at Taco Bell or the Quikmart, because there are only around 15-20 appointments available for around 120 TAs in the summer. You may also need relevant job experience for after you've completed your PhD. 
  * Try to get a GRA as soon as possible. Just as it is not a completely healthy situation to take classes and teach at the same time, it's downright frightening to think about taking classes, teaching 20 hours a week, and working for an advisor who expects to see you in the lab or at your desk every waking moment. The ability to support you with a GRA (especially over the summer) should be an important criterion when considering advisors. It should also be a motivation for trying to find an advisor as soon as you can. 
  * **Summer Tuition Fellowships** : In the case that you do find a summer appointment as a TA, AI, GRA, or RESA appointment, you are required register for a certain minimum number of credit hours during your appointment. You can ask Norma what the specific requirement is for your appointment. While you're at it, tell Norma that you want to fill out an application for a Summer Tuition Fellowship; you just might get back the money you lay out on tuition later in the summer. 

An important recent development is the evaluation of general physics
proficiency that all TAs must pass. This has been adopted as an assurance that
undergraduates will receive the best education possible from our department.
Failure to become certified will mean that you will be required to do homework
problems from the freshman engineering physics class on the material that you
should be better prepared in. Our advice is that you get certified at your
first opportunity to do so; therefore prepare for the exam. The homework is
multiple choice and not what you should be spending your time on. Also,
remember that, while Prof. Moore is responsible for assigning problems to you
and making sure that you are complying with the requirements, he is only your
boss if you are appointed as a grader or computer assistant for him. If you
are a lab TA and the assignment he gives you is not a multiple choice homework
assignment like those assigned in the freshman course, if it looks curiously
like you're being asked to prepare an assignment for use in a course, don't be
afraid to stand up for yourself. Your duties regarding the general proficiency
requirement are not supposed to go beyond preparing you for coaching and your
other duties; if they aren't doing that, then complain to Prof. Gentle or to
the Graduate/TA Welfare Committee.

## Degree Requirements

Official university documents can tend to be obfuscating disasters. Here we'll
try to boil down _exactly_ what requirements you must have satisfied before:
1) qualifying for candidacy, and 2) getting your PhD.

### Doctoral Candidacy

To be admitted to doctoral candidacy, you must have completed the following
requirements within 27 months of admission (generally by the end of your third
November here, if you came in during the Fall term):

  1. You must pass the four "core" courses, Quantum Mechanics I, Classical Electrodynamics I, Classical Mechanics, and Statistical Mechanics with a grade-point average of B+ (3.3) or better. 
  2. You must show evidence of exposure to modern methods of experimental physics through a senior-level course, participation in an experimental research program, or by taking the graduate course (380N) in experimental physics 
  3. After having completed the above requirements, you must present a seminar on a proposed research topic followed by an oral examination. 

There are some intricate details in completing these requirements. First of
all, there is some leeway in achieving the B+ average in the core classes. As
long as you have at least a B- in all of the cores, you can substitute your
grade in the 380N Experimental Physics course for a low grade in one of the
core classes if it improves your average. If you repeat a core class, only
your best grade is used to calculate your average. Don't expect that the core
classes are curved around a B+, though. Scores can come out curved low as well
as high. In rare cases, however, the chairman will demand that a professor
change grades to better approximate a B+ average.

A suitable advanced undergraduate laboratory will satisfy the experimental
physics requirement, though Prof. Udagawa has the final word on the issue.
However, working with an experimentalist as an RA might not get you out of
this requirement, again Udagawa will have the last word. If you have to take
the Experimental Physics course, definitely do it during the summer session
(just make sure that you have some sort of appointment, because you do not
want to pay out-of-state tuition if you can avoid it). There is room for foul
play here. If you are trying to get into a particular experimental group
(maybe even get an RA'ship), doing a 380N project for them is a way to make
yourself indispensable. What you supposedly can't do is a 380N project for a
group if you already work there, but let's just say they don't always notice.

Your advisor may have his or her own ideas on what degree of accomplishment
you should have reached by the time you give your qualifying seminar, but as
far as the department is concerned, you aren't expected to have produced
anything original. The purpose of the qualifying seminar is to demonstrate
your ability to perform research in your chosen area of specialization, not to
show that you have made a significant contribution to that area; unfortunately
even dissertations don't always do that. By the time you give your qualifier,
you should have a problem in mind which you intend to focus your research
efforts on; your seminar should discuss what you know about that problem, your
proposal for a novel way to approach the solution of that problem, and any
progress you may have made to date. The professors on your qualifying
committee will generally use the oral exam part of the qualifier to test you
on the material covered in your talk, but be warned that their questions can
be more general. This is a difficult requirement, however, and you will want
to begin preparation as early as possible.

### PhD Requirements

Once you've satisfied the above requirements for candidacy, you must prepare
an approved program of work as part of your application for candidacy. At the
time this Guide is being written (check with Udagawa), there are two options
within the guidelines for the program of work:

Beyond the requirements for candidacy, you must also take at least four
advanced courses in physics (a list of approved courses appears below) with a
grade of B- or above. In addition, three courses are required to constitute
"supporting work", with the following options:

  * **Option I** : Two advanced courses in physics which are outside of your area of specialization and one course outside the department. 
  * **Option II** : One advanced course in physics which is outside of your area of specialization and two courses outside the department. 
The advanced courses within the supporting work count toward the required
four. Two of the three supporting work courses can also be taken on a
credit/NC basis. The outside the department courses can be undergraduate
courses as long Prof. Udagawa approves.

Approved Advanced Courses  
---  
380L Plasma Physics I | 380M Plasma Physics II  
380N Experimental Physics | 381N Advanced Methods of Mathematical Physics  
382M Fluid Mechanics | 385T Advanced Topics in Statistical Mechanics  
387L E&M; II | 389L Quantum Mechanics II  
387M Relativity I | 387N Relativity II  
392K Solid State I | 392L Solid State II  
392T Nonlinear Dynamics | 396J Introduction to Elementary Particle Physics  
395 Atomic&Molecular; Physics | 395K Nonlinear Optics and Lasers  
396K Quantum Field Theory I | 396L Quantum Field Theory II  
  
The online Course Catalog has a list of the currently offered advanced
classes.

Note that 381M, Mathematical Methods I, is neither a core class nor an
advanced class. Well, it just so happens that it is taught as part of the
Computational and Applied Mathematics (CAM) interdisciplinary program, so it
can count as an out of department supporting course if you take it with the
CAM unique number. There are other physics courses which are also offered
under CAM or other department headings; check the course schedule carefully.

## Getting Into a Research Program

First, the general situation: If you haven't realized it by now, you are
completely on your own. There is no official process at all which helps you
become associated with and supported by a faculty member. You simply have to
start knocking on doors to learn what people are doing and if they have room
for new students. You might want to bring along a resume/curriculum vitae. If
you are interested in someone in particular, find out the names of post-docs
and grad students who already work for her or him, then go to them to gather
details on the work being done and the atmosphere in which it is done. Frankly
there are a few professors who are lousy to work with. Some are too busy to
work with you, others have few resources and no means of supporting their
students with GRAs, and others may outright fire you without warning. Choosing
an advisor is an important decision and you should be careful and get many
second opinions.

We suggest that you begin considering your options for an advisor immediately.
In our opinion, an optimal situation is one in which you begin approaching
professors during your second semester here and begin working (on at least a
trial basis) with someone over your first summer. On rare occasions, you might
even find summer support this way. Even if you're not certain what it is that
you want to do, talk to the graduate students and professors in the fields you
are at least interested in. For your benefit, this document includes a brief
discussion of the opportunities associated with the major research groups in
the department. Links to any Web-based information supplied by these groups
have been included.

Getting into a group can involve some delicate maneuvering. In some cases you
should plan to offer some time, as much as a semester or longer, volunteering.
As one professor put it, "If you become indispensable, we'll keep you around."
For some groups or fields not even this may get you in. As mentioned above,
for experimentalists, another good way to get to know a group is to do a
project in 380N, Experimental Physics. Theorists have the least funding and
theory students are often the ones who become career TA's and AI's.

## Advice (and where to get it)

Some important official people to remember:

  * Norma Kotz, the graduate coordinator. Norma will probably be the person at UT with whom you interact with the most your first year here. She will also be one of the friendliest amongst the faculty and staff. She can help you with much of the bureaucracy surrounding your TA appointment and academic affairs, as well as fill you in on the housing and shopping available to you in Austin. 
  * Olga Vorloou, the administrative coordinator. Olga takes care of administrative issues, such as financial matters associated with your TA appointment and in-state tuition entitlements. She'll be the one who explains to you why you didn't get paid before November for an appointment that began at the end of August. 
  * Takeshi Udagawa, the graduate advisor. Prof. Udagawa will advise you on all of the courses you take until you are approved for PhD candidacy. Prof. Udagawa is the person who must approve your course of work when you apply for candidacy, so you should probably pay attention. However, it's a level playing field, you're free to register for anything you want. Just make sure you take the required courses by the appropriate deadlines. 
  * Ken Gentle, the chairman. Prof. Gentle is the boss man for all you TA-types. Some of you may know him from his recent short term as graduate advisor. He's pretty friendly, but we don't know as yet if he's as slippery as Gleeson. 

Things will tend to be easier for you (at least you probably won't find any
suprises) if you do your own homework, by reading any relevent university
documentation or talking to other students, before you consult the official
sources above or otherwise, when you're trying to find out something important
of an academic nature or regarding your employment.

We recommend that you consider all avenues for advice when you need it, and
urge that you seek the advice of the grad students who've been through all of
this once. Many of them have been packed into RLM 9.222, as will some of you;
go there if you need to bitch about your paycheck (or lack of one), or need
directions to the Austin Plasma Center (where you can sell blood plasma) or
Pharmaco (where you earn money as a guinea pig).

* * *

* * *

# 2\. Core Classes and Your Best Bets for Fall 1998

Your performance in the core classes is an extremely big part of your survival
out here at UT, as such you should choose the professors you take them from
wisely. Here we have listed some suggested references to use in the core
classes, as well as a brief discussion of the professors who teach them. The
online version of this document allows you to click on a professor's name to
get to their listing in the Professors section. We urge you to read over both
the recommendations and the comments regarding each professor before making a
final decision as to which classes you register for.

* * *

## Classical Mechanics

Goldstein's book hasn't yet been defeated as the classic text for this course,
although it is now out of date. Landau and Lifshitz has been used as the
assigned text in some recent courses. It's terse, but is a good reference for
the basics, and has many worked-out problems. Expect to see non-standard texts
assigned for this course, such as the homegrown book by Richard Matzner and
Larry Shepley, which is a quite reasonable text, or a book which is more up-
to-date on developments in integrable systems and chaos, such as Tabor's
_Integrability and Chaos in Dynamical Systems_ , which is good, but riddled
with typos and other errors.

**Recommendations:** Try to take Classical Mechanics from Morrison if at all
possible. This means take it this semester, if you can. In general, avoid
Schieve and Matzner and see the comments below on Berk. Drummond is no longer
really considered a reasonable choice.

### Classical Mechanics Professors

  * Fall 1998: 
    * William Drummond. 
    * William Schieve. 
  * Past Semesters: 
    * Herbert Berk. 
    * Bryce DeWitt. 
    * Richard Matzner. 
    * Philip Morrison.  

* * *

## Quantum Mechanics I

Most students are happy with the modern perspective contained in Sakurai's
book. Landau and Lifshitz and Cohen-Tannoudji's texts are thorough and very
useful for seeing worked problems, but neither are ever the main texts.
Merzbacher is often the assigned text, but even the professor assigning it
won't follow it very closely; avoid it. When Arno Bohm teaches the course, he
assigns his own book, which isn't as bad as his teaching.

**Recommendations:** Dicus comes strongly recommended. Many professors have
taught this in the past, so there isn't much in the way of regularity; among
them we recommend Fischler, Fitzpatrick, and Udagawa.

### Quantum Mechanics I Professors

  * Fall 1998 
    * Duane Dicus. 
  * Past Semesters 
    * Vadim Kaplunovsky. 
    * Qian Niu. 
    * George Sudarshan. 
    * Takeshi Udagawa.  

* * *

## Electromagnetic Theory I

There is room for surprise here. Typically, you should prepare to spend your
nights and weekends with Dr. J. D. Jackson during your tenure in this course,
but Fitzpatrick covers a bit more reasonable set of material, so you will
spend your nights and weekends with his course notes . The "standardized"
syllabus omits chapters 2-5 of Jackson (the material on the static Maxwell
equations), but Fitzpatrick manages to treat the subject matter in a
relativistically motivated manner, covering subjects usually left to a second
semester.

**Recommendations:** You should definitely take the class from Griffy if you
have a chance, since his E&M; class is a classic. In general, Fitzpatrick and
Udagawa are good as well, but you will want to avoid Horton and Matzner.

### Electromagnetic Theory I Professors

  * Fall 1998 
    * Takeshi Udagawa. 
  * Past Semesters 
    * William Drummond. 
    * Richard Fitzpatrick. 
    * Thomas Griffy. 
    * Wendell Horton. 
    * Richard Matzner.  

* * *

## Statistical Mechanics

Kerson Huang's textbook seems to be preferred by quite a few students, but
expect to use Reichl's book when she's teaching the course. It is a rather
good reference, but the second edition is published by Wiley and they're
gouging students for about $95 per copy! The book by Pathria is also well
recommended, and never underestimate the power of Landau and Lifshitz. Tajima
has recommended the text of Toda _et al_ in the past, but you will probably
find him teaching out of Huang.

**Recommendations:** Berk's gotten a bad rap in the past, but seems to be
getting better. We're very interested in hearing from anyone who take his
course this semester.

### Statistical Mechanics Professors

  * Fall 1998 
    * Herbert Berk. 
  * Past Semesters 
    * Qian Niu. 
    * Linda Reichl. 
    * William Schieve. 
    * Toshi Tajima.  

* * *

## Your Best Bets for Core Classes in Fall 1998

The best bet is that you take **Quantum Mechanics** , since students seem to
be pretty generous in their praise of Dicus' QM in previous semesters.
Udagawa's **Electromagnetic Theory** has always been a solid course, so it's
probably a better choice than the other options. Berk's classes seem to have
improved, so the adventurous might consider his **Statistical Mechanics**
course, which we haven't seen him teach in recent history. Unless you really
need to take **Classical Mechanics** , we suggest you avoid taking it from
either Drummond or Schieve.

As always, you should limit yourself to only one or two core classes.

* * *

* * *

# 3\. Professors.

Here we've covered all of the core class professors for this semester and most
of the others who we'd expect to see teaching a graduate course in the near
future. We've concentrated on their classroom teaching, which is not
necessarily indicative of their abilities as mentors.

**Herbert Berk:** Previous writeups on Berk in this Guide have been extremely
negative, as in "[He] assumes students already know the material, and probably
isn't willing to slow down any...avoid at all costs," amongst other rather
direct statements. Such criticism, however, couldn't go unoticed for long and
he is apparently quite aware of these statements. Interestingly enough,
students in other departments seem to hold him in high regard for his teaching
("the best Professor of Physics I ever had," "I am an aerospace engineering
graduate student, and I learned a great deal in Prof. Berk's class"), one must
decide for oneself whether or not this means that physics students are just a
sad lot that must be whipped into shape, or if we're spoiled by having
extremely good teachers amongst our faculty, or if it means something else
entirely. Recent students have reported that the coverage and grading was
quite reasonable and that, at least in retrospect, Berk's course was pretty
good.

**Arno Bohm:** His Quantum Mechanics textbook does a good job unifying theory
and experiment by presenting many experimental results. Unfortunately, Bohm
seems to try to teach all of his classes out of it, even when the subject
isn't Quantum I and requires more advanced topics. As a result, his Quantum
Field Theory class was a disaster back when it went by the name Relativistic
Quantum Mechanics. He does, however, often spend half a lecture trying to
answer a student's question. The main complaint of students is the slothful
pace he sets for his courses.

**Bryce DeWitt:** An extremely knowledgeable individual and an excellent
teacher. Anything he teaches will be well prepared and well delivered. His
problem sets aren't too hard, but don't let that allow you to relax before one
of his tests. His Advanced Mathematical Methods classes are particularly worth
taking, though don't expect to see much in the way of physical applications,
these are math courses for the physicist.

**Matthew Choptuik:** According to students in his Computational Physics
class, Choptuik is great: "outstanding and a cool guy." Expect that he will
try to get a lot of work out of you during the semester, but it will be
relevant material and you'll learn by it all. Given his numerical bent, we
might expect to see some numerical assignments in his Relativity class, so
beware if you consider yourself a computer illiterate.

**Duane Dicus:** Occasionally clumsy on the blackboard (he's not that bad)
when he's trying to do calculations in detail, but overall a _very_ good
instructor. His particle physics course is excellent, when it is actually
being taught. His quantum course is pretty good too. Seems to grade around a
pretty wide B+, which can be good or bad depending on your perspective.

**William Drummond:** To directly quote a student who took one of his
Classical Mechanics courses,  "Drummond is a very friendly guy." He is eager
to answer questions and prefers teaching through discussion, rather than
lectures. This has, in his recent Classical Mechanics classes, lead to strong
complaints about a lack of interest and lack of preparation on Drummond's
part. His problem sets and exams tend to be easy, to the point that one must
get extremely good raw scores to obtain a satisfactory grade in the course.
Sometimes the exams are take-homes, which can be nice, but you probably will
never figure out the grading policy. Unfortunately, if you can't put up
without having a syllabus or a well-defined exam schedule, you will not be at
all happy.

**Willy Fischler:** His courses are well-prepared and interesting. His
teaching manner is rather straightforward and if you ask lots of questions
he'll answer in good detail, so keep asking questions. His lectures are also
rather entertaining, so you'll stay awake to hear the subtle details of the
subject that he'll keep pointing out.

**Richard Fitzpatrick:** An articulate lecturer who cares enough about his
teaching that he TeXs up a well-thought set of lecture notes for every course
that he teaches. He is friendly and approachable, and assigns a very
reasonable amount of homework. His tests are often ridiculously long, but he
is fair in his grading, so this isn't really a problem. Unfortunately, he's
taken this as an excuse for having midterms outside of class, usually at quite
unreasonable hours, e.g., Friday night from 8-10 PM.

**Austin Gleeson:** Our beloved ex-chairman is articulate and cares about his
teaching. However, this doesn't stop him from being occasionally not well
prepared and disorganized. He does offer insight and illustrations of the
course material, and is also a nice guy, but you will see very beefy problem
sets.

**Thomas Griffy:** Griffy's E &M courses are simply excellent. He is well
prepared and has a lot of insight to offer. Also, expect to see a lot of
discussion of practical applications of the general principles covered in his
courses. How to beat police radar with aluminum foil and using the Hubble
Space Telescope as a spy satellite were two recent topics.

**Wendell Horton:** He is a very knowledgeable individual and, although he
does seem to try, is not a very effective teacher. The main complaint is that
he fails to emphasize the important details of the material he's covering, so
many students fail to gain very much insight into the material covered, unless
they already know the subject well, in which case his lectures can, in fact,
contribute greatly to their knowledge. He occasionally lapses into bouts of
reading directly from Jackson, so even the more motivated students can quickly
lose interest. Those who are highly self-motivated and can teach themselves
may be better suited to this style of instruction. Horton is very
approachable, however, and welcomes students' questions.

**Richard Hazeltine:** Take anything you can from Hazeltine. He's articulate
and just plain sharp. In the past few years he has taught only undergraduate
and graduate plasma physics.

**Vadim Kaplunovsky:** An extremely rigorous and demanding professor who has
crawled through the muddy details of every imaginable facet of physics and
expects the same of students. Reports of 20 hours per weekly assignment are
common; he teaches a tough class, but you will learn something by it all. His
Quantum Mechanics II course is extremely well prepared and shouldn't be
missed. If you feel up to it, sign up, but the grades are not free.

**Michael Marder:** Marder's most recently taught the year-long Condensed
Matter sequence. He does not give out a take-home any more but replaces it
instead with a very reasonable in-class midterm and final (grades based on 60%
HW, 20% mid-term, 20% final). His homework can be a bit time consuming, but is
quite interesting. One has to expect some computational work as well. He hands
out copies of his (not yet finished) book which he follows pretty much. He
emphasizes the meaning of the physics and refers to the details in the
handouts rather than putting it all on the board. He is very approachable by
e-mail and during office hours. Lots of people think that he's an excellent
teacher and enjoy his courses.

**Richard Matzner:** He is not at all an inspiring lecturer, so attendance to
his classes tends to drop off sharply long before the end of the semester. His
demeanor outside of class is much better, but this does not make up for
lectures which can consist of copying formulae incorrectly out of Jackson.
Beware of Jackson problems on his E &M midterms.

**Philip Morrison:** Excellent teacher in the sense of presenting information
in an interesting and thorough manner. If you have questions you would like
answered outside of class, limit your visits to office hours and make sure
your questions are good ones. Expect lots of homework and unsolvable problems
on his midterms. The homework makes an important contribution to the class,
however, so if the grader is not returning assignments on time, complain
bitterly. If the grader loses an assignment, kill that grader.

**Qian Niu:** Very well organized, thorough and interesting, but his tests
could be a little more relevant to the course being taught. Niu is also
helpful to students outside of class and welcomes office visits.

**Linda Reichl:** Has written her own book for Statistical Mechanics and will
obviously use it, but unfortunately more or less reads from it. There is
almost none of the additional insight which usually comes from the professor's
own lectures. Beware of her all or nothing grading approach. Concentrate on
solving problems completely on her exams, since the partial credit you'll get
is negligible. Also expect that there will be several results you will almost
need to have memorized to get right. Watch out if you're off by factors of two
and memorize the precise definition of every critical exponent. The key is to
work on the problems in her book that she didn't assign as homework and to
follow the methods she presents. Prefers to give her midterms (typically 3 of
them) outside normal class hours, occasionally at night.

**William Schieve:** An infuriatingly aloof lecturer ("the [eigenvalue for a
spin-1/2 system] is 3/2 hbar, I looked it up"); be prepared for some
frustration with the hieroglyphics he writes on the board and the way he calls
every Greek letter "sigma." It is clear that he understands subjects like
classical and statistical mechanics well, but he tends to be less than
effective in conveying that knowledge. Expect that what he says aloud will be
more accurate than anything he writes on the board. The word on the street is
"avoid if at all possible, and even when not possible." Some people think that
"he's not that bad," so who are we to complain?

**George Sudarshan:** A prominent professor who knows much, but seems to
harbor some disdain for chalk and slate, preferring instead to engage in
discourses on the nature of quantum mechanics. Be alert for deep insights
couched in murky metaphors. This can be interesting, but it's tough to learn
more than qualitative features without some initiative on your part. Homeworks
are pretty easy. He's generous with grades and the department has actually
lowered them before.

**Jack Swift:** Often presents very good lectures. Homeworks are reasonable
and relevant. Some dislike the monotonic oratorical style, but this is
something you have to decide for yourself. His fluid mechanics course is well
recommended.

**Toshi Tajima:** Recently, he's taught a reasonable graduate course in
remedial Mathematical Methods and a more-or-less dubious course in
Computational Physics. According to some, his lectures in his Statistical
Mechanics course this Spring seems to be well organized, but don't expect
satisfactory answers to your questions. According to others, he in poorly
prepared and egotistical, "I would rather eat ground glass than spend one more
day in the same room as him." "I can't believe a word that man says!"

**Takeshi Udagawa:** A fastidious lecturer who sets a reasonable work-load. He
occasionally gets mired in 10 minute searches for signs that didn't work out
and is not afraid to erase the last 15 minutes of board work as being
"totally wrong," but on the whole is well organized (some people disagree with
this). The notes you take turn out to be quite good in retrospect (some people
disagree with this too), which is fortunate since they are the primary source
for exam material. Watch for the famous "binary grading" \- all or nothing
(though he assures us that's not true!), as well as the thick accent.

* * *

* * *

# 4\. Research Groups.

It should go without saying that the best way of finding out what physics a
research group is doing is to go look at some of the papers their professors
and students have written recently. In some cases, you can browse their Web
pages (for which links are provided below). We'll try to give you the scoop on
your chances of getting into (and later funded by) the groups that we're most
familiar with.

**Center for Nonlinear Dynamics, Prof. Harry Swinney, Director**

This is the nationwide #1 group in the specialty of Nonlinear Dynamics/Chaos,
according to the 1996 _America's Best Graduate Schools_ , published by US News
& World Report, and they've earned it. Experimental students in this group are
often recruited while they are still undergrads, though there is still a
reasonable chance of getting into the group if you are undecided when you get
here. The group is well funded and another experimentalist has just joined the
group. Students on the experimental track typically TA for two years and then
become GRAs around the time that they qualify. Funding in theory is, as a
general symptom, not so promising, but there are currently some theorists
hired as GRAs, so it's not out of the question.

**Center for Particle Physics and **High Energy Physics Laboratory** , Prof.
Roy Schwitters, Director**

The Center for Particle Physics has shifted its focus recently, from being a
purely theoretical group to one with a significant experimental component, in
the form of the High Energy Physics Laboratory. Most of the theorists here are
willing to take on large numbers of students and the experimentalists need
students, so it's quite possible to find work here to do. While the
experimentalists here have money, funding here for theorists is not
particularly good, being completely non-existent for several of its members. A
majority of the students here remain on the career TA track.

**Center for Relativity, Prof. Richard Matzner, Director**

Imminent retirements will concentrate the research activities of this group on
purely computational areas; it's likely that any future faculty hirings will
also involve computational physics. The group is small and selective, but NSF
funding for the current computational projects is very reasonable. Students
should still, however, expect to TA for several years before a chance at a GRA
arises.

**Femtosecond Spectroscopy, Prof. Mike Downer, Director**

A rapidly growing group with good GRA funding prospects. Browse their web
pages for more info. Currently provides one of the only stable prospects for
doing experimental plasma physics in our department, albeit with table-top
devices rather than tokamaks.

**Fusion Research Center, Prof. Kenneth Gentle, Director**

The current crop of students up there don't seem to want to tell us much about
the FRC, but you can look at the Research Opportunities in the FRC web page.
If you find out what the story is, please let us know.

**Gas-Surface Dynamics Group, Prof. Greg O. Sitz, Director**

This small group does some nice surface physics and probably could use some
students. Funding is probably also possible and we've heard that "Greg Sitz is
just about the best advisor a student could have."

**Ilya Prigogine Center for Statistical Mechanics, Prof. Ilya Prigogine,
Director, Prof. Linda Reichl, Acting Director**

A small group with close to a full complement of students, but there are
probably some opportunities here. Funding is available, in many cases only
partial appointments are made, so you can probably expect to TA well after you
qualify. Despite the name, they don't do just Stat. Mech. There are faculty
working in several areas of theoretical quantum chaos, but also others working
on projects less worthy of note.

**Institute for Fusion Studies, Prof. Richard Hazeltine, Director**

This group is occupied with the theoretical study of plasma physics and
associated fluid dynamics. A strong component of this is in computational
physics. They tend to be quite selective in accepting students, but are
currently well funded; almost all students are supported once they've
qualified. The IFS currently has several openings for students.

**Laser Cooling and Trapping, Prof. Daniel J. Heinzen, Director**

The Heinzen group is a hard working, well funded group that is curently doing
some fascinating experiments in the field of quantum control and ultracold
collisions in atomic gases. They have one of the few working Bose-Einstein
condensate machines in the world. The students in the lab say that the
research is exciting, but you had better expect to work between forty and
sixty hours a week if you are considering joining the group.

**Molecular Structure Investigation by Electron Diffraction and Spectroscopy,
Prof. Manfred Fink, Director**

There are opportunities to work on several extremely interesting projects
here. Funding opportunities are currently excellent and Manfred is very
involved with and accessible to his students.

**Nonlinear Laser Spectroscopy, Prof. John Keto, Director**

There are two graduate research assistantships available to start immediately.
These positions are in the nonlinear Raman lab, two-photon excitation and
probing of excited rare gas manifolds, or supersonic beam studies of rare gas
dimers and clusters. Currently has two graduate students, one working on Raman
spectroscopy and one working on nanoparticles. Supersonic beam, multiple
photon and linear accelerator experiments are currently not staffed; there are
opportunities here. Funding has improved with the receipt of a Welch grant and
Keto has mentioned buying things rather than building to save time. Students
do generally fix broken equipment themselves but this is now more flexible
than in the past. Fixing equipment tends to lengthen the amount of time
students take to graduate but does give them tremendous hands-on experience,
something that recent graduates that went into the semiconductor industry have
found helpful.

**Quantum Optics Group, Prof. Mark Raizen, Director**

A full group, but one who's always looking for more good students. Funding is
very promising and the experiments done here are amazing, check their web
pages and visit their lab for more information.

**Relativistic Heavy Ion Physics (RHIP)**

We have no idea what goes on in this group. Maybe you can get some idea from
their web pages, whenever they're completed. If you are a student who knows
something about the group please let us know so that this listing can be
updated.

**Scanning Probe Microscopy and Superconductivity, Prof. Alex de Lozanne,
Director**

Well funded and we expect that there is room for new students, here or with
another of the electron microscopists in the department.

**Surface Physics/Thin Film Magnetism Research, Prof. James Erskine,
Director**

All of the students here are qualified and, with only one exeption, supported
by GRAs.

**Theory Group, Prof. Steven Weinberg, Director**

Since there is a certain amount of prestige associated with this bunch, it is
probably the toughest nut to crack. The group is also relatively saturated
with students. Support is currently provided to all students who have
qualified. There are no guarantees that it will help, but prospective students
should register as early as their first year for whatever these guys are
teaching, especially since courses in field theory and strings aren't offered
every semester. Going to their seminars and brown bag talks is a good way to
find out what they're doing and to be seen. These statments apply to all
research groups, but we were urged to reiterate these points here.

* * *

## How to Contribute to this Guide

This web page is maintained by _Richard A. Corrado
(rcorrado@zippy.ph.utexas.edu)_. Please direct all contributions, comments,
complaints, etc. to him. All contributions will be kept in the strictest
confidence.

