# Detailed Discussions for BSEE and BS Comp. Eng. Curriculum Reform for the
2002-2004 Catalog

**Talks in Chronological Order**

  * February 15, 2000, Gustavo de Veciana, "Increasing the Place of Information, Signals, and Systems Early in the Curriculum" [PDF](gustavo.pdf)
  * February 29, 2000, Gary Hallock, "EE464H/K Senior Laboratory" [PDF](hallock.pdf)
  * April 14, 2000, Brian L. Evans, "Summary of Ideas for the BSEE Degree in the 2002-2004 Catalog" presented to the ECE Visiting Committee [PDF](EEreform.pdf) \- [PowerPoint](EEreform.ppt)
  * September 5, 2000, Brian L. Evans, "BSEE and BS Comp. Eng. Degrees: Ideas for the 2002-2004 Catalog" presented to EE302 Honors Section [PDF](TalkInEE302.pdf) \- [PowerPoint](TalkInEE302.ppt)
  * October 24, 2000, Brian L. Evans, "Summary of Faculty and Student Discussions for the BSEE Curriculum for the 2002-2004 Catalog", presented to the ECE Department [PDF](TalkECEDept.pdf) \- [PowerPoint](TalkECEDept.ppt)
  * November 7, 2000, "Computer Engineering: Proposed Changes for 2002-2004 and Beyond," presented to the ECE Department [PDF](CraigTalk.pdf) \- [PowerPoint](CraigTalk.ppt)
  * December 1, 2000, Brian L. Evans, "Proposal for the BSEE Curriculum for the 2002-2004 Catalog," presented to the ECE Faculty [PDF](BSEEproposal.pdf) \- [PowerPoint](BSEEproposal.ppt)
  * December 1, 2000, Craig Chase, "Proposed Changes for 2002-2004 and Beyond," presented to the ECE Faculty [PDF](BSCEproposal.pdf) \- [PowerPoint](BSCEproposal.ppt) 

* * *

## Table of Contents

  * 1.0 Introduction  

  * 2.0 Ideal Skills  

  * 3.0 Topics for Today's EE  

  * 4.0 Topics for Tomorrow's EE  

  * 5.0 Major Sequence  

  * 6.0 Suggested Proposals for a New BSEE Curriculum  

  * 7.0 Technical Areas  

  * 8.0 Basic Sequence  

  * 9.0 Visiting Committee Comments  

  * 10.0 Agenda for the February 15, 2000, Meeting  

  * 11.0 Agenda for the February 29, 2000, Meeting  

  * 12.0 Agenda for the February 9, 2001, ECE Faculty Meeting  

  * 13.0 Committee
  * [Appendix A: Discussion about EE316](ee316.html)  

  * [Appendix B: Proposals for EE321](ee321.html)  

  * [Appendix C: Proposals for EE338 (EE438)](ee338.html)  

  * [Appendix D: Discussion about EE313](ee313.html)  

  * [Appendix E: Discussion about EE411](ee411.html)  

  * [Appendix F: Discussion about EE302](ee302.html)  

  * [Appendix G: ABET, University, and College Requirements](abet.html) 

* * *

This document attempts to summarize the ideas presented during formal and
informal discussions about ideas for a BSEE curriculum for the 2002-2004
catalog. The formal discussions in Spring 2000 included four BSEE curriculum
reform meetings and an ECE Visiting Committee (technical advisory board)
meeting. In parallel with the discussions involving the BSEE curriculum,
discussions involving the BS Comp. Eng. curriculum for the 2002-2004 catalog
were being moderated by Prof. Craig Chase. The ideas for the revised BSEE
degree that have received some consensus have been assembled in Section 6.0
Proposals for a New BSEE Curriculum. Based on those proposals, we have created
a four-year schedule of courses and a two-year schedule of courses for
transfer students.

## 1.0 Introduction

We are considering ways to improve the BS degree in Electrical Engineering
curriculum. We plan to take a top-down and a bottom-up approach. We are not
considering the Computer Engineering curriculum, as that is the responsibility
of another committee headed by Prof. Craig Chase.

A variety of innovative technologies has attracted past generations of
students into electrical engineering:

  * early 1980s: home computers, MTV, voiceband data modems, bulletin boards 
  * late 1980s: PCs, analog cell phones, audio CD players, bulletin boards 
  * early 1990s: laptops, digital cell phones, video CDs, Internet Browsing 
  * late 1990s: palm pilots, Internet cell phones, DVD players, AC3 players, ADSL modems, cable modems, Internet multimedia 
These technologies contain an increasing amount of communications, signal
processing, and networking capabilities. These technologies are also
increasingly digital, and software is making up a larger and larger part of
the digital subsystems. Analog, radio frequency, and optical subsystems are
needed to interface the digital subsystems to the physical world. The
shrinking area, volume, and power consumption of consumer electronic products,
as well as the continued exponential increase in clock speeds on programmable
processors, are largely due to advances in devices and semiconductor
manufacturing. A balanced understanding of the theory and practice of devices,
circuits, systems, software, electromagnetics, technical communication, and
business practice would prepare our BSEE students for success.

1.1 _BSEE Curriculum in the 1998-2000 Catalog_

In the 1998-2000 catalog, the BSEE degree requires a total of 128 hours of
coursework. A minimum of 60 hours of EE courses must be taken: 51 hours of
required EE courses and 9 elective hours for a technical area. These 60 hours
of EE courses can be categorized as follows:

_Topic_ | _Percentage_ | _Credit Hours_ | _Courses_ |  analog circuits and
systems | 40% | 24.3 | 3/5 EE302 + 2/3 EE313 + EE411 + 1/2 EE321 + EE321K +
EE338 + EE338K + EE351K + EE362K  | specialization | 18% | 11.0 | 1/2 EE464H/K
+ 3 technical area electives  | analog devices/electromagnetics | 10% |  6.0 |
EE325 + EE339  | technical communication |  9% |  5.6 | EE155 + EE333T + 4/10
EE464H/K  | digital logic/microprocessors |  8% |  5.0 | 1/6 EE302 + EE316 +
1/2 EE319K  | programming |  8% |  4.5 | EE312 + 1/2 EE319K  | discrete-time
processing/data acquisition |  4% |  2.5 | 1/3 EE313 + 1/2 EE321  | business
practice |  2% |  1.1 | 0.2333 EE302 (ethics) + 1/10 EE464H/K (ethics)  |
**Total** | **100%** | **60.0** |

1.2 _1998-2000 BSEE Curriculum Based on Analog Circuits_

In the BSEE curriculum in the 1998-2000 catalog, nearly half of the 60 EE
credit hours are spent on analog devices, circuits, systems, and
electromagnetics. Six of the required analog circuits courses plus senior
design project form a pre-requisite chain that takes six semesters to
complete:

EE302 -- > EE411 --> EE313, EE338, EE321 --> EE338K --> EE321K --> EE464H/K

This long pre-requisite has two disadvantages:

  1. it may delay students from taking technical area electives that rely on EE338K until the senior year, and 
  2. it may prevent transfer students from finishing the BSEE degree in less than three years. 
The first disadvantage has a dramatic impact on two technical areas:
Electronics Materials and Devices, and Integrated Electronics. Concerning the
latter disadvantage, about one-fifth of the undergraduate students entering
the Department of ECE each year are transfer students from institutions other
than UT Austin, as explained next. The second disadvantage is described next.

1.3 _Transfer Students_

Transfer students from institutions other than UT Austin accounted for 18.9%
of the new students enrolled in the ECE Department during the 1999-2000
academic year. During Summer 1999, Fall 1999, and Spring 2000 semesters, 106
students from institutions other than UT Austin transferred to the ECE
Department: 11 freshmen, 59 sophomores, 24 juniors, and 12 seniors. These
classifications depend on the total number of transferred hours: freshman
0-29, sophomore 30-59, junior 60-89, and senior 90+. In Fall 1999, 463 new
freshmen enrolled.

When considering changes to the BSEE curriculum, two key concerns for transfer
students are:

  1. smooth transition into the BSEE degree, and 
  2. expedience in finishing the BSEE degree 
Transfer students may not always have learned the necessary calculus, science,
and/or programming knowledge to sufficient depth to make a smooth transition
into the BSEE degree. In EE411 Circuit Theory during the Spring 2000 semester,
Prof. Takis Konstantopoulos gave a background evaluation test of basic
calculus and science knowledge (quiz #1) and a test on introductory circuits
material (quiz #2). Quiz #2 tested the material in the first two weeks of the
course (Ohm's law, KVL, KCL for circuits with one loop). On average, transfer
students performed a letter grade lower than non-transfer students on the
first two quizzes, as shown below.

| _Student Status_ | _Students_ | _Quiz 1  
Average_ | _Quiz 1  
Std. Dev._ | _Quiz 2  
Average_ | _Quiz 2  
Std. Dev._ | Non-transfer | 85 | 62% | 14% | 80% | 22%  | Transfer | 41 | 55%
| 13% | 73% | 22%

To help make the transition more smooth, the ECE department publishes
suggestions for [transferring into the ECE department from Austin Community
College](http://www.ece.utexas.edu/undergradinfo/courseinfo/EvenProgUpdate/programinfo.html).

Concerning expedience in finishing the BSEE degree under the 1998-2000
catalog, the biggest obstacle encountered by a transfer student is the
following pre-requisite chain of required EE courses:

EE302 --> EE411 --> EE313, EE338, EE321 --> EE338K --> EE321K --> EE464H/K

In satisfying this pre-requisite chain, a transfer student would need to spend
a minimum of three years at UT. One workaround for the long pre-requisite
chain has been to allow transfer students to take a special section of EE411
Circuit Theory as their first EE course. Those students would either take
EE302 in parallel with EE411, or opt out of EE302. Although this workaround
reduces the time spent at UT to two years if the transfer student attends both
summer sessions, this workaround has two disadvantages:

  1. The special section of EE411 has to cover 1.5 semesters of analog circuits material in 1 semester, which makes the transition into the BSEE degree more difficult. 
  2. A special section of EE411 has to be developed, maintained, and taught. 
In revising the BSEE curriculum, we will try to keep the unique needs of
transfer students in mind.

1.4 _ABET, IEEE, and University Guidelines_

The ABET, IEEE, and University guidelines for a BSEE degree are given in more
detail in [Appendix G](abet.html) and summarized below.

A summary of ABET Guidelines follows:

  * incorporate engineering standards and realistic constraints that include most of the following considerations: economic; environmental; sustainability; manufacturability; ethical; health and safety; social; and political. 
  * one year of a combination of college level mathematics and basic sciences (some with experimental experience) appropriate to the discipline 
  * one and one-half years of engineering topics, consisting of engineering sciences and engineering design appropriate to the student's field of study 
IEEE Guidelines suggest that BSEE students have knowledge of

  * probability and statistics 
  * differential and integral calculus 
  * basic and engineering sciences necessary to analyze and design complex electrical and electronic devices 
  * software 
  * systems containing hardware and software components 
  * advanced mathematics, typically including differential equations, linear algebra, complex variables, and discrete mathematics. 
The University's basic education requirements comprise the following:

  * English and writing 
    * English 306, Rhetoric and Composition 
    * English 316K, Masterworks of Literature 
    * Completion of two additional courses that have a substantial writing component, at least one of which must be upper-division. 
  * Foreign language 
    * Either two years in a single foreign language in high school or two semesters in a single foreign language in college 
  * Social science 
    * Six semester hours of American government, including Texas government 
    * Six semester hours of American history 
    * Three additional semester hours of social science 
  * Natural science and mathematics 
    * Three semester hours of mathematics 
    * Six semester hours in one area of natural science 
    * Three additional semester hours in natural science, mathematics, or computer science 
  * Fine arts/humanities 
    * Three semester hours of fine arts or humanities  

## 2.0 Ideal Set of Skills for Success in Industry

2.1 _Question_

What are the five ideal skills that a graduating BSEE student should possess
for success in industry?

  * 6 nominations 
    * Technical communication (DEHLRV) 
  * 4 nominations 
    * Ability to work as part of a team (DELR) 
    * Ability to learn new topics independently: searching library and Web (DERV) 
  * 3 nominations 
    * Understanding of the product development cycle, which includes specification, design, testing, and manufacture (DER) 
  * 2 nominations 
    * Business principles: marketing, budgeting, etc. (DL) 
    * General programming skills (HV) 
    * Familiarity with software tools in their respective areas, e.g. Matlab and Spice (HV) 
  * 1 nomination 
    * Management of personal finance, health and family (L) 
    * Management skills (L) 
    * General understanding of hardware tools and products (V) 
    * Engineering mathematics (H) 
    * Engineering electromagnetics: radiation and wave propagation (H)  

2.2 _Discussion_

Concerning technical communication, the committee members are very satisfied
with the current content and scope of the required technical communication
courses EE155, EE333T, and EE464H/K. The technical communication program is
headed by David Beer. David Beer points out that the new name for EE333T
Technical Communication will be EE333T Engineering Communication in the
2000-2002 catalog. David Beer also suggests that we might consider integrating
more technical communication in other EE courses besides EE155, EE333T, and
EE464H/K. EE302 has already implemented this integration to some extent.

Concerning technical communication, the committee members have suggested to
move EE155 to the freshman or sophomore years so that they can get an earlier
perspective on the field of electrical engineering. EE155 already helps
students to explore different technical fields to help them choose the
direction for their career, and hence, their technical area(s) for the BSEE
degree. Ray Russell believe that moving EE155 earlier in the curriculum is
fine, but suggests that English 306 be an explicit pre-requisite. Ray Russell
points out that "I make a pitch to the potential presenters that this course
is a platform for them to 'showcase' their companies to students who will soon
be graduating." Moving EE155 to the freshman or sophomore years would require
a change in this emphasis.

Concerning teamwork, students work in teams of two in the laboratory courses.
On rare occasion in EE464H, students work in teams of 3 or 4; however, EE464K
students must work in teams of 2. The only required course in which students
work in teams of more than 2 is EE302.

Concerning understanding of the product development cycle, our current
required courses do not cover all aspects of the cycle. EE464H/K currently
covers the design process. EE464H students may specify their own project,
whereas EE464K projects are specified by the instructors. EE464H/K does not
cover testing and manufacture.

Concerning general programming skills, the required courses in the 1998-2000
catalog train students to program in assembly language and C in EE319K, and
C++ in EE312. The required courses do not teach algorithms, data structures,
and software engineering (specification, development, and testing). The
required courses also do not cover Matlab as a programming language.
Therefore, a programming course beyond EE312 should be a required course.

Concerning how programming is taught, Francis Bostick, Dewayne Perry, and Yale
Patt suggest a bottom-up approach. The first class would start with gates then
memory elements and ALUs and finally assembly language. We could call this new
course EE306 Introduction to Computing. The second class would cover with C
and Matlab as imperative programming languages. C is really a key high-level
implementation language for software developed for embedded microcontrollers
and digital signal processors and for fast implementations of functions for
desktop computing. Matlab is to control, signal processing, imaging, and
communication algorithm designers as Spice is to analog/RF circuit designers.

  * Potential Impact on EE312: with EE306 as a pre-requisite, EE312 could become a course that teaches procedural programming in C. It could cover functions, arrays, data pointers, basic algorithms, and recursion. At present, EE312 is an object-oriented programming in C++ course. We recognize that this is a controversial proposal to someone with a top-down philosophy who may believe that replacing C++ by C is a step backward. 
  * Potential Impact on EE319K: with EE306 as a pre-requisite, Jack Lipovski writes: "My proposed changes in 319K are to introduce software engineering for small systems, or embedded systems, if you wish. I guess that the freshman course [EE306] will shorten 319K by about 3 chapters. I would add 3 chapters to 319K: 
    1. abstraction - use of object-oriented and generic programming, 
    2. synchronization - use of semaphores and messages, and 
    3. measurement - use of profiling and cycle counting, in a simulator.  I believe these would be of considerable use to any engineers since many will probably write software for microcontrollers, or be in contact with someone who does." 

Concerning familiarity with software tools in their respective areas, e.g.
Matlab and Spice, Francis Bostick has suggested that Spice be integrated into
a sophomore EE course. In addition, Francis suggested that sophomores be
trained in C and Matlab.

2.3 _Proposals_

  * **Technical Communication** : move EE155 to the freshman or sophomore year. 
  * **Teamwork** : have EE464H/K students work in teams of four, which could be subdivided into two teams of two (D), or in teams of three with a designated technical leader. 
  * **Programming** : require a programming course beyond EE312 (V) 
  * **Business** : require a junior/senior course in Engineering Economics, which would be required by EE464H/K, e.g. EE366 Engineering Economics I. Now, EE464H/K students could write a business plan provided that lectures on the topic were added in EE464H/K (RH). 
  * **Tools** : convert EE312 into a procedural programming course, e.g. in C and perhaps Matlab. Leave object-oriented programming, e.g. in C++, to one or more of the subsequent courses. 

## 3.0 Most Important EE Topics to Cover for Today's EE

3.1 _Question_

What are the five most important topics to cover in an EE curriculum?

  * 5 nominations 
    * Circuit theories -- e.g. KVL, KCL, BJT and MOS circuits (DHLRV) 
    * Solid state electronics -- e.g. how semiconductor devices work (DHLRV) 
  * 4 nominations 
    * Digital systems and programming skills -- e.g. Boolean algebra (DHLR) 
    * E&M; theories -- e.g. Electrostatics, Maxwell's eqn. (EHLR) 
    * Linear systems and signal processing (DERV) 
  * 2 nominations 
    * Fourier and Laplace analysis (ER) 
    * Probability and random processes -- e.g. noise, branch prediction (EH) 
    * Algorithms and data structures (DV) 
  * 1 nomination 
    * Sampling Theorem -- e.g. convert between analog and digital signals (E) 
    * Basic abstraction and design concepts (V)  

3.2 _Discussion_

Francis Bostick points out that in the ECE Department,

  * EE: 30% of the students, 70% of the faculty 
  * CE: 70% of the students, 30% of the faculty 
Can a four-year degree adequately prepare a person to be productive at a
company without additional training? The consensus was "no". Companies train
new hires, and often require annual professional development and training.

The issue of abstraction is a serious one because of Moore's Law. Moore's Law
states that the number of transistors on a single chip doubles every 18
months. Hence, the complexity of design and testing is growing exponentially.
During a four-year degree, for example, this complexity would increase by a
factor of 6. Design abstraction is the key to handle this complexity, yet
design abstraction is not covered in any of the required courses. Abstraction
is a basic tenet of object-oriented programming.

3.3 _Proposals_

  * **Algorithms** : Make a programming course beyond EE312 required 

## 4.0 Most Important EE Topics to Cover for Tomorrow's EE

4.1 _Question_

What are the five most important technical topics that an EE who graduates in
the next 5-10 years will need to know?

Technology is exploding and becoming increasingly multidisciplinary. I am
expecting this list to be quite different from the answer to the previous top-
down question concerning the current five most important technical topics an
EE should know.

  * 4 nominations 
    * Networking (EHLR) 
    * Multimedia signal processing: speech, audio, image, and video processing (EHRV) 
  * 3 nominations 
    * Wireless communications (EHR) 
  * 2 nominations 
    * Computer science: software engineering, computer architecture, and operating systems (HL) 
    * Design: principles, abstraction, complexity and processes (EV) 
  * 1 nomination 
    * Algorithms: adaptive, learning, optimization, EM (V) 
    * Simulation: CAD tools, statistics/estimation (V) 
    * Practical limitations of current technologies (V) 
    * Biomedical engineering: man-machine interfaces (E) 
    * Mixed analog, RF, digital design (L) 
    * New materials (L) 
    * Post-silicon era devices (L) 
    * Optics (H)  

4.2 _Discussion_

None.

4.3 _Proposals_

  * **Design** : Add optimization to the curriculum. For example, quadratic optimization is sometimes covered in EE362K. 

## 5.0 Major Sequence

5.1 _Question_

As Jack Lee points out, students have been complaining that seven required
analog circuits and electronics courses are too many. 58% of the undergraduate
students are in computer engineering. Most of them are in digital hardware
design or software and simply do not need seven circuits courses. The seven
circuits courses follow:

EE302 Introduction to Electrical and Computer Eng.  
EE411 Circuit Theory  
EE321 Electrical Engineering Lab I  
EE321K Electrical Engineering Lab II  
EE338 Electronic Circuits I  
EE338K Electronic Circuits II  
EE464K Senior Design Course  

This listing is in order of the middle digit, even though EE338 is a pre-
requisite for EE321 and EE338K is a pre-requisite for EE321K. Please offer a
proposal that might improve this situation.

5.2 _Discussion_

Concerning EE302 and EE464H/K, Gary Hallock points out that EE302 is about 60%
analog circuits. The early EE302 course covered less circuit material. EE464K
is not inherently a circuits course, although many of the assigned projects
are circuits-based. About 1/3 of our students now take EE464H Honors Senior
Design Course, in which the students can define their own projects. Very few
EE464H projects involve analog circuit design. If we desire less circuits in
464K, then we just need to develop the appropriate projects and make sure the
labs can support them.

Otto Friedrich points out that new engineers at an engineering firm do not
know that the information they need is available on the Internet. Brian Evans
believes that a good place to enforce this reality is in EE464H/K Senior
Design Project.

In the 1998-2000 catalog, six of the required analog circuits courses plus
senior design project form a pre-requisite chain that takes six semesters to
complete:

EE302 -- > EE411 --> EE313, EE338, EE321 --> EE338K --> EE321K --> EE464H/K

5.3 _Proposals_

Rebecca Richards-Kortum proposes to

  * eliminate EE321 and EE321K as required courses 
  * combine EE338 and EE338K into one course 
  * revise EE302 and EE312 to make a comprehensive overview of ECE, that is a one-year long course 
  * revise EE316 and EE411 to be a follow-on one-year course to this introductory sequence 
Gary Daniels proposes to

  * keep EE302, EE411, and EE464 as required courses 
  * keep EE321 and EE321K 
  * make EE338, EE338K, and PHY355 electives 
  * require a Digital Signal Processing course 
  * reduce the number of required courses and increase the number of electives 
Jack Lee proposes to

  * keep EE302 optional 
  * keep EE411 required 
  * make EE321 and EE321K optional 
  * combine EE338 and EE338K 
  * make EE464H/K optional 
  * remove PHY303L/PHY103N (Lab) 
Gustavo de Veciana proposes to

  * broaden EE302 
  * make EE411 a thorough basic course on circuit theory 
  * keep EE464K but possibly broaden the range of topics: perhaps we could have several sections for people with different interests. 
Brian Evans proposes the following to help strength the continuous variable
math skills of the BSEE student:

  * add several lectures and homework sets in EE302 reinforcing calculus skills, matrix algebra, and phasors and complex arithmetic. 
  * add Laplace transforms and/or frequency analysis to EE411. 
  * make M340L Matrices and Matrix Calculations a pre-requisite for EE313, which would help in explaining eigenfunctions in EE313 (the pre-requisite for M340 L is one semester of calculus). 
  * replace one of the two Technical Electives with an Approved Math Elective. 
  * suggest to the area committees to add a math course in each technical area (the Information Systems technical area already lists M365C Real Analysis). 

The committee also proposes to

  * make EE362K broader to include modern feedback systems from robotic, biomedical, networked, and mechatronic systems. 
    * Bruce Buckman points out that his second EE362K lecture example is mechatronic (a piezoelectric positioner and control) and that many examples in newer textbooks have many examples related to robotics. 
  * change the pre-requisites of EE464H/K to be 
    * EE366 Engineering Economics I 
    * EE333T Engineering Communication  
_In the 2000-2002 catalog, EE333T Technical Communication has been renamed to
EE333T Engineering Communication_

    * An advanced laboratory elective: EE321, EE440, EE345L, EE345S, or EE374L 
    * Senior standing 
  * remove the distinction between the basic and major sequences. 
    * the application to major sequence was initiated in 1982 when the undergraduate ECE enrollment exploded from 1500 to 2000 as a way to regulate the total enrollment 
    * students are accepted to the major sequence (upper division courses) after completing the majority of the basic sequence courses while maintaining a 2.5 GPA 
    * until Spring 2000, admission to major sequence was the only way to ensure that an undergraduate ECE student had finished a certain amount of courses that were pre-requisites for the upper division courses; as of Spring 2000, this pre-requisite check is now performed on a per course basis by the ECE Undergraduate Office by means of an automated script 
    * the ECE Department is the only engineering department at UT that requires undergraduates to apply to the major sequence. 
    * we propose that the notion of basic and major sequences be replaced with lower and upper division courses, which would be compatible with the rest of UT Austin  

## 6.0 Suggested Proposals for a New BSEE Curriculum

The following proposals have received consensus at three open meetings held in
January and February of 2000. The key ideas are:

  * divide the required EE courses into six parallel tracks 
  * allow students to choose two technical areas instead of one 
  * introduce a new technical area in circuit design 
The parallel tracks (circuits, systems, digital, programming,
electromagnetics, and writing) could allow students to enter into their
technical areas earlier and transfer students to finish the BSEE degree
earlier. If a transfer student has already completed the non-engineering
requirements for graduation, then the transfer student could finish the BSEE
degree in as little as two years (four long semesters plus two summer
semesters). The engineering course requirements are 16 required EE courses, 6
technical area elective courses, and 2 other technical elective courses. From
a faculty perspective, the decoupling of courses into parallel tracks could
make it easier for the various curriculum area committees to make changes to
courses.

The six tracks of required courses follow:

  * _Required Courses Track #1_ (Analog Circuits): EE302 (Lab) -- > EE411 --> EE438 (Lab)  

    * EE302 
    * EE411 lists M427K as a co-requisite, which covers Laplace transforms in special sections as of Spring 2000. For Fall 2000, Laplace transforms has been added to M 427K according to the [Syllabus for M 427K](http://www.ma.utexas.edu/text/syllabi/syllabi29.html). 
    * EE438 would be EE338 plus a laboratory ([proposed modifications to EE338](ee338.html)) 

  * _Required Courses Track #2_ (Systems): EE313 -- > EE351K, EE362K  

    * EE313 could add M340L as a pre-requisite 
    * EE351K could add a pre-requisite of M427K 
    * EE362K could add M427K, M340L, and EE313 as pre-requisites, and replace the pre-requisite of EE338K with EE438; and 
    * EE351K and EE362K do not depend on each other as is the case in the 1998-2000 catalog. 

  * _Required Courses Track #3_ (Microprocessors): EE306 (Lab) -- > EE319K (Lab)  

    * EE306 could be a new course that is a bottom-up treatment of computer architecture from gates to assembly language programming 
    * EE319K would list EE306 and EE312 as pre-requisites 

  * _Required Courses Track #4_ (Programming): EE312 -- > EE322 (Lab)  

    * EE312 Programming I could cover the C programming language take a bottom-up approach, and build on EE306 
    * EE312 Programming I and EE322 Programming II would teach students to analyze algorithms but not to design them. They could cover control structures, program organization, elementary data structures, validation of software, coding techniques, and software development tools. EE312 could be primarily in C, and EE322 could be primarily in object-oriented C++. Programming would likely be in Visual C++ on a PC. 

  * _Required Courses Track #5_ (Electromagnetics): PHY303L -- > EE325 --> EE339  

    * Request that a special EE section of PHY303L be taught that emphasizes electromagnetics and optics as well as Heisenberg uncertainty and relativity, but does not cover circuits or electronics 
    * EE325 could add PHY303L as a pre-requisite 
    * EE339 has no change 

  * _Required Courses Track #6_ (Writing): EE155, EE333T -- > EE464H/K (Lab)  

    * EE155 could require English 306 and could be taken by a first-year or second-year student 
    * EE333T could require English 316 and junior/senior standing 
    * EE464H/K could require EE155, EE333T, EE366, an advanced laboratory course (EE321, EE440, EE345L, EE345S, or EE374L), and senior standing 
      * rename EE464H from Electrical Engineering Honors Projects to Honors Senior Design Project 
      * rename EE464K from Electrical Engineering Projects Laboratory to Senior Design Project  
There is some overlap between the tracks:

  * EE411 is a pre-requisite for EE325 and EE313. 
  * EE313 is a pre-requisite for EE438. 
  * EE438 is a pre-requisite for EE362K. 
  * EE306 is a pre-requisite for EE312. 
  * EE312 is a pre-requisite for EE319K. 
Nonetheless, the parallel tracks would allow students to access EE electives
sooner and enable transfer students to graduate faster:

  * First-year students could take the courses in the Circuits, Microprocessor, and Software tracks 
  * Second-year students could take the required courses in all of the tracks 
  * Third-year students could finish the required EE courses in the tracks and take several electives 
  * Fourth-year students could take several electives plus senior design project 
Other electrical engineering courses required for the BSEE degree follow:

  * EE366 Engineering Economics I  
_Add a co-requisite of EE351K. During the 1999-2000 academic year, the EE
department taught one section in the Fall (by Martin Baughman). As many as
four sections per year would need to be added to implement the course as a
required course (one Fall, two Spring, and one Summer). Three professors other
than Martin Baughman have expressed interest in teaching a section._

  * Technical Area #1: three EE electives 
  * Technical Area #2: three EE electives 
  * Advanced Laboratory: EE321, EE440, EE345L, EE345S, or EE374L  
_This course may also be counted as a technical area elective_

Other required courses:

  * Sciences: CH301, PHY303K/PHY103M (Lab)  
_PHY303L is listed under the electromagnetics track above_

  * Math: M408C, M408D, M427K, M340L  
_Request that the math department use Matlab in M340L_

  * Humanities: E306, E316, GOV310L, GOV312L, HIS315L 
  * Four other electives: Fine Arts/Humanities, Social Science, Technical, Free  
_John Cogdell points out that since the ECE department has a throughput of 120
students per semester, we might negotiate with the non-engineering departments
to tailor some of their courses to engineering, e.g. engineering ethics or
history of science and technology._

A new technical area in Circuit Design is proposed that would consist of
EE316, EE321, EE321K, and EE338K. In addition, EE316 could be added as a
technical area elective in Computer Engineering (Group 2) and Integrated
Electronics since it is a pre-requisite for EE360M and EE360R, respectively.
See [Appendix A: Discussion about EE316](ee316.html).

We suggest making PHY355 optional and add it to two Technical Areas:
Electromagnetic Engineering, and Electronic Materials and Devices. Some of the
material in PHY355, such as quantum physics and Heisenberg uncertainity, are
covered in EE 339.

The proposed changes

  * add 2 required courses (EE306, EE322) 
  * make 6 required courses electives (PHY103N, EE316, EE321, EE321K, PHY355, EE338K) 
  * replaces the engineering science elective with EE366 
  * changes EE338 to EE438. 
Three of the freed courses become a second technical area.

Based on these proposals, the 49 credit hours of required EE courses and 18
hours of technical area electives for the BSEE degree would cover the
following topics:

| _Topic_ | _Percentage_ | _Credit Hours_ | _Formula_ |  specialization | 30%
| 20.0 | Advanced Lab + 1/2 EE464H/K + 5 technical area electives  | analog
circuits and systems | 24% | 16.5 | 1/2 EE302 + 2/3 EE313 + EE411 + 3/4 EE438
+ EE351K + EE362K  | digital logic/microprocessors |  10% |  6.5 | 1/6 EE302 +
EE306 + EE319K  | programming |  9% |  6.0 | EE312 + EE322  | analog
devices/electromagnetics |  9% |  6.0 | EE325 + EE339  | technical
communication |  8% |  5.6 | EE155 + EE333T + 4/10 EE464H/K  | business
practice |  6% |  3.9 | 1/6 EE302 (ethics) + 1/10 EE464H/K (ethics) + EE366
(economics)  | discrete-time processing/data acquisition |  4% |  2.5 | 1/6
EE302 + 1/3 EE313 + 1/4 438  | **Total** | **100%** | **67.0** |

## 7.0 Technical Areas

7.1 _Question_

What changes would you make to the technical areas?

7.2 _Discussion_

The technical areas will likely be impacted by decisions about the major
sequence. In the previous section, the consensus proposal creates a new
technical area called Circuits that consists of EE316, EE321, EE321K, and
EE338K. The consensus proposal also adds PHY355 as an elective in the
technical areas of Electromagnetic Engineering, and Electronic Materials and
Devices.

Since the Fall of 1996, about 2/3 of the ECE students have either majored in
computer engineering or have chosen the computer engineering technical area.
During the same time, about 1/6 of the ECE students have chosen one of three
telecommunications technical areas.

7.3 _Proposals_

  * Add an advanced math course in each technical area to encourage BSEE students to strengthen their math skills. In the 1998-2000 catalog, the Information Systems Technical Area listed M365C Real Analysis as a technical elective. 
  * Other suggestions will largely depend on the choices made in the previous section. 

## 8.0 Basic Sequence

| _Class_ | _Amount of Material_ | _Decade of Syllabus_ | _Relevance to all
EEs_ | _Any Redundant Material_ | _Course Rating_ | _Instructor Rating_ |
[EE302](http://www.ece.utexas.edu/courses/fall_99/ee302/) |  Just right (DHLR)
| 1980s | Yes (HR) Make optional (L) Too narrow (EV) | No | 3.65 | 3.65  |
[EE411](http://www.ece.utexas.edu/~ee411acc/) | Too much (EV) Just right (LR)
| 1980s | Yes (HL) No (E) | Yes, with EE302 | 3.80 | 3.55  |
[EE312](http://www.ece.utexas.edu/projects/courses/fall_99/ee312) | Should
cover more (V) | 1990s | Yes (EL) Medium (H) | No | 3.00 | 3.05  |
[EE313](http://www.ece.utexas.edu/~bevans/courses/ee313/) | Too much (E) |
1980s | Yes (EH) | No | 3.60 | 3.69  | EE316 | Redundant with itself | 1980s |
Yes (DL) Medium (H) No (E) | Yes, with EE302 | 3.33 | 3.03  | EE319K |  |
1990s | Yes (DEL) Medium (H) | No | 3.18 | 3.24

The Course Ratings and Instructor Ratings represent the average of these
ratings given on the Student Evaluation from Fall 1996 to Summer 1999
semester, inclusive, with the exception of EE313 which has only been taught
since Fall 1998. The average was only computed for adjunct, instructional,
tenure-track, and tenured faculty. Teaching assistant ratings were not
included. The average overall instructor rating for the College of Engineering
is 3.9 (out of 5.0).

## 9.0 Visiting Committee Comments

After discussion with representative students and faculty, the committee
expressed concern that classroom performance by professors and instructors is
not receiving the emphasis that it deserves to ensure the continued
improvement in the quality of the Department. The quality of the teaching
process appears to vary widely from one course or section to the next, ranging
from excellent in some cases to negligible or non-existent in others. This
appears to go beyond the expected "normal distribution" of teaching talent, to
the point that some courses are of negligible benefit to anyone.

It appears that the system of punishments and rewards existing within the
Department, and the College of Engineering as well, fail to encourage
classroom excellence on a par with, for example, research activities. Further,
it appears that the Chairman has precious few tools with which to promote
teaching excellence among the ECE faculty (or to discourage the opposite).

As representatives of industry, the traditional consumer base of the
Department's products, the members consider this a very serious matter. We
expect UT ECE graduates to have the knowledge and skills that are implied by
their transcript. We urge the Department to devote effort to finding ways to
bring the reward system into a balance that will support continued growth of
UT in the rankings, and that will ensure that students receive the support
required to master their studies.

The committee heard other, more specific concerns expressed by students and
faculty:

  1. The EE and CE curricula may not be laid out in a truly "logical sequence of learning." 
  2. The CE curriculum is too much like the EE curriculum. Students would like to begin to specialize earlier in the curriculum. 
  3. There is interest in adding a third specialty option, referred to as "generalist." Indeed, several other departments whose curricula were reviewed had more than two specialty options. 
  4. There is a general lack of sufficient orientation service to give students the knowledge required to choose their major, their specialty and their elective courses intelligently. The other Universities that offer more curriculum flexibility supplement it with adequate counseling. 
  5. The number of Teaching Assistants is currently inadequate. 
  6. There is an interest in having more co-ops. 
  7. There is the feeling that the EE155 Seminar Course should be offered earlier in the program. 
  8. There is the concern that some Professors and Instructors do not maintain office hours rigorously enough. 
  9. On a more subjective note, there is a sense that the students do not feel that the faculty really cares if they learn the material, that loyalty to the Department is low, and that the camaraderie among students is not as high as in other highly-ranked universities. 
As such, the Visiting Committee (VC) recommends that the ECE department
evaluates the 10 points discussed above and provide the VC with a proposed
plan for addressing these issues.

## 10.0 Agenda for the February 15, 2000, Meeting

The focus of the meeting on February 15, 2000, was to discuss what courses
belong in the basic sequence and what content should be in them. The consensus
was that the basic sequence courses should be EE302, EE306, EE411, EE312,
EE313, and EE319K. The suggestion at the two previous meetings to make EE316
an elective for the BSEE degree received consensus for the third time.

The agenda for the meeting follows:

  1. 5 minutes: Agenda for the meeting and summary of previous discussions: Brian Evans 
  2. 5 minutes: The importance of abstraction: Brian Evans 
  3. 15 minutes: Increasing the place of Information, Signals, and Systems early in our EE (CE/SE) curriculum: Gustavo de Veciana ([Slides](gustavo.pdf)) 
  4. 15 minutes. Discussion concerning EE302 
  5. 15 minutes: Summary of the content in EE316: Chuck Roth 
  6. 15 minutes. Discussion of ideas for updating EE316 
  7. 15 minutes: Ideas for a new EE306 and EE312 sequence: Yale Patt 
  8. 15 minutes. Discussion of EE306 and EE312 and its impact on EE319K and EE316 
  9. 15 minutes: Ideas for changes to EE411: Jack Lee 
  10. 15 minutes. Discussion of ideas for EE411 and its impact on EE338 (438) and EE321 
  11. 15 minutes: Ideas for changes to EE313: Brian Evans 
  12. 15 minutes. Discussion concerning EE313 
Gustavo's talk also presented ideas on how to improve the continuous variable
math skills of the BSEE students, esp. matrix algebra, complex arithmetic, and
optimization.

## 11.0 Agenda for the February 29, 2000, Meeting

The focus for this next meeting was to consider the required EE courses in the
"major" sequence:

  * current courses needing discussion: EE438, EE351K, EE362K, advanced laboratory, and EE464H/K 
  * proposed courses to be added that will need discussion: programming course beyond EE312, and EE366 
  * courses not needing discussion: EE325, EE333T, EE339, EE155 
The scheduled agenda follows:

  * 2:00 - 2:15 PM: Agenda for the meeting and summary of previous discussions: Evans 
  * 2:15 - 2:25 PM: Ideas for a new laboratory for EE438: Buckman 
  * 2:25 - 2:35 PM: Discussion concerning a new laboratory for EE438 
  * 2:35 - 2:45 PM: Ideas for the Advanced Laboratory choices: Evans 
  * 2:45 - 2:55 PM. Discussion concerning the Advanced Laboratory choices 
  * 2:55 - 3:05 PM: Ideas for EE464H/K: Hallock 
  * 3:00 - 3:15 PM: Discussion concerning EE464H/K 
  * 3:15 - 3:30 PM: **Break**
  * 3:30 - 3:40 PM: Summary of the programming sequence (EE312, EE322, EE360C): Chase 
  * 3:40 - 3:50 PM: Discussion concerning the programming sequence 
  * 3:50 - 4:00 PM: Summary of the content of EE366: Baughman 
  * 4:00 - 4:10 PM: Discussion concerning making EE366 a required course 
  * 4:10 - 4:20 PM: Ideas for improving EE362K: Womack 
  * 4:20 - 4:30 PM: Discussion of ideas for improving EE362K 
  * 4:30 - 4:40 PM: Ideas for improving EE351K: de Veciana 
  * 4:40 - 4:50 PM. Discussion concerning ideas for improving EE351K 

## 12.0 Agenda for the February 9, 2001, ECE Faculty Meeting

The focus of this next meeting was to vote on specific proposals for both BSEE
and BS Comp. Eng. curriculums. The agenda follows.

  * Agenda item #1 Proposal: We propose to make the BS major in Computer Engineering a separate degree. This will require approval on The University and the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board. 

Comment: The biomedical engineering department was approved after about 1.5
years of effort. So, if we were to seek approval for a separate computer
engineering degree, then the effort would likely finish sometime during the
Fall of 2002 semester.

  * Agenda items #2 and #3, Amending the BSEE and BSCE curriculums. Please note, curricula package for the 2002-2004 catalog described at 

<http://www.ece.utexas.edu/~bevans/eereform/index.html>

Since a number of the specific items in the proposed BSEE and BSCE curriculums
are in common, it will be more efficient to discuss these items for both BSEE
and BSCE simultaneously. However, any decision (i.e., vote) regarding an item
will be made independently for each curriculum.

    * a. We propose to have 15 technical areas. There are ten technical areas associated with EE fields and five technical areas associated with CE. fields. A BSEE student would either choose both technical areas from the EE areas or one technical area from the EE areas and one technical area from the CE areas. A BSCE student would either choose both technical areas from the CE areas or one technical area from the CE areas and one technical area from the EE areas. A student would choose three classes in a technical area. A class can only be counted for one technical area. The proposed set of technical area courses is described at 

<http://www.ece.utexas.edu/~bevans/eereform/catalog/techareas.html>

Floor open to amendments on technical areas. votes taken.

    * b. We propose the following with respect to the non-ECE courses required for the BSEE and BSCE. curricula: 
      * 1\. CH 301 would no longer be required, but would become a technical elective. 
      * 2\. The basic physics courses, PHY 303K, PHY 103M, PHY 303L, and PHY 103N, would remain required. We propose that PHY 355 Modern Physics would no longer be required but become a technical area elective. 
      * 3\. The Engineering Science Elective, an artifact from older ABET requirements, was either EM 314 mechanics, ME 320 Thermodynamics, or ME 353 Economics. We propose to replace the Engineering Science Elective with EE 366 Economics I. 
      * 4\. The required math courses remain the same as the 2000-2002 catalog 
        * M 408C, M 408D, M 427K, and M 325K for CE curriculum 
        * M 408C, M 408D, M 427K, and M 340L for EE curriculum 
      * 5\. The other required non-engineering classes remain the same (1 fine arts/humanities elective, 1 social sciences elective, 2 history courses, 2 government courses, and 2 English courses).  Floor open to amendments for "outside ECE course requirements", votes taken. 
    * c. For both the BSEE and BS Comp. Eng. curricula, we propose the following new foundation course for first-year students: 

EE 306 Introduction to Computing. Bottom-up introduction to computing; bits
and operations on bits; number formats; arithmetic and logic operations;
digital logic; the Von Neumann model of processing, including memory,
arithmetic logic unit, registers, and instruction decoding and execution;
introduction to structured programming and debugging; machine and assembly
language programming; the structure of an assembler; physical input/output
through device registers; subroutine call/return; trap instruction; stacks and
applications of stacks. Prerequisite: None. Three lecture hours and one
recitation hour a week for one semester.

Comment: A similar class has been adopted in the first-year for the BS in
Biomedical Engineering degree (BME 303). EE 306 was taught in Fall 2000 and is
being taught in Spring 2001 as an EE 379K class.

Floor open to amendments regarding EE306 requirement, votes taken.

    * d. Building on EE 306, we propose that the BSEE and BS CE. curricula have two programming courses, EE 312 and EE 322: 

EE 312. Introduction to Programming. Programming skills for problem solving;
programming in C; elementary data structures; asymptotic analysis.
Prerequisite: [EE 306 or BME 303] with a grade of at least C. Three lecture
hours and one recitation hour a week for lone semester.

EE 322. Data Structures. Programming with abstractions; programming in C++;
data structures; templates; algorithm analysis. Prerequisite: EE 312 with a
grade of at least C.

Comment: The two foundation courses, EE 302 and EE 306, and the proposed
required courses the follow them, serve the following similar roles:

        
                EE 302 -> EE 411 -> EE 438  implementation of circuits in hw lab
                         -> EE 313  abstraction from circuits to systems
        
        EE 306 -> EE 312 -> EE 319K implementation of software in hw lab
                         -> EE 322  abstraction from procedural programming
                                    to object-oriented programming
        

Floor open to amendments on "high-level programming sequence", votes taken

    * e. Also building on the EE 306 and EE 312 sequence, we propose that the pre-requisite for EE 319K Introduction to Microcontrollers be changed to EE 312. Because of the foundation laid by EE 306 and EE 312, EE 319K can have a richer starting point. Some of the material in the current EE 345L Microprocessor Applications and Organization can be shifted to EE 319K. We propose the following course abstract for EE 319K: 

EE 319K Introduction to Microcontrollers. Basic computer structure;
instruction set; addressing modes; assembly language programming; subroutines;
arithmetic operations; programming in C; C functions; basic data structures;
input/output; and survey of several microcontrollers. Prerequisite: EE 312
with a grade of at least C.

Floor open to amendments on EE319K prerequisite change, votes taken.

    * f. We propose to add a one-hour lab to EE 338 Electronic Circuits I to make it EE 438. The one-hour lab would consist of about one-third of the labs in EE 321 Electrical Engineering Lab I. 

Floor open to amendments on EE338 to EE438 change, votes taken.

    * g. The 2000-2002 BSEE curriculum allows a student to choose any one of the following three courses to fulfill an advanced laboratory pre-requisite for EE 464: EE 321K, EE 345M, or EE 345S. With the shifting of some material from EE 345M to EE 345L and with the shifting of some material from EE 321K to EE 321, we propose for the BSEE curriculum only that 
      1. the new list of possible advanced laboratory courses be changed to EE 321, EE 345L, and EE 345S 
      2. the new list of possible advanced laboratory courses also include EE 374L Applications of Biomedical Engineering and EE 440 Microelectronics Fabrication Techniques 
      3. the choice of the advanced laboratory course may also be counted as a technical area elective.  Comment: The BSCE curriculum proposes to require EE 345L, which would satisfy the advanced laboratory pre-requisite for EE 464. The BSCE curriculum does not count the "advance" lab as one of the technical area electives. 

Floor open to amendments on advance lab requirements, votes taken.

    * h. In discussing curriculum reform, we spent a lot of time prioritizing the courses that every BS in Computer Engineering would need to know. Because two of the five technical areas in Computer Engineering-- Software Development and System Software-- are so remote from solid state devices and electromagnetics, we propose for the BS Computer Engineering curriculum only that EE 325 and EE 339 would not be required for the degree. EE 325 would become a technical elective, and EE 339 would become a technical area elective. EE 325 and EE 339 would remain required in the BSEE curriculum. 

Comment: Even though EE 325 would not be required for Computer Engineering,
about 70% of the Computer Engineers would take EE 325 as a technical elective
because EE 325 is required for Computer Engineering students who choose any of
the following technical areas: Electromagnetic Engineering, Electronic
Materials and Devices, and VLSI Design. In addition, 40% of Computer Engineers
choosing Biomedical Engineering, 25% of those choosing Electronics, and 50% of
those choosing Power Systems would need to take EE 325 to satisfy pre-
requisites.

Comment: Even though EE 339 would not be required for Computer Engineering,
about 50% of the Computer Engineers would take EE 339 as a technical area
course because it is required for Computer Engineers taking the VLSI Design
technical area. EE 339 is also a technical area course in the following
technical areas: Electronics, Electronic Materials and Devices, and Embedded
Systems.

Floor open to amendments on EE325/EE339 requirement for BSCE, votes taken

    * i. In discussing curriculum reform, we spent a lot of time prioritizing the courses that every BSEE student would need to know. Due to the impact of EE 306, the BSEE curriculum committee believed that many but not all EEs need EE 316: 

EE 316. Digital Logic Design. Boolean algebra; analysis and synthesis of
combinational and sequential digital logic; applications to computer design.
Prerequisite: [EE 306 or CS 310] with a grade of at least C.

We propose that EE 316 be a technical elective for the BSEE curriculum and
required for the BS Computer Engineering curriculum.

Comment: EE 316 addresses the implementation of finite state machines in
digital hardware using gates. For EEs, a key topic to understand is state.
Analysis of finite state machines is covered in EE 306. Finite state machines
are implemented in software in EE 319K. EE 313 introduces state-space
descriptions, which are covered in detail in EE 362K.

Comment: EE 316 also covers the analysis and design of sequential and
combinatorial logic. EE 306 covers the analysis of sequential and
combinational logic. The EE 302 instructors in the Fall 2000 semester found
out how well the students learned the material on digital logic in EE 306.

Comment: It turns out that none of the courses in the ten EE technical areas
relies on EE 316. EE 316 is important in computer engineering, as it is
required for three of the five Computer Engineering technical areas (these are
the three technical areas that together form the Computer Engineering
technical area under the 2000-2002 catalog). Under the 2000-2002 catalog, with
only one choice of technical area, about 40% of the BSEE students are choosing
Computer Engineering as their technical area and hence would be required to
take EE 316 under the 2002-2004 catalog. With BSEE students being able to
choose two technical areas, we expect this percentage to increase. All BS
Comp. Eng. students (which make up more than half of the undergraduate ECE
students) would be required to take EE 316.

Floor open to amendments on EE316 requirement for BSEE degree, vote taken.

    * Floor open to additional amendments from faculty, votes taken. 
  * Agenda item #4 final vote, up-or-down on BSEE curriculum as revised by successful amendments 
  * Agenda item #5 final vote, up-or-down, on BSCE curriculum as revised by successful amendments 
  * Adjourn. 

## 13.0 Committee Members

The committee coordinating the faculty discussion on the BSEE degree for the
2002-2004 catalog consists of the following faculty:

  * Mr. Gary Daniels (D) [RGDAustin@aol.com](mailto:RGDAustin@aol.com)
  * Prof. Gustavo de Veciana (V) [gustavo@ece.utexas.edu](mailto:gustavo@ece.utexas.edu)
  * Prof. Brian L. Evans, Chair (E) [bevans@ece.utexas.edu](mailto:bevans@ece.utexas.edu)
  * Prof. Gary Hallock (H) [hallock@ece.utexas.edu](mailto:hallock@ece.utexas.edu)
  * Prof. Jack Lee (L) [lee@ece.utexas.edu](mailto:lee@ece.utexas.edu)
  * Prof. Rebecca Richards-Kortum (R) [kortum@mail.utexas.edu](mailto:kortum@mail.utexas.edu) 
The following students have been participating in the discussion of the ideas
for a new BSEE curriculum:

  * [Ms. Ariane Beck](http://www.ece.utexas.edu/~ariane/), BSEE, Materials and Devices Technical Area, senior, [ariane@ece.utexas.edu](mailto:ariane@ece.utexas.edu)
  * [Mr. Robert Knock](http://www.ece.utexas.edu/~knock/), BS Computer Engineering, sophomore, [knock@ece.utexas.edu](mailto:knock@ece.utexas.edu)
  * [Mr. Elijah Liu](http://www.ece.utexas.edu/~eliu2/), BSEE, Telecommunications and Signal Processing, sophomore, [eliu2@ece.utexas.edu](mailto:eliu2@ece.utexas.edu)
  * [Mr. Brian Ward](http://www.ece.utexas.edu/~bsward/), BSEE, Solid State Technical Area, senior, [brian_w@mail.utexas.edu](mailto:brian_w@mail.utexas.edu) 

* * *

Last updated 06/09/02. Mail comments about this page to
[bevans@ece.utexas.edu](mailto:bevans@ece.utexas.edu).

