![](seclogo.gif)

# 2000/2001 Graduate Admissions Handbook

## LETTER FROM THE DEAN

We live in a period of continuing and profound change. As we approach the next
millennium our society is increasingly more dependent on technology,
innovation, and the exploitation of information.

How do we address the profound societal intellectual and ethical challenges of
the new information age? How do we help maintain our quality of life, so
envied among the world's nations, particularly our health and social security
systems, in the midst of pressures of reduced government spending? How do we
ensure the promotion of our distinctive cultural identity midst pressures to
view culture as a commodity in the global trading system? How do we contribute
to an understanding of the costs of poverty, unemployment, causes of crime and
violence, or the ethical implications of genetic breakthroughs such as the
recent cloning achievements that produced Dolly?

Advanced training and research are the keys to our understanding of our
society, to our ability to engage in activities toward the betterment of our
society, and to the search for solutions to fundamental problems. We are
members of an institution that is knowledge driven. Research by faculty and
graduate students is one of the major components of a graduate education
within a university.

The purpose of graduate education, therefore, is to engage both in the pursuit
of fundamental knowledge (pure research) and in the pursuit of knowledge of
direct benefit to society (applied research). A graduate education also
develops critical thinking, analytical ability and a responsiveness to
society's needs. These goals are achieved through a variety of career paths. A
graduate education offers an opportunity for in-depth exploration of a topic
and for the acquisition of an understanding of the state of the art in one's
chosen discipline.

It develops critical thinking and an ability to present cogent arguments,
clearly and persuasively. A graduate education also offers an opportunity to
engage in original research and scholarship that is on the cutting edge of
one's discipline. It allows for the pursuit of studies that will enhance and
further our knowledge of social, cultural, political, and economic issues; it
affords one to become a member of a community of scholars by participating in
national and international networks of scholars.

Our graduate students are our country's most valuable resource. You are our
future intellectual leaders. Your work in the areas of basic and applied
research will help Canada compete in the global economy, facilitate
communication among citizens in a multi-ethnic society and improve the quality
of our lives.

I wish you a productive and happy new academic year.

Dr. Gordana Lazarevich

Dean, Graduate Studies

## CITY OF VICTORIA

The advantages of Victoria's West Coast setting are almost legendary. Victoria
is well known for having Canada's mildest climate - our winters are warm, our
summers temperate, and we get little snow and not a whole lot of rain. If you
are looking for a better climate than Victoria's, you will have to head south!

Located on the southern tip of Vancouver Island, more than 75 kilometres south
of the 49th parallel, Victoria is surrounded with mountains, ocean, lakes,
wilderness, rain forests, islands and sandy beaches. The City of Victoria is
also a culturally rich community with an active arts and entertainment scene.
The major cities of Vancouver and Seattle are both just a few hours away.

Greater Victoria's recreational opportunities are hard to beat. Whether it is
outdoor recreation on the water and beaches, in the mountains and parks, or
indoor recreation in the pools, gyms, rinks and meeting places, you are not
likely to get bored.

Victoria is a size many people consider just right. Large enough to offer the
economic, cultural, and recreational opportunities of a big city, Victoria is
also small enough to be clean, safe, and easy to get around in. If you have a
bicycle, do not leave it behind - this is an ideal cycling city.

## UNIVERSITY OF VICTORIA

### HISTORY

The University of Victoria has had autonomous degree-granting status since
1963, but its history spans 98 years and an entire continent. At the turn of
the century, local educators called for an extension of available academic
facilities and, in response to their request, Victoria College was chartered
on July 24, 1902. The College was affiliated with Montreal's McGill
University, from 1903 to 1915, and offered first and second year courses in
Arts and Science. In 1920 the College became affiliated with the University of
British Columbia (UBC) and continued to offer two-year programs.

Victoria College expanded rapidly during the 1950's and awarded, still in
affiliation with UBC, its first bachelor's degree in 1961. In 1963 Victoria
College was invested as an independent degree-granting institution and renamed
the University of Victoria.

In the years since its formation, the College and University has occupied
several sites throughout the city. In 1963 it made its final move to Gordon
Head, a 385 acre campus located 5 miles from the city centre and within
walking distance to Cadboro Bay.

The University of Victoria has a teaching staff of over 500, and approximately
16,000 students (14,000 undergraduate and 2,000 graduate students) enrolled in
the faculties of Arts and Science, Business, Fine Arts, Education,
Engineering, Law, Human and Social Development, and Graduate Studies.

## FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES

The University of Victoria's Faculty of Graduate Studies offers degrees in the
following areas:

  * [Anthropology](http://web.UVic.CA/anth/master.htm) \- MA 
  * [Biochemistry and Microbiology](http://zeus.bioc.uvic.ca/BiocDept.Html) \- MSc, PhD 
  * [Biology](http://darwin.ceh.uvic.ca/) \- MSc, PhD 
  * [Business](http://www.business.uvic.ca/) \- MBA 
  * [Chemistry](http://chemserver1.chem.uvic.ca/chemistw/gradstud.htm) \- MSc, PhD 
  * [Child & Youth Care](http://www.hsd.uvic.ca/CYC/cyc.htm) \- MA 
  * [Computer Science](http://www.csc.uvic.ca/) \- MA, MSc, PhD 
  * [Earth and Ocean Sciences](http://ceor.seos.uvic.ca/seos/) \- MSc, PhD 
  * [Economics]( http://web.uvic.ca/econ) \- MA, PhD 
  * [Education](http://www.educ.uvic.ca/) \- MA, MEd, PhD 
    * Arts in Education ([ Art](http://www.educ.uvic.ca/depts/aied/pages/programs/pro.art.grad.html) or [Music](http://www.educ.uvic.ca/depts/aied/pages/programs/pro.music.grad.html) Education) 
    * Communication and Social Foundations (Curriculum Studies, Educational Administration, Language Arts) 
    * Physical Education - MA, MEd, MSc (Coaching Studies, Sports and Exercise Studies) 
    * Psychological Foundations (Counselling, Educational Psychology, Special Education) 
    * Social and Natural Sciences (Mathematics, Science, or Social Studies Education) 
  * [Electrical and Computer Engineering](http://www.grad.ece.uvic.ca/) \- MASc, MEng, PhD 
  * [English](http://www.engl.uvic.ca/Grad/gradHome.html) \- MA, PhD 
  * [French Language and Literature](http://web.uvic.ca/french/) \- MA 
  * [Geography](http://geography.geog.uvic.ca/dept/homepage.html) \- MA, MSc, PhD 
  * [Germanic Studies](http://web.uvic.ca/german/) \- MA 
  * [Greek and Roman Studies](http://web.uvic.ca/GRS/) \- MA 
  * [History](http://web.uvic.ca/history/grads.html) \- MA, PhD 
  * [History in Art](http://kafka.uvic.ca/historyinart/) \- MA, PhD 
  * [Human and Social Development](http://www.hsd.uvic.ca/MDM/mdm.htm) \- MA, MSW, MN (Interdisciplinary programs with streams in Child & Youth Care, Nursing, Social Work, [Dispute Resolution](http://dispute.resolution.uvic.ca/madr.htm) and [Indigenous Governance, M.A.](http://web.uvic.ca/igov/).) 
  * [Linguistics](http://web.uvic.ca/ling/) \- MA, PhD 
  * [Mathematics and Statistics](http://www.math.uvic.ca/grad/grad.html) \- MA, MSc, PhD 
  * [Mechanical Engineering](http://www.me.uvic.ca/) \- MASc, MEng, PhD 
  * [Music](http://kafka.uvic.ca/music/grad2.html) \- MA, MMus, PhD (Musicology, Performance, Composition, Musicology with Performance) 
  * [Physics and Astronomy](http://www.phys.uvic.ca/) \- MSc, PhD 
  * [Political Science](http://www.cous.uvic.ca/poli/gradl.htm) \- MA 
  * [Psychology](http://web.uvic.ca/psyc/grad.html) \- MA, MSc, PhD 
  * [Public Administration](http://www.hsd.uvic.ca/PADM/programs/gradprog/mpa.htm) \- MPA 
  * [Sociology](http://web.uvic.ca/soci/) \- MA 
  * [Theatre](http://kafka.uvic.ca/theatre/phoenix.html) \- MA, MFA, PhD 
  * [Visual Arts](http://kafka.uvic.ca/visualarts/) \- MFA 

* * *

## ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS

### MASTER'S DEGREE

#### General

All applicants for a Master's degree must have completed an acceptable
bachelor's degree from a recognized institution, and have earned the
equivalent of a grade average of at least "B" on the last two years' of course
work (eg, 30 UVic units; 10 full courses; 60 semester-hour credits). Some
departments have set higher standards (please check our tables for details:
[International applicants](international_admission_ta.html); [North American
Applicants](na_admission_table.html)). Evidence is required, in the form of
two Assessment Reports from qualified referees, of the applicant's ability to
undertake advanced work in the area of interest.

Applicants without a bachelor's degree (or its equivalent in another country)
cannot be considered for admission. The Graduate Admissions and Records Office
determines whether or not a particular institution is "recognized" for the
purpose of admission to the Faculty of Graduate Studies. If you have any
questions about the status of an institution, contact the Graduate Admissions
and Records Officer.

When determining whether or not an applicant meets the minimum academic
standards, certain courses are not taken into consideration:

  * Physical Education activity courses 
  * credit granted on the basis of "life" or "work" experience 
  * credit granted from institutions not recognized by the University of Victoria

Once such courses have been discounted from an applicant's record, what
remains must be equivalent to a bachelor's degree.

#### Mature Student Admission

Master's degree applicants who do not meet the minimum academic requirement
may be considered in the Mature Student category if they meet the following
conditions:

  * they completed a bachelor's degree 
  * four years have elapsed since completion of the degree 
  * four years of professional experience directly related to the area of interest has been undertaken since completion of degree

The decision as to whether or not an applicant qualifies to be considered in
this category is made by the Director of Graduate Admissions and Records. A
separate application is not required.

Students admitted in this category cannot receive transfer credit for any
courses completed prior to enrolling in the Faculty of Graduate Studies.

#### DOCTORAL DEGREE

Admission to a Doctoral degree program normally requires completion of a
Master's degree from a recognized university. In exceptional circumstances,
applicants can be considered for direct admission to a PhD program if they
have completed a bachelor's degree with an overall admission grade average of
at least first class ("A-"). There is no Mature Student category for doctoral
applicants.

Admission to a Doctoral program requires evidence that the applicant is
capable of undertaking substantial original research. Such capability will be
judged from the two assessment reports.

#### NON-DEGREE ADMISSION

Non-degree graduate students are those taking courses in the Faculty of
Graduate Studies, but who are not in a formal degree program. Such students
are admitted in one of the following categories.

**

Visiting**

Students admitted for the purpose of taking specific courses for credit
towards a graduate degree at another university. Applicants must be students
in good standing in a graduate degree program at a recognized university. This
evidence is in the form of a Letter of Permission issued by the applicant's
home university. The Letter of Permission must specify the courses requested.
A completed application form accompanied by the application fee must be
submitted to the Graduate Admissions and Records Office. The Letter of
Permission is the only supporting documentation required by the Faculty of
Graduate Studies, although academic departments may request additional
information. International students will be required to provide transcripts
and evidence of English competency.

**

Exchange**

This is a special kind of "Visiting" category for students currently enrolled
in a graduate degree program at a western Canadian university that is a
signatory to the Western Deans' or other exchange Agreements. The Western
Deans' Agreement form, issued by the student's home university, must specify
the courses requested. Incomplete forms will be returned to the student for
completion before a decision on admission is made. Documentation required by
the Faculty of Graduate Studies varies according to the terms of the
agreement. For details consult your exchange office or Graduate Admissions and
Records.

Students admitted in this category, who provide evidence that they are
formally registered and paying fees at their home university, will have their
University of Victoria tuition fees waived for the approved courses.

**

Non-degree**

Other students who wish to take courses on a non-degree basis must apply in
the same manner as for admission to a master's degree. All transcripts and
assessment reports must be submitted and the same minimum academic standards
will apply.

#### General

Courses completed as a "Visiting" or "Exchange" student cannot be counted
towards a degree at the University of Victoria.

Transcripts are not automatically sent to the home institution of a "Visiting"
or "Exchange" student. They must be requested through the Graduate Admissions
and Records Office. The fee for 1999-00 was $5.35 per transcript (includes
GST).

If a "non-degree" student is later admitted to a graduate degree program, no
more than 3.0 units of course work taken as a non-degree student may be
considered for transfer to the degree program. None of the fees paid as a non-
degree student may be applied to the minimum fees required for a degree
program.

### EXAMINATIONS

#### GRE (Graduate Record Examination)

Individual departments may require the GRE (General, Subject or both).
Applicants should contact the department directly for information.

#### TOEFL, IELTS (Academic), or MELAB Requirement

Applicants whose first language is not English, and who have not completed a
recognized degree in an ***** English-speaking country nor have resided in an
English-speaking country for three years immediately prior to the entry-point
applied for, must take the Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL). The
minimum acceptable TOEFL score is 550 on the paper-based test or a score of
213 on the computer based test. Scores older than two years are not
acceptable. Individual departments may set a higher standard. This requirement
will not be waived.

A minimum overall Band 7 on each component of the International English
Language Testing System - Academic (IELTS) or a score of 85 on the Michigan
English Language Assessment Battery (MELAB) will be accepted as an alternative
to a TOEFL score of 550.

Official test score reports must be sent directly to the University of
Victoria by the testing agency.

Upon the recommendation of the academic unit offering admission, successful
completion of the University Admission Preparation Course (UAPC) offered by
the University of Victoria [English Language
Centre](http://www.uvcs.uvic.ca/elc/) will be accepted in lieu of the above
standardized English Competency tests.

**_

*** Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, United Kingdom, United States of
America, English-speaking countries of the Caribbean.

_

### GMAT (Graduate Management Admission Test)

The GMAT is required of all applicants to the MBA program. Contact the School
of Business for more information. The School of Public Administration
recommends submitting a GMAT score if it will strengthen your application.

#### APPLICATION FEE

The application fee is *$50 Canadian or $35 US. This fee applies to all
applicants - including international students. It is non-refundable and will
not be credited towards tuition fees. Applications will not be processed
unless the application fee is paid. Payment must be in Canadian funds drawn on
a Canadian bank, or US funds drawn on a US bank. Reactivations for a new
academic session must also be accompanied by the application fee. **DO NOT
SUBMIT CASH!** Cheques should be made payable to the University of Victoria.

_

*This fee is subject to change without notice.

_

#### SECOND MASTER'S OR DOCTORAL DEGREE

The Faculty of Graduate Studies will consider applicants who wish to pursue a
second Master's or Doctoral degree provided it is not in the same discipline
as the first degree. None of the research or course work from the first degree
may count towards the second.

#### INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS

Please consult [International Graduate Student Admission and Application
Kit](intl.html), a brochure can be requested from the Graduate Admission &
Records Office.

### [DEPARTMENTAL ADMISSION REQUIREMENTS](depttable.html)

## APPLICATION PROCESS

Thank you for your interest in applying to the Faculty of Graduate Studies at
the University of Victoria. If you do not already have application materials
you may access them in one of two ways. You may write to:

GRADUATE ADMISSIONS AND RECORDS  
UNIVERSITY OF VICTORIA  
PO BOX 3025 STN CSC  
VICTORIA BC V8W 3P2  
CANADA

Please indicate the department(s) which interest you. Materials will be mailed
more quickly if you enclose a self-addressed mailing label.

You can also access printable application materials on our World Wide Web site
at [[http://www.uvic.ca/grar](appmat.html)]. This site contains the electronic
versions of several graduate publications as well as important deadline and
event information.

#### GENERAL

The following section outlines the basic steps through which your application
will pass. Steps 1 to 3 are the sole responsibility of the applicant. Steps 4
to 10 explain the process once your application is received. To assist
students through this process, the name and telephone number of the admissions
clerk handling the application appears on the letters mentioned in Steps 4, 5,
and 6.

**

STEP 1**

The process begins when you complete the application form. The form must be
filled in properly and signed. If the application is incomplete, or unsigned,
it will be returned to you. This will delay your application. There are
important details on the cover sheet of the application form so do not throw
it away. All applicants to the Faculty of Graduate Studies must meet the
minimum standards required by the Faculty. Check to make sure you meet the
requirements before you continue with your application for admission.

**

STEP 2**

Submit the form and application fee to the Graduate Admissions and Records
Office (the address is printed on all parts of the form). If you do not pay
the application fee, your application will not be processed.

There are four entry points throughout the year: September, January, May and
July. The majority of students start their graduate programs in September.
Deadlines for receiving complete applications varies between departments.

Applications may be received after deadlines, but it may not be possible to
process them in time for consideration. Deadlines for some departments are
quite early and some departments do not accept new students for all entry
points - please refer to the [Departmental Admission Table](depttable.html).

**

STEP 3**

Arrange for the supporting documentation listed below to be sent. Documents
will not be returned - they become the property of the University of Victoria.
Documentation from applicants who are not admitted, or do not take up an offer
of admission, will be kept on file for two years.

All documents are routinely verified. Evidence of altered or falsified
documents will result in the applicant being banned from the university.
Information on falsified documents is shared with the Association of
Universities and Colleges of Canada.

#### Supporting Documentation Transcripts

Two copies of your transcripts must be sent from ALL post-secondary
institutions you have attended. The university requires a complete academic
history. Official transcripts are those which are received in envelopes that
have been sealed and enclosed by the issuing institution. Failure to submit
all transcripts could delay your application.

You are welcome to submit unofficial transcripts in your possession - this
will begin the process. However, no final decisions can be made until official
transcripts are received DIRECTLY FROM THE INSTITUTION.

#### Assessment Reports

On the forms provided, you must obtain reports from two professors or other
academic authorities who are familiar with your work. These reports are
confidential and must be sent directly to the Graduate Admissions and Records
Office from the people filling them out on your behalf. If the Graduate
Admissions and Records Office receives letters of reference directly from the
assessors the assessment report forms will not be required.

#### Other

Please refer to the table on the previous page for departments that require
additional documentation such as a GRE or GMAT score, resume, writing sample,
or statement of intent. Departmental brochures may provide more detailed
information.

If you wish to have a third party (family member, friend, etc) act on your
behalf, you must provide us with a signed letter of permission authorizing
them to do so.

**

STEP 4**

When your application form and fee are received, the data from the form is
transferred to our computer database. We will send you a letter indicating
that we have received your application. This letter will list the material we
have received as well as the documents still required for your file.

**

STEP 5**

Once your file is complete, your academic record will be evaluated to
determine whether or not it meets the minimum standards required for
admission.

**

STEP 6A**

If your academic record meets the minimum standards, your file will be
forwarded to the department for final decision. We will send you a letter
advising you of this once it has happened.

Remember, meeting the minimum requirements does NOT guarantee admission. Each
department receives more qualified applicants than places available in their
program. Admission is very competitive and is not based on grade point average
alone.

**

STEP 6B**

If your academic record does not meet the minimum standards required for
admission, you will be sent a letter from the Director of Graduate Admissions
and Records informing you that your application for admission was
unsuccessful. If you want information about what is required for you to
upgrade to the minimum level to be considered eligible for admission, contact
the Director of Graduate Admission and Records Office in writing.

All applicants must satisfy the minimum requirements. Departments are not
allowed to consider applications below these standards.

**

STEP 7**

Once the department receives your application file, they will make a decision
about whether or not to offer you a place in their program. The evaluation
process varies from department to department. Some departments respond to
individual applications as they are received while others wait until they have
all of the applications and deal with them as a batch in a departmental
meeting. Once you have been notified that your file has been sent to the
department, all inquiries about the status of your application should be
directed to the Graduate Advisor in the department.

**

STEP 8**

When the department has made a decision, it will notify the Graduate
Admissions and Records Office.

**

STEP 9**

The official decision letters are sent. THE ONLY OFFICIAL DECISION LETTERS ARE
THOSE THAT ARE SIGNED BY THE DIRECTOR OF GRADUATE ADMISSIONS AND RECORDS. Some
departments will send preliminary letters that tell you they have recommended
admission to graduate study but the final decision comes from the Graduate
Admissions and Records Office. Do not make any final plans to come to Victoria
until you receive an OFFICIAL admission letter from the Director of Graduate
Admissions and Records.

**

STEP 10**

If you do not receive registration information with your letter of admission,
it will be sent to you approximately 4-6 weeks before the beginning of
classes.

#### RE-ACTIVATING UNSUCCESSFUL APPLICATIONS

Application materials from applicants who are refused, or who do not take up
an offer of admission, are kept on file for two years. If you wish to re-
activate your application you must submit a written request, a new application
fee, and transcripts of any academic work completed since you last applied.

#### APPEALS

The final academic/professional decision on the admission of applicants who
meet the minimum requirements is the prerogative of the department; however,
you may ask them to reconsider if you feel that your circumstance warrants
special consideration.

If your application is refused because it does not meet the minimum academic
standard, you may ask the department if it is willing to accept you and if it
will make a written appeal to the Graduate Studies' Admissions and Awards
Committee on your behalf. Appeals without the support of the department are
not considered.

* * *

## FEES

The fees for graduate students are very different than those assessed for
undergraduate study. The following information is provided to assist you in
planning your finances for your graduate program. Full details on fees are
found in the University of Victoria Calendar. All amounts quoted below are
subject to change.

Students must read the section on fees in the University of Victoria calendar.
If you have questions about tuition or student fees, contact the Graduate
Admissions and Records Office.

### TUITION FEES

#### Degree Students

There is a minimum fee for all graduate degree programs. The unit of payment
is a "fee installment". The minimum program fee for a Master's degree is 5
full fee installments (or a combination of full and half installments
amounting to a total of 5 full fee installments). The minimum program fee for
a PhD degree is 7.5 installments (or a combination of full and half
installments amounting to a total of 7.5 fee installments).

The rates for 2000-01 are: $966 (full installment)

$483 (half installment)

Fees are assessed three times per year, usually in September, January and May.

If students have not completed their degree by the time the program fee has
been paid, they will then be assessed a re-registration fee for each term
until the time limit has been reached.

The re-registration fee for 2000-01 is: $323 per term

Non-Degree Students

Non-degree students pay for individual courses on a "per-unit" basis. Fees
assessed for work done as a non-degree student are NOT transferable to the
minimum program fee if a degree program is subsequently taken.

The fee for 2000-01 is: $323 per unit

### STUDENT FEES

These fees are charged to all graduate students regardless of their degree
program.

The rates for 2000-01 are:

Graduate Student Society $44 per term

Athletics and Recreation $30 per term

Universal Bus Pass $44 per term

Dental Plan $154 per year

Extended Health Plan $94 per year

### CO-OP FEES

Students enrolled in a Co-op work term pay a fee for that term (in addition to
any applicable tuition fee installments and student fees).

The rate for 2000-01 is: $346 per term

### OTHER FEES

Some departments require payment of a $100 acceptance deposit. This deposit is
non-refundable but it will be credited to the first term fees if the student
registers.

Some courses are subject to a surcharge.

### PAYMENT OF FEES

Fees are assessed by the Faculty of Graduate Studies and paid to Accounting
Services. Fee statements are not mailed to students but may be picked up at
Accounting Services at the end of the first month of each term.

* * *

## AWARDS & FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

The following is a brief introduction to some of the awards and sources of
financial assistance available to new students. A full listing of all awards
is available through the Office of the Dean of Graduate Studies or on our
[website](awards.html) at
[www.uvic.ca/grar/awards.html](www.uvic.ca/grar/awards.html).

### UNIVERSITY FELLOWSHIPS

All new applicants whose applications are COMPLETE by the 15th of February are
automatically considered for University Fellowships. The minimum requirement
is an average of "A-" (7.00 on the UVic grading scale) over the last two years
on their undergraduate and, if applicable, graduate course work. Grade
calculations and equivalencies are determined by the Graduate Admissions and
Records Office. Normally, awards are available only for those entering in
September.

Fellowships are held for one year (September to August) and are distributed in
12 monthly payments. The awards for 2000-01 will be $12,400 for Master's
students and $13,400 for PhD students.

Master's Fellowships are renewable once (to a maximum of 24 months), and PhD
Fellowships are renewable twice (to a maximum of 36 months). If a student
proceeds directly from a bachelor's degree to a PhD, without receiving a
Master's degree, it may be possible to renew the Fellowship to a maximum of 48
months. In order to qualify for renewal, each Fellowship holder must be
recommended by their department and have maintained a sessional and cumulative
grade point average of not less than 7.00.

The competition for University Fellowships is formidable. Fewer than 10% of
graduate students hold such an award at any given time. Meeting the minimum
standard for consideration does not guarantee that you will be successful in
the competition.

### PRESIDENT'S RESEARCH SCHOLARSHIPS

Applicants who hold national awards (eg, NSERC, SSHRC, or MRC) will normally
be eligible for a further award from the President's Research Scholarship
fund. In order to be considered for these awards you must notify your home
department and the Office of the Dean of Graduate Studies of your eligibility.
These are awards of $2,000 each. They are paid in two equal installments
(October and January).

**

Howard E. Petch Research Scholarships

**

Departments are asked to recommend highly qualified students to compete for
special President's Research Scholarships named in honour of President
Emeritus Howard E. Petch. There are ten awards available annually, valued at
$5,000 each. They are paid in three equal installments (September, January and
May).

### DEPARTMENTAL TEACHING ASSISTANTSHIPS

Teaching Assistantship (TA) arrangements are made directly between the student
and the department. Contact your prospective department as soon as possible.

### GRADUATE TEACHING AND RESEARCH FELLOWSHIPS (GTRF)

The Faculty of Graduate Studies makes available supplements to students hired
by departments as Teaching Assistants, Research Assistants, or to fulfill
other academically related duties. The exact amount of the supplement varies,
depending on the value of the assistantship and the funds available. GTRFs are
awarded in September, January and May, based on recommendations from
departments/schools.

### RESEARCH ASSISTANTSHIPS

Research Assistantship (RA) arrangements are made directly between the student
and the department or supervisor. Contact your prospective department as soon
as possible.

### OTHER UNIVERSITY AWARDS

There are many other awards available to students based on their performance
in the first and subsequent years of graduate study. Details are available
through the Office of the Dean of Graduate Studies or on our
[website](awards.html) at
[www.uvic.ca/grar/awards.html](www.uvic.ca/grar/awards.html).

### EXTERNAL AWARDS

Information on external awards such as NSERC, SSHRC, Science Council of BC,
etc, is available at the financial aid office, awards office, or Office of the
Dean of Graduate Studies at your home university.



* * *

## SERVICES & RESOURCES

### ACADEMIC RESOURCES

#### Centres and Institutes

The university is home to a variety of centres and institutes including the:
Centre for Earth and Ocean Research; Centre for Forest Biology; Centre for
Studies in Religion and Society; Centre on Aging; Institute for Dispute
Resolution; Centre for Asia-Pacific Initiatives; Canada Centre for Climate
Modelling and Prediction; Canadian Climate Centre; Centre for Advanced
Materials and Related Technology; Institute for Integrated Energy Systems;
Humanities Centre; Laboratory for Automation, Communication and Information
Systems; and Centre for Environmental Health.

#### Educational Facilities

The university is also home to the Phoenix Theatre, one of the best
educational theatre facilities in Canada; the Maltwood Art Gallery; and a
state-of-the-art, computer-assisted, multi-media language laboratory.

#### Regional Resources

There are many specialized libraries, archives and laboratories throughout the
Capital Region for specific information. Please consult the entry for the
department in which you are interested.

Many of the University's programs are enriched by collaboration with the
following regional resources: Dominion Astrophysical Observatory (including
the Canada-France-Hawaii telescope); Provincial Archives; Royal BC Museum;
Victoria Conservatory of Music; Institute of Ocean Sciences; Pacific
Geoscience Centre; Bamfield Marine Station. In addition, University of
Victoria scientists share in the operation of TRIUMF, an accelerator-based
meson facility which was established in 1968 as a joint project of the
University of Victoria, University of Alberta, University of British Columbia
and Simon Fraser University.

### ATHLETICS & RECREATION

The Department of Athletics and Recreational Services provides an extensive
range of recreational facilities and services. The McKinnon Building includes
a gymnasium, dance studio, weight training room, 25m L-shaped pool, squash
courts, fitness testing area, running track and playing fields. The UVic
Gordon Head Complex includes a field house, gymnasium, fitness/weight centre,
25m outdoor pool, courts (tennis, squash, racquetball and badminton), and ice
rink. Both areas offer change rooms and shower facilities. There are also
miles of jogging trails through the woods around campus and along Cadboro Bay.

The Outdoor Recreation Center, located at the UVic Gordon Head Complex, has a
variety of camping and hiking equipment available for rent and offers ski
tickets at student rates during the winter months.

In addition, instructional programs, fitness programs, intramural leagues and
towel and locker rentals are available. These programs and services are open
to all students with a valid student card.

A program guide, listing the dates and times of each course and club offered,
can be picked up at the beginning of each term in the McKinnon Building or
UVic Gordon Head Complex.

Students wishing to get involved in intramurals or sports clubs (including
soccer, volleyball, ice hockey, basketball, badminton, ultimate and others)
are encouraged to contact Athletics and Recreational Services at the McKinnon
Building 721-8406, the UVic Gordon Head Complex 472-4000 or the Intramurals
Office 472-4035.

UVic is an active campus - join in and get involved.

## BOOKSTORES

### University Book Store

Textbooks may be purchased at the university bookstore in the campus services
building. Book lists are provided and textbooks are arranged by academic
departments and course numbers. On your request any available book will be
specially ordered. The bookstore also carries school supplies, art supplies,
gym strip, cards, university crested clothing and gifts, drugstore items,
hosiery and candy. A film developing service, post office and a dry cleaning
service are also offered.

### CALENDAR

The University Calendar is available on the web at
[http://web.uvic.ca/calendar/](http://web.uvic.ca/calendar/%20). It may also
be purchased at the University Bookstore in person or by mail. Registered
students with a current student card can obtain, at the bookstore cash
registers, one free calendar each. A refund may be claimed by new students,
who have purchased the calendar, when they obtain their student card for the
following term. Please call (250) 721-8311 to place your order.

### CAMPUS TOURS

In order to experience university life first-hand, you may wish to take an
organized tour or walk around the campus on your own or with a friend using a
campus map obtainable from the Information Booth in the University Centre
Building. A general walking tour, which lasts about one hour and a half, is
available at 12:00 pm on Monday and Friday of each week. Tours must be
reserved in advance. You will have the opportunity to visit several buildings
including the residences, McKinnon athletic complex, Bookstore, Graduate
Student Centre, and McPherson Library. Campus tours are conducted by UVic
students. For more information call UVic Communications at 721-6248

### CHILD CARE

Three full-time child care centres are housed in Complex A, 3889 Finnerty
Road. These centres are staffed by Early Childhood Educators and are licensed
to care for children from 18 months to five years of age. They provide a
stimulating and nurturing environment for your children.

Licensed, out-of-school care is housed in Complex B, 3891 Finnerty Road. It
provides a recreational program within a safe, fun and creative environment
for children six to 12 years of age.

Provincial government subsidies, based mainly on income, may be available to
cover a portion of child care fees. If, after a provincial government
interview, the payment of child care fees continues to be a problem for
student-parents, they should contact the Student Financial Aid Service on
campus. All programs are run on a non-profit basis.

Inquiries should be made as soon as possible due to space limitations. For
further information contact Terri Collyer 721-8500 or Lucille MacKay, Manager
721-6656.

### COMPUTERS, EMAIL and THE INTERNET

Computing Services offers an extensive range of services for students, staff
and faculty members. Graduate and undergraduate students may use the computing
facilities of the university to complete assignments in many different
courses. Research users include faculty members from nearly all academic
departments. New applications in computing are continually being developed for
teaching and research purposes, and a major objective is to provide adequate
support for the computing requirements of academic programs.

Computing Services operates laboratories and classrooms equipped with Windows
and Apple microcomputers. Many other departments on campus have installed and
operate their own systems in support of their specific activities, and these
include microcomputers, SUN servers and workstations running UNIX, VAX servers
and workstations using VMS, and various special purpose systems for unique
applications.

A wide range of training, support and consultation services are offered as
well. Further information regarding these services is available from the
Computer User Services Help Desk in Clearihue A004. Computing Services also
operates a Computer Store in Clearihue C143 where Apple, IBM, Microsoft, and
other personal computer products are available for sale at discount prices.

The main computing facility is located in the Clearihue Building and includes
an IBM 2003-116 and several multinode IBM SP systems. Except for scheduled
maintenance periods, these systems operate throughout the year on a seven day,
24 hour basis to allow usage of services whenever required. Access to these
systems is provided by terminals, microcomputers and workstations distributed
throughout the campus utilizing broadband and Ethernet communication
facilities. Also, the computers are connected to the University campus
network, regional, national and international research networks and commercial
Internet.

Interactive and batch software services are supported on the IBM 2003-116
server by the VM/ESA and MVS/ESA operating systems and the CMS (Conversational
Monitor System) component of VM/ESA. Software resources include C, COBOL,
FORTRAN, PL/I, REXX, ADABAS, NATURAL, SCRIPT, SAS, SPSS, TEX, TCP/IP and CMS
Pipelines.

The IBM SP Systems include language support for C, FORTRAN, REXX, PERL, and
packages such as TEX, MATLAB, EMACS, NEWS, FREEWAIS, LYNX, ELM, PICO, PINE,
PROCMAIL, ZMODEM, SAS, SPSS, SPLUS and most GNU Software. The SPs also support
a free email service for students, faculty and staff.

### COUNSELLING

In order to help students to succeed academically, the university provides a
free, confidential professional counselling service at 721-8341. Students
attending the university are invited to use any or all of the services which
include:

Students may seek personal counselling for concerns about family,
relationships, physical or sexual abuse, anxiety, depression, sexual
orientation, health, disability, substance abuse, stress, eating disorders,
loss and grief, suicidal thoughts, or any other personal issue.

For students who have questions or second thoughts about career goals,
services include individual counselling, interest and personality.

While Counselling Services does not do course planning (an advisor in your
department can help you), assistance is provided to graduate students who are
setting or changing educational goals, are concerned about their progress in
graduate school, or who encounter difficulties in professional relationships.

Students may participate in a number of Personal Development and Career
Workshops/Groups such as: Assertion Training, Career Interest Testing,
Improving Self-Esteem, Eating Disorders, Public Speaking/Class Participation,
Relaxation, Stress Management and Anger Management.

The services of the Learning Skills Program include assistance with
thesis/dissertation completion for graduate students, groups to improve public
speaking skills, study skills courses and individual assistance with learning
concerns. The Thesis/Dissertation Completion Program is designed to promote
self-management skills such as goal setting, continuous progress, and task
completion. Many graduate students have found these services helpful.

The Public Speaking Groups (five-session groups) are designed to provide
instruction and practice in giving presentations.

Teaching assistants might want to check out the special courses and workshops
for undergraduate students. If your students are having difficulties with time
management, reading, concentration, writing assignments, note-making, or
exams, then you might want to refer them to this service. You are invited to
drop in and pick up a course syllabus to share with your students.

### DISCRIMINATION AND HARASSMENT

The University of Victoria is committed to providing an environment which
affirms and promotes the dignity of human beings of diverse backgrounds and
needs. Discrimination and harassment, including sexual harassment, are not
tolerated. If you think you are being discriminated against or harassed you
can seek information and advice from the Office for the Prevention of
Discrimination and Harassment on campus at (250) 721-7007 or (250) 721-8488.
You can receive information and help on dealing with the issue yourself,
having someone intervene for you in an informal way, or on how to request a
formal investigation. Do not remain silent, hoping the discrimination or
harassment will stop - remember that help is available. The office is located
in Room C118, Sedgewick Building.

### FOOD SERVICES

A full range of meal and beverage services are provided by the Food Service
department in outlets conveniently located across campus. Any member of the
University community may choose to participate in the Dining Plus Program
which provides incremental bonuses in all food outlets operated by the
University. The UVic ID card is used much like a debit card where individuals
pay money into their account (established in Food Services) and, depending on
the investment amount, receive an appropriate bonus amount. $50 - $199 payment
gives a 6% bonus, a $200 - $399 payment gives an 8% bonus, $400+ gives a 10%
bonus.

To open a Dining Plus account, contact the Housing Food & Conference Services
Office in the Craigdarroch Office Building 721-8395. Visit our web site at
[http://housing.uvic.ca](http://housing.uvic.ca/) for details.

### GRADUATE STUDENTS' SOCIETY

The Graduate Students' Society (GSS) is the body of graduate student
representatives elected to work for you. Their primary mandate is "to
represent the graduate student body in all matters pertaining to its welfare
as a unit or the welfare of individual members".

GSS acts as political advocates for graduate student issues and concerns. As
associate members of the Canadian Federation of Students, they have a voice on
the largest national student body that lobbies for student issues. A little
closer to home, they hold monthly meetings wih the Grad Council (student
representatives from each department) so they can keep abreast of current
issues facing the graduate student community at UVic.

GSS offers travel grants and department activity grants to help you finance
your academic pursuits. They provide meeting rooms at the Grad Centre for
courses, defences and conferences.

You and your friends are invited to drop by the Graduate Students' Centre
where you can engage in enlightened debates or just hang out and eat yummy
food. It is a great place to wind down after class or a long day at the
computer. Throughout the year they host special events which are posted in the
Grad Centre and in their newsletter, The Unacknowledged Source. Visit their
web site at
[http://info.uvic.ca:70/1/student/gs.](http://info.uvic.ca:70/1/student/gs).

### HEALTH SERVICES

University Health Services offer comprehensive medical services. They can act
as the family physician while the student is at university. Office hours are
8:30 am to 4:30 pm weekdays, except Tuesday morning when they open at 9:30 am.
Students do not need an appointment and can walk in anytime, until 4:00 pm,
and be seen by one of the physicians or nurses. 24-hour emergency coverage is
provided by the university doctors as well as hospital care when required -
telephone 721-8492 (24 hours).

Psychiatric consultation, dermatology, a sports medicine clinic, wart clinic,
orthopaedic consultation, physiotherapy, and nutrition consultation are the
specialized services available.

### HOUSING

Visit our web site at [http://housing.uvic.ca](http://housing.uvic.ca/) for
details and rates.

#### On Campus Accommodation

The university offers three types of on-campus accommodation: residence,
cluster and family housing.

Residence housing provides single and double room accommodation for 1,200
students in co-educational, non-smoking residence halls. All rooms are
furnished with desk, chair, desk lamp, wardrobe, bed and linen for each
student. All areas have been desingated as academic halls for those who wish a
quieter and more studious atmosphere.

Cluster housing provides accommodation for 376 students in 94 separate self-
contained units. Each unit consists of four private bedrooms. Living room,
dining area, kitchen and washroom facilities are shared by the four occupants.
Each bedroom is furnished with bed, linen, desk, chair, chest of drawers and
closet. Lounge furniture, dining room table and chairs, stove, two fridges,
dishwasher and vacuum cleaner are provided. Dishes, cutlery and cooking
utensils are not provided. Cablevision, telephone and mainframe computer hook-
up are available. Cluster housing is completely self-contained and no board
package is required. These units are for senior and graduate students.
Applicants must be 20 years of age as of December 31.

Family housing provides accommodation for families in 181 self-contained
units. There are 48 one-bedroom apartments, 12 two-bedroom apartments, 115
two-bedroom townhouses and 6 three-bedroom townhouses. Some units have been
designed for persons with disabilities. Units are unfurnished. Utilities are
not included. Cablevision, telephone and mainframe computer hook-up are
available. These units are available to families with or without children. The
monthly rents for 1999-2000 were; 1-bedroom apartment, $549, 2-bedroom
apartment $642, 2-bedroom townhouse $723 and 3-bedroom townhouse $773.

#### Off Campus Housing Registry

An off campus accommodation listing service is maintained on the web at
[http://housing.uvic.ca](http://housing.uvic.ca/). Types of accommodation
include rooms, rooms with meals, suites, shared accommodation, houses and
apartments.

### INTERFAITH CHAPLAIN SERVICES

Chaplain Services makes available to the University an interfaith team of
Chaplains from the Buddhist, Christians, Muslim, Unitarian and Wiccan faith
communities. We network with many other religious traditions to offer pastoral
counselling, meditation, spiritual exploration, lifestyle studies, marriage
preparation, worship services, weddings, memorial services, retreats, informal
discussions on spirituality with faculty and staff. The Champlains are able to
link out-of-town students with their faith community and/or assist students to
pursue their individual spiritual interests.

Eleven Chaplains may be contacted 8:30 am to 4:30 pm weekdays through our
office in the CAMPUS SERVICES BLDG. Students are welcome to visit the student
drop-in centre where they can browse through up-to-date religious journals,
borrow resources, and check the notice board for up-coming discussions and
events, study groups and worship services. Contact the Liz Kuhr, Secretary, at
(250) 721-8338 or at our email: chaplain@uvic.ca for more information. Our
newsletter is published four times a year. Check out our website at
http://www.stas.uvic.ca/chap/.

The Interfaith Chapel is located outside Ring Road adjacent to Parking Lot 6,
beside Finnerty Gardens. It offers a large Celebration Hall for services and
religious gatherings as well as a quiet meditation room. It is open from 8:00
am to 5:00 pm weekdays. Contact Becky Shaver at 721-8022 to book the
Celebration Hall.

### LIBRARIES

The McPherson Library contains about 1.6 million volumes, 4,500 current
periodical subscriptions, 1.7 million items in microform, 42,000 records,
tapes and compact disks, 28,000 scores and 4,000 films and videos. CD ROM and
on-line electronic access to many information databases in Reference and
Interlibrary Loan Service is also available.

The Curriculum Laboratory, located on the second floor of the MacLaurin
Building, serves student teaching requirements in the Faculty of Education
with 35,000 volumes as well as a substantial collection of non-book materials.
The Diana M. Priestly Law Library, on the main floor of the Begbie Building,
contains over 138,000 volumes and 58,000 microforms. More than 60,000 maps and
80,000 aerial photographs are accessible in the Map Library on the main floor
of the Cornett Building.

The on-line public catalogue contains all material added to the McPherson and
Curriculum Lab collections since 1978, and the Diana M. Priestly Law Library
since 1988. Materials acquired before these dates are listed in the card
catalogues. GATEWAY is an information retrieval system developed by the UVic
Libraries that provides user friendly and integrated access to McPherson,
Curriculum Lab and the Priestly Law Library, on-line computer catalogues,
electronic reference information, and the vast resources of the Internet.
GATEWAY access includes the on-line collections of thousands of other
libraries around the world; 25 major subject indexes to the contents of
journals; full-text databases to newspapers and magazines; and all the search
engines and thousands of electronic information pages on the World Wide Web.
GATEWAY can be searched on more than 45 terminals in the libraries, and
searches can be downloaded to several libraries' printers. Remote access to
GATEWAY is available via department and dorm computers on campus, as well as
on home computers: [http://gateway.uvic.ca](http://gateway.uvic.ca/)

A limited number of library study carrels are available to graduate students
on a shared, first-come-first-served basis.

### LOCKERS

Free lockers are provided for the use of students in a number of buildings on
the campus. Students wishing to acquire a locker may do so on a first-come-
first-served basis by placing a lock on the selected locker. Use of such
lockers is subject to university policies regarding cleaning and
responsibility for damage or loss to the contents. In addition, some lockers
are available for the specific use of students in Law, Theatre, Visual Arts,
and Music. Students may apply for such lockers through the designated
administrative office. Gymnasium lockers may be rented annually from Athletics
and Recreational Services.

### STUDENT EMPLOYMENT CENTRE

The Student Employment Centre is located in the Campus Services Building and
is open 8:30 am to 4:30 pm on weekdays. Website:
[http://www.stec.uvic.ca](http://www.stec.uvic.ca/).

Services offered:

  * individual consultations and group sessions on resume preparation, interview skills and job search strategies 
  * part-time, summer and career employment opportunities targeted to UVic students and graduates on-line through campus work link: NGR (obtain password from Student Employment Centre) 
  * casual jop postings board in the Student Employment Centre 
  * information and postings for on-campus part-time and summer opportunites 
  * information on overseas work opportunities, organizations and programs 
  * listing of local volunteer opportunities 
  * Career Resource Library including employer information files 
  * registration in the Tutoring and Casual Job Inventory 
  * use of typewriters and computers and internet access for job search purposes 
  * career forums (presentations on career-related topics) 
  * assistance following graduation through Alumni Career Services 

TIP: some summer and career recruitment deadlines occur prior to Christmas.
Visit the centre regularly. Don't miss out!

Contact Jennifer Margison, Manager for these and other services, at 721-8421.

### STUDENTS WITH A DISABILITY

The University of Victoria welcomes applications from qualified students with
a disability. Prospective students are advised to contact a student advisor at
the Resource Centre for Students with a Disability, room 150, Campus Services
Building to discuss their specific needs. Students are also encouraged to
discuss with their professors the impact of their disability on their program
of studies. The university will attempt to provide suitable arrangements
within the limits of resources but cannot guarantee accommodation of all
requests for support services. Please be prepared to substantiate your
disability to the university if your situation will require special class or
examination requirements.

The Resource Centre maintains a limited inventory of adaptive equipment for
students with a variety of disabilities. Students may also be eligible to
receive funding from various government agencies to assist them with the
purchase of adaptive equipment or services necessary for their studies.
Student advisors may be reached at 721-6361.

## Academic Departments

* * *

### [ANTHROPOLOGY](web.UVic.CA/anth/master.htm)

The Department of Anthropology offers a program leading to the MA degree. It
is a general degree requiring a candidate to have a broad knowledge of all
subfields of the discipline. The program includes core courses in cultural and
social anthropology, archaeology, physical anthropology, and linguistic
anthropology.

University resources of particular benefit to anthropology students include
the Anthropology Department's archaeology, ethnology, physical and comparative
faunal laboratories, the interdisciplinary Pacific and Asian Studies program,
the University Computing Centre and the McPherson Library which provides one
of the best book-student ratios in Canada. Students interested in Northwestern
North America will find the important collections and holdings of the Royal
British Columbia Museum and Provincial Archives very helpful.

### ADMISSION

In addition to the material required by the Faculty of Graduate Studies, the
department requires applicants to submit a recent sample of their written work
(term paper or honours thesis), and a brief statement outlining the intended
program and field of study. Ordinarily, a B+ average (6.00 GPA on the UVic
scale) over the last two years of university courses is a minimum requirement
for admission to the program.

Students with undergraduate majors in other disciplines will be considered for
admission provided they have obtained credit for a substantial number of
courses in Anthropology. Such an applicant may be advised to register as an
unclassified undergraduate

student for the one or two years required to obtain a satisfactory background.
Completion of these requirements does not guarantee admission into the
graduate program and the student would subsequently need to apply to the
department for acceptance.

### PROGRAM OF STUDIES

The department offers two programs of equal status leading to the MA: a) by
course work and a thesis, and b) by course work only. All graduate students
follow a common program for the first year.

#### Thesis Option

Approval to select the thesis option is given after completion of two terms of
work and is based on satisfactory progress in developing a thesis proposal.
Permission to enter the thesis option is granted only if that thesis proposal,
approved by the student's supervisory committee, is on file with the
department's Graduate Advisor before the next registration subsequent to the
initial two terms. Normally, a thesis will entail specialized research on a
topical area chosen in consultation with the student's supervisory committee.

#### Non-thesis Option

Most students need two years to complete this option. At the end of the
program there will be a final oral examination based on three papers prepared
as part of the requirements for graduate courses. The three papers will be
selected to reflect a variety of interests and approaches.

### FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

The department has a number of eight-month academic assistantships. Last year
the assistantships were valued at approximately $3,330 - supplemented by
Graduate Teaching Fellowships of up to $3,000. Superior students are also
eligible to apply for a Sara Spencer Foundation Research Award in Applied
Social Science to defray research costs. The award carries a maximum value of
$1,500.

### INQUIRIES:

Graduate Advisor, Department of Anthropology, University of Victoria, PO Box
3050 STN CSC, Victoria, BC V8W 3P5 Canada.

Telephone: (250) 721-7046 FAX: (250) 721-6215 E-mail:
[anthuvic@uvvm.uvic.ca</FONT

