**University of Maine**

**SIE 525 INFORMATION SYSTEMS LAW**

Fall 2001

11:00 \- 12:15 Tues & Thurs, Room 126 Barrows Hall

Instructor:  [Professor Harlan J.
Onsrud](http://www.spatial.maine.edu/~onsrud)

**Course Objectives**

This course reviews the current status of information systems law in regard to
rights of privacy, freedom of information, confidentiality, work product
protection, copyright, security, legal liability, and a range of additional
legal and information policy topics. We will investigate the legal
difficulties that technological innovations are causing in all of these areas.
We will focus particularly on these issues in regard to their impact on the
use of databases and, more specifically, spatial databases. Legal options for
dealing with the conflicts caused by technological change and likely
adaptations of the law over time in response to societal changes will be
explored.

**Course Materials**

Note that this is a graduate course in information systems law and ethical
issues for non-law students. The typical enrolled student is pursuing a
graduate degree in engineering, information systems, or computer science. As
such, a substantial amount of time is spent on introductory legal concepts.
Further, we will focus on overview books for most of the readings rather than
use the text of case law or legislation. (For materials appropriate for a law
school course, see for instance, [Law 276.1
Cyberlaw](http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~pam/).)

Required readings include several [books](books.htm).  The required books are
typically cheaper to purchase online than in the university bookstore so you
should purchase them online yourself from any distributor you desire. I have
listed a few sample prices. I recommend that you order the books by express
mail in the first week of class (or earlier) and begin reading them at once.

Suggested completion dates for each book are indicated on the syllabus.
Course lectures will NOT correspond exactly with the readings although I
reference some sections in the books for you to consult on topics as we cover
them.

Additional reading materials will be made available on the web over time.
Geographic data conflict examples are often used in this course to illustrate
principles.

<a href="DiscussionPiece.htm" target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Discussion
Piece (Read this in the first week.)

**Communications**

All enrolled students must obtain a FirstClass mail account.  Delivery of
assignments, exams, and written communications among the class as a group will
occur through use of this system. Information on obtaining a FirstClass
account and information on acquiring additional free software to access course
materials may be found at [access, hardware and
software](http://www.spatial.maine.edu/MSIS/access_software_hardware.htm).
Contacts for phone and e-mail technical assistance are also provided. I highly
recommend that all students view the distance education considerations below.
In the event I need to travel I may video some lecture materials in advance or
after the fact that may be viewed using the technologies described.

Notes Concerning First Class:  Please note that messages may be sent from
anywhere on the Internet to the rest of the class by sending a message to
[SIE525@umit.maine.edu](mailto:SIE525@umit.maine.edu)  If you prefer using
another e-mail address, you can set FirstClass to forward any e-mails arriving
on your FirstClass account to your standard e-mail address (or vice versa.)
All assignments and exams will be delivered by electronic mail by you to a
FirstClass assignment folder.

[Important Notice to All Students](ImportantNotice.htm)

[Copyright Notice for Materials Accessible through this
Website](CopyrightNotice.htm)

For those students interested in [GIS Law](../../GISlaw.htm) issues.

[Term Paper Instructions](termpapers.htm)

[Book Review Instructions](BookReviewGuideline.htm)

**Distance Education Considerations**

Some students may be taking this course through live streaming video on the
web.  To sign up for the course from a distant location, contact the UMaine
[Continuing Education Division](http://www.ume.maine.edu/~ced/ced).  In order
to take the course by distance methods, [access, software and hardware
requirements](../../MSIS/access_software_hardware.htm) must be met.  To ensure
that all technologies are working you should be able to view (1) this web
page, (2) the slides for a lecture, and (3) the streaming video all at the
same time on your screen in three separate windows.  After you have followed
the download instructions, test that you are operational prior to the first
class meeting by clicking on "Slides 1" and "Lecture 1" in the syllabus below.
If you can't view the web and these two items at the same time, call the
technical assistance folks as noted for help.  

Lectures may be viewed during the time they are occurring on campus (11:00 -
12:15 T & Th) by accessing <a
href="http://www.spatial.maine.edu/~onsrud/Courses/SIE525/movies/sie525live.mov"
target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'live','toolbar="no,scrollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')"">LIVE
STREAMING VIDEO.  (If you have problems, call 1-877-947-4357).  The videos may
be viewed a day or so after they occur by clicking on the lecture links below.

**Office   Hours**

I am in the office most days and you are welcome to drop by at any time
although appointments are sometimes better for longer discussions. E-mail is
the simplest way to get a message through and a response. I generally look at
messages coming to onsrud@spatial.maine.edu before I look at any messages
coming to my FirstClass address (i.e. Harlan_Onsrud@umit.maine.edu)

**Typical Schedule of Lectures**

**Wk** | **Day** | **Date** |    **Topic** | **Required Readings** * |
**Assignment** | **Class Video**  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
1 |  T | Sept 4 |  Introductory Materials  [[SlidesIntro](SlidesIntro.htm)]  |
Le Ch 1-5, NRC pp 1-54 |   | <a href="movies/1.mov" target="intro"
onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
1  
  | TH | Sept 6 |  (continued) |   | Read [Tragedy of Info
Commons](../../pubs/tragedyabstract42.htm) | <a href="movies/2.mov"
target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')"">Lecture
2  
2 |  T | Sept 11 |  Liability [[SlidesLiability](SlidesLiability.pdf)] | Le Ch
6-8 | Read [Liability in Use of GIS](../../pubs/liabilityabstract40.htm) | <a
href="movies/3.mov" target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
3  
  | TH | Sept 13 |  (continued) |   |   | <a href="movies/4.mov"
target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
4  
3 |  T | Sept 18 |  Ethics  [[SlidesEthics](SlidesEthics.pdf)] | Sp Ch 1 | 1\.
Liability Response Due | <a href="movies/5.mov" target="intro"
onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
5  
  | TH | Sept 20 |  (continued) |   | Finish Lessig | <a href="movies/6.mov"
target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
6  
4 |  T | Sept 25 |  Privacy [[SlidesPrivacy](SlidesPrivacy.pdf)] | Sp Ch 5, Le
Ch 11 |   | <a href="movies/7.mov" target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
7  
  | TH | Sept 27 |  (continued) |   |   | <a href="movies/8.mov"
target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
8  
5 |  T | Oct 2 |  Privacy  |   |   | <a href="movies/9.mov" target="intro"
onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
9  
  | TH | Oct 4 |  (continued) |   | Finish Privacy Book | <a
href="movies/10.mov" target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
10  
6 |  T | Oct 9 |   _Fall Break_  
  | TH | Oct 11 |  Intellectual Property Basics
[[SlidesIPBasics](SlidesIPbasics.pdf)] | Sp Ch 4, Le Ch 9&10 | 2\. Privacy
Book Review Due | <a href="movies/11.mov" target="intro"
onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
11  
7 |  T | Oct 16 |  Copyright   | NRC Ch 2-4 |   | <a href="movies/12.mov"
target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
12  
  | TH | Oct 18 |  (continued)   | Li p60-63, Ch 5-8, Ch 12 |   | <a
href="movies/13.mov" target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
13  
8 |  T | Oct 23 |  Database Legislation & Academic Research
[[SlidesDtbs](SlidesDtbs.pdf)] |   |   | <a href="movies/14.mov"
target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
14  
  | TH | Oct 25 |  Self-help Technologies: Copyright, Copyleft & DE Commons
[[SlidesCpyLt](SlidesCpyLt.pdf)] |   | Finish Litman | <a href="movies/15.mov"
target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
15  
9 |  T | Oct 30 |  Copyright, Copyleft & DE Commons (con't) |   |   | <a
href="movies/16.mov" target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
16  
  | TH | Nov 1 |  Public Information  [[SlidesFOIA](SlidesFOIA.pdf)] |   |   |
<a href="movies/17.mov" target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
17  
10 |  T | Nov 6 |  IP Discussion Piece on MP3s |   | 3\. In class IP exercise
| <a href="movies/18.mov" target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
18  
  | TH | Nov 8 |  Scientific and Technical Data | NRC Ch 3-6 |   | missed  
11 |  T | Nov 13 |   Public Information (con't) |   |   | <a
href="movies/19.mov" target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
19  
  | TH | Nov 15 |  Public Information
[[SlidesLocalGovt](SlidesLocalGovt.pdf)] |   |   | <a href="movies/20.mov"
target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
20  
12 |  T | Nov 20 |  Free Speech  [[SlidesFreeSpeech](SlidesFreeSpeech.htm)]]
| Sp Ch 3, Le Ch 12 | Finish NRC Report | <a href="movies/21.mov"
target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
21  
  | TH | Nov 22 |   _Thanksgiving Break  _  
13 |  T | Nov 27 |  Evidentiary Admissibility [[SlidesEvid](SlidesEvid.htm)]]
|   | [Evidence from
GIS](http://www.spatial.maine.edu/~onsrud/pubs/evidence.pdf) | <a
href="movies/22.mov" target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
22  
  | TH | Nov 29 |  Jurisdiction and the Internet
[[SlidesJuris](SlidesJuris.htm)]] | Sp Ch 2, Le 14 |   | <a
href="movies/23.mov" target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
23  
14 |  T | Dec 4 |  International Law and Trade  [[SlidesILT](SlidesILT.htm)] |
| 4\. Scenario Response Due | <a href="movies/24.mov" target="intro"
onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
24  
  | TH | Dec 6 |  (continued) |   |   | <a href="movies/25.mov" target="intro"
onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
25  
15 |  T | Dec 11 |  International Law and Trade |   |   | <a
href="movies/26.mov" target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
26  
  | TH | Dec 13 |  (continued) |   | Finish Spinello | <a href="movies/27.mov"
target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
27  
  |   | Dec 17 | Final Exam Week |   | 5\. Final Exam | <a
href="movies/28.mov" target="intro" onclick="window.open("
,'lecture','toolbar="no,scroollbars=no,alwaysRaised=yes,titlebar=no,dependent=yes,innerHeight=255,innerWidth=335,height=255,width=335')">Lecture
28  
  


* 

Le = Lessig, Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace

Li = Litman, Digital Copyright

NRC = National Research Council, The Digital Dilemma

Sp = Spinello, Cyber Ethics: Morality and Law in Cyberspace



![Ruler](../../../images/Rulers/SIE_HR615.gif)





[[Primary Research Interests](../../research.htm)] [[Selected
Publications](../../pubs.htm)] [[Courses](../../courses.htm)]

[[GIS Law, Policy and Ethics](../../GISlaw.htm)] [[GIS in Developing
Countries](../../emergingeconomies.html)] [[GSDI Survey](../../GSDI.htm)]

[[Spatial Odyssey](http://wwwsgi.ursus.maine.edu/gisweb/home.html)]

[[Onsrud Index](../../)] [[UMaine SIE Program](../../../)]
[[UMaine](http://www.umaine.edu)]

