[![General
Information](/images/linkbar_general_information.gif)](/GeneralInfo/GeneralInfo.html)
[![Academics](/images/linkbar_academics.gif)](/Academics/Academics.html)
[![Admission](/images/linkbar_admission.gif)](/Admissions/Admissions.html)
[![Facilities](/images/linkbar_facilities.gif)](/Facilities/Facilities.html)
[![People](/images/linkbar_people.gif)](/People/People.html)
[![Research](/images/linkbar_research.gif)](/Research/Research.html)
[![Search](/images/linkbar_search.gif)](/search) |  [![College of
Engineering](/images/ngbldg-small.gif)](http://www.coe.fit.edu)  
---|---  
![](/images/fit-cs_background.gif)  
  

# Department of Computer Sciences [Students Assistantships]

**November 7, 2000**

  

##  Contents

  * [Contents](gsa.html)
  * [Policies for Awards](gsa.html#SECTION00020000000000000000)
    * [Academic Requirements](gsa.html#SECTION00021000000000000000)
    * [Language Requirements](gsa.html#SECTION00022000000000000000)
    * [The GSA Seminar](gsa.html#SECTION00023000000000000000)
    * [Level of Commitment](gsa.html#SECTION00024000000000000000)
    * [Academic Standing](gsa.html#SECTION00025000000000000000)
    * [Computer Science Help Desk and Office Hours](gsa.html#SECTION00026000000000000000)
    * [University Policy on Graduate Assistantships](gsa.html#SECTION00027000000000000000)
  * [Assistantship Descriptions](gsa.html#SECTION00030000000000000000)
    * [Lab Facilitator](gsa.html#SECTION00031000000000000000)
    * [Grader](gsa.html#SECTION00032000000000000000)
    * [Systems Administrator](gsa.html#SECTION00033000000000000000)
    * [Lab Teaching Assistant](gsa.html#SECTION00034000000000000000)
    * [Teaching Assistant](gsa.html#SECTION00035000000000000000)
  * [Application Procedures](gsa.html#SECTION00040000000000000000)
    * [Forms and Other Documents](gsa.html#SECTION00041000000000000000)
    * [Due Dates](gsa.html#SECTION00042000000000000000)
    * [Submitting An Application](gsa.html#SECTION00043000000000000000)
  * [Informational Items](gsa.html#SECTION00050000000000000000)
    * [Contracts](gsa.html#SECTION00051000000000000000)
    * [Keys and Mailboxes](gsa.html#SECTION00052000000000000000)
    * [Textbooks and Course Material](gsa.html#SECTION00053000000000000000)
    * [Xeroxing Policy](gsa.html#SECTION00054000000000000000)
    * [Class Lists and Grade Sheets](gsa.html#SECTION00055000000000000000)
    * [Archiving Course Material](gsa.html#SECTION00056000000000000000)
    * [Honor Policy](gsa.html#SECTION00057000000000000000)
    * [Computer Accounts and Access](gsa.html#SECTION00058000000000000000)
    * [When Problems Arise](gsa.html#SECTION00059000000000000000)
    * [Extracurricular Activity](gsa.html#SECTION000510000000000000000)
  * [Application Form](gsa.html#SECTION00060000000000000000) 

Assistantships recognize promising students and are awarded based on academic
merit and potential. Full assistantship carries tuition remission and a
stipend for living expenses. Students awarded with assistantships are required
to perform duties: teaching classes, supervising labs, grading, and system
administration. This document details the qualifications, duties, and
application procedures for these assistantships. In addition, research
assistantships are available through individual [Computer Science
faculty](http://www.cs.fit.edu/people/faculty.html). Research assistantships
are not described in this document and students should contact [faculty
members](http://www.cs.fit.edu/people/faculty.html) directly to learn of the
availability of research assistantships.

The Computer Sciences Department awards assistantships to full-time
undergraduates and graduates in our program. Undergraduates are awarded
assistantships as [lab facilitators](gsa.html#lf), [graders](gsa.html#grader),
[systems administrators](gsa.html#sa), and [#.#>](<tex2html_cr_mark) Graduate
students are awarded assistantships in the above categories, but may also be
assigned responsibility to teach classes.

Award decisions for each new academic year (Fall term) are made in May of each
year. Some assistantships may still be available after May due to unforeseen
changes in the plans of students. Some assistantships become open in January
(Spring term) of each year. Only a few students are supported by
assistantships during the Summer term.

#  Policies for Awards

##  Academic Requirements

All Assistants must have at completed a data structures and algorithms class
(comparable to CSE 2010 at the undergraduate level or CSE 5100 at the graduate
level). Graduates students who have taken graduate courses must have a GPA of
3.5 or higher. Undergraduates must have at least a 3.0 GPA. The Southern
Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS) requires that graduate students who
have primary responsibility for teaching a course have at least 18 hours of
graduate level courses in computer science. Specific requirements for
assistantships are given in [Assistantship Descriptions](gsa.html#assist-desc)
below.

##  
Language Requirements

Students whose first language is not English must score 600 or higher on the
Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) and 45 or higher on the Test of
Spoken English (TSE). Official test scores must be submitted to the
University's office of Graduate Admissions.

##  
The GSA Seminar

The Dean of the Graduate School requires that all students who teach attend
series of seminars held during the week two weeks prior to the start of school
in the Fall. Students who do not attend this seminar can not be assigned to
teach classes or laboratories. The sessions of the Instructional Development
Seminar posted at the following site:

[http://www.lib.fit.edu/workshops/seminar.cfm.](http://www.lib.fit.edu/workshops/seminar.cfm)

The seminar is required for students who hope to become Teaching Assistants,
but it does not guarantee that a a student will be offered an assistantship.

##  Level of Commitment

A full-time student assistant is assigned twenty (20) hours of duties per
week, for nineteen (19) weeks each semester. These 19 weeks include 2 weeks
prior to the start of classes. Student assistants must be available these
preliminary weeks to prepare for the classes they will teach or to maintain
and improve computer systems and laboratories.

The normal load for a full-time student assistant is 2 classes or
laboratories, or administration of one type of computer system. Student who
are assigned classes to teach must prepare a class syllabus, homework and
programming projects, quizzes and examinations.

##  Academic Standing

Continuation of the award depends on successful academic performance and
progress toward the student's degree. Graduate assistants are expected to
maintain a 3.5 GPA and undergraduate assistants are expected to maintain a 3.0
GPA. Assistants are expected to only earn grades of B or better.

##  
Computer Science Help Desk and Office Hours

Teaching assistants are required to staff the Computer Science Help Desk at
least 2 hours per week. Teaching assistants, those that have full
responsibility for one or more classes or one or more computer laboratories
are required to have at least 2 office hours per week for every class/lab they
teach.

##  University Policy on Graduate Assistantships

Graduate applicants should read the [Graduate Assistantships
section](http://www.fit.edu/catalog/graduate.html) of the University catalog
for additional policies on student assistants.

#  
Assistantship Descriptions

Computer Sciences awards assistantships to students to help the department in
various ways. Brief descriptions of these duties and minimal requirements are
given below.

##  
Lab Facilitator

Lab facilitators are upper-class undergraduates who have proven themselves as
good students in freshman/sophomore computer science courses, in particular,
as programmers. Lab facilitators assist the instructor of the course and the
[lab teaching assistant](gsa.html#lta) by helping students in computer
laboratories with problems they may encounter. Lab facilitators receive a
[stipend](gsa.html#compensate). They are _not_ required to attend the [GSA
Seminar](gsa.html#gsa-seminar), submit [TOEFL or TSE](gsa.html#toefl) scores,
maintain [office hours](gsa.html#help), or staff the [Computer Science Help
Desk](gsa.html#help) (although they are encourage to perform this last
service).

##  
Grader

Graders help instructors by grading homework, programs, quizzes and exams.
Graders must have passed, with high marks, the course (or a comparable course)
for which they will grade Graders receive a [stipend](gsa.html#compensate).
They are _not_ required to attend the [GSA Seminar](gsa.html#gsa-seminar),
submit [TOEFL or TSE](gsa.html#toefl) scores, maintain [office
hours](gsa.html#help), or staff the [Computer Science Help
Desk](gsa.html#help) (although they are encourage to perform this last
service).

##  
Systems Administrator

Systems administrators maintain the department's computer systems. This
includes laboratories, and faculty and staff computers and peripherals. The
program supports Windows 98, Windows NT, Sun Solaris, Silicon Graphics Irix,
and IBM Aix computers. Previous knowledge of these operating systems is not
required, but is helpful. They are _not_ required to attend the [GSA
Seminar](gsa.html#gsa-seminar), submit [TOEFL or TSE](gsa.html#toefl) scores,
maintain [office hours](gsa.html#help), or staff the [Computer Science Help
Desk](gsa.html#help) (although they are encourage to perform this last
service).

##  
Lab Teaching Assistant

Lab teaching assistants help an instructor to prepare, deliver, and grade
programming assignments. Most lab teaching assistants are graduate students,
but rising undergraduates who plan to attend graduate school may also be
awarded lab teaching assistantships. Lab teaching assistants never have
primary responsibility for teaching a course. Lab teaching assistants _are_
required to attend the [GSA Seminar](gsa.html#gsa-seminar), submit [TOEFL and
TSE](gsa.html#toefl) scores, maintain [office hours](gsa.html#help), and staff
the [Computer Science Help Desk](gsa.html#help). Knowledge of the programming
language being used by the class is normally assumed. Computer Sciences
teaches laboratory classes in Ada, C/C++, Java, FORTRANand other programming
languages. Depending on enrollment and lab duration, full-time lab teaching
assistants are assigned to 2 or 3 laboratories. Classes with lab teaching
assistants include:

  * Fundamentals of Software Development 1 (Java) 
  * Fundamentals of Software Development 2 (Java) 
  * Algorithms and Data Structures (Java) 
  * Introduction to Software Development with C++ 
  * Advanced to Software Development with C++ 

##  
Teaching Assistant

Teaching assistants have primary responsibility for teaching and grading
courses. They _are_ required to attend the [GSA Seminar](gsa.html#gsa-
seminar), submit [TOEFL and TSE](gsa.html#toefl) scores, maintain [office
hours](gsa.html#help), staff the [Computer Science Help Desk](gsa.html#help),
and have at least 18 graduate-level credits in computer science. Full-time
teaching assistants are assigned 2 classes. Classes assigned to teaching
assistants include.

  * Introduction to Computer Applications 
  * Introduction to Software Development with FORTRAN 
  * Introduction to Programming (restricted to Ph.D. level assistants) 
  * Assembly Language and Computer Organization (restricted to Ph.D. level assistants) 

#  Application Procedures

To apply for an assistantship, students must supply the department with
information to support their application.

##  Forms and Other Documents

###  Application Form

The [appendix](gsa.html#form) contains an [application form](gsa.html#form)
which must be completed and returned to the Department of Computer Sciences
before students will be considered for an assistantship.

###  Transcripts

All assistantship applicants must provide the department with official
transcripts from all universities they have attended.

###  Resume

All assistantship applicants must provide the department with a resume that
describes their experience and goals.

###  Recommendation Letters

At least two (2) recommendation letters must be submitted to the department.
These letters must be from persons familiar with the applicants academic or
computer skills.

##  Due Dates

All application information ([application form](gsa.html#form), transcripts,
resume, recommendation letters) needed by the department to review applicants
for an assistantship must be submitted by February 15 for students seeking
awards for the Fall term, or by September 15 for students seeking an award for
the Spring term.

##  Submitting An Application

All application information ([application form](gsa.html#form), transcripts,
resume, recommendation letters) should be delivered to the department at
address:

> Department of Computer Sciences  
>  Florida Institute of Technology  
>  150 W. University Boulevard  
>  Melbourne, Florida 32901-6975

Applicants may submit the [application form](gsa.html#form) electronically at
through the form available through the URL for this document [
http://www.cs.fit.edu/~wds/guides/gsa/gsa.html](http://www.cs.fit.edu/~wds/guides/gsa/gsa.html)
Resumes and letters of recommendation may be send via electronic mail to
[wds@cs.fit.edu](mailto:wds@cs.fit.edu).

#  Informational Items

##  Contracts

Once a student has been notified that they have been selected for an
assistantship they must meet with the Computer Science secretary to provide
information needed to complete a contract letter.

##  Keys and Mailboxes

Once a student has been hired as an assistant, they should arrange, through
the Student Office secretary, to obtain building, office and laboratory keys,
and a mailbox.

##  Textbooks and Course Material

Students who are assigned to teach a class or laboratory must see the Computer
Science secretary to obtain a copy of the
[textbook](http://www.cs.fit.edu/courses/) and other supplemental materials.

##  Xeroxing Policy

Student may use the department's copying machine for small copy jobs (less
that 25 sheets), but for larger ones they must submit material to be copied to
the [University Copy Center](http://copynet.fit.edu). Copy request forms are
available in the student office, copy center and their Web site
<http://copynet.fit.edu>.

##  Class Lists and Grade Sheets

Several times during a term class lists will be distributed. Some of these are
for your information only, but others require to you document attendance or
grades. Class list and grade sheets that fall into this category must be
promptly returned to the Computer Science secretary before the deadline.

##  Archiving Course Material

The Computer Sciences department must maintain records to document our
instruction of students. Student assistants must help in this effort. The
following material must be submitted to the Computer Science secretary.

  * Class syllabus, office hours, and a schedule of Help Desk hours must be submitted before the end of the first week of classes. 
  * Samples of graded exams, homework, programming projects must be submitted for inclusion in course notebooks. An example of excellent, average, and poor work should be submitted. 
  * At the end of each term a copy of the grade book used in determining student grades must be submitted to the Computer Science secretary. 
New teaching assistants should review this archival material to help them
prepared for their responsibilities.

##  Honor Policy

The Computer Sciences department has an [honor
policy](http://www.cs.fit.edu/~wds/misc/honor/cshonor/cshonor.html) that
governs the use of computers and academic honestly. The honor policy must be
distributed to students in your class at the beginning of each term.

##  Computer Accounts and Access

Know how to [request a computer account](http://www.cs.fit.edu) on any and all
computers your students may use. Also know how to obtain after-hours access to
computer laboratories. Inform your students of these processes.

##  When Problems Arise

Whenever you have a concern immediately inform your faculty coordinator and
the program chair. Always look to them for support in making tough decisions
or when you are uncertain about something. Report all computer (hardware and
software) problems to the systems administrator in charge. Follow-up to see
that any problem is corrected and see the program chair if the problem is not
resolved.

##  Extracurricular Activity

Become involved in [faculty research](http://www.cs.fit.edu/research), student
organizations (for example, the [ACM](http://www.cs.fit.edu/%7Eacm) and the
[UPE](http://www.cs.fit.edu/%7Epkc/upe)) and short courses offered for the
University community.

#  
Application Form

Students who want to be considered for financial aid must [complete and return
the attached form](http://www.cs.fit.edu/cgi-bin/assist_app.cgi).

This document is available on the World-Wide Web at URL:

[
http://www.cs.fit.edu/wds/guides/gsa/gsa.html](http://www.cs.fit.edu/wds/guides/gsa/gsa.html)

and in the Department of Computer Sciences Office (room 246 of the Olin
Engineering Complex).

**Florida Institute of Technology**  
Department of Computer Sciences  
150 West University Boulevard,  
Melbourne, FL 32901-6988  
Tel. (321) 674-8763, Fax (321) 674-7046,  
E-mail: [www@cs.fit.edu](mailto:www@cs.fit.edu)  

* * *

(C) 2000 [Florida Tech](http://www.fit.edu), this server is currently
maintained by the Department of Computer Sciences. Please send your questions,
comments and suggestions to [www@cs.fit.edu](mailto:www@cs.fit.edu).  

* * *

_William Shoaff_  
_2000-11-07_

