**Course Syllabus** (last revised 10/08/01)  
**CS 1521 Computer Science II  
Fall Semester, 2001  
**

### Course Information

**Instructor:**[Steve Holtz](http://www.d.umn.edu/~sholtz/)

**Office:** Heller Hall 315

**Email:**[sholtz@d.umn.edu](mailto:sholtz@d.umn.edu)

**Phone:** 726-8643

**Office Hours:**  

Monday 2:00 to 4:00  
Tuesday 12:00 to 1:30  
Thursday 12:00 to 1:30

**Texts:**  

  * Berman, A. M., [_Data Structures Via C++: Objects by Evolution_](http://www.amberman.org/evolve/), Oxford Universiy Press, 1997.
  * LaFore, R., [_Object-Oriented Programming in C++_](http://www.mcp.com/sams/detail_sams.cfm?item=157169160X), Sams, 1999.

**Teaching Assistants:**  

  * Section 2/3 - [Sameer Apte](http://www.d.umn.edu/~apte0002/)
  * Section 4/5 - [Saif Mohammad](http://www.d.umn.edu/~moha0149/)

**Lecture:** 11:00am-11:50am Monday, Wednesday, Friday in MWAH 195

**Discussion:**  

  * Section 2 - 11:00am-11:50am, Thursday - HH 302
  * Section 4 - 11:00am-11:50am, Tuesday - HH 302

**Lab:**  

  * Section 3 - 11:00am-11:50am, Tuesday - KPlz 144
  * Section 5 - 11:00am-11:50am, Thursday - KPlz 144

### Prerequisites

Semester: CS 1511; Quarter: CS 1622

  
  

### Course Description

Procedural and data abstraction. Elementary abstract data types, including
stacks and queues, and their applications. Intermediate abstract data types,
including trees, heaps, hash tables, and their applications. External methods.

### Course Objectives

The course begins with a brief introduction to the C++ language and the
concepts of abstraction, encapsulation, polymorphism and inheritance. The
basic design principles of object oriented programs are discussed and the
concept of an ADT ( **A** bstract **D** ata **T** ype) is introduced. The ADT
concept is then elaborated on in a series of assignments and lectures covering
the basic ADTs: lists, stacks, queues, tables, trees and graphs. By the end of
the course, the student should have mastered the main concepts of Object
Oriented Programming and have successfully completed programming assignments
in C++ on each of the basic ADTs.

### Course Requirements

You are responsible for reading the assigned textbook material and for
obtaining any material covered in lecture, discussion, and lab, including:

  * lecture notes
  * assignments and handouts
  * turning in programming assignments and homework
  * films (if any)

If you are unable to attend a class meeting, it is your responsibility to
obtain class notes, assignments, and extra copies of handouts from a fellow
student.

### Late Work

Late work will be will be handled as follows, homework:

  * turned in before the HH314 lab closes on the due date - full credit.
  * turned in any time the next day that HH314 is open - 25% deduction.
  * turned in after that - no credit.

Word of wisdom: Start programming your solution to an assignment **early**!

### Grading Policies

There will be two midterm exams, worth 12.5% of your grade each and a final
exam worth 25% of your grade. These exams are closed book. Midterm exams will
be handed back and discussed in the discussion sections. If you are unable to
attend discussion the day exams are handed back and discussed, you are
encouraged to come review your exam during office hours with the TA. The two-
hour final examination is cumulative. It is Department of Computer Science
policy not to return final exams, however they are kept and you can look at
your exam in the instructor's office. There will be no make-up exams without
the PRIOR consent of the instructor, and even then only under VERY unusual
circumstances.

**Note:** The grade of I (incomplete) can be given _only_ when

  1. the student has performed satisfactorily during most of the semester, and
  2. the student is unable to finish the semester's work on time for reasons beyond his or her control.

Students will not be assigned an incomplete solely for the purpose of avoiding
a poor grade. According to [UMD
policy:](http://www.d.umn.edu/catalogs/current/umd/gen/grades.html) (found at
http://www.d.umn.edu/catalogs/current/umd/gen/grades.html) "[t]he temporary
grade I (incomplete) is assigned only when a student has made an agreement
with the instructor to complete the course requirements before the instructor
submits final grades for a semester."

Many of the exam questions will be discussed during lecture and the discussion
sections. All the questions mentioned in the reading assignments will be
answered in the lectures.

Scores and total points will be posted periodically on the
"[Grades](http://www.d.umn.edu/~sholtz/cs1521-1/fall2001/grades/)" page of the
class web site.

### Grading Procedures

Final grades are based on the following distribution:

  * Labs and other assignments 50% of grade (420 to 450 points)
  * Midterm Exam I 12.5% of grade (100 points)
  * Midterm Exam II 12.5% of grade (100 points)
  * Final Examination 25% of grade (200 points)

Grades are assigned based on a percentage of the total points.

  * A- cutoff is 90%
  * B- cutoff is 80%
  * C- cutoff is 70%
  * D cutoff is 60%
  * F is below 60%

These cutoff percentages may be lowered but they will not be raised.

### Exam Schedule

Midterm Exam I - Wednesday, October 3, 11:00-11:50 in MWAH 195  
Midterm Exam II - Wednesday, November 14, 11:00-11:50 in MWAH 195  
Final Exam - Monday, December 17, 12:00-1:55 PM in MWAH 195

  
  

### Equal Opportunity

The University of Minnesota is committed to the policy that all persons shall
have equal access to its programs, facilities, and employment without regard
to race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex, age, marital status,
disability, public assistance status, veteran status, or sexual orientation.
As your instructor, I am committed to upholding University of Minnesota's
equal opportunity policy. I encourage you to talk to me in private about any
concerns you have related to equal opportunity in the classroom. To inquire
further about the University's policy on equal opportunity, contact the
[Office of Equal Opportunity](http://www.d.umn.edu/equaloo/), 255 DAdB, phone:
726-6827, email: equaloo@d.umn.edu.

### Students with Disabilities

If you have any disability (either permanent or temporary) that might affect
your ability to perform in this class, please inform me at the start of the
quarter. I may adapt methods, materials, or testing so that you can
participate equitably. To learn about the services that UMD provides to
students with disabilities, contact the [Access Center/Disability
Services](http://www.d.umn.edu/access/) 138 Kirby Plaza, phone: (2318)
726-8217 or TTY (218) 726-7380, email: access@d.umn.edu, or contact the
[Office of Equal Opportunity](http://www.d.umn.edu/equaloo/), 255 DAdB, phone:
726-6827, email: equaloo@d.umn.edu.

### Getting Help with Programming Assignments

If you need help with a programming assignment, here is a list of resources,
which you should make use of in the following order:

  1. course materials, such as texts, notes, and previous lab assignments
  2. TA's in HH 314, all of whom should know C++
  3. your own TA in HH 314 (who will definitely know C++)
  4. a tutor at the [UMD Tutoring Center](http://www.d.umn.edu/tutoring) in Campus Center 40. They provide both free tutors and a list of private tutors.
  5. the instructor

You can also ask fellow students general questions for understanding, however
see the next section on cheating and plagiarism for an overview of the actions
taken if you are caught cheating.

### Cheating/Plagiarism

All lab assignments are to be your own work -- there will be no group labs in
this course. The copying of other student's assignments will NOT be tolerated.
This includes source code, right down to commenting. Changing variable names
while copying the structure of someone elses code - even for a single routine
- is an actionable offense. The TA's will be instructed to be keenly aware of
cheating and the procedure for handling such offenses will be as follows:

  * **First minor offense** : Individuals involved will share the total points awarded. E.g. 2 people involved (both first time offenders) on an assignment awarded 44 out of 50 points will each receive 22 points (half points will be rounded down).
  * **Second minor or first major offense** : Individual will receive a zero for the assignment and a report will be filed with the Head of the Department of Computer Science.
  * **Third minor or second major offense and subsequent offences** : Individual will be turned in to the appropriate disciplinary committee on grounds of [scholastic dishonesty](http://www.d.umn.edu:80/student/proced/cond/code.html).

The instructor's discretion determines whether a violation is a minor or major
offense.

See the appropriate section(s) of the [Student Conduct
Code](http://www.d.umn.edu:80/student/proced/cond/conduct.html) at
http://www.d.umn.edu:80/student/proced/cond/conduct.html.

Note that ignorance is no defense, i.e. being unaware that someone copied your
work does not free you of the consequences. Also, offenses are accumulated on
an individual basis, e.g. a first time offender may receive partial credit
while the second time offender they are involved with receives a zero.

