**SYLLABUS for PHYSICS 4412 Spring 2002**

** **

**QUANTUM MECHANICS**



**instructor:**

|

Dr Cecilia Barnbaum  
  
---|---  
  


|

  
  
**meeting time:**

|

M W 3:30 - 4:45  
  


|

**FINAL EXAM 12:30 pm Fri 3 May**  
  


|

  
  
**office hours**

|

T W                       12:30 am - 2:30 pm

MWF                    11:00 am - 12:30 pm or by appointment  
  


|

  
  
**requited texts:**

|

_A Primer of Quantum Mechanics_ by Chester

_Quantum Physics_ , by Eisberg & Resnick

_CRC Mathematical Tables_

_A Ghost in the Atom_  
  


|

  
  
**description:**

|

Quantum mechanics is the basis of modern physics. We spent the first semester
mastering the basics, i.e., the necessary mathematical tools, the problems
that led to the development of quantum mechanics, and the rudiments of Dirac
notation using the 1-D paradigm of a bead-on-a-wire (where V=0). In this
second semester we will broaden our understanding by considering systems with
potentials in 3-D spatial coordinates. We will investigate new operators such
as angular momentum, spin, and raising and lowering operators. Using the
mathematical formalism of linear algebra, we will solve eigenvalue problems.
We will finish with basic statistical mechanics, a brief description of
nuclear physics and particle physics in the context of the four fundamental
forces of nature. For the quantum mechanics part of the course we will
continue to use _A Primer of Quantum Mechanics_ by M. Chester. Dr Chester, who
owns the copyright, has given us permission to reproduce as many copies as
there are students in the class. For the rest of the material we will use
Eisberg  & Resnick from last semester.  
  


|

  
  
**requirements:**

|

PHYS 4111, PHYS 4112 (or concurrent), and PHYS 4411 with course **grades no
lower than C** in any of the above.  
  


|

  
  
**grading:**

|

Your performance will be judged on the following:

3 midterms @ 15% each                    45 %

homework                                          10%

final exam                                          45%



Your final grade in the course will be based on the total number of points you
achieve, weighted as indicated above, such that:

87.5 - 100.0 %  A

75.0 - 87.4 %  B

62.5 - 74.9 %  C

50.0 - 62.4 %  D

0 - 49.0 %  F

At **any time** if you wish to know your current grade, please come see me.  
  
  



**expectations:**

|

You are expected to attend all lectures. Absences in excess of 20% can result
in a failing grade, as outlined in the _1998-1999_ _VSU Undergraduate
Bulletin._ Review sessions are optional.



Homework will be collected once or twice a week and full solution sets will be
provided. Only one or two problems will be graded for each homework set,
chosen at random. If you do not do the problems consistently, I guarantee that
you will not be able to pass the exams. The midterms and the final exam will
consist of problems similar but not identical to the homework. Exams in
physics courses are not designed to test whether you have memorized a problem-
solving method in a rote manner. Physics exams test your ability to apply the
concepts that you have mastered in the homework to new situations. Bear this
in mind.  
  
---|---  
  


|

  
  
**general policies:**

|

No late **homework** will be accepted.



There will be no make-up exams for **midterms**. If you miss an exam (i.e.,
you are absent without making arrangements with me **beforehand** ) you will
receive a zero for that midterm exam. My approval for an absence depends on
your having a _legitimate_ reason. (Note: a doctor's appointment is _not_ a
legitimate reason to miss an exam).



As for all physics courses, the **final exam** will be **comprehensive**. _No
one will be exempt from taking the final exam for any reason._



For the midterms and final exam, you may use the **CRC Mathematical Tables**.



**Cheating is absolutely unacceptable.** **The first offense will result in a
failing grade in this course.**  
  


|

  
  


|

Students requiring accommodations because of a **documented disability**
should discuss this need with me at the beginning of the semester, and I will
do everything possible to make reasonable adjustments. Disabled students who
are not registered with the Special Services Program should contact the
Special Services Office in Nevins Hall, room NH 1115 or call them at
245-2498.  
  


|

  
  
**tips for success:**

|

I encourage you to work together. That is, after trying a homework set on your
own, get together with classmates to discuss any hard spots. As a student, I
found it very helpful to copy over lecture notes, filling in any steps that
were left out in class. For me, it was a good way to find out what I did not
understand. But above all else,







**DO THE HOMEWORK!!**

  
  
  

**SCHEDULE OF LECTURES**



**Week #**

|

**Day**

|

**Topics**

|

**Reading**  
  
---|---|---|---  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|



|



|

  
  
1

|

M        7 Jan

|

Introduction, 4411 Final Exam Review

|

  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        9

|

Brief Review of Chp 3

|

Chp 3  
  


|



|



|

  
  
2

|

M        14

|

Harmonic Oscillator in _x_ -space

|

  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        16

|

Particle in a Box

|

Chp 4  
  


|



|



|

  
  
3

|

M        21

|

**MLK HOLIDAY**

|

Chp  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        23

|

Lowering and Raising Operators

|

Chp 4  
  


|



|



|

  
  
4

|

M        28

|

Multi-dimensions and Angular Momentum

|

Chp 5  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        30

|

Vector Operators

|

Chp 5  
  


|



|



|

  
  
5

|

M        4 Feb

|

![](phy4412syl_files/image001.gif) and its Eigenvalues -- Spherical Harmonics

|

Chp 5  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        6

|

**FIRST MIDTERM EXAM**

|

  
  


|



|



|

  
  
6

|

M        11

|

Magnetic Moment Spectra

|

Chp 6  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        13

|

Spin and the electron

|

Chp 6  
  


|



|



|

  
  
7

|

M        18

|

Review of Matrix Manipulation

|

Chp 6  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        20

|

Matrices and the Eigenvalue Problem

|

Chp 6  
  


|



|



|

  
  
8

|

M        25

|

Photoelectric Effect Revisited

|

Chp 7  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        27

|

Time-dependent Schrodinger Equation

|

Chp 7  
  


|



|



|

  
  
9

|

M        4 Mar

|

Interaction Hamiltonian

|

Chp 7  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        6

|

Two Bound Particles

|

Chp 8  
  


|



|



|

  
  
10

|

M        11

|

**SECOND MIDTERM EXAM**

|

  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        13

|

Periodic Boundary Conditions

|

Chp 8  
  


|



|



|

  
  
11

|

M        18

|

Eigenstates of Energy-Compatible Operators

|

Chp 8  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        20

|

Electrostatic Field and the Hydrogen Atom

|

Chp 8  
  


|



|



|

  
  
12

|

M        25

|

**SPRING BREAK**

|

Chp 9  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        27

|

**SPRING BREAK**

|

Chp 9  
  


|



|



|

  
  
13

|

M        1 Apr

|

Bosons and Fermions -- Indistinguishability

|

Chp 9  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        3

|

Spin and Total Angular Momentum

|

Chp 10  
  


|



|



|

  
  
14

|

M        8

|

Perturbation Theory & the WKB Approximation

|

  
  


|



|



|

  
  


|

W        10

|

**THIRD MIDTERM EXAM**

|

  
  


|



|



|

  
  
15

|

M        15

<td width=25

