**MICROCOMPUTERS IN EDUCATION**

**ELCF 442 **

**SYLLABUS**

Click here to see Amplification of Course Assignments

Dr. Makedon

Office: ED 223

Telephone: x2003 on campus

(773) 995-2003 off campus

Credit Hours: 3

Office Hours: M, W, F 11-11:50; T, Th 4-4:450 and by appointment. Hours for
each term are also posted outside Dr. Makedon's Office, ED 223.

Course Description:

An overview of the philosophy and approaches to educational utilization of
microcomputers. Focus on hardware, software, existing programs, funding and
potential for administrative and instructional microcomputer use. Students
engage in hands-on review of computer programs, including class demonstrations
of a variety of K-12 software designs. Our department maintains a software
library in ED 319, which students can use for their software review projects.
In addition to hands-on experience in the computer classroom, students
complete homework assignments in the microcomputer lab in the Douglas library
(LIB 122).

Course Objectives:

1\. Microcomputer Basics: Familiarity with the world of microcomputers,
including operating a microcomputer; computer peripherals; keyboarding;
Windows 3.1 and 95; MS-DOS; BASIC and C programming; and basic communications

2\. Desktop Applications: Hands-on experience with wordprocessing (icnl. MS
Word, Corel Wordperfect), database, and spreadsheet programs

3\. Internet: Educational uses of the Internet, including: educational web
sites  & resources; dowloading information; understanding the basics of
HyperText Mark Up Language (HTML); designing web pages/sites with HTML Editors
(incl. Netscape Publishing Suite); Internet Service Providers (ISPs); and
sending mail and files through the internet (E-mail).

4\. Multimedia: Educational CD ROM disks (math, science, language arts, social
studies, and other educational applications); text readers (reading skills,
and students with disabilities); embedding speech and graphics in text; and
utilizing educational web sites and web resources

5\. Computer Labs: Setting up computer laboratories in schools (hypothetical
exercises); analyzing research findings on the educational effectiveness of
microcomputers; securing funding; and administering educational computer
centers

Textbooks:

Required:

1\. Alexander Makedon. Microcomputers in Education, Instructional Packet.
Chicago, Illinois: Abacus Publishing, 1997.

Optional:

1\. Michael R. Simonson and Ann Thompson. Educational Computing Foundations.
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Merrill, an imprint of Prentice Hall, Division
of Simon & Schuster, 1997.

2\. Heilborn, Maarten, et. al. Master Windows 95 Visually. Foster City, CA:
IDG Books Workdwide, Inc., 1997.

3\. Corel Corporation. Corel Wordperfect. Ottawa, Ontario, Canada: Corel
Corporation Limited, 1996.

4\. Joe Kraynak, et. al. The Big Basics Book of the Internet. Indianapolis,
IN: Que, A Division of Macmillan Computer Publishing, 1996.

Requirements:

Attendance 10%

School Project 10%

Vendor Project 10%

Homework Assignments 10%

Software Review Project 10%

School Lab Project 20%

Final examination 30%

Grading Policy

90-100............. A

80-89.............. B

70-79.............. C

60-69.............. D

Below 60........... F

Attendance Policy:

A point is subtracted for each hour that a student is absent from class. For
example, if class meets for 3 hours, then for each class session that a
student is absent the instructor will subtract three (3) points from a
student's total score (see grading scale, above, for number of points required
for each grade). A student who wishes to have his or her absence excused, must
give the instructor written evidence of the reason for his or her absence
(e.g., doctor's notice, notice from employer, and the like).

Incompletes Policy:

Only students who are receiving a grade of C or better are eligible for an
incomplete at the time they request it. This means that they must have
accumulated at least 70 points at the time they request an incomplete. To
receive an incomplete, a student must also have a legitimate reason for why he
or she is unable to complete the course requirements on time. By "legitimate"
is meant an event beyond the student's control.

Schedule of Readings and Requirements:

1\. Introduction. Hands On Computer Operations

2\. Hands On Computer Operations

Computer Components

Connecting to the Internet

Section 1 "Course Requirements." In Instructional Packet.

Section 2 "Introduction to Educational Computing."

Beginning of Vendor, School and Software Projects

3\. Windows 95 Operating System.

Section 3 "In the Beauty Shop: Computer Peripherals."

Section 4 "Have Laptop, Will Travel"

Vendor/School/Software Projects.

4\. Windows 95-cont'd.

Section 5 "Old Without Growing Up: Windows 3.1." Vendor/School/Software
Projects.

5\. Windows 3.1.

Section 6 "The War of the Operating Systems: MS-DOS & Windows 95."

Vendor/School/Software Projects.

6\. MS-DOS.

Section 7 "Some Old Fashioned Programming: BASIC Programming Language."

Vendor/School/Software Projects.

7\. BASIC Programming.

Section 8 "Hey Mister, Can You Spare a Dime? Databasing and Spreadsheeting."

Section 9 "A Darwinian View of Wordprocessing: The Evolution of Wordperfect."

Vendor/School/Software Projects.

8\. Wordperfect 5.0/Corel Wordperfect.

Section 10 "Peace on Earth: Introduction to the Internet."

Mid Term Paper & Presentation (Design of School Lab).

9\. Worprocessing: Continued. Integration of Graphics, Voice, Sound, and
Internet resources.

Section 11 "Coming of Age in Software: HTML Basics."

Vendor/School/Software Projects.

10\. Surfing the Internet: Connecting, communicating, downloading, and sending
e-mail.

Section 12 "Don't Forget to Write: E-Mail."

Section 13 "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About the Internet, But Were
Afraid to Ask: Some Internet Secrets for Teachers."

Section 14 "One Person, one Vote: How to Set Up Your own Web Site."

Section 15 "Is It All Worth It? Research on the Educational Effectiveness of
Computers."

Vendor/School/Software Projects.

11\. Review for the Final Examination

12\. Final Examination (Hands On In Class)

Bibliography

Aiken, Peter and Bradley Jones. Teach Yourself C in 21 Days. Indianapolis, IN:
Sams Publishing, 1994.

Corel Corporation. Corel Wordperfect. Dublin, Ireland: 1996.

Creative Labs. Text Assist, User's Guide. Milipitas, CA: Creative Technology
Ltd., 1994.

Freedman, Alan. The Computer Desktop Encyclopedia. New York, NY: Amacom,
American Management Association, 1996.

2\. Heilborn, Maarten, et. al. Master Windows 95 Visually. Foster City, CA:
IDG Books Workdwide, Inc., 1997.

Hirschbuhl, John J. and Loretta F. Wilkinson, eds. Computers in Education.
Guilford, Connecticut: The Dushkin Publishing Group, Inc., 1992.

Kraynak, Joe, et. al. The Big Basics Book of the Internet. Indianapolis, IN:
Que, A Division of Macmillan Computer Publishing, 1996.

Lemay, Laura. Teach Yourself Web Publishing with HTML 3.0. Indianapolis, IN:
Sams.net Publishing, 1996.

Makedon, Alexander. "Computers and Paideia: The Cultural Context or
'Compupaideia' of Computer Assisted Learning." ERIC Clearinghouse on
Information Resources, September 1991. ERIC Document No. ED 331 481.

MGI Software Corp. MGI PhotoSuite 8.0 Reference Nanual. URL: www.mgisoft.com.
E-mail: photosuite@mgisoft.com. Not dated.

Microsoft Corporation. Microsoft Windows Version 3.1. Redmond, WA: Microsoft
Corporation, 1990-92.

______ Microsoft Windows 95. No place indicated: Microsoft Corporation, 1995.

Netscape Communications Corporation. Netscape Publishing Suite/Net Objects
Fusion PE. Mountain View, CA: Netscape Communications Corporation, 1997.

_____ Netscape Communicator 4. Mountain View, CA: Netscape Communications
Corporation, 1997.

Radio Shack Technical Productions. Going Ahead with Extended Color BASIC. Fort
Worth, Texas: Tandy Corporation, 1981.

Roblyer, M.D. et. al. Integrating Educational Technology into Teaching. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Merril, an imprint of Prentice Hall, 1997.

Sausage Software, The Hot Dog Web Editor Pro 2.0. Newport Beach, CA: Anaware
Software, Inc., Not dated.

Serim, Ferdi and Melissa Koch. NetLearning: Why Teachers Use the Internet.
Sebastopol, CA: Songline Studios and O'Reilly and Associates, Inc., 1996.

Simonson, Michael R. and Ann Thompson. Educational Computing Foundations.
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Merrill, an imprint of Prentice Hall, Division
of Simon & Schuster, 1997.

Simpson, Alan. Understanding dBase III Plus. San Francisco, CA: SYBEX, Inc.,
1986\.

Smith, Bud and Arthur Bebak. Creating Web Pages for Dummies. Foster City, CA:
IDG Books Worldwide, Inc., 1996.

Stewart, Charles O., III, et. al. Using Wordperfect 5. Carmel, IN: Que
Corporation, 1988.

Wolverton, Van. Running MS-DOS. Redmond, Washington: Microsoft Press, 1989.

Woodward, Jeff. Lotus 1-2-3. San Francisco, CA: SYBEX, Inc., 1992.

Wyatt, Allen L., Sr., et. al. Using MS-DOS 6.2 Special Edition. Indianapolis,
IN: Que Corporation, 1993.

Zenith Data Systems. GW-BASIC 3.2. St. Joseph, Michigan: Zenith Data Systems
Corporation, 1986.  
  
---  
  
Return to the Top

Alexander Makedon  
Chicago State University

_**Copyright (C) 1999 A. Makedon**_

![](http://webs.csu.edu/cgi-bin/count.cgi/pagecounterELCF442Syllabus.dat)
_visits since  09/01/1999_

