###  ![Book Image](graphics/books-t.gif) Building the Virtual Department: A
Case Study of Online Teaching and Research

####  English 214, _Topics in Writing_

* * *

  * **Scenario**
  * **Technical Summary**
  * **Catalog Description**
  * **Syllabus**
  * **[The Scenarios Discussed in This Essay](scenario.htm#one)**
  * **[Summary (in Table Form) of All Scenarios](table.htm)**

* * *

###  Scenario:

Historically, the first English course taught entirely in SCAILAB (a joint
project of the Department of English and the Tutorium in Intensive English,
our ESL program) was Keith Dorwick's [English 214: Writing and Publishing [for
Cyberspace]](http://www2.uic.edu/~kdorwick/syll214.html), a topics-based
writing course. Usually, the topics for the course are determined by the needs
of the department and are strictly an internal matter. Dorwick's orginal topic
for the course, "Writing and Publishing in Chicago," had been approved through
standard departmental procedures.

However, his decision to make the course an online course - and to make its
topic "Writing in Publishing in Cyberspace - was new territory for the
department. Donald Marshall, Head, asked Dorwick to meet with Steven Weaver,
Assistant Dean of the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, and gain his
approval for the change, not so much for the topic as for **[Dorwick's
pedagogy](dorwick's.htm)**.

Though Dean Weaver did in fact approve 214, he also stated that he would not
approve such courses in the future as topics courses; instead, he charged the
English Department with creating formally approved permanent writing courses
for the teaching of hypertext and the use of such technologies as Netscape and
other Internet resources, a charge that has not yet been fulfiled, though some
efforts have been made by graduate students at UIC.

**[Other online courses](scenario.htm)** and **[courses specializing in
electronic pedagogy](eng558.htm)** have been successfully taught at UIC.  

* * *

###  Technical Summary:

**[Computer Content of Course:](models.htm)** **[Transitional
Model](models.htm#trans)**

**[Percent of Internet Use:](glossary.htm#internet)** High both for students
writing in the physical lab and for those students attending virtually

**[Percent Face-to-Face Contact:](glossary.htm#f2f)** 100% for students using
the traditional attendance policy, down to 0% for students using the virtual
attendance policy

**[Percent of Technical Training Needed by Students:](glossary.htm#techstud)**
30-50% of Class Time

**[Technical Training Needed by Faculty:](glossary.htm#techfac)** Extensive

**[Percent Lecture:](glossary.htm#lect)** 0%

**[Percent Discussion or Other Student Centered
Activity:](glossary.htm#disc)** 100%

**[Percent Use of Computer Classroom:](glossary.htm#cc)** 100%

**[Percent Use of Multimedia Facilities:](glossary.htm#mm)** 0%

**[Attendance Requirements:](glossary.htm#att)** Two attendance policies, one
for traditional students, another for virtual attendees

**[Inclass Worktime:](glossary.htm#icwt)** 100%

**[Out of Class Worktime:](glossary.htm#ocwt)** Varies

**[Computer Skill Requirements:](glossary.htm#skill)** High

**[Equipment Requirements:](glossary.htm#equip)** High

**[Use of Printed Textbooks or Other Materials:](glossary.htm#texts)** Low

**[Software Requirements:](glossary.htm#software)** High

Note: this section of the scenario uses Claudine Keenan's typology of the
**[three models for teachers](models.htm)** in online environments.  

* * *

###  Catalog Description of English 214, Topics in Writing:

**3 Hours.** May be repeated for a maximum of 6 hours of credit if topic is
different for each registration. Analysis of and practice in a particular form
of writing. Content varies. Prerequisite: Engl 201 or the equivalent.  

* * *

###  Syllabus:

####  Scholarly Works in Cyberspace: A Cybercourse

Where is scholarship going in cyberspace? What will the scholarship produced
by and for writers who are comfortable with and proficient in the use of
electronic environments look like? This course will have two goals:

  * Studying some examples of the new scholarship
  * Creating our own online journal

* * *

###  Texts:

Campbell, Dave and Mary. **The Student's Guide to Doing Research on the
Internet**. Reading, MA: Addison-Welsey Publishing Company, 1995.

Cervone, Thea, et. al. **Guide to Resources for UIC Students**. 2nd ed.
Champaign, IL: Stipes Publishing Company, 1994.

Gibaldi, Joseph. **MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers**. 4th ed. New
York: MLA, 1995.

[Kairos: A Journal For Teachers of Writing in Webbed
Environments](http://129.118.38.138/kairos/1.3/)

[RhetNet: A CyberJournal for rhetoric and
writing](http://www.missouri.edu/~rhetnet/)

[ebr: (electronic book review)](http://www.altx.com/ebr/)

###  Some Helpful WWW pages:

[Netscape page for New
Webspinners](http://home.netscape.com/assist/net_sites/index.html)

[A Beginner's Guide to
HTML](http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/General/Internet/WWW/HTMLPrimer.html)

###  Software:

[HTML
Assistant](http://www.yahoo.com/Computers/World_Wide_Web/HTML_Editors/MS_Windows/HTML_Assistant/),
freeware version of HTML Assistant.

[Microsoft Internet
Assistant](http://www.microsoft.com/word/Internet/IA/default.htm), free add-on
for Microsoft Word.

* * *

###  Assignments

####  Web(s): 50% of the grade for the course

At least 150 1 to 2 paragraph nodes, each with at least 11 links; students may
design any number of webs, so long as there are at least 60 nodes total.

####  Grading Scale for the Web(s):

Quality/relevance of the links -- 30% of the grade  
Content of the web -- 50%  
Aesthetics of site -- 20%

####  Work on the online journal: 50% of the grade for the course

In any class taught in an electronic environment, a major component of the
course is work - it should produce a definable product. In this case, 50% of
the final grade will be given for work on our online journal, which will be
published on the World Wide Web.

* * *

###  Instructor's Note:

This course is going to be unlike most courses you've taken here at UIC. There
are two major differences:

  1. ![\[Image: Air Keyboard!\]](graphics/airkeyboard.gif)Most of the course will take place in cyberspace. Thus, students taking this class will have to learn a set of skills that -- though not part of the traditional research paper course -- will be very useful for you in future classes and in the rest of your careers. If you do not already know how, you will learn to e-mail, to transfer files, to write HyperText Markup Language (HTML), to work with e-mail lists, to post your own pages to the World Wide Web (WWW), and more. No one needs any computer experience whatsoever, and I will serve (among other roles) as your resource for computer questions during the semester.
  2. The use of class time will also be different from most courses at UIC. Cyberspace classes need not necessarily meet face to face. Instead, they can meet in a virtual or on-line classroom. The primary meeting space for this class will be a Hyper News web page for class members, located here at UIC; our official class meeting times will be reserved for computer access, for office hours and consultations with the instructor, and for any face to face meetings needed by students to do the work of the class. This will be a good opportunity for people who need to work on their computer skills. I would anticipate that class work could be completed during class hours. Once we get the course running, your presence during face-to-face class sessions will not be required. However, **you must attend all sessions until you have demonstratedsufficient computer skills to work on your own**.

* * *

###  Virtual Office Hours:

I maintain a 24-hour virtual office at my e-mail address. Instead of trying to
call me at work or at home, you should e-mail me. You will be pleasantly
surprised at how fast I respond to on-line questions and concerns. You can
also always find me in class.

* * *

###  Attendance:

There are two attendance policies for the course -- except as noted below,
students may choose the policy that best suits their needs:

####  In-Class Attendance:

Full attendance at all scheduled class sessions in Scailab. Students with four
or more absences will have their grades lowered.

####  On-Line Attendance:

Face to face (physical) attendance during the scheduled class times will not
be necessary. Instead, students' virtual attendance on the webpage and other
electronic environments including Daedalus and private e-mail to other members
of the classroom community. Make sure you cc me on private e-mail if you want
it to count toward attendance.

#####  Note:

Students can **NOT** opt for the on-line attendance policy until they have
demonstrated their ability to complete the necessary computer skills to
complete the course on their own:

The instructor will be available to help all students become computer
literate. No computer experience is necessary for this course.

#####  These tasks are required for the work of the course for all students,
not just for students who wish to take this course on-line.

* * *

###  Notes:

####  Note 1:

HTML is the language that is used by the World Wide Web (WWW), the fastest
growing section of the Internet. The WWW allows you to retrieve graphics,
texts, film and audio clips, programs, etc., and HTML will be an increasingly
important (read, lucrative) skill in the years to come.

* * *

####  Note 2:

Necessary Computer Skills

  * Create a UNIX account on Icarus
  * Set Mail Forwarding from their UIC address to their Icarus account
  * Send, receive, and respond to e-mail
  * Join the class webpage and become a HyperNews member
  * Code a one page essay in HTML using HTML Assistant or Internet Assistant, both available at Scailab
  * Post the coded essay on the World Wide Web including proper permissions for access.

* * *

####  Note 3:

Students never, ever believe me on this one. I promise to return e-mail within
12 hours. Usually, it's much faster. And I'm very patient during e-mail. As
for phone calls, I hate returning phone calls, so it can be days before I get
around to returning your phone call, assuming I got the message in the first
place!

* * *

###  Glossary:

See <http://odwin.ucsd.edu/glossary/others.html>

* * *

**[The Scenarios Discussed in This Essay](scenario.htm#one)**

**[Summary (in Table Form) of All Scenarios](table.htm)**  

* * *

####  [How to Navigate This Essay Without Getting Lost](navigate.htm)

* * *

[![Go Back Home!](graphics/backhome.jpg)](toc.htm#contents) **[Back to the
Table of Contents](toc.htm#contents)**  

* * *

Copyright (C) 1996-1998 by [Keith Dorwick](mailto:kdorwick@uic.edu)

