For a published version of this course syllabus, see _Radical History Review_
64 (Winter 1996), 19-30.

![](52pic1.jpg)

##  HISTORY OF MANHOOD IN AMERICA, 1750-1940

History 52  
Swarthmore College  
Prof. Bruce Dorsey  
Spring1999

This course is designed to allow students to explore the meanings of manhood
and the various constructions of masculine identity in America between the
late-18th century and the beginning of the 20th century. The negative images
(opposites) against which manhood has been constructed, such as womanhood,
boyhood, dependency, slavery, and racial and class difference, will be
examined. Topics include politics, work, family, sexuality, race, war and
violence, sports, drinking, and the myth of the self-made man. It is a course
on the cultural and social history of gender in America.



## REQUIRED READINGS:

The following books are required readings and available at the College
Bookstore:

  * E. Anthony Rotundo, _American Manhood_. 
  * Mark C. Carnes and Clyde Griffen, eds., _Meanings for Manhood_. 
  * Mark C. Carnes, _Secret Ritual and Manhood in Victorian America_. 
  * Bertram Wyatt-Brown, _Honor and Violence in the Old South_. 
  * Gail Bederman, _Manliness and Civilization_. 
  * Ava Baron, _Work Engendered: Toward a New History of American Labor_. 
  * George Chauncey, _Gay New York._
  * Elliott Gorn, _The Manly Art: Bare-Knuckle Prize Fighting in America._ 

## COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

_Reading and Class Participation_ : Students are expected to attend all class
meetings, including films and guest lectures scheduled outside of class. The
following is the History Department policy on attendance: "Students are
required to attend all classes for the successful completion of the course.
Unexcused absences will result in a lower grade." Students are encouraged to
complete the assigned readings before every class meeting, and be prepared for
discussion. Students should have all the reading completed before a discussion
meeting.

_Short Papers_ : _Two_ short papers (6-8 pages) will be written over the
course of the semester. The essays will be based primarily on the optional
reading list, but should also try to integrate the class lectures, discussion,
and assigned readings. The short paper will allow students to do in-depth
studies of topics for which the course can only provide a rudimentary
exposure. Students can decide among a choice of topics based on the optional
reading list. The short papers are not designed to be research papers, but
rather analytical essays integrating assigned and optional readings. (A
handout will be distributed outlining the expectations and topics for the
short papers.)

**First Paper Due: February 22. Second Paper Due: April 19.**

_Document Discovery and Analysis_ : Each student will write a brief paper (3-4
pages) on an historical document that they discovered that was relevant and
revealing for the history of masculinity in America between 1750 and 1940. A
copy, or a brief synopsis, of the document must be appended to the paper.
Students will then analyze the gendered meanings inherent within the document
and relate it to the material covered during this course. Students will be
evaluated based on the originality, creativeness, and ingenuity in finding a
document, and on their historical analysis of that document. Assistance will
be given in locating sources of possible documents.

_Examinations_ : There will be an in-class midterm examination and a final
examination on the date and time scheduled by the College Registrar. The exams
will be based on the assigned readings, class lectures and discussions.  

## CLASS SCHEDULE:

Abbreviations: (O) Optional Book at Bookstore; (H) Handout; (R) Reserve; (RB)
Reserve Binder; * Primary source document

**(WEEK 1)**

**Jan. 18 INTRODUCTION TO THE COURSE**

**Jan. 20 MANHOOD AND THE STUDY OF GENDER**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Rotundo, _American Manhood_ , Introduction, Ch. 1 
  * Mark C. Carnes and Clyde Griffen, eds., _Meanings for Manhood_ , Introduction, and Ch. 12 - Nancy F. Cott, "On Men's History and Women's History," pp. 205-211. (R) 

**Jan. 22 MANHOOD IN COLONIAL & REVOLUTIONARY AMERICA **

_Required Reading_ :

  * Anthony Wallace, _Death and Rebirth of the Seneca_ , pp. 21-48 (R) 
  * Cornelia Dayton, "Taking the Trade: Abortion and Gender Relations in an 18th-Century New England Village" _William and Mary Quarterly_ 48 (1991), 19-49 (R) 
  * Toby Ditz, "Shipwrecked; or Masculinity Imperiled: Mercantile Representations of Failure and the Gendered Self in Eighteenth-Century Philadelphia," _Journal of American History_ 81 (June 1994), 51-80 (R) 
  * Ruth Bloch, "The Gendered Meanings of Virtue in Revolutionary America," _Signs_ 13 (1987), pp. 37-58 (R) 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * * Benjamin Franklin, _The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin_. (O) 

**  
(WEEK 2)**

**Jan. 25 INDUSTRIALIZATION & CAPITALISM: MEN, WOMEN, AND WORK**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Steven Watts, _The Republic Reborn_ , pp. 109-130. (R) 
  * Paul Johnson, "The Modernization of Mayo Greenleaf Patch," _New England Quarterly_ (1982), 488-516. (R) 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * David Roediger, _The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the American Working Class_. (O) 

**Jan. 27 THE DILEMMAS OF 19TH-CENTURY WHITE MANHOOD**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Mark C. Carnes, _Secret Ritual and Manhood in Victorian America_.. 
  * John Starrett Hughes, "The Madness of Separate Spheres : Insanity and Masculinity in Victorian Alabama," in Mark Carnes and Clyde Griffen, eds., _Meanings for Manhood_ , pp. 53-66. (R) 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * Karen Halttunen, _Confidence Men and Painted Women_. (R) 

**Jan. 29 DISCUSSION**

**  
(WEEK 3)**

**Feb. 1 SLAVERY AND AFRICAN AMERICAN MANHOOD**

_Required Reading_ :

  * James Horton, "Freedom's Yoke: Gender Conventions Among Antebellum Free Blacks." _Feminist Studies_ (1986), 51-76 (R) 
  * James Cullen, "I's a Man Now: Gender and African American Men." in Catherine Clinton and Nina Silber, eds. _Divided Houses: Gender and the Civil War_ , 76-91 (R) 
  * Martha Hodes, "The Sexualization of Reconstruction Politics," _Journal of the History of Sexuality_ 3 (1993), 402-416 (R) 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * * Frederick Douglass, _Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, A Slave_. (O) 
  * Bertram Wyatt-Brown, "The Mask of Obedience: Male Slave Psychology in the Old South." _American Historical Review_ (1988), 1228-1252. (R) 

**Feb. 3 WHITE SOUTHERN MANHOOD**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Bertram Wyatt-Brown, _Honor and Violence in the Old South_. 

**Feb. 5 DISCUSSION**

**  
(WEEK 4)**

**Feb. 8 MEN AND WOMEN IN THE WEST**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Joan Cashin, _A Family Venture: Men and Women on the Southern Frontier_ , ch. 2, 5. (R) 
  * John Mack Faragher and Christine Stansell, "Women and Their Families on the Overland Trail," in _A Heritage of Her Own_ , pp. 246-61. (R) 

**Feb. 10 FILM: _IN THE WHITE MAN'S IMAGE_.**

**Feb. 12 DISCUSSION**

**  
(WEEK 5)**

**Feb. 15 URBAN MANHOOD BEFORE THE CIVIL WAR**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Timothy Gilfoyle, _City of Eros: New York City, Prostitution, and the Commercialization of Sex, 1790-1920_ , pp. 76-91. (R) 
  * Patricia Cline Cohen, "Unregulated Youths: Masculinity and Murder in the 1830s City." _Radical History Review_ (1992). (R) 

**Feb. 17 BOYHOOD, YOUTH, AND REFORM MOVEMENTS**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Rotundo, _American Manhood_ , Ch. 2 & 3\. 
  * William Breitenbach, "Sons of the Fathers: Temperance Reformers and the Legacy of the American Revolution," _Journal of the Early Republic_ 3 (Spring 1983). (R) 
  * Carroll Smith Rosenberg, "Davy Crockett as Trickster" in _Disorderly Conduct_ , pp. 90-108 (R) 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * * T. S. Arthur, _Ten Nights in a Bar-Room, And What I Saw There_. (R) 

**Feb. 19 DISCUSSION**

**  
(WEEK 6)**

**Feb. 22 IMAGES OF MANHOOD IN THE AMERICAN RENAISSANCE**

> **_(FIRST SHORT PAPER DUE)_**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Ann Douglas, _The Feminization of American Culture_ , ch. 9. (R) 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * * Herman Melville, _The Confidence Man_. (O) 

**Feb. 24 WAR, VIOLENCE, AND THE AMERICAN MALE**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Michael P. Rogin, _Fathers and Children_ , ch. 5. (R) 
  * Reid Mitchell, _The Vacant Chair: The Northern Soldier Leaves Home_ , pp. 3-18, 55-69, 115-33. (R) 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * Michael C.C. Adams, _The Great Adventure: Male Desire and the Coming of World War I_. (R) 

**Feb. 26 DISCUSSION**

**  
(WEEK 7)**

**Mar. 1 LATE 19TH-CENTURY "CRISIS" IN MASCULINITY?**

**Mar. 3 _MID-TERM EXAMINATION_**

**Mar. 5 NO CLASS**

**  
Spring Break Mar. 8-12**

**  
(WEEK 8)**

**Mar. 15 TURN-THE-CENTURY TRANSITION IN WHITE, MIDDLE-CLASS MASCULINITY**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Gail Bederman, _Manliness and Civilization_ , ch. 1-3. 
  * Clyde Griffen, "Reconstructing Masculinity from the Evangelical Revival to the Waning of Progressivism: A Speculative Synthesis," in Carnes and Griffen, _Meanings for Manhood_., 183- 204. (R) 
  * Margaret Marsh, "Suburban Men and Masculine Domesticity" in Carnes and Griffen, _Meanings for Manhood_ , pp. 111-127. (R) 

**Mar. 17 STRENUOUS, PASSIONATE MANHOOD**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Gail Bederman, _Manliness and Civilization_ , ch. 4-5, Conclusion. 
  * Rotundo, _American Manhood_ , ch. 10 & 11\. 
  * Peter G. Filene, _Him/Her/Self: Sex Roles in Modern America_. Ch. 3 "Men and Manliness." (R) 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * * Theodore Roosevelt, _The Strenuous Life: Essays and Addresses_. (R) 

**Mar. 19 DISCUSSION**

**  
(WEEK 9)**

**Mar. 22 LABOR AND IMMIGRANT MEN**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Baron, _Work Engendered_ , pp. 1-190. 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * Baron, _Work Engendered_ , ch. 10, 12-13. 
  * Philip Foner and Ronald Lewis, eds., _The Black Worker: A Documentary History_ , vol. 1. (R) 

**Mar. 24 PROFESSIONS AND THE EXCLUSION OF WOMEN**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Rotundo, _American Manhood_ , Ch. 8 & 9\. 
  * Michael Grossberg, "Institutionalizing Masculinity: The Law as a Masculine Profession." in Carnes and Griffen, _Meanings for Manhood_ , pp. 133-151. (R) 
  * Mary Roth Walsh, _"Doctors Wanted, No Women Apply": Sexual Barriers in the Medical Profession, 1835-1875_ , ch. 1, 4. (R) 

**Mar. 26 FILM: _LOS MINEROS_.**

**  
(WEEK 10)**

**Mar. 29 NO CLASS -- (Work on Second Paper)**

**Mar. 31 DISCUSSION**

**Apr. 2 WOMEN, COURTSHIP, AND SEX: MALE-FEMALE SEXUALITY**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Rotundo, _American Manhood_ , ch. 5 & 6\. 
  * Ben Barker-Benfield, "The Spermatic Economy: A 19th Century View of Sexuality." in Michael Gordon, ed. _The American Family in Social-Historical Perspective_ , 374-402. (R) 
  * Kevin J. Mumford, "'Lost Manhood' Found: Male Sexual Impotence and Victorian Culture in the United States." _Journal of the History of Sexuality_ (1993). (R) 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * * Polly Longworth, ed., _Austin & Mabel: The Amherst Affair. . ._ (R) 
  * Peter Stearns and Mark Knapp, "Men and Romantic Love: Pinpointing a 20th-Century Change," _Journal of Social History_ 26 (1993), 769-795. (R) 

**  
(WEEK 11)**

**Apr. 5 FAMILY LIFE: MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Rotundo, _American Manhood_ , ch. 7. 
  * Robert Griswold, "Divorce and the Legal Redefinition of Victorian Manhood" in Carnes and Griffen, _Meanings for Manhood_. (R) 
  * Herbert Gutman, _The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom, 1750-1925_ , pp. 45-47, 50-52, 59-75. (R) 

**Apr. 7 FAMILY LIFE: FATHERHOOD**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Stephen M. Frank, "Rendering Aid and Comfort: Images of Fatherhood in the Letters of Civil War Soldiers from Massachusetts and Michigan," _Journal of Social History_ 26 (1992), 5- 31. (R) 
  * Margaret Marsh, "Suburban Men and Masculine Domesticity" in Carnes and Griffen, _Meanings for Manhood_ , pp. 111-127. (Reread) 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * Robert Griswold, _Fatherhood in America_. (R) 
  * William G. McLoughlin, "Evangelical Child-Rearing in the Age of Jackson: Francis Wayland's View on When and How to Subdue the Willfulness of Children," _Journal of Social History_ (1975), 21-43. (R) 

**Apr. 9 DISCUSSION**

**  
(WEEK 12)**

**Apr. 12 MALE-MALE INTIMACY**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Rotundo, _American Manhood_ , Ch. 4 "Youth and Male Intimacy." 
  * Donald Yacovone, "Abolitionists and the 'Language of Fraternal Love.'" in Carnes and Griffen, _Meanings for Manhood_ , pp. 85-95. (R) 
  * Martin Bauml Duberman, "'Writhing Bedfellows': Two Young Men from Antebellum South Carolina's Ruling Elite Share 'Extravagant Delight'," in Duberman, _About Time: Exploring the Gay Past_ , pp. 5-14. (R) 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * Karen Hansen, "'Our Eyes Behold Each Other: Masculinity and Intimate Friendship in Antebellum New England." in Peter Nardi, ed., _Men's Friendships_ (1992). (RB) 

**Apr. 14 HOMOSEXUALITY AND GAY MANHOOD**

_Required Reading_ :

  * George Chauncey, _Gay New York_ , esp. Introduction, ch. 2-7, 10-12, Epilogue. 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * * Claude Hartland, _The Story of a Life_. (O) 
  * George Chauncey, Jr., "Christian Brotherhood or Sexual Perversion? Homosexual Identities and the Construction of Sexual Boundaries in the World War One Era." _Journal of Social History_ 19 (1985). (R) 

**Apr. 16 DISCUSSION**

**  
(WEEK 13)**

**Apr. 19 SPORTS AND RECREATION**

> **_(Second Short Paper Due)_**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Elliot Gorn, _The Manly Art: Bare Knuckle Prize Fighting in America_ , ch. 4, 6, epilogue. (R) 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * Ted Ownby, _Subduing Satan: Religion, Recreation, and Manhood in the Rural South, 1865-1920_. (O) 

**Apr. 21 RELIGION**

_Required Reading_ :

  * Susan Curtis, "The Son of Man and God the Father: The Social Gospel and Victorian Masculinity," in Carnes and Griffen, _Meanings for Manhood_ , pp. 67-78. (R) 
  * William Becker, "The Black Church: Manhood and Mission." _Journal of the American Academy of Religion_ 3 (1972). (R) 
  * Gail Bederman, "'The Women Have Had Charge of the Church Work Long Enough': The Men and Religion Forward Movement of 1911-1912 and the Masculinization of Middle-Class Protestantism," _American Quarterly_ 41 (September 1989). (R) 

_Optional Reading_ :

  * * Harold Frederic, _The Damnation of Theron Ware_. (O) 
  * Ted Ownby, _Subduing Satan: Religion, Recreation, and Manhood in the Rural South, 1865-1920_. (O) 

**Apr. 23 DISCUSSION**

**  
(WEEK 14)**

**Apr. 26 THE MALE REVOLT AGAINST THE BREADWINNER**

**Apr. 28 CONCLUSIONS: MASCULINITY IN THE LATE 20TH CENTURY**

**Apr. 30 NO-CLASS -- FILM TO BE SCHEDULED DURING THE WEEK**



