  
[ ![H-Urban Teaching Center](../graphics/btnsyltc154x40.jpg)](../index.htm) [
![H-Urban Syllabus Archive](../graphics/btnsylsa154x40.jpg)](index.htm) [
![H-Urban](../graphics/btnsylhurban154x40.jpg)](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~urban)
|  ![Syllabus Archive Selection](../graphics/skysylarchselect.jpg) |



[ ![H-Urban Syllabus Use & Submission
Policy](../graphics/btnsyluse154x40.jpg)](syluses.htm) [ ![Comments and
Questions](../graphics/btnsylcques154x40.jpg)](mailto:EDTEACH-
URBAN@h-net.msu.edu)  
---|---|---  
  
**Culture and Social Life in the American City, 1800-1970**  
(History 458, Sec. 883)  
  
  
**Timothy J. Gilfoyle**  
  
Loyola University  
Chicago, Illinois, USA  
**Fall 1992**  
  

* * *

## Introduction

According to one historian, the United States was born in the country and
moved to the city. This course examines that social movement and the evolution
of the United States from a rural and small-town society to an urban and
suburban nation. Cities, and especially Chicago, have long offered some of the
best laboratories for the study of American history, social structure,
economic development and cultural change. Certain problems and themes recur
thoughout the course of American urban and cultural history which will be
focal points of this seminar: the interaction of private commerce with
cultural change, the rise of distinctive working and middle classes, the
segregation of public and private space, the formation of new and distinctive
urban subcultures organized by gender, work, race, religion, ethnicity, and
sexuality, problems of health and housing resulting from congestion, and
blatant social divisions between the rich and poor, the native-born and
immigrant, and blacks and whites.

The colloquium will provide a historiographical introduction to the major
questions and issues in the culture and social life of American cities. Class
discussion will also examine different possibilities for future research.

The course requirements include one typewritten essay (66%) and class
participation (34%). Essay guidelines can be found at the end of this
syllabus. The primary responsibility of students is to complete the weekly
reading before the date of the scheduled class and contribute their
thoughtful, reflective opinions in class discussion. The books can be
interpreted in a variety of ways and students should formulate some initial
positions and questions to offer in the class discussion. Recommended readings
are also included for the benefit of individual students who may wish to
pursue certain topics in greater depth.

## Class Meeting Dates and Assignments

Sept. 1: Introduction

  * Thomas Bender, _Community and Social Change in America_ (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press, 1978).
  
  

  * Joseph Kelly & Timothy Kelly, "Social History Update: Searching the Dark Alley: New Historicism and Social History," _Journal of Social History_ , 25 (1992), 677-94.

Sept. 8: The Forces of Urbanization

  * William Cronon, _Nature's Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West_ (New York: W.W. Norton, 1991).

15 Sept.: Class and Culture in the l9th-Century City

  * David Schuyler, _The New Urban Landscape: The Redefinition of City Form in Nineteenth-Century America_ (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press 1986).

17 Sept.: MIDNIGHT BIKE RIDE - Urban and Social History in Chicago  
(Rain Date: 24 Sept. 1992)

22 Sept.: Definitions of Gender, Class, Crime, and Consumption

  * Elaine S. Abelson, _When Ladies Go A-Thieving: Middle-Class Shoplifters in the Victorian Department Store_ (New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1988).

27 Sept.: The Social Construction of Urban Crime  

  * Roger Lane, _Roots of Violence in Black Philadelphia, 1860-1900_ (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986).
Dinner and discussion at Tim Gilfoyle's.

29 Sept.: Field trip to Illinois Regional Archives Depository (IRAD),  
Chicago Branch, Ronald Williams Library, Northeastern Ill. University, 5500 N.
St. Louis Avenue

6 Oct.: Streets and Culture, Order and Disorder

  * Susan G. Davis, _Parades and Power: Street Theatre in Nineteenth-Century Philadelphia_ (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1986).
  * Lawrence Levine, Highbrow/Lowbrow: _The Emergence of Cultural Hierarchy in America_ (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1988), prologue, chapters 1, 3, epilogue.

13 Oct.: Sexuality and Nightlife

  * Timothy J. Gilfoyle, _City of Eros: New York City. Prostitution. and the Commercialization of Sex_. 1790-1920 (New York: W.W. Norton, 1992).

OR

  * Lewis A. Erenberg, S _teppin' Out: New York Niahtlife and the Transformation of American Culture_. 1890-1930 (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1981).

20 Oct.: Families, Immigrants, and Mobility

  * Joel Perlmann, _Ethnic Differences: Schooling and Social Structure Among the Irish, Italians, Jews, and Blacks in an American City, 1880-1935_ (New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1988).

27 Oct.: Internal Migration and Race

  * Nicholas Lemann, _The Promised Land: The Great Black Migration and How it Changed America_ (New York: Vintage, 1991).

3 Nov.: Religion and 20th-Century Popular Culture

  * Robert A. Orsi, _The Madonna of 115th Street: Faith and Community in Italian Harlem. 1880-1950_ (New Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1985).
  * Robert A. Orsi, "The Center Out There, In Here, and Everywhere Else: The Nature of Pilgrimage to the Shrine of St. Jude, 1929-1965," _Journal of Social Historv_ , 25 (Winter 1991), 213-32.

5 Nov.: Paper Due 10 Nov.: Work and 20th-Century Popular Culture

  * Lizabeth Cohen, _Making a New Deal: Industrial Workers in Chicago. 1919-1939_ (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990).

17 Nov.: Suburban Culture

  * Kenneth T. Jackson, _Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States_ (New York: Oxford University Press, 1985).
  * Elaine Tyler May, _Homeward Bound: American Families in the Cold War Era_ (New York: Basic Books, 1988), introduction, chapters 1, 4,  & 7.

24 Nov.: Race and Segregation

  * Arnold R. Hirsch, _Making the Second Ghetto: Race and Housing in Chicago, 1940-1960_ (New York: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1983).

1 Dec.: The Postindustrial City

  * Mike Davis, _City of Ouartz_ (New York: Vintage, 1991).

## PAPERS

Two types of essays are acceptable for this course: historiographical and
research.

Historiographical essays should be based upon secondary sources, or what
historians have written about a subject. Research essays should analyze a
specific topic using primary sources.

Both types of assignments should be the length of a standard scholarly article
(approximately 20 typewritten pages of text, plus notes). All papers should be
free of typographical errors, misspellings and grammatical miscues. For every
eight such mistakes, the essay's grade will be reduced by a fraction (A to A-,
A- to B+, etc.). Essays are to be written for this class ONLY. No essay used
to fulfill the requirements of a past or current course may be submitted.
Failure to follow this rule will result in an automatic grade of F for the
assignment.

TWO copies of the essay should be in the professor's possession by NOON on 5
November 1992. Extensions are granted automatically. However, grades on essays
handed in 48 hours (or more late) will be reduced by a fraction (A to A-, A-
to B+, etc.). Every three days thereafter another fraction will be droppped
from the paper's final grade. Students who complete the essay on time have the
option to rewrite the paper upon its evaluation and return (remember - the
only good writing is good rewriting). Two copies of the rewritten essays are
due at the final class meeting. Students who are disabled or impaired should
meet with the professor within the first two weeks of the semester to discuss
the need for any special arrangements.  
  
---  
  
  
[ ![Author Index](../graphics/btnsylauthor154x40.jpg)](author.htm) [ ![Subject
Index](../graphics/btnsylsubject154x40.jpg)](subject.htm) [ ![Geographic
Index](../graphics/btnsylloc154x40.jpg)](location.htm)  
---  
  
[![H-Urban](../graphics/skyhurban198x38.jpg)](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~urban)  
Top | [Teaching Center](../index.htm) | [Syllabus Archive](index.htm) |
[Comments and Questions](mailto:EDTEACH-URBAN@h-net.msu.edu) |
[H-Urban](http://www.h-net.msu.edu/~urban)  
[H-Urban Syllabus Use and Submission Policy](syluses.htm)  
  
  

