[![Modern Latin America](images/map.gif)](index.html)

[How to use this site](help.html)  
[Syllabus](syllabus.html)  
[Class Schedule](schedule.html)  
[Assignments](assign.html)  
[Grade Page](grades.html)  
[Netforum discussions](http://www.ilstu.edu/cgi-bin/netforum/hist127/a/1)  
[Resources](resources.html)

* * *

[History Department](http://www.cas.ilstu.edu/History/website.htm)

[Illinois State University](http://www.ilstu.edu)

* * *

[![Marc Becker's Home Page](images/marc.gif)](http://www.ilstu.edu/~mbecker)

Marc Becker, _Professor_  
[mbecker@ilstu.edu](mailto:mbecker@ilstu.edu)

|

# Latin American History

### (History 127)

**Note:** This is a static document. Any changes to the readings or
assignments will be posted to the [Class Schedule](schedule.html) page.

* * *

|  Summer 1998, Illinois State University  
Schroeder 216, MTWR 1:25-4:15  
Office: Schroeder 332-I  
<http://www.ilstu.edu/class/hist127> | Marc Becker  
[mbecker@ilstu.edu](mailto:mbecker@ilstu.edu)  
Office Hours: after class or by appt.  
Phone: 438-8306  
---|---  
  
**Description**

Why is Latin America poor? Is it because the region lacks natural resources,
the people are lazy or somehow inferior, or due to overpopulation? Using a
dependency theory approach, we will examine how these stereotypes are wrong
and how poverty is a human creation that did not have to happen. We will
examine the process of colonization, neo-colonialism, and other economic
political forces which impoverished the region and continue to keep it so. We
will examine attempts to alter these fundamentally unequal social and economic
relations. In doing so, we will examine a variety of themes including the role
of Indigenous peoples, the land tenure system, religion, education,
imperialism, and revolutions.

The basic structure of this course is primarily chronological as well as
geographic and thematic. The first week we will focus on pre-Hispanic
Indigenous civilizations in the Americas and the European conquest. The second
week we will look at European colonial structures and the creation of economic
dependencies. The third week we will examine revolutionary responses to
foreign domination in the twentieth century in four Latin American countries.
The fourth week we will examine thematically a series of social movements
including Indian, student, and women's movements.

Summer courses are unique, and therefore the form and content of this course
will vary considerably from what you might experience in a semester-long
course. We will make extensive use of films and videos in this course. The
reading assignments are relatively light, but you may find them intense given
the compacted time frame of this course. Class lectures and discussions will
assume knowledge of the reading materials, and so it is critically important
that you read the assignments _before_ class. There will be almost daily
quizzes over the readings, and it is critical that you do not miss any class
periods. You are responsible for the material covered in the lectures,
readings and films, and for any announcements made in class.

If you have a disability or any conflicts which may affect your class
performance, please bring this to my attention immediately so that we can make
arrangements for this to be a positive learning experience for you. I reserve
the right to modify the syllabus and assignments for this class as necessary
in order to improve the quality and value of the class. If you have
suggestions for improving the class, please bring these to my attention.

**Readings**

There are two required books for this class in addition to other readings at
the reserve desk in Milner library and on the Internet. You may either
purchase the books at campus bookstores or read them at the reserve desk in
Milner Library.

Galeano, Eduardo. _Open Veins of Latin America: Five Centuries of the Pillage
of a Continent_. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1998.

Keen, Benjamin. _A History of Latin America_. 5 th ed. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin Company, 1996.

**Internet**

This course makes use of a web site (http://www.ilstu.edu/class/hist127) and
Netforum discussion group on the Internet to extend the scope of the class
beyond that of the immediate classroom setting. Class schedule updates,
important terms from the textbook, lecture outlines, additional information on
assignments, and other resources and information related to the class will be
posted to the web site. The Netforum discussion group is designed for the
posting of announcements, a forum to ask questions, continue class
discussions, complain about the weather, etc. You are expected and encouraged
to make active use of these resources. ISU provides students with free email
accounts and access to computer terminals in labs around campus. Let me know
at the beginning of the semester if access to these resources will be a
problem for you.

**Assignments and grades**

Course grades will be based on the following assignments. I will post study
guides for each of the exams and more detailed information on the written
assignments to the web page. Absolutely no late assignments will be accepted.
Use the Netforum discussion group to discuss these assignments with your
classmates in a relaxed and informal virtual discussion session.

**Exams** (60%): There will be an exam worth 20% of the course grade at the
end of each of the first three weeks. The exam will cover the material we
studied during that week. I will give you ten terms, and you will identify and
give the significance of five of these terms. The terms will be taken from the
study guides posted on the Internet for the readings as well as the lecture
outlines.

**Essay** (30%): On the last day of class a three to five page (750-1250 word)
essay is due in which you examine why you think Latin America is poor and what
can be done about it. You are expected and required to make use of Galeano in
the writing of the essay, as well as Keen, other readings, lectures, class
discussions, films, etc. You may also use outside material, although you are
not required or expected to do so. The essay must be typed, double spaced,
include citations and a bibliography, and otherwise follow the essay
instructions which are posted on the Internet.

**Quizzes** (10%): There will be a minimum of 10 quizzes based on the terms
listed on the study guide for the readings for that day. Normally the quiz
will be in the form of 10 multiple-choice questions. The first quiz is on the
second day of class and will be a map quiz. The terms and places you should
know for this quiz are posted on the class web page.

**Extra Credit** (up to 8%): For extra credit you may write critiques of
articles which relate to some aspect of Latin America published in one of the
following leading mainstream newspapers: _Miami Herald_ , _New York Times_ ,
_Washington Post_ , _Chicago Tribune_ , _Christian Science Monitor_ , _Los
Angeles Times_ , _Dallas Morning News_. These newspapers are available either
in Milner Library or through links from the class web page. If you want to use
another newspaper (particularly one from Latin America or an alternative news
source), please check with me first. The critique must be typed, double-
spaced, and one-page (250 words) long. Include one paragraph describing the
content of the article and a second analyzing its historical and social
significance. Please include a copy of the article along with your written
critique. You may submit a maximum of two such critiques each week, for a
maximum total of eight for the course. The article must be from that week, and
is due the following Monday (except for the last week, in which case all
articles are due on the last day of class). I will add one percentage point to
your course grade for each acceptable critique.

**Class Schedule**

**Week 1: Indians and Conquest**

Monday, July 13 Introduction and Geography

Tuesday, July 14 Amerindian Societies

**Read:**

  * Keen, "Introduction" (xiii-xvi), ch. 1 ("Ancient America")
  * Galeano, "Introduction"
  * Jan Knippers Black, "Introduction: The Evolution of Latin American Studies," _Latin America, Its Problems and Its Promise: A Multidisciplinary Introduction_ , 3rd ed (Boulder, Colo: Westview Press, 1998), 1-17 (Milner Reserve)
  * "The Writing of a Historical Essay or Research Paper" (Internet)

Wednesday, July 15 European Explorations

**Read:**

  * Keen, ch. 2 ("Hispanic Background")
  * Galeano, ch. 1 ("Lust for Gold, Lust for Silver")

Thursday, July 16 The Conquest

**Read:**

  * Keen, ch. 3 ("Conquest of America")
  * "Letter from Lope de Aguirre, to King Philip of Spain, 1561" (Internet)

**Week 2: Colonial Structures**

Monday, July 20 Class Structures and Slavery

**First exam**

**Read:**

  * Keen, ch. 4 ("Economic Foundations of Colonial Life")
  * Galeano, ch. 2 ("King Sugar")

Tuesday, July 21 The Mission

**Read:**

  * Keen, ch. 5 ("State, Church and Society")
  * James Schofield Saeger, "The Mission and Historical Missions: Film and the Writing of History," _The Americas_ 51 (January 1995): 393-415 (Milner Reserve)

Wednesday, July 22 Independence

**Read:** Keen, ch. 7  & 8 ("Bourbon Reforms" & "Independence of Latin
America")

Thursday, July 23 Nineteenth Century

**Read:** Keen, ch. 9-11 ("Latin America in the Nineteenth Century")

**Week 3: Revolutions**

Monday, July 27 Mexico

**Second exam**

**Read:**

  * Keen, ch. 12 ("Mexican Revolution")
  * Galeano, ch. 3 ("The Invisible Sources of Power")

Tuesday, July 28 Chile

**Read:** Keen, ch. 14 ("The Chilean Way")

Wednesday, July 29 Cuba

**Read:** Keen, ch. 17 ("The Cuban Revolution")

Thursday, July 30 Nicaragua

**Read:** Keen, ch. 18 ("Revolution and Counterrevolution in Central America")

**Week 4: Social Movements**

Monday, August 3 Student Movements

**Third exam**

**Read:** Galeano, pt. II  & III ("Development is a Voyage" and "Seven Years
After")

Tuesday, August 4 Indian Movements

**Read:**

  * Keen, ch. 16 ("Storm over the Andes")
  * Jose Carlos Mariategui, "The Problem of the Indian," _Seven Interpretive Essays on Peruvian Reality_ (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1971), 22-30 (Milner Reserve or Internet)

Wednesday, August 5 Women's movements

**Read:** Keen, ch. 21 ("Latin American Society in Transition")

Thursday, August 6 International Relations

**Essay due**

**Read:** Keen, ch. 20 ("The Two Americas")

