

**Immigration and Assimilation in American Life**

Ethnic Studies 1B
Ross Frank  
Winter 2001
Office:   SSB 227  
MWF  1:25-2:15 PM
Office Hours:  
Center 101
Mon. 3-5 PM  
E-mail:
Wed. 3-5 PM

> rfrank@weber.ucsd.edu
Phone:  858-534-6646

Teaching Assistants:  Julie Hua, Denise Khor, Grace Kim, and John Marquez.

* * *

**COURSE ORGANIZATION**

This course traces immigration to the United States from the colonial era to
the present with a special emphasis on issues of assimilation, pluralism, and
multiculturalism.  Evaluation will be based on the following:  Participation
in discussion section (25%), a midterm exam in two parts (30%, 15% each part),
four quizzes given during the quarter (20%, 5% each), and a final exam (25%).
The quizzes will be given unannounced during lecture during the quarter.  They
will require short answers to questions which will test your familiarity with
the material in lecture and the assigned readings.  Missed quizzes cannot be
made up under normal circumstances.

* * *

**COURSE OBLIGATIONS**

All students must attend lectures and discussion sections, and read the
assigned materials in order to complete this course.  The discussion sections
are designed to encourage your active engagement with the course material.
Discussion grades will depend on your attendance and constructive
participation.  You have a responsibility to create an environment conducive
to learning in section and during lectures.

* * *

**LECTURES AND ASSIGNED READING**

The following required books have been ordered for the course and are
available at Groundwork Books in the Student Center (452-9625):

Elliot R. Barkan  _And Still They Come:   Immigrants and American Society 1920
to the 1990s_.

David G. Gutierrez,  _Walls and Mirrors:   Mexican Americans, Mexican
Immigrants, and the Politics of Ethnicity_.

Viki L. Ruiz and Ellen Carol DuBois.  _Unequal Sisters: A Multicultural Reader
in US Women "s History_  (2nd or 3rd Edition).

Upton Sinclair,  _The Jungle._

The required _Ethnic Studies 1B Reader_ (Winter 2001) is available for sale
before and after lecture during Week 1 & 2.  You may order a copy thereafter
from University Reader Printing Service, contact Bassim Hamadeh at
**bhamadeh@aol.com**

All assigned books and a copy of the ES 1B Reader are on two-hour library
reserve.

  

* * *

**SYLLABUS**

The reading(s) under each week heading should be read **before** the Friday
class meeting.   In many cases your TA will ask that specific readings be
completed before your weekly section meeting.  Longer reading assignments
appear over the period given to complete them.  Be prepared to discuss the
reading material in discussion section on a regular basis.

WEEK 1  

READING:

> Steinburg, "The Ignominious Origins of Ethnic Pluralism in America," _ES IB
Reader_ , 1-22.

>

> Harding, "American Bondage, American Freedom," _ES IB Reader_ , 23-40.

>

> Ruiz and Dubois, "Introduction," in _Unequal Sisters_ , xi-xvi.

               JANUARY 8            Introduction

               JANUARY 10          European Expansion and Cultural Conflict

               JANUARY 12          Colonial Systems, Race and Ethnicity (Guest Lecturer, David Gutierrez)

* * *

WEEK 2

READING:  

> Gutierrez, _Walls and Mirrors_ , 13-38;

>

> Purdue, "Cherokee Women and the Trail of Tears," in _Unequal Sisters_ ,
32-43 (2nd), 93-104 (3rd).

>

> Takaki, "Emigrants From Erin," _ES IB Reader_ , 41-56.

>

> Primary Sources #4-8 (Cooper to Custer), _ES IB Reader_ , 57-72.

               JANUARY 15          NO CLASS, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day

               JANUARY 17          Race & Space: Democracy, Indian Removal and Western Labor

               JANUARY 19          Plymouth Rock, Statue of Liberty

* * *

WEEK 3

READING:  

> Upton Sinclair, _The Jungle_.

>

> Gutierrez, _Walls and Mirrors_ , 39-68.

               JANUARY 22          Melting Pot, Mosaic, Multiculturalism

               JANUARY 24          19th Century Migrations and Assimilation

               JANUARY 26          **MIDTERM EXAM, PART 1**

* * *

WEEK 4

READING:

> Czitrom, "Underworlds and Underdogs:  Big Tom Sullivan and Metropolitan
Politics in New York, 1889-1913", _ES IB Reader_ , 73-96.

>

> Yung, "The Social Awakening of Chinese American Women as Reported in Chung
Sai Yat Po, 1900-1911." in _Unequal Sisters_ , 247-259 (2nd), 257-267 (3rd).

>

> Primary Sources #10-16 (Marburg to Twain), _ES IB Reader_ , 97-114.

               JANUARY 29          Labor, Self-activity, and Immigrant Radicalism

               JANUARY 31          Immigrant Organization and Politics

               FEBRUARY 2         **MIDTERM EXAM, PART 2**

* * *

WEEK 5

READING:  

> Barkin, _And Still They Come_ ,  1-43.

>

> Gutierrez, _Walls and Mirrors_ , 69-116.

>

> Thomas Dixon, _The Clansman_ , _ES IB Reader_ , 115-118.

>

> Broughton Brandenburg, "Racial Traits in American Beauty,"  _ES IB Reader_ ,
119-126.

>

> Ruiz,  "The Flapper and the Chaperone", _ES IB Reader_ , 127-136.

>

> Pascoe, "Race, Gender, and the Privileges of Property", _ES IB Reader_ ,
137-146

>

> Carby, "'It Jus Be"s Dat Way Sometime'", in _Unequal Sisters_ , 330-341
(2nd), distributed in section (3rd). Primary Sources #21-34 (New York World to
Hanson), _ES IB Reader_ , 147-176.

               FEBRUARY 5         Ethnic Conflict Within and Without

               FEBRUARY 7         Popular Culture and Americanization

               FEBRUARY 9         Ethnic Inclusion by Racial Exclusion  _The Jazz Singer_   (beginning)

* * *

WEEK 6

READING:

> Barkin, _And Still They Come_ ,  44-85.

>

> Schultz,  ""The Pride of the Race Had Been Touched"", _ES IB Reader_ ,
177-198.

>

> Primary Sources #36-47 (Los Angeles Times to Palmer), _ES IB Reader_ ,
199-224.

>

> Cohen, "Workers' Common Ground", _ES IB Reader_ , 225-246.

               FEBRUARY 12       _The Jazz Singer_ (conclusion)

               FEBRUARY 14       Cutting the Immigrant Flow

               FEBRUARY 16       The Culture of Unity and Redemptive Outsiders

* * *

  

WEEK 7

READING:

> Barkin, _And Still They Come_ ,  56-143.

>

> Matsumoto,  "Japanese American Women During World War II", in _Unequal
Sisters_ , 436-449 (2nd), 478-491 (3rd).

>

> Gutierrez, _Walls and Mirrors_ , 117-178.

               FEBRUARY 19       NO CLASS      President's Day

               FEBRUARY 21       Refiguring Ethnicity in the Postwar Period

               FEBRUARY 23       Cold War, Consumerism, and Ethnic Memory

* * *

WEEK 8

READING:

> Espiritu, "Ethnicity and Panethnicity," and "Coming Together: The Asian
American Movement" (Chapters 1-2), _ES IB Reader_ , 247-276.

>

> Flores, ""Que Assimilated Brother, Yo Soy Asimilao"," _ES IB Reader_ ,
277-286.

>

> Gutierrez, "Community, Patriarchy, and Individualism:  The Politics of
Chicano History and the Dream of Equality", in _Unequal Sisters_ , distributed
in section (2nd), 587-606 (3rd).

               FEBRUARY 26       The Civil Rights Movement and Immigration Reform

               FEBRUARY 28       Global Migration, Economic Transformation, and Gender Roles

               MARCH 2                Regions of Ethnic and Cultural Confusion

* * *

WEEK 9

READING:

> Barkin, _And Still They Come_ ,  144-177.

>

> Ui,  "Unlikely Heroes:"  The Evolution of Female Leadership in a Cambodian
Ethnic Enclave.", _ES IB Reader_ , 287-296.

>

> Salzinger,  "A Maid by Any Other Name", _ES IB Reader_ , 297-310.

               MARCH 5                The New Politics of Ethnicity

               MARCH 7                Transnational Capital and Global Migration 

               MARCH 9                Film: _Who Killed Vincent Chin?_

* * *

WEEK 10

READING:

> Barkin, _And Still They Come_ ,  178-196.

>

> Gutierrez, _Walls and Mirrors_ , 179-216.

>

> Kim, "Home is Where the Han Is," _ES IB Reader_ , 311-322

>

> Lipsitz, "Home is Where the Hatred Is,"  _ES IB Reader_ , 323-end.

               MARCH 12             Pan-Ethnicity and Cultural Fragmentation

               MARCH 14              Immigration, Pan-ethnicity, and Ethnic Identity

               MARCH 16              Beyond Assimilation

* * *

_Friday_       MARCH 23              **FINAL EXAM**           (11:30 AM - 2:30
PM)

REVIEW SESSIONS:

Monday and Wednesday Sections, 3/20/01 Tuesday 6:30-8:00 p.m., CENTER 216

OPEN REVIEW LED BY PROFESSOR FRANK, YOU WILL BE TEAMING WITH OTHERS TO ANSWER
THE SAMPLE QUESTIONS, 3/21/01 Wednesday 4:40-6:50 p.m. CENTER 214

* * *

(C) 2001, Ross Frank, updated: March 15, 2001.

