



**WSUFA Senate Minutes**

**November 2, 1998**

**Members present: David** Bratt, Pauline Christensen, Darrell downs, Shirley
Eiken, Pat Ferden, Ruth Forsythe, Yogesh Grover, James Hoch, Matthew Hyle,
Colette Hyman, H. Vernon Leighton, Mary Kesler, Bill Ng, Fred Otto, Dennis
Pack, Kevin Possin, Frances Ragsdale Jim Reineke, Robin Richardson, Sally
Sloan, Martyn Smith, Susanne Smith, Jo Stejskal, Alex Yard

**Members absent:** Sara Barbor, Narayan Debnath

**Others Present: Peter** Henderson, Susan Hatfield



**I. Call to Order**

The meeting was called to order by President Yard at 3:02 p.m.

**II. Approval of Minutes of October 19, 1998 meeting**

One Senator sought correction of grammatical errors in the Possin motion
concerning WSU Reg. 5-2.

Possin/Kesler move to approve. _Carried_.

**III. Agenda Additions and Approval**

The following items were added to the agenda:

**Old Business**

B. Syllabus Policy

**New Business**

D. Cultural Awareness Task Force

Sloan/Kesler to adopt with additions. _Carried_.

**IV. President's Report**

* President Yard reported the social on Friday was a success. He stated there was a new edition of the IFO update in the mail. It includes a member survey concerning negotiations. The deadline of Friday is to make it possible to the results before the next IFO Negotiating Team Meeting. The IFO Board Meeting adopted a set of goals and priorities from the government relations committee and a public relations plan. Darrell Downs is co-chair of the IFO State Action. Yard also presented concerns about wording on commencement memo from academic VP.

**V. Review of Meet and Confer Notes**

Modified Item 3 to clarify third sentence.

**VI. Committee**

**A. A2C2 Committee**

No report.

**B. Graduate Council**

No report



**C. Government Relations Committee**

* Darrell Downs urged all faculty and students to vote tomorrow. The IFO Legislative goals adopted by Government Relations Committee and the IFO Board will be distributed by e-mail. He said all WSU recommendations except one on dental benefits were included. Topics include the Bachelor of Applied Science degree.

**D. Personnel Policies and Grievance Committee**

* Suzanne Smith reported that the committee is meeting with VP Gorman this week and that the committee has been successful on two grievances.

**E. Negotiations/Action**

* Matt Hyle said efforts are underway to start negotiations November 29th. He emphasized the importance of completing are returning the negotiations survey which will be in the next issue of IFO Update.

**F. Committee on Committees**

Motion from committee to accept the following recommendations:

_Resignations from Faculty Association Committees_

Honors Council - Joyati Debnath

_Appointments to All-University Committees_

* Long Range Planning and Assessment - Marie Maher and Norma Blankenfeld (Rochester members)

Laptop Program - David Kulas - Computer Science

Safety - Mark Seeley

Scientific Misconduct - Celeste Matthews - Education

_Carried_.

Kesler said three faculty have responded to her request for someone to serve
on statewide salary equity committee. She is working to find one among them
who can serve.

Sloan/Possin to allow Committee on Committees to appoint member to statewide
salary equity committee.

_Carried_.

**G. Computer and Multi-Instructional Systems Committee (Com-G)**

* Motion from Executive Board to postpone consideration of report until they hear from Technology committee and the Laptop Program Committee.

Hyle/Bratt to amend to postpone until next Senate Meeting, with the assumption
of these committees will report on their committee's considerations.

_Amendment Carried._

_Motion as amended Carried._

**VII. Old Business**

**A. Draft Revision of WSU Reg. 5-2: Procedure for Affirmative Action
Recruiting and Hiring and Possin Substitute (OB-A)**

_Motion to substitute Possin's revision of WSU regulation carried_.

**Possin Substitution for WSU Reg. 5-2:**

1\. That the deadline for applications for a national search, after the
official publication of the Notice of Vacancy within the MnSCU System, be a
minimum of 30 days, plus any contractual time afforded for reassignment
rights; and for a local search, the deadline should be minimum of 15 days and
a maximum of 30 days.

2\. That each department or unit uses its own association's national  
medium, whenever possible, for advertising its notices of vacancies.

3\. That advertising notices of vacancies in the _Chronicle of Higher
Education_ is unnecessary and ineffectual for most academics postings, and
should, therefore, be discontinues when a disciple'e  
own publication will broadcast the notice of vacancy as well if not better.

4\. That, with its Dean's approval, a department or unit be allowed to post
its notice of vacancy as a possible position pending funding approval' in its
discipline's job-listing publication, when that publication has the standing
practice and means of so indicating the conditional nature of a position.

5\. That the formal process of administrative approval of position vacancies
begin at the first Meet & Confer of the Academic year or as soon afterward as
possible, to accommodate the publication deadlines of many disciplines' job-
listing publications and job-interviewing conventions.

6\. That the Affirmative Action Office release candidates' files as those
files are complete, rather than waiting for the application deadline to
release all files simultaneously. This would facilitate the Search Committees'
study of the files and avoid hastily cramming through in order to prepare for
interviewing.

Hyle/Christensen to separate. _Carried_.

Item Number one carried.

Item Number two S. Smith/Stejskal moved to amend as follows:

That each department or unit uses its own associations national

medium, whenever possible and/or the Chronicle of Higher Education, if

it chooses, for advertising its notices of vacancies.

Reineke/Pack substituted following motion:

* That each department or unit shall advertise in appropriate association's national media, the Chronicle of Higher Education or other media appropriate to the Search.

Motion withdrawn.

_Carried as originally amended._

Item 3. Failed

Item 4. Failed.

Item 5. Carried.

Item 6.Hyle/Bratt motion to substitute for Item 6 the following

language:

To solicit among faculty to address the release of files and the timing of

the release of files with the Affirmative Action Officer and report back

to the Secretary by First Senate meeting of Spring Semester.

_Substitution Carried._

_Motions substituted Carried._

* **Volunteer lis** t: Kevin Possin, Suzanne Smith and Robin Richardson

**B. Syllabus Policy**

Postpone consideration until legality of MnSCU Board action is considered.



**VIII. New Business**

**A. Math Placement Exam For First Year Students (NB-A)**

Executive Committee Board motioned to refer to A2C2.

_Carried._

**B. Revised Mission Statement (NB-B) Susan Hatfield, 3:30 p.m.**

Susan Hatfield and Peter Henderson told the background of the

revised Mission Statement. Possible amendments were discussed.

Smith/Kesler motioned to approve in principle.

_Carried._

* Hatfield said she would bring it back in relatively final form at the next Senate Meeting.

**C. Rochester Chamber of Commerce Membership**

Pack/Sloan moved to approve.

_Carried._

**D. Cultural Awareness Task Force**

Refer to Cultural Affairs Committee.

**IX. Adjournment**

Sloan/Ng moved to adjourn at 5:24 p.m.

_Carried._

Respectfully submitted;



Dennis Pack

Co-Secretary





