  
![H-Urban Teaching Center](../graphics/btnsyltc154x40.jpg) ![H-Urban Syllabus
Archive](../graphics/btnsylsa154x40.jpg)
![H-Urban](../graphics/btnsylhurban154x40.jpg) |  ![Syllabus Archive
Selection](../graphics/skysylarchselect.jpg) |



![H-Urban Syllabus Use & Submission Policy](../graphics/btnsyluse154x40.jpg)
![Comments and Questions](../graphics/btnsylcques154x40.jpg)  
---|---|---  
  
**The City in American History**  
(History 364)  
  
**David C. Hammack**  
  
Case Western University  
Cleveland, Ohio, USA  
  
**Fall 1989**  
  
  
---  
  
* * *

## SYLLABUS

  

### Course Objectives

This course is designed to introduce the student to the history of American
cities from the first European explorations to the present. Lectures and
readings will consider the role of cities and the triumph of urbanization in
America from the colonial period to the present, emphasizing the nature of
life in colonial, frontier, industrial and contemporary cities. We will pay
close attention to the economic reasons for the creation, location, growth,
and decline of cities in the United States. We will also give special
attention to the history of urban planning and design.

The course is also designed to give students familiarity with significant
primary sources and documents (including maps, plans and photographs as well
as texts) and with Metropolitan Cleveland as itself a document in urban
history, and to provide experience in discussing and writing about cities.

### Required Reading:

  1. Bernard Bailyn, The Peopling of British North America (Vintage).
  2. Charles Rosenberg, The Cholera Years (U. of Chicago Press).
  3. Horatio Alger, Ragged Dick (Penguin).
  4. Jacob A. Riis, How The Other Half Lives (Dover)
  5. Sam Bass Warner, Jr. Streetcar Suburbs (Harvard U. Press).
  6. David C. Hammack, Power and Society: Greater New York at the Turn of the Century (Columbia Univ. Press).
  7. Allen H. Spear, Black Chicago (U. of Chicago Press)
  8. Reyner Banham, Los Angeles: The Architecture of Four Ecologies (Penguin)

Additional short documents will be distributed from time to time.

  

### Requirements:

The required work for the course will include two or three short essays or
exercises on the readings and on questions related to the economics of
urbanization, a final paper on a topic related to the course, and mid-term and
final examinations. Regular attendance and well-prepared participation in
class discussions will also be expected.

Several of the lectures will emphasize slide presentations; these form an
integral part of the course and may be the subject of examination questions.

Toward the end of the course the class will devote an entire day to a tour of
the Cleveland area, planned, organized, and narrated by the members of the
class. Each member of the class will prepare a portion of this tour.

  

### Grades:

The short essays and exercises wall count for about 15% of the original grade,
the final paper will count for 20%, the mid-term will count for 25%, and the
final will count for 35%. Active participation in class discussion will count
for at least 5%.

  
  

## TOPICS

  
  

### I. THE COLONIAL CITY

  

#### August 28 -- Approaches to The History of Cities

#### August 30 -- The Peopling of British North America

  * Begin Bailyn, _The Peopling of British North America_

#### Sept. 1 -- City and Town in the Early British Empire

#### Sept. 3 -- Labor Day Holiday

#### Sept. 4 -- Colonial Towns and Town Planning

  * John Winthrop, "Modell of Christian Charity"

#### Sept. 8 -- Eighteenth-Century Towns and the Atlantic Economy

#### Sept. 11 -- The Absence of Towns in Virginia

  * Documents on the Chesapeake and the back country.
  * Complete Bailyn, _The Peopling of British North America_
  * First Exercise Due

#### Sept. 13 -- The Strange Career of Ebeneezer McIntosh

  * Documents on towns in the American Revolution.

#### Sept. 15 -- No Class

  
  

### II. THE MERCANTILE CITY

#### Sept. 18 -- Cities and Regions in the National Economy

  * Documents and data on towns and trade.
  * Begin Rosenberg, _The Cholera Years_.

#### Sept. 20 -- City Form in the Early Nations: Dock, Warehouse, Counting
House, Shop, Frontier Town

#### Sept. 22 -- The People of the Northern Cities

#### Sept. 25 -- Slavery in the Cities

  * Documents on southern cities and their slaves.

#### Sept. 27 -- Class and Diversity: Mercantile Society

  * Complete Rosenberg, _The Cholera Years_.

#### Sept. 29 -- Disease and Politics: Governing the Mercantile City

#### Oct. 2 -- Grids, Rails, Graveyards, and Parks: The Shape of the
Mercantile City

  * Documents on town planning.

#### Oct. 4 -- Mid-Term Examination

  
  

### III. THE INDUSTRIAL CITY

#### Oct. 6 -- Completing the Urban Network

  * Warner, _Streetcar Suburbs_ , pp. 21-31.
  * Hammack, _Power and Society_ , ch. 2. 

#### Oct. 9 -- Cities and Industry

  * Begin reading Alger, _Ragged Dick_.

#### Oct. 11 -- City People: Labor

  * Riis, _How the Other Half Lives_ , ch. 11, 12, 20.

#### Oct. 13 -- Industrial City People: The Immigrants

  * Riis, _How The Other Half Lives_ , ch. 3, 5, 9, 10, 13.

#### Oct. 16 -- Fall Break

#### Oct. 18 -- Industrial City People: Inequality and Opportunity

  * Complete Alger, _Ragged Dick_.

#### Oct. 20 -- Industrial City People: Diversity

  * Hammack, _Power and Society_ , ch. 3.

#### Oct. 23 -- Industrial City Housing: Slums

  * Riis, _How The Other Half Lives_ , ch. 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 14, 24, 25, appendix.

#### Oct. 25 -- Industrial City Housing: Suburbs

  * Warner, _Streetcar Suburbs_ , ch. 4-6.

#### Oct. 27 -- Frederick Law Olmsted's Industrial City

  * Solutions: Parks, Boulevards, Suburbs

#### Oct. 30 -- City Politics: Mayors and Interest Groups

  * Hammack, _Power and Society_ , ch. 4, 5.

#### Nov. 1 -- City Politics: Parties and Voters

  * Hammack, _Power and Society_ , ch. 6. 
  * Tour Plans and Explanations Due

#### Nov. 3 -- No Class

#### Nov. 6 -- Controlling the Industrial City: Intervention

  * Riis, _How the Other Half Lives_ , ch. 2, 7, 11, 15-25.
  * Hammack, _Power and Society_ : ch. 9.

#### Nov. 8 -- Controlling the Industrial City: Laissez-Faire

  * Warner, _Streetcar Suburbs_ , ch. VI, VII.
  * Hammack, _Power and Society_ , ch. 8.

#### Nov. 10 -- Society, Politics, and Power

  * Hammack, _Power and Society_ , ch. 1, 10. 
  * Second Exercise Due

  
  

### IV. THE METROPOLITAN REGION

#### Nov. 13 -- The Old Metropolis: Turn-of-the-Century Views

#### Nov. 15 -- The New Metropolitan Region: Technology and Economic Change

  * Banham, _Los Angeles_ , ch. 4.

#### Nov. 17 -- No Class

#### Nov. 20 -- The Rise of the Metropolis: Planning Traditions

  * Banham, _Los Angeles_ , ch. 7.
  * Documents on urban and regional planning in the twentieth century.

#### Nov. 22 -- Metropolitan People: Communities of Constraint

  * Spear, _Black Chicago_.
  * Banham, _Los Angeles_ , ch. 8.

#### Nov. 24 -- Thanksgiving Holiday

#### Nov. 26 -- Tour of Cleveland

####  Nov. 27 -- Metropolitan People: Communities of Choice

  * Banham, _Los Angeles_ , ch. 2, 5, 7.

#### Nov. 29 -- Metropolitan Culture: From Baseball to Art

  * Banham, _Los Angeles_ , ch.10; 
  * documents to be provided.

#### Dec. 1 -- Controlling the Metropolis: City Politics

  * Documents to be provided. 

#### Dec. 4 -- Controlling the Metropolis: Regional Politics

  * Documents to be provided.

#### Dec. 6 -- The Way We Live Now?

  * Banham, _Los Angeles: The Architecture of Four Ecologies_

#### Dec. 8 -- Cleveland: Comeback City or Standard Metropolitan Region?

  * Final Paper Due

#### December -- FINAL EXAMINATION  
  
---  
  
  
![Author Index](../graphics/btnsylauthor154x40.jpg) ![Subject
Index](../graphics/btnsylsubject154x40.jpg) ![Geographic
Index](../graphics/btnsylloc154x40.jpg)  
---  
  
![H-Urban](../graphics/skyhurban198x38.jpg)  
Top | Teaching Center | Syllabus Archive | Comments and Questions | H-Urban  
H-Urban Syllabus Use and Submission Policy  
  
  

