##  Business Benefits of Accessible Electronic and  
Information Technology Design

## ![Picture of Steve Jacobs](../images/sjacobs.jpg)

To view an 18 minute captioned video sampler of a few of the design conceptt
covered in this workshop you will need the FREE RealPlayer Basic to view the  
video contained in the link below. You may download and install this FREE  
player from:http://www.real.com. Look for the RealPlayer Basic 8 link. It  
is sometimes hard to find. You can now link to, and view, the video:  
http://www.easi.cc/media/ideal.ram. If you have problem playing the media,  
please write EASI/IDEAL technical consultant at: dick@easi.cc  

Instructor: Steve Jacobs  
Web: http://www.rit.edu/~easi/jacobs.htm  
E-mail: sjacobs2@columbus.rr.com Steve is President of IDEAL, a not-for-
profit, employee-led, organization whose mission is to support NCR employees
and customers with disabilities and the development of accessible information
technologies.

###  Workshop Description:

The Internet is changing our everyday lives and changing them very rapidly.
The Internet is no longer just a tool connecting people, businesses,
governments and information together. It is driving the creation of new
economies that are altering the way people live, learn, work, play and
interact with each other. Unfortunately, the Internet is also alienating and
isolating people people with disabilities people living within low and no-
bandwidth infrastructures people who have never learned to read people who
speak languages different than our own people who only use English as a Second
Language and older populations. Everyone is different from everyone else.
Everyone's informational wants, needs and preferences are also different. In
fact, this was the catalyst that sparked the evolution of our one-to-one
marketing philosophy... the ability to customize products and services to the
wants needs and preferences of individual consumers. This is the foundation
upon which our future information infrastructures will have to be built in
order for our businesses to succeed in a technically, economically and
culturally diverse world.

This course was designed, over a period of two years, in support of providing
the knowledge, direction and resources necessary to prepare the student to
both understand and address many of these important business success factors.

2002 Schedule: January

Three (3) continuing education units are available, and this course is also an
optional course towards the new EASI/USM certificate in Accessible Information
Technology.

**** This course is being given to an exclusive group of international
business executives in the fall of 2001 as promised as part of the Clinton
accessibility initiative in the fall of 2000. The insights of these executives
will be integrated into the course for its first public offering in January
2002.**

Registration Fee: $350  
Register for January 2002 Couse.  
Discounts available for groups. Please write nrcgsh@rit.edu.

Do you need to have a technical or business background in order benefit from
taking this workshop?  
No you don't! This workshop does not require that you have any particular core
competency in order to benefit from the course. The more time you are willing
to invest in studying the materials presented during the course, participating
in discussion groups and completing your homework assignments the more you
will learn. It all up to you!

###  Workshop Structure:

This workshop is designed either to be taken entirely independently or to
combine your independent study with group discussion. We have found that
participants frequently learn as much from sharing together as they do from
us. Everyone will be put on a listserv discussion list. Those wanting to work
entirely alone may request to be removed. Otherwise, we can use the listserv
discussion to share questions and experiences thereby enriching our individual
learning. In the syllabus below, lessons are grouped under four weeks. If we
all try to work at this pace, the listserv discussion will be more meaningful.

###  Workshop Syllabus:

**Week 1 - Lesson 1: Consumer Trends, Characteristics and Demographics**

Description: Review of consumer trends, characteristics and demographics of
the world's top 20 business economies and the emerging markets of _C_ hina,
_I_ ndia, _B_ razil, _I_ ndonesia, _R_ ussia - _S_ outh Korea, _P_ oland, _A_
rgentina, _C_ entral and Eastern _E_ urope [CIBIR SPACE] This includes a
review of learning styles, life expectancies, literacy rates, aging patterns,
language usage, cultural differences and much more.

**Week 1 - Lesson 2: Information Infrastructure Trends**

Description: Review of information infrastructure trends taking place in the
world's top 20 business economies and the emerging markets of _C_ hina, _I_
ndia, _B_ razil, _I_ ndonesia, _R_ ussia - _S_ outh Korea, _P_ oland, _A_
rgentina, _C_ entral and Eastern _E_ urope [CABER SPACE]. This includes a
review of the numbers and use of telephones, cell phones, radios, radio
broadcast stations, TVs, TV broadcast stations, Internet service providers,
e-commerce, available bandwidth and much more.

**Week 2 - Lesson 3: Marketing Philosophies**

Description: Traditional marketing [One market of billions], mass-marketing,
segmentation and product line extension, niche marketing, selling value add
and today's One-to-One Marketing Philosophy [Billions of markets of one] will
be discussed.

**Week 2 - Lesson 4: Technology-Related Laws, Standards and Guidelines**

Description: Sections 255, 508 and the Americans with Disabilities Act

**Week 3 - Lesson 5: Consumer and E-Commerce Buying Trends and Statistics
[Part 1]**

Description: E-Commerce critical success factors, why businesses invest in
e-commerce, why consumers invest in e-commerce, E-Commerce Statistics,
E-Commerce Revenues and much more.

**Week 3 - Lesson 6: Consumer and E-Commerce Buying Trends and Statistics
[Part 2]**

Description: Continuation of Lesson 5.  

**Week 4 - Lesson 7: Overview of Disabilities**

Description: Deafness, Hearing Impairments, Blindness, Low Vision, Dexterity
Disabilities, Cognitive and Learning Disabilities, Communication Disabilities
and mobility disabilities

**Week 4 - Lesson 8: Technology Trends**

Description: Review of technology trends taking place in the world's top 20
business economies and the emerging markets of _C_ hina, _I_ ndia, _B_ razil,
_I_ ndonesia, _R_ ussia - _S_ outh Korea, _P_ oland, _A_ rgentina, _C_ entral
and Eastern _E_ urope [CIBIR SPACE]. This includes a review of local bandwidth
usage, borrowers, monitor resolutions, color-depths, Internet technologies and
much more.

**Week 5 - Lesson 9: Assistive Technology (AT) Overview**

Topics Covered:

Deaf/Hard of Hearing: Teletypewriters (TTYs), PC- TTY modems, telephone
amplifiers, assistive listening systems, and visual signaling devices.

Blind/Low Vision: Magnification systems, speech and Braille output systems,
scanner/reader systems, Braille embossers, and Braille notetakers.

Dexterity Disabilities: Alternative keyboards, word prediction software,
speech recognition systems, pointing devices, hands-free computer interface
systems, and keyguards.

Cognitive/Learning Disabilities: Talking dictionaries and scanner/reader
systems.

Communication Disabilities: Electronic communication aids and speech output
systems to augment communication.

**Week 5 - Lesson 10: Accessible Design Methodologies**

Topics Covered:

Principles of "Universal" Design

Accessible design guideline references for software, hardware, consumer
electronics, interactive transaction machines [ATMs, self-service and
informational kiosks] and websites

**Week 6 - Lesson 11: Electronic Curbcuts**

Description: A rich history of electronic curb cuts will be presented. Many
examples, references and videos that overview today's curbcuts or in other
words the mainstream business benefits of accessible electronic and
Information Technology (E&IT) design! **< **

**Week 6 - Lesson 12: Evaluation Tools for Compliance**

Description: Many resources will be covered here in support determining the
access compliance of software, hardware, consumer electronics, interactive
transaction machines [ATMs, self-service and informational kiosks] and
websites  

![Back to EASI Workshop page](../images/4sml.gif)

![TC](http://c2.thecounter.com/id=1432144)

