![George Mason University 2000-2001 Catalog](catlogo.gif) |

Catalog Index  
Course Descriptions

**Search the 2000-2001 Catalog:**  
  
  
  
---|---  
  
# **College of Nursing & Health Science**

* * *

  * Undergraduate Programs 
    * Introduction
    * Nursing Professional Development
    * Saudi-U.S. University Project  

    * Nursing, B.S.N.
      * Acceptance into Junior Standing in Nursing
      * Degree Requirements
      * Writing-Intensive Requirement
        * Academic Grade Standards 
          * Nursing Warning
          * Professional Conduct Policy
          * Readmission
          * Leave of Absence
          * Appeal Process
      * Undergraduate Honors Program 
      * Student Learning Portfolio
      * Required Computerized NCLEX Assessment
      * Special Requirements 
        * Fees and Expenses
    * Health Science, B.S.
      * Program Requirements
        * Health Systems Management Traditional Pathway
        * Health Care Coordination Traditional Pathway
        * Health Systems Management Accelerated Pathway for Students with Associate's Degrees in Allied Health
        * Health Care Coordination Acelerated Pathway for Students with Associate's Degrees in Allied Health
      * Certificate in Gerontology
        * Certificate Requirements 

* * *

## Undergraduate Programs

The undergraduate nursing program at George Mason University uses a community-
based curriculum preparing students to deliver superior nursing care and
provide leadership in nursing in the increasingly complex and challenging
field of modern health care. Graduates are in demand as professional nurses in
hospitals, long-term care facilities, community health agencies, and other
health care agencies. The program emphasizes health promotion and disease
prevention capitalizing on early detection of potential health problems,
health maintenance in ambulatory services, and preparation for the managerial
responsibilities of nursing.

The program is accredited by the Virginia State Board of Nursing, the National
League for Nursing and the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education.

Attendance at the first meeting of all nursing courses (lecture, on-campus
laboratory, and agency laboratory) is mandatory. Those who do not appear for
nursing courses are dropped from the classes.

**Nursing Professional Development**

Continuing nursing education is a commitment of the College of Nursing and
Health Science and the university. Activities are planned to meet the special
needs of individuals and groups in the community. The College of Nursing and
Health Science offers opportunities for credit and noncredit courses. Contract
courses are offered in a variety of health care agencies in the Northern
Virginia area. These credits can be applied to a program of study in nursing.

Comments and suggestions for programming from the health care community are
welcomed. To obtain information about specific activities, call (703)
993-1910.

**Saudi-U.S. University Project**

In 1995, the College of Nursing and Health Science received a grant from the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia through the Saudi-U.S. University Project to assist in
preparing baccalaureate-prepared nurses for the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The
established second degree program is used for this project. This program is
offered under a contract.

* **

### Nursing, B.S.N.

**

The B.S.N. degree prepares graduates to function as professional nurses in
hospitals, long-term care facilities, and the community. The community-based
program may be completed on a full- or part-time basis. Special accelerated
pathways for registered nurses (RNs) and licensed practical nurses (LPNs) take
into account the needs of the working RN and LPN. Students interested in these
pathways must contact the nursing program before admission. All pathways lead
to completion of the objectives of the undergraduate program.

Clinical nursing begins at the junior level. Students must complete a
prenursing curriculum and be admitted to junior standing or to one of the
accelerated pathways.

**Acceptance into Junior Standing in Nursing**

A student who is interested in pursuing a major in nursing must make an
additional and separate application for junior standing to the nursing
program. To be eligible to apply for junior standing, traditional prenursing
students must complete the 40-42 credits of required general education, which
applies to the degree, by the end of the spring semester. LPN students who
desire to be full-time students must complete all prerequisite general
education requirements by the end of the fall semester.

Students must earn a C or better in psychology (6); sociology or anthropology
(3); BIOL 124-125 (8); BIOL 246 and 306 (4); and science (chemistry, biology,
physics) (3-4).

Admission to the nursing program is competitive. It is based on a minimum
cumulative GPA of 3.000 in the 42-44 credits of general education (wherever
taken) required for the degree (excluding electives). The acceptable GPA may
increase each year based on the number of spaces available in the nursing
program.

Transfer students and those changing their majors to nursing are ranked
downward from 4.000 on the basis of the number of junior spaces available in
any given year. Students admitted as prenursing freshmen must have a minimum
GPA of 3.000.

Students are accepted for junior standing each fall. The application deadline
is April 1, and students are notified of their status in early June. LPN
students desiring to be full-time students in the spring semester must submit
an application by November 15. Part-time LPN students are admitted in the fall
and spring semesters.

Permission to register for NURS 330, 331, 332, and 333 requires prior
acceptance into junior standing in nursing.

Full-time nursing requires carrying a heavy schedule; therefore, outside
obligations should be limited to ensure success.

**Degree Requirements**

Candidates for the degree must present at least 120 credits. Specific
requirements for the B.S.N. are as follows.

  |   |

**Credits**  
  
---|---  
**Language arts and culture** |

**15**  
  
> ENGL 101, 302 (three credits of humanities are a prerequisite to ENGL 302)

|

6  
  
> Communication

|

3  
  
> Humanities (three credits must be from PHIL 151 or 309)

|

6  
  
> Art (appreciation, history, criticism, or theory)

|  
  
> Music (appreciation, history, criticism, or theory)

|  
  
> Literature (at 200 level or above, does not include ENGL 101, 302)

|  
  
> Philosophy, language, religion, or humanities

|  
  
**  
Social and behavioral sciences** |

**9**  
  
> Sociology or anthropology

|

3  
  
> Psychology (PSYC 100 and 211)

|

6  
  
> (Any psychology for RNs and LPNs)

|  
  
**  
Natural sciences and mathematics** |

**21-23**  
  
> Science (biology, chemistry, physics)

|

3-4  
  
> BIOL 124,125

|

8  
  
> Microbiology (BIOL 246 and 306)

|

4  
  
> Statistics (STAT 250, PSYC 300, DESC 200, or SOCI 221)

|

3-4  
  
> Normal nutrition (HSCI 295)

|

3  
  
**  
Nursing major** |

**57-61**  
  
> NURS 330, 331, 332, 333, 334, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, 346, 410, 425,
436, 440, 441, 442, 451, 452, 453, 455, 465

|  
  
**  
Physical education activities** |

**2**  
  
> (recommended as part of elective credits)

|  
  
**  
Electives** |

**10-16**  
  
> (No more than three credits of nursing electives may be used to satisfy this
requirement.)

|  
  
  
**Total** |

**120**  
  
The school provides opportunity for credit by examination in several courses
for students presenting evidence of previous education. Programs of study are
based on student needs.

**Writing-Intensive Requirement**

The university requires all students to complete at least one course in their
majors designated "writing intensive" at the 300 level or above. Students
majoring in nursing fulfill this requirement by successfully completing NURS
465\.

**Academic Grade Standards**

**Nursing Academic Warning**  
A final nursing course grade of less than C prohibits further progress in the
nursing major until that course is repeated and a satisfactory grade of C or
better is earned.

The student is placed on "nursing academic warning" and must notify the
associate dean for undergraduate programs in writing, within two weeks of
final exams, of his/her intent to repeat the course. Students should be aware
that space may not be available in some clinical nursing courses that they may
need to repeat. Although attempts will be made to place the student
clinically, it must be understood that the student may have to sit out a
semester or more until space becomes available.

A nursing course in which a grade of less than C is earned may be repeated
once. A student who fails to earn a C or better in the repeated course is
dismissed from the nursing program. Upon earning a grade of C or better in the
repeated course, the student may resume progress in the sequence of required
courses.

Earning a grade of less than C in a second nursing course results in dismissal
from the nursing program.

A nursing major who has failed a course must repeat the course and earn a C or
better to resume progression in classes with NURS/HSCI prefixes. Before the
course is repeated, the student may not register for any other courses with a
NURS or HSCI prefix.

**Professional Conduct Policy**  
The College of Nursing and Health Science reserves the right to discipline
(i.e., place on probation, suspend, or dismiss) a student from the program who
does not demonstrate professional conduct. This includes, but is not limited
to, verbal abuse and/or insubordination, as well as behavior that threatens
the safety of a client, another student, a faculty member, or other health
care provider when the behavior occurs within the context of the academic
program. The student has the right to appeal. The process for implementation
of this Professional Conduct Policy in documented in the Student Handbook.

**Readmission**  
Readmission to the nursing program for nonacademic and/or professional
infractions is not automatic. A former student must apply in writing for
readmission to the associate dean for undergraduate programs by September 1
for the spring semester, by February 1 for the fall semester, or by November 1
for the Summer Term.

The letter requesting readmission should include the following:

1\. A description of the circumstances surrounding the nonacademic suspension

2\. A description of interim activities

3\. Steps taken to support success upon readmission

4\. Reasons readmission is justified

5\. Rationale to support expectation of success upon readmission

Students meeting the above criteria are considered for readmission on a space-
available basis. Students have the right to appeal unfavorable decisions.

**Leave of Absence**  
A leave of absence from the nursing program of up to two semesters may be
requested in writing by a student in good standing. Readmission following the
leave of absence is granted only on a space-available basis.

**Appeal Process**  
Although the faculty members of the nursing program are generally the best
judges of a student's professional performance, in some instances a student
may feel that their judgment of readmission or dismissal is unfair. In such
cases, the student should ask the associate dean for undergraduate programs to
reconsider the decision. If the student remains dissatisfied, the matter may
be appealed to the dean. If the dean believes that the student may have a
legitimate complaint, the dean will appoint a committee of three faculty
members and a student peer to review the decision. After the committee
thoroughly reviews the student's case, it will issue a written recommendation
to the dean with a copy to the associate dean.

### Undergraduate Honors Program

The honors program within an undergraduate major in the College of Nursing and
Health Science provides opportunities for highly motived, self-directed
students seeking enriched course work and research involvement. Highly
qualified students in any of the nursing and health science programs are
eligible to participate in specialized course work while working closely with
an honors faculty advisor and graduate students to accomplish individualized
projects.

Policies that apply to the honors program within the undergraduate nursing
program are described below:

1\. Course work: The undergraduate honors program includes a minimum of six
credits or two to three semesters of honors course work. This course work is
accomplished through one or more of the following options:

    

a. Nursing courses designated as honors courses. This could be a designated
section of an existing course or a special course developed for the honors
program (i.e., Honors Colloquium).  

b. Independent study courses designated as honors courses.  

c. Add-on honors credits that are completed in conjunction with an existing
required nursing course. One or two credits are given for additional work
required of an honors student.

All honors courses contain the word "honors" so they are easily identified in
the University Catalog, Schedule of Classes, and registration forms for
specialized courses, and on student transcripts.

2\. Criteria for admission to the undergraduate nursing honors program:

    

a. George Mason students awarded General Education Honors and achieving a
3.000 GPA in the prerequisite course work for junior standing are accepted
into the nursing honors program. All other interested traditional students
apply during the first semester of junior-level nursing course work.
Interested LPN and RN pathway students apply while taking NURS 334\.  

b. Applicants to the undergraduate honors program must submit GPA of 3.500 or
better; short essay; and a letter of reference from a teacher familiar with
their academic abilities; and a letter of reference from a colleague able to
speak to the applicant's leadership potential, and past and future community
involvement.  

c. Final decisions on acceptance of students to the honors program in nursing
are made by the College of Nursing and Health Science Honors Admissions
Committee.

3\. Students admitted to the nursing honors program do not constitute more
than 10 percent of the graduating students receiving B.S.N. degrees each year.

**Student Learning Portfolio**

All students in the College of Nursing and Health Science initiate a learning
portfolio in the first semester of the junior year. The purpose is to provide
evidence of a student's ability to meet programmatic outcomes of provider of
care; designer, manager and coordinator of care; and member of the profession;
demonstrate development of professional values and behaviors through providing
evidence of work completed throughout the nursing program; and develop a "Best
Works" portfolio at the conclusion of the nursing program to evaluate program
outcomes and to use for ongoing professional development. Each course requires
elements of the portfolio and is integrated into the course syllabus.

**Required Computerized NCLEX Assessment**

All students are required to take a computerized version of a practice NCLEX-
RN exam in the first semester of their senior year.

**Special Requirements**

**Fees and Expenses**  
Fees and expenses specific to the nursing program are as follows: laboratory
equipment kit, standardized testing fee, uniforms, stethoscope, name pin,
books, course materials, transportation to and from agencies, CPR
certification, fee for review of health forms, immunizations, and any other
additional fees as mandated by clinical agencies (i.e., clinical background
check).

A one-time lab fee of $80 is required for traditional and LPN students before
beginning the first semester of nursing. A lab fee of $10 is required for RN
students before they take NURS 425\. A one-time health records review fee of
$10 is required for all students before their first clinical rotations.

Nursing students are required to obtain a health examination and immunizations
before registering for their first clinical course. Students must complete two
of the three hepatitis B immunizations in accordance with current U.S. Public
Health Service recommendations before entering the first clinical setting. The
cost of the immunizations is the responsibility of the student. Student
immunization records are monitored at the College of Nursing and Health
Science Office of Student Academic Affairs, which charges a small fee for this
service.

Clinical agencies sometimes require additional records and documentation, such
as criminal background checks, before student participation. Any cost is the
responsibility of the student.

Student assignments are based on the learning needs of the student without
regard to the HIV or HBV status of the client. Failure to practice universal
precautions and bloodborne pathogen safety results in dismissal from the
nursing program.

No student or faculty member is discriminated against or denied admission to
the nursing program for the sole reason that the student or faculty member has
been exposed to, infected, or diagnosed with HIV or HBV.

In the event that a student has a clinical experience/practicum exposure to
body fluids of a client, procedures and appropriate incident reports are to be
completed according to institutional and nursing policies.

Information related to exposure or infection is confidential, and
dissemination of such information is based on the need to know criteria that
apply generally in health care situations. A complete and detailed HIV/HBV
policy is available in the College of Nursing and Health Science Office of
Student Academic Affairs, Robinson Hall, Room A382.

All students are required to have an active e-mail account.

Students are responsible for their own uniforms and transportation. Student
liability insurance is provided by the university. Students are strongly
advised to maintain health insurance coverage at all times. An accident and
health insurance plan is available through the university. Each student is
responsible for his or her health care, including emergency care. The nursing
program assumes no financial responsibility for the health care of students.

A junior student must have CPR certification before entering NURS 331 and
maintain it through the remainder of the program. Either the American Red
Cross Professional Rescuer or the American Heart Association's Basic Life
Support is required.

The drop period for nursing courses offered for fewer than 14 weeks is 3
weeks.

Because knowledge, skills, and behavior patterns in the major field of this
program are so vital to the health and perhaps even the survival of
individuals or groups being served, failure or borderline achievement cannot
be tolerated. Therefore, the faculty of the nursing program has established,
with approval of university faculty and administration, the following special
major field quality standards that go beyond the general university quality
standards printed elsewhere in this catalog.

* **

### Health Science, B.S.

**

The B.S. in Health Science prepares students to function as managers and
clinicians in a variety of settings such as hospitals, clinics, community
health, schools, home care, long-term care, employee health, managed care
organizations, group medical practices, manufacturing, medical technology and
supply organizations, the health insurance industry, and financial consultant
services. Two pathways are available: health systems management, and health
care coordination.

The program may be completed on a full- or part-time basis, and special
accelerated pathways for graduates of allied health technical programs take
into account the needs of the adult learner. Students interested in the
program should contact the health science program before admission. All
pathways lead to completion of the objectives of the undergraduate health
science program. The major begins at the junior year. Students must complete a
prehealth science curriculum before enrolling in major courses.

**Program Requirements**

**_Health Systems Management Traditional Pathway_**

**Language arts and humanities** |

**15**  
  
---|---  
English composition (three credits must be in advanced composition) |

6  
  
Communications (COMM 101) |

3  
  
Humanities (PHIL 309 Medicine and Human Values and three credits in
literature) |

6  
  
**  
Behavioral and social sciences** |

**6**  
  
Sociology or anthropology |

3  
  
(SOCI 101 or ANTH 114) |  
  
Psychology (PSYC 100) |

3  
  
**  
Statistics** (DESC 210) |

**4**  
  
**  
Natural science** |

**11**  
  
Biology (BIOL 103 and 104) |

8  
  
Mathematics (MATH 108 ) |

3  
  
**  
Business and management** |

**13**  
  
Economics (ECON 103) |

3  
  
Management information systems |

4  
  
(MIS 102 and 201) |  
  
Management (MGMT 302 and 312) |

6  
  
**  
Government** (GOVT 103) |

**3**  
  
**  
Health science major** |

**45**  
  
HSCI 295, 302, 303, 332, 378, 402, 436, 440, 453, 465, 495  |  
  
**  
Electives** (two must be in HSCI) |

**23**  
  
  
**Total** |

**120**  
  
**_Health Care Coordination Traditional Pathway  
_**

**Language arts and humanities** |

**21**  
  
---|---  
English composition (three credits must be in advanced composition) |

6  
  
Communication (COMM 101, 305 and 320) |

9  
  
Humanities (PHIL 309 Medicine and Human Values and three credits in
literature) |

6  
  
**  
Behavioral and social sciences** |

**12**  
  
Sociology or anthropology |

3  
  
(SOCI 101 or ANTH 114) |

9  
  
Psychology (PSYC 100, 211, and 321) |  
  
**  
Natural sciences** |

**11**  
  
Biology (124 and 125) |

8  
  
Computer science (CS 103) |

3  
  
**  
Statistics** (SOCI 313) |

**4**  
  
**  
Business and management** |

**9**  
  
Economics (ECON 103) |

3  
  
Management (MGMT 302 and 312) |

6  
  
**  
Health science major** |

**45**  
  
HSCI 250, 295, 332, 341, 344, 402, 436, 440, 453, 465, 497  |  
  
**  
Electives** (two must be in HSCI) |

**18**  
  
**  
Total** |

**120**  
  
**_Health Systems Management Accelerated Pathway for Students with Associate's
Degrees in Allied Health  
_**

**Language arts and humanities** |

**15**  
  
---|---  
English composition (three credits must be in advanced composition) |

6  
  
Communications (COMM 101) |

3  
  
Humanities (PHIL 309 Medicine and Human Values and three credits in
literature) |

6  
  
**  
Behavioral and social sciences** |

**6**  
  
Sociology or anthropology |

3  
  
(SOCI 101 or ANTH 114) |  
  
Psychology (PSYC 100) |

3  
  
**  
Natural science** |

**11**  
  
Biology (BIOL 103 and 104) |

8  
  
Mathematics (MATH 108) |

3  
  
**  
Statistics** (DESC 210) |

**4**  
  
**  
Business and management** |

**13**  
  
Economics (ECON 103) |

3  
  
Management (MGMT 302 and 312) |

6  
  
Management information systems |

4  
  
(MIS 102 and 201) |  
  
**  
Government** (GOVT 103) |

**3**  
  
**  
Health science major** |

**68**  
  
HSCI 295, 302, 303, 332, *334, 378, 402, 436, 440, 495  |  
  
**  
Total** |

**120**  
  
* Upon completion of bridge course HSCI 334, students are awarded 31 advanced placement hours from the associate's degree program. 

**_Health Care Coordination Accelerated Pathway for Students with Associate's
Degrees in Allied Health  
_**

**Language arts and humanities** |

**21**  
  
---|---  
English composition (three credits must be in advanced composition) |

6  
  
Communication (COMM 101, 305, 320) |

9  
  
Humanities (PHIL 309 Medicine and Human Values and three credits in
literature) |

6  
  
**  
Behavioral and social sciences** |

**12**  
  
Sociology or anthropology |

3  
  
(SOCI 101 or ANTH 114) |  
  
Psychology |

9  
  
(PSYC 100, 211, and 321) |  
  
**  
Natural science** |

**11**  
  
Biology (124 and 125) |

8  
  
Computer science (CS 103) |

3  
  
**  
Statistics** (SOCI 313) |

**4**  
  
**  
Business and management** |

**9**  
  
Economics (ECON 103) |

3  
  
Management (MGMT 302 and 312) |

6  
  
**  
Health science major** |

**63**  
  
HSCI 250, 295, 332, *334, 341, 344, 378, 402, 436, 440, 497 |  
  
**  
Total** |

**120**  
  
* Upon completion of bridge course HSCI 334, students are awarded 26 advanced placement hours from the associate's degree program. 

  * **Certificate in Gerontology** 

The undergraduate certificate program in gerontology prepares students for
work with older adults, as well as with professionals who are already working
with the elderly. The program provides a background of basic knowledge in
gerontology and then permits the student to prepare in professional skill
areas such as counseling, recreation, social work, nursing, and
administration.

The certificate program in gerontology is administered by the College of
Nursing and Health Science. Three other academic units participate in the
program: the Graduate School of Education, Department of Psychology, and
Department of Sociology and Anthropology. A Gerontology Certificate Committee
determines program policy and curriculum.

Academic advising and an application form are available from the College of
Nursing and Health Science.

**Certificate Requirements**  
The certificate program in gerontology consists of 24 credits. Students
receiving the certificate must either hold a baccalaureate degree or have
earned one from George Mason University by the time they receive the
certificate.

The 24 credits are divided as follows:

  0. A minimum of 12 credits selected from HSCI 480; NURS 505, 570; PRLS 315, 415; PSYC 415; SOCI 441; and SOCW 483 

  1. Six credits in a practicum in gerontology: PSYC 548, 549 (Students must have completed at least nine credits of core courses before enrolling in the practicum.) 

  2. Six credits of electives selected from HEAL 110, 323, 480; HSCI 332; PHED 415, 450, 499; PRLS 210, 310; PSYC 211, 325, 326, 415, 423; PUAD 502, SOCI 350, 390, 599; SOCW 300, 351, 352; Reading and Research in Gerontology from any department 

  

* * *

George Mason University: 2000-2001 University Catalog: Catalog Index: College
of Nursing & Health Science: Undergraduate Programs

