**A Quick Guide to the World History of Globalization**

* * *

 **[Resource Links](http://www2.hawaii.edu/~fredr/glopages.htm)** ... **[Key
Concepts](http://www2.hawaii.edu/~fredr/glocon.htm)** .... **[Vinnie's online
reading](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/acad/intrel/globaliz.htm)**

[**MAPS**](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist188/)

* * *

 **A Very Long-Term View**

**Globalization Since the Fourteenth Century**

**A Very Long-Term View**

The many meanings of the word "globalization" have accumulated very rapidly,
and recently, and the verb, "globalize" is first attested by the _Merriam
Webster Dictionary_ in 1944\. In considering the history of globalization,
some authors focus on events since 1492, but most scholars and theorists
concentrate on the much more recent past.

But long before 1492, people began to link together disparate locations on the
globe into extensive systems of communication, migration, and
interconnections. This formation of systems of interaction between the global
and the local has been a central driving force in world history. [for very,
very long-term _world system_ history, see [Andre Gunder
Frank](http://csf.colorado.edu/authors/Frank.A_Gunder/) and especially "[the
five thousand year world system: an interdisciplinary
introduction,"](ftp://csf.colorado.edu/psn/authors/Frank.Gunder/5000-yr-WS-
intro) by Andre Gunder Frank and Barry K. Gills.]

  **Q: what is global?** |  **A:** the expansive interconnectivity of
localities -- spanning local sites of everyday social, economic, cultural, and
political life \-- a phenonmenon but also an spatial attribute -- so a
_global_ space or geography is a domain of connectivity spanning distances and
linking localities to one another, which can be portrayed on maps by lines
indicating routes of movement, migration, translation, communication,
exchange, etc.  
---|---  
  **Q: what is globalization?** |  **A:** the physical expansion of the
geographical domain of the global \-- that is, the increase in the scale and
volume of global flows \-- and the increasing impact of global forces of all
kinds on local life. Moments and forces of expansion mark the major turning
points and landmarks in the history of globalization  
  
  

**1\. c.325 BCE: Chandragupta Maurya** becomes a Buddhist and combines the
expansive powers of a world religion, trade economy, and imperial armies for
the first time. Alexander the Great sues for peace with Chandragupta in 325 at
Gerosia, marking the eastward link among overland routes between the
Mediterranean, Persia, India, and Central Asia.

**2\. c.1st centuries CE: the expansion of Buddhism in Asia** \-- makes its
first major appearance in China under the Han dynasty, and consolidates
cultural links across the Eurasian Steppe into India \-- the foundation of the
silk road.

**3\. 650-850: the expansion of Islam from the western Mediterranean to
India**

**4\. 960-1279: the Song Dynasty in China** (and contemporary regimes in
India) which produced the economic output, instruments (financial),
technologies, and impetus for the medieval world economy that linked Europe
and China by land and sea across Eurasia and the Indian Ocean.

**5\. 1100: The Rise of[Genghis
Khan](http://www.nationalgeographic.com/features/97/genghis/timeline/index.html)**
and the integration of overland routes across Eurasia -- producing also a
military revolution in technologies of war on horseback and of fighting from
military fortifications.

**6\. 1300: the creation of the Ottoman Empire** spanning Europe, North
Africa, and Middle East, and connected politically overland with Safavids and
dynasties in Central Asia and India -- creating the great imperial arch of
integration that spawned a huge expansion of trade with Europe but ALSO raised
the cost for trade in Asia for Europeans ---

a side effect of this was the movement of Genoese merchant wealth to Spain to
search for a Western Sea route to the Indies

**7\. 1492 and 1498:** Columbus and da Gama travel west and east to the
Indies, inaugurating an age of European seaborne empires.

**8\. 1650:** **the expansion of the slave trade** expanded was dramatic
during the seventeenth century -- and it sustained the expansion of Atlantic
Economy, giving birth to integrated economic/industrial systems across the
Ocean -- with profits accumulating in Europe during the hey day of
mercantalism and rise of the Englightenment. (estimates of slave trade
population)

**9\. 1776/1789: US and French Revolutions** mark the creation of modern state
form based on alliances between military and business interests and on popular
representation in aggressively nationalist governments \-- which leads quickly
to new imperial expansion under Napolean and in the Americas -- the economic
interests of "the people" and the drive to acquire and consolidate assets for
economic growth also lead to more militarized British, Dutch, and French
imperial growth in Asia. These national empires expand during the industrial
revolution, which also provokes class struggles and new ideas and movements of
revolution within the national states and subsequently in their empires as
well. [The historical chronology of
modernity](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist086/hist11lect10.htm) coincides
with the chronology of globalization from the eighteenth century.

**10\. 1885: Treaties of Berlin** mark a diplomatic watershed in the age
modern imperial expansion by European and American overseas empires, beginning
the age of "high imperialism" with the legalization of the Partition of
Africa, which also marks a foundation-point for the creation of international
law. In the last decades of the 19th century, the global ["white man's
burden"](http://www.boondocksnet.com/kipling/index.html#Poem) became a subject
of discussion. (Here is an old syllabus for an undergraduate course on "[US
Empire](http://www.sas.upenn.edu/~dludden/h206syll.htm)" with some useful
links.)

**11\. 1929: the great depression** hits all parts of the world at the same
time \-- in contrast to depression of late 19th century, but following rapid,
simultaneous price rise in most of the world during the 1920s. Preceded by
first event called World War and followed by first really global war across
Atlantic and Pacific.

**12\. 1950: decolonization** of European empires in Asia and Africa produces
world of national states for the first time and world of legal-representative-
economic institutions in the UN system and Bretton Woods.

\--- perhaps 1989 and the end of the cold war and globalization of post-
industrial capitalism which appears to be eroding the power of the national
states is on a par with the watershed of the 1950s -- we'll see , **Part II**

  
**Part II: globalization since the fourteenth century**

  
**1\. The Segmented Trading World of Eurasia, _circa_ 1350**  
  
By 1350, networks of trade which involved frequent movements of people,
animals, goods, money, and micro-organisms ran from England to China, running
down through France and Italy across the Mediterranean to the Levant and
Egypt, and then over land across Central Asia (the Silk Road) and along sea
lanes down the Red Sea, across the Indian Ocean, and through the Straits of
Malacca to the China coast.  
  
The Mongols had done the most to create a political framework for the overland
network as attested by both Ibn Battuta and Marco Polo. The spread of Muslim
trading communities from port to port along the littorals of the Indian Ocean
created a world of sea trade there analogous to the world of land routes in
Central Asia.  
  
This was a world of commodities trades in which specialized groups of
merchants concentrated their energies on bringing commodities from one port to
another, and rarely did any single merchant network organize movements of
goods across more than a few segments of the system. For instance, few
Europeans ventured out of the European parts of the system; and the most
intense connections were among traders in the Arabian Sea or the Bay of Bengal
or the South China Sea regions of the oceanic system.  
  
The novelty of the physical integration of the trading system is indicated by
the spread of the Black Death in Europe -- which was repeated in waves from
the fourteenth through the sixteenth centuries -- because the plague traveled
from inland Mongolia and China to Europe by land and sea, lurking in rodents
that stowed away on ships, feeding on their food supplies. The epidemics in
Europe indicated a relative lack of exposure to the plague bacillus before
then -- and though some outbreaks are indicated along the coast and in China
at the same time, it appears that plague was endemic to the Asian parts of the
system.  
  
The parts of the system depended upon one another and with increasing
frequency travelers record movements across the whole system are recorded from
1300 onward, as by Ibn Battuta, Marco Polo, and others. Janet Abu Lughod
argues plausibly that the so-called  "rise of Europe" after 1500 followed a
mysterious period of decline in the Chinese part of the system, and that in
the 1300s, it was actually the vast expansion in production in China that was
most responsible for the integration of the trading system -- because all
roads led to China in the medieval trading world. The expansion of the Chinese
economy in this period is well documented and included agriculture and
industry -- and the Mongol regime in China was significant force in tying
China into the world economy more forcefully.  
  
Coercion and state power was critical in producing stable sites of trade and
accumulation along routes of exchange and in protecting travelers on the long
overland routes between sites. There does not seem to have been any
significant military power at sea.  
  
Exchange within the various regional parts of the system was connected by
networks of trade to commercial activity within trade and power relations in
other parts -- in a segmented system of connections, like pearls on a string
-- and observers made it very clear that states took a keen interest in
promoting and protecting trade, even as rulers also used force to extort
revenues and coerce production here and there.  
  
In South Asia, it should be noted, the Delhi Sultanate and Deccan states
provided a system of power that connected the inland trading routes of Central
Asia with the coastal towns of Bengal and the peninsula and thus to Indian
Ocean trade for the first time.  
  
Ibn Battuta __ as much as the Khaljis and Tughlaqs represent the nature of the
agrarian environment in the fourteenth century, and though warriors did use
force to collect taxes, there was also substantial commercial activity in
farming communities over and above what would have been necessary to pay
taxes. Agrarian commercialism inside regions of trading activity clearly
supported increasing manufacturing and commercial activity -- and also a
growth spurt in the rise of urbanization.  
  
Ibn Battuta (1350) -- like Abu-l Fazl (1590) and Hamilton Buchanan (1800) --
viewed his world in commercial terms, and standing outside the state, he does
not indicate that coercion was needed to generate agrarian commodities. At
each stop in his journey, he observed everyday commercialism. "Bangala is a
vast country, abounding in rice," he says, "and nowhere in the world have I
seen any land where prices are lower than there." In Turkestan, "the horses
... are very numerous and the price of them is negligible." He was pleased to
see commercial security, as he did during eight months trekking from Goa to
Quilon. "I have never seen a safer road than this," he wrote, "for they put to
death anyone who steals a single nut, and if any fruit falls no one picks it
up but the owner." He also noted that "most of the merchants from Fars and
Yemen disembark" at Mangalore, where "pepper and ginger are exceedingly
abundant." In 1357, John of Marignola, an emissary to China from Pope Benedict
XII, also stopped at Quilon, which he described it as "the most famous city in
the whole of India, where all the pepper in the world
grows."[1](../WINDOWS/TEMP/PM2A0B3.TMP#FNT0)  
  
  
**2\. The European Seaborne Empires, 1500-1750  
  
a. Phase One: the militarization of the sea, 1500-1600**  
  
Vasco da Gama rounded Africa in 1498 and forced rulers in the ports in the
Indian Ocean system to pay tribute and to allow settlements of Portuguese
military seamen who engaged in trade, supported conversion, acquired local
lands, and established a loose network of imperial authority over the sea
lanes, taxing ships in transit in return for protection. The militarization of
the sea lanes produced a competition for access to ports and for routes of
safe transit that certainly did not reduce the overall volume of trade or the
diversity of trading communities -- but it did channel more wealth into the
hands of armed European competitors for control of the sea. The Indian Ocean
became more like Central Asia in that all routes and sites became militarized
as European competition accelerated over the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, as the Portuguese were joined by the Dutch, French, and British.  
  
**b. Phase Two: early modern world economy, 1600-1800**  
  
The commodities trades continued as before well into the seventeenth century,
concentrating on local products from each region of the Eurasian system --
Chinese silk and porcelain, Sumatra spices, Malabar cinnamon and pepper, etc.
-- but by the 1600s, the long distance trade was more deeply entrenched in the
production process. An expansion of commercial production and commodities
trades was supported by the arrival into Asia of precious metals from the New
World, which came both from the East and West (the Atlantic and Pacific routes
-- via Palestine and Iran, and also the Philippines and China).  
  
Like the plague in the 1300s, new arrivals in Europe after 1500 signal the
rise of a new kind of global system. In medieval Europe, there was no cotton
cloth, and no cotton cloth was produced for export anywhere except in the
coastal regions of the Indian Ocean. Europeans began not only to buy this
cloth for export to Europe, but to commission cloth of specific types for
specific markets, and to take loans from local bankers and engage in
commodities trades within the Indian Ocean system so as to raise the value of
the merchant capital that they could re-export to Europe.  
  
By 1700, European capital invested in trading companies traveled regularly to
Asia on ships insured and protected by European companies and governments, in
order to secure goods produced on commission for sale and resale within Asian
markets, with the goal of returning to Europe with cargo of sufficient value
to generate substantial profits for investors. Circuits of capital thus moved
along trade routes, across militarized sea lanes, and organized production of
cloth for export in Asia. This Eurasian extension of the circuits of merchant
capital did not only emanate from Europe; it also included large expansions
within Asia itself, not only among the merchants and bankers who financed the
regional trade and facilitated European exports, but also along financiers who
provided state revenues in the form of taxation. The connections between state
revenue collection and commodities trades became very complex and the
Europeans were surrounded by Asian  "portfolio capitalists" (as they have been
dubbed by Sanjay Subrahmanyam and Chris Bayly) who operated both in the so-
called private and state sectors.  
  
By 1700, also, competing European powers also controlled the Atlantic Economy;
and like cotton from Asia, sugar and tobacco from the Americas arrived in
Europe as commodities within circuits of world capital accumulation (see Samir
Amin, _Accumulation on a World Scale_ ). The role of _primitive accumulation_
was much greater in the Atlantic System, including the capture of native lands
in the Americas, forced labor in the silver mines of Peru, the purchase of
slaves captured in wars along the African coast, the forced transportation of
slaves to the Americas, and the construction of the slave plantation economy
in coastal Americas. The volume of the slave trade peaked around 1750.  
  
By 1800, the Atlantic and Indian Ocean systems were connected to one another
via the flow of currencies and commodities and by the operations of the
British, French, and Dutch overseas companies \-- all being controlled, owned,
or  "chartered" by their respective states. The 17-18th centuries were the
_age of mercantilism_ , in which state power depended directly on the
sponsoring and control of merchant capital, and merchant capital expanded
under the direct protection and subsidy of the state treasury. It has been
argued that the expansion of "portfolio capitalists" in the Indian ocean
reflected a similar kind of mercantilist trend in Asia during the eighteenth
century.  
  
Ottoman, Safavid, Mughal, and Ch'ing empires provided an overland system of
economic integration and interconnection that was more expansive than any
before. Asian capital, coercive power, and productive energies were dominant
in determining economic trends in the Asian parts of the world economy.
European activity has long received the bulk of the attention by historians
concerned with the integration of the early modern world economy, but from
Istanbul to Samarkhand, Cochin, Dhaka, Malacca, Hong Kong, Beijing, and Tokyo,
they were not the most prominent players in most of the major sites of
economic and political activity until the later nineteenth century. Europeans
were dominant only in the Atlantic System in the early eighteenth century --
the hemispheres of the world economy remained, in this respect, very
different.  
  
**3\. The World Empires of Industrial Capitalism, 1750-1950.  
  
a. Phase One: the formation of national economies**  
  
Basic eighteenth century economic conditions continued well into the
nineteenth century, until the railway and steam ship began lower
transportation costs significantly, and to create _new circuits of capital
accumulation_ that focused on sites of industrial production in Europe and the
US. But important structural changes in the world economy began in the later
decades of the eighteenth century.  
  
First, European imperial control of the Americas was broken, first in the
north and then the south. This accelerated the rise of capital and capitalists
as a force in the reorganization of nationally defined states, whose professes
purpose was the political representation of the interests of their constituent
property owners and entrepreneurs. The independence movements in the Americas
and revolutions in Haiti and France produced new kinds of _national
territoriality_ within the world economy, and states that strove for greater
control of resources within their boundaries than any before. Adam Smith and
Frederick Hegel were two important theorists of this transitional period --
both of whom took a universal few of national issues, and theorized a great
transformation away from an age of kings and emperors toward an age ruled by
peoples and nations.  
  
Second, European imperial expansion shifted into Asia, where the use of
military power by European national states for the protection of their
national interests became a new force in the process of capital accumulation.
Chartered companies were criticized by Adam Smith as a state-supported
monopoly -- for the English East India Company had a monopoly on the sale of
all commodities imported into England from the "East Indies," which included
all the land east of Lebanon -- and this early version of the _multi-national
corporation_ expanded its power base in India with government support but
without official permission. The British empire expanded without official
policy sanction throughout most of the nineteenth century, as British troops
went in simply to protect the operations of British nationals operating as
merchants overseas.  
  
The national state thus became both a mechanism for the control of territory
within its own borders and for the expansion of national enterprise around the
world. The US expanded over land and into Latin America by the expansion of
the enterprise of its citizens and expansion of its military power, as the
British empire expanded into Asia and then Africa -- along with the French and
Dutch. In the discourse of nationalism, the "nation" and "empire" lived in
their opposition to one another; but "economic imperialism" was standard
practice for economically expansive nation states, and "gun boat diplomacy"
became a typical feature of economic transactions among hostile states.  
  
The 1840s form a watershed in the institutionalization of a world regime of
national expansion and international economic organization \-- when the
British navy forced open the interior of China to British merchant settlements
with military victories waged during the Opium Wars to protect the right of
British merchants to trade in opium in China; and when the US Admiral Perry
forced the Japanese to open their ports to American trade.  
  
**b. Phase Two: world circuits of industrial capital**  
  
The integration of separate, specialized world regions of agricultural and
industrial production within a world economy of capital accumulation occurred
during the nineteenth century. The industrial technologies of the factory,
railway, telegraph, gattling gun, and steam ship facilitated this development;
but as important were the organizational technologies of modernity, which
include state bureaucracy, land surveys, census operations, government
statistics, national legal systems, and the like. The result was not only the
creation of regions of the world with their own distinctive economic
specializations, integrated into one world system of production; but also the
construction of a single world of rules and regulations for the operation of
the system. This change did not happen over night, but it was clearly moving
ahead at the start of the nineteenth century and well advanced by the end.  
  
Institutional markers: (1) the abolition of the slave trade and (2) the rise
of international protocols for the operation of national competition at a
world scale, culminating in the treaties of Berlin that organized the
partition of Africa in the 1880s.  
  
Market indicators: (1) the South Sea Bubble and the crashes of the 1820s and
1830s, (2) the depression of 1880-1900 and its impact on Africa.  
  
Regional Cases: (1) the US South, (2) the world cotton economy, (3) jute in
Bengal.

