**Teaching East Asia in the Secondary Curriculum**  
**A Seminar for Secondary School Teachers at**  
Slippery Rock University of Pennsylvania

![](TempleGarden2.JPG)  
  
**Syllabus**

Map and Directions to The Cleveland Museum of Art

* * *

**  TEA Seminar Main** | **Course Requirements**  
---|---  
**Teaching Resources** | **Links to Asian Studies**  
  
* * *

  
Professor George Brown  
209 Spotts World Culture Building  
Ph: 724 738-2435  
E-mail: george.brown@sru.edu  
www.sru.edu/depts/artsci/gov/Gbrown/Gbrown.html  

* * *

Teaching East Asia in the Secondary Curriculum is designed for middle and high
school teachers of World Cultures, World History, Geography, Economics,
Humanities, and Literature.  This course is **Funded by the Freeman Foundation
and Presented by the Asian Studies Program atSlippery Rock University of
Pennsylvania**  
**In Association with theNational Consortium for Teaching about Asia and the
Asian Studies Program, University Center for International Studies, University
of Pittsburgh.**  

* * *

**The seminar will be offered in two options:**

1) As a 30 hour Non-Credit Workshop through Slippery Rock University's Office
of Continuing Education. Participants who choose to sign up for the non-credit
option will receive 60 activity hours toward their Act 48 training
requirements.

2) Simultaneously, the course will be offered as a regular three-credit course
(Political Science 371, Politics of Development and Security in East Asia) for
3 SRU credits.

The approach to the course will be interdisciplinary, with a focus on East
Asia, including China, Japan and Korea. There will be 15 three hour sessions
(10 for those enrolled in the non-credit option), taught by six faculty from
Slippery Rock University, which will include sessions on geography, history,
philosophy and religion, literature and film, politics and political economy.

The program director and primary instructor for the seminar will be Dr. George
P. Brown , Department of Government and Public Affairs at Slippery Rock
University. Individual course segments will be taught by Slippery Rock
University faculty including Dr. Carol Prorok , Department of Geography, Dr.
Peggy Denning , Department of History, Dr. Theodore Kneupper , Department of
Philosophy, Dr. Alison McNeal , Department of English, and Dr. Sunita Peacock
, Department of English.

The seminar will be taught on Saturdays throughout Spring Semester, 2002, and
will be held on the Slippery Rock University campus. Parking is free on
Saturdays on the SRU campus. Sessions will be held from 9:00 AM to 12:00 PM in
Spotts World Cultures Building, Room 200.  

* * *

**Textbooks for the seminar include the following:**

  * Rhoads Murphey, _East Asia: A New History_ .
  * Patricia Ebrey, ed., _Chinese Civilization: A Sourcebook_ , (second revised and extended edition), Free Press, 1993.
  * C. Scott Littleton, ed., _The Sacred East: an Illustrated Guide to Buddhism, Hinduism, Confucianism, Taoism and Shinto_ , Ulysses Press, 1999. (This is abbreviated as SE in the reading assignments)
  * Global Studies, _Japan and the Pacific Rim_ , 6th edition.
  * Suzanne Ogden, _Global Studies: China_ , 9 th edition.
  * Carolyn Prorok _Asian Women and Their Work: A Geography of Gender and Development_.

(Note:  The Textbooks will be provided to participants through a grant from
the Freeman Foundation and the National Consortium for Teaching About Asia)  

* * *

**Seminar Sessions Include the Following:**

**Session One: Saturday, January 19.** **Geographic foundations of East Asian
Culture - Dr. Carol Prorok, Professor of Geography, SRU**

This session will focus on the environmental and cultural characteristics that
define the East Asian realm. Climatic conditions (e.g., monsoon, aridity,
humid subtropics) and prominent landforms (e.g., mountain systems, river
valleys) will be explained. A brief overview of those cultural traits (e.g.,
linguistic, religious) that have historically defined this realm as well as
divided it into subregions will also be covered.  

* * *

**Session Two: Saturday, January 26. Early Institutions - Dr. Peggy Denning,
Professor of History, SRU**

Recommended Readings:

  * Rhoads Murphey: _EAST ASIA: A New History._
  * Patricia Ebrey, Ed: _Chinese Civilization: A Sourcebook._
  * Global Studies: _JAPAN AND THE PACIFIC RIM, 6 th Ed._

In these sessions, participants will be introduced to the events that
constitute the histories of East Asian countries. We will consider how those
events were affected by the traditions discussed in the preceding session
dealing with geography and philosophies and discuss their influence on the
subsequent modernization of the region.

1\. **Early Institutions: Emperors, Gentry, Bureaucrats, Peasantry, and
Warriors**

The emphasis in this hour will be on the social and political system
established in China and their subsequent influence on Japan, Korea, and early
Indochina. We will aim at understanding the traditions that unite the
countries socially and discuss "East Asia" as a moniker applied by the outside
observer.

**Assignments:** Murphey vi-xx, chapters 1 and 4 are essential; chapters 2 and
3 are supportive. Ebrey, sections I and II contain supporting information.

**Handouts:** The Language System, Sima Qian: Records of the Grand Historian
(excerpt on the establishment of the imperial Confucian Academy; Ban Zhao:
Lessons for Women.

2\. **Flourishing East Asian Cultures**

This hour will focus on the imperial period in each country, with particular
emphasis on the diverse cultures produced despite the common Confucian core.
Here we consider the elements that make East Asian countries distinct from one
another as we discuss their diverging historical paths. We will concentrate on
the Tang through Ming periods in China, shogunal Japan, Korea's Yi dynasty,
and the agonies of unification in Vietnam.

**Video:** Excerpt from a video on the Tang.

**Assignments:** Murphey chapter 5, pps. 83-92; chapter 6, pps.101-110;
chapter 7, 125-132, 137-145; chapter 9, and chapter 11 are essential. All
other sections of those chapters are recommended. In some, important material
related to your literature sessions is provided there; sections III, IV, and V
in Ebrey contain important supporting material.

**Handouts:** A Record of Musings on the Eastern Capital (Hangzhou), Lafcadio
Hearn: Japanese Women's Hair, Yamamoto Tsunetomo: Hagekure (The Book of the
Samurai), Honda Tashiaki: A Secret Plan for Managing the Country, Ferdinand
Verbiest: Letter From China (1683), Wu Ching: The Scholars, Mitsui Takafusa:
Some Observations on Merchants (18 th Century), Kangxi: Self-Portrait, Zhang
Tingyu: History of the Ming, Tokugawa Hidetada: Rules on Governing Military
Households, Wang Daolun: Biography of Zhu Jiefu and Gentleman Wang, Kaibara
Ekken: Common-Sense Teachings for Japanese Children and Greater Learning for
Women.

3\. **East Asia and the West**

The confrontation of the adventuring Western civilizations and the resistant
East Asian countries supplies the curiosity and chaos that propel China,
Japan, Korea, and Vietnam into a period of transformation resulting in what we
refer to as "modernization." During this hour, we will consider the challenges
faced as well as the successes achieved with special emphasis on the economic,
social, political, technological, and cultural decisions made by China, Japan,
Korea, and Vietnam.

**Video:** Excerpts from the Pacific Century video on Lu Xun and Kita Ikki.

**Assignments:** Murphey, chapters 13 and 14 are essential; chapters 8-12 are
supportive. Handouts: Tokugawa Iemitsu: Closing Japan, Vasilii Galovnin:
Memoirs on Captivity in Japan, Lafcadio Hearn: Geisha, Japanese Women's Hair  

* * *

  
**Session Three: Saturday, February 2. Philosophic and Religious Foundations
of East Asia, Part One \- Dr. Theodore Kneupper, Professor of Philosophy,
SRU.**

Please read the assigned sections prior to class, so that the sessions can be
used for clarifying and discussing the concepts presented in the readings. The
readings fromThe Sacred East are required core readings, those marked with an
asterisk are recommended.

Required Reading:  
C. Scott Littleton, ed., _The Sacred East: an Illustrated Guide to Buddhism,
Hinduism, Confucianism, Taoism and Shinto_ , Ulysses Press, 1999.

  * Overview: (Read: SE 6-13, RA 1-32*)

> > Religions and ideologies of Chin  
> Religions and ideologies of Japan  
> Religions and ideologies of Korea

  * Chinese religions and ideologies (Read: SE 92-143, RA191-220*)

> > Shamanism and Folk Religions  
> Taoism  
> Confucianism

Recommended Reading:

  * **Daoist Studies**http://www.daoiststudies.org/index.php3
  * **Survey of Relgion in Modern Japan** http://homepage.mac.com/paulshew/research/xty.jpn/surveyReligionJpn.html
  * **Belief, Philosophy and Religion in Korea**http://asnic.utexas.edu/asnic/countries/korea/beliefsystem.html

Niels Neilsen, Frank E. Reynolds, Alan L. Miller, Grace G. Burford (Editor),
John Y. Fenton, _Religions of Asia_ (third edition), Bedford/St. Martin's
Press, 1993.  

* * *

  
**Session Four: Saturday, February 9. Film and Literature of Ancient China,
Japan, and Korea -- Dr. Alison McNeal, Dr. Sunita Peacock, Department of
English, SRU**

Required Readings are from :

  * Anderson, G. L., ed. _Masterpieces of the Orient_. New York: Norton, 1977. (Referred to as MO).
  * Clerk, Jayana and Ruth Siegel, eds. _Modern Literature of the Non-Western World_. New York: Harper Collins, 1995. (Referred to as ML).
  * Westling, Louise, et. al., Eds. _The World of Literature_. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall, 1999\. (Referred to as WL).

**First Hour:**

  * Chinese poetry and Translation
  * Japanese Waka, Tanka, and Haiku

**Second Hour:**

  * Discuss Tale of Gengi
  * Noh Drama

**Third Hour:**

  * Discuss Korean poetry: handout for small group discussion
  * Korean film and film clips

**Suggested Reading:**

**China:**

**Some web links to Confucianism:**

  * **Key Characteristics in the Analects**http://www.geocities.com/hrt236/key.html
  * **Confucian Classics in Chinese (with English Translations of each character)**http://zhongwen.com/lunyu.htm
  * **Confucianism**http://www.askasia.org/frclasrm/readings/r000004.htm

  
**Li Po (Li Bai), Poetry
Magazine**http://www.poetrymagazine.com/archives/2000/November00/po.htm

Owen, Stephen, Editor and Translator. _An Anthology of Chinese Literature:
Beginnings to 1911_. New York: W . W. Norton  & Co., 1997.

**Japan:**

Murasaki, Shikibu. _The Tale of Genji_ . Trans. By Edward G. Seidensticker.
New York: Vintage, 1985.  
**Noh and Noh
Masks**http://www.enncorp.co.jp/Exhibit/noh/nohmask.html#nohMaskKind  
**Noh Dancing**http://www-staff.mcs.uts.edu.au/~don/pubs/noh.html

**Korea:**

Lee, Peter H., Editor. _Anthology of Korean Literature: From Early Times to
the Nineteenth Century_. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1981.  

* * *

**Session Five: Saturday, February 16. Philosophic and Religious Foundations
of East Asia, Part Two \- Dr. Theodore Kneupper, Professor of Philosophy,
SRU.**

Please read the assigned sections prior to class, so that the sessions can be
used for clarifying and discussing the concepts presented in the readings. The
readings from SE are required core readings, those marked with an asterisk are
recommended.

  * Chinese religions and ideologies (continued.) (SE 54-85, 90-91; RA 131-87, 220-243

> > Buddhism  
> Maoism

  * Japanese religions and ideologies (SE 86-89,144-161; RA 244-278*)

> > Shintoism  
> Japanese Buddhism

**Recommended Reading:**

  * Buddhism on the Silk Road http://idp.bl.uk/idp/buddhism/index.html
  * Combined Digital Index of Buddhist Lexicons http://www.human.toyogakuen-u.ac.jp/~acmuller/digitexts.htm
  * Resources for the Study of Buddhism http://online.sfsu.edu/~rone/Buddhism/Buddhism.htm

Niels Neilsen, Frank E. Reynolds, Alan L. Miller, Grace G. Burford (Editor),
John Y. Fenton, _Religions of Asia_ (third edition), Bedford/St. Martin's
Press, 1993.  

* * *

**Session Six: Saturday, February 23. Flourishing East Asian Cultures - Dr.
Peggy Denning, Professor of History, SRU**  


**In Class Assignment:   Dr. Denning has asked that each student prepare a 5 -
7 minute presentation on how they would develop a teaching session (not a full
curriculum plan) using one or more of the documents in the Ebrey book or from
the handouts that Dr. Denning provided.  You may also use other materials from
the class to support these primary documents.  You should try to tie these
historical documents into your academic specialty.  You can use this to build
on the similar assignment in the course requirements.**

Recommended Readings:

  * Rhoads Murphey: _EAST ASIA: A New History._
  * Patricia Ebrey, Ed: _Chinese Civilization: A Sourcebook._
  * Global Studies: _JAPAN AND THE PACIFIC RIM, 6 th Ed._

1\. **Hour One:** **Responses to a Changing World: The Varied Paths of China
and Japan.**

Tokugawa Japan and Qing China coped with the intruding Western civilizations
in quite different ways with obviously varied results. During this hour, we
will address these choices and examine the divergent paths they produced.

**Video:** Excerpts from the Pacific Century video IV: _The Meiji
Restoration_.

**Assignments:** Murphy chapters 15 and 17 are essential; chapters 16 and 18
are supportive. Ebrey's section V and VI provide documentary information.

**Recommended Reading:**  
Andrea and Overfield, _The Human Record_ ,
http://shop.barnesandnoble.com/textbooks/booksearch/isbninquiry.asp?userid=6ARXKE4EOZ&mscssid=BGHRCNT8XP8Q8PS3699HH7QH1NV582XA&isbn=0395870887  
_Sources of the Japanese Tradition_ , Wm. T. de Bary, ed.  
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/tg/stores/detail/-/books/0231086059/reader/1/103-2995974-1039848#reader-
link

**Handouts:** Fukuzawa Yukichi: On Japanese Women, Iwasaki Yataro: Letter to
the Mitsubishi Employees, Ho Chi Minh: Selected Writings, Mao Zedong: Selected
Writings, Lu Xun: Selected Writings, The Declaration of Independence of the
Democratic Republic of Vietnam, Phan Thanh Gian: Letter to Emperor Tu Duc,
several Vietnamese folktales.

2\. **Hour Two:** **Contemporary East Asia**

This hour emphasizes developments since the Sino-Japanese War (the West's
World War II). We will examine the historical upheavals of the period as well
as the growing prosperity of a large part of the region.

**Video** : Excerpts from Raising the Bamboo Curtain: Vietnam

**Assignments:** Murphey, chapters 19 and 22 are pertinent; chapter 20 and 21
are supportive. Ebrey's section VIII provides documentary information.

3\. **Hour Three:Contemporary East Asia/Using the Material**

Although we will be discussing the adaptation of East Asian history to the
K-12 environment throughout the seminar, it seems expedient at this juncture
to focus on suggestions and resources for formulating lessons appropriate to
each individual's particular situation. During this hour, we will pay
particular attention to primary sources, documents, and other resources that
will both extend the participant's understanding of East Asian history and
supply them with handy tools for teaching. At this time, participants may also
want to voice their concerns regarding challenges to the task of making East
Asian history accessible to their students.

**Assignments:** Japan and the Pacific Rim contains information significant to
the understanding and teaching of modern East Asia.  

* * *

**Session Seven: Saturday, March 2. Film and Literature of Modern China,
Japan, and Korea - Dr. Alison McNeal, Dr. Sunita Peacock, Department of
English, SRU.**

Required Readings are from:

  * Anderson, G. L., ed. _Masterpieces of the Orient_. New York: Norton, 1977. (Referred to as MO).
  * Clerk, Jayana and Ruth Siegel, eds. _Modern Literature of the Non-Western World_. New York: Harper Collins, 1995. (Referred to as ML).
  * Van Gulik, Robert. _Celebrated Cases of Judge Dee: An Authentic Eighteenth-Century Chinese Detective Novel_ . New York: Dover Publications, 1976.

**Hour One: China**

1\. Discussion of Van Gulik's Celebrated Cases of Judge Dee using material
from Education about Asia.

  * Judge Dee - The Mystery Novels of Robert Van Gulik http://www.teleologic.com/crghome/vangulik.html
  * Online Learning about Robert Van Gulik http://www.j4.com/authors/van_gulik_robert.php
  * Webpages on Robert Hans van Gulik and Judge Dee http://www.ude.de/gulik/webpages.html
  * Robert van Gulik Bibliography http://hjem.get2net.dk/bnielsen/gulik.html

  
2\. Small group prompts for discussion of Ha Jin's Waiting.

**Hour Two: Japan and Korea**

1\. Discussion and prompts of modern Japanese short stories and poems.

  * Ryunosuke Akutagawa 1892-1927 http://www.kalin.lm.com/akut.html
  * Books and Writers: Ryunosuke Akutagawa   http://www.kirjasto.sci.fi/akuta.htm
  * Books and Writers: Junichiro Tanizaki (1886-1965) http://www.kirjasto.sci.fi/tanizaki.htm
  * Amazon.com books on Tanizaki
  * YASUNARI KAWABATA BIBLIOGRAPHY http://www.otterbein.edu/home/fac/plarchr/kawabata.htm
  * Nobel E-Museum, Yasunari Kawabata http://www.nobel.se/literature/laureates/1968/kawabata-bio.html
  * Books and Writers: Yasunari Kawabata http://www.kirjasto.sci.fi/kawabata.htm

  
2\. Discussion and prompts of Korean short stories and poems.

**Hour Three: Images of women and family in selected Chinese and Japanese
film**

Suggested Reading:  
**China:**

  * Chang, Jung. _Wild Swans: Three Daughters of China_. New York: Anchor World Views, 1992.
  * Gao Xingjian. T _he Other Shore: Plays by Gao Xingjian_. Trans. C. F. Fong. China: Chinese University Press, 1999.
  * Heng Liu. _Green River Daydreams: A Novel_. New York: Grove Press, 2001.

**Japan:**

  * Akira Yoshimura. _Shipwrecks_. New York: Harvest Books, 2000.
  * Endo Shusako. _Deep River_. New York: New Directions, 1996.
  * Van C. Gessel and Tomone Matsumoto. _The Showa Anthology: Modern Japanese Short Stories_. Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1985. (Referred to as SA).

**Korea:**

  * Kim, Richard. _Lost Names: Scenes from a Korean Boyhood_. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988.
  * Lee, Peter H., ed. _Modern Korean Literature_ . Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1990.

* * *

**Session Eight: Saturday, March 9. The Post-War Rise of East Asia. Dr. George
P. Brown, Department of Government, SRU**

Required Readings:

  * Rhoads Murphey, _East Asia: A New History_ , Chapters 20-21.
  * Patricia Ebrey (Ed.), _Chinese Civilization: A Sourcebook_ , Selections from Part VIII.
  * Suzanne Ogden, Global Studies: China.
  * Global Studies, _Japan and the Pacific Rim_.

Photocopied Readings:

  * Mikiso Hane, _Eastern Phoenix: Japan Since 1945_ , Ch. 1. "The End of the Pacific War," pp. 9-39 and Ch. 2, "Political Developments after Independence," pp. 41-59.

Recommended Readings:

  * Edwin O. Reischauer and Marius B. Jansen, _The Japanese Today: Change and Continuity_ , Enlarged Edition, Belknap / Harvard Press.
  * John W. Dower, _Embracing Defeat: Japan in the Wake of World War II_ , W.W. Norton, 1999.

**Hour One: Revolution in China**

**Hour Two: Cold War Dynamics in East Asia**

  * Japan and the US Occupation
  * The Korean War
  * Split between Communist East Asia (China, N. Korea, Vietnam) and US dominated allies (Japan, S. Korea, Taiwan)

**Hour Three: The dynamics of East Asian Capitalism**

  * Japan - from ashes of war to the world's second largest economy
  * S. Korea and Taiwan - Asian Tigers
  * China - rising Dragon

**Links to resources and web-sites on these topics**

* * *

**Session Nine: Saturday, March 16. Asian Women & Their Work in Eastern Asia.
Dr. Carol Prorok, Professor of Geography, SRU**

This session will focus on the social geography of gender and development in
East Asia. Particular attention will be paid to China (e.g., especially in
regards to their population policies) and South Korea (e.g., an inversion of
gender roles is taking place on Cheju Island). Learning activities for
classroom use will be provided.  

* * *

**Session Ten: Saturday, April 6. Politics in Contemporary East Asia. Dr.
George P. Brown, Department of Government, SRU**

Required Readings:

Global Studies, Japan and the Pacific Rim,

**Hour 1: Contemporary Political Dynamics**

  * Japan: liberal democracy
  * S. Korea, Taiwan: transitional democracies

Recommended Readings:

  * Duncan McCargo, _Contemporary Japan_ , St. Martin's Press, 2000.
  * Jacob M. Schlesinger, _Shadow Shoguns: The Rise and Fall of Japan's Postwar Political Machine_ , Stanford University Press.
  * Gerald L. Curtis, _The Logic of Japanese Politics: Leaders, Institutions, and the Limits of Change_ , Columbia University Press.

**Hour 2: China: Transitional Leninist-Capitalist System**

Required Readings:

Suzanne Ogden, _Global Studies: China_.

Recommended Readings:

  * Alan Hunter, John Sexton, _Contemporary China_ , St. Martin's Press, 1999.
  * Cheng Li, _Rediscovering China: Dynamics and Dilemmas of Reform_ , Rowman & Littlefield.
  * Kenneth Lieberthal, _Governing China: From Revolution Through Reform_ , W.W. Norton.

**Hour 3: Teaching Resources on Contemporary Asia**

  * Using the World Wide Web as a Resource for Teaching About Asia
  * ERIC (The U.S. Department of Education, Education Resource Information Center)
  * AEMS: Asian Educational Media Service http://www.aems.uiuc.edu/index.las
  * Education About Asia

* * *

**Session Eleven: Saturday, April 13. Unresolved issues and Challenges in
Asia.** **Dr. George P. Brown, Department of Government, SRU**

Required Readings:

Suzanne Ogden, _Global Studies: China_ ,

Articles from Photocopied Reading

**Hour One: Rising China as Threat or Partner in the 21 st Century?**

**Hour Two: China - Taiwan Issue.**

  * Frontline Documentary website _Dangerous Straits: Exploring the Future of US-China Relations and the Long Simmering Issue of Taiwan_ (Note: this includes a teacher's guide) _  _http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/china/

**Hour Three: N-S Korea Issue, Japan's Unresolved Tensions with Korea and
China.**

Recommended Readings:

Andrew J. Nathan and Robert S. Ross, _The Great Wall and the Empty Fortress:
China's Search for Security_ , W.W. Norton.  

* * *

**Session Twelve: Saturday, April 20. Exploring Additional Topics on Asian
Studies. Dr. Brown and other faculty as requested.

* * *

Session Thirteen: Saturday, April 27. Curriculum Development Projects. Dr.
Brown and other faculty as requested.

* * *

Session Fourteen: Saturday, May 4. Curriculum Development Projects. Dr. Brown
and other faculty as requested.

* * *

Session Fifteen: Friday, May 10. Final Exam Meeting to be held at 6:00 PM.
Presentations on Curriculum Development Projects.  Dr. Brown.**  
    


