**HISTORY OF ISLAMIC CIVILIZATION** **Office:** FSK 2161

**Fall 1999** **Office Hours** 12:30-1:30 PM Tue.

Tue and Thu 11:00-12:15 in FSK 0103 Telephone, (202)333-0071

  
  

******REQUIRED TEXTS: Available in the bookstore or on reserve at McKeldin
library.**

Ahmed, Leila. WOMEN AND GENDER IN ISLAM: HISTORICAL ROOTS OF A MODERN DEBATE.
[On Reserve]

Denny, Frederick Mathewson. AN INTRODUCTION TO ISLAM. [Book Store]

Esposito, John. ISLAM: THE STRAIGHT PATH. [Book Store]

Hourani, Albert. HISTORY OF THE ARAB PEOPLES. [Book Store]

Itzkowitz, Norman. THE OTTOMAN EMPIRE AND ISLAMIC TRADITION. [Book Store]

Lapidus, Ira. HISTORY OF ISLAMIC SOCIETIES. [On Reserve]

Toledano, Ehud R. SLAVERY AND ABOLITION IN THE OTTOMAN MIDDLE EAST. [On
Reserve]

  
  

**RECOMMENDED TEXTS: These books are available on reserve.**

Hakim, Tawfiq. MUHAMMAD. Translated by Ibrahim Hassan El-Mougy; revised by
Ahmad Kamal Metwalli.

Maalouf, Amin. LEO AFRICANUS. [A novel]

Maalouf, Amin. THE CRUSADES THROUGH ARAB EYES. [A narrative]

Musallam, Basim. SEX AND SOCIETY IN ISLAM.

Said, Edward. Orientalism. [The first 31 pages]

Savory, Roger R. INTRODUCTION TO ISLAMIC CIVILIZATION.

  
  

(Few films and a number of short articles may be added during the semester).

  
  

_____________________________________________________________________

  
  

******DESCRIPTION:**

This course is designed to introduce the students to the emergence and
evolution of islamic civilization from the seventh century through the modern
era. It covers a wide variety of topics that include, among others, the birth
and the spread of the Islamic message, the rise and fall of Muslim Empires,
religious and political institutions, Social and economic structures,
scientific and cultural contributions of Muslim societies, and the position of
women and religious minorities in society throughout Islamic history -- with
particular emphasis on the Middle East. The last few weeks of the course will
be focused on discussing the collision between the western world and the world
of Islam in the modern period, the colonialist experience, and the rise of
nationalism and the emergence of nation states in the Middle East.

The students will be encouraged to think critically about all such issues and
try to look at them in their proper historical contexts.

  
  

_____________________________________________________________________

  
  

******CLASS REQUIREMENTS AND GRADES**

1) Attending all classes and participating in class discussions. (10%)

2) A quiz or an assignment. (20%)

3) A mid-term examination. (30%)

4) A final exam. (40%)

(The instructor reserves the right to alter the syllabus and the grade
distribution at any time during the semester.)

  
  

**NOTE:**

**Standards of academic conduct are set forth in the University's Academic
Integrity Code. You are obligated to become familiar with your rights and
responsibilities as defined by the Code. Violations of the Code will not be
tolerated. Violations include receiving inappropriate assistance on
examinations or writing papers and plagiarism.**

**Students with special needs must discuss with me the best possible means of
accommodating these needs.**

**_____________________________________________________________________**

**ASSIGNMENTS**

  
  

WEEK ____ 1

**Introduction.**

**[A] Studying other societies and cultures.**

**[B] Muslim Apologists.**

**The students are required to take notes in the class.**

**Recommended: Said. Orientalism, PP. 1-33**

**WEEK** ____ 2

**The Middle East from pre-Islamic Arabia through the birth of Islam.**

**[A] The social structures and political organization in pre-Islamic
Arabia.**

**[B] pre-Islamic religions.**

**[C] Political and economic life in the context of the sixth century world
system.**

Readings, __ Denny, Frederick. PP. 1-56

WEEK ___ 3

The first Muslim political community.

[A] The life of prophet Muhammad in Mecca.

[B] The first Muslim political community in Medina.

Readings __ Denny, Frederick. PP. 59-82. Esposito, John. PP. 3-34

**RECOMMENDED __ Savory, Roger. PP. 1-31. al-Hakim, Tawfiq. Muhammad.**

**WEEK ____4**

The rightly-guided Caliphs, (Rashidun)

[A] The first succession crisis.

[B] Islamic conquests.

[C] The second succession crisis.

[D] The first Muslim civil wars and the end of the Rashidun.

**READINGS** __ Denny, PP. 83-104. Esposito, PP. 34-69

**RECOMMENDED** __ Savory, PP. 31-53.

WEEK ____ 5

The Umayyad Empire.

[A] From Caliphs to Monarchs.

[B] Power base and political legitimacy.

C] Social structure and sources of revenues.

[D] Continuing expansion of the world of Islam.

[E] The status of non-Muslims and non-Arab Muslims in society.

[F] Political and religious opposition.

**READINGS __** Denny, PP. 172-194. Esposito, PP. 69-114

**Recommended __** Savory, PP. 46-60

WEEK ____ 6

The Abbasid Empire.

[A] The abbasid revolution

[B] Power base and legitimacy.

[C] The economic foundations of the empire.

[D] Islam as a universal message.

[E] the co-optation of the religious elite.

[F] the decentralizing forces within the empire and the rise of local
dynasties.

[G] the fall of the Abbasids.

READINGS **__ Denny, PP. 107-172. Lapidus, Ira. PP. 81-242**

**WEEK ____ 7**

Religion and Politics.

[A] Islamic sects.

[B] Religious Sciences.

READINGS __ The material is fully covered in the previous assignments. ****

**WEEKS ____ 8 and 9**

Culture and society

[A] The Muslim Suffi ways and Esoteric piety.

[B] Islamic sciences and arts.

[C] Women and the family.

[D] Slavery in Islamic societies.

[E] **MIDTERM EXAM )THURSDAY, OCTOBER 28)**

**READINGS** __ Denny, PP. 219-317. Toledano, Ehud. first three chapters.

**RECOMMENDED** __ Ahmed, Leila. PP. 39-123. Musallam, Entire book. Savory,
PP. 61-125 ****

**WEEKS ____ 10 And 11**

The rise of the ottoman and Safavid Empires.

**[A] The Middle East from the thirteenth to the fifteenth century.**

**[B] The rise of the Ottomans.**

**[C] the rise of the Safavids.**

**[D] Ottoman expansion into Anatolia and Europe.**

**[E] Ottoman expansion into the Arab parts of the Middle East.**

**[F] Tensions and border conflicts between the Ottomans and the Safavids.**

**[G] Social, political, and religious institutions in the two empires.**

**READINGS __** Class Notes and other Assigned Articles. Plus Itzkowitz, PP.
3-109 ****

**WEEK ____ 12**

European economic penetration and political hegemony over Middle Eastern
societies.

**[A] The change in the balance of power between the Ottoman Empire and
Europe.**

**[B] European geo-political and economic interests in the Middle East.**

**[C] The diplomacy of the Eastern Question.**

**[D] Economic and political concessions.**

**[E] The rise of rebellious Ottoman governors to power.**

**[F] European military expansion into Ottoman territories.**

**Readings __** Hourani, PP. 249-333.

WEEK ____ 13

The british and the French colonialism in the Middle East.

**[A] French colonialism in North Africa and the Levant.**

**[B] British colonialism in Egypt and the Arab East.**

**[C] The partitioning of the Ottoman Empire after World War I.**

**[D] The creation of artificial borders and new states.**

READINGS __ **Hourani, PP. 333-373**

**WEEK ____ 14**

The struggle for independence

**[A] The second World War and the waning power of the old Empires.**

**[B] The emergence of new political elites.**

**[C] Competing ideologies.**

**[D] The creation of the state of Israel and the destruction of Palestine.**

**[E] remarks on the Arab Israeli conflict.**

READINGS __ **Hourani, PP. 373-434.**

**WEEK ____ 15 AND 16**

Discussion of current issues.

[A Islamic resurgence.

[B] Islam and democracy.

READINGS __ **Esposito, PP. 114-219. Denny, PP. 321-366**

**WEEK ____ 17**

Final Exam, Fri. December 17 8:00-10:00 AM.

