The University of Texas at Austin                                        Fall
semester 1997  
Government 320L/MES 323K                                    Prof. Clement M.
Henry  
Unique numbers: 33270, 36485                                           Office:
Burdine 422  
Burdine 116: Tu Th 11-12:30                               Office hrs: Tu
1:30-3, Th 10-11  
                                                                                                    or by email

# Arab-Israeli Politics

    * Course Content
    * Class discussions over the Internet
    * Simulation game
    * Required texts:
    * Course requirements:
    * Role profiles (500 words)
    * Annotated bibliogaphies
    * Simulation game participation
    * Debriefing Paper (800 words)
    * Schedule of Topics and Readings

Back to Arab-Israeli Politics home page

18 July 1997  
Department of Government, College of Liberal Arts, University of Texas at
Austin. Questions, Comments, and Suggestions to chenry@gov.utexas.edu

* * *

Course Content

This is a course about politics and clashing value systems, not history, but
first you will need to learn the history and learn why you are learning the
historical facts that are presented. You will also discover that "Arab-
Israeli" politics really involves several levels: 1) conflicts between Arabs
and Israelis in Palestine/Israel, 2) conflicts between the state of Israel and
various Arab states in the region, 3) conflicts, muted since the end of the
Cold War but still present, between powerful states outside the region who are
sucked into the first two sets of conflicts, 4) conflicts within the American
community over the nature of our commitment to Israel and how to reconcile it
with other national interests, 5) conflicts within the Israeli body politic
over relationships with their Arab neighbors, and 6) conflicts between Arab
states and within the various Palestinian communities over their relationships
with Israel. This course is designed to enhance your understanding of these
domestic, regional, and international factors in the "Arab-Israeli" conflict.

Some of these conflicts may divide you as well as the protagonists in the
Middle East. You will be expected to develop an understanding and empathy with
the protagonists, whatever your own views on the subject may be. You will
learn to appreciate the clashes in values that may accompany conflicting
political perspectives. You may deepen your own appreciation of some of the
moral dilemmas underlying political choices.

Irrespective of your own convictions, you will be expected to develop your
critical faculties, in order to be able to detect "bias" or "spins" in
narratives of the Arab-Israeli conflict and in the daily press, whether in the
form of "news" reports or editorial opinion. In the guise of "objective"
narrative and "scientific" analysis crucial facts may be omitted, or others
emphasized that reinforce the views of some protagonists against others. To
detect the omissions or get a feel for the balance or lack of balance in a
supposedly objective report, you will need to acquire a good command of the
history of conflict between Arabs and Jews over territories named "Palestine"
and "Israel." How far back? Your textbook (Smith) starts off with Biblical
times (circa 1400 BC). Smith's book was attacked by some reviewers on the
ground that Zionism emerged as a cultural and political movement only in the
late nineteenth century.

Table of contents  

* * *

### Class discussions over the Internet

While we will try to discuss various points of view in class, you are also
expected to express some of your views and perceptions in "chat," our
electronic discussion forum. This forum is protected by a password, so that it
is very much like our classroom. Make a  comment and it will be seen only by
other members of the class, your TA, and your professor. Your contributions
will count toward your class participation grade. You will all be given
computer accounts on September 11 (and the password earlier, for Netscape
users), so that you can get practice using the Internet in plenty of time for
our electronic simulation game.

Table of contents  

* * *

### Simulation game

The best way to develop your empathy and critical understanding of the various
protagonists is through hands-on experience. You will therefore all be
involved in a simulation game of diplomatic interaction among the major
players of the Arab-Israeli conflict. We will be joining classes of students
from other universities, including the American University in Cairo. We willl
be sending computer messages back and forth among ourselves and between our
players and theirs. Each of you will represent a particular actor in the
conflict. The instructor will try to take account of your personal preferences
in selecting the role. The richest experience, for those of you who already
have strong convictions and seek to develop empathy for conflicting
perspectives, may be to play the role of one of your "enemies." But most of
you probably just want to learn something about the Middle East and have no
particularly entrenched views. No prior experience or course work is required.
Whatever your previous knowledge of the Middle East, expect to spend a fair
amount of time on this course preparing position papers and exchanging
messages through our computer-conferencing system. No prior experience with
computers is needed to complete your work satisfactorily, but you will need to
type. You will enhance your computer literacy and learn how to use the
Internet as a research tool.

Table of contents  

* * *

### Required texts:

**You will be expected to purchase (or share):**

Donna E. Arzt, Refugees into Citizens (NY: Council on Foreign Relations, 1997)

T.G. Fraser, The Arab-Israeli Conflict (NY: St. Martin's, 1995)

Charles D. Smith, Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict 3rd edition (St.
Martin Us Press, 1996).

**Recommended:**

Asher Arian, The Second Republic: Politics in Israel (Chatham House, 1997)

Seymour M. Hersh, The Sampson Option, New York: Vintage, 1991

B Korany and A.E.H. Dessouki, The Foreign Policies of Arab States 2nd edition
(Westview, 1991)

Walter Laqueur and Barry Rubin eds, The Israel-Arab Reader, Penguin1995  
-very strongly recommended for in-depth documentation.

William B. Quandt, Peace Process (Brookings pb, 1993)

Glenn E. Robinson, Building a Palestinian State (Indiana UP, 1997)

Mark Tessler, A History of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict (U of Indiana
Press, 1994)

You should read either The New York Times, The Washington Post, or the
Christian Science Monitor regularly, and/or use our UT Clarinet news
resources. The Jerusalem Post and the Jerusalem Dawn (Al-Fajr), available in
PCL, also provide useful and timely insights, respectively from Israeli and
Palestinian perspectives, and you may subscribe in class to Middle East
International ($10 for 6 or 7 issues to be received in the course of the
semester). You also have free access, with the class password, to some
copyrighted resources.

Table of contents  

* * *

### Course requirements:

Grading

Midterm 20%  
Role Profile Paper 10%  
Annotated bibliography 5%  
Game participation 10%  
Debriefing paper 10%  
Class Participation 15% (includes computer "chat" participation)  
Identifications Test 15%  
Final take-home essay 15%

Important Dates

MID-TERM EXAM: Thursday, October 9.  
ROLE PROFILE PAPER: due Tuesday, Oct. 14.  
ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY: due Tuesday, Oct. 14.  
GAME BEGINS: Tuesday, Oct. 21.  
GAME ENDS: Thursday, Nov. 20.  
INDIVIDUAL DEBRIEFING PAPER: due Tuesday, Nov. 25.  
IDENTIFICATIONS TEST: Thursday, Dec. 4.  
FINAL EXAMINATION ESSAY (take home): due Thursday, Dec. 4, in class.

Table of contents  

* * *

  
Role profiles (500 words)

You will be expected to do some research on the character you are representing
in the game. You will pay special attention to his or her statements and
positions with respect to Middle East foreign policies and strategies in
general, and the Arab-Israeli conflict in particular.

Here are the sorts of information to look for:

TITLE: Check to make sure your assigned title is correct, if you were given a
name.

ROLE NAME: given in handout or to be researched in light of your title.

PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION: Optional and please be very brief if you happen to come
up with something.

BACKGROUND BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION (do the best you can):

Place of birth:

Date of birth:

Schooling:

Career pattern:

Present post:

*DISCUSSION OF POLITICAL GOALS AND STRATEGIES: (Very important, and you can do it for the country even if you don't have much personal information). How they developed and how they relate to your topic at hand, the Arab-Israeli conflict and peace process.

*ROLE DESCRIPTION: your duties and responsibilities, political position and power should be analyzed.

*POLITICAL ALLIES AND OPPONENTS: Specify your principal allies and adversaries within the simulation.

GREATEST CONTRIBUTIONS (optional): Major past accomplishments of which the
other players should be made aware.

ROLE PLAYING NOTES (optional): Character-related information that is
significant for the simulation, eg. foibles and desires, reputation.

MEANINGFUL QUOTATIONS (optional): These might indicate some of the actor's
views relevant to the simulation.

**SOURCES (very important for grading purposes): give sources in your
annotated bibliographies, and pay attention to the quality of the evidence.
(See your syllabus for suggestions on electronic sources; you may also try the
PCL reference room)

You will be expected to write a collective role profile of about 500 words.
You will present one copy in class on October 15, and you will also transmit
it to our collection of role profiles on the Internet. (We will explain in
class to you the mechanics of signing into our computer system and sending
messages).

Table of contents  

* * *

### Annotated bibliogaphies

You will also present annotated bibliographies of the sources you used to
prepare the role profile. You will present one copy in class on October 14,
and you will also transmit it to our archive of annotated bibliographies on
the Internet. The bibliography should consist of 5 to 10 useful sources about
your character. They may be general background about your character's concerns
(such as Jersualem, water, settlements, compensation for refugees, the future
political status of Palestine, etc.) as well as biographic information or a
sample of your character's speeches. The sources may be articles, books, or
electronic files. Electronic sources can be documented with their URL
(http://......). You should make a brief critical summary of each source. Make
sure that the electronic verson of your annotated bibliography has an
informative subject header, such as the name of your character or a
substantive subject heading. You may break your bibliography down into
separate items corresponding to your sources.

For your bibliography and general information, you may access many useful
materials, including translations of the foreign press, over the Internet. You
may not even need to go to the library, just use our course home page internet
resources and surf the net for a tremendous amount of information! Or look at
the supplementary bibliography on our home page. If you do go to the PCL, you
may also consult such newspapers as The New York Times, The Jerusalem Post,
the Egyptian Gazette, and The Economist, as well as recent issues of the
Journal of Palestine Studies, Washington Report on Middle East Affairs, Middle
East Policy, Middle East Reports, The Middle East Journal, Middle East
Insight, Foreign Affairs, Foreign Policy, The Link, and (most useful of all)
Middle East International. In the periodical room of the PCL you may consult
translations of various Middle Eastern newspapers and speeches of political
leaders on microfiche. Ask the periodical librarian for suggestions and
instructions on how to use the microfiches (JPR series of translations of
speeches and newspaper articles by Foreign Broadcasting Information Service,
FBIS--now also available online for UT students via the World News
Connection). For briefings on the military strengths and weaknesses of the
various protagonists, consult the annual reports of the Institute of Strategic
Studies (London) and other materials (SIPRI, for example) available in the
reference room of PCL.

You may find lots of up-to-date material in the Middle East Center's library.
The Center is on the 6th floor of the West Mall Bldg.

Table of contents  

* * *

### Simulation game participation

You will be expected to sign on and participate in the simulation game at
least once every other day (including weeekends) from October 21 to November
20.

Table of contents  

* * *

### Debriefing Paper (800 words)

You will then be expected to write a second paper of no more than 800 words,
due Tuesday, Nov. 25, (hard copy in class, electronic version to the
"debriefing" file) presenting your impressions of the game, what you learned
from it, and how "realistically" you thought other characters performed in the
game. Try to avoid play-by-play descriptions and summaries of what happened.
You will be graded for your originality and perceptiveness and also for your
ability to document your insights. You should footnote required readings and
research you did in connection with the course when comparing "real life" with
what went on in the game. A good paper will have a lead idea and develop a
well documented argument.

Table of contents  

* * *

### Schedule of Topics and Readings (on Reserve, UGL):

**Aug. 28** : Getting started: discussion of simulation game procedures and
requirements. The importance to the United States of resolving the Arab-Israel
conflict. Impact of the Second Gulf War (1990-91).

Readings:

1) Get familiar with our WWW home page for Gov 320L/MES 323K. You may access
it via  and then click on Government courses and then Gov 320.

2) Start reading T.G. Fraser, The Arab-Israeli Conflict and finish it by
September 12.

**Sept 2** : Conceptual themes: issues of national self-determination,
dialogue, and perspective ("bias").

**Sept. 4** : The Middle East context: a strategic area, unstable and
"penetrated" political systems, diplomatic paralysis, and local arms races.

**Sept. 9** : Arab and Jewish nationalisms: an overview.

Readings: Charles Smith, Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict, pp. 1-37  
Laqueur and Rubin, The Israel-Arab Reader, pp. 599-611, or  
http://www.israel-mfa.gov.il/peace/basicref.html read #19,  
Israel-Palestinian Declaration of Principles, Sept. 13, 1993.

**Sept. 11** : The Status of Palestine: Thrice-Promised Land 1915-1922.

Readings: Smith, pp. 38-67. Laqueur and Rubin, The Israel-Arab Reader, p.16,
The Balfour Declaration.

**Sept. 16** : The Issue of Autonomy: British dilemmas over Palestine:
conflicting commitments concerning political representation, land, and people.

Readings: Smith, pp. 68-111,Cairo Agreement of 4 May 1994, and "Oslo 2"
(September 28, 1995), summarized in Rabin's speech to Knesset, Oct. 5, 1995.

You may also want to read other more documents from the Israeli foreign
ministry's home page of basic references, such as the Hebron accords of
January 17, 1997, including attached notes. Also you may download a map
outlining the areas A and B from which the Israeli army is redeployed.

**Sept. 18** : Class in Computer Lab, Burdine 120: to receive your course
accounts and learn about our e-mail system.

Readings: Arian, The Second Republic, pp. 103-140 (about Israeli political
parties and elections) **or** http://www.israel-mfa.gov.il/news/elect596.html  
and finish T.G. Fraser, The Arab-Israeli Conflict

**Sept. 23** : Issues of Internal Security and Terrorism--"Gun Zionism" and
the Emergence of Israel

Readings: Smith, pp. 112-151; recommended: Mark Tessler, A History, pp.
273-335, Deir Yassin Remembered

**Sept. 25** : Issues of Refugees and Self-Determination

Readings: Arzt, pp. 1-62

**Sept. 30** : The Issue of Regional Security: Recalling the Arab-Israeli
Conflict, 1949-56.

**Readings: Smith, pp. 152-177.**

**Oct. 2** : From War to War, 1956-1967

Readings: Smith, pp. 178-205; Laqueur and Rubin, The Israel-Arab Reader, pp.
217-218: UN Security Council Resolution 242.  
Optional: browse through the home page of the USS Liberty

**Oct. 7** : Review Session and introduction to computer conferencing

**Oct. 9** : Midterm exam: to consist of two parts:

1) 10 identification questions (eg. what/when was the Madrid Conference and
what was its significance? ....Golan Heights?..(you would also need to put
this one on a blank map we will give you) for 50% of the grade, and

2) an essay question.

**Oct. 14** : Costs of Diplomatic Paralysis: the 1973 War. Step by step vs.
comprehensive solutions?

Readings: Smith, pp. 206-241.

Role profiles and annotated bibliographies due: hard copies in class. Please
also post them in the computer system as instructed. You may use our WWW home
page form or e-mail.

**Oct. 16** : Regional Insecurity and Lebanon: the American expeditions of
1958 and 1982.

Readings: Smith, pp. 242-280

**Oct. 21** : The Intifada, the Transformation of the PLO, and the Gulf
Crisis: Pressures for Peace. (Game begins today)

Readings: Arzt, pp. 63-79; Smith, pp. 281-313;  
Palestinian Declaration of Independence

**Oct. 23** : The Israeli-Palestinian Peace Process. Continuing Peace with
Jordan?

Readings: Smith, pp. 313-341; optional: Israel-Jordan Treaty (Oct. 26, 1994).

**Oct. 28** : Syria and the Golan

Readings: Compare the Israeli settlers' history of the Golan Heights with that
of the Encyclopedia Britannica (requires your student ID number).

**Oct. 30** : The political issue of mutual recognition: what is autonomy --
what is self-determination?

Readings: Arzt, pp. 83-100; Noam Chomsky, A Painful Peace (1996) or The
Israel-Arafat Agreement (1993)

**Nov. 4** : The refugee and settlement issues

Readings: Arzt, pp. 101-123; Applied Research Institute, Jerusalem, Recent
Israeli Settlement Activity, read one of the 8 cases, including maps

**Nov. 6** : Water

Reading: Stephan Libiszewski, Water Disputes in the Jordan Basin Region;
optional: Miriam R. Lowi, Water and power (Cambridge University Press, 1995)

**Nov. 11** : Jerusalem

Readings: An official Israeli view: Basic Law and links to legal background
paper.  
A Palestinian view: The Status of Jerusalem Reconstructed  
Maps ofJerusalem (PCL, 1984) and Har Homa=Abu Ghnaim

**Nov. 13** : U.S. foreign policy: oil and domestic constraints

Readings: optional: Paul Findley, They Dare Speak to Speak Out, 25-49, and
visit AIPAC and Washington Report, April/May 1997, pp. 43-44.

**Nov. 18** : Arms control and nuclear proliferation

Readings: optional: Seymour Hersh, The Sampson Option

**Nov. 20** : Summing up the peace process: Palestinian self-determination and
Israeli security?

Game ends today with plenty of news!

**Nov. 25** : Game debriefing: debriefing paper due

**Nov. 27** : Thanksgiving holiday

**Dec. 2** : Prospects for Peace? Your last chance to participate in class
discussion!

**Dec. 4** : Identifications Test

Final take-home essay due

Table of contents  

* * *

