#  ART527 Art of Central Africa

![](rule04.gif)

![](rule04.gif)

College of Arts and Sciences![](sundi1.gif)

Governors State University

Division of Liberal Arts

COURSE SYLLABUS

Index Number: ART 527

Course Title: African Art: Central Africa

Professor: Dr. A. Bourgeois

Credit Hours: 3.0

Trimester: Winter 2002

Time: 7:30-10:20 pm, Thursdays

CATALOG DESCRIPTION:

A survey of the traditional art of Sub-Saharan Africa from the Western Sudan
to the Congo Basin and beyond. Treated are stylistic classifications,
archaeology, historical interactions, and ethnographic contexts with emphasis
given to specific regions listed in the course subheading. Students may repeat
this course for additional credit under differing subheadings. This term the
course will be devoted to the Art of Central Africa.

EXPECTED STUDENT OUTCOME:

Upon completion of the course the student has acquired:

1\. The ability to analyze a number of art objects with regard to their form
and content.

2\. Is familiar with the iconography of select examples from differing styles
within this subject.

3\. Has conducted research on a particular object within the scope of this
subject matter.

COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

1\. Attendance at lectures and participation in discussions are mandatory.
Required readings are therefore necessary.

2\. Mid-term and final examination consist of slide identification (media,
provenance, date, significance) and essay questions. Only one make-up
examination will be offered for students absent from initial exam; highest
possible grade for a re-scheduled examination is the grade of "B".

3\. All students are required to submit a research paper on an approved topic
in an acceptable format: undergraduates 6-8 typed pages exclusive of
illustrations, graduate students are expected to submit graduate-level
research of 8-10 typed pages.

LECTURES:

1\. Introduction to African Art and its style areas of sculpture, an overview
of art in archaeology, and expressions in textiles, furnishings, and body
arts.

2\. Geography, archaeology, and language families of Central Africa.

3\. Northwestern Forests to Cameroon Grasslands: Ejagham, Mileke, Menda-Tikar,
Duala.

4\. Equatorial Forest Peoples: Fang, Tsogo, Kwele, Kele-Kota, Shira-Punu.

5\. Lower Congo/Zaire River area: Kongo.

6\. Pool Malebo & Middle Congo: Bwendi, Bembe, Teke, Kuyu.

7\. Kwango River Region: Mbala, Suku, Yaka, Holo, Pende.

8\. Kasai River Region: Eastern Pende, N. Kete, Kuba, Ndengese, Luluwa,
Salampasu, Mbagani, Lwalwa.

9\. Lunda Plateau: Chokwe, Songo, Lwena, Ndembu.

10\. Upper Congo River: Tetela, Songye, Kusu, Pre-Bembe, Hemba, Luba, Tabwa.

11\. Equatorial Forest: Eastern Portion - Lega, Lengola, Mbole.

12\. Uele Forests in the North: Mangbetu, Zande; Ngbaka, Ngata.

13\. East of the Lakes and South of the Zambezi.

14\. International Styles and Contemporary Scene

15\. Slide Quiz and Examination.

TEXT:  Visona, Monica Blackmun, Robin Poynor, et al.  _A History of Art In
Africa_.   Prentice Hall Inc. 2001.

STUDY QUESTIONS:

1\. Turner, V. "Color Classification in Ndembu Ritual: A Problem in Primitive
Classification," in _Forest of Symbols,_ pp. 59-91.

What is the range of meanings attributed to the basic triad in Bantu societies
according to this author?

2\. From required reading, outside reading, and lectures, develop two examples
of a similarity in sculpture or motif of different ethnic groups based upon
their common history, economy, social structure, ritual symbolism and
institutions.

RESEARCH PAPER IN ART HISTORY

A research paper is required of all students who are taking this course for
credit. The topic should be selected in consultation with the instructor or
chosen from an approved list.

The research paper is intended to demonstrate your comprehension of the
subject as well as to provide an exercise in the methods and approaches used
in the study of an art object. Whatever your topic, you are expected to seek
out the latest sources, including current periodical literature. Begin by
consulting your texts and suggested readings in the course syllabus. For
further information on bibliographies and periodicals, speak with a Reference
Librarian. If the library lacks necessary sources, you are expected to obtain
them from other libraries or utilizes inter-library loan allowing sufficient
time for delivery.

Research papers must be typed (double-spaced) and carefully proofread.

The following approach is suggested:

Study one object of art within the subject matter of this course (choice of an
object within a public collection in the greater Chicago area is highly
recommend for firsthand analysis).

1\. Describe object and its formal organization, e.g., size, proportion,
repetitions, contrasts, emphasis and subordination and characteristics of
shape, line, color and texture.

2\. Research techniques and tools with which the object was made.

3\. What is known regarding the artist?

4\. Why was it made? Research the original context.

5\. When was the object made?

6\. Research motifs or symbols featured within the work.

7\. Compare with like objects in the literature deriving from same artist,
locale or time period or antecedent to the artwork.

Illustrate your paper with drawings, photocopy or photographs giving each a
number, caption and citation within the narrative of your text. All
illustrations are to be placed following the text and are not to be included
in the total page count (8 pages for undergraduates, 10 pages graduate
students). Preparation of a map is often an excellent means to help clarify
relationships and demark origins.

You must footnote any material you use in your paper that derives from other
printed sources that cannot be considered as common knowledge. Plagiarizing is
the taking of ideas, writing, etc., from another and pass them off as one's
own.

The bibliography must include complete information on the author, publisher,
edition, and date of publication of the sources utilized.

For further informationon format or analytical terminology consult Sylvan
Barnett _A Short Guide to Writing About Art_ (Little, Brown & Co).

As an upper-division or graduate level course, much of your grade depends upon
your research and writing of this term paper. Give this project adequate time
and your best effort. Do not hand in anything of which you are ashamed.

RESEARCH AND STUDY LINKS:

 Library References For Art

Unknown Artist: Yaka Circumcision Mask

Maps of Africa

Zaire Page

AFRICA: THE ART OF A CONTINENT: Central Africa

ART HISTORY RESOURCES: Part 4 Non-European Art

http://www.govst.edu/library/class3.htm

STYLE MAPS

1\. Cameroon

2\. Gabon

3\. Congo Basin Statuettes

4\. Congo Basin Masks

Other GSU Courses:

ART527 African Art: West Africa

ART523 Pre-Columbian Art: Mexico-Guatemala

ART523 Pre-Columbian Art: Lower Central & S. Amer.

ART360 Seminar: Concepts and Methods

ART505 Worlds of Art Internet Course

