**HIST 146** **American Civilization  Summer, 2001**

**Instructor: Dr. Kevin Kragenbrink**

**Office Hours: Before Class or by Appointment   **

**Office #: SH-134**

**Phone 880-5995 E-Mail: [kkragenb@csusb.edu ](mailto:kkragenb@csusb.edu)**

[[Personal Information](vita.htm)] [[Other History Sites](other.htm)]
[[History 200](hist200.htm)] [[History 356](hist356.htm)]

[[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return to Hist. Dept. Main
Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)] ****

* * *



[**STUDY GUIDE FOR EXAM ONE**](EX1%20Study%20Guide%20for%20Exam%20One.htm)

[**STUDY GUIDE FOR EXAM TWO**](Exam%202%20Study%20Guide.htm)

[**FINAL EXAM STUDY GUIDE**](Final%20Exam%20Study%20Guide.htm) ****

[Course Description] [Assigned Readings] [Course Requirement] [Grading]
[Schedule of Lectures]

* * *

**CourseDescription:**

This course is a survey of the History of the United States from pre-
colonization to the present. Obviously, we will not be able to cover all the
names, dates, facts and so on in so large a survey. Instead, the course will
offer you a chance to explore themes in the development of American
Civilization including Political, Cultural, Social, and Religious subjects. We
will, as you might expect, encounter some of the significant events and
persons in American history, but we will also give attention to cultural and
social diversity exemplified through the lives and activities of a wide range
of individuals and groups. We will give specific attention to such themes in
American development as: political values and structures, individualism and
community, racial and ethnic interactions, religious idealism and reform, and
gender and family roles. The purpose of the course is not simply to give you
facts and information about what happened in the American past, but to help
you analyze and evaluate how what has happened influenced American
civilization.

[return to top of page] [[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return
to Hist. Dept. Main Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)]

* * *

**Texts** **and Other Reading Material:**

**Assigned Readings:**

As with most history courses, this is a reading intensive class. If you hope
to do well, you **_must do all_** the reading **.** You would do well to
simply read the text assigned straight through. This will give you a
significant head start on the material to be covered in this course and
provide you with a solid background in the basics of U. S. history. There will
be test information taken from the text on the exams.  
  

Text: Tindall, George Brown and David E. Shi, _America: A Narrative History_ ,
Brief Edition, (New York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1997).  

**Internt Research:**

This web site that includes a page of links on topics of importance for
students of United States History. I will also be including study aids and
other information periodically to strengthen your understanding of the course
material and improve your ability to perfom well on exams and on course
projects.  I want to encourage every one to take advantage of this site and
its links to increase your knowledge of history, but also to enhance your
awareness of and improve your skills in using the resources available on the
World Wide Web. **PLEASE NOTE:** The study aids found on the Web Site will not
be presented to you in any other form. You must go on the web to use them.

[return to top of page] [[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return
to Hist. Dept. Main Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)]

* * *

**CourseRequirements:**

**Reading The Text:** There is no assigned reading schedule for this course,
but I expect that you will read the text from cover to cover and that you will
use it as a tool to build your base of knowledge regarding American
Civilization. My strong recommendation is that you begin reading immediately
and that you make every effort to read the entire text before the conclusion
of the second week of class. I assure you that reading faithfully will help
you do well in this course. Conversely, failing to read will undoubtedly make
it more difficult for you to do well on the exams.

**Examinations:** There will be two sectional (mid-term) exams and a final
exam. All three exams may include a combination of true/false, multiple
choice, and fill-in type questions. Each of the sectional exams will cover
only the material presented immediately before that exam. Make-up exams will
be given at _**my**_ discretion and only if you make arrangements **_before_**
the exam or if you provide documentary proof of the emergency which prevented
you from taking the exam at the scheduled time. Make-up exams will be all
essay in form and are generally more difficult than the regularly scheduled
exams.  
  

[return to top of page] [[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return
to Hist. Dept. Main Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)]

* * *

**Grading** **:**

There is no "curve" for this course and I do not offer extra credit. Grades
are assigned on a simple 10% scale. The exams are weighted as listed below.

**Grade Distribution**

|

**Weighted Values**  
  
---|---  
  
92-100% = A

|

78-79% = C+

|

60-62% = D-

|

Sectional exam #1: 30%  
  
90-91% = A-

|

73-77% = C

|

Below 60% = F

|

Sectional exam #2: 30%  
  
88-89% = B+

|

70-72% = C-

|



|

Final exam: 40%  
  
83-87% = B

|

68-69% = D +

|



|

  
  
80-82% = B-

|

63-67% = D

|



|

  
  
[return to top of page] [[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return
to Hist. Dept. Main Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)]

* * *

**Lecture Schedule NOTE: These are proposed titles. The professor reserves the
right to change this schedule of lectures as the course develops ** ****

**Week One  June 21**

Introduction to the Course;

Native American Cultures of North America

"God, Gold, Glory": Foundations of American Civilization

**Week Two  June26, 28**

"A Necessary Evil?": Racism and The Roots of American Slavery

Developing an American Civilization: The Road to Revolution

**Sectional Exam 1, June 28**

The Struggle to Define America: The Articles of Confederation & The
Constitution.

A Government of the People: From Republicans to Democrats

**Week Three  July 3, 5**

A Nation of Winners: Expanding Frontiers and Manifest Destiny

Reforming the Dream: Making a Middle Class America.

The "Peculiar Institution" and American Racism.

Americans Respond to Slavery: The Road to Civil War.

**Week Four  July 10, 11**

**Sectional Exam 2  July 11**

Winners and Losers: The Aftermath of Civil War.

Entering the "Modern" age: Urbanization, Industrialization, and the "New
Immigration."

An American Empire: America in the World

**Week Five  July 17, 19**

The search for "Normalcy" in America, From WWI to the 1950s

Confronting Racism For Real: The Civil Rights Movement.

**Week Six  July 24, 26**

Unrealized Potential: Contemporary America Confronts a New World.

Disillusioned and Divided: Social & Political Crisis in Contemporary America

**Final Exam  July 26**



[return to top of page] [[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return
to Hist. Dept. Main Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)]

