    
  | **Professor Mia Bay : Office - Van Dyck 002D**  
**tel., 932-6695, email:** _mbay@rci.rutgers.edu_  
Office hours: Tuesdays 4:30-5:30 and by appointment |

Section leaders: Scott Bruton,  
Justin Lorts,  
and Charles Upchurch  
  
---|---  
  


**Course description**

This course provides an introductory overview of American history from its
beginnings to 1877. Opening with an overview of the Atlantic world in the
fifteenth century, the course traces the social, cultural, and political
history of America through to Reconstruction. Subjects include the first
contacts between Native inhabitants and European colonists, the evolution of
Britainis American colonies, the displacement of Native peoples, the
development of slavery, the social impact of successive waves of European
migration, and the emergence, expansion, and consolidation of the United
States. Topical rather than comprehensive, the course will emphasize the
historical experiences of individual Americans, and the major events, ideas,
and social and political conflicts that have shaped American society.  


**Sections**  
Each of you is enrolled in a discussion section. Discussion sections will meet
six times over the course of the semester and are essential part of the
course. Discussion sections are on Thursdays on the dates listed on the
syllabus. You should come to discussion sections fully prepared to discuss the
readings, and may be asked to submit one-page commentaries on the readings.
Alternatively, you may be asked to participate in classroom exercises on the
readings, or answer brief quizzes about them.

**Requirements**

**Readings**  
The weekly readings required in this course usually range between 50-100
pages. Course readings are contained following four books, all of which are
available at the Rutgers University Bookstore:

James A. Henretta et.al, _America: A Concise History_ (listed on the schedule
as _America_ )  
William Andrews _, Classic American Autobiographies_  
James MacPherson, _What They Fought for1861-1865_  
_Bibliobase Coursepack_ (listed on the schedule as _CP_ )

Please note that students are expected to do _all_ the reading. As indicated
above, there will be several pop quizzes and/or section assignments on the
weekly readings. Readings will also be discussed and analyzed in lecture.
Please bring your weekly readings to class.  
    
    


**Written Assignments**  
In addition, course participants must complete three papers, a midterm exam,
and a final. Both the papers and the exams will be based on the readings. The
course grade will be divided as follows: the first paper will count for 10% of
the final grade; each of the second two papers will be worth15%; the midterm
and the final will comprise 20% each; and quizzes, section assignments, and
participation in section will make up the remaining 20%.

> [First Written Assignment](UShistory2.html)  
> [Midterm Study Sheet](UShistoryMT.html)  
> [Second Written Assignment](UShistoryP2.html)  
> [Third Written Assignment](UShistoryP3.html)

  
**Attendance**  
Attendance is mandatory. Beginning the second week of the course, you are
expected to sign in and attend the entire class. More than three unexcused
(medical, family emergency) absences will lower your grade one letter grade.
Six unexcused absences from lecture and discussion will result in failure.
Arriving more than five minutes after class begins will count as half an
absence. Signing in and leaving early (without notifying your instructor) is a
triple absence. If you cannot get to class on time on a regular basis due to a
schedule conflict, do not enroll in this class.  
    
    
  

**Course Schedule**

**Week 1 Introduction**

January 16: Studying American History

January 18: 1492: World Collide  
READING: Columbus Announces His Discovery (1493) _CP_ , 1-4; _America_ 1-21.  
    


**Week 2: Exploration, Invasion, And Settlement**

January 23: European Powers In the New World  
READING:; The Exploration Of New Mexico (1582) _CP,_ 4-6; Richard Hayklut,,
England is Title to North America (1584), handout; _America_ , 29-37.  
[16th Century Timeline](UShistory1.html)

January 25: Discussion Section  
READING: The Divine Right to Occupy The Land, _CP_ , 7-8; _America_ 21-27.  


**Week 3: British American Settlement**

January 30: [Pioneers, And Pilgrims](UShistory3.html)  
READING: Captain Smith Rescued By Pocahontas, The Earliest Days of Virginia
(1607) History Of Plymouth Plantation, (1620) _CP_ , 9-18; _America_ , 38-44.

February 1: [The Puritan Experiment](UShistory4.html)  
READING: A Model of Christian Charity (1630), The Trial of Anne Hutchinson
(1637) _CP_ , 19-30, _America_ , 44-56.  


**Week 4: The City on the Hill**

February 6: [Puritan Discontents](UShistory5.html)  
READING: The Wonders of the Invisible World (1693)

February 8: Discussion Section:  
READING: Mary Rowlandson, The True History of the Captivity and Restoration of
Mrs. Mary Rowlandson, _Classic American Autobiographies_ , 20-69.

*****1st Paper Due *****

  
  
  

**Week 5: The British Empire in America**

February 13: Colonial Slavery  
READING: A Quaker Confronts Slavery 1757; Advertisements For Runaway Slaves
(1767-1839); An African View of The Slave Trade (1789) _CP,_ 36-51; _America_
58-79.  

February 15: [The Great Awakening](UShistory7.html)  
READING: Sinners In The Hands Of An Angry God; _CP,_ 51-58; _America,_ 86-113.  


**Week 6: Colonial America**

February 20: [Benjamin Franklinis America](UShistory8.html)  
READING: Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin, _Classic American
Autobiographies_ , 70-156.

February 22: **Midterm Exam**  
READING: Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin, _Classic American
Autobiographies_ , 156-228.  


**Week 7: The Revolution**

February 27: [The Revolution](UShistory9.html)  
READING: Parliamentary Debates (1766), Common Sense (1776), The Intimate
Revolution _CP,_ 58-88; _America,_ 115-141, D1-D-3.  
March 1: The Constitution  
READING: Essays Of Brutus (1787) Federalist #10 (1787-1788) _CP,_ 88-108.
_America_ , 144-200, D-4-D-20.  


**Week 8: Creating A New Nation**

March 6: Forging A New Nation  
READING: Farewell Address (1796), Jeffersonis Inaugural Address (1801),
Against Christian Missionaries (1805), _CP,_ 102-113; _America,_ 201-228.

March 8: Section  
READING: _America,_ 229-256  
    


**Week 9: The New Republic Takes Shape**

March 20: [From Jefferson to Jackson](UShistory10.html)  
READING: A Revival in Cincinnati, 1828, How to Get Elected (1834), _CP,_
111-117; _America_ , 257-300.

March 22 [Indian Removal](UShistory11.html)  
READING: Jackson's Second Annual Message To Congress (1830); To the People of
the United States (1830), _CP_ , 117-124, _America,_ 300-310.  


**Week 10: Slavery and Freedom in the New Republic**

March 27: [Slavery and Freedom](UShistory12.html)  
READING: The Autobiography of Frederick Douglass, _Classic American
Autobiographies,_ 229-327.

March 29: Section  
READING: The Pro-Slavery Argument (1832) _CP,_ 124-129 Rules on a Rice
Plantation 134-136; _America_ , 337-347.  *****2** ND Paper Due *** **Week 11:
Reform Movements**

April 3: [Abolitionism and Womenis Rights](UShistory13.html)  
READING: The Liberator (1831; Legal Disabilities Of Women (1837); Declaration
of Sentiments (1848), The Great Lawsuit (1843); CP _,_ 137-148; America,
323-336.

April 5: [Antebellum Culture](UShistory14.html)  
READING: Self-Reliance (1841), Civil Disobedience (1849) _CP,_ 148-163;
_America_ 311-323.  


**Week 12: The 1850s**

April 10: [Sectionalism and Southern Thought](UShistory15.html)  
READING: Manifest Destiny (1845) Fugitive Slave Act (1850), Cotton Is King
(1858); A Disquisition On Government (1851), _CP,_ 130-134 _,_ 163-180.

April 12: Discussion Section  
READING: The Planter's Northern Bride (1854) _CP_ , 180-186; _America_ , 347-
391  


**Week 13: The Civil War**

April 17: The Irrepressible Conflict  
READING: The Lincoln-Douglas Debates (1858); Slavery and the Confederacy
(1861), _CP,_ 186-207; _America,_ 392-418.

April 19: War  
READING: James MacPherson, _What They Fought For: 1861-1865,_ 1-69.

**3** rd Paper Due  


**Week 14: The World the War Made**

April 24: Reconstruction and Redemption  
READING: A Southern View of Defeat (1866), The Negro Exodus (1879), Civil
Rights Cases, (1883), _CP,_ 207-225; _America_ , 419-445.

April 26: Discussion Section

**Final Exam, May 8, 8-10pm**

