## Hypermedia in History

### History 197/201

### Winter 1996

Instructor: Jan Reiff     Office: Bunche 9347 (825-5029)      E-mail: [jreiff@
ucla.edu](mailto:jreiff@ucla.edu)     Office hours: 12:00-2:00 Thursdays

**Course Overview:**

From the outset, it should be noted that this class will be eclectic. Its
readings include a few historians, some literary critics, some computer
scientists, some designers, and a handful of anonymous web writers. Some of
the readings come via the traditional medium of books, others will be found
only on CD-ROMs, on-line databases, and on the World Wide Web. The material
your present will take various forms as well. Some will be oral, some entirely
visual, some in the  "traditional" written form and some as a World Wide Web
page. Each of you will do some historical research of the kind you have come
to expect in a research seminar, although only those who continue through the
second quarter will do large amounts of research. In short, it should be
exactly the kind of course that you should anticipate from its title
Hypermedia in History.

The goal of the course is to have participants explore the possibilities of
information technology revolution in general and hypermedia in particular for
learning and presenting history. It aims to do that by having participants
read what others have said about it and hands-on evaluation and development.
By the end of the quarter, you will have built a World Wide Web page using
HTML (hypertext mark-up language) and will have designed a web site that would
work either for a teaching module in a history class or to present your own
research in a new and provocative way. (Those continuing into the second
quarter will actully realize these web sites.) You will have surfed the web
for history resources, both good and bad. Plus, you will have considered the
impact of computer technology and the World Wide Web from a number of
different perspectives.

**Course Requirements:**

Everyone is expected to attend class regularly, do the readings and
participate in class discussion. Class participation will account for 25% of
your grade.

Each person will also have to develop a proposal for a World Wide Web site
that could be used either for teaching an undergraduate course or as a
presentation of research findings. A more detailed description of this
proposal will be distributed in class and via this class's home page. This
proposal will account for 40% of your grade. In addition, you will have to
design and implement a WWW home page that serves as the entrance point for the
project you propose. That home page will account for 10% of your grade.

Finally, there will be five short assignments, each of which will contribute
5% of your grade.

**Tentative Outline of Meetings, Topics and Readings:**

_Please note that many of the questions and topics considered in this class
make the newspapers and magazines every day. On-line news sources are also
ready sources of related information. I anticipate that you will all look for
relevant information in these various sources and bring it to class whenever
it is appropriate. I may also provide other materials that I think you might
find useful or interesting._

**ALL THE BOOKS ARE AVAILABLE AT THE BOOK STORE. ARTICLES WILL BE AVAILABLE IN
THE HISTORY READING ROOM.**

Jan 09 -- Course introduction, technical matters, introduction to WWW for
those not familiar with it

Jan 16 -- Is the computer a "defining technology" or an overgrown typewriter?
What has     the computer done for history? Thinking about history on the
internet

    **Readings:**

     J. David Bolter, _Turing's Man_

     Andrew McMichael, Michael O'Malley, and Roy Rosenzweig, "Historians and the Web: A Beginner's Guide," AHA Perspectives, January 1996, also available on the World Wide Web at [http://chnm.gmu.edu/chnm/beginner.html]( http://chnm.gmu.edu/chnm/beginner.html )

    **Assignment 1:**

     Write a review of approximately five (5) pages of the World Wide Web as a source for "doing" history. This review should briefly describe the sites you chose and explain why you think it is particularly useful for historians (students or researchers). 

    A paper copy should be brought with you to class, but you should also send it to me electronically at jreiff@ucla.edu. For this assignment, I will prepare it for the WWW and post it in our class web site so that others can visit the site as well. 

    Some places to start include (but are not limited to): 

    <http://www.kaiwan.com/~lucknow/horus/horuslinks.html>     <http://www.lib.virginia.edu/etext/ETC.html>     <http://www.msstate.edu:80/Archives/History/USA/usa.html>     <http://www.georgetown.edu/labyrinth>     <http://lcweb2.loc.gov/amhome.html>     [](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow/vshadow.html)<http://thomas.loc.gov/>     <http://www.ucsc.edu/civil-war-letters/home.html>     <http://www.history.rochester.edu>     <http://neal.ctstateu.edu/history/world_history/world_history.html>     <http://www.lib.virginia.edu/journals/EH/EH.html>     <http://white.nosc.mil/museum.html>     <http://www.comlab.ox.ac.uk/archive/other/museums.html>     <http://history.cc.ukans.edu/history/WWW_history_main.html>     <http://english-server.hss.cmu.edu/History.html>     <http://miavx1.acs.muohio.edu/~ArchivesList/index.html>     <http://www.onramp.net:80/~hbarker/>     <http://www.webcom.com/~jbd/ww2.html>     <http://www.cwc.lsu.edu/>     <http://cobweb.utcc.utk.edu/~hoemann/warweb.html>     [http://latino.sscnet.ucla.edu:80/murals/dunitz/Street-G.html](http://latino.sscnet.ucla.edu:80/murals/dunitz/Street-G.html )     <http://www.ionet.net/~uheller/vnbktoc.shtml>     [http://www.tntech.edu/www/acad/hist/resources.html ](http://www.tntech.edu/www/acad/hist/resources.html)     <http://www.directnet.com/history>     [http://web.syr.edu/~laroux/ ](http://web.syr.edu/~laroux/)<http://h-net.msu.edu/>     <http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/crossroads.html>     <http://muse.jhu.edu/index.html>     <http://scarlett.libs.uga.edu/darchive/hargrett/maps/neworld.html>

    And you can do web searches from: 

    <http://www.yahoo.com>     [http://home.netscape.com/home/internet-search.html ](http://home.netscape.com/home/internet-search.html)

    The list grows and grows ..... 

    <http://www.clever.net/19cwww/exhibit.html>     (note this art exhibit is only available through Feb. 28, 1996) 

    To see the reviews of your classmates, [click here](reviews.html). 

Jan 23 -- Historical Narratives: Presenting History

    **Readings:**

     William Cronon, "A Place for Stories: Nature, History, and Narratives," _Journal of American History_ , 78:4 (March, 1992), 1347-1376. 

    Please visit <http://grid.let.rug.nl/~welling/usa/>

    _Who Built America?_ (CD-ROM textbook, available in faculty lab, please make arrangements with J. Lally or J. Reiff 

    Film: Nasty Girl 

Jan 30 -- Non-Linear Narratives: Hypertext

    **Readings:**

     George P. Landow, _Hypertext_

     To see one of Landow's projects on the Web, see [ World Wide Web (html) Versions of Materials Created in Intermedia, Storyspace, and Print]( http://www.stg.brown.edu/projects/hypertext/landow/HTatBrown/wwwtrans.html)     For an on-line volume, see Mike Franks, [Internet Publishing Handbook](http://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/ssc/franks/aw/final/iph-urls.htm)

    Mark Poster, "Derrida and Electronic Writing: The Subject of the Computer," in _The Mode of Information_ , p. 99-128 (available in grad reserve) 

    An **optional reading** for those who are interested is Vannevar Bush's ["As We May Think"](http://www.isg.sfu.ca/~duchier/misc/vbush/) which was published originally in the July, 1945,  Atlantic Monthly. I've also put a copy in the History Department Reading Room. Thanks to Gene Moy for reminding me of this article and finding its Web location. 

    To see a syllabus for a class designed by one of the luminaries in this area, Michael Joyce, visit <http://iberia.vassar.edu/~mijoyce/H_P.html>

    And to see another point of view on all of this, check out John Unsworth, [Electronic Scholarship or, Scholarly Publishing and the Public](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/~jmu2m/mla-94.html)

Feb 06 -- Images

    **Readings:**

     John Berger, _Ways of Seeing_

     You can see Landow using images at George P. Landow, "[Margaret M. Giles's Hero and the Sublime Female Nude]( http://www.stg.brown.edu/projects/hypertext/landow/cv/Chapters/Giles/Giles_633.html )" 

    **Assignment 2:**

     Bring at least 3 images that you might consider using in your hypermedia presentation to class. Make copies to hand in, along with a brief narrative (no more than a paragraph) explaining what you want the observer to learn from them. 

Feb 13 -- Visualizing LA in Hypermedia

    **Readings:**

     Thomas S. Hines, "Wilshire Boulevard," in Jan Cigliano, Sarah Bradford Landau, eds., _The Grand American Avenue, 1850-1920_

     Thomas S. Hines, "Housing, Baseball, and Creeping Socialism: the Battle of Chavez Ravine, Los Angeles, 1949-1959"

    Evelyn Schlusselberg, _" Dans le Quartier St. Gervais:_ An Exploratory Learning Environment," in Matthew E. Hedges and Russell M. Sasnett, _Multimedia Computing_

     To see one tour on line, check out [El Camino de Santiago](http://www.humnet.ucla.edu/santiago/iagohome.html)

    **Assignment 3:**

     Come prepared with images, texts, descriptions of audios and visuals, that you might use to provide students or Angelenos with a hypermedia history of either Wilshire Boulevard or Chavez Ravine. 

Feb 20 -- Learning HTML

    **READINGS:**

     A handout will be provided in class on HTML and you should begin perusing the Larry Aronson, _HTML Manual of Style_. Also before coming to class, peruse the web to see what is available out there on HTML 

Feb 27 -- Learning HTML, part II

    **Assignment 4:**

     One web ready page based on results of visualizing LA in hypermedia discussion on Feb. 13. Details of assignment will be distributed then. 

Mar 05 -- A Democratic Medium?

    **Readings:**

     Lewis Mumford, "Authoritarian and Democratic Techniques," _Technology and Culture_ (Winter 1964), 1-8. 

     Charles Ess, "The Political Computer: Hypertext, Democracy, and Habermas," in George P. Landow, _Hyper/Text/Theory_ , p. 225-267 

    Usenet, press discussion of the controversy over pornography on the net, especially recent debate between Germany and Compuserve. You can access Usenet lists by choosing the NEWSGROUP or USENET FAQs options in the Web search engine provided with Netscape. 

    also try visiting some sites like the [Center for Democracy and Technology](http://www.cdt.org/), [Freedom Magazine](http://www.theta.com/freedommag/internet.html), the [Censorship and Intellectual Freedom page](http://bronze.ucs.indiana.edu/~quinnjf/censor.html), or just search for key words like democracy, freedom, or the recent communications bill passed by Congress. 

Mar 12 -- A discussion of proposals:

    **Assignment 5:**

     Storyboards for your proposal. Bring enough copies for everyone in class. 

**FINAL PROPOSALS ARE DUE TO ME BY 3:00 PM, MARCH 15 **

Jump to classmates' proposed [home pages](hmpgspr.html) or return to [Reiff
home page](index.html)

