# Latin 100

**Instructor** : [Jed Parsons](mailto:jed@socrates.berkeley.edu)  
**Office Hours** : 11-12, M T W Th, 7236 Dwinelle.

**Time** : 12:00 to 2:00, M T W Th, July 6 through August 13. ([Registration
and Catalog info](http://www-
telebears.berkeley.edu:3438/0928552243/001038/cweb?_InField1=CWEBC;_InField2=LATIN++100+++;_InField3=99C1;))

**Place** : [Dwinelle
Hall](http://www.berkeley.edu/campus_map/maps/CDEF345.html), in elegant [Room
279](http://regssl.berkeley.edu/rooms/room.htx?&x_building=DWINELLE&x_room=279&x_prefix=&x_suffix=).

## Purpose and Requirements

In Latin 100, we will read sources that are primarily, though not exclusively,
prose from the republican period of Roman history. The course has three main
objectives:

  1. Review and solidify basic grammar and vocabulary.
  2. Develop an awareness of the subtleties of the Latin language.
  3. Develop a knowledge of important aspects of Roman culture.

### Description

We will spend the first third of the course reviewing the fundamentals of
grammar, and reading much of Cicero's _de Amicitia_. This text introduces a
number of important cultural features. Chiefly among these, the institutions
of the family, social alliances, gift exchange, and trust, will be important
for our understanding of the readings to follow. At the same time, we will
read some selections by Cicero and Sallust on the Catilinarian conspiracy.

Following _de Amicitia_ , we will read a number of texts pertaining to the war
between Caesar and Pompey (aka the Civil War). Our sources will include
Caesar's own commentary on the war, as well as letters by him, Pompey, and
Cicero. We will also read a selection of the _Bellum Hispaniense_. This text,
which describes the portion of the Civil War fought in Spain by Caesar against
Pompey's oldest son, was written by a soldier in Caesar's army, and is an
important source of less ``literary'' and more ``quotidian'' Latin.

We will by now have read a lot about the cultural standards for self-
representation, e.g., _honos_ and _uirtus_ , at least as they apply to men. As
we leave the Civil War behind, we will look at some evidence for public
expectations of feminine _uirtus_. Our sources will be a few poems by Catullus
and Martial (whose vocabulary will be familiar to readers of prose), two
letters of Pliny, and a poem by Sulpicia (a woman).

All this will provide an introduction to some of the more complex aspects of
Roman culture and society. Along the way, we will have read much
conversational, epistolary, and ``vulgar'' Latin (as the real-life, man-in-
the-street Latin is called). This will lead to a greater understanding of the
subtleties and variability of the language. It will in particular help us
reach a higer level of understanding that goes above the rather artificial
rules of the grammar book to the levels of discourse pragmatics and socio-
linguistic negotiations that are fundamental to language use in the real
world.

### Requirements

The syllabus below lists the basic reading plan of the course. There are some
important other requirements as well. These assignments are due on the day in
which they are listed on the syllabus.

  * Four short grammar and reading **quizzes** , which will last no more than half an hour. 
  * Three **prose compositions**. You are advised that these things can take some time, so don't start the night before. 
  * A **grammar test** , after the period of the grammar review. This will last one hour. 
  * A **commentary** on a text of your choice (which is _not_ part of our syllabus), minimum two pages. 
  * A **module** on a grammatical, historical, or literary topic of your choice for the Living Language Textbook. One or two pages. (This will be explained fully.) 
  * A **final exam**. 

Note that on Thursday, a **convivium** has been instituted. It will convene at
the Jupiter (on Shattuck by Center). Note also that you may submit a **T-Shirt
design**. We'll all vote on what design to print in commemoration of this six
week period.

We have 23 days to accomplish what is normally given a semester. Expect to
work fairly hard.

## Syllabus

July Mon| Tue| Wed| Thu  |  |  | 6 | Introduction and hellos | Begin grammar
review | Begin _de Amicitia_ |  |  7 |  |  | 8 | **Prose comp due** |
Convivium  |  | 12 | **Quiz** |  |  13 |  |  | 14 | Pick subject for module  |
| 15 | **Grammar Test** |  Convivium  |  | 19 |  |  | 20 |  |  | 21 |  |  | 22
| **Prose comp due** |  Finish _de Amicitia_ |  Begin Civil War readings |
Convivium  |  | 26 | **Quiz** |  |  27 |  |  | 28 |  | 29 | **Commentary due**
|  T-Shirt design submissions | Convivium  August | Mon| Tue| Wed| Thu  |  | 2
| **Quiz** | **Module due** | _Bellum Hispaniense_ |  |  3 | _Bellum
Hispaniense_ |  |  4 | End Civil War readings | Graffiti, wax tablets, codices
|  | 5 | **Prose comp due** |  Pliny | Convivium  |  | 9 | **Quiz** |  Pliny
|  | 10 | Sulpicia  |  | 11 | Review  |  | 12 | **Final Exam** |  Party!

This may change, depending on how things go.

The readings will include

  * Cicero, _de Amicitia_ 8-9, 16-20, 40-42, 46-47, 56-64, 69-70, 71-76, 91-95, 97-100, 103-end. 
  * Cicero and Sallust, selections on the conspiracy of Catiline 
  * Civil war readings: 
    * Letters of Cicero 
    * Letters of Caesar 
    * Letters of Pompey 
    * Caesar, _Bellum Ciuile_ 3.90-96 
    * Some guy, _Bellum Hispaniense_ 36-39 
  * Catullus, poems 49, 70, 87, 58, 5, 7 
  * Martial, poem 6.43 
  * Graffiti from Pompeii (from _CIL_ IV) 
  * Correspondence on wax tablets, with Plautus _Pseudolus_ 13-73 
  * Pliny the Younger, letters 4.19, 5.16 
  * Sulpicia, ``Tibullus'' 4.7 

* * *

Last Modified: 4 Jun, 1999.

