RUTGERS UNIVERSITY

Department of History

# War, Peace, and the Military in the U.S. to 1877



History: 512:347 Professor John W. Chambers II

Fall 2002 210 Van Dyck (CAC); phone 932-3613

Tu-Thu 4th (1:10-2:30 p.m.) e-mail
[chamber@rci.rutgers.edu](mailto:chamber@rci.rutgers.edu)

Location: Murray 211 (CAC) Office Hours: To be announced



## SYLLABUS

COURSE DESCRIPTION:

This is a survey of American attitudes towards and experiences with war,
peace, and the military from colonial settlement in 1607 through the Civil
War, Reconstruction, and the Plains Indian Wars.

The course examines the development of military institutions (militia,
National Guard, Army, Navy, and Marines) in peace and war. It also examines
aspects of the nations wartime experiences. The course covers technological
and organizational developments, changing strategic doctrines, and the
nationalization and professionalization of the armed forces.

It also explores civilian attitudes towards war, peace, and the military,
contours in civil-military relations, development of antiwar, peace, and
disarmament movements, and the relationship of war, peace, and the military to
U.S. foreign and national security policy and to American society and culture.



I.                     Books



The following books are required readings of the students enrolled in this
course. They are available at the Rutgers University Bookstore, Albany Street,
New Brunswick.



Allan R. Millett and Peter Maslowski, For the Common Defense: _A Military
History of the United States of America_ Revised and Expanded Edition (N.Y.:
The Free Press of Macmillan, 1994). Paperback. The basic textbook; for use in
both semesters of this course.



John W. Chambers II and G. Kurt Piehler, eds., _Major Problems in American
Military History: Documents and Essays_ (Boston: Houghten Mifflin, 1999).
Paperback. The basic anthology for use in both semesters of this course.



Arthur E. Ekirch, Jr., _The Civilian and the Military: A History of the
American Anti-Militarist Tradition_ (Colorado Springs, Colo.: Ralph Myles
Publisher, 1972, c. 1956). Paperback. History of an alternative tradition. For
use in both semesters of the course.



INTERNET NOTE: For those interested in using the web, two useful relevant
websites are the American Memory archive of words, sounds, and pictures at
the library of Congress at the following: <http://www.loc.gov/> and the
archives of the History Net at <http://www.thehistorynet.com/>



II.                   Course requirements:



All readings on the list below are required. Each group of readings should be
completed by the time of the lectures which it parallels.



There will be a midterm examination and a final examination. Both examinations
will cover the readings, lectures, and discussion material. With the
permission of the instructor, an optional term paper may be substituted for
the midterm examination.



Student Options

#  

# Option A



Class Discussion 10%



Midterm Exam 40%



Final Exam 50%



Totals: 100%



# Option B



Class Discussion 10%



Term Paper 40%



Final Exam 50%



100%



# Option C



Class Discussion 10%



Midterm Exam 30%



Term Paper 30%



Final Exam 30%



100%



