![ESPM 160](media/banner.gif)  
---  
![](media/stem.gif)

[![Home](media/side_home.gif)](index.html)

[![Lectures](media/side_lectures.gif)

[![Assignments](media/side_assignments.gif)](assignments/index.html)

[![Study Guide](media/side_guide.gif)](studyguide/guide.html)

[![Discussion](media/side_discussion.gif)](discussion/index.html)

[![Chat](media/side_chat.gif)](chat/index.html)



  |  |  |

## Syllabus

Please read carefully. Hopefully, this will answer all your questions.

**Department:** Environmental Science, Policy, and Management, University of
California, Berkeley.

**Department Office:** 145 Mulford Hall; Student Services, 129 Mulford;
Resource Center: 260 Mulford.

**Professor:** Carolyn Merchant, 114 Giannini Hall, 642-0326; Mailbox: 135
Giannini Hall. Office hours: M. 1:30-2:30, W. 2-3 or by appointment

**Required Discussion Sections:** To be in the class you must attend and sign
in for 1st 3 weeks. Discussion sections start in Week One with Preface and
Chapter 1, Major Problems

Description

Three 1-hour lectures and one 1 and 1/2-hour discussion per week. History of
the American environment and the ways in which different cultural groups have
perceived, used, managed, and conserved it from colonial times to the present.
Cultures include American Indians and European and African Americans. Natural
resources development includes gathering-hunting-fishing; farming, mining,
ranching, forestry, and urbanization. Changes in attitudes and behaviors
toward nature and past and present conservation and environmental movements
are also examined. Readings are from primary source documents supplemented by
recent essays.

Approved for the American Cultures requirement and for the History major.
Satisfies the Conservation and Resource Studies Social Science or Humanities
requirement and can be used in the CRS Area of Interest.

#### Course Materials

Text: Major Problems in American Environmental History, ed. Carolyn Merchant.
Lexington, MA: Houghton Mifflin (formerly, D.C. Heath), 1993. Available in the
ASUC Store, Ned's Berkeley Books, and Campus Textbooks on Bancroft Avenue.
Copies on 2-hour reserve in the Bioscience and Natural Resources Library,
Valley Life Sciences Building.

[ESPM 160 Study Guide](studyguide/guide.html) containing discussion questions
and chapter outlines can be accessed, downloaded, and printed from this web
site: http://www.cnr.berkeley.edu/departments/espm/env-hist/espm160/ or can be
copied from 2-hour reserve in the Bioscience and Natural Resources Library.

#### Reading Assignments

Eight hours of work outside of class per week is expected (i.e. 2 hours per
credit unit). There are fifteen chapters in the reader and fifteen weeks in
the course. We will read one chapter each week (approximately 40 pages per
week) in Major Problems in American Environmental History. Each chapter is
divided into primary source documents and secondary source essays. You should
read the documents in preparation for the Monday lecture, the essays in
preparation for the Wednesday lecture, and be prepared to answer the questions
in the Study Guide during the discussion sections. On Fridays required films
and videos will be shown and one-page papers (5 total) on the contents are due
every two weeks (see films and videos assignments).

#### Requirements and Grading

Your final grade will be composed of four parts:

  1. **Participation in discussion sections is required.** **(** **30% of the gradeÂ‹15% attendance/15% participation** **)**. The discussion sections are not simply reviews of the lectures. You should be prepared to discuss the assigned readings, be able to answer the weekly discussion questions in the Study Guide, and relate them to the lecture materials. Attendance in sections will be recorded. Your [Personal Environmental History](assignments/personal_history.html), 1-2 pp. Due Wednesday of Week Two. See assignments on this web site. 
  2. **Midterm examination ( 20% of grade)**. Monday of Week 8. The midterm will cover chapters 1-7 of the text (Weeks 1-7) and will be drawn from the discussion questions in the Study Guide and the films and videos. There will be a choice. The best way to prepare is to attend the lectures and discussion sections each week and prepare your answers to the discussion questions as you go along. 
  3. **[Course project](assignments/creative.html) ( 10% of grade)**. To be presented in discussion sections starting week 4. Sign up in section for a chapter in Major Problems during week 2 (2 persons only per week) and turn in a 1/2 page proposal for a creative project on Monday of Week 3 in the lecture section. See assignments on this web site. Your creative projects must have (a) historical authenticity and (b) environmental content, be relevant to the chapter you have chosen, and include an index card detailing both (a) and (b). Examples are: a short play; one or more poems, paintings, or sculptures; a series of cartoons or jokes; a musical offering; an environmental history of Berkeley, your home town, or region in words or pictures; preparation or planting of historical or ethnically authentic foods; a restored or reconstructed piece of technology; a journal of personal responses to the readings; another project of your own imagination. You get up to ten points if you do the project on time and fulfill the above criteria; 0 points if you fail to do it or do it in a sloppy or half-you know what-(hearted, of course) manner. 
  4. **[Films and videos](assignments/videos.html) ( 15% of grade)**. Five 1-page critiques of films. See assignments on this web site. 
  5. **Final examination ( 25% of grade).** The examination questions will be drawn from the readings, lectures, Study Guide questions, and the films and videos. There will be essays (choices will be offered), multiple choice, IDs, and a map question. 
  
---  
![](media/clr_dot.gif) | ![](media/clr_dot.gif) | ![](media/clr_dot.gif) |
![](media/clr_dot.gif)

