![1766 logo](../../images/ru1766.gif)** RUTGERS UNIVERSITY  
![](../../images/rel_dept.gif)
![](../../images/clearpix.gif)[![](../../images/Home.jpg)](../../index.html)**

![](../../images/redline1.gif)  
[Home](http://religion.rutgers.edu/index.html) | [Requirements](http://) |
[Fall Courses](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/fall_01.html) | [Winter
Session](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/winter_00.html) | [Spring
Courses](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/spring_01.html) | [Summer
Session](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/summer_00.html) ****

**840:317:01**![](../../images/beadred.gif) **CATHOLICISM AND THE MODERN WORLD  
Spring 2002**

**![](../../images/clearpix.gif)Thomas Myladil**

Office: Loree 116 (Douglass Campus)

Office hours: 11.30 - 12.30 on Mondays and Thursdays

E-mail: thomdil@rci.rutgers.edu



Roman Catholicism from the French revolution to the present; popes of the
twentieth century and the Second Vatican Council; topics such as worship
(liturgy), authority in the Church, social justice, sexual ethics, role of
women in the Church, Catholicism versus other churches and other religions,
inculturation.

**  
Required Readings:**

McCarthy, Timothy G. _The Catholic Tradition: The Church in the Twentieth
Century._ 2 nd Edition, Chicago: Loyola Press, 1998. __

Miller, Gerald L. & Stancil, Wilburn T., Editors. _Catholicism at the
Millennium_. Kansas City, MI: Rockhurst University Press, 2001.

Bokenkotter, Thomas. _A Concise History of the Catholic Church_. New York:
Image Books, Doubleday, 1990.

**  
Recommended Reading:**

_The Catechism of the Catholic Church._ New York: Double Day (An Image Book),
1995.

**  
Requirements:**

  
1\. _Class Attendance_. Class attendance is necessary and it will be marked in
the roster at the beginning of every class. Students are expected to read and
to be able to discuss in class the designated readings as well as to complete
on time other assignments that may be given.

  
2\. _Course Paper_. A course paper of 10 pages is required. The topic of the
paper must be chosen by February 20 with the approval of the instructor. The
course readings may be made use of, along with material of your choice, as
sources of the paper. Detailed instructions on how to proceed with the work of
the term paper will follow.

  
3\. _Exams and Grading._ There will be two exams: **a mid-term exam on March
11 and the final examination.** The final grade will be calculated in this
manner: mid-term exam=30%; final exam=30%; term paper=20%; class attendance
and class activities (quizzes, etc.)=20%. ****

**  
**

**  
Schedule:**

_  
Class Day(s):_ _Topic(s) and Readings:_

  

Jan. 23  Introduction

_The Catholic Tradition,_ Introduction __

_Catholicism at the Millennium,_ Chapter 1

  

Jan. 28, 30 The Church and Modernity

_The Catholic Tradition_ , Chapter 2

_Catholicism at the Millennium_ , Chapters 2-4, 10

  

Feb. 4,6Liberal Catholics and the Syllabus of Errors

_A Concise History of the Catholic Church_ , Chapters 24-26

  
Feb. 11, 13 Vatican I and Infallibility

A _Concise History....._ , Chapter 27-29



Feb. 18, 20 World Catholicism, American Church

_A Concise History...._ , Chapters 30-31

_Catholicism at the Millennium_ , Chapter 5

  
Feb. 25, 27 Twentieth Century Popes

_A Concise History...._ , Chapter 32

_The Catholic Tradition,_ Chapter 1

  
March 4, 6 The Second Vatican Council

_A Concise History...._ , Chapters 33

_The Catholic Tradition_ , Chapter 3

  
March 11, 13 _Midterm Exam on March 11_

Identity and Mission of the Catholic Church

_The Catholic Tradition_ , Chapter 4

_Catechism of the Catholic Church_ , pp. 214-272

  
March 25, 27 Authority in Catholicism

_A concise History....._ , Chapter 34

_The Catholic Tradition_ , Chapter 5

  
April 1, 3 Catholic Worship

_The Catholic Tradition_ , Chapter 8

_Catholicism at the Millennium_ , Chapter 9

  
April 8, 10 The Church and Social Justice

_A concise History......,_ Chapter 35 __

_The Catholic Tradition_ , Chapter 9

_Catholicism at the Millennium_ , Chapters 7-8

  
April 15, 17 The Church and Sexual Ethics

_The Catholic Tradition_ , Chapter 10

  
April 22, 24 The Catholic Church, Other Churches, and Other Religions

_The Catholic Tradition_ , Chapters 6-7

_Catholicism at the Millennium_ , Chapter 11

  
April 29, May 1 _April 29: Last day to submit the term paper_

Catholicism, Mary, and the Role of Women in the Church

_The Catholic Tradition_ , Chapters 11-12

  
May 6 Roman Catholicism in the 21st Century; Conclusion

_Catholicism at the Millennium_ , Chapter 6 __

_The Catholic Tradition_ , pp. 453-454

  
May 14 Final Exam

![](../../images/redline1.gif)

[Home](http://religion.rutgers.edu/index.html) | [Requirements](http://) |
[Fall Courses](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/fall_01.html) | [Winter
Session](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/winter_00.html) | [Spring
Courses](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/spring_01.html) | [Summer
Session](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/summer_00.html)

**This page was revised Jan 02/02**

