### History 387  
Introduction to Business History: The American Experience

(Professor William Childs)



**Course Description:** This course is an introduction to the study of
business history. While a course in American History, it also serves as an
introduction to two other courses in the Department of History:

  * 568.01: Comparative Business History, and 
  * 568.02: Japanese Business History. 

To lend coherence to these offerings, all will include material on these
themes:

  1. evolution of the firm (business & management strategies, firm structures); 
  2. evolution of business-government relations; 
  3. evolution of management-labor relations; 
  4. interactions between business and society; and, 
  5. general developments in economic thought, science, and technology. 



This course will study the evolution of "American capitalism" within the
larger framework of the development of western societies: from pre-capitalist
economies of the medieval period to emergent capitalism of the 16th and 17th
centuries; from the industrial revolution of the 18th and 19th centuries to
managerial-financial capitalism of the 20th century, to what some have labeled
postÂ­industrial capitalism of the mid-to-late 20th century.

The student will thus gain factual knowledge of the development of American
business and conceptual understanding of the study of business history.
Together, these two objectives shall furnish a basis for comparison to other
nation states' experience with business enterprise.

I have designed this course (degree of sophistication, reading assignments,
and exams) to be a 300-level course in History. Students will have to read the
assignments, think about them and the lecture material, and then write essays
and short answers on topics that require them to integrate the reading and the
lecture material. Thus, another objective of the course is to improve the
student's abilities in analysis and writing.



**Assigned Readings** : Students are required to read the following books.
Study guides will be furnished for all books except the text. All are
available at SBX. Several copies of the textbook have been placed on reserve
in the Main Library.

  1. Blackford and Kerr, _Business Enterprise in American History_ (3rd ed.). 
  2. Harold Livesay, _American Made_
  3. Horatio Alger, _Ragged Dick_ and _Mark, The Match Boy_
  4. Kurt Vonnegut, _Player Piano_ 

The Blackford and Kerr text furnishes the basic chronological development of
American business. _American Made_ contains biographical analyses on numerous
key manufacturers. The Alger novels introduce the student to the conflicts
between American values and industrialism. _Player Piano_ offers a
prescription for the future that is based on where business, government, and
society had evolved by the 1950s.

[Note for sample syllabus: The first two books listed above have been used in
the original 564 course, which is to be replaced by 387. In the current 564
course, the instructors have usually required a total of 5 books. Each
instructor has experimented with different book lists. The Alger and Vonnegut
novels are used here only for illustrative purposes.]



**Office Hours:** I encourage all students to visit me during office hours in
order to discuss course concepts, problems in writing, or whatever.



**Your Grade in This Course:** Your grade will be based on three graded
assignments: One midterm (30%); one paper (30%); and a final exam (40%). The
midterm and final exam will be structured in the same manner: 50% of each exam
will consist of an essay, which you will write outside of class. The other 50%
will consist of short answers, which you will write during the class hours
noted. Instructions and limitations on length will be furnished with the essay
topics. You will have choices to make in both parts. The essay portion of the
midterm and final exams will be handed in with the short answers in class.

Students will have a choice among several paper topics; some will ask for
further reading beyond the required list. More information on the paper will
be handed out in class.

_You are forewarned that I will pursue cases of academic misconduct to the
appropriate University Committee._



**Three special comments:**

  1. Since the University does not record D- grades, _a student earning a course average below 62 will receive an E in this course_. 
  2. In order to pass the course, students must pass the Final Exam. 
  3. I reserve the right to consider improvement when determining final grades. 



**Grading Your Exams:** Most of your grade in History 387 will be based on how
well you communicate in writing what you have learned. Students should consult
my handout,  "Guide to Writing Short Answers and Essays in History." In
addition, I furnish below brief descriptions of how you will earn your essay
grades:

_" C" essays will include_: an introductory paragraph that contains your
thesis; a body of several paragraphs in which you offer evidence from the
readings and lectures to support your thesis; and a conclusion that reiterates
your basic argument.

_" B" essays will include_: all of the above requirements for a "C" essay plus
more relevant data and analyses than is found in an average essay.

_" A" essays will include_: all of the above requirements for a "B" essay plus
more data and some indication of independent or extended thought.

_As for "D" and "E" essays_: usually, these essays do not include a viable
thesis and/or they do not include very much information from the course.

_Note_ : On the out-of-class portion of the exams and on the paper, students
will lose points for misspellings and incorrect grammar.



**Make-up Exams:** As for make-up exams, I do not like them. They are
inherently unfair to all concerned (you, me, and your fellow students). I
realize, however, that occasionally a few students encounter problems with
taking exams at the scheduled time. In these cases, you must contact me before
the exam date. To make-up any exam, you will have to take it during one of the
regularly scheduled exam sessions offered by the Department of History. _If
you cannot contact me before the day of the exam you are to miss, you should
contact the History Department office (292-2674) during regular business hours
(8 a.m. to 5 p.m., Mon - Fri) to leave a message._

**Attendance Policies:** Given the requirements noted above (evidence from the
readings _and_ lectures), I expect you to attend regularly. Very often
material offered by students during discussions should be included in your
answers. Most short answer topics are selected from lecture materials.

**Please note:** The Chair of the Department of History has decided that all
students must be officially enrolled in the course by the end of the second
full week of the quarter. No requests to add the course will be approved by
the Department Chair after that time. Enrolling officially and on time is
solely the responsibility of the student.



**Other notes:** Because I want you to improve your ability to take effective
notes and because legal considerations and issues of equity demand it, I do
not allow the use of tape recorders during class time.

_Think about your fellow students:_ If arriving in class late, take the
nearest seat available unobtrusively; if you must leave a few minutes early,
sit near an exit and leave quietly.

[Students with learning disabilities should see Dr. Childs _immediately_ in
order to work out potential problems with notetaking, reading the assigned
books, and taking the exams.]



**Schedule of Lectures, Discussions, and Exams:**

    
    
    Week 1	[B&K, Intro, Ch 1; begin reading Alger]
    
    
    
    
    	Introduction to the course
    
    
    
    
    	Overview of the Origins of Business History
    
    
    
    
    	Elements of Capitalism
    
    
    
    
    	European Origins of American Business History
    
    
    
    
    
     2	**_Market Capitalism
    
    
    **_
    
    	[B &K, Ch 2; Livesay, Intro;]
    
    
    
    
    	Political Economy of Colonial America
    
    
    
    
    	Adam Smith
    
    
    
    
    	Business, the Revolution, and the Constitution
    
    
    
    
    	Jefferson vs. Hamilton: Business-Government Relations
    
    
    
    
    
    3	[B&K, Chs 3-4; Livesay, Chs 2-3]
    
    
    
    
    	Early Industrialism and the Expanding Market
    
    
    
    
    	Discuss Alger novels
    
    
    
    
    	Introduce Industrialism
    
    
    
    
    
    4 _**Managerial and Financial Capitalism
    
    
    **
    
    	_ [B&K, Ch 5; Livesay, Chs 4-6]
    
    
    
    
    	The Rise of Big Business: Railroads, Mass Manufacturing, and Distribution
    
    
    
    
    	Karl Marx
    
    
    
    
    
    5	**First Exam**
    
    
    
    
    	**_Towards American-Style Welfare State Capitalism_**
    
    
    
    
    	[B &K, Chs 6-7]
    
    
    
    
    	Reforming Capitalism-Origins of American Labor Movement
    
    
    
    
    	Origins of the Administrative State
    
    
    
    
    	Origins of the Consumer Culture
    
    
    
    
    
    6	[B&K, Ch 8, Ch 9 (to page 270); Livesay, Chs 7-8]
    
    
    
    
    	The "New Era": New Management Strategies & Firm Structures
    
    
    
    
    	Advertising the American Dream
    
    
    
    
    
    7	[B&K, Ch 9]
    
    
    
    
    	From Illusion to Crisis in Capitalism
    
    
    
    
    	From Hoover to Roosevelt:  The Mixed Economy & Welfare State Capitalism
    
    
    
    
    	John M. Keynes
    
    
    
    
    
    8	[B&K, Chs, 10-11; begin reading Vonnegut]
    
    
    
    
    	**Paper due**.
    
    
    
    
    	**_American Capitalism in a Changing Global Setting
    
    
    **
    
    	_ World War II
    
    
    
    
    	The Affluent Society
    
    
    
    
    	Exporting Capitalism
    
    
    
    
    	Film, "The Corporation"
    
    
    
    
    
    9	[B&K, Chs 12-13; Livesay, Ch 9]
    
    
    
    
    	The Administrative State in 1960s-1970s:
    
    
    
    
    	The "New" Societal Regulations
    
    
    
    
    	Economic Deregulation
    
    
    
    
    	Discuss Vonnegut
    
    
    
    
    
    **Graduating Seniors:** You will be given a take-home final exam
    at the end of the 9th week. It will be due the following Tuesday.
    
    
    
    
    
    
     10	[Livesay, Ch 10, 11] [distribute Final Exam Essay topics]
    
    
    
    
    	American Business, Organizational Capabilities and Global Competition, 1960s - 1980s
    
    
    
    
    	The Persistence of Small Business Enterprise
    
    
    
    
    	Student Evaluations and Review
    
    
    
    

The Final Exam will occur during the regularly-scheduled time. You will turn-
in your final essay with your final exam.

