History W106  
Dr. [Ruth Karras](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras)  
Spring 1998  
T-Th 10:10-11:30  
AC 28

  **MEDIEVAL EUROPE** [Course
Requirements](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/w106s98.htm#Course
requirements)  
[Office Hours](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/w106s98.htm#Office
Hours)  
[Required Reading](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/w106s98.htm#Required
Reading)  


[Introductory](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/w106s98.htm#Introductory)  
[Europe in a Wider
Context](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/w106s98.htm#Europe in a Wider
Context)  
[Monastic life](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/w106s98.htm#Monastic
Life)  
[Peasant life](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/w106s98.htm#Peasant
Life)  
[Urban Life](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/w106s98.htm#Urban Life)  
[Aristocratic
life](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/w106s98.htm#Aristocratic life)  
[Lay religion](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/w106s98.htm#Lay
Religion)  
[Marriage](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/w106s98.htm#Marriage)  
[War, Famine, Pestilence,
Etc](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/w106s98.htm#War, Famine,
Pestilence).

Western Europe from the twelfth through fifteenth centuries, an era of great
change, social, economic, political, and cultural. This course will focus on
several issues in medieval European history: the way medieval Europe was
itself a multicultural society, merging together a variety of cultural
currents, and the ways in which medieval culture was ancestral to our own vs.
the ways in which it was alien from our own. We will approach these issues by
reading texts that were written by people at the time, so that students will
be able to construct their own ideas about what the world of the Middle Ages
was like.

The course will not be moving chronologically but rather thematically, as
indicated by the syllabus. The first three classes will be devoted to a
chronological overview.

**_Course Requirements_**

Two take-home exams (midterm and final), 15% of grade each. The purpose of the
exams is to check on the students understanding of the content of the course
and the students ability to analyze and integrate the material assigned.
Exams will consist of passages from texts the students have not seen before
(the texts will be identified for you), which you will then discuss in the
context of what we have discussed in class.

One paper of ca. 2500-3000 words, 40% of grade. This paper is to construct a
historical argument based on primary sources. I will distribute [suggestions
for topics](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/Topics.htm) and/or help you
come up with your own. The purpose is to give the student an opportunity to be
a historian, framing a historical question to ask and answer by using specific
sources. Materials for this paper will be due at several stages: a topic with
bibliography, an outline, a sample section of the paper, a draft of the full
paper, and a final version. The paper grade is based on the quality of the
final version. All items are due **at the beginning of class** on their due
dates. The final grade on the paper will be reduced by one point on a
100-point scale for every day the bibliography, outline, or sample section is
late, and by two points for every day the draft or final paper is late.

E-mail discussion, 15% of grade. The purpose of this requirement is to
accustom students to frequent informal writing, to promote discussion of the
class topics outside of class, and to give me feedback on how students have
understood the course material. All students are required to participate in
this discussion (via listserv) at least once a week.

Class participation, 10% of grade. This includes any in-class writing
assignments. Attendance is required. Class participation requires you to be
present in spirit as well as in body, having done the reading and prepared to
talk about it. Repeated absence may result in a failing grade for the course,
at my sole discretion, regardless of grades on other work.

No extensions or incompletes except in case of serious, documented illness or
family emergency.

In case of bad weather phone 204-4858; if class is canceled there will be a
voicemail message saying so.

**_ _**

**_Office Hours_**

Dr. Karrass office is Gladfelter 919. The phone number is 1-4858; a message
can be left on voicemail at any time. Office hours are Tuesday and Thursday
9:00-10:00 or by appointment. Dr. Karras can also be reached by
[E-mail](mailto:rkarras@nimbus.ocis.temple.edu)



**_Required Reading_**

The following books are available from the Bookstore: C. Warren Hollister,
_Medieval Europe: A Short History_ , 7th Edition  
Patrick Geary, _Readings in Medieval History_ , vol. 2. A course packs
containing other assigned readings are available for purchase from Docu-Care,
900 N. Broad Street. The rest of the readings are from a site on the World
Wide Web, the _Internet Medieval Sourcebook_ at the ORB site (On-Line Resource
Book for Medieval Studies).

CP=course pack; IMS=Internet Medieval Sourcebook

**_Schedule of Readings and Assignments_**

    
_I.  Introductory_  


  * [20 January](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/M12098.htm):    First class, no reading assignment

  * [22 January:](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/M12298.htm)     Hollister, chs. 9-12

  * [27 January](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m12798.htm):     Hollister, chs. 13-16

    
_II.  Europe in a Wider Context_  


  * [29 January](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m21997.htm):    Crusade and Reconquista: Geary, 70-104, and documents on Reconquest of Valencia, 209-15 (CP).

  * [3 February: ](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/M2398.htm)   Travel Accounts: [John Mandeville](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/mandeville.html); [Marco Polo](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/polo-kinsay.html); Christopher Columbus, "A Letter Concerning Recently Discovered Islands," 467-73
  
_III.  Monastic Life_

  * [5 February](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m12997.htm):     An Oblate: Guibert of Nogent, Geary 25-49.

  * [10 February](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m22497.htm):    A Theologian: St. Bernard, Geary 15-24.

  * [12 February](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m21298.htm):     A Builder: [Suger](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/sugar.html)

_IV.  Peasant life_

  * [17 February](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m4297.htm):     Freedom and Unfreedom: documents from [Catalonia](http://kuhttp.cc.ukans.edu/kansas/aarhms/vic.htm), [England](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/manumission.html), and Germany (CP)

  * [19 February](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m21998.htm):     Documents on Peasants Revolt, 155-198 (CP)

**PAPER TOPIC/BIBLIOGRAPHY DUE**

_V.  Urban Life_

  * [24 February](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m22498.htm):     Guilds and Work: [Garment Cutters of Stendal](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/stendal-guild1231.html) (IMS); Commercial Documents from London, 201-08 (CP)

  * [26 February](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m22698.htm):      Ritual and Social Regulation: [Jacques de Vitry on Student Life in Paris](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/vitry1.html), Brothel Regulations from London (CP), Documents on Muslims and Christians in Valencia, 338-42 (CP)


  * [3 March](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m31797.htm):     Jews in the Medieval Town: [Thomas of Monmouth](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/1173williamnorwich.html) on William of Norwich, _[Siete Partidas](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/jews-sietepart.html)_


  * [5 March](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m3598.htm):     Commerce and Wealth in Late Medieval Italy: Diary of Gregorio Dati, Geary 451-66, and Florentine _Catasto_ , Geary 436-50.
  **PAPER OUTLINE DUE**

_VI.  Aristocratic life_

  * [17 March](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m31798.htm):     Representations of Aristocratic Life: Excerpts from Song of Roland, 7-10 (CP), Gottfried of Strassburg's _Tristan and Iseult_ , 150-59 (CP); Thomas Malory, _Death of Arthur_ , 130-36 (CP); Marie de France, _La ustic_, 20-22 (CP); Chretien de Troyes, _Erec and Enide_ , 23-25 (CP)

  * [19 March](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m31998.htm):     Relations Between Lords and Vassals: Hugh of Lusignan, Geary 51-56, Galbert of Bruges, Geary 57-69, and Magna Carta, Geary 408-420.

**TAKE-HOME MIDTERM DISTRIBUTED**  


  * [24 March:](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/Aginfilm.htm)     Warfare: Froissart, _Chronicles_ , in Geary, 364-88

**TAKE-HOME MIDTERM DUE**  
  * [26 March](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m32698.htm):     The Aristocratic Household: Christine de Pisan, _Treasure of the City of Ladies_ , 109-41 __ (CP)
  **SAMPLE SECTION OF PAPER DUE**  
_VII.  Lay Religion_

  * [31 March](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m33198.htm):     Popular Piety: Stories of the [Virgin Mary](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/tales-virgin.html) and of the [Devil](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/tales-devil.html); Stories of the Eucharist, 89-95 (CP)

  * [2 April](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m4298.htm):     Heresy: Inquisition Records of Jacques Fournier, Geary 185-204, and [Confession of Peter Waldo](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/waldo1.html)
  


  * [7 April](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m4798.htm):     Jewish Piety: [Ethical Wills](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/jewish-wills.html)

  * [9 April](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m4998.htm):     Pilgrimages and Visions: Margery Kempe, Geary 227-59.

**DRAFT PAPER DUE**

_VIII.  Marriage_

  * [14 April](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m41498.htm):   Marriage Law: Gratian, _Decretum_ , Bk 4 Case 29, 31, 32, Gregory IX, _Decretals_ , Bk 5, Titles 129-32, and English Marriage cases (pp. 26-29, 37-62, 129-32, 183-86, 191-92) (CP); [Rashi ](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/1105rashi.html)on Jewish marriage cases; Muslim marriage cases from Granada, 323-26 (CP).

  * [16 April](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m41698.htm):     Two Marriages: Abelard, _Story of my Adversities,_ 11-40 (CP), and story of [Thomas of Elderfield](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/wulftrans.html)


  * [21 April](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m42198.htm):     Attitudes to Marriage: _A French Fabliau: The Peasant Doctor,_ 282-87 (CP), Jaume Roig, _[Spill](http://gopher.humnet.ucla.edu/santiago/roigsant.html)_ , and sermons of [St. Bernardino of Siena](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/bernardino-2sermons.html)

_IX.  War, Famine, Pestilence, etc._

  * [23 April](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m42398.htm):     The Black Death: Bocaccio, _[Decameron](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/boccacio2.html)_ ; Henry Knighton, 385-88 (CP);

**FINAL PAPER DUE**  
  * [28 April](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m42898.htm):     Joan of Arc: Trial of Joan of Arc, 315-17 (CP); [Johannes Nider](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/nider-stjoan1.html) on Joan of Arc; Christine de Pisan on Joan of Arc, 434-49 (CP)


  * [30 April](http://nimbus.ocis.temple.edu/~rkarras/m5597.htm) Witchcraft: [Malleus Maleficarum and other documents](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/witches1.html)
  
**TAKE-HOME FINAL** distributed at last class, due Tuesday, 12 May, 10:30 a.m.
in 919 Gladfelter Hall (but it would make my life a lot easier if you turn it
in earlier!)

