**A History of Architecture in the West**

**Professor Jerrilynn D. Dodds**

** **

**_Lecture:_ Tuesday/Thursday ****9:30-10:20AM** **in NAC R0/201**

**_Seminar Hours:_ Mon 1-1:50 (in Studio) ; Tuesday ****10:30-11:10** **(in
304 Sh);**

** or Tues. 1-1:50 (in Studio). Please note your seminar assignment below.**

** **

**Professor Dodds Office Hours: **

**Tu. 11:15-1:15 in 303B Shepherd Hall**

**[mailto:JDDNYC@AOL.com](mailto:JDDNYC@AOL.com) **

** **

* * *

** **

**Course Requirements Examinations Readings Formal Analysis Important Warnings
****What Seminar are you in**? **Monuments and Terms**

** **

* * *

** **

This course follows the history of architecture, landscape and urban space in
Europe, the Mediterranean and the Americas, as one way of understanding the
evolving values of civilizations through their built form. Its goal is to
teach the skills needed to see, understand, and articulate ideas about works
of architecture, through an understanding of the interaction of buildings of
the past and present with the societies that produced them. In exploring how
architecture can be read as a document of political, social and philosophical
values throughout time, you can also begin to form an idea of the kind of
architect you want to be; how you might choose to transform your society
through the buildings and environments you create.



In addition to lectures in NAC, students will participate in smaller seminars
(see below for seminar assignments), in which they will explore the analysis
of buildings. Through _**formal analysis**_ **,** we can begin to understand,
not only how works of architecture effect their environments, but also how
they act on the people who use them and come into contact with them. You will
learn to analyze how the forms, spaces, materials, and construction of
buildings and landscapes can shape vital aspects of our lives and society.



**Course Requirements** **: **

1. Attendance at all lectures and sections

2. Readings as assigned

3. A Written Formal Analysis assigned by your Seminar Instructor

4. A Midterm Examination to be held on Thursday, 

5. A Final Exam on a date to be announced



**Examinations** **:** Attached to this syllabus you will find a list of
monuments and terms. You will be expected to know the buildings, their dates,
periods, architects and patrons as stated in this list. But that is just the
structure for your studying. You will also be expected to write short essays
that link the buildings you have identified with ideas about culture, society
and history that we have discussed in class,



**Readings** **:** Weekly readings are assigned from the text for the course:
(1 ) Spiro Kostoff, _A History of Architecture (Available at the CCNY
Bookstore)_. They are intended to support the ideas we will have discussed in
class, and to give certain of the ideas more background and depth. It is
important to have a copy of this book, since it not only contains readings,
but also images that will be helpful as you begin studying for your exam. (2)
The second kind of readings are selections from historical sources: writings
by or about architects in their own time. These will be distributed by your
seminar leaders.



**Formal Analysis** **:** The formal analysis is a written paper that will be
assigned by your seminar instructor. Because part of your work here involves
learning to read and analyze works of architecture yourself, you are not
expected to use your texts or other written sources in preparing your formal
analysis. It is not a research paper. It must revolve around your own
observations and analysis.



**Important Warnings:**

**_***_** Absence from an examination can only be excused with a doctor's
note, or some written proof of an appropriately grave situation. The missed
examination will otherwise be counted a failure.



**_ ***_**Any incidence of copying, even short excerpts from any other work--a
book or article or the writing of another person published or unpublished--
will result in _failure of the entire course. _ Any unauthorized talking
during examinations, or consultation of anothers work, will also result in
failure of the entire course.

_ _

_ _

**What Seminar are you in?** ****

In addition to lectures, students registered for this course must attend a
seminar session for one hour each week. You are assigned a seminar section in
the following way:

(1) If you are also taking AES 230 (second year design), you will attend your
seminar on

_Mondays_ _1-1:50 PM_ with your studio instructor in the same space where your
studio meets.

(2) If you are taking AES 190 (design) you will meet with Professor DePace on
_Tuesday 1-1:50_ in your studio space. ****

(3) If you are taking _neither_ 230 nor 190, you  will attend a large seminar
session with Professor Dodds in 304 Shepherd Hall on _Tuesday_ _10:30-11:10_
(right after the lecture).



* * *

**  
**

** **

**AES 232: SYLLABUS**

** **

** **

1\. What is Architecture? / Pre-Historic Architecture

2\. Ancient Mesopotamian Architecture

******Reading** **:** Kostof pp.50 -65



3\. Ancient Near Eastern Empires

4.      Egyptian Architecture in the Old and Middle Kingdoms

# **Reading** **:** Kostof pp. 67-78



5. Egyptian Architecture in the New Kingdom and Ptolemaic Period

6. Minoan and Mycenean Architecture

******Reading** **:** Kostof pp. 103-113



7. Greek Archaic Architecture: The Doric Temple

8. Greek Classical Architecture: The Parthenon

******Reading** **:** Kostof pp.150 -159



9. Private and Public Space from Classical to Hellenistic Greece

Reading: Kostof pp.161-176



10\. The Roman Republican City: Pompeii and the Provinces

******Reading** **:** Kostof pp.191-207



11\. Rome in the Imperial Period

****

12\. Imperial Rome to Late Antique Rome

******Reading** **:** Vitruvius, _Ten Books on Architecture_

Book V, Chapter II, pp.174-180-Symetry & Proportions



### 13\. MIDTERM: 1st Semester

14\. Multicultural Rome and the Rise of Christianity

15\. Byzantium: The Haigia Sophia

******Reading** **:** Kostof pp. 260-267



16\. Early Islamic Architecture in the Mediterranean

******Reading** **:** Kostof pp. 295-296

17\. Jerusalem of the Three Religions from the 1st through the 7th Century



18\. Early Medieval Kingdoms

19. Castle and Monastery in the Rise of Feudalism: Romanesque

**Reading** **:** Kostof pp. 305-321



20\. Romanesque Architecture and the Triumph of the Church

21\. Gothic Architecture and the Rise of the City in Europe

**Reading** **:** Kostof pp. 329-341

22\. Rayonnant and Late Gothic Architecture.



23\. Toledo and Venice from the 11th to the 13th Centuries,

24\. Granada, Cairo and Florence in the 14th-15th Centuries:

******Reading** **:** Kostof pp. 394-401



25. Brunelleschi and Alberti: The Early Renaissance

******Reading** **:** Alberti, _Ten Books on Architecture_ (pp. #s TBA)

26\. Rome and the High Renaissance: Bramante

  
  
---  
| ![](232syllabus_files/image001.gif)  


  

**Monuments and Terms for Architecture 232** **:**

** **

**1\. Prehistoric Architecture**

Huts from Terra Amata (France): _c. 400,000 BCE_

Painted Caves at Lascaux (France): _ c. 15,000 BCE_

Jericho, Fortified Settlement (Palestine/Isreal): _ c. 7,500 BCE_

Catal Huyuk, Neolithic Settlement (Anatolia, Turkey): _c. 6,000 BCE_

Stonehenge, Neolithic Monument: _ c. 2,000 BCE_



**Terms:**

Tension and Compression

Post and Lintle

Canon

Theory

Apotropaic

Stratigraphy

Mud Brick

Paleolithic

Neolithic





**2\. Ancient Mesopotamian Architecture:**

_Mesopotamian/ Sumeria_ ****

Uruk, The White Temple: _n c. 3000 BCE_

Portrait Head of Akkad

_Neo-Sumerian_

Ur, Ziggurat: _ c. 5000 BCE_

Ur, Houses

Ur, Stele of Ur-Nammu

Gudea as Architect



**Terms:**

Ziggurat

Theocratic Socialism

Mesopotamian/Sumerian

Akkadians

Neo-Sumerian





**3\. Ancient Near Eastern Empires:**

City and Palace of Khorsabad, _Assyrian Empire c. 900BCE_

City and Palace of Percepolis, _Achemenid_ _Empire c. 500 BCE_

_ _

**Terms:**

Axiality

Appropriation

Transition

Exclusion

_ _

_ _

4\. **Egyptian Architecture in the Old and** **Middle** ******Kingdoms** **:**

_Old Kingdom_ _:_

Saqqara, Pyramid Complex of Zoser, _3rd Dynasty, 2680 BEC: Architect: Imhotep_

Giza, Pyramid Complex, _4th Dynasty, 2570-2500 BCE_

_Middle Kingdom: ****_

Deir El-Bahri, Tomb of Mentuhotep, _11th Dynasty, 2050 BCE_



**Terms:**

Sign

Pyramid

Stepped Pyramid

Ka

Serdab

Valley Temple

Mortuary Temple

Sphinx

Ra

Osiris

Isis

Horus





5 **. Egyptian Architecture in the** **New Kingdom** ****

_New Kingdom_ _:_

Deir El-Bahri, Temple of Hatshepsut, _18th Dynasty, c. 1480 BCE: Architect:
Senmut_

Luxor, Cult Temple to Amon; Patron: Amenhotep III

Karnak, Cult Temple to Amon; Construction and additions under patronage of
various  pharaohs, _1525-1250 BCE_

Abu Simbal, Temple to Ramses II, _1250 BCE_

_ _

**Terms:**

Frontal, Frontality

Processional Axis

Progressive Exclusion

Sphinx Avenue

Pylon Gate

Colonnade,

Columned Court,

Hypostyle Hall

Obelisk

Amon





6\. **Minoan and Mycenean Architecture**

Knossos, Minoan Palace, c. _1700 BCE_

Myceane, Mycenean Palace, c. _1,300 BCE_

**Terms:**

Organic

Organic Plan

Entasis

Corbeled Arch

Corbeled Vault

The Myth of Theseus, King Minos, and the Labyrinth

Megaron

Hearth

Cyclopean Masonry

Beehive Tomb

The Iliad





7\. **Archaic Greek Architecture: The ****Doric** ******Temple**

Segesta (Sicily), Doric Temple

Delphi, Sanctuary to Apollo



**Terms:**

Symmetry

Grid

Colony

Orders

Temple

Cella

Columns in antis

Doric Order

Stylobate

Column

Fluted Column

Collonade

Peripteral Collonade

Capital

Entablature

Architrave

Freize

Metapies

Triglyphs





8. **Greek Classical Architecture: The Parthenon and the Acropolis**

Athens, The Acropolis, The Parthenon _ 448-432 BC_

Architects: **** Ictinos and Kallicrates; Sculpture supervised by: Phideas

Patronage: Pericles representing the City of Athens

Athens, The Acropolis, Temple of Nike



**Terms:**

Perspective

Visual Refinements

Canon of Proportions

Ionic Order

Freize

Athena Parthenos

Nike

Battle of the Lapiths and Centaurs

Panathenaic Procession

The Sacrifice of Erectheus





9\. **Private and Public Space from Classical to Hellenistic ****Greece**

Athens, The Agora

The Stoa of Attalos

Athens, Houses

Miletus, Hellenistic City Plan

Agora, Stoa; Senate; Temple Precinct



Didyma, Temple to Apollo

Pergamon, City and Great Altar



**Terms:**

Stoa

Grid

Bouletarion

Sacred Precinct

Battle of the Giants and the Gods





10\. **The** **Roman** ******Republican** ******City** **:** **Pompeii** **and
the Provinces**

Roman Architecture in Pompeii: _all before 79 CE_

** **

Pompeii, City Plan

The Forum

Basilica in the Forum

Temple of Jupiter in the Forum

(Insulae (apartment houses) at Ostia like those which existed at Pompeii)

Theatre Complex

Amphitheater (Coliseum)

House of the Faun

House of the Vetii

Villa of the Mysteries

Roman Architecture in Nimes, France:

The Aqueduct "Pont du Gard"

The "Maison Carree" Pedestal Temple, _19 BCE_

The Amphitheater (Coliseum)

In Orange, France: The Roman Theatre



**Terms:**

Axis

Colonialism

Forum

Basilica

Pedestal Temple

Theatre

Frons Scenae

Amphitheatre

Atrium

Peristyle

Tablinium

insulae

Villa

Aedicula

Trompe l'oeil ****





**11.** **Rome** **in the Imperial Period**

Arch of Titus

Baths of Caracalla

Domus Aurea of Nero _, 64-68 CE_

Coliseum, _80 CE_

Forum of Trajan, _113 CE _ Architect: Appolodoris of Damascus

Market of Trajan

Basilica Ulpia



**Terms:**

arch

voussoir

keystone

barrel vault

groin vault

dome

"Dome of Heaven"

concrete

brick

orders

clerestory

oculus





12. **Imperial** **Rome** **to Late Antique** **Rome** ****

The Pantheon, _120 CE_

Hadrian's Palace at Tivoli



Split, Palace of Diocletian _300-306 CE_

Rome, Basilica of Maxentius _307-312 CE_

Arch of Constantine _312-315 CE_



**Terms:**

Dome

Dome of Heaven ****

Basilica/Central Plan

Mausoleum

Baptistry

Martyrium

Rome/ Constantinople

Spolia

Aniconism

Architrave/ Arcade

Clerestory





13. **Midterm Exam**

**14\. Multicultural** **Rome** **and the Rise of Christianity**

Rome, Catacombs

Mithraeum _3rd. C. CE_

Dura Europus, Christian House _ 231_ _CE_

Synagogue _ 3rd CE_

Other Sanctuaries

Rome, The Basilica of St. Peters Patron: Constantine and the Christian
Community

The Mausolem (and later Martyrium) of Santa Costanza; _ c_ _. 350_

Ravenna, Basilica of San Appolinare Nuovo

Orthodox Baptistry

Mausoleum of Theodoric

Battle of Mulvey Bridge

Martyrium

Baptistry

Apse/ Altar

Mosaics

Torah Niche

Atrium

Architrave

Arcade

Clerestory

Christ in Majesty





15. **Byzantine Architecture**

Ravenna, San Vitale Patron: Justinian _ 6th_ _c._

Constantinople, The Haigia Sophia Patron: Justinian

Architects: Isidorum and Anthemius _ 532-537 AD_

Stiris (Greece), Monastery of Hosios Lukas, Church of the Theotokos, _c. 1040_



**Terms:**

Overlapping Space

Mosaics

Marble Revetement

Cross in Square Plan

Icon

Iconastasis





16. **Early Islamic Architecture**

Mecca, The Kaaba

_Umayyad Caliphate:_

Great Mosque of Kufa (I _), 7th c._ __ (Iraq)

Great Mosque of Cordoba (I), _8th c._ ( Spain) Patron: Abd al Rahman I



**Terms:**

Islam

Muslim

Koran

Muhammad

Caliph

Imam

Mosque

Mihrab

Minaret

Qibla Wall

Hypostyle Plan

Aniconic

Voussoirs

Alternating Voussoir

Horseshoe Arch





17\. J **erusalem** ** of Three Religions from the 1st through the 7th
Century**

Reconstructions of the Second Temple, _constructed_ _under_ Zerubbabel _; 6th
C BCE; rebuilt by _Herod _in the 1c BCE_

Jerusalem, The Holy Sepulchre, _5th c. CE _ Patron: Constantine

Jerusalem, Dome of the Rock, _7c_ Patron: Abd al-Malik



**Terms:**

Torah

1st Temple

Sacrifice

Crucifiction

Resurrection

Martyrium

Congregation

Peoples of the Book

Spolia





18 **. Early Medieval Kingdoms in** **Europe**

<st1

