Dr. Michael Lewis

**



History 389: Environmental History: The United States

**

Section 151, Wednesday 6:00-8:30

GC 236-B

Office: 389 Holloway Hall

E-mail: mllewis@salisbury.edu

Phone: 677-5020

Office Hours: Tu/Th 2:00-3:00, Monday 12:00-3:00, and by appointment



**Course Texts:

** Opie, _Natures Nation

_

Cronon, _Changes in the Land

_

Hurley, _Environmental Inequalities

_

Kurlansky, _Cod: A Biography of the Fish that Changed the World_

White, _The Organic Machine_

Worster, _The Dust Bowl

_**

Course Description and Objectives**: This course has two primary goals. It
will introduce you to environmental history as a type of historical inquiry,
with specific goals and concerns, and second, it will give you an overview of
the general environmental history of the United States. The course will be
discussion-intensive, and will also allow you the opportunity to write a
research paper demonstrating the environmental history approach.

**

Grading Scale**:

A 90-100%

B 80%-89%

C 70-79%

D 60-69%

F 59% and below

**

Course Requirements**:

_Attendance_ : You will be allowed one absence with no penalty but remember,
missing one class is the equivalent of missing an entire weeks worth of
information! You will be responsible for making up any material missed. Any
further absences will result in a substantial reduction in your grade. Please
note that, while we all are occasionally forced to be late, a continued
pattern of tardiness to class will not be tolerated, and will result in a
reduction in your participation grade.

_Preparation_ : You are responsible for completing the assigned readings for
each week. This course will be discussion intensive. The university suggests
that you should spend 2 3 hours at home doing work for every one hour in
class (or roughly nine hours a week for this class). You should be able to
complete this courses readings in less time than that. I reserve the right to
give unannounced quizzes over the readings at any time. Also note that your
examinations will not just be derived from in-class discussions. You are
responsible for all of the material assigned, even if it was not directly
discussed in class. It is impossible to underestimate how important it is to
read your class texts! It will make the class far simpler to understand, and
will help your grade immeasurably.

_Participation_ : Your participation in class, or lack thereof, will be noted.
Active participation is not optional, but is a precondition for success in
this class.

_Examinations_ : You will have one in-class examination, and a final exam. If
you miss a scheduled examination, you will not have the opportunity for a
make-up, barring some truly spectacular and documented reason, cleared with me
PRIOR to the examination.

_Papers_ : You will be responsible for one major research paper of 10-12
pages. You will also be assigned brief essays to complete at home or in-class
as a pre-cursor to discussions; these brief papers (1-2 pages) will count
towards your participation grade.

_Class trips:_ There will be two Saturday trips for this class. These trips
are required. I understand, however, that some people have legitimate
commitments that preclude their attendance at a trip outside of class. If you
cannot make one or both of these class trips, please meet with me as soon as
possible so that we can work out an alternative assignment.

**

Grading Breakdown:

Participation: 25%

Mid-Term Examination: 20%

Paper: 30%

Final Examination: 25%

Writing Across the Curriculum: **Writing across the Curriculum is a nationally
recognized initiative that is designed to improve students learning through
encouraging different types of writing in all university courses. This course
is committed to this program, and will use the following tools:

> > > 1.) You will be required to refine your note-taking skills in class

>>>

>>> 2.) Your examinations will be essay based. These essays will require you
to think broadly about the primary themes of the course, and to marshal
specific evidence in support of an argument.

>>>

>>> 3.) You will be required to do short writing assignments in-class and at
home to allow you the opportunity to think through some general course
questions.

>>>

>>> 4.) You will write one polished research paper in which you develop and
pursue a historical argument demonstrating your mastery of the environmental
history approach.

\-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

September 5, Week 1: Introductory class  Syllabus hand out

September 12, Week 2: Kurlansky: _Cod_ (read the whole book) _,_ also, Opie,
Introduction.  **Turn in assignment**.

September 19, Week 3: Opie: Chapter 1.

September 26, Week 4: Cronon, _Changes in the Land_ (complete), also,

Opie: Chapter 2

**

September 29: Saturday: Class Field-trip

**

October 3, Week 5: Opie, Chapter 3

**Deadline to discuss paper topic with me (required)

**

October 10, Week 6: Opie, Chapter 4, Chapter 5

October 17, Week 7: Opie, Chapter 6, **the mid-term examination will be given
in the last hour of class.

**

October 24, Week 8: White: _Organic Machine (_ complete).

October 31, Week 9: Opie, Chapter 7, Chapter 8

November 7, Week 10: Chapter 9

**Research Papers Due (November 7)

**

November 14, Week 11: Hurley, _Environmental Inequalities_ (complete)

**

November 17: Saturday: Class Field Trip and discussion (to

substitute for Week 12 class meeting on November 21st)

**

Opie, Chapter 10

November 21, Week 12: No meeting. See above (November 17)

November 28, Week 13: Worster: _Dust Bowl_ (complete)

December 5, Week 14: Opie, Chapter 13 (also _skim_ Chapter 12)

December 12, Week 15:  Opie, Chapter 15

**Final Exam: December 19 th, 7:45-9:45 pm

**

_[home](welcome.htm)_

