![1766 logo](../../images/ru1766.gif)** RUTGERS UNIVERSITY  
![](../../images/rel_dept.gif)
![](../../images/clearpix.gif)[![](../../images/Home.jpg)](../../index.html)**

![](../../images/redline1.gif)  
[Home](http://religion.rutgers.edu/index.html) | [Requirements](http://) |
[Fall Courses](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/fall_01.html) | [Winter
Session](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/winter_00.html) | [Spring
Courses](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/spring_01.html) | [Summer
Session](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/summer_00.html) ****

**840:212**![](../../images/beadred.gif) **Religions of the Western World  
Summer 2002**

**![](../../images/clearpix.gif)James Pavlin**

**840:212:SEC. H6**

**Time and Place:** TTh 6:15-9:45 (7/9-8/13), FH-A5/CAC

**Instructor:** Dr. James Pavlin

**Office:** Loree Bldg. 130/DC, (732) 932-2107 (office phone and voice mail);  
**email:** jpavlin@hotmail.com

**Office Hours:** before and after class, or by appointment



**Course Description:** The purpose of the course is to introduce the student
to the academic study of religion by focusing on the monotheistic religions of
the Near Eastern and Western traditions. After acquiring the necessary
terminology and concepts related to the study of religion, the course will
focus on the scriptures, beliefs and practices of Judaism, Christianity, and
Islam. Each religion will be studied with particular attention paid readings
of primary sources related to historical developments in terms of theology,
philosophy and mysticism.



**Required Text:** Kessler, Gary E. _Western Ways of Being Religious_.

**Recommended Texts on Reserve at Alexander Library:**

Grant, Michael. _The History of Ancient Israel_.

Peters, F.E. _Jerusalem: the holy city in the eyes of chroniclers, visitors,
pilgrims, and prophets from the days of Abraham to the beginnings of modern
times_.

__. _Judaism, Christianity, and Islam: the classical texts and their
interpretation_ , 3 vols.

Sanders, E.P. _The Historical Figure of Jesus_.

Waines, David. _An Introduction to Islam_.



**Course Requirements:**

1) Class Attendance and Participation: 30% of final grade. Students are
expected to contribute to class discussions. Material covered in class may be
included on the final exam. Quizzes or other assignments may be given
occasionally, without the possibility of make ups. In order to receive an
excused absence,

students must present a written note (from doctor, etc.).

2) Three Topical Papers: 40% of final grade. Each paper must have a cover page
and bibliography. There must be a minimum of 4 pages of text (about 250 words
per page). Students will do one paper on each of the three religions covered
in the course, i.e., Judaism, Christianity and Islam. They may choose a topic
related to the readings in Kesslers book. Spelling, grammar and writing style
will be considered in grading. Papers should be in standard format: typed or
printed on white paper (8 1/2 x 11) with 1 in. margins and double-spaced, a
plain font at 10 or 12 point, black ink. All papers must be handed in one
their due date, late papers will be accepted from students having an excused
absence.

3) Final Exam: 30% of final grade. Both exams will be in class essay exams,
the midterm covering the first half of the semester and the final covering the
second half. Make up exams are permitted for those having an excused absence.



**General Policies:** Students are expected to be prepared for class by
reading all required assignments. Students are responsible for all information
presented in the lectures as well as what is contained in the required
readings, all of which may appear on the exams. Recommended readings are
optional and meant for use on the topical papers and exploring certain topics
in depth. An incomplete ( T grade) for this course will ordinarily not be
given.

**Grading System:** A=100-90, B+=89-87, B=86-80, C+=79-77, C=76-70, D=69-65,
F=64 and below

  

**Course Outline and Reading Assignments:**

Introduction to the Study of Religion

7/9 Kessler, chs. 1, 2 & 3

Ancient Israel

7/11 Kessler, ch. 4 (Intro. through 4.3.3)

Medieval Judaism

7/16 Kessler, ch. 4 (4.4 through 4.4.3)

Modern Judaism:

7/18 Kessler, ch. 4 (4.5 through 4.7)

Early Christianity

7/23 Kessler, ch. 5 (Intro. through 5.2.6) **1 st paper due**

Medieval Christianity

7/25 Kessler, ch. 5 (5.3 through 5.4.2, and 5.6)

Modern Christianity

7/30 Kessler, ch. 5 (5.5 through 5.7)

Early Islam:

8/1 Kessler, ch. 6 (Intro. through 6.2.2) **2 nd paper due**

Medieval Islam

8/6 Kessler, ch. 6 (6.3 through 6.3.3)

Modern Islam

8/8 Kessler, ch. 6 (6.4 through 6.6)

8/13 Final Exam **3 rd paper due**  
  
---  
  
![](../../images/redline1.gif)

[Home](http://religion.rutgers.edu/index.html) | [Requirements](http://) |
[Fall Courses](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/fall_01.html) | [Winter
Session](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/winter_00.html) | [Spring
Courses](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/spring_01.html) | [Summer
Session](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/summer_00.html)

**This page was revised 1 July 2001**

