CRD 140

## CRD 140

CRD 140, 4 units  
M. Kenney  
Office: 2307 Hart Hall  
Office Hours MW 10-11 am, T 4:30 -5:00 and RF by appointment  
| |  Department of Human and Community Development  
University of California, Davis  
Office tele. # 530-752-0328  
[mfkenney@ucdavis.edu](mailto:mfkenney@ucdavis.edu)  
  
---|---|---  
  
[Syllabus](CRD140syll02.doc) | [Course objectives](crd140.html#objectives) |
[Required readings](crd140.html#readings) | [Course
requirements](crd140.html#requirements)

  
  
Winter 2002  
  
CRD 140 -- Dynamics of Regional Development  
  
**Course objectives**  

This course examines the development of cities, regions and industries from a
political economic perspective. My goal is to encourage you to think about the
operation of capitalist economies in a global perspective and to highlight
some of the critical forces shaping the contemporary economy. The course goal
is to provide you with insights into some of the business and economic
headlines that you read in the newspaper every day. Further, for those of you
who plan to be change agents in your communities, it is important to
understand the economic forces structuring the world within which you live and
act.

It is not sufficient to learn only from the contemporary situation. History
also has important lessons. It is my intention to examine certain political
economic trends through the use of both contemporary and historical examples.
The history of capitalism shows that no single actor or small group of actors
control the economy, not even the most powerful businesspersons who are
usually its greatest beneficiaries. Having said that, it is also clear that
economic power is differentially distributed in society. Moreover, those with
economic power have significant clout in politics. And yet, history is a
chaotic process in which social, political, and economic actors are constantly
operating, dealing, finagling, building, destroying, winning, and losing. The
groups involved in these struggles are not only the elites. Unions,
environmental groups, organizations pushing for workplace justice, and anti-
globalization groups also affect these outcomes. It is always possible to
shift the terms of debate and to bring new actors into the equation. For
example, even as corporations have become globalized so have other
organizations seeking to impact their practices. In contrast to most
observers, I believe globalization is no longer an issue, it is quite simply a
fact of life -- the debate is about how it will be shaped.

This course concentrates on two significant issues: the development of
regional economies and globalization. One fact I would like you to keep in
mind the entire quarter is that all of the articles in this class are written
by persons with their own perspectives and agendas. This is not wrong, it is
simply a fact. For me, one objective will be to teach you to think more
critically and understand why some things are happening.

[![](top.gif) Back To Top](crd140.html#Top)  
  
**Required reading - see syllabus**

Readings are an essential part of the course and will be discussed during
class. They are a necessary background for discussion. Class participation is
important and students are expected to be prepared to discuss readings in
class. I will call on you by name.

The one book you might choose to purchase is Urban Fortunes by John Logan and
Harvey Molotch (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988). We will read
100 pages of it. I did not make it a required book, but copies might be
available in the bookstore and it is certainly available for purchase online.
I have also put two copies on reserve in the library.

The remaining readings (with the exception of the Logan and Molotch book and
those available on websites) are available in the Shields Library Copy Center.
Ask for the readings for CRD 140 taught by Martin Kenney.

[![](top.gif) Back To Top](crd140.html#Top)  
  
**Course requirements**

The course grade will be based upon the following:  
  

Participation --10%  
Midterm-- 30%  
Term paper -- 60%  

Midterm: The midterm examination is in class and takes the form of essays and
perhaps some short answer questions. It covers the reading and the lectures.

Term paper: The task is to take a corporation and trace its evolution. The
crucial feature is for you to examine how it has changed its production, R
&D;, and headquarters√ï location through time. In effect, you are doing an
economic, social, and geographical history of the company. You should try to
answer why it changed locations, did it globalize, is it located in a cluster,
the implications of its relocation to the communities that lost the
investments and those that gained the investment. Try to tie in our readings
to the changes in the corporation. Samples of excellent past papers are
available in the library.

The objective of the paper is to provide you with a deeper understanding of
how firms evolve, the effect of the community on the firm, and the effect of
firm on the communities dependent on the firm. All students are required to
submit the name of the company on **Wednesday, January 16, 2002**. I will then
discuss the feasibility of your choices with you. If possible choose a company
with which you are familiar or in which you have some interest. The earlier
you begin work on the paper, the more insightful and interesting the paper is.

The term paper must be typewritten, double-spaced. A style sheet will be
handed-out later in the quarter.

During the last couple weeks of classes, all students make a 5-minute
presentation on the history of their company. These presentations are not
graded. Often, students bring examples of the products of their company.

_Very Important_ : Failure to make this presentation will result in a full
grade deduction on your final paper.

Participation: Roll is not taken, however the instructor notes excessive
absences. Failing grades have been assigned for the 10% participation portion
of your grade. Even 10 percent is a substantial portion of your grade, it can
have an effect upon the final grade. One way I measure participation is
through the questions I ask during class.  
  
[![](top.gif)Back To Top](crd140.html#Top)  
  

