** **

![darwin1.jpg \(26433 bytes\)](darwin1.jpg)

**

Syllabus  
HSCI 3333

**

**Issues in 20 th Century American Science**

The primary goal of this IT Honors course is to familiarize students with a
number of central topics in the history of science and technology in theUnited
States during this nearly completed century. We will consider issues that have
been central to modern history of science: experts and the enormous influence
of scientific thinking in the progressive era of the early twentieth century;
technology and public culture as reflected in not only industrial investments
but also in the very toys engineered for children; the sources and goals of
eugenics and genetics as these were pursued by scientists and political
leaders; the national and international context of science through wars and
depression; the institutional dynamics of science in the Cold War and Space
Age; and the implications of "big science" for individual scientists. Issues
of individual and group ethical behavior will be a subtheme of the course, as
the class considers the intellectual, social, political, economic, and private
components of choice in the context of professional expectations.

Students will be expected to complete readings as assigned on the syllabus and
come prepared to discuss these in class or to participate in on-line
discussions or postings. There will be three microthemes (15%), four computer
tasks (20%), a group project (10%), as well as a midterm (20%) and a final
exam (20%). Class participation (15%) will be included as part of the overall
evaluation of each student in the class based on participation in class,
discussion groups, and the discussion board. Late assignments will be reduced
in grade, and an incomplete in the course is possible only in unusual
circumstances and with explanations documented in writing. This course meets
the historical perspectives, citizenship and public ethics, and writing
intensive requirements of the university requirements as defined by the
Council on Liberal Education.

Texts for the class include the following books, on reserve in Walter Library
and also for sale in the Williamson Bookstore:

*Jeffrey Burton Russell, _Inventing the Flat Earth: Columbus and Modern Historians_ (New York: Praeger, 1991).

*Diane B. Paul, _Controlling Human Heredity, 1895 to the Present_ (Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press Intl., 1995).

*Loren Graham, _The Ghost of the Executed Engineer: Technology and the Fall of the Soviet Union_ (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1994).

*Howard E. McCurdy, _Inside NASA: High Technology and Organizational Change in the U.S. Space Program_ (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993).

(On reserve and recommended) John Hatton and Paul B. Plouffe, _Science and Its
Ways of Knowing_ (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1997).

Computer Web Site - case studies and class assignments at
www.umn.edu/scitech/3333h-home.htm

_**

Course Instructors and Their Availability**_

In addition to office hours and assistance in class, on-line help will be
available. If you have a general question, you should post it on the
discussion board so fellow students and the instructors may help. If you have
a more urgent problem, you may contact the TA or faculty member at the e-mail
addresses listed below. You are particularly encouraged to take advantage of
the office hours if you encounter problems with your reading or other
assignments, seek special help with understanding the material, or simply want
to explore the issues being raised in class.

**Copyright Â© 1997  
[Program in History of Science and
Technology](http://www.physics.umn.edu/groups/hsci/)  
[University of Minnesota](http://www.umn.edu/)  
All Rights Reserved  
Site Designed and Constructed by [Eric S.
Boyles](mailto:boyl0018@tc.umn.edu)**

