####  You may return to the [course main page.](latam.html)

# Latin American History

This is the syllabus of the fall 2001 version of J. B. Owens's sophomore-level
course Latin American History (Hist 251), which can be taken to satisfy Goal
10A of the General Education Requirements of Idaho State University and the
World Regions history requirement of history majors and minors. Paying
particular attention to the PREFACE and STUDENT OUTCOMES sections, History
majors should read the web page on the [Undergraduate Curriculum in
Comparative and World History.](http://www.isu.edu/~owenjack/undergrad.html)

Questions and comments about this course should be sent to OWENJACK@ISU.EDU,
or you may [send a message now.](mailto:owenjack@isu.edu) Please include your
name and e-mail address in the body of your message.

  * Office: Rm. 344 of the Liberal Arts Building, Idaho State University 
  * (208) 282-3232 (office telephone number) 
  * (208) 282-2379 (Secretary, Dept. of History, for messages) 
  * e-mail: owenjack@isu.edu 
  * www: http://www.isu.edu/~owenjack/latam/latam.html 
  * [Latin America information sites](http://www.isu.edu/~owenjack/bookmarks/iberia.html) 

## BOOKS

The following books are to be purchased: E. Bradford Burns, Latin America: A
Concise Interpretive History, 6th edition (1994); Benjamin Keen and Keith
Haynes, A History of Latin America, 6th edition (2000).

## WRITTEN ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADES

There will be THREE EXAMS in this course: 28 Sept., 31 Oct., and 17 Dec. (this
third exam starts at 7:30 a.m. and lasts until 9:30 a.m.). Each exam will take
the entire class period and must be taken in a university exam book (blue
book).

Students will be excused from exams only for illness or death, usually their
own, or for any other reason for which the President of the University will
excuse a student. No excuse will be given, however, unless the instructor is
notified of the request PRIOR to the time of the regular exam. A make-up exam
will be necessary. Because the exams will be graded on points and failure to
take one will give the student a zero, no one should take an unexcused absence
from an exam or fail to make one up.

Grades will be based on the exams and on class and discussion list
participation. Because class attendance is important, it is MANDATORY.
Moreover, if you miss four (4) or more classes, you will fail this course. A
seating chart will be established, and attendance will be taken.

## NOTE-TAKING

In class you will often be introduced to interpretations different from those
in the Burns and Keen/Haynes books. Success on examinations will depend
heavily on your ability to understand the interpretations of Burns and
Keen/Haynes, as well as mine. In order to study and reflect on the ideas
presented in class, you will have to take good notes: that is, notes that
reflect accurately the positions I present. Failure to take good notes from
the beginning will trouble you throughout.

You may make an audio recording of class sessions if you wish, but these will
be of most use to you if you also take complete written notes and use the
recordings only to clarify points poorly expressed in the written version.

## ELECTRONIC OFFICE HOURS AND DISCUSSION LIST

Often it will not be possible for you to get essential questions answered
during class or my regular office hours. The networked computer is my ally in
providing you with the PERSONAL ATTENTION you need and deserve. I want to use
computer-mediated interaction is this way, and it is for this reason that you
are required to have an ISU computer account and provide me with your e-mail
address.

Your class is too large (over three times larger than our national association
recommends); on-line office hours will help personalize your education if you
take the initiative to clarify those points in the lectures and readings that
you do not understand.

But it gets better than this. Naturally, I will respond to anything of a
personal nature with an individual response to you alone. However, many of the
questions and comments I will get, about the lectures for example, will be of
importance to everyone in the class, and I will, therefore, post your message
and my response to everyone using an automated discussion list called LatAm
(Latin American History discussion list). That way I, and you, will derive
much more benefit from my interactions with students outside of class.

I will respond on LatAm to your queries about the lectures, reading
assignments, exams, and other matters related to the course. But we won't stop
there. In addition to your questions, you are welcome, indeed encouraged, to
post statements of your ideas on particular subjects, messages of an
informational nature ( _e.g._ , the times for group study sessions in the
Student Union or College Market), and YOUR responses to the questions and
requests for help of other students.

## READING ASSIGNMENTS

Readings are to be completed by the date indicated.

27 August: INTRODUCTION TO THE COURSE     Burns, List of Maps (p. vii),
Preface, & pp. 342-362; Keen/Haynes, List of Maps, Preface, ch. 21 (578-599),
and Glossary.

NOTE: There is a substantial emphasis on Geography in this course. For those
of you who are upper-division students or above and planning careers in
teaching, I will be teaching a special course during the spring semester
entitled "World History and Geography for Teachers." 29 August: MENTAL
MAPPING: What do students know about world geography?     Your assignment is
to pay close attention to the maps in your textbooks because you will be asked
to reproduce, from memory, some of this information. In class, you will draw,
using only materials I will provide, a "mental map" of the world, indicating
particularly the domains of Iberian monarchs during the first global age,
roughly 1400-1800. In addition to drawing materials, I will provide you with a
list of historical, political, economic, and physical details relevant to the
course.

I adapt this class session from the work of Deborah Smith Johnston of
Lexington High School and Northeastern University in Massachusetts. She has
been recognized as the outstanding Geography teacher by the [National Council
of Geography Education](http://www.ncge.org). Her objective is: "For students
to envision the historical world spatially in order to create mental
geographical constructs that are useful in providing them with a framework for
understanding the world through interactions across time and place."

31 August: THE THREE SOCIAL AND CULTURAL ENVIRONMENTS: American, European, and
African     Keen/Haynes, Introduction and chs. 1 and 2; Burns, ch. 1 3
September: Labor Day (no class)     A long time ago (and before there was a
country called "Israel"), one of the greatest U.S. leaders of the 20th century
said, "Labor like Israel has many sorrows...." And it continues to be so. 5, 7
and 10 September: IBERIAN EXPANSION: Castile and Portugal seek world empires
Keen/Haynes, pp. 2-4 and ch. 3 12, 14 and 17 September: THE INSTITUTIONS OF
IMPERIALISM: The consolidation of empire     Keen/Haynes, chs. 4 and 5; Burns,
ch. 2 18 September: THE WORLD IN A BOX     Viewing and discussion of the video
"The World in a Box" (an introduction to Geographic Information Systems, GIS).
Students who attend one of these sessions and submit their notes, along with a
statement of how GIS might be used in the study of History, may earn up to
three points toward their course total, depending on the quality of their
notes and statement. 19 and 21 September: LATIN AMERICA IN THE AGE OF THE
ENLIGHTENMENT: From Crown domains to colonies     Keen/Haynes, chs. 6 and 7 24
and 26 September: THE WORLD TURNED UPSIDE DOWN: Revolution and the end of
empire     Burns, ch. 3; Keen/Haynes, ch. 8

28 September: FIRST EXAM     On all readings and discussions to date.

1, 3 and 5 October: ADVENTURES IN NATIONHOOD (I): Imperial Brazil     Burns,
ch. 4; Keen/Haynes, pp. 182-183 and ch. 9

4 October: GIS IN THE HUMANITIES     For those students who are interested, I
have organized a special presentation on Thursday, 5 October, at 7:00 p.m., by
Dr. Karen Kemp of the University of Redlands in California. Students who
attend Dr. Kemp's presentation and submit their notes on her lecture will earn
up to three points toward their course total, depending on the quality of
their notes. 8 and 10 October: ADVENTURES IN NATIONHOOD (II): Mexico and _La
Reforma_      No additional reading assignment. Start the reading for the next
assignment. 12 October: THE POSITIVIST AGE     Keen/Haynes, chs. 10, 11 and 19
(502-510; 522-527); Burns, ch. 5 15 and 17 October: REPUBLICAN BRAZIL
Burns, ch. 6; Keen/Haynes, read pp. 262-272 and review ch. 10 (236-244) 19 and
22 October: REVOLUTIONARY MEXICO     Keen/Haynes, ch. 12 (to p. 287); Burns,
ch. 7 24 October: NEW NATIONALISM (I): Storm over the Andes     Keen/Haynes,
ch. 16 26 and 29 October: NEW NATIONALISM (II): Mexico     Keen/Haynes, ch.
12, pp. 287-296; Burns, ch. 8

31 October: SECOND EXAM     On all readings and discussions since the last
exam.

2, 5 and 7 November: NEW NATIONALISM (III): Brazil     Keen/Haynes, ch. 15,
pp. 358-376 9 and 12 November: NEW NATIONALISM (IV): Argentina
Keen/Haynes, ch. 13 14 and 16 November: MARXISM AND THE INTELLECTUALS
Burns, ch. 9; Keen/Haynes, ch. 21 (review pp. 578-599; read pp. 599-607) 19,
21, and 23 November: Thanksgiving Holiday (no class)      26 and 28 November:
THE ROAD TO SOCIALISM: Cuba     Keen/Haynes, chs. 12 (296-310), 17, 18
(461-463), and 20 (556-562) 30 November: MILITARY DICTATORSHIP IN DEFENSE OF
THE OLD ORDER (I): Chile     Keen/Haynes, ch. 14 3 and 5 December: [Electronic
Cultural Atlas Initiative (ECAI)](http://ecai.org) (http://ecai.org) meeting,
Guadalajara, Mexico, in conjunction with the [Pacific Neighborhood Consortium
(PNC)](http://pnclink.org) (http://pnclink.org).     [Ibero-Mundo Regional
Atlas
Team](http://redgeomatica.rediris.es/ecai/atlas_iberomundo/atlas_iberomundo.html),
Spanish "Santuarios" Team, [Cartographic Guidelines
Team](http://redgeomatica.rediris.es/ecai/cgc/index.html), Technology Team (no
class) 7 December: MILITARY DICTATORSHIP IN DEFENSE OF THE OLD ORDER (II):
Brazil and Central America     Keen/Haynes, chs. 15 (pp. 376-392) and 18 10
December: THE GREAT FEAR     Burns, ch. 10; Keen/Haynes, chs. 19 (510-522;
528-540) and 20, and review pp. 261-272 12 December: GROWTH OR DEVELOPMENT --
APPROPRIATE INVESTMENT     Exploration of E. Bradford Burns's distinction
between economic growth and development. 14 December: LATIN AMERICA --
GLOBALIZATION'S IMPACT ON A WORLD REGION     Exploration of "globalization"
and its impact on the peoples of contemporary Latin America.

Monday, 17 December: THIRD EXAM (7:30 - 9:30 a.m.)     On all readings and
discussions since the last exam.

## OLD EXAMINATION QUESTIONS

For study purposes, you may refer to the examination questions used in earlier
versions of this course at the URL
[http://www.isu.edu/~owenjack/latam/oldques.html](oldques.html)

You may return to the [course main page.](latam.html)

* * *
    
    
    All contents copyright (C) 1995-2001.
    J. B. Owens
    All rights reserved.
    
    
    
    Revised:  26 November 2001
    
    
    
    URL:  http://www.isu.edu/~owenjack/latam/syllabus.html
    



