![](images/spacer.gif) | ![photo, disabled black WWI veteran & family watching
parade, New York City, 1919](H3821blackvet.jpg)

**HIST 3821**  
3 credits/Fall 2001  
T/Th 11:15AM-12:30 PM  
Anderson 270  



**Professor Barbara Welke**  
752 Social Sciences Tower  
Office Hours:  
T/Th 3:00-4:30 p.m.  
tel: (612) 624-7017  
[welke004@tc.umn.edu](mailto:welke004@tc.umn.edu)

| ![](images/spacer.gif) |  [![](H3821header.gif)](H3821.htm)  
![](images/spacer_grn.gif) | **Syllabus** |  | | [Schedule](3821sch.htm) | | |
[Lectures](3821lec.htm) | | | [Internet
Resources](http://www.hist.umn.edu/%7Ehist20c/internet/index)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
![](images/spacer_grn.gif)

  
**Syllabus**

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

Thinking about the United States in the first half of the 20th century brings
a jumble of conflicting images to  mind: immigrants on Ellis Island against
the backdrop of the Statue of Liberty; nasty tenements and sweatshops mere
blocks from lavish department stores; drinking fountains and restaurants
bearing placards reading "whites only" or "colored" at home, Americans
fighting for democracy and equality abroad. These were the years of the first
movies, of the automobile, radio, and the rise of advertising. These were the
years of the "Great War," violent corporate and state supported repression of
labor unrest, giddy speculation, numbing depression, and once again war. The
United States emerged from it all the world's leading industrial power.

This is a survey course open to both history majors and those outside history.
Our goals this semester are not only to get a feeling of what life was like
and how it changed over the first half of the 20th century, but also to
understand why; to understand the relationship between forces in the larger
world and change at home; to highlight America's triumphs and accomplishments,
as well as to grapple with its' shortcomings. We will talk about national
politics and everyday life, about popular culture and technological
innovation, about corporate power and government regulation, about
international affairs and economic development. Much of our reading will be in
primary sources \- speeches, interviews, letters, articles, photographs,
films, advertisements,and more - the actual "stuff" of history and from which
history is written. Ask questions of the sources we read, of yourself, and
each other, participate, have fun, be troubled. It is by engaging the past
that we develop a sense of who we are today.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

Students are responsible for all assigned readings, regular attendance at
lectures, and active participation in class discussions. Most classes will
incorporate discussion into the lecture. You should always bring your assigned
readings to class because we will be referring to them. In addition to regular
attendance and participation in discussions, students are required to take an
in-class midterm and take-home final exam, and write 5 short papers (3-6 pages
each). Course grades will be based on the following formula: 25% midterm exam,
25% final exam, 50% short papers (5 x 10%). You can also improve your grade by
1/3 letter grade (e.g., B to B+, B+ to A-) by regular attendance and active,
informed participation in class.

** REQUIRED TEXTS**

The following texts are required reading. They are available at the H. B.
Smith Bookstore on the West Bank.

1\. Linda Gordon, _The Great Arizona Orphan Abduction_ (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1999)(Winner of the 1999 Bancroft Prize in American History
and the 2000 Albert J. Beveridge Award of the American Historical
Association).  

2\. Studs Terkel, _" The Good War": An Oral History of World War II_ (New
York: The New Press, 1984)(Winner of the Pulitzer Prize in History).  

3\. Nelson Lichtenstein, Susan Strasser, Roy Rosenzweig, _Who Built America?
Working People and the Nation's Economy, Politics, Culture, and Society_ ,
Vol. Two, 1877 to the Present (New York: Worth Publishers, 2000).

**INTERNET READINGS**  

For most of our readings this term we will be relying on primary sources
available on the internet resources link to the course webpage. You should
familiarize yourself with the course website:

http://www.hist.umn.edu/~bywelke/H3821

The syllabus and lecture schedule will be on-line and there is an extensive
web-page with links to primary sources. I have purposely kept the number of
texts for purchase at the bookstore to a minimum so that we can add primary
readings from the web as we go along. This means that in addition to checking
your paper copy of the syllabus for assigned class readings, you should also
listen for announcements in class, and, any time you miss class, check the
schedule on-line so that you are prepared for class discussion.

For the hours and locations of all University computer labs, please contact
Academic & Distributed Computing Services.

**MIDTERM AND FINAL EXAM**

1\. The format for the Midterm and Final Exams will be essay, with some
identify and explain the significance questions on the Midterm.

2\. One week before each exam I will distribute in class a list of potential
questions from which I will draw the exam questions.

3\. On both exams I will be using blind-grading.

4\. The Midterm Exam will be in-class on Tuesday, October 30th.

**5.** **The Final Exam will be a take home exam and will be due in 752 SST
(my office) no later than 5:00 p.m., Thursday, December 20th**.

**SHORT PAPERS**

One of the goals of this course is to introduce you to the basic skills used
by historians to understand, analyze, research, and write history. The short
papers are intended to develop these skills.

Guidelines for completing short papers:

1\. Most of the short papers will involve using primary sources -- the stuff
from which history is written -- and ask you to think for yourself as a
historian. Where I ask for your opinion, I really mean that I want to hear
what you think. But I expect your opinion to reflect and bring to bear
material from lecture, your survey text, and other relevant primary sources we
have read.

2\. To receive credit, you must turn in your assignment in class on the
scheduled date. I will not accept late papers. These assignments will be
providing the foundation for our class discussions. If you are not in class or
have not completed the assignment, you won't be prepared to participate in
discussion.

3\. Your short papers may be either typed or handwritten. The quality of the
thinking in papers is what matters most. I have read just as many terrific
handwritten papers as I have read crummy typed ones, so don't feel at a
disadvantage if you need or would prefer to write out an assignment.

4\. I note a page length or page range for each assignment. I generally assume
250 words per page. If you are handwriting an assignment, use this as a guide.
In fairness to all students, I expect everyone to honor the page limits.

5\. Be creative on these assignments. Have fun. And really think. This is what
these assignments are all about.

**OPTIONAL 1-CREDIT DISCUSSION SECTION**

You may enroll for an additional 1-credit discussion section taught by Matt
Carhart. The discussion section is on Tuesdays, 1:25-2:15 p.m. in Blegen 260
and is limited to 25 students. Students in the discussion section will do
additional weekly readings and complete additional assignments. Students in
the discussion will receive a separate grade for the discussion.

**UNIVERSITY POLICIES**

**GRADES AND GRADING POLICIES**

University-wide grading standards are as follows:

  * A - achievement that is outstanding relative to the level necessary to meet course requirements 
  * B - achievement that is significantly above the level necessary to meet course requirements 
  * C - achievement that meets the course requirements in every respect
  * D - achievement that is worthy of credit even though it fails to meet fully the course requirements 
  * S - achievement that is satisfactory, which is equivalent to a C- or better
  * F(or N) - Represents failure (or no credit) and signifies that the work was either (1) completed but at a level of achievement that is not worthy of credit or (2) was not completed and there was no agreement between the instructor and the student that the student would be awarded an I (see also I) 
  * I - (Incomplete) Assigned at the discretion of the instructor when, due to extraordinary circumstances, e.g., hospitalization, a student is prevented from completing the work of the course on time. Requires a written agreement between instructor and student 
  * Academic dishonesty in any portion of the academic work for a course shall be grounds for awarding a grade of F or N for the entire course. 

**PLAGIARISM**

Use of written material (such as quotations) and/or ideas from the work of
other scholars or writers without acknowledgement constitutes plagiarism.
While I reserve the right to treat cases of unintentional plagiarism, you
should be aware that the College of Liberal Arts recommends a failing grade
for any plagiarized assignments. A second offense would result in a failing
course grade. If you are uncertain about the meaning of plagiarism, please
consult me. For more information on academic conduct, contact the [Student
Dispute Resolution Center](http://www.tc.umn.edu/%7Esos/), 107 Eddy Hall
(625-5900).

**EQUAL OPPORTUNITY**

The University of Minnesota is committed to the policy that all persons shall
have equal access to its programs, facilities, and employment without regard
to race, religion, color, sex, national origin, handicap, age, veteran status,
or sexual orientation. For further information, contact the Office of Equal
Opportunity and Affirmative Action in 419 Morrill Hall (624-9547).

**SEXUAL HARASSMENT**

Sexual harassment is defined as "Unwelcome sexual advances, requests for
sexual favors, and other verbal or physical contact of a sexual nature when
(1) submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term
or condition of an individual's employment or academic advancement, (2)
submission to, or rejection of, such conduct by an individual is used as the
basis for employment decisions or academic decisions affecting the individual,
or (3) such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with
an individual's work or academic performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile, or offensive working or academic environment." All faculty,
supervisors, and administrators are legally and ethically obligated to take
appropriate action to prevent sexual harassment. For further information,
contact the Office of Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action in 419 Morrill
Hall (624-9547).

**DISABILITIES **

The University will provide accommodation for students with special needs.
Please inform me if this may apply to you. For further information, contact
[Disability Services](http://disserv3.stu.umn.edu/index2.html), 180 Gateway
Center (626-1333).

![](images/spacer_grn.gif) [Main](H3821.htm) | | | [Schedule](3821sch.htm) | |
| [Lectures](3821lec.htm) | | | [Internet
Resources](http://www.hist.umn.edu/%7Ehist20c/internet/index) | | | top  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
![](images/spacer_grn.gif)

  
  
  |   |   |  

