**



MODERN GREECE

History 517

Winter Quarter 1999

A History of Modern Greece

* * *

Course Description:

**

A history of Modern Greece, from the fall of Constantinople (1453) to the
present, with an emphasis on social, cultural, and political developments. The
course focuses on the question: "who is Greek and what does it mean to be
Greek?" and it explores this through a variety of issues and historical
periods. The course will provide a chronological framework of events and it
will utilize music, literature, and folklore, along with traditional
historical sources, to gain a better understanding of the modern Greek dilemma
and identity. The emphasis of the course will be on the most recent period,
but a detailed study of earlier periods will be necessary to place the present
in its proper historical context.

**

Instructor: **Professor Timothy E. Gregory, 365 Dulles Hall, 230 W. 17th
Avenue. Telephone: 292-1949 (office), 292-2674 (Department of History),
291-4015 (home). Fax: 292-2282.

**

Office Hours**: Monday and Wednesday 9:30-10:30, Monday 1:30-2:30, and by
appointment.

**

E-mail**: gregory.4@osu.edu

**

Personal web site**: http://www.acs.ohio-state.edu/history/isthmia/teg

**Class Web Site:**[ http://www.acs.ohio-
state.edu/history/isthmia/teg/hist517](http://www.acs.ohio-
state.edu/history/isthmia/teg/hist517) **

Class Discussion List:**[ _hist517@lists.acs.ohio-
state.edu_](mailto:hist517@lists.acs.ohio-state.edu) ****  
---  
**

Required Texts:

**

Richard Clogg, _A Concise History of Greece_. Cambridge University Press.
1992.

Nicholas Gage, _Eleni

_

Nikos Kazantzakis, _Freedom or Death

Readings in Modern Greek History

_**

Optional Text:

**

Stathis Gourgouris, _Dream Nation : Enlightenment, Colonization, and the
Institution of Modern Greece._ Stanford University Press. ISBN: 0804727252

Note: All books, except _Readings in Modern Greek History_ , are available
only at SBX. There may be problems getting hold of _Freedom or Death_. If you
can't find the book at SBX you may want to get a copy from the public library.
Readings is sold at Cop-EZ in the basement of Bricker Hall.

**

Class Schedule and Reading Assignments

**

January 4 THE BYZANTINE HERITAGE

            Clogg, Ch. 1

January 11 TOURKOKRATIA

            Clogg, Ch. 2

            Kazantzakis, _Freedom or Death_

January 18 REVOLUTION

            Clogg, Ch. 3

            Readings 1 (Makryiannis)

January 25 THE NEW NATION

            Clogg, Ch. 4

            Readings 2 (Mark Twain)

            Gourgouris, start reading

February 1 WORLD WAR I AND THE KATASTROPHE

            Clogg, Ch. 5

            Readings 3 (Treaty of Lausanne) 

            Continue Gourgouris

February 8 DICTATORSHIP AND WAR

            Clogg, Ch. 6

            Readings 4 -5 (Road to Rebetika; Hondros)

February 15 CIVIL WAR

            Readings IV-V

            Gage, _Eleni

_

            Readings 6 (Wittner)

            Complete Gourgouris

February 22 THE JUNTA

            Clogg, Ch. 7 

            Readings VI

Readings 7-8 (Athenian, McNeill)

March 1 RESTORATION OF DEMOCRACY

Clogg, Ch. 8

Readings 9-12 (Cyprus)

March 8 PROSPECTS AND RETROSPECT I

Readings 13-14 (Women)



**

Student Responsibilities

**

Students will be expected to attend all scheduled classes and to read all
assignments (including handouts) on time. In addition to these common
requirements, the course will encourage each student to investigate aspects of
modern Greek history that interest him/her. These will include a book report
and a class project.

**

Book Reports:

**

1\. A brief (500-750 word) report on Freedom or Death by Nikos Kazantzakis.
The report should evaluate the character Captain Michalis as a historical
personage. That is, you should explain the background against which the book
is set and critically evaluate how well the book reflects the _historical_
reality of Greece in that setting. This means that you should compare what you
read in Clog and what we've discussed in class with what you read in _Freedom
or Death_. Remember that you may have trouble getting this book--so take care
of this potential problem at an early date. The report is due January 27\.
Late papers will be subject to a substantial reduction of grade.

2\. A brief (500-750 word) report on _Eleni_ by Nicholas Gage. The report
should state the central thesis of the book and critically evaluate how well
the book reflects the _historical_ reality of Greece during the Civil War.
This means that you should compare what you read in Clog and what we've
discussed in class with what you read in _Eleni_. The report is due February
22. Late papers will be subject to a substantial reduction of grade.

**

Class Project:

**

All students must prepare a class project of their own choosing and
delineation. All projects should be discussed with the instructor and you
should decide on your topic no later than February 15. The project may be on
any topic of your choice, as long as it deals with the history of modern
Greece. One topic that is especially encouraged is the study of the "
immigrant experience" of someone who came to America sometime in the past.
Such a project would normally require you to conduct an oral interview with
the person, asking him/her certain questions such as a) where they came from
in Greece, b) why they left Greece, c) when they left, d) where they lived in
America and what work they did, e) how they would describe their experience in
America (good, bad, difficult, rewarding), and f) what they think about Greece
now. A project along these lines may be particularly appropriate for students
of Greek descent, but it may be attractive to anyone. All students will make a
brief oral presentation of their project and they will prepare a brief written
summary of the results of the project (2-4 pages). This written summary is due
on March 1. Those who prefer may wish to set up a web site to present their
project. Grades for the project will be determined by the amount of effort put
into it and how well it is presented.

**

Grading:

**

The following represents how the final grade for the course will be
determined:

Mid-Term Examination 20%

Book Reports 20% (10% each)

Class Project 25%

Final Examination 25%

Class Participation 10%

**

Important Dates:**

First Book Report January 27

Mid-Term Exam February 10

Second Book Report February 22

Class Project March 1

Final Examination to be announced

All students should be aware that plagiarism, or any other kind of academic
dishonesty, is a serious offense and can result in penalties, including
failure in the course and dismissal from the University. All work in this
course must be your own, and dishonesty of any kind will not be tolerated.



syl517.doc

