                                                **European Military History**



HTY 279
Professor Stephen M. Miller

Spring 2002
Stevens Hall, 265D (Ext. 1905)

T, TH 11:00-12:15                                                      E-mail:
[stephen.miller@maine.edu](mailto:stephen.miller@maine.edu)

J 102
Office Hours:  TH 2:00-4:00

                                                                                         and by appt. 

_ _

**Course Description:**

The course examines European military history from the Eighteenth Century to
the present day.  It will examine the relationships between states and their
armies, as well as evaluate army organization and administration, social
relationships within the military, and civilian attitudes towards military
institutions.  The history of war is an integral part of understanding the
history of society and this class is concerned with both.  Topics of study
will include the causes and nature of war, the rise of the citizen army, the
European conquest of Africa and Asia, the effects of technology on modern
warfare, the wars of national independence, and guerrilla warfare.



_Required Readings_

J. Keegan                                _The Face of Battle_ (Chapters 1,
2-5)

Clausewitz                               _On War_ (hand-outs)

C. Woodham-Smith                _The Reason Why_

S. Miller                                  _Lord Methuen and the British Army_  

J. Ellis                                     _Eye-Deep in Hell_

H. Boll                                    _And Where Were You Adam?/The Train
Was on Time_

_ _

# Recommended Textbook

L. Addington                           _Patterns of War Since the 18th
Century_

This text gives a good overview of military history since the 18th century.  I
_strongly recommend_ that you read it chapter by chapter as we progress
through the semester.   It is _not_ a substitute for missing lectures.   This
text, as well as all the required texts, will be on sale at the bookstore and
will be available at the library reserve. __

_ _

_Requirements_

Mid-term exam (20%), Final exam (30%), one 5-8 page paper (30%), class
participation (20%).



1) Exams.  There will be a Midterm exam (75 minute) and a Final exam (90
minute).  Each exam will consist of short identifications and essay questions.
All make-up exams will be given on the last day of this class, May 9.  Any
missed exam will be marked as a zero in the grade book.



2) Paper.  You will read two or more scholarly books and/or articles on a
topic concerning Modern European Military History and do a comparative
analysis of the authors' theses.  (These can not come from the required
reading list.)  This is NOT a research paper.  The goal of the paper is to
demonstrate that history is not a science; research and analysis can reflect
the historian's viewpoint.  You will pick one topic and compare differing
viewpoints on that topic.  A good paper will have a clear thesis in the
introduction which tells the reader the subject of the paper and the sources
that are being used.  This will be followed by a few pages of historical
background which will allow the reader to better understand the subject.
Next, the arguments of the selected authors will be analyzed.  And finally,
the arguments will be compared and contrasted.  You are welcome and encouraged
to provide your own opinion in the conclusion.  For footnotes, bibliography
etc... please use Turabian's _A Manual for Writers_ or _The Chicago Manual of
Style_.



Each of you MUST meet with me to discuss your paper topic before you begin
your research.  Make sure I approve of your choice of sources.  Paper topics
are due 3/5.  The first draft is due 4/18, (in class).  The first draft is to
be a finished product, complete with bibliography and footnotes.  It will not
be graded as long as meets the requirements.  Bring 5 copies of your paper to
class.  Written criticisms and comments are due 4/30 (in class).  Please make
2 copies.  The final draft is due 5/9. **Failure to do any of the above
assignments on time will result in a reduction of your final paper grade.



Knowingly passing off the work of another as your own will result in a grade
of zero in that assignment.  Further penalties such as failing the course may
be appropriate as determined by the professor and the University.  This
includes material from the internet.  Plagiarism and cheating are violations
of the University of Maines Student Conduct Code.  Please see the University
of Maines student handbook for the Student Conduct Code and the Universitys
policies relating to academic integrity.  If you have any questions please see
the professor.  When in doubt, cite!



3) Participation.  You are expected to attend class and to _participate_.
This includes raising questions in class, coming for help or to discuss the
lectures or assignments during office hours, and, especially, commenting on
the assigned readings on the days set aside for discussion.  Don't be afraid
to speak out!  (Feel free to communicate by e-mail too.)  A conference will be
set up on First Class for further discussion.  Grades for any pop quizzes
relating to the readings will be factored into this component of your grade.
Failure to attend class will effect this portion of your grade.  Participation
will count for 20% of your final grade.

#  

# Extra Credit

Everyone is encouraged to take advantage of the two extra-credit options.  The
first is to do a short (5 minute) oral report on a topic relevant to the days
lecture _approved_ by the instructor at least a week before the class meeting.
Topics can vary from biographical sketches and battlefield analyses to
political assessments and social commentaries.  The second option is to read
an _assigned_ fictional work relevant to the topic of European military
history and to write a 2-3 page paper (instructions to be handed out by
request.)   Each option is worth a possible 5 points added to your final grade
(based on a 100 point scale).  All extra-credit topics must be approved by May
1.



_Films_

"Zulu" __

"Land and Freedom"



Any student with a disability for which he/she may be requesting an
accommodation, please immediately contact Ann Smith, Coordinator of Services
for Students with Disabilities (Onward Building, 581- 2319).



_Course Outline_ (subject to change)

1/22           Introduction  

1/24           The Age of Battles  

1/29           Building and Dismantling Empires  

1/31           The Fatherland in Danger - The French Revolution  

2/5             _Discussion:_   Keegan (chapter 1, 3)

2/7             Napoleon and Nationalism  

2/12           Clausewitz and the Prussian Model (Clausewitz handouts)  

2/14           Disease, Incompetence and Surprise - The Crimea and the Indian
Mutiny

2/19           _Discussion:_   Woodham-Smith

2/26           Wars of Imperial Expansion  

2/28           The Wars of Unification

3/5             Blueprints for Modern War - Anglo-Boer, Russo-Japanese,
Spanish American

3/7             **Midterm**

3/26           _Discussion:_   Miller

                  Film:  "Zulu" I

3/28           Film:  "Zulu" II  

4/2             Outbreak of the First World War

4/4             Verdun and The Somme

4/9             _Discussion:_   Ellis, Keegan (chapter 4)

4/11           Versailles  

4/16           Grounds for Experiment - Manchuria, Ethiopia, Spain

4/18           Film:  "Land and Freedom" I  

4/23           _Discussion:_   Boll

                  Film:  "Land and Freedom" II

4/25           The Second World War - Europe and Asia

4/30           **Oral Critique of Papers**

5/1             The Second World War - The War against Civilians

5/7             Peace and Cold War

5/9             The Collapse of Empire

                  _Discussion:_   Keegan (chapter 5)



