

**History 370** |

DeeAnna Manning  
---|---  
  
**Colonial Mexico** |

603 Oldfather Hall  
  
Spring 2000 |

472-3255; 472-2414  
  
MWF 11:30-12:20 |

Office Hours:  M-F 2:00-3:00p  
  
Mabel Lee Hall 265 |

e-mail:  [dmanning2@unl.edu](mailto:dmanning2@unl.edu)  
**<http://www.unl.edu/LatAmHis/homepage.html>**

_Course Description_

This course is a survey of Mexican history beginning with the civilizations
that existed in the region prior to the "Encounter" between Europe and the New
World in 1492. The class will then examine the era of conquest, exploration,
and settlement. We will study the establishment and entrenchment of Iberian
colonial control as well as issues of race, culture, gender, the economy,
religion, societal structure, and political development between 1492 and 1810.
The Bourbon reforms, foreign influence in the region, and the Mexican
independence movements until 1825 will also be covered.

_Course Objectives_

  * Students will become familiar with the major political, social, economic, and cultural trends in colonial Mexican history. 
  * Students will learn to conduct independent and cooperative research on specialized topics. 
  * Students will develop analytical skills to enable them to synthesize information and construct concise, cogently written essays on topics of interest to them. 
  * Students will become familiar with the dynamics of group discussion and presentation of their research and reading. 
  * Students will learn the basics of web page design and construction as a tool for completing individual projects. 

_Course Requirements_

  * Students are expected to attend all lectures and complete all assigned readings. Attendance will be taken on a regular basis and will be reflected in the student's course grade. Participation in discussions is strongly encouraged. 
  * Students are responsible for obtaining lecture notes/handouts from fellow classmates in the event of an absence. 
  * Acceptable excuses for failure to attend class include scheduled university activities, health problems, or serious family emergencies (such as the illness of a child or a death in the family), and require documentation from an appropriate professional, such as a physician, funeral director, etc.). 
  * Unexcused late assignments will be penalized by 1/3 letter grade for each 24-hour period by which the assignment is late. 

_Grading Policy_

Final grades will be determined as follows:

[5-pg written project (10%); presentation (5%) & bibliographic review (5%)
](http://www.unl.edu/LatAmHis/shortproject.html) |

(20%)  
---|---  
  
[5-pg written project (10%), presentation (5%) & bibliographic review
(5%)](http://www.unl.edu/LatAmHis/shortproject.html) |

(20%)  
  
[8-10 pg written project (20%), presentation (5%) & bibliographic review
(10%)](longproject.htm) |

(35%)  
  
[Individual web project](http://www.unl.edu/LatAmHis/webtutor/)  |

(15%)  
  
Participation & Attendance  |

(10%)  
  
_Required Readings_

  * Meyer/Sherman/Deeds, _The Course of Mexican History, 6th Ed._
  * Peden, Margaret Sayers (transl.), _A Woman of Genius: Sor Juana Ines de la Cruz_ 

_Class and Reading Schedule_

Jan. 10-14 |

Pre-Columbian Civilizations  |

M & S 3-92  
---|---|---  
  
Jan. 17  |

**MLK Jr. Â– no classes  ** |  
  
Jan. 19-21  |

Pre-Columbian Civilizations  |  
  
Jan. 24-28  |

Conquest, Exploration & Settlement  |

M & S 95-150  
  
Jan. 31-Feb. 4  |

Conquest, Exploration & Settlement  |  
  
Feb. 7-11  |

**[Presentations](Checklist21100.htm) ** |

**PROJECTS DUE 2/11/2000**  
  
Feb. 14-18  |

Colonial Administration & Economy  |

M&S 153-183  
  
Feb. 21-25   |

Religion & the Role of the Church |

M&S 184-202  
  
Feb. 28-Mar. 3    |

Class, Society, & Gender |

M&S 203-247  
  
Mar. 6-10  |

Tutorial + research |  
  
Mar. 13-17  |

**Spring Break - no classes** |  
  
Mar. 20-24  |

Sor Juana & the Baroque Era  |

Peden  
  
Mar. 27-31  |

Race & Pigmentocracy |  
  
Apr. 3-7  |

**[Presentations](checklist4700.html)** |

**PROJECTS DUE 4/7/2000**  
  
Apr. 10-14  |

The Bourbon Reforms & Foreign Influences  |

M&S 251-284  
  
Apr. 17-21  |

Independence Movements  |

M&S 285-323  
  
Apr. 24-28   |

**Presentations** |

**PROJECTS DUE 4/28/2000**  
  
May 5, 10a-12p  |

**Final Meeting** |

**ALL web projects due by 4/28/2000 at 5:00 p.m.**  
  
_[Academic Honesty](acadhonesty.htm)_

College and university regulations regarding academic misconduct, as set forth
in the Student Code of Conduct and other university documents and
publications, will be enforced. Any incident of academic dishonesty will be
grounds for failing the course; students who believe they have been unfairly
graded may appeal their grade following standard university procedures.

_NOTE:_

This syllabus is an outline only, and is subject to change at the discretion
of the professor. If you have any questions whatsoever regarding the course
requirements, materials, grading, etc., please talk to me as soon as possible.
Feel free to come and see me during office hours. This is especially important
if you are having difficulties or doing poorly in the course. If my office
hours conflict with your schedule, see me before or after any class period to
make an appointment for some other mutually agreeable time.

