![1766 logo](../../images/ru1766.gif)** RUTGERS UNIVERSITY  
![](../../images/rel_dept.gif)
![](../../images/clearpix.gif)[![](../../images/Home.jpg)](../../index.html)**

![](../../images/redline1.gif)  
[Home](http://religion.rutgers.edu/index.html) | [Requirements](http://) |
[Fall Courses](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/fall_01.html) | [Winter
Session](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/winter_00.html) | [Spring
Courses](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/spring_01.html) | [Summer
Session](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/summer_00.html) ****

**840:332**![](../../images/beadred.gif) **African Religion  
Spring 2002**

**![](../../images/clearpix.gif)Pr. Richard M. Shain**

109 Language Lab

Office Hours: Thursday - 5:00-6:00

Telephone: Office - 732-932-3219

Religion department - 732-932-9641

Home - 609-324-0571

e-mail:
[![](../../images/email.gif)shainr30@hotmail.com](../../php/feedback.php3?receiver_name=Pr.Richard%20M.Shain&receiver_email=shainr30@hotmail.com)

_  
**OBJECTIVES**_

This course explores the multifaceted world of African religion from an
interdisciplinary perspective, bringing together insights and readings from
religious studies, anthropology, history, cultural geography, and literature.
The course primarily examines the cultural logic through which Africans have
organized their spiritual lives. It demonstrates how Africans have used the
openendedness of their indigenous religions to incorporate new religious
elements and embark on new theological speculations. In particular, the course
emphasizes the historical dimensions in African religion, showing constant
change in belief and practice. The course closes by looking at the
contributions of African religion to contemporary African popular culture and
the still vital role African religion plays in African political life.

_**  
REQUIRED TEXTS**_

Kwame Gyekye _An_ _Essay_ _on_ _African_ _Philosophical_ _Thought_

Benjamin Ray _African_ _Religions_

Paul Stoller & Chery Olkes _In_ _Sorcery s_ _Shadow_

Course Packet

_  
**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**_ **:**

Essay on Reading - 15%

Mid Term - 20%

Research Paper -25%

Final Exam - 25%

Class Participation - 15%

(Note: To receive a passing grade, you must complete __all__ course
requirements)

_  
**TOPICS**_ **:**

1\. The Multiple Realities of African Religion

2\. Cosmologies in Motion

3\. The Old Men Are Coming Home: Ancestral Veneration

4\. Making Womens Worlds: Prophecy and Divination

5\. Religion and Resistance

6\. Is There a Word for It?: Evil, Good and Free Will in African Religion

7\. The Modernity of Witchcraft

8\. Earth, Rain and Fire: Rainmaking and Other Forms of Environmental Control

9\. Cults and Culture: Regional Cults and Cults of Affliction

10\. Flashes of the Spirit, Objects of Power: Masquerades and Cult Objects

12\. The Invention of _Traditional_ Religion

13\. The Future of the Past: African Religion in the Twenty-First Century

_**  
READING ASSIGNMENTS AND CLASS CALENDAR:**_

January 24: Course Orientation.

January 31: Ray: 1-25; Packet Selections - Armstrong & Onwuejeogwu.

February 7: Gyekye: 59-104; Packet Selection - Drewal.

February 14: Ray: 72-92; Packet Selections - Abímbólá & Shaw.

February 21: Ray: 92-104; Packet Selection - Stoller.

February 28: Gyeke: 104-187.

March 8: **_ESSAY ON READING DUE_** (topic to be distributed in class).

March 15: **_MID_ - _TERM_**..

March 22: Spring Break

March 29: Ray: 104-112; Stoller: 1-49; Packet Selection - Willis.

April 4: Stoller: 49-149.

April 11: Stoller: 153-232; Packet Selection - Geschiere.

April 18: Ray: 112-143; Film: _Yeleen_ (Mali, Souleymane Cisse, 1987).

April 25: **_RESEARCH_ _PAPER_ _DUE_**.

May 2: Packet Selections - Barber & Appiah.

May 9: Concluding Discussions.

_**  
TESTS**_ **_AND_ _CLASS_ _POLICIES_**

I will administer two types of exams during the course. The mid-term will be
in essay form and will be based on both the lectures and the text books. You
will be required to answer two questions out of four. The final exam, like the
mid-term, will be in essay form. It will be weighted heavily towards the
lectures and readings after the mid-term, although some questions might be
cumulative. You will be required to answer four questions out of the set of
twelve. The questions will be restricted to material encompassed by the course
in class and in the readings. What we do **_not_** cover on the syllabus will
**_not_** appear on the final exam.

Make-up exams: It is your responsibility to show up adequately prepared for
exams. Please ensure that you start any vacation **_after_** the final exam
since under no circumstances is it

possible to take the final exam other than on the scheduled date. If a family
crisis occurs or if you are not well, I will schedule a make-up test _only_
after you obtain permission from the academic dean of your college. Failure to
take a test for any other reason on the dates announced in _class_ will result
in an automatic grade of  "0".

Class Participation: I will base your class participation grade on both
regular attendance and the quality of your contribution to class discussions.
You will receive a preliminary class participation grade when your mid-term
exam is returned. During the last class you will receive your final
participation grade.

![](../../images/redline1.gif)

[Home](http://religion.rutgers.edu/index.html) | [Requirements](http://) |
[Fall Courses](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/fall_01.html) | [Winter
Session](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/winter_00.html) | [Spring
Courses](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/spring_01.html) | [Summer
Session](http://religion.rutgers.edu/schedules/summer_00.html)

**This page was revised Jan/02/2002**

