> * * *

>

> ## The Secular Mind (RelSt 109*)

>

> ## Spring, 2002

>

> *This course is cross-listed with the Departments of Anthropology,
Philosophy, and Sociology

>

> * * *

>

> #### **The Purpose of the Course**

>

> The purpose of this course is to help you to understand the development of
those ideas and institutions that have shaped the way we think about religion
and society. To this end, you will be asked to read from a small selection of
documents that have played a part in this development. We will then discuss
these documents in class.

>

> Because the focus of the class lectures and discussions will be on these
documents, you will find it difficult to participate in, contribute to, and/or
understand the lectures and discussions unless you have read each of them
prior to the class session. Success in this class will be highly correlated
with careful reading outside of  and prior to  the class sessions.
Examinations will consist of short selections from the texts, upon which you
will be invited to comment. If you dont understand the text, you will be
unable to comment on it reasonably and intelligently. The best way to
understand the documents is to read them carefully, think about them, and then
listen to the lecture and, if possible, participate in class discussion.

>

> The course was designed to serve the general education of undergraduate
students at the University of Illinois. It is an appropriate choice for anyone
who wants to think seriously and critically about religious experience. While
those who plan to major in sociology, history, philosophy or religious studies
are welcomed and even encouraged to take the course, it is no more appropriate
for sociology, history, philosophy or religious studies majors than for
students in any other discipline. The only prerequisite is a willingness to
read carefully, think critically, and to listen and participate actively in
class.

>

> * * *

>

> #### Requirements

>

> There are three requirements for this course:

>

>     * **Reading**. The primary source texts assigned for the course are all
included in the textbook, available from Notes  & Quotes, 502 East John
Street, Champaign. If you don't do the reading regularly and on time, you will
not benefit from the lectures and discussions, you will find it impossible to
participate effectively in class, and you will not perform well on
examinations.

>     * **Attendance**. Roll will not be taken, but the lectures and class
discussions will be essential to your understanding of the texts assigned.

>     * **Examinations**. There will be four examinations, given on February
1, March 1, March 29, and May 1. On each of those dates, at approximately 5
pm, a question will be posted on this web site. The question will typically
consist of one or more passages taken from the readings assigned, on which you
will be invited to comment in some specific way. Your answer may take a
variety of different forms, but may not exceed 500 words in length. Your
answer must be sent via email to Cheryl Lehman (ctrotter@students.uiuc.edu) by
11 pm on the third day after the exam. Your answer will be given a letter
grade (e.g., A, A-, B+, B, B-, etc.), which will be sent to you a few days
later   again via email  with a brief explanation. There will be no final
examination, and none of the four examinations is cumulative.  

>

> * * *

>

> #### Policies

>

> See the Code of Policies and Regulations Applying to All Students
(www.uiuc.edu/admin_manual/code/code_contents.html)

>

> Violations of academic integrity (e.g., cheating, plagiarism, etc.) will be
taken extremely seriously. Typically, a student who is caught cheating or
plagiarizing will not only be given an F for the assignment and the course,
but might also be suspended or even expelled.

>

> * * *

>

> #### Time and Place

>

> 3:00 PM, MWF  253 Mining & Engineering Building

>

> * * *

>

> #### **Textbook**

>

> _The Secular Mind_ (R. A. Jones, ed.)  
>  Available at Notes  & Quotes, 502 East John Street, Champaign.

>

> * * *

>

> #### **Instructor**

>

>

>

>> Professor Robert Alun Jones  
>  Office: 3156 Foreign Languages Building  
>  Office Hours: by appointment or by electronic mail  
>  Phone: 367-3899 (home)  
>  E-mail: rajones@uiuc.edu  
>  [[more information](../JonesCV.html)]

>

> * * *

>

> #### Teaching Assistant

>

> Cheryl Lehman  
>  Office: 3156 Foreign Languages Building  
>  Office Hours: 9-10 AM, Monday and Wednesday  
>  E-mail: ctrotter@students.uiuc.edu

>

> * * *

>

> #### Daily Assignments

>

>

>

>> Monday, January 14

>

>     * Introductions.

>     * Review of the syllabus.

>     * Instructions for obtaining the readings, communications, etc.

>

> Wednesday, January 16

>

>     * An introduction to Rousseau, and particularly his views on inequality.

>     * The reading assignment is his second discourse  i.e., _The
Discourse on the Origin and Foundations of Inequality Among Men_.

>

> Friday, January 18

>

>     * Continuing discussion of Rousseau, with special emphasis on his views
of natural law and politics.

>     * The reading assignment is a selection from his _Social Contract_.

>

> Monday, January 21 (Martin Luther King's birthday  no class)

>

> Wednesday, January 23

>

>     * The completion of our discussion of Rousseau, with his views on
education and religion.

>     * The reading assignment is The Profession of Faith of the Savoyard
Vicar, from _Emile_.

>

> Friday, January 25

>

>     * An introduction to Kant, beginning with his views on epistemology and
particularly the possibility of any philosophical proofs of the existence of
God.

>     * The reading assignment is a selection from his _Critique of Pure
Reason_.

>

> Monday, January 28

>

>     * Discussion of Kants ethics.

>     * Students should read the selections from Kants _Groundwork of the
Metaphysic of Morals_ and _The Critique of Pure Reason_.

>

> Wednesday, January 30

>

>     * Completion of our discussion of Kant, now focusing on his philosophy
of religion and his views on Christianity.

>     * The reading assignment is a selection from his _Religion within the
Limits of Reason Alone_.

>

> Friday, February 1 (First Exam)

>

>     * An introduction to Schleiermacher on religion and romanticism.

>     * The reading assignment is the first speech of his _On Religion:
Speeches to its Cultured Despisers_.

>

> Monday, February 4

>

>     * An introduction to Hegel, and particularly his philosophy of history
and philosophy of right.

>     * The reading assignment is a brief selection from his _Lectures on the
Philosophy of World History_.

>

> Wednesday, February 6

>

>     * Discussion of Hegels philosophy of mind, alienation, and self-
consciousness.

>     * The reading assignment is a brief selection from his _Phenomenology of
Mind_.

>

> Friday, February 8

>

>     * Completion of our discussion of Hegel, focusing on his philosophy of
religion.

>     * The reading assignment is a very brief selection from Hegels 1827
_Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion_.

>

> Monday, February 11

>

>     * Introduction to post-Hegelian writers on religion, beginning with
David Friedrich Strauss.

>     * The reading assignment is a selection from Strauss _Life of Jesus_.

>

> Wednesday, February 13

>

>     * Continuing discussion of post-Hegelian writers on religion, turning to
Ludwig Feuerbach and religious alienation.

>     * The reading assignment is a selection from Feuerbachs _Essence of
Christianity_.

>

> Friday, February 15

>

>     * Introduction to the early works of Karl Marx.

>     * The reading assignment includes several short writings, including his
Introduction to a Critique of Hegels Philosophy of Right, his essay On the
Jewish Question, his eleven Theses on Feuerbach, and a selection from The
Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844.

>

> Monday, February 18

>

>     * Continuing discussion of Marx, turning to his theory of historical
materialism.

>     * The reading assignment is a brief selection from his book (written
with F. Engels), _The Germany Ideology_.

>

> Wednesday, February 20

>

>     * Introduction to the Darwinian Revolution, beginning with a discussion
of the relationship between religion and science before Darwin.

>     * The reading assignment is the first three chapters of William Paleys
_Natural Theology_.

>

> Friday, February 22

>

>     * Continuing discussion of the Darwinian Revolution, including its
consequences for religion and social theory.

>     * The reading assignment is the concluding chapter of Darwins _Origin
of Species_.

>

> Monday, February 25

>

>     * The first of three lectures on the French sociologist and philosopher
Emile Durkheim.

>     * The reading assignment is the chapter on egoistic suicide and religion
from his book, _Suicide_.

>

> Wednesday, February 27

>

>     * The second lecture on Durkheim deals with the development of his
theory of primitive religion.

>     * Students should begin reading Chapter VII, Book Two, of _The
Elementary Forms of the Religious Life_.

>

> Friday, March 1 (Second Exam)

>

>     * The third lecture on Durkheim deals with the implications of his
theory of primitive religion.

>     * Students should complete their reading of Chapter VII, Book Two, of
_The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life_.

>

> Monday, March 4

>

>     * The first of three lectures on the German sociologist and economist
Max Weber.

>     * Students should begin reading Part I of _The Protestant Ethic and the
Spirit of Capitalism_.

>

> Wednesday, March 6

>

>     * The second of three lectures on the German sociologist and economist
Max Weber.

>     * Students should complete their reading of Part I of _The Protestant
Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism_.

>

> Friday, March 8

>

>     * The third and final lecture on Weber deals with his larger theory of
the progressive rationalization of the West, particularly as concerned with
religion.

>     * The reading assignment is his Social Psychology of the World
Religions.

>

> Monday, March 11

>

>     * The first of two lectures on William James will deal with his
psychological theories and the origins of pragmatism.

>     * The reading assignment is the third lecture of his book on _The
Varieties of Religious Experience_.

>

> Wednesday, March 13

>

>     * The second lecture on James deals with his pragmatic theory of
religion.

>     * The reading assignment is his essay, The Will to Believe.

>

> Friday, March 15

>

>     * This single lecture on John Dewey will continue with the development
of pragmatism and its application to our understanding of religion.

>     * The reading assignment is Deweys _A Common Faith_.

>

> Monday-Friday, March 18-22 (Spring Break  no classes)

>

> Monday, March 25

>

>     * The first of two lectures on Søren Kierkegaard will deal with his
anti-Hegelianism and the early development of his Christian existentialism.

>     * The reading assignment is the discussion of the Genesis account of the
Fall in his _Concept of Dread_.

>

> Wednesday, March 27

>

>     * The second lecture on Kierkegaard deals with his mature work.

>     * The reading assignment is his discussion of the Biblical account of
Abraham and Isaac in his _Fear and Trembling_.

>

> Friday, March 29 (Third Exam)

>

>     * The single lecture on Schopenhauer and philosophical pessimism, in
part as preparation for Nietzsche.

>     * The reading assignment is Chapter 49, The Road to Salvation, from
_The World as Will and Representation_.

>

> Monday, April 1

>

>     * The first lecture on Nietzsche will deal with the development of his
early thought and especially his theory of tragedy.

>     * The reading assignment is the Attempt at a Self-Criticism, the
Preface fo Richard Wagner, and Sections 1-9 of _The Birth of Tragedy_.

>

> Wednesday, April 3

>

>     * The second Nietszche lecture deals with his views on religion.

>     * The reading assignment is the Foreword and Sections 1-38 of _The Anti-
Christ_.

>

> Friday, April 5

>

>     * The first lecture on Freud will deal with his early life and the
development of psychoanalysis.

>     * The reading assignment is _On Dreams_.

>

> Monday, April 8

>

>     * The second Freud lecture will deal with his views on religion and
civilization.

>     * The reading assignment is _The Future of an Illusion_.

>

> Wednesday, April 10

>

>     * An introduction to Heidegger and the foundations of existentialism.

>     * The reading assignment is his essay, What is Metaphysics?

>

> Friday, April 12

>

>     * An introduction to Sartre and existentialism.

>     * The reading assignment is his essay on The Humanism of
Existentialism.

>

> Monday, April 15

>

>     * The first lecture on Tillich will deal with his early life and the
development of his thought.

>     * The reading assignment is the introduction and Chapters 1-3 of _The
Dynamics of Faith_.

>

> Wednesday, April 17

>

>     * The second lecture on Tillich will deal in greater depth with his
theology and Christian existentialism generally.

>     * The reading assignment is Chapter 3-6 and the conclusion of _The
Dynamics of Faith_.

>

> Friday, April 19

>

>     * An introduction to the early Wittgenstein.

>     * The assignments consists of selected parts of the _Tractatus Logical
Philosophicus_.

>

> Monday, April 22

>

>     * An introduction to the later Wittgenstein.

>     * The reading assignment is a selection from his _Philosophical
Investigations_.

>

> Wednesday, April 24

>

>     * The first lecture on MacIntyre will deal with his theory of the
incoherence of contemporary moral discourse.

>     * The reading assignment is chapters 1 and 14 of _After Virtue_.

>

> Friday, April 26

>

>     * The second lecture on MacIntyre will deal with his theory of the
virtues and his notions of tradition and practice.

>     * The reading assignment is chapters 15-18 of _After Virtue_.

>

> Monday, April 29

>

>     * The first lecture on Rorty will be an introduction to his pragmatist
critique of modern philosophy, and his distinction between metaphysicians and
ironists.

>     * The reading assignment is his essay on Private Irony and Liberal
Hope.

>

> Wednesday, May 1 ([Fourth Exam](exams.html))

>

>     * The second lecture on Rorty  and the last of the semester  will deal
more specifically with his view of religion.

>     * The reading assignment is his essay on Pragmatism as Romantic
Polytheism.

>

> * * *

>

> #### Civility

>

> One of the less attractive features of modern society has been the gradual
decline of civility  i.e., a respect for the feelings and interests of
others, reflected in courteous, polite behavior. The more obvious and
egregious manifestations of such behavior include loud talking in movie
theatres, cell phone conversations during church services, phone soliciters
calling during the dinner hour, and so on. Unfortunately, this kind of
behavior has increasingly invaded the university classrooms and lecture halls
 e.g., students consistently wandering into class late and/or leaving early,
making sufficient noise to disturb the concentration of other students,
falling asleep in class (and occasionally snoring), and so on.

>

> Let me be abundantly clear about this. While I recognize that one might
occasionally, unavoidably be late to class, there is no excuse for repeated
tardiness; and there is no excuse whatever for repeated early departures.
Neither is there any excuse for falling asleep in class. If your studying the
night before has left you exhausted and unable to stay awake, then there is no
point in your coming to class in the first place. Those who violate the basic
norms of civilized behavior will simply be asked to leave.

>

> * * *

>

>

>   * __

