## INR 3004: Geography, History, and International Relations (Spring 2002)

|  **[Dr. Paul Hensel](../index.html)**  
Office: 550 Bellamy Bldg.  
Phone: 644-7318  
[phensel@garnet.acns.fsu.edu](mailto:phensel@garnet.acns.fsu.edu)  
|  **Fall 2001 Semester**  
TTh 11:00-12:15 AM  
334 Rovetta Business Bldg.  
Office Hours: T 3:30-5:00, F 2:00-3:00 PM  
  
---|---  
  

* * *  
  
|

#### Index to This Syllabus

  * **[Main Syllabus Page](inr3004.html)** _(this page)_
    * [Course description](inr3004.html#course)
    * [Required texts](inr3004.html#require)
    * [Course rules](inr3004.html#rules)
  * **[Assigned Readings](inr3004a.html)**
  * **[Internet Resources](inr3004r.html)**
  * **[Research Paper Assignment](inr3004p.html)**
    * [Paper assignment](inr3004p.html#topic)
    * [On-line resources](inr3004p.html#sources)
    * [Topic list](inr3004p.html#topics)
  * **[Exam Review Sheet](inr3004s.pdf)** (when available) 
  * **[Full Syllabus (PDF Format)](inr3004.pdf)**   
  

|

#### Related Pages on My Web Site

  * [**Teaching**](../teaching.html)
    * [**Teaching Policies**](../policies.html)
    * [**Grading Policies and Expectations**](../grading.html)
    * [**Essay Exam Advice**](../examtips.html)
  * [**Writing Tips**](../writing.html)
    * [**Common Student Writing Problems**](../problems.html)
    * [**Citations and Plagiarism**](../citation.html)
    * [**Using and Evaluating Internet Resources**](../internet.html) 
  
  
---|---  
![flagline](../Images/flagline.gif)  
  
  
  
**_NOTE: This is the syllabus from Spring 2002, not Fall 2002. There will be
some relatively small changes in the organization of the course, and perhaps
in the specific readings that are assigned, but this syllabus should give
prospective students a good idea of what to expect. The final fall syllabus
will be posted here once it is completed, but that may not be until mid-
August._**

#### Course Description

Most political scientists study international relations "in a vacuum," without
reference to the geographic and historical context in which events take place.
The purpose of this course is to introduce students to the impact of geography
and history on international relations, and to re-examine traditional
international relations phenomena such as trade or military conflict with a
consideration for the influence of historical and geographic factors. A more
technically accurate title might be "Geographic and Historical Influences on
International Relations," although that is too long to fit in the schedule of
classes. Upon completion of this course, students should have a better
understanding of how geographical and historical forces influence
international relations, and should be able to apply these concepts in
following world events. The course will require a range of readings, regular
attendance, two essay exams, and two research papers.  
  
It should be noted that this is NOT a course in geography or history, but
rather a course on the ways that geographic and historical factors can
influence international relations. The topics covered in this course are
traditionally seen as political science topics, and most of the readings and
lecture materials are drawn from political scientists and political science
journals. Students interested in a more geographic perspective are urged to
take a complementary course from the geography department, such as GEO 4471
(Political Geography) or GEO 4480 (Military Geography). Additionally, this
course uses history as a theoretical explanation for decision-making, events,
and interactions in international relations, rather than as a separate subject
of study; specific historical events or episodes will only be used to
illustrate general theories. Students interested in history are urged to take
any of the many courses offered by the history department.  
  

#### Required Texts

* " **Student Atlas** ": John L. Allen (2001). _Student Atlas of World Geography,_ second edition. Guilford, CT: Dushkin/McGraw-Hill. (available at the FSU Bookstore or Bill's Bookstore)  
* The remaining readings are available online, sometimes through JSTOR (a journal service provided for us by FSU). The online version of the syllabus has direct links to these resources.  

  
  

#### Course Requirements

(1) **Examinations** : two noncumulative essay exams are required. The first
exam will be given in class on **Tuesday, March 5** ; the second exam will be
given in the regular class room on **Monday, April 22** from 5:30 - 7:30 PM
(the assigned time for the course's final exam). Each exam will be worth 25%
of the total course grade.  
  
(2) **Research Paper** : two research papers are required for this class; more
details are provided at the end of this syllabus. These papers will be due at
the _beginning_ of class on **Tuesday, February 26** and **Thursday, April
11**. Each paper will count for 20% of the total course grade.  
  
(3) **Preparation, Attendance, and Participation** : Students are required to
complete the assigned readings before class, attend class regularly, and
participate actively in class discussion. Class preparation will be measured
through approximately six to ten (unannounced) quizzes given at the very
beginning or ending of class periods, which together will be worth 10% of the
total course grade; each student's quiz grade will be determined from the five
highest scores.  
  

#### Course Rules

(1) Make-up examinations are given only with **prior** instructor approval and
with appropriate documentation, and take place only during final exam week.
Note that the documentation must indicate why you could not be in class _at
the exact time of the test_. (Also note that standard Thagard notes explicitly
state that they are not valid class excuses)  
  
(2) Failure to complete any paper assignment or failure to take any exam will
result in a failing grade for the entire course; a passing grade requires
completion of all course requirements.  
  
(3) Any exceptions to these rules are given at the instructor's discretion,
only with **prior** approval where possible, and only under extraordinarily
pressing and well-documented circumstances.  
  
(4) Students are required to keep an extra copy of each assignment until the
instructor has returned the graded copy of that assignment. Students are also
required to keep graded, returned copies of all exams and writing assignments
until two weeks after the final exam. Failure to do so will invalidate any
potential question or protest about assignment or course grades.  
  
(5) All course policies -- classroom expectations, late paper policies,
grading policies, and many others -- are available at  <
**http://garnet.acns.fsu.edu/~phensel/teaching.html** >.  
  

#### Americans with Disabilities Act

_(See also the section of the FSU Student Handbook dealing with the[Americans
with Disabilities Act](http://www.fsu.edu/Books/Student-
Handbook/codes/ada.html), and the [Disabled Student
Services](http://www.fsu.edu/~staffair/dean/disable.html) page from the Dean
of Students Office)_  
  
Students with disabilities needing academic accommodations must (1) register
with and provide documentation to the Student Disability Resource Center
(SDRC), and (2) bring a letter to the instructor from SDRC indicating that you
need academic accommodations. This must be done within the first week of
class.  

  
  

#### Academic Honor Code

_(See also the section of the FSU Student Handbook dealing with the[Academic
Honor System](http://www.fsu.edu/Books/Student-Handbook/codes/honor.html))_  
  
_" The academic honor system of The Florida State University is based on the
premise that each student has the responsibility: (1) To uphold the highest
standards of academic integrity in the students own work, (2) To refuse to
tolerate violations of academic integrity in the University community, and (3)
To foster a high sense of integrity and social responsibility on the part of
the University community."  
_  
Students are expected to bring possible violations of this honor code to the
attention of the instructor as soon as possible, so that the violations -- if
any -- may be stopped quickly. Violations include (but are not limited to) the
use of unauthorized information on course assignments or examinations,
representing anothers work or any part thereof (published or unpublished) as
ones own, assisting another student in obtaining unauthorized information for
course assignments or examinations, and attempting to commit such an offense.
A more complete listing of violations can be found in the FSU Student
Handbook.  
  
Violation of this honor code will be dealt with in an appropriate manner,
consistent with FSU guidelines. Academic penalties may include (but shall not
be limited to) a requirement of additional work to provide evidence that the
student knows and understands the course material; a lower or failing grade on
the assignment or examination in question; and a lower or failing grade for
the course. The University may also enforce further disciplinary penalties,
such as a formal reprimand, probation, or suspension or dismissal from the
University.  

  
  

#### Instructor's Web Site

The instructor maintains a web site at <
**http://garnet.acns.fsu.edu/~phensel/** > with -- among other things --
teaching policies, solutions to common writing problems, and numerous Internet
resources for students of international relations or geography. The on-line
version of this syllabus, found at <
**http://garnet.acns.fsu.edu/~phensel/Teaching/inr3004.html** >, includes
links to additional Internet resources not included in the printed version of
the syllabus. Students are strongly encouraged to become familiar with this
web site during the semester.  

  
  
![flagline](../Images/flagline.gif)  
---  
  
**INR 3004:** [Syllabus](inr3004.html) * [Assigned Readings](inr3004a.html) *
[Internet Resources](inr3004r.html) * [Paper](inr3004p.html) * [Review
Sheet](inr3004s.pdf)  
**Writing:** [Writing Tips](../writing.html) and [Problems](../problems.html)
* [Citations and Plagiarism](../citation.html) * [Using Internet
Sources](../internet.html)  
**Dr. Hensel:** [Teaching Overview](../teaching.html) *
[Teaching](../policies.html) and [Grading](../grading.html) Policies *
[Exam/Paper/Quiz Tips](../examtips.html)  
  
  
http://garnet.acns.fsu.edu/~phensel/Teaching/inr3004.html  
Last updated: 8 January 2002  
  
To contact me please send email to
[phensel@garnet.acns.fsu.edu](mailto:phensel@garnet.acns.fsu.edu)  
  
Return to My [Home Page](index.html)  
  
_The W3C validates this page as HTML 4.0 (Transitional):_  
[ ![Valid HTML
4.0!](../Images/valid40.gif)](http://validator.w3.org/check/referer)

