**ANTH/CWES 274** |

**FALL 2000**  
---|---  
  
**

PRACTICUM IN ARCHAEOLOGICAL ANALYSIS**  
  |  
  
Tuesday or Wednesday, 1:00-5:00 |

Gettysburg National Military Park  
  
Prof. Julia A. Hendon and the Park Archaeologists  
  
---  
**Contact Information:**  
|  Come to my office, **Glatfelter Rm. 007** , during my **Office Hours:**
Mon. 11:00-12:00 / Tues. 10:00-12:00 / Wed. 11:00-12:00 / Thurs. 10:00-11:30  
OR | Email me at [jhendon@gettysburg.edu](mailto:jhendon@gettysburg.edu)  
OR | Call me at **337-6188** \-- but NO VOICE MAIL MESSAGES -- I rarely check
it  
  
**

Course description:** Have you ever wondered what archaeologists do with all
the artifacts they dig up? Are you interested in learning about the history of
the Gettysburg National Military Park from the perspective of the artifacts
and architecture left behind? This course takes a hands-on approach to these
questions. It offers an introduction to archaeological data analysis and
research. Working with the collections of the Gettysburg Park, students carry
out labwork, including artifact processing and classification, data entry in
local or national computerized databases, processing of site information, and
research. The exact mix of activities varies from semester to semester,
depending on the materials available and the priorities of the Park
archaeologists.

**

Prerequisites:** To be eligible for this course you must (1) have previous
course work in archaeology, history, or Civil War Era Studies and (2) obtain
the consent of Prof. Hendon.

**

Cross-listing:** This course is cross-listed with Anthropology and Civil War
Era Studies. You may enroll in either department. The same prerequisites,
requirements, and criteria for evaluation apply.

**

Special Notes on Scheduling and Transportation:** Students must work one
4-hour block of time per week and may choose from the following two time
periods: Tuesday from 1:00-5:00 and Wednesday from 1:00-5:00. These are the
only blocks of time available. Students are responsible for their own
transportation to and from the Park.

**

Grading and Credits:** The course is graded S/U and is a 0.50-credit course.
It may be repeated for credit with permission of the instructor.

**

Course Requirements and Criteria for Evaluation: In order to receive a
Satisfactory grade for the course, you must complete all of these
requirements. They are thus weighted equally in my assessment of your
performance.

**

    1. Successful completion of a minimum of 40 hours of work at the Park. The hours must be completed during the regular semester. At least half of the minimum number of hours must be completed by mid-semester.
    2. Meetings with Prof. Hendon to discuss what students are doing and to discuss the assigned readings. The first meeting will be at the offices of the Park archaeologists, who will explain their expectations and procedures. The remaining meetings will take place on campus over lunch.
    3. Completing all assigned readings.
    4. Keeping a journal during the semester in which the student discusses the kinds of analyses carried out and what kinds of collections were worked on.
    5. Writing a final report in which the student summarizes the activities and reflects on what was learned.

**

Required Readings:

**   |

Bureau of Historic Preservation, Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission
1991, _Cultural Resource Management in Pennsylvania: Guidelines for
Archaeological Investigations_.  
---|---  
  |

Deetz, James 1996, _In Small Things Forgotten_. Anchor.  
  |

Stevens, Kristen 1999, Recent Archaeological Investigations at Gettysburg
National Military Park: Viewing the Battle Through the Rural Remains. Paper
presented at the Mid-Atlantic Archaeological Conference, Harrisburg, PA.  
**

Weekly Outline  
(subject to addition, correction, or modification as the semester progresses)

**

Week1 |

Meeting 1: Introduction to the course, the facilities, and the goals of the
Park archaeologists. Location: Gettysburg National Military Park. Time: To be
arranged.  
---|---  
  
Weeks 2-15 |

Work at Park.  
**Additional activities and reminders:**  
  
  |

Week 3: Monday, 9/11, noon, Faculty Dining Hall. Meeting 2: Discussion of
_Cultural Resource Management_ and Stevens 1999.  
  |

Week 4: Tuesday, 10/10, is Reading Day. If you normally work on Tuesdays and
will be out of town, you must make arrangements to make up the hours.  
  |

Week 8: Must have completed 20-hours of work.

Monday, 10/16, noon, Faculty Dining Hall. Meeting 3: Discussion of Chapters
1-3 of Deetz.  
  |

Week 12: Monday, 11/13, noon, Faculty Dining Hall. Meeting 4: Discussion of
Chapters 4-6 of Deetz.  
  |

Week 15: Monday, 12/4, noon, Faculty Dining Hall. Meeting 5: Discussion of
Chapters 7-9 of Deetz.  
  
Exam Period |

Tuesday, 12/12: Journal and final report due by 9/30 PM.

