






INFOBITS> IAT INFOBITS -- February 1998

INFOBITS> IAT INFOBITS -- February 1998

Date:   Wed, 25 Feb 1998 14:19:36 -0500
From: Carolyn Kotlas <carolyn_kotlas@unc.edu>
To: infobits@unc.edu
Subject: IAT INFOBITS -- February 1998

IAT INFOBITS    February 1998           No. 56          ISSN 1071-5223

About INFOBITS

INFOBITS is an electronic service of the Institute for Academic
Technology's Information Resources Group. Each month we monitor and
select from a number of information technology and instruction
technology sources that come to our attention and provide brief notes
for electronic dissemination to educators.

......................................................................

Collaboratories -- Doing Science in a Virtual Lab
Finding Experts/Colleagues Online
College Education Key to Office Workers' Success
Universal Access to Technology in Education
Interview with Cyberspace Pioneer
Metadata Project Holds Promise

......................................................................

COLLABORATORIES -- DOING SCIENCE IN A VIRTUAL LAB

A collaboratory, a term coined in 1989 by computer scientist William
Wulf, is a "center without walls" allowing users to "perform their
research without regard to geographical location-interacting with
colleagues, accessing instrumentation, sharing data and computational
resources, [and] accessing information in digital libraries." In "The
Virtues (and Vices) of Virtual Colleagues" (TECHNOLOGY REVIEW, vol.
101, no. 2, March/April 1998, pp. 52-59), Nancy Ross-Flanigan explores
the benefits derived when scientists can run experiments using remote
connections to data gathering instruments, can have shared access to
research results, and can communicate online with colleagues and
mentors. Ross-Flanigan points out that there are some downsides to
working in an electronic environment: lack of trust, difficulty in team
building, increased information overload. [See also "Balkanization of
the Global Village," IAT Infobits, December 1996, No. 42,

http://www.iat.unc.edu/infobits/bitdec96.html#4]

Collaboratories have been set up to help institutions with limited
resources partner with major research universities to share expensive
equipment. Some collaboratories allow scientists to mentor individual
students or provide expert advice to K-12 classrooms.

The complete article and links to the collaboratory projects described
in the article are available on the Web at

http://web.mit.edu/techreview/www/articles/ma98/ross-flanigan.html

Technology Review [ISSN 0040-1692] is published six times a year by the
Association of Alumni and Alumnae of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 201 Vassar St., W59-200, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA; tel:
617-253-8250; fax: 617-258-5850; Web: http://web.mit.edu/techreview/

To subscribe, contact Technology Review, P.O. Box 489, Mount Morris, IL
61054 USA; tel: 800-877-5230; fax: 815-734-5237; email:
trsubscriptions@mit.edu; Web:

http://web.mit.edu/techreview/www/freeissue.html
Annual subscriptions are available for $19.95 (U.S.); $25.95 (Canada);
$37.95 (foreign air delivery to all other countries).

......................................................................


FINDING EXPERTS/COLLEAGUES ONLINE

Collaboratories are not the only virtual communities where thinkers and
researchers congregate. Founded in 1988, the non-profit Edge
Foundation, Inc., was established "to arrive at the edge of the world's
knowledge, seek out the most complex and sophisticated minds, put them
in a room together, and have them ask each other the questions they are
asking themselves." To eavesdrop on the latest Edge conversations,
check out their Web site at http://www.edge.org/

Want to start online dialogue with others in your field but don't know
how to contact them? Locating email addresses for others in academe can
be a time-consuming, frustrating task, despite the proliferation of
email address directories available on the Web. (See

http://www.iat.unc.edu/guides/irg-08.html#2 for examples of
directories.) Many higher education institutions now provide online
faculty directories that include email addresses. To locate schools
that have a Web presence, try Christina DeMello's extensive list of
college and university Web pages. The list has not been updated
recently, nevertheless, with over 3,000 entries from around the world,
it is the most comprehensive list of its kind.
Alphabetical listing: http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/cdemello/univ.html
Geographical listing: http://www.mit.edu:8001/people/cdemello/geog.html

......................................................................

COLLEGE EDUCATION KEY TO OFFICE WORKERS' SUCCESS

A recent study by the Educational Testing Service (ETS) refutes the
conventional image of a future American workforce divided into two
groups: high-paying, high-technology jobs and low-paying, low-skilled
jobs. Anthony Carnevale and Stephen Rose, co-authors of the study's
report, "Education for What? The New Office Economy," found that in the
1990s office workers make up 41 percent of the U.S. workforce and
account for 50 percent of all earnings. The study also confirms that
college education is a key factor in securing a place in the growing
office economy: between 1959 and 1995, 75 percent of college-educated
workers held the high-paying elite professional and managerial jobs
that promise greater job growth and earnings potential.

A brief summary of the report is available on the Web at

http://www.ets.org/aboutets/oficecon.html
Free copies of the report are available from ETS, Communications
Services, MS 50-D, Rosedale Road, Princeton, NJ 08541 USA; tel:
609-734-5050.

ETS is the world's largest private educational measurement institution.
The non-profit organization develops and administers achievement,
occupational and admission tests, such as the SAT for the College
Board. For more information, contact Corporate Headquarters,
Educational Testing Service, Rosedale Road, Princeton, NJ 08541 USA;
tel: 609-921-9000; fax: 609-734-5410; email: etsinfo@ets.org; Web:

http://www.ets.org/

......................................................................

UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO TECHNOLOGY IN EDUCATION

Recent articles and reports stress that universal access to technology
in schools is vital for preparing students for future challenges in the

workplace and society. In "Creating a Level Playing Field for Campus
Computing: Universal Access" (SYLLABUS, vol. 11, no. 6, February 1998,
pp. 12, 14, 29, 44), Glen McCandless describes universal access in
higher education and outlines the major issues that are preventing the
realization of it: who pays, its impact on student enrollments, faculty
resistance to change, and the freedom from imposed standards in
academe. An excerpt from the article is available on the Web at

http://www.syllabus.com/feb98_mag.html

In the CEO Forum's "School Technology and Readiness (StaR) Report: From
Pillars to Progress" it was reported that "while 3% of American schools
[of the 80,000 public schools surveyed] are effectively using
technology in the classroom, almost 60% of America's schools have
inadequate and outdated technology." Using the "Four Pillars" of
education and technology outlined by the Clinton/Gore administration
(hardware, connectivity, digital content, and professional
development), the CEO Forum created an assessment tool (School
Technology and Readiness Chart) for school leaders to "gauge whether
their school is preparing its students for the 21st century." Copies of
the report can be obtained from the CEO Forum by calling 202-393-1010.
The complete report is also available on the Web at

http://www.ceoforum.org/report97/ [HTML format] and

http://www.ceoforum.org/report97/report97.pdf [PDF format].

The CEO Forum on Education and Technology was founded in the Fall of
1996 to "help ensure that America's schools effectively prepare all
students to be contributing citizens and productive workers in the 21st
Century. To meet this objective, the Forum will issue an annual
assessment of the nation's progress toward integrating technology into
American classrooms through the year 2000." For more information,
contact: The CEO Forum on Education and Technology, 1001 G Street, NW,
Suite 900 East, Washington, DC 20001 USA; tel: 202-393-2260; fax:
202-393-0712; email: ceoforum@itstrategies.com; Web:

http://www.ceoforum.org/

Syllabus [ISSN 1089-5914] is published ten times a year by Syllabus
Press, Inc., 345 Northlake Drive, San Jose, CA 95117-1261 USA; tel:
408-261-7200; fax: 408-261-7280; email: info@syllabus.com; Web:

http://www.syllabus.com/
Annual subscriptions are available for $24 (individual/North America);
$75 (institution/North America); $75 (individual/outside North
America); $135 (institution/outside North America). Subscriptions in
the U.S. are free to individuals who work in colleges, universities,
and high schools. A free subscription application is available at

http://www.syllabus.com/syllsub.html

......................................................................

INTERVIEW WITH CYBERSPACE PIONEER

Asked about the use of computers in the classroom, John Perry Barlow
said, "We need to change our pedagogical model to one that enhances
students' opportunities to get out and really experience things." As
co-founder of the Electronic Frontier Foundation and of Lotus
Corporation, Barlow is no enemy of technology, but has strong opinions
on the appropriate applications of it in learning and training in

schools and in the corporate sector. An interview Barlow granted, after
delivering a speech at the 1997 Educom conference, is recorded in "A
Confederacy of Apprentices" (TRAINING, vol. 35, no. 1, January 1998,
pp. 44-48, 50).
The full text of the article is available this month on the Web at

http://www.trainingsupersite.com/publications/magazines/training/article1.htm

Training [ISSN 0095-5892] is published monthly by Lakewood
Publications, Inc., Lakewood Building, 50 S. Ninth St., Minneapolis, MN
55402 USA; tel: 612-333-0471; fax: 612-333-6526; Web:

http://www.trainingsupersite.com/TSS_Link/lakeset.htm
Annual subscriptions are available for $79 (U.S.); $89 (Canada); $100
(all other countries).

......................................................................

METADATA PROJECT HOLDS PROMISE

According to Elliot Soloway, in "No One Is Making Money in Educational
Software" (COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM, vol. 41, no. 2, February 1998,
pp. 11-15), finding educationally appropriate materials is a "classic
time-consuming, hit-or-miss activity for teachers." He points out that
the metadata system developed as part of Educom's Instructional
Management Systems (IMS) initiative [http://www.imsproject.org/] holds
great promise for solving this problem with regard to Web-based
materials. Metadata is "data about data" which "allows the user to
locate, evaluate, access, and manage online available learning
resources." The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is a member
of the IMS initiative, and Dr. Thomas Wason, IAT Director of Research
and Evaluation, is in charge of the IMS Metadata project. For more
information on the Metadata project, see the project's homepage at

http://www.imsproject.org/metadata/index.html and Dr. Wason's papers in
the IAT's technical publications area at

http://www.iat.unc.edu/publications/tech.html

Communications of the ACM [ISSN: 0001-0782] is published monthly by the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), One Astor Plaza, 1515
Broadway, New York, New York 10036 USA; tel: 212-869-7440; fax:
212-944-1318; email: acmhelp@acm.org; Web: http://www.acm.org/
Subscriptions are included with membership in the ACM. Annual
subscriptions for non-members are $144 (print version), $173 (print and
online versions), $115 (online version). Subscribers outside North
America can get expedited airmail delivery for an additional $35/year.

......................................................................

To Subscribe

IAT INFOBITS is published by the Institute for Academic Technology. The
IAT is a national institute working to place higher education at the
forefront of academic technology development and implementation. As a
part of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, the IAT
strives to facilitate widespread use of effective and affordable
technologies in higher education.

To subscribe to INFOBITS, send email to listserv@unc.edu with the
following message:

SUBSCRIBE INFOBITS firstname lastname

substituting your own first and last names.

Example: SUBSCRIBE INFOBITS Mary Daheim

INFOBITS is also available online on the IAT's World Wide Web site at

http://www.iat.unc.edu/infobits/infobits.html (HTML format) and at

http://www.iat.unc.edu/infobits/text/index.html (plain text format).

If you have problems subscribing or want to send suggestions for future
issues, contact the editor, Carolyn Kotlas, at carolyn_kotlas@unc.edu

Article Suggestions
Infobits always welcomes article suggestions from our readers, although
we cannot promise to print everything submitted. Because of our
publishing schedule, we are not able to announce time-sensitive events
such as upcoming conferences and calls for papers or grant
applications; however, we do include articles about online conference
proceedings that are of interest to our readers. While we often mention
commercial products, publications, and Web sites, Infobits does not
accept or reprint unsolicited advertising copy. Send your article
suggestions to the editor at carolyn_kotlas@unc.edu

-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Copyright 1998, Institute for Academic Technology. All rights reserved.
May be reproduced in any medium for non-commercial purposes.





