## History 515.02

### FRANCE IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

Professor Rothney

* * *

### _GENERAL INFORMATION_

_Books_ : All required reading will be assigned in the following paperback
books, available exclusively at the Student Book Exchange (SBX):  

> Gordon Wright, _France in Modern Times_ (Fifth edition)  
>  Lucie Aubrac, _Outwitting the Gestapo_  
>  Laurence Wylie, _Village in the Vaucluse: An Account of Life in a French
Village_  
>  Raymonde Carroll, _Cultural Misunderstandings: The French-American
Experience_  
>  Robert Gildea, _France Since 1945_

_Examinations_ : There will be two. An hour examination is tentatively
scheduled for Monday, July 28, covering the lectures and readings of Sections
I and II of the Course Outline. The final examination will include some
questions covering the entire quarter's work. Copies of recent hour and final
examinations given in this course are included in this course outline. This
quarter's examination will have the same format and scope (but not the same
questions). Make-up examinations will be administered only in cases of
compelling necessity after presentation of a valid medical excuse.

The Final Examination is scheduled for Friday, August 29, 7:30-9:30 a.m.

_OFFICE HOURS_ : Monday. 11:30-1 in Dulles Hall 339A, or by appointment: call
292-2674 or 261-9943.

_PAPERS AND GRADES_ : Undergraduates have the option of writing a paper to be
counted for 25% of their final grade, together with the Hour Examination (25%)
and the final examination (50%). For undergraduates who do not choose to write
a paper, the hour examination will count 33% and the final examination 67% of
the course grade. All graduate students enrolled in the course must submit a
paper. No paper will be accepted later than the final examination. Students
thinking about writing a paper, or required to write one, are invited to
consult the Instructor early in the quarter to discuss their topic, which may
be almost anything related in some fashion to France in the twentieth century.

_PLEASE NOTE_ : All students must be officially enrolled in the course by the
end of the second full week of the quarter. No requests to add the course will
be approved by the department chair after that time. Enrolling officially and
on time is solely the responsibility of each student.



### _COURSE OUTLINE_

#### Section I: DECLINE, DIVISION, AND DEFEAT, 1914-1940

_READING_ :  
Gordon Wright, _France in Modern Times_ , pp. 246-311 & 321-382  
Raymonde Carroll, _Cultural Misunderstandings: The French American Experience_
, entire

_LECTURES_ :

Monday, June 23

  1. Introduction to the Course 
  2. France in 1914 

Wednesday, June 25

  1. The Great War: Defeat in Victory 
  2. The Emergence of French Communism 

Monday, June 30

  1. Illusions of Normalcy 
  2. Between Two Wars: The Fears and Threats of the Right 

Wednesday, July 2

  1. Between Two Wars: The Hopes and Frustrations of the Left 
  2. The French Radicals in the 1930's 

Monday, July 7

  1. "America the Menace"
  2. Discussion of Carroll, _Cultural Misunderstandings_

Wednesday, July 9

  1. The Failure of French Foreign Policy 
  2. Not so "Strange" a Defeat 

Monday, July 14

  1. VIDEO: "DeGaulle and France: A Certain Vision of France"
  2. The Man of 18 June 



#### SECTION II: FRANCE OCCUPIED AND LIBERATED, 1940-1944

_READING_ :  
Wright, _France in Modern Times_ , 383-395  
Lucie Aubrac, _Outwitting the Gestapo_ , entire

_LECTURES_ :

Wednesday, July 16

  1. "National Revolution" or Collaboration? 
  2. The Underground Resistance and the Cross of Lorraine 

Monday, July 21

  1. Some Voices from the "Republic of Silence"
  2. The Race to Liberate Paris 

Wednesday, July 23

  1. The Roots of American Anti-Gaullism and Gaullist "Anti-Americanism"
  2. REVIEW SESSION 

Monday, July 28

  1. [HOUR EXAM](RothneySU97.htm#HourExam)
  2. The Ideologies of the Resistance 



#### SECTION III: THE AGONY OF REBIRTH: THE FOURTH REPUBLIC, 1946-1958

_READING_ :  
Wright, _France in Modern Times_ , 396-410  
Begin, Laurence Wylie, _Village in the Vaucluse_

_LECTURES_ :

Wednesday, July 30

  1. From the Fourth Republic--to the Third 
  2. The Army and the Trauma of Decolonization 

Monday, August 4

  1. The Political Impasse 
  2. VIDEO: "DeGaulle and France: The Return of The General"



#### SECTION IV: THE EMERGENCE OF A NEW SOCIETY, ECONOMY, AND POLITICS: THE
FIFTH REPUBLIC, 1958-1991

_READING_ :  
Wright, _France in Modern Times_ , 411-458  
Complete Wylie, _Village in the Vaucluse_  
Robert Gildea, _France Since 1945_ , entire

_LECTURES_ :

Wednesday, August 6

  1. The Thirteen Plots of May 13, 1958 
  2. The Liquidation of the Algerian War 

Monday, August 11

  1. Grandeur and Misery of Gaullist Foreign Policy 
  2. Fifty Million Frenchmen 

Wednesday, August 13

  1. A France Without Peasants? 
  2. DISCUSSION of Wylie, _Village in the Vaucluse_

Monday, August 18

  1. The Planners, the Planned, and the Unplanable 
  2. Ugly at Nanterre 

Wednesday, August 20

  1. VIDEO: "DeGaulle and France: Challenging the World"
  2. The Days of May, 1968 

Monday, August 25

  1. France since DeGaulle: the Global Challenge 
  2. FINAL REVIEW SESSION 

**

Friday, August 29, 7:30-9:30 a.m.: [FINAL
EXAMINATION](RothneySU97.htm#FinalExam)**

* * *

* * *

**THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY  
HISTORY 515.02  
FRANCE IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY  
HOUR EXAMINATION (SAMPLE)**

I. (10 minutes; 20 points) Identify and briefly indicate the historical
significance of _FOUR_ of the following:

Tardieu  
Saint-Pierre and Miquelon  
Stavisky  
Pierre Laval  
Verdun  
Matignon Agreements  
_Croix de Feu_  
AMGOT  

II. (40 minutes; 80 points) After thinking for a few moments and outlining
your answer in your mind or on paper, write an essay discussion on _ONE_ of
the following quotations. Be sure to make it clear whether or not you accept
the quotation as a valid generalization, and to explain your reasoning by
citing appropriate historical evidence.

a) "Though her soldiers and politicians failed France in 1940, it was the
failure of her diplomats in the 1920s and 1930s that made her downfall in 1940
inevitable."

OR

b) "Frenchmen during the 1930s and even after the defeat of 1940 regarded
Hitler in the light of their own bitter domestic political conflicts. Thus
some Frenchmen collaborated with Hitler because they thought his political
system was a good model for France, while others resisted him because they
thought Nazism a bad model."

OR

c) "Though supporters of the Popular Front blamed its failure on the Right, it
was in fact doomed by the persistent divisions of the Left."

* * *

* * *

**THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY  
HISTORY 515.02  
FRANCE IN THE TWENTIETH CENTURY  
FINAL EXAMINATION (SAMPLE)**

I. (15 minutes; 15 points) Identify and briefly indicate the historical
significance of _FIVE_ of the following:

_Pieds-noirs_  
"Sarcellitis"  
Poujade  
Mendes-France  
the Community  
FLN  
Article 16  
"Enarchs"  
Jeunesse Agricole Chretienne  
Daniel Cohn-Bendit

II. (60 minutes; 60 points) After thinking for a few moments and outlining
your answer, write an essay discussing _ONE_ of the following. Be sure to make
clear whether you accept it as a valid generalization or not, and to explain
your answer by mentioning appropriate historical evidence.

a) After his retirement in 1969, General DeGaulle bitterly summed up his
historical relationship to France by declaring "I carried a corpse in my
arms." By surveying the changes that have occurred in France's relative
position in the world, in her economy and society, and in her hopes and
aspirations between 1914 and 1969, judge the accuracy of DeGaulle's verdict.
In what sense is it quite true, and what sense quite false, that France has
become a twentieth-century "corpse?"

OR

b) "The overthrow of the Third and Fourth Republics does not necessarily prove
that parliamentary democracy is an unworkable system unacceptable to the
French. Though the antagonism that divided Frenchmen were mirrored in
parliament and reduced its effectiveness, we must remember that neither
Republic was overthrown by a broadly-supported revolution. The Third Republic
was overthrown by Hitler, the Fourth by Charles DeGaulle."

III. (25 minutes; 25 points) Answer _ONE_ of the following:

a) On the basis of your reading of _Village in the Vaucluse_ , contrast the
differences in attitude between the citizens of Peyrane and your own community
toward _one_ of the following: the family; work and pleasure; the younger
generation; education; or any other matter of social significance that
interests you.

OR

b) Why was the revolution of May, 1968 only an "almost-revolution?"

