(Course Syllabi)

    
    
     Ellison 5839  Tuesdays 3-5 PM & by appt.              Francis A. Dutra         
    There are no office hours during finals week           Winter 1994              
    

Reader: Paul Brasil, Ellison 4807 (Mondays 4-6 & by appt.)

    
    
                  History 154A:  Portugal Overseas, 1415-1825                       
                    University of California, Santa Barbara                         
    

ORIENTATION: Jan. 3

**I. THE PORTUGUESE BACKGROUND: FROM LATE MEDIEVAL TO RENAISSANCE**

PORTUGAL. Jan. 3, 5, 10.

**II. EXPLORATION AND COLONIZATION FROM THE MEDITERRANEAN TO THE**

ATLANTIC, 1229-1492. Jan. 10, 12.

MARTIN LUTHER KING JR.'S BIRTHDAY (HOLIDAY) Jan. 17

**III. THE PORTUGUESE IN NORTH AFRICA (1415-1769), THE ATLANTIC**

    
    
            ISLANDS (TO 1800), AND EXPLORING AND EXPLOITING THE WEST                
            AFRICAN COAST IN THE 15TH CENTURY.  Jan. 12, 19, 24.                    
    

**IV. VASCO DA GAMA, HIS IMMEDIATE SUCCESSORS, AND THE CREATION OF AN**

ASIAN EMPIRE. Jan. 26, 31.

**V. PORTUGAL'S MID-SIXTEENTH CENTURY CRISIS IN ASIA, AFRICA, AND**

AMERICA. Feb. 2.

MIDTERM EXAMINATION: Monday, Feb. 7, 7-8:30 PM. The student will answer two of
the six questions chosen from the discussion questions in Topics I to V for
40% of the course grade.

VI. THE PORTUGUESE IN THE SOUTH ATLANTIC, 1500-1650. Feb. 9.

**VII. DECLINE, STAGNATION, AND CONTRACTION IN THE EAST AND THE GLOBAL**

WAR AGAINST THE DUTCH. Feb. 9, 14.

VIII. REVIVAL AND EXPANSION IN THE WEST, 1663-1750. Feb. 14.

IX. THE POMBALINE DICTATORSHIP AND ITS AFTERMATH. Feb. 16.

PRESIDENT'S DAY (HOLIDAY) Feb. 21.

X. SEAFARING AND THE PORTUGUESE EXPERIENCE. Feb. 23.

XI. CHURCH, CLERGY, AND CONVERTS. Feb. 28.

REVIEW PAPER (1500 WORDS): Due Feb. 28 (see last page of syllabus).

**XII. THE TOWN COUNCIL AND THE MISERICORDIA IN THE PORTUGUESE WORLD.**

March 2.

**XIII. PORTUGUESE SOCIETY IN ASIA, AFRICA, AND BRAZIL: A COMPARISON.**

March 7.

**XIV. RACE RELATIONS IN THE PORTUGUESE OVERSEAS EMPIRE, 1415-1825.**

March 9.

FINAL EXAMINATION. Friday, March 18, 7-8:30 PM. The student will answer two
questions--one from those chosen from Topics VI-IX and one from those chosen
from Topics X-XIV--for 40% of the course grade.

**I. THE PORTUGUESE BACKGROUND. FROM LATE MEDIEVAL TO RENAISSANCE**
**PORTUGAL.**

Required reading:

Francis A. Dutra, "Portugal to 1279" and "Portugal: 1279-1481,"

Dictionary of the Middle Ages X, 35-56 [on reserve]. Charles R. Boxer, The
Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825, pp.

xx-xxvi; 1-14. Antonio H. de Oliveira Marques, History of Portugal I, pp. 73-

132; 165-216 [on reserve]. Sanjay Subrahmanyam, The Portuguese Empire in Asia,
1500-1700,

pp. 30-54. James Lockhart and Stuart B. Schwartz, Early Latin America, pp.

3-30 [on reserve].

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. "The Portuguese by the middle of the sixteenth century 

dominated more of the world and more of its trade than any other
[country....Why](telnet://country....Why) was this small, rather poor,
culturally backward nation, perched on the southwest coast of Europe, so
dramatically successful in that great century of enterprise that started about
1440?" In your answer, discuss and analyze the motives which inspired the
Portuguese during the first century of overseas expansion, 1415-1499. What
factors in Portuguese history helped or hindered this expansion?

**II. EXPLORATION AND COLONIZATION FROM THE MEDITERRANEAN TO THE** **ATLANTIC,
1229-1492.**

Required reading:

Felipe Fernandez-Armesto, Before Columbus, pp. 11-252.

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. How does Fernandez-Armesto's Before Columbus succeed or fail 

to explain Castilian and Portuguese expansion in North Africa, the Atlantic
islands, and coastal West Africa to 1500? What role did the Catalans and the
Genoese play?

**III. THE PORTUGUESE IN NORTH AFRICA (1415-1769), THE ATLANTIC** **ISLANDS
(TO 1800), AND EXPLORING AND EXPLOITING THE WEST AFRICAN** **COAST IN THE
FIFTEENTH CENTURY.**

Required reading:

Charles R. Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825, pp.

15-38. Antonio H. de Oliveira Marques, History of Portugal I, pp. 133-

163; 217-229; 238-248; 257-258; 368-378 [on reserve]. Bailey W. Diffie and
George D. Winius, Foundations of the

Portuguese Empire, 1415-1580, pp. 37-174; 301-317.

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. One historian described the Portuguese experience in North 

Africa 1415-1640 as one in which "Portuguese commanders waged fruitless wars
against neighboring Moorish chieftains, withstood their periodic sieges and
threats, got involved in their frequent and obscure intriques and sided with
Moorish exiles and pretenders whom they hoped to use as puppets." Do you
agree? What conditions confronted the Portuguese stationed there? How would
you evaluate the Portuguese experience in North Africa, 1415-1769? In your
answer discuss and analyze Portuguese activity in North Africa from the
capture of Ceuta [1415] to the abandonment of Mazagao [1769].

  2. The Portuguese mid-Atlantic islands [Madeiras, Azores, and the 

Cape Verdes] "in the days of sailing ships, played an important, an
influential, and in certain areas and times, even an indispensable and vital
role in oceanic trade, transport, and
[communication....Certain](telnet://communication....Certain) islands, in
addition to serving as victualing stations and bases for ship maintenance,
were also commercial centers in their own right." Do you agree? Discuss. In
your answer analyze the discovery, settlement, and economy of the Atlantic
islands by the Portuguese and the roles these islands played in the 15th to
the 18th centuries.

  3. Discuss and analyze Portugal's advance down the African coast 

in the fifteenth century. What were its highlights? Who were the major
explorers and what were their contributions? What role did Prince Pedro,
Prince Henry, and Joao II play in the planning, organization, and financing of
these voyages and what were their aims? Discuss.

**IV. VASCO DA GAMA, HIS IMMEDIATE SUCCESSORS, AND THE CREATION OF** **AN
ASIAN EMPIRE.**

Required reading:

Sanjay Subrahmanyam, The Portuguese Empire in Asia, 1500-1700,

pp. 9-29; 55-79; 107-143. Charles R. Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire,
1415-1825, pp.

39-82. Antonio H. de Oliveira Marques, History of Portugal I, pp. 223-

226; 228-238; 249-251; 258-263 [on reserve]. Bailey W. Diffie and George D.
Winius, Foundations of the

Portuguese Empire, 1415-1580, pp. 175-278.

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. "The Portuguese achievement in establishing a seaborne empire 

in Monsoon Asia was no less remarkable than that of the Spaniards in
establishing their land-based empire in America. Perhaps even more so, when we
consider that the population of Portugal in the sixteenth century probably
never exceeded about a million and a quarter souls." Discuss. What were the
characteristics of the Portuguese maritime empire in the East? What were the
chief factors helping and hindering Portugal in the building up of her Asian
empire?

  2. Discuss and analyze Portuguese conquest, consolidation, and 

expansion in Asia, 1497-1610.

  3. PORTUGAL'S MID-SIXTEENTH CENTURY CRISIS IN ASIA, AFRICA, AND **AMERICA.** 

Required reading:

Sanjay Subrahmanyam, The Portuguese Empire in Asia, 1500-1700,

pp. 80-143. Bailey W. Diffie and George D. Winius, Foundations of the

Portuguese Empire, 1415-1580, pp. 338-359. Antonio H. de Oliveira Marques,
History of Portugal I, pp. 263-

322; 335-355. James Lockhart and Stuart B. Schwartz, Early Latin America, pp.
181-201 [on reserve].

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. Discuss and analyze the crisis the Portuguese faced in Portugal, Asia, North Africa, West Africa, and Brazil in the mid- sixteenth century and how it affected the history of Portugal and the above-mentioned regions. 

**VI. THE PORTUGUESE IN THE SOUTH ATLANTIC, 1500-1650.**

Required reading:

Charles R. Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825, pp.

84-105; 106-127. Antonio H. de Oliveira Marques, History of Portugal I, pp.
251-

257; 355-378 [on reserve]. James Lockhart and Stuart B. Schwartz, Early Latin
America, pp.

202-252 [on reserve].

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. "Only in Brazil did Portugal initiate a true settlement 

policy, meaning one that implied the development of large- scale commercial
agriculture, the control of extensive territory, and the wholesale subjugation
of a foreign population." Discuss. How does this compare with the Portuguese
presence in West Africa, 1481-1650? Discuss. What role did sugar play in
Portuguese America to 1650?

**VII. DECLINE, STAGNATION, AND CONTRACTION IN THE EAST AND THE** **GLOBAL WAR
AGAINST THE DUTCH.**

Required reading:

Sanjay Subrahmanyam, The Portuguese Empire in Asia, 1500-1700,

pp. 144-215; 270-277. Charles R. Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire,
1415-1825, pp.

106-149. Charles R. Boxer, The Dutch Seaborne Empire, 1600-1800 [on

reserve].

  1. R. Disney, Twilight of the Pepper Empire [on reserve] 

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. Discuss and analyze Portuguese decline, stagnation and 

contraction in Asia and East Africa, 1600-1800. What role did the Dutch play?
What impact did the Dutch have on Portugal's South Atlantic empire, 1624-1654?

  2. Based on a careful reading of C. R. Boxer's Portuguese 

Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825 and his Dutch Seaborne Empire, 1600-1800, discuss
and compare the similarities and differences between the two empires in the
17th and 18th centuries.

  3. Discuss and analyze A. R. Disney's Twilight of the Pepper 

Empire.

**VIII. REVIVAL AND EXPANSION IN THE WEST, 1663-1750.**

Required reading:

Charles R. Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825, pp.

150-176. Antonio H. de Oliveira Marques, History of Portugal I, pp. 431-

479 [on reserve]. James Lockhart and Stuart B. Schwartz, Early Latin America,
pp.

369-388 [on reserve].

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. Discuss and analyze the effect of the gold discoveries in 

Brazil [beginning in the 1690s] had on Portugal's South Atlantic empire to
1750.

  2. Discuss and compare administration in the Portuguese overseas 

world, 1500-1808.

**IX. THE POMBALINE DICTATORSHIP AND ITS AFTERMATH**

Required reading:

Charles R. Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825, pp.

177-203. Antonio H. de Oliveira Marques, History of Portugal I, pp. 431-

479 [on reserve]. James Lockhart and Stuart B. Schwartz, Early Latin America,
pp.

388-404 [on reserve].

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. Draw up a balance sheet for Pombal's dictatorship [1750-1777], 

his reforms and repressions and their effect on the Portuguese overseas
empire. What was the fate of these reforms in the years 1777-1808?

  2. SEAFARING AND THE PORTUGUESE EXPERIENCE 

Required reading:

T. Bentley Duncan, "Navigation Between Portugal and Asia in the

Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries," pp. 3-25 [on reserve]. James Duffy,
Shipwreck and Empire, pp. 3-168 [on reserve]. Charles R. Boxer, The Portuguese
Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825, pp.

205-227. Carla Rahn Phillips, Six Galleons for the King of Spain, pp. 152-

180 [on reserve].

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. "It is an outstanding thing to see the facility and frequency 

with which the Portuguese embark for [India....Each](telnet://India....Each)
year four or five carracks leave Lisbon full of them; and many embark as if
they were going no further than a league from Lisbon, taking with them only a
shirt and two loaves in the hand, and carrying a cheese and a jar of
marmelade, without any other kind of provision." How would you analzye the
sailors' and passengers' problems on their voyages to various parts of the
Portuguese empire? How successful was Portuguese navigation on the carreira da
India in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries?

**XI. CHURCH, CLERGY, AND CONVERTS**

Required reading:

Charles R. Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825, pp.

65-83; 228-248; 367-378. Charles R. Boxer, The Church Militant and Iberian
Expansion,

1440-1770, pp. 1-121 [on reserve]. Bailey E. Diffie and George D. Winius,
Foundations of the

Portuguese Empire, 1415-1580, pp. 335-337.

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. Discuss and compare Portuguese conversion policies in Asia, 

Africa and Brazil. Were they successful? What were the chief obstacles the
Portuguese encountered in their efforts to convert Asians, Africans and
Amerindians to Christianity.

or Draw up a balance sheet showing the contributions and failings of the
secular clergy, the religious clergy and the hierarchy in the Portuguese
overseas empire, 1415-1825. What influence did the Padroado Real have? What
role did foreign clergy play?

**XII. THE TOWN COUNCIL AND THE MISERICORDIA IN THE PORTUGUESE** **WORLD**

Required reading:

Charles R. Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825, pp.

273-295. Charles R. Boxer, Portuguese Society in the Tropics. The

Municipal Councils of Goa, Macao, Bahia, and Luanda, 1510- 1800, pp. 3-149.

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. Discuss and compare the characteristics of four towns in the 

Portuguese overseas empire--Goa, Macau, Bahia, and Luanda. What were their
chief similarities and differences? What role did their municipal councils and
misericordias play?

**XIII. PORTUGUESE SOCIETY IN ASIA, AFRICA AND BRAZIL: A** **COMPARISON.**

Required reading:

Charles R. Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825, pp.

296-339. Sanjay Subrahmanyam, The Portuguese Empire in Asia, 1500-1700,

pp. 216-269.

  1. J. R. Russell-Wood, A World on the Move, pp. 58-122. 

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. Discuss and analyze the Portuguese presence in Asia, Africa, 

and America, 1500-1808. Russell-Wood asserts that "the Portuguese seaborne
empire was characterized by a constant flux and reflux of people" and sees
mobility as an important characteristic. Do you agree? What were the other
important characteristics of Portuguese overseas society? What major changes
took place during the three centuries in question? Discuss and compare the
role of women and the family in Portuguese Africa, Asia and Brazil.

**XIV. RACE RELATIONS IN THE PORTUGUESE OVERSEAS EMPIRE, 1415-1825**

Required reading:

Charles R. Boxer, Race Relations in the Portuguese Colonial

Empire, 1415-1825 [on reserve] Charles R. Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne
Empire, 1415-1825, pp.

249-272.

Discussion questions [Guide to the Required Reading]:

  1. Discuss, compare and analyze Portuguese race relations in 

Africa, Asia and Brazil

  2. Discuss and analyze the Portuguese origin and character of the 

African slave trade, 1441-1825. What was the justification for such a trade?
Was there opposition? Discuss.

1500-WORD REVIEW PAPER: Due Feb. 28

Discuss how A. J. R. Russell-Wood, A World on the Move. The Portuguese in
Africa, Asia and America, 1415-1808 succeeds, partially succeeds or fails to
give a better understanding of Portugal overseas, 1415-1808.

General instructions for the paper:

  1. The paper must be at least 1500 words (about 6 to 7 pages). 
  2. Grading of paper: 80% for content; 20% for grammar, spelling and proofreading. 
  3. The paper must show that the book was carefully read and that the student is familiar with the course materials. 
  4. Citations of quotations and non-quoted ideas are necessary. This can be done immediately after the quotation or at the end of the paragraph; e.g., (p. 277) or (pp. 180, 215). For sources other than A World on the Move but listed in the syllabus, cite e.g. (Subrahmanyam, 35) or e.g. (Boxer, Seaborne Empire, p. 220) if the author has several books listed. If you use sources not listed in the syllabus, attach a bibliography. 
  5. All papers must be typed, double-spaced and with one-inch margins. The print should be dark and easily read. 

**GENERAL COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

There are two categories of reading: required and supplementary.

Required reading: All students must read each of the six following books:
Boxer, The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825 Diffie/Winius, Foundations of
the Portuguese Empire, 1415-1580 Fernandez-Armesto, Before Columbus Boxer,
Portuguese Society in the Tropics Russell-Wood, A World on the Move
Subrahmanyam, The Portuguese Empire in Asia, 1500-1700 Plus the selected pages
from Oliveira Marques, History of Portugal and from Lockhart and Schwartz,
Early Latin America.

Supplementary reading: Reading in addition to the above as listed in the
required reading for each topic is necessary only if the student chooses to do
the question in that topic.

Information provider:  
Unit: H-Net program at UIC History Department Email:
[H-Net@uicvm.uic.edu](mailto:H-Net@uicvm.uic.edu)  
Posted: 16 Sep 1994

