**Greek and Roman Historians: Concepts and Practice**  
**ANCH 402**  
  

Term: Spring 1999  
Instructor: Brent Shaw (bshaw@sas.upenn.edu)  
Office: 264 Logan Hall  
Time: TR 12:00-1:30  
Place: Logan Hall 311  
  
  

This course is designed to introduce the student to some of the most important
historians of ancient Greece and Rome, and to their writings. In many ways,
history is an unusual genre of writing as well as an unusual mode of by which
humans come to know about their world. Why, then, was it created in the first
place? And, once created, what were the nature of the debates over the nature
of writing history? Were the ancient Greek and Roman conceptions of 'doing
history' fundamentally different from ours? And how did history relate to its
neighboring genres of literary production? Amongst the most significant of
these other influential genres were those of rhetoric and of biography. How
did they influence the writing of history? Finally, we shall consider the
dominant models for the writing of history that were forcefully established by
its first two major practitioners, Herodotus and Thucydides, and then ask what
types of important changes were made in the writing of history during the
first millennium of its existence.

**In-class discussion:** These sessions, in which assigned readings from the
original historians will be discussed in depth, are a _most important_ part of
the course. The instructor will introduce the general field of historiography,
including the invention of the genre of historiography by the Greeks and the
general pattern of its development by later Latin and Roman writers. He will
also offer a general interpretation of the main developments and of each major
historian. Equally important, however, will be that part of the course that
will be devoted to the regular in-class discussion of assigned readings from
the major historians of the time. It is therefore very important that you are
willing to take the reading assignments seriously. You should carefully read
the assigned texts. The instructor will assist you in this reading by handing
out in advance of each reading a 'prompt sheet' that will both set the reading
and provide you with a number of perspectives and questions that will help you
to organize your reading of the original texts. You should make notes for
yourself about those aspects of each reading that seem particularly important
and relevant to the historian's practice as an historian.

  
_TEXTBOOKS_  
  
Herodotus, _The Histories_ ,translation by Aubrey de Selincourt, introduction
by John Marincola, Harmondsworth, Penguin Classics, 1997. (paperback)  
  
Thucydides, _The Peloponnesian War_ , translation by Rex Warner, introduction
by Sir Moses Finley, Harmondsworth, Penguin Classics, 1982. (paperback)  
  
Polybius, _The Rise of the Roman Empire_ , translation by Ian Scott-Kilvert;
introduction by Frank Walbank, Harmondsworth, Penguin Classics, 1981.
(paperback)  
  
Tacitus, _The Agricola and the Germania_ , revised edition, translation by
Harold Mattingly, Harmondsworth, Penguin Classics, 1982. (paperback)  
  
Tacitus, _The Annals of Imperial Rome_ ,revised edition, translation by
Michael Grant, Harmondsworth, Penguin Classics, 1989. (paperback)  
  
Eusebius, _The History of the Church_ , revised edition, translation by G. A.
Williamson, Harmondsworth, Penguin Classics, 1989. (paperback)  
  
All other readings will either be placed on reserve or will be handed out in
class.

  
**Final Grade:** The final grade will be based on a midterm examination, a
final examination, a term paper, and in-class participation in discussion of
the assigned readings. The distribution is as follows:  
  
Midterm: 20%  
  
Final: 30%  
  
Class participation: 25%  
  
Term Paper: 25%  

  
**Term Paper**  
  
The term paper will be **DUE** absolutely no later than **APRIL 15**. Length
is not fixed, but approximately 12-15 double-spaced pages should suffice. You
are also encouraged to form a research topic on your own, if you wish. Your
choice, however, must be cleared with the instructor. It is also a good idea,
if you foresee any difficulties, to consult with the instructor beforehand on
a draft version of your paper. Such consultation, however, must be arranged
reasonbly in advance of the final due date; a flurry of requests in the final
week(s) before the due date cannot be entertained.

In connection with research that you will undertake either in connection with
the readings, or more probably, your term paper, the following books are ones
that should be consulted as some of the best modern analyses of the problems
for each of the historians that we are considering. Those that are asterisked
(*) have been placed on reserve in Rosengarten Reserve Library in the Van Pelt
Library:

_General _  
  
* Charles Fornara, _The Nature of History in Ancient Greece and Rome_ , Berkeley, 1983 

* J. Marincola, _Authority and Tradition in Ancient Historiography_ , Cambridge, 1997 

I. Moxon, J. Smart, A. Woodman eds., _Past Persepctives: Studies in Greek and
Roman Historical Writing_ , Cambridge, 1986

* A. J. Woodman, _Rhetoric in Classical Historiography_ , Portland, 1988  
  
  
_Herodotus_  
  
J. A. S. Evans, _Herodotus: Explorer of the Past_ , Princeton, 1991

Charles Fornara, _Herodotus: An Interpretative Essay_ , Oxford, 1971

Detlev Fehling, _Herodotus and his "Sources": Citation, Invention, and
Narrative Art_ , Leeds, 1989  
  
John Gould, _Herodotus_ , London, 1989  
  
Francois Hartog, _The Mirror of Herodotus: the Representation of the Other in
the Writing of History_ , Berkeley, 1988  
  
* Virginia Hunter, _Past and Process in Herodotus and Thucydides_ , Princeton, 1982  
  
* Henry R. Immerwahr, _Form and Thought in Herodotus_ , Chapel Hill, NC, 1966  
  
Donald Lateiner, _The Historical Method of Herodotus_ , Toronto, 1989

James Romm, _Herodotus_ , New Haven, 1998

Benyamin Shimron, _Politics and Belief in Herodotus_ , Stuttgart, 1989

  
  
_Thucydides_

* W. R. Connor, _Thucydides_ , Princeton, 1984

Francis M. Cornford, _Thucydides Mythistoricus_ , London, 1973

Gregory Crane, _Thucydides and the Ancient Simplicity: The Limits of Political
Realism_ , Berkeley, 1998

* Virginia Hunter, _Thucydides: the Artful Reporter_ , Toronto, 1973 

* Virginia Hunter, _Past and Process in Herodotus and Thucydides_ , Princeton, 1982

Clifford Orwin, _The Humanity of Thucydides_ , Princeton, 1994

  
_Polybius_

Arthur Eckstein, _Moral Vision in the History of Polybius_ , Berkeley, 1995

Kenneth Sacks, _Polybius on the Writing of History_ , Berkeley, 1981

* Frank W. Walbank, _Polybius_ , Berkeley, 1972

  
_Latin Historians_

C. S. Kraus  & A. J. Woodman, _Latin Historians_ , Oxford, 1997

T. A. Dorey, _Latin Historians_ , London, 1966

  
_Sallust_

* Sir Ronald Syme, _Sallust_ , Berkeley, 1964

  
_Livy_

* T. J. Luce, _Livy:the Composition of His History_ , Princeton, 1977

Andrew Feldherr, _Spectacle and Society in Livy's History_ , Berkeley, 1998

Mary Jaeger, _Livy's Written Rome_ , Ann Arbor, 1997

* Gary B. Miles, _Livy: Reconstructing Early Rome_ , Ithaca NY, 1995

  
_Tacitus_

Judith Ginsburg, _Tradition and Theme in the Annals of Tacitus_ , New York,
1981

T. J. Luce & A. J. Woodman eds., _Tacitus and the Tacitean Tradition_ ,
Princeton, 1993

* Ronald H. Martin, _Tacitus_ , London, 1981

* Ronald Mellor, _Tacitus_ , New York, 1983

Sir Ronald Syme, _Tacitus_ , 2 vols., Oxford, 1958

Sir Ronald Syme, _Ten Studies in Tacitus_ , Oxford, 1970

  
_Eusebius_

* Glen F. Chesnut, _The First Christian Historians_ , Macon GA, 1986 

* T. D. Barnes, _Constantine and Eusebius_ , Cambridge, Mass., 1981 

  
  

**_READING ASSIGNMENTS**_

The following is the general schedule of readings that will be assigned for
class discussion. It is **only provisional** , however, and is subject to
modification. More detailed prep sheets will be handed out in class.

_Schedule of Topics and Readings_

Week 1 (January 12  & 14)

Introduction to the class; the idea of history; Near Eastern and other
precursors to the writing of history and historical research

Week 2 (January 19 & 21)

Herodotus, _The Histories_ :Introduction by John Marincola (pp.ix-xxviii);
_The Histories_ , Book One (all; pp. 3-85)

Week 3 (January 26 & 28)

Herodotus, _The Histories_ , Book Two [all; pp. 86-153] (Egyptians); Book
Three, chapters 1-38 [pp. 154-69] (Ethiopians, European burial customs); Book
Four, chapters 1-82 [pp. 217-42] (Scythians); Book Four, chapters 145-199 [pp.
260-78] (Africans)

Week 4 (February 2 & 4)

Herodotus, _The Histories_ , Book Six, chapters 94-140 [pp. 355-71] (Marathon,
the first Persian attack); Book Seven (all; pp. 372-450); Book Eight, chapters
1-125 [pp. 451-90] (the second Persian attack, Thermopylae and sea battle at
Salamis)

Week 5 (February 9 & 11)

Thucydides, _The Peloponnesian War_ , Introduction by Sir Moses Finley [pp.
9-32];Thucydides, _The Peloponnesian War_ , Book One [all; pp. 35-123]

Week 6 (February 16 & 18)

Thucydides, _The Peloponnesian War_ , Book Two, chapters 1-78 [pp. 124-173]
(outbreak of the war, Perikles' Funeral Oration); Book Three, chapters 1-85
[pp. 194-245] (Mytilenaean Debate, civil conflict in Corcyra)

Week 7 (February 23 & 25)

Thucydides, _The Peloponnesian War_ , Book Five, chapters 84-116 [pp. 400-408]
(The Melian Dialogue); Book Six, chapters 1-88 [pp. 409-465]; Book Seven,
chapters 72-87 [pp. 525-537]; Book Eight, chapters 1-5 [pp. 538-41] (The
Sicilian Expedition)

**MIDTERM EXAMINATION**

Week 8 (March 2 & 4)

Polybius, _The Rise of the Roman Empire_ : Introduction by Frank Walbank (pp.
9-40); _The Rise of the Roman Empire_ , Book One, chapters 1-6 [pp. 41-47]
(design of his history); Book Two, chapter 56 [pp. 167-169 (sources); Book
Three, chapters 6-40 [pp. 183-214] (official documents); Book Six, all [pp.
302-352 (the constitution of the Roman state); Book Twelve, all [pp. 429-451]
(Timaeus, a "bad" historian)

MIDTERM BREAK: March 8 - 12

Week 9 (March 16 & 18)

Early Roman Annalistic Historians, Cato the Elder, Sallust, and Livy
[Handouts]

Week 10 (March 23 & 25)

Ethnography: Tacitus, _Germania_ [all; pp. 101-141  & from the introduction:
pp. 9-12, 24-34] (& handout on Caesar's _Gallic War_ )

Week 11 (March 30 & April 1)

Biography: Tacitus, _Agricola_ [all; pp. 51-99  & from the introduction: pp.
9-24] (& handout)

Week 12 (April 6 & 8)

Tacitus, _Annals_ : Introduction by Michael Grant [pp. 1-28]; _Annals_ ,
chapter 1, "From Augustus to Tiberius," [all; pp. 31-42]; chapter 4, "The
First Treason Trials" [all, pp. 90-103]; chapter 5, "The Death of Germanicus,"
[all; pp. 104-28], chapter 6, "Tiberius and the Senate," (pp. 129-56); chapter
7 "Partner in my Labours," (pp.157-76 ONLY)

Week 13 (April 13 & 15)

Tacitus, _Annals_ , chapter 12, "Nero and his Helpers," [all; pp. 320-44];
chapter 14, "The Burning of Rome," [all; pp. 360-67]; chapter 15, "The Plot,"
[all; pp. 368-81]; chapter 16, "Innocent Victims," (all that remains, pp.
382-97] (Nero: the corruption of absolute power)

Week 14 (April 20 & 22)

Eusebius, _History of the Church_ , introduction by Andrew Louth (pp. ix-
xxxv); _History of the Church_ , Book One, "Christ and his Contemporaries,"
[all; pp. 1-34]; Book Two, 2.13-16 [pp.47-50] (Simon Magus), and 2.19-26
[pp.55-64] (the reign of Nero); Book Five [all; pp. 138-77]; Book Eight, "The
Great Persecution" [all; pp. 256-80], Book Nine, "The End of Persecution"
[all; pp. 282-302]

