**Extended Syllabus and Comments on Readings**

**I. Introduction**

Text: chapter 1

Trescott: "[The Twentieth Century:An Economic
Retrospect](readings/20thcentu.htm)"

"[Freedom's Journey;A Survey of the 20th Century](reading.htm), Economist
Sept. 11, 1999.

Read carefully the list of 15 issues on pp. 1-2 of text. Think about

  1. Which of these are matters the government can or should determine, and which will be determined primarily by private decisions and attitudes?
  2. How will the chosen patterns for items 10-14 affect other items in the list?
  3. Note that items 6-9 constitute the basic tasks of any economic system. Review the way in which a free-market economy determines each of these.
  4. My nomination for item 16 would be "what will be the role of violence and coercion in the society?"

_Institutions_ "define modes of action or social relationships. . . that are
expected and proper. . ." Institutions "create patterns of behavior which are
durable and routine due to traditions and customs or legal constraints."(p. 4)

Important institutions involve groups and organizations:

> >   * families

>>   * business firms

>>   * government agencies

>>   * non-profit organizations: churches, charities, labor unions, advocacy
groups. affinity groups (fraternity, scouts, 4H, YMCA etc.)

>>

_Economy_ may be defined as the set of activities and institutions which carry
on the _production_ and _distribution_ of goods and services. In a market
economy, these are interdependent. People receive incomes for the
contributions their labor and their property make to the production process.
When they spend those incomes, the resulting demand for products affects
decisions about what products to produce, in what quantities. Efforts to pay
incomes in ways unrelated to production are likely to create problems of
_incentives_.

Economic goods and economic resources are scarce--there is not enough to meet
all the possible desires that people may have. To obtain more of one product
or service, we probably must accept less of another.

_Philosophical basis_ includes people's attitudes about things which are good
or bad, right or wrong. Some possible elements might include:

  * "Honesty is the best policy."
  * "Each person should work for what they want and not free-load on others."
  * "Each person has a moral obligation to develop his/her talents and abilities."
  * "People should not be judgmental toward others."
  * "Violence should be avoided in relations with others."
  * "Successful people have a moral obligation to help those who are less successful."
  * "Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we may have an exam."
  * "The best things in life are loving and rewarding relationships with other people, rather than a big income or a lot of wealth."

_Evolutionary-Institutional Approach_

At pp. 7-11 the author sets forth five themes embodying this approach, as
follows:

>   1. "Economies are best understood within an historical context." Of
course. The high-income level of the present-day United States reflects the
capital, technology, and organizational patterns which developed in the past.
The author urges us to "refrain from believing that people over time and in
different societies respond in a consistent, uniform manner to changes in
economic variables." I would see the task of historical analysis to determine
_whether_ and _to what extent_ there are such "consistent, uniform" responses.

>   2. "Studying both economic and noneconomic factors is necessary." Of
course. But the author has left out the most important noneconomic category--
violence. The bloody wars and revolutions of the 20th century produced many of
the important economic changes. War and revolution enabled Communist
governments to come to power in the Soviet Union and in China. The desire to
avoid further war has been the major motivator for European Union.

>

More generally, economic conditions in many regions are damaged by
dysfunctional government. Westerners tend to see government as a benign
institution, responsive to public opinion, performing useful and good-hearted
activities. But all governments have two important dimensions:

>   1. Governments rely on coercion, in such dimensions as military force,
taxation, criminal law, and property confiscations.

>   2. Governments are a major source of income and wealth, for their
employees, recipients of transfer payments, and clientele groups.

>

When these two dimensions predominate, as they do in much of the world, the
economic consequences can be disastrous.

>   1. "Economies are characterized by ongoing processes of dynamic
transformation." Things change. One generation dies off and another is born.
Economists are particularly interested in the process of economic growth, by
which output increases and people's living conditions may improve. Economic
growth in the 20th century, despite the destruction of wars and revolutions,
dramatically transformed ways of living for the United States, Europe and many
other areas.

>

> Individual innovations which seem initially beneficial may have unforeseen
negative consequences. The spread of television after the 1940s made people
more sedentary (and thus less physically fit) but less inclined to read,
causing increased problems of child literacy. Introduction of birth-control
pills in the 1960s (soon after Roe v. Wade) led to radical changes in sexual
attitudes, producing a great increase in abortions and in births to unwed
mothers, aggravating poverty among children. Currently there is much concern
about genetic engineering.

>

>   2. We should pay attention to "the philosophical underpinnings which shape
the participants' values in the particular economy being analyzed." "Reform"
of the welfare system (transfer payments to low-income families) arose when
many people decided these payments were subsidies to harmful life-styles
(sexual misbehavior, drug and alcohol abuse, lack of work ethic).

>

> A major problem arises when values and interests conflict. Current examples
include gun control, abortion, cigarette smoking, and the relation between
religion and education. The U.S. political tradition relies on majority rule,
but it must be constrained by appropriate concern for the rights of
minorities.

>

> Fortunately, "many U.S. social scientists are occupied determining costs and
benefits of alternative solutions to pressing social problems such as health
care, welfare, and crime." Cost-benefit analysis has been particularly
appropriate in judging environmental policies.

>

>   3. "One cannot conclude that an advanced level of economic development in
a particular nation suggests that its working rules and institutions will
generate the same favorable performance [in] another nation." Sweden has been
relatively successful with comprehensive welfare-state policies. Sweden is a
small country, ethnically homogeneous, with high levels of literacy and a
strong work ethic, located in a relatively northward geographic environment.
These considerations set limits on the relevance of the Swedish experience for
a large, ethnically and climatically diverse country like the U.S.

>

We can still argue that when a policy regime has had disastrous results in one
country, it may be likely to produce similar results elsewhere. Communist
regimes, originating in violent revolution and dictatorial governments, have
been disastrous in many different environments.

A good way to judge what people think of an economic system is to observe
their eagerness to move _into_ or _out of_ that country.

_Overview_

The author criticizes "an orthodox [economic] perspective" which holds that
"competitive markets operate effectively in most societies, or would. . . in
the absence of state intervention."(p.13) A more defensible view is that free
markets operate effectively in most societies when supported by appropriate
government policies. These government policies include definition and
protection of rights of property and contract, personal liberty, and
infrastructure including education, transport, and communication. An important
dimension concerns the business corporation, for which details of structure
and operation depend on government. These details extend to financial
instruments such as stocks, bonds, and other loans, and the institutions which
deal in them, including stock markets. United States government policies
toward corporations have long been more liberal than those of Britain and
western Europe, in ways which have promoted both economic development and
openness for new firms and new business leaders.

_ATTENTION!_ The material between the middle of page 13 and the middle of page
17 can be skipped.

_Behavior of the Economy_ (p. 17-18)

"How is resource allocation decision making [production] organized?"

One can examine the relative ownership of physical capital and the proportions
of employment and output provided by business firms, government, and other
forms such as cooperatives and non-profit organizations.

"What are the rules regarding ownership and control over productive
resources?"

An important task for government is to define and enforce property rights.
Owning property means a) controlling what is done with it, and b) receiving
the rewards (or paying the penalties) resulting from its use. Property owners
will use their property in ways which brings them the largest rewards; this
motive will lead them to seek productive ways to use the property. Owners of
land and other natural resources will have an incentive to protect the value
of the property by conservation techniques.

"What type of social process has been adopted for coordinating information and
for making production and distribution decisions."

Are decisions regarding inputs and outputs made on basis of profit
maximization, or some other criterion? Are people free to choose their
employment? Can producers choose their inputs freely? Are prices fixed by
government, or negotiated between buyers and sellers?

Profit-seeking businesses in competitive markets have an incentive to produce
products consumers desire( since this will bring revenue to sellers) and to
use efficient methods of production (since this will keep down costs).

Since government enterprises can be subsidized out of general government
revenue or government loans, they do not have the same incentives to meet
consumer desires or to be efficient. Economies dominated by government
enterprises tend to be situations of "producers' sovereignty", run for the
benefit of the administrators and workers in the enterprises.

**II. Evaluating and Comparing Economies**

Text, ch. 2

There are several reasons one might wish to compare and evaluate economic
systems. Some important ones are

  1. To assess possible policy changes in our own country. The experiences of other countries with government-supplied universal medical care can help us to evaluate proposals for improving our health-care system.
  2. As a scholarly exercise to judge the validity of major economic principles. It is important to try to find out if
  3. rapid increase in the money supply is likely to produce inflation, raise interest rates, and cause the international value of the currency unit to decline.

ii. fixing wages at a high level by government decree is likely to decrease
job opportunities, especially for young people just entering the work force.
The French government has just instituted a 35-hour work week for private
employers. What are its effects?

    3. paying generous benefits to the unemployed is likely to reduce incentives to seek work and to upgrade work skills.
  4. In particular, inter-country comparisons are important in trying to understand the process of economic growth. For example
  5. the relative success of Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia, and Hong Kong indicates that a tropical climate need not be a serious obstacle to rapid growth.
  6. ii. The relative failure of the USSR and Communist China in 1950-75 indicates that a high rate of investment does not necessarily produce beneficial economic growth, if the investment is not directed by some optimization system.

iii. The relative success of Japan indicates that abundant natural resources
are not necessary for rapid growth.

    3. The relative success of Germany and the U.S. in 1870-1914 indicates that high tariffs do not prevent economic growth.

_Measuring Economic Performance_ (pp. 28-36)

The author examines each of the following as an indicator of the performance
of national economies:

> >   1. Economic growth.

>>   2. Economic stability: inflation, unemployment

>>   3. Static and dynamic efficiency

>>   4. International balance of trade, payments, and currency value

>>   5. Income distribution

>>   6. Quality of life

>>

It seems to me that #6, Quality of Life, is by far the most important.
Economic growth and efficiency are beneficial insofar as they improve people's
lives. Economic growth is much more important for low-income countries than
for high-income countries like the U.S. Item #6 likewise is important insofar
as it affects people's living conditions.

Beginning at page 33, the author presents data on 5 measures of performance.
Mostly these are measures of items 1, 2, 5, and 6. In addition, he considers
per capita gross national product (GNP).

Gross national product measures the value of a nation's output. Products and
services are assumed to be worth what the final buyer pays for them. In
competitive markets, such measures are fairly accurate, but in societies where
government buys much of the output, its valuation can be quite arbitrary.
Recall that 15-20 years ago Soviet GNP was assumed to be one-half or two-
thirds as large as that of the U.S. International comparisons of GNP per
capita are not very accurate. Products and services differ widely across
countries, and their relative prices are also widely divergent.

GNP includes a number of items which may not contribute directly to the
economic welfare of residents. All government purchases of goods and services
are included. Military expenditures may be of dubious value, or may even have
negative utility in a dictatorship where the regime exercises despotic power
through the military. GNP also includes expenditures for investment, meaning
the current production of capital goods (structures, equipment, additions to
business inventories). Investment is an important source of economic growth,
provided the capital is allocated and managed under some system of
optimization. When government does a lot of the investment, however, it may be
wasted, as has been the case with much investment in the USSR and Maoist
China.

In its World Development Report for 2000, the World Bank presents data for
many countries. A handout gives these data for a few countries and for
aggregates. Two different measures are given for GNP per capita. The first
starts with each country's GNP as measured in their own currency unit. This is
then adjusted to U.S. dollars by using the exchange rate between that
country's currency unit and the U.S. dollar. However, because relative prices
and consumption patterns differ from country to country, they present a second
estimate, based on "purchasing power parity." Observers in each country obtain
price data on a large number of goods and services, and then compare these
between each country and the U.S. As the handout shows, the PPP estimates are
generally much higher for low-income countries.

Data are also given for the average annual growth of per capita consumption
between 1980 and 1998. It is not clear why the world measure of growth is only
1.3 per cent when all three income components grew faster. A shocking fact is
that Nigeria displayed a decrease of per capita consumption by 4 per cent per
year over the nearly 20-year period. Civil war and political unrest, the
collapse of world oil prices, and the AIDS epidemic all contributed. For
similar reasons sub-Saharan Africa as a whole experienced a decrease in per
capita consumption by about one per cent per year.

The handout also presents several other World Bank measures of the Quality of
Life, as follows:

  * Child malnutrition (children under age 5)
  * Child mortality (under 5 years of age)
  * Life expectancy at birth
  * Adult illiteracy rate
  * Urban population

As a rough approximation, the higher a country's per capita GNP, the better it
scores in these measures. However, at any given income level there is
substantial variation across countries and regions. And among the high-income
countries there is very little correlation between income and the individual
measures of quality of life.

World Bank estimates of the Gini index are given for individual countries in
the handout. A large number indicates a greater degree of inequality. Japan
registers a very low degree of inequality. The U.S. index is intermediate (and
very close to China). Brazil and Mexico show a high degree of inequality.

The average annual inflation rate for each country is given for 1990-1999.
Inflation was relatively low in the U.S., France and Germany. Russia and
Brazil recorded triple-digit inflation. A figure of 100% inflation indicates
prices doubled in one year. Eussia and Brazil exceeded this level. Inasmuch as
most prices and wages rise together during an inflation, the process does not
make the population in general worse off. However, there are always some
people on fixed incomes (pensioners especially) who lose real purchasing
power. In general, inflation causes more anxiety, social disruption and
injustice when it is _not_ anticipated.

**III. Laissez-Faire Market Economy (LFME): theory and practice in the
mid-19th century**

Readings: Text, ch. 5, 6

It is convenient to date the beginnings of the modern world around 1492.
Columbus's voyages set off a frenzy of exploration and colonization by the
major world powers--England, France, Spain and Portugal. The resulting rapid
growth of world trade greatly raised world production efficiency and world
consumption. The great influx of gold and silver brought increased prices and
stimulated efforts to analyze monetary systems.

In 1517 began the actions of Martin Luther which set off the Protestant
Reformation. About the same time, printing from movable type was invented.
Luther stressed the goal of having each person interpret the Holy Scriptures;
Gutenberg made it possible for each person to possess a printed Bible. To
achieve salvation, people needed to learn to read.

Scientific inquiry became more systematic and objective, as exemplified in the
work of Sir Isaac Newton. Newton's vision of a well-ordered and understandable
physical universe helped inspire Adam Smith's vision of a well-ordered and
understandable social universe.

Monarchs struggled to strengthen their regimes internally and internationally.
They formed political alliances with wealthy merchants who could aid them
financially. They sought to achieve economic development to strengthen their
nation in international competition. At first Spain and Portugal, then England
and France developed vast overseas colonial empires. The sparsely settled
areas of North and South America and Australia absorbed European settlers and
European institutions.

Economic productivity can be severely hampered by violence arising from
revolutions, wars, crime, and oppressive government. England experienced these
problems, culminating in violent revolution and civil war 1640-1689. These
events formed a learning experience which helped produce a political system
devoted to non-violence. This was complemented by a legal system stressing the
rights of individuals, with courts and procedures to make these effective.
Property rights and sanctity of contracts became central elements. Feudal
inequalities, which held individuals in serfdom, had passed away even earlier,
but lingered on in much of Continental Europe.

England's North American colonists demanded still more freedoms and achieved
them through a relatively civilized revolution (1776-1783). Adam Smith
insightfully noted that North America, with land so abundant and labor so
scarce, would display high wages and relatively low land rents and prices.
This attracted an increasing influx of immigrants. It also led to the expanded
inflow of black slaves from Africa. While such slavery was also important in
Britain's West Indian colonies, it was never important within the British
Isles.

Developments in the 1700s, especially in Britain, are often said to have
included the following:

> >   1. a commercial revolution. Internationally trade and colonization
expanded. But important increases also occurred in the internal trade of
individual countries, limited by the means of transport.

>>   2. an agricultural revolution. Farmers began to develop techniques to
increase productivity, such as crop rotation, selective breeding, use of
fertilizers, draining of swampy ground. These improvements often involved
Enclosures (text, pp. 90-91), which drove some people off the land. However,
food output increased, brining decrease in death rates and increase in
population.

>>   3. an industrial revolution. Technological innovations were particularly
significant in

>>     1. the cotton textile industry: cotton gin, mechanized spinning and
weaving.

>>     2. iron metallurgy, making possible the manufacture of modern
machinery, notably

>>     3. the steam engine. This required metal that was heat-resistant,
strong, and suitable for machining to precise measures. In the 19th century,
steam power revolutionized the world transport system, through railroads and
steamships.

>>

These developments were carried out almost entirely by private entrepreneurs
and inventors. And they occurred in a world in which most people lived in
rural areas, engaged in agriculture, and had very low levels of income and
consumption.

_Mercantilism_ Heads of government attempted to strengthen themselves and
their countries by mercantilist policies, described in text pp. 88-90. Many of
these ideas persist in our political world today. One is the idea that exports
are good and imports are bad. Industries which face competition from imports
(textiles, shoes, steel) complain about the unfair competition from
foreigners. Journalists point with dismay to the "adverse balance of trade"
arising from the fact that the United States imports more than it exports.
From the standpoint of consumer welfare, however, it is imports which are
beneficial. Exports simply disappear, to improve the lives of people in other
countries.

Mercantilist policies were the target of strong criticism from Adam Smith. He
warned against policies which put the supposed interests of producer groups
ahead of the interests of consumers.

_Religion_. The Protestant Reformation probably promoted economic enterprise
and capitalism (text, pp. 91-3). An important contribution was the
encouragement of schooling and literacy. English Puritans and Quakers,
persecuted at home, became leaders in the economic development of the North
American colonies. English historians stress the further contributions of
Methodism, originating with John Wesley in the 18th century. Methodism is
credited with reducing alcohol abuse, sexual misconduct, and domestic
violence, and helping to create a non-violent labor movement.

_Classical economics_. Much of the analytical core of modern Economics was
created by Adam Smith, Thomas Malthus, John-Baptiste Say, and David
Ricardo.(text pp. 95-108)

* * *

| [ Front Matter](index.htm) | [Class Syllabus ](syllabus.htm)| [Reading
Assingments](reading.htm) | [About Me ](aboutme.htm)| Guest Book |

* * *





