The University of Michigan  
Department of History  
  
**HIS 619:** **Technology in the Industrial World**  
  
Fall 1995

Instructor: R. Frost, L14 Winchell [basement], 747-2434; rfrost@umich.edu  
Time/Place: Wednesdays, 2-4, 4217 modern Languages Bldg.  
Office Hours: Tues. 10:15-11:15, Wed. 12-2, Thurs. 1:15-3:00, and by
appointment.  
  
_COURSE OBJECTIVES_ :  
This course is intended to serve as far more than a survey of the history of
technology. Indeed, given that current scholarship in the history of
technology is among the best now being produced in the historical profession,
we will go far beyond simple description or studies of hardware. Crucially, we
will approach technology as a set of texts within social, cultural, political,
and economic contexts. Our approaches shall range from economic to semiotic,
studying technology as symbol and as artifact. Most importantly perhaps, we
will try to understand the critical relationship between society (and social
orders) and technology.  
  
In the industrial era, technology transfers have been so pervasive that we
must address a broader geographical community then the usual US, Europe, or
Third Wrold set of distinctions, hence opting for that of the North Atlantic
basin. Nonetheless, because the best and most profuse scholarship in this
field is of North American provenance, we shall largely concentrate on the US.
Finally, the focus of the course will be largely upon industrial and consumer
technologies.  
  
_COURSE READINGS_ :  
Merritt R Smith & Leo Marx, eds., _Does Technology Drive History?_  
Maxine Berg, _The Age of Manufactures_  
David Hounshell, _From the American System to Mass..._  
Thomas P. Hughes, _American Genesis_  
Claude Fisher, _America Calling_  
Nye, David, _Electrifying America_  
Judith Wacjman, _Feminism Confronts Technology_  
Jeffrey Miekle, _Twentieth Century Limited_  
Kristin Ross, _Fast Cars, Clean Bodies_  
Jeffrey Herf, _Reactionary Modernism_  
Bruno Latour, _Science in Action  
\--plus assorted reserve readings  
  
__ASSIGNMENTS_ :  
Students will be expected to complete an article-length research paper--thesis
chapters are acceptable--of about 20 pages on topics of their choice. Topics
should first be cleared with the professor. Students will also be expected to
select one of the recommended books and write a 5 to 7-page critique of it and
integrate their reactions to it into the research paper. Weighting of scores:
research paper, 60%; recommended book critiques, 25%; class participation:
15%.  
  
_SCHEDULE OF MEETINGS & TOPICS_:  
**Week 1** (6 September). Introduction to Technology: What Constructs What?  
_Topics_ : Defining technology, technique, artifact, and image.  
_Readings_ : none.  
  
**Week 2** (13 September). Technological Determinism: Real or Red Herring?  
_Topics_ : Do tools make the man [ _sic_ ]? Marx's "forces" vs. "Relations,"
problems of historical causation..  
_Readings_ : Smith & Marx, entire, except for Perdue and Bulliet.  
  
**Week 3** (20 September). Industrial Revolution or a Revolution of
Industriousness?  
_Topics_ : Creative and malevolent destruction begin; myths of machines and
progress; the social process of the industrial revolution; factories, shops,
and families.  
_Readings_ : Berg, Part One.  
_Also recommended_ : M. Bloch, _French Rural History;_ N. Rosenberg,
_Perspectives on Technology_ ; E. P. Thompson, "Time, Work-Discipline...,"
_Past and Present_ (Feb., 1968) _.  
  
_**Week 4** (27 September). Machines, Artisans, Sewers, and Gardens.  
_Topics_ : Technological change approached, early American tech, agronomy;
problems of early infrastructure.  
_Readings_ : Berg, Part 2.  
_Also recommended_ : Donald M. Reid, _Paris Sewers and Sewermen_ ; John
Kasson, _Civilizing the_ Machine; Leo Marx, _The Machine in the Garden;_ E. P.
Thompson, _The Making of the English Working Class;_ compare to T. S. Ashton,
_The Industrial Revolution_.  

**\--*-- Be Prepared to Discuss Research Proposals due on the 4 th \--*--**

Week 5 (4 October). Early Industrialization and the Birth of the `American
System.'  
_Topics_ : Paths to the factory, craft vs. manufacture, Whitney and myth.  
_Readings_ : Hounshell, Intro. & up to chapter on McCormick.  
_Also recommended_ : Otto Mayr and Robert C. Post, eds., _Yankee Enterprise:
The Rise of the American System of Manufactures_ , David Hounshell, _From the
American System to Mass Production_ , Merritt Roe Smith, _Harper's Ferry
Armory and the New Technology.  
  
_**Week 6** (11 October). High Factories and New Infrastructure  
_Topics_ : Myths of mass production, production practices in the new factory,
machine as cultural icon; discussion of research proposals.  
_Readings_ : Hounshell, finish; Hughes, Intro & Chs. 1-3.  
_Also recommended_ : Michelle Perrot, "The Three Ages of Industrial Discipline
in Nineteenth-Century France," George J. Sheridan, Jr., "Household Craft in an
Industrializing Economy," Habakkuk; N. Rosenberg, _Perspectives on
Technology;_ A. Chandler, _The Visible Hand;_ Marx & Engels, _Communist
Manifesto;_ David MacKenzie, "Marx and the Machine." _Technology and Culture_
(July, 1984); David J. Jeremy, _The Transatlantic Industrial Revolution;_
Arnold Pacey, _The Culture of Technology.  
  
_**Week 7** (18 October). The  "Second Industrial Revolution".  
_Topics_ : "Second" or _first_?; infrastructure and the state; capital
restructures and reorganizes; the imperial alternative; scale economies and
social myths.  
_Readings_ : Fisher, 1st half; Nye, Intro & chs. 1-3.  
_Also recommended_ : David Landes, _The Unbound Prometheus_ , E. J. Hobsbawm,
_Industry and Empire;_ Daniel Headrick. _Tools of Empire_ ; David Montgomery,
_Workers' Control in America,_ James Laux, _et al, The Automobile Revolution,_
T. Hughes, _Networks of Power.  

_**\--*-- Note Well: Book critiques due on the 25 th! \--*--**

Week 8 (25 October). The New Masters of Production.  
_Topics_ : The emergence of managers and engineers, innovation and the fate of
skills, questions of control.  
_Readings_ : Hughes, Chs. 4-5; Wajcman, Ch. 1; Nye, to end (exc. Chapter on
domestic tech).  
_Also recommended_ : Eda Kranakis, "Social Determinants of Engineering
Practice..." _Social Studies of Science_ (1989); R. Frost,  "Labor and
Technological Innovation...," _Technology and Culture_ (1988), Philip
Scranton,  "The Workplace, Technology, and Theory..." _International Labor and
Working Class History_ (1989), Samuel Florman, _The Existential Pleasures of
Engineering_ , D. Noble, _America by Design.  
  
_**Week 9** (8 November). Imagining Progress: Technology as Liberator
(thematic).  
_Topics_ : Paths of progress, ideological hegemony.  
_Readings_ : Fischer, to end; Wajcman, Chs. 2-3.  
_Also recommended_ : J. Corn, ed., _Imagining Tomorrow_...; J. Weiss, _The
Making of Technological Man;_ T. Veblen, _Engineers and the Price System,_
Judith Walker-Leavitt paper on male obstetrics, John Staudenmaier,
_Technology's Storytellers_.  
  
**Week 10** (15 November). War and Interwar Technology: Production-Consumption
Symmetries Imagined.  
_Topics_ : Technocracy, consumerism and productivism, rationalization &
revolt.  
_Readings_ : Wajcman, Ch. 4; Hughes, 6-7; Frost, "Machine Liberation..."; Nye,
Ch. 6.  
_Also recommended_ : Richard F. Kuisel, _Capitalism and the State in Modern
France;_ Jeffrey Herf, _Reactionary Modernism,_ John Ellis, _A Social History
of the Machine Gun_.  

**\--*-- Note Well: Research papers due on the 15 th! \--*--**

Week 11 (15 November). The Language of Design.  
_Topics_ : When machines talk, what do they say, and who constructs the
meanings?; artifacts as political and cultural arguments; is design peripheral
to function?  
_Readings_ : Miekle, entire.  
_Also recommended_ : Anything by Donald A. Norman, Rosalind Williams, or
Michael L. Smith; recent work by Julie Wosk.  
  
**Week 12** (22 November). Technology and Political  "Progress": Einstein's
Dilemma.  
_Topics_ : High-tech barbarians, low-tech cognoscenti; fascism as the
synthesis of chromium and testosterone.  
_Readings_ : Herf, entire; complete Wacjman.  
_Also recommended_ : R. Frost, "Mechanical Dreams...;" By contrast, see the
work of Charles S. Maier or Richard F. Kuisel.  
  
**Week 13** (29 November). The Chrome-Plated Megaphone of Destiny: Postwar
Fantasies of Mass Technologies.  
_Topics_ : The European miracle, nukes and post-colonialism; spatial and
[later] info-mobility. [You'll notice we do little on info-tech; feel free to
suggest readings, as the literature is cast].  
_Readings_ : Ross, entire; Wajcman, Chs. 5 & 6.  
_Also recommended_ : Robert L. Frost, _Alternating Currents_ ; Works-in-
progress by Gabrielle Hecht, Stephen Hilgartner, _Nukespeak..._ ; Daniel Ford,
_The Cult of the Atom_ , Shoshana Zuboff, _In the Age of the Smart Machine_ ;
Sherry Turkel, _The Second Self;_ David F. Noble,  "Social Choice in Machine
Tool Design...," _Politics and Society_ (1978), Joan Scott,  "The
Mechanization of Women's Work;" _Scientific American_ (September 1982);  
  
**Week 14** (6 December). The Making of Contemporary Scholarship in SciTech.  
_Topics_ : The social construction of technology; what of the cultural, the
discursive construction of technology?  
_Readings_ : Latour, entire.  
_Also recommended_ : Michael L. Smith, "Selling the Moon," in RW Fox and TJJ
Lears, _The Culture of Consumption_..., Bryan Pfaffenberger,  "The Social
Construction of the Personal Computer," _Anthropological Quarterly_ (1988);
Frost,  "Flood of Progress...;". _French Historical Studies_ (Spring 1985);
Weibe Bijker, Thomas P. Hughes, and Trevor Pinch, eds. _The Social
Construction of Technological Systems._  
  
An additional short bibilography on conceptualizing technology (full citations
available on request):  
Madeleine Akrich,  "How Can Technical Objects be Described?", CSI discussion
paper.  
R. Heilbroner, "Do Machines Make History?," _Technology and Culture_ (1967)  
Thomas P. Hughes, "The Evolution of Large Technological Systems," in  
John Law, "On the Social Explanation of Technical Change: The Case of
Portugese Maritime Expansion," _Technology and Culture_ (1987).  
  
\--there are many others; just ask.  
  

