   [Homepage](GRR.htm) | [Syllabus](GRRsyl.htm) | [Schedule](GRRsch.htm) |
[Instructor](index.html) | [Resources](GRRres.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
####  Greek and Roman Religions, Fall 1999

|  |  
---|---|---  
|  | **Syllabus**  
**RELS 110-601**  
**CLST 110-601**  
**Carl Seaquist**  
|  |  
|  | **A.   About the Course**

This course surveys the history of religion in the Greek and Roman worlds from
the Bronze Age until  the advent of Christianity.  We will examine the range
of religious expression in the ancient world, including ritual, priestly
organization, the problem of belief, views of the divine, myth, iconography
and religious architecture.  We also will consider Greek and Roman religious
culture in the context of contemporary societies in  India, Iran, Mesopotamia,
Egypt, and China, and look at evolution over time.

In addition, the course is focused around a central theme:  the relationship
between religion and literature.  As we will begin discussing early in the
term, the primary form of religion in the ancient world was cultic,  the
religious rituals of individual city-states and regions in Greece and Italy.
But our evidence for cultic religion is limited and partial.  Our best
evidence is literary, because literary texts from antiquity were widely copied
during the Middle Ages and hence survived into the modern period in large
numbers.  Since clearly the religions of cult and of literature differ in
significant ways,  one of the main problems for any student of classical
religions is to decide how to reconcile these disparate types of evidence and
types of religion to form a unified picture.

For some further thoughts on how this course works, [click here](GRRnonl.htm).

The instructor for this course is [Carl
Seaquist](http://ccat.sas.upenn.edu/~carlas).  Contact information is as
follows:  
  | email | carlas@ccat.sas.upenn.edu  
---|---  
home phone | (215) 474-2977  
office |  
office phone |  
office hours | not yet set  
  
|  |  
|  | **B.   Textbooks**

 The following required books can be found at the Penn Bookstore (36th and
Walnut Streets):

  * Walter Burkert, _Greek Religion_ , Harvard UP 1985.
  * Paul Veyne, _Did the Greek Believe in Their Myths?_ , U of Chicago Press 1988.
  * Denis Feeney, _Literature and Religion at Rome:   Cultures, Contexts, and Beliefs_, Cambridge UP 1998.
  * Miller, Andrew, ed., _Greek Lyric_ , Hackett 1996.
  * Ovid, _Fasti:   Roman Holidays_, Betty Nagle, trans. and ed., Indiana UP 1995.

The Burkert is the  textbook for the Greek half of the course.  Book reviews
will be written on the Veyne and Feeney books; all three of these books are
recent, secondary sources.  The Miller edition and the Ovid provide you with
some primary sources.  Other primary sources will be available online.

The following was going to serve as our textbook for Roman religion, until I
was informed that it was out of print.  It seems the bookstore did manage to
locate about 10 copies, so this will be a required book if you can easily get
a copy, and an optional one if you can't.  People who can't get a copy will
have alternative assignments for a couple of weeks.  This system actually
works out rather well, since it will let us cover more material without doing
more homework. Officially, this book is _optional_ for everyone.

  * Beard, Mary, John North, and Simon Price, _Religions of Rome_ , vol. 1 only (History), Cambridge UP 1998

In addition, the following book is _purely_ _optional_.    It is a collection
of primary sources; you might find it useful in writing your Final Paper,
especially if you also have the first volume, since the two volumes are cross-
referenced to each other.  You can also find sources for your Final Paper in
the library, if you would prefer:

  * Beard, Mary, John North, and Simon Price, _Religions of Rome_ , vol. 2 (Sourcebook), Cambridge UP 1998 

  
|  |  
|  | **C.   Course Schedule**

This is available on a separate web page, which can be accessed at
[GRRsch.htm](GRRsch.htm).  
  
|  |  
|  | **D.   Grading**

Grades for this course will be based on two book reviews and a final paper.
Details about these follow.  Briefly, the book reviews will be written on the
Veyne and Feeney volumes, and are intended as critical reviews.  The final
paper will address the relationship between religion and literature in Greece
and Rome, referring to assigned secondary source readings, other secondary
source readings if you like, and a selction of primary sources of your
choosing.  The final paper will account for roughly half the course grade,
with the other half coming equally from the two book reviews.

Class attendance is not a formal part of the course grade, but all students
are advised that regular class attendance is, as a practical matter, necessary
in order to do well on the written assignments that are graded.  Not only will
you learn things in lecture that are necessary background, but you will learn
what I think about the subject matter and what I expect on the reviews and
paper.  My attitude is that I should earn your attendance by making classes
interesting and useful.

I am also open to allowing students to pursue research projects on subjects
covered at some point in this course, even if they do not relate to the
religion-and-literature theme that structures the course.  In all likelihood,
only majors in Classics or, perhaps, Religious Studies will have the
background and skills in an introductory class to pursue serious independent
research, so I will not advise anyone to write a research paper.  However, it
is useful, for example in applying to graduate schools, to have a file of
research papers ready at hand, and I will certainly help any students who
feels the desire to take this harder means of satisfying the course
requirements.  If you want to write a research paper, please speak to me early
in the term.  Grades for such students will be based entirely on the one term
paper, though I will also expect you to give an oral presentation of your
research to the class in one of the weeks after Thanksgiving.  
  
|  |  
|  | **E.   Class Organization**

This class will be run in a seminar format.  I will prepare some formal
lectures for every class, because my experience teaching this course shows me
that most students appreciate some lecturing.  But I would rather have active
class discussion than formal lecture, and I will run the class in ways that
encourage discussion.  Thus, I will designate one or two students for every
class session (what I call "session leaders"), who will plan to be especially
well prepared for class that day.  This means you will be asked to make a
short (5 minutes, perhaps) presentation (maybe an answer to a pre-determined
question) early in the class, and you will be prepared to help keep discussion
going.  Since leading sessions is not a formal part of the grade in class,
this is not strictly required.  And students who are highly uncomfortable with
public speaking can opt out of leading sessions entirely.  But I expect
everyone to volunteer since this will help the course  maintain a seminar
flavor and should make it a better academic experience for everyone.  The more
you participate, the less I will have to lecture at you.  
  
|  |  
|  | **F.   Book Reviews**

These are critical reviews, not just plot summaries.  They should have two
major components:  a summary of the book's main thesis, including a discussion
of the author's use of sources and his argument; and your educated reaction to
this thesis.  These do not need to be formally separated into distinct
sections of the paper, though this might be the easiest format to follow.  In
fact,  how you structure the paper is up to you, as long as you follow a style
appropriate to scholarship in the humanities.  If you have any questions about
format or style, feel free to ask me.

Your summary of the book is not a trivial part of this review:  it forces you
to select some topics and omit others, and to create the object that you will
react to in the rest of the paper.   There are a number of possible, good
readings of each book, but there are more bad readings than good ones.  So you
have a lot of freedom in this assignment, but the book you review will be a
objective check to your summary.  Your reaction to the book's thesis may make
arguments not found in the book and may refer to evidence that the book does
not mention, but it should be a reaction to the thesis of the book, as you
understand it.  If you assume a five page review, perhaps two pages should be
devoted to your summary, and three to your reaction.  But these are only very
approximate guidelines.

Think of the audience for these reviews as the average Penn student, or your
parents, or the average intelligent, college-educated person in the business
world.  In other words, you can't assume knowledge of what has happened in our
class, and you can't expect much knowledge of the ancient world beyond what is
found in standard European history courses.

We will discuss these books in class to some extent, but one reason I am
asking you to write reviews of these books is because there is not much time
in the schedule to talk about them in class.  Probably we will discuss
Feeney's book in more detail than Veyne's, since it is more central to the
main theme of the course.  
  
|  |  
|  | **F.   Final Paper**

This is in many ways the culmination of the course.  It will seek to address
the following question:  
  |  | Did Greek and Roman religions become transmuted by their incorporation
into literature, or should we think of religion and literature as two distinct
cultural practices that helped define each other over the course of the
centuries?  
---|---  
You probably don't want to put your paper in the form of an answer, of course.
You should state a thesis somewhere early in the paper, and the form your
thesis takes will dictate the structure of your paper (so you probably want to
write your thesis after you know how your paper will go).   But this question
should serve to guide you.

Notice that this question is formulated in the language that Feeney uses in
his book:  this paper is the natural extenstion of the work you did in your
two book reviews.  (In fact, Feeney relies heavily on Veyne's book, so the
second book review is in the same way an extension of the first review.)

The week before Thanksgiving, I am asking you to give me a summary, or
outline, and/or working bibliography of your final paper.  This gives me an
idea where you are in working on your paper, and will allow me to plan our
last two classes to maximize the benefit to you.  You won't be graded on this
summary per se, but the more effort you put into it, the better off you will
be when the time comes to write your final paper.

For a fuller explanation of what is expected for the final paper, click
[here](GRRfinpap.htm).  
  
  
 last updated:  August 24, 1999

