

**_Mar¨ªa_** ** _Elena Bucelli _**  
([mbucelli@gmu.edu](mailto:mbucelli@gmu.edu))  
_George Mason University  
__Department of Modern and Classical Languages  
__703.993.1240_  
  
---  
  
* * *

**In Spring 2002 I am teaching Spanish 201, 209, and 352.**

**I will be leading the GMU Summer program to**[
**Florence**](http://mason.gmu.edu/~mbucelli/Florence2002.htm) **in June 2002.
This trip includes visits to** **Venice** **and** **Rome** **during the months
of June and July. Take a look at last year 's visit to
****[**Sevilla**](http://mason.gmu.edu/~mbucelli/Sevilla2001.htm) to get an
idea on the wonderful learning experience of a semester abroad. Ana Alonso is
the Faculty Director for this year 's Sevilla program, so feel free to contact
her for information on that trip**
[**(aalonso@gmu.edu)**](mailto:aalonso@gmu.edu) **.**

**Students will spend four or eight weeks at the Scuola Leonardo da Vinci
language school, and will be earning six to twelve credits in Italian. ** ****

**Class schedule and itinerary will be published as soon as they become
available.**

**Italy....beautiful Florence and Venice....**

**![](florence_veduta1b.jpg)![](venice_sp_3-20.jpg)**

![](sevilla_plaza.jpg) Spain....wonderful Sevilla....

  
  
  
**SYLLABUS: SPANISH LANGUAGE, CULTURE AND LITERATURE IN SEVILLA**

**  
OBJECTIVES**

**To provide students with practical knowledge of the Spanish language, and
offer them insights into the complex  contemporary and historical aspects of
Spanish culture, especially in Andaluc¨ªa. This program carries a six-credit
undergraduate academic load. **

**DESCRIPTION**

**PART I:  
The course consists of two class periods (75 minutes each) in the Spanish
language (8:30-11:15 Monday-Friday) and one class period (120 minutes) on the
culture of Spain and  Andaluc¨ªa (11:30-13:30 Monday-Friday). **

**LANGUAGE: 80 hours of instruction devoted to conversational practice with
emphasis on the vocabulary needed for survival or advanced functioning
(depending on the student level) in specific social situations: the post
office, the telephone, around the house, stores and markets, seeking medical
help, traveling, among others. This component, along with the students stay
with host families, should increase the students' ability to function well in
a variety of social situations. Instruction in practical Spanish will be
complemented by considering three important elements of Spanish and Andalucian
cultural life: Spanish and American stereotypes, the history and art of
flamenco, and the cultural components of bullfighting. **

**CULTURE: 40 hours will be devoted to class lectures on different topics: The
history of Spain, the educational system of Spain, the political and economic
structure of modern Spain, and the Spanish mass media as well as the
historical monuments of Andaluc¨ªa, especially
**[**Sevilla**](http://www.ayunt-sevilla.es/hitos_y_mitos_de_sevilla.htm) **,
C¨®rdoba and Granada. The diverse cultural heritage of modern Spain will be
presented to students through guided visits to the **[**Cathedral, the Royal
Palace, the Museo de Bellas
Artes**](http://www.spaintour.com/heritage.htm#seville) **, as well as the
ruins of It¨¢lica, **[**La Mezquita in
C¨®rdoba**](http://www.spaintour.com/heritage.htm#mosque) **and**[ **La
Alhambra**](http://www.granada.org/turismo/ingles/fset20.html) **in Granada.  
  **

**PART II**

**In addition to Part I, several activities, tours and excursions are offered
to enhance your knowledge and understanding of the Spanish culture. Your
attendance to these activities is of utmost importance for it constitutes 25%
of your final grade. Upon arrival you will receive further details regarding
the exact dates and times of such events: visit to the ruins of It¨¢lica,  an
afternoon in C¨®rdoba, a weekend in ****Granada** **.**

**REQUIREMENTS**

**Depending on the number of participants, there could possibly be three
levels for all students in the program. Upon entering your corresponding
course, you will receive further instruction from each professor regarding
homework, assignments, quizzes, papers and exams. You are required to
successfully pass each class and participate in the cultural events in order
to receive GMU credit.**

**FINAL GRADE**

**Pending on successful completion of the above mentioned requirements, your
final grade will be the average of all grades given by your instructors in
Madrid. This will constitute 75% of your GMU grade. The remaining 25% will
reflect your attendance to and active participation in the previously
mentioned activities (Part II). I must emphasize that your final grade is a
resident credit grade, thus, it will be entered in your grade report with a
letter value [A, A-, B+,   B, B-, C+, C, D, F].  Typically, and depending on
the level they are in their school before going to Sevilla, students
participating in these programs get credit either to complete their
requirement (Intermediate Spanish 201 /202) or to enhance their knowledge of
the language and the culture of Spain (Span  301, 323, 324, 351, 352, 451,
452, 461, 480).  Be advised though that for you to get credit in these upper
level courses, GMU requires evidence of a sufficient amount of writing for all
of them (even the conversation courses 351, 451).  All assignments must be
completed within the four-week time frame. Under NO circumstances will GMU
accept an INCOMPLETE grade. Graduate students should consult with their
advisor and the Faculty Director of the program. **

**  
  **

**  
    
  **

