29 January 2002\---------------------------------Return to [Italy Tour Welcome
Page](Italytourwelcome.html)\--------------------- Design by:
[joseph.kunkel@mnsu.edu](mailto: joseph.kunkel@mankato.msus.edu) -  

City Republics of Italy



POL 201-60 Issues in Politics

|

#### POL 410-60 Topics in Pol Philosophy  
  
---|---  
  


Spring 2002  

Tuesdays 3:00 - 5:45 p.m.    Armstrong Hall 231



Dr. Joe Kunkel
Phone: 389-6930  

109C Morris Hall
FAX: 389-6377

EMAIL: joseph.kunkel@mnsu.edu                              WEB:
http:krypton.mnsu.edu/~jak3

     

**OFFICE HOURS**

Mon

10:00-12:00

|

Tue



|

Wed

10:00-12:00

3:30-4:30

|

Thurs

 9:00-10:00

|

Fri

10:00-12:00

2:00-4:00  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
** **

## OBJECTIVES



  * We want to learn about the political history of the city-republics of northern Italy in the late middle ages and Renaissance. We will focus especially on Venice and Florence and their impact on political philosophy and thought about self-government. **  ** Studying this political history will give us a useful perspective for our travels in Italy. 
  * We will also prepare for our trip to Italy. We want to learn about modern Italy. We want to adjust our expectations for international travel and the experience of a different culture. We want to be prepared for the practical challenges and opportunities of travel. We want to get acquainted with each other and become a learning community. 

** **

## REQUIRED READING



Purchase from Bookstore

  * Flower, Raymond and Alessandro Falassi. 2000. Culture Shock Italy: A Guide to Customs and Etiquette. Graphic Arts Center Publishing. Portland OR

¡ì       Viroli, Maurizio. 2000. Niccolo's Smile: A Biography of Machiavelli.
Farrar, Straus and  Giroux. New York.

¡ì  

Purchase from Morris Hall Copy Shop

¡ì       Ruggiers, Paul G. 1964. Florence in the Age of Dante. Univ. of
Oklahoma Press. Norman.  

¡ì  

Other reading will be on reserve in Memorial Library, or from internet sites.  

##  

## GRADING

The requirements for grades are shown on the grid on page 3. The professor
will decide whether you have met the requirements in each box. You must
complete the requirements of all eight boxes in the stack to get an A. If you
complete requirements or boxes higher in the stack but miss some lower your
stack drops and grade drops.



#### REQUIREMENTS EXPLAINED



##### Citizenship

Participate in decisions the group needs to make. Be cooperative and have a
positive attitude. Obey all laws, any rules adopted by the group, or stated by
the lead professors, Seminars International, transportation providers, guides,
hotels, museums, churches etc. Be where and when you are expected. Be helpful
to others in the group.



##### Attend Tours

Attend all required tours and tour events unless excused.



##### Journal  (Checked periodically before March 5, due completed by April 8)



  _Weekly Entries_ : Write a 2 page journal entry for each week of class. Each
week's journal should include

  * (Before class) 500 words (3/4 page if typed  single spaced) on something you learned from the required readings, 
  * (Before class) 250 word (half-page) report of what you learned from at least one website. Include the URL so you can share in class. 
  * (After Class) 500 words on what you learned from class. 



_Daily Tour Entries_ :

¡ì       250 words (1/2 page if single spaced) on what you did and what you
learned each day of the tour. This is not a personal diary.



#### Discussion

Show learning from each week's reading by joining discussion. Students in POLS
410 will have somewhat more reading and will be expected to be more active in
contributing to and leading discussion.



### Report in Class

### POLS 201

Give a 5 min. class presentation on some particular topic approved by the
professor.

### POLS 410

### Give a 10 min. class presentation on some particular topic approved by the
professor.



##### Expertise on Tour (due by April 8)

#### Before the end of the tour become an authority or expert on something
relevant to our study tour. In other words learn enough about something to
teach another person or group. Before the end of the tour share what you
learned with the group, some group members or an individual. Have the person
or persons complete a form to verify to the professor what they learned from
you.



#### Book Review (due by May 1)

Write a review of one relevant book not included in your required reading for
the course. A list of recommended books is below. You may choose another books
from a library or bookstore if approved by the professor. The book may be
either fiction or non-fiction, historical or contemporary. The review should
be three pages (about 800 words) typed double-spaced. The review is due by May
1.



**_GENERAL POLICIES_**

**_ _**

#### Assistance to Students

All students are encouraged to visit with the professor if you need help. If
you are a student with a disability, please see me as early in the semester as
possible to discuss accommodations, and/or contact the Disability Services
Office at (507) 389-2825 (v) or 1-800-627-3529 (MRS/TTY)0.



###### **Late Work**

     Those needing extension of the due date for some work must submit an Assignment Delay Form to the professor. This form will state the reason and set the new time for completing the assignment. Work not completed at that time will incur the penalty, unless another form is approved. Assignment Delays will be most likely to be permitted before the original due date. Failure to make a good faith effort to comply with these policies will result in a 5% penalty for each school day (MTWRF).   

**_ _**

#### Syllabus

     Changes in the syllabus may be made from time to time in order to correct errors, adjust the schedule, or fine tune course details. Such changes will not affect the structure or requirements of the course in a major way. We may well change some of the required readings. Changes will be announced in class a reasonable time in advance, and the professor will consider student advice on such changes. The professor assumes that you are aware of any syllabus changes announced in class. 



  

**GRADING   & ASSIGNMENTS**

##### _A_

|

**_B_**

|

**_C or P_**

|

**_D_**  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
#### Book Review

Write review of one book



|



|



|

  
  
### Report

In class give a report on a special topic.

201 5 minutes

410 10 minutes



|



|



|

  
  
##### Expertise

On Tour be an authority or expert on something and teach another.



|

##### Expertise

On Tour be an authority or expert on something and teach another.

|



|

  
  
#### Discussion

Show learning from each week's reading by joining discussion.



|

**Discussion** Show learning from most week 's reading by joining discussion.

|

**Discussion** Show learning from some week 's reading by joining discussion.

|

  
  
##### Journal

Complete weekly journal on class, reading and web browsing and tour.



|

##### Journal

Complete weekly journal on at least 6 classes, all reading and web browsing
and every day on tour.

|

##### Journal

Complete weekly journal on most classes, most reading and some web browsing
and every day on tour.

|

  
  
##### Attend Class

Attend all class sessions unless excused.



|

**Attend Class** Attend at least 6 class sessions unless excused.

|

**Attend Class** Attend at least 5 class sessions unless excused.

|

**Attend Class** Attend at least 5 class sessions unless excused.  
  
##### Attend Tours

#####  Attend all required tour events on tour unless excused.



|

**Attend Tours** Attend all required tour events on tour unless excused. ****

|

**Attend Tours** Attend all required tour events on tour unless excused. ****

|

**Attend Tours** Attend almost all required tour events on tour unless
excused. ****  
  
##### Citizenship

Participate cooperate, obey, Be helpful and reliable

|

##### Citizenship

Participate cooperate, obey, Be helpful and reliable

|

##### Citizenship

Participate cooperate, obey, Be helpful and reliable

|

##### Citizenship

Participate cooperate, obey, Be helpful and reliable  
  
__

**CALENDAR & REQUIRED READINGS  **

**
**

#### [1\. January 15
Overview & Introductions](Courseunits.html#Anchor-49575)

201

Italy (The Italian Republic), Global Studies 1997. Dushkin. (Handout)

|

410

Italy (The Italian Republic), Global Studies 1997. Dushkin. (Handout)

  
  
---|---  
  
####  

#### 2\. January 22
The City Republics

201









William Gilbert, History of the Renaissance

ch. 3 The Italian City States of the Renaissance

<http://www.ukans.edu/~hisite/gilbert/03>













Flower, Raymond and Alessandro Falassi. 2000. Culture Shock Italy: A Guide to
Customs and Etiquette. chs. 1-4 and 12 (68pgs)



|

410

William Gilbert, History of the Renaissance

ch. 2 The Breakdown of Medieval Civilization

<http://www.ukans.edu/~hisite/gilbert/02>



William Gilbert, History of the Renaissance

ch. 3 The Italian City States of the Renaissance

<http://www.ukans.edu/~hisite/gilbert/03>



Whelpton, Eric. 1964. A Concise History of Italy. (ON RESERVE)

<p class=MsoNormal st

