####

# J. B. "Jack" Owens

### This page an index of the materials available on this web site. It is
maintained by [J. B. Owens](mailto:owenjack@isu.edu), Professor of History,
Idaho State University, Pocatello, Idaho 83209, USA.

* * *

"I believe in the future because I myself participate in its construction." --
Jules Michelet

* * *

##### For all relevant materials: Copyright (C) 1994-2002 by J. B. Owens. In
keeping with the spirit of the Internet and WWW, these pages are provided as
an educational resource for personal non-commercial use. All other uses are
permitted only with permission from [J. B. Owens,](mailto:owenjack@isu.edu) to
whom you may send an e-mail message by clicking on his name. Please include
your name and e-mail address in the body of any message.

* * *

###

Check here to see [What's New](whatsnew.html) since your last visit.

# RESOURCE LIST

### By selecting the highlighted titles below, you can examine the materials
for J. B. Owens's courses, information about him, and other resources.

## [Topics in World History,
1350-1800](http://www.isu.edu/~owenjack/cmdl/topics.html)

    

### Here are the instructional materials for the May-July 1998 graduate-level
professional development course for secondary school teachers.

## [Renaissance Creativity

](http://www.isu.edu/~owenjack/rencr/rencr.html)  

### Here are the instructional materials for the fall 1998 upper-division and
graduate level course on Renaissance Creativity, part of the core curriculum
in comparative and world history.

## [Religious Reformation and Conflict

](http://www.isu.edu/~owenjack/rrc/rrc.html)  

### Although I was originally scheduled to teach this course during the spring
semester of 2001, I will not do so.

## [The Spanish Empire

](spemp/spemp.html)  

### I am currently revising this course for the fall semester 2002. For those
interested in the course, I have left online the materials for the fall 1999
upper-division and graduate level course on the Spanish Empire, part of the
core curriculum in comparative and world history. Because a revision is in
progress, some of the links may not function properly.

## [Constituting Modern Spain](conmodsp/conmodsp.html)

    

### Here you will find the materials for the spring 1998 version of the upper-
division and graduate level course Constituting Modern Spain, 1808-1982, part
of the core curriculum in comparative and world history. The course is a
comparative study of attempts to create countries on the basis of written
constitutions. Although I planned to offer this course during the fall 2001
semester, I was not able to do so.

## [Foundation of Western Civilization

](westciv/westciv.html)  

### Here will be found the course syllabus and other information about J. B.
Owens's fall 2002 section of the lower-division undergraduate course
Foundation of Western Civilization, which can be taken to satisfy Goal 10A of
the General Education Requirements of Idaho State University and is required
of all History majors and minors.

## [Latin American History

](latam/latam.html)  

### Here, from time to time, will be placed information useful for students of
J. B. Owens's lower-division undergraduate course Latin American History,
which can be taken to satisfy Goal 10A of the General Education Requirements
of Idaho State University and the World Regions requirement of all History
majors and minors. The syllabus for the fall 2001 version of the course is
here.

## [Personal Information

](personal.html)

## [Publications

](publications/publications.html)

## [Scholarly Links of Interest

](bookmarks/bookmarks.html)  

### Here you will find a list of useful Internet resources for historians
accompanied by explanations of these sites and connections to them.

## [Scholarly Journals of Interest

](journals.html)  

### A selected list of scholarly journals of interest to historians in the
collection of the [Eli M. Oboler Library](http://www.isu.edu/isutour/build-
descrip/library.html) on the [campus of Idaho State
University.](http://www.isu.edu/isutour/isumap.htm) The list is not complete
and is directed towards the needs of my students.

## [Spanish Political Iconography Project

](poster.html)  

### Here will be placed information about the Spanish Political Iconography
Project of J. B. Owens, a short-title catalogue of the graphic art works in
the Project Archive, and photographs of the individual works and related
subjects.

## [Glenn E. Tyler Collection

](tyler.html)  

### Here, from time to time, will be placed information about the Glenn E.
Tyler Collection (History and Philosophy of Medicine and Science) of the [Eli
M. Oboler Library,](http://www.isu.edu/isutour/build-descrip/library.html)
which J. B. Owens directs.

Other useful information:

  * The [Manifesto](manifesto.html) of the Department of History, Idaho State University 
  * [My collaborators](collaborate.html)
  * The [undergraduate curriculum in comparative and world history](undergrad.html) of the Department of History, Idaho State University 
  * A proposed [M.A. program in comparative and world history](grad.html) developed by the Department of History, Idaho State University. Due to lack of adequate administrative support, the proposal has been withdrawn. 

* * *

Please send questions, comments, requests, and recommendations to [J. B.
Owens](mailto:owenjack@isu.edu) (owenjack@isu.edu). Please be sure to include
your name and e-mail address in the body of your message. Thank you for any
assistance you are able to offer.

* * *
    
    
    All contents copyright (C) 1995-2002.
    J. B. Owens
    All rights reserved.
    
    
    
    Revised:  17 August 2002
    
    
    
    URL:  http://www.isu.edu/~owenjack/index.html
    

