 [![FSU Seal](BLUSEAL2.GIF)](http://www.uncfsu.edu/) **FAYETTEVILLE STATE
UNIVERSITY**  
**[College of Arts and Sciences](http://spacer.uncfsu.edu/cas/)**  
**[Department of Government and
History](http://spacer.uncfsu.edu/d_ghp/index.HTM)**

|

[![Govt and Hist
Logo](file:///A|/Images/Ghlgb.gif)](http://spacer.uncfsu.edu/d_ghp/index.HTM)**DIANNE
W. OYLER, Ph.D.** **[TEACHING](file:///A|/Teaching.htm)| [Advising and
Service](file:///A|/Advising.htm) | [Research](file:///A|/Rsrch.htm) |
[Background](file:///A|/Bkgd.htm) | [Links](file:///A|/Links.htm) |
[Home](file:///A|/Index.htm)**  
  
---|---  
  


  
Fall 2001  


 COURSE SYLLABUS: HISTORY 370, AFRICA SOUTH OF THE SAHARA  
    3 SEMESTER HOURS CREDIT   

Locator | Description | Texts | Objectives | Evaluation | Requirements |
Strategies | Outline | References

    I.  LOCATOR INFORMATION 

        Instructor's Name:     Dr. Dianne W. Oyler   
        Office Location: JKSA 115    Office Phone: 672-1946   
        Office Hours: M&W 2-4 p.m.  T & TH 2- 4 p.m. OR BY APPOINTMENT   
        Alternate phone:      Ms. Lashly, 672-1573        
        E-Mail: doyler@uncfsu.edu   


II. COURSE DESCRIPTION:

 In the catalogue this course is described as a study of ancient, medieval,
colonial, and modern civilizations and nations in sub-Saharan Africa, with
attention to issues relating to African heritage and to the rise of
contemporary African nations and cultures.

 This course is, however,  a general survey of African history.  It will focus
on issues such as Ancient Egypt; the spread of Islam; the Atlantic slave
trade; slavery within Africa; the role of women; European conquest; and
African resistance.  The course assumes no prior background in African
studies, however it requires the students to master the general history of
Africa, and then analyze the broad historical debates in formal essays and
exams.

III.  TEXTBOOKS

      Kevin Shillington, History of Africa.  New York: St. Martin's Press, 1995.   
      Chinua Achebe, Things Fall Apart. London: Heinemann, 1986.   
      D.T. Niane, Sundiata.  Translated by G.D. Pickett.  New York: Longman, 1994.   


IV. COURSE GOALS, BEHAVIORAL OBJECTIVES (and DPI HISTORY COMPETENCIES:  
 Upon completion of this course, a student will be able to analyze change and
continuity overtime, organize historical evidence, and ask and answer critical
questions about the past.  The student will also be able to demonstrate
knowledge of people and events across time, to be used as building blocks for
critical interpretation and understanding of the past.  In addition, a student
will be able to identify the enduring themes of the historical experience and
discuss history as a discipline.  Moreover, the student will be able to
demonstrate an understanding of the historical role of both common and diverse
cultural traditions that constitute Western Civilization.  Finally, the
student will be able to illustrate the cultural products that past societies
have regarded as aesthetically pleasing and the ways in which they were
produced.

    In accordance with the University's Teacher Education Conceptual Framework which is aligned with NCATE Standards, upon completion of this course, the prospective facilitator of learning will:

**Knowledge:**

     \--Demonstrate understanding of the subject matter, how it relates to other disciplines, and to their individual lives.

     \--Demonstrate in-depth knowledge of African history and culture, and how it relates to the social studies in general and history specifically.

**Technology:**

**      \--**Apply new technologies to teaching, learning, and research

**Reflection:**

     \---Reflect upon his/her knowledge of the history of the African continent and demonstrate a commitment to ongoing professional development by keeping abreast of current affairs in the region.

      **SPECIFIC STUDENT OUTCOMES** :  Students who complete this course with a C grade will   
 Apply critical and analytical skills through the study of African history
(DPI 1.1, 1.2,1.3, 1.4, 1.5),  (NCSS 2.1);

 Apply historical methodology by utilizing both primary and secondary sources
including journals, monographs, and revisionist history (DPI 1.5), (NCSS 2.1);

 Write critically and analytically (DPI 1.5), (NCSS 2.1);

 Discuss issues concerning multiculturalism (DPI 1.3); (NCSS 1.1, 1.4, 1.5,
1.6, 1.8, 1.9)

  Identify African cultures, environments, and political states on appropriate
maps (DPI 1.2, 1.3, 1.4); (NCSS 1.3, 1.4, 1.5, 1.6, 1.8, 1.9);

  Describe the scope and sequence of African history through sequenced course
work (DPI 1.1, 1.4), (NCSS 1.2, 1.3, 1.6, 1.8, 1.9);

  Analyze Africa's global connection during periods of world history. (DPI
1.1, 1.4), (NCSS 1.6, 1.9);

  Evaluate the economy of Africans at the local, regional, state, and
international levels.(DPI 1.2, 1.3, 1.4), (NCSS 1.7, 1.9)

 Apply reflective decision-making skills to the medium of history (DPI 1.2,
1.5); (NCSS 1.2).  


**V. EVALUATION CRITERIA/GRADING SCALE:**  
    
 Grades will be based on three examinations, writing assignments, and class
participation.  Each exam will be based on the units of study immediately
preceding it.

Exams will each count  3 x 20%  
Writing Assignments   20

Paper                       10  
Class Participation   10  


Grades and their numerical equivalents are as follows:  
  Numerical Limits    Letter Grades  
  92 and above          A  
  83 - 91                    B  
  73 - 82                    C  
  64 - 72                    D  
  63 and below           F  
    


  **SPECIAL NOTE ON ACADEMIC HONESTY:**

 Students should be aware that a university is a community of scholars
committed to the discovery and dissemination of knowledge and truth.  Without
the freedom to investigate all materials, scrupulous honesty in reporting
findings, and proper acknowledgment of credit, such a community can not
survive.  Students are expected to adhere to the highest traditions of
scholarship.  Any infractions of these traditions, such as plagiarism, are not
tolerated.  Though we do not anticipate any such occurrence, for the record,
misrepresenting someone else's words or ideas as one's own, constitutes
plagiarism.  In cases where plagiarism occurs, the instructor has the right to
penalize the student(s) as he or she thinks appropriate.  One guide line holds
that the first offence = failure of the assignment; the second offence =
failure of the course.

**VI. COURSE REQUIREMENTS:**

  **Assignments:**

 Assignments for this class will include reading, writing, and special
projects.  Readings may be assigned not only from the texts, but also from
photocopied materials and library books.  Attendance at certain cultural
functions may also be required.  Students are responsible for all work
assigned in this class, whether or not they are present.  Assignments are
expected to be completed on time, and written assignments such as papers must
be typed.  Short quizzes may be given on assigned materials at any time.
Directions for specific assignments will be made separately.

  **EXAMS** will be based on material presented both in class and in the
required reading.  The format of the exams will be short answer/identification
and essay questions.  Written portions of the exams will be done in **blue
books** purchased in the book store.

  **WRITING ASSIGNMENTS:** Two assignments will be based upon short outside
readings--one on the oral tradition surrounding Sundiata the first emperor
(Mansa) of Mali and the other on a novel showing the impact of European
Imperialism on the indigenous world of the Ibo. The third assignment will be a
Current Events Notebook.   The final assignment is a popular film review, an
analysis of a film's potential to accurately portray the historical setting
for an event. [(GUIDE)](H370swri.htm)



  **Attendance and Punctuality:**

    Students are responsible for material covered and assignments regardless of whether or not the student has an excuse.   
    


  **Class Participation** :

 All students are expected to come to class prepared to discuss the assigned
material, so it is important to complete all the assigned readings before
coming to class.  Any student may, at any time, be called upon to recite or to
write a short essay on the assigned material. Short quizzes may be given on
assigned materials at any time. Students are expected to understand the
material, or at least have identified those items that they do not yet
understand in order to ask question in class.  The instructor will assume that
students know the material and are prepared to discuss it.  Students are
responsible for all work assigned in this class, whether or not they are
present.  Assignments must be completed on time.

 Students are expected to observe normal courtesy in class.  They are expected
to pay attention to the instructor, to take detailed notes, to refrain from
personal conversations, and to avoid any other behavior which is disruptive
and disturbing to others.  A student who does not observe these courtesies may
be asked to leave the room.  


**VII.   TEACHING STRATEGIES**

 The mode of presentation for the course will be lecture/student discussion.
There will be opportunities for cooperative learning. I encourage peer
teaching and recommend students to work together through study groups.  I want
to  emphasize the critical analysis of data-- information you read and see on
film/video and the communication of your ideas supported by facts.  While
these skills are important to the course work at hand, they are most important
in your life's work where you read, listen, evaluate, articulate, communicate
your understanding, ideas, and opinions on a daily basis.  These activities
will give you practice in these areas.

**VIII. BIBLIOGRAPHY**

Ajayi, J.F. Ade and Michael Crowder. _History of West Africa_ , Volume I & II.
Third Edition,   London, Longman, 1985. CLASSIC TEXT

Binns, Tony.  _Tropical Africa_.   London: Routledge, 1994\.

Boahen, A. Adu. _African Perspectives on Colonialism_ ,   Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University   Press, 1989

 Boahen A. Adu, J.F.A Ajayi, and Michael Tidy. _Topics in West African
History._   Second   Edition, London: Longman Group, 1986.

Brenner, Louis. _Muslim Identity and Social Change in Sub-Saharan Africa_.
Bloomington:   Indiana University Press, 1993.

Brooks, George.  _Landlords and Strangers, Ecology, Society, and Trade in
Western Africa 1000-   1630. _  Boulder: Westview Press, 1993.

Cohen, William. B.  _The French Encounter with Africans: White Response to
Blacks, 1530-1880._    Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1980.  CLASSIC
TEXT

Collins, Robert O. _Central and Southern African History_.   New York: Markus
Wiener, 1990.  DOCUMENT READER

__________. _East African History_.    New York: Markus Wiener, 1990.
DOCUMENT READER

__________. _West African History._    New York: Markus Wiener, 1990.
DOCUMENT   READER

Collins, Robert O., James McDonald Burns, and Erik Kristofer Ching.  _Problems
in African    History: The Precolonial Centuries_.  New York: Markus Wiener,
1994.

Connah, Graham.  _African Civilizations--Precolonial cities and states in
tropical Africa: an    Archaeological Perspective._  Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1989.  CLASSIC

Comaroff, John and Jean Comaroff.  _Of Revelation and Revolution:
Christianity, Colonialism,    and Consciousness in South Africa. _ Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1991.

Conrad, David and Barbara Frank.  _Status and Identity in West Africa._
Bloomington: Indiana   University Press, 1995.

Crowder, Michael.  _West Africa under Colonial Rule_.   Fifth Edition.
London: Hutchinson   University Library for Africa, 1981. CLASSIC

 Crowder, Michael.. _West African Resistance: The Military Response to
Colonial Occupation._     New York: Africana Publishing Corp., 1971.

Curtin, Philip, Steven Feierman, Leonard Thompson, and Jan Vansina.  _African
History: From    Earliest Times to Independence_.  2nd Edition.  London:
Longman Group.  1995\.

Davidson, Basil.  _The Search for Africa: History, Culture, Politics._   New
York: Random House,   1994\.

Davis, R. Hunt.  _Apartheid Unravels_.   Gainesville: University of Florida
Press, 1991.

Feierman, Steven.  _Peasant Intellectuals._   Madison:  University of
Wisconsin Press, 1990.    CLASSIC

Feierman, Steven and John M. Janzen.  _The Social Basis of Health and Healing
in Africa._  
 Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992.

Grinker, Roy Richard and Christopher B. Steiner.  _Perspectives on Africa: A
Reader in Culture,    History, and Representation_.  Cambridge, MA: Blackwell
Publishers, 1997.

Gordon, April and Donald L. Gordon.  _Understanding Contemporary Africa_.
Boulder: Lynne   Rienner Publishers, 1992.

Hilliard, Constance B.  _Intellectual Traditions of Pre-Colonial Africa_.
Boston: McGraw-Hill,    1998\.

Hiskett, Mervyn. _The Development of Islam in West Africa._   London: Longman
Group, 1984.

Hopkins, A.G. _An Economic History of West Africa._   New York: Columbia
University Press,   1973.  CLASSIC

Iliffe, John.  Africans: _The History of the Continent._   Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press,   1995\.

 Iyob, Ruth.  _The Eritrean Struggle for Independence: Domination, Resistance,
Nationalism    1941-1993_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995.

Johns, Sheridan and R. Hunt Davis. _Mandela, Tambo, and the African National
Congress: The    Struggle against Apartheid, 1948-1990._  Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1991.

July, Robert.  _A History of the African People_.   Fourth Edition.  Prospect
Heights, IL: Waveland   Press, 1992.

Kenyatta, Jomo.  _Facing Mount Kenya_.     Vintage Press, 1965 CLASSIC

Khapoya, Vincent.  _The African Experience: An Introduction._    2nd Edition,
Upper Saddle River,  NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998.

Kissling, H.J., F.R.C. Bagley, N. Barbour, J.S. Trimingham., H Braun, B.
Spuler, and H. Hartel.   _The Last Great Muslim Empires: History of the Muslim
World_.   Princeton: Markus   Wiener, 1996

_The Koran._   Penguin Classics.

Mandela, Nelson.  _Long Walk to Freedom: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela._
Boston:   Little, Brown, and Company, 1994\.

Manning, Patrick. _Slavery and African Life: Occidental, Oriental, and African
Slaves Trades._  
 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.  CLASSIC

Manning, Patrick.  _Francophone Sub-Saharan Africa, 1880-1985_.   Cambridge:
Cambridge   University Press, 1989.

 Marcus, Harold.  _A History of Ethiopia.  _ Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1994.

Martin, Phyllis M. and Patrick O'Meara. _Africa._ 2nd Edition Bloomington:
Indiana University   Press, 1986.  CLASSIC

__________. _Africa._ 3nd Edition Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995.  
Miers, Suzanne and Igor Kopytoff.   Slavery in Africa: Historical and
Anthropological  
Perspectives.  Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1979 CLASSIC

Miller, Joseph. _Way of Death: Merchant Capitalism and the Angolan Slave Trade
1730-1830._     Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1988. CLASSIC

O'Brien, Donal B. Cruise, John Dunn, and Richard Rathbone. _Contemporary West
African    Societies._  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.

Oliver, Roland and Anthony Atmore. _The African Middle Ages, 1400-1800_.
Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press, 1986. CLASSIC

Mann, Kristin and Richard Roberts _. Law and Colonial Africa_. Portsmouth, NH:
Heinemann,    1991\.

Rodney, Walter.  _How Europe Underdeveloped Africa.  _  Washington, DC: Howard
University   Press, 1972.  CLASSIC

 Sanneh, Lamin.  _The Crown and the Turban: Muslims and West African
Pluralism._   Boulder:   West View Press, 1997\.

Tefft, Stanton K.  T _he Dialectics of Secret Society Power in States_.
Atlantic Highlands, NJ:   Humanities Press, 1992\.

Thompson, Leonard. _A History of Southern Africa._   New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1990.

Vail, Leroy.  _The Creation of Tribalism in Southern Africa._ Berkeley:
University of California    Press.  1991\.  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


I **X.   LECTURE/DISCUSSION TOPICS AND READING/WRITING ASSIGNMENTS:**  


AUG 23-30                                 Introduction to the course  
                                                  GEOGRAPHY OF AFRICA 

                                                Stone Age   
                                                Required Readings:   
                                                TEXT:  Shillington, Chapter 1, pp.1-13.   


                                 **THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN AFRICA & EGYPT**

SEPT 4                                           Required Reading:  
                                                      TEXTS:  Shillington, Chapter 2 & 3, pp. 14-48   
    
    
                       **THE SPREAD OF BANTU SPEAKERS ACROSS THE CONTINENT**

                                                        Required Reading:   
SEPT 6                                            TEXT: Shillington, Chapter
4, pp. 49-61  
    


                           **AFRICAN STATES RELATIONSHIP OF TRADE TO RELIGION**

SEPT 11-25                                              A. NORTH AFRICA  
                                                                 Required Reading:   
                                                                 TEXT: Shillington, Chapter 5, pp. 62-77 

                                                            B.  WEST AFRICA   
                                                                   Required Reading:   
                                                                   TEXT: Shillington, Chapter 6, pp. 78-89   
                                                                   Chapter 7, pp. 90-106 

                                                            C. EAST AFRICA to 1500   
                                                                 Required Reading:   
                                                                 TEXT: Shillington, Chapters 8 & 9, pp. 107-137 

                                                             D. SOUTHERN AFRICA   
                                                                   Required Reading:   
                                                                   TEXT: Shillington, Chapter 10, pp. 138-156 

**WRITING ASSIGNMENT: DUE 9/20/01**

SEPT 27                           **EXAM #1     [Study Guide
#1](H370sg1.htm)**  


                        **SLAVERY IN AFRICA AND THE AFRICAN SLAVE TRADE**

OCT 2  & 9                         A. CAUSES OF THE SLAVE TRADE  
                                           Required Reading:   
                                           TEXT: Shillington, Chapter 12, pp. 171-180 

**[WRITING ASSIGNMENT](H370swri.htm) DUE 10/9/01: ORAL TRADITION: D.T. Niane,
_Sundiata_**  


OCT 16                               WOMEN IN AFRICA

                                           Required Reading:   
                                           TEXT: **Handout**   


                          **REGIONAL STATUS OF STATES TO THE 18TH CENTURY**

OCT 18-25                             A. WEST AFRICAN STATES  
                                                 Required Reading:   
                                                 TEXT: Shillington, Chapter 13, pp. 181-196 

                                          B. CENTRAL AND EASTERN AFRICA   
                                               Required Reading:   
                                               TEXT: Shillington, Chapter 14, pp. 197-211 

                                          C. SOUTHERN AFRICA   
                                               Required Reading:   
                                               TEXT: Shillington, Chapter 15, pp. 212-225 

                                                     **ISLAM IN AFRICA**

OCT 30 & NOV 1       A. ARABIZATION OF NORTH AFRICA  
                                       Required Reading:   
                                       TEXT: Shillington, Chapter 11, pp. 157-170 

                                    B. ISLAMIC JIHAD IN THE SAVANNA   
                                        Required Reading:   
                                       TEXT: Shillington, Chapter 16, pp. 226-242 



                         **STATUS OF STATES TO THE 19TH CENTURY**

NOV 6-13                      A. EAST AND SOUTHERN AFRICA  
                                       Required Reading:   
                                       TEXT: Shillington, Chapter 17, pp. 242-257 

                                   B. PRE-INDUSTRIAL SOUTHERN AFRICA   
                                       Required Reading:   
                                       TEXT: Shillington, Chapter 18, pp. 258-274 

                                  C. NORTH AND EAST AFRICA   
                                       Required Reading:   
                                       TEXT: Shillington, Chapter 19, pp. 275-288 

  
NOV 15                             **EXAM #2    [Study Guide
#2](H370sg2.htm)**  

                                         **COLONIALISM IN AFRICA**

NOV 20-29                A. THE SCRAMBLE FOR AFRICA  
                                   Required Reading:   
                                   TEXT: Shillington, Chapters 20-21, pp.289-317   


                                       B. EUROPEAN IMPERIALISM   
                                       Required Reading:   
                                       TEXT: Shillington, Chapters 22-23, pp. 318-347 

DEC 4                                   C. AFRICA DURING THE WORLD WARS  
                                       Required Reading:   
                                       TEXT: Shillington, Chapters 24-25, pp. 348-373   


 DEC 6 & 11                  **WINNING AFRICAN INDEPENDENCE**  
                                       Required Reading:   
                                       TEXT:  Shillington, Chapter 26, pp. 374-390   
                                                   Chapter 27, pp. 391-407   
  
  **[WRITING ASSIGNMENT](H370swri.htm)DUE 12/4/01:  NOVEL: Chinua Achebe's
_Things Fall Apart_**

                             **AFRICA SINCE INDEPENDENCE**

                               Required Reading:   
                               TEXT: Shillington, Chapter 28, pp. 408-427 

DEC 13               **EXAM #3   [Study Guide #3](H370SG3.htm)**



Locator | Description | Texts | Objectives | Evaluation | Requirements |
Strategies | Outline | References

