##  Art History 164  
Romanesque Architecture

|  
---|---  
  
###  Winter 2000

|

##

Syllabus  
  
Art History 164 (code 37090)  
Winter 2000

Early Medieval & Romanesque Architecture  
Virginia Jansen

Cowell College 203 (459-2055)

  
office hours: TuTh 1:50-2:20pm. outside EMS B210  
     Thursdays 6:15 - 7:30 pm at Cowell 203   
mail slot at Cowell Faculty Services, room 220  
e-mail: goth@cats.ucsc.edu

**COURSE DESCRIPTION:**   Meaning and form of ecclesiastical architecture in
western European society, c. 800-1130, within monastic, imperial, ducal, and
urban environments.

Auditors welcome as space allows.

**COURSE WORK:**   Assigned readings and videos with brief summaries and
responses, a set visual exercise (3-4 pages), one term paper (7-8 pages) or
studio project option for art and architecture majors, midterm, and final
examination. Each student will also serve as a discussion assistant.

If you wish to do an individual topic for the term paper, you should see me as
soon as possible. Other paper options considered by individual appointment.
Permission for the studio project option should be obtained after discussion
in office hours with the instructor by February 17.

Standards of academic honesty are expected for students to pass the course;
consult the winter quarter schedule of classes, p. 25, or the UCSC catalogue.

Students with disabilities needing accommodation must communicate as soon as
possible with the instructor, preferably by January 20.

**ATTENDANCE:**   Attendance is required and necessary at all classes since
the instructor will be presenting material which is not readily available in
published form or in English. Participation in discussion is expected.
Students who miss more than _two_ classes may be dropped from the course. If
you need to miss a class for a valid reason, an absence may be marked excused
if _prior_ notification is given. Do _not_ cut class in order to finish a
paper; that only makes things worse! It is better to turn it in the next day.

**ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION:**   All students must have an e-mail address and
send me a very brief electronic message immediately. The WWW site address for
this course is: http://wwwcatsic.ucsc.edu/~goth/arth164/

**RESERVES:**   Various books, primarily for good illustrations and
background, have been placed on reserve at the Reserve Desk in the main
library. A catalogue of these is located nearby. A special file of course
hand-outs plus sample student work, called "Course Papers," will be set up at
the Reserve Desk. Slides of buildings seen in lecture may be reviewed for
examinations on reserve at the Slide Library for individual or group viewing.
To see these slides or slides for the term paper, students should make an
appointment in advance (ext. 9-2791); in rush periods, a review schedule will
be posted on the Slide Library door. Images shown on examinations will have
been seen in class or discussed in the reading and can be reviewed in the
reading, in books on reserve, in slides at the slide library, or in limited
ways on the Web.

Videos on medieval architecture are on course reserve at the Media Center in
McHenry.

**EVALUATIONS or LETTER GRADES** will be based on papers, exams, notes and/or
active class participation, with the term paper and the final exam usually
counting the most. Improvement over the quarter will be weighed significantly,
since understanding the material in this course represents an accumulative
process. The final examination, seen as the culmination of your quarter's
efforts, _must_ be passed in order to pass the course. Also, either active
participation in class discussions or more than 50% of the notes as assigned
in the syllabus (preferably both!) are required to pass the course.



**SCHEDULE OF MAJOR EVENTS (subject to change with notice):**

Tu Jan. 18

|

Class discussion of technical terms (contest!)  
  
---|---  
  
Tu Feb. 8

|

Exercise due (2 copies)

(Late papers are accepted for 24 hours; after that no more papers can be
accepted, and students should drop the course.)  
  
Tu Feb. 15 |

Midterm. Bring your own paper (cut off any ragged spiral edges, please!).  
  
Tu Feb. 22 |

Term paper synopsis with its annotated specialized bibliography or studio
project statement due (subject to previous discussion with instructor), if
student has chosen individual topic  
  
Tu Mar. 14 |

Term paper and projects due in class.  
  
Fr Mar. 17 9:00-11:00 a.m.

|

Final examination in the classroom.

Bring paper (no spiral edges) or blue books.

Please do not enroll if you cannot take the exam at this time. The final exam
must be passed in order to pass the course.  
  
**NOTE:**   It is departmental policy not to grant extensions on papers or
incompletes except in severe emergencies, in which case a note from the proper
authority (Health Center, parent, etc.) is required documenting the emergency.

**TEXTS**

Required texts available at Bay Tree Bookstore, The Literary Guillotine
(457-1195; 204 Locust St.) and on reserve:

Roger Stalley, _Early Medieval Architecture_ , Oxford History of Art (the
newest treatment of the subject; by theme rather than chronology)

R. W. Southern, _The Making of the Middle Ages_ (excellent treatment of
historical material; to be read rapidly for general comprehension).

Charles M. Radding and Willian W. Clark, _Medieval Architecture, Medieval
Learning_ (Part I only; contemporary cross-discipnary study)

a good dictionary, such as _The American Heritage Dictionary_ (well
illustrated)

and a series of sources, articles, and other texts.

Recommended texts (available at Bay Tree Bookstore):

Blanche Ellsworth, _English Simplified_ (to write papers using correct English
usage)

John Fleming, Hugh Honour, and Nikolaus Pevsner, _Penguin Dictionary of
Architecture_ (useful; the most authoritative, small-sized dictionary of
architecture).

Hermann Kinder and Werner Hilgemann, _Anchor Atlas of World History_ , vol. I
(useful, quick fact-finder; a treasure).

If you have never taken a course in medieval art, skim for general
comprehension the relevant sections in one of the following:

Spiro Kostof, _A History of Architecture

_

Nikolaus Pevsner, _An Outline of European Architecture

_

James Snyder, _Medieval Art

_

Whitney S. Stoddard, _Art and Architecture of Medieval France_ (hardback
title: _Monastery and Cathedral in France_ )

Marilyn Stokstad, _Medieval Art

_

George Zarnecki, _Art of the Medieval World

_

For enjoyment and a lively picture of life and building in the 12th century,
read Ken Follett, _Pillars of the Earth._ Other medieval-based narratives,
which contain bits of the built environment, include Sharan Newman's Catherine
LeVendeur mysteries and the Brother Cadfael books by Ellis Peters and the
videos (shown on PBS stations) based on the books. Sharan Newman is a
historian trained at UCSB and Ellis Peters's locale is the abbey of Shrewsbury
in northwestern midland England.

**

READINGS, LECTURES, AND ASSIGNMENTS

**

Students should consult the syllabus carefully and prepare the material
assigned before the appropriate class. Consult the supplementary bibliography
or ask me for more specific literature if you wish to pursue a topic in depth.
The following schedule is ideal and will probably have to be adjusted to the
individual personality of this class.

**

Reading notes** assigned will be due at the class in which discussion takes
place. They have a threefold purpose: to prepare students for a more informed
class discussion, to serve as notes for the examinations, and to demonstrate
involvement with the reading assigned. Students should concentrate on the
value of the reading in relationship to gaining a greater understanding of
medieval architecture. No notes are required on Stalley (the course text), nor
on other required reading for which notes are not assigned in the syllabus.
Notes should also be turned in for the videos required. Because the notes are
meant for students' use, they do not need to be typed, proofread, or written
in any formal manner.

## PART I. BACKGROUND, GENERAL MATERIAL, AND THEMATIC STUDY

Tu Jan. 4

|

What is Romanesque?

Ideas and themes. Methods. Concentration on St.-Sernin at Toulouse and
St.-Etienne at Caen.

Required: Study the maps, illustrations, and terms in the class readings. Read
Stalley, Introduction.  
  
---|---  
  
Th Jan. 8

|

Liturgy. Original appearance. Meaning.

Required: Be prepared to discuss the liturgical and biblical selections: 1
Kings Chapters 4-8, Ezekiel 40-43:5, and Revelation (Apocalypse) 1, 4-5,
20-21. Don't get bogged down with measurements, but pay attention to ratios.

**

For discussion in class:** What do we learn about liturgy, appearance, and
meaning from the biblical texts? How might the liturgy have affected building
design? Write a brief (one-paragraph), but _specific_ summary of each group of
the selections on liturgy and from the Bible. Bring your notes to class, but
save them to hand in on Jan. 11.

Also hand in brief notes on the selections below. Notes should emphasize the
relation of the material to an understanding of architecture.

Deimling in readings; note three points  
miscellaneous in section on primary sources in readings  
Radding and Clark, "Introduction," 1-8.

Suggested:  
The video, _Buildings and Beliefs: Medieval Social Structure and Spirituality_
(VT 3499) in the McHenry Media Center _.  
  
Tu Jan. 11

|

Structure and construction.

Required: J.E. Gordon, _Structures_ , excerpt. Note three important points to
hand in. Add further specifics on building to your notes; hand in your notes
in class after discussion.  
Stalley, chapter 5 and chapter 6. No notes on Stalley are required.

**For discussion in class:** Be prepared to discuss the selections on
building, including the bibilical reading from Jan. 8, from the Course Reader.

Study as soon as possible the videos, _Cathedral_ (VT 1993) and _Light on the
Stones_ (VT 1651) for information on building. Hand in four points about
building from each video. Consider what particular points of view may be
espoused in the video.  
  
** **

BACKGROUND: TRADITIONS AND INFLUENCES

**

Th Jan. 13

|  Historical background. Institutions. Survey of Late Antique, Early
Christian, Carolingian, and Ottonian architecture

Required: Read rapidly Stalley, chapter 1.  
As historical background read selection from Georges Duby, _The Age of the
Cathedrals_ , 3-9; the Concordat of Worms, Otto of Freising, and documents on
the First Crusade; and, rapidly for general context, Southern, 11-73.

**

For discussion in class:** Write down two important points from Duby, brief
specific comments from the documents, and eight points from Southern to hand
in. For Southern also consider the "Notes for Discussion" and hand in brief
responses to those questions.

Suggested:  
Barber selections  
Kenneth J. Conant, _Carolingian and Romanesque Architecture 800-1200_ ,
Pelican History of Art, 1959 (well illustrated, good coverage, but some
information is unjustified or now out-of-date); however, for some topics and
buildings covered in this course, this text will provide useful information.  
A. W. Clapham, _Romanesque Architecture in Western Europe

_  
---|---  
  
Tu Jan. 18  |  Carolingian and Ottonian architecture: Crypts and westworks

Required: Read Stalley, chapter 2, cursorily and chapter 7, pp. 147-55, more
carefully, reviewing those sections pertaining to material covered in class.

**

** CONTEST**** in class! Prepare as many _termini technici_ as you can, except
for those marked "Go." Come with the total number you can explain to the class
and questions on the others. (You may consult your notes as you explain.)  
  
Th Jan. 20  |  Monastic planning: The Plan of St. Gall

Required: Study carefully the Plan of St. Gall (Stalley, 187; also p. 178) and
monastic plans and drawings. Read selections on monastic planning, noting at
least three points from each section; from the section on primary sources,
read Davis-Weyer, "Cluny under Odilo," and "Desiderius' Church at Monte
Cassino," and Hollister, text by William of St. Thierry and correspondence
between Hildegard of Bingen and Bernard of Clairvaux, noting at least two
points for each selection; and from Braunfels, noting five sentences; also
read Southern, 154-69, 185-93, noting five sentences. Skim Stalley, chapter 8,
concentrating on the general discussion of monastic planning.

**

For discussion in class:** Analyze the different types of monastic planning
and the functional placement of the buildings. What types of order does the
planning convey? Hand in notes from the reading on these questions as well as
the specific points mentioned above.

Suggested:  
Walter Horn and Ernest Born, _The Plan of St. Gall_ , 3 sumptuous,
encyclopedic volumes (1 copy in Protected Collection, houses at the Reserve
Desk, 1 in Special Collections, McHenry)  
Lorna Price, _The Plan of St. Gall_ _in Brief_ , a short version of the above,
on reserve  
David Knowles, _Christian Monasticism_ George Zarnecki, _The Monastic
Achievement_  
Barber, chapter 4  
Virginia Jansen, "Architecture and Community in Medieval Monastic
Dormitories," _Studies in Cistercian Art and Architecture_ (Cistercian Studies
Series 167),  
ed. Meredith Parsons Lillich, V, 1998, 58-94 (off-print on reserve)  
  
## PART II. STUDY OF BUILDINGS

** **

EARLIEST BEGINNINGS

**

Tu Jan. 25  |  Architecture at the Millennium: St.-Benigne at Dijon

Required: Stalley, chapter 3

**

For discussion in class:** Davis-Weyer, 124-128. (Raoul Glaber, anonymous
chronicle on St.-B enigne, and Leo of Ostia) while looking at the
illustrations of St.-Benigne. Pick out the major parts of the building
described in the chronicle. List five key sentences from the chronicle
relating to architecture to hand in. List two each from Leo of Ostia and
Glaber.  
  
---|---  
  
Th Jan. 27  |  Dijon (continued)

Required: Krautheimer, "Introduction to an 'Iconography of Medieval
Architecture'"; concentrate on the main ideas; do not get bogged down in the
details. Try "freewriting." Then, write a one-paragraph summary and list five
key points to turn in; be prepared to read them in class. Also hand in brief
responses to "Notes for Discussion".  
  
**

EARLY ROMANESQUE: EXPERIMENTS AND SYNTHESES

**

Tu Feb. 1  |  Imperial Traditions: Limburg and Speyer

Required: Stalley, chapter 9, pp. 197-211 and Epilogue; Radding and Clark,
"Beginnings," 11-19, and Bony _French Gothic_ , 81-85.

View video VT 2428, _Cathedral of Speyer_ , at Media Center.

**

For discussion in class:** Horn, "On the Origins of the Mediaeval Bay System."
Read for central thesis. Consider in what ways Horn's argument may seem valid.
Or does it seem too speculative as far as you can judge? How does he revise
and expand his argument in the excerpts from "Survival, Revival,
Transformation"? Write a two-paragraph summary with critique and brief
responses to "Notes for Discussion" to hand in as well as eight significant
points and a few major ones from Bony and the video. What particular points of
view are espoused in the video?  
  
---|---  
  
Th Feb. 3  |  St.-Martin-du-Canigou and Iberian traditions; Cardona

Required: Stalley, chapters 6, pp. 130-38, and 9, pp. 195-97; Southern,
74-139, especially 118-24; review 21-24. See foundation charter, p. 183, and
information for visitors on Canigou, p. 273.

**

For discussion in class:** Southern and the historical background of the
period. List five significant developments to read to the class and to turn
in. Also bring your questions and comments.

Suggested: Review the video VT 1651, _Light on the Stones.

_  
  
Th Feb. 10  |  Notre-Dame at Jumieges

Required: Stalley, chapter 9; Bony, _French Gothic_ , 21-22; hand in four
points from Bony.  
  
Tu Feb. 15  |

You may consult a 3 x 5" card for notes only on the assigned reading; no names
of buildings and dates may be included, nor may the card be used during the
slide portion of the exam.  
  
Th Feb. 17  |  Traditions in Italy during the Romanesque period.

Required:  
Review Stalley, chapter 9, especially pp. 199-202.  
Read Mathilda's grant, p. 223, and McLean on Pisa, pp. 355-56; view video VT
3467, _Pisa: Story of a Cathedral Square_ ; hand in two or three points on
each selection except for Stalley.

Suggested:  
Walter Horn, "Romanesque Churches in Florence and Their Chronology and
Stylistic Development," _Art Bulletin_ , XXV, 1943, 112-131

|

Tu Feb. 22 |  Italy continued.

Required: Stalley, pp. 140-41; Bony, _French Gothic_ , 7-17, and hand in five
points.

If not working on set class topics, synopsis of term paper with annotated
specialized bibliography or statement of studio project due; must have been
previously discussed with instructor in her office hours.  
  
Th Feb. 24  |  Advising day--no classes. Work on your term papers.

**

ROMANESQUE DEVELOPMENTS: MONUMENTAL AND INTERNATIONAL SOLUTIONS

**  
  
Tu Feb. 29  |  The "Pilgrimage-Road" church type: St.-Sernin at Toulouse and
Santiago Cathedral

Required: Stalley, chapter 7, pp. 155-65; Radding and Clark, chapters 2
("Masters") and 3 ("Builders"), 20-44; Bony, _French Gothic_ , 21-22;
Southern, 240-245. As time permits, read excerpts from Shaver-Crandall and
Gerson, _Pilgrim's Guide_.

**

For discussion in class:** Davis- Weyer, 147-156, "Guide to Santiago"; and
Radding and Clark. Hand in at least six key points from each text.

Suggested:  
_The Song of Roland

_

Video VT 2897, _Heaven or Hell: The Last Judgment_.

Conrad Rudolph, "The Pilgrimage to Santiago and to the End of the World," a
piece of personal writing about walking "the Road," unpublished manuscript
(1997), on reserve  
  
Th March 2  |  Pilgrimage and Cluny

Required: Stalley, chapter 8, pp. 168-75, and 6, pp. 138-39; Bony, _French
Gothic_ , 17-21; view video VT 3498, _Romanesque Architecture of Burgundy_.
Hand in five points from Bony and the video. What particular points of view
are espoused in the video?

**For discussion in class:** Davis-Weyer, 168-170. (St. Bernard) and Barbara
Abou-El-Haj, "The Audiences for the Medieval Cult of Saints." Hand in several
statements pertinent to building and responses to notes for discussion on the
Abou-El-Haj article and four points from Bernard's text.  
  
Tu March 7  |  Burgundy and Vezelay

Required: Stalley, chapter 8, pp. 175-82; Radding and Clark, 44-54.

**

For discussion in class:** Southern, 131-154, 179-181, 193-203 (suggested
219-257). Come prepared to ask questions and to discuss the significant
issues. Make a list of at least five major points to read to the class and to
turn in. Also view the video (VT 1651) and read the text by Georgia Wright,
_Light on the Stones_ , _TheMedieval Church of V ezelay_. List at least eight
points significant to understanding the built environment of Vezelay to hand
in. What difference is there between Wright's and Abou-El-Haj's information?
What particular points of view are espoused in her video?

When you have time, view Video VT 3498, _Romanesque architecture of Burgundy._
Hand in five points. What particular points of view are espoused in the video?

Suggested: VT 3471: _French Romanesque Art

_  
  
Th March 9  |  Norman Romanesque architecture: Mont-Saint- Michel and
St.-Etienne at Caen

Required: Stalley, chapter 9, pp. 202-04, and chapter 10; Bony, _French
Gothic_ , 22-26; hand in five points from Bony; view video VT 3497,
_Romanesque Architecture of Normandy_. Hand in five points. What particular
points of view are espoused in the video?  
  
**

LATE ROMANESQUE: NEW EXPERIMENTS

**

Tu March 14  |  Anglo-Norman Romanesque, Late Romanesque, and conclusions

Required: Review Stalley, chapter 10, and pp. 140-44.

Suggested:  
Video VT 3472, _Three English Cathedrals_ , the section on Norwich.

Castle architecture.

Papers and studio projects due. Late papers cannot be accepted after 24 hours.

Come with some general thoughts about Romanesque architecture and both general
and specific questions to suggest for the final examination.  
  
---|---  
  
Fri. March 17  |  Final examination in the classroom; bring your own writing
materials.

9:00-11:00 a.m. You may consult a 3 x 5" card for notes only on the assigned
reading; no names of buildings and dates may be included, nor may the card be
used during the slide portion of the exam.

