**

History 410

Contested Events in Early America

**

Winter 1999, Tu, Th, 2-3:20, 342 GIL

Matthew Dennis, History (hours: M, 1-3; Th, 12-1), 220 PLC; mjdennis@darkwing

Gordon Sayre, English (hours: W, 1-3; Th, 1-2), 521 PLC; gsayre@oregon

This team-taught, interdisciplinary course on early American literature,
history, and culture will adopt a case-study approach to assess the colonial
origins of American culture as well as the methods and approaches of literary
scholars and historians. It will combine lectures, class discussion, and small
group collaboration in its efforts to study the texts and context of colonial
America. This course is the equivalent of History 455 or English 461 and will
count as such toward major requirements. Next term, the course will continue
as English 410, probing the literature, history, and culture of the early
national period; that course will be the equivalent of History 456 or English
461. Both courses may be taken idependently of each other.

The class is divided into five two-week units, as described below. These are a
few of the questions we will be asking as we study American culture,
1600-1775, this term: Who was Pocahontas? Does her life and legacy -- or the
way they have been portrayed by Disney and others -- matter? What was the
nature of the encounter between European colonists and Native North Americans?
If it was often violent, was it also a clash of world views and words, a
rhetorical as well as a political and economic contest? How did Europeans
respond to the strange New World, and how was the Native American old world
transformed by colonization into something new? What happened when colonists
were held captive by Indians? Why did some refuse to return to Christian
civilization, while the captivity narratives of those who did created a
foundational genre of American literature? What do we make of the witch-
hunting crisis at Salem, Massachusetts in 1692? Why did women predominate
among the accused? Have we fully exorcised such demons today? How is it
possible that slavery existed in the land of opportunity and freedom? Did
racism cause slavery, or was racism a product of the "peculiar institution"?
How did enslaved Africans understand, accommodate, and resist their
predicament and in the process create something new and American: African
American culture?

**

Attendance** is mandatory, both at general class meetings and in discussion
sections.

**

Readings** include three required books available at the UO Bookstore:

Jean Fritz, _The Double Life of Pocahontas

_ John Demos, _The Unredeemed Captive

_

Elizabeth Reis, _Spellbound_ ,

Most of the reading assignments, however, are contained in a photo-copied
packet available for purchase at the Copy Shop, 539 E. 13th Ave. A few short
excerpts are not in the copy packet, but will be available on electronic
reserve, and on paper reserve at the Knight Library.

**

Assignments and Grading** There will be no exams, but students will write five
short papers (one per two-week unit; each 10% of grade) as well as a term
paper of moderate length (30%) -- an in-depth study of a topic chosen from one
of the course units. Students will also be evaluated on the quality of their
discussion participation (20%). Academic integrity is important. We will hold
all students to the UO "Standards of Conduct." Plagiarism will not be
tolerated; all work must be your own, written for this class. **



Unit 1 - Pocahontas: An American Myth

**

The story of Pocahontas, daughter of the powerful chief Powhatan, who helped
the early Jamestown colonists, married one of them, and journeyed to England,
originates in just a few pages of documents from the early 1600s. It has
captured the imaginations of millions since then, and has been retold in
countless histories, plays, poems, children's books and films. Our aim in
studying Pocahontas is twofold: first we shall examine the source documents
and assess the evidence for and against the veracity of the events recounted
by John Smith; then we will try to determine why the myth has retained such
power, and how it has been updated over the past 200 years.

**

Schedule

**

Jan. 5 Introduction to the plans and goals of the course. Outline of the
assignments. Introductory words on Pocahontas.

Assignment: John Smith selections 1-5; First half of Fritz; Philip Young
article (which is on reserve only; not in copy packet).

Sections: Review an historian's account of "the rescue." Discuss standards of
evidence and proof in the controversy.

Jan. 7 Lecture: contrasting views of the myth from Historical and Literary
scholars. Paradigm of mutual misinterpretation in cultural encounter.
Colonialist analysis; myth-archetype analysis.

Assignment: selections by John Davis, Henry Adams.

Jan. 7th, 7-9 pm; Jan. 11th, 5-7 pm - Screenings of "Pocahontas" in IMC.

Jan. 12 Pocahontas romanticized and politicized; on stage and canvas; in North
vs. South.

Assignment: last 2 selections from Smith; Rolfe, Purchas; second half of
Fritz.

Sections: choose research teams for research project. Discuss Pocahontas.

Jan. 14 Prof. Sayre on Pocahontas in England and Tilton's book. Prof. Dennis
on changing race relations in 17th and 18th century Virginia.

Assignment: Brebeuf, Relation of 1635 [for Unit 2].



Additional Reading for Research Projects: Pocahontas

This bibliography will provide a good start for research into the Pocahontas
legend, from an historical or a cultural perspective. There are, however, many
more sources, including several more plays about Pocahontas, many short
historical articles, and many works of literature which mimic the myth. Ask
Prof. Sayre for more help on sources if you need it.

James Nelson Barker, _The Indian Princess_ (1808) in _Early American Drama_ ,
ed. by Jeffrey H. Richards. Penguin Books, 1998.

Robert Beverley, _The History and Present State of Virginia_ (1705). Ed. Louis
B. Wright. Chapel Hill: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 1947.

Leslie Fiedler, _The Return of the Vanishing American._ New York: Stein and
Day, 1966.

Jay B. Hubbell, "The Smith-Pocahontas Story in Literature" _Virginia Magazine
of History and Biography_ 65:3 (July 1957), 274-300.

Peter Hulme, _Colonial Encounters: Europe and the Native Caribbean,
1492-1797._ London: Routledge, 1986. pp 137-173.

J. A. Leo Lemay, _Did Pocahontas Save Captain John Smith?_ Athens, GA:
University of Georgia Press, 1992.

Frances Mossiker, _Pocahontas_. New York: Knopf, 1976.

David R. Ransome, "Pocahontas and the Mission to the Indians" _Virginia
Magazine of History and Biography_ 99:1 (January 1991), 81-94. [many other
articles about Pocahontas have been published in this periodical]

Helen C. Rountree, _Pocahontas's People_. Norman, OK: Univ. of Oklahoma Press,
1990.

Bradford Smith, _Captain John Smith_. Philadelphia, Lippincott, 1953.

Robert Tilton, _Pocahontas: The Evolution of an American Narrative._ London:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 1994.

Alden T. Vaughan, _American Genesis: Captain John Smith and the Founding of
Virginia_. Boston: Little, Brown, and Co., 1975.

Grace Steel Woodward, _Pocahontas_. Norman, OK: Univ. of Oklahoma Press, 1969.



**

Unit 2: Jean de Br ebeuf and the Jesuit Mission in New France.

**

Although little known in the United States, the missionaries of New France,
and the Relations which record their efforts, are an epic story of colonial
North America. These Jesuits' accounts of the customs of the Hurons and other
native tribes are among the most valuable ethnographic sources available, and
their religious zeal was astounding. Our unit concentrates on one missionary,
St. Jean de Brebeuf, who labored among the Hurons for 15 years until he was
martyred in an attack by the enemy Iroquois. We will also watch "Black Robe,"
an unusually perceptive and powerful cinematic representation of early
American history.

**

Schedule

**

Jan. 19th Lecture introducing the Jesuit Relations. Maps, chronology,
religious and colonial context.

Assignment: Watch "Black Robe", read Ward Churchill's review.

Jan. 19th 7-9 pm; Jan. 20th, 5-7 pm - Screenings of "Black Robe" in IMC

Sections: Issues of representation of Native Americans. Discuss film.

Jan. 21 Lecture and discussion of Black Robe. Review some scenes.

Assignment: Relation of 1636 and chapter from Parkman.

Jan. 26 Lecture and discussion of Huron ethnography, the Feast of the Dead,
and the Earthdiver myth.

Assignment: Brebeuf's martyrdom and Issac Jogues' captivity narrative (which
is in Unit 3 in your course packet and on the e-reserves).

Sections: discuss captivity and martyrdom, cultural attitudes toward violence

Jan. 28 Lecture on adoption and torture, typology, suffering, and martyrdom.

Assignment: Mary Rowlandson's captivity narrative.



Additional Readings for Research Projects: Brebeuf and the Jesuits

The chief source of primary texts by and about Brebeuf is _The Jesuit
Relations and Allied Documents._ Ed. Reuben Gold Thwaites. 73 vols. Cleveland:
Burrows Brothers, 1897-98. This huge set was not only the first time most of
these texts had been translated into English, it was also the first time that
some texts written by the French Jesuit missionaries had been published at
all. The Thwaites edition has "page-opposite" translation throughout, with
English on the right-hand page, and French (or occasionally Latin or Italian)
on the left. The documents on Br ebeuf are all in the first half of the set,
and some other interesting excerpts are cited below. We encourage students to
do additional reading in this edition, which is in Knight library at F 1030.7
C96. Treat them with care, however; these books are rare.

from the _Jesuit Relations_ :

"Of the difference between the manners and customs of the French, or the
Europeans, and those of the Savages" vol. 44 pp. 277-309. This is a marvellous
essay in cultural relativism, which shows how open-minded the Jesuits could
be, or at least how their encounter with Native Americans forced the
reexamination of European values.

Paul LeJeune, _Relation of 1634_ in Vol. 6. This narrative of LeJeune's winter
with the Montagnais nation is another of the best episodes in the Relations,
and provided some of the details used in the novel and film, _Black Robe_.

_

Relation of 1637_ vol. 13 pp. 171-189. This is a good excerpt for showing the
give and take between the missionaries and the Indians over the values of
Christianity and baptism. In the midst of an epidemic of illness afflicting
both Hurons and Jesuits, one town agrees to build a chapel and be baptized.
Explanations and debates about Heaven and religion ensue.

Other sources:

Francis Parkman, _The Jesuits in North America in the Seventeenth Century_ ,
from which we've taken one chapter for the course packet. Parkman was a very
popular historian during the mid-nineteenth century, author of _The Oregon
Trail_ as well as a seven-volume colonial history entitled _France and England
in North America_. When Parkman was writing the Thwaites edition had not yet
begun, and Parkman travelled to Paris and transribed many documents by hand.
He had great respect for the French missionaries and explorers, even as his
history tried to show why the English Protestant colonists eventually defeated
the French.

Joseph P. Donnelly, S. J. _Jean de Br ebeuf _Loyola University Press, 1975.
This biography of Brebeuf is useful for information on his life before coming
to New France, and about his canonization and beatification.

James Axtell, "The Power of Print in the Eastern Woodlands" _William and Mary
Quarterly_ 44:2 (April 1987) pp301-309.

Brian Moore, _Black Robe_ (the novel on which the movie was based).

Gordon Sayre, _Les Sauvages Am ericains: Representations of Native Americans
in French and English Colonial Literature. _Chapel Hill: Univ. of North
Carolina Press, 1997.





**

Unit 3: Captivity Narratives and colonial warfare in New England.

**

While the French Jesuits have been virtually ignored in the United States, the
Captivity Narratives of Puritan New England have been frequently re-read and
re-published, and according to many scholars have had an important influence
on our national ideology. Although the literary history of the Captivity genre
extends through the nineteenth century, in this unit we will emphasize two
female captives from late seventeenth-century Massachusetts, Mary Rowlandson
and Eunice Williams. One wrote her own story, which has long been a classic of
early American literature; the other did not record her story, and in fact
never returned to her former life. Her narrative is the work of a modern
historian.

**

Schedule

**

Feb. 2: Mary Rowlandson compared to Jean de Brebeuf. History of King Philip's
War.

Assignment: reread Rowlandson and write position paper. Read Hannah Duston's
captivity (on e-reserve).

Sections: Debating Mary Rowlandson.

Feb. 4 More on Rowlandson. Eunice Williams and the problem of assimilated
captives. Archetypes of captives.

Assignment: _The Unredeemed Captive_ , chapters 4-6 (pp. 77-139)

Feb. 9: History or Literature? the controversy over _The Unredeemed Captive_.

Assignment: _The Unredeemed Captive,_ chapters 7-9 (pp. 140-213).

Sections: workshop on the writing of History and of Literary Interpretation.

Feb. 11: Conclusion of Demos. Puritans vs. Catholics; English vs. French.



Additional Readings for Research Projects: Captivity Narratives

There is an enormous body of writing about the Captivity Narrative as a
literary genre and captivity as an historical phenomenon. Here are a few good
sources which concentrate on Rowlandson, on Williams, or on King Philip's War.

Kathryn Zabelle Derounian. "Puritan Orthodoxy and the 'Survivor Syndrome' in
Mary Rowlandson's Captivity Narrative." _Early American Literature_ 22 (1987)
82-93.

Gary L. Ebersole, _Captured by Texts: Puritan to Postmodern images of Indian
Captivity._ Charlottesville, U. Press of Virginia, 1995.

David L. Greene, "New Light on Mary Rowlandson" _Early American Literature_ 20
(1985) 24-37.

Douglas Leach, _Flintlock and Tomahawk: New England in King Philip's War._ New
York: Macmillan, 1958.

Jill Lepore, _The Name of War._ New York, 1998.

Alexander Medlicott, Jr. "Return to this Land of Light: A Plea to an
Unredeemed Captive." New England Quarterly 38 (1965) 202-216.

Neil Salisbury, ed. _The Sovereignty and Goodness of God._ New York:
Bedford/St. Martin's, 1997. [this classroom edition contains supporting
documents, and a fine introduction]

John Seelye. _Prophetic Waters: The River in Early American Life and
Literature._ New York: Oxford UP, 1977 pp. 281-304.

Richard Slotkin. _Regeneration through Violence: The Mythology of the American
Frontier, 1600-1900._ Middletown, CT: Wesleyan Univ. Press, 1973 pp. 78-145.



**

Unit 4: The Salem Witchcraft Trials and Beyond

**

Few episodes from the history of colonial America have been as fascinating,
puzzling, and enduring as the notorious trials in Salem, Massachusetts in
1692, in which over a hundred people were accused of witchcraft and some
twenty executed for the crime. This unit examines this crisis as a way to
probe the nature of early American religious belief and practice, to study the
colonial New England's "world of wonder," and to analyze the shifting
intellectual and cultural atmosphere of colonial America. The witch-hunting of
1692 quickly became an embarrassment for some, especially those embracing a
new "rationalism" associated with the Enlightenment. But did faith in
revelation, providence, and worlds of wonder disappear in the 18th century or
later? Students might also contemplate the question: why did witch-hunting so
consistently target women? Finally, we might consider the persistent use of
Salem witch-hunting -- and the social psychology of fear, recrimination, and
persecution it seemed to display -- as a metaphor for later crises in American
life (as in the 20th-century Cold War fear of Communism).

Feb. 16: lecture on New England "World of Wonder": Lived Religion in Puritan
New England; social, economic, political context of the 1692 witchcraft
crisis.

Assignment: _Spellbound_ , 1-24; trial record excerpts (Hobbs, Carrier,
Foster, Lacey, Nurse).

Sections: discuss relationship between "reason" and "revelation," between
"wonder" and "rationality," in historical context. Assess "what actually
happened" at Salem - why might this be a difficult question?

Feb. 18: lecture and discussion on the Crisis at Salem - assessment of events
and perspectives . . . and how they were represented by participants or
contemporary observers. Outline range of historical interpretations of the
event. Possible screening (in class) of parts of "Three Sovereigns for Sarah."

Assignment: trial record excerpts (Roots, Tituba, Toothaker); Lawson, Brief
and True Narrative; _Spellbound_ , 25-98.

Feb. 19th, 5-7 pm; Feb. 22nd, 7-9 pm - Screening of "The Crucible" in IMC.

Feb. 23: discussion of women and witchcraft: how and why have women been
demonized through witchcraft accusations?

Assignment: Cotton Mather, Discourse; Increase Mather, Cases of Conscience;
"Reversal of Attainder"; _Spellbound_ , 99-119. Paper: approx. 3 pp. assessing
the following quotation: iThe most curious of all facts in that welter we call
Salem witchcraft is this: . . . the intellectual history of New England up to
1720 can be written as though no such thing happened. . . . [Only later] does
it begin to be that blot on New Englandis fame which has been enlarged, as
much by friends as by foes, into its greatest disgracei [Perry Miller, _The
New England Mind: From Colony to Province_ (Boston, 1966 [orig. publ. 1953]),
190].

Sections: discussion of The Crucible - though fictional, does the film
nonetheless hold up as historical representation?

Feb. 25: Beyond Salem: discussion of the representation of witchcraft in
America, and the practice of witch-hunting in later American history.

Assignment: Hawthorne, "Young Goodman Brown"; _Spellbound_ , xi-xxiii, 121-43.



Additional Reading for Research Projects: Salem Witchcraft

Paul Boyer and Stephen Nissenbaum, eds., _The Salem Witchcraft Papers:
Verbatim Transcripts of the Legal Documents of the Salem Witchcraft Outbreak
of 1692, 3 vols._ (New York, 1977).

_____, _Salem Possessed: The Social Origins of Witchcraft_ (Cambridge, Mass.,
1974).

John Putnam Demos, _Entertaining Satan: Witchcraft and the Culture of Early
New England_ (New York, 1982).

David D. Hall, _Worlds of Wonder, Days of Judgment: Popular Religious Belief
in Early New England_ (New  York, 1989).

Carol F. Karlsen, _The Devil in the Shape of a Woman: Witchcraft in Colonial
New England_ (New York, 1987).

Elizabeth Reis, _Damned Women: Sinners and Witches in Puritan New England_
(Ithaca, N.Y., 1997).

Bernard Rosenthal, _Salem Story: Reading the Witch Trials of 1692_ (Cambridge,
1993).





**

Unit 5: Servitude and Slavery in Colonial America

**

This two-week unit addresses the origins of slavery in colonial America --
perhaps the nation's greatest paradox and challenge. The unit probes the
questions: how and why did slavery emerge as a fundamental social, economic,
and political instution in colonial Anglo North America? And how did the
institution affect those who experienced it? Students will examine the
relationship between slavery and anti-black racism, as well as study more
generally the nature of "race" in early America. Finally, students will assess
the creation of a new African American culture in North America, born of
necessity as a means to endure, resist, or transcend the horrors of slavery.
Our sources include primary, narrative accounts of servitude and slavery,
excerpts from legal sources, folk songs and tales, and visual representations
of slavery and the slave trade. Secondary historical writings add background
and context.

March 2: lecture on labor, servitude, the transatlantic slave trade, and the
origins of slavery in colonial America.

Assignment: narrative accounts and documents (Frethorne; Revel poem; Beverly,
Falconbridge; Virginia statutes); historical essays (Jordan, Edmund Morgan).

Sections: discussion of timing and causes of slavery's emergence on mainland
North America.

March 4: discussion of slave experience; how scholars can reconstruct a sense
of this through documentary and literary sources.

Assignment: narratives (Ayuba Suleiman Diallo; Venture Smith); historical
essays (Kullikoff, Philip Morgan).

March 9: Accommodation, resistance, rebellion - background lecture and
discussion.

Assignment: narratives and documents (Marrant; Dunlop; report to South
Carolina Assembly); historical essay (Wood).

Sections: discussion of origins of racism in America, its relationship to
institution of slavery; and/or discussion of slave accommodation and
resistance and origins of African-American culture in America.

March 11: Origins of African-American culture, especially African-American
literature.

Assignment: selections of African-American songs and tales.

Paper: in 1903, W. E. B. DuBois wrote of a idouble-consciousnessi among
African Americans: iOne ever feels his two-ness, -- an American, a Negro; two
souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one
dark body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunderi
[Souls of Black Folk (New York 1961 [orig. publ. 1903]), 17.] In approx. 3
pp., assess the origins and significance of this doubleness for African
Americans in the colonial period.

Supplementary Reading for Research Projects:

Olaudah Equiano [ca. 1745-97], _The Interesting Narrative and Other Writings_
(New York: Penguin, 1995).

Accounts of the Middle Passage, from Elizabeth Donnan, ed., _Documents
Illustrative of the Slave Trade to America_ , 4 vols. (Washington, D.C.,
1930-35).

Vincent Carretta, ed., _Unchained Voices: An Anthology of Black Authors in the
English-Speaking World of the 18th Century_ (Lexington: University of Kentucky
Press, 1996).

Henry Lewis Gates, Jr., ed., _"Race," Writing, and Difference_ (Chicago,
1985).

Winthrop D. Jordan, _White Over Black: American Attitudes Toward the Negro,
1550-1812_ (Chapel Hill, 1968)

Lawrence W. Levine, _Black Culture and Black Consciousness: Afro-American Folk
Thought from Slavery to Freedom_ (New York, 1977).

Michael McGiffert, ed., Constructing Race, special edition of _The William and
Mary Quarterly_ , 3d ser., 54: 1 (January 1997).

Russell R. Menard, "From Servants to Slaves: The Transformation of the
Chesapeake Labor System," _Southern Studies_ , 16 (1977), 355-90.

Edmund S. Morgan, _American Slavery, American Freedom: The Ordeal of Colonial
Virginia_ (New York, 1975).

Philip D. Morgan, _Slave Counterpoint: Black Culture in the Eighteenth-Century
Chesapeake and Low Country_ (Chapel Hill, 1998).

Darrett B. Rutman and Anita H. Rutman, _A Place in Time: Middlesex County,
Virginia, 1650-1750_ (New York, 1984).

Shane White and Graham White, _Stylin': African American Expressive Culture
from Its Beginnins to the Zoot Suit_ (Ithaca, N.Y., 1998).

Donald R. Wright, _African Americans in the Colonial Era: From African Origins
through the American Revolution_ (Arlington Heights, Ill.: Harlan Davidson,
1990).

Final examination, Tuesday 16 March, 3:15PM. 

