**HIST 4300 TOPICS:**

**RELIGION IN LATIN AMERICAN HISTORY**

**Prof. Rick Warner**



Carlson Hall 319 7:30-8:20 MWF

Office Hours: Wed. 1-3 pm AEB 340 richard.warner@m.cc.utah.edu

581-5294 University of Utah Spring 1999



This course surveys changes in religious thought and practice through five
centuries of Latin American history. The cultural clash and fusion that
followed the initial encounters between Europeans, Africans and Native
Americans involved confrontations between diverse religious traditions. Over
time, the Catholic Church became a principal unifying institution in the
region, and challenges to its power have increased into the modern period.
Themes we will consider include Native American religious belief and practice,
Roman Catholic missions and evangelization, the role of relgion in politics
and revolution, liberation theology and twentieth-century missions by other
Christian denominations.



Discussions

As much as possible, this course will be conducted as a seminar. As such, all
of us are participants in our endeavor to understand more about the religious
history of Latin America. Preparation for and participation in discussions are
very important; many voices will make this journey a fascinating one. Class
members are encouraged to express their opinions freely, and to respect the
beliefs and statements of others.



To facilitate our discussions of course literature, students must prepare
brief "discussion provokers," which will be due in class on the day of the
discussion. A handout will be distributed during the first week of class which
provides suggestions for the preparation of these papers. We will have ten
such discussions; students must prepare at least seven discussion provokers,
and everyone should prepare papers for the first two discussions. Under no
circumstances will discussion papers be accepted after the end of class on the
day of the discussion.



Term Paper

Each student will write a ten to fifteen page term paper on a topic of her or
his choice, in consultation with the professor. Topic ideas will be
distributed the first week of class. Work on the term paper will progress in
stages, including preparation of a working bibliography and prospectus, rough
draft and final presentation. Students will report their progress to the class
several times during the process. At the end of the semester, each student
will discuss their project with the class for ten to fifteen minutes.
Attendance at these class meetings is mandatory.



Final Exam

A final take-home examination will be based on course readings and
discussions. The exam will consist of two essays, each of about three to four
pages.



GRADING

Class Participation 25%

Includes discussion provokers.

Term Paper 50%

Includes timely completion of bibliography, rough draft and final

presentation.

Final Exam 25%



Course Texts Available at University Bookstore and on reserve at Marriott
Library:



William Christian, Local Religion in Sixteenth-Century Spain

Inga Clendinnen, Ambivalent Conquests: Maya and Spaniard in Yucatan, 1517-1570

H. McKennie Goodpasture, Cross and Sword: An Eyewitness History of
Christianity in Latin America

Erick Langer and Robert H. Jackson, eds., The New Latin American Mission
History

Selections from Ernesto Cardenal, The Gospel in Solentiname (on reserve)

David Stoll, Is Latin America Turning Protestant?



COURSE SCHEDULE



WEEK 1.

1/11 Beginnings



1/13 Latin America: Places and Peoples

Hand Out Topic Suggestions



1/15 Latin American Religions: Themes and Questions



WEEK 2.

1/18 HOLIDAY



1/20 Native Traditions



1/22 African Traditions



WEEK 3.

1/25 Spain of the Catholic Monarchs

Have Term Paper Topic Selected by now.



1/27 DISCUSS Christian



1/29 Meet In Library: Bibliographic Search Orientation



WEEK 4.

2/1 Spiritual Conquest



2/3 DISCUSS Clendinnen



2/5 Colonial Catholicism

WEEK 5.

2/8 Popular Christianity



2/10 FILM--"Flowers for Guadalupe" Bibliography and Prospectus due



2/12 DISCUSS Goodpasture, chs. 2-4



WEEK 6.

2/16 Frontier Missions



2/17 DISCUSS Jackson ed.



2/19 Female Religious Vocations



WEEK 7.

2/22 DISCUSS progress on projects



2/24 Colonial Church and Liberalism



2/26 DISCUSS chs. 6-7 Goodpasture



WEEK 8.

3/1 Fusions: Religion in Brazil



3/3 Fusions: Religion in the Caribbean



3/5 Research time. Extended office hours.



WEEK 9.

3/8 ROUGH DRAFT DUE. NO EXCEPTIONS

cooperative learning exercise



3/10 FILM



3/12 DISCUSS Good pasture chs. 9 and 11



SPRING BREAK



WEEK 10.

3/22 Vatican II and Medillin



3/24 Liberation Theology



3/26 DISCUSS Goodpasture ch. 13 and selections from The Gospel in Solentiname



WEEK 11.

3/29 FILM Jesuits in El Salvador



3/31 Protestant Missions



4/2 DISCUSS Goodpasture chs. 10, 12, 14



WEEK 12.

4/5 FILM "Onward Christian Soldiers" (Pentecostal missions)



4/7 Latin America Religion today



4/9 DISCUSS Stoll



WEEK 13.

4/12 Writing Day. Extended Office Hours



4/14 Writing Day. Extended Office Hours



4/16 FINAL PAPERS DUE

PRESENTATIONS--attendance mandatory



WEEK 14.

4/19 PRESENTATIONS--attendance mandatory



4/21 PRESENTATIONS--attendance mandatory



4/23 PRESENTATIONS--attendance mandatory



WEEK 15.

4/26 COURSE CONCLUSION



4/28 Exam Review



  

