"Transformations of Language" (Spring 1991, University of Pennsylvania)

This syllabus outlines a course I taught once that anticipates some of my
later teaching. There is also a
[bibliography](transformations.bibliography.html) associated with this
structured set of readings.

I. Introduction

II. Matter and Form: the principal media of ancient writing, the history of
their introduction and use; how written artifacts came into circulation; who
consumed them and how; what kind of evidence survives to illuminate these and
related questions.

  * F.G. Kenyon, _Books and Readers in Ancient Greece and Rome_
  * F.W. Hall, _A Companion to Classical Texts_
  * B. Bischoff, _Latin Palaeography_
  * E.G. Turner, _Greek Papyri: An Introduction_
  * A.G. Gordon, _Illustrated Introduction to Latin Epigraphy_
  * G. Susini, _The Roman Stonecutter_
  * A.K. Bowman and J.D. Thomas, _Vindolanda: The Latin Writing-Tablets_ (London, 1983) 
  * Reynolds and Wilson, _Scribes and Scholars_ __
  * R.J. Starr, `The Circulation of Literary Texts in the Roman World,' _Classical_ _Quarterly_ 37(1987), 213-23 
  * R.J. Starr, `The Used-Book Trade in the Roman World,' _Phoenix_ 44(1990), 148ff. 

III. Greeks Bearing Gifts: literacy itself came earlier to the Greeks and the
scholarly study of the interplay of oral and literate cultures has been far
livelier in the case of the Greeks; but the Greeks were also aware that the
value of writing is ambiguous.

  * E. Havelock, _Preface to Plato_
  * E. Havelock, _The Literate Revolution_
  * R. Thomas, _Oral Tradition and Written Record_
  * T. Lentz, _Orality and Literacy_
  * B. Gentili, _Poetry and its public in ancient Greece : from Homer to the fifth century_
  * B. Frischer, _The Sculpted Word_
  * G. Ferrari, _Listening to the Cicadas_ (on the _Phaedrus_ ) 
  * On Homer especially, F.A. Wolf, _Prolegomena to Homer_ , M. Parry, _Homeric Writings_ , A. Lord, _Singer of Tales_

IV. The persuasive word: rhetoric. The rise and function of the effective
orator at Rome; the differences in status and function between early and later
republic, early and later empire; the particular prestige of Cicero; the
prestige of rhetoric itself.

  * Anonymous, _Rhetorica ad Herennium_
  * Cicero, _On the Orator_ ; _The Orator_ ; _Brutus_
  * Quintilian, _Institutio Oratoria_
  * Tacitus, _Dialogue Concerning Orators_
  * Seneca the Elder, _Suasoriae et Controversiae_
  * Kennedy, _Art of Rhetoric in the Roman World_
  * Kennedy, _Greek Rhetoric under Christian Emperors_ 

V. The persuasive word at a distance: letter-writing. Who wrote; to whom; why;
difference between `private' and `public' (if any); publication of letter
collections.

  * Cicero, _Letters_
  * Pliny the Younger, _Letters_
  * J.L. White, ed., _Studies in Ancient Letter Writing_ (= _Semeia_ 22; Chico, Cal., 1982) 

VI. The persuasive word at a distance, from on high: imperial edicts. Who
wrote; to whom; why; the power of the written word; the impotence of the
written word.

  * Augustus, _Res Gestae Divi Augusti_ , ed. P.A. Brunt (or other editions) 
  * Pliny, _Letters_ (book 10) 
  * C. Pharr, ed. and trans., _The Theodosian Code_
  * A. Watson, ed. and trans., _The Digest of Justinian_
  * F. Millar, _The Emperor in the Roman World_

VII. The persuasive word spread over space and time: Jesus and Apollonius. A
particular genre (`biography') employed to give the acts and words of a
charismatic figure power beyond the range of his voice; reliability of such
documents; their role in shaping and motivating communities of readers.

  * G. Anderson, _Philostratus_
  * A. Schweitzer, _The Quest for the Historical Jesus_
  * J. Robinson, _The New Quest for the Historical Jesus_
  * S. Neill, _The Interpretation of the New Testament, 1861-1961_
  * P. Achtemeier, ` _Omne verbum sonat_ : The New Testament and the Oral Environment of Late Western Antiquity', _Journal of Biblical Literature_ 109(1990), 3-27 
  * W. Kelber, _The Oral and the Written Gospel_
  * B. Gerhardsson, _Memory and Manuscript_
  * J. Neusner, _Oral Tradition in Judaism_ (and other titles) 

VIII. The authoritative text. The book itself as the center of veneration; the
organization and management of the community joined by sharing a common sacred
text; what makes one text sacred, another not; written texts in `pagan',
Jewish, and Christian religious communities.

  * C.H. Roberts, _Manuscript, Society and Belief in Early Christian Egypt_ (London, 1979) 
  * C.H. Roberts and T. Skeat, _The Birth of the Codex_
  * _The Cambridge History of the Bible_ (volume 1)

IX. Mediators of the authoritative text. The day-to-day mechanics of creating
and maintaining the textual community of early Christianity. The spoken word,
the significant gesture, the written text, and the oral exposition of the
written text.

  * A. Bouley, _From freedom to formula: the evolution of the eucharistic prayer from oral improvisation to written texts_ (Washington, DC, 1981). 
  * J.A. Jungmann, _The Early Liturgy_
  * F. van der Meer, _Augustine the Bishop_ 277ff 
  * G. Dix, _The Shape of the Liturgy_

X. Living with the authoritative text. Monasticism as cultural movement; the
place of the written `rule' and the oral authority of the teacher; the place
of scriptural texts in the life of the community; the authority of venerated
leaders of former generations.

  * J. Leclercq, _Love of Learning and Desire for God_
  * D.J. Chitty, _The Desert a City_
  * J. Decarreux, _Monks and Civilization_
  * P. Rousseau, _Ascetics, Authority, and the Church_
  * D. Knowles, _Christian Monasticism_
  * J. Cassian, _Institutes_ and _Conferences_
  * _The Rule of the Master_
  * Gregory the Great, _Dialogues_ , book 2 (life of Benedict)

XI. Word and text at the margins of culture. Penetration of the culture of the
written word into geographical and social milieux removed, and even alienated,
from the dominant oligarchies and central regions of the Mediterranean world.
Readings here can range the most widely.

  * R. Lane Fox, _Pagans and Christians_
  * G. W. Bowersock, _Hellenism in Late Antiquity_
  * Sebastian Brock, _Syriac Perspectives on Late Antiquity_ , chapter II, `Greek into Syriac and Syriac into Greek'; supplement with J.B. Segal, _Edessa, the Blessed City_
  * _Egeria's Travels_ (ed. Wilkinson) 
  * _The Passion of Perpetua and Felicity_
  * E.J. Champlin, _Final Judgments_ (about Romans writing their wills) 

What about Diogenes of Oenoanda, who carved the teachings of Epicurus
magnificently in stone for the edification and instruction of his townsmen?
What about the treatise in Greek on hieroglyphics and their meaning by
Horapollon? What about the stenographic transcript of the debate at Carthage
in 411 between the schismatic Donatists and the imperially-supported
Catholics? What about the elaborately illustrated manuscript of treatises on
surveying preserved at the great German library of Wolfenb¨¹ttel? What about
the story in Bede's _Ecclesiastical History_ about the illiterate bard
Caedmon?

XII. The view from the scriptorium. After antiquity; the culture of the
`successor kingdoms'; the `island of saints and scholars'?; the `Carolingian
Renaissance'.

* P. Rich¨¦, _Education and Culture in the Barbarian West_
* E. Auerbach, _Literary Language and Its Public in Late Antiquity and the Latin Middle Ages_
* L. Bieler, _Ireland: Harbinger of the Middle Ages_
* M. and L. DePaor, _Early Christian Ireland_
* B. Bischoff, _Latin Palaeography_
* C. De Hamel, _A History of Illuminated Manuscripts_
* J.J. O'Donnell, _Cassiodorus_ (reserved in Cl. St. seminar) 
* R. Wright, _Late Latin and Early Romance_

XIV. Theoretical reflections. So what? Is it possible to abstract from a study
of this sort general principles that can help in the interpretation of other
cultural phenomena? Is technology determinism? Is the human mind an unchanging
constant merely taking various different guises from time to time?

  * M. McLuhan, _Understanding Media_
  * I. Illich, _ABC: The Alphabetization of the Popular Mind_
  * J. Goody, _Literacy in Traditional Societies_ (and other titles by him) 
  * W. Ong, _Orality and Literacy_
  * H. Innis, _Empire and Communications_
  * E.A. Havelock, _Origins of Western Literacy_ 

