#  ![](arapacis1.jpg)

#  Ancient Rome



EUH 3411 005/ HIS 5934 AV 442

|

pkaplan@unf.edu  
  
---|---  
  
Dr. Philip Kaplan

|

Office: 8/2533  
  
Times: Monday-Wednesday 12-1:15

|

Phone: 620-2886  
  
Room: 2/2083

|

Office hours: T 1:00-2:00, W 1:30-2:30, R 2:00-3:00 & by appt.  
  
> > Rome rose from a small city in central Italy to control one of the largest
empires the world has ever known. In the course of this remarkable rise, the
Romans needed to learn how to govern an enormous territory which contained a
diverse assortment of peoples. The legal and administrative structures of the
Roman state, its religious and artistic traditions, its physical
infrastructure, cities, and monuments, spread throughout Europe, the
Mediterranean and the Near East, profoundly affecting the cultural development
of these regions. In this course, we will trace the history of Rome's rise to
greatness from the early days of the Republic, through the establishment of
the Principate, to the transformations of the later Empire. We will see how it
encountered, absorbed, and was influenced by the surrounding peoples. We will
also examine how the characteristic institutions of Roman life emerged, and
how they shaped the lives both of the elites and of the common people. We will
rely on text books, and several primary sources, translations of significant
works of Latin literature, as well as inscriptions and the archaeological
remains and artistic monuments of Rome which will help us to understand how
the Romans saw themselves and their world.

###  Requirements:

> > Attendance and participation in class is expected for this class. You
should read the material and come to class prepared to discuss it.  In
addition, the course will make use of Blackboard
([blackboard.unf.edu](http://blackboard.unf.edu)) for its supplementary
materials and for on-line discussion. Familiarize yourself with Blackboard;
you will be expected to post weekly contributions to on-line discussions about
the readings. You will also be expected to do one presentation on a Roman art
object or monument, in order to enrich the class's exposure to the archaeology
and artistic heritage of Rome. The rest of your grade will come from a mid-
term, a final exam, and a 5-page paper in which you will analyze a Roman work
of literature in terms of what it tells us about Roman life.

> > *In-class and on-line participation: 20%

>>

>> *[Paper](romepap.html): 30%

>>

>> *[Presentation](Romegroup.html): 10%

>>

>> *Mid-term exam: 20%

>>

>> *Final exam: 20%

>>

>> *Extra credit (worth 5%): a 3-page review of a movie based on some aspect
of Roman history, comparing it to the ancient sources

>>

>> ###  Graduate Section Requirements:

>>

>> Graduate students are responsible for all of the work assigned to
undergraduates. In addition, Graduate students will be expected to turn in a
short (2-3 page) review/analysis of a recent scholarly work on some aspect of
Roman history. The final paper that the Graduate students turn in will be 10
pages long, and will involve a comparative evaluation of multiple ancient
sources, as well as some investigation of recent research on the topic. In
addition, Graduate students will be expected to do a longer (10- 15 minute)
presentation on the subject of their paper, to be scheduled in consultation
with the professor

>>

>> ###  Attendance and classroom policies:

>>

>> *Attendance is required. If you miss the roll call or attendance sign-in at
the beginning of class, you will be recorded as absent that day. A pattern of
absenses will affect your grade; more than eight absenses will result in
failure.

>>

>> *Civility in class is expected: do not talk while others are speaking to
the class, read or do work not relevant to the class, sleep or create any
other disturbances. If you must leave early, notify the teacher in advance.
Please turn off phones and beepers; if you must have one on, set it to
vibrate.

>>

>> *All work you turn in for this class must be your own, and must have been
produced for this class. Any violations of academic integrity will result in
failure for the assignment, probable failure of the class, and possible
further administrative action.

>>

>> ###  Texts:

>>

>> _A History of Rome._ Marcel Le Glay, Jean-Louis Voisin, Yann Le Bohec.
Blackwell Publishers, 1996. Paperback. ISBN: 0631194584

>>

>> _The Early History of Rome: Books I-V of The History of Rome From Its
Foundation (Ab Urbe Condita)._  
>  Titus Livy,  Aubrey De Selincourt (Translator), R. M. Ogilive
(Introduction). Viking Penguin, June  1972\. Paperback, 424pp. ISBN:
0140441042

>>

>> _The Rise of the Roman Empire.  _Polybius.  Ian Scott-Kilvert (Translator)
F. W. Walbank (Introduction). Viking Penguin, January  1980.Paperback, 574pp.
ISBN: 0140443622

>>

>> _Selected Political Speeches.  _Marcus Tullius Cicero,  Michael Grant
(Translator). Viking Penguin,  
>  December  1977\. Paperback, 335pp.  ISBN: 0140442146

>>

>> _The Twelve Caesars  _(Penguin Classics) by Suetonius, Robert Graves
(Translator). Paperback - 363 pages. Reprint edition (August 1991). Viking Pr;
ISBN: 0140440720

>>

>> _The Golden Ass.  _ Lucius Apuleius  P. G. Walsh (Translator). Oxford
University Press, Incorporated, March  1999\. Paperback, 277pp. ISBN:
019283888  
>  
>>

>> ###  Internet Resources

>>

>> *The Dalton School in New York maintains the [Rome
Project](http://www.dalton.org/groups/rome/)  site, a directory of on-line
resources on Rome.

>>

>> *[Perseus Project](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/) is a site devoted mainly
to the art, archaeology and literature of Greece, but it has a selection of
Roman texts in Latin and in translation.

>>

>> *The [Classics and Mediterranean
Archaeology](http://rome.classics.lsa.umich.edu/welcome.html) site at the
University of Michican has an enormous list of sites devoted to the study of
the ancient world

>>

>> *[Romarch](http://acad.depauw.edu/romarch/) is a gateway to on-line
resources for the study of Roman art and archaeology on the web.

>>

>>
*[LacusCurtius](http://www.ukans.edu/history/index/europe/ancient_rome/E/Roman/home.html)
is a rich collection of resources and links on Rome

>>

>> *[The Classics Page at ad Fontes Academy](http://patriot.net/~lillard/cp/):
Latin texts, links to resources

>>

>> * [Greek and Latin Classics
Resources](http://lcweb.loc.gov/global/classics/claslink.html#special) : a
Library of Congress Internet Resource Page

>>

>> *[Illustrated History of the Roman Empire](http://www.roman-
empire.net/index.html) : cute, but hokey, site with some good images of
reenactments, etc.

>>

>> ###  

###  Schedule:



**Date**

|

**Topic**

|

**Readings**  
  
---|---|---  
  
Jan 9

|

Introduction

|

Le Glay, pp. xxi-xxiii  
  
1/14

|

Early Italy

|

Le Glay, pp. 2-18;  Livy Book 1.1-16 (pp. 33-51)  
  
1/16

|

The Foundation of Rome: Myth and History

|

Le Glay, pp. 19-37; Livy Book 1.16-60 (pp. 51-101)  
  
1/21

|

MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. DAY

|

SCHOOL CLOSED  
  
1/23

|

Early Republic: Internal Struggles

|

Le Glay pp. 39-58; Livy Book 2.1-8 (pp.105-115);  3.33-3.58 (pp. 219-247)  
  
1/28

|

Expansion in Italy

|

Le Glay pp. 59-71; Livy Book 4  
  
1/30

|

Punic Wars

|

Le Glay pp. 71-80; Polybius Books III; VII-XI; XIV-XV; XXXVI  
  
Feb 4

|

Rome and the Greek East

|

Le Glay pp. 81-96; Polybius Books XV, XVIII, XXIV, XXXI (pp. 482-534)  
  
2/6

|

Roman Republican Society

|

Le Glay, pp. 96-100; 103-104; Polybius Book VI; [descriptions of the slave
revolts](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/3slaverevolttexts.htm); scenes
from _Spartacus_  
  
2/11

|

The Gracchi and the Social Wars

|

Le Glay, pp. 100-103; 105-7; [Appian, On the
Gracchi](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/appian-civwars1.html)  
  
2/13

|

Marius and Sulla

|

Le Glay, pp. 113-120  
  
2/18

|

The Crisis of the Republic

|

Le Glay, pp. 120-126 Cicero, _Against Lucius Sergius Catalina_  
  
2/20

|

Julius Caesar

|

Le Glay, pp. 127-132; Suetonius, _Julius Caesar;_ scenes from _Julius Caesar_  
  
2/25

|

Anthony, Octavian and the Civil War

|

Le Glay, 132-137; Cicero, _The First Philippic Against Marcus Antonius_ ;
scenes from _Cleopatra_  
  
2/27

|

World of the Late Republic

|

Le Glay, 107-111; 137-144  
  
Mar 4

|

**MIDTERM EXAM**

|

bring bluebooks  
  
3/6

|

Augustus and the Principate

|

Le Glay, 146-155; 169-181; 193-196; 208-209 Suetonius, _Augustus;_[Res Gestae
Divi Augusti](http://classics.mit.edu/Augustus/deeds.html)  
  
3/11

|

The Julio-Claudian Emperors

|

Le Glay, pp. 211-227; Suetonius, _Tiberius, Gaius (Caligula), Claudius, Nero;_
scenes from _I, Claudius_  
  
3/13

|

Rome and the Provinces

|

Le Glay, 155-168; 196-207  
  
3/18

|

SPRING BREAK

|  
  
3/20

|

SPRING BREAK

|  
  
3/25

|

Early Imperial Society

|

Le Glay, pp. 181-193; 228-237; [The Banquet of Trimalchio, from Petronius'
Satyricon](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/petronius-satyricon-
feast.html); scenes from _Ben Hur_  
  
3/27

|

The Flavian Emperors

|

Le Glay, 239-258; Suetonius, _Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian, Titus,
Domitian_  
  
Apr 1

|

The Household, Slaves, and Women

|

Le Glay, 259-266; readings from  [Women's Life in Greece and
Rome](http://www.stoa.org/diotima/anthology/wlgr/wlgr-romanlegal.shtml), M.
Lefkowitz and M. Fant, eds.  
  
4/3

|

The Antonines

|

Le Glay, 267-296; Apuleius, _[The Golden
Ass,](http://www.ancienthistory.about.com/homework/ancienthistory/library/bl/bl_text_apuleius.htm)
_ Books 1-3; scenes from _Gladiator_  
  
4/8

|

The Rise of the Provinces

|

Le Glay, 296-337; 375-390; Apuleius, Books 4-7; [Letters Between Trajan and
Pliny on the Administration of Asia
Minor](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/pliny-trajan1.html)  
  
4/10

|

The Severi and the Third Century Crisis

|

Le Glay, 339-368; 391-404; Apuleius, Books 8-11  
  
4/15

|

Diocletian and Constantine

|

Le Glay, 405-415; [Notitia
Dignitatum](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/notitiadignitatum.html);

[The Foundation of
Constantinople](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/sozomen-
constantinople1.html);

**Paper Due in Class**  
  
4/17

|

The World of Late Antiquity

|

Le Glay, 417-455; TBA  
  
4/22

|

The Rise of Christianity

|

Le Glay, 455-474; Apuleius, Book 11; Book of
[Acts](http://bible.gospelcom.net/cgi-
bin/bible?passage=ACTS+1&language=english&version=NIV); [Letter of Pliny to
Trajan](http://www.stolaf.edu/people/kchanson/pliny.html); [Letter of Julian
the Apostate to
Arsacius](http://campus.northpark.edu/history/classes/Sources/Julian.html)  
  
4/24

|

Decline and Fall?

|

Le Glay, 475-486; [Battle of
Adrianople](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/378adrianople.html)
;[Alaric's Sack of
Rome](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/ancient/410alaric.html)

