ARTS AND LETTERS 100g--SECTION 47467R  


_RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE AND THE MAKING OF WESTERN CULTURE_  


**Instructor:** Prof. Sheila Briggs **Place and Time:** MWF 11 THH 121

**Office Hours:** MW 1.30-2.30 PM

**Tel.:** (213) 740-0267

**Office:** THH 328H

**Course web site:** <http://www-bcf.usc.edu/~sbriggs/arlt100.htm> **_COURSE
SYLLABUS_**

  
  
  
  
  

**WHAT THIS COURSE IS ABOUT**

How to study cultures of the past. People in the past are not just like us but
in fancy dress. They thought and felt differently as well. This course looks
at that historical difference and outlines what methods are used to gain
understanding of past cultural experience. It also asks why do we today study
those who are historically different from us, and what reasons have been given
during the last two centuries of the modern West for the significance of the
past.

Which cultural past we are studying. "Western Civilization" is a construction,
i.e., a way of looking at the world which may or may not be shared by others.
Most importantly, its is often not the way the people understand or understood
themselves, whom are being described, "constructed," by others. For example,
Plato, the ancient Greek philosopher, and Augustine, the Christian theologian
in the late Roman Empire, would have found the word and concept of "Western
Civilization" totally alien. Yet, these two thinkers are seen as founders of
"Western Civilization." How are decisions made about what belongs and does not
belong to a cultural tradition, such as "Western Civilization?" How are
decisions made about what is significant in the cultural past--why are Plato
and Augustine considered more significant than other ancient thinkers? These
questions are going to be prominent in the course.

How religion is central to the study of culture. Religion is a central feature
of culture, and this alone makes the study of religion important to
understanding a culture. "Religion" is derived from a Latin word, meaning
"binding together." In ancient and medieval societies religion performed
functions which would later be taken over by other social and cultural
institutions. Religious practices were "bound together" with other social and
cultural practices, which today we distinguish from religion. Christianity
claimed to make sense of the past, by binding together all the events and
conditions of the past into a single story--how God created the world and then
saved it after human beings had ruined God's original plan. This "binding
together" of different historical contexts by Christianity promoted a sense of
continuity with the past and laid the foundation for later secular
constructions such as "Western Civilization." Because of the "binding
together" activities of religion, religious texts, art and music are often the
best and sometimes the only way to gain insight into how people thought and
felt and into why, therefore, they made their culture the way they did.

What this course is not about. We will not be concerned in this course whether
religious belief or any set of religious beliefs are justified. Examining the
truth claims of religious beliefs is a valid academic study but it is not our
subject-matter. Instead, our interest will be with religious beliefs only as
part of the broader religious practices and institutions in their society. We
will be asking not whether religious beliefs of people in the past make sense
to us, but what meanings did they carry for those who held them, what were
their motivations and reasons for religious beliefs, which may seem strange
and absurd at times to us.  


**REQUIRED READING**

_The Epic of Gilgamesh_

Euripides, _Bacchae_

Apuleius, _The Golden Ass_

Augustine, _Confessions_

_The Rule of Benedict_

Julian of Norwich, _Revelations of Divine Love_

John Bunyan, _The_ _Pilgrim's Progress_

Friedrich Schleiermacher, _**On Religion. Speeches to its Cultured
Despisers**_

Students must also read the shorter texts, distributed in class, and be
familiar with the music sources and visual materials as they are presented in
the course.  


**COURSE OUTLINE**  


Aug. 28. **Introduction to the course**. We will discuss what is meant by
"critical" in light of the expectations of students in ARLT 100 courses that
they develop their skills in critical reading, writing and thinking. All these
skills are related to the use of _language_. Language is the basic medium
through which social and cultural relations are transacted. By studying how
people use language and how languages change over time we can see what is
distinctive about a particular culture and how it differs from other cultures.
But we also are language-users, and the cultural norms and assumptions of our
own society or social group are embedded in our use of language. Critical
reading, writing and thinking are associated with a sense of how we and others
use language and with the ability to assess the significance of differences
and similarities between uses of language.  


Aug. 30- Oct. 13. **Before the West** (Major texts: _The Epic of Gilgamesh_ ;
Euripides, _Bacchae_ ; Apuleius, _The Golden Ass_ ; Augustine, _Confessions_
). The goal in this part of the course is to realize the distance between
ourselves and the past, especially the remote past of the ancient Near East
and the ancient Mediterranean. The ancient Near East is the broader
geographical and historical context in which ancient Israel and the Hebrew
scriptures emerged. In later antiquity the ancient Mediterranean became
dominated by Greek culture and Roman political power, and is therefore often
called the Greco-Roman world. Christianity began in this Greco-Roman world.
Christianity saw itself as the successor of ancient Israel and created a
Judeo-Christian tradition which became foundational for later European and
North American societies. In this sense Christianity was also instrumental in
creating the "West." Yet, before Christianity and the West there was a broad
diversity of religions and cultural experiences and practices, linked to these
religions. We will be exploring the range of religious and cultural diversity
in the ancient world. We will, thus, be looking at what was _not_ selected by
Christianity. Yet, we will also be looking at ancient Christianity's various
stances to its broader culture and its process of selection and adaptation of
culture.  


**The Epic of Gilgamesh**  


Aug. 30-Sept. 1. Reading: _The Epic of Gilgamesh_ , Introduction and pp. 2-47.

Sept. 6. Reading: _The Epic of Gilgamesh_ , pp. 50-108.

Portfolio exercise: Read chapters 2 and 3 ( the story of the Creation and
Fall) and chapters 6, verse 5 through 9, verse 17 (the story of the Flood) in
the Book of Genesis in the Bible.  


(N.B. Biblical references are normally given in a shortened form. So, the
above would read "Genesis 2-3 and 6:5-9:17").  


What parallels do you find between the _Epic of Gilgamesh_ and the stories in
Genesis. A parallel does not mean that the two texts have to have the same
wording or even that they say the same thing in one or more places. A parallel
exists between two texts where they have a topic, phrase or image in common,
or where they describe the same or similar events, settings or characters. The
use of the common elements may be very different between the two texts. For
example, events may occur in different sequences or a common image may occur
at different points in a text and be given a different meaning. How many
parallels can you find? Make a short note of them in your portfolio and be
prepared to discuss them in class.  


**Euripides' _Bacchae_**  


Sept. 8. Reading: Euripides' ****_Bacchae_ , lines 1-911 (pp.3-43)

Sept. 11. Reading: Euripides' ****_Bacchae_ , lines 912 to end (pp.43-70)

Sept. 13. Optional Reading: Sutherland's critical essay on Euripides'
_Bacchae_ , pp. 85-142.  


Portfolio exercise (to be discussed in class on Sept.11 and 13):

Do you notice any similarities between Gilgamesh and Pentheus? Do they have a
similar relationship with the gods and do they receive a similar fate at the
hands of the gods? How would you characterize the gods, depicted in the _Epic
of Gilgamesh_ and in Euripides' _Bacchae_? Why do you think women were
attracted more to the cult of Dionysus? Write one or two pages addressing the
above questions.  


**Apuleius' _The Golden Ass_**

Sept. 15. Reading: Apuleius' _The Golden Ass_ , pp. 1-57

Sept.18. Reading: Apuleius' _The Golden Ass_ , pp. 58-119

Portfolio exercise (to be discussed in class on Sept. 18):

Write a few sentences on what you think might have led the second-century
inhabitants of the Roman Empire to believe so strongly in witchcraft and magic
and often to resort to them.

Sept. 20 Reading: Apuleius' _The Golden Ass,_ pp. 120-137

Portfolio exercise (to be discussed in class on Sept. 20):

_Psyche_ is the Greek word for soul and the story of Cupid and Psyche in _The_
****_Golden_ ****_Ass_ is usually understood as a parable about the human
soul. What points do you think Apuleius is making in this parable about human
moral and spiritual development?

Sept. 22 Reading: Apuleius' _The Golden Ass_ , pp. 138-190

Sept.25. Reading: Apuleius' _The Golden Ass_ , pp. 191-240

Sept. 27. No reading assignment. Mid-term examination due on Sept. 27.  


**Augustine's _Confessions_**  


Sept. 29 Reading: Augustine's _Confessions_ , pp. 3-34

Portfolio exercise: Write a paragraph on what Augustine thinks his youthful
robbing of a pear tree shows about the nature of evil.

Oct. 2. Reading: Augustine's _Confessions_ , pp. 35-89

Oct. 4. Reading: Augustine's _Confessions_ , pp. 90-132

Oct. 6. Reading: Augustine's _Confessions_ , pp. 133-178

Portfolio exercise: (to be discussed on Oct. 4 and 6). Does Augustine find
love of God incompatible with the ordinary forms of loving another human
being?

Oct. 9. Reading: Augustine's _Confessions_ , pp. 179-220

Portfolio exercise: What role does memory for Augustine play in human
experience?

Oct. 11-13. Reading: Augustine's _Confessions_ , pp. 221-305.  


Oct. 16-Nov. 3. **Monks, mystics and the creation of a Christian culture**
(Major texts: _The Rule of Benedict_ ; Julian of Norwich, _Revelations of
Divine Love_ ). The term "Middle Ages" has been used to designate a period of
a thousand years between the collapse of the Roman Empire in the fifth century
and the discovery of the New World in the late fifteenth century. Obviously,
there were great changes within such a long time period. The cultural unity of
the ancient Mediterranean was shattered. On the southern shore of the
Mediterranean the Arab invasions of the seventh century led to an Islamic
culture. The northwestern territories of the old Roman Empire were conquered
by Germanic tribes. Eventually, this whole area became Christianized and it
was as Christendom that Europe as a geographical and cultural region began to
emerge. Medieval Europe was saturated with religion in every aspect of its
life. In this part of the course we will be looking at how the origins of so
much of European culture in medieval Christianity has affected its later
development, even into modern and more secular times. We will be paying
particular attention to two features of culture. First, we will explore the
interaction of written texts with other cultural artifacts--music,
architecture and visual representations. Second, we will investigate the
relations between popular and elite cultures.  


**_The Rule of Benedict_**

Oct. 16-20. Reading: _The Rule of Benedict_

Portfolio exercise: What attitudes and behavior does Benedict want a monk to
cultivate? How would a monk spend a normal day in the monastery?  


Oct.23. No reading assignment.. First paper due on Oct.23.  
    
    


**Julian of Norwich, _Revelations of Divine Love_**

Oct. 25. Reading: Julian of Norwich, _Revelations of Divine Love_ , pp. 11-44.

Oct. 27. Reading: Julian of Norwich, _Revelations of Divine Love_ , pp.
61-105.

Oct. 30-Nov.1. Reading: Julian of Norwich, _Revelations of Divine Love_ , pp.
106-154.

Nov.3. Reading: Julian of Norwich, _Revelations of Divine Love_ , pp. 155-213

Portfolio exercise: Make a chart of the three persons of the Christian Trinity
and under each one of the three write the names and terms with which Julian of
Norwich describes each one. Does anything strike you about Julian's language
for God?  


During these sessions we will be listening to medieval music and looking at
medieval architecture. We will pay special attention to the music and poetry
of Hildegard of Bingen.  


Nov.6-17. **Piety as culture** (Major text: John Bunyan, _The Pilgrim's
Progress)_. The period between the sixteenth century and the mid-eighteenth
century has conventionally been described as the "early modern period." Over
the last twenty years historians have challenged this designation. Some have
pointed out the strong continuities that would make the period from ca.
1250-1650 a coherent unity. Others see a fundamental break occurring in the
second half of the eighteenth century which would render all earlier periods
essentially "premodern" when compared with the modernity, emerging in the late
eighteenth century. What difference does how we cut up the past make to
cultural inquiry? We will take up this question and others which get at the
issue of what is the relation of this period to modernity? The Protestant
Reformation of the sixteenth century ushered in a time of intense religious
conflict, which lasted into the middle of the next century. At the same time,
we encounter an increasing significance of the individual. In the political
realm the authority of religious institutions is contracting and that of the
state is expanding. We will be posing the historical question of whether
society and culture were becoming more secular. In this part of the course we
will be taking a more explicit look at the relationship between texts (and
other cultural artifacts) and their socio-political contexts. We will also be
studying piety as religious practices which integrate theological convictions,
moral and aesthetic judgments with individual and group behavior. Does piety
in these centuries have a cultural role in mediating between the claims of the
individual and the demands of the state and in adjudicating the conflicts
between them?  


**John Bunyan's _Pilgrim's Progress_**  


Nov.6-8. Reading: John Bunyan, _The Pilgrim's Progress_ , Introduction and pp.
3-77

Nov. 10. Reading: John Bunyan, _The Pilgrim's Progress_ , pp. 78-143

Portfolio exercise: How does Bunyan's description of Vanity-Fair reflect
Puritan social criticism of seventeenth-century England?  


Nov.13-15. Reading: John Bunyan, _The Pilgrim's Progress_ , pp. 147-278

Portfolio exercise: Contrast the description of an individual's spiritual
journey in the first part of _The Pilgrim's Progress_ with Bunyan's greater
emphasis on the Christian community in the second part? What do we learn of
the Puritan experience and ideals of community?

Nov.17. No reading assignment.. Second paper due on Nov. 17.  


Nov.20-Dec.6. **Religion as Experience** (Major text: Friedrich
Schleiermacher, **_On Religion. Speeches to its Cultured Despisers_** ). This
section of the course examines the role of religion in the modern societies of
Europe and North America. Between the late eighteenth and twentieth centuries
Christianity lost most of its authority in the socio-political area and many
of its public roles. This occurred through actions such as the separation of
church and state. At the same time, profound changes in culture accompanied
the rise of modern industrial society. Although the Christian churches had
become politically marginal, debates about religion were crucial to this
cultural transformation. We will be concentrating on four interlinked
phenomena. First, we will study how modern Westerners came to see themselves
as _existing in history_. This distinguishing mark of modern Western culture
is expressed in theological and philosophical accounts of "historical
consciousness," the creation of modern historical scholarship and such issues
as "historicism." Essential to this shift in modern self-understanding was
religion becoming an object of historical study. Christian thinkers claimed
that their religion had as its core historical consciousness and had therefore
led to modern Western culture. Second, from the late eighteenth century
onwards Europeans and North Americans developed the view of themselves as
constituting "Western Civilization," which was distinct from (and some thought
opposed to) other cultural groups. This attitude was bolstered by the
historical study of Christianity and by the view of it as the historically
conscious religion and of Westerners possessing a unique historical
consciousness. Third, historical consciousness and the view that human beings
were divided into radically different cultures fostered new cultural
institutions and activities (museums, archaeology, anthropology) and the re-
shaping of old ones (universities, libraries). In some cases these were
substitutes for and competitors with religious institutions and practices, but
in other cases they were allies. Fourth, culture became the expression of
human experience and cultural artifacts the representations of human mental
states, moral and psychological dispositions. Modern religious practices and
influential writings on religion encouraged this emphasis on human experience
as the measure of all things. Religious beliefs were no longer primarily about
God but about how human beings experienced God. The diversity of religious
beliefs both outside and within "Western Civilization" pointed to the
diversity of human religious experiences.  


**Friedrich Schleiermacher's _On Religion. Speeches to its Cultured
Despisers_**  


Nov. 20. Reading: Schleiermacher's _On Religion,_ Introduction and pp. 3-17.

Nov.22-27. Reading: Schleiermacher's _On Religion,_ pp. 18-54.

Portfolio exercise: What for Schleiermacher is religion really?

Nov. 29 Reading: Schleiermacher's _On Religion_ , pp. 55-71.

Portfolio exercise: How does a person become religious?

Dec. 1. Reading: Schleiermacher's _On Religion,_ pp. 72-94.

Portfolio exercise: Why does religious experience lead to the formation of
community?

Dec.4-6. Reading: Schleiermacher's _On Religion_ , pp. 95-124.

Portfolio exercise: What is the place of Christianity among the world's
religions?  


Dec. 8. **Conclusion: After the West**. All of us know the phrase "global
village." It is an image which points to the effects of several processes of
"globalization" which in the late twentieth century are occurring in the
social and cultural as well as in the political and economic domains. Many
modern assumptions are being questioned. The distinction between "Western" and
"Non-Western" is being blurred in a culturally diverse metropolis like Los
Angeles. For the first time, North Americans and Europeans are living in
religiously diverse societies, which comprise not only different strands of
Christianity and the older religious minority of Jews, but Muslims, Buddhists,
Hindus and members of countless other religions, large and small, old and new.
At the same time, many "postmodern" thinkers have disputed the claim that
culture is the expression of human experience. In fact, at the end of the
course we will be exploring the postmodern sensibility present today, i.e.,
the feeling that we have gone beyond the attitudes and values which
characterized the last two centuries. The word "postmodern" crops up
constantly in a vast range of contexts and with a baffling variety of
definitions, but in all cases it indicates this sensibility. As with other
aspects of contemporary culture it is difficult to say in such a varied
religious landscape what is central to religion. However, this does not mean
that religion is marginal to late twentieth-century society. Religion has many
centers in a postmodern world, and we will be looking at how older religious
ideas are dispersed in new ways throughout the culture.  


Dec. 8. No reading assignment.. Third paper due on Dec 8.  
    
    


**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

**Three** short papers of 5 pages which will test the student's critical
understanding of the course material. These papers will be due on **October
23, November 17** and **December 8**. Each paper carries 20% of the course
grade. More detailed instructions will be handed out with each paper
assignment.

**One** take-home mid-term examination, distributed in class on **September 20
and due in class on September 27**. This will carry 20% of the course grade.

**One** in-class final examination on Monday, December 11, 11.00 a.m. -1.00
p.m **.** It, too, will carry 20% of the course grade.

Each student is required to have one conference with the instructor after the
first paper assignment is returned to the student. Students will be asked to
sign up for an appointment.

In addition, each student is required to maintain a portfolio which will
contain ungraded assignments of course work. The instructor will collect this
portfolio at the conference with the student and on the last day of classes.
Students are also required to retain all graded course work throughout the
semester and to hand these assignments in with the portfolios on the last day
of class. The portfolios will serve as a measure of course participation. In
most cases the portfolios will not affect the course grade. However, a
portfolio which shows exceptionally diligent and intelligent work throughout
the semester may receive an additional third of a grade (e.g. from a B- to a
B). Conversely, a poorly maintained and incomplete portfolio may lead to a
reduction of a third of a grade (e.g. from a B- to a C+).

**No written assignment in the course will be accepted by fax or e-mail**. All
assignments must be physically handed to the instructor or to the School of
Religion office, where the student will receive a receipt.  


**EXPECTATIONS OF AND RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS IN THIS COURSE**

The most basic intention of Arts and Letters courses is to socialize freshmen
into the intellectual demands of college. It is hoped that students at the
beginning of their college careers will be excited to see how scholarship is
practiced in the humanities and what the contemporary questions and debates in
these fields are. These courses are designed to make substantial claims on
students' time and energy through heavy reading and writing assignments. This
may well be the toughest course you will take in college! You will find this
course more manageable if from the outset of your college career you develop
good academic habits.

**Don't cut class**. You are expected to attend every session. If you miss
class, then you are left to your own resources to make up the lost work. In
such cases, you can try borrowing a fellow student's notes or doing extra
reading on the session's topic, but you will have missed the class discussion.

**Hand in written assignments punctually**. Assignments handed in late may
lose points or not be graded at all! If you are having difficulties completing
an assignment, contact the instructor as soon as possible, before or by the
time the assignment is due. It is always easier to accommodate student
requests for time extensions on assignments, when these are presented _before_
an assignment is due. It is also important that students note the date and
time and attend the final examination. The final course grade must be
submitted soon after the final examination by the instructor. The final course
grade is precisely that. It cannot be altered by the instructor, and even
students with compelling reasons for not completing the work on time have to
undergo a long petition process which is often unsuccessful.

**All requests by students to the instructor must be made in person or by
letter, not by 'phone or e-mail**. If you have an urgent request, you may
'phone or e-mail my office, but you should follow up with either personal
contact or a letter.

**This course is writing-intensive, but is not intended to offer instruction
in writing**. Many of you will find it hard to reach the standards of college-
level writing. The Writing Center is there to help you. To use it, all you
need to do is make an appointment by 'phone or in person a few days in
advance. You can also try just walking in, but then you are not guaranteed an
appointment, and the center at times will be very busy. Writing Center
consultants will help you develop ideas and arguments and revise rough drafts
for the three papers required in the course. **Students, who achieve a "B-" or
lower grade on a paper, are required to make at least one appointment with the
Writing Center to revise their next paper**. The Writing Center is situated on
the third floor of Taper Hall (Tel.: 740-3691).

All students are expected to know and follow USC's rules on academic
integrity. Students must acknowledge all sources (books, journals, videos,
web-based and electronic materials, etc.) used in a paper, whether these are
directly quoted, paraphrased or their main ideas summarized. This can occur
through either footnotes or endnotes which provide the name of the author,
title and page reference. Although students are encouraged to work together on
course assignments, all students must submit a completed assignment which is
entirely produced by their own hand and not copied from another student's
work.

A web page is available for this course (http://www-
bcf.usc.edu/~sbriggs/arlt100.htm) for this course which will contain the text
of this course syllabus and all other material handed out by the instructor as
well as links to other web sites of interest to students taking this course.

 [Back to Course Main Page](http://www-bcf.usc.edu/~sbriggs/arlt100.htm)

