SYLLABUS  
**HISTORY OF MEXICO TO 1848**  
(HIST 3327)  
Dr. J.F. de la Teja

**SCOPE AND CONTENT**  
Modern Mexico is the heir of ethnic and cultural influences as diverse as the
Mesoamerican civilizations of the Olmecs and Maya, Classical Rome, and
Reconquista Spain. It is impossible to comprehend Mexico today without
understanding the precolumbian civilizations whose cultural influences endure,
the Spanish colonial experience through which the country was incorporated
into the world economy, and Mexico's early national experience which, among
other things, shaped the nature of its relationship with the United States.
This course will explore the variety of that experience through lectures,
readings, and writings examining the ethnic, social, economic, political, and
religious dimensions of Mexican history up to its war with the United States,
a war which not only defined Mexico geographically but set off a new struggle
for modernization.

**NOTE:** This syllabus and calendar are intended to provide you with all the
information necessary to successfully keep up with the course. Unless
expressly stated in class, the guidelines established herein are final. These
documents are also available on my homepage under
**[SYLLABI](http://www.history.swt.edu/Full-Time-
Faculty/WEBSHARE/WWWROOT/DelaTeja/Homepage.htm)**.

**STUDENT GOALS**

  * Understand major themes in Mexican history from the advent of human settlement to the loss of territory to the U.S.
  * Identify the major figures and the their roles in the colonial and early national periods
  * Acquire familiarity with the cultural and ethnic variety of early Mexico and its influences in national development
  * Increase critical thinking and writing skills
  * Acquire and/or increase proficiency in library and computer skills

  
**READINGS**  
Meyer, Sherman, Deeds, _The Course of Mexican History_ , 6th ed.  
Le¨®n Portilla, _The Broken Spears: The Aztec Account of the Conquest of
Mexico.  
_ Viqueira Alb¨¢n, _Propriety and Permissiveness in Bourbon Mexico_.  
Selected documents and readings.  


**REQUIRED WRITING**  
There will be three writing assignments during the semester, two book reviews
and a term project.

**The   book reviews** are to be critical appraisals of the required books,
**not** mere reports of their contents. Each review should be no more than
three pages long and contain the following elements:

Clearly state the theme and scope of the book being reviewed-what is it about;
what are the major arguments?

Discuss the organization and contents of the book-is it chronologically or
thematically organized; is the organization effective (does the book make
sense or is it confusing), and why or why not?

Analyze the use of sources-is a wide variety of sources used or only a limited
number; what is the balance between primary and secondary sources; does the
author discuss the sources in the text; are the author's statements clearly
documented?

Assess the value of the book-how does the book contribute to your body of
knowledge; who might form an appropriate audience for the book?

The review should be no more than 600 words long and should be formatted as
follows: typed (reasonably clean of "typos" and grammatical mistakes), double
spaced, one-inch margins on all sides on all pages, stapled at the upper left-
hand corner; title of the book, author, place of publication, press, date at
the top of the first page; skip four lines and begin the review; on the left
margin at the end of the review your name, skip a line, the semester and class
time (e.g. Spring 1995, 9 am). **_Failure to observe these rules will result
in a lower grade_**.

**For an example of how to properly organize and format a book review, see my
homepage under[BOOK REVIEWS](http://www.history.swt.edu/Full-Time-
Faculty/WEBSHARE/WWWROOT/DelaTeja/bookreviews.htm) and for proper grammatical
form see [GRAMMAR AND SPELLING](http://www.history.swt.edu/Full-Time-
Faculty/WEBSHARE/WWWROOT/DelaTeja/grammar&spelling.htm)**.

**The third writing assignment** is a term project of appropriate length on a
subject to be selected in consultation with the instructor. The purpose of the
project is for the student to look into one of the major themes in Mexican
history and examine how the issue has been treated by historians over time.
The student will be responsible for putting together a bibliography,
containing both books and periodical literature, from which the project will
be constructed.

**Note** : All papers should be written in standard English, with proper
grammar and spelling. Grades will be lowered for sloppy, poorly argued
writing, and for not meeting page limits. Please refer to the calendar for due
dates. For more details on writing an acceptable paper, see my homepage under
**[WRITING ASSIGNMENTS](http://www.history.swt.edu/Full-Time-
Faculty/WEBSHARE/WWWROOT/DelaTeja/writing-tips.htm)** for structural and
grammatical questions see under **[GRAMMAR AND
SPELLING](http://www.history.swt.edu/Full-Time-
Faculty/WEBSHARE/WWWROOT/DelaTeja/grammar&spelling.htm)**.

**ASSESSMENT**  
Aside from the papers, there will be two tests during the semester, a midterm
and a final, and short quizzes on readings. The midterm will consist of two
(50 points each) out of four essay questions. It is designed to test your
understanding of the readings and lecture material covered up to that point.
The final examination will consist of two (25 points each) out of four essay
questions on the material covered in the second part of the course, and a
comprehensive essay question. The test will be graded on clarity and
conciseness as well as level of detail. There will be a weekly quiz on
readings consisting of five multiple choice questions. Passing ten out of
twelve quizzes will earn the student 100%.  


**FINAL GRADE**  


Book Reviews | 20% (1st-7.5%, 2nd-12.5%)  
---|---  
Term Project | 30%  
Quizzes | 10% (10 out of 12, 1% each)  
Mid-term | 20% (2 questions, 50% each)  
Final | 20% (3 questions, 2 @ 25%, 1 @ 50%)  
| A=91-100 B=81-90 C=71-80 D=61-70 F=below 61  
  
* * *

**CLASS POLICIES**  
The following policies will be enforced rigorously. Exceptions will be made
only in documented cases of hardship or catastrophe:

**Withdrawal** : Withdrawals made after the "automatic W" date will carry with
them the appropriate grade. That is, if you withdraw while holding an F
average, your semester grade will be an F. Anyone holding a D or above will be
granted a W. It is **your** responsibility to withdraw from class. Anyone who
has stopped attending class but appears on the final grade roster will receive
a grade.

**Incomplete** : An incomplete will not be issued in the course except under
the conditions noted above. Failure to show up for an examination **does not**
constitute grounds for issuance of an I.

**Deadlines** : Deadlines are final. Work turned in after a deadline will be
subject to a one-half grade reduction per class-day late. It is **your**
responsibility to have all work in on time and to show up on examination dates
and times.

**Attendance**. A record will be maintained to substantiate presence.
Attendance is **not** mandatory, but **you** remain responsible for keeping up
with class and taking note of any changes in the calendar or assignments.
Moreover, I place much emphasis on lecture material in test answers.

**Office hours** : Aside from announced and posted hours, I will be more than
happy to make special arrangements to see you. If, on a written assignment or
test, I request that you see me during office hours, make sure you do it.
Failing to meet with me when I so request will have significant consequences.

**Computer Lab** : Use of the History Department computer lab is strongly
encouraged. The department's fully equiped lab includes both Macs and PCs.
There is scanning equipment available and all machines have Internet access.
Aside from the general department homepage, which includes sources for
historians, please check my homepage at **LINKS** for sites specifically
relevant to my courses.

Please remember the most important rule of all, **IGNORANCE IS NO EXCUSE**. If
you have a question, **ASK!**  

* * *

[CALENDAR](Mexico_fall2000_calendar.htm)

