**[COLLEGE OF THE HOLY CROSS](http://www.holycross.edu/)**  
**[DEPARTMENT OF
HISTORY](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/website/homepage/index.html)**

**HIST 129 Mexico Since Independence**  
**Spring 2001**

[![](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/mexico/eres.gif)](http://204.165.204.7/coursepage.asp?cid=41)
We are going to start using the New Electronic Reserve system for our course.
We will use it at first for chat, and later we will add reserve readings.

[Dr. A. Lauria-
Santiago](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/)  
[Contact
Info](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/contact.htm)

**GOALS AND APPROACH:**  
This course will provide students an advanced introduction to the "National"
political and economic history of Mexico while also considering many "local"
experiences usually studied by social history. Among the topics we will
examine are: the origins of  Mexican Independence, the formation of the
peasantry, the formation of the Nation-State, economic development and
modernization, revolution, relations with the US, the post-revolutionary
state, the rise and decline of the PRI, and recent challenges from below.

**REQUIREMENTS**  
Your participation in this class constitutes a contract between you and
myself. As part of this contract I expect you to follow the guidelines
presented below and I in turn will do my best to convey to you, in a variety
of manners, the fundamental problems in the study of Mexico's history. Most
important, I expect a reasonable degree of enthusiasm and interest from you.
You will have to complete all requirements in order to receive a grade in this
course. I expect you to come to all class sessions and be on time. I expect
all students to participate in debates and discussions, and to feel free to
bring in any additional materials, sources, or questions to class meetings.
**It is especially important that you spend seven or eight hours a week
completing the readings for this course.**

  * _**Participation** :_  Your participation in class activities, including attendance, will be an important component of your final grade. The short assignments that form part of the participation grade include short response papers. They should be about one page long and reflect some thinking, coherent questioning, analysis or reflections upon some aspect of that week's readings.
  * **_Determination of Grade:_**   Class participation, attendance, map exercises, web reports, and short written assignments (40%); Two discussion papers (sections I and III of course) (20% each); One comprehensive final exam (20%).
  * In the calculation of the final grade of borderline cases, improvement and dynamic class participation will be decisive factors. I consider all students equally capable of successfully completing the requirements for this class with an above average grade, which does not mean you will receive a B for mediocre work.
  * **_Discussion Papers:_ ** I will provide the topics for these two papers. They will be based on class readings and discussion. Additioanal research will be necessary for the second paper.  These papers will need to be 7-8 pages in length and reflect your participation in class, your completion of readings, and your own analysis of the materials. Late papers will be penalized for each day of lateness at the rate of a third of a grade per day (B to B-, B- to C+, A to A-, etc.).
  * **_Final Exam_ :**  There will be a two hour comprehensive in-class exam scheduled during exam period.
  * **_Web Content_ :** Approximately every other week there will be some assigned web-based materials either from our campus intranet or from the web itself. Some of these materials will be presented in class but others will be for your own individual browsing. These materials are as essential to the course as any other assigned reading.
  * You should check this web page **at least once a week** for revisions and the posting of **assignments**.
  * Start reading the Carlos Fuentes novel as soon as the bookstore gets it.  You have the choice of reading it in English or Spanish.  We will discuss it throughout the second half of the course.
  * Once you have read and understood these terms click [here](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/contract.htm).

  
**BOOKS REQUIRED FOR THIS COURSE**  
The following books are available at the bookstore. They are listed more or
less in the order we will use them. Other readings not ordered by the
bookstore are available on reserve.

  * Colin Maclachlan. _El Gran Pueblo: A History of Greater Mexico_. Prentice Hall.
  * Heather Fowler-Salamini, ed. _Women of the Mexican Country-Side, 1850-1990_. Arizona UP.
  * Mark Wasserman. _Everyday Life and Politics in Nineteenth Century Mexico: Men, Women, and War_. Univ of New Mexico P.
  * Adrian A. Bantjes. _As If Jesus Walked on Earth: Cardenismo, Sonora, and the Mexican Revolution_. Scholarly Resources.
  * Elena Poniatowska. _Massacre in Mexico_. Univ of Missouri Pr.
  * Carlos Fuentes. _The Years with Laura D iaz_. (English version: Farrar Straus & Giroux; Spanish: Downtown Book Center)
  * Andres Oppenheimer. _Bordering on Chaos: Mexico's Roller-Coaster Journey to Prosperity_. Little Brown  & Co.
  * John Womack (Editor). _Rebellion in Chiapas: An Historical Reader_. The New Press.
  * Ramon Eduardo Ruiz. _On the Rim of Mexico: Encounters of the Rich and Poor_. Westview Press.
  * Judith Adler-Hellman. _Mexican Lives_. The New Press.

  
**COURSE ORGANIZATION AND SCHEDULE**

##  _Creation of the Fragmented Mexican Nation-State, 1810-1910_

**Week 1: [Jan 16, 18]   Introduction:  New Spain During the late Eighteenth
Century**, **Independence**

    * Maclachlan. _El Gran Pueblo_. Chap. 1.
    * John Tutino. _From Insurrection to Revolution in Mexico_. Chap. 2. [Reserve]
    * Michael Meyer and William Beezley, eds. _The Oxford History of Mexico_. Chap. 6. [Reserve]
    
[Maps of Mexico--Study them
here](http://www.lib.utexas.edu/Libs/PCL/Map_collection/mexico.html)  
[Map and other assignment for
Thursday](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/mexico/weekonework.htm)  
[Powerpoint Slides--Use Internet Explorer to
view](http://intranet.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/mexico/mexico1.pps)  
[Discussion
Questions](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/mexico/discuss1.htm)

  
**Week 2: [Jan 23, 25] The Conflicted and Contradictory Emergence of the
Mexican Nation-State: Federalism, Civil Conflict, and Foreign Intervention,
1820-1875**

    * Maclachlan. _El Gran Pueblo_. Chaps. 2-3.
    * Wasserman. _Everyday Life and Politics in Nineteenth Century Mexico_. Parts I and II.
    * John Tutino. _From Insurrection to Revolution in Mexico_. Chap. 6. [Reserve]
    * Fowler-Salamini. _Women of the Mexican Countryside_. Chap. 1.

> > > Make sure you review the chronologies for this period included in
Maclachlan  
> Write a short summary of any of the three non-textbook readings for this
week, choose the one you find most interesting, explain why  
> [Maps for this week--Study them
here](http://intranet.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/mexico/graphics1_2.htm)  
> [Powerpoint
Slides](http://intranet.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/mexico/mexico2.pps)  
> [Discussion
Questions](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/mexico/discuss2.htm)

>>

>> Web Sites to examine:

>>

>>> * [Mexico: from Empire to Revolution (Getty Research
Institute)](http://www.getty.edu/gri/digital/mexico/index.htm)

>>> * [The Mexican-America War
Memorial](http://sunsite.unam.mx/revistas/1847/)

>>> * [Nineteenth-Century
History](http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Forum/9061/mexico/mex19.html)

>>> * [Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo](http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/ghtreaty/)

**Week 3: [Jan 30, Feb 1]   State and Elites During the Porfiriato,
1876-1910**

    * Maclachlan. _El Gran Pueblo_. Chaps. 4-5.
    * Wasserman. _Everyday Life and Politics in Nineteenth Century Mexico_. Part III.

> > [Discussion
Questions](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/mexico/discuss3.htm)  
> [Semester-long
Project](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/mexico/states.htm)

    
**Week 4: [Feb 6, Feb 8]   The Impact of Porfirian Modernization on the
Peasants and Workers, Women, Indigenous Peoples**  
    * Fowler-Salamini. _Women of the Mexican Countryside_. Chaps. 2-4.
    * John Tutino. _From Insurrection to Revolution in Mexico_. Chap. 8. [Reserve]
    * Wasserman. _Everyday Life and Politics in Nineteenth Century Mexico_. Part IV.
    * Evelyn Hu-DeHart. "Yaqui Resistance to Mexican Expansion." in John Kicza. _The Indian in Latin American History_. Chap. 7. [Reserve]

[Discussion
Questions](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/mexico/discuss4.htm)

##  _The "Revolution": Civil Wars, Political Conflict, and the Formation of a
New National State, 1910-1940_

> **Week 5: [Feb 13, 15]   The "Armed Stage" of the Revolution, 1911-1917**

>

>   * Maclachlan. _El Gran Pueblo_. Chap. 6-page 269.

>   * Fowler-Salamini. _Women of the Mexican Countryside_. Chap. 5.

>

> > [General Chronology on the Mexican
Revolution](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/modern/wk4chron.htm)  
> [Detailed Chronology of the Mexican
Revolution](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/modern/wk4chron2.htm)  
> [The Zapatista Plan de
Ayala](http://www.ilstu.edu/class/hist263/docs/ayala.html)  
> [The origins and radicalism of the 1917 Constitution](http://www.mexico-
sydney.com/constitution_of_1917.htm)  
> [Mexican Revolution Web Sites--Browse one or
two](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/modern/wk4links.htm)  
> [First Paper
Due!](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/mexico/paper1.htm)

> **Week 6: [Feb 20, 22]   The Struggle over a New Order, 1917-1937**

>

>   * Maclachlan. _El Gran Pueblo_. Chap. Page 269-Chap. 9.

>   * Bantjes. _As If Jesus Walked on Earth._ Part I

>   * Womack. _Rebellion in Chiapas_. Part II, chaps. 5-7.

>

>

>> [Discussion questions for next two
weeks](http://www.holycross.edu/departments/history/alauria/mexico/discuss6-7.htm)  
> [Discussion Board for our course--click on link, login, and check out the
discussion threads on the "Discussion Board" feature--follow through on the
discussion threads I started.](http://204.165.204.7/coursepage.asp?cid=41)

> **Week 7: [Feb 27, Mar 1]   Consolidation of the Party of the Revolution and
the New State, 1938-1940**

>

>   * Maclachlan. _El Gran Pueblo_. Chap. 10.

>   * Fowler-Salamini. _Women of the Mexican Countryside_. Chaps. 6-7.

>  
>  Bantjes. _As If Jesus Walked on Earth._ Parts II-III.

**_Post-Revolutionary State and Society: Mexico and the PRI_**

> **Week 8: [Mar 13, 15] Construction of the PRI's Hegemony 1940-1968**

>

>> * Maclachlan. _El Gran Pueblo_. Chap. 11.

>> * Stephen R. Niblo. _Mexico in the 1940s: Modernity, Politics and
Corruption_. Chap. 1, 5. [Reserve]

>> * Luis Gonzalez, _Pueblo en Vilo_ , Chap. TBA

>

> **Week 9: [Mar 20, 22]   Cracks in the "Mexican Miracle:" 1940-1960s**

>

>> * Maclachlan. _El Gran Pueblo_. Chap. 12

>> * Poniatowska. _Massacre in Mexico_. Entire.

>

> **Week 10: [Mar 27, 29]   Peasants, Workers and the State in the Era of the
PRI**

>

>   * Fowler-Salamini. _Women of the Mexican Countryside_. Chaps. 9-13.

>   * TBA [chapter on local case study of land reform and agrarian
development]

>

**Week 11: [Apr 3, 5]   The US/Mexico Border**

>   * Ruiz. _On the Rim of Mexico_. Entire.

##  _The End of an Era?   The Decline of the PRI's Mexico or the End of the
PRI?_

**Week 12: [Apr 10] The One Party State and Mexican Society: Downward Spiral
or Cycles of Crisis? 1980-1997**

>   * Adler-Hellman. _Mexican Lives_. Entire.

**Week 13: [Apr 17, 19] Crises of Mexican Society, 1980-1997**

>   * Oppenheimer. _Bordering on Chaos_. Entire.

**Week 14: [Apr 24, 26] Insurgencies and Social Movemenets 1980-90s**

>   * Womack. _Rebellion in Chiapas_. i-61; other selected documents.

