HIST 112 Honors Comparative Civilizations

Spring 1999

MWF 11:00-11:50 a.m.

"World Mythology"

Judith Lynn Sebesta

East Hall 204 X5218

[jsebesta@usd.edu](mailto:jsebesta@usd.edu)

Office Hours: MWF 3:00-4:00 p.m.



Human beings have always told stories, from time immemorial, exercising that
power to imagine that distinguishes humans from animals. Stories not only
relieve the tedium of daily life, but remind those listening of the beliefs,
values, and history of their culture.

One important kind of story is the myth. This course will concentrate on two
types of myths: the hero myth and the cosmogonic myth (myth of the creation of
the world). Hero myths will be considered in terms of the typology of the
hero: though cultures differ, are there any parallels or similarities among
the hero myths of the world? If there are similarities or parallels, what can
account for them? Cosmogonic myths will be considered in terms of how they
inform people of a particular culture about the structure of that culture.
What are its values, and what are the relationships between the people and
their god(s) and nature?

In the second half of the course, we will turn to creation myths around the
world. Creation myths are stories of beginnings and explain why a particular
society is organized as it is, why it has the values that it has, and what
relationship it has to its world and deity/deities. The societies will include
cultures of the past, such as the ancient Israelites, and current cultures,
such as the Japanese. While not all of the world's cultures can be covered in
this course (there are simply too many), some cultures from each of the six
inhabited continents will be included.

Other course requisites include two exams; an argumentative paper; an original
, annotated creation myth for a culture; a report on a particular culture; and
presentation of this myth to the class.

**Attendance and Expectations** :

Attendance is mandatory except for personal illness or family crisis. Students
are expected to read all assignments, attend every lecture, take notes,
participate in discussions, and secure all handouts.

Students who expect to miss more than three meetings should meet with the
instructor during the first week. In case of an emergency causing a student to
miss more than two consecutive meetings through absence from campus, the
student should notify the Office of the Dean of the College of Arts and
Sciences who will notify all the instructors.

**Textbooks**

Joseph Campbell, _The Hero with a Thousand Faces_.

Danny Jackson, _The Epic of Gilgamesh_.

David Leeming, _The World of Myth_.

Barbara Sproul, _Primal Myths: Creation Myths around the World_.

**Reserve Materials**

Campbell, _The Power of Myth_ BL 304.C36 1988

Campbell, _he Hero with a Thousand Faces_. BL 313.C28 1968

Dundes, _Sacred Narrative: Readings in the Theory of Myth_ BL 304.S19 1984

Maclagan, Creation Myths BL 325.C7 M3

Kirk, _Myth: Its Meaning and Functions in Ancient and Other Cultures_ BL
311.K55 1970

Vickery, _Myth and Literature_ PN 56.M94 V5 1969

Armstrong, _In the Beginning_ #

Moyers, _Genesis_ #



**Grading:**

Exam #1:100 pts. .

Exam #2: 100 pts.

Paper: 100 pts.

Original myth: 50 pts.

Cultural unit: 100 pts.

Attendance at three cultural events: 30 pts.

A = 480-436 pts

B = 435-388 pts.

C = 387-340 pts.

D = 339-292 pts.

F = 291-0 pts.

**Exams:**

The exams will include short-answer and essay questions.

**Paper: Due February 26**

The paper will be an argumentative paper, five to ten pages in length. The
paper is due in the Office of the History (E 207) by 4:00 p.m. on the
scheduled day. It may, of course, be turned in early. Papers submitted later
than that time and date will be penalized by ten points, and an additional ten
points every twenty-four hours thereafter.

The paper should be a critique or an application of Campbell's theory of the
myth of the hero. Students may critique or apply his theory in relation to the
myth of [Psyche](psyche.html), or any heroic myth (other than Gilgamesh), or
modern use of heroic myth (e.g. _Star Wars_ , _Apocalypse Now_ , etc.)

For how the paper will be evaluated, [click here](paper.html).

The paper must be typed neatly and conform to the [history department's
guidelines.](http://www.usd.edu/history/deptguid/deptguid.htm)





**Original Creation Myth: Due April 26**

In this assignment use your imagination and role-play being a shaman or seer
relating a myth to a social group. Your myth must be your own, original
creation, but it must also show the influence of myths you have read for this
course. Your myth should relate to a culture you create. For an example of a
culture and its myth and the annotation style, click on this
[link.](cultures.html) Each student will present her/his myth to the class.

The myth should also be submitted in written form, with annotations that
connect each motif you use with one of the myths we have read in Sproul. The
original myth will be graded thus:

grammar/punctuation 10 pts.

annotations: 20 pts.

number of annotations: 17-20: 20 pts.; 13-16: 15 pts.; 9-12: 10 pts.; 5-8: 5
pts..  



**Cultural Unit:**

Each student group will be assigned one of the geographic areas covered in
Sproul's book. In essence, the group will be the instructor(s) for the day.
Each group will consider how to present the culture(s) of the
geographic/cultural area: the first major task is to decide whether all
cultures of the area can be covered in a single class or whether only some can
be covered. The assignment is a cultural UNIT, which means that there should
be some unifying thread/theme to whatever topic(s) is (are) presented. The
group should also consider what is important to present to the class and what
**can** be presented to a class in a single period. The presentation may
center on concepts of art or music, religion, social problems, health
problems, economic features of the culture, etc. The presentation should have
strong instructional content and show evidence of planning; it should not be
superficial.

The group will make its presentation in the second of the two class periods
devoted to the geographic/cultural area. [Names in your group](names.html).

Groups may want to make use of campus resources: African art and videos in the
Weeks Library, slides from the Department of Art, musical instruments in the
Shrine to Music, etc. If we need to relocate the class to a particular site,
please inform the instructor as soon as possible so that the site can be
reserved for the class.

**Attendance at three cultural events:**

All students are required to attend one of the two lectures presented by
Elizabeth Barber on April 21 and 22. The other two cultural events may be
selected from any that are on campus: lectures, plays, art exhibits, serious
films, musical performances (including Brown Bags at the Shrine to Music),
IdeaFest, Student History Conference, etc. Cultural events do not include rock
concerts, Disney cartoons, or jello wrestling. When in doubt, consult the
instructor. Each student will bring this [form](form.html) to the instructor
as verification of attendance at the cultural event.



[Calendar of Readings](myth%20calendar.html)

**Calendar of Topics**

**_January_**

8 **** What is Myth?

11 video: Joseph Campbell

13 Campbell's Monomyth

15 More on the Monomyth

20 Class Discussion on Campbell's Theory

22 Gilgamesh

25 Gilgamesh

27 Discussion on Gilgamesh

29 Why are there no Women Hero Myths?

**_February_**

1 Class Discussion on Paper on the Hero

3 Creation Myths

5 Near Eastern and Ancient Hebrew Creation Myths

8 Ancient Hebrew Creation Myths

10 Exam #1 [LINK TO STUDY GUIDE](test.html)

12 [Japan and China](japan.html)

17 Guest speaker, Dr. Robert Wood, Education

19 Japan and China

22 Central and South America

24 Guest speaker, Professor John Banasiak, Art

26 Central and South America: Student Cultural Unit

**_`Paper on Hero due`_**



**_March_ **

1 Discussion: How to Approach Creation Myths

3 India

5 India: Student Cultural Unit

Spring Break

15 Annotating your Creation Myth

17 India, Professor Sayeeda Mamoon, Modern Languages

19 North America

22 North America: Student Cultural Unit

24 Guest speaker, Ms. Meg Quintal, Indian Studies

26 Siberian and Eskimo

29 Siberian and Eskimo: Student Cultural Unit

31 Siberian and Eskimo, Professor Diane Chidester, Anthropology



**_April_**

Easter Holiday Break

7 African

[9 Exam #2](exam%20two.html)

12 No Class

14 African: Student Cultural Unit

16 Australia and South Pacific

19 Austrailia and South Pacific

21 Australia and South Pacific: Student Cultural Unit

23 Guest speaker, Dr. Elizabeth Barber

26 Telling Your Myth

28 Telling Your Myth

30 Telling Your Myth

[BACK to Homepage](jsebesta.html)

