|  
---|---  
|  |  |  
---|---  
  
#  
World History, 1000 to 1700 CE (Hist 2B) [syllabus
available](../syllabi/cline/2b.html)  
and [table of contents for reader available](../syllabi/cline/2btoc.html)

# History of Mexico (Hist 156 A&B)

# Introduction to Latin American History (History 8)

# Indians of Colonial Mexico (Hist 156I)

# The Mexican Revolution (Hist 156P)

# History of the Latin American Church (Hist 158L) [syllabus
available](../syllabi/cline/158l.html)  
and [table of contents for reader available](../syllabi/cline/158ltoc.html)

#

# [Links to available syllabi of current History Department
courses.](../syllabi/syllabi.html)

#

# [Current Courses offered by the History
Department.](http://www.history.ucsb.edu/schedule/courses)

|  
|  
  
  
  

|  
|  
  
# Syllabi

#  

# Click [here](../links.htm) for a list of links to History Department
Resources.

  
  
  
  
  
|  
  
[  
![Adobe Acrobat Reader Link](../acrobatreader.gif)](http://www.adobe.com)

Download Acrobat Reader to view online documents.  
  
|  |  |

[Previous](brownlee.htm) | [Next](cohen.htm)  
  
---  
|

**[![Sarah Cline](images/cline.jpg)](images/clinelarge.jpg)S ARAH CLINE  
HISTORY OF MEXICO, CHRISTIANITY**

OFFICE: HSSB 4251  
OFFICE PHONE: 805.893.2726  
[CLINE@HISTORY.UCSB.EDU](mailto:CLINE@HISTORY.UCSB.EDU)

* * *  
  
---  
|

I believe the personal is political, and my work as an historian draws on
insights from my life experiences as well as my academic training. I grew up
in a Northern Virginia suburb of Washington, D.C. when the schools were
racially segregated and other color bars existed. In high school I marched for
civil rights and protested the war in Vietnam, and my consciousness of gender
issues awakened. When I graduated from high school in 1967, the University of
Virginia did not accept women--and did not do so until 1971. As an
undergraduate at Northwestern University, I was part of a small group of
women's liberationists, debating the feminist issues of the day. I have spent
much of my life outside the U.S., living for many years in both English and
French Canada and travelling to Latin America. I have been "the first" and
"the only" woman in many situations, most recently as chair of the History
Department. My academic work is informed by gendered and racial uses of power
and I have pursued those in my work on Latin American history, particularly
Mexican Indian women. That academic work itself grows out of the personal,
since I am a second-generation Latin American historian.

My first academic work, the result of my doctoral studies at UCLA, focuses on
indigenous society in the early Spanish period (i.e., 16th century). My
published work so far deals with Mexican Indians in central Mexico based on
native language documentation in Nahuatl (Aztec), written by Indian men
literate in alphabetic writing. A very large number of documents were
generated at the local community level for the Indians' own use.

My doctoral work centered on a collection of last wills and testaments from
the Nahua town of Culhuacan, which I published as The Testaments of Culhuacan
(1984). The analysis of those wills was my doctoral dissertation, published as
a separate monograph, Colonial Culhuacan, 1580-1600: A Social History of an
Aztec Town (1986) which allowed me to reconstruct a picture of Nahua society
sixty years after the Spanish conquest of central Mexico. Since there were an
equal number of testaments by men and women, by both rich and poor of both
genders, I was able to do a gendered comparison of wealth, differential
importance of various family ties, labor, intereaction with the Spanish world,
and other key issues in the local life of Indians living under Spanish rule.

My other monograph based on Nahuatl-language archival materials is a house-to-
house census from the Cuernavaca region, just south of the capital, published
as The Book of Tributes: Sixteenth-Century Nahuatl Censuses from Morelos
(1993)). The censuses are the earliest known Nahuatl records in alphabetic
writing Family structure and economic relations emerged as the key topics for
analysis. Since women wove the cotton cloth which was the main tribute item,
the structure of work and the community economy were greatly affected by
women's contributions.

My current research is on religion in Latin America, with special interest in
religious blending (a.k.a. syncretism). I am particularly interested in the
role of women in religion, since many currents in the modern religious
landscape are highly gendered. Women play an important role in the
revitalization of progressive Catholicism (liberation theology) at the
community level, participating in grassroots communities. Pentecostal
Protestantism is a rapidly growing movement in many parts of Latin American
and women's participation is a significant factor in its growth. I maintain my
strong interest in the early period of Latin American history, particularly in
the church and in women's history, looking especially at the Inquisition in
Mexico as a regulator of elite social mores and at religious confraternities,
which, as lay organizations had the potential for women's participation.

I am interested in working with graduate students wishing to do research on
Latin American social and cultural history. I am a specialist on Mexican
history, but have broad interests in Latin American history generally and in
comparative histories of gender, ethnicity, and colonialism.

* * *

  
  
---  
|

**Professor of History  
Affiliated with the Religious Studies Department and the Women Studies , Latin
American and Iberian Studies, and Global and International Studies Programs  
PhD, University of California at Los Angeles, 1981  
  
Field: **

  * Latin America -- Christianity in Latin America 1492-present; colonial Latin American history; Mexican Indians.

**Major publications:**

  * _The Book of Tributes: Early Sixteenth-Century Nahuatl Censuses from Morelos_ (1993)
  * _The Conquest of New Spain, 1585 Revision by Fray Bernardino de Sahagun_ (editor) (l989)
  * _Colonial Culhuacan, 1580-1600: A Social History of an Aztec Town_
  * [with Miguel Leon-Portilla] _The Testaments of Culhuacan_ (l984)

  
---  
|

  
If you have any questions or comments concerning this site, please contact [
salzgeber@history.ucsb.edu](mailto:salzgeber@history.ucsb.edu).  
2001(C)  
  
---

