### SYLLABUS AND CONTRACT OUTLINE  
AMERICAN STUDIES 1041  
THE FRONTIER HERITAGE

* * *

**Required texts:  
** Texts:

Erdrich, L. **_Tracks_**

Grey, Z. **_Spirit of the Border_**

Lavalle, R. **_Tchipayuk_**

Sandoz, M. **_Slogum House_**

Welch, J. **_Fools Crow_**

**Readings available in[WEB Anthology](1041anth)**

**Return to[Summary Page](summary.html)**

|

**Check[Schedule](schedule.html)

**Instructor:**  
[**Tom Bacig**](mailto:tbacig@d.umn.edu)  
Office - 203 Cina Hall 726-6369  
Home Phone 218-525-4840  

You can post questions, commentaries, reactions to each others work, and
suggestions about interesting websites to our **[**Frontier
Forum**](http://www.d.umn.edu/~tbacig/front/forum/cxiv.cgi)

**TAKE HOME[FINAL](/cla/faculty/tbacig/ams1041/syllabus.html#index1) DUE BY
6:00 PM, MONDDAY, DECEMBER 18, 2000  
POSTINGS DUE BY DECEMBER 8  
******

* * *

**STRUCTURE:** Class sessions will alternate between lecture-discussions on
assigned texts and films and workshop sessions. During workshop sessions
quizzes on assigned readings will be given and after quizzes are completed
students will participate in small group and/or class discussions. Attendance
at discussion sessions is mandatory.

**GOALS:** This course is in Liberal Education Category III-B - Individual and
Society: Historical and Philosophical Foundations. Liberal education courses
are intended to add breadth to your education. American Studies 1041 deals
with human history and its influence on contemporary life. Specific liberal
education objectives are to: (a) encourage you to think critically about
issues; (b) provide experience in the analytic methods of study used in
American Studies; (c) provide an awareness of historical traditions, social
issues, and diverse cultural values; and (d) introduce you to knowledge
important for an active and socially responsible citizen. AmS 1041 also meets
the cultural diversity requirement because it deals with a cross-cultural
comparison of the frontier in Canada and America from the perspective of
Europeans and Native Americans of both genders.

This course is designed to acquaint you with the history of the North American
frontier as reflected in the music, art, literature and film we will examine
this quarter. Some of the common threads in these portrayals of frontier
experience are related to the "character" or "nature" of Americans. In
addition, the frontier seems to be one of the chief sources of archetypes and
stereotypes that inform and infect our culture, and is the ground where
European culture met and was reformed by the indigenous cultures of the
Americas.

Finally,the course is aimed at helping us discover both the common threads and
the differentiating patterns that characterize frontier experiences of
European and Native Americans in Canada and the United States. The course also
attempts to explore the experiences of both men and women in these groups and
of other minority groups where relevant. If we are to treasure the diversity
of our cultures, we need to understand the archetypes and stereotypes which
blur and obscure the ways in which indigenous and European cultures change
each other. As Faragher suggests in "Americans, Mexicans, Metis: A Community
Approach to the Comparative Study of North American Frontiers," in W. Cronon,
G. Miles, and J. Gitlin (Eds.), Under an open sky: Rethinking America's
western past. New York: Norton. (1993, p. 92) , if we wish to "grasp the
remarkable complexity and diversity of North American history," we must commit
ourselves to developing "the comparative history of North American societies."

The course proceeds by examining primary sources to discover recurring
patterns in the presentations of Europeans and ethnic and cultural minorities
in literary and popular materials. It uses this technique for exploring the
contemporary significance of the stories we tell ourselves about our past and
present. Specifically, the course uses materials drawn from Canadian and
American film, visual art, music, popular and belles lettristic literature,
and historical writing to explore the stereotypes and archetypes emerging on
and from the frontier.

**GRADING:** Your grade in this course will be computed on the basis of points
earned by taking quizzes, participating in group projects and turning in your
take home essay examination. The requirements for the course derive from the
purpose and structure. You are expected to attend class, to read assigned
materials, to take notes, make comments and ask questions. **You will also be
assigned to groups to work preparing more complex postings.** Brief
informational quizzes on assigned materials and lectures will be a regular
possibility, as will postings related to assigned reading and viewing
materials. The four quizzes in the course are 15 point true false quizzes,
corrected for guess and with the opportunity to write responses to confusing
questions. Required postings are scored according to a general rule of thumb
which is 15 points for an A posting, 10 points for a B, and 5 points for a C.
There is, however, **no upper limit for the number of points earned on a
posting or on the number of postings** that students may enter. Postings are
not limited to written work or analytic essay formats. Students may choose the
form of their postings. Oral presentations, poetry, musical performance and
works of art and web pages are acceptable. Most of these can be posted on our
[Frontier Discussion
Forum](http://www.d.umn.edu/~tbacig/front/forum/cxiv.cgi). If you wish to make
comments for the instructor alone or need help posting materials, send email
to [tbacig@d.umn.edu](mailto:tbacig@d.umn.edu) or call at 726-6369.

The **final take home examination** will require that you integrate a variety
of course materials into an essay that presents and discusses your views about
some dimension of the frontier experience. Thus, your final examination essay
can be prepared gradually throughout the term. It is to be based exclusively
on course materials (readings, lectures, media presentations, discussion) and
should indicate accurate knowledge and comprehensive familiarity with the
course. The course is designed to provide you with a great deal of material
from which you can select evidence to support your independent conclusions
about the following question:

**FINAL TAKE HOME EXAMINATION**

Fredrick Jackson Turner claims that:  

... to the frontier the American intellect owes its striking characteristics.
That coarseness and strength combined with acuteness and inquisitiveness; that
practical inventive turn of mind, quick to find expedients; that masterful
grasp of material things, lacking in the artistic but powerful to effect great
ends; that restless nervous energy; that dominant individualism, working for
good and for evil, and with all that buoyancy and exuberance which comes with
freedom ...

  
Margaret Atwood claims that:  

The central symbol for Canada -- and this is based on numerous instances of
its occurrence in both English and French Canadian literature -- is
undoubtedly Survival, la Survivance. ... Like the Frontier ... It is a
multifaceted and adaptable idea. For Early explorers and settlers, it meant
bare survival in the face of "hostile" elements and/or natives: carving out a
place and a way of keeping alive ... hanging on, staying alive. Or central
idea is one which generates, not the excitement and sense of adventure which
The Frontier holds out, ... but an almost intolerable anxiety. Our stories are
likely to be tales not of those who made it but of those who made it back,
from the awful experience -- the North, the snow-storm, the sinking ship --
that killed everyone else.

**Are these accurate characterizations of Americans and Canadians. Explain how
what you've read, seen or heard in this course demonstrates that Americans and
Canadians "is or ain't" what they used to be?**

In answering this question refer to all four novels, at least five short
selections from the readings, and three videos.

**CONTRACTS:** A modified contract grading system will be used in determining
the grades for this course. Essentially, students will have to earn specified
numbers of quiz/commentary to qualify for "A," "B", or "C" grades. In
computing the final grade quiz/commentary points will be weighted equally with
points earned on the take home final examination.

**"A" CONTRACT** \- To **_qualify_** for an A students must earn **120**
quiz/posting points and make at least nine postings.

To **_earn_** their "A" students must write a take home examination which
brings their point total to **240** points.

**"B" CONTRACT** \- To **_qualify_** for a B a student must earn **100**
quiz/posting points and and make at least seven postings.

To **_earn_** their "B" students must write a take home examination which
brings their point totals to **200** points.

**"C" CONTRACT** \- To **_qualify_** for a C a student must earn **80**
quiz/posting points and and make at least five postings.

To **_earn_** their "C" students must write a take home examination which
brings their point total to **160** points.

**_All students must complete all scheduled quizzes with a total of 45 points
to qualify for an "A"; four of five with a total of 36 points to qualify for a
"B": or three of five with a total of 27 to qualify for a "C".

**_Individuals who have any disability, either permanent or temporary, which
might affect their ability to perform in this class are encouraged to inform
the instructor at the start of the quarter. Adaptation of methods, materials
or testing may be made as required to provide for equitable participation._**
_**

