**SYLLABUS - NAS 202**

**WINTER 2001**

**NATIVE AMERICAN LANGUAGES AND**

**THE POLITICS OF SURVIVAL**



_**DESCRIPTION** : _The importance of language survival to national survival
is a common theme in human history. This seminar will explore the questions of
whether a given indigenous nation (ethnicity) can survive while changing its
mother tongue, how a nation can avoid the loss of its traditional language,
what techniques have succeeded and which ones have seemed to fail, and the
politics enmeshed in the issues of bilingualism, orthography selection, and
definition of what constitutes the nation.



_**TEXT**_ : This seminar is designed to take a broad look at the issue of the
survival of American languages, the efforts being made to revive now dormant
idioms, and the obstacles - social, political, economic, and "sicological,"
which have prevented the maintainence of bilingual and multilingual indigenous
communities.

            Language will be considered broadly including both oral and signed talking as well as inter-tribal jargons such as Northwest Coast (Chinook). The politics of orthography selection will be explored including the relevance of professional linguist's phonetic systems.

            Since the appearance of elected tribal councils and local decision-making, and especially since the 1960s, tribes have had the ability to give preference to their own languages in all reservation signage and in tribal meetings and publications. Nonetheless, very few tribes have actually converted English to either bilingual or American language use. Thus one of the issues to be considered will be the "saikolajikal" and "soshal" constraints on Native language promotion, i.e., do tribal governments (controlled often by non-speakers) really, sincerely desire a return to American language usage? If not, wai naht? What has been the rol of local BIA in this reluctans? Of national BIA? and Congress?

            Another factor to be explored is the strong tendency in the dominant society of the USA and Canada to favor English and/or French (even in provinces where Cree is far more important than French, in Canada), and in Latin America, Spanish. In the USA "patriotism," loyalty, and "belonging" seem "kloslee" connected with speeking "Englatino," the English creole of our modern epoch. To wut extent duz this pressure prevent Native Americans from becoming fluent in a non-European language? Are they reluctant to invest serious time in something they don't really want anyway? Do youth and adults fear being singled out as "different" and/or "foreign" if they speak American (which, after all, cannot be identified as American by a monolingual Anglo-American but might sound like Arabic or Farsi to them).

            Perhaps the very nature of nationalist "idialoji"  and identity-formation in the American republics (save perhaps Paraguay and some Andean regions) makes it extremely difficult for Native Americans to seriously pursue fluency in a non-dominant language, an act which might be perceived as being virtually "subversive." If so, wut ken bee dun?

            The seminar, in short will take a look at the full range of relevant issues, both in a time-depth and contemporary sens. Students wil hav a wide-range of choices in terms of selecting topics for research papers.

            (Plees noat thet Ai hav yusd alturnutiv ways of speling Englatino too ilustrat sum uv thu ishyus fayst bai Umerikun-speekers end imagrants).



_**REQUIREMENTS** :_ There will be assigned readings which may be purchased in
the bookstore in some cases or duplicated in the Reserve Book Room in Shield's
Library.

*      In addition, students will be expected to present an oral report on one work not required of all.

*      Oral participation will be important and can make the difference between grades.

*      A research paper will be required, based upon your original investigation of some relevant topic, or an applied work such as a handbook focused on learning a specific language (where none currently exists) or a handbook examining the choice of orthographies for a particular language or related languages, etc.

*      A resource will be the Jack Forbes Collection in Special Collections (Shields) and especially F-52 Native American Languages. For research on the history of the struggle for Native languages F-2 Correspondence and F-51 Proposals and Projects might also be useful.

_**READING LIST:**_

**_REQUIRED OF ALL:_**

1\. Language Folder (will be placed in RBR, a folder of loose articles and
examples of language lessons)

2\. Farnell, Brenda, DO YOU SEE WHAT I MEAN? (U of Texas, 1995) -read only the
introduction and then scan and browse the rest.

3\. Hinton, Leanne "Survival of Endangered Languages..." in INTERNATIONAL
JOURNAL OF THE SOCIOLOGY OF LANGUAGES v.123, pp. 177-191.

4\. McCarty, Teresa L. INDIGENOUS EDUCATION AND LITERACY (1995)

5\. Perreault, Jeanne and Sylvia Vance, WRITING THE CIRCLE: NATIVE WOMEN OF
WESTERN CANADA (1990) pp. xv-xxx only.

6\. Ortiz, S. "The Language we Know," in Riley, P. GROWING UP NATIVE AMERICAN,
pp. 29-38 only.

7\. Fishman, Joshua A. HANDBOOK OF LANGUAGE AND ETHNIC IDENTITY, PP. 25-40,
42-58, 101-104, 181-210, 444-453.

8\. FORBES, Jack D. AMERICAN WORDS (introduction and glance through the
sections and the last chapters on Chinook jargon and the index).

9\. Forbes, Jack D., co-ed, A MODEL OF GRASSROOTS COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. All.

10\. Forbes, Jack D. NATIVE AMERICAN LANGUAGES. All. Compare with "As Long As
the Language Lives" in both formats.

11\. Forbes, Jack D. "As Long As the Language Lives...." BILINGUAL RESOURCES
4(1) 1981, PP. 14-27.

12\. Forbes, Jack D., "As Long As the Language Lives, the Nation is Not Dead"
manuscript. All.

13\. Tapahonso, Lucy, "A Sense of Myself," DINE BE' IINA' JOURNAL OF NAVAJO
LIFE v. 1(1) pp. 53-4.

14\. Walters, Anna Lee TALKING INDIAN (1992) pp. 11-55.

15\. Dick, G.S. and T.L. McCarty, "Reclaiming Navajo"in Hornberger,ed.,
INDIGENOUS LITERACIES IN THE AMERICAS (1997), PP. 69-94.

16\. FORBES, JACK D., "An Idea-Picture Writing Way," manuscript.

The above are available in the RBR on 1 day or 3 day reserves. You may also
purches some of my works in the bookstore in the campus authors section or see
Paul Takushi at the counter in the rear of the ground-level floor. Some will
be in xeroxed format because some are out of print.

It is best to begin with 12, 14, 11, 10, 5, 7. Some are quick reading, but we
will be referring back to this material all during the seminar.



_**OPTIONAL**_

_1._ Fishman, Joshua, REVERSING THE SHIFT

2\. FORBES, JACK D. WAPANAKMIKOK LANGUAGES

3\. Dorian, Nancy C., ed., INVESTIGATING OBSOLESCENCE

4\. Hinton, Leanne,   FLUTES OF FIRE: ESSAYS ON CALIFORNIA INDIAN LANGUAGES

