**PSC 4231 Current Issues in Latin America**

**Spring Semester 2002**

**Prof. John Carey**  
**Eliot Hall 228**  
**935-5834**  
**jmcarey@artsci.wustl.edu**  
**http://artsci.wustl.edu/~polisci/carey/**

PSC 4231 is an advanced seminar on current political science research on Latin
American politics.  It is aimed undergraduates who have already taken at least
one class in Latin American politics or history, as well as at graduate
students who have research interests in the region.  Students' base of prior
knowledge of the region will allow the class to focus directly on current
research on a number of prominent issues in Latin American politics, rather
than on an introduction to various countries.

**Outline of the course**  
We begin by reading three books addressing very different issues in Latin
American politics -- the relationship between Church and state, the
establishment democracy through guerrilla insurgency, and the accountability
of elected officials -- all of which rely on a theoretical approach we could
characterize as political economy.  In the next section of the course, we
spend two weeks following up on the theme of political accountability, in this
case by examining some recent research on the structure and performance of
legislatures in a number of Latin America's new democratic regimes.  Next, we
will spend three weeks on the unique case of Cuba, beginning with a book on
the history of U.S. relations with Cuba traced back through the War of 1898,
then exploring the idea of political culture through a book on conscious
efforts by the Castro regime to re-shape Cuban culture, and finishing with a
journalist's account of travels through post-Cold War Cuba.  After that, we
will wrap up our assigned readings with three one-week sections on a series of
'hot' topics in Latin American politics \-- first, taking advantage of a visit
to Washington University in March by Princeton Professor Deborah Yashar to
read some of her recent research on the political movements of indigenous
peoples in Latin America; then reading some work on the decentralization of
political authority to subnational governments in various countries; and
finally, reading about efforts in Latin America to establish politically
independent courts and enforce the rule of law.  The last two classes of the
semester will be devoted to in-class presentations of students' own research.  


**Student responsibilities**

  * class participation
  * brief commentary on readings, due in class each week
  * lead discussion on readings one week during the semester
  * final research paper

_class participation_  
Not much needs to be said about this.  This is a seminar, which will be based
on class discussion, not lectures.  You need to do the assigned readings
before class each week and be prepared to discuss them.  Discussion can _and
should_ mean raising questions about things that are not clear from the
readings, so the expectation is not that you show up each week as an expert on
the material -- just that you know what's in there and are prepared to talk
about it.

_weekly commentaries_  
Each week, each student should provide a brief written commentary on the
reading.  By brief, I mean this should fit on one side of a piece of paper --
even half of a side.  It does not have to be polished \-- just coherent and
easy to read (typed, not hand-written).  Some of the sorts of things you might
include are:

  * questions you have about the reading
  * the most important arguments made in the reading
  * claims made by authors that you find unwarranted or unconvincing, and why
  * points of comparison with other assigned readings (either from the same week or previous readings)

The purpose of this requirement is that putting a few thoughts down on paper
helps you articulate your "take" on the assigned readings before class each
week, which will improve the quality of class discussions.  I will read the
commentaries and write comments where appropriate, but I will not put letter
grades on them, so think of this as an exercise in trying out ideas and
putting forward questions, rather than a graded assignment.  No pressure.

_leading discussion_  
After the first week, one student (or two, depending on enrollment) will be
assigned to lead the discussion each week, with my help.  The discussion
leader should meet with me ahead of time (probably the day before class) to
work out a plan, prepare a list of discussion questions to supplement those
generated by other students' weekly commentaries, and perhaps a brief
introductory discussion.  


***********  
**_1/10/02 modification_**  
_The list of discussion leader responsibilities, based on the weeks each of
you signed up for in the first class, has been added, below, in the list of
reading assignments.   That list will be updated to reflect any subsequent
changes.  Be sure to note which week you're responsible._  
***********  


_research presentation and paper_  
Your main written work for the semester will be a research paper on a topic of
your own design, approved by me.  You may build off themes and material in the
assigned readings, or you may design an entirely independent topic.  Either
way, you should start thinking about your topic early in the semester, get a
written prospectus to me as early as possible, begin gathering materials, and
write early drafts (or partial drafts) so you can get comments back and
revise.  During the last two weeks of the semester, each student will give a
brief presentation (10 minutes, followed by Q&A) on her or his research topic.
This will give you an opportunity to get feedback from the rest of the class,
as well as from me, before you write your final draft.  We'll talk about all
this in class.

**Grades** participation | 20%  
---|---  
commentaries | 11% (one point each)  
discussion leadership | 10%  
research presentation | 10%  
research paper | 49%  
  
**Where to get the readings**  
The assigned books are available in the bookstore, all in paperback, except
the Ripley book.  Most are available used.  All are (or will be, by the time
they are assigned) available in the library.  Some weeks, we will be reading
recent research that has not yet been published.  In these cases, I will make
every effort to have the assigned readings available electronically, either
online or provided to students as email attachments.  In a few cases, I may
make shorter readings available to students to photocopy.  Finally, a
supplemental bibliography of readings on Latin American politics is
[here](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~polisci/carey/psc4231/supplementalbibliography.html).  
    
    
  

**Schedule of classes and readings** **Introduction**  
Week 1:    Selection from popular press (chosen by each student)

**Political Economy**  
Week 2:    Gill, Anthony. 1998. _Rendering Unto Caesar: The Catholic Church
and the State in Latin America._ Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.  
_Discussion leaders:   Emily Carroll, Carolyn McKenzie_  
_[Notes and questions from Prof. Carey](classnotes/renderinguntocaesar.pdf)_

Week 3:    Wood, Elisabeth Jean.  2000.  _Forging Democracy from Below:
Insurgent Transitions in South Africa and El Salvador_.  New York:  Cambridge
University Press  
_Discussion leaders:   Anke Guenther, Erica Campbell_  
_[Notes and questions from Prof.
Carey](classnotes/forgingdemocracyfrombelow.pdf)_

Week 4:    Stokes, Susan C.  2001.  Mandates and Democracy:  Neoliberalism by
Surprise in Latin America.  New York:  Cambridge University Press.  
_Discussion leaders:   Matt Jacobs, Caitlin Dorsey_  
_[Notes and questions from Prof.
Carey](classnotes/neoliberalismbysurprise.pdf)_

**Legislatures**  
Week 5:    Carey, John M.  (papers available on-line)  
**             [Note changes, as of 1/29/02, in _both_ the schedule _and_ the
papers that are assigned.]**  
_Discussion leader:   Bia Henriquez (Brazil paper)_  
_[Notes and questions from Prof. Carey](classnotes/careyarticles.pdf)_

  * ["The Reelection Debate in Latin America"](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~polisci/carey/research/LAPS/LAPSversionjanuary2002.pdf)
  * ["Discipline, Accountability, and Legislative Voting in Latin America"](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~polisci/carey/research/rollcalls/electronic/accountability.pdf)
  * ["Coalition Brokers or Breakers:  Brazilian Governors and Legislative Voting"](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~polisci/carey/research/rollcalls/federalism/governorsdecember01draft.pdf)

  
**Federalism**  
Week 6:  Kathleen O'Neill, ["Decentralization as an Electoral
Strategy,"](articles/ONeillarticle.pdf) and ["Decentralization in Bolivia:
Electoral Incentives and Outcomes,"](articles/ONeillchapter.pdf) and  
Kent Eaton ["The Link Between Political and Fiscal Decentralization in South
America."](articles/eatonchapter.pdf)  
_Discussion leaders:   Maria Cristina Capelo, Juan Gabriel Gomez Albarello_  
_[Notes and questions from Prof. Carey](classnotes/decentralization.pdf)_  


**Cuba**  
Week 7:    Perez, Louis A..  1998\. _The war of 1898 : the United States and
Cuba in history and historiography_.   Chapel Hill : University of North
Carolina Press.  
_Discussion leaders:   Matthew Kennedy, Erica Townsend-Bell_  
_[Notes and questions from Prof. Carey](classnotes/warof1898.pdf)_

Week 8:    Bunck, Julie Marie.  1994.  _Fidel Castro and the Quest for a
Revolutionary Culture in Cuba_.   University Park, PA:  Penn State University
Press.  
                See also, Che Guevara's essay, ["Man and Socialism in Cuba"](http://www.marxists.org/archive/guevara/1965/03/man-socialism.htm)   
_Discussion leaders:   Ginger Elsea_  
_[Notes and questions from Prof.
Carey](classnotes/revolutionarycultureincuba.pdf)_

Week 9:    Ripley, C. Peter.  1999.  _Conversations with Cuba.   _Athens, GA:
The University of Georgia Press.  
_Discussion leader:   Ali Rand_

**Indigenous movements**  
Week 10:   Deborah Yashar:

  * "Indigenous Protest and Democracy in Latin America." Jorge I. Dominguez and Abraham Lowenthal, eds., _Constructing Democratic Governance: Latin America and the Caribbean in the 1990s -- Themes and Issues_. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 1996:87-106.
  * "Contesting Citizenship: Indigenous Movements and Democracy in Latin America." _Comparative Politics_ 31(1) (October 1998):23-42.
  * ["Democracy, Indigenous Movements, and the Postliberal Challenge in Latin America."](http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/world_politics/v052/52.1yashar.html) _World Politics_ 52(1) (October 1999):76-104.
  * links to the International Labour Organization's (ILO's) [Convention 169 on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries](http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/62.htm), and to some [background](http://www.ilo.org/public/english/standards/norm/whatare/stndards/indig.htm) on the origins and status of this convention
  * link to an article on [mobilization by Chile's Mapuche indigenous groups](articles/chilemapucheprotests.html) against the construction of a dam in their region

_Discussion leaders:   Sergio Salmeron, Rachel Kaul_  
_[Notes and questions from Prof. Carey](classnotes/indigenouspolitics.pdf)_  


**Courts**  
Week 11:     Miguel Schor,  ["The Rule of Law and Democratic Consolidation in
Latin America."](http://darkwing.uoregon.edu/~caguirre/schor.html)  
Bruce M. Wilson and Roger Handberg.  2000.  ["Costa Rica's New Constitutional
Court:  A Loose Political Cannon?"](articles/wilson&handberg.pdf) _South
Eastern Latin Americanist_ 18(4)(Spring):58-79.  
Washington Post article, plus academic rebuttal, on [rule of law in
Mexico](articles/mexicoruleoflaw.html)  
_Discussion leader:   Alba Ponce de Leon  (with special guest, Jeff Staton)_  
_[Notes and questions from Prof.
Carey](classnotes/courtsdiscussionquestions.pdf)_  
**_******_**  
**_Also in Week 11:   Research paper prospectus due.  (Students excused from
producing written commentary on assigned readings this week.)_**  
******  


**Student research presentations**  
Week 12:    Ali, Alba, Juan Gabriel, Matt J., Rachel  
Week 13:    Erica C., Ginger, Maria Cristina, Erica T-B, Sergio  
Week 14:    Bia, Matt K., Carolyn, Anke, Caitlyn  


**Final papers due**  
**April 29th by 4:30 at my office, Eliot 229 (or in the Political Science
Department office, Eliot 219)**

