  **AMH 4914FP:   Research in South Florida History **

**Fully Online Section**

**Professor Brian Peterson   **

**Spring Semester 2002   **

**Office Hours:   Tues, Thurs, 5-6 PM, or by appointment   **

**DM 396   **

**Phone: 305-348-2343   (You can leave a message by phone mail, but don't
count on a quick response.  Send an email if I don't pick up the phone when
you call.)  **

**Email:   peterson@fiu.edu  **  
**********  
This course will include a general history of Miami and its hinterlands --
especially the Keys and the Ten Thousand Islands -- from the time of the
Calusa and the Tequesta until today.  We will be especially interested in the
pattern of relationships between ethnic groups and the cultures of each of the
ethnic groups living here.

Student research in this course will focus on the Calusa Indians, and
particulary their mound villages on the Turner River and Chokoloskee Island.
Our main goal will be to map the two villages and to determine the purposes of
each of the mounds, plazas and canals.  We will also be interested in the
historical development of connections between the villages in the Chokoloskee
Bay area and the Calusa capital at Mound Key.  When did Chokoloskee Bay come
under the authority of Mound Key?  How did the chieftainship at Mound Key
collect tribute from the people at Chokoloskee Bay? We will read several books
in common and do a research project concerning the Calusa mounds on the Turner
River and Chokoloskee Island.  
**********  
**Required Reading:   **

Marvin Dunn, **Black Miami in the Twentieth Century**

Maria Cristina Garcia, **Havana USA : Cuban Exiles and Cuban Americans in
South Florida, 1959-1994** ** **

Peter Matthiessen, **Killing Mr. Watson**

John Viele, **The Florida Keys : A History of the Pioneers**  

Christopher Cox, **A Key West Companion**  
**********  
**Grading:  **

Midterm exam:  25%.

Final exam:  25%.

Short response papers:  25%.

Long term paper:  25%.

Group work:  If students attend the chatroom regularly and participate
actively in group work, particularly in helping others make webpages, they
will receive a notch up in their course grade (such as from a B to a B+.)  
**********  
**Academic honesty:   **

Plagiarism is using other people's words without quoting them.  If you have as
few as three consecutive words from another source that are not in quote
marks, you are guiltyof plagiarism.  Citing a source does not eliminate the
sin of plagiarism.  Only quotation marks do. The penalty for small amounts of
plagiarism in this course is rewriting a two page response paper as a ten page
paper and rewriting a five page paper as a twenty page paper.   I catch
plagiarism all the time.  Avoid it like the plague!  For more serious
cheating, I will refer the case to the University Student Court.  
**********  
**Field Trips:**

You are invited on the field trips.  I will give you more information
concerning which ones will take place and where and when and full details.  I
will be determining which field trips to take on the basis of student
interest.  If there are any that you certainly wish to go on, please let me
know as soon as possible.  
**********  
**Individual PowerPoint Presentations:**

This activity is designed to acquaint you with using PowerPoint.  Your
presentation should have at least twenty images and as many pages of
commentary as are necessary to get across the story of the images.

It is important that you have a unique topic and that you do a good job with
research so that you come up with fresh images and information.  Here are the
topics from which to choose.  These have been chosen based on the likely
availability of images for downloading or scanning.  Call libraries where you
want to scan and find out about their procedures before going.  You may need
to take certain types of disks.

The best web source is the State of Florida Historical Archive.
<http://fpc.dos.state.fl.us/>

A listing of many web sources for Florida history:
<http://dlis.dos.state.fl.us/stlib/flhist.html>

Only one student per topic:

1.  Ponce de Leon

2.  Pedro Menendez de Aviles 

3.  Castillo de San Marcos in St. Augustine

4.  Fort Mose

5.  Spanish missions in Florida

6.  Spanish ranches in Florida

7.  Florida in European maps, 1500-1800

8.  Henry Flagler

9.  The photographs of Ralph Munroe.  (There is a book you could scan.)

10.  The Florida East Coast Railroad

11.  Early aviation in South Florida

12.  Coconut Grove, 1870-1914

13.  Meyer Lansky

14.  The changing Seminole way of life, 1850-present.

15.  Black labor in Florida, 1850-1900.  

16.  Key West, 1820-1950.

17.  Ed Watson.  (This might be impossible.  Check it out first.)

18.  Sheriff Dan Hardie and Hardieville.  (Pictures in the South Florida Historical Museum's library?)

19.  Miami in 1896 or other years.  Specific locations could be dealt with, such as the Miami River or Biscayne Bay or downtown.  Or specific topics could be dealt with.  (A team of students could work together and scout out different sources.  Each could acquire images for all -- or at least pinpoint where the images could be found.  Good free sources at the Historical Society and at the Florida Room of the Downtown Public Library.)

20.  Vizcaya.  (You could take the outdoors photos yourself.  Scan the indoor photos.  Make sure you pay attention to the secret sexual history of Vizcaya.)

21.  Biltmore Hotel.

22.  The building of Miami Beach or Coral Gables.

23.  An analysis of the overall layout of Coral Gables or Miami Beach or Coconut Grove.  Use maps and photographs you take yourself to explain the original plan and how it has evolved.  Think about the social messages contained in the planning.

24.  Lighthouses.

25.  Boats.  (Sailing ships; racing; construction industry.)

26.  Julia Tuttle.

27.  The Brickell family.

28.  Schools.  

29.  Fishing industry.  Sponges.  

30.  Coontie and coontie mills.

31.  Lemon City.  Or any little settlement for which map and photographic evidence exists.

32.  Women's fashions.  (Lots of fashion shows from Burdines in the state archives photography collection.  Make this a serious discussion of the impact of Miami on the American lifestyle in the 20th century.)   
**********  
**Term paper topics:**

The most important thing we are seeking in this research is the exact layout
of the Calusa villages on the Turner River and Chokoloskee.  They have
probably already been mapped by archeologists, but I have never seen such
maps.  If you know an archeologist, see if they have any ideas about this.  It
is also possible that existing data at FIU's Geographic Information Systems
(GIS) Laboratory in the Green Library has good maps of the mounds and canals,
but one has to know how to get this out of the digital data.  Terraserver,
owned by Microsoft, used to have free images of relief maps and infrared
vegeation maps available on the web, but this is now a pay service.  

The best source for Turner River mounds topographical maps that I know is the
LAnd Boundary Information System (LABINS) of the Florida Department of
Environmental Protection.  This is a clickable map which shows you closer and
farther out views.  This shows the Turner mounds as extending in a line, but
it does not really capture the quality of these mounds as long, parallel,
slanting structures heading in a  northwest-southeast direction.  Finer
measurements are perhaps necessary to depict this aspect of the mounds.
<http://www.labins.org/imap/>

See if you can find a good site with infrared vegetation maps of the
Chokoloskee Bay area.  See if you can distinguish mangroves from other types
of vegetation on these maps.  If you can see tropical hardwood hammocks in the
midst of mangroves, these may well be sites of Calusa villages with their
elevation coming from shell mounds.  This would be a great topic on which to
write.

A good website concerning Mound Key is at
<http://www.ecotrail.com/mound_key.htm>

Many of the following topics have several sub-topics obviously present within
them.  You can divide them up with other students who choose the same topic.
Just be sure not to do the exact same thing.  Aside from maps, no web research
is permitted for this term paper.  You must get all of your information from
books (many on reserve under WOH 2001), articles and archeological reports.

Only one student per topic.  Claim your topic on the bulletin board inside
WebCT.  First claimant get it.  Possible topics:

1.  The geographic layout of the Calusa village at Turner River or Chokoloskee Island (or any other Calusa village, including Mound Key).  This is what I care the most about.

2.  The historical pattern of development of Calusa villages in general.

3.  The religious beliefs of the Calusa.

4.  Spanish attempts to convert the Calusa to Christianity.

5.  The involvement of the Calusa with Cuban/Spanish "fish ranches" in the eighteenth century.

6.  Calusa techniques for catching mullet, their most important food source.  Weirs.  Fish migration.

7.  Oysters in Chokoloskee Bay:  seasonality, size, historical changes, impact of Calusa upon, role in Calusa food supply.

8.  Calusa fishing in the Gulf of Mexico.  Sharks were important for the Tequesta in Miami.  Were they important also on the west coast of Florida?

9.  Women's role in foodgathering.  Did they participate in gathering oysters?  Did they hunt small animals?  Gather information from hunting and gathering peoples around the world concerning what animals and marine life women might hunt or gather and what were reserved to men.  How do different societies draw the lines on male and female roles in hunting and food gathering?

10.  The Calusa as a wealthy, non-agricultural people.  What other peoples were similarly wealthy based on marine resources?  Look at peoples in the Pacific Northwest and in Africa, Asia and Europe who depended primarily on fish (salmon).

11.  Moundbuilding in world history.  What political organization of society is associated with moundbuilding?  Is moundbuilding always associated with a great increase in human sacrifice?  Does a certain population size always trigger moundbuilding?  Is moundbuilding associated with a shift from an egalitarian animistic religion to a more hierarchical, paramount sky-god religion?

12.  The chieftainship in world history.  What brings about a society based on tribute -- where one village subordinates many other villages and collects material wealth from them on a regular basis?  Were the powers of the Calusa chief to allocate fishing grounds his main basis of power?  Does this hold true for other chieftainships?

13.  Human sacrifice in history.  How should we situate the Calusa and Tequesta within the overall pattern of human sacrifice?  Exactly what does the type of sacrifice they practiced tell us about their society and their religious beliefs?

14.  Berdache was very important in Timucua society.  The Timucua appear to have been engaged in a process of social class differentiation associated with assigning feminine work tasks to some non-warrior males.  Was a similar berdache institution present among the Calusa?  Do you see any evidence of this in the Spanish writings about the Calusa?  [If you do this topic, have every student report to you any evidence that they find in their research.  You might find nothing at all.  In that case, write a general paper on male initiation rites around the world and what happens to those males who are not accepted as warriors.  Killed?  Given special social status?]

15.  Why was the Turner River site abandoned in the tenth century CE?  What was happening with the Calusas in general in that century?  Worldwide climate change?

16.  Why was the Turner River site settled in the third century CE?   Did a village exist a Chokoloskee at that time?  Was there a Calusa empire based on Mound Key that extended its control to Chokoloskee Bay at that time?  Why is the Turner River village located just out of sight of the bay?  Military defense?  Against whom?

17.  Trace the evolution of the social class structure among the Calusa.  How did aristocratic chiefly clans or families emerge?  When did human sacrifices begin as a means of commemorating the death of a member of the chiefly family?

18.  What use did the coastal Calusa make of the interior Everglades?  Did they go in every summer to hunt deer?  Were there permanent Calusa villages in the interior of the Everglades?  

19.  Is there any evidence of trade with Cuba or Mexico before 1492 among the Calusa on the west coast of Florida?

20.  Review the latest evidence on whether the Calusa and Tequesta could have originated in Mexico, Cuba or the Bahamas.  How can we be sure that their ancestors came from further north in America?

21.  Is there evidence of a decimation of the Calusa by European diseases?  When?  What about the disappearance of the people of the Bear Lake Mounds near Flamingo around 1500?  Caused by European disease?  Slave hunters from Cuba?  Were Calusa and Tequesta slaves being taken to Cuba in the 1500s?   
**********  
**Course schedule:   **

Wed, January 9:  Face to face meeting.  DM 396.

Mon, Jan 14:  Two page response paper on my PowerPoint dealing with the
Timucua Indians which is posted in WebCT.  Topic:   For this and every other
essay you write in this course, be sure to have a strong central argument that
you support with facts from the reading.  Stick to your argument all the way
through the paper.  The argument must be interesting, unusual and personal.
Do not argue something that is obvious.  Your essay should be unified around
one strong argument.  Do not go in several different directions in one essay.
Make your essay have an introduction, a body and a conclusion.  Fix up the
writing in terms of spelling and grammar before sending in the essay.  If you
need to have a friend help you, do so.  If you want to pair with another
student in the class to check papers before sending them in, do so.

Claim topics for PowerPoint presentation and Calusa term paper on the bulletin
board inside WebCT.  The first claimant gets it.

Chatroom

Saturday, Jan 19 and/or Sunday, Jan 20:  Field trip to Mound Key, capital of
the Calusa Empire.  Located in Estero Bay near Fort Myers Beach.  Three hours
drive each way.

Mon, Jan 21:  Send in two-page response paper on first half of Dunn book.
Topic:  How has Miami's pattern of race relations been unique in the United
States?  How has race relations here followed the general Southern pattern?

Chatroom

Mon, Jan 28:  Two-page response paper on the second half of the Dunn book.
Topic:  What impact did the arrival of the Cubans from 1959 on have on Miami
Blacks?

Chatroom  
    
Saturday, Feb 2:  Field trip to Coconut Grove, including The Barnacle, home of
Commodore Ralph Munroe.

Mon, Feb 4:  Two-page response paper on first half of **_Killing Mr.
Watson_**.   Discuss the impact of geography (climate, mangroves, mosquitoes,
hurricanes, location within nation) on the culture of the people of the Ten
Thousand Islands.  How did geography determine who was attracted there in the
first place?  How did geography shape their lives once they were there?

Chatroom  

Sunday, Feb 10:  Field trip to downtown Miami (site of Tequesta village and
Royal Palm Hotel) and the Miami River Rapids Park (where the Miami River
originated from the Everglades before 1912 when a canal was put in to Lake
Okeechobee).

Mon, Feb 11:  Second two-page paper on **_Killing Mr. Watson.   _**Show Ed
Watson symbolizes the United States.  How does the killing of Mr. Watson help
explain September 11?  What positive qualities does Watson show?  Does
Matthiessen think that the US should be destroyed like Watson or is he warning
us that it will be destroyed or what is he trying to say?

Send me a list of your sources for the PowerPoint presentation.  Make sure you
can find what you need or else change your topic.

Chatroom

Sunday, Feb 17:  Field trip to Miami Beach.

Mon, Feb 18:  Submit PowerPoint presentation.

Chatroom  
    
Saturday, Feb 23 or Sunday, Feb 24:  Field trip to Chokoloskee.

Mon, Feb 25:  Midterm exam.  Will include 20 short identification items
(people, places, events, ideas, terms) and two essays of two pages each.  Two
hour exam.  Study together in the chatroom in preparation for this.  Meet at
times other than the regularly weekly class meeting.  Help each other figure
out the likely ID items and essay topics.  But make sure that your own essays
are unique.

Chatroom

Mon, Mar 4:  Write two page paper on the **_Havana USA_** book.

Send me your list of sources for the Calusa term paper.  If you cannot find
the information you need, change your topic.

Chatroom

Week of March 11:   Two-page response paper on the Viele book.  Topic:
Discuss the wrecker Jacob Housman and his relevance to South Florida.  How has
his tradition lived on?

Chatroom

Mon, Mar 25:  Two-page paper on the Cox book.  Topic:  What unique
characteristics of the culture of the Florida Keys between 1820 and the
present came about because they are semi-tropical islands?  How does being
sub-tropical and being islands affect human culture there?

Chatroom

Mon, Apr 1:  Submit five page term paper on Calusa.

Chatroom

Mon, Apr 8:  Future Miami group project submitted.  Everyone in the class work
on this together.  

Chatroom

Week of Mon, Apr 15:  Final exam.  Same format as midterm.  
---

