_Syllabus_

HUMANITIES 2984 (Index 3031)  
SPECIAL STUDY: EXPLORATIONS IN ASIAN-AMERICAN CULTURES  
Spring Semester 2000  
Tuesdays and Thursdays, 3:30-4:45 p.m., McBryde 318

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Instructor: Peter L. Schmitthenner  
Office: 407 Major Williams  
Office Hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays, 2-3 p.m. and by appointment  
Phone: 231-8377 (office); 552-0687 (home; please don't call after 10 p.m.)  
E-mail: pschmitt@vt.edu  
Class listserv: hum2984_3031@listserv.vt.edu (not operational until the second
week of classes)  
WWW url: http://www.majbill.vt.edu/history/schmitthenner/  


**Description**

This course is an enquiry into Asian-American cultures. It will examine
selected aspects of Asian American cultures through an interdisciplinary
approach, intertwining such disciplinary approaches as anthropology, history,
film, literary and cultural studies, religious studies, and sociology.  


**Objectives**

Having successfully completed this course, a students will be able to:

 * explain the continuities and transformations of Asian cultures as they shift from ancestral homelands into the diaspora 

 * compare the Asian-American diaspora experience with other past and present immigrant communities who have settled in the U.S. 

* understand the Asian-American experience from various disciplinary standpoints and appreciate the benefits of an interdisciplinary approach to learning about cultures 

 * claim s/he is more cross-culturally literate 

 * demonstrate an enhanced ability to critically think, write, and verbally express themselves   


**Evaluation**

 Your grade in this course will be based on three components:

 1\. Short writing assignments (30%)  
This will involve near weekly 1-2 page reflections on readings, audio-visual
materials used in class, and local class-related events (such as lectures,
cultural exposes, and films).  Informal writings are just that.  I am mostly
interested in how you interpret and reflect on a given assignment.  There is
no single way to interpret materials so you need not worry about being right
or wrong.  I will also tolerate grammatical and other writing errors.  Your
reflections should fill 1-2 pages and may be handwritten.  Submitting
something is better than submitting nothing.  I will usually provide more than
one option for each assignment.  Grading for these will also be informal.  I
will assign a number grade (out of 10) for each assignment, but will not give
a formal grade on this component until the end of the semester.

 2\. Class participation (30%)  
Along with normal expectations of asking questions and expressing themselves
in class, students will be required to take turns leading discussion on course
materials. You will be required to lead such discussions at least twice during
the semester. To promote a more continuous dialogue, participation on a
listserv or chat will also be taken into account.

 3\. Final Project (40%)  
This will involve an in-depth study on a topic a student will decide in
consultation with the instructor. This could be in the form of a conventional
research paper (at least 15 pages in length), a local field study, the
production of a web site, or a service learning project. Collaborative
projects are possible, but need to show evidence of collaboration. In
addition, a class presentation on the project (20-30 minutes), for purposes of
gaining feedback, will be required. A project proposal (1-2 pp.), including a
list of sources you intend to use (5-10 is recommended), is due before the
Spring Break.  


**Course Materials**

**  Texts**

Lee, Joann Faung Jean. _Asian Americans: Oral Histories of First to Fourth
Generation Americans_

     _from China, the Philippines, Japan, India, the Pacific Islands, Vietnam and Cambodia_. New York: The New Press, 1992.

  
Takaki, Ronald. _Strangers from a Different Shore: A History of Asian-
Americans_. Updated and

     revised edition. Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1998

  
**Other readings**

Will be placed on reserve at Newman Library or will be accessible through the
World Wide Web.  


**Tentative Schedule of Topics and Readings**  
(subject to change)

Week 1: January 18, 20

 Course introduction  
Perceptions and stereotypes about Asian Americans  
Reading: Takaki, xi-xv, 3-18; Lee, vii-xii, 121-34  


Week 2: January 25, 27

 Frameworks for studying and understanding Asian-American cultures  
Reading (on reserve): Robin Cohen, _Global Diasporas: An Introduction_
(Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1997), ix-xii, 1-29 (especially
21-29), 155-196

 The first wave of Asian Immigration into the U.S.  
Reading: Takaki, 21-75

Week 3: February 1, 3

 Emergence of Chinese American culture  
Reading: Takaki, 77-131, 230-269; Lee 3-9; 38-44, 140-143  
 Showing of the documentary "Chinatown" (Feb.3)  
Guest commentary by Dr. Larry Shumsky, History Dept., Virginia Tech  
See the [documentary's web site](http://www.pbs.org/kqed/chinatown/index.html)
for useful background information  


Week 4: February 8, 10

 Early establishment of Asian communities in Hawaii  
Reading: Takaki, 132-176; Lee, 24-37

 Emergence of Japanese American Culture  
Reading: Takaki, 177-229  


Week 5: February 15, 17

 Early Communities of Korean and Indian Americans  
Reading: Takaki, 270-314

 The First Wave of Filipino Americans  
Reading: Takaki, 315-354; Lee, 144-5  


Week 6: February 22, 24

 Asian-Americans during World War II  
Guest presentation (Feb. 22):  
Chikako Takeshita: On Japanese-American narratives of their internment during
World War II  
Reading: Takaki, 357-405; Lee, 10-18, 45-49, 99-103  


Week 7: February 29, March 2

 Interracial Relationships involving Asian Americans  
Reading: Lee, 121-5, 132-4, 173-226

 "Second Wave" Asian Americans  
Reading: Takaki, 406-471, Lee, 55-120  


Week 8: March 7, 9

  Discussion of Service Learning; Project proposals due (March 7)

 No class (March 9)  


Spring Break (March 11-19)  


Week 9: March 21, 23

 Showing of clips from "Mississippi Masala" (March 21)  
 Guest Presentation (March 23):  
Nandini Assar: On the community of Indian-American motel owners  
Reading (on reserve at Newman Library): Nandini Narain Assar, "Indian-American
Success Story of "Potel"-Motels: Immigration, Traditions, Community, and
Gender," Current Research on Occupations and Professions, Vol. 10 (1998), pp.
67-86; and Tunku Varadarajan, "A Patel Motel Cartel?," New York Times
Magazine, July 4, 1999, pp. 36-9.  


Week 10: March 28, 30

 Guest Presentation (March 28):  
Dr. Peter Wallenstein, History Dept., Virginia Tech:  
On the history of Asian Americans at Virginia Tech and in U.S. Institutions of
Higher Education  
Readings: Peter Wallenstein, "Asians and Asian Americans at Virginia Tech: The
Early Years, 1920-1950," _Diversity News_ (Virginia Tech), Vol. 4, No. 1 (Fall
1997), pp. 8-9, 11; Takaki, pp. 497-502, Lee, see pp. under "Education" in
index.  
 March 30: Video: "Pilgrimage to Pittsburgh"  


Week 11: April 4, 6

 Family and Religion among Asian Americans  
Reading: 140-172

 Present and Future of Asian Americans  
Reading: Takaki, 472-509; Lee, 227-231  


Week 12: April 11, 13

 April 11: no class

 April 13: Presentations on Individual Projects: Ming, Hiro, and Tom  


Week 13: April 18, 20

 April 18: Presentations on Individual Projects: Phil, Bobby, and Fatima

 April 20: Presentation on Individual Project: Emileigh  
                Presentaions on Service-Learning Projects: Kim S. and Linda   


Week 14: April 25, 27

 April 25: Presentations on Service Learning Projects: Sarah, Jeremy, and Ben

 April 27: Presentations on Service Learning Projects: Ka Lee, Dave, and Mike  


Week 15: May 2

 Presentations on Service Learning Projects: Parham and Kim N.  
 Course Wrap-up  


**May 6 (Saturday): Final Project due (end of scheduled final exam: 9:45
a.m.)**  
****  
****

