![](../graphics/hnetemboss.gif)  

**Course Syllabus**

History 364  | Thomas G. Alexander  
---|---  
American Environmental  | History Office: 410 KMB  
Fall Semester, 1995  | Hours: 2:00 to 3:00 p.m. M, W, F  
10:00 to 10:50 a.m. M, W, F | And By Appointment, Call 378-2944(o)  
. | Or 375-8797 (h)  
  
_Note: The following course outline may be revised as necessary to meet our
needs during the semester._

**_Introduction:_**

History 364 is a survey of the history of the interaction of Americans with
the physical environment from the beginning of European expansion to the
Western Hemisphere to the present. It will cover a broad range of topics
including human activities in such places as wilderness, rural areas, and
cities. The discussions and lectures will emphasize the ways in which human
beings have visualized the environment; how they have interacted with their
surroundings; how they have modified the places they have visited and lived
and in which they have worked; and how they have responded to the results of
modification.

Since this is a three semester hour survey, we cannot hope to consider all
possible topics. As a result, we will select certain representative topics
from a much larger possible list.

The course will consist of both lectures and discussions. Each of you is
invited to contribute to the discussion by making comments and asking
questions.

**_Textbooks_ :**

I have selected five textbooks for the course:

  * Roderick Nash, _American Environmentalism: Readings in Conservation History_ (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990); 
  * William Cronon, _Changes in the Land: Indians- Colonists- and the Ecology of New England_ (New York: Hill and Wang, 1983); 
  * Aldo Leopold, _A Sand County Almanac: With Essays on Conservation from Round River_ (New York: Ballantine, 1970 (orig. ed. 1949 and 1953); 
  * Kenneth T. Jackson, _Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of the United States_ (New York: Oxford, 1985); 
  * Carolyn Merchant, _Major Problems in American Environmental History_ (Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath, 1993). 

All are available in paperback and should be on hand in the textbook section
of the bookstore. I have also asked the library to place them on reserve. If
you have any problems getting the texts, please let me know and also discuss
the matter with the bookstore's textbook office. You should not consider a
discussion with the textbook office an imposition. They have a monopoly on
textbook orders for the university and are obligated to meet your needs.

You must read the text assignment before coming to class the day of the
lecture discussion on the topic under consideration since I will conduct the
course as a combination of lecture and discussion. For the discussion, it is
assumed that you have a knowledge of the text material.

**_Grading:_**

**Examinations:** There will be three examinations for the course. Each of
them will be partly essay and partly identification. They will be graded on
the following percentage basis: A = 92-100; A- = 90-91; B+ = 88-89; B = 82-87;
B- = 80-81; C+ = 78-79; C = 7277; C- = 70-71; D+ = 68-69; D = 62-67; D- =
60-61; F = 59 and below. The two midterm examinations will be non-cumulative.
That is, they will cover only the material since the last examination (or in
the case of the first examination, since the beginning of the course.) The
final examination will cover the material since the previous examination, but
it will also have questions which ask you to deal with an aspect of the entire
course.

Examinations will consist of two parts, 1. an identification section, in which
you will be asked to provide a brief discussion of several individuals or
topics; and 2. two essay questions selected from several that I will supply.
The essay questions will be broad and will ask that you summarize a large
topic, dropping in facts to show that you understand the concrete aspects of
the topic.

_Examinations must be written in bluebooks and in ink._ I insist that you
write in bluebooks because sheets of paper are difficult for me to manage. I
will deduct 5 points from any exam not written in a bluebook.

My general policy is to return examinations one week after the examination is
taken.

**Term paper** : Each of you is to write a short paper of 10 to 13 double-
spaced typewritten pages on a subject of your choice on some aspect of the
interaction of Americans with the environment. You are to type or print your
paper double-spaced in 12 pitch (elite type) with one inch margins. If you
print your paper on a dot-matrix printer or @ it on a typewriter with a cloth
ribbon, you must use a new ribbon and print it in the letter quality mode
rather than the draft mode. If the paper is turned in print that is difficult
to read, I will return it to you ungraded.

In order to help you with your papers, I am requiring each of you to turn in a
prospectus for the paper. _The prospectus is due on September 13_. ( Note a
prospectus is a statement in which you tell me what you plan to do in the
paper and what sources you intend to use to do it.) The prospectus is to be
typed or printed.

You must document your paper using footnotes or endnotes following the style
of Kate L. Turabian, _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers- Theses, and
Dissertations_ (5th edition) or the 13th or 14th edition of the Chicago Manual
of Style upon which Turabian is based. You may use either the footnote or the
endnote style. _You may not use the parenthetical reference form_. The forms
for footnotes and endnotes are conventions adopted to allow readers to
understand the sources you have used and find them in libraries and
bookstores. If you use a notation style other than Turabian or the Chicago,
you may make it difficult for me to judge the accuracy of the citations. If
you are unfamiliar with the forms, you must secure a copy of Turabian or the
Chicago Manual and consult it while preparing your notes. I have asked the
library to put a copy of Turabian and the 13th and 14th editions of the
Chicago Manual on reserve. If your notes do not follow the required form, I
will deduct five (5) points from your final grade on the paper.

The paper is to be based both on secondary and primary sources and it must
show evidence of critical thinking and of interpretive balance. You must be
certain that you use the _best secondary and primary sources available in the
BYU library._ You are not required to travel to manuscript collections,
however, but may use sources available in the BYU library. I will not accept
as an excuse that the books or document collections owned by the BYU library
that you needed to use were missing from the shelves in the library or were
checked out. This means that you must begin your work on the paper early in
the semester. If you cannot find the books you want, you must ask the library
staff to recall the books from the patrons who have them or to search for the
books if they are missing. If the library staff cannot secure the book, you
should ask them to reorder the book for the library, and then you should order
it for yourself on interlibrary loan. _If you have problems in books, please
let me know, I will deal directly with the library staff on your behalf_.
Please note: faculty members may check books out for a semester. Library
policy requires them to return a book, however, if they have kept it for more
than two weeks. If you have problems securing a book because a faculty member
has it, please complain to the library. You may also speak with me about the
matter and I will complain as well. The preliminary version of the paper is
due about three and a half weeks after the first examination. I will read the
paper and return it to you with my comments and with a preliminary grade. That
grade will have no bearing on your final grade in the course unless you choose
not to revise the paper. If you revise it, your grade will be determined by
the final grade you receive on the paper. Thus, you are to revise the paper
based on my comments and to resubmit it on Monday, December 11. You can earn
up to 100 points on the paper on the following basis: A = 92-100; A90-91; B+ =
88-89; B = 82-87; B- = 80-81; C+ = 78-79; C = 72-77; C- = 70-71; D + = 68-69;
D = 62-67; D- = 60-61; F = 59 and below. Papers must be turned in by 3 p.m. on
the day they are listed as due. You automatically lose one grade step (e. g.
drop from an A to a B) if they are late. If you turn in the paper more than a
week late, you lose all the points for that assignment unless you have
discussed the matter with me and have secured my written permission to turn it
in late. If you anticipate a problem, you must contact me.

**_A Note on Office hours and my availability_** : My office hours are listed
at the top of the course outline. I keep them regularly except in extenuating
circumstances. Most usually reasons for failing to keep them are illness or
attendance at a professional convention. If you

want to see me at my office hour, you do not need to make an appointment. I
will meet with all students on a first come, first served, basis. Note,
however, if you want to meet with me at some other time, please make an
appointment. As a university professor, my first obligation is to my students.
Also as a university professor I have a scholarly obligation to conduct
research and publish my findings. We university professors see these
activities as complementary, but they require a division of time. That means
that you may not find me in my office if you choose just to drop in to try to
see me. If you cannot meet me during my scheduled office hours, please talk
with me or call me to make an appointment. I do not consider it an imposition
for you to call me at home to make an appointment to see me.

**_Final Grade for the Class_**

You can earn up to 400 points in the class from the exams and paper. I will
calculate grades on the following basis:  

Points  | Grade  
---|---  
368 and up | A  
360 - 367 | A-  
352 - 359 | B+  
328 - 351 | B  
320 - 327 | B-  
312 - 319 | C+  
288 - 311 | C  
280 - 287 | C-  
272 - 279 | D+  
248 - 271 | D  
240 - 247 | D-  
239 and below | E  
  
**_Lecture. Discussion, and Reading Topics and Assignments_**

  * Introduction to the Course-- Merchant, Chapter 1, Nash, pp. 1-8
  * Pre-Columbian European Conceptions of the American Environment
  * American Indians and the Environment-- Nash, Chapter 1; Merchant, Chapter 2
  * The Columbian Exchange, Native American and European Contact, Cronon, _Changes in the Land_ , all; Review: Crosby, "Ecological Imperialism," in Merchant pp. 14-22; and Merchant, Chapter 2.
  * Origins and Development of the American Public Land System The Romantic Revolution and the American Environment-- Nash, Chapters 4 and 5;
  * Merchant Chapter 6
  * The Religion and the Environment, Stewardship or Exploitation, Nash, Chapter 42 and Alexander, "Stewardship and Enterprise" (copy to be passed out in class)
  * Rural Land Use in the Nineteenth Century, Farming, Irrigation, Ranching, Lumbering, Mining.-- Nash, chapters 6, 10; Merchant, Chapters 5 and 7
  * Urban Land Use in the Nineteenth Century, Jackson, pp. 1-156; 307-327;
  * Beginnings of Concern for the Land, National Parks, Resource and Land Management in the late 19th century, Nash, Chapters 7, 8, 9, 10; Merchant, Chapter 10
  * The Progressive Conservation Movement-- Nash, Chapters 11, 12, 13, 16, 17, 18; Merchant Chapter 11 and Review Merchant Chapter 10
  * Aesthetic Conservation--the Wilderness Movement, Nash, Chapters 14, 15, 25, 28; Leopold, all; Review Merchant, Chapter 11
  * Aesthetic Conservation--The National Park and Monument Movement. Review Nash, Chapters 4, 6, 7, 14, 19, Review Merchant, Chapter 11
  * Water Resource Conservation in the Progressive Era, Rivers, Dams, and Irrigation, Nash, Chapters 19, 20; Merchant Chapter 10
  * Timber Management, The Forest Service and Private Timber Companies in the Progressive Era, Merchant, Chapter 14
  * Regional and Urban Planning, Nash, Chapters 24, 26, Review previous assignment in Jackson and, in addition, read chapters 9 through 12; Merchant, Chapter 12
  * Conservation in the 1920s and 30s, Nash, chapter 22 (Review chapters 19 and 20).
  * Grazing and Land Management, Leopold, review all.
  * Wildlife Management, Leopold, review all.
  * The Great Plains and the Dust Bowl, Nash, chapter 21; Merchant, Chapters 9 and 13
  * The New Environmentalism and the Ecological Movement, Nash, Chapters 23, 29, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39, 46; Merchant, Chapters 14 and 15
  * Debate over Resource Use, Nash, 30, 31, 38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 44, 45, 48, 49, 50, 51.
  * Environmental Radicalism, Nash, Chapters 46, 47.
  * Air Pollution and Water Pollution, Nash, Chapters 30, 31, 33.
  * The Recent Controversy over Timber Management, Nash, Chapter 38
  * The Sagebrush Rebellions, land use and ownership.
  * Problems of the Urban Environment, Jackson, Chapters 12-16 and Appendix.
  * Conflicting Interests and the Environmental Crisis, review previous readings.

**_Dates to Remember:_**

  * Prospectus will be due on Wednesday, September 13.
  * November 23, 24, Thanksgiving Holiday.
  * First Examination: Friday, September 29
  * First Version of Paper Due: Wednesday, October 25
  * Second Examination: Friday, November 10
  * Final Version of Paper Due: Monday, December 11
  * Last Day of Class Instruction: Wednesday, December 13
  * Final Examination: Wednesday, December 20, 11: 00 a.m. to 2: 00 p.m.

[![](../graphics/asehreturn.gif)](../index.html) [an error occurred while
processing this directive]

