English 393 African American Studies African-American Literature Fall 2000
Course Polices  

Dr. Lou-Ann Crouther Cherry Hall 117 Phone: 745-5713  
Office Hours: MWF 12:10-1 p.m.; TR 12:20-1 p.m.; and by appointment  
Texts:  
_Cornerstones: An Anthology of African American Literature,_ Donaldson.  
_Race Manners,_ Jacobs.  
African and African-American history books.  
A college grammar handbook  
A college desk dictionary

Grading:  
A number of elements will be used to determine you final grade. All work will
be assigned points according to its importance; for example, 100 points for
each exam, and 200 points for your Research Paper. You will receive 0-100
points for class participation. The points will be totaled, and a suitable
scale will be devised. My evaluation of your work in the class will also be
considered. Incompleteness will be granted only for extraordinary reasons.

Attendance:  
Regular attendance is essential; I will take attendance each day. No work can
be made up unless you present an official excuse as soon as you return to
class, or not more than one week after the absence. It is you responsibility
to see me to catch up on the assignments. Unannounced quizzes and writing
exercises will not be made up. After four unexcused absences by the semester's
end, your name will be reported to the Academic Advising and Retention Office
and your final grade will be lowered one letter. Keep your own attendance
record; save your excused absence paperwork all semester.

Objectives  
This is a reading and writing class In the course of the semester we will read
a variety of literature by African-American writers and try to understand how
their perceptions of their worlds have influenced their literature. We will
study their use of literary conventions to see how their imaginations are
portrayed. We will also discuss American history, sociology, and politics, for
example, to examine the role of African-Americans in the United States, see
the forces that have influenced their works, and discover the particular role
the African-American writer serves in the African-American community.

You should also enjoy the experience, and the key to this is participation,.
The class will go better and you will get more out of it if you contribute
something of your own. By all means speak up whenever you have something to
say. Each time you take part in a discussion or raise a question you are
shaping the course into something more responsive to your needs. Your are
encouraged to respond to all materials creatively. You are also welcomed to
suggest topics and materials for assignments and discussions. CONFERENCES ARE
WELCOMED!!

Writing Center:  
Proficient writing is demanded in this course. It is you responsibility to
work on your writing deficiencies in the Writing Center, in Cherry Hall 124\.
You may earn extra points by attending the Writing Center a maximum of three
times, but not more than once a week. Each visit will be worth 5 points.

Format for papers:  
All out-of-class work must be typed. No work done in pencil will be accepted.
Do not type-write on the backs of pages. Don not hand in papers with ragged
edges.

Begin your text as close to the top of each page as possible. Double space all
text. Adhere to the page requirement.

Please single space your name, class, hour, type of work, and the date the
paper is due in the upper right hand corner of the first page of your paper.
Your last name and a page number should be in the upper-right-hand corner of
additional pages.

Do not put cover sheets on your work; do not use folders. I will not accept
papers of two pages or longer that are not stapled or clipped together.

All in-class papers/exams must be written in Examination Books (blue books);
they can be purchased in the bookstore.

At least 10 points will be deducted from late papers. _Work more than a week
late will not be accepted._ Indicate on you late papers if they are late due
to an excused or unexcused absence, or if they are late due to other reasons
(under the due date on the first page). Computer problems are rarely
acceptable excuses for late papers.

All assignments are due to me, in class, on the specified date. Students with
verified excused absences must bring the work and verification to class the
day they return, or meet with me to arrange an alternate due date. _Excused
late work more than one week will not be accepted_.

Five points will be deducted from your grade for each of the following: no
title, a weak introduction, a weak conclusion, contradictions, slang, messy
papers, and quotes from memory in exams. Proofread your work.

Keep copies of the work you do outside of class. Save all your papers so you
will have record of your work. Do not put anything under my office door. _No
work will be accepted after 1:00p m, Friday, December 1, 2000._  


Assignments:  
All work done in class must be work that you have written from ideas that are
yours.  When you choose to use others' ideas, you must document those ideas as
indicated in our college grammar handbook, or as indicated in your major's
style book.  If I am suspicious that you did not write what you have given me,
especially if I think you have plagiarized, the consequences will be severe.

Research Paper:  
Your Research Paper can analyze any person, event, work, or movement that has
influenced African-American literature.  The paper should be seven to ten
complete, double-spaced, typed pages long, and must have documentation and a
bibliography.  Follow the style book for your major, or the Modern Language
Association format.  You may interview at least one person who will be used as
a source in your paper.

Ten points will be deducted per day from late Research Papers.  An additional
ten points will be deducted from papers received after 1 p.m. each day.
Students who papers are not handed in one week after the deadline will receive
zeroes as their grades for this assignment.

Oral Report:  
If time permits, you may be required to present a five-to-seven minute oral
report in which you discuss your Research Paper.  You may bring in
audio/visual aids to supplement your report.

Journals:  
You are expected to keep a journal in which you write your responses to the
readings and class discussions.  Write at least on well-developed and
insightful paragraph per week.  I will announce the due dates for the
journals.  Each journal will contain two paragraphs.  One paragraph in each
journal must discuss/analyze the selections in our text.  Each paragraph
should be 1/2 typed page long (doubled spaced), and is worth 10 points.

Outside Event:  
You must attend an event, such as a lecture or conference, and write a one
page, typed paper about what you learned from the presentation.  The paper
should not be a listing of what happened; write a paper you would enjoy
reading.  This assignment is worth 30 points.

Miscellaneous:  
Ten points will be deducted from your grade for each call you make to my home.

If you wish to know your final grade at the end of the semester, please give
me a self-addressed, stamped envelope or postcard, an I will mail the
information to you after I have computed the final grades.

If you must bring someone to class, your guest should not be disruptive, and
you might be courteous enough to mention the visit in advance, if possible.
If you must bring children to class, they should sit quietly, have something
to do, and not disrupt the class.  
    


* * *

