Dr. Libby

A346

American Diplomatic History: 1890-1945.



Office................CA-527

Office Phone..........274-3981

History Office........CA-504N

History Department....274-3811

_e-mail:   jhlibby@iupui.edu_



The study of One's nation's history makes one a better and moral loyal
citizen.

> > > > > > > > (Voltaire)

The trouble of the world is not that people so little, but that they know so
many things that ain't so.

> > > > > > > > (Mark Twain)

History is the witness of truth. The Life of Memory. The Teacher of Life. The
Messenger of Antiquity.

> > > > > > > > (Cicero)

Wisdom is the Principal Thing Therefore Get Wisdom

> > > > > > > > (Plato)

But perhaps the study of history has been hindered by the following truth:
After you have heard two eyewitness accounts of an automobile accident, you
begin to worry about history.

> > > > > > > (Barbara Dobbins)

>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>> > >  

Perhaps in our course, we shall not only become better citizens (Voltaire),
learn many things that are so (Twain), be reminded of our antiquity, memory
and life (Cicero), get wisdom (Plato), and come to a consensus about history
(Dobbins).

I hope you will find the time in your busy careers to attempt those lofty
objectives.

_A346 - American Diplomatic History: 1890-1945

_

_This course is designed to introduce the student to the broad spectrum of
American diplomatic history from the presidency of Theodore Roosevelt to the
formal signing of the peace treaty between the United States and Japan on
April 28, 1952. _

The course provides the student with perhaps his or her first introduction to
historical research, writing a sizeable paper, footnoting and concluding his
or her study with a Bibliographical Essay. The essence of these technical
aspects of the paper will be explained more fully in class.

> > > > **_

>>>>

>>>> Textbook_ :

>>>>

>>>> **

>

> Walter LaFeber, _The American Age: U.S. Foreign Policy at Home and Abroad
Since 1750_.

>

>> > > > > > >  

**_

Examinations_:

**

There will be a _MID-TERM and a FINAL EXAMINATION_. All of my examinations are
essay in form...I do not ask fill-in-the-blank questions...choose the right
answer...etc., you will need to write and to write well. You will have plenty
of notice before the examinations are given.

The student is expected to answer completely, comprehensively and in a clear
fashion. If you have not had experience in writing essay examinations it would
be prudent to visit the _Writing Center_ on the fourth floor for assistance. I
will discuss further details in class.



_

PLEASE READ CAREFULLY_:

*****Attendance is now required by the university so there will be a seating
chart. Students who continue to be absent from class will have their names
reported to the Registrar's Office and to the Admissions Office.

In the night classes attendance will be taken after the break as well.

If you do not have time for the course or for any reason become dissatisfied
with the academic offering, do not merely leave the class but withdraw
officially.

I ask students _not_ to record my lectures; this is a private conversation
between you and me and since lectures were recorded years ago and sold to
students, I adopted this procedure.

If you are hearing impaired or, in any other way cannot take lecture notes
without a tape recorder (for example because English is not your native
language), please visit the Office of Adaptive Educational Services in CA-001C
and have them contact me.

If you need to call that office the phone number is:

_

274-3241_ or _274-3242_.



Indiana University has a policy regarding cheating and plagarism. I ask you
not to do either as no one wins.

If a student plans on leaving the course I would recommend that you withdraw
officially by visiting the Registrar's Office.

Do not assume that I know you left the course because you have chosen to no
longer attend the class.

Many students find out much later that they are not officially withdrawn from
the class and there is no way I can be of assistance.

Should you call my office I have an answering machine which records the time
and date of the call...for some reason students will speak clearly when
talking to such machines but then give their phone numbers too rapidly for the
mechanism to record.



_

Please speak precisely so the machine can pick up your whole messsage_.



If you have never had a good experience in a history course (presuming you
were taught by an historian) I would recommend staying current with your
reading in the textbook and the _Chronology_ to avoid that sense of being
overwhelmed and frustrated by the course's requirements.

There is no daily nor weekly reading assignment. By the time you have arrived
at the college-university level educational process, you should be able to
make such judgements for yourself.

The textbook is a supplement to my lecture but it cannot serve as a substitute
for learning the material required for the course.

The grade of incomplete is rarely given, usually for deaths in the family or
hospitalization. Please do not rely on the possibility of an incomplete to
save you if you have not completed the work.



If you have any questions regarding the grade of incomplete please see Dean
Miriam Langsam in CA-401 or Pat Bostwick in her office for a more detailed
explanation. The number is _274-3976_.



I encourage students to ask questions in class so do not be embarrassed. If
the question is an honest inquiry then there is no reason not to clear up any
confusing aspects of the course or its content.



The main information you will need for the examinations will come from my
lectures...the _Chronology_ will give you an overall panorama of the
information contained in our course and the textbook is a supplement.



If you have not had any experience in writing essay examinations I suggest you
visit the Writing Center (CA-427) on the fourth floor for assistance. Do check
for the center's semester hours.

_



The dates of the examinations will be announced in class_.

_

The Midterm Examination will cover_:

> > > > > _

>>>>>

>>>>> Chapters 7-10, pages: 193-333_.

>>>>>

>>>>>>  

_

The Final Examination will cover_:

> > > > > _

>>>>>

>>>>> Chapters 11-13, pages 334-456

>>

>> _

_

Office Hours will be announced during the semester in_ _which this course is
taught as well as by appointment_.

> >  

If you have any questions about what has been written above, be sure to see
me.



**_

Written Paper_:

**

The student will choose one of the topics listed below and write a _20-30 page
paper_.

_

YOU WILL HAVE AMPLE TIME TO COMPLETE THE ASSIGNMENT SO PLEASE START EARLY AND
END ON TIME.

_

The essay will be typed, double spaced, but beyond the format the student
should exhibit enterprising research (no encyclopedias... dictionaries...
etc.), a thorough analysis of the topic, person or treaty chosen, in addition
to revealing an understanding of the topic chosen.

If you begin researching your topic immediately at the beginning of the
semester the time frame will not be a burden; however, if you wait to research
and write the paper until the week before the essay is due to be turned in,
then, of course, you have created an unnecessary burden upon yourself which
could have been avoided with proper time allotment.

More about the paper will be said in class.

**********If you have never written a sizeable 300 level history paper and
consider yourself a poor writer perhaps you might wish to rethink your reasons
for signing up for my course.

Some students are under the false perception that this course is required in
their degree program and some have been told that information by their
counselors.

The paper constitutes _40 percent_ of the class grade while the two
examinations total _60 percent_ of your grade.

_

Topics_:

Because of the number of students in the diplomatic class it would be
impossible if not futile to list all the topics so the subjects noted below
are just samples of what students may choose for their topics.

_

I do ask all students to check with_ _me and to let me mark their topics on_
_my syllabus_.

1\. The Era of Expansionism beginning in 1890 and terminating with the
acquisition of Puerto Rico, Guam and the Philippine Archipelago in the Treaty
of Paris, December 10, 1898.

This is a very broad topic and the student might consider researching and
writing on any subject within that time frame.

_

***BE SURE TO SEE ME FIRST BEFORE EMBARKING ON ANY OF THE VARIOUS TOPICS
DURING THIS TIME PERIOD.

_

2\. _Theodore Roosevelt_ :

> > A. The concept he had of the balance of power in European affairs, his
reaction to the new imperialism motivating European nations to seek new
empires in Africa, the eastern end of the Mediterranean, in Southeast,
Northeast, and Eastern Asia, as well as what today we call the Pacific Rim.



> > B. Caribbean intervention including his Colombian-Panamanian policies, the
Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine and his ideas of receiverships.

>>

>>> >  
>>

>> C. Asian issues and negotiations following the American acquisition of an
insular empire throughout the Pacific basin.

> > > >  
>>

>> You will need to define Roosevelt's concept of American diplomatic and
military policies and strength combined with his growing suspicions and fears
of Imperial Meiji Japan.

>>

>> D. American acquisition of an empire and its consequences. Here the student
will research and reflect upon the Supreme Court "Insular Cases" that allowed
the United States to gain an insular empire and the Congressional legislation
written and passed(sponsors of these proposals) that enabled the United States
to govern these newly won possessions.

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > >  
>>

>> The student will also need to address the controversies surrounding the
acquisitions as defined and argued by expansionists and anti-expansionists and
know the exact difference between their philosophies.

>>

>>> >  
>>

>> _

>>

>> BE CAREFUL: THEIR PHILOSOPHIES_

>>

>>> _

>>>

>>> NEED CAREFUL EVALUATION_.

>>>

>>>> > > > >  

> > 3\. The presidency of _William Howard Taft_..choose one

>>

>>> > of the three major issues of his administration:

>

>> > A. The issues in Asia, especially the Taft-Knox Neutralization Scheme
regarding railroads in Manchuria as well as other issues relating to Eastern
Asia in general and Japan specifically.



> > > B. His policies revolving around Dollar Diplomacy in Central and South
America.

>>>

>>>>  
>>>

>>> C. Whichever topic relating to President Taft that you choose be sure to
explain his later conflicts with Theodore Roosevelt which were so important in
electing Thomas Woodrow Wilson to the White House in 1912.

>>>

>>>>  
>>

>> 4\. _Woodrow Wilson's Diplomacy_ :

>>

>>> A. Pre-World War I diplomacy and the futility of neutrality, 1914-1917.
The student will need to explain Wilson's decision to ask Congress for a
declaration of war in April, 1917.

> > > B. Once the United States was in the First World War what were Wilson's
objectives, how did he hope to implement them and then evaluate how well he
achieved his goals by explaining the issues he faced during the Treaty of
Versailles and League of Nations negotiations.

> > > Finally, discuss and explain the provisions of the treaty and League as
well as the treaty's strengths and weaknesses as commented upon by historians.

>

>> > C. Explain Wilson's relationship with the Senate before we entered the
war, during the conflict and during the crucial advice and consent
ratification debates.



_

***ANY STUDENT CHOOSING ONE OF THE WILSON TOPICS SHOULD BE VERY EXPERIENCED IN
RESEARCH, HAVE A FIRM KNOWLEDGE OF THE LIBRARY AND BE WILLING TO READ MANY OF
THE BOOKS AND ARTICLES RELATING TO THESE TOPICS AND KNOW ALSO HOW TO WRITE
EVALUATIVE PAPERS_.



> > 5\. _Republican Foreign Policy: 1921-1933_.

>>

>>> > A. Washington Conference, 1921-1922...explain the four treaties and
their impact on our government's diplomatic and military policies during the
decade.

>>>>

>>>> B. Reaction to the Chinese Revolution, 1925-1928.

>>>>

>>>> C. The origins, diplomacy and consequences of the Kellogg-Briand
Pact...The 'Outlawry of War' concept.

>>>>

>>>> D. The Manchurian Crisis, 1931-1933...the Hoover-Stimson Non-Recognition
Policy...the onset and continuation of the depression and the continuing
issues in China.

>>

>> 6\. _The Diplomacy of Franklin Roosevelt_ :

>>

>> The diplomacy of the four-term president is so vast that it cannot be
conveyed in the handout. I would, however, divide the issues into four time
frames:

>>

>>> A. The diplomacy of the early New Deal...the Italian-Ethiopian War of
1935, Hitler's invasion of the demilitarized Rhineland in 1936, the problems
relating to neutrality legislation from 1934 to 1937, and the Spanish-Civil
War, 1936-1939.

>>>

>>> B. Reaction to the Second Sino-Japanese War beginning on July 7, 1937 at
the Marco Polo Bridge (also known as the Marco Polo Bridge Incident) and its
consequences through June 1940.

>

>> > Be sure to include in this topic the bombing and sinking of the U.S.S.
_Panay_ on December 12, 1937, the attempt to revise the Neutrality Legislation
and how Roosevelt viewed Chiang Kai-shek and China in America's East Asian
policy formulation.

>>

>>> C. American-Japanese relations, 1933-1937. Here the student should begin
with relations following Japan's withdrawal from the League of Nations, her
withdrawal from the Washington Conference Naval Treaty obligations and the
announcement of a future New Order in Asia that foreshadowed antagonisms in
the next several years.

>>>

>>> There are other issues but those mentioned here are required for
understanding the growing hostility between Tokyo and Washington.

>>>

>>> D. For the years 1937-1941, relations with Japan continued to deteriorate
and the student will need to explain the final collapse of diplomatic
cordiality between the two nations resulting in the Japanese strategic
military blunder of attacking Pearl Harbor on that " _date_ _(NOT DAY)_ that
will live in infamy ".

>>

>>> _

>>>

>>> ****THERE ARE TOO MANY ASPECTS TO AMERICAN-JAPANESE_ _RELATIONS BETWEEN
1937 AND THE ATTACK AT PEARL HARBOR TO LIST HERE. THUS, ANY STUDENT DESIRING
TO WORK ON TOPIC NUMBER D SHOULD SEE ME DURING REGULAR_ _OFFICE HOURS LISTED
BELOW_.

>>>

>>> E. Any student who wishes to write about the historiography of the Pearl
Harbor disaster and the charges of dereliction of duty that arose from the
attack should see me for assistance with this massive topic.

>

>> > The Bibliography that was passed out in class should be helpful.

>>>

>>>> _

>>>>

>>>> PLEASE USE IT; DO NOT IGNORE IT_.

>>>

>>>>  
>>

>> 7\. Some students might wish to pursue the _Cold War_ topics centering on
American relations with the Soviet Union. A wide reading is required for this
topic so do not attempt it without making that commitment.

>

>> 8\. _Other possible topics_ :

> > > A. Overview of American-Chinese Relations... 1911-1949

>>>

>>> B. Overview of American-Soviet Relations.... 1933-1950

>>>

>>> C. Overview of American-Japanese Relations.. 1900-1919

>>>

>>> D. Overview of American-Japanese Relations.. 1920-1940

>>>

>>> E. Overview of relations with European-Asian-Latin American countries not
mentioned above. Since Africa was not of primary interest to American policy
makers until the last thirty years, policies formulated for Saharan and sub-
Saharan Africa were officially presented through the various foreign offices
of governments with colonial interests on that continent.

>>>

>>> I encourage students to research and write papers relating to the newly
forming republics in the post World War II era on any continent but diplomatic
sources might be insufficient in English.

The student is also encouraged to study a Secretary of State within the many
administrations since the turn of the twentieth century. Among the more
notable heads of the State Department include:

For Benjamin Harrison....James G. Blaine............1889-1892

> > > > > John W. Foster.............1891-1893

>>>

>>>> > > > > > >  

For Grover Cleveland.....Walter Q. Gresham..........1893-1895

> > > > > Richard Olney..............1895-1897

>>>>>

>>>>>> > > > >  

For William McKinley.....John Sherman...............1897-1898

> > > > > William R. Day.............1898

>>>>

>>>>> John Hay...................1898-1901

>>>>>

>>>>>> > > > >  

For Theodore Roosevelt...John Hay...................1901-1905

> > > > > Elihu B. Root..............1905-1909

>>>>

>>>>> Robert Bacon...............1909

>>>>

>>>>> > > > > >  

For William Howard Taft..Philander C. Knox..........1909-1913



For Woodrow Wilson.......William Jennings Bryan.....1913-1915

> > > > > Robert Lansing.............1915-1920

>>>>>

>>>>> Bainbridge Colby...........1920-1921

>>>>>

>>>>>> > > > >  

For Warren Harding.......Charles Evans Hughes.......1921-1923



For Calvin Coolidge......Charles Evans Hughes.......1923-1925

> > > > > Frank B. Kellogg...........1925-1928

>>>>>

>>>>>> > > > >  

For Herbert Hoover.......Henry L. Stimson...........1929-1933



For Franklin Roosevelt...Cordell Hull...............1933-1944

> > > > Edward R. Stettinius, Jr...1944-1945

For Harry Truman.........Edward R. Stettinius, Jr...1945

> > > > James F. Byrnes............1945-1947

>>>>

>>>> George C. Marshall.........1947-1949

>>>>

>>>>> Dean G. Acheson............1949-1953

>>>>>

>>>>>> > > > >  

For Dwight Eisenhower....John Foster Dulles.........1953-1959

> > > > > Christian A. Herter........1959-1961

>>>>>

>>>>>> > > > >  

For John Kennedy.........Dean Rusk..................1961-1963



Lyndon Johnson...........Dean Rusk..................1963-1969



For Richard Nixon........William P. Rogers..........1969-1973

> > > > > Henry A. Kissinger.........1973-1974

>>>>>

>>>>>> > > > >  

For Gerald Ford..........Henry A. Kissinger.........1974-1977



For Jimmy Carter.........Cyrus R. Vance.............1977-1980

> > > > > Edmund Muskie..............1980-1981

For Ronald Reagan........Alexander M. Haig..........1981-1982

> > > > George P. Schultz..........1982-1989

>>>>

>>>>> > > >  

For George Bush..........James A. Baker III.........1989-1992

> > > > > Lawrence Eagleburger.......1992-1993

>>>>>

>>>>>> > > > >  

For Bill Clinton.........Warren M. Christopher......1993-1997

> > > > Madeline Albright..........1997-

>

> You would have to use contemporary accounts found in newspapers, magazines,
and the most recently published scholarly textbooks and journals.

> _

>

> *****BE CAREFUL: SOME OF THE SECRETARIES OF_ _STATE WHO DID NOT SERVE LONG
TERMS MIGHT BE_ _DIFFICULT TO STUDY_ _FOR_ _MATERIALS MAY BE_ _LACKING THAT
WOULD PREVENT A DISTINGUISHED AND_ _SCHOLARLY PAPER. SEE ME IF YOU HAVE ANY_
_QUESTIONS ABOUT ANY TOPIC AND SECRETARY OF_ _STATE_.

To begin your research be sure to consult the Bibliographies in the textbook
by LaFeber as well as the sources listed below.

From the sources listed below you have a beginning to inaugurate your
historical-detective research regarding your topic.

_

Do not ignore these sources but do not rely upon them as your only source
materials_.

> > _

>>

>>  
>>

>> _ Samuel Flagg Bemis and Robert Ferrell, eds., _The American Secretaries of
State series in multiple volumes.

>>

>> _

> > _

>>

>> Richard Dean Burns, ed., Guide to American Foreign Relations, Since 1700

>>

>> _

> > Frank Merli and Theodore Wilson, _Makers of American_ _Diplomacy_ (2
volumes).

> > Norman Graebner, ed., _An Uncertain Tradition: American Secretaries of
State in the Twentieth Century_

I have always found it curious that even after listing these sources, students
do not utilize them nor cite them in their papers.

_

IN ADDITION, BE SURE TO CONSULT THE  _**REFERENCE LIBRARIANS AT IUPUI, THE
MARION COUNTY MAIN LIBRARY ON MERIDIAN STREET, THE STATE OF INDIANA LIBRARY AT
OHIO AND SENATE STREETS AND IF POSSIBLE THE INDIANA UNIVERSITY LIBRARY IN
BLOOMINGTON.



I WOULD SUGGEST VISITING OUR REFERENCE SECTION FOR ASSISTANCE INITIALLY**.

The grade for the paper is determined not only by the _content_ but by the
quality of the _sources_ you have used.



If you plan on just using an encyclopedia or copying from one source (or
finding it on the web-site) perhaps we should part as friends and on good
terms for that indifference to my course will not suffice but belongs in
another level of your education that hopefully you passed out of years ago.



To be a good historian one must be a good detective and to do well in my class
all of these elements go into determining your grade.



> > > > > > **_

>>>>>>

>>>>>> DO NOT CHEAT YOURSELF_.

>>>>>>

>>>>>> **

>>>>>>

>>>>>>> >  
>>

>> _

>>

>> IF THERE IS ANYTHING ON THIS SYLLABUS THAT STILL CONFUSES YOU PLEASE SEE AT
YOUR EARLIEST CONVENIENCE.

>>

>> _

