|  |  |  |  |  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
Kathleen Kennedy  
---  
Office: HU 271  
Hours: TR 1-1:50 ABA  
Phone: x3043  
E-mail: [kkennedy@cc.wwu.edu](mailto:kkennedy@cc.wwu.edu)  
Web: [http://www.wwu.edu/~kkennedy](history_103.htm)  
  
History 265

Lesbian and Gay Experience in American History

Few topics evoke as much controversy in American society and culture as do
homosexuality and gender nonconformity. While most Americans do not support
overt discrimination against lesbian and gay people, they do support what
legal historian William Eskridge Jr. calls the "apartheid of the closet"\--an
ideological and legal system that, in essence, denies to gay and lesbian
people the same rights and privileges of citizenship as heterosexuals. To many
Americans this apartheid of the closet seems natural. This course challenges
this assumption ; it instead contends that contemporary understandings of
homosexuality, heterosexuality, queer etc...are historically constructed.  
  
This course examines the historical construction of discourses about
homosexuality, and how those discourses have helped to create gay and
experiences in the United States. We will ask questions such as: how has
homosexuality come to inhabit this position--the apartheid of the closet--in
American legal, social, medical, and cultural discourses? How have lesbian and
gay people responded to this position? What are the relationships between
race, gender and class and constructions of homosexuality and gay and lesbian
identified, communities, and politics? And how have all of these factors
changed over time?  
  
In examining these questions, we will explore constructions of homosexuality
and lesbian and gay experiences in the United States from 1870-1988.
Specifically we will examine how lesbian and gay people formed identities,
communities and civil rights movements. We will begin in the late nineteenth
century when sexual identities took shape. We will then explore how lesbian
and gay people used those identities to create communities and organize
political movements in support of lesbian and gay rights and against
homophobia, heterosexism, and AIDS. We will conclude by examining the role of
lesbian and gay history in contemporary lesbian and gay lives.  
  
For reasons that we will explore in this course, Americans have great
difficulty talking about sex. Americans grant sexual discourses special
privileges; that is, they/we grant them their own categories and inscribe them
with unique abilities to do harm, or conversely, to liberate us from the iron
cage of history. This granting of sexual discourses special privileges means
that Americans talk about sex a lot even as some Americans try to restrict
access to sexual materials and discourses. These sexual discourses as well as
the debates over their status in American culture are critical to
understanding lesbian and gay history. For this reason, we will examine
material in this course that contains sexual content that some may find
offensive. My purpose in using this material is not to "shock" or offend you
but rather to expose you to the various ways in which lesbian and gay
identities, communities and politics have taken shape. Your enrollment in this
course presupposes your willingness to engage with this material.  
  
  
_Required Reading_ : The following texts are available at the University
bookstore and, with the exception of the course manual, they are also
available at That Textbook Place in Sehome Village. You may also be able to
obtain these books on the internet.  
  
Brett Beemyn, (ed) _Creating a Place for Ourselves: Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual
Community Histories_

Joan Nestle, _A Fragile Union: New and Selected Writings_

Randy Shilts, _And the Band Played On: Politics, People and the AIDS Epidemic_
or reserve reading

Kathleen Kennedy, (ed) _[Course
Reader](bib_course_pack.htm)_[,](bib_course_pack.htm)  
  
Choose one of the following autobiographical stories:  
  
Audre Lorde: _Zami: A Different Spelling of My Name_

Leslie Feinberg, _Stone Butch Blues: A Novel_

Samuel Delany, _The Motion of Light in Water_ (not available. I will replace
with a packet of readings)

Paul Monette, _Becoming a Man: Half a Life Story_  
  
  
  

_Assignments_ : You are required to write three essays and take several in [
class quizzes](quizes.htm). You are also expected to actively participate in
class discussions. Late papers will be penalized five percent for every day
they are late and will not be accepted once I have returned the papers. See
the [ assignment sheet](assignment_sheet-103.htm) for more details. All
written assignments must conform to the directions on the assignment sheet. I
will give no incompletes for reasons others than those explicitly outlined in
the course catalog.  
  

_Grades_ : Your final grade will be based on the following:  
  

[First Essay........April 27..............................200
pts.](assignment_sheet-103.htm)

Second Essay......May 18............................200 pts.

Third Essay........June 5...............................200 pts.

[Quizzes](quizes.htm)......................................................300
pts.

Participation...............................................100 pts.  
  
  
  

A................................................900-1000 pts.

B................................................800-899 pts.

C................................................700-799 pts.

D................................................600-699 pts.

F...................................................0-599 pts.  
  

Students who receive under x30 will receive a minus grade while students who
receive a x70 or above will receive a plus grade. For example a students who
receives 873 points will receive a B+ for the course while a student who
receives a 827 will receive a B-.  
  

Course Schedule  
  
_Section One: Introduction: Why is History Important?_  
  
  
Week One: The Hardwick Decision and Misappropriation of History

Reading: Nestle, pp. 55-68 & 89-96  
  
  
_Section Two: Constructing Sexual Identities_  
  
  
Week Two: Medicine and Law

Reading: Duggan and Chauncey in the course reader  
  

Week Three: Queering the Color Line

Reading: Somerville in the course reader

Nestle, pp. 19-48  
  

Week Four: Gay New York

Reading: Excerpts from George in the course reader

Chauncey in Beemyn  
  
  
  
_Section Three: Gay and Lesbian Constructing Communities_  
  

Week Five: Reinventing Homosexuality

April 27: Reading Meyerowitz in course reader  
  

Week Six: Constructing Gay Communities

Reading: Kennedy and Davis in Beemyn

Drexel in Beemyn

Thorpe in Beemyn

Beemyn in Beemyn  
  
  
_Section Four: Politics_  
  
Week Seven: Before Stonewall

Reading: Your selected autobiography  
  

Week Eight: Stonewall, Civil Rights, Feminism and Gay Liberation

Reading: Stein in Beemyn

Allen in course reader  
  

Week Nine: Backlash and AIDS

Reading: Gamson in course reader

Reserve Reading:  From _A Queer World_ :

    "On the Need for a Gay Reconstruction of Public Health"

    "Randy Shilt's Miserable Failure"

From _Social Perspectives in Lesbian and Gay Studies_

    "Lesbian Involvement in the AIDS Epidemic"  
  

Week Ten: What Does it Mean to Be Queer? Recentering Class and Race

Reading: Lee in course reader

Almaguer in course reader

Nestle, pp. 89-125 & 55-68  
  
  
  
Please Note that there will be a quiz on June 8th at 1:00



[Home](index.htm)  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

