##  **A Natural History of Water**

**TEST 331   Spring 2002 [University of Washington,
Tacoma](http://www.tacoma.washington.edu/)**

**M-W 8:30-10:35AM GWP 216**

**Michael Kucher[kucher@u.washington.edu](mailto:kucher@u.washington.edu)**

**New phone: 253-692-3859**

**Fax:   253-692-5718**

**Office hours:   after class**

**Course URL: http://courses.washington.edu/tande/hw/**

**For Campus Info in case of snow, seismic activity, etc.: 253-383-INFO
(unless the Chancellor closes the campus, you can assume class will meet as
scheduled)**

  
**_Course Description_** :  
A Natural History of Water is a reading- and research-intensive course that
will examine the historical impact of human activities upon the regional and
global environment. Each time the course is taught it will address a different
theme. The course will be organized around case studies of various topics with
an emphasis on the sources and methods historians use to study environmental
change over time. Students will complete a major research paper in which they
apply the methods they learn to studying the history of an environmental issue
in the Pacific Northwest.

**In the Spring of 2002 this course will focus on the water and water-related
issues in the Puget Sound and Commencement Bay Watersheds, but will place them
in a global context using Marq De Villiers new book, _Water_**. We will adapt
the methods of environmental history and ecological history to the study of
the Puget Sound Watershed. Individual projects will place a local change in
the environment into a global context. Students will actively contribute to
the class through discussion, peer reviews of drafts of their papers, projects
in which they analyze the work of major environmental historians, and a final
presentation of their research project. Diligent research, careful analysis,
and thoughtful interpretation--presented through quality writing--will be
essential features of the course. Together we will strive for the highest
quality of written work through a combination of peer review and re-writing
multiple drafts of each paper. The importance of carefully crafted writing in
the course can be seen in the choice of required texts and in the grading
system.

**_Course Objectives_ :**  
Students will gain an understanding of major water issues confronting the
environmental  historian through course lectures, readings, and (perhaps)
field trips. Class discussion of the readings as well as writing several
review essays on recent works in the field will give students training in
critical thinking. In addition, students will gain essential research,
writing, and speaking skills through a written research project and in a final
presentation to the class. Finally, students will learn how to interpret the
human impact on the water cycle through slide lectures and field work

**[_Required Readings_ : (click here for schedule at
http://courses.washington.edu/tande/hw/schedule.htm)](http://courses.washington.edu/tande/hw/schedule.htm)**

Arthur Kruckeberg, _The Natural History of Puget Sound Country_ (Seattle,
1991).  
Alice Outwater, _Water: A Natural History_ (New York, 1996)  
Marq De Villiers, _Water:   The Fate of Our Most Precious Resource_

Also, strongly **_suggested_** (especially if it has been a long time since
you have written a research paper for a history class) are:  
Mary Lynn Rampolla , _Pocket Guide to Writing History_ , 3d ed. (Boston,
2001).  
William Kelleher Storey, _Writing History:   A Guide for Students_.  (New
York, 1998).  
All can be found in the Tacoma Campus Library.

Some E-Reserve Readings, filed under the course name and number at the [UWT
Library E-Reserve site](http://ereserves.tacoma.washington.edu/) and noted on
the attached reading schedule, will also be required.

Required and suggested readings are available at the [University
Bookstore](http://www.bookstore.washington.edu/store_locations/tacoma.html).

**[_Course Bibliography_
](http://courses.washington.edu/tande/hw/bibliogr.htm)** your starting point
for all research projects. **[Click here:
http://courses.washington.edu/tande/hw/bibliogr.htm](http://courses.washington.edu/tande/hw/bibliogr.htm)**

**_Grading and Evaluation_ :**

  * Class Participation, Preparation, & Presentations (showing up on time, precis in hand, having done all the assignments) 40%
  * Research Paper Proposal (1 p. + bib or primary and secondary sources) 10%
  * Annotated Bibliography of all works cited, in HTML, (on disk) 10%
  * Research Paper Final Draft (15 pp. of text + notes) 40%

Note: each written assignment will be given two grades of equal weight: one
for the quality of your writing, the other for its content. Grading is based
on a 100 point system. 100-90=A; 89-80=B; 79-70=C; 69-60=D; <59=F. Exceptional
work will earn an A; work well-above average a B; average work a C; below
average a D. The exam will cover all readings, discussions, and presentations.
You are responsible for finding out from other students what happened during
any class you miss.

**_Class Preparation and Participation_** :  
This is not a lecture course. Attendance is required.  More than two absences
will hurt your grade. The success of the class for each student will depend on
how well he or she is prepared and to what extent each student contributes to
furthering the class discussion. The quality of preparation and participation
will be as important as the quantity.  If I notice a lot of students are
unprepared any week I may even offer a pop quiz for your enjoyment. Finally,
whereas these guidelines may at first glance seem draconian, upon closer
inspection they will reveal the value I place on each student's contribution
to everyone's education.

**_Assignments_ :**  
One Precis for each class meeting and one longer research paper, which will be
a traditional 15 page term paper as well as an annotated bibliography, to be
submitted on disk, in HTML. You will also make a presentation of your final
project to the class, as well as occasional "works-in-progress" reports to
your classmates.

I will not accept work that has not been proof read or any precis that is
late. A "Spell check" on your word processor does not constitute proof
reading. Failure to proof read your work will automatically drop your grade.
If you have any doubts about the need to proof read your writing consult the
UW Writing Center. The people at the Writing Center will not proofread your
paper, but they can tell you if your writing needs it and they can give you
instruction about how to do so yourself.

All assignments will be graded for clarity of composition and grammar as well
as content. All assignments must be typed, double-spaced, with at least one-
inch margins, in 12-point type (Roman preferred). Sources will be cited in
footnotes or endnotes using Sally Barr Ebest, , et. al. _Writing from A to Z:
The Easy-to-Use Reference Handbook_.   If you have any doubts you may also
consult _The Chicago Manual of Style_ , 14th ed. (available in the library) or
contact the Writing Center. All assignments must be turned in on time.

**Late assignments** will be dropped 1.0 point per day (every day counts)
late, except in extreme circumstances (death certificates must be notarized
with raised seals). No extensions will be granted except for a written medical
excuse presented **before** the due date of the assignment. Work returned for
failure to proofread will be counted as late.   Don't send me MS Word
documents as attachments to your email because too often this fails and I
can't be responsible.  Please print your work out.  Precis will only be
accepted on the dates due.  They cannot be turned in late.

**_General Evaluation of Written Work_ :**  
Writing effectively means writing clearly and concisely and using correct
grammar. Excellent papers will meet all of the following criteria:

  1. The paper addresses all of the questions and issues posed in the assignment.
  2. The paper draws upon relevant readings and class discussions. The paper applies what you have been learning.
  3. The paper adds your own insights to the analyses. The quality of your own ideas is important. Show your own independent thinking as much as possible.
  4. The paper is convincing. You have the responsibility to justify your arguments. You must back up your points and conclusion. Support your argument by using evidence from the class readings or other sources. Use explicit examples to illustrate what you say. Do not assume anything on the part of the reader.
  5. The paper is well organized. It has an introduction with a thesis (argument), it has a body supporting this thesis, and it ends with a conclusion summarizing the main points.
  6. The paper has no spelling or grammatical errors.
  7. You have completely documented each and every source used, following the _Chicago Manual of Style_ (CMS) citation method.   **Failure to properly document even a single source can result in a zero for the assignment.**   Documentation is covered in _A to Z_ , Rampolla, and Storey.
  8. The final draft shows substantial and significant improvement over earlier drafts.

**_[Book Reviews ](http://courses.washington.edu/tande/hw/sources.htm)
(formerly know as "Sources and Methods Analyses_ :"**  
Each student will analyze three books during the course. Two will come from
your own bibliography and one will involve the assigned books. You will write
a 2-page analysis of the author's sources and discuss the methods by which the
author uses those sources to make an argument (see Rampolla [available at the
UWT Library], pages 23-26, for suggestions). You are responsible for obtaining
your books in a timely manner so you can submit your analysis on the due date.
These analyses are intended to get you to think critically about the ways in
which other authors write history. The presentations will provide an
opportunity to present your comments and work, in addition to giving the rest
of the class an idea of the different research and analytical methods for
studying the history of the environment. The peer review process will help you
hone your ideas and sharpen your argument.

**_Research Paper_ :  see additional guidelines at:
<http://courses.washington.edu/tande/checklist.htm>**  
Each student will write a 10-15 page research paper and give a brief oral
presentation of its contents at the end of the term. The paper topic should
focus upon an individual species, watershed, or watercourse; or upon a
technology, industry, or person who has had an impact on the environment in
the Puget Sound Watershed.

The paper will be made up of several components which will be due over the
course of the quarter. By submitting your work in increments you will be able
to get feedback from both me and your peers and thereby improve the quality of
the project before its final due date. The components are as follows:

  1. **Paper Proposal:** a one or two page statement describing your research topic, a summary of the primary and secondary sources you will use (say, ten (10) of each), and any particular difficulties you anticipate. The nature of the primary sources you find will vary according to the topic you choose. You may wish to note collections you will use and the contacts you have made in order to secure access to those collections. If you have any doubts about what constitutes a primary or secondary source in the context of your project that Rampolla (pages 2-3) has not clarified, do not hesitate to ask.
  2. **Annotated bibliography in HTML (1-4 pages):** a list of pertinent primary and secondary sources. Many of these will be found in local archives, such as the [Northwest Room](http://www.tpl.lib.wa.us/v2/nwroom/nwroom.htm) at the Tacoma Public Library, the [UW Tacoma Library](http://www.tacoma.washington.edu/library/index.html), the [Tacoma Public Utilities](http://www.ci.tacoma.wa.us/tpu/) Archives, the [National Archives in Sand Point](http://www.nara.gov/regional/seattle.html), the [Pacific Northwest Collection](http://www.lib.washington.edu/Specialcoll/) in Seattle, the [Seattle Public Library](http://www.spl.lib.wa.us/), the [Washington State Archives](http://www.secstate.wa.gov/archives/) in Olympia, and through other sources such as interviews, newspapers, census records, and the course bibliography. Do not forget to include a personal inspection of the place you are writing about. The bibliography will conform to CMS.  A photocopy of the section of USGS 7.5' map pertaining to your topic would be useful.
  3. **First draft (optional):** A fully proofread, near-perfect draft of part or all of the final paper. This draft should be as well thought out and as well written as possible at this stage and should not be submitted in outline format. The draft should include your complete text and revised bibliography. A list of illustrations should accompany it; you may include the illustrations themselves if you have time. You will submit your rough draft to peer review and incorporate suggestions that you find useful into the final draft.
  4. **Final draft:** Combine all the revised components, including your peers' comments and mine, into one final, perfect package. Additional materials such as maps, photographs, and drawings should be included. Color photocopies are ideal (but not required) for the final version.
  5. **Presentation:** Each student will give an approximately 10-minute long presentation followed by questions and answers from the class on his or her project at the end of the quarter. The presentation should clearly summarize your project and address any issues concerning the topic you have chosen to study. The use of visual aids such as charts, slides, photographs, and maps, etc. is strongly encouraged, **but** , please, focus on making a well wrought argument. You will be evaluated on the clarity of your thesis and the degree to which your evidence supports it.  Glitzy visuals are no substitute for excellent content.

The end result should be a piece of first-class writing suitable for inclusion
in your portfolio or submission as a writing sample for a job or graduate
school application.

**_Email Account Required for the Course_**  
Finally, because we will be seeing each other only twice a week, and because
the UW makes [free email accounts](http://www.washington.edu/computing/email/)
available to all matriculated students, you will be required: (1) to have an
email account up (I don't care who supplies your account) and running within
four days of the first class meeting, and, (2) **to send me a message before
the second meeting with the subject line:   "TEST 331"** so that I may record
your email address. **Failure to send me an email address the first week can
cost   up to 10% of  participation and preparation grade.  No excuses.**

Computer literacy and familiarity with the Internet are givens in today's
academic environment, and I would be doing you a disservice to let you think
you can be a fully functioning university student without surmounting the
computer hurdle. Email is the best way of reaching me and asking questions
that arise between classes. Those of you who are working full time will find
it particularly convenient. With an email account you will be able to access
the [UW Library](http://www.lib.washington.edu/) Catalog, course reserve
lists, dictionaries, and two formidable [encyclopedias--from](http://www-
lj.eb.com:180/) your own home if you have a computer and modem. Otherwise you
may use computers on campus.

Computer literacy includes knowing how to use footnotes and endnotes, not
assuming everyone in the world uses MS Word, backing up your work, and saving
copies of anything you turn in;  in short, computer literacy means
understanding that computers are imperfect beasts on good days.

**_Pace of the Course_ :**  
By now you may be thinking "so much work." Actually, what I have done is
simply shifted a lot of the work to the beginning and the middle of the
quarter. I have done this in response to student comments about how bad it is
to have all your courses demanding work in the final two weeks. You will be
able to sit back after 31 May and focus on your other courses and finals
because I have scheduled nothing for finals week.

**_Miscellaneous_ :**

If you choose to drop the course, you are responsible for reporting the change
to the registrar's office. If you stop coming to class and do not contact the
registrar, you will end up receiving a failing grade even if you attended only
once.

Don't send me MS Word documents as attachments to your email.  Print your work
out.  I am not your printer.

If you would like to request academic accommodations due to a permanent or
temporary physical, sensory, psychological/emotional or learning disability,
please contact Lisa Tice, counselor for Disability Support Services (DSS). An
appointment can be made through the front desk of Student Affairs (692-4400),
by phoning Lisa directly at 692-4493 (voice), 692-4413 (TDD), or by e-mail
(ltice@u.washington.edu). Appropriate accommodations are arranged after you've
presented the required documentation of your disability to DSS, and you have
conferred with the DSS counselor.

**_["Congress shall make no law . . . abridging the freedom of speech. . .
."](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~DRBR/bill_rts.html)_**  
The right to free speech applies in our classroom as well as in your written
work. In light of the potentially controversial topics we will be studying,
let me assure you that you will not be graded on your opinions, but on the
quality of the evidence and the cogency the argument with which you support
your position. We will probably disagree often, but we will strive to remain
polite and respectful to each other. Heated discussions can enliven a class,
but they are only worth it when conducted with the utmost courtesy to our
classmates. Return to [Michael Kucher's Home
page](http://faculty.washington.edu/kucher/)  
(C) Copyright 1997-2002  Michael Kucher   updated: 5 April 2002

