` HISTORY 221 **  
19th CENTURY AMERICA**  
FALL SEMESTER 1995 WEC _  
SYLLABUS_  

Prof. Chris Kimball

Office: Memorial Hall 114A

Campus Box #30

Phone: 330-1195(o)/724-2329(h)

Internet: kimball@augsburg.edu

Office Hours: MF 8-9, TW 6-6:30, W 11-12, and by appointment.

**

Course Description:**

This course surveys the history of the United States during the 19th Century.
The focus will be on the impact of immigration, expansion, technology, and
social change on the values of the early republic. Particular attention will
paid to sectionalism and the debate over slavery. After examining the Civil
War and Reconstruction, attention will turn to the social, political, and
cultural implications of economic growth, especially as reflected in the
emergence of the modern, industrial city.

**

Course Objectives:**

This course has several objectives appropriate to a general introduction to
American history which addresses the Western Heritage Perspective and includes
a Critical Thinking graduation skill component:

1. To acquire factual knowledge. This does not imply the memorization of facts but rather an introduction to what historians call "historical evidence"--people ( _who_ ), places ( _where_ ), events, ideas, trends ( _what_ ). This material is the basis for understanding 19th-century America. We will spend time with primary sources as well as secondary ones. Students will be asked to evaluate the assumptions, argument and claims advanced by the writers whom we study.

2. To learn basic concepts (theories, if you prefer) useful in understanding _how_ and _why_ the United States evolved in the way that it did during the 19th Century.

3. To apply these concepts in order to make sense of the massive amount of available evidence. That is, the course should provide the opportunity to interpret _what_ happened, _why_ it happened (and _why then_ , as opposed to some other era). Finally, we will attempt to assess the significance of this material (the _so what_ question) by asking why something is worth knowing. This process of explanation and interpretation is central to the historian's craft. As we practice understanding people and processes, we will gain a sense of how historians work.

4. To develop oral and written expression through large- and small-group discussions as well as writing assignments. Attention will be paid to the ability to present (orally and in writing) evaluations and/or conclusions regarding the evidence consulted in the course. In addition, each student will lead their group in discussion of those questions.

**

Course Requirements:**

Class attendance, required readings listed below, five short writing
assignments, two tests, demonstrated engagement with the course material, and
a comprehensive final.

Regular class attendance is essential. Unexcused absences may be grounds for a
reduction in grade. The exams, which are based on the class material as well
as the readings, will consist mainly of essays and include analysis of primary
sources. Make-up exams will be given only in cases of medical or other
emergency.

Each member of the class must turn in five (5) writing assignments based on
assigned primary source documents. Most of these documents can be found in the
Boller and Story reader; toward the end of the semester, a few will be handed
out in class. [Questions](H221Q.html) will be assigned for each document and
should be answered in 2-3 typewritten pages. The assignments are due on the
day for which the document is assigned (see class schedule below). These
writing assignments pay special attention to the skill of making critical and
interpretive judgments asking you to begin with specific evidence and build
toward larger conclusions. Each will be assessed on a twenty-point scale. A
separate hand-out will describe the criteria to be used in grading these
assignments. Since the questions and criteria will not be handed out until the
first class, one will not have the opportunity to write on the three documents
assigned for that day.

Please note that there are many more than five documents. While each class
member must only submit five assignments, you are free to turn in more than
that. If so, the top five grades will be counted. _Please also note that
everyone is required to read all the assigned documents and think about the
questions, whether or not one chooses to write on them._ Many of our in-class
discussions will concern these documents and questions. For example, then, the
Monroe Doctrine (document 20 in Boller) is to be read for the 23 September
class. Those who chose to write on the document should also turn in the
assignment that morning.

Finally, there is engagement. Engagement has been defined as "a cognitive and
affective process, enabled by the relationship between student and teacher,
that stimulates curiosity and leads to focused attention, the discovery of
connections and satisfaction with learning." Demonstrating engagement
includes, but is not limited to, active participation in class activities.
Therefore, each class member is expected to participate in all small- and
large-group discussions of the course material. In addition, everyone should
be prepared to lead at least one class discussion. Feedback will be provided
by the instructor and the other members of the class.

Augsburg College has adopted an Academic Honesty Policy which can be found in
the Augsburg Student Guide. It is your responsibility to read and understand
that policy. All students will be asked to sign the following honesty policy
statement:

I have read and understand the policies of Augsburg College regarding academic
honesty. I understand how they apply to this course, and I pledge myself to
abide by the policies and work to create an atmosphere of academic integrity
on the campus.

You are encouraged to ask questions about the application of the policy in
this course.

Students working with the CLASS Office should contact me about any necessary
accommodations.

**

Grading:**

Grades will be assigned according to the following point scale:

Test #1 - 100 points

Test #2 - 100 points

Engagement - 100 points

[Document Writing Assignments](H221Q.html) - 100 points

Final - 100 points

500 total possible points

450 = 4.0  
425 = 3.5  
400 = 3.0  
375 = 2.5  

According to Augsburg College policy, number grades have the following
definitions:

4.0 Achieves highest standards of excellence

3.0 Achieves above basic course standards

2.0 Meets basic standards for the course

A 2.0 is the minimum grade which can be earned to meet the Critical Thinking
skill criteria.

**

Required Readings:**

Barney (William, not the dinosaur), _The Passage of the Republic_

Boller and Story, _A More Perfect Union_ , 3rd ed., vol. I __

Booker T. Washington, _Up From Slavery

Class Schedule and Reading Assignments:_

Sept. 9 Introduction: History, Historians, and the 19th Century **

Reading** : Barney, Chapters 1 and 2

Boller, Documents 22, 30, 31

Sept. 23 The Age of Jackson **

Reading** : Barney, Chapters 3 and 4

Boller, Documents 20, 21, 23, 27, 28, 29

Oct. 7 The Sectional Crisis/TEST ONE **

Reading** : Barney, Chapter 5

Boller, Documents 24, 25, 26, 32, 33

Oct. 14 The Civil War **

Reading** : Barney, Chapter 6

Boller, Documents 34, 35, 36, 37

Oct. 28 Reconstructing the Union **

Reading** : Barney, Chapter 7

Boller, Documents 38, 39, 40, 41, 42

Washington, Intro., Chapters 1 through 5

Nov. 11 The Gilded Age/TEST TWO **

Reading** : Barney, Chapters 8 and 9

Document hand-outs

Washington, Chapters 6 through 11

Dec. 2 At the End of the Century **

Reading** : Barney, Chapters 10 and 11

Documents hand-outs

Washington, Chapters 12 through 17

Dec. 9 Review/FINAL EXAM

`

