**

#  HSTAA 322: TWENTIETH CENTURY  
AFRICAN-AMERICAN HISTORY

## Dr. Quintard Taylor

* * *

**_

The history of African Americans has been a paradox of incredible triumph in
the face of tremendous human tragedy. This course will present a detailed
examination of the black experience in America from 1890 to today to provide
an understanding of the role African Americans have played in the history of
the American nation and an assessment of why they were until the recent past,
excluded from the promise of American democracy. We will continue our analysis
of the various political, economic, social, and cultural methods African
Americans have employed to survive in an overwhelmingly hostile environment
and assess their prospects as they make the final frontal assault on the
structure of racially discriminatory institutions. Is the battle against
racism and discrimination over? Using a variety of historians and history
sources, we shall try to answer that question during this quarter.

_ _

* * *

_

###  Required Textbooks:

John Hope Franklin and Alfred Moss Jr, __From Slavery to Freedom: A History of
Black Americans_ (Seventh Edition)_

Paula Giddings, __When and Where I Enter: The Impact of Black Women on Race
and Sex in America__

Quintard Taylor, __The Forging of a Black Community: Seattle's Central
District from 1870 through the Civil Rights Era__

Quintard Taylor, __The African American Experience: A Manual for HSTAA 322_
(This manual will be on electronic reserve in Odegaard Library)_

###  Supplemental Readings:

I have placed on reserve in Odegaard Undergraduate Library additional readings
which will help explain African America. As the need arises I may add other
articles to the reserve room holdings.

* * *

### Examinations/Grading:

Your course grade is based on three exercises: a midterm exam, a final
examination and a 10-12 page research paper _(see manual for details on the
paper)_. The midterm is scheduled for the end of the fifth week. Some students
will be unable to take the midterm exam with the rest of the class. In that
case I ask them to take a makeup exam scheduled for 5:00-6:00 p.m. on the last
Friday of instruction during the quarter. The room will be announced later.
Since the makeup exam will be _penalized 10 points_ on a 100 point exercise,
all students should make every effort to take the exam at its scheduled time.

Those students who perform poorly on the midterm exam (69 or below) have the
option of writing a book review to offset that grade. Should you choose to
write the review, it can be handed in no later than the Friday of the
**_ninth_** week of the term. Please read the page titled _Optional Book
Review Assignment_ in the manual before initiating your review.

My grading procedures are simple. Since each exam is worth up to 100 points I
will average your numerical score. I will also assign a numerical score for
your research paper, "C"=75, "C+"=78, etc. Your numerical scores will then be
averaged to determine your course grade. Thus if your overall average is 76
your course grade will be the numerical equivalent of a "C" in the UW grading
system.

I do not issue "incompletes" to students who by the end of the quarter have
not taken an exam, handed in an assigned paper or otherwise met the course
requirements. If you have not completed all of the course requirements by the
end of exam week, and you have not, by that point, explained why, your grade
will be lowered accordingly.

* * *

### READING ASSIGNMENTS

#### Week 1: Booker T. Washington and the Politics of Accommodation

Franklin and Moss, pp. 270-285

Giddings, Chapter 1

Taylor, _Manual_ , Chapter 1

Taylor, _The Forging of a Black Community_ , Chapter 1

* * *

#### Week 2: Militant Protest: The Niagara Movement, the NAACP, and the NACW

Franklin and Moss, pp. 308-322

Giddings, Chapters 5-6

Taylor, _Manual_ , Chapter 2

Taylor, _The Forging of a Black Community_ , pp. 79-90

_Film: Ida B. Wells, A Passion for Justice_

* * *

####  Week 3: The Great Migration: Blacks in the Urban North

Franklin and Moss, Chapter 18

Giddings, Chapter 8

Taylor, _Manual_ , Chapter 3

Taylor, _The Forging of a Black Community_ , Chapters 2, 5

Film: _I REMEMBER HARLEM_

_

* * *

_

####  Week 4: The Garvey Movement and the Communists

Tony Martin, _Race First: The Ideological and Organizational Struggles of
Marcus Garvey and the UNIA_ , Chapters 1, 7 **[on reserve]**

Franklin and Moss, Chapter 19

Giddings, Chapters 11-13

Taylor, _The Forging of a Black Community_ , pp. 90-105

Taylor, _Manual_ , Chapter 4

* * *

#### Week 5: World War II and the Genesis of the Civil Rights Movement

Franklin and Moss, Chapter 21

Giddings, Chapter 14

Taylor, _Manual_ , Chapter 5

Taylor, _The Forging of a Black Community_ , Chapter 6

**_

MIDTERM EXAM

* * *

_**

#### Week 6: We Shall Overcome: 1950-1965

Franklin and Moss, 492-517

Giddings, Chapters 15-16

Taylor, _Manual_ , Chapter 6

Taylor, _The Forging of a Black Community_ , pp. 190-216

Film: _FUNDI, The Story of Ella Baker_

Charles Payne, "Ella Baker and Models of Social Change," _Signs_ 14:4 (Summer
1989):885-899 **[on reserve]**

**

* * *

**

####  Week 7: Black Power: 1965-1970

Franklin and Moss, pp. 518-531

Giddings, Chapter 18

Taylor, _Manual_ , Chapter 7

Taylor, _The Forging of a Black Community_ , pp. 216-233

* * *

#### Week 8: Race v Gender: Black Women and Women's Liberation

Phyllis Marynick Palmer, "White Women/Black Women: The Dualism of Female
Identity and Experience," _Feminist Studies_ 9:1 (Spring 1983), pp 151-170.
**[on reserve]**

Giddings, Chapter 17

Taylor, _Manual_ , Chapter 8

* * *

#### Week 9: African America in the 1990s

Franklin and Moss, Chapter 24

Giddings, Chapter 20

Nicholas Lemann, "The Origins of the Underclass, _Atlantic Monthly_ (June
1988). pp. 31-55 **[on reserve]**

Taylor, _Manual_ , Chapter 9

Taylor, _The Forging of a Black Community_ , Conclusion

* * *

#### Week 10: African America into the 21st Century: An Assessment

No reading assignment, prepare for the final exam.

* * *

