Department of African-American Studies  
  
---  
  
  

| [Home](../index.htm) | [|](../Default.htm) | [Newsletter](../newsletter.htm)
| | | [Programs](../programs.htm) | | | [Courses](../courses.htm) | | |
[Faculty](../faculty.htm) | | | [Contact Us](../contact_us.htm) | | | [Site
Map](../site_map.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
* * *  
  
**[Back to Courses](../courses.htm#AAS 1140)**  
---  
  
Course Syllabus

**_

African American History and Culture  
_**_**A Survey of History, Culture and Resistance**  
  
_ AAS 1140  
MW 5:30 - 6:45pm, 135-S  
TTH 1:00-2:15pm, 431-G  
Dr. Arletha Livingston Office: One Park Place South, Suite 955  
Phone: (404) 651-2157 Office Hours: MW 4:00-5:00pm  

**_

Course Overview

**_

This course explores several parameters of the African experience concurrent
with the Maafa and its ensuing political, social and cultural dislocation. We
will explore major theoretical approaches to African history and culture in
America and then proceed with a discussion framed by the tension within these
schools of thought. Black culture will be discussed as it is impacted by
significant historical themes such as the Sankofa/Wehem Mesu tradition,
diasporization, liberation movements and reaffirmations of European hegemony
(white supremacy). The aims of the course are threefold: 1) analyze the
discourse that surrounds African American history and culture; 2) define and
observe African resistance in the American context; 3) observe major trends in
African history and culture in America. Although this is an introductory level
course, it will require a substantial amount of reading, synthesis of various
scholarly perspectives and application of some of these perspectives to
assigned materials.

**_

Course Objectives

_ **

* Operationalize the purpose of Africalogical scholarship. 

* Understand the significance of culture to the empowerment of Pan-African people;

* Understand major perspectives on the Black cultural experience and respective political visions of their adherents;

* Identify and define forms of cultural resistance;

* Identify historic and contemporary institutions which facilitate African resistance and cultural continuity;

* Identify key moments in the history of Pan-African culture;

* Discuss language and Ebonics as aspects of Pan- African culture;

* Discuss Hip Hop as the heir to the above areas & as a conduit of cultural values;

* Suggest African liberation praxis based on historical and contemporary information.

**_



Required Texts

_ **_

Franklin & Moss, From Slavery to Freedom: a History of African Americans 7th
ed.

Giddings, When and Where I Enter: The Impact of Black Women on Race and Sex in
America

The instructor will provide additional readings in class or on reserve in the
main library _

**_

Recommended Texts

**_

The following texts, although not required, will enhance student understanding
of the historical and contemporary African culture:

Marimba Ani, _Let the Circle Be Unbroken

_

Erriel Kofi Addae, _To Heal a People_

Anthony Browder, _Nile Valley Contributions to Civilization

_

Sterling Stuckey, _Coming Through the Storm

_

\-----, _Slave Culture

_

Edward Scobie, _Global African Presence

_

Cheikh Anta Diop, _The Cultural Unity of Black Africa_

M.K. Asante & K. Welsh-Asante (eds.), _African Culture: The Rhythms of Unity

_

Kariamu Welsh-Asante, _The African Aesthetic

_**_

Expectations and Requirements

**_

The student should expect the following from the professor and this course: 1)
fair and consistent grading criteria, 2) clear delineation of course material,
key concepts and topical sequence, 3) facilitation of discourse about African
culture in the diaspora, and 4) active conceptualization of praxis aimed at
empowering African people.

In return, I will require the following from all students enrolled in the
course:

* Mastery of **_all**_ ** information disseminated

* Completion of all assignments by due date/time, I will not accept late assignments without a very valid excuse

* Completion of reading assignments, which are key to discussions

* Daily attendance (on-time) and _Constructive_ participation are mandatory (your final grade will be devalued one letter grade for more than three unexcused absences. Three tardies and/or early exits will equal one absence)

* Students are encouraged to email me at least once per month

* All papers must be typed and word processed

**_

Evaluation

**_

Quizes (2) 20%

Midterm 20%

Final 20%

Research Paper/Oral History project 20%

_

Class Participation/attendance 20%

_**

Final Grade 100%

_

COURSE OVERVIEW

_

** __

Part I. Scope of the Course

_**

Week One & Two

**_ _**

Week One & Two

Week One & Two

**_

Course Overview, Introduction: a) Clarke Video b) Who am I? c) Schools of
Thought on African culture in America; d) The African Worldview and Africana
Studies

**

Readings** : Obenga, Ani

**

**__

Part II. History

___**Weeks Three & Four

**_

Pre-colonial African History a) African Origins of Humanity, Diop Video, b)
Nile Valley Civilizations, Browder Video, c) Early West African Nations, d)
The Moorish contribution to civilization, e) Pre-colonial African culture,
cosmology, cultural unity

**

Readings:** Franklin  & Moss Chapters 1 & 2, Tierney, Brunson & Rashidi

**

Quiz #1

_

Weeks Five, Six & Seven

**_

The Maafa a) Servitude, b) Arab enslavement, European enslavement, c) Sankofa
Video, d) colonialism e) Diaspora & Resistance; f) Culture as a sphere of
self-preservation, Resistance Institutions

**Readings** : Franklin & Moss Chapter 3,4, 8, 5, 6 Giddings 2, 3, Stuckey,
pts I-IV

**



MIDTERM

**

**_

Weeks Eight & Nine

**_

Early African American History a) Ethnic Notions Video, b) Civil War Era, c)
Reconstruction, d) Garvey, e) Race, class, & Gender, f) Turn of the Century
Conference, G) Harlem Renaissance

**Readings:** Franklin  & Moss Chapters 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, Giddings
1, 4-7

**_

Weeks Ten & Eleven

**_

African American History Continued a) The New Deal, b) Cold War, c) Civil
Rights, d) Caribbean & African Independence, e) Black Liberation and Culture:
The Historical Inter-relationship between Nationalist Movements and African
Culture

**

Readings**: Franklin & Moss Chapters 19, 22, 23; Giddings 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, Scobie; Stuckey, pts. V-IX; Neal

**Quiz #2

** __

Part III: Culture

_ __**

Weeks Twelve & Thirteen

**_

African American Culture a) Retentions-Frazier/Herskovitz debate b)
Spirituality/Religion

c) Aesthetics, c) Hip-Hop: The State of Black Arts

**

Readings**: Holloway, Welsh-Asante, Ani, TBA, Livingston

**

_

Week Fourteen

**_

African American Culture a) The Black Family, b) Value systems & culture, c)
Language, The power of Nommo, Ebonics: Recasting African Language Issues, d)
African American Expression

**

Readings**: *Obenga; *Turner; Ebonics article



**_Week Fifteen

_ **

Wrap up: The Present and Future of the African world, Your duty

**Readings:** Franklin  & Moss 24, Giddings 20



**_Week Sixteen

_ **

Oral History Project due the last day of class

**FINAL EXAM during finals week

This syllabus represents the best judgement of the professor, all items are
subject to change

**_Our oppressors have emphasized the loss of language, dress, living patterns
and other tangible and surface aspects of culture Until we learn that it
serves our interests to emphasize the similarities, the ties, the unifying
principles, the common threads and themes that bind and identify us all as
"African," we will continue to be politically and ideologically confused.

_**

Marimba Ani (1994)

** |  |  
**[Back to Courses](../courses.htm#AAS 1140)**

