### Eco 368

## History of Economic Thought  
SYLLABUS

### Course Description

This course deals with the history of economic thought in modern times, i.e.,
since the rise of capitalism as a social, and increasingly global, system. It
is a central tenet of my approach to studying and teaching this history, that
the ideas themselves be grasped as a part of the history within which they
were formulated and spread. Ideas stand neither above nor outside of history
but within it, as moments of strategic thinking and of the ideological
justification of strategies for organizing the world. The history of economic
ideas, therefore, can only properly be grasped as part of the history of the
economy itself, with all its moments of organization and conflict. "Economics"
is the study of the economy, i.e., the capitalist organization of the
production and distribution of wealth. But it has also been part of the effort
to promulgate and justify that economy and the subordination of all of society
to it. As you will discover, as capitalism has developed and transformed more
and more of social life into moments of itself, economics has simultaneously
provided an "economic understanding" of those moments to replace previous
ones.

Indeed, the contemporary definition of economics as the "science of choice"
clearly seeks to embrace an extremely wide array of human social activities
--many of which, like the internal personal relations of families, were
hitherto considered outside the economy. But, of course, this is not just a
matter of intellectual imperilism, of economists seeking to impose their logic
on new realms of the human. It is an intellectul moment that reflects,
justifies and seeks to order the actual incorporation of families into the
reproduction of the economy (capitalism) itself.

For economists are preeminently architects of the economy. They do not simply
seek to understand it or to justify it. They seek to maintain, strengthen and
expand it. They develop abstract theories but those theories inform (often
quite intentionally) the management of the economy and of all the social life
it encompasses.

Therefore, I argue, how you feel about economic theories, about economists and
their work, depends on how you feel about the economy (capitalism) of which
they are the caretakers and propagators. If you are in fundamental agreement
with their view that this is the best kind of social order that can be
achieved, then your primary interest in studying the history of economic
thought will be in analysing the strengths and weaknesses of various
approaches to managing it within various contexts. If on the other hand, you
have severe critiques of this kind of social order and think humans ought to
be able to transcend it, then your interest in the various moments of economic
thought may be primarily in seeing how economists have contributed to
thwarting such transcendence in the past, as an aid to understanding how they
are doing so in the present.

### Study Materials

It is my intention that the majority of the reading material for this course
be made available to you online. In as much as this is the first time I have
taught this course (Fall 2001), I am spending a goodly chunk of the summer
searching the web (and other e-text sources) to gather useful material and
create links to it here in your syllabus. The online material will be linked
within this syllabus (or in the "lecture notes" I am creating for each
section) and you will be expected to read all the material so linked unless
you have been told otherwise. I expect this process of gathering material,
however, will outlast the summer and continue into the Fall semester. It is a
process to which you are invited (see below) to contribute. A major online
source for information on economists and their original texts is the [ History
of Economic Thought website](http://cepa.newschool.edu/het/home.htm). Many of
the links provided for this class are to that site or to others found through
it. In as much as this is a one-semester survey course, there is far more
informaton available than we will cover and such sites can provide you with
valuable tools for further explorations on your own.

One hardcopy text that has been ordered for this course is Robert
Heilbronner's _The Worldly Philosophers_. This book provides an easy to read
overview of the history of economic thought up to the post WWII period. It is
an interpretive essay, however, and no substitute for reading original texts
by the various authors. Moreover, given the time it was written it does not
cover more recent decades and therefore must be followed up with more
contemporary material.

### Suggested Study Method

As a means of studying the materials listed above, I recommend that you keep a
notebook during the entirety of the course consisting of the following:

1) Your own notes summarizing the arguments of the various authors and
relating them to the times in which they lived and wrote as well as to each
other.

2) Class notes on my lectures and class discussions, and finally, most
importantly,

3) Your own comments on the authors, critiques of my comments and your own
interpretations of the subject matter.

The notebook could be designed as follows: a spiral or loose-leaf notebook
with notes spread across two opposing pages. The left page divided in two with
the left column for notes on the various authors and the right column for
class lecture notes, the right page for your own commentaries. I strongly
recommend that you keep your reading and note taking ahead of class lectures.
If you have read, studied and taken notes on material before it is covered in
class, then when you listen to the lectures, you will be in a much better
position to understand and evaluate what is being said, to ask questions or to
offer your own interpretations. If you get behind in this class, you are in
real trouble! The notebook can provide you with a unified, compact instrument
for studying and thinking about the materials. It would also be your best
preparation for tests.

### Prerequisites

This is an upper division economics course and you will find it easier if you
have already taken at least the two introductory courses in macro and micro.
In as much as we will be studying the development of economic thought within
history, you will also be better off if you are familiar with the history of
the UK (esp. England, Scotland and Ireland), of France and of the United
States from the mid-18th through the 20th Centuries. If you are not familiar
then you will have a little extra work acquiring enough familiarity to situate
the texts you will be reading.

### Requirements

There will be three tests, each covering about 25 percent of the course, and a
"paper" worth 25 percent in which you can do one of the following: 1) take
some economist _not_ covered in the course and survey their important ideas,
find their original texts, and write an critical overview of their work within
their history, 2) write a paper on some aspect of the work of some economist
who _is_ covered in the course but whose work in this subject is _not_
covered, or 3) take some economist and some aspect of their work that _is_
covered and write a paper that deals with the person and their treatment _more
thoroughly_ than has been done here. Each person must choose a different
economist-subject combination. Once you have chosen, post your choice to the
web-forum. Once that choice is posted no one else may choose it.

In all cases the paper will take the form of a web page with proper formatting
and linkages to accessible and relevant materials. If key texts are not
available on line, then you will be responsible for scanning them and making
useable e-text/html versions. (Scanners and the necessary software to create
e-text are available in the Undergraduate Library computer lab.) As to style
you can either copy that which is used in this course's materials --which is
extremely simple-- or, if you are already familiar with html encoding, you can
innovate.) The object of this exercise, besides the learning you will acquire
from the study, is to contribute to the elaboration of materials for this
course. If your materials are so used, you will be fully credited.

### Readings now on [separate page](368readings.html)

