Course syllabus

###

History 107 On-line Course Syllabus  
Summer 2002

|

###

| Dates | May 20 to August 7

| Instructor | Brian Waddington

| Phone | 626-857-4039

| E-mail | [bwaddington@citrus.cc.ca.us](mailto:bwaddington@citrus.cc.ca.us)

| Course Texts | Gary Nash & Others, _The American People_ , Vol 1, 5th ed.,  
(Longman, 2000) & John Garraty, ed., _Historical Viewpoints_ , Vol 1, 8th ed.,
(Longman, 1999)

| Text Website | [www.awl.com/nash/](http://www.awl.com/nash/)

| Office Hours |  Online@To be announced and by appointment.

### COURSE DESCRIPTION

This course is structured to cover the early history of the North American
lands that eventually become the United States of America. It will begin with
the pre-Columbian era and conclude at 1876 with the end of Reconstruction. A
synthesis of multiple academic disciplines will be utilized to understand the
dynamics of economic, political and social change in this period. Among the
topics the course will cover are: the various cultures of early American
people; colonial America and the nature of the American Revolution, the early
republic and the spread of two distinct economic and cultural systems, the
United States Civil War and Reconstruction.



### LEARNING OBJECTIVES

  1. To develop a better understanding of important developments, events and individuals in American history before 1877. 
  2. To develop a better understanding of the nature of the relationship between people and the historical process. 
  3. To acquire a better understanding of the techniques and tools of the historian. 
  4. To continue to develop and improve study and research skills which reading comprehension, critical thinking and effective verbal and written communication. 
  5. To utilize and understand how current technology works as a study and research tool. 

### COURSE REQUIREMENTS

  * _Basic Course work_ : Basic course work consists of twelve mini-lecture assignments,one midterm essay and a final examination. The information students are responsible for is based on course readings, lectures, videos and discussions. Students should not go outside of the course information to respond to essay or mini-lecture topics. The essays will be assessed on the quality of content, analysis and organization. Completion of English 100 or equivalent is recommended. Students should notify the instructor if any extra accommodations are needed to enable success. Timeliness is important to basic course work Students who complete the modules by the dates listed in the course schedule will be rewarded by being able to receive a maximum of 50 points on their midterms and ten points on mini-lecture assignments. The maximum midterm score will be reduced by five points for each following week and mini-lecture assignments by one point per week, so timeliness pays. See the summer schedule for maximum score dates. Please notify the instructor if you need any accommodating in order to do well in the class. 



  * _Participation_ : Students will also receive an assessment on their participation. The on-line course should not be approached as a correspondence course, but rather should be engaged in as an interactive experience much like a classroom setting. Participation can be either synchronous through chat sessions, or asynchronous through discussion board postings, or a combination of both. Students will be required to either support or contest other student's postings at least eight times during the first eight weeks of the semester. Students who are the first to make a comment on any given topic will receive a bonus in their participation score. A student should contribute to participation at least twelve times in the eleven week semester, however more participation than this is welcome. Participation points will be primarily assessed on the quality of the student's work. Chat sessions will also be held on a weekly basis. Times will be based on student input, but are generally held on weekdays. Attendance and participation at a chat session can be used as a substitute for two discussion board postings. Any anticipated prolonged absence from course work or participation should be reported to the instructor as soon as possible. 





###

GRADE POLICY AND SCALE

|  |

###

| _Basic Assignments_ | _Maximum Possible Points_

| [Mini-Lecture Exercises](107mini.html) |  12@10=120

| [Midterm Essays](107es.html) | 50

| [Final Exam Essay](107es.html) | 50

| Participation | 30

_Grade Scale_  

A= 250-225 B= 224-200 C= 199-175 D= 174-150 F= Below 150

###

**HISTORY 107 SUMMER SCHEDULE**

###  

Week 1 May 20-26: Optional orientation to be announced. Check-In. E-mail
instructor with information on the module you are studying. Send in first
mini-lecture assignment. Participate on Discussion Board.

Week 2 May 28-June 2: Students should have turned at least two mini-lecture
assignments and made two discussion board postings or a chat participation by
the end of the week. Note that since this is an eleven week semester that at
some point you will need to turn in at least two mini-lecture assignments
during a single week. Assignments can be turned in any day of the week. Happy
Memorial Day!

Week 3 June 3-9: Students should have turned at least three mini-lecture
assignments and made three discussion board postings by the end of the week.

Week 4 June 10-16: Final week to receive ten maximum points on mini-lecture
assignments from the first module. Maximum score for first module assignments
will be reduced by one point each following week. Happy Fourth of July!

Week 5 June 17- 23: Students should be at least finished with the first
assignment from the second module. Stay active in either Discussion Board or
chat.

Week 6 June 24-30: This is the halfway point in the semester. Try to have at
least six mini-lecture assignments completed. Make sure to contact the
instructor to begin the midterm process. Remember, the semester is going by
fast and in an eleven week semester you will want to turn in at least two
assignments in one week.

Week 7 July 1-7: Stay active at this point in the semester. You should not
only have completed or be working on the midterm, but you should also stay on
pace with the mini-lecture assignments.

Week 8 July 8-14: Final week to receive 50 maximum points on the midterm
essay. Maximum score for the midterm will be reduced by five points each
following week. Eight to nine mini-lecture assignments and eight Discussion
Board postings or the equivalent in chat should also be completed by the end
this week.

Week 9 July 15-21: Try to have about ten mini-lecture assignments in by the
end of the week. Final week to receive ten maximum points on mini-lecture
assignments from the second module. Maximum score for first module assignments
will be reduced by one point each following week.

Week 10 July 22-28: Students should have ten to eleven assignments in by the
end of this week.

Week 11 July 29- August 4: Final week to send in twelfth mini-lecture
assignment. I will accept no more than two assignments this week. Send in a
final exam topic proposal with your final mini-lecture assignment.

Final Exam Week August 5-7: Last day to turn in Final Exam is August 7.

###

* * *

###

####

[107 Online Home Page](hist107.htm)

