### History 587.02  
Science, Technology, and Business in Japan

(Professor James Bartholomew)



_Description_ : This course deals with the historical development of business
in Japan from the early seventeenth century to the present. giving particular
attention to the inter-connections between business, technology, and science.
Specific industries and firms will be discussed, together with such aspects of
the business environment as education, research, banking and taxation, trade
and government policies, and labor. Particular attention will be given to the
issue of how and why Japan emerged in recent times as the world's second
richest nation.

_Objectives_ : History 587.02 is conceived as a general survey of the history
of business in Japan but with a strong emphasis on the history of technology
and science as they relate to commercial activities. It is intended for
history majors, business majors, or any other undergraduate student with a
serious interest in the subject. It is intended also as an opportunity for
students to sharpen their analytical skills in both the examinations the
course paper, and in class discussions. It introduces particular topics - the
histories of the electronics, steel, and automobile industries among them -
which are central to contemporary relations between the United States and
Japan, as well as in the present day world at large. The course aims to deepen
students' understanding of all such issues.

_Format, Requirements and Evaluation_ : The course follows a lecture-
discussion format with regular use of audio-visual materials (primarily
transparencies and computer-scanned images but with the possible use of
occasional films). Discussion, not confined to any particular day, constitutes
about a quarter of class time, lectures and a-v material the remainder.

All students are asked to take a midterm examination, attend class faithfully
and participate in discussions, write a course paper (see below), and take the
final comprehensive examination. Course grades will be calculated as follows:

    
    
         Midterm examination -- 20 percent
         Course paper -- 30 percent
         Participation & discussion -- 10 percent
         Final examination -- 40 percent
    



_Readings_ There is no appropriate English language textbook of the subject in
print at this time. However, students are asked to purchase their own copies
of the following books at the campus area bookstores:

  1. William Dietrich _In the Shadow of the Rising Sun_
  2. Andrew Gordon, ed. _Postwar Japan As History_
  3. Mikiso Hane _Modern Japan: A Historical Survey_ (2nd ed.) 
  4. Thomas Rohlen _Japan's High Schools_ 

Additional readings will be on reserve at Sullivant Library or in a course
packet for purchase at Kinko's Copy Service on High Street. They are listed
week by week in the syllabus as indicated.



_Course Papers_ : Students will write a course paper on the Dietrich book,
giving particular attention to the fundamental hypothesis or argument on which
the book is based.

Issues to be engaged should include the following: you agree or disagree with
the author's particular perspective? From what point of view is he writing'?
How strong is his evidence ? If you reel that the author overstates or
misrepresents his case, do you consider it likely or possible that current or
short-term future trends will confirm his basic view of Japan?

If you strongly prefer to write a course paper on a different subject. be sure
to discuss the matter with the instructor before setting out. Course papers
must not exceed ten (10) pages in any case, and 7 to 8 pages would be more
appropriate. Proper footnoting (endnotes are acceptable) is expected: a
bibliography, if any, should also be appended.



_

Lecture Topics And Reading Assignments

_ _

Week One_ \-- Tokugawa Developments, 1639-1867 (I)

Introduction to the Course

Government and Business Parameters

Long Term Economic Trends

Discussion

Readings: Hane, pp. 23-37; Toyoda, A History of Pre-Meiji Commerce in Japan,
pp. 58-78.



_

Week Two_ \-- Tokugawa Developments. 1639-1867 (II)

Tokugawa Merchants

Technological & Scientific Change

Business & the Meiji Restoration

Discussion

Readings: Hane, pp. 84-101; Toyoda, pp. 78-98; Bartholomew, "Why Was There No
Scientific Revolution in Tokugawa Japan?" Japanese Studies in the History of
Science pp. 111-125.



_

Week Three_ \-- Early Meiji Problems  & Institutions

Business Factor Endowments

Early Entrepreneurs

Business Ideology & Public Acceptance

Discussion

Readings: Hane, pp. 139-151, 185-191; Richardson & Ueda, eds. Business and
Society in Japan, pp. 67-74; Marshall, Capitalism and Nationalism in Prewar
Japan, pp. 30-50.



_

Week Four_ \-- Infrastructure  & Economic Reforms

Capital Formation: Taxes, Banking

Zaibatsu & Sogo Shosha Organizations

Technological Change: Textiles & Steel

Discussion

Readings: Hane, pp. 196-198, 206-209; Yamamura in H. Patrick, ed. Japanese
Industrialization and Its Social Consequences, pp. 161-199; Oshima in W. W.
Lockwood, ed. The State and Economic Enterprise in Japan, pp. 353-389.



_Week Five_ \-- World War I and Research

Scientific-Technological Policies of Government

Impact of World War I

Business & the Institute for Physics & Chemistry

Discussion

Readings: Yagi & Itakura, "The Japanese Research System and the Establishment
of the Institute for Physical and Chemical Research," in Yagi, Nakayama &
Swain eds. Science and Society in Modern Japan, pp. 158-201; Tsuge,
"Historical Development of Science and Technology," in Modern Japan pp.
120-127; Bartholomew, "The Formation of Science in Japan," pp. 199-237.



_Week Six_ \-- Business in the Interwar Period

MIDTERM EXAMINATION

Dr. Honda and the Steel Industry

The Two-Tiered Business Economy

Discussion

Readings: Kawamiya, "Kotaro Honda: Founder of the Science of Metals in Japan,"
in Japanese Studies in the History of Science pp. 145-158; Watanabe,
"Industrialization, Technological Progress & Dual Structures," in Klein and
Ohkawa, eds.; _Economic Growth: The Japanese Experience_ , pp. 122-134;
Rohlen, _Japan's High Schools_ (begin reading); and Dietrich, _In the Shadow
of the Rising Sun_ (begin reading).



_Week Seven_ \-- Business and World War II

Japanese Business & the World Economy

Colonialism and the New Zaibatsu

Wartime Mobilization of Business & Science

Discussion

Readings: Hane, pp. 269-271, 331-333, 341-348; H. Patrick, "The Phoenix Rises
from the Ashes: Postwar Japan," in Crowley, ed. Modern East Asia pp. 298-336;
Rohlen pp. 63-76.



_Week Eight_ \-- Early Recovery, the 1940s  & 1950s

Business and the U. S. Occupation

Recovery Strategy

Mm's Role in Business Development

Discussion

Readings: Hane pp. 362-368; Richardson & Ueda, eds. pp. 194-199; Dietrich pp.
55-122; Gordon, ed., _Postwar Japan As History_ , pp. 34-63, 99-122, 145-166.



_Week Nine_ \-- 1960s and the First Oil Shock

SONY and the Transistor Revolution

Postwar Education

Japanese Women Entrepreneurs

Discussion

Readings: Hane pp. 379-386; Richardson & Ueda, eds. pp. 75-98; Imai, "Iron and
Steel," in Sato, ed. _Industry and Business in Japan_ , pp. 291-344; Ueno &
Muto, "The Automobile Industry of Japan," in Sato pp. 139-189; Gordon pp.
167-186, 373-394; Rohlen (finish reading).



_Week Ten_ \-- 1970s to the Present

Steel and Automobiles

Energy Policy and Energy Resources

R & D, the Bubble Economy Discussion and Review

Readings: Hane pp. 387-390, 410-417; Richardson & Ueda, pp. 101-107; "Long,
Technology and Power: Japan Catches Up," in L. Austin, ed. _Japan: The Paradox
or Progress_ , pp. 141-164; Gresser, "High Technology and Japanese Industrial
Policy," pp. 1-60; Gordon, pp. 449-464; Dietrich (finish).



FINAL EXAMINATION DURING EXAMINATION WEEK

