![](root3.gif) **

### SYLLABUS for HIS 580: HISTORY OF APPALACHIA  
Professor Ron Eller, University of Kentucky, Lexington

####

  * Course Description
  * Required Texts
  * Attendance
  * Course Evaluation Requirements
  * Course Outcomes
  * Research Essay
  * Graduate Students
  * Class Resources On-Line
  * Sample Exam/Essay Questions
  * Course Outline/Schedule
  * Suggested Research Topics 

##### Department of History, Patterson 1753, 606 257-6857  
Office Hours- 9am-10:45am, Tues. and Thurs;  
By Appt: Appalachian Center; 624 Maxwelton Court, 606 257-4851

* * *

_Spring 1997 Class meets Tues and Thur, 11 am - 12:15, in Rm 101, Thomas Poe
Cooper Bldg._

* * *

**_Course Description:_**  
This course is a survey of the social and economic history of the Appalachian
region from the colonial period of American history to the present. The course
examines changing patterns of culture, land use, economy, politics, and social
structure in the mountains with an eye to understanding the contemporary
social system in Appalachia. Special emphasis will be placed upon the
interaction of mountain residents with the broader forces of social change at
work in America: changing family structures, gender roles, economic systems,
political cultures, material life, and value orientations. The nature of pre-
industrial Appalachian life will be explored as a basis from which to examine
the industrialization of Appalachia in the last century. The emergence of
popular images of Appalachia in the late nineteenth century (the Idea of
Appalachia) will be discussed in light of its impact upon the behavior of
private groups and federal agencies toward the region since 1900. Stereotyped
images of Appalachia as an isolated, atypical land, unconnected to the rest of
the American experience will be contrasted with a view of Appalachian history
as shaped and effected by the same forces of political concentration,
capitalist transformation, mass society, and the bureaucratic state that have
created modern America. In this manner the study of Appalachian history (i.e.
regional history) will shed light on the national experience and on the
universal process of modernization itself.

* * *

**_Required Texts: (all in paperback)_**

  * Durwood Dunn. _Cades Cove: The Life and Death of a Southern Appalachian Community, 1818-1937_
  * Phillip Paludan. _Victims: A True Story of the Civil War_
  * Ronald D Eller. _Miners, Millhands and Mountaineers: The Industrialization of the Appalachian South, 1880-1930_
  * David Whisnant. _All That Is Native And Fine: Politics of Culture in An American Subregion_
  * David Whisnant. _Modernizing the Mountaineer: People, Power, and Planning in Appalachia_ 

* * *

**Go toTop of Syllabus**

* * *

**_Attendance:_**

Attendance at all class sessions is required. Three absences will be excused.
Thereafter, one-third of a letter grade will be deducted from the final grade
for each additional absence.

* * *

**_Course Evaluation Requirements:_**  

    
    
    	Unit I Examination			20 %
    	Unit II Examination			20 %
    	Unit III Examination			20 %
    	Research Essay				30 %
    	Class Discussion			10 %

* * *

**_Course Outcomes_**

In successfully completing this course, students will be able to:  

  1. Identify the basic themes and important eras which underlie the history of Appalachian America.  

  2. Identify and evaluate the major theories (historiography) used to interpret the history of Appalachia.  

  3. Analyze and critically evaluate historical works on Appalachia.  

  4. Write an imaginative historiographical essay in a correct grammatical style.  

  5. Justify the selection of reliable sources of information on at least two historiographical problems in Appalachian history.  

  6. Discuss critically the impact of national, economic, political, and social forces on the internal history of the Appalachian region, citing evidence to support a hypothesis.  

  7. Formulate a logical hypothesis as to the development or lack of development of the Appalachian region in comparison to other areas of the United States based on facts from the most reliable sources. 
  8. Investigate possible reliable sources and gather information on a selected subject in Appalachian history.  

* * *

**Go toTop of Syllabus**

* * *

**_Research Essay:_**

Each student will complete an original research essay based upon additional
readings chosen from the supplemental bibliography and other sources. The list
of sample topics will provide an ample number of subjects for your research,
but additional topics can be explored with the permission of the instructor.
Essays may cover a variety of topics related to the history of Appalachia from
the colonial period to the present. Where possible, primary sources should be
used to supplement the secondary literature. It is expected that a minimum of
four sources will be consulted.

Essays should review the historical literature on a particular subject and
should follow a format which includes:

  1. an introduction to the subject and a discussion of the historical significance of the subject 
  2. a summary of the event or issue 
  3. an examination of the historical evidence or a summary of the viewpoints of the sources - noting any biases, weaknesses, or differences in the literature, 
  4. a conclusion, including your own assessment of what you have read, and 
  5. a bibliography of sources. 

The essays should range from **8 to 10 pages** in length for undergraduates
and **15 to 20 pages** for graduate students.

* * *

**_Graduate Students:_**

Graduate students pursuing advanced research in Appalachian history or
regional studies should also be familiar with the following titles:

  1. Altina Waller. _Feud: Hatfields, McCoys, and Social Change in Appalachia, 1860-1900_. (Chapel Hill, 1988)  

  2. Henry D. Shapiro. _Appalachia on Our Mind: The Southern Mountains and Mountaineers in the American Consciousness, 1870-1920_. (Chapel Hill, 1978)  

  3. Rodger Cunningham. _Apples on the Flood: The Southern Mountain Experience_. (Chapel Hill,1987)  

  4. John Gaventa. _Power and Powerlessness: Quiescence and Rebellion in an Appalachian Valley_. (Urbana, 1980) 
  5. Stephen L. Fisher, ed., _Fighting Back in Appalachia: Traditions of Resistance and Change_. (Temple, 1993) 
  6. Robert Mitchell, ed., _Appalachian Frontiers: Settlement, Society, and Development in the Preindustrial Era_. (Univ. Press of Ky, 1991) 
  7. Pudup, Billings, and Waller, eds., _Appalachia in the Making: The Mountain South in the Nineteenth Century_. (Univ. of NC, 1995). 

* * *

**_Class Resources On-Line:_**

HIS 580, "History of Appalachia," has its own WWWebSite at:  
**[http://www.uky.edu/RGS/AppalCenter/580class.htm](580class.htm)** There,
students will find course materials including the syllabus and class schedule
as well as other On-Line resources, all provided to assist you in becoming
better prepared for in-class discussions and in choosing and researching paper
topics.

The Class WebSite is located within the much-larger WebSite maintained by and
for the Appalachian Center at the University of Kentucky:  
[http://www.uky.edu/RGS/AppalCenter/](welcome.htm). Drawing from the Center's
multi-faceted Program of Research, Instruction, and Service to the Appalachian
community, the AppalCenter WebSite has many other features that students
enrolled in this course will find informative, useful, and efficient.

* * *

**Go toTop of Syllabus**

* * *

**_Sample Exam/Essay Questions:_**

1\. Harry Caudill describes the early settlers of the Appalachian mountains as
"a population of embittered rejects and outcasts" from "the teeming and
iniquitous cities of England." Do you agree? Describe the early settlement of
the Appalachian region and the groups which settled it.

2\. It has been argued that Appalachia, prior to the coming of the railroads
in the late nineteenth century was not significantly different from other pre-
industrial open-country areas, especially in the South. In fact, Cratis
Williams suggested that the mountaineer seemed not to have distinguished
himself from other Americans until the late nineteenth century. Do you agree?
Describe economic and social conditions in the region prior to the 1880's.

3\. The historian, Henry Shapiro, has written that by the turn of the century
Appalachia had been defined in the popular mind as a Strange Land Inhabited By
A Peculiar People. Describe the creation of the "Idea of Appalachia" in the
late nineteenth century and how it affected the responses of outsiders to the
Appalachian region and to mountain people.

4\. Social Analysts differ in the way they explain and seek to solve
Appalachian social problems. Discuss at least three ways (models) of
explaining the causes of social and economic underdevelopment in Appalachia.
In your opinion, which model provides the best explanation and discuss the
historical evidence to support your opinion.

5\. It has been suggested that by 1945 Appalachia was a "suspended society" -
suspended halfway between the "old America" and the "new America" but fully
belonging to neither. Explain this analogy in light of what you have learned
about Appalachian history since 1880. Describe the political, social, and
economic changes brought to Appalachia by industrialization as well as the
persisting traditional qualities of mountain life. Which way is Appalachia
headed today?

6\. American historians have argued whether the history of Appalachia has been
similar to or different from the history of the rest of the nation. In what
ways has Appalachian history since 1880 been similar to that of the rest of
the country? In what ways has it been different? In light of the history of
the region, what, in your opinion, does the future hold for Appalachia?

* * *

**Go toTop of Syllabus**

* * *

**_Course Outline/Schedule - Spring 1997_**

    
    
    **INTRODUCTION**		January 15  & 21 
    	The Region Defined
         	Images and Stereotypes
    	Resources - The Internet and Appalachian Center Web Page
    	Assignment:  Eller, M.M.&M.;, Introduction
    
    **BEGIN UNIT I**
    
    SETTLEMENT AND THE REVOLUTIONARY PERIOD		Jan. 23  & 28
    	Assignment: Dunn, Cades Cove, pp.xii - 62
    
    ANTEBELLUM APPALACHIA		Jan. 30 & Feb. 4 
    	Preindustrial Society, Economy, and Culture
    	Assignment: Dunn, Cades Cove, pp.63-121
    	Eller, M.M.&M.;, Chapter I
    
    THE CIVIL WAR AND RECONSTRUCTION	Feb. 6, 11, & 13
    	Assignment: Paludan, Victims, all
    	Dunn, Cades Cove, pp. 123-200
    
    **UNIT I EXAMINATION**		Feb. 18
    
    
    **BEGIN UNIT II**
    
    APPALACHIA IN THE PROGRESSIVE PERIOD		Feb. 20  & 25 
    	Literary Discovery
    	Missionaries and Romantics
    	Assignment: Dunn, Cades Cove, pp. 201-257
    		       Whisnant, All That Is Native and Fine, all
    	Film/Discussion: "Strangers and Kin" (March 4)
    
    THE COMING OF THE INDUSTRIAL AGE	Feb. 27 & Mr  4 & 6 
    	Modernization and American Industrialization
    	The Selling of the Mountains
    	Assignment: Eller, M.M.&M.;, Chapter II
    
    
    THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT OF APPALACHIA	March 11, 13, & 25
    	The Coal Industry
    	The Coal Barons
    	The Company Town
    	Timber and Textiles
    	Other Development
    	Assignment: Eller, M.M.&M.;, Chapters III-VI
    
    **DEADLINE FOR IDENTIFYING RESEARCH ESSAY TOPIC**	March 11 
    
    INDUSTRIALIZATION AND THE MOUNTAINEER		March 27  & Apr. 1  
    	Cultural Resistance and Social Change
    	Union Struggles of the Early Years
    	Assignment: Eller, M.M.&M.;, Chapter VII
    		Film/Discussion: Even The Heavens Weep	(March 27)
    
    **UNIT II EXAMINATION**	April 3
    
    **BEGIN UNIT III**
    
    The GREAT DEPRESSION		April  8
    
    THE POST-WAR YEARS AND THE 1960'S	April 10, 15, 17, 22
    	The Great Migration
    	The War On Poverty
    		Office of Economic Opportunity
    		Appalachian Regional Commission
    	Assignment: Whisnant, Modernizing the Mountaineer
    		Introduction and Chapters I - V
    	Film/Discussion: "Long Journey Home" (April 15)
    
    APPALACHIA AND THE PROCESS OF MODERNIZATION	April 24, 29  & May 1
    	Development and Developers
    	Models of Development
    	Cultural Values and Development
    	The Future of Appalachia
    	Assignment: Whisnant, Modernizing the Mountaineer, 
    			Chapter X
    
    **RESEARCH ESSAY DUE**	April 29
    
    **UNIT III EXAMINATION (Final)		10:30am, Wed. May 7**	
    

* * *

**Go toTop of Syllabus**

* * *

**_Suggested Research Topics_**

Appalachia Before 1840

  * The Pre-European Cherokee 
  * Slavery Among the Cherokee 
  * Indian/White Conflicts on the Appalachian Frontier 
  * Issue of Appalachian Ancestry 
  * Slavery and Blacks in Early Appalachia 
  * Early Explorers (Boone, Walker, Sevier, etc.) 
  * John Bartram and other early Botanists 
  * Settlement patterns along specific River valleys 
  * Battle of Kings Mountain 
  * the Whiskey Rebellion 
  * Regulator Movement 
  * State of Franklin 
  * Wilderness Trail 
  * Trail of Tears (Cherokee Removal) 

Preindustrial Appalachia, 1840-1900

  * Slavery in Appalachia 
  * Abolitionists of the Mountains 
  * The Second Great Awakening in Appalachia 
  * Forest Agriculture and Herding in the Mountains 
  * Union Sentiment in Appalachian Counties 
  * Parson WIlliam Brownlow 
  * Zebulon Vance 
  * Internal Violence in Appalachia During the Civil War 
  * Reconstruction in Appalachian states 
  * The Missionary Movement in Appalachia 
  * Settlement Schools in the mountains 
  * Origins of Stereotypes and Images of Appalachia 
  * Mountain Republicanism (regional politics) 
  * Folk Craft Revival 
  * Aspects of Traditional mountain music 
  * the Whiskey Tax, Revenuers, and Local Distilleries 
  * Causes of Mountain Feuds 
  * The Populist movement in Appalachia 
  * Pre-industrial Architectural Styles in Appalachia (homes, barns) 
  * Women's Life and Work in Pre-industrial Appalachia 

Industrial and Modern Appalachia

  * The Building of Railroads in Appalachia (specific RRs) 
  * Textile Mills in Appalachian South 
  * Child Labor in the Hills 
  * Mill Villages 
  * Company Towns (coal) 
  * Immigrants in Appalachia 
  * Blacks in Appalachia 
  * The Tourist Industry in the Mountains 
  * Logging and/or Rafting in the Mountains 
  * National Forests in the Mountains 
  * Working Conditions in the Coal Mines 
  * Mine Accidents and explosions 
  * Mine Wars and Union Organizing (e.g. Harlan Strike, Paint Creek, Battle of Blair Mountain, etc.) 
  * Mother Jones 
  * John C.C. Mayo (or other industrialists) 
  * John L. Lewis 
  * Arnold Miller 
  * the Black Lung Movement 
  * The Tennessee Valley Authority 
  * New Deal Programs (CCC, WPA, PWA, etc.) 
  * Outmigration From Appalachia 
  * The War on Poverty in Appalachia (ARC, OEO, etc.) 
  * The Media and Appalachia in the 1960's 
  * School Consolidation in Appalachia 
  * Racism and the Civil Rights Movement in Appalachia 
  * Land Ownership and Taxation Appalachia 
  * The Brookside Strike ( or other recent strikes) 
  * Stripmining Protest and Environmental Regulation 
  * The Decline of Mountain Agriculture 
  * Appalachian Political Leaders (Bert Combs, Robert Byrd, Carl Perkins, etc.) 
  * The Appalachian Volunteers 
  * The Frontier Nursing Service 
  * The Council of the Southern Mountains 

* * *

**Go toTop of Syllabus**

* * *

**

Return to[HIS 580 ClassPage](580class.htm) -OR- Go to [AppalCenter
HomePage](welcome.html)

* * *

**The Appalachian Center at the University of Kentucky  
624 Maxwelton Court, Lexington, KY 40506-0347  
Telephone (859)257-4852; FAX:(859)257-3903  
Write us via our [feedback form](feedback.htm) or e-mail our
[Staff](staff.htm) **  
---  
  
**

#####  [research](http://www.uky.edu/RGS/AppalCenter/research/) |
[service](service.htm) | [staff](staff.htm) | [publications](publis.htm) |
[home](welcome.html)

**

