I. Course Description:

Designed to help students attain, through wide, relevant reading, an
understanding of the United States culture as one of many peoples and ways of
life; and literature itself as a device for securing equality among them.

II. Conceptual Framework:

For over 300 years, the population that has made up the nation state of the
United States of America has evolved into a diverse and complex society. The
literature of the indigenous peoples as well as the various ethnic groups that
have settled in the U.S. reflects the concerns and issues that have shaped the
literary canon. The novels from writers of the four ethnic minority groups
explore issues of identity formation, of living within a nation-state where
one is the "other," and of survival and maintenance of the root culture.

III. Goals and Objectives:

Participants will become familiar with the four major "minority" groups
(Native American, Chicano/a African American, and Asian American) in the
United States by reading novels that deal with identity and by fulfilling the
following objectives.

Participants will complete the terms of the Contract for English 4338.102 and
thereby fulfill the objectives that are focused on three competency areas:
writing, speaking and use of technology. The class activities are designed to
demonstrate both affective and cognitive outcomes. In addition to
demonstrating a knowledge of the literatures and cultures of the four groups,
participants will also demonstrate competencies in sharing this knowledge
through academic writing and presenting.

IV. Instructional Activities:

  * Lectures will introduce each of the units: Native American, Chicano/Chicana, African American, and Asian American. 
  * During the class, participants will engage in collaborative learning activities and will experience a variety of pedagogical approaches. 
  * Participants will engage in various readings, web sites, and videos as assigned
  * Presentations on novels outside of the general reading list will enhance the participants= exposure to the literatures.
  * Pre- and Post-tests will be administered at the beginning and conclusion of each unit.
  * Mid-term and Final examinations will be administered as noted in the Schedule.
  * Participants will attend scheduled lectures by various speakers.

V. Grading and other Policies

Cellular phones must be turned off during class No late papers or
presentations will be accepted without prior approval of the professor.

**Grading:**  
Grades will be contingent on the completion of the various competencies at the
usual level (90-100%=A; 80-89=B; 70-79=C; 60-69=D; 59 or below= F). See
Contract form for detailed breakdown. Sign the contract and turn in to the
Professor by the second week of classes. Students must turn in an e-mail
address to the professor by the second week of classes.

**Textbooks/Readings:**

VI. Schedule:

Week 1 Introductions; goal setting

Lecture: Culture, Ethnicity and Weltanschauung  
Sign up for Papers and Presentations  
Discussion and Activity: Theories of Literary Analysis Lecture: Native Peoples
of the Americas  
Pre-Test: Native American Literature; Elements of narrative texts

Week 2

Lecture: Native American Literature in the U.S.  
Sign Contract Forms; Turn in e-mail address  
Activity: Artifacts as icons  
Reading: _Fools Crow_  
Writing: Reader's Response to Fools Crow  
Lecture: Readers and Writers  
Mini-Lesson: Setting  
September 14 Speaker: Jim Baca

Week 3

Lecture: Reading and Writing  
Presentation #1  
Reading: _Ceremony_  
Key Concepts  
Lecture: War in Historical Context  
mini-lesson: Point of view

Week 4

Lecture: Healing and Stories  
Native- American Literature Papers due 9-21-99  
Exam I -- 9-23-99

  * Native American Literature 
  * Setting, Point of view

Key Concepts  
Readers' Response to Ceremony  
October 4 Speaker: David Weber

Week 5

Lecture: Chicano/a Literature--history and tradition  
Pre-test: Chicano/a Literature  
Reading: _Pocho_  
Video: El Teatro Campesino  
Writing: Who Am I?  
October 12 Dia de la Raza

Week 6

Lecture: Urban vs. Rural  
Key Concepts  
Readers' Response to Villarreal  
Lecture: Chicano/a Literature in the 90's  
Reading: _Can icula_  
Mini-Lesson: Character  

Week 7

Lecture: Memory and Reality  
Presentation #2  
Reading: _Can icula_  
Discussion: Borderlands Literature  
Video: Chicano!  
Writing: A Photograph  
Chicano/a Literature Papers

Week 8

Readers' Response to Cantu 10-26-99  
Exam II 10-28-99

  * Chicano Literature
  * Characterization

November 1-2 All Saints Day/Day of the Dead--Calaveras

Week 9

Lecture: African American Literature: From Oral Tradition to Hollywood  
Reading: _Go Tell It On the Mountain_  
Pre-Test: African American Literature  
Discussion: The Civil Rights Movement  
Video: Eyes on the Prize  
November 8 Speaker: Andres Tijerina

Week 10

Lecture: On Becoming  
Key Concepts  
Readers Response to Baldwin  
Writing: When I Was Fourteen  
Mini-Lesson: Action/Plot

Week 11

Lecture: African American Women Writers  
Presentation #3  
Reading: _The Color Purple_  
Historical Fiction  
November 16 Last Day to Drop a Class or Withdraw from TAMIU  
African-American Literature Papers 11-23-99  
Exam III 11-23-99

  * African American Literature
  * Action, Plot

Week 12

Readers Response to Walker  
Lecture: African American Writers  
Theories and Africanist Perspectives

Week 13

Lecture: Asian Americans in the U.S. from China to Viet-Nam  
Pre-Test: Asian American Lit  
Cultural clash and colonialist experiences  
Reading: _No No Boy_  
Reading: Essay on Asian American Writing

Week 14

Lecture: Cultural homogeneity and immigrant communities  
Presentation #4  
Readers Response to Okada  
Mini Lesson: Theme  
Asian American Papers

Week 15

Reading: _Woman Warrior_  
Lecture: Asian-American Women Writers  
Writing: A Tradition  
Exam IV

  * Asian American Lit
  * Theme and Narrative Structures

Week 16

Readers Response to Kingston  
Conclusions/Celebration/Contracts  
Final Examinations

See the Contract Form for when you are scheduled to present, turn in journals,
or take an examination.

