![](ethnicban.gif)   ![](courseban.gif)   **_Courses Offered by the Ethnic
Studies Program_**  

Additional courses are under development.  Please check with the [Ethnic
Studies Program Office](mailto:burnst@uwplatt.edu) for details.

Many courses which count for Ethnic Studies general education credit carry
other general education credit, as indicated below.  You may want to visit the
on-line syllabi of some of our classes to see which ones most interest you!  


  * **ES 17-103, 3 credits Race, Gender, and Class**
  
Examines the concepts of race, gender, and class in the United Stat es as
these influences are related historically to form a matrix that serves as a
comprehensive basis for understanding the contemporary society of the United
States.   **GE: Ethnic, Gender**  


  * **ES 17-213, 3 credits The Native American Experience**
  
Examines the indigenous peoples of North America with particular emphasis on
the area now called the United States.  **GE: Ethnic, Humanities**  


  * **ES 17-220, 3 credits Introduction to Ethnic Studies**
  
Examines the concepts, issues, and experience of People of Color in the U.S.
with an emphasis on historical and contemporary interaction of race, gender,
and class within and external to communities of color.  **GE: Ethnic**  


  * **ES 17-340, 3 credits History of Chicano Peoples in the U.S.** An examination of the history of the indigenous peoples in the Americas who experiences the Spanish conquest and colonization, and their subsequent inclusion in the United States as a result of U.S. expansion, war, economic imperialism, and migration within the Americas. 
  
**GE:   Ethnic, Historical Perspective**



**_Ethnic Studies Courses Offered by Other Departments_**  

  * **ES 17-273/ART 18-273, 3 credits Ethnic Art in the United States**
  
Course explores influences of a va riety of cultures on art of present-day
America. The focus is on art of Africa, Mexico and Native America and on
contemporary artists whose work grows out of those and other traditions. **GE:
Ethnic, Fine Arts**  


  * **ES 17-293/ENGL 15-293, 3 credits Minority Women Writers of the U.S.**
  
Literature written by Native-American women, African-American women, Latina-
American women, and Asian-American women. Includes investigation of historical
and cultural backgrounds as well as literary traditions of minority women of
the United States. Students will read authors such as Alice Walker, Toni
Morrison, Maya Angelou, Maxine Hong Kingston, Cabeza de Baca, Louise Erdrich,
Leslie Marmon Silko, and others. Every other S P: ENGL 123 **GE: Ethnic,
Gender, Humanities  ** [Course
Syllabus](http://vms.www.uwplatt.edu/~burnst/mwr.htmlx)  


  * **ES 17-373/ENGL 15-373, 3 credits Black Literature in America**
  
A survey of African-American literature beginning in the antebellum period and
continuing to the present, includin g oral forms (folk tales and spirituals),
novels, poetry, drama, autobiography, and other selected nonfiction. F S P:
ENGL 123  **GE: Ethnic, Humanities  ** [Course
Syllabus](http://vms.www.uwplatt.edu/~wendorff/373.html)  


  * **ES 17-374/ENGL 15-374 Asian-American Literature  **
  
A survey of Asian-American literature beginning in the early 1900s and
continuing to present times. Includes works of fiction, autobiography, poetry,
and drama. Focuses on writers from different literary and oral traditions
including (but not limited to) Mandari Chinese, Japanese, Thai, Hmong,
Vietnamese, and Indian, and examines the impact of family, culture, and
gender, both within these traditions and between a particular tradition and
U.S. popular culture. P: ENGL 123 **GE: Ethnic, Humanities  ** [Course
Syllabus](http://vms.www.uwplatt.edu/~burnst/alit.html)  


  * **ES 17-375/ENGL 15-375 American Literature of Ethnicity and Immagration  **
  
An examination of various U.S. "racial" and "ethnic" groups, including
African-, Italian-, Mexican-, Jewish-, Asian-, and Native-American. Emphasis
will be placed on the meaning of "race" and "ethnicity," the effects of
immigration, and the impact of gender in this literature. P: ENGL 123 **GE:
Ethnic, Humanities**  


  * **ES 17-373/POSC 45-373 Ethnic Rights and Politics**
  
Changing patterns of ethnic, gender, and race relations; legislative and
judicial developments affecting civil rights; political movements; political,
social, and economic discrimination; judicial system and legal protection for
ci vil rights. Women and other minorities. P: POSC 123 or permission of
instructor. S **GE: Ethnic, Social Sciences**  


  * **ES 17-323/SOC 49-323 Human Relations**
  
A sociological analysis of selected aspects of human relations that are
assumed to be socially structured and primarily group relations. The central
focus is on relations between groups of people who are in unequal positions in
society, based on the central dimensions of class, race/ethnicity and
sex/gender. P: SOC 103. F S **GE: Ethnic, Gender, Social Sciences**  


  * **ECON 6 6-293 Contemporary Economic Issues**
  
Analysis of income (in)security, income distribution, poverty, discrimination
and the economics of contemporary social issues including ethnicity, race and
gender. Issues are chosen which provide students the opportunity to apply
elementary economic principles of equity and efficiency. Focus is on
development of critical thinking skills and enhanced understanding of the
critical economic choices confronting a democratic society. P: sophomore
standing. Recommended: ECON 213 and ECON 223. F S **GE: Ethnic, Social
Sciences**  


  * **BSAD 56-334 Management, Gender, and Race**
  
This course reviews the changing nature of management and explains why gender
and race/ethnicity have become important considerations in business. It
examines the status of women and people of color in managerial or
administrative positions and discusses socialization processes, stereotypes,
equal employment opportunity laws, illegal harassment, and power in
organizations. Networking, mentoring, work/life balance, and career planning
are other topics that are addressed. P: BSAD 233 or junior standing.  **GE:
Ethnic, Gender** ****

**Descriptions coming soon for:  **

  * **ES 17-324/ HIST 33-324 African American History** (GE: Ethnic, Historical Perspective)
  * **ES 17-383/CJ 13-283 Ethnicity, Race, and Crime** (GE: Ethnic)
  * **ES 17-341/ENGL 15-340 Chicano Literature** (GE: Ethnic, Humanities) 
  * **ES 17-383/ WS 51-383   3 credits Black Feminism **(GE: Ethnic, Gender)

  
---  
  ![](footer.gif)

