![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)[![Radcliffe Institute
Fellowships](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/n_fel_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/fellowships/index.html)[![Radcliffe
Association](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/n_ras_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/alumnae/index.html)  
![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)[![Murray Research
Center](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/n_mrc_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/murray/index.html)[![Educational
Programs](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/n_edu_d.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/seminars/index.html)  
![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)[![Radcliffe Public Policy
Center](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/n_ppc_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/pubpol/index.html)[![Development](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/n_dev_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/dev/index.html)  
![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)[![Schlesinger
Library](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/n_scl_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/schles/index.html)[![Undergraduates](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/n_und_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/undergrad/index.html)  
![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)  

|

![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/gray.gif)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/TRCGCWS.jpg)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)  
  
  
---|---  
  
![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)

|

![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/blue.gif)  
![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/blue.gif) E d u c a t i o n a l   P r o g
r a m s :   G r a d u a t e   C o n s o r t i u m  i n  W o m e n ' s  S t u d
i e s

|

![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/blue.gif)  
[![radcliffe](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/n_radlogo_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/)  
![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)  
  
---|---|---  
  
![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)[![About
Radcliffe](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/nu_abo_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/about/index.html)[![News
and
Publications](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/nu_nap_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/news/index.html)[![Calendar
of
Events](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/nu_coe_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/calendar/index.html)[![Contacts](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/nu_con_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/contacts/index.html)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/gray.gif)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/gray.gif)  
![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)[![Search](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/nu_sea_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/search/SearchRad.html)[![Administration](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/nu_adm_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/administration/index.html)[![Radcliffe
Home](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/nu_rad_i.gif)](http://www.radcliffe.edu/index.html)[![Harvard
Home](http://www.radcliffe.edu/nav_imgs/nu_har_i.gif)](http://www.harvard.edu/)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/gray.gif)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/gray.gif)  
![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/gray.gif)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/gray.gif)  
  
![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)  

|



|

![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)



### Gender, Sexuality, and Culture in the United States and Latin America

Spring 1994 Graduate Seminar Syllabus

**Faculty**

Lynn Stephen  
Dept. of Sociology and Anthropology, Northeastern University  
  
Brad Epps  
Dept. of Romance Languages and Literatures, Harvard University

In this course we will explore the construction, destruction, and resistance
of sexual subjects in the U.S. and Latin America using a variety of sources,
including ethnography, film, testimony, narrative fiction, and autobiography.
Drawing from both the social and human sciences, we will examine essentialist
and constructivist notions of sexuality. Because the greatest challenges to
such notions come from the margins of dominant culture, we will concentrate on
non-heterosexual and non-Western formulations of identity, experience, and
lifestyle.

The course therefore emphasizes the diversity of sexual beings within and
across specific cultures. Topics addressed include: classical constructions of
sexuality in psychology and anthropology; recent "deconstructive" readings of
sexuality; the problems of (knowing, studying, or viewing) others and
alterity; the presence and absence of sexual discourse in the testimonies of
Latin American women; race and gender in the work of Chicana and African
American Lesbians; indigenous perspectives on sexuality and history;
community, nationality, nationalism, and political activity; sex, work, and
class under capitalism, socialism, and totalitarianism; state constructions of
the family and women's resistance.

The course will function as a seminar with each student responsible for at
least one weekly presentation. Students will write weekly 2-page reaction
papers and a final term paper of 20-30 pages.

**Weekly Assignments, Questions, Readings**

**Week I: Sex, Gender, and Representation**

What is the relationship between sex, sexuality, and gender? How is the body a
cultural construct? What is at stake in the representation of desire? What is
the role of dualism and/or binary logic? How do popular culture and technology
reinforce and/or challenge dualistic thinking? What is the relation between
thinking, seeing, and desiring?

Garber, Margery. "Spare Parts: The Surgical Construction of Gender," _The
Lesbian and Gay Studies Reader._ Eds. Abelove, Barale, Halperin. New York:
Routledge, 1993. 321-336.

Rubin, Gayle. "Thinking Sex: Notes for a Radical Theory of the Politics of
Sexuality," _The Lesbian and Gay Studies Reader._ Eds. Abelove, Barale,
Halperin. New York: Routledge, 1993. 3-44.

Video (selections): Paris is Burning; Justify My Love; and High Heels. (in
class)  
Painting: Frida Kahlo and Diego Rivera (in class) **Week II: Psycho-Sexuality
and Its Discontents**

What assumptions about gender, sexuality, and sex are made by Freud? To what
degree, if any, are these assumptions rooted exclusively in Western culture?
What is the role of the author (and authority) in these texts? What is the
status of identity, subjectivity, and otherness? What are the possibilities
and problems of Freudian analysis for Feminism? What are the implications of a
clitorially based theory of sexual development for women and men?

Freud, Sigmund."'Civilized' Sexuality, Morality and Modern Nervousness,"
_Collected Papers._ Vol. 2. Trans. Joan Riviere. New York: Basic Books, 1959.

Freud, Sigmund. "Femininity," _New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis._
New York: W. W. Norton, 1965. 99-119.

Freud, Sigmund. "Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality," _Freud on Women: A
Reader._ New York: W. W. Norton  & Co, 1990. 89-145.

Kofman, Sarah. Part 2, Chapter 5: "Psychoanalysis: The Child Becomes a Woman,"
_The Enigma of Woman: Woman in Freud's Writings._ Ithaca: Cornell University
Press, 1985. 122-225. **Week III: Anthropology and Feminist Critique**

Which Freudian assumptions about gender and sexuality have anthropologists
adopted? What are the effects of the cross-cultural approaches of
anthropology? To what degree do Levi-Strauss, Mead, and Malinowski
universalize these assumptions? What do they take to be culturally specific?
How does Rubin both support and undermine the assumptions of the social
scientists she critiques? What are the relations between the social and the
psychic? How do they impinge on notions of freedom, autonomy, and
independence? What is the "economy of pleasure"? What are the connections
between violence, desire, and truth in these works? How are they mobilized in
studies on civilization and savagery?

Mead, Margaret. "On Freud's View of Female Psychology," _Women and Analysis:
Dialogues on Psychoanalytic Views of Femininity._ Ed. Jean Strouse. New York:
Grossman Publishers, 1974. 95-106

Malinowski, Bronislav. _The Sexual Life of Savages._ Boston: Beacon Press,
1987. (selections)

Levi-Strauss, Claude. _Elementary Structures of Kinship._ Boston: Beacon
Press, 1969. (concluding chapter on endogamy, exogamy, and the exchange of
women)

Rubin, Gayle. "The Traffic in Women: Notes on the 'Political Economy' of Sex,"
_Towards an Anthropology of Women._ Ed. Rayna Reiter. New York: Monthly Review
Press, 1975. 157-210.

**Week IV: The History of Sexuality**

What is the place of Foucauldian analysis in feminism? What is the function of
language or discourse in the formation of sexual identity? How are agency,
repression, and resistance (re)figured? What are the relations between
knowledge and power?

Foucault, Michel. _The History of Sexuality._ Trans. Robert Hurley. New York:
Random House, 1990.

Hartsock, Nancy. "Foucault on Power: A Theory for Women?" _Feminism/
Postmodernism._ Ed. Linda Nicholson. New York: Routledge, 1990. 157-175.

**Week V: Eyeing Others, Writing Selves: Testimonies of Latin American
Women.**

What is needed to bring out the authority of those usually silenced? Is such
an objective possible? What is at stake in silence and expression? How do
these women identify their sexuality? How does their work relate to gender
roles and to political activity? What do these accounts tells us about the
ways that these women "publicize" their sexual identity? How do transcription,
translation, editing, marketing, distribution, and reception affect these
accounts? What does it mean to testify, attest to, or witness? What is the
status of truth in these acts?

Menchu, Rigoberta and Elizabeth Burgos. _I, Rigoberta Menchu: An Indian Woman
in Guatemala._ Trans. Anne Wright. London: Verso.

Stephen, Lynn & Maria Teresa Tula. _Hear My Testimony: Maria Teresa Tula,
Human Rights Activist of El Salvador._ Boston: South End Press, 1993.

Clifford, James. "On Ethnographic Authority," _The Predicament of Culture:
Twentieth-Century Ethnography, Literature, and Art._ Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1988.

Rosaldo, Renato. "Border Crossings," _Culture and Truth: The Remaking of
Social Analysis._ Boston: Beacon Press, 1989. 196-217.

**Week VI: Writing the Self, Again: Desire and Race.**

How do these accounts of sexuality, produced from within the U. S., vary from
those of the Latin American women read the previous week? Does the expression
of sexuality have a particular link to political work and gender roles? How do
race and sexuality intersect in these works? What do they have to say about
female sexuality in the context of racial politics? What are the similarities
and differences for the African-American and the Hispanic-American
communities? What, for that matter, is the validity of the term or concept
"Hispanic"? What is the function of mythology, story-telling and the
imagination in the making or re-making of history? How do conquest,
imperialism, and colonialism figure in these texts? How is identity placed,
replaced, and/or displaced in Anzaldua, hooks, and Lorde?

Anzaldua, Gloria. _Borderlands/La frontera: The New Mestiza._ San Francisco:
Aunt Lute Books, 1987. Chapters 1-3, 5,  & 7.

Moraga, Cherrie. "We Fight Back With Our Families," _Loving in the War Years._
Boston: South End Press, 1983. 105-125.

Lorde, Audre. "The Master's Tools Will Never Dismantle the Master's House,"
_This Bridge Called My Back._ Eds. Gloria Anzaldua  & Cherrie Moraga.
Watertown: Persephone Press, 1981. (version from Lorde, _Sister Outsider_ )

hooks, bell. _Yearning: Race, Gender, and Cultural Politics._ Boston: South
End Press, 1990. Chapters 7, 8,  & 20.

Yarbo-Bejarano, Yvonne. "De-constructing the Lesbian Body," _The Lesbian and
Gay Studies Reader._ Eds. Abelove, Barale, Halperin. New York: Routledge,
1993. 595-603.

**Week VII: The "Subject" of Indigenous Sexuality**

Many indigenous accounts describe more than two genders: what are these
genders and what are their implications for universal (as well as cross-
cultural) constructs? How do "alternative" genders influence the construction
of sexuality in indigenous (American) culture? Is sexuality bound directly and
irrevocably to gender? Does this relationship vary from culture to culture,
time to time?

Blackwood, Evelyn, ed. "Breaking the Mirror," _The Many Faces of
Homosexuality: Anthropological Approaches to Homosexual Behavior._ New York:
Harrington Park Press, 1989. 1-17

Parker, Richard. _Bodies, Pleasure, and Passions: Sexual Culture in
Contemporary Brazil._ Boston: Beacon Press, 1991.  
OR  
Williams, Walter. _The Spirit and the Flesh: Sexual Diversity in American
Indian Culture._ Boston: Beacon Press. (selections)

Newton, Esther. "Yams, Grinders, and Gays: The Anthropology of Homosexuality."
_Outlook_ (Spring 1988): 28-37.

**Week VIII: Nationality, Nationalism, Community and Contradiction**

How does nationality impinge on sexuality (and vice versa)? How can
nationalist discourses and projects make gender and sexual differences
invisible or insignificant? How have women, gay men and lesbians rewritten or
attempted to rewrite nationality and nationalism? What strategies have they
used? What is at stake in such issues as privacy, intimacy, discretion, and
individuality for "sexual minorities"? What are the bonds between
communication and community formation? In what ways are these imaginary? How
is the nation, as product and process, at once utopian and ideological? What
are the limits of citizenship?

Anderson, Benedict. _Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and
Spread of Nationalism._ London: Verso, 1983.

Gutierrez, Ramon. "Community, Patriarchy, and Individualism: The Politics of
Chicano History and the Dream of Equality." _American Quarterly_ 45.1 (1993):
44-72.

Burton, Julianne. "Don (Juanito) Duck and the Imperial-Patriarchal
Unconscious: Disney Studios, the Good Neighbor Policy, and the Packaging of
Latin America," _Nationalisms and Sexualities._ New York: Routledge, 1992.
Eds. Parker, Russo, Sommer,  & Yaeger.

**Week IX: Sex and Class under Capitalism.**

How does class influence the ways in which sexualities are represented and
experienced? Does class privilege compensate for sexual marginalization? How
are labor relations reflected and affected in sexual relations? How does the
state reinforce and (re)institutionalize the sex/gender relations of
capitalism? Are these relations specific (or in any way unique) to capitalism?
What is involved in the commerce of pleasure? In the marketing of the body?
What are the power plays of prostitution? What is the fate of morality, from
both the left and the right, in prostitution? What about the places of
knowledge, awareness, self-determination, and critique (who says what is good
and bad, right and wrong, legal and illegal, etc)?

Puig, Manuel. _The Kiss of the Spider Woman._ New York: Vintage Books, 1980.

D'Emilio, John. "Capitalism and Gay Identity," _The Lesbian and Gay Studies
Reader._ Eds. Abelove, Barale, Halperin. New York: Routledge, 1993. 467-476.

**Week X: Revolutionizing Desire and Desiring Revolution in Latin America.**

Do socialist states differ from capitalist states where sexuality and gender
are concerned? If so, where? If not, why? How do revolutionary states
understand (revolutionize or preserve) heterosexuality? How have struggles for
gender equality and sexual liberation been affected by an emphasis on class
politics, typically in the guise of Marxism?

Film: _Improper Conduct._ Nestor Almendros  & Orlando Jimenez Leal.

.

Arenas, Reinaldo. _Before Night Falls._ New York: Viking Press, 1993.

Adam, Barry. "Homosexuality Without a Gay World: Pasivos y Activos en
Nicaragua." _Outlook_ (Winter 1989).

Ferguson, Ann. "Lesbianism, Feminism, and Empowerment in Nicaragua."
_Socialist Review_ 21\. 3-4 (1991): 75-97.

Recommended:

Arguelles, Lourdes & B. Ruby Rich. "Homosexuality, Homophobia, and Revolution:
Notes Toward an Understanding of the Cuban Lesbian and Gay Male Experience,"
_Hidden From History: Reclaiming the Gay and Lesbian Past._ Eds. Duberman,
Vicinus,  & Chauncey. New York: Meridian, 1990.

Lancaster, Roger N. "Subjected Honor and Object Shame: The Construction of
Homosexuality and Stigma in Nicaragua." _Ethnology_ 17.2 (1988): 111-126.

**Week XI: State Constructions of Sexuality and Women's Resistance.**

How have women resisted (and with what success) state constructions of
femininity and female sexuality? What are the politics of such resistance? How
have movements centered on the traditional sexuality or asexuality of the
mother (and wife, sister, etc.) addressed issues such as domestic violence,
reproductive rights, and women's health? How do women's experience of
themselves as sexual beings change as they participate in social movements
that challenge dominant gender ideologies? How do the state and the family
interrelate? Does feminism presuppose a liberal state ideology? Is feminism
possible, and if so to what extent and in what ways, under a totalitarian
regime? What are the possibilities and pitfalls of the cinema as a means of
political critique? What problems does the representation of violence, in
words as well as in images, entail?

Film: _The Official Story._ Luis Puenzo.

Film: _Portrait of Teresa_ Pastor Vega.

Valenzuela, Luisa. _Other Weapons._ Hanover, New Hampshire: Ediciones del
Norte, 1985.

**Week XII: Challenges to Sexualities and Genders: Parenting, Bisexuality,
AIDS.**

Alonso, Ana Maria & Maria Teresa Koreck. "Silences: 'Hispanics', AIDS & Sexual
Practices," _The Lesbian and Gay Studies Reader._ Eds. Abelove, Barale,
Halperin. New York: Routledge, 1993. 110-126.

Watney, Simon. _Policing Desire: Pornography, AIDS, and the Media._
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1989. Chapters 1-4.

Lewin, Ellen. _Lesbian Mothers: Accounts of Gender in American Culture._
Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1993. (selections)

Kaplan, Rebecca. "Compulsory Heterosexuality and the Bisexual Existence:
Toward a Bisexual Understanding of Heterosexism," _Closer to Home: Bisexuality
and Feminism._ Ed. Elizabeth Reba Weise. Seattle: Seal Press, 1992. 269-280.

Rust, Paula C. "Who Are We and Where Do We Go From Here?" _Closer to Home:
Bisexuality and Feminism._ Ed. Elizabeth Reba Weise. Seattle: Seal Press,
1992. 281-310 (along with "Notes on the Kinsey Scale," 311-318).

  
  

[Gender, Sexuality, and Culture in Latin America and U.S. Latino/a Culture,
fall 1996 syllabus](GSf96.html)

  
  

|

![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)  
  
  
---|---  
  
![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/gray.gif)

|

![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)

|

![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/gray.gif)

|

![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)

|

[ Graduate Consortium in Women's
Studies](http://www.radcliffe.edu/gcws/index.html)

|

![](http://www.radcliffe.edu/images/white.gif)

|

[Participating Institutions](http://www.radcliffe.edu/gcws/schools/index.html)

[Courses and Academic
Policies](http://www.radcliffe.edu/gcws/courses/index.html)

[Faculty](http://www.radcliffe.edu/gcws/faculty/index.html)

[Events and Publications](http://www.radcliffe.edu/gcws/events/index.html)

[Related Sites](http://www.radcliffe.edu/gcws/related/index.html)  
  
---|---  
  
[Intellectual Renewal Weekends](http://www.radcliffe.edu/intell/index.html)

[Voices of Public
Intellectuals](http://www.radcliffe.edu/feminisms/index.html)

