**Asian American Studies 60C Discussion Section Syllabus, Spring, 2001**

**[TA  Michael Masatsugu](http://www.ags.uci.edu/~mmasatsu/)**

Section 1 (M 1-150)  Section 2 (M 2-250)  
Office:  Krieger Hall 323 Office Hours:  
Tuesday 1230-130 pm or by appt.  
[mmasatsu@uci.edu](mailto:mmasatsu@uci.edu)

**[[ Send Email to the Section Listserv](mailto:18001-s01@classes.uci.edu) ]
[ Introduction ]   [ [Your Section
Grade](http://www.ags.uci.edu/~mmasatsu/his40a.html#section) ]   [ Plagiarism
Policy ]**

**Introduction**

I have worked as a TA in a wide range of courses in History and Asian American
Studies from an upper division course in Asian American Racial and Ethnic
Communities to survey courses in Premodern East Asia, the recent history of
Japan, China and the United States and in Asian American Studies.  Despite the
variety of courses, there are aspects of my teaching common to all my courses:
I always seek to create an inclusive space for students to grapple with
critical issues and questions that emerge in the course of discussion.  My
goal is to create an atmosphere where each student is intellectually
challenged and where all thoughtful comments and interpretations of readings
and lectures are both critically considered and respected.  At the same time,
I try to impress upon students why some interpretations are more convincing
then others.  


**Your Section Grade** is assessed on the basis of attendance and the level of
commitment you make towards preparation for and participation in section.

**Attendance**   is mandatory.  Failure to attend section on a regular basis
will dramatically lower your section grade.  There are no make ups for missed
section.  Exceptions may be made for family or medical emergencies with
documentation.  I appreciate advance notification including the reason that
you will be missing section.

**Timeliness**   I understand and try to be flexible with occasional
tardiness.  On the other hand, I have little   patience with those who are
regularly late to class or arrive excessively late. In these cases, you may
not receive credit for attending class.  I take attendance at the beginning of
class.  If you come to section late, it is your responsibility to remind me to
update my gradebook at the end of class.

**Preparation:**    I prepare to moderate discussion and I expect each of you
to bring course texts for the week to section and to prepare in advance for
discussion in section.

**Participation:   **You will be given a number of different kinds of
opportunities to participate in discussion.

    1.  Full class discussion of lectures, readings.   
    2\. Group based discussion - We will break into groups and regroup as a class.   
    3.  I also consider the way that  your questions or responses draw others into discussion.   
    4.  "One minute rounds" - Each person is given a maximum of one minute to discuss a chosen topic.   
    5.  Listserv -  I give **participation credit** to those of you who send insightful comments or questions to the class listserv.  I recommend a short paragraph in which you discuss an aspect of the readings, lectures or discussion.  You could respond to another student's question/comment on the listserv.  I sometimes use our listserv discussion as the basis for real-time discussions.   
     6.  TA office hours -  I encourage you to come visit me during office hours.  This is a great opportunity to further discuss topics not covered in section.

**Respect:**    Respect  in section  is reciprocal.  It should be factored
into your assessment of me and I will factor it into my assessment of each of
you.   Simply put, each of you will be treated and assessed in section
according to the effort and attitude that you bring to section and to the
listserv.  In my final assessment of your participation grade I will consider
each of these factors.

    Respect for other student's opinions in section and on the listserv.   
    Respect for your own opinion.  Each of you are important contributors to our section.   
    Racist, Sexist, Homophobic etc. comments will not be tolerated.   
    Your pager and cell phone are turned off prior to section.   
    Timeliness and Attentiveness

**Plagiarism Policy** :  I take plagiarism and cheating very seriously.  In
this course I am only required to assess your own original work.  Cheating and
Plagiarism will automatically result in serious actions.  The incident can be
documented on your permanent student record.  In the worst case scenario it
can and has resulted in dismissal from the university.  Please don't do it.  I
consider this fair warning, the consequences are yours.   You should be warned
that I perform **random web text searches** for research papers and take home
examinations.  For more information on what constitutes plagiarism please see
the[ University policy on academic
honesty.](http://eee.uci.edu/00s/07200/appx_2.html#dishonesty)

**Expectations**

If you have questions about any of my policies or expectations, it is best to
come talk to me in person.  If you are having problems with an aspect of the
course, it is highly recommended that you speak with me early in the quarter.
I'm happy to discuss any questions, problems, or further interests that you
might have regarding our course, the major in Asian American Studies or
history, or graduate/professional school in general.

[top](http://www.ags.uci.edu/~mmasatsu/his40a.html)  
    


