![](467_bbrstop.gif)  
---  
[ READINGS IN AMERICAN INTELLECTUAL HISTORY  
FROM 1890 TO MODERN TIMES  
](read.html) Hist 467-B

| [Bulletin Board](wwwboard) | [ Teaching Schedule](sched.html) |
[Home](index.html)

  
  
This course is designed to provide you with a comprehensive look at American
thought and culture from the 1890s to modern times. To achieve this objective,
you will read the works of primary and secondary authors and will be graded
each class period on your ability to discuss and synthesize the topics
studied. Additional course objectives include written and oral communicative
skills development, logical and critical thinking, an understanding of varying
discipline methodologies, and the ability to synthesize ideas.

The principles upon which this course are based include the following: (1)
knowledge is acquired only through thinking; (2) students can learn what to
think only as they learn how to think; (3) to become educated is to learn how
to gather, analyze, synthesize, assess, and apply information for oneself; (4)
discussion, focused on issues, is a better sign of learning than silent
students passively accepting what the instructor says; (5) students gain
significant knowledge only if they value it; (6) information should be
presented so as to be understandable from the point of view of the learner;
(7) students learn best by working with other students in settings that
generate mutually supportive debate and empathic exchange of ideas; (8)
students need intellectual standards to assess their thinking and the thinking
of others; (9) students should expect continuous feedback from the instructor
on the quality of the work presented.

**_Presentation/Critique of Books**_

During each class period, you will be expected to discuss and critique
assigned books. This will require you to have read an assignment prior to
class and be able to explain the nature, purpose, and content of the book, its
relation to the topic under discussion, and other pertinent factors beneficial
to fellow students in the class. You are also be expected to provide
background knowledge of each author. _At the conclusion of each class, you are
required to turn in a one-page synopsis of the book or article which you read.
Copies of all synopses will be given to each student_.

Since you will be graded each class period, and since no other student will be
reporting on your book or article, your absence will affect the outcome of the
specific topic being discussed. Therefore, absences are discouraged, and three
or more absences will affect the final grade.

_**Research Paper**_

The research paper will enable you to investigate in depth a topic of
particular interest to you. Please consult with instructor as you formulate
your ideas. Be sure to select a topic that is manageable and focused. Papers
will be read critically. State the purpose of the paper at the outset--what
are you trying to show? Do not present a superficial survey of some discipline
as your topic; this is too general and serves no useful purpose. Ask yourself
an historical question at the outset, provide evidence for your answers, and
draw conclusions from your sources. Weigh your sources. Are they correct in
what they say? Look for biases in the sources and use them judiciously. Be
sure to look at both primary and secondary sources. Put the paper in
historical context. Do not present a simple compilation of facts unassociated
with the setting in which they occurred. Explain the facts. History is not
just a chronology of events. Be sure to use journals and magazine articles as
well as books in your research. Immerse yourself in the readings on your topic
before doing any writing. The library staff, reference books, and computer
assisted data searches are to be used. Do not skip them in your research. They
are essential to a good paper. _The instructor encourages students to submit
papers early to get feedback prior to final submission._

**_The "Haller Commandments" for Writing Research Papers:_**

  1. Keep paper in past tense.  

  2. Avoid passive voice.  

  3. No paragraphs of less than four sentences.  

  4. Provide abstract at beginning of paper.  

  5. Do not use indented quotes.  

  6. Quoted material should not be longer than 4 lines.  

  7. Do not use chapter titles.  

  8. Seven word limit on title of research paper.  

  9. No more than 15 pages, not including title page, footnotes, and bibliography.  

  10. Identify all individuals mentioned in paper.

**_Research Talk_**

You will be allotted a short block of time in which to present the results of
your research. Use it well. Do not read your paper to us. Distill from it the
essential points and tell them to the class. Begin your talk with some remarks
about the purpose of your research. End up with your conclusions. Be as clear
and concise as possible. Questions from the class should be expected.

Each research paper will be judged for its clarity, relevance, consistency,
logic, depth, coherence, and fairness. _Students will read each others papers
and be expected to answer the following questions_ :

    1. Is the question-at-issue (thesis) well stated? Is it clear and unbiased? Does the thesis do justice to the complexity of the matter at issue?

    2. Does the writer cite relevant evidence and information essential to the issue?

    3. Does the writer clarify key concepts when necessary?

    4. Does the writer show a sensitivity to what he or she is assuming or taking for granted (insofar as those assumptions might reasonably be questioned)?

    5. Does the writer develop a definite line of reasoning, explaining well how he or she is arriving at his or her conclusions?

    6. Is the writer's reasoning well-supported?

    7. Does the writer show a sensitivity to alternative points of view or lines of reasoning? Does he or she consider and respond to the objections framed from other points of view?

    8. Does the writer show a sensitivity to the implications and consequences of the position he or she has taken?

| Return to Top of File

