ETHNIC STUDIES: 359- **101** (HU &)  
Instructor: John Boatman; Office: Holton 291

**The United States Ethnic Experience: American Indians, Hispanics, and
Immigrants from Northern and Western Europe**

**COURSE DESCRIPTION** :

A survey of the United States Ethnic Experience of American Indians,
Hispanics, and Immigrants from Northern and Western Europe. Includes an
overview of the homeland history of selected Ethnic Groups, as well as the
pre-immigration, immigration, and post-immigration experiences of the people
from these groups, in the United States, in general, and in Wisconsin, in
particular.

**OFFICE HOURS FOR STUDENTS** :

I am scheduled to be teaching on campus every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday
during the semester. I am teaching two other courses in addition to this one
and have a total of approximately 800 students.

On Mondays-Wednesdays-Fridays I will _normally_ be available in my office from
**10:00 - 11:15**.

All other office hours **by appointment**. I bring my appointment book to each
class; in addition, students may telephone for an appointment. **Telephone** :
229-6686. If you telephone my office and there is no immediate answer, leave a
message and I will return your call as soon as I am able.

I may also be contacted by E-Mail: boatman@csd.uwm.edu

**COURSE ASSISTANTS** : - ( **H** olton - **285** )

Office Hours: By Appointment. Make arrangements after class.

**REQUIRED COURSE TEXT BOOK** :

_A Survey of the United States Ethnic Experience: Volume I, American Indians,
Hispanics, and Immigrants from Northern and Western Europe_ , John Boatman,
1992.

(This book is to be read according to the topic schedule contained in this
syllabus.)

**OTHER COURSE REQUIREMENTS** :

Students will be expected to know the **general Ethnic Studies Concepts**
which are listed and defined in the text book Introduction.

Students will also be expected to know aspects of the history of selected
Ethnic Groups whose peoples settled in various regions of the United States,
including Wisconsin. This will include:

Unique facts about the homeland history of each of the Ethnic Groups. These
unique facts include special things that make the group different from all
other groups, as well as those things which make the group similar to other
groups.

**Why** and approximately **when** significant numbers of people from each
group left their homeland and came to the "Americas," including the United
States.

Significant, unique customs of these various Ethnic peoples and the
contributions they made to the United States "American" culture.

Students **will also be expected** to become geographically literate regarding
the selected Ethnic Groups. This will include:

Being able to **correctly locate, on an outline map of Europe or North and
Central America** , the **homeland of each of the Ethnic Groups** we cover in
this course.

Being able to **correctly locate, on an outline map of the United States** ,
the **major post-immigration settlement areas of various Ethnic Groups** we
cover in this course.

Being able to **correctly locate, on an outline map of Wisconsin** (on which
the counties are named and located) **the specific counties where significant
numbers of immigrants from various Ethnic Groups initially settled**.

Students will also be expected to **spell the official name of each Ethnic
Group correctly, as it is spelled in this syllabus**.

Each time on an exam that an Ethnic Group name is spelled incorrectly, the
student will lose 1/2 point for that particular answer.

**ATTENDANCE** :

I do **not** take or keep track of attendance. Class attendance is
recommended, however, because exams are based on the lecture material as well
as on the reading from the required book.

The classes for this course will begin promptly as scheduled. Please make
arrangements to **be on time** \- or - if you have a valid reason for
regularly being late, tell me about it!

**EXAMS** :  
  
There will be THREE scheduled exams during the semester AND a
**comprehensive** final exam during the Final Exam Period.  
  
Each of the first three exams will count 20% of the course grade. These exams
must be taken on the assigned dates, unless I approve an exception
**__before__** the date of the exam, or a student has a verifiable, written,
medical excuse.  
  
The comprehensive final exam will count the other 40% of the course grade.  
  
Note: Participation in or attendance at Athletic Events is **NOT** considered
to be a valid reason for missing an exam.

NO required papers to be researched and written in this course.

* * *

**ETHNIC GROUPS INCLUDED IN THIS COURSE**

After a brief course introduction, selected Ethnic Groups included in this
course will be studied in the order in which they are listed.

**AMERICAN INDIANS  
SPANISH

HISPANICS (LATINOS):  

  * MEXICANS 
  

  * PUERTO RICANS 
  

  * CUBANS 

BASQUES  
FRENCH  
ENGLISH  
CORNISH  
WELSH  
SCOTS (or) SCOTTISH  
DUTCH  
BELGIANS  
LUXEMBOURGERS  
GERMANS  
AUSTRIANS  
SWISS  
AMISH

SCANDINAVIANS:

  * NORWEGIANS 
  

  * SWEDES (or) SWEDISH 
  

  * DANES (or) DANISH 
  

  * FINNS (or) FINNISH 
  

  * ICELANDERS 

IRISH **

