  ![](467_bbrstop.gif)  
---  
 [Readings](read.html) |  [Bulletin Board](wwwboard) |  [Teaching
Schedule](sched.html) |  [Home](index.html)  
  

This course is designed to provide you with a comprehensive look at American
thought and culture from the 1890s to modern times. To achieve this objective,
you will read the works of primary and secondary authors and will be graded
each class period on your ability to discuss and synthesize the topics
studied. Additional course objectives include written and oral communicative
skills development, logical and critical thinking, an understanding of varying
discipline methodologies, and the ability to synthesize ideas.

The principles upon which this course are based include the following: (1)
knowledge is acquired only through thinking; (2) students can learn what to
think only as they learn _how_ to think; (3) to become educated is to learn
how to gather, analyze, synthesize, assess, and apply information for oneself;
(4) discussion, focused on issues, is a better sign of learning than silent
students passively accepting what the instructor says; (5) students gain
significant knowledge only if they value it; (6) information should be
presented so as to be understandable from the point of view of the learner;
(7) students learn best by working with other students in settings that
generate mutually supportive debate and empathic exchange of ideas; (8)
students need intellectual standards to assess their thinking and the thinking
of others; and (9) students should expect continuous feedback from the
instructor on the quality of the work presented.

  
**_

Presentation/Critique of Books

**_

During each class period, you will be expected to discuss and critique
assigned books. This will require you to have read an assignment prior to
class and be able to explain the nature, purpose, and content of the book, its
relation to the topic under discussion, and other pertinent factors beneficial
to fellow students in the class. You are also be expected to provide
background knowledge of each author. _At the conclusion of each class, you are
required to turn in a one-page synopsis of the book or article which you read.
Copies of all synopses will be shared with each student. The instructor will
provide written comments on each assignment.

___

Since you will be graded each class period, and since no other student will be
reporting on your book or article, your absence will affect the outcome of the
specific topic being discussed. Therefore, absences are discouraged, and
_three or more absences will affect the final grade.

_  
**_

Essays

**_

For those of you who choose to write three essays, these three-to-five page
papers should represent your own thoughtful commentary on topics relevant to
the course. These are _not_ research papers and, therefore, they should not be
prepared with footnotes or bibliography. Instead, you should consider them as
highly personalized essays on topics drawn from ideas or opinions raised in
class discussions and/or personal reactions to books you are reading.

  
**_

Research Paper

**_

The research paper (seniors can use this for their senior research paper) will
enable you to investigate in depth a topic of particular interest to you.
Please consult with instructor as you formulate your ideas. Be sure to select
a topic that is manageable and focused. Papers will be read critically. State
the purpose of the paper at the outset--what are you trying to show? Do not
present a superficial survey of some discipline as your topic; this is too
general and serves no useful purpose. Ask yourself an historical question at
the outset, provide evidence for your answers, and draw conclusions from your
sources. Weigh your sources. Are they correct in what they say? Look for
biases in the sources and use them judiciously. Be sure to look at both
primary and secondary sources. Put the paper in historical context. Do not
present a simple compilation of facts unassociated with the setting in which
they occurred. Explain the facts. History is not just a chronology of events.
Be sure to use journals and magazine articles as well as books in your
research. Immerse yourself in the readings on your topic before doing any
writing. The library staff, reference books, and computer assisted data
searches are to be used. Do not skip them in your research. They are essential
to a good paper. _Students are required to submit papers early to get feedback
prior to final submission.

_

Students who choose to write research papers should ask themselves the
following questions.

  1. Is the question-at-issue (thesis) well stated? Is it clear and unbiased? Does the thesis do justice to the complexity of the matter at issue? 

  2. Do you cite relevant evidence and information essential to the issue?

  3. Do you clarify key concepts when necessary?

  4. Do you develop a definite line of reasoning, explaining how you are arriving at your conclusions?

  5. Is your reasoning well-supported?

  6. Do you show a sensitivity to alternative points of view or lines of reasoning? Do you consider and respond to the objections framed from other points of view?

  7. Do you show a sensitivity to the implications and consequences of the position you have taken?

  
_

Rules for Writing Research Papers:

****_

  1. Keep paper in past tense.  

  2. Avoid passive voice.  

  3. No paragraphs of less than four sentences.  

  4. Provide abstract at beginning of paper.  

  5. Do not use indented quotes.  

  6. Quoted material should not be longer than 4 lines.  

  7. Do not use chapter titles.  

  8. Seven word limit on title of research paper.  

  9. No more than 15 pages, not including title page, footnotes, and bibliography.  

  10. Identify all individuals mentioned in paper.  

  
---  
  
Return to Top of File  
---

