**HIST 419 Western Military History-WR**

**TR 1:00-2:15 Strickler 305**

**Prof. Wayne Lee
301e Gottschalk**

**wlee@louisville.edu
852-6817 (dept phone) **

**1\. PURPOSE:** This course is designed with two purposes in mind. First, it
will survey Western military experience from the earliest times to the
present, viewing war as a social institution that must be seen in its fullest
cultural context to be understood. Second, it will provide a conceptual
framework for analyzing and evaluating military institutions and events. The
conceptual framework consists of eight "Themes and Variables in Military
History" (see attached sheet). These serve as a checklist of things to
consider when evaluating a military situation. Throughout the course we will
apply the Themes and Variables to specific historical cases. We shall examine,
for example, how the politics of the classical Greek polis influenced the
military institutions of the city states, or how the technological changes of
the industrial revolution shaped the American Civil War. Additionally, each
student will use the themes and variables to analyze three military events or
phenomena in independent research papers. No formula for interpreting warfare
is implied by this checklist, nor is the course premised on any school-
solution to historical questions. The sole purpose of studying the topic in
this way is to ensure that military history is not reduced to mere battle
studies (though there will be some of these). Students are free to substitute
their own schemes of analysis or add to the list as it is, so long as they do
not narrow the subject. The major objectives are **thinking** and breadth of
vision.

This class meets the Writing Requirement (WR).

**2\. READING:** Purchase the following books:

Carl Von Clausewitz, _On War_ , ed. Anatol Rapoport (New York: Penguin, 1982).
ISBN: 0140444270, $12.95

Arther Ferrill, _The Origins of War, From the Stone Age to Alexander the
Great_ , Revised ed. (Boulder: Westview Press, 1997). ISBN: 0813333024 $29.00

John Keegan, _The Face of Battle_ (New York: Penguin, 1983). ISBN: 0140048979
$14.95

John Keegan, _The Book of War: 25 Centuries of Great War Writing_ (New York :
Penguin, 2000) ISBN: 0140296557 $17.00

Geoffrey Parker, _Cambridge Illustrated History of Warfare_ (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000). ISBN 0-521-79431-5 $35.00

Richard A. Preston, Alex Roland, and Sydney Wise, _Men in Arms, A History of
Warfare & Its Interrelationships with Western Society_ 5th Ed. (Fort Worth :
Harcourt College Publishers, 1991). ISBN: 0030334284 $23.75

Other required reading may be handed out in class.

**3\. SCHEDULE**

_Date      Lesson     Title     Reading_

8/27     1     Introduction     None

8/29    2     Primitive Warfare     F, 9-63; P, 5-13

9/3     3     Ancient Warfare         F, 65-85, 91-147

9/5     4     Greek Warfare         P, 14-28; F, 149-223; BW, 15-25

9/10     5     Roman Warfare     P, 29-54; Ci, 32-61; BW, 25-40

9/12     6     Naval Warfare: Oars     P, 104-110; Ci (insets) 22-25, 42; BW,
12-15

9/17     7     Medieval Warfare     P, 55-68; Ci, 64-91; BW, 46-52

9/19     8     Agincourt                     K, 79-116; BW, 52-60

9/24     9     Breakdown of Feudal warfare     P, 69-85; Ci, 92-105; BW, 60-69

9/26     10     Emergence of the Nation         P, 86-103; Ci, 106-117

10/1     11     Limited Warfare             P, 116-132; Ci, 146-185; BW,
102-104

10/3     12     Naval Warfare II: Sails     P, 110-15, 133-44; Ci, 120-131,
208-213

10/8     13     American Revolution     P, 145-56; Ci, 186-190; BW, 105-112,
113-117

10/10     14     **MIDTERM EXAM**

_fall break_

10/17     15     French Rev. and Napoleon         P, 157-74; Ci, 190-208; BW,
137-169

10/22     16     Waterloo                         K, 117-203; BW, 172-183

10/24     17     Industrial Revolution             P, 175-208; Ci, 216-220

10/29    18     American Civil War             P, 209-26; Ci, 220-233; BW,
205-210

10/31     19     The Managerial Revolution     Ci, 233-241; Cl, all

11/5     20     World War I                 P, 227-58; Ci, 256- 296; BW,
252-261

11/7     21     The Somme                 K, 204-84; BW, 296- 303

11/12     22     Naval Warfare III: Steam         Ci, (insets) 282-283; BW,
366-372

11/14     23     World War II         P, 259-91; BW, 325-336, 404-409

11/19     24     The Cold War        P, 292-305; Ci, 340-42, 356-361

11/21     25     Nuclear War         P, 306-30; BW, 452-456

11/26     26     Conventional War         P, 331-58, Ci, 342-45, 361-63; BW,
464-67

12/3     27     Low Intensity Conflict and "Other!"     P, 359-92, Ci, 346-56;
BW, 457-464

12/5     28     Review

CL: Clausewitz                                     F: Ferrill

K: Keegan (Face of Battle)                   P: Preston, et.al.

Ci: Cambridge Illustrated (Parker)        BW: Book of War (Keegan)

All reading is to be completed before the class meeting

**4\. RESEARCH PAPERS** : Three research papers are required. In each one, use
the handout, "Themes and Variables in Military History," to evaluate the
relative military capabilities of two combatants or potential combatants. The
subjects, to be drawn from the following periods, are to be selected and
reported on by the following dates:

_Period                             Topic Due             Report Due_

15th Century (or earlier)     9/5                         9/19

19th Century                     10/3                         10/31

20th Century                     11/7                        11/26

Not all themes and variables will be equally applicable to all countries in
all epochs. For each paper, concentrate on the particular themes and variables
that are most significant in evaluating the relative military potential of the
countries you are studying, but be sure to at least consider each of them
before deciding whether or not to discuss them in your paper.

The first two papers should be 5-7 typed pages (1250-1800 words). The third
paper, of 7-10 typed pages (1800-2500 words), should, in addition to comparing
two twentieth-century adversaries, comment on how your three papers have
revealed changes or consistencies in the relative impact of the different
variables on military strength from the 15th century to the present. We will
discuss the methods you should use for writing these papers as the class
progresses.

**5\. EXAMS:** There will be two exams. The midterm will be done in class on
**October 10** , and will cover all the assigned reading and class discussion
to date. The final will be on **Friday, Dec. 13, at 2:30 to 5:00**. It will
cover all reading and class discussion; approximately 1/3 of the exam will
focus on the first half of the course; 2/3 on the second half.

**6\. GRADING:** The final grade for the course will be determined from the
following course work:

1st research paper 5%

2nd research paper 15%

3rd research paper 30%

mid-term 20%

final 30%

**7\. POLICIES:**

**Plagiarism:** Plagiarism is defined as the unacknowledged use of the words
or ideas of another person. The most obvious case of plagiarism is the use of
another's words in a word-for-word manner in your own work, without citing the
original author. It also includes, however, borrowing the framework of ideas
from another author (or another student), again, unless you acknowledge that
borrowing in your work. If you ever have any doubts then ask.  You are
responsible for understanding the university policy on plagiarism. If you have
doubts then ask. If I discover that you have plagiarized your work or cheated
on your exams you will receive a failing grade for the course and be subject
to University disciplinary action.

**Late policy:** All assignments are due at the beginning of class on the day
specified in the syllabus (unless other arrangements have been made). Do not
come late or skip class to finish an assignment. It will be counted late. More
specifically, any work turned in late, but on the same day, will be docked 1/3
of a letter grade. For each succeeding 12 hour period that it is not turned in
it will lose a full letter grade.

**Missed deadlines or exams:** If you know you will miss a test, inform me
before hand. If you legitimately miss a test, you may take a makeup. It is
your responsibility to contact me within six days, make an appointment for a
makeup, and keep that appointment. Makeup tests may have a different format,
at my option. Keep all returned tests until the end of the semester. As a
matter of uniformity, any missed assignment or test must be justified with
some kind of documentation. You are adults. You are obviously free to choose
when you need to miss class. That freedom does not extend to quiz days or days
when assignments are due. For that you need an excuse.

**Finding me:** I will be in my office on a regular basis from 2:30 to 3:30 on
Tues. and Thurs. I am in my office much more than that, and will also be
available after class for specific questions. If my office hours conflict with
your class schedule, please let me know and we can make an alternate
appointment.

**Reserve Clause:** Circumstance may require that I make changes to the
syllabus. Such changes will be announced as far in advance as possible.

**THEMES AND VARIABLES IN MILITARY HISTORY**

The following outline provides a checklist of factors to consider when
evaluating the relative strengths and prospects of two or more real or
potential military adversaries. Use the list in this order, which proceeds
from the general to the particular, from social milieu to the battlefield.

**1\. RULES OF THE GAME** : what to do and what not to do and how.

    a. Cultural traditions and customs (chivalry, pacifism, etc.)

    b. International law

        1\. jus ad bello

        2\. jus in bello

    c. Similarities and differences in societies and their norms

        1\. one set of rules for group members, another for outsiders

        2\. bad rules drive out good

**2\. POLITICS (CIVIL-MILITARY RELATIONS)**

    a. Nature of societies (political, economic, social)

    b. Place of the military within society

    c. Composition and organization of the military

    d. Relation of the military to the political system

**3\. SCALE (NUMBERS)**

    a. Population (total and military-eligible)

    b. Budget (total and military)

    c. Size of the military force (total and field armies)

    d. Area of the conflict (size of the battlefield: land, sea, air)

    e. Duration of battles and wars

    f. Casualties and losses (human and material)

**4\. TECHNOLOGY**

    a. Technological base of the country

    b. Military technology

        1\. Appropriateness

    c. Doctrine

**5\. GEOGRAPHY**

    a. Nature of borders and neighbors    

    b. Natural defenses

    c. Natural avenues of attack

    d. Nature and location of battlefield

    e. Distance

**6\. MORALE**

    a. Motivation (patriotism, money, religion, etc.)

    b. Military virtues (honor, loyalty, courage, discipline)

    c. Indoctrination and training

    d. Physical and emotional condition (fatigue, discontent, drunkeness, resentment, zeal, excitement)

    e. Hostile feelings

    f. Consciousness of danger

**7\. GENIUS**

    a. This ingredient can upset all others

**8\. PRINCIPLES OF WAR:** the variables manipulated by the military in
pursuit of victory; really principles of military operations.

    a. Economy of force (concentration)

    b. Surprise

    c. Mobility

    d. Command and communications

    e. Intelligence

    f. Flexibility (because of chance)

    g. The fog of war

    h. Friction

    i. Firepower

    j. Terrain

    k. Training

    l. Logistics

    m. Offense v. defense

    n. Interior v. exterior lines

    o. Base

    p. Armor

    q. Unity of command

  
  

