### HISTORY 774  
HISTORY OF AMERICAN LAW AND SOCIETY

(Professor Michael Les Benedict)



SUBJECT MATTER OF THE COURSE: The history of American law and legal
institutions, and their relationship to society, from colonial times to the
twentieth century.

GOALS OF THE COURSE: The purpose of this course is not only to impart
information about the history of American law. It is also designed to develop
the ability to analyze legal and historical arguments, to discriminate between
more important and less important information, and to research and report on
legal and historical subjects. This will be done through assignments and
classroom reports and discussions.

REQUIRED TEXTS (available at Longs Bookstore and Law School Bookstore, 150 Law
Building):

  1. Peter Hoffer, _Law and People in Colonial America_ (1992) 
  2. Kermit L. Hall, _The Magic Mirror_ (1989) 
  3. Michael Les Benedict (ed.), _Sources in the History of American Law and Society_ (photocopied reader) 
  4. Michael Les Benedict (ed.), _Readings in the History of American Law and Society_ (photocopied reader) 

STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES:

  1. Graduate students must be officially enrolled in the course by the end of the second full week of the quarter. History Department rules say that no requests to add a course can be approved after that time. 
  2. Regular class attendance and participation in discussions. 
  3. Completion of assigned readings before the day they are covered. 
  4. Completion of term papers and associated assignments, as noted below, on the day assigned unless other arrangements are made. The term paper must be turned in to receive credit for the course. 
  5. Completion of examinations, as noted below, on the days scheduled unless other arrangements are made. Examinations must be taken to receive credit for the course. 

TERM PAPER: Graduate students will prepare an paper of approximately 15-20
pages on a subject or the historiography of a subject having to do with the
history of legal institutions, the law, or law and society, or on an important
legal historian. They will inform me of their subject on January 29. Papers
will be due March 8. The paper must be typed on standard paper, double-spaced.

EXAMINATIONS: There will be a midterm examination on February 5, covering
material to February 2. The final examination will be held March and will be
comprehensive. Examinations will consist of both short-answer and essay
sections. The law-student examinations will be entirely essay and similar to
those taken in other law courses.

GRADING:

    
    
         Attendance                                         10%
         Participation and preliminary paper assignments    10%
         Midterm examination                                20%
         Term paper                                         25%
         Final examination                                  35%
    



SCHEDULE AND ASSIGNMENTS

WEEK OF JANUARY 1

Wed.: Introduction to the class for non-law students



WEEK OF JANUARY 8

Wed.: Introduction to the class: What is the law? How does it affect other
aspects of society? How is it affected by other aspects of society? What is
legal history?

Readings: Magic Mirror (Hall), introduction, 9-12; Benedict, Source Reader
#1-2

Fri.: Introduction for law students; The English Background: The Legal Systems
of England and the Struggle for the Supremacy of the Common Law

Readings: Hall, 9-12; Hoffer, 1-10; Benedict, Sources #3-7

NOTE: Law students are expected to have completed the readings for January 3
as well as those above.



WEEK OF JANUARY 15

Mon.: NO CLASS--MARTIN LUTHER KING DAY

Wed.. Sources of Authority and the Structure of Legal Institutions in the
American colonies

Readings: Hoffer, 10-46; Benedict, Sources #8-11

Fri: Community and Law in Early Colonial America

Readings: Benedict, Essays #1; Benedict, Sources #12-19



WEEK OF JANUARY 22

Mon.: Courts and Community in Early Colonial America

Readings: Benedict, Essays #2; Benedict, Sources #20-23

Wed.: The Anglicization and Practice of the Law in Colonial America

Readings: Hoffer, 47-70; Benedict, Sources #24-35

Fri: Law and Status in Colonial America

Readings: Hoffer, 70-95; Benedict, Sources #36-42



WEEK OF JANUARY 29

Mon.: Law and Status in Colonial America (cont.)

Readings: Benedict, Sources #43-54; Benedict, Essays #3

Wed.: Law and Liberty in the Revolutionary Era

Readings: Hoffer, 96-123; Benedict, Sources #55-60; U.S. Constitution, Article
VI; Benedict, Sources #61-62



WEEK OF FEBRUARY 5

Mon.: MIDTERM EXAMINATION

Wed.: Towards an American Law

Readings: Benedict, Sources #63-68

Fri.: Establishing a Commercial Federal Republic

Readings: Hall, 67-94; U.S. Constitution, Articles I, III, IV; Benedict,
Sources #69-76



WEEK OF FEBRUARY 12

Mon.: Legal Instrumentalism and the "Grand Style" of American Jurisprudence

Readings: Hall, 94-128; Benedict, Sources #77-88

Graduate and Law Student Reading: Benedict, Essays #4 and 5

Wed.: Lawyers and Law Reform

Readings: Benedict, Sources #89-98

Fri.: Responsible Individualism and the Rise of Contract

Readings: Benedict, Sources #99-106; Benedict, Essay #6



WEEK OF FEBRUARY 19

Mon.: Responsible Individualism the the Rise of Negligence

Readings: Benedict, Sources #107-113; Benedict, Essay #7

Wed.: Nineteenth-Century Criminal Law and Procedure

Readings: Hall, 168-88; Benedict, Sources #114-120; Benedict, Essay #8

Fri.: Women, Family, and the Law in Nineteenth-Century America

Readings: Hall, 150-67; Benedict, Sources #121-124; U.S. Constitution,
Amendments XIV and XV; Benedict, Sources #125-31; Benedict, Essay #9



WEEK OF FEBRUARY 26

Mon.: Slavery and Race

Graduate and Law Student Reading: Benedict, Essay #10

Readings: Hall, 129-49; Benedict, Sources #132-33; U.S. Constitution,
Amendments XIII-XV; Benedict, #134-39

Wed.: Legal Formalism, Law, and the Rise of the Industrial State

Readings: Benedict, Essays #11, 13; Hall, 189-210, 226-46; Benedict, Sources
#140-152; review #112-113 for formalism.

Fri.: Legal Formalism, Law, and the Rise of the Industrial State (cont.)

Readings: Benedict, Essays #12



WEEK OF MARCH 4

Mon.: Sociological Jurisprudence, Legal Realism, and the Regulatory State

Readings: Hall, 276-85; Benedict, Sources #153-162; Benedict, Essays #14 and
15

Wed.: Modern Society and the Socialization of Risk

Readings: Benedict, Sources #163-166; Spur Industries Inc. v. Del E. Webb
Development Co.--to be handed out; Benedict, Essay #16--to be handed out

Fri.: The Death of Personal Responsibility in Contract

Readings: "Contract into the Twentieth Century"--to be handed out; Benedict,
Sources #167-171

