### HISTORY 730  
STUDIES IN XX-CENTURY EUROPEAN CULTURE

(Professor Claudio Fogu)



**

Topical Outline** : Long confined to literary scholarship, the topic of
Modernism has finally attracted the interest of cultural and intellectual
historians. This seminar is designed to introduce graduate students to recent
literature focusing on 'Modernism' as a cultural phenomenon --rather than a
literary canon-- responding to European socio-political 'modernity' in the
first half of our century. Readings for the course will be divided in four
sections, addressing: 1) Questions of periodization, 2) Questions of
nationality, 3) Questions of politics, and 4) Questions of theory. In the
selection, emphasis will be given to texts that display advanced
methodological, and interdisciplinary characteristics.

**

Objectives and Prerequisites** : The seminar will offer graduate students the
opportunity of reading and discussing some of the fundamental texts required
for doing either a minor or a major field in European cultural history.
Previous enrollment in 522.02 (or comparable undergraduate course on XX-
Century European history) will be required. It will also constitute a pre-
requisite for all students seeking to do a research seminar (800 level) on
related topics.

**

Requirements** : Attendance of all seminars is required. Each student is
expected to make one oral presentation on a selected optional reading (30% of
final grade), and write an essay (15-20 pages) discussing the methodological,
historiographical, and theoretical questions raised within one of the four
approaches to Modernism outlined in the course (70% of final grade).



**

Readings**

_

Texts on sale at SBX (* = optional / oral presentations):

_

  1. Allan Megill, _Prophets of Extremity_ (selections) (1987) (*) 
  2. Martin Jay, _Downcast Eyes_ (1996) 
  3. Stephen Kern, _The Culture of Time and Space_ (1983) 
  4. Raymond Williams _The Politics of Modernism_ (1989) (*) 
  5. Thomas Harrison, _1910: The Emancipation of Dissonance_ (1996) (*) 
  6. Carl Schorske, _Fin-de-Siecle Vienna_ (1979) 
  7. Regina Gagnier, _Idylls of the Market Place: Oscar Wilde and the Victorian Public_ (1986) 
  8. Michael Tratner, _Modernism and Mass Politics: Joyce, Woolf, Eliot, Yeats_ (1995) (*) 
  9. Walter Adamson, _Avant-Garde Florence: From Modernism to Fascism_ (1993) 
  10. Jeffrey Herf, _Reactionary Modernism_ (1984) 
  11. Richard Golsen, _Fascism, Aesthetics, and Culture_ (1992) 
  12. Richard Wolin, _The Heidegger Controversy_ (1993) (*) 
  13. Peter Burger, _Theory of the Avant-Garde_ (1984) 
  14. Russell Berman, _Modern Culture and Critical Theory. Art, Politics, and the Legacy of the Frankfurt School_ (1989) 
  15. Andreas Huyssen, _After the Great Divide_ (1986) (*) 
  16. Andrew Hewitt, _Fascist Modernism_ (1990) (*) 
  17. Vivian Sobchack, ed., _The Persistence of History. Cinema, Television, and the Modern Event_ (1996) 
  18. Reader available at Cop-Ez. Bricker Hall: 
    * Marshal Berman, "Why Modernism still Matters," from _Modernity and Identity_ (1992) 
    * Robert Wohl, "The Generation of 1914 and Modernism," from _Modernism. Challenges and Perspectives_ (1986) 
    * Edward Timms, "Treason of the Intellectuals? Benda, Benn and Brecht," from _Visions and Blueprints_ (1988) 
    * Dorothy Ross, 'Modernism Reconsidered," from _Modernist Impulses in the Human Sciences. 1870-1930_ (1994) 
    * Peter Jelavich, "Popular Dimensions of Modernist Elite Culture: The Case of Theatre in Fin-de Siecle Munich" from _Modern European Intellectual History_ (1982) 
    * Herman Ramsden, "The Spanish 'Generation of 1898': 1. History of a Concept," from _Bulletin of the John Ryslands University of Manchester_ 56 (1973-4) 
    * Russell Berman, "Modernism, Fascism, and the Institution of Literature" from _Modernism. Challenges and Perspectives_ (1986) 
    * Helga Geyer Ryan, 'Walter Benjamin's Philosophy of History," from _Visions and Blueprints_ (1988) 
    * Hayden White, "The Burden of History," from _Tropics of Discourse_ (1978) 
    * "Historical Emplotment and the Problem of Truth," from _Probing the Limits of Representation_ , Saul Friedlander ed. (1992) 
    * Dominik Lacapra, "Rethinking Intellectual History and Reading Texts," from _Modern European Intellectual History: Reappraisals and New Perspectives_ (1982)  



**

I) QUESTIONS OF PERIODIZATION

**

WEEK 1: INTRODUCTION

WEEK 2: MODERNISM AS INTELLECTUAL PHENOMENON

Allan Megill, Prophets of Extrimity (1987) Martin Jay, Downcast Eyes (1996)

Reader:

Marshal Berman, "Why Modernism still Matters," from Modernity and Identity (
1992)

Robert Wohl, "The Generation of 1914 and Modernism," from Modernism.
Challenges and Perspectives (1986)

¡¤ Edward Timms, "Treason of the Intellectuals? Benda, Benn and Brecht," from
visions and Blueprints (1988)

WEEK 3: MODERNISM AS CULTURAL PHENOMENON

Stephen Kern, The Culture of Time and Space (1983)

Raymond Williams, The Politics of Modernism (1989)

Reader:

Dorothy Ross, "Modernism Reconsidered," from Modernist Impulses in the Human
Sciences. 1870-1930(1994)



**

II) QUESTIONS OF NATIONALITY

**

WEEK 4: GERMANIC WORLD

Thomas Harrison, 1910: The Emancipation of Dissonance (1996) Carl Schorske,
Fin de-Siecle l Vienna Reader: Peter Jelavich, "Popular Dimensions of
Modernist Elite Culture: The Case of Theatre in Fin-de Siecle Munich" from
Modern [European Intellectual History (1982)

WEEK 5: ANGLO-AMERICAN WORLD

Regina Gagnier, Idylls of the Market Place. Oscar Wilde and the Victorian
Public (1986) Michael Tratner, Modernism and Mass Politics. Joyce, Woolf,
Eliot, Yeats (1995)

WEEK 6: LATIN WORLD

Walter Adamson, Avant-Garde Florence. From Modernism to Fascism (1993) Reader:
Herman Ramsden, "The Spanish 'Generation of 1898': 1. History of a Concept,"
from Bullettin of the John Ryslands University of Manchester 56 (1973-4)



**

III) QUESTIONS OF POLITICS

**

WEEK 7: RIGHT-WING MODERNISM

Jeffrey Herf, Reactionary Modernism (1984)

Richard Golsen, Fascism. Aesthetics, and Culture (1992)

Richard Wolin, The Heidegger Controversy (1993)

Reader: Russell Berman, "Modernism, Fascism, and the Institution of
Literature," from Modernism. Challenges and Perspectives (1986)

WEEK 8: LEFT-WING MODERNISM Russell Berman, Modern Culture and Critical
Theory. Art, Politics, and the Legacy of the Frankfurt School (1989)



**

IV) QUESTIONS OF THEORY

**

WEEK 9: MODERNISM / AVANT-GARDE

Peter Burger, Theory of the Avant-Garde

Andreas Huyssen, After the Great Divide

Andrew Hewitt, Fascist modernism

WEEK 10: MODERNISM / HISTORY / THEORY

Vivian Sobchack ed., Persistence of History. History, Television, and the
Modern Event(1996)

Reader:

Helga Geyer Ryan, 'Walter Benjamin's Philosophy of History," from Visions and
Blueprints (1988)

Hayden White, "The Burden of History," from Tropics of Discourse (1978)

" , "Historical Emplotment and the Problem of Truth," from Probing the Limits
of Representation, Saul Friedlander ed. (1992)

Dominik Lacapra, "Rethinking Intellectual History and Reading Texts," from
Modern European Intellectual History. Reappraisals and New Perspectives (1982)

