### HISTORY 579.02  
AMERICAN CULTURAL AND INTELLECTUAL LIFE  
IN THE 20TH CENTURY

(Professor Steven Conn)



This course is intended to give students a working familiarity with the major
currents in American thought and culture from the end of the nineteenth
century to the end of the twentieth. We will begin with the flowering of
American Pragmatist philosophy and end with a consideration of our "post-
modern" condition.

Along the way, we will consider questions about the nature of truth, the
relationship between elite culture and popular culture, between art and
politics, and about how ideas take cultural form. Finally, we will ask whether
we can define an American cultural and intellectual tradition.

This course will assume a basic familiarity with twentieth century American
history. Students are strongly encouraged to have taken History 152, or to
have a solid understanding of American history, before enrolling in this
course, or else they should be prepared to do extensive additional reading.



REQUIREMENTS:

Class attendance is mandatory and expected. I will periodically take
attendance and absences will be noted. Class meets twice per week. One class
each week will be reserved for a lecture and the other class will be run as a
discussion seminar. Be advised: students who miss more than three (3)
discussion sessions without and excuse I believe will not pass this course.

Simply attending class, however, is not the same thing as participating in it.
Active participation is expected of all students. I define participation as:
coming to class having done all required work, contributing your thoughts,
questions, and observations, and listening to your colleagues as they share
theirs. Students who do not intend to participate in this way should find
another class.

The readings listed in the syllabus are not put there for decorative purposes.
All readings listed are required and they are to be completed in time for the
discussion session This course demands a great deal of reading and students
who don't like to read will surely be unhappy in this class.

You will write four (4) short papers for this class. Each paper will be 2-3pp
in length and will ask you to respond critically and analytically to a
question provided by me. These papers are to be typed, well-polished, well-
written, and carefully reasoned. Typos, misspellings, and grammatical errors
make me cranky-- avoid them and avoid making me cranky. You will have the
opportunity to re-write one of these papers during the course of the term. Due
dates for these papers are listed in the syllabus, and papers are due at the
beginning of class. Papers handed in late will not be graded (they will simply
be failed) unless you have made a previous arrangement with me.

The course will conclude with a take-home final. The question will be given
out in the last week of class, and will ask students to synthesize information
and ideas from lectures, readings, and discussion into a coherent essay of
8-10 pages.

Finally, I reserve the right to administer unannounced quizzes and to make
additional assignments as the mood strikes me. These will be figured as part
of the class participation grade.

For graduate students there will be an additional, secondary reading
assignment made each week. The titles will be arranged with the professor. The
short papers will take the form of critical review essays and the final
project will be a substantial (20 pgs) historiographic essay. Finally, each
graduate student will be called on once during the term to lead class
discussion.

Evaluation in this course will be based on the following formula: Papers, 10%
each (40%); class participation, 25%; final, 35%.



READINGS:

The following texts will be required for this course. They are available at
SBX and are on reserve at the Undergraduate Library in Sullivant Hall.

  1. _Puzzled America_ , Sherwood Anderson 
  2. _Twenty Years at Hull House_ , Jane Addams 
  3. _Main Street_ , Sinclair Lewis 
  4. _On the Road_ , Jack Kerouac 
  5. _The Feminine Mystique_ , Betty Friedan 
  6. _The Twilight of Common Dreams_ , Todd Gitlin 
  7. In addition, there is a xeroxed packet of readings, also required for the course, available at Cop-Ez in Bricker Hall. This packet is not on reserve.



CLASS SCHEDULE:

Week 1: Introductions, Definitions, Review of the Darwinian Revolution

Week 2: Pragmatism and the Rise of American Philosophy     Read: Essays by
William James (Cop-Ez Packet)     *FIRST PAPER DUE

Week 3: Urban Culture as American Culture     Read: Lewis Mumford and Frank
Lloyd Wright (Cop-Ez Packet) NOTE: YOU SHOULD PROBABLY BEGIN READING MAIN
STREET THIS WEEK -- IT IS A LONG BOOK AND YOU WON'T BE ABLE TO READ IT ALL IN
ONE WEEK

Week 4: Progressivism as a Philosophy     Read: Jane Addams, _Twenty Years at
Hull House_ ; skip chapts. 4, 9, 15, 17

Week 5: Mass Culture as American Culture     Read: Sinclair Lewis, _Main
Street_      *SECOND PAPER DUE

Week 6: Culture in Crisis: The 1930s     Read: Sherwood Anderson, _Puzzled
America_

Week 7: Suburban Culture as American Culture: The Post-War Era     Read: Jack
Kerouac, _On the Road_      *THIRD PAPER DUE

Week 8: Assault on Liberalism     Read: Tom Hayden, "The Port Huron Statement"
(Cop-Ez Packet)

Week 9: Modern Feminism     Readings: Betty Friedan, _The Feminine Mystique_
*FOURTH PAPER DUE

Week 10: The End of the World as WE Knew It: Post-Modernism     Read: Todd
Gitlin, _The Twilight of Common Dreams_

