**![Syllabus](_derived/syllabus.htm_cmp_boldstri010_bnr.gif)**  
[![Home](_derived/home_cmp_boldstri010_hbtn.gif)](index.htm)
![Syllabus](_derived/syllabus.htm_cmp_boldstri010_hbtn_p.gif)
[![Schedule](_derived/schedule.htm_cmp_boldstri010_hbtn.gif)](schedule.htm)
[![Student Data Sheet](_derived/data.htm_cmp_boldstri010_hbtn.gif)](data.htm)
[![Links](_derived/links.htm_cmp_boldstri010_hbtn.gif)](links.htm) [![Term
Projects](_derived/projects.htm_cmp_boldstri010_hbtn.gif)](projects.htm)
[![Student Projects
2000](_derived/projects2000.htm_cmp_boldstri010_hbtn.gif)](projects2000.htm)

  
  
---  
**



**

## **SYLLABUS

#  Introduction to Public History

**

### History 705 Section 0101  
Fall, 2000  
_Monday 7:00-9:30 P.M.  
Administration Building # 729  
_ UMBC _University of Maryland Baltimore County  
_

**[ Dr. Joseph N.
Tatarewicz](http://www.gl.umbc.edu/~tatarewi/Welcome/index.htm)  
** Associate Professor  
Director, Public History Track  
Department of History  
_Phone: (410) 455-2312 (Messages)  
(410) 455-2306 (Direct)  
e-mail: TATAREWICZ@UMBC.EDU

_



**

Catalog Description**: Survey of the practice of history in public venues,
including government agencies, historical societies, archives, museums,
businesses, and various professional organizations. Intended to provide
students with a broad survey of such historical practice and the tools to
explore chosen specialties in depth, the course addresses intellectual as well
as practical issues.

**

Extended Description**: This course looks at history outside the university,
including history in government agencies, historical societies, businesses,
and professional organizations. As the official course description suggests,
we shall look at the broad range of historical activities that take place
outside academe. The course is intended to provide students with a broad
survey of such historical practice, and the tools to explore chosen
specialties in depth. In addition, the course is equally concerned with
intellectual as well as practical issues.

Public history employs the standard historiographic techniques, and embraces
the traditional values of historical scholarship and communication. But
because the audiences and contexts of public history are so diverse, special
research and communication techniques are often required. We shall explore the
challenges and quandaries that often arise when traditional historical
practice is stretched to operate in the public context. As public history has
sought to create its own separate identity in the past decade or so,
thoughtful commentators from a wide range of positions have grappled with
serious intellectual and professional issues. We shall read and discuss some
of this literature.

On the practical side, public historians often discover that they need to
develop special research and communication skills in order to practice in
their particular specialty. There are many specialized bibliographies,
manuals, groups and associations, newsletters and journals, catalogs, etc.
oriented toward one or another of the public history specialties. One aim of
the course is that the students, at the end, will have a good feel for what a
practitioner does in each of the specialties and how to continue education in
those areas. All students will be expected to work through the entire menu to
sample the many varieties; each student will be encouraged to investigate a
particular area that interests him or her in some depth. All students will be
expected to report to the group during class on what they have learned in
their chosen special area.



_

### Texts:

_  The following books and other materials are required for the course and are
on sale at the University Bookstore:

James B. Gardner and Peter S. LaPaglia, Eds. _Public History: Essays from the
Field_. Public history series. Malabar, Fla.: Krieger, 1999.

Mike Wallace, _Mickey Mouse History: And Other Essays in American Memory_.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1996.

Leffler, Phyllis K. _Public History Readings_. Public history series. Malabar,
Fla.: Krieger, 1991. (Recommended)

_

### Reserve Readings:_  

A variety of materials will be on reserve in the Department of History Lounge.
Please see the individual dates on the schedule for assignments. Journal
articles are available in the UMBC Library Serials department, or if
unavailable there will be distributed in class ahead of time. In addition, a
loose-leaf "History 705 White Binder" will be in the History Department
Lounge, containing a variety of ephemera.

_

### Electronic Mail, Internet:

_

You will find an electronic version of this syllabus with additional resources
at **<http://gl.umbc.edu/~tatarewi/h705>.**    This History 705 Home Page can
also be found on the main UMBC World Wide Web site, under "Student & Faculty
Resources," "UMBC Course Materials online via WWW," "History."

_

### Preparing for Class:

_ Class sessions will consist of a mixture of instructor's lecture, class
discussion, and presentations by various students in the class. Everyone
should read the assigned readings with sufficient care to participate in a
serious discussion during class. Each week instructions will be given
concerning areas of emphasis for the following week's discussion to aid you in
approaching the reading assignments. Some of the reading assignments might
seem lengthy, but they sometimes include rather light reading and bibliography
in the page ranges. You should use your judgment and interests to decide what
to skim and what to read carefully. The aim is to bring substantial and
relevant issues to the discussions and to your own work. Information and
reading overload is a fact of our professional lives, and developing coping
skills and strategic approaches is one of the instructional objectives of this
course.

_

Office Hours:_ MWF 11:00-1:00 and M 6:00 - 7:00 pm in Administration Building
# 702, and by appointment. You can call me during office hours at 455-2036.

_

Grades:_ Grades will be based on a combination of class participation, written
work, and class presentations on special topics. There will be no traditional
"exams", as such. All students in the class will be required to: (a) write
short papers on specific topics; (b) prepare an assigned set of readings for
oral presentation in class; (c) prepare some public history product typically
required in an area in which she or he is particularly interested--this could
be a proposal for funding, an exhibit planning document, an archival
collection assessment, etc. Specifics will be discussed in class, and are
detailed below.

**

### _Assignments and Grading_** **_Details:_

** _**

Short Paper #1

**_

Read Peter Novick, _That Noble Dream_ , pp. 512-21, and the rejoinders to
Novick by public historians in _The Public Historian_ [ **Otis L. Graham, et
al., "'The Ideal of Objectivity' and the Profession of History,"** vol. 13
**No. 2** (Spring 1991): 9-23]. Using these citations, as well as others on
the subject, Identify the chief issues and analyze the rhetoric. Your paper
should answer the following questions: (a) What is the most desirable
relationship of public to academic history? (b) How do various partisans view
the relationship as it actually exists? (c) What is being said _sotto voce_ in
all this--i.e., comment on the rhetorical code-words and make the issues of
prestige and value explicit.   Length 5-6 pp. + notes.

_**

Short Paper #2

**_

Read Karamanski, Ed., _Ethics and Public History_. Identify the most pressing
ethical issues in one particular public history context. Your paper should
include the following sub-parts: (a) chief ethical issues; (b) way in which
these issues are addressed via practices, mechanisms, or codes; (c) find an
extant case in which such codes had to operate (review the literature for one
that has been discussed or locate a practitioner and interview them on how the
codes apply in the  "real world").  Length 5-6 pp + notes.

_**

Class Presentation

**_

One session (approx. 30-min) presenting and leading discussion of one
selection of _Public History Readings_ , as explained in class.

_**

Term Project

**_

Creation of one public history product in chosen area, as explained below and
in class.

###  _Grading Basis_

|

Short Paper #1  

|

15  
  
---|---  
  
Short Paper #2  

|

15  
  
Class Presentation  

|

20  
  
Class Participation General  

|

15  
  
Term Project  

|

35  
  
TOTAL  

|

100  
  


![](_themes/boldstri/abstrrul.gif)



