##

## ![](images/barnone.gif)

## _17.507 / 17.508 Syllabus (2002)_

##  

[_Home/Contact_](index.html) \- [_Syllabus_](syllabus.html) \- [_Readings by
Week_](readings.html) \- [_Useful Links_](weblinks.html) \- [_Examples of Good
Work_](papers.html) \- [_Class e-mail List_](classlist.html) \- [_Syllabus and
Calendar in PDF Format_](17.508%20syllabus%202002--final.pdf)

Home/Contact Syllabus Readings by Week Useful Links Examples of Good Work
Class e-mail List Syllabus and Calendar in PDF Format

##  

#####

##### WHY YOU SHOULD TAKE THIS COURSE:

> Coups, civil wars, and revolutions and peaceful transitions are the "real
stuff" of political science. They show us why politics matters, and they
highlight the consequences of political choices in times of institutional
crisis. This course will help you understand why democracies emerge and why
they die, from ancient times to the recent wave of democratization in Southern
Europe, Eastern Europe, and the developing world.

##### WHAT THIS COURSE IS ABOUT:

> Few things are more dramatic than the collapse of a political system,
whether through violent conflict or the peaceful negotiation of new political
institutions. Explaining why regimes break down, why new ones emerge, and how
these new regimes are consolidated are among the most important questions in
political science. Not surprisingly, regime change has obsessed scholars for
centuries, from Aristotle to Machiavelli to Marx to current theorists of
democratization.

>

> You will review several broad explanations for regime change before turning
to more detailed examination of some of history's most famous and
theoretically interesting political transitions: the collapse of the Weimar
Republic in Germany; democratic breakdown, the consolidation of military
dictatorship, and re-democratization in Chile; the breakdown of British
colonial rule in the Massachussets Bay Colony; and protracted political
transition in Mexico. There will be shorter discussions of democratization in
Spain,South Africa, and South Korea; as well as democratic collapse in Brazil,
Austria, and Italy..

>

> **Please note that there are two numbers for this class, 17.508 and
17.507.** Only the first of these, 17.508, is listed in the MIT course guide.
Graduate students and undergraduate concentrators should register under
17.508. Undergraduates who need to fulfill distributional requirements should
register under 17.507.

##### READINGS:

> Readings are assigned for each week of class, **_including for the first
week (February 11)._** Weekly reading requirements are different for graduate
students and undergraduates. Undergraduates are expected to read approximately
100 pages per week, which will focus on the central theoretical issues or case
studies for that week. These readings should take you about three to four
hours, depending on how fast you read.

>

> Graduate students are expected to read an **additional** 100-125 pages that
cover additional cases or expand on theoretically challenging issues raised by
the principal case. For instance, undergraduate readings on the rise of
fascism in Europe examine the collapse of the Weimar Republic in Germany.
Additional graduate readings in that week examine the rise of fascism in
Italy, as well as the case of Austria (where fascist and Nazi parties failed
to take power). My expectation is that graduate students should be able to
complete all the readings for a typical week in about ten hours.

>

> All readings will be placed on reserve in Dewey library (Building E53), as
will copies of the following books:

  * Arturo Valenzuela, _The Breakdown of Democratic Regimes: Chile_ (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978).
  * Mary Helen Spooner, _Soldiers in a Narrow Land: The Pinochet Regime in Chile_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1994).
  * Nathaniel Davis, _The Last Two Years of Salvador Allende_ (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1985).
  * Samuel P. Huntington, _Political Order in Changing Societies_ (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1968).
  * Samuel P. Huntington, _The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century_ (Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma, 1991). 

Graduate students should consider purchasing these books, if they do not
already own them. All students should consider purchasing at least the first
two, as we will read virtually all of them.

***** Please note that there are readings due the first week of class. *****

##### WRITTEN REQUIREMENTS:

> You have two options: (1) one long paper of approximately 25 pages **_OR_**
(2) five short papers of approximately 4-5 pages each. **There will be no
final exam.**

>

> **1.** _ **Long paper:**_ Pick an instance of regime change (or failed
regime change) not covered in the course, and analyze it in detail. Your topic
may be a military coup, revolution, civil war, peaceful transition to
democracy, or some other incident. It may also be a period of political crisis
in which regime change did _not_ occur--e.g., a failed coup attempt. It can be
very specific (e.g., the suppression of the pro-democracy movement in China in
1989) or reasonably broad (e.g., the breakdown of democracy in Brazil in
1964). In either case, your paper must draw on at least some primary sources
(newspaper articles, government documents, or interviews), as well as on
secondary sources.

>

> In analyzing your case, you should pay special attention to four questions.
First, what happened in the case you are studying? The more narrow you focus,
the more specific your paper should be - for instance, if you were analyzing
the failure of the democracy movement in China, you should report details like
which military units were deployed during the Tiananmen Square massacre,
where, and when.

>

> Second, what larger, structural factors played a role in the event you are
analyzing? This portion of your paper should include a discussion of the
effects of class structure, ethnic cleavages, political culture, and similar
background conditions. For instance, if you were studying the Brazilian
military coup of 1964, you would mention factors like extreme socio-economic
inequality, low levels of education, a history of military participation in
government, and similar issues.

>

> Third, what were the short-term triggers for the event you chose to analyze?
Common factors include the state of the economy, civil-military disagreements,
incompetent or polarizing leadership, and similar variables. In the Brazilian
coup, for example, you would presumably discuss the policies of President
Goulart, leftist mobilization, falling living standards, and rising inflation.

>

> Fourth, is the incident you analyzed better explained by structural or
short-term factors? What realistic options did leaders have? Were specific
mistakes made that fundamentally changed the course of events? Or was the
event you describe basically destined to occur (though not necessarily exactly
when it did?

>

> If you choose to write a long paper, you must come up with a list of
potential topics by February 20. These topics should be in the form of
testable propositions or hypotheses, rather than simply vague expressions of
interest. By February 26, you must turn one of these topics into a proposal
that includes a clear statement of the question you seek to address (including
a clearly delineated time frame) and a list of sources to be consulted. By
March 19, you must submit a two-page overview of your case that should reflect
your overall conclusions. (In other words, it should reflect the fact that you
have already done virtually all of the descriptive reading for your case, and
a chunk of the theoretical reading.) By March 26, you must submit a 5-10 page
description of the incident you have chosen to analyze - that is, what
happened, when, etc. By April 16 (a week in which class will not meet), you
must submit a second installment of 5-10 pages, summarizing the theoretical
conclusions of your paper. By April 30, you must submit a complete draft of
your paper. This version should be polished and free of grammatical or
stylistic errors. I will return this draft to you by the following week, and
you will then have an additional week before the end of the semester to revise
your paper based on my comments. The final version is due on May 14 in class,
during which you will be expected to make a 10 minute presentation of you
findings. **Please note that each of your submissions will be graded.**

>

> **[Topics for the research paper.](topics.htm)**

>

> **2. _Short papers:_** Short papers should be 1,000-1,200 words and should
address some of the required readings from the week in a coherent way. They
should _not_ be composites of separate critiques of the readings. Rather, they
should develop a coherent argument regarding the topic of the week, support
that argument with evidence from the readings, and address potential counter-
arguments. As a rule of thumb, you should leave at least eight hours to write
a good short paper, in addition to the time you spend on the readings.

>

> **Short papers are due by 4 p.m. on the Sunday before class to my mailbox in
the political science department (Building E53, fourth floor). They may also
be emailed to me as a Microsoft Word attachment but must be received by 4
p.m.** I will then print them out and grade them. I'd like to practice blind
grading, so please don't include a title page or put your name in the footer.
Also, at the risk of stifling self-expression and generally sounding like a
pain, I ask that all essays and short papers be double-spaced and submitted in
Times font. (Otherwise I learn people's fonts after the first paper, which
defeats the purpose of blind grading.)

>

> Finally, if you choose to write short papers, you must space them out to
some degree over the course of the semester. **Unless you clear it with me
ahead of time, you will be expected to write at least two papers in the first
six weeks of the class and at least two in the last six weeks.**

##### ORAL REQUIREMENTS:

> Oral requirements consist of regular class participation and one or two
class presentations (depending on enrollment).

>

> **1. _Class participation:_** Students are expected to participate actively
and intelligently in class discussions. As a rule of thumb, you should plan to
spend about an hour or two going over your notes from the readings and
preparing for class each week, after you have completed the readings.

>

> After each class, I will review the discussion and assign all students a
letter grade. Please notify me at the beginning of the class if, for whatever
reason, you are unprepared to participate in class discussion that day. Also,
if you must miss a class, please let me know in advance. More than one
unexcused absence or "unprepared" will count against your class participation
grade.

>

> **2. _Presentation(s):_** Each class will begin with a brief (5-15 minute)
presentation discussing and critiquing the readings. You should choose a week
-- or, in the case of enrollment under twelve people, two weeks -- for your
presentation. Bear in mind that the goal of your presentation is to refresh
people's memories about the readings, to highlight the key areas of
disagreement, and to stimulate class discussion; you should not feel compelled
to mechanically summarize every article. As a rule of thumb, you should plan
to spend an extra hour preparing for class on the day of your presentation(s).

##### OTHER REQUIREMENTS:

> Students are expected to complete a handful of small assignments over the
course of the semester. For the second week of the semester, for instance,
students must register to vote. (Students who decline to register or who live
abroad and thus cannot register may instead submit a 100-word statement on why
politics interests them or is relevant to their life.) As part of the fifth
week of the course (on the breakdown of British rule in the Massachussets Bay
Colony), students are expected to walk the "Freedom Trail" in downtown Boston.
In several weeks, readings are supplemented by popular films; in others,
students are expected to find and read at least one newspaper article dealing
with the current political situation in the countries under study (Chile,
Korea, and Mexico). These assignments should take you approximately an hour or
two for the weeks that they are due.

##### OVERALL WORKLOAD:

> Combining the readings, class preparation, class presentation(s), small
assignments, written work, and actual time in class, **undergraduates should
plan to devote approximately eight hours per week to the class on average,
over a thirteen week semester. Graduate students should plan to devote
approximately twelve hours per week.**

##### GRADING:

> Twenty-five percent (25%) of your grade will be based on class
participation, including your presentation(s). Each presentation grade will
count as the equivalent of six sessions of regular class participation. The
other 75% of your grade will be based on your written work - i.e., either one
long paper or five short papers. Short papers will all count equally (15%
each); if you are feeling wildly ambitious and want to write more than the
requisite number of papers, your best five papers will be counted.

>

> Components of the long paper will be graded as follows: list of potential
topics (5%), refined topic and bibliography (10%), two-page introduction
(10%), first installment (10%), second installment (10%), completed paper
(10%), revised paper (10%), and presentation of findings in class (10%).

>

> Grading standards for written work are different for graduate students and
undergraduates. A good undergraduate research paper, for instance, should
present a solid description of a particular case and a compelling explanation
for why things turned out the way they did. A good graduate research paper
should do these same things, but it should also situate your case in the
context of broader scholarly debates on regime change, and it should
demonstrate why your case is theoretically relevant to those debates. In other
words, undergraduate research papers should explain _trend_ (that is, why
things turned out the way they did); graduate research papers should explain
_variation_ (that is, why things turned out one way in certain countries and
differently in others). Put differently, a good undergraduate paper should
tell me something _new_ ; a good graduate paper should tell me something that
is both new and theoretically _interesting_.

##### _KEY DEADLINES:_

##### **FEBRUARY 11:** ** _READINGS WILL BE DISCUSSED IN CLASS._**

##### **FEBRUARY 20:** **THOSE WRITING** A LONG PAPER ******MUST SUBMIT A LIST
OF POTENTIAL PAPER TOPICS.**

##### **MARCH 1** **:** **THOSE WRITING** A LONG PAPER **MUST SUBMIT A ONE
PARAGRAPH SUMMARY OF THEIR TOPIC AND AN INITIAL BIBLIOGRAPHY (~20 SOURCES).**

##### **MARCH 15:** **THOSE WRITING A LONG PAPER MUST SUBMIT A TWO PAGE
INTRODUCTION TO THEIR PAPER, PLUS A 5-10 PAGE SUMMARY OF WHAT HAPPENED IN
THEIR CASE.**

##### **APRIL 5:** **THOSE WRITING A LONG PAPER MUST SUBMIT A 5-10 PAGE
THEORETICAL DISCUSSION OF THEIR CASE.**

##### **APRIL 19:** **THOSE WRITING A LONG PAPER MUST SUBMIT A** COMPLETED
DRAFT OF THEIR PAPER.

##### MAY 8: THOSE WRITING A LONG PAPER MUST SUBMIT THEIR COMPLETED FINAL
PAPER, AND MUST EMAIL A COPY TO ALL STUDENTS IN THE CLASS.

##### **MAY 13:** **CLASS PRESENTATIONS ON PAPER TOPIC**  

##### **MAY 24:** **THOSE WRITING A LONG PAPER MAY SUBMIT** A REWRITE.  
  
---  
  
![](images/barnone.gif)

Back to Top

