* * *

**[[Home](/amlab/)] [[Resources](/amlab/resources.html)]
[[Tools](/amlab/tools.html)] [[Lecture Outlines](/amlab/lectures/)]
[[Assignments](/amlab/assignments.html)] [[Discussion](/amlab/amlab-
password/discussion/)] [[Announcements](/amlab/amlab-password/announcements/)]
[[Readings](/amlab/amlab-password/readings/)] **

* * *  
  
---  
  
![](images/title.gif)

American Labor in the Twentieth Century

16A:142

Fall, 2001



Instructor:

Professor Shelton Stromquist

162 Schaeffer Hall

[shelton-stromquist@uiowa.edu](mailto:shelton-stromquist@uiowa.edu)

335-2301

Office Hours: T,Th 12:30-1:30 pm; W 1:30-2:30 pm.



This course examines the history of American workers in the twentieth century.
We consider, among other things, the impact of changes in work and the
organization of industry and the service economy on the lives and livelihoods
of workers. We also explore changes in workers' culture, organized activity,
and politics. Of particular interest is the evolving race, gender and ethnic
composition of the American working class. The structural and cultural changes
in working-class life induced by war and depression, and the position of
American workers in a global economy also figure prominently.





**_Required Books_** (all are available for purchase at **Prairie Lights
Bookstore** )



Eileen Boris and Nelson Lichtenstein, _Major Problems in the History of
American Workers_

Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, _Rebel Girl_

Shelton Stromquist, _Solidarity and Survival: An Oral History of Iowa Labor in
the Twentieth Century_

Michael Honey, _Southern Labor and Black Civil Rights: Organizing Memphis
Workers_

Cheri Register, _Packinghouse Daughter_

Deborah Fink, _Cutting into the Meatpacking Line_



In addition, a few short readings will be available on reserve in the main
library (RBR).



The required reading for the course averages 115 pp. per week.

# _Course Requirements_



## Undergraduates

1) **Attendance and participation.** Regular attendance and participation in
class discussions is required. Students who fail to attend class on a regular
basis will be penalized. Class participation, debates, and quizzes will
comprise 15% of students' final grade.



2) **First Paper**. Students will write a 5-6 page paper on labor radicalism
in the early twentieth century using Elizabeth Gurley Flynn's autobiography,
_Rebel Girl._ (Due September 25; 15% of grade.)



3) **Oral history project.** **__Phase I__ :** Students will be required to
select three interviews of workers in a particular community or trade from the
Iowa Labor History Oral Project (ILHOP) and write 2-3 pp. analytical summaries
and critiques of _each_. (DUE: October 11) **__Phase II__** : Using those
interviews and other research that may be necessary, students will **either**
conduct and tape an interview with an Iowa worker and produce a typed,
corrected transcript and commentary, **or** write an analytical paper on some
aspect of Iowa labor history for which the ILHOP interviews provide
substantial evidence. (DUE: December 11: 8-10 pp.; 30% of grade.)



4) **Exams. ** A midterm exam (October 18; 15% of grade) and a final (25%) are
scheduled.



## Graduate Students

The course requirements for graduate students are different from those for
undergraduates.

1) **A historiographical paper** on a significant topic in twentieth-century
labor history is due on October 18. (8-10 pp.; 20%)

2) **Two book reviews** due on October 2 and November 1. The books chosen may
also figure into your historiographical or research paper.(3-4 pp.; 10% each).

3) **A final paper** is required based on use of secondary and some primary
sources. The topic will be chosen in consultation with me. Proposal and
bibliography due: October 9; paper due: December 11. (15 pp.; 40%)

4) **A take-home final exam** will be based on the required reading for the
course. The question will be distributed on Friday, December 13 in class;
written essay is due by noon, Monday, December 17. No more than three hours of
writing time; open book. (20%)



## Organizational Matters

Class meetings are organized around lectures and discussion. I will make some
effort to integrate discussion into the presentation of lecture material, but
some class sessions will be largely lecture and some primarily discussion. The
success of such discussions will depend on whether students have read the
required material. I expect all students to keep up with the reading
assignments and to come to class prepared to discuss them.



Regular class attendance and close attention to the required readings,
lectures and films, as well as participation in class discussions, will have a
direct bearing on how well students do in this course. Since lectures do not
duplicate the material covered in the readings, I assume that all students
will have complete and detailed notes for all class sessions. For each
assignment you will be given a letter and a percentage grade: A 92-100%, A-
90-91%, B+ 88-89%, B 82-87%, B- 80-81%, C+ 78-79%, C 72-77%, C- 70-71%, D+
68-69%, D 62-67%, D- 60-61%, F below 60%.



Students with disabilities should make an appointment to see me at the
beginning of the semester to discuss whatever accommodations may be needed.



If you must miss class because of illness, please inform me in advance. Email
is fine: [shelton-stromquist@uiowa.edu](mailto:shelton-stromquist@uiowa.edu)



Be certain to keep copies of all work submitted and all graded work received,
at least until final grades have been awarded. THIS IS YOUR RESPONSIBILITY.



You should feel free to raise any concerns about the conduct of this class
with me or with the chair of the History Department: Kenneth Cmiel, 335-2303
([kenneth-cmiel@uiowa.edu)](mailto:kenneth-cmiel@uiowa.edu\))..



Plagiarism will be severely punished. If you have questions about how to use
and appropriately cite material from other sources, see me. You may also
consult the "Tools" page of the course web site for references to proper
citation methods.







**_Course Web Site:_**

This course has a **web site** : <http://twist.lib.uiowa.edu/amlab/>
consisting of several features, some of which will require a password (to be
distributed only to class members.) If you require instruction about how to
access the web site or require other assistance, please contact me. The web
site consists of:

\-- _Syllabus page_. This provides a readily available copy of the syllabus
and other handouts regarding assignments, exams, etc.

\-- _Readings page_. This page is _password protected_.

\-- _Tools page_. Here you will find a guide with links to a variety of
bibliographical and web-based library tools.

\-- _Resources page_. On this page you will find links to a wide variety of
web sites and other information sources about labor history. This page may
expand significantly as the semester unfolds.

\-- _Announcements page_. This is a _password protected_ place for
announcements pertaining to the course, assignments, deadlines, or other
events that may be relevant to the subject matter of the course.

\-- _Discussion page_. This _password protected_ page offers us the
opportunity to carry on discussion of questions or issues raised in class.
THIS IS NOT AN ALTERNATIVE TO IN-CLASS PARTICIPATION but simply a way of
expanding those discussions.



**IMPORTANT** : I will expect each class member to visit the **discussion page
and the announcements page** sometime before **every** class session and be
familiar with any questions raised and responses offered. From time to time I
will post questions on the discussion page pertaining to in-class discussion
of the assigned reading or a forthcoming assignment. Use of the discussion
page (but not overuse) will figure into a student's class participation grade.
I expect all communications to be constructive and thoughtful.

**_  
_**

## Class Schedule and Reading Assignments



August 28: Introduction and Organization



August 30: Looking Backward: Industrialization in America



Boris & Lichtenstein (B&L): 2-32





September 4: The Formation of a Working Class



B&L:Documents: 85-95, 230-235

QUIZ and discussion



September 6: A "Second Industrial Revolution"



B & L:Documents: 172-176, 319-323

Essays: 284-297, 333-360



September 11: Making a "new" working class



B & L: Essays: 191-200, 200-214

Flynn, _Rebel Girl_ , 21-60

Stromquist, _Solidarity and Survival_ , XI-XII, 2-49



# September 13: Syndicalists, socialists, and trade unionists



Flynn, _Rebel Girl,_ 61-126

B & L,Documents: 234-239

Essays: 250-274



September 18: Labor, Politics and the State in the Progressive Era



Flynn, _Rebel Girl_ , 127-216

B & L, Documents: 410-415



September 20: Overview of the ILHOP Collection: Mary Bennett



State Historical Society of Iowa

401 S. Gilbert





  

September 25: A war for industrial democracy?



Flynn, _Rebel Girl_ , 217-252



Film: "The Killing Floor"

UNDERGRADS: FIRST PAPER DUE

# September 27: The aftermath of war and the American Plan



Flynn, _Rebel Girl_ , 252-335

Finish: "The Killing Floor"



October 2: Class and Culture in the 1920s



Lizabeth Cohen, "Encountering Mass Culture at the Grassroots: the

Experience of Chicago Workers in the 1920s," _American Quarterly_ ,

1989, 41:1, 6-33. (RBR)



Stromquist, 51-69



Debate: The rise of mass consumption in the 1920s eroded working-class

cultural autonomy.

** **

** ** GRADS: 1ST BOOK REVIEW DUE



October 4: Economic collapse and the crisis of welfare capitalism



Honey, _Southern Labor and Black Civil Rights_ , 1-64

Stromquist, 69-90

October 9: The New Deal, the NRA, and the revolt of 1934



Honey, 67-92

Stromquist, 90-111



Film: "The Uprising of 1934"



GRADS: PROPOSAL AND BIBLIOGRAPHY FOR FINAL PAPER



  

October 11: The Rebirth of Industrial Unionism



Honey, 93-144

Stromquist, 111-122

B & L, Documents: 362-9, 416-423



Finish: "The Uprising of 1934"



UNDERGRADS: SUMMARIES OF ILHOP INTERVIEWS DUE



October 16: How radical were the 1930s?



B & L, Documents: 369-74

Essays: 375-408

Debate: The 1930s witnessed a radical restructuring of American society.



October 18: MIDTERM (UNDERGRADS)



GRADS: HISTORIOGRAPHICAL PAPER DUE



October 23: Labor and the state revisited



Honey, 145-173

B & L, Essays: 428-460



October 25: Workers and the war



Honey, 177-213

Stromquist, 123-147

B & L, Documents: 464-467, 471-74



October 30: Reaping the postwar whirlwind



Honey, 214-244

Stromquist, 149-186

B & L, Essays: 475-495



Film: "Walter Reuther"



  

November 1: Labor, the Cold War, and the crisis of New Deal Liberalism



B & L, Documents: 468-71, 497-503

Essays: 510-539

Honey, 245-291



Finish: "Walter Reuther"



GRADS: 2ND BOOK REVIEW DUE



November 6: The roots of institutional crisis: labor in the 1950s and 1960s



Stromquist, 187-213

B & L, Documents: 423-427, 503-510



November 8: A new working class?



Register, _Packinghouse Daughter_ , 5-71

Stromquist, 215-259



November 13: Working class culture in a "mass society"



Register, 75-131



November 15: Constructing a new solidarity: race and gender



Stromquist, 261-299



Film: "The Willmar 7"

November 20: Laboring on the "New Frontier"



Register, 135-240



Finish: "The Willmar 7"



November 22: THANKSGIVING



November 27: Deindustrialization and Corporate Restructuring



Fink, _Cutting into the Meatpacking Line_ , 1-71

B & L, Documents: 581-590

Essays: 608-621



  

November 29: An even newer "new working class"



Fink, 72-154

B & L, Documents: 542-553

Essays: 553-578



December 4: Labor relations and class conflict in a conservative era



Fink, 155-190

B & L, Documents: 590-608

Essays: 621-632

Debate: The U.S. is a "middle class" society.



December 6: American labor and the era of globalization



Fink, 191-201

Stromquist, 301-309

B & L, Documents: 636-654

Essays: 654-672



December 11: A new internationalism?



B & L, Essays: 673-681

Kim Moody, _Workers in a Lean World,_ 180-226, 269-292

(RBR)



UNDERGRADS & GRADS: FINAL PAPER DUE



December 13: The fruits of oral history and review



December 17: GRADS TAKE-HOME FINAL DUE

  
  
* * *

**[Top]** **[[Home](/amlab/)] [[Resources](/amlab/resources.html)]
[[Tools](/amlab/tools.html)] [[Lecture Outlines](/amlab/lectures/)]
[[Assignments](/amlab/assignments.html)] [[Discussion](/amlab/amlab-
password/discussion/)] [[Announcements](/amlab/amlab-password/announcements/)]
[[Readings](/amlab/amlab-password/readings/)] **

* * *

Instructor: Shelton Stromquist [[shelton-stromquist@uiowa.edu](mailto:shelton-
stromquist@uiowa.edu)]  
Research Librarian: John Schacht [[john-schacht@uiowa.edu](mailto:john-
schacht@uiowa.edu)]  
For technical help with this web site, click [here](/forms/TWIST-
feedback.html).

[TWIST](http://twist.lib.uiowa.edu/), University Libraries, The University of
Iowa.  
Copyright (C) 2001 The University of Iowa. All rights reserved.  
URL: http://twist.lib.uiowa.edu/amlab/syllabus.html  
Page Updated: Thursday, September 6, 2001 / Size: 45376 bytes

