**Problems in Literary Study: Darwin's Entangled Bank  
** William Howarth, Lisa Sideris, Laura Sayre  
Wednesday, 1:30-4:20 at 5 Ivy Lane, Conference Room  
_Sponsored by the Center for the Study of Religion_

Charles Darwin's theory of evolution by natural selection has profoundly
altered modern literature, religion, and science. His vision of nature as "an
entangled bank," a web of connected yet also competing life forces, disputes
the humanist belief in divine creation and challenges many traditional ideas
about race, sexuality, and class struggle. This seminar explores Darwin's
"dangerous idea" through readings that range from world scriptures and fables
to recent work on animal rights, bioethics, and ecofeminism.

Seminar readings (200 pp a week) outline the ideology Darwin confronted and
assess the impact of evolution on key issues in modern intellectual history.
Abstracts (4-6 pp) are provided to summarize current scholarship and suggest
areas for student research. The main product of the seminar will be student
papers, written to pre-sent at a public conference on June 8, 2001, to an
audience invited from several institutions. A funded summer workshop will
support revision of the conference papers into publishable essays.  

07 Feb **Creation Myths**

Topics: creation and life forms, impact of human error, dominion and
stewardship.

Readings: Genesis, Koran, Hindu and Greek myths; Lucretius, _The Nature of the
Universe;_ Luther,  "Lectures on Genesis"

Abstracts: _Primal Myths: Creation Myths from around the World_ , by Barbara
Sproul. Peter Bowler, _Norton History of Environmental Sciences_ , ch 1-2. Max
Oelschlaeger, _Caring for Creation: An Ecumenical Approach to the
Environmental Crisis_.  

14 Feb **Early Religion and Science**

Topics: ideas of nature, providence, theodicy, natural history, and animal
status before 1800.

Readings: Greek and Hindu fables; Francis Bacon, _The New Atlantis;_ Carolyn
Merchant, _The Death of Nature_ ; Peter Bowler, _Norton History of
Environmental Sciences_ , ch 2-4 (32-138)

Abstracts: Keith Thomas, _Man and the Natural World_ ; Marston Bates, _The
Nature Of Natural History_ ; David Lindberg & Ronald Numbers, _God and Nature:
Historical Essays on the Encounter Between History and Science_ ; Neil
Evernden, _The Social Creation Of Nature_ ; Clarence Glacken, _Traces on the
Rhodian Shore: Nature and Culture in Western Thought From Ancient Times to the
End of the 18th Century.  
_

21 Feb **Ecology and Empire**

Topics: growth of Darwin's ideas, relation to political context, ecology as a
paradigm.

Readings: Darwin, _Voyage of the Beagle_ , ch 10, 11, 17 and "Retrospect";
**** John Tallmadge, "From Chronicle to Quest: The Shaping of Darwin's Voyage
of the Beagle"; Richard Grove, "The Island and the History of Envi-
ronmentalism"; Bowler, _Norton History of Environmental Sciences,_ ch 5-7
(139-305). __

Abstracts: Barbara Maria Stafford, _Voyage into Substance: Art, Science,
Nature, and the Illustrated Travel Account, 1760-1840_ ; Lynn White, _The
Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis_ ; Joel Hagen, _An Entangled Bank:
The Origins of Ecosystem Ecology.  
_

28 Feb **Darwin and Evolution**

Topics: evolution and its reception, Darwinism in literature, politics,
ethics, and science. ****

Readings: Darwin, _Origin of Species_ , ch 3, 13, 15; Hull, Darwin and his
Critics; Steve Jones, Darwin's Ghost; Bowler, _Norton History of Environmental
Sciences,_ ch 8-9 (306-427).

Abstracts: Gillian Beer, _Darwin's Plots: Evolutionary Narrative in Darwin,
George Eliot, and Nineteenth-Century Fiction_ ; Adrian Desmond, _The Politics
of Evolution: Morphology, Medicine, and Reform in Radical London_ ; James
Rachels, _Created from Animals_ ; Evelyn Fox Keller, _Keywords In Evolutionary
Biology.  
_

07 Mar ** __**__**Social Darwinism and Sociobiology** __

Topics: production and consumption, competition and collaboration, socialized
biology.

Readings: Malthus, Summary View of the Principle of Population; Levins and
Lewontin, _The Dialectical Bi-ologist_ ; Caplan, _The Sociobiology Debate_ ;
Wilson, _Naturalist_.

Abstracts: Mike Hawkins, _Social Darwinism in European and American Thought,
1860-1945_. Laura Otis, _Membranes: Metaphors of Invasion in Nineteenth-
Century Literature, Science, and Politics_. **** John Bellamy Foster, _Marx's
Ecology: Materialism and Nature_.  

14 Mar **The Two Cultures**

Topics: aesthetic and scientific expression, heredity and environment, life
writing.

Readings: Darwin, _Autobiography,_ 1-145; Alfred Russell Wallace, The Malay
Archipelago; Darwin, _The Ex-pression of Emotions in Man and Animals_ , ch
1-2; Donald Fleming, "Charles Darwin, The Anaesthetic Man".

Abstracts: David Locke, _Science as Writing_ ; M. Halliday, J. R. Martin,
_Writing Science: Literacy and Discursive Power_ ; J. W. Slade, J. Y. Lee,
_Beyond the Two Cultures: Essays on Science, Technology, and Literature_ ; G.
Levine, A. Rauch, _One Culture: Essays in Science and Literature_ ; Daniel
Cordle, _Postmodern Postures: Literature, Science, and the Two Cultures_.  

28 Mar ** __ The Many Genders**

Topics: animal emotions, fundamentalism, feminism and primatology.

Readings: Darwin, _The Expression of Emotions in Man and Animals_ , ch 5; _The
Descent of Man_ , ch 2-3, 7, 13, 19-20; Edward Larson, _Summer for the God_ s;
Donna Haraway, _Primate Visions_.

Abstracts: Londa Schiebinger, _The Mind Has No Sex? Women in the Origins of
Modern Science_ ; Mary Jacobus, Evelyn Fox Keller, Sally Shuttleworth, _Body
Politics: Women, Literature, and the Discourse of Science_ ; __ Anne
Primavesi, _From Apocalypse to Genesis: Ecology, Feminism and Christianity._  

04 Apr **Darwinism as Dogma**

Topics: revisions of evolution: nature-culture studies, biogeography,
intelligent design

Readings: Stephen J. Gould, _Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shales and the Nature
of History_ ; Jonathan Weiner, _The Beak of the Finch_ ; Philip Johnson,
_Objections Sustained: Subversive Essays on Evolution, Law and Cul-ture_ ;
Daniel Dennett, _Darwin's Dangerous Idea_ ; Peter Bowler, _The Environmental
Sciences,_ ch 10 (428-502).

Abstracts: Bruno Latour, _We Have Never Been Modern_ ; Thomas Kuhn, _The Road
Since Structur_ e; Philip Kitcher, _The Advancement Of Science: Science
Without Legend, Objectivity Without Illusions_ ; David Quammen, _Natural Acts:
A Sidelong View of Science and Nature_.  

11 Apr **Nature as Web**

Topics: ecology and environmentalism; wilderness preservation, toxic
discourse.

Readings: Aldo Leopold, _Sand County Almanac_ ; Rachel Carson, _Silent Sprin_
g; Wallace Stegner, "Wilderness Letter"; Carolyn Merchant, "The Theoretical
Structure of Ecological Revolutions"; William Cronon, "The Trouble with
Wilderness: Or Getting Back to the Wrong Nature"; Bowler, _The Norton History
of Environ-mental Sciences_ , ch 11 (503-53).

Abstracts: Linda Graber, _Wilderness as Sacred Space_ ; Roderick Nash, _The
Rights of Nature: A History of Environmental Ethics_ ; __ Michael E.
Zimmerman, _Environmental Philosophy: From Animal Rights to Radical Ecology_ ;
Lawrence Buell, _The Environmental Imagination_ ; Niles Eldridge, _Ontogeny
and Phylogeny_.  

18 Apr **Sacred Places**

Topics: biodiversity; ritualized landscapes, sociobiology, ecofeminism,
creationism.

Readings: Yi-Fu Tuan, _Topophilia: A Study of Environmental Perception,
Attitudes, and Value_ s; E. O. Wilson, _Biophilia_ ; Vadana Shiva, _Staying
Alive: Women, Ecology, and Development_ ; Terry Tempest Williams, "The Clan of
the One-Breasted Women"; Joyce Carol Oates, "Against Nature".

Abstracts: Wilson and Kellert, eds. _The Biophilia Hypothesis_ ; Paul Shepard,
_Man in the Landscape: A Historic View of the Esthetics of Nature_ ; Belden
Lane, _The Solace of Fierce Landscapes_ ; Jamie Scott, _Sacred Places and
Profane Spaces: Essays In the Geographics of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam_
; Henry Morris, _Evolution and the Modern Christian_ ; Duane Gish, _Evolution:
The Fossils Say No_ ; Vincent Crapanzano, _Serving the Word: Literalism in
America from the Pulpit to the Bench.  
_

25 Apr **Ecotheology**

Topics: sacramental nature, eschatology and salvation, deep ecology and
evolution.

Readings; John Grim, Mary Evelyn Tucker, _Worldviews and Ecolog_ y; Sallie
McFague, _Super, Natural Chris-tian_ s; Mary Evelyn Tucker, _Earth Ethics
Newslette_ r.

Abstracts: Bill Devall, George Sessions, _Deep Ecology: Living as if Nature
Mattered_ ; Timothy Luke, _The Dreams of Deep Ecology_ ; Rupert Sheldrake,
_The Rebirth of Nature: The Greening of Science and God_ ; Michael E.
Zimmerman, _Contesting Earth's Future: Radical Ecology and Postmodernity_ ;
Joanne O'Brien, Fazlud Khalid, _Islam and Ecology_.  

02 May **Bioethics**

Topics: the ethical status of natural order, genetic engineering, animal
research, arguments for and against intelligent design, the future of
Darwinism.

Readings: Ronald C. Turner, _The New Genesis: Theology and the Genetic
Revolutio_ n; Behe, _Darwin's Black Box_ ; Michael Pollan,  "The Botany of
Desire"; other handouts to come.

Abstracts: James Rachels, _Created from Animals_ ; Claus Emmeche, _The Garden
in the Machine: The Emerging Science of Artificial Life_ ; Richard Leowontin,
_It Ain't Necessarily So.  
_

