**![HS 6200](_derived/hs_6200_--
_teaching_european_history.htm_cmp_sandston010_bnr.gif)**  
[![Home](_derived/home_cmp_sandston010_hbtn.gif)](index.htm)
[![Up](_derived/up_cmp_sandston010_hbtn.gif)](favorite.htm) [![HS
1000](_derived/hsrf_1000.htm_cmp_sandston010_hbtn.gif)](hsrf_1000.htm) [![HS
3458](_derived/hs_3458_--
_ireland,_1688-1923.htm_cmp_sandston010_hbtn.gif)](hs_3458_--
_ireland,_1688-1923.htm) ![HS 6200](_derived/hs_6200_--
_teaching_european_history.htm_cmp_sandston010_hbtn_p.gif)

  
  
---  
  
> | |

**HSGA 6200
Dr. Nancy Curtin**

** **

** **

**                                                    Development of Modern **
**Europe**

**                                     Teaching European History:  Content and
Method**

**                                                                     Spring
2002**





_Course description_



This course is designed to prepare graduate students for the teaching of a
modern European history survey course.  Approximately two-thirds of the course
will be devoted to the content; the last third will address preparation
(drawing up a syllabus and selecting required reading) and teaching methods
(lecturing, class discussions, exams and papers, and certain common problems
that might arise in a classroom situation).



_Required reading_



Students will generally not do the same reading for each class.  Instead, one
from  a number of titles under each topic (on the attached reading list) will
be selected, representing a different focus on the topic (political, social,
economic, intellectual, etc.) as well a certain ideological perspective.
Students will read one of  a number of selected texts under each topic and
identify significant themes, compare such themes with those identified by
others reading other works, and how such themes could most effectively be
presented to freshmen.



_Schedule of meetings_



WEEK                                                 TOPIC



Jan. 14                                     Introduction



Jan. 28                                     Pedagogical Technology

                                                                        See [fordham.blackboard.com](http://fordham.blackboard.com/?bbatt=Y)

                                                 

Feb. 4                                      Old Regime and Enlightenment

See reading list



Feb. 11                                    French Revolution and Napoleon

See reading list



Feb. 19                                    Teaching styles

                                                                        See [fordham.blackboard.com](http://fordham.blackboard.com/?bbatt=Y)

Paper due

  





Feb. 25                                    Restoration and Reaction (1815-48)

See reading list



Mar. 4                                     Industrial Revolution

See reading list



Mar. 11                                   Liberalism and Socialism

See reading list



Mar. 18                                   Using primary sources and Writing to
Learn

                                                                        See [fordham.blackboard.com](http://fordham.blackboard.com/?bbatt=Y)

Paper due



Apr. 8                                      Nationalism and Imperialism

See reading list



Apr. 15                                    World War I

See reading list



Apr. 22                                    Russian Revolution

See reading list



Apr. 29                                    Europe Between the Wars

See reading list



May 6                                      Themes and Trends in European
History

          Construct a final cumulative exam        

          Textbook selection

          Constructing a syllabus



  _Course requirements_  

1) weekly one page (single-spaced) discussions of the thesis of the book read
for class with copies to be distributed among all students in the course (post
to [fordham.blackboard.com](http://fordham.blackboard.com/?bbatt=Y) under
appropriate topic by noon the day before class)

2)  two to four half-hour presentations which should be considered as a mini-
lecture on the topic under examination

3) a short paper (3-5 double-spaced pages) on teaching styles based on
observation of three faculty members teaching HSFC 1000 (post to
[fordham.blackboard.com](http://fordham.blackboard.com/?bbatt=Y) by  noon ,
Feb. 17)

4) a short paper (3-5 double-spaced pages) using a primary source or film,
setting an assignment, and then executing that assignment (post to
[fordham.blackboard.com](http://fordham.blackboard.com/?bbatt=Y) by  noon ,
Mar. 16)

5) actual teaching of a class in a freshman course with the cooperation of the
relevant faculty member (this would occur during the last half of the course).
You will be observed by me and we will privately discuss your performance.

6) a final project where students would design and justify a syllabus in
modern European history (this would involve not merely listing topics,
requirements, and assigned reading, but explaining the rationale for such
selections, the major themes of each unit, as well as providing an overall
introduction explaining the unifying themes of the proposed course), due
Monday, May 13.



_Office hours_ :  

611 Dealy (817-3931)

1:00-2:15 Mon.

5:15-6:00 Wed.

or by appointment

            [mailto:NancyCurtin@telocity.com](mailto:NancyCurtin@telocity.com)

  
---|---|---

