  **Dr.   Michael Wm. Doyle** |

**Office Phone: 765-285-8732**  
  
---|---  
**Ball State University** |

**Fax: 765-285-5612**  
  
**Department of History** |

**E-Mail: mwdoyle@bsu.edu**  
  
**Burkhardt Bldg. 213** |

**Home Page: www.bsu.edu/classes/doyle/hist240**  
  
**Muncie, IN 47306-0480** |

**Office Hrs.: Thu., 2:00-4:00 P.M. & by appt.**  
  
  **HISTORY 240 / Sec. 1: INTRODUCTION TO PUBLIC HISTORY**  
**Spring Semester 2002**  
**  Meets Tues., 2:00-4:40 P.M., in BB 103**

**  COURSE DESCRIPTION**

 This course provides an overview of the practice of history for the benefit
of the general public and in a public setting.  It is also designed to
acquaint history majors or prospective majors with professional opportunities
in nonteaching, history-related careers.  Among these are archives and records
management; museum work; interpretation of historic sites; historic
preservation; cultural resources management; editing of history journals and
documentary collections; development of interpretive audiovisual media;
corporate history; entrepreneurial history; oral history; and public policy
research and consulting.  While surveying these fields, students will either
undertake an in-depth study of one career area or complete a special project
for a public history organization or agency, and thereby have contact with
working professionals.  In addition, students will learn career development
skills such as how to craft a resume, conduct a thorough job search, and
research graduate programs and prepare effective applications to them.

 The course furthermore serves as one of three prerequisites (along with
History 320:  
Laboratory Course in American History, and History 445: History and
Historians) for the  
Option 2 History Major.  Completion of this sequence enables the qualified
undergraduate to obtain a 9-12 credit-hour internship in a public history
setting.  Details may be obtained from the Instructor, who serves as Public
History Internship Program Coordinator for the History Department, or from the
Internship Program website: <www.bsu.edu/classes/doyle/hist300-369>.  
    
    
  

**  REQUIRED TEXTS**

1) James B. Gardner and Peter S. LaPaglia, eds.,  
 Public History: An Introduction  
  (Malabar, Fla.: Krieger, 1999).   [Referred to below as "Gardner"]

2) Mike Wallace,  
 Mickey Mouse History; and Other Essays on American Memory  
  (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1996). ["Wallace"]

Copies of the above texts have been placed on 2-Hour/Overnight reserve at
Bracken Library.

3) A course packet containing articles and handouts must be purchased at
T.I.S. College Book Store in the University Village, 1717 West University Ave.
["Course Packet"]  
    
    

**COURSE GOALS**

 This course is designed to introduce students to the variety of public
history careers and training opportunities that exist; to expose students to
specific skill areas and terminology utilized by public historians, such as
collection theory and methods of interpreting data, documents, and artifacts;
to help students develop skills in critiquing public history institutions and
sites by taking field trips to museums and historical agencies; and to show
students how to apply history skills and knowledge in the presentation of
history to a general audience and in a nonacademic setting.  
    
    

**  POLICY ON ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION**

 Students are expected to attend all class meetings, field trips, and exams,
and to arrive punctually and ready for listening and discussion.  This course
is conducted differently from most other college classes in that it features
relatively little lecturing by the instructor.  Instead we'll explore our
subject matter by devoting considerable time to discussing the assigned
readings.  Like a seminar, it will involve, in Antonio Gramsci's words, "the
detailed work of discussion and the investigation of problems in which
everybody participates, everybody contributes, and in which everybody is
simultaneously teacher and student."  To be successful the course thus
requires the faithful attendance and regular thoughtful contributions by all.

 You will be permitted one unexcused absence during the semester.  Excused
absences as defined by the University include serious illness (attested to by
a physician's note), a death in the family, religious observance, and
participation in varsity athletics.  Missing more than one class will result
in the lowering of your final course grade by two percentage points for each
class missed.  As a bonus for those with perfect attendance (i.e., missing no
classes or part of classes without exception) -- and who also regularly
contribute to class discussions -- I will raise your final grade to the next
highest level (e.g., from a C+ to a B-).

 In the event that you are absent, it is your responsibility to contact me or
one of your classmates to catch up on the work you missed in class, including
any guest presentation(s) or field trip undertaken.  
    
    
  
  

**  MAKE-UP EXAM POLICY**

 Make-up exams will be administered only in extraordinary cases of an
emergency nature.  You must make every effort to contact me prior to the exam
to discuss your circumstances.  Do not assume that you will be permitted to
take a make-up exam if you fail to show up for any regularly scheduled exam
without prior arrangement.  
    
    
  

**  GRADING PERCENTAGE SCALE**

A 93-100%          C+ 77-79%             F 0-59%  
A- 90-92 %          C 73-76%  
                             C- 70-72% 

B+ 87-89 %          D+ 67-69%  
B 83-86 %            D 63-66%  
B- 80-82 %           D- 60-62%  
    
    

**  GRADING CRITERIA**

15%  Pop Quizzes on the Readings, Offered Periodically; 3 Response Papers

15%  1st Written Report: Public History Site Evaluation Due 6 February

25%  Midterm Exam: In-class on 26 February

20%  2nd Written Report: Career Assessment Paper, Teaching Unit, or  
  Special Project Due 2 April

25%  Final Exam: Weds., 1 May, 2:15-4:15 P.M. in BB 103

[See also "Policy on Attendance and Participation" on p. 2, and "Writing
Assignments" below concerning bonus and penalty points.  It should be
understood that students must satisfactorily complete all course requirements
in order to qualify for a passing grade.]  
    
    

**  WRITING ASSIGNMENTS**

 All out-of-class writing assignments must be neatly typed in a regular-sized
(i.e., 12 point) font and double-spaced.  Top, bottom, and side margins should
be set at approximately one and one-quarter inches.  Besides listing your
name, the course number, date, and assignment topic on the first page, your
paper should be titled, paginated, and stapled.  Citation style (either
footnotes or endnotes are acceptable) should conform to one of the following:
Mary Lynn Rampolla, A Pocket Guide to Writing in History [available as an
optional course textbook]; Kate L. Turabian, A Manual for Writers of Term
Papers; or The Chicago Manual of Style.  Do not use The MLA Handbook.  Because
this course is intended to orient you to work in a professional career, it is
essential that you observe the standard rules of communicating clearly,
concisely, and correctly.  Points will be deducted for errors in grammar and
mechanics.  Always proofread and run the spelling-checker utility on your
draft before printing it out for submission.

 Assignments will be penalized one grade level for each twenty-four hour
period (or part thereof) the assignment is late, including weekends (unless an
extension has been granted in advance by the Instructor).  For example, a
paper due on a Tuesday that is turned in on the following Monday would be
counted as six days late; if it merited a grade of B+, that grade would be
reduced six levels to a D+.  
    
    
  

**  FREE TUTORING SERVICE**

 University College is an academic unit offering comprehensive programs and
services to enhance students' success.  The College houses the Learning
Center, located in North Quad 323, which offers free peer tutoring,
supplemental instruction, and other forms of academic assistance to all Ball
State students.  For information call University College at 285-1006.  If you
feel that your formal writing skills are deficient, I urge you to take a draft
of your written work to a tutor at either the Learning Center's Writing Desk
(285-3778; open Mon.-Thu.: 9 AM-8 PM, and Fri.: 9 AM-Noon), or the Writing
Center (Robert Bell Bldg. 291; 285-8387; open Mon.-Wed.:  
10 AM-7 PM, and Thu.-Fri., 10 AM-5 PM), for evaluation and help in revision
prior to submitting it to me for grading.  
    
    

  **FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES OR SPECIAL NEEDS**

 If you need course adaptations or accommodations because of a disability, if
you have emergency medical information to share with me, or if you need
special arrangements in case the building must be evacuated, please make an
appointment with me as soon as possible.  
    
    

**  FIELD TRIPS**

 Several field trips to public history museums and agencies in Muncie have
been arranged for the first part of the semester.  These will be taken during
the second half of the class meeting period and we will all depart on them
from BB 103.  Everyone is expected to attend each one.   Attendance will again
be taken on site and anyone who is absent will be counted as having missed one
day's worth of classes.  Students need to provide their own means of
transportation; however, we will coordinate car-pooling at the class meeting
prior to each trip.  The information presented during these field trips is an
integral part of the course and consequently will comprise part of the
material on which you'll be tested by the Midterm and Final Exams.  Because
they also have been designed to acquaint you with career, volunteer, and
internship opportunities, students are expected to maintain a professional
demeanor during these visits, to take notes, and ask appropriate questions.  
    
    

**  OBTAINING AND USING AN E-MAIL ACCOUNT**

All students must obtain an e-mail account (available for free through Ball
State) by Tues., 15  Jan., and send the Instructor a message confirming their
account on or before that date.  Plan to check your e-mail regularly for
course-related messages posted by the Instructor.  
    
    

**  READING ASSIGNMENTS AND QUIZZES**

You should plan to read carefully all selections by the date they are
assigned, regularly consulting a dictionary for any terms that are unfamiliar.
Plan to bring the books and that week's portion of the Course Packet with you
when you come to class and be prepared to discuss all of the readings.  A
portion of your grade for this course is determined by pop quizzes that will
be given from time to time during the semester.  They will be administered
only during the first fifteen minutes of class and be based on that week's
reading assignment.  There will be no make-ups for absentees, nor extra time
given to students who come late to class.  Your lowest grade will be dropped.
I strongly recommend that you take notes on the readings to aid you in
studying for the exams; you may also consult these notes during the quizzes
(but not during the exams).  

[ Back to History 240
Homepage](http://www.bsu.edu/classes/doyle/hist240/main.htm)

