**Economics 440**

**_Topics in US Economic History:_**

**_The Interaction of Economic Theory and Public Policy_** __

**Prof. Jason Taylor, 210 Rouss
Hall,[jet9b@virginia.edu](mailto:jet9b@virginia.edu), 924-3811**

**Time and Classroom: 1:00-3:15, Cabell 345**

**Office Hours:**   **By appointment**





\--"It has generally been the fate of economic theory to run a losing race
against the course of history, and never to have completed the analysis of one
phase of economic development before another takes its place."

                                                                                                            \--Joan Robinson



\--"The ideas of economists and political philosophers¡­ are more powerful than
is commonly understood.  Indeed the world is ruled by little else."

                                                                                                            \--John Maynard Keynes



**Objectives:**   This class will be a conglomeration of three topics--
economic history, public policy, and the evolution of economic thought.
Overall, this class will not be substantially different from any mainstream
400-level course in American Economic History, however, an overriding theme
throughout will be to look at the _interaction_ of evolving economic theory
with American public policy between 1776 and today.   Topics covered will
range from the U.S. Constitution to Mr. Bush's tax cut. Understand that
economists do not study history for the sake of history.  Rather, we study
history because we believe it can give us insights to the validity of economic
theory and public policy today and in the future.  We will not be following
every critical event along a time line, but instead we will focus on certain
aspects of those events and eras dealing with the task at hand--economic
theory, public policy, and the interaction of these two. One side note--this
class will have a distinctly 20th century emphasis (compared to more
traditional economic history classes) since most public policy, i.e. what the
Mr. Clinton called "the era of big government," has taken place since the
1930s.  



**Summer Atmosphere:**   This is going to be a very intensive 4 weeks.  You
will receive the same amount of credit for this course as you would if you
were to take it during the fall or spring semesters.  To maintain the academic
integrity of summer courses, you should expect to do the same amount of work
for this course as any other 400-level course.  Each meeting essentially
covers essentially one week of work.  If you normally do 3-5 hours of studying
per week for a course, you may expect to do that each day!  On the other hand,
I do want to have a relaxed atmosphere in the class (though not necessarily in
your _approach_ to the class) and it is my hope that we will all have a very
enjoyable month getting to know each other as we discuss and learn about these
important (and dare I say fun and interesting) issues.



**Prerequisites:**   Formally, you need to have taken at least ECON 201 and
202.  More importantly, to succeed in this class you must have an interest in
economic policy issues and openness to the lessons that history can teach us
about our current situation.  **_Additionally, you MUST be willing to do the
assigned reading and participate in class each day --it is prerequisite that
you can read and verbally communicate with me and your classmates between the
hours of 1 and 3:15 p.m., Monday through Friday  (this may seem like a silly
prerequisite to list, but you'd be surprised).  _**



**Readings:**   To foster an intellectual environment of student
participation, readings will be assigned almost every day.  Rather than having
you spend money on an inadequate textbook (since there is no book that covers
the specific theme of this class), I've assembled a packet of readings from
library books and academic journals.

**  
**

**Grade:**   **300 points total** :  We will have **one midterm** and a
**final exam**.   The **midterm** will consist of **100 points** and the
**final exam 115 points.**   In addition, each of you will give a **short
presentation** (10-15 minutes --we'll discuss guidelines in class¡­ these will
likely be done in groups of two due to the large size of the class) about a
specific New Deal program and it's relationship to the economic theory of the
time.  Along with your presentation, I'd like an **8-page** **research paper**
detailing the major parts and importance of the program.   [ _Note:_   Please
do not just read your paper in place of your presentation!  Papers and
presentations are two entirely different animals and are not interchangeable.]
Your oral presentation is worth **30 points** and the paper **15 points**.
**Forty** more points will be allotted based on your overall verbal
contribution to the class (i.e **. participation grade** ).  **_These 40
points must be earned like any others_.**   With small classes being such a
rarity at UVA (especially in the economics department), let's take advantage
of this opportunity to truly make an "intellectual community."  If you do not
plan on participating in the class, understand that you're already starting
with a B at best since you will lose 40 points--one full letter grade and a
third!  If you can deal with that, by all means stay in the class.  If you
cannot, drop and pick up another class ** _.   _**_This class structure will
not work without your participation!   We'll just sit around staring at each
other and yawning. ****_

** **



**Schedule and Readings:**

7/13--Introduction and the Economic system before 1776:  Mercantilism and the
colonies.



7/16--The U.S. Revolution and Constitution:  Starting from scratch in the
post- _Wealth of Nations_ era.   Read: Smith reading from packet.



7/17--Getting the right environment for growth: transportation, patents,
inventions, westward expansion, etc.  Was growth lead by an invisible hand?
Read: Smith and Sockoloff.



7/18-- The Marginalist Revolution: Technical economists and the new _static_
view of perfect competition.   Where should we draw the line between harmful
and healthful competition? Read:  Machovic.



7/19-- The Visible Hand: Managers and the "Scientific Management movement."
The rise of the firm and the fall of the family business.  Trust-busting in
late 19th century. Read: DiLorenzo and High.



7/20--Firms in the Progressive Era, 1900-1929: Laissez-faire gets a heart
while the workingman learns to swing as the "Age of Mass Consumption" begins.
Two short readings:  Parrington and Rostow.



7/23-- That Invincible Feeling:  The omnipotent power of economic theory and
the "everlasting" prosperity of the 1920s.  Read: Taylor and Selgin.



**7/24 --Midterm**



# Part II:  The Era of Big Government



7/25--Goodbye job, Hello Hooverville:  What caused the Great Depression?
Market failure, policy failure, or both?  Too many wrong policies or too few
of the right ones?  How did economists react to the depression? Read: None (a
break after studying for the exam)



7/26--Don't just stand there, do something!:  The Keynesian Revolution in
theory (and practice?).  Roosevelt's own revolution--the New Deal. Was the New
Deal Keynesian? Case Study: The National Industrial Recovery Act.  Readings:
Keynes and Peppers in packet.



7/27--The New Deal Continues: Americans learn their ABCs:  Class
presentations.



7/30-- Presentations Continued.



7/31--Presentations finished up if necessary.  Conclusion: Did New Deal follow
or lead economic theory in the 1930s?  The Political Economy of the New Deal,
what's on Roosevelt's agenda?  Read: Anderson and Tollison.



8/1--The New Deal goes to War:  How separable are the two?  Did the war end
the Great Depression? Was WWII the triumph of Keynesian economics?  Read:
Higgs.



8/2--"Lessons" from 1929-46 and the impact of Keynesian economics: 1946-1978.
Does Theory Affect Policy?  The full employment goal, "fine tuning," the
Phillips Curve, and the Great Society.  Was the Great Society a continuation
of the New Deal?  Read: Aaron and Time article.



8/3--Don't do something, just stand there!:  Milton Friedman and the
Monetarists Counterrevolution.  Politicians and FED response in the 1970s and
1980s.  Read: Friedman.



8/6--AS to the rescue!:  "Reaganomics" and a new generation of "Classical"
economists.  Deregulation, tax policy, and antitrust.  Economics of deficits
and deficit reduction.  Read: Karier.



8/7-- The era of big government¡­ is over? Potpourri of " _current topics "_
for discussion¡­

Free Trade--the EU, NAFTA, etc., and economic theory.  The Bush Agenda and
economic theory.  Current and future monetary policy and economic theory.
Concluding thoughts and discussion:  Does theory affect policy or vice versa?
Read: TBA.

_ _

**TAKE-HOME FINAL EXAM:**

**Handed out at end of class on the 7 th.  *Must* be returned by Friday August
10, 3:30 p.m.**

** **

***Exams handed in between 3:31 p.m. Friday and noon Monday August 13 will
result in a loss of 23 points out of 115 (20%--i.e. two letter grades).   The
reason should seem clear--having all of this extra time (almost double) will
be a major advantage and should improve the chances of the student having
high-quality answers.  Clearly it would be unfair to the people who hand the
test in on time to give full credit for a late exam.  No paper will be
accepted after noon August 13 and you will automatically fail the class.  **

** **

**No exceptions will be made to these rules outside of university-approved
excuses such as illness or a death in the family.**



