[![Crossroads
logo](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/logo_sm.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/index.html)
|   |

[![Technology &
Learning](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/tech_sm.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/innovation.html)
[![Reference &
Research](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/ref_sm.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/reference.html)
[![Communities](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/com_sm.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/community.html)

![horizontal red rule](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/redrule.gif)
[![Curriculum](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/cur.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/curriculum.html)

# Elective Courses  
  
---|---|---  
  
  |

**Criminal Trials and American Popular Culture** American Studies 321a, Yale
University   **Debby Applegate** American Studies Program Yale University
Email: [deborah.applegate@yale.edu](mailto:deborah.applegate@yale.edu)

This course will examine public representations of criminal trials as a way of
tracing changes in American culture; focusing particularly on the use of the
trial system to define relations between the individual and the community; the
relationship between mass media and conceptions of truth; and the impact of
spectatorship upon notions of the public sphere.

We will be looking at rhetoric, genres, cultural conventions and formulas, as
a way of reconstructing how people at different points in American history
have conceived their understanding of individualism, of social responsibility,
of the methods of finding truth. We will begin with the premise that the form
of the message shapes our understanding of the content of the message and that
the two cannot be separated.

> To know a culture is to know its conventions and formulas, to know the
patterns it places on the world, the stories with which it tells its lives,
the maps it makes of its terrain, the names it uses. These conventions and
genres stand at the start of cultural study, some already formed and known in
the common sense of the culture itself, others part of that culture's image in
the histories made by cultures distant in time, space or social world. An
account of a culture's conventions can be a tool of critique leading us from
the individual texts, the local symbolic acts, to the wider social and
historical meanings of cultural production.

>

> Michael Denning, _Mechanic Accents_ , 74-75

**Requirements**

1\. 1 page reading response posted each week to the class newsgroup on e-mail
before noon on Monday.

2\. 7-10 page paper on one of the week's readings, due 10 am Monday morning.

3\. 20 page analytical research paper that examines the cultural significance
of either a single trial or a particular portrayal of a trial. A 1 page
abstract of the proposed paper is due at midterm.

4\. Attendance is required, as is a high level of class participation during
discussion. Attendance will be kept so please let me know ahead of time if you
will be absent.

5\. Your grade in the class will reflect the amount of genuine intellectual
growth you demonstrate over the course of the semester. Qualities I'm looking
for include: sincere curiosity, ambitious thinking that pushes beyond your
current level of comfort, well reasoned writing, and enthusiastic
participation.

**Course Schedule**

The first three weeks of the course introduce and begin to deconstruct the
principles that underlay both the jury system itself and our traditional
perceptions of it. **Unit One** traces the emergence of modern mass media out
of the selling of crime and spectatorship. It provides concrete examples that
allow us to begin examining the impact of form on the interpretation of truth
and justice. **Unit Two** focuses on crime in the era of 'moving pictures.' It
uses two very different conspiracy trials to explore how notions of
citizenship and public obligation change in the post-World War II era,
becoming increasingly privatized. **Unit Three** takes us up to the
contemporary period, tracing how the concept of citizenship has been taken
over by the concept of personal identity. We will use the debate over race and
the O.J. Simpson trial to focus on the implications of privatization on both
public policy and private identity.

**Introduction Class 1** \-- **Constructions and Deconstructions** : Frances
Olsen, "Notes to Amuse a Legal Worker -- Series 1, No. 1: Reductionism," _Yale
Journal of Law and the Humanities_ 1 (December 1988): 157-164.

**Class 2** \-- **Conceptions and Deceptions of Law** : Alexander Hamilton,
"Federalist Paper #83," _The Federalist Papers_ (1787); Alexis de Toqueville,
"What Tempers the Tyranny of the Majority in the United States," _Democracy in
America_ (1848); W. Lance Bennett and Martha Feldman, _Reconstructing Reality
in the Courtroom: Justice and Judgment in American Culture_ (selections).

**Class 3** \-- **Storytelling and Law** : Martha Minow, "Identities," Yale
Journal of Law and the Humanities 3 (Winter 1991): 97-120.

**Unit 1 -- Crime and the Emergence of Mass Media** : From Sermons to Scandal
Sheets:

**Class 4 -- Good, Evil and Genre** : Daniel Cohen, "An Overview: The
Succession of Genres, 1674-1860," Pillars of Salt, Monuments of Grace; Daniel
E. Williams, _Pillars of Salt: An Anthology of Early American Criminal
Narratives_ , pp. 1-63 and selected narratives.

**Class 5 -- The Rise of Newspapers and Crime Reporting** : Edgar Allen Poe,
"The Murders at Rue Morgue" (1842); Andie Tucher, Froth and Scum: Truth,
Beauty, Goodness and the Ax Murder in _America's First Mass Medium_ , chs.
1-9, 16-epilogue.

**Class 6 -- The Beecher-Tilton Adultery Scandal** Anonymous [Johnathan
Molot],  "Sympathy as a Legal Structure," _Harvard Law Review_ 105 (June
1992): 1961-1980;  "The Beecher-Tilton Investigation: The Scandal of the Age,"
_New York Times_ (1874), pp. 19-66, 75-94, 107-128. Laura Hanft Korobkin,
"The Maintenance of Mutual Confidence: Sentimental Strategies at the Adultery
Trial of Henry Ward Beecher," _Yale Journal of Law and Humanities_ (Winter
1995): 1-48.

**Unit 2 -- Citizenship and Lay Legal Consciousness** \-- from Newsreels to
the Nightly News:

**Recommended outside reading for this unit** : Relevant portions of _The
Glory and the Dream: A Narrative History of America_ , 1832-1872, William
Manchester.

**Class 7 -- The Rosenberg Conspiracy Trial** : Screening: _The Unquiet Death
of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg,_ Virginia Carmichael,  "Prologue: Motives of
Narrative" & "Cold War Frame Narrative," _Framing History: The Rosenberg Story
and the Cold War_.

*** Abstracts for paper topics due this week. ****

**Class 8 -- Picturing Justice** : Screening: _Twelve Angry Men_ & an early
episode of _Perry Mason_ ; Anita Sokolsky, "The Case of the Juridical Junkie:
Perry Mason and the Dilemma of Confession," _Yale Journal of Law and the
Humanities_ 2 (Winter 1990): 189-200.

**Class 9 -- The Chicago Riots** : Screening: _Conspiracy: the Trial of the
Chicago Eight_ , "Introduction" by Dwight MacDonald, _Tales of Hoffman_
(1970); Juliet Dee,  "Constraints on Persuasion in the Chicago Seven Trial,"
_Popular Trials: Rhetoric, Mass Media, and the Law_ (Robert Hariman, ed.):
86-113.  "Radical Chic," Tom Wolfe

**Unit 3 -- Identity Politics and Lay Legal Consciousness** \-- from the
People's Court to Court T.V.:

**Class 10 -- The O.J. Simpson Trial** : Henry Louis Gates, Jr., "Marketing
Justice," & Jeffery Rosen, "One Angry Woman," _The New Yorker_ (Feb. 24-March
3, 1997): 11-12,  & 54-64, and letters to editor in response; Jeffery Toobin,
_The Run of his Life: The People v. O.J. Simpson_ (selections).

**Class 11 -- Reprise: Good, Evil and Genre** ; Patricia Williams, _The
Alchemy of Race and Rights: Diary of a Law Professor_.

**Class 12 & 13 -- In-progress Paper Presentations and Review of Course**

*** Final papers due at end of Reading Week. *** |  
---|---|---  
  
[Communities](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/community.html) |
[Curriculum](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/curriculum.html) | [Technology &
Learning](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/innovation.html) | [Reference &
Research](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/reference.html)  
[Crossroads home page](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/index.html) | [About
Crossroads](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/about.html) | [What's
New](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/new.html) | [Visitors'
Book](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/visitor.html)

This section last updated February 1998. Please send comments to [Crossroads
Webstaff](mailto:cepacs@gusun.georgetown.edu).  

