### History 307  
WORLD WAR II



**Texts**

You may choose either of two main textbooks:

Gerhard A. Weinberg, _A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II._
(This is the standard work on the subject, based on the latest scholarship and
written by one of the foremost historians in the field. If you already know
something about World War Two and want a book you can consult for years to
come, get this book. It's reasonably priced and you'll find it more
satisfactory.) Michael J. Lyons, _World War II: A Short History_ , 2nd
edition.     (This is a college textbook, written especially for undergraduate
courses like this, and the best choice if you have little previous knowledge
about World War Two.)

Both books are available at SBX. _A World at Arms_ is also readily available
at most retail bookstores (Borders, Barnes  & Noble, Waldenbooks, etc.)



These works are also required and may be purchased at SBX:

  1. John Dower, _War Without Mercy_
  2. Donald L. Niewyck (ed.), _The Holocaust_ 



**Enrollment**

All students must be officially enrolled in the course by the end of the
second full week of the quarter. No requests to add the course will be
approved by the department chair after that time. Enrolling officially and on
time is solely the responsibility of each student.



**Make-up Exam Policy**

If for any family or medical reason you find it absolutely necessary to miss
an examination, I want you to contact me _in advance_ if you want to take a
make-up. Make-up exams are administered by the department at certain scheduled
times during the quarter. If you take a make-up, it will be at one of these
times.



**Requirements**

First mid-term (20%), second mid-term (30%) and a final exam (50%).

NOTE: The lectures do not necessarily follow either the organization or the
emphasis of the textbooks. For that reason, good attendance is vital. Dower's
_War Without Mercy_ will be tested on the second mid-term; Niewyck's _The
Holocaust_ on the final exam. The latter two works are not textbooks. Rather,
they are intended to reinforce one of the major themes of the course, namely
the centrality of ideology and racism in the Second World War.



**Week-by-week syllabus**

WEEK 1.

    
    
       Monday          The First World War
       Wednesday       Origins of the Second World War - I.
       Friday          Origins of the Second World War - II.
    
    
    

WEEK 2.

    
    
       Monday          Outbreak
       Wednesday       The Fall of Western Europe
       Friday          Britain Alone
    
    
    

WEEK 3.

    
    
       Monday          The Battle of the Atlantic
       Wednesday       Barbarossa
       Friday          _FIRST MID-TERM EXAMINATION_
    
    
    

WEEK 4.

    
    
       Monday          Eastern Front, 1941-44
       Wednesday       Origins of the Pacific War
       Friday          NO CLASS
    
    
    

WEEK 5.

    
    
       Monday          Pearl Harbor to Guadalcanal
       Wednesday       The Mediterranean Theater - I.
       Friday          The Mediterranean Theater - II.
    
    
    

WEEK 6.

    
    
       Monday          The Pacific War, 1943-1944
       Wednesday       Societies at War:  The Democratic Experience
       Friday          Societies at War:  The Totalitarian Experience
    
    
    

WEEK 7.

    
    
       Monday          Occupied Europe
       Wednesday       The Combined Bomber Offensive
       Friday          _SECOND MID-TERM_ (covers _War Without Mercy_ )
    
    
    

WEEK 8.

    
    
       Monday          OVERLORD
       Wednesday       The End of the War in Europe - I.
       Friday          The End of the War in Europe - II.
    
    
    

WEEK 9.

    
    
       Monday          The Holocaust - I.
       Wednesday       The Holocaust - II.
       Friday          The Pacific War, 1945
    
    
    

WEEK 10.

    
    
       Monday          MEMORIAL DAY; NO CLASS
       Wednesday       The Decision to Drop the Atomic Bomb
       Friday          The War's Place in History
    
    
    

**FINAL EXAMINATION; WILL INCLUDE QUESTION ON _THE HOLOCAUST_.**  
Tuesday, June 4, 11:30 a.m. to 1:18 p.m.



* * *

* * *



**HOW TO SURVIVE HISTORY 307**  
A Guide for Undergraduates



**Introduction**

History 307 is an undergraduate survey designed to accommodate the massive and
still growing interest in the largest, most catastrophic war of human history.
The focus is chiefly on the strategic aspects of the struggle, but the course
will also deal with the origins and outcomes of the conflict, wartime
diplomacy, the impact of the war on the major civilian societies, the
ideological dimensions of the conflict, the problem of moral judgment under
the stress of war, and the Holocaust.

I assume that students will bring to History 307 a strong commitment to attend
the lectures and do the assigned reading. If you have any doubts about your
level of interest, I urge you to drop the course. This is a matter of simple
common sense. The course, after all, is a free elective, so dropping it cannot
harm your college program. On the other hand, if you persist in taking it but
then do poorly on the exams, the resultant unhappy grade will be on your
transcript forever.



**Readings**

You may choose either Gerhard Weinberg's _A World at Arms_ or Michael J.
Lyons' _World War II: A Short History_ , depending on your level of interest
and background. The Lyons book is best if you don't know much about the war or
if you need a concise guide to the most important material. The Weinberg book
is far richer and will suit you better if you already know something about the
war and have a strong interest in it.

The other two books are not intended as textbooks. I selected them because
they illuminate the darkest aspects of the Second World War. The conflict was,
in many respects, profoundly influenced by ideology--ideology tinged with a
strong streak of racism. The Nazis launched the invasion of the Soviet Union
not only as an anti-Bolshevik crusade, but also with the conviction that their
Russian enemies were racially inferior Slavs. The Japanese created their
"Greater East Asian Co-Prosperity Sphere" on the assumption that they were
superior to other Asians. The United States grossly underestimated the
Japanese chiefly because Americans felt certain that the Japanese were a
nation of myopic, monkey-like imitators. These ideological and racist elements
made the Second World War even uglier and more violent than it would otherwise
have been.



**Office Hours**

I encourage you to take full advantage of my office hours and those of the
teaching associates. As a practical matter, you may want to visit them in
preference to myself, since they will be grading your examinations.



**Examinations**

The mid-term and final are divided into two main parts: "identifications" and
essays.

1\. Identifications

Identification questions call upon the student to identify and give the
significance of a given term. The identification portion of the answer should
define the term and/or discuss its important features. The significance
portion should link the term to one or more of the larger conceptual issues
raised in the course. Example:

> _Barbarossa_ \- Operational code-name for the German invasion of the Soviet
Union in June 1941. It inaugurated the largest land campaign of the Second
World War. Significance: Barbarossa called for the destruction of the Soviet
army in a single summer campaign and largely ignored logistical factors. In
this respect it was typical of the German emphasis on operational prowess to
the neglect of sound strategy. The planning for Barbarossa also reflected the
racial and ideolological nature of Hitler's regime and foreclosed any
political effort to undermine the Soviet regime.

Many students might suppose that the first two sentences of the response offer
both a satisfactory identification of the term and an adequate appraisal of
its significance. But calling Barbarossa "the largest land campaign of the
Second World War," while true, only testifies to the term's importance. The
final three sentences introduce the pertinent conceptual issues and thus place
the term within a larger context. That larger context, essentially, defines
the term's significance.

Note that the entire answer required only five sentences, no more. A good ID
answer should be as brief as possible. All too frequently students indulge in
an overkill of the ID responses that takes precious time from the essay
question. Each ID represents 12.5% of your grade; the essay counts for 50%.

Geography is vital to understanding military history. Therefore, every exam
contains a map on which the student is asked to pinpoint (within reason) the
location of several strategic places. However, the student is also asked to
identify and give the significance of those places. In other words, map IDs
should be treated just like regular IDs.

It should be noted that the maps provided on the test sheets are topographical
maps of Europe, not political maps. Thus you will need to locate strategic
places with reference to terrain features (mountains, oceans, rivers), not
political boundaries.



2\. Essay

The identification portion of the test is concerned primarily with the
student's understanding of the facts. By contrast, the essay is more concerned
with the student's grasp of the overarching concepts and how these concepts
organize and give meaning to the facts themselves. Students frequently assume
that the essay is just another way for them to demonstrate what they know
about the material that has been presented in class. This leads them to do a
"memory dump," which can have unpleasant consequences and usually does,
because an essay is intended to test your ability to think analytically and to
explain your analysis on paper. This involves, in turn:

  1. an ability to write clearly, so that the reader is not baffled by misspellings, grammatical faults, run-on sentences, etc.; 
  2. an ability to articulate a thesis; in other words, to orient the reader to the question that will be answered and to explain why the question is important; 
  3. an ability to prioritize. What issues are most important in answering the question? What is the most logical order in which to present them? What examples most clearly illustrate these critical issues? 
  4. an ability to avoid the irrelevant: everything you write should relate directly and explicitly to the question posed; 
  5. an ability to write an essay that is proportional to the time allowed for its completion. If you have 20 minutes to complete an essay, you must tailor your depth of coverage so that you cover the whole question in 20 minutes, without omitting important points or overemphasizing one point to the detriment of another. 



**MILITARY TERMS MADE EASY**

Although History 281 is not a course designed for military specialists, it
does require an understanding of a certain basic military vocabulary. This
short glossary should help orient you to some of the most important terms.
HOWEVER, IF YOU EVER HEAR A TERM USED IN CLASS WHICH YOU DO NOT UNDERSTAND,
_ASK!_

_Strategy_ has to do with issues that bear on the ultimate aims of a
belligerent nation. The key question can usually be expressed in this way: We
wish to achieve a certain objective. How can we best use our available
resources to do so? These issues incorporate both political decisions and
high-level military decisions. Examples:

  1. The Anglo-American decision in 1941 to concentrate on defeating Germany first. 
  2. The American decision to create a wartime Army of only ninety divisions--in the expectation that this would permit the greater mobilization of U.S. industrial resources. 
  3. The American decision in 1941-1942 to undertake unrestricted submarine warfare against Japan. 

_Operations_ deal with the large-scale employment of military forces in order
to achieve the goals of strategy. Examples:

  1. Strategically in 1941 Germany sought to destroy the Soviet Union in a single, quick campaign. The operational response to this requirement was a massive armored offensive along three main axes, aimed at shattering the Soviet Army in the span of a few months. 
  2. In 1944 the British and Americans sought to open a major second front in western Europe with the intention of breaking the power of the German armed forces, and, by entering Germany, to crush the heart of Nazi power. The Normandy invasion was the operational first step toward this goal. 

_Tactics_ refers to the deployment of weapons systems in order to win battles
and thus attain operational success. Examples:

  1. The German Navy's use of "wolf packs" as a means to overwhelm the Allied convoy system. 
  2. The Soviet penchant (developed in 1942-1943) for permitting the Germans to attack, then counterattacking the enemy's spearheads once they had pierced the front lines, in order to wear down German strength and prepare the way for a major operational counterstroke. 



**Military Organizations**

Although it is not necessary to know in detail how military forces are
organized, it is very helpful to have at least a general idea of the main land
unit designations and their relation to one another:

  * Company: about 100-200 men. 
  * Battalion: a group of several companies; usually about 600-900 men. 
  * Regiment: a group of two or more battalions; usually about 1,500 men. 
  * Brigade: a group of two or more regiments; usually about 3,000 men. 
  * Division: a group of two or more brigades; usually about 6,000-20,000 men. 
  * Corps: a group of two or more divisions; usually about 20,000-50,000 men. 
  * Army: a group of two more corps; usually 50,000-100,000 men. 
  * Army Group: a group of two or more armies; usually 300,000-750,000 men. 



Bear in mind that the exact size and relationship of military units varies
from time period to time period, nation to nation, and even from one service
branch to another.

