History/Political Science 229 Cocks/Grossman

Film Images of World War II Spring 2002

Course web-page:
[www.courses.albion.edu/plsc229](http://www.courses.albion.edu/plsc229)



Syllabus



The purpose of this course is to explore history through film and film through
history. The subject matter of the course is the cataclysm of World War II as
recorded by historians, filmmakers, writers, and participants. The approach of
the course is eclectic and interdisciplinary. We will be viewing our subject
from a variety of perspectives including politics, economics, aesthetics,
sociology, psychology, technology, literature, military history, and film
criticism, among others.



Required Texts (available in bookstore; plus a few book excerpts on library
reserve)

Gordon Wright, _The Ordeal of Total War, 1939-1945 _

Saburo Ienaga, _The Pacific War, 1931-1945 _

John Chambers & David Culbert, eds., _World War II, Film, and History_

Ronald Takaki, _Hiroshima: Why America Dropped the Atomic Bomb_

Course Requirements



READINGS: Weekly assignments are to be completed before class each week so
that you may view the films, hear the lectures, and participate in discussions
in an informed historical and literary context. In general, you are
responsible for knowledge of the main outlines, central arguments, and major
events contained in the readings. The readings are especially important since
they provide basic information upon which classroom lectures, film
discussions, and examinations will be based.



FILMS: You are responsible for knowing what each film wants to say and what it
does say, as well as how where it was made and when it was made affects its
point of view.



LECTURES: You are responsible for the main outlines, critical arguments, and
chief examples contained in the lectures.



DISCUSSION: By all means participate.



EVALUATION:

% of grade

2 short (5-7 pp.) papers (due 2/7 & 4/18) 20/30

1-hr. mid-term essay examination (2/28) 20

2-hr. final essay examination (4/30) 30



Note: Instructions for each paper will be made available in a timely fashion
during the semester.



  

I The Last European War: Athe strong do what they can and the weak suffer what
they must@ (Thucydides, _The Peloponnesian War_ )



1/8 illustrated lecture The 1930s. Excerpts from _Fire Over England_ (Great
Britain, 1937), _Alexander Nevsky_ (USSR, 1938), _Triumph of the Will_
(Germany, 1935), _The Wizard of Oz_ (USA, 1939), _The Great Dictator_ (USA,
1940)



1/10 lecture American Domestic Politics, 1938-1941 __

_ _

_ Prelude to War_ (USA, 1942; 53m); discussion



READING: Wright, 1-16; Ienaga, vii-xvi, 3-74;Chambers & Culbert, vii-viii,
xiii- xv, 3-10, 123-27; Thucydides, AMelian Dialogue@ (library reserve)



IIa Blitzkrieg: ATanks! That's what I want!@ (Adolf Hitler)



1/15 illustrated lecture Blitzkrieg. _Soldier of Orange_ (Netherlands, 1979),
_Forbidden Games_ (France, 1952), _Spitfire_ (Great Britain, 1942), _All
Creatures Great and Small_ (Great Britain, 1978)



IIb The Battle of Britain: AVery well, alone.@ (David Low, June 18, 1940)



1/17 _ It Happened Here _(Great Britain, 1964; 99m); w/ _Listen to Britain_
(Great Britain, 942, 20m); discussion



READING: Wright, 17-37, 129-43



III The Battle of the Atlantic: Afull armed with weapons and with courage . .
. you see your far-flung fleet come boiling in@ (Lucretius, _The Nature of
Things_ )



1/22 lecture Intelligence; Excerpts from _Victory at Sea_ (USA, 1952) and

_The Secret War_ (Great Britain, 1976)



1/22, 24 _The Boat_ (West Germany, 1982; 209m); discussion



READING: Wright, 167-73



IV Barbarossa: AThe enemy must not be left a single engine, or a single
railway truck, and  not a pound of bread nor a pint of oil.@ (Joseph Stalin,
July 3, 1941)



1/29 lectures Operation Barbarossa; The USSR in the Grand Alliance



1/31 _Ivan_ _=_ _s Childhood_ (USSR, 1963; 95m); discussion



READING: Wright, 37-78, 107-23; Chambers & Culbert, 85-95

  

V The Arsenal of Democracy: AWell, Rick, you're not only a sentimentalist, but
you've become a patriot.@



2/5 lecture Warmaking and the State: A Divided Arsenal?; _The Negro Soldier_
(USA,1944; 40m) w/AAll This and Rabbit Stew@ (USA, 1942?); discussion



2/7 _Casablanca_ (USA, 1943; 102m); discussion



READING: Ienaga, 75-127; Wright, 182-88; Chambers & Culbert, 31-44,
127-34,137-44; Kryder, AThe Divided Arsenal@ (library reserve)



**2/7 PAPER #1 DUE **



VI War with the Rising Sun: ADo unto Japs as Japs do unto you--but first.@
(Peter  Bowman, _Beach Red_ )



2/12 lecture Technology; Excerpts from _The Secret War_ (Great Britain, 1976)



2/14 _The Fighting Seabees_ (USA, 1944; 100m); w/ ATokio, Jokio@ (USA,
1944/45?); discussion



READING: Ienaga, 129-80, 203-28; Wright, 79-106



VII Victory in Europe: AHitler kaputt@ (graffito, 1945)



2/19 illustrated lecture Combat: The Terror and the Beauty. Excerpts from _The
Bridge_

(West Germany, 1960), _A Walk in the Sun_ (USA, 1945), _The War Lover_ (USA,
1962), _Band of Brothers_ (USA, 2001); discussion



2/21 _Saving Private Ryan_ (USA, 1998; 175m)



READING: Wright, 189-230, 234-67; Chambers & Culbert, 47-75, 79-83, 97-106



2/26 discussion; mid-term examination review



**2/28 MID-TERM EXAMINATION**



VIII Coming Home: AYou're home _now_ , kid.@



3/12 lecture Demobilization and Social Science Research; _Let There Be Light_
(USA,

1946; 60m)



3/14 _The Best Years of Our Lives_ (USA, 1946; 170m)



READING: Hammen, AAt War With the Army@ (library reserve)

  

IX Strategic Bombing: Athe suburbs on top of the cathedrals . . . locomotives
on belfries! (@Louis-Ferdinand Celine, _Castle to Castle_ )



3/19 discussion of VIII lecture and films; lecture The Evolution of Strategic
Bombing __

_ _

3/21 _ Th_e _Memphis Belle_ (USA, 1944; 45m) w/excerpt from _The Purple Heart_
(USA,

1944); discussion



3/26 lecture Moral and Political Issues of Strategic Bombing; discussion



3/28 _ Strategic Air Command_ (USA, 1955; 100m); discussion

READING: Wright, 174-82; Walzer, AThe Decision to Bomb German Cities,@ AThe
Dishonoring of Arthur Harris@ (library reserve)



X Holocaust: AHere there is no why!@ (Auschwitz guard)



4/2 illustrated lecture The War Against Civilians. Excerpts from _Distant
Thunder_ (India, 1973), _Two Women_ (Italy, 1960), _Come and See_ (Belarus,
1993), _Kanal_ (Poland, 1956), _The Eternal Jew_ (Germany, 1940), _The Sorrow
and the Pity_ (France, 1971), _The Pawnbroker_ (USA, 1964), _Sophie's Choice_
(USA, 1982); _Shoah_ (France, 1985)



4/4 __ _Kitty: A Return to Auschwitz_ (Canada, 1981; 90m); _The Psychology of
Neo-Nazism:_

_Another Journey by Train to Auschwitz_ (Great Britain, 1993; 52m); discussion



READING: Wright, 107-29; Ienaga, 181-202



XI Women and War: AThe girl he left behind is still behind him.@ (magazine
advertisement)



4/9 _The Life and Times of Rosie the Riveter_ (USA, 1980; 65m); discussion



4/11 lectures: American Women and the War; Into the Ice Box: Cold War, 1946-50



READING: Chambers & Culbert, 107-21



XII Hot and Cold Running Wars: A. . . today war is too important to be left to
politicians. They have neither the time, the training, nor the inclination for
strategic thought. I

can no longer sit back and allow Communist infiltration, Communist
indoctrination,

