[![Crossroads
logo](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/logo_sm.gif)](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/index.html)
|   |  [![Technology &
Learning](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/tech_sm.gif)](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/innovation.html)
[![Reference &
Research](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/ref_sm.gif)](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/reference.html)
[![Communities](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/com_sm.gif)](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/community.html)

![horizontal red rule](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/redrule.gif)
[![Curriculum](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/cur.gif)](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/curriculum.html)

**_Essays in Teaching American Studies:_**

 **"Any Old Way You Choose It": Popular Music as an Introduction to American
Studies**  
Professor Daniel Czitron  
Mount Holyoke College  
---|---|---  
  
> This essay first appeared in the _ASA Newsletter_ , September 1994, and was
accompanied by the syllabus, _[**Teaching American Culture through
Music**](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/syllabi/czitrom.html)_ ,
described by Professor Czitrom in his essay.

* * *

|  The American Studies major at Mount Holyoke is designed to provide students
with the flexibility to draw from a variety of traditional disciplines in
order to address major problems of American culture and society. A group of
sixteen faculty members, representing eight different departments, constitutes
the American Studies Committee. Committee members act as advisers to majors,
and, on a rotating basis, teach two core courses: "American Studies 101:
Introduction to the Study of American Culture," and "American Studies 301:
Senior Seminar." Both of these are conceived as topics courses that draw on
the intellectual interests of the American Studies Committee. The senior
seminar allows students to examine major issues or themes from an
interdisciplinary perspective, and also provides a "bonding" experience for
American Studies majors.

By contrast the introductory course is meant to invite first- and second-year
students into considering the American Studies approach. In consultation with
the Committee one faculty member chooses a topic sufficiently broad enough
both to attract student interest and to draw on the talents and expertise of
other American Studies faculty. By building a number of guest lecturers into
the syllabus, the introductory course thus serves to showcase the rich variety
of approaches represented on Mount Holyoke's American Studies Committee.
Recent American Studies 101 topics have included "The American City," "The
Culture of the 1960s," and "Cold War Culture at Home and Abroad." Regardless
of the individual topic the introductory course is framed around several large
questions: How can a multiplicity of perspectives enrich our understanding of
the American experience? What questions do individual disciplines ask about a
culture? How does the project of American Studies build on these questions to
forge its own mode of interdisciplinary inquiry?

The idea for organizing this introductory course around popular music had its
roots in a History Department research seminar that I team-taught, some years
back, with John Mack Faragher. That class, "The Social History of American
Popular Music," proved quite successful in opening up some of the important
dynamics of American history to students through a focus on popular culture.
It centered on exploring the relationships between social change,
urbanization, and industrialization and the evolution of American popular
music. With enrollment limited to 25 students, we were able to run the class
as a research seminar. Each student was responsible for writing a major
research paper, integrating primary and secondary sources. Students also made
in-class presentations, using musical examples to illustrate the heart of
their findings.

The American Studies 101 course, however, presented a thorny logistical
problem: pre-registration figures revealed that 100 students had signed up for
the class. I thus had to prepare for a large lecture course without the
benefit of teaching assistants. I already knew that my version of this course
would take a decidedly historical slant on the subject. I organized the
readings, lectures, and film series with the goal of giving the students a
historical grounding in several important areas: an examination of nineteenth-
century folk traditions, principally European and African, and their
exploitation for commercial purposes; the establishment of a popular music
industry that mass-produced musical commodities such as sheet music; popular
music as a mirror for American racism and race relations; the
professionalization of musical performance; the relationship between migration
and changes in musical forms; the crucial role of evolving technologies in the
twentieth century. The central assumption behind my approach was that a close
examination of musical practices over time and space could illuminate some of
the fundamental issues in American culture and history. By "musical practices"
I mean the complex relationships that exist at any given moment between
musical performers, audiences, the music itself, the music business, and the
technologies that influence the production, distribution, and consumption of
music.

On paper, I was ready to roll. But soon after my first meeting with the
100-odd students who jammed themselves into Mount Holyoke's new, fully
equipped media classroom, I realized that I needed to shift priorities. I
devoted the first two sessions to listening to the students. I asked each of
them to speak to what music they felt passionate about: What did they love and
hate? What was the first record they ever bought and concert they attended?
How did they feel about their parents' music? Did they ever perform or write
music? What music were they interested in learning more about? How had their
own tastes changed?

What struck me most forcefully was the severely narrow range of the music they
discussed. The gaps in the class's collective familiarity with American
popular music were staggering. The vast majority of the students seemed to be
thoroughly unfamiliar with (and had never even heard) so many of the artists
who might be considered foundational figures: Louis Armstrong, Jimmie Rodgers,
Thomas A. Dorsey, the Carter Family, Robert Johnson, Bessie Smith, Bob Wills,
Count Basie, Duke Ellington, Muddy Waters, Hank Williams, Dizzy Gillespie,
Charlie Parker, Machito, Patsy Cline, James Brown, Tito Puente, Ray Charles,
and so on. Discussion suggested that the ever-tightening constrictions of
American mass media were partly to blame: strictly controlled Top 40 radio
playing the same "classic," "lite," or "current" hits; the rise of AOR format
("Album Oriented Rock," later dubbed "Apartheid Oriented Radio") virtually
devoid of black music; country stations with no sense of history; the paucity
of American music performed on television shows; the CD revolution making many
older records harder to find. What the students needed above all, it seemed to
me, was to listen to as wide a range of American popular music as possible.
The primary goal of the class became less to introduce American Studies and
more simply to introduce American popular music.

In one of these first classes I distributed a lyric sheet for the Chuck Berry
classic, "Rock and Roll Music." After playing his version, and those of the
Beatles and the Beach Boys, I asked the class to compare what they had heard.
Many were familiar with the two cover versions, but not the original. The
Berry version, all agreed, sounded less produced, less raucous, even "folky."
I invited them to read the verses and asked them: What is this song about?  

> "I got no kick against modern jazz  
>  Unless they start to play it too darn fast  
>  And lose the beauty of the melody  
>  Until it sounds just like a symphony  
>  
>  "I took my love way up across the tracks  
>  So she could hear my man awailing sax  
>  I must admit they had a rockin' band  
>  Man they was blowin' like a hurricane  
>  
>  "Way down South they gave a jubilee  
>  The country folks they had a jamboree  
>  They're drinking home brew from a wooden cup  
>  The folks dancing got all shook up  
>  
>  "Don't care to hear them play a tango  
>  I'm in no mood to hear a mambo  
>  It's way too early for the congo  
>  So keep arockin' that piano"  
>

The consensus was that the Berry song was a straight-ahead celebration of
rock'n'roll energy, an invitation to dance and party. I then suggested that
Chuck Berry was also a perceptive student of history as well, and that his
song revealed an African American artist keenly conscious of the layers of
history embedded in popular music. Berry's verses offer a capsule summary of
American black music, defining rock'n'roll as belonging squarely within a long
tradition of musical practice. Berry's song can be read as a "back to the
future" tour of African American music. It begins by invoking contemporary
"modern jazz," moving back "across the tracks" to rhythm and blues, then down
South to a jubilee (echoing the celebration of Emancipation), traveling
further south into popular Latin American rhythms, and ultimately landing back
in Africa. One way into the history of American popular music, I suggested,
was to pay special attention to the historical sensibility of its greatest
artists, such as Chuck Berry.

Although I left myself room to improvise and take off on tangents, I found
that careful planning and attention to mechanics for a course like this was
crucial. Our classroom was fully equipped with phonograph, tape, multiple CD
changer, film, and video projection capability--but occasional technical
glitches were inevitable and sometimes broke the flow of a class. I put a lot
of effort into coordinating readings, film showings in and out of class, guest
lecturers, and the preparation of tapes. The class met twice weekly, and I
organized each week around a different topic. For each session I alternated
lecturing with musical examples from prepared audio tapes or CDs; I handed out
a list of music to be played at the start of each class. I tried to frame each
week with a few key questions or issues that I asked the students to engage
while listening to the music, doing the reading, and watching the films.
Daniel Kingman's American Music (2nd ed.) served as a useful and comprehensive
overview text, supplemented by four other books.

For example, in the week devoted to Anglo-European Folksong Traditions and
African Transformations, I asked students to consider the process by which
camp-meeting Protestantism re- invented the psalm-song as the revivalist
"spiritual." What role did the nineteenth-century publishers of "shape note"
songbooks (perhaps the first mass medium for "popular" music in America) and
the itinerant masters of "singing schools" play in spreading a new kind of
sacred music throughout the countryside? Why did songs of "love and death,"
such as "Barbara Allen" and "The House Carpenter," become the pre-eminent form
of ballad in America? I used Robert Farris Thompson's video African Art in
Motion to illustrate how the fundamentals of West African musical traditions
differ from those of the European in tonality, rhythm, and dance.

Our first guest lecturer, John Grayson of the Religion Department, offered a
thoughtful overview of gospel music's development, focusing on the career of
composer Thomas A. Dorsey. Grayson argued that gospel music was perhaps the
best example of how popular music integrated African, European, and indigenous
musical styles, and he stressed that gospel had always blurred the lines
between the sacred and secular concerns of the urban black community. The
class received a special treat when one of the students, gospel singer
Funteller Thomas, performed a breathtaking, a cappella version of Dorsey's
"Precious Lord" in class.

The two weeks spent on blues and jazz were especially intense, and I probably
tried to cover too much (Figures 1 and 2). Robert Palmer's Deep Blues,
although perhaps too detailed, provided an excellent introduction to the Delta
blues tradition. As with our explorations into New Orleans jazz I asked the
students to try to connect musical styles to specific times and places. What
was unique in the social and political history of post-Reconstruction New
Orleans that helps account for the explosion of what became known as jazz?
What was the role of Creoles--who are neither black nor white, and both--in
the development of this innovative style? How did the obscure musicians who
lived and worked in the turn-of-the-century Delta create a music that is now
instantly recognizable (and more popular than ever) around the world? To what
extent has the rather continuous migration of twentieth-century black America
from country to city been imaginatively reflected in blues music? Conversely,
how have even the most polished "uptown" blues stylings retained the themes
and feel of classic country blues? An in-class screening of Bessie Smith's
spectacular short 1929 film St. Louis Blues (the only surviving performance
footage of her) led to an extended discussion of Smith's extraordinary
popularity, and that of other female blues singers during the 1920s. Out-of-
class screenings of The Harlem Rhythm and Blues Review (1955) and Bruce
Ricker's seminal documentary Last of the Blue Devils (1982) illustrated the
wide range of expressive performance styles in the r&b; and jazz traditions.

Dealing with country music presented a special challenge: nearly everyone in
the class hated it. I decided to work with that and I urged the students to
articulate why. In fact, a great deal of the dislike for country music turned
on class and regional differences, and to (often unconscious) responses to
cultural cues ("its low-rent," "it's for the uneducated," "every song sounds
the same," "it's for men only"). Reading Loretta Lynn's autobiography, Coal
Miner's Daughter, as well as seeing the film version of her story, definitely
helped to humanize the country scene and to dispel easy notions about the
music's "inherent" sexism. Lynn's career also provided a fine case study of
the tangled contradictions that have always accompanied the commercialization
of country music. Her music also helped us to consider several of the "master
narratives" present in country music, the most important of which may be an
insistent longing for a simpler, less complicated, more moral "country life."

Roberto Marquez of the Latin American Studies Program provided a brilliant and
concise overview of "The Latin Tinge" in American popular music (Figure 3).
Marquez began with examples of Puerto Rican and Cuban roots music from the
early twentieth century, including aguinaldo, plena, bomba, and son styles. He
then traced the migration of these forms to the mainland, the fusion of son
and plena with jazz, the extraordinary popularity of mambo and other Latin
dance styles in the 1950s, and the emergence of salsa in the 1960s. An in-
class screening of the documentary on Machito, arguably the most influential
of all Latin bandleaders, brought home the creative power of this tradition,
as well as its cross-pollination with jazz. The movie Crossover Dreams,
featuring the Panamanian singer/songwriter Ruben Blades, raised critical (and
universal) issues about assimilation and "making it" for musicians outside the
mainstream. In addition to educating us about the particulars of Latin music,
Marquez's presentation also forced the class to consider American Studies as
something far more complex than simply United States Studies.

Rock'n'roll, soul music, world beat, and hip-hop all received short shrift I'm
afraid. The story of early rock'n'roll was fairly familiar to the students,
but it was hard for most of them to hear Elvis Presley, Buddy Holly, Jerry Lee
Lewis, or the other pioneer white rockers as anything but campy. They were
intrigued, however, by the relationship between the origins of rock and the
rise of the teenager as a key force in postwar consumer culture. Nelson
George's Where Did Our Love Go? is the best book on Motown, and it contains an
enormous amount of insight about the music business and the price of crossover
success for African American culture. Students did not quite know how to react
to "The T.A.M.I. Show," a 1964 filmed concert that includes powerful
performances from James Brown, the Miracles, Marvin Gaye, and the Rolling
Stones, along with painful-to-watch appearances by Lesley Gore, Billy J.
Kramer and the Dakotas, and Gerry and the Pacemakers--all surrounded by female
go-go dancers in cages. Several students wanted to know if James Brown had
been on drugs. Were these the same ones who had never heard of Bob Dylan? Stan
Lathan's underrated 1984 film Beat Street breathed life into a standard,
Hollywood formula music film by fully showing the connections between rappers,
breakdancers, and graffiti writers. Douglas Amy of the Politics Department led
a lively session on 2 Live Crew and the politics of music censorship, which
brought us up to the present.

As with all survey courses, there was not enough time to appropriately cover
the topic. To a certain extent the class was a victim of its own success: too
many students, not enough discussion or attention to readings, no space for
student presentations. The large lecture format, of course, inhibited
discussion, and with no TAs I made final papers optional. Everyone took a
midterm and final, which included musical and video identifications.
Undoubtedly this class would work better if it were smaller and if each
student were required to write about popular music and present her findings to
the class. But I think this version of American Studies 101 succeeded in
educating students about the variety, artistry, intelligence, and sheer
emotional power to be found in American popular music. Course evaluations
suggested that it also encouraged further listening, reading, and viewing. And
I like to think that the course also proved Chuck Berry right: "Any old way
you choose it," taking popular music seriously offers a vital and exciting way
into American culture and history.  |  
---|---|---  
  
* * *

[Communities](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/community.html) |
[Curriculum](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/curriculum.html) |
[Technology & Learning](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/innovation.html)
| [Reference & Research](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/reference.html)  
[Crossroads home page](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/index.html) |
[About Crossroads](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/about.html) | [What's
New](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/new.html) | [Visitors'
Book](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/visitor.html)

This section last updated October 1996. Please send comments to [Crossroads
Webstaff](mailto:cepacs@gusun.georgetown.edu).  
  
---

