[![Crossroads logo](logo_sm.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/index.html)
|   |

[![Technology &
Learning](tech_sm.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/innovation.html)
[![Reference &
Research](ref_sm.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/reference.html)
[![Communities](com_sm.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/community.html)

![horizontal red rule](redrule.gif)
[![Curriculum](cur.gif)](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/curriculum.html)

#  
  
---|---|---  
  
Dr. Lori Landay  
The Institute for Liberal Arts & Interdisciplinary Studies  
303 Berkeley Street, A32  
Office hours: T, Th 2-3 & by appointment  
617/824-8283  
llanday@emerson.edu  
Teaching Assistant: Brian Haffner

## **   IN 125: Topics in Women's and Gender Studies **

## **SEXUAL REVOLUTIONS**

## **Fall 1999 T, Th 12-1:45 303 Berkeley, A21 Overview**

In 1913, a popular magazine announced that the clock had struck "sex o'clock"
in America, and indeed there were major changes in the "manners and morals" of
masculine and feminine gender and sexuality in modern American culture. During
the Jazz Age of the 1920s and again in the 1960s through the early 1970s, many
Americans perceived that they were witnessing and participating in sexual
revolutions. This course explores these sexual revolutions and how they were
represented, repressed, and transformed in music, film, art, advertising,
literature, theater, and other media.

Members of the class will work individually and collaboratively on projects
that combine creative and critical perspectives to investigate topics such as:
the Harlem Renaissance, the flapper, consumerism, jazz, the blues queens,
Prohibition, silent film, and modernism in the Jazz Age; and in the 60s and
70s, the Summer of Love, Black Power, the lesbian and gay liberation movement,
rock, drugs and the counterculture, women=s liberation, television, and
pornography. After the units on the 20s and the 60s, the course concludes with
speculation about the state of sexuality and gender our current era and into
the next millennium.

****

**Sexual Revolutions** will provide a forum for you to develop the skills you
will need to excel in college, and offer the opportunity to learn about the
history of sexuality and gender in American culture. The courses in the First
Year Program in the Institute for Liberal Arts & Interdisciplinary Studies are
designed to provide a rigorous and exciting introduction to liberal arts
education at Emerson. All courses in the First Year Program are writing
intensive, and sharpen critical reading, writing and speaking skills. These
courses also emphasize topics, course materials, and pedagogical strategies
appropriate to the interdisciplinary study of the liberal arts.

# **     Course Goals and Objectives **

1) To provide an introduction to the interdisciplinary inquiry central to
Women=s Studies, Gender Studies, the history of sexuality, and cultural
history.

2) To pursue an understanding of the past, present, and possible futures of
the processes of sexual revolution.

3) To create a collaborative learning environment that encourages you to think
and work independently and share your insights cooperatively.

4) To foster active and critical reading, writing, viewing, and thinking. To
combine critical work with creative endeavors.

5) To give you an opportunity to read, screen, discuss, and write about
touchstone texts in a historical and multicultural framework.

6) To help you make connections between your academic studies and the world in
which you live.

** Some questions we=ll explore during the semester:**

# **Definitions**

What is a sexual revolution? What are Amanners and morals@?

Who and/or what defines sexuality?

What=s at stake?

How do definitions of sexuality change over time?

How are popular culture and perceptions of sexual revolution related?

How do race, gender, class, ethnicity, nation, and religion inflect
perceptions of sexuality?

What is interdisciplinary inquiry? Women=s Studies? Gender Studies?

# **Interpretations: Metaphors, Representations, Practices, Internalizations,
Rejections** ****

How do people interpret the cultural role of sexuality in their everyday
lives?

What practices internalize, externalize, reinforce, or reject cultural
definitions of sexuality?

How are representations of sexuality created, reproduced, circulated,
interpreted, consumed, revised, and parodied? What methods can we use to
understand the process of making meanings?

How does visual culture offer the opportunity to challenge, reinforce, and/or
reinvent sexuality?

# **Readings:**

__

_Intimate Matters_ , John D=Emilio and Estelle B. Freedman

_The Sun Also Rises_ , Ernest Hemingway

_Passing_ , Nella Larsen

_Madcaps, Screwballs, and Con Women: The Female Trickster in American Culture_
, Lori Landay

_Ways of Seeing_ , John Berger

*Norman Mailer, AThe White Negro@

*Annette Koedt, AThe Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm@

*Alice Echols, ANothing Distant About It: Women=s Liberation and Sixties Radicalism@

*George Lipsitz, AWho=ll Stop the Rain? Youth Culture, Rock >n= Roll, and Social Crises@

*Beth Bailey, ASexual Revolutions(s)@

recommended: _From Front Porch to Back Seat: Courtship in Twentieth-Century
America_ , Beth L. Bailey

# **Films:**

_Male and Female_ (1919)

_Easy Rider_ (1969)

_It_ (1927)

_Bob & Carol & Ted & Alice_ (1969)

_Un Chien Andalou_ (1927)

_Gimme Shelter_ (1970)

_Our Dancing Daughters_ (1928)

_Carnal Knowledge_ (1971)

_Bare Knees_ (1928)

_Before Stonewall_ (1985)

_She Done Him Wrong_ (1933)

_Demon Rum_ (1990)

_Jules and Jim_ (1961)

_The Doors_

_Dr. Strangelove, or How I Learned to_ _I Shot Andy Warhol_ (1996)

_Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb_ (1964)

The _Belle du Jour_ (1967)

_Wild Women Don_ _= t Get the Blues_ (1989)

_The Graduate_ (1967)

_I Remember Harlem_

# **Coursework:**

Grades are based on your written work, presentations, and
collaboration/participation in class activities.

Critical Responses (1-2) pages 20%

Essay (4-6 pages) 15%

Take-home midterm 15%

Take-home final 15%

Group projects 15%

Collaboration/attendance/participation/quizzes 20%



# **Group projects**

5-10 minute in-class presentation involving groups of 4-5 class members

Each group presentation must incorporate the following elements:

  * research into the topic 
  * clear connection to at least one of the major concepts of the course
  * visual component (video, posters, transparencies)
  * music
  * class involvement
  * equal contributions by each member of the group
  * handout

# **WWW Links**

**general**

The Sexual Revolution Debates _http://www.awarenet.com/amm/dbate.htm_

Howard Zinn on sexual revolution and Clinton/Lewinsky
_http://www.lbbs.org/zinn_left.htm_

__

_Ways of Seeing_
http://courses.washington.edu/englhtml/engl569/berger/bergersup.html

**Jazz Age**

Retro magazine article on the blues
****_http://www.retroactive.com/vices/entendre.html_

Godey=s Ladies Book, 19th c magazine
_http://www.history.rochester.edu/godeys/03-50.htm_

Notes on the Gaze _http://www.aber.ac.uk/~dgc/gaze09.html_

Flapper Culture & Style _http://www.pandorasbox.com/flapper.html_

Music, art & culture of the 1920s
_http://www.usuers.interport.net/~ahajnal/20s.html_

____

Bessie Smith _http://www.hub.org/bluesnet/readings/bessie.html_

Media History Timeline, 1920s _http://www.mediahistory.com/time/1920s.html_

Greatest Films of the 1920s http://www.filmsite.org/20s _intro.html_

Index of sites on modernism
http://www.modcult.brown.edu/people/Scholes/modlist/Title.html

**1960s**

_Dr. Strangelove_ continuity script
****_http://mach.me.queensu.ca/~bakhtiar/kubrick/strangescript.html_

Psychedelic >60s _http://www.lib.virginia.edu/exhibits/sixties/_

Timeline of the Civil Rights Movement ****_http://www.wmich.edu/politics/mlk/_

Photographs of the 1960s counterculture
_http://www.si.edu/organiza/museums/nmah/ve/lisalaw/_

Suburban Culture in the 1960s _http://home.texoma.net/~kgreg/_

Abbie Hoffman, Black Panthers, & other activists
_http://www.brandeis.edu/students/st951310/_

Visit Haight-Ashbury in SF in the 60s
_http://www.halcyon.com/colinp/archives.htm_

Summer of Love _http://www.sftoday.com/enn2/summerlove.htm_

Swingin' Chicks of the '60s _http://www.swinginchicks.com/_

****

**Film Analysis**
_http://pages.emerson.edu/Faculty/Lori_Landay/coursematerials/filmanalysis.htm_

****

**Critical Responses**
_http://pages.emerson.edu/Faculty/Lori_Landay/coursematerials/criticalresp.html_

** INSTITUTE FILM SERIES **

16 September **The Doors IN125**

23 September Johnny Mnemonic IN115

30 September **Jules and Jim** IN108, **IN125**

7 October Wuthering Heights IN118

14 October Portrait of a Lady IN120

21 October 2001 IN115, IN106

28 October Blade Runner IN115

4 November The Matrix IN115, IN106

18 November Dr. Strangelove IN122

2 December **I Shot Andy Warhol** IN109, **IN125**

9 December **The Ice Storm ** IN108, **IN125**

# **Course Policies:**

**ATTENDANCE:** Because this course is based on your active participation,
attendance is mandatory. If you are late, leave early, or are disruptive in
class, it will affect your grade. There are no Aexcused@ or Aunexcused@
absences. If you miss more than two classes, your grade will be affected no
matter what reason you have for missing class. According to College policy,
more than 5 absences will result in a failing grade for the course. There will
be occasional unannounced quizzes that cannot be made up. It is your
responsibility to contact another student, find out what we did in class, and
make sure you understand the assignment for the next class. If you have a
serious problem that prevents you from coming to class or completing an
assignment, such as an illness or personal emergency, talk to me before the
assignment is due and we will work out a way for you to make up the work.

**Note: ** Your final exams have been scheduled. Do not make (or have parents
make) travel plans without taking your exam times and other deadlines into
consideration. No exceptions!

**ASSIGNMENTS:** Assignments are due at the _beginning_ of class, or by the
deadline indicated on the assignment. If you hand something in late, your
grade will be lowered. If you do not hand in all the assignments, you will not
pass the course. Over the semester, there will be opportunities for extra
credit.

**CRITICAL RESPONSES:** These occasional 1-2 page typed assignments should be
concise, well-written, carefully focused, and well-organized. These
assignments are a way for you to engage in the ideas raised by the readings.
See handout on critical responses and/or
_http://pages.emerson.edu/Faculty/Lori_Landay/coursematerials/criticalresp.html_
and
_http://pages.emerson.edu/Faculty/Lori_Landay/coursematerials/filmanalysis.htm_

**GRADES:** Grades will be based on your written work, projects and
presentations, participation, and collaboration. **** All grades are final and
non-negotiable. Changes will be made only in the case of computation errors.

**ACADEMIC DISHONESTY:** All work in this class is to be done on an individual
basis. It is your responsibility to be aware of and abide by the rules
governing plagiarism, cheating, and academic dishonesty. Any instance of
plagiarism, cheating, or academic dishonesty will be turned over to the
administration and dealt with in the strictest manner. Additionally, willful
damage to books, videos, or any other library or departmental material used in
the preparation of assignments will result in an F for the assignment and
other disciplinary action.

**FILMS AND OTHER OUT OF CLASS ACTIVITIES:** There will be films and other
activities that will take place outside of class. Several of the films for our
course will be included in the Institute Film Series, which has screenings
every Thursday night at 8. If you cannot make it to a film screening, it is
your responsibility to see the film either at the media services center on the
3rd floor of 180 Tremont or to rent the video on your own.

**STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES:** If you need accommodations due to a disability
(including a learning disability), please talk to me.  
  


[Communities](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/community.html) |
[Curriculum](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/curriculum.html) | [Technology &
Learning](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/innovation.html) | [Reference &
Research](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/reference.html)  
[Crossroads home page](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/index.html) | [About
Crossroads](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/about.html) | [What's
New](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/new.html) | [Visitors'
Book](http://crossroads.georgetown.edu/visitor.html)

This section last updated April 2001. Please send comments to [Crossroads
Webstaff](mailto:cepacs@gusun.georgetown.edu).  

