University of Wisconsin-Madison  
SLIS 841  
SCHOOL OF LIBRARY & INFORMATION STUDIES  
W. Wiegand  
Spring 1999

## SYLLABUS

## Reading Interests of Adults

Jan. 19 |

Introduction: Setting up class responsibilities for semester.  
---|---  
  
Jan. 26 |

DISCUSSION: (Class Members A-L) John Fiske, _Understanding Popular Culture_ ;
(Class Members M-Z) John Storey, _An Introduction to Cultural Theory and
Popular Culture_ (2d ed.) HAND IN: One page "Personal Reading Profile"; be
prepared to identify "Theme" or "Area of emphasis" you will be covering in
your journal.  
  
Feb. 2 |

DISCUSSION: (1) Boyarin, _Ethnography of Reading_ ; (2) Manguel, _A History of
Reading_ ;

(3) Alter, _The Pleasures of Reading in an Ideological Age_ ; Whole class
read: Dahlin, Kinsella, Lamm, and Wiegand  
  
Feb. 9 |

Mystery/Detective Fiction: One Mystery/Detective Novel (1A, 2B, 3C); Whole
Class read Frederick, "The Competition is Murder;" scan Gary Niebuhr,
"Reference Books on Mysteries"  
  
Feb. 16 |

Science Fiction, Fantasy: Read one Science Fiction or Fantasy Novel (1B, 2C,
3A) Whole class read Killheffer, "Fantasy Charts new Realms."  
  
Feb. 24 |

Romances: (1) Janice Radway, _Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy and
Popular Literature_ (1991 Ed.), 2A; 3C. Whole class read Wexler, "The Many
Sites of Love;" and Dyer/Dahlin, "Birds Do It, Bees Do It"  
  
March 2 |

Westerns: (2) Jane Tompkins, _West of Everything: The Inner Life of Westerns_
; 1C, 3B.  
  
March 9 |

SPRING BREAK  
  
March 16 |

Horror: (1A, 2B, 3C)  
  
March 23 |

Christian Reading: Read one book sold in Christian Bookstore; Whole class read
Harrison, "Spinning Spiritual Tales That Sell"  
  
March 30 |

New Age: Read One book fitting this category. Whole class read Mantell,
"Shedding a

Brighter and Broader Light"  
  
April 6 |

Comics: Read three comic books (please vary your selections). Whole class read
Morales, "Telling New Stories with Comics"  
  
April 13 |

Tabloids: (3) S. Elizabeth Bird, _For Enquiring Minds: A Cultural Study of
Supermarket Tabloids_. (1, 2) Read One Tabloid sold at Grocery or Convenient
Store (please vary your selections).  
  
April 20 |

Pornography: Read "Selected Pages from _Adult Video News_ ;" One Magazine or
Book from Adult Bookstore (please vary your selections).  
  
April 27 |

Bookstore Tour (if possible); TERM PAPER DUE (Submit two copies)  
  
May 4 |

Final Class Discussion "Wrap-Up". HAND IN READING JOURNALS BY 4:00 P.M.,  May
7  
  
A = To 1970  
B = 1975-1990  
C = 1990-Present

_

COURSE DESCRIPTION_ :

An examination of the nature and societal functions of a variety of mass
media-generated adult reading materials and their relationship to contemporary
field of library and information studies.

_

PURPOSE_ :

The course is designed to augment students' awareness of the cultural milieu
in which the majority of Americans live, and from which they draw much of
their information to understand and accept their social, political, economic
and cultural institutions and agencies.



_

OBJECTIVES_ :

Students will:

  1. Compare and contrast the cultural environment of contemporary mass society with the cultural environment of contemporary library and information agencies.

  2. Examine their own reading interests and cultural environment, and assess ways in which they have used it and how it has affected them.

  3. Compare and contrast democratic myths and values with the nature of information communicated in the mass media.

  4. Examine one or more adult reading interest genres in depth.



_

METHOD OF EVALUATION_ :

1. READING JOURNAL (40%). At the beginning of the term you will be asked to select a particular theme or area of emphasis which you can then track through the various adult reading interest areas we will be covering. Examples of themes/areas of emphasis include: sports, violence, gender, sexual orientation, death, fashion, marriage, heroes, villains, minorities, parents, divorced people, children, young adults, elderly, leisure, regionalism, religion, physical features. This list is hardly exhaustive; be creative and come up with your own area of emphasis.

After selecting the area of emphasis for which you will be responsible (which
can also be the subject of your term paper, if you wish), you will be expected
to read types of literature covered in class with that area in mind. In class,
you will be counted on to articulate how the works you read treat your
observations. Your task here will be made considerably easier if you PAY
SPECIAL ATTENTION TO DETAIL (i.e., on what does the author spend much or
little literary effort). This should enable you later to make better
connections between literary genres and the people who read them.

To assist you in this task, you will be expected to maintain a daily journal,
and fill it with your observations, and reflection on required readings, the
various genres assigned, and class discussions, especially as they relate to
the course objectives.

In your journal be sure to cite specific titles, points of discussion (and the
people in class who made them) and assigned readings upon which you are basing
your observations. This journal will be handed in on the date identified on
the syllabus.

2. CLASS PARTICIPATION AND DISCUSSION (20%). In a course that is primarily discussion based (as this one obviously is), you are expected to contribute orally. Since you will be responsible for focusing your observations on a particular area of emphasis, it is important that your classmates benefit from your observations so they can develop a more holistic perspective of how adult reading interests fit into the world of library and information science.

3. TERM PAPER (40%). Choose any area of adult reading interests we have covered in class. Read at least one history of that genre; then read six to eight examples of the genre. (If possible, choose examples that cover a fairly long chronological time span.) Apply the knowledge and expertise you have developed in content analysis to prepare a double-spaced 10-15 page paper (excluding bibliography) in which you:

a) define the genre you have chosen (1-2 paragraphs)

b) describe how the 6-8 examples you have chosen fit that genre (2 pages)

c) describe changes you see as having occurred over a period of time (at least
20 years) (2 pages)

d) explain the popularity of the genre, analyze the information (both
aesthetic and utilitarian) content of the genre, and measure how libraries or
information agencies are or are not at present filling this information need
(10 pages)

HAND IN TWO COPIES OF YOUR TERM PAPER ON THE DAY IDENTIFIED ON THE SYLLABUS

* * *

TEXTS:

  * John Fiske, _Understanding Popular Culture_ (New York: Routledge, Chapman and Hall, 1989).
  * John Storey, _An Introduction to Cultural Theory and Popular Culture_ 2d. ed. (Athens, GA: University  of Georgia Press, 1998).
  * Jonathan Boyarin, _The Ethnography of Reading_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993)
  * Alberto Manguel, _A History of Reading_ (New York: Viking, 1996)
  * Robert Alter, _The Pleasures of Reading in an Ideological Age_ (New York: Norton, 1996)
  * Jane Tompkins, _West of Everything: The Inner Life of Westerns_ (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993).
  * Janice Radway, _Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy and Popular Literature_. Rev.ed. (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1991)
  * S. Elizabeth Bird, _For Enquiring Minds: A Cultural Study of Supermarket Tabloids_.(Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee Press, 1992)

  

ON RESERVE:

  * Dahlin, Robert, "The `90s Groups Activity is All the Rage," _PW_ (November 18, 1996): 42-45
  * Kinsella, Bridget, "Book Groups Get Wired," _PW_ (November 18, 1996): 46-47
  * Lamm, Bob, "Reading Groups: Where Are All the Men?" _PW_ (November 18, 1996): 48
  * Wiegand, Wayne A., "MisReading LIS Education," _Library Journal_ (June 15, 1997): 36-38
  * Frederick, Heather Vogel, "The Competitions Is Murder," _PW_ (April 14, 1997): 40-48
  * Killheffer, Robert K.J., "Fantasy Charts New Realms," _PW_ (June 16, 1997): 34-40
  * Wexler, Diane Patrick, "The Many Sites of Love," _PW_ (Nov. 11, 1996): 50-51.
  * Dyer, Lucinda, and Dahlin, Robert, "Birds Do It, Bees Do It," _PW_ (November 10, 1997): 40-50
  * Harrison, Nick, "Spinning Spiritual Tales That Sell," _PW_ (August 17, 1998): S6-S14
  * Mantell, Suzanne, "Shedding a Brighter and Broader Light," _PW_ (April 13, 1998): 30-43
  * Morales, Robert, "That's Entertainment: Telling New Stories with Comics," _PW_ (June 30, 1997): 49-55
  * Selected pages from contents of _Adult Video News 1994 Adult Entertainment Guide_.

  

OTHER TITLES YOU MIGHT WANT TO CHECK:

  * Herald, Diana Trixler. _Genreflecting: A Guide to Reading Interests in Genre Fiction_ 4th ed. (Libraries Unlimited, 1995)
  * Ramsdell, Kristin. _Romance Fiction: A Handbook for Readers, Writers, and Librarians_ (Libraries Unlimited, 1998)
  * Rothschild, D. Aviva. _Graphic Novels: A Bibliographic Guide to Book-Length Comics_ (Libraries Unlimited, 1995)
  * Hoffman, Frank. _American Popular culture: A Guide to the Reference Literature_ (Libraries Unlimited, 1994)

* * *

![](/slis/art/l_hand.gif)[Course Information](../../academic/)

Questions and comments about the SLIS Home Page should be directed to the
[I-Team](mailto:slispages@slisweb.lis.wisc.edu).

