### History 360



Each student is expected to have in hand:

  1. Brinton, _The Anatomy of Revolution_ , 2nd ed. 
  2. Kuhn, _The Structure of Scientific Revolutions_ , 2nd ed. 
  3. A packet of xeroxes, to be purchased at the University Cop-ez service in the basement of Bricker Hall (watch for announcements; because of copyright problems, this packet may not be availible on the first day and may come in two or more packages ready at different times; students are responsible for all assignment arrangements announced in class) 
  4. A few handouts to be furnished in class. 

Each of these items is to be brought to class when the item is being
discussed. All material should be purchased at the beginning of the quarter or
as soon as it is available.



This course is about historical change, using episodes in the development of
modern science and scientific institutions to explore the way in which change
occurs and particularly what change means in science. No particular background
on the part of any student is assumed.

This quarter the entire class will take up together in order: the idea of
revolution, the structure of scientific revolutions, the Copernican
revolution, the chemical revolution, the Darwinian revolution, and the
Freudian revolution.



There will be two fifty-minute examinations (100 points each) over the reading
and class work. At the end of the course, each student will write a term paper
(165 points), which will substitute for the final examination, applying what
he or she has learned to a particular scientific revolution or alleged
scientific revolution _not_ already covered in class. A special sheet will be
handed out containing instructions. A preliminary oral report (see assignment
dates) is required (up to 5 points), and no paper will be received unless an
outline has been approved ahead of time (see assignment sheet for deadline).
There will in addition be a substantial amount of class discussion of the
readings (as many as 50 bonus points), and if the instructor finds it
necessary, there will be additional short quizzes (announced or unannounced)
at 10 points each. Students are required to attend class; penalty for more
than three unexcused absences will be 5 minus points per day.



All students must be officially enrolled in the course by the end of the
second full week of the quarter. No requests to add the course will be
approved by the Department chair after that time. Enrolling officially and on
time is solely the responsibility of each student.



Please notice that in the following assignments the work load varies, and
students should plan ahead so that they can finish each day's assignment on or
before the day it is assigned.

    
    
    September 25    Introduction
    September 30    Brinton, pp. 3-5, chapters 2, 3, and 4
    October 2       Brinton, chapters 5, 6, and 7
    October 7       Brinton, chapters 1, 8, and 9
    October 9       Lecture on background for the history of science.
                      Houghton, "Scientific Periodicals" (availability to be
                      announced); possible additional handouts--watch for
                      assignment in class
    October 14      History of science, continued. Possible handouts
                      Eleusis; students are to bring decks of cards
    October 16      Kuhn, chapters I, II, III, IV, V
    October 21      Kuhn, chapters VI, VII, VIII, IX
                      Examination preparation material available.
    October 23      Kuhn, chapters X, XI, XII, XIII, and Postscript
    October 28      HOUR EXAMINATION
    October 30      Copernican Revolution.
                      Selections from Stimson (9-21), John of Sacrobosco;
                      Duncan, _Copernicus_ ; Chronology;
                      Selections from _Commentariolus_ ;
                      _Six Books on the Revolutions_
                      Selections from Westman
                      (all from xerox packet)
    
         Signup list for term paper topics opens; deadline is November 14.
         Students are urged to look over some general histories of modern
         science for ideas for topics; a number of histories are to be found
         in the Science and Engineering Library on reserve and on the shelves
         there and in the Main Library stacks
    
    November 4      Chemical revolution.
                      Chambers; Sedgwick and Taylor (304-309) (xerox packet);
                      Table of Simple Elements (handout);
                      Lavoisier textbook (xerox packet)
    November 6      Chemical revolution.  Assignment to be announced
    November 11     UNIVERSITY CLOSED
    November 13     Darwinian revolution.
                      Paley; Lyell; Darwin's autobiography;
                      selection from Darwin, _Origin of the Species_
                        (xerox packet)
                    Last day for term paper topic choice
    November 18     Darwinian revolution.
                      Fawcett (xerox packet); Sedgwick (xerox packet);
                      and further assignment to be announced
                    Bibliography for term paper due
    November 20     Freudian Revolution.
                      Freud,  "The Origin and Development of Psychoanalysis"
                        (xerox packet)
                    Examination preparation material available
    November 25     Freudian Revolution discussion continued; possible handout
    
    
    November 27     HOUR EXAMINATION
    December 2      LAST DAY FOR OUTLINE APPROVAL (Papers will not be accepted
                      at all unless a preliminary bibliography is submitted
                      and the outline is approved ahead of time. Penalty for
                      failure to adhere to approval schedule: 10 points)
    December 4      Preliminary reports of findings. Watch for assignment.
                      Attendance required in group to which student is assigned.
    
    December 10 (Tuesday), 9:18 a.m. TERM PAPER DUE (in lieu of final examination).
       Proctor will be in classroom to receive papers from 9:00 to 9:18 only.  If 
       students wish to submit papers ahead of time, the papers should be left in 
       the office of the Department of History, 106 Dulles Hall.
    
       Only those papers turned in with a duplicate copy and a stamped, self-
       addressed envelope will be returned with comments.  Late papers will be
       penalized at 10 points per 24 hours of any business day or any part thereof.
    
    

