CC 348/WS 345/27265

WOMEN IN CLASSICAL ANTIQUITY

Dr [Barbara Goff](../index.html)

TTh 11-12:30 RAS 211B  
Office: WAG 223  
Office hours: T 12:30-1:30, 3:30-4, Th 1-2, 3:30-4

### **ANNOUNCEMENT:**

**_Agamemnon_ by Different Stages now runs through April 18th **

**Goals of the course** :

The goals of the course are twofold: to introduce students both to the primary
material on women in antiquity and to current debates about it, and to assist
students in the development of a clear and cogent writing practice. This
practice will entail the construction of coherent arguments, the conduct of
supporting analyses, and the expression of such argument and analysis in
persuasive form.

**Scope of the course** :

The course undertakes to restore women to history, and history to women, in
the context of Classical Antiquity from archaic Greece to imperial Rome.
Within this period, we shall attempt to reconstruct women's lives and assess
their cultural importance through the study of literature, art, and texts on
history, religion, medicine and law. We shall investigate change and
continuity in the position and representation of women over time, and shall
consider strategies for dealing with the paucity of evidence generated by
women themselves. The classical societies of Greece and Rome are often
considered to provide the origins of present Western attitudes towards women,
so we shall be particularly interested in the similarities or differences
between ancient notions about female identity and those of contemporary
society. The course readings will also lead us to discuss some issues that are
important for present-day feminist debates, such as whether female identity is
essentially similar over time, or conditioned by historical circumstances, and
whether it is historically responsible to describe women as 'victims'.

** **

**Responsibilities in the course** :

This course valorizes three activities: reading, writing and discussion.
Students are expected to read the required texts carefully and thoughtfully,
to test their hypotheses and explore alternatives in class discussion, and to
articulate arguments and conclusions in a series of papers.

Students are responsible for attending all classes and for all assigned
readings. All classes will be conducted as discussions; students should have
read the assigned material thoroughly before the class, and be prepared to
contribute fully to discussion. In addition, each student will be responsible
for introducing the material in one or more classes. You will shortly be asked
to sign up for the session(s) of your choice. I can provide more bibliography
for the student who is introducing the class.

No knowledge of Greek or Latin is required, as all texts will be in English.
This course contains a substantial writing requirement, and grades will be
determined as follows:



    quizzes: 5%
    participation : 20%
    3 papers of 5 pages each: 25% each
    ** **
** **

**Papers are due 2/26, 4/7, and 5/7. Quizzes are scheduled for 2/5, 2/19,
3/10, 3/31, 4/14, and 4/28.**

Each student will have the option of submitting one rewritten paper, if the
original paper obtains a grade of B or under. The rewrite must be submitted no
more than two weeks after the original paper is returned to the student. There
is, of course, no guarantee that the rewritten paper will obtain a higher
grade, but if it does, it will replace the previous grade for that paper. This
rewriting option is not available for the final paper in the course.

Precise topics for papers will evolve in the course of class discussion. Late
papers will be penalized, unless an extension is sought, and granted, for a
good and substantiated reason

There will also be at least 2 short writing assignments which will be
evaluated but for which no grade will be recorded. These are not optional.
There will be no mid-term or final. There will be no make-ups for quizzes, but
only the best five quiz grades will be counted towards the final grade.

Poor attendance and/or preparation will be penalized in the event of a
borderline grade. Scholastic dishonesty of any kind will result in a failing
grade (F) for that quiz or paper. Scholastic dishonesty includes any kind of
cheating; if you are unsure about the exact definition you should consult 'A
Students' Guide to Living in the Heart of Texas' p.10-11, or the General
Information Bulletin, Appendix c, Chapter 11.

** **

**Texts**

You will need to purchase:

Aeschylus  |

The Oresteia (tr. Fagles, Penguin)  
---|---  
  
Euripides  |

Plays 1 (tr. Grene and Lattimore, Chicago)  
  
Fantham et al  |

Women in the Classical World (Oxford)  
  
Foley  |

Reflections of Women in Antiquity  
  
Homer  |

Iliad (tr. Fagles, Penguin)  
  
Homer  |

Odyssey (tr. Lattimore, Harper Row)  
  
Lefkowitz and Fant  |

Women's Life in Greece and Rome (Johns Hopkins)  
  
Pomeroy  |

Goddesses, Whores,Wives, and Slaves (Schocken)  
  
Sophocles  |

Plays 2 (tr. Grene and Lattimore, Chicago)  
  
Sophocles  |

The Theban Plays (tr. Fagles, Penguin)  
  
Vergil  |

Aeneid (tr. Fitzgerald, Vintage)  
  


There will also be a required course supplement available for purchase at the
University Duplicating Service in the Union. The texts of Aristophanes will
also be available as a reader, later in the semester.

Several books and articles which are recommended but (usually) not required
will be put on reserve at PCL. These are included in the bibliography appended
to this syllabus.

** **

**Calendar of assignments**

For each class, you must read the material assigned from the texts for
purchase and from the reader. The material in italics, which is described as
on reserve, is recommended but not required. In most cases it provides a more
theoretically inflected account of the primary material. Those introducing the
class discussion are expected to read the recommended as well as the required
material for their presentation topic.



WLGR = Women's Life in Greece and Rome, Pomeroy = Goddesses, Whores,Wives and
Slaves, Foley = Reflections of Women in Antiquity, Fantham = Women in the
Classical World



1/22 Introduction

1/27 Homeric epic: women in a warrior society

    Iliad (Fagles) pp 132-136, 141-143, 146-147, 203-212, 339, 374-381, 412-415, 483-487, 490-498, 542-558, 611-614
    Pomeroy 16-31 (omitting 23-25)
    Arthur in Foley

1/29 Homeric epic: a catalog of women

    Odyssey 1-12 : Lattimore 1, 2.42, 3.58, 4.65-73, 5.90-93, 6, 7.111-113, 8.128-30, 133, 10.156-67, 11.172-80, 12.185-92
    Fantham 33-34

2/3 Homeric epic: coming home

    Odyssey 13-24:
    13\. 204-09, 14, 15.225-6, 228,-9, 234-7, 16, 17.254, 260-61, 266- 69, 18.274-79, 19.283-end, 20.298-301, 21.309-12, 317-18, 22.331-34, 23.335-44, 24.348-50
    Winkler on Penelope in Winkler 1989 in reader
    Foley in Peradotto and Sullivan 1978 in reader

2/5 Minoan and other matriarchies

    Pomeroy 13-15, 23-25
    Billigmeier and Turner in Foley
    Fantham 128-135
    Herodotus on Amazons 176-177 in reader
    Pomeroy 1976 in reader
    Bamberger in Rosaldo and Lamphere 1974 in reader
    QUIZ 1

2/10 Hesiodic appropriations

    Pomeroy 32-35, 48-52
    WLGR# 54-57
    Hesiod on Muses in reader
    Loraux 1993 in reader
    Arthur 1983 on reserve
    Bergren 1983 on reserve

2/12 Women's voices from ancient Greece

    WLGR #1-21, # 160, #162
    Pomeroy 52-56
    Stigers and Winkler in Foley
    on Sappho:Winkler on Sappho in Winkler 1989 on reserve
    Skinner in Rabinowitz and Richlin 1993 on reserve
    on Nossis:Skinner 1989,on reserve
    Skinner in Pomeroy 1991 on reserve

2/17 Homeric Hymn to Demeter: female anger and submission

    WLGR # 393
    Hymn in reader
    Foley 1994: 103-150 in reader

2/19 Classical Athens: law and life

    WLGR # 77-90, 267
    Pomeroy 57-74, 79-92
    Gould 1980 on reserve
    QUIZ 2

2/24 Classical period, history: extraordinary women

    Herodotus in reader
    Dewald in Foley

2/26 Classical period, philosophy: defining the female

    WLGR #72-74, #208, 216, 217, 218
    Pomeroy 115-119
    PAPER 1 DUE

3/3 Classical vase-paintings: making women visible

    Sutton in Richlin 1992 in reader
    Williams in reader
    on women in The City of Images in reader
    Fantham 46-49
    Keuls 1985: 229-266 on reserve

3/5 Classical and Hellenistic period: Medicine

    WLGR #338-352, 355-56, 375, 380
    Dean-Jones in Pomeroy 1991 on reserve
    King in Cameron and Kuhrt 1983 on reserve



3/10 Classical and Hellenistic period: religion

    WLGR #86, 383-387, 389-392, 394-400, 402-406
    Pomeroy 75-78
    Kraemer 1988 in reader
    Pausanias on Arrhephoria, in reader
    Fantham 34-39, 83-96
    Zeitlin 1982 on reserve
    QUIZ 3

3/12 Athenian tragedy. Female triumph?

    Oresteia 1: Agamemnon, Choephoroi
    Pomeroy 93-99

3/17 NO CLASS

3/19 NO CLASS

3/24 Athenian tragedy. Female defeat?

    Oresteia 2: Eumenides
    Zeitlin in Peradotto and Sullivan 1978 in reader

3/26 Sophoclean heroines

    Antigone, Electra, Women of Trachis
    Rosaldo, Ortner in Rosaldo & Lamphere 1974 on reserve
    Pomeroy 99-103

3/31 Euripidean anti-heroines

    Medea, Hippolytos, Bacchae
    WLGR # 29-33, 32-34, 59-61
    Pomeroy 103-112
    Foley in Foley
    Zeitlin 1991 on reserve
    QUIZ 4

4/2 Athenian comedy: the world turned upside-down

    Lysistrata, Thesmophoriazousai, Ecclesiazousai
    Pomeroy 112-114
    Zeitlin in Foley

4/7 Dorian Women : alternative possibilities

    WLGR # 76, 95-100, 401
    Pomeroy 35-42
    Fantham 56-67
    Kunstler 1987
    PAPER 2 DUE

4/9 Hellenistic Women: a new deal?

    WLGR #228, 229, 230, 415
    Theokritos in reader
    Apollonius Rhodius in reader
    Griffiths in Foley
    Pomeroy 120-148
    Fantham 136-182

4/14 Rome: early legends

    WLGR # 107-119, # 165, 166, 233
    Livy in reader
    Fantham 216-228
    Female origins
    QUIZ 5

4/16 Roman republican women: matrons and virgins

    WLGR # 51, 52, 53, # 71, #167, 168, # 173, 174, 176, 178, #214, #258, 259, 260, #408-413
    Pomeroy 149-185, 189-226
    Carp in Foley
    Hallett 1989 in reader
    Fantham 230-37

4/21 Roman Imperial women: power and sexuality

    WLGR # 120-147, #170, # 175, # 189, 190, # 210, 211,
    # 265, 266
    Tacitus in reader
    Pomeroy 185-189
    Fantham 294-329
    Richlin in Foley

4/23 Imperial epic: women in a new world order

    Vergil Aeneid 1, 2, 4, 6

4/28 Imperial epic: endings

    Vergil Aeneid 7, 11, 12
    Perkell in Foley
    QUIZ 6

4/30 Imperial elegy: are women real?

    WLGR #22-27
    Catullus, Propertius, Tibullus, Ovid in reader
    Fantham 280-293
    Wyke 1989 in reader
    Hallett 1978 in reader
    Gold in Rabinowitz and Richlin on reserve

5/5 Women in the early Christian period

    WLGR # 75, # 192-201, # 242, # 261, # 441-452
    Free at last?

5/7 Conclusions

    PAPER 3 DUE



Bibliography on reserve at PCL

** **

**Books**



Cameron and Kuhrt 1983 = Averil Cameron and Amelie Kuhrt, eds, Images of Women
in Antiquity (Detroit 1983)

Claude Berard, The City of Images (Paris 1984)

Fantham = Elaine Fantham et al ed. Women in the Classical World (Oxford 1994)

Keuls 1985 = Eva Keuls, The Reign of the Phallus: sexual politics in ancient
Athens (New York 1985)

Loraux 1993 = Nicole Loraux, The Children of Athena (Princeton 1993)

Peradotto and Sullivan 1978 = John Peradotto and John Sullivan eds, The
Arethusa Papers: women in antiquity (New York 1978)

Pomeroy 1991 = Sarah Pomeroy , ed. Women's History in Ancient History (Chapel
Hill 1991)

Rabinowitz and Richlin 1993 = Nancy Sorkin Rabinowitz and Amy Richlin, eds,
Feminist Theory and the Classics (New York and London 1993)

Richlin 1992 = Amy Richlin, ed. Pornography and Representation in Greece and
Rome (Oxford and New York 1992)

Rosaldo and Lamphere 1974 = M. Rosaldo and L. Lamphere, eds, Woman, Culture
and Society (Stanford 1974)

Winkler 1989 = John J. Winkler, Constraints of Desire (New York 1989)

** **

**Articles**



Arthur 1983 = Marilyn Arthur, 'The dream of a world without women: poetics and
the circles of order in the Theogony prooemium', Arethusa 15 (1983) 97-114

Bergren 1983 = A. L. T. Bergren, 'Language and the female in early Greek
thought' Arethusa 16 (1983) 69-94

Gould 1980 =J. Gould, ' Law, custom and myth: aspects of the social position
of women in classical Athens' JHS 100 (1980) 37-59

Kunstler 1987 = Barton Kunstler, 'Family Dynamics and Female Power in Ancient
Sparta', in Marilyn Skinner, ed Rescuing Creusa: new methodological approaches
to women in antiquity (Lubbock, 1987)

Skinner 1989 = Marilyn Skinner, 'Sapphic Nossis', Arethusa 22 (1989) 5-18

Wyke 1989 = Maria Wyke, 'Mistress and metaphor in Augustan elegy', Helios 16.1
(1988) 25-47

Zeitlin 1982 = F. I. Zeitlin, 'Cultic models of the female: rites of Dionysus
and Demeter', Arethusa 15 (1982) 129-154

Zeitlin 1991 = F. I. Zeitlin, 'Playing the Other' from F. I. Zeitlin and J. J.
Winkler eds Nothing to do with Dionysos? (Princeton University Press:
Princeton, 1991)

* * *





