[![Department of History](images/heading-dept_history.gif)](index.html)

[![American University](images/heading-AU.gif)](http://www.american.edu/)

[![About the Department](images/nav-about.jpg)](about.html) | ![](images/nav-
divider.jpg) | [![Degree Programs](images/nav-degreeprog.jpg)](degree.html) |
![](images/nav-divider.jpg) | [![Faculty Info](images/nav-
facultyinfo.jpg)](faculty.html) | ![](images/nav-divider.jpg) | [![Internships
and Institutes](images/nav-internships.jpg)](institutes.html) |
![](images/nav-divider.jpg) | [![History Course Descriptions](images/nav-
coursedescrip.jpg)](http://www.american.edu/american/registrar/descrip/courses/dt-
hist.html) | ![](images/nav-divider.jpg) | [![Schedule of Classes](images/nav-
schedule.jpg)](http://www.american.edu/american/registrar/schedule.html) |
![](images/nav-divider.jpg) | [![Research Links](images/nav-
links.jpg)](links.html) | ![](images/nav-divider.jpg) | [![Career
Center](images/nav-careerctr.jpg)](http://www.american.edu/careercenter/) |
![](images/nav-divider.jpg) | [![Admissions and Financial Aid](images/nav-
admissions.jpg)](http://www.american.edu/admissions/) | ![](images/nav-
divider.jpg) | [![Download Application](images/nav-
downloadapplication.jpg)](http://www.american.edu/admissions/appdownload.html)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
**MA Track in Public History**

Welcome to the Public History Home Page!  

**Why Public History?** People's demand for history extends beyond the
classroom. Each year millions watch the History Channel and visit Civil War
battlefields, the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum, and the Smithsonian
Institution. Today, historians inside and outside academia are collaborating
to bring the lessons of the past to the general public via parks, museums,
movie theaters, television and radio stations, courtrooms, embassies and
consulates, and the Internet.

**What IS Public History?** Public History may be loosely defined as the
practice of history outside the academic setting in, for example, museums,
archives, corporations, government agencies, and historic sites. Public
history, however, is not most distinguished by where it is practiced, but
instead by its audiences and methods of communication. Public historians
believe that history and historical memory shape the way people understand
their world and live their lives, and that people become more interested in
history when they see their personal connections to it. Public history can
have a number of goals:

To bring meticulously researched and creatively interpreted new scholarship to
public audiences  
To democratize the study of the past by including the public in the process of
doing history; to encourage people to study the past and form their own
interpretations based on evidence  
To help individuals and communities understand their shared histories and
heritage; to help people develop a sense of community identity through their
history  
To give people (both through academic programs and public outreach) the
scholarly, research, writing, and educational skills to effectively and
accurately disseminate history through a variety of increasingly popular and
powerful media, including web sites, exhibits, television programs, movies, or
newspapers  
To make history useful, relevant, fun, and easily accessible to a wide
audience

_The work of public historians can roughly be divided into two major areas:_  
**Historical Resources Management** : involves the collection, preservation,
and intelligent use of materials from the past in public agencies or private
institutions including historical societies, museums, archives, media, parks,
or preservation offices. Dissemination of information about these resources
also falls into this area, and occurs in a variety of fields including
publishing, editing, filmmaking or web design.

**Applied Research** : involves the use of history for client-related research
where the historian's perspective is valuable in problem solving, policy
analysis, litigation, or project histories for businesses, institutions, and
government agencies.

**Why American University?** Our history faculty in the College of Arts and
Sciences, professors in related departments at American University, and
historians and professional staff at Washington, D.C.'s many public and
private institutions offer you a challenging and stimulating environment in
which to pursue your degree and career. We encourage interdisciplinary study,
individually designed programs, and close contact between students and our
internationally renowned faculty. In addition, many members of our faculty are
[practicioners of public history](facultypublichistory.htm) who bring their
own experiences into the classroom to enrich students' understanding of the
topic. Our two-field MA in public history prepares you for opportunities
beyond teaching, enhancing your preparation for positions in museums, parks,
archives, film and television studios, and many government agencies.

No city in the country can rival the historical richness of Washington, with
its collection of museums, monuments, public agencies, embassies, and
government institutions. Guardian of the national heritage, Washington is also
a diverse and culturally rich urban community and the center of a thriving
metropolitan region that includes the states of Maryland and Virginia. A
bustling international city, Washington is also a global intersection where
Europeans, Asians, Africans, and Latin Americans interact.

**LINKS:**

[Requirements for the Completion of the M.A. Public History Track](degree-ma-
requirements.html#publichistoryreqs)  
[Courses](publichistorycourses.htm)\--General information and course catalogs
by semester  
[Spring 2002 Introduction to Public History
Syllabus](file:///C|/History%20Website/Kamoie/Public%20History%20Syllabus.pdf)  
[Guest Speakers to the Spring 2002 Introduction to Public History
course](Kamoie/S02%20guest%20speakers.pdf)  
[Internships](internships.htm)  
[Our Students](ourstudents.htm)



