[**Home**](http://www.acd.roch.edu/courses/hist1618/)

|

[**Grades**](http://www.acd.roch.edu/courses/hist1618/h1618gr.html)

|

[**Lessons**](http://www.acd.roch.edu/courses/hist1618/h1618ln.html)

|

[**Bulletin Board**](http://members.aol.com/wrldhist/hist1618/h1618bb.htm)  
  
---|---|---|---  
 **

HISTORY 1618  
WORLD HISTORY SINCE 1500  
SYLLABUS

**

* * *

Instructor 1: Richard Miller

|

Home Phone:  
  
---|---  
  
Office: Memorial Hall 447

|

Office Phone: 285-7533  
  
Office hours: (MW)

|

10 - 10:45 AM - and by appointment  
  
E-Mail Address:

|

rmiller@rconnect.net  
  
  |  
  
Instructor 2: William Bakken

|

Home Phone: 288-8602  
  
Office: Memorial Hall 447

|

Office Phone: 285-7533  
  
Office hours: (MW)

|

11 - 11:50 AM - and by appointment  
  
E-Mail Address:

|

bakken1@aol.com  
  
  |  
  
Course Internet site:

|

http://www.acd.roch.edu/courses/hist1618/  
  
**Textbook:**

|

Bentley & Ziegler, _Traditions and Encounters_ , Vol II  
  
---|---  
  
**Course Description:**

This course will be a global overview of the modern period of world history.
Beginning with a study of the major areas that existed in 1500 and the
European renaissance and reformation, this course will include the influence
of European expansion and colonialism of Europe itself and the rest of the
world. Particular subjects to be investigated include changes in religious
patterns, the French Revolution and Napoleon, the influence of the industrial
revolution, nationalism, Marxism and communism, and the political and economic
rearrangements of the 20th century. The course will end with a brief review of
contemporary conditions.

**

Attendance Policy:**

Attendance is the prerogative of the student, however, you are expected to be
present and participate in class discussions. You must arrange with the
instructor if exceptional circumstances require make-up tests. Instructor
office and home phones have answering machines and e-mail is checked on a
regular basis, so you can always reach one of us.

**Tests and Quizzes:**

There will be two objective tests in this course. Test I cover chapters 22 to
31, Test II will review the remainder of the course. We will discuss the
nature of the tests the first week of class. Before each test, you will
receive a list of map locations and study terms to help you prepare for that
test. Make-up tests not arranged before the test was given can still be taken,
but the test grade will be reduced by one letter grade (10 points).

There will be twelve quizzes and essays assigned in the course of the
semester. Some of these assignments will be in the form of short papers that
will be done at home and then discussed in class. The grade for one of these
quizes or papers can be dropped in each half of the class. In class quizes can
not be made up unless you have an excused absence.

Each test will be worth one-third of your final grade, the quizzes other
assignments cover the remaining third. Any evidence of cheating on a test or
quiz, or plagarism on an essay will result in a 0 grade and likely student
conduct action. (See 3.6.1 Student Code of Conduct in your _2000-2001 Student
Policy and Advising Handbook_.)

Total Points Possible = 450. A = 405; B = 360; C = 315; D = 270.

* * *

**Preliminary Schedule for Lectures, Discussions and Tests:**  
  
---  
  
Aug 23

|

Introduction, Global Connections

|

Bently: Chapt 22  
  
Aug 28

|

The Transformation of Europe

|

Bentley: Chapt 23  
  
Aug 30

|

New Worlds: Americas and Oceana

|

Bentley: Chapt 24  
  
Sep 4

| **

Holiday**

|  
  
Sep 6

|

Africa and the Atlantic World

|

Bentley: Chapt 25  
  
Sep 11

|

Tradition and Change in East Asia

|

Bentley: Chapt 26  
  
Sept 13

|

Revolutions and National States

|

Bentley: Chapt 29  
  
Sep 18

|

Making of Industrial Society

|

Bentley: Chapt 30  
  
Sep 20

|

The Americas in the Age of Independence

|

Bentley: Chapt 31  
  
Sep 20

|

Test Review and **Test I**

|  
  
Sep 25

| **

Holiday**

|  
  
Sep 27

|

Societies at Crossroads

|

Bentley: Chapt 32  
  
Oct 2

|

The Building of Global Empires

|

Bentley: Chapt 33  
  
Oct 4

|

The Great War

|

Bentley: Chapt 34  
  
Oct 9

|

The Age of Anxiety

|

Bentley: Chapt 35  
  
Oct 11

|

New Conflagrations, WWII and the Cold War

|

Bentley: Chapt 36  
  
Oct 16

|

Retreat from Empire in a Bipolar World

|

Bentley: Chapt 37  
  
Oct 18

|

Transformations and A World without Borders

|

Bentley: Chapt 38, 39  
  
Oct 18

|

Review and **Final Test**

|  
  
The dates and topics above may vary depending on class discussion, etc.

[**Home**](http://www.acd.roch.edu/courses/hist1618/)

|

[**Grades**](http://www.acd.roch.edu/courses/hist1618/h1618gr.html)

|

[**Lessons**](http://www.acd.roch.edu/courses/hist1618/h1618ln.html)

|

[**Bulletin Board**](http://members.aol.com/wrldhist/hist1618/h1618bb.htm)  
  
---|---|---|---

