**History 458 Modern Europe  
Syllabus, Spring 1998**



Carol Loats                                                        Office
Hours:

Office: Psych 117                                             MW 11-12, W 3-4,
Tu-Th 2-3

549-2348                                                             and by
appointment

**_Course Description_**

This course provides in-depth coverage of Europe's Modern period, from the
late eighteenth century to the late twentieth century, a period of turmoil,
complex political and economic developments, and new ideologies familiar
today. Through a combination of lecture and interactive seminar, students will
have the opportunity to learn about multiple aspects of the period, including
intellectual, cultural, social, political, and religious aspects. As a course
designed for history majors and miners; this course will expose students to
the historical process, and the use of both secondary and primary source
material, as background for mastery of this particular region and time period.

**_Course Objectives_**

1\.     The course will provide an opportunity to develop a sound knowledge
base about European history from the late 1700s to the late 1900s, including
specialized knowledge about certain topics.

2\.     The course will increase student awareness of the complexity of the
past, and increase their ability to synthesize, analyze, and make connections.

3\.     The course will provide the opportunity to engage in independent
research into a topic of their choosing, and present the results in a formal
paper.

4\.     The course will provide frequent practice in formulating and sharing
ideas orally and in writing. Students are expected to demonstrate ability to
write competent book reviews or to write skillfully about an independent
research topic.

  ** _Texts and Readings_**

1\.     John Merriman, A History of Modern Europe, vol. 2, 1997, required
basic text.

2\.     Wiesner, Ruff, and Wheeler, Discovering the Western Past: A Look at
the Evidence, vol. 2, 3rd edition, 1997. This is a collection of primary
sources and related material.

3\.     Two required works on specific topics: Martha Ackelsberg, Free Women
of Spain, 1991; and Philippe Perrot, Fashioning the Bourgeoisie, 1997.

4\.     Additional readings, either handouts or on reserve, will be assigned
from time to time. Stay tuned.

_  Note: All reading assignments are to be completed by the date listed on the
syllabus, because class discussions will often revolve around them. Be
prepared for class!! Changes or further information about readings and written
assignments will be presented in class. The reading load is heavy, and
modifications may also be announced._

  ** _Daily Schedule of Topics and Assignments_**

Jan. 13     Unit I: INTRODUCTION TO COURSE

 Unit II     BACKGROUND: EUROPE IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY

 Jan. 15     Historiographical Issues and Background  
                 Read : Merriman, Oh. 9, 10, 11, on reserve, optional  
                 Write: letter of introduction

 Unit III     EUROPE FROM THE LATE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY THROUGH 1848



Jan. 20     French Revolution  
                Read : Merriman, Ch. 12  
                Write: paraphrase exercise



Jan. 22     French Revolution and Napoleonic Era  
                Read : Merriman, Ch. 13



Jan. 27     Congress of Vienna and Emerging Political Ideologies  
                Read: Merriman, Ch. 14



Jan. 29     Emerging Political Ideologies (cent.)  
                Read : Discovering Ch . 7  
                Write: worksheets

 Feb. 3     Politics in France and Great Britain to 1848  
                Write: Topic Description for Options A _and_ B (see handouts)

 Feb. 5     Industrial Revolution to 1850  
                Read: Merriman, Ch. 16

 Feb. 10   Industrial Revolution (cent.)  
                Read: Discovering, Ch. 6  
                Write: worksheets

 Feb, 12   Revolutions of 1848  
                Read: Merriman, Ch. 17  
                Write: for Options A _and_ B (see handouts)

 Unit IV ECONOMICS, SOCIAL CHANGE, AND POLITICS TO 1914

 Feb. 17   The Middle Class's Nineteenth Century  
                Read: Merriman, Ch, 15  
                Perrot, Fashioning, to p. 150

 Feb. 19   The Middle Class's Nineteenth Century (cont.)  
                Read: Perrot, Fashioning  
                Write: worksheets

 Feb. 24   Power and Political Culture  
                Read: Merriman, Ch. 18 and 19, as assigned

 Feb. 26   Society in the Late 1800s: Top and Bottom  
                Read: Merriman, Ch. 20 and 21, as assigned

 March 3   stay tuned for update  
                 Write: book review (for Option B - see handout)

 March 5   MIDTERM EXAM

 March 10   Society in the Late 1800s (cont.)  
                   Read: Discovering, Oh. 10  
                   Write: Worksheets

 March 12   European Imperialism  
                   Read: Merriman, Oh. 22

 March 17   European Imperialism  
                   Read: Discovering, Ch. 9  
                   Write: Worksheets

 Unit IV EUROPE 1914 TO 1945: Politics, Economics, Society

March 19   World War I  
                   Read: Merriman, Ch. 23  
                   Write: for Options A _and_ B (see handouts)

 March 23 to 27: SPRING BREAK

 March 31   World War I and the Fall of the Russian Monarchy  
                    Read: Merriman, Ch. 24

 April 2       Russian Revolution  
                  Read: Discovering, Ch. 11  
                  Write: Worksheets

 April 7     Europe Between the Wars: Stalin's USSR through 1930s  
                 Read: Merriman, Ch, 25  
                 Write: for Option A, see handouts

Annotated Bibliography due for Option B

 April 9     Europe Between the Wars: Democracy and Fascism  
                 Read: Merriman, Ch. 26 and 27, as assigne  
                 Ackelsberg, _Free Women_ to p. 150

 April 14     Europe Between the Wars (cont.)  
                   Read: Ackelsberg, _Free Women  
                   _Write: worksheets

 April 16     World War II and the Holocaust  
                    Read: Merriman, Oh. 28

 April 21     Perspectives on the Cold War and Recent Developments  
                   Read: Merriman, Oh. 29 and 30, as assigned  
                   Write: Research Paper due for Option A  
                   Book Review due for Option B

April 23     Recent Developments (cont.) and Course Conclusion  
May 1        FINAL, 10:30 am

**_  Additional Important Information_**

1)     Your grade in this course will be based on the following:

         OPTION A  
        25 %         two exams (midterm and final)  
        20 %         worksheets on two books (7.5% and 12.5 %)  
        35 %         research paper  
        20 %         misc. : discussions (preparing, attending, contributing) ,  
_                           _short essays, worksheets on Discovering, etc.  
        100 %

        OPTION B  
        25 %         two exams (midterm and final)  
        15 %         worksheets on two books (5%, 10%)  
        25 %         two book reviews (10%, 15%)  
        15 %         annotated bibliography based on extensive bibliographic research  
        20 %         misc.: discussions (preparing, attending, contributing),  
_                         _short essays, worksheets on Discovering, etc.

        100 %



2)     Grading options A and B will be discussed during the first week of
class. Be sure you understand, and make your choice.



3)      **Attendance** is _EXPECTED_. you are expected to come on time and
prepared to contribute to intelligent and thoughtful discussions. You are
responsible (in discussions, worksheets, exams, and other oral and written
work) for all material presented or discussed in class and covered in the
syllabus. If circumstances prevent your attendance, or you miss a sign-up
sheet or an individual assignment or a change in assignment, it is your
responsibility to see me about it.



4)     For book reviews and the research paper (depending on whether option A
or B is in effect), handouts will explain the requirements. I use checklists
as I grade essay assignments, and my checklists are available to you ahead of
time if you wish to refer to them as you complete your work.



5)     Reminder: for this (and any) university-level course, you can expect to
work about 2 hours out of class for every hour in class.



6)      **Plagiarism** is the act of using someone else's exact words, or
extensively paraphrasing someone else's ideas, as if they were yours (that is,
without giving credit to the author, book, or person you are "stealing" from).
Plagiarism is not allowed, and results in an F on an assignment. You risk
failing the course as well.



7)      **If you need assistance** in understanding anything on this syllabus,
or in fulfilling any of the requirements for the course, please see me. Any
student eligible for and needing academic adjustments or accommodations
because of a specific physical, psychiatric, or learning disability is
requested to speak with me about it _no later than the end of the second week
of classes_. I hope to see all of you regularly in my office as we explore
history together.

