    
    


[![](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/1a_home.gif)](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/~sgabriel/main.html)  
[![](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/1b_courses.gif)](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/coursepage/)  
[![](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/1c_online_papers.gif)](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/~sgabriel/research.html)  
[![](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/1d_worldmedia.gif)](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/media.htm)[![](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/1e_political_economy_links.gif)](http://www.nd.edu/~remarx/links/main.html)  
    
    
    
    


![](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/title_header_test2.jpg)

    
  
  
Economics 105 | Spring 2002 | MW 2:30  
---|---|---  
  
Satyananda Gabriel  
Associate Professor Economics  
Mount Holyoke College  
Email:  [sgabriel@mtholyoke.edu](mailto:sgabriel@mtholyoke.edu)

Teaching Assistants:

Michael Coles:  e-mail:  [
worcestermichael@hotmail.com](mailto:worcestermichael@hotmail.com)  
Michael's office hours are Monday 4-5 in Thompson 628.  
Michael's discussion sections are at 9:05 and 10:10 in Dickinson 206.

Merrilee Mardon:     e-mail:
[mardon@econs.umass.edu](mailto:mardon@econs.umass.edu)  
Merrilee's office hours are Wednesday 1:00 -2:00 and TBA (to be arranged).  
Merrilee's sections are at 11:15 in Dickinson 206 and at 12:20 in Dickinson
109.

Course Description:  
Introduction to political economy for majors and nonmajors.

Political economy is the study of the role of economic processes in shaping
society and history.  Political economy (particularly when the word "radical"
is added as an adjective) has come to be closely associated with the work of
economists who adopted key concepts developed by Marx, in particular his focus
on **[class
processes](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/classprocess.htm)** or
relationships, but who rejected the economic determinism of orthodox versions
of Marxian theory.   Thus, political economy makes extensive and intensive use
of **class analysis** in making sense of society and history, but does so in
the context of political, cultural, and environmental processes, as well as
other economic processes.  

Nevertheless, most of the writings in political economy, including the work of
Marx, has been concerned specifically with understanding the role of **[
capitalism**](capitalism_defined.htm) (as the prevalence of a specific class
arrangement or set of class processes) in shaping society and history.  This
course introduces students to a **_post-structuralist_** approach to political
economy, an approach that _de-centers_ political economy from this narrow
focus on capitalism.   Post-structuralist political economy provides an
alternative to orthodox ( _neoclassical_ ) economic theory (taught in its
purest form in the introductory course in microeconomics), as well as to more
traditional (economic determinist) versions of Marxian (or Marxian-influenced)
political economy.

In the architecture of this new form of political economy, all social
processes are significant determinants of economic outcomes, the behavior of
economic agents and institutions, and the direction of historical change.  In
other words, the post-structuralist approach studied in this course _rejects
economic determinism_ in favor of a more open-minded approach to social
causality and the creation of history ( **
_[overdetermination](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/overdetermination.htm)_**
).  For instance, unlike orthodox economic theory or economic determinist
versions of Marxian theory, the post-structuralist approach would view
cultural processes are no less significant than economic processes in shaping
investment decisions.  The same could be said for political or environmental
processes.  This point, among others, will be made by essays and papers read
during the semester.

This post-structuralist political economy, like a number of other versions of
(radical) political economy, is, in part, a product of debates over the
theoretical contributions of Marx. This has implications for the concepts that
are highlighted within social analysis. In particular, it implies a concern
with conducting _class analysis_. Thus, students in the course will learn the
language of class analysis and study a range of different applications of
class analysis.

Primary Course Objective: At the end of the semester students should be
comfortable with the language and mode of analysis of post-structuralist
political economy and be well positioned for later comparison of this approach
to alternative economic theories.  Thus, each student should achieve the
following objectives:  **i) understand the difference between the orthodox
determinist/reductionist approaches to economic and social analysis and an
overdeterminist approach;   ii) understand the basics of conducting class
analysis;  iii) understand the post-structuralist Marxian definition of
capitalism; iv) learn how to distinguish capitalist class processes (the basis
for capitalism) from non-capitalist (slave, feudal, ancient, communal) class
processes; and, perhaps most crucially, v) understand how the material covered
in the course relates to his or her life.**

Required Text:  _[Re/Presenting
Class](http://shop.barnesandnoble.com/Booksearch/isbnInquiry.asp?ean=9780822327202&sourceid=00388763054044163164&bfdate=01-31-2002+20:20:14&bfinfo=7001_1012526404619-12556)_
edited by J.K. Gibson-Graham, Stephen Resnick, Richard Wolff (GGRW). This
textbook is available at the annex or from [online
booksellers](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/booksellers.html).
**Other readings will be available online**. Therefore, _do not_ simply print
a copy of this syllabus and think it is etched in stone. Instead, check this
online syllabus at the end of every week (online readings will be posted no
later than Friday noon if relevant for the following week).

Grading:  Final grades will be based on two midterms and a final exam. The
first midterm contributes 25% to the semester grade, the second contributes
35%, and the final examination 40%.  
    


**Calendar:**

**Readings denoted with an * require [Adobe
Acrobat](http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep.html).**

January 30th: Introductory Lecture  


February 4-6: J.K. Gibson-Graham, Stephen Resnick, and Richard Wolff, "Toward
a Poststructuralist Political Economy," pps. 1-22 of GGRW  
Gabriel, [Greater Caribbean:  Crossing the Boundary, chapters 1 &
2](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/Boundary.pdf) *****

February 11-13: Bruce Norton, "Reading Marx for Class," pps. 23-55 of GGRW  
Gabriel, [Capitalism, Socialism, and the 1949 Chinese
Revolution](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/economics/china-
essays/1.html)

February 18: No class --- Note that Mount Holyoke College does not recognize
the power of UMass administrators to change days of the week, so the Monday
class scheduled on a Tuesday is cancelled.

February 20-25: J.K. Gibson-Graham and Phillip O'Neill, "Exploring a New Class
Politics of the Enterprise," pps. 56-80 of GGRW  
Gabriel, [Lecture Notes on Post-structuralist Theory of the
Firm](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/

post_structuralist_firm.htm)

February 25-March 4:  Gabriel and Todorova, ["Racism and Capitalist
Accumulation"](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/racismcs.pdf) *****

March 6-11: Review and Summary of Introductory Concepts and Logic  
                    [Sample Questions for First Midterm](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/105_questions_1.htm)

**March 13 First Midterm**

March 16-24: Spring Break

March 25-27: Andriana Vlachou, "Nature and Class:  A Marxian Value Analysis,"
pps. 105-130 of GGRW

April 1-3: Carole Biewener, "The Promise of Finance: Banks and Community
Development," pps. 131-157 of GGRW  
............Case Study:  Belize Rural Women's Association  
............Gabriel, [ Belize Rural Women's Association, Revolving Loan Fund,
](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/brwa.htm)  
............ [ & Women's
Cooperatives](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/brwa.htm)

April 3-8: J.K. Gibson-Graham and David Ruccio, "After Development: Re-
imagining Economy and Class," pps. 158-181 of GGRW

April 8-10: Gabriel, "A Class Analysis of the Iranian Revolution of 1979,"
pps. 206-226 of GGRW

April 15: Patriot's Day

**[Click Here for Study Questions for Midterm II](MidtermII.html)

**April 17 Second Midterm** **

April 22-24: Serap Kayatekin, "Sharecropping and Feudal Class Processes in the
Postbellum Mississippi Delta," pps. 227-246 of GGRW

April 29-May 1: Dean Saitta, "Communal Class Processes and Pre-Columbian
Social Dynamics," pps. 247-263 of GGRW

May 6-8: Gabriel, ["Ambiguous Capital:  The Success of China's New
Capitalists"](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/economics/china-
essays/13.html)  
             Gabriel, ["Ambiguous Capital II:  Restructuring China's State-owned Enterprises"](http://www.mtholyoke.edu/courses/sgabriel/economics/china-essays/14.htm)

May 13-15: Stephen Resnick and Richard Wolff, "Struggles in the USSR:
Communisms Attempted and Undone," pps. 264-290 of GGRW

**[Click Here for Study Questions for Final Exam](105_final_questions.html)

Final Exams  
    


  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


