## For the fourth year Virginia Tech offered the course:

##  

## Global Issues in Natural Resources

##  

# Formerly known as, "Issues in World Forestry and Forest Products:

## A Tropical Study Program in Central America"

# Visit this site often to get new information on the course!

![](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/barmove.gif)

  * **[_Syllabus_](syllabus.pdf)**
  * **[_Application_](Application.pdf)**

  * **_Location_**
  * **_Purpose_**
  * **_1999 Highlights_**
  * **_[2000 Highlights](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/00pics.html)_**
  * **_Program overview and syllabus_**
  * **_Instructors_**
  * **_Credits_**
  * **_Eligibility_**
  * **_Costs_**
  * **_Housing_**
  * **_Contact for more Information_**

** **

**Supplemental Information and Links:**

  * **[_Nicaragua Links_](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/niclink.html)**
  * **[_Panama Links_](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/panlink.html)**
  * **[_Other Forestry and Development Links_](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/otherlinks.html)**
  * **[_Student Papers_](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/papers.html)**
  * **_Student Resumes_** ****
  * **[_Relevant Literature List_](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/litlist.html)**

Attention NGO's! We visited Domitila Private Wildlife Reserve and found that
it is in need of a partnership to help establish Nicaragua's first privately
owned reserve. Find out how you can help
[here.](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/domitila.html)

* * *

![](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/flag2.gif)

![](http://www.abcnews.go.com/reference/countries/images/flag_panama.gif)

## Location:

In 2000, the course was based again at the [Proyecto Ecologico Field
Station](http://www.guegue.com.ni/eco-nic/) in the Laguna de Apoyo Protected
Area, a one hour drive south from Managua, Nicaragua (See
[Map](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/img/Niclarge.gif)). The field station
is used for ecological research, conservation activities, and environmental
education programs, and is convenient to several exceptional field trip sites
in southwest Nicaragua. The facilities of the University of Central America in
Managua, and other organizations will again be utilized.  The course also
featured a week long stay in the rainforest of Panama.

* * *

## Purpose:

Knowledge of global forest resources, products, and issues related to their
use and management is a major requirement for those working in the natural
resource sector. This program is designed to expose participants to a broad
array of interdependent and international influences on the management of the
world's forest and the extraction and use of forest products. This course will
enhance understanding of the role forest enterprises play in world society,
and on the environment and economy. It will feature current issues important
in our daily lives such as green certification, deforestation, and
international trade of forest products.

* * *

## 2000 Highlights:

            To learn what happened in 2000, see our [2000 Photo Album](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/00pics.html).

* * *

## 1999 Highlights:

For the version with photographs proceed to the [1999 Photo
Album](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/99pics.html). The text only version
follows.

Flying into Managua, one gets an immediate feeling of the terrain as you pass
over mountains nearing the flatter agricultural plains around Lake Managua.
The airport has been recently renovated and is relatively effortless. Outside
a ride waits. Don't mind the heat of urban Managua, soon you will be in a lush
volcanic crater that is filled with crystal clear water. This is Laguna de
Apoyo.

During the first weekend we began making the Laguna de Apoyo our home away
from home, establishing our rooms and chatting with the others. This of
course, was after we dipped into the cool waters of the laguna. We stayed
immersed in awe of the rim surrounding us, which turned an emerald green in
the afternoon sun. This refreshing beauty was accentuated by Volcan Mombacho's
cloud blanketed summit in the distance, and the little Spanish speaking voices
of children enjoying their Sunday swim.

The first week was geared towards orienting us toward the area and each other.
The first meal was undoubtedly a good indicator of the delicious native
quisine we would eat in abundance. In the classroom we formed our groups and
received informal lectures accompanied with fresh squeezed juices and snacks.
The afternoons were spent hiking around the Laguna de Apoyo protected area,
observing the use of forest products amongst the residents, learning the
native flora, and chasing the Howler monkey's. Fortunately, Jeremy Dahl , a
Howler expert was well equipped with the ear and the knowledge to track them.
We also took field trips to the summit of
[Mombacho](http://www.nicanews.com.ni/nn21/mombacho.html), visited artisans in
the local towns, sawmills, Granada (a great city), Choco Yero Protected Area,
the market in Masaya, USAID and the Nicaraguan Government offices in Managua.

These stops involved both play, and the chance to meet some very influential
players in Nicaragua's development. We talked with Pedro Chamorro the Minister
of Defense for Nicaragua, [Eco-Canal](http://www.nicanews.com.ni/nn17/eco-
canal.html) General Manager Gabriel Pasos, and USAID. We also met with NGO's
such as Prolena, Colcibolca, and FUNDECI, about their roles in sustainable
development of a forested Nicaragua. Before long we had talked with the
government, the U.S. government, non-governmental organizations,
entrepreneurs, and the common Nicaraguan.

On the second week we departed to the north. First stop was the other research
station operated by the Proyecto Ecologica where we had lunch and a swim. Then
pass the chain of volcanoes to Leon. Before reaching the town we stopped at a
seed bank to observe their operation. Over pizza in Leon, we were fortunate to
the have the company of a United Nations worker who had been working with the
refugees from Hurricane Mitch and child labor rights. We spent two nights in
Leon.

One day was spent witnessing the damage of Hurricane Mitch and the enormous
landslide which killed thousands and displaced many into refugee settlements
which we also visited. In the afternoon we split up while some went to the
university to hear about a tree species as alternative fuel, while another
group met with a housing organization. A group member, Terry, had a low cost
timber frame housing unit that he recently developed and was trying to get
into the hands that could utilize such a design. Before we left a small group
visited the Pacific.

Esteli, and Ocatal were the next stops. We looked at a program that offered
stream side land to at-risk-youth for their promise to reforest and replant
the stream-side. We also talked with a farmer who owned a commercial
operation. In Ocatal we visited a pine stand that was being managed for
natural regeneration. The owner of this stand gave us a great tour of the
area, his treated lumber operation, and even a neighbors shade-coffee system.
Three of us took on a local team of boys in a quick game of basketball. Then
we headed home (Laguna de Apoyo), stopping at a forestry college, a tobacco
operation, and an herbal medicine enterprise.

The last week was spent pulling everything together in classroom discussions
and team presentations and just having a good time. We visited the Volcan
Masaya National Park, enjoyed a nice dinner with Virginia Tech alumni in
Nicaragua, and celebrated at a street fair in Granada. We also took some short
field trips to see wood product operations such as furniture, lumber, and
handicraft operations. And visited San Juan de Oriente where firewood is used
to fire pottery.

After all was said and done, we went home with a clear understanding of the
Nicaraguan forest, a list of our new friends addresses, tans, stories, and an
urge to return.

##

* * *

## ProgramOverview:

During the first week the course activities will be based in or near the
Laguna de Apoyo protected area. The course will include lecture and discussion
in the mornings lead by the instructors and guest speakers including experts
from Nicaragua's Department of Natural Resources (MARENA), the [US Forest
Service](http://www.fs.fed.us/), and several donor and non-governmental
development organizations. The afternoon sessions will consist of team
learning activities and short field trips to sites in the area. Evening
sessions will feature in-depth discussions with visiting guest speakers, and
opportunities to learn more about the needs of local forest users.
Participants will be lodged at the Laguna de Apoyo field station during this
phase.

During the second and third weeks, the concepts and issues presented during
the first week will be further illuminated though several longer field trips
to visit parks and reserves, forest based enterprises, and important forest-
based field development sites in other regions of Nicaragua and Panama.
Participants will meet and discuss important issues with specialists of the
[World Bank](http://www.worldbank.org/), [FAO](http://www.fao.org/), and
[USAID](http://www.info.usaid.gov/) and learn first-hand about international
career opportunities. As needed, the participants will stay in local hotels
and field station facilities when away on field trips.

We prepared for the year 2000 course an [information sheet
](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/00info.pdf)which you may download. Please
pass on to those who might be interested.

For more detailed information, please download a copy of the course
[syllabus](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/syllabus.pdf).

To see the application for the course, you should download and complete an
[application form](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/application.pdf).
Instructions on where to submit your application are at the end of the form.

The deadline for submitting the application for 2000 was 1 March, 2000. For
next years course, we would appreciate earlier applications so that we can
finalize commitments and help insure a well planned and fully rewarding
experience.

* * *

## Instructors:

Instructors with extensive international experience, both in Nicaragua and
throughout the region, strengthen greatly this unique educational opportunity.
[Dr. A.L. Hammett](http://www.class.forprod.vt.edu/faculty/hammetta.htm),
Associate Professor in Virginia Tech's College of Natural Resources, will
teach and coordinate the team leading this year's course.  
  
Dr. Jeffery McCrary will help and direct the course's several field trips. Dr.
McCrary is a Fullbright Scholar in Nicaragua conducting research at the
University of Central America in Managua. As Director of the Proyecto
Ecologica, Dr. McCrary conducts several other training programs in Nicaragua.

Mr. Gerald Bauer, of the USDA Forest Service and the Natural Resources
Specialist with the United States Agency for International Development (USAID)
in Panama, was instrumental in helping to establish this program. Mr. Bauer's
long career in Central America includes managing forestry projects in
Honduras, helping to develop the environment program in Nicaragua, and
supervising part of the US Forest Service's National Forest in Puerto Rico.

View an article by the instructors entitled "[Forest Products in
Nicaragua](http://www.forestprod.org/FPJ_9906Jun.pdf)" which was featured in
the June 1999 issue of the _Forest Products Journal._

The course is not limited to those only interested in trees or forest
products. In 1999 we were fortunate to have the participation of two other
faculty resource persons: one from Emory University in Atlanta who will focus
lectures and field work on primates and protected areas; and another from
Augusta University to help lead field activities focused on the influence of
natural resources on art and culture.

* * *

## Credit:

All those who pay tuition and successfully complete this course will receive
three hours of college-level credit. (For undergraduate credit register for
WOOD/FIW/FOR 3954; graduate WOOD/FIW/FOR 5954)

* * *

## Eligibility:

The course has a maximum enrollment of 20 persons. We welcome participants
from diverse perspectives to the program. Participation is not limited to
those studying in natural resource based programs. Applications will be
considered on a first come, first served basis. Students at a sophomore level
or above in agriculture planning and natural science related fields should
consider this program. Students from other universities, or persons enrolling
as special students, may also apply.

* * *

## Cost:

The total cost is $1,700 including all in-country expenses (Nicaragua and
Panama) such as lodging, board, fees for parks, and field trip expenses. This
cost is subject to change with future expansion of the program. Virginia Tech
tuition (estimated cost of $400), airport taxes, and airfare to and from
Nicaragua are not included in this price. Students traveling from other
countries need to make their own flight arrangements. A group rate for travel
arrangements from the U.S. can be made for all those who apply and are
accepted.

* * *

## Housing:

Housing will be provided in the beautiful Laguna de Apoyo Protected Area,
located in a forest on the edge of a fresh water crater lake. Excellent meals
will be served three times daily. As in the past, we can accommodate the needs
of vegetarians. When in the field, lodging will be in local hotels.

* * *

![](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/turtle.gif)

## Contact for Information:

Dr. A.L. (Tom) Hammett  
Coordinator of International Programs  
College of Natural Resources  
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061 (mail code0323)  
Phone: (540) 231-2716  
Fax: (540) 231-8176  
[![](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/eemail.gif)himal@vt.edu](mailto:himal@vt.edu)

* * *

[![](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wd3784nic/butbak.gif)Return to _World Forestry_
Homepage](http://www.cyber.vt.edu/wood3784/)

**Global Issues in Natural Resources**

  
Last Updated 2/28/01, djs  
Web Page produced by James Newman and maintained by Marc Barany and ALH  
[Virginia PolytechnicInstitute and State University](http://www.vt.edu)

