###  Unit 2

####  Cultural Identity in Transition: Responses to the Peloponnesian War

Description | Texts | [Images](wvint.htm#Images) and [Maps]( wvint.htm#Maps) |
Further Information  
  
_

Session _ |  _

Day _ |  _

Date _ |  _

Time _ |  _

Topic _  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
15  |

Mon  |

9/23  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

_History_  
  
16  |

Wed  |

9/25  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

_History_  
  
17  |

Fri  |

9/27  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

_History_  
  
18  |

Mon  |

9/30  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

_History_  
  
19  |

Wed  |

10/2  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

_History_  
  
20  |

Fri  |

10/4  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

Convocation, Smith Auditorium: Keith Scales, "Greek Comedy"  
  
21  |

Mon  |

10/7  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

_Lysistrata_  
  
22  |

Wed  |

10/9  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

_Lysistrata_  
  
23  |

Fri  |

10/11  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

_Lysistrata_  
  
24  |

Mon  |

10/14  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

_Lysistrata_  
  
25  |

Wed  |

10/16  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

_Lysistrata_  
  
26  |

Fri  |

10/18  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

2nd Paper Due; Introduce _The Birds_  
  
27  |

Mon  |

10/21  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

_The Birds_  
  
28  |

Wed  |

10/23  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

_The Birds_  
  
29  |

Fri  |

10/25  |

12:40-1:40 pm  |

Mid-Semester Day: Classes Do Not Meet  
  
###  Description

> The Peloponnesian War (431-404 BCE) marks both the apogee and the end of
Athenian hegemony in Greece. By this point, the Athenians had reduced the more
than 400 independent member states of the Delian Sea League (a defense
alliance to ward off the threat of another Persian invasion) to the status of
mere tribute-paying vassals of Athens. Disgruntled members were prevented from
leaving the league, others were forced to join it. Threatened by the
increasingly expansionist policies of Athens, Sparta and its allies in the
Peloponnesian League finally declared war.

>

> The war raged for 27 years. Basically, the whole Greek-speaking world was
involved. Entire cities were destroyed, their population killed or enslaved.
Athens herself was almost permanently under siege, while Spartan armies were
devastating its hinterland and destroying the crops. In the third year of the
war, a terrible plague wiped out a third of the Athenian population, including
Pericles, the motor of Athens' past successes. Still, it often looked as if
Athens would get the better of Sparta. In the end, however, bad strategy,
ruthless treachery, and Persian support for the Spartans resulted in the utter
defeat of Athens. The Spartans razed the walls of the city and installed a
puppet government. The days of Athenian greatness were over.

>

> This devastating defeat severely challenged the Athenians' view of
themselves. In his History of the Peloponnesian War, Thucydides (ca. 460-400
BCE), himself a former Athenian general, tried to answer the question what had
caused the war and the downfall of Athens. Banished from Athens for most of
the war after the loss of a strategically important city in Thrace (432 BCE),
Thucydides had the opportunity to interview both sides of the conflict. His
account of the war affords unique insights into the Greek psyche and shows
what arrogance, the hunger for power, and the experience of war do to a nation
and its citizens.

>

> The comedies of Aristophanes (ca. 447-385 BCE), in contrast, give us a
picture of the war and its effect on the Athenians from inside the beleaguered
city. The Lysistrata was produced in early 411, when Athens had just lost an
entire army in Sicily and disaster loomed on the horizon. In the play,
however, the women of Athens save the day . Tired of the war, they organize a
sex strike of all Greek women until their husbands give in and they make
peace. Under the bawdy humor, the play advances serious criticism of the war
effort and pokes fun at Athenian views on proper gender roles. The Birds, in
turn, was staged in 414 BCE, at the outset of the Sicilian expedition. It
features two Athenian adventurers who, burdened by debts and sick of the
frivolous lawsuits rampant in Athens, escape to the realm of the birds. In a
brilliant parody of Athenian expansionist politics, the two Athenian rascals
persuade the birds to found their own kingdom, Cloudcuckooland, force gods and
men into submission, and make themselves the supreme rulers.

###  Texts

> Thucydides. _On Justice, Power, and Human Nature_. Translated by Paul
Woodruff. Indianapolis, Indiana: Hackett Publishing, 1998. __

>

> Aristophanes. _The Birds and Other Plays_. Translated by Stephen Halliwell.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.

>

> Aristophanes. _The Clouds_. Translated by Peter Meineck. Indianapolis,
Indiana: Hackett Publishing, 2000.  
>

>

>  

###  Further Information

> Study guides for [_History of the Peloponnesian War_](history.htm),
[_Lysistrata_](lysistrata.htm), _The Birds_

>

> [Sources for Thucydides](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/Thucydides/) \- essays
from Project Perseus

>

> [Diotima: Women and Gender in the Ancient
World](http://www.stoa.org/diotima/)

>

> [Greek Theatre](wvint.htm#Theatre) resources

More [Library](wvref.htm) and [ Internet](wvint.htm) Resources for World Views

Top of page  
Return to [World Views Home Page](index.htm)

