### Abridged Syllabus For

_

### General Studies 200, Western Traditions I:

_

### Section Title: Finding A Right Relationship

_

### John S. Bolin

**_ **

Catalog Description:** [Berea College
Catalog](http://www.Berea.edu/BCCatalog/GST.courses.html)

**

Prerequisites:** GST 100, and 103, sophomore status.

**

Extended Description:** All sections of Western Traditions I must include as
their objectives study of biblical, classical, and medieval roots of Western
civilization. All sections are to study six or seven primary texts **** during
the term's course and introduce students to the history of the west through
the close of the middle ages (using Spievogel's _Western Civilization_ through
chapter 13). In addition, all sections consider the multiplicity of western
traditions, which will certainly include the varied experiences of women as
well as men, and the variety of religious traditions. This section will
include an introduction to Islam as well as the more standard introduction to
Hebrew (Jewish), Christian, and pagan religous thought.

This section of Western Traditions I is titled "Finding A Right Relationship."
This title is meant to indicate the central theme of the section, which is an
examination of the ways in which western peoples began to create, define,
imagine, and revise their understanding of mutual relationships and their
relationships with the universe, the divine, and with other tribes or nations.
In particular this section will explore various ways of making political,
religious, and ethical relational systems.

The first unit of the course will explore some of the ways in which the
ancient Hebrews evidenced their understanding of right relationships. Texts in
unit one include: Spielvogel, chapters 1 and 2; and the following from Old
Testament: _Genesis_ 1-4; 6-9; 11:1-9: and 12-25; _Exodus_ 19-23; _The Book of
Ruth_ ; and Psalms 23, 42, 84, and 137. The writing assignment will be
centered on one of the books of the prophets in the Old Testament.

The second unit will explore some of the ways the ancient Greeks evidenced
their understanding of right relationships. Texts in unit two include:
Spielvogel, chapters 3, 4, 5 and 6 (to page 188); _The Oresteia_ and texts by
Plato. The second writing assignment will center on these two works also.

The third unit will exploe some of the ways the first Christians evidenced
their understanding of right relationships. Texts in unit three include:
Spielvogel, chapters 6 (from 188 on) and 7; and _The Gospel According to Mark_
, portions of _The First Letter of Paul to the Corinthians_ , and all of _The
Letter of Paul to the Galatians_.

The fourth unit will explore some of the ways the Christian church and
medieval Christian society evidenced its understanding of right relationships.
Texts in unit four include: Spielvogel, chapters 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12; and
_The Rule of St. Benedict_ , and the morality play _Everyman_. Secular and
poetic material by Andreas Capellanus and Marie deFrance will be the subject
of third writing assignment.

The fifth and final unit will explore some of the ways early the early Islamic
faith and society evidenced its evidenced its understanding of right
relationships. Texts in unit five include portions of Speilvogel chapters 7
(pages 230-234); 8 (pages 264-266); and 11 (339-350); and _The Koran_
(portions) and _The Cid_. The fourth writing assignment, done in class during
the final examination period, will be centered in these readings.

**

Course Objectives:** The course has two main objectives: one to being learning
about the traditions and **** culture of the West, and two, to further develop
communication abilities. Details about the ways in which learning about
Western traditions and culture have already been given. Details about
development of communication abilities follow below.

_

Communication Learning and Writing:

_

To the degree possible (limited by the number of students in the course), the
course will be taught in ways which provide many opportunities for student
practice of communication skills, oral and written. In-class discussions,
short oral presentations, and out of class reading, writing and research will
be key elements of the course. Students in Western Traditions I, are to
produce at least one documented, scholarly essay. This assignment will prepare
students for the more lengthy work of producing a research paper in Western
Traditions II. The documented, scholary essay(s) will be included in the
student's _Communication Portfolio_ at the end of the course. All writing,
including the _Portfolio_ completion, will be graded.

According to course-wide requirements, the documented, scholarly essay should:

  
1 - promote active, independent thinking  
2 - deepen knowledge and understanding of (a) primary document(s) in the
course  
3 - develop abilities in writing and library research.

These essays should be grammatical, use more than one source, fulfill the
purposes of the asignments, and be writen in a formal style.

Another communication objective of this course is further development of the
student's abilities to use an academic library for purposes of research,
especially finding and using appropriate standard refernce works, indexes, and
bibliographies; assessing the authority, reliability, and cogency of works
located as sources; and citing courses acording to academic convention (in
this course, using the MLA style).

**

Course Goals:** Course goals lie beyond objectives. They are the larger, and
more important benefits of a course. They are not always immediately
attainable, but are the real reasons for engaging in undergraduate liberal
studies. It is my hope that this course will give you a broad historical and
cultural foundation for life-long learning about Western civilization.

**

Required Texts:** The following texts are required for students in this
course:

_

Common text:_

  
**_Western Civilization**_ by Jackson Spielvogel. Comprehensive volume, third
edition.

_Texts for Unit One:_

  
An edition of _The Bible_ repsected for its accuracy in translation and
annotation. I _strongly_ recommend **_The New Oxford Annotated_ _Bible**_. In
addition some comparative reading will be assigned from the King James'
version as printed in **_Literature of the Western_ _World_ , ** Vol. I,
edited by Brian Wilkie and James Hurt.

_

Texts for Unit Two:_

  
**_The Oresteia_ ** by Aeschylus, transleated by Robert Fagles, printed in
_Literature of the Western World_ , Vol. I. This translation is the only
acceptable one. Also **"The Parable of the Cave"** from **_The Republic_ **
and **_The Apology**_ by Plato as printed in _Literature of the Western World_
, Vol. I.

_

Texts for Unit Three:_ same as for Unit One.

_

Texts for Unit Four:_

_The Rule of St. Benedict**_ , translated by Anthony C. Meisel and M.L. del
Mastro; material by Andreas Capellanus (from **_The Art_ _of Courtly Love**_ )
and Marie De France ( ** _Bisclavret**_ and **_Yonec**_ ), and the play
**_Everyman**_ all as printed in _Literature of the_ _Western World_ , Vol. I.

_

Texts for Unit Five:_

  
**_The Koran_ ** , revised translation by N. J. Dawood; and **_The Cid**_ ,
translated by Lesley Byrd Simpson.

_

Other texts:_

  
_Berea College Communication and Research Portfolio_

  

* * *

[Dr. John Bolin's Home Page](http://www.Berea.edu/ENG/Bolin/Bolin.html) |
[Berea College English and Theatre Dept. Home
Page](http://www.Berea.edu/ENG/ENG.home.html) | [Berea College Home
Page](http://www.Berea.edu)  

* * *

Copyright (c) 1998, Berea College

_Updated August 14, 1998._

URL: www.berea.edu/ENG/Bolin/GST200.html

Information prepared by John Bolin,
[John_Bolin@Berea.edu.](mailto:John_Bolin@Berea.edu)

Page maintained by Sandy Bolster.

