![](/Pictures/InforM/blank.gif)  
| [![University of Maryland](/Pictures/webglobe.gif)](http://www.umd.edu/) |
ARTH 250 Syllabus  
---|---  
![______________________________________________________](/Pictures/InforM/line1.gif)  
![](/Pictures/InforM/blank.gif) |  ![](/Pictures/InforM/line1.gif) |
![](/Pictures/InforM/blank.gif) |  ![](/Pictures/InforM/blank.gif)  

**ARTH 250: Pre-Columbian Art & Architecture**

**Dr. Jennifer K. Younger **

**T/TH 9:30-10:20 am, ASY 2203**

**Spring 2002**



This course is a survey of the art and architecture of pre-Hispanic
Mesoamerica and the Andes. We will discuss the architecture, ceramics,
sculpture, manuscripts and textiles of various pre-contact cultures, focusing
specifically on how works of art and architecture functioned politically,
economically and culturally within the historical context of native Amerindian
societies. You will be expected to recognize the stylistic characteristics of
various culture groups, understand the technical processes by which objects
were created, as well as analyze the many roles which pre-Hispanic art played
within the community.



**Required texts** : Mary Ellen Miller, _The Art of Mesoamerica_

Rebecca Stone-Miller, _Art of the Andes from Chav¨ªn to Inca_



**Office hours** : T/TH 8:30-9:30 am, and by appointment

ASY Room # 4216

phone: 301-405-1490

e-mail: jenkrzy@wam.umd.edu



**Grading** :  Mid-term Exam 25% (3/21)

Final Exam 35% (5/21)

Research Project 25%

Discussion 15%



**Coursework** :  There will be two exams and one [research
project](http://www.inform.umd.edu/EdRes/Colleges/ARHU/Depts/ArtHistory/courses/ARTH250/SP02/project.html)
in this class. Weekly discussion sections are an integral part of this course
and your participation in them constitutes 15% of your final grade. The mid-
term will cover the first half of the course material, and the final exam will
be cumulative. Small group research projects will be ongoing throughout the
semester, with each group presenting their findings at an appointed time
during weekly discussion sections.



**Make-up exams & late work**: In general, late work is not accepted and there
are no make-up exams. If you have a legitimate reason for missing an exam or
an assignment, you must discuss it with your TA in advance and we will do our
best to accommodate the situation. If you miss work due to a medical
situation, you will need to provide documentation.



## SCHEDULE



T 1/29 Introduction to Mesoamerica ( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 1 &
Chap. 3 pp. 38-47.

TH 1/31 Olmec ( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 2)



T 2/5  Olmec, Teotihuacan ( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 2 & 4)

TH 2/7 Teotihuacan ( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 4)



T 2/12 Monte Alb¨¢n ( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 3 pp. 48-54 & chap. 5
pp. 83-91)

TH 2/14 Classic Veracruz ( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 5 pp. 91-99)



T 2/19 Film: Lost Kingdoms of the Maya

TH 2/21 Maya: Tikal ( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 6 pp. 102-121 & chap.
7)



T 2/26 Maya: Palenque ( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 7)

TH 2/28 Maya: Palenque, Cop¨¢n ( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 7)



T 3/5 Maya: Cop¨¢n & Quirigu¨¢ ( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 7)

TH 3/7 Film: Nova: Cop¨¢n



T 3/12 Maya: Yaxchil¨¢n & Piedras Negras ( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 7)

TH 3/14 Maya: Chichen Itz¨¢ & Uxmal ( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 7, pp.
140-145 & chap. 8)



T 3/19 Maya Painting (( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 7)

# TH 3/21 MIDTERM EXAM



T 3/26 SPRING BREAK

TH 3/28  SPRING BREAK



T 4/2 Aztec( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 9) ****

TH 4/4 Aztec ( _The Art of Mesoamerica_ , chap. 9)



T 4/9 Andean culture & civilization, Chav¨ªn ( _Art of the Andes_ , chap. 1 &
chap. 2)

TH 4/11 Chav¨ªn ( _Art of the Andes_ , chap. 2)



T 4/16 Paracas ( _Art of the Andes_ , chap. 3 pp. 50-66)

TH 4/18 Nazca ( _Art of the Andes_ , chap. 3 pp. 66-82)



T 4/23 Moche ( _Art of the Andes_ , chap. 4)

TH 4/25 Moche ( _Art of the Andes_ , chap. 4)



T 4/30 Film: Sipan

TH 5/2 Tiwanaku & Wari ( _Art of the Andes_ , chap. 5)



T 5/7 Late Intermediate Period ( _Art of the Andes_ , chap. 6)

TH 5/9 Inca ( _Art of the Andes_ , chap. 7)



T 5/14 Inca ( _Art of the Andes_ , chap. 7)



**FINAL EXAM: Tuesday, May 21, 2002**

** 1:30-3:30pm**

** ASY 2203**

******* The Final is cumulative *******





**DISCUSSION SECTIONS:**



0101 M 10-10:50 ASY 3221 Angela George

0102 W 10-10:50 ASY 3221 Flora Vilches

0103 F 11-11:50 ASY 3211 Ann Wagner

0104  F 10-10:50 ASY 3219 Ann Wagner

0105 W 9-9:50 ASY 3215 Flora Vilches

0106 M 9-9:50 ASY 3215 Angela George





Please check out the course's web page for updates at

** **

**[www.inform.umd.edu/EdRes/Colleges/ARHU/Depts/ArtHistory/courses/ARTH250/SP02](http://www.inform.umd.edu/EdRes/Colleges/ARHU/Depts/ArtHistory/courses/ARTH250/SP02)**

** **

** **

** **

** **

  
  
---|---|---|---  
![_______________________________________________](/Pictures/InforM/line1.gif)  
  |  
|  |   |  [UM Home](http://www.umd.edu/) |
[Directories](http://www.umd.edu/whoswho.html) |
[Search](http://www.search.umd.edu/) |
[Admissions](http://www.umd.edu/prospective/) |
[Calendar](http://www.umd.edu/calendar/today/)  
Direct questions and comments to [Christopher
Columbus](mailto:fvilches@wam.umd.edu).  
Last modified Tuesday, January 29, 2002           (C) 2002 University of
Maryland |  
---|---|---  


