

[HOME](101home.html) / [QUIZ](quiz.html) / [SECTIONS & T.A.'s](sections.html)
/ [IMAGES](images.html)

* * *

SYLLABUS  
---  
  
**ARTH 101 - History of Art I** \-- Prehistoric to Medieval Art

Fall 1997 -- T Th 2:00-3:15 - 153 Campbell Hall

Professor John Yiannias assisted by Mr. Michael Anderson, Ms. Amanda Guyton,
Mr. Kevin Britton and Ms. Kimberlee Cloutier-Blazzard.

Office Hours: Monday 2-3:30, Tuesday 3:30-5 and readily by appointment

For the other course websites, see the Art Department website at [
http://minerva.acc.virginia.edu/~finearts/ArtWelcome.html](http://minerva.acc.virginia.edu/~finearts/ArtWelcome.html),
click on the frame called [Course
Websites](http://minerva.acc.virginia.edu/~finearts/websites.html).

**_Textbooks_** : Required--Gardner, _Art Through the Ages_ , Vol. 1, tenth
edition.  
Also required-- _ARTH 101 Course Packet_ ,  
Both texts can be bought at the University of Virginia Bookstore.

**_Lectures_** : There will be two 75-minute lectures each week. Attendance at
lectures is expected and advisable.

**_Discussion Sections_** : ARTH 101 Carries four hours of credit because you
are expected to attend one discussion section weekly in addition to the two
75-minute lectures. In the informal setting of a discussion section you'll be
able to ask questions about the lecture material and acquire practice in
visual analysis, a skill required in examinations. Some points that are only
touched upon in the lectures will be explored further in section. Also, your
semester grade will be based in part on your performance in section.  

For these reasons, attendance at the sections is mandatory. You are allowed
_only one excused_ and _only one unexcused_ absence from section. An excused
absence is one for which you can provide either a medical reason or proof of
participation in a university athletic event. A fabricated excuse will be
considered a violation of the Honor System. No medical excuse will be accepted
later than one week after you return to class. If you have more than the
allowed number of absences, even as late as in the final week of class, you
will be dropped from the course.  

[Discussion section meetings](sections.html) will begin the week of September
15th**. Sections meet in 107 Campbell Hall or in 318 Cabell Hall (these are
different buildings).  

**_Reading Assignments_** : All reading assignments are in Gardner. Specific
page assignments are listed below with each lecture topic. Students are
strongly urged to do the reading before each lecture in order to learn the
names of artists and their works, as well as pertinent art historical
vocabulary. The lectures will not cover all the material in the text but will
present a selection from it. Bibliography for further reading is given in the
back of the textbook, it recommends further reading on specific artists,
subjects, and works of art. There is also a valuable glossary of technical
terms in the textbook, which you should consult for unfamiliar vocabulary, as
well as a pronuciation key for artists' names.

**_Required Images_** : Most of the images you will be responsible for
identifying and discussing on exams are in Gardner's textbook; a few not in
Gardner will be among those available on the course home page and posted on
the bulletin boards outside the lecture hall. Lists of works you will have to
know are in the course packet.

**_Examinations_** : There will be short quizzes in some discussion sections.
Your TA will discuss with you the scope of these quizzes during the first
section meeting. Each quiz will be announced in section a week ahead. There
will be two 75-minute examinations on October 9th, November 11th and a two-
hour final on December 15th. Each exam will include slides to be identified
and discussed, and an essay question. The exams will not be cumulative, **with
this exception** : In the last week of class, you will be given several take-
home essay questions, two of which entail review of material covered earlier
in the semester.  
Please note that the date of the Final Exam is set by the University. I am not
permitted to change it; nor may I give early final exams.  

**_Grading_** : Your final grade for the course will be determined
approximately as follows: First 75-minute exam 20%; second 75-minute exam 25%;
quizzes and contribution to discussion sections 20%; final examination 35%. In
arriving at your final grade, emphasis will be placed on attendance,
participation in discussion, and improvement.

**_Schedule of lectures and reading assignments_**

September |

4 |

Introductory Remarks  
---|---|---  
  
|

|

Introduction  
  
|

9 |

Prehistoric (Paleo-, Meso-, Neolithic)  
  
|

|

pp. 21-39  
  
|

11 |

Ancient Near Eastern  
  
|

|

pp. 40-63  
  
|

16 |

Egyptian: Early Dynastic and Old Kingdom  
  
|

|

pp. 64-81  
  
|

18 |

Egyptian: Middle and New Kingdoms  
  
|

|

pp. 81-97  
  
|

23 |

Aegean (Cycladic, Minoan, Mycenean)  
  
|

|

pp. 98-115  
  
|

25 |

Greek: Geometric and Archaic  
  
|

|

pp. 116-140  
  
|

30 |

Greek: Early and High Classical  
  
|

|

pp. 140-160  
  
|

|  
  
October |

2 |

Greek: Late Classical  
  
|

|

pp. 161-171  
  
|

7 |

Greek: Hellenistic  
  
|

|

pp. 171-183  
  
|

9 |

**FIRST EXAM**  
  
|

|

\---  
  
|

13-14 |

**Reading Break**  
  
|

16 |

Etruscan and Roman Republican  
  
|

|

pp. 186-217  
  
|

21 |

Roman: Early Empire  
  
|

|

pp. 217-227  
  
|

23 |

Roman: High and Late Empires  
  
|

|

pp. 227-255  
  
|

28 |

Early Christian  
  
|

|

pp. 256-279  
  
|

30 |

Byzantine: Early  
  
|

|

pp. 281-303  
  
|

|  
  
November |

4 |

Byzantine: Middle and Late  
  
|

|

pp. 303-317  
  
|

6  |

Islamic  
  
|

|

pp. 318-343  
  
|

11  |

**SECOND EXAM**  
  
|

|

\---  
  
|

13 |

African  
  
|

|

pp. 596-617  
  
|

18  |

Early Medieval in the West  
  
|

|

pp. 344-361  
  
|

20 |

Early Medieval: Carolingian and Ottonian  
  
|

|

pp. 361-377  
  
|

25  |

Romanesque Architecture  
  
|

|

pp. 378-397  
  
|

26-30 |

**Thanksgiving Recess**  
  
|

|  
  
December |

2  |

Romanesque: Sculpture, Painting  
  
|

|

pp. 397-413  
  
|

4  |

Gothic: Early  
  
|

|

pp. 414-429  
  
|

9  |

Gothic: High  
  
|

11 |

Gothic: Late and non-French  
  
|

|

pp. 445-461  
  
|

|  
  
|

15  |

**FINAL EXAMINATION 9:00-12:00**  
  


