![Decoration](./separ.jpg) ![Persian Guard from Persepolis](/arth-
bin/get/id=267866th.gif) | **Art History 201: Survey of Ancient and Medieval
Art**  
**Fall 2001  
Course Overview** | ![Duccio, Maesta Altarpiece](/arth-
bin/get/id=172958th.gif) ![Decoration](./separ.jpg)

This course will survey the arts of Egypt, the Near East, the Classical Greek
and Roman worlds, and Medieval Europe, from about 2500 BC to about 1400 AD. We
will consider the great variety and richness of the arts of these different
cultures, and some of the general problems of how art historians understand
and write about art. We will discuss problems of the social context of art:
its historical circumstances, context, patronage, the influence of the
individual artist, and the role of those who have been the viewers of art. We
will consider what constitutes understanding and explanation in art history,
and some of the different ways we can approach a work of art and grasp its
various meanings.

We will spend about half the course on the ancient world, Greece and Rome, and
half on late antiquity and the medieval period; and will look at works of
sculpture, architecture, wall and vase painting, mosaic, manuscript
illumination, and other media, and try to consider all these works in their
physical, historical and social contexts.

# Textbooks

The course has a general textbook, with additional readings chosen to focus on
certain issues in greater depth and allow students to get some sense of the
varied scope of art historical writing. Required and recommended texts can be
purchased at the University Book Store and the reader at Bob's Copy.

## Required:

  * Marilyn Stokstad, Art History vol. 1, second edition. New York: Prentice Hall, 2002.
  * AH 201 Course Reader, assembled for this course, reproduced by Bob's Copy, University Square, and available there (across the street from the Elvehjem). Referred to throughout as "Reader." 

### Reader Contents:

  * J. M. Russell, "Sennacherib's Lachish Narratives." in P. J. Holliday, ed. Narrative and Event in Ancient Art. Cambridge Studies in New Art History and Criticism, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993) 55-73.
  * C. H. Hallett, "The Origins of the Classical Style in Sculpture," Journal of Hellenic Studies 106 (1986) 71-84.
  * Ancient sources on the Aphrodite of Knidos: Pliny, Natural History 36, iv.20-21; Lucian, Amores 9-18.
  * Exerpts from Sir Kenneth Clark, The Nude: A Study in Ideal Form. Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 1972.
  * Nannette Salomon, "The Venus Pudica: Uncovering art history's 'hidden agendas' and pernicious pedigrees," in G. Pollock, ed. Generations and geographies in the visual arts : feminist readings. London, Routledge, 1996.
  * S. Nodelman, "How to Read a Roman Portrait," Art in America (1975) 27-33.
  * Chapter 2, "The Chariot and the Donkey," from Thomas F. Mathews, The Clash of Gods: A Reinterpretation of Early Christian Art (Princeton, rev. ed. 1999).
  * Exerpt from Bernard of Anger, Book of Miracles of Sainte-Foy, from H. Belting, Likeness and Presence: A History of the Image Before the Era of Art (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994, tr. E. Jephcott) pp. 536-537.
  * Ellert Dahl, "Heavenly Images: The Statue of St. Foy of Conques and the Signification of the Medieval Cult Image in the West," Acta ad archaeologiam et artium historiam pertinentia 3 (1978) 175-191.
  * Exerpts from Geoffrey of Canterbury, Tract on the Burning and Reparation of the Church of Canterbury. (1174).

## Strongly recommended:

  * Larry Gonick, The Cartoon History of the Universe, vols. I and II. New York: Doubleday, 1990 and 1994. Referred to throughout as "Gonick I and II." If you are not familiar with ancient and medieval history, this is probably the most painless way to gain some background.
  * James Smith Pierce, From Abacus to Zeus: a handbook of Art History (Prentice Hall, 1995). A good handbook and glossary of art historical terms.

If any topic particularly captures your interest, the instructor will be happy
to recommend further reading.

Readings are listed in the course syllabus. You will benefit most from lecture
if you have done the required reading prior to the lecture.

# Lectures and discussions

There will be two lectures and one discussion section a week. All are
mandatory: exams will include material from discussion sections as well as
from the lectures. Lectures in a course like this are necessarily broad,
introducing you to a fairly wide range of objects and issues, and developing
the different relationships between art and history. Discussion sections, on
the other hand, will consider particular topics in more depth than is possible
in lecture, let students practice their skills of analysis and comparison of
works of art, and afford the opportunity to read a variety of works by art
historians writing as specialists. A list of topics and questions to consider
is below; the readings will be found mainly in the course reader. Although you
can obviously ask questions about things that were not clear in lecture, they
are not review sessions: they will further develop themes introduced in
lecture, and give a depth of coverage which is difficult to achieve in
lectures. For review, the textbook, World-Wide Web and other resources are
more appropriate.

Sections will also include regular quizzes (see below).

# Examinations, and what you will need to know

There will be two midterm exams, on Oct. 2 and Nov. 15 in class, and a final
exam on Dec. 18, from 12:25 - 2:25 PM, also in L160 Elvehjem. Examinations
will include slide identifications, identifications of unknown objects, and
essays from a list of topics which will be made available in advance.

The goal of the examinations is to test how well you understand and can
analyze the works of art presented in the course. This course is not primarily
about memorization, and if you were only to memorize the works of art, their
names and dates, etc., the course would not have been a success. We want you
to begin to understand how and why they were created in a particular time and
place, what were the circumstances under which they were made and viewed, and
how they are reflected in the efforts of later artists. Such an understanding
is best tested with essay questions, and this will be the primary format of
the exams.

However, to understand the history of art you _will_ need to know relevant
information about the objects we will work with: identification, location,
dates, makers, etc. This is the basic information of art history; without
knowing the works of art themselves, you won't be able to gain a coherent
understanding of their history. You will be responsible for basic information
about all the works shown in class which are also illustrated in Stokstad --
title or description of what the work is, where it is from, the appropriate
date, the period or culture to which it belongs, and artist or patron (if
known). Flash cards, time lines, practice quizzes on the World-Wide Web and
other such study aids will help you remember this information.

There will be quizzes given in section to help you keep up with memorization.
The quizzes will sometimes be simple identifications, and sometimes will ask
you to place an unknown work of art where you think it belongs historically.
The lowest quiz will be dropped in calculating your grade. Don't get stressed
out on these; take them as an opportunity to encourage yourself to keep up
with the material and to keep track of how you're doing.

How closely do you need to remember dates? Closely enough so that the date you
give is appropriate. Fifty years leeway will be allowed where that is
appropriate, but not where it would suggest a misunderstanding of important
historical material. For example, the art from Mycenaean shaft graves is not
dated by any contemporary historical evidence, and estimated dates vary
widely, so a date anywhere within 50 years of the date Stokstad provides would
be acceptable. On the other hand, the sculptures from the Parthenon are known
from contemporary inscriptions to date from 447-432 BC. A date of ca. 440 BC
would be fine (although 447-432 would be better); but if you dated them 40-50
years later, around 400 BC, you would be putting them after the decline of
Athenian power with the Peloponnesian War (432-404 BC), and that would be
wrong. In other words, you should try to understand why an object is dated as
it is, rather than just memorize the date given by Stokstad.

# Writing assignments

Rather than one longer paper, this term students will undertake short written
exercises (in one case a sketch) to be turned in at the beginning of section.
Typically, they ask you to respond to some specific questions regarding the
reading for section. The topics are designed to allow you to practice your
critical reading skills, and to explore issues of interest to art historians.

# Grading of midterm and final: (subject to revision)

| 92-100| A  
---|---  
89-91| AB  
83-88| B  
79-82| BC  
73-78| C  
66-72| D  
65 and below| F  
  
# Grade Breakdown:

20% (!)| Section participation and assignments  
---|---  
15%| Quizzes (lowest quiz dropped from consideration)  
30%| Midterm exams  
35%| Final exam  
  
**IMPORTANT!** If you know in advance of a conflict with an exam or quiz, and
you feel that your situation is worthy of special consideration, you may speak
with the professor or your TA. He or she will decide whether the situation
justifies a makeup, and make arrangements accordingly. If you miss an exam and
you have not made arrangements in advance, you will need a medical excuse or a
note from the Office of Student Academic Affairs in order to take a make-up
exam. No exceptions will be made.

# AH 201 Web Site

The Art History department maintains a World Wide Web site. This site
contains, among other things, digital images of most of the slides shown in
class, notes from lectures, sample quizzes, information about the art history
department, and links to other resources for the study of ancient art. In
addition to providing useful study and review materials for this course, your
experience in using the Internet for research will give you valuable computer
skills which are essential in today's world.

The URL (Internet address) for the site is: http://www.wisc.edu/arth/. Click
on "Current Course Materials" and then click on "AH 201, Ancient and Medieval
Art (Cahill)". The direct address for this is http://www.wisc.edu/arth/ah201.
Also try "Local and Global Internet Resources for Art Historians" which has
many further links. If you have problems accessing the site, please get in
touch with Prof. Cahill or your TA.

For copyright reasons, the larger images are _only_ available to users on the
University of Wisconsin - Madison system. If you're using your WiscWorld
account, either by modem or direct connection, you shouldn't have any problem.
If you're using another ISP, though, (such as AOL) you won't be able to see
the larger images. Everything else (thumbnails, text, etc.) is available to
all.

# Getting In Touch With Us:

Nick Cahill: office hours Monday and Wednesday, 3-5 PM, or by appointment,
room 220 Elvehjem Museum. Phone no. 263-8980; email: [mail me
here](./mailme.html).

Mailboxes for the Instructor and TAs are in the Art History Office, room 232
Elvehjem Museum. Phone no. 263-2340.

* * *

[Go on to the syllabus for Art History 201](./syllabus.html)

[Go on to the list of section topics for Art History 201](./sections.html)

[Return to the Art History 201 index](./index.html)

Last modified Aug. 29, 2001, by [Nick Cahill](./mailme.html)

