![](images/hr1.gif)  
---  
[![LII](images/lii.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/) |  **SUPREME COURT
COLLECTION** | [![Supreme Court Collection
home](images/sc2.gif)](../index.html)  
![](images/hr1.gif)  
  
 [![Supreme Court collection
home](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/images/colln1.gif)](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct)

|

**Search  **   \--all current and historic decisions Current decisions only
Current syllabi only Historic decisions only  
  
---|---  
  Printz v. United States (95-1478), 521 U.S. 98 (1997)  
  
---  
 **Dissent**  
[ Breyer ]|  **Opinion**  
[ Scalia ]|  **Concurrence**  
[ O'Connor ]|  **Syllabus**  
 |  **Dissent**  
[ Stevens ]|  **Concurrence**  
[ Thomas ]|  **Dissent**  
[ Souter ]  
[HTML version](/supct/html/95-1478.ZD2.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/95-1478.ZD2)| [HTML version](/supct/html/95-1478.ZO.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/95-1478.ZO)| [HTML version](/supct/html/95-1478.ZC.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/95-1478.ZC)| [HTML version](/supct/html/95-1478.ZS.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/95-1478.ZS)| [HTML version](/supct/html/95-1478.ZD.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/95-1478.ZD)| [HTML version](/supct/html/95-1478.ZC1.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/95-1478.ZC1)| [HTML version](/supct/html/95-1478.ZD1.html)  
[WordPerfect version](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/word-
perfect/95-1478.ZD1)  




NOTE: Where it is feasible, a syllabus (headnote) will be released, as is
being done in connection with this case, at the time the opinion is issued.
The syllabus constitutes no part of the opinion of the Court but has been
prepared by the Reporter of Decisions for the convenience of the reader. See
_United States_ v. _Detroit Timber & Lumber Co.,_ [200 U.S.
321](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?200+321), 337.



**SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES**

Syllabus



PRINTZ, SHERIFF/CORONER, RAVALLI COUNTY, MONTANA _v.  _UNITED STATES

 certiorari to the united states court of appeals for the ninth circuit

 No. 95-1478. Argued December 3, 1996 \-- Decided June 27, 1997

[n.*]

Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act provisions require the Attorney General
to establish a national system for instantly checking prospective handgun
purchasers' backgrounds, note following [18 U.S.C. ¡ì
922](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/18/922.html) and command the "chief law
enforcement officer" (CLEO) of each local jurisdiction to conduct such checks
and perform related tasks on an interim basis until the national system
becomes operative, ¡ì922(s). Petitioners, the CLEOs for counties in Montana and
Arizona, filed separate actions challenging the interim provisions'
constitutionality. In each case, the District Court held that the background
check provision was unconstitutional, but concluded that it was severable from
the remainder of the Act, effectively leaving a voluntary background check
system in place. The Ninth Circuit reversed, finding none of the interim
provisions unconstitutional.

  _Held:_

1\. The Brady Act's interim provision commanding CLEOs to conduct background
checks, ¡ì922(s)(2), is unconstitutional. Extinguished with it is the duty
implicit in the background check requirement that the CLEO accept completed
handgun applicant statements (Brady Forms) from firearms dealers,
¡ì¡ì922(s)(1)(A)(i)(III) and (IV). Pp. 4-34.

 (a) Because there is no constitutional text speaking to the precise question
whether congressional action compelling state officers to execute federal laws
is unconstitutional, the answer to the CLEOs' challenge must be sought in
historical understanding and practice, in the Constitution's structure, and in
this Court's jurisprudence. P. 4.

 (b) Relevant constitutional practice tends to negate the existence of the
congressional power asserted here, but is not conclusive. Enactments of the
early Congresses seem to contain no evidence of an assumption that the Federal
Government may command the States' executive power in the absence of a
particularized constitutional authorization. The early enactments establish,
at most, that the Constitution was originally understood to permit imposition
of an obligation on state _judges_ to enforce federal prescriptions related to
matters appropriate for the judicial power. The Government misplaces its
reliance on portions of The Federalist suggesting that federal
responsibilities could be imposed on state officers. None of these statements
necessarily implies--what is the critical point here--that Congress could
impose these responsibilities _without the States' consent._ They appear to
rest on the natural assumption that the States would consent, see _FERC_ v.
_Mississippi,_ [456 U.S. 742](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-
choice.cgi?456+742), 796, n. 35 (O'Connor, J., concurring in judgment and
dissenting in part). Finally, there is an absence of executive commandeering
federal statutes in the country's later history, at least until very recent
years. Even assuming that newer laws represent an assertion of the
congressional power challenged here, they are of such recent vintage that they
are not probative of a constitutional tradition. Pp. 4-18.

 (c) The Constitution's structure reveals a principle that controls these
cases: the system of "dual sovereignty." See, _e.g., Gregory_ v. _Ashcroft,_
[501 U.S. 452](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?501+452),
457. Although the States surrendered many of their powers to the new Federal
Government, they retained a residuary and inviolable sovereignty that is
reflected throughout the Constitution's text. See, _e.g., Lane County_ v.
_Oregon,_ 7 Wall. 71, 76. The Framers rejected the concept of a central
government that would act upon and through the States, and instead designed a
system in which the State and Federal Governments would exercise concurrent
authority over the people. The Federal Government's power would be augmented
immeasurably and impermissibly if it were able to impress into its service--
and at no cost to itself--the police officers of the 50 States. Pp. 18-22.

 (d) Federal control of state officers would also have an effect upon the
separation and equilibration of powers between the three branches of the
Federal Government itself. The Brady Act effectively transfers the President's
responsibility to administer the laws enacted by Congress, Art. II, ¡ì¡ì2 and 3,
to thousands of CLEOs in the 50 States, who are left to implement the program
without meaningful Presidential control. The Federal Executive's unity would
be shattered, and the power of the President would be subject to reduction, if
Congress could simply require state officers to execute its laws. Pp. 22-23.

 (e) Contrary to the dissent's contention, the Brady Act's direction of the
actions of state executive officials is not constitutionally valid under Art.
I, ¡ì8, as a law "necessary and proper" to the execution of Congress's Commerce
Clause power to regulate handgun sales. Where, as here, a law violates the
state sovereignty principle, it is not a law "proper for carrying into
Execution" delegated powers within the Necessary and Proper Clause's meaning.
Cf. _New York_ v. _United States,_ [505 U.S.
144](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/sup-choice.cgi?505+144), 166. The
Supremacy Clause does not help the dissent, since it makes "Law of the Land"
only "Laws of the United States which shall be made in Pursuance [of the
Constitution.]" Art. VI, cl. 2. Pp. 24-25.

 (f) Finally, and most conclusively in these cases, the Court's jurisprudence
makes clear that the Federal Government may not compel the States to enact or
administer a federal regulatory program. See, _e.g., New York, supra,_ at 188.
The attempts of the Government and the dissent to distinguish _New York--_ on
grounds that the Brady Act's background check provision does not require state
legislative or executive officials to make policy; that requiring state
officers to perform discrete, ministerial federal tasks does not diminish the
state or federal officials' accountability; and that the Brady Act is
addressed to individual CLEOs while the provisions invalidated in _New York_
were directed to the State itself--are not persuasive. A "balancing" analysis
is inappropriate here, since the whole _object_ of the law is to direct the
functioning of the state executive, and hence to compromise the structural
framework of dual sovereignty; it is the very _principle_ of separate state
sovereignty that such a law offends. See _e.g., New York, supra,_ at 187. Pp.
25-34.

 2\. With the Act's background check and implicit receipt of forms
requirements invalidated, the Brady Act requirements that CLEOs destroy all
Brady Forms and related records, ¡ì922(s)(6)(B)(i), and give would be
purchasers written statements of the reasons for determining their
ineligibility to receive handguns, ¡ì922(s)(6)(C), require no action whatsoever
on the part of CLEOs such as petitioners, who are not voluntary participants
in administration of the federal scheme. As to them, these provisions are not
unconstitutional, but simply inoperative. Pp. 34-36.

 3\. The Court declines to address the severability question briefed and
argued by the parties: whether firearms dealers remain obliged to forward
Brady Forms to CLEOs, ¡ì¡ì922(s)(1)(A)(i)(III) and (IV), and to wait five
business days thereafter before consummating a firearms sale,
¡ì922(s)(1)(A)(ii). These provisions burden only dealers and firearms
purchasers, and no plaintiff in either of those categories is before the
Court. P. 36.

 66 F. 3d 1025, reversed.

 Scalia, J., delivered the opinion of the Court, in which Rehnquist, C. J.,
and O'Connor, Kennedy, and Thomas, JJ., joined. O'Connor, J., and Thomas, J.,
filed concurring opinions. Stevens, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which
Souter, Ginsburg, and Breyer, JJ., joined. Souter, J., filed a dissenting
opinion. Breyer, J., filed a dissenting opinion, in which Stevens, J., joined.



* * *

###  Notes

* Together with No. 95-1503, _Mack_ v. _United States,_ also on certiorari to the same court. 





[![Copyright](/supct/images/copyright.gif)](http://supct.law.cornell.edu/supct/credits.html)
|

 [![About us](/supct/images/aboutus.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/lii.html)
|

 [![Send email](/supct/images/email.gif)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/help/)  
---|---|---

