---  
| |



**THE REFORMATION (History 425B)**

**DR. GAYLE K. BRUNELLE** **

![celebrating.jpg \(63257 bytes\)](celebrating.jpg)

****[Homepage](Default.htm)         [Reading List ](Reformationlist.htm)
Bottom** **

History 425B, "The Reformation", Dr. Brunelle, Spring, 2000

Section 16338**

**M, 7:00-9:45 MH 502**

**Office: H 710 E**

**Telephone: Office: 278-7045 or 278-3474 (History Department, where you can
leave a message for me).**

**Email: _gbrunelle@fullerton.edu_** **Email: _gbrunelle@fullerton.edu_**

**Web Site: _http://fpwebs.fullerton.edu/gbrunelle_** **Web Site:
_http://fpwebs.fullerton.edu/gbrunelle_**

**Office Hours: M, 10:30-11:30, 6-7, W, 6-7 or by appointment**

**Final Exam: Monday, May 22, 7:30-9:20 p.m.**  

**Required Readings:**

**Christopher Marlow, _Dr. Faustus_**

**Steven Ozment, _Balthazar and Madalena_ (Yale UP: 1989)**

**Merry E. Wiesner, _Women and Gender in Early Modern Europe_ (Cambridge:
1993)**

**Robert Jutte, _Poverty and Deviance in Early Modern Europe_ (Cambridge:
1994)**

**Ron Po-Hsia, _The Myth of Ritual Murder_ (Yale: 1990)**

**Roger Schlesinger, _In the Wake of Columbus_ (New York: Harlan Davidson,
1996)**

**Textbook: James D. Tracy, _Europe =s Reformation, 1450-1650_, (New York:
Rowman & Littlefield, 1999).** **Textbook: James D. Tracy, _Europe =s
Reformation, 1450-1650_, (New York: Rowman & Littlefield, 1999).**

s Reformation, 1450-1650, (New York: Rowman & Littlefield, 1999). _

**Note: No class, Feb. 21, March 27**_



**The two companion classes, "The Renaissance" and "The Reformation" really
cover what contemporary historians call the period of "Early Modern Europe",
from about 1300 to about 1700. This era is considered the transitional era
between the Medieval culture that dominated Europe for a thousand years after
the decline of Rome, and the Modern culture which developed during the 18th
and 19th centuries. This class, "The Reformation" will focus on the second
half of this period, from about 1500, with the development of Christian
Humanism and the Protestant Reformation, through to the reign of Louis XIV,
which spanned the second half of the seventeenth century. The class is called
"The Reformation" because the development of European civilization during
these years was deeply influenced by the rise of Protestantism. Hence, among
the topics we will cover will be: the rise, spread and fragmentation of
Protestantism, and its cultural ramifications; the Catholic response to the
Protestant challenge; the Wars of Religion, including the Thirty Years War;
Absolutism, its rise and meaning; and the economic, cultural and social
changes of the era.**

**Requirements: History is about working with written sources, meaning books
and documents, and about reading and writing. Because this is an advanced
history course, a heavy emphasis will be placed on a seminar format in class.
Lecture will be kept to a minimum, and students will be expected to read the
assignments and be prepared to discuss them in class. The Tracy textbook is
meant to provide students with background information on the Reformation
(i.e., as many students like to phrase it, "the facts") to assist them in
understanding the readings. This class is _not_ recommended for anyone who has
not had Western or World Civilization. **

**Assessment:**

**Grades will be based on four things: 1. A midterm essay exam (Monday, March
20), worth 30% of the final grade; 2. A paper, worth 30% of the final grade;
3. A final examination, also essay, worth 40% of the final grade; 4. Class
participation. As this is a seminar class, students will be expected to
participate in discussions. Whereas I will not subtract points for lack of
participation, students who participate in class on a regular basis can have
their grade improved by as much as half a grade.**

**The paper will be a comparative book review of _two_ books on a similar
topic and chosen from the list of suggested readings. The paper will be not
more than twelve pages in length, and not less than ten. It is required that
students hand in a draft of the paper for editing before they hand in the
final draft, due on the last day of class. The edited draft must then be
handed in with the final draft of the paper. This requires students to revise
and edit their work and also permits me to assess level of improvement in
grading from the initial draft to the final draft. The last day to hand in
drafts is Monday, May 1.**

_

**NOTE: GRADUATE STUDENTS USING THIS COURSE FOR THEIR STUDY PLAN ARE EXPECTED
TO PERFORM MORE WORK THAN UNDERGRADUATES. THIS WILL MEAN THAT THEY WILL BE
EXPECTED TO WRITE TWO BOOK REVIEW PAPERS.**_

**Assignments: (Please note: the amount of reading due from one week to the
next varies. You should start some assignments early in order to make your
reading load more equal each week. Also note that the reading becomes somewhat
heavier after the midterm. It is recommended that you begin working on your
book reviews before the midterm.)**

**Week 1: Jan. 31, Introduction; Review of the Renaissance, medieval heresy
and conditions of social and religious unrest in late 15th and early 16th
century Europe.**

**Week 2: Feb. 7, Erasmus vs. Martin Luther: The relationship between
Christian Humanism and early Protestantism. Readings: Tracy, chs. 1 - 4;
Christopher Marlowe, _Dr. Faustus_ , all.**

**Week 3: Feb. 14. The expanding Reformation and the fragmentation of
Protestantism. Readings: Tracy, chs. 5-6.**

**Week 4, Feb. 21, no class, WashingtonWeek 4, Feb. 21, no class, Washington**
**= s Birthday.

Week 5: Feb. 28, The Catholic Response: The Catholic Reformation and the
Counter Reformation. Readings: Tracy, ch. 7

Week 6: March 6, The Wars of Religion and the Thirty Years War. Also, the
Elizabethan settlement and the English Civil War. Reading: Tracy, Part III,
chs. 8-11

Week 7: March 13, The Reformation and Popular versus Learned Culture. Reading:
Ron Po Hsia-Chia, _The Myth of Ritual Murder_. Review for Midterm. By this
date students should havechosen their books for the book review paper.

Week 8: March 20; Mid-term examination. Early Modern social structures.
Reading, Tracy, Part IV, chs. 12-14.

Week of March 27, No class, Spring Break.

Week 9: April 3, Poverty, deviance and marginalization in Early Modern Europe.
Reading: Jutte, _Poverty and Deviance_ , all.

Week 10: April 10, Women's history and the witch craze in Early Modern Europe.
Reading: Wiesner, _Women and Gender_ ; all. The Witch Craze. Reading: Articles
on reserve; Kors and Peters, _The Malleus Malificarum_ , exerpt; Alison
Coudert, AThe Myth of the Improved Status of Protestant Women: The Witch
Craze.@ Week 10: April 10, Women's history and the witch craze in Early Modern
Europe. Reading: Wiesner, _Women and Gender_ ; all. The Witch Craze. Reading:
Articles on reserve; Kors and Peters, _The Malleus Malificarum_ , exerpt;
Alison Coudert, AThe Myth of the Improved Status of Protestant Women: The
Witch Craze.@

Week 11: April 17, The Witch Craze. Reading: Articles on reserve; Kors and
Peters, _The Malleus Malificarum_ , exerpt; Alison Coudert, AThe Myth of the
Improved Status of Protestant Women: The Witch Craze.@ Week 11: April 17, The
Witch Craze. Reading: Articles on reserve; Kors and Peters, _The Malleus
Malificarum_ , exerpt; Alison Coudert, AThe Myth of the Improved Status of
Protestant Women: The Witch Craze.@

Week 12: April 24, Popular culture and families in Early Modern Europe.
Reading, Ozment, _Baltazar and Madalena_. Paper drafts due next week.

Week 13: May 1, The commercial expansion of Europe in the 16th and 17th
centuries. Exploration and the beginning of colonization. Reading: Tracy, ch.
15; Schlesinger, _In the Wake of Columbus_. Paper Drafts Due.

Week 14: May 8, The Science and Culture of Post-Reformation Europe. Art
History slides. Discuss Paper Drafts.

Week 15: May 15, Conclusion: The reign of Louis XIV and Baroque into
Enlightenment. Review for final. Final Drafts of Papers Due.

Week 16: Final Exam: Monday, May 22, 7:30-9:20 p.m.

**Top of Page** **  
---|---|---

