**HISTORY 111 RISE OF THE CHRISTIAN WEST PROF. L. ATTREED**  
    


**PURPOSE OF COURSE:**

**_To provide students with an understanding of the chronological development
of Western Europe from the late Roman Empire in the first century A.D., to the
start of the formation of nation-states in the mid-eleventh century._**

**COURSE DESCRIPTION:**

**History 111 examines multicultural history in a medieval setting. The time
period studied involved tremendous confrontations between different cultures
(Greco-Roman, Germanic, Celtic, Near Eastern; Christian, Moslem, Mediterranean
and Northern pagan, to name just a few), and their ultimate synthesis into the
concept Europe. Because medieval people thought so often about the Roman world
from which their culture derived, and tried to model their institutions upon
those of Rome, we must spend a short time getting to know late classical
society.**

**This course extends from the height of the Roman Empire to the middle of the
eleventh century. Topics will include the later Roman Empire and its fall, the
invasion of the Germanic/Gothic tribes, the development and role of
Christianity, the Carolingian Renaissance, the rise of feudalism, and the
western and eastern Frankish Empires (early France and Germany). Political,
economic, and cultural achievements will be stressed, but time will also be
spent on examining how ordinary people survived in the Middle Ages.**

**We will also place some emphasis upon interpretations of the period:
theories on the decline and fall of the Roman Empire; the Pirenne thesis,
which attempted a novel explanation of the start of the medieval world; and
the theories that helped shape the notion of the "Middle Ages".**

**Please note that this is a survey and provides only an introduction to the
early and high Middle Ages. More specialized courses on the intermediate and
advanced levels are available in the History Department, for which History 111
acts as firm background.**

**CONTACT:**

**Office: O'Kane 389 (phone 793-2358). E-mail: lattreed@holycross.edu**

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS:**

**Attendance _and_ punctuality are expected at all lectures and class
meetings; excessive absences or late arrivals (defined at the discretion of
the professor) will result in notification of the class dean and lowering of
the course grade. The student is responsible for the content of lectures and
discussions of the class, and for all announcements made at such times.
Attendance is required for examinations; make-up exams are given only with
authorization from the student's class dean. Attendance forms _part_ of the
grade for discussion and participation, but perfect attendance with little or
no class discussion will not result in a perfect grade.**

**The composition of the final grade can be found on page 6 of this syllabus.
There will be two hour exams, two 5-8 page papers on primary sources, and a
final (cumulative) examination. For details of the papers, see separate sheet.
A guide to taking exams and daily studying is found on pages 5-6.**

**ALL PAPERS SUBMITTED TO HISTORY COURSES, BY HISTORY MAJORS AND ALL OTHER
STUDENTS, MUST FOLLOW THE GUIDELINES SET FORTH IN F. P. PRUCHA, _RESEARCH
PAPERS IN HISTORY_ , 4th ed., AVAILABLE IN THE BOOKSTORE (END OF HISTORY
SECTION). FAILURE TO RESPECT THIS REQUIREMENT WILL RESULT IN LOWERING OF THE
PAPER'S GRADE.**  
    


**BOOKS (ordered for bookstore):**

**Tierney, Brian. _Western Europe in the Middle Ages: 300-1475_ , 6th ed.
(textbook)**

**Tierney, Brian. _The Middle Ages, Volume I: Sources of Medieval History_ ,
6th ed. (source collection)**

**Tacitus. _Agricola and Germania_ , trans. Hugh Mattingly, Penguin ed.**

**Einhard and Notker. _Two Lives of Charlemagne_. Ed. and trans. Lewis
Thorpe.**

**Ganshof, F. _Feudalism_.**

**Geary, Patrick. _Before France and Germany_.**

**Prucha, F. P. _Research Papers in History_ , 4 th ed. (also available on the
History Department website)**

**BOOKS AVAILABLE ON DINAND RESERVE:**

**Lawrence, C. H. _Medieval Monasticism_ , 2nd ed.**

**Lyon, Bryce. _Origins of the Middle Ages_.**

**Wood, Charles T. "The Peasants," and "The Feudal Aristocracy," in _The Quest
for Eternity_.**

**XEROXES ON DINAND RESERVE:**

**Barraclough, Geoffrey. " _Medium Aevum_."**

**Bendiner, Elmer. _The Rise and Fall of Paradise: When Arabs and Jews Built a
Kingdom in Spain_ , pp.14-24, 38-41, 145-50, 154-68, 208-9.**

**Fletcher, Richard. _The Quest for El Cid_ , chapter 5.**

**Hall, R. A. _Jorvik: Viking Age York_.**

**Hill, Boyd H., Jr., ed. _The Rise of the First Reich: Germany in the Tenth
Century_ , pp.9-30.**

**Hoyt, Robert S., and Stanley Chodorow. _Europe in the Middle Ages_ , 3rd
ed., pp. 78-83, 304-10.**

**Katz, Solomon. "The Roman Legacy," in _The Fall of Rome? Can It Be
Explained?_ , ed. Mortimer Chambers, pp.112-18.**

**Laistner, M. L. W. _Thought and Letters in Western Europe_ , pp.95-103.**

**Lemarignier, Jean-Francois. "Political and Monastic Structures in France at
the End of the Tenth and the Beginning of the Eleventh Century,", part 1, "The
Decline of Political Structures," pp. 102-111 only.**

**Power, Eileen. "Bodo the Peasant" chapter of _Medieval People_.**

**Procopius. _The Secret History_. Trans. G. A. Williamson, pp.81-86, 130-36,
192-94.**

**Wemple, Suzanne. "Monogamous Marriage Among the Franks." In _The Many Sides
of History Volume I_ , ed. Steven Ozment and Frank Turner, pages 121-33.**  
    


**TOPICS AND READINGS:**

**Introduction**

**The Study of Medieval History**

**Tierney text, pp. 1-14; Barraclough " _Medium Aevum_ " xerox.**

**Roman Legacy to the Medieval World**

**Katz, "Roman Legacy" xerox; Tierney text, pp. 17-24; Tierney sources #4 (pp.
9-10).**

**Alternate World Views: The Barbarians of Tacitus**

**Tierney text, pp. 24-33, 61-66; Tacitus (discussion assignments made in
class); Geary, _Before France and Germany_ , ch.2, pp.39-62.**

**The Spread of Christianity**

**Tierney text, pp. 34-56; Tierney sources #5, 6, 7, 8.**

**Theories of Decline and Fall**

**Lyon, _Origins_ , pp. 7-56; Tierney source #1, and review _City of God_
passage pp. 22-25 in number 7.**

**"Barbarian" Kingdoms**

**The Transition from Roman Rule**

**Tierney text, review pp. 61-66, continue with pp. 66-71; Tierney sources**

**#2, 3, 14, 15.**

**The Ostrogoths**

**Tierney text, 74-77, 79-81; Tierney source #10; Laistner, _Thought and_**

**_Letters_ , pp. 95-103.**

**The Visigoths in Gaul and Hispania**

**Tierney text, 77-79.**

**The Franks**

**Tierney text, 71-74, 94-105; Tierney number 11 (review 14).**

**The Anglo-Saxons and the Age of Arthur**

**Hoyt & Chodorow xerox, pp. 78-83.**

**The Peasants' World**

**Tierney text, 175-84; Wood, "The Peasants," xerox (book on Dinand
reserve).**

**FIRST HOUR EXAM**

**Justinian and the Byzantine Empire**

**Tierney text, 85-94; Tierney sources #12,22; Procopius, _Secret History_ ,
pp. 81-86, 130-36, 192-94.**

**The Rise of Islam**

**Tierney text, 121-27; Tierney number 23.**

**The Moslems in Iberia**

**Bendiner, _Rise and Fall_ , pp. 14-24, 38-41, 145-50, 154-68, 208-9.**

**Spread of Monasticism**

**Tierney text, pp. 56-59; Tierney sources #16,17,19,20.**

**Monasticism and the Conversion of the North**

**Tierney text pp. 105-21; Tierney sources #18, 21**

**FIRST SOURCE PAPER DUE, by 5 p.m.**

**Europe in Formation**

**Tierney text, review pp. 94-105, continue with 127-32; Tierney sources
#24,25.**

**The Carolingians**

**Formation of the Empire --**

**Tierney text, 134-40; Tierney sources #26,27; Einhard in _Two Lives_**

**Society and the Land --**

**Tierney text, 141-45; Tierney sources #28,29; Notker in _Two Lives_ ;**

**"Bodo the Peasant" xerox.**

**Society and the Role of Women**

**Wemple, "Monogamous Marriage," in Ozment and Turner, _Many Sides_ ,**

**pp. 121-33, xerox.**

**The Pirenne Thesis**

**Lyon, _Origins_ , pp. 57-87.**

**Viking Invasions and Carolingian Defeats**

**Tierney text, 145-52; Hall, _Jorvik_.**

**SECOND HOUR EXAM**

**The Formation of Feudal Society**

**_Common reading_ : Tierney text, 157-74; Tierney source #52; Wood, "Feudal
Aristocracy" xerox; Ganshof, _Feudalism_ , pp. xv-xviii. _Discussion
assignments to be divided in class from_ : Ganshof, pp. 65-105, 113-17,
125-28, 133-37, 142-45, 156-67; Tierney numbers 32, 33, 34 (1020 document
only), 35.**

**The New Kingdoms**

**Western Frankland --**

**Tierney text, 189-94; Lemarignier, "Structures" xerox.**

**Anglo-Saxon England --**

**Tierney text, 194-96.**

**Iberia and the Mediterranean --**

**Hoyt & Chodorow xerox, pp. 304-10; Tierney text 251-53; Fletcher,**

**_Quest for El Cid_ , chapter 5.**

**Eastern Frankland --**

**Tierney text, 203-11; Tierney source #30; Hill, _The Rise of the First_**

**_Reich_ , pp. 9-30.**

**SECOND SOURCE PAPER DUE, by 5 p.m.**

**The Reform of the Church and Papacy**

**Tierney text, 212-85; Tierney source #36; Lawrence, _Medieval Monasticism_ ,
pp. 111-35, xerox (book on Dinand reserve).**

**FINAL EXAM (cumulative)**  
    


**ADVICE FOR EXAM-TAKING:**

**Exam questions for the survey courses can take three different forms: a.)
the short identification, of people, place-names, things, concepts (examples:
Julius Caesar, Constantinople, _Vulgate_ , _comitatus_ ); b.) a short essay
based on one of the readings, including the textbook; c.) a long essay
requiring synthesis of lecture, discussion, primary and secondary sources.**

**Exams should be prepared for by careful reading of the assigned passages.
You should take notes on the readings, and not rely on highlighting passages
in the books. You should actively compare and contrast lecture material with
what is found in the readings. History requires you to master chronology, and
if this means you have to memorize dates in order to learn them, then
memorization becomes a part of your task.**

**For the identifications, apply the questions who, what, when, where (as many
as pertinent) to the question. Most of all, it is important to identify the
historical importance of the item: why it appears in our course. It is not
necessary to answer these identifications with a full essay, but you should be
complete in your response.**

**For the essays, because these form the largest part of the exam grade, it is
important to shape your response with a thesis, followed by the evidence that
informs it. It is less important and appropriate to convey _everything_ you
remember about the topic, than it is to argue your position and choose the
details that support it. Because you are under time constraints, it is better
to declare your position on the topic early in the essay; in the time that
remains, argue the case with the evidence and the details you feel best prove
it. Budget your time wisely so you can make all the points you believe are
vital. Sometimes it is helpful to jot down the major points you wish to make,
to have in front of you so that you know what remains to be written in the
time left. You don't have time for a full outline, but it often helps to note
a few key words to keep your essay on target. These key words and concepts can
also help you to begin your essay with a full statement of the position you
wish to argue. Including reference to primary sources in the essay gives your
argument added strength because you are citing contemporary evidence, and not
just interpretations of modern historians.**

**ADVICE FOR DAILY STUDYING:**

**Most of the material encountered in this class will be entirely new to you.
The methodology may also be novel: taking a critical approach to primary and
secondary sources is much more challenging than accepting what authorities
wrote simply because it is in print. Mastering this material and critical
outlook requires more effort on your part than you may have encountered in
high school history courses. Learning the material, especially dates,
certainly requires the repetition of reading, re-reading, and careful note-
taking. Do not underestimate the benefits this has for your powers of
organization and your capacity to think in a disciplined and rational manner,
in this class and in others.**

**Take responsibility for your studying: prepare for class before attending,
at the very least by skimming the text and readings to acquaint yourself with
the topics under discussion. No one but you is responsible for the level of
interest which you bring to the task. Entertainment is far less the object of
this class than an expansion of your understanding of human culture and human
achievement.**  
    


**COMPOSITION OF GRADES:**

**Hour exam I 17%**

**Hour exam II 19%**

**Source paper I 12%**

**Source paper II 14%**

**Class discussion 10%**

**Final exam 28%**

**____**

**100%**

