+++++++ course portfolio +++++++

American Literary Traditions / Randy Bass

**Cover Letter**

**To the Reader:**

This is a "course portfolio" for American Literary Traditions, a course that I
first taught in the Spring of 1997, and again in Fall 1997. I chose to write a
course portfolio for American Literary Traditions (ENGL 210) because I created
the course a year ago with the intentions of testing a set of assumptions
about new approaches to teaching an introductory American literature course.
Specifically, I wanted to introduce the use of new technologies into a
mainstream, introductory American literature course setting, and I wanted to
see if these technologies, in combination with other pedagogies and methods,
could successfully support an approach to American fiction that emphasized the
complexities of literary and narrative form, but in a way very accessible to
students who were new to the subject. Writing the course portfolio on American
Literary Traditions has given me an opportunity to reflect seriously on these
two semesters of experimentation both in the context of my own professional
development and as a contribution to the field of teaching American
literature.

The course portfolio is a relatively new genre that is being created to enable
teachers to discuss both the scholarly and pedagogical dimensions of their
teaching. I have written this portfolio and designed it to be read in an
electronic, hypertext environment for several reasons. First and foremost, I
have written the portfolio as a way of being rigorous with myself in trying to
track, document, and interpret the kinds of student learning that are taking
place in my courses. Two years ago, when I first taught in a networked
computer environment and an electronic workshop pedagogy, I encountered many
problems and the lowest student evalutations (by a wide margin) of my teaching
career. In anticipation of my upcoming tenure review, I considered this drop
in student evaluations very dangerous. Most of my professional energy is spent
on the use of new technologies in teaching culture and history. For me,
everything was at stake in making new approaches to teaching with technology
work here at Georgetown. I welcomed the opportunity to write a portfolio
because it allowed me to formalize the experimental and hypothetical stance
with which I approached my teaching to begin with.

Second, I have written a course portfolio as a formal part of my tenure
dossier. As with many faculty, teaching is a highly integrative activity for
me, a site for crossing boundaries between scholarship and pedagogy.
Especially because I am working with new technologies, and frequently showing
this work in workshops and presentations, my course resources, pedagogical
materials, and student work is particularly public (as is the work of most
faculty teaching their courses with online components). I do not merely
consider my teaching a contribution to my local context, but a significant
contribution to my field. A course portfolio enables me to reflect on my
teaching in a research model and in a publication format so that it might be
subject to peer review as would any other part of my dossier.

Third, I have designed my course portfolios as electronic, hypertext documents
primarily out of necessity: my teaching materials and my students' work are in
electronic form, and therefore, only an electronic writing environment could
adequately represent them. The hypertext format for a course portfolio also
solves some problems that faculty authors of print course portfolios have
encountered. Chief among these is the problem of evidence. How much evidence
do you include for your readers? If too much, the portfolio is overwhelming to
read. If too little, then you run the risk of leaving readers with questions,
skepticism, or just generally wanting to see more. A hypertext format allows
me to offer examples of evaluations or students learning in summary form and
then present readers with direct electronic access to the balance of evidence.
Indeed, this is the format I have followed throughout.

As a hypertext course portfolio, I also have the luxury of multiple modes of
organization and access. The portfolio is divided into four main sections, in
addition to this Cover Letter. The first section addresses the multiple
[Contexts](http://www.georgetown.edu/bassr/portfolio/amlit/contexts.html) for
the course, briefly discussing the personal, institutional, and disciplinary
contexts for American Literary Traditions. The next and longest section is the
[Argument](http://www.georgetown.edu/bassr/portfolio/amlit/argument.html), in
which I lay out my intentions for the design of the course and my general
conclusions about its strengths, weaknesses, and lessons learned. The third
section is the [Annotated
Syllabus](http://www.georgetown.edu/bassr/portfolio/amlit/syllabus.html)
(another uniquely electronic feature) in which the course syllabus is
annotated with reflections about several key moments of the course, accessible
in "pop-up" windows, where the syllabus and the reflection are on the screen
simultaneously. The final section is called [Learning: A Narrative
Analysis](http://www.georgetown.edu/bassr/portfolio/amlit/altanlys.htm), in
which I consider the main components of course design and pedagogical
intention in the context of student learning and work.

In addition to these sections, the hypertext course portfolio contains several
navigation tools, including a [Comprehensive
Index](http://www.georgetown.edu/bassr/portfolio/amlit/cpaltidx.htm) to course
materials, related evaluation data, and the sections of the course portfolio.
Additionally, at the bottom of every page in the course portfolio is a
"navigation bar" with each of the portfolio's components accessible through
links.

Although I have written the portfolio to be read by reviewers and colleagues,
it is nonetheless a work that will always be in progress. I welcome all
comments and critique.

[Randy Bass](mailto:rbass@guvax.georgetown.edu) Washington, D.C. December 1997

* * *

#### [course portfolio Homepage](index.html) | [course portfolio
Index](cpaltidx.htm)

    [cover](http://www.georgetown.edu/bassr/portfolio/amlit/cover.html) * [contexts](contexts.html) * [argument](argument.html) * [syllabus](syllabus.html)* [learning](altanlys.htm)

  

* * *

