  **[Georgetown University](http://www.georgetown.edu/)**  
---  
**CNDLS  
Faculty Colloquium**  
**on New Learning Environments** | ![](LOGO.gif)  
  
* * *

**Links to Colloquium Resources:**

* * *

  


* [About the Colloquium](index.html)_   


* [Schedule of Colloquium
    Events](calendar.html)
  


* [Agenda of Second
    Plenary](agendaC2.html)
  


* [Call for Participants](sp00call.html)
  


* [List of Participants](sp00list.html)
  


* [Colloquium Resource     Packet](packet.html)
**Colloquium on New Learning Environments: Plenary 2**  
**February 22, 2000**

"Some Framing Issues for Our Work in Learning and Technology"

Opening remarks by Randy Bass, Executive Director  
Center for New Designs in Learning and Scholarship (CNDLS)

* * *

        **The Cricket Against the Moon**   


> In one of the novels by N. Scott Momaday, a Native American novelist, he has
an image of the cricket against the moon. He describes someone sitting on the
steps of a porch at night, slowly turning his head. He sees right in front of
his eyes a cricket, sitting on the railing, silhouetted against the full moon
just above the horizon. This is described as an extraordinary image: holding
something so small, so detailed, so local (the cricket) in view at the same
time as something so distant, so whole, so ideal (the moon).

>

> This image, of the proximate and local held against the ideal, is an image
that fits well with the goals of the Colloquium. One the one hand we're all
interested in the long term improvement of what we value most about teaching
and learning; on the other hand, we have to hold that in perspective to the
need for paying attention to what's right in front of us, whether it is the
details of student learning in the classroom or the intricacies of new
technology tools. Not losing perspective and focusing exclusively on one or
the other is what the Colloquium is all about.

>

> To begin, let's think about what those broader, more distant and abstract
goals of our local work might. Let me lay out very sketchily a few pieces of a
framework for curriculum reform that we might keep in front of us.  
  
---  
  
  **Shifting from Teaching to Learning**  
    
    Probably one of the most difficult parts of focusing on student learning is shifting from a teacher-centered perspective. This is especially difficult because with any formal training in how to teach, we tend to teach the way we were taught. And for the most part, the way we were taught was designed to work best on people who end up being us: people who teach what we teach. Thus, we know very little about, and think very little about, what material might look like to people with novice status in our domain off knowledge and perhaps even discomfort with a certain way of thinking. Grant Wiggins puts this well in an article: 

>  "Teaching, by nature, is an egocentric profession in the sense Piaget used
the term: we find it difficult to see when our teaching isn't clear or
adequate. We don't easily imagine how what is so obvious and important to us
cannot be equally so to novices. Combined with our desire to cause learning
and to find any evidence of success, we are prone to unending self-deception.
How easily we hear what we want and need to hear in a  student answer or
question; how quickly we assume that if a few intelligent comments are made,
all students get the point. This is the tragic flaw inherent in trying hard,
and for the right reasons, to get people to understand and value what we
understand and value. It then often doesn't occur to us that students are
trying equally hard to appear knowledgeable." (Grant Wiggins, "Embracing
Accountability").

  
**Teaching for Understanding** ****

When we start to focus on learning as opposed to teaching, we can more easily
focus on the idea of "teaching for understanding." Not all teaching is
teaching for understanding. That is, not all teaching is designed to maximize
the ability of students to "perform" their knowledge and not merely to
"represent" it on exams. David Perkins defines "teaching for understanding"
this way:

> "So, what is understanding?...In a phrase, understanding is the ability to
think and act flexibly with what one knows. To put it another way, an
understanding of a topic is a "flexible performance capability" with emphasis
on the flexibility. In keeping with this, learning for understanding is like
learning a flexible performance--more like learning to improvise jazz or hold
a good conversation or rock climb than learning the multiplication table or
the dates of the presidents... Learning facts can be a crucial backdrop to
learning for understanding, but learning facts is not learning for
understanding." (David Perkins in _Teaching for Understanding_ ).

  
**Coverage vs. Uncoverage**

One critical dimension of teaching for understanding is the issue of
"coverage." Howard Gardner, in _The Unschooled Mind_ , notes that the primary
obstacle to teaching for understanding is a devotion to _coverage_. Grant
Wiggins poses a useful distinction between "coverage" and "uncoverage":
coverage, we're all familiar with. "Uncoverage" is a term that refers to the
process by which a few key terms or concepts in a course are uncovered for
students. These are concepts that are both difficult to grasp and crucial to
building a foundation for future learning. Wiggins describes "uncoverage" this
way:

> "A curriculum designed to develop understanding would uncover complex,
abstract, and counterintuitive ideas by involving students in active
questioning, practice trying out ideas, and rethinking what they thought they
knew. 'Uncoverage' describes the design philosophy of guided inquiry into
abstract ideas, to make those ideas more accessible, connected, meaningful,
and useful. Uncoverage, then, must be done by design." (Understanding by
Design, p. 21).

The salient question then is how different might your syllabus look if you
begin putting a course together with the question: what topics do I need to
"uncover" in this course, as opposed to "cover"?

**The "Prior Learning Problem" and the "Transfer of Learning Problem"**

Teaching for understanding, and attending to learning as opposed to teaching,
compels us to face a number of teaching "problems." Two of the most important
of these are the "prior learning problem" (i.e. what prior understandings and
misunderstandings do students bring to a course that has impact on their
ability to learn anything in the course) and the "transfer of learning"
problem (i.e. what do students take away with them from the course beyond the
exams and papers). There is a lot to explore about both these problems. One
excellent source of reflection about them in a context of the scholarship of
teaching is [a case study by William Cerbin, online at the Carnegie Foundation
for the Advancement of
Teaching](http://kml.carnegiefoundation.org/gallery/bcerbin/index.html). Both
prior learning and transfer of learning are important problems to think about
and may point to a couple areas of targeted investigation for curricular
innovation and classroom research.

**"Making Thinking Visible"**

One of the key places where these learner-centered concepts intersect with the
capabilities of digital tools and new learning environments can be captured in
the phrase "making thinking visible." The phrase "making thinking visible"
comes from a well-circulated article by John Seely Brown, Allan Collins, and
Anne Holum. In the context of the article they focus on what they call
"cognitive apprenticeship," a learning model whereby the "master" (teacher as
expert learner) models authentic ways of doing work in a field for the
"apprentice (the novice learner) and then gradually, through guided work,
"fades" back as the apprentice takes on more and more of the critical tasks.
One key set of ideas in "cognitive apprenticeship" is that the teacher has to
make visible all of the "strategic knowledge" that often remains invisible in
_novice_ learning contexts.

And this is where we can especially think about new media technologies and
learner-centered instruction that fosters real understanding. A question for
reflection then:

What are the successful strategies that you already use for making thinking
visible in your courses, whether

  * **Students to students** (communication, collaboration, peer instruction, reciprocal teaching)
  * **Students to faculty** (public pedagogy, rehearsal of ideas, drafting, metacognitive activity)
  * **Faculty to students** ("strategic knowledge," organizing assumptions behind materials, connections from a course to research or other courses).

What is it about these strategies makes them successful? How might new
technologies, such as the CourseInfo environment, or myriad other
possibilities, help make thinking more visible? These are just some thoughts
to get started.  

* * *

  


**Some Print and Electronic Sources on Teaching for Understanding, Scholarship
of Teaching, and New Media Technologies.** ****

**[For additional resources, see the CNDLS[Bibliography of Teaching and
Learning
Resources](http://www.georgetown.edu/main/provost/candles/bib.html)]**

> [American Studies Crossroads
Project](http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/). American Studies Association
and Georgetown University.

>

> Bass, Randy. "The Scholarship of Teaching: What's the Problem?"
[Inventio](http://www.doiiit.gmu.edu/inventio/index.html) (Winter 1999).

>

> \---. [Course Portfolio on American Literary
Traditions.](http://www.georgetown.edu/bassr/portfolio/amlit/) Georgetown
University. http://www.georgetown.edu/bassr/portfolio/amlit/.

>

> Bransford, John D., Ann L. Brown, and Rodney R. Cocking, eds. 1999. _How
People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School_. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.

>

> Kafai, Yasmin and Mitchel Resnick. 1996. _Constructionism in Practice:
Designing, Thinking, and Learning in a Digital World_. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.

>

> Perkins, David N., Judah L. Schwartz, Mary Maxwell West, and Martha Stone
Wiske, eds. 1995. _Software Goes to School: Teaching for Understanding with
New Technologies_. Oxford: Oxford University Press 1995.

>

> Wiggins, Grant and Jay McTighe. _Understanding by Design_. 1998. Alexandria,
VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.

>

> Wilson, Brent G., ed. 1998. _Constructivist Learning Environments: Case
Studies in Instructional Design._ Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Educational
Technology Publications.

>

> Wiske, Martha Stone, ed. 1998. _Teaching for Understanding: Linking Research
with Practice._ San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.  
>  

Some interesting sites:

>  
> [InterQuest Online courses](http://www.orst.edu/instruct/phl201/)
(Philosophy and others)  
> http://www.orst.edu/instruct/phl201/

>

> [Inventio](http://www.doiiit.gmu.edu/inventio/index.html) (Online journal
about teaching and learning; George Mason University)  
> http://www.doiiit.gmu.edu/inventio/index.html

>

> National Museum of American Art cd-rom. Smithsonian National Museum of
American Art.

>

> Perrin, Nancy, and John Rueter, [Curriculum Revision with Educational
Technology: Improving Student Outcomes in Large
Courses](http://edtech.clas.pdx.edu/). (FIPSE funded project; Portland State
University).  
> http://edtech.clas.pdx.edu/

>

> ["Soul Murder"
Workshop](http://www.assumption.edu/HTML/Academic/history/WWHP/Workshop.html),
John McClymer (Assumption College).  
> http://www.assumption.edu/HTML/Academic/history/WWHP/Workshop.html

>

> [Technology and the Classroom: A
Bibliography](http://madison.wlu.edu/~kobersteink/class.htm) (Kathy
Koberstein)  
> http://madison.wlu.edu/~kobersteink/class.htm

>

> ["Women and the American Experience
Syllabus,"](http://www.assumption.edu/HTML/Academic/history/Hi113net/Hi113Syllabus.html)
John McClymer (Assumption College).  
> http://www.assumption.edu/HTML/Academic/history/Hi113net/Hi113Syllabus.html

>

> [World Lecture Hall ](http://www.utexas.edu/world/lecture/)(University of
Texas).  
> http://www.utexas.edu/world/lecture/  
  
---  
  

* * *

Return to [CNDLS homepage](http://www.georgetown.edu/main/provost/candles/).

