**PRINCETON UNIVERSITY**

**DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY**

**History 398: Technologies and Their Societies: Historical Perspectives**

**Professor Michael S. Mahoney**

_An Extended Syllabus Prepared for the Sloan NLA Program (Updated 2001)_

**_Motivation and Goals for the Course_**

_Technologies and Their Societies_ arose in the late '70s from two concerns.
First, the staff of Princeton's Program in History of Science had long felt
the need to include history of technology in its curriculum. Second, much of
the widely read literature of the 1970s criticizing technology and the nature
of its social presence used historical examples in ways that seemed to neglect
the structural determinants of technological systems, the limits and
possibilities the structures placed on the system, and the complexity of the
interrelations between systems and the societies that develop them and live
with them. Curiously for works that purported to reflect on historical trends,
critiques of the 1970s tended to place technology beyond history, ascribing to
it a nature and force independent of place and time. The course has been aimed
primarily at bringing a proper historical perspective to technology by taking
its technical content seriously and by emphasizing how its shape at any given
time has reflected the society that has used it.

That is the primary reason for the use of the plural in the title. There is no
Technology across time and place; there are only technologies used at
particular times in particular places. Indeed, techno _logy_ as explicit
rationalization of craft practice, expressed through manuals, treatises, and
textbooks and grounded ultimately in scientific theory, is itself an
historical phenomenon that first emerged in the sixteenth century and took its
modern shape only in the nineteenth, when the term itself first came into use.
The transition from lore to learning, from oral tradition to written
discipline, and from experience to theory is part of the history of technology
and reflects the development of the societies in which it occurred. Building a
Gothic cathedral does not presuppose a science of statics, nor does the
construction of mills rest on a science of dynamics. Practice did not require
theory, and hence the felt need for theoretical understanding of practical
experience calls for historical explanation.

The course soon picked up another goal. In assembling materials, I followed my
practice of building on original sources, and as an historian of science I had
printed sources in mind. As they proved hard to find, at least for the
technologies themselves, it gradually dawned on me that I was looking for the
wrong thing. Technology is not a literate enterprise. It does not produce
words, but rather things: structures, machines, processes, systems. Reading
its history means reading artifacts rather than books, looking at engineering
design as an expression of the designer's understanding of the problem to be
solved and of the range of desired or acceptable solutions: who is going to
use this machine, what must the user know, what can the user be expected to
learn, how does the machine fit into a productive system, and so on? The
concept of "reading" a machine is now central to the course, and the lectures
in particular make extensive use of illustrations and models. The goal is to
turn out students who are able readers of their own technological environment.

**_General Structure of the Course_**

The design of the course rests on a tripartite schema of technology,
instantiated in four historical episodes. The central element of the schema is
a technical system, e.g. the factory. At the heart of the system is a
technical core, the basic machine(s) or process(es) on which it rests and
which determines the potential and the limits of the system: for example, a
factory powered by a steam engine or a waterwheel can expand to immense size,
but it is limited by the power available and it must work as a unit.
Surrounding the system schematically is the society whose needs and desires it
fulfills and which in turn accommodates the system. The factory system
provided cheap standard goods for ever expanding markets, while it required a
large, urban workforce.

The four episodes considered are late medieval technics as reflected by the
mill and the cathedral, the origins of the factory system in England in the
late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the development of mass
production and the assembly line in nineteenth-century America, and the modern
high technology as exemplified by the computer. The focus on machines reflects
my own tastes and training, but the underlying schema and the basic
periodization are adaptable to other forms of technology. For example, one
could follow agriculture from the Middle Ages through the Industrial
Revolution to modern agribusiness, or mining and metallurgy over a similar
sequence of changes.

**_[The Syllabus for Fall
1996](http://www.princeton.edu/~hos/h398/398-96.html)_**

**_[The Syllabus for Fall
1998](http://www.princeton.edu/~hos/h398/398-98.html)_**

**_[The Syllabus for Spring
2001](http://www.princeton.edu/~hos/h398/398syl.html)_**

**_The Readings in General_**

In keeping with the goal of developing the students' critical skills in
analyzing technology and discussions of it, the course does not have a
textbook but rather is built around a series of books read in their entirety
or in large part and supplemented by articles and excerpts from scholarly
monographs. The lectures carry much of the burden both of historical narrative
and of technical detail, leaving the broad, open-ended questions of motivation
and social impact to the discussion sections, for which the readings are meant
to provide argumentative stimulus.

Arnold Pacey's _The Maze of Ingenuity_ is meant to serve that provocative
purpose, although it also provides a useful survey of technology in medieval
and early modern history, periods unfamiliar to most students. By emphasizing
the idealistic aspects of technological development, sometimes to the
exclusion of fundamental economic motivations (as in the building of
cathedrals), Pacey also offers a forceful counterpoise to readings encountered
later in the course, several of which focus critically on technology as the
foundation of industrial capitalism and hence direct their attention to
political and economic issues. Several questions on examinations have asked
the students to compare Pacey with one or more of the latter works.  


**Week 1, _Introduction, The Technics of Simple and Compound Machines_**

The second lecture introduces the basic characteristics of simple and compound
machines, taking as examples the machines described by Georgius Agricola in
his _De re metallica_ (1556) and the application of machines to the task of
moving the Vatican obelisk as recounted by Domenico Fontana in his work of
1585.

**_Readings and Sources_**

Frances and Joseph Gies, _Cathedral, Forge, and Waterwheel: Technology and
Invention in the Middle Ages_ (NY: HarperCollins, 1994), summarize the current
literatureon the machine technology of the Middle Ages. Agricola's work as
translated by Herbert and Lou Henry Hoover is still available in a Dover
reprint. Also available from Dover is _The Various and Ingenious Machines of
Agostino Ramelli_ , trans. by Martha Teach Gnudi, with notes by Eugene S.
Ferguson, which is a treasury of Renaissance (i.e. medieval) machine technics.
The catalog for the exhibition _Mechanical Marvels: Invention in the Age of
Leonardo_ , organized by the Istituto e Museo di Storia delle Scienze in
Florence and the Italian firm Finmeccanica in 1997 offers a rich collection of
Renaissance illustrations and photographs of reconstructions of Renaissance
machines.  It was accompanied by a compact disc that included the animations
of the machines at work.

**Week 2, _Mill and Manor, Cathedral and Town_**

With the technical system of the mill covered in Lecture 2 and that of the
cathedral laid out in Erlande-Brandenburg's book, the lectures for this week
turn to the place of the two systems in their respective social settings.
Given the nature of the readings, the lectures emphasize the social and
economic presence of the mill and the cathedral. A highly schematic
description of the traditional agricultural village sets some of the
background for understanding the upheaval brought about by the Industrial
Revolution, especially among cottagers and marginal labor.

**_Readings_**

The chapters in Holt's study place the medieval English mill in its manorial
setting and bring the miller out from behind the caricature presented by the
literature of the period. In both cases, the argument offers insight into the
sources and methods of cultural history of technology in pre-modern societies.

**_Sources_**

The mill is arguably the most sophisticated technical system of the
preindustrial world. Certainly it was the most prevalent at the time; Domesday
Book recorded almost 6000 watermills in England in 1068, and a century later
the windmill began to spread from its apparent origin in East Anglia. Mills
dotted the countryside throughout Europe, filled the understructures of the
bridge of Paris, and floated in the major rivers. Structurally, the mill seems
the evident model for the mechanical clock, devised sometime in the late 12th
or early 13th century. Yet, as a technical system and as a social presence the
mill has until recently escaped the attention of historians.

Two works now admirably fill the lacuna. Terry S. Reynolds' _Stronger Than A
Hundred Men: A History of the Vertical Water Wheel_ (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins,
1983) is a wide-ranging study that moves between technical details and social
settings from ancient times down to the nineteenth century and that rests on
what seems an exhaustive bibliography. Richard Holt's _The Mills of Medieval
England_ (Oxford, 1988) is geographically more focused but socially more
detailed. Drawn from extensive archival research, it provides a well
illustrated, technically proficient account of the construction and working of
water and wind mills, and then sets out the economic, legal, and social
structures that tied them to medieval English society. In this latter area,
Holt's account significantly revises the long standard interpretation of Marc
Bloch in his classic "The Advent and Triumph of the Watermills" (in his _Land
and Work in Medieval Europe_ , London 1967; orig. "Avenement et conquete du
moulin a eau", _Annales d'histoire economique et sociale_ 36[1935], 583-663),
at least for England. John Muendel has written a series of articles on mills
in northern Italy, exploring both their technical and their economic
structure; see for example "The distribution of mills in the Florentine
countryside during the late Middle Ages" in J.A. Raftis, ed., _Pathways to
Medieval Peasants_ (Toronto, 1981), 83-115, and "The horizontal mills of
Pistoia", _Technology and Culture_ **15** (1974), 194-225. Chapter 2 of Lynn
White's classic _Medieval Technology and Social Change_ sets the background of
the mill in "The Agricultural Revolution of the Middle Ages", and Chapter 3
treats water power, the mill, and machines in general. Marjorie Boyer's "Water
mills: a problem for the bridges and boats of medieval France" ( _History of
Technology_ **7** (1982), 1-22), an outgrowth of her study of medieval
bridges, calls attention to the urban presence of mills and makes it all the
more curious that medieval scholars could talk of the _machina mundi_ without
mentioning them.

Two other monographs provide valuable guides to the technical structure of the
mill. John Reynolds' _Windmills and Watermills_ (London, 1970) and Rex
Wailes's _The English Windmill_ (London, 1954) are both richly illustrated,
though Wailes's superb drawings, born of thirty years of visiting mills, often
make the operations clearer than do Reynolds' photographs.

Robert Mark's _Experiments in Gothic Structures_ analyses in some detail the
technical structure of cathedrals, taking advantage of recent engineering
methods such as photoelasticity and finite-element analysis. As the course
developed, it became clear that the book is too long and technically detailed.
The lecture lays out the main argument, illustrated by slides used in the book
and reinforced by Mark's article coauthored with William W. Clark, "Gothic
Structural Experimentation", _Scientific American_ **251** ,5(1984), 176-185.
There Mark and Clark document technical communication between builders at
Notre Dame in Paris and at the new cathedral in Bourges. Jean Gimpel, _The
Cathedral Builders_ (NY, 1961), and Henry Kraus, _Gold Was the Mortar: The
Economics of Cathedral Building_ (London, 1978), place the building of
cathedrals in the wider social context of the medieval city. In "The Education
of the Medieval English Master Masons", _Mediaeval Studies_ **32** (1970),
1-26, and "The Geometrical Knowledge of the Medieval Master Masons",
_Speculum_ **47** (1972), 395-421, Lon Shelby dispels the legends of a secret
science by describing the measurements the masons actually carried out in
building large structures. David Macauley's _Cathedral_ brings medieval
construction to life in his inimitable drawings, the basis for an animated TV
documentary.

The social drama of the building of a cathedral has attracted the attention of
several novelists.  Ken Follett's _Pillars of the Earth_ is my favorite, in
particular for its technical accuracy and for its focus on the masons whose
skill made the buildings possible.

**Week 3, _Power Machinery, The Steam Engine_**

The two lectures use slides and models to explain the workings of the new
textile machinery and of the steam engine as they were invented and developed
in the mid-to-late 18th century. The first focuses on the mechanization of
spinning and the different relationship between operator and machine in the
jenny and the frame, while the second follows the motives behind Watt's
improvements on the Newcomen design and the resulting shift of focus from
mines to factories and then to railroads.

**_Readings_**

The first chapter of Peter Laslett's _The World We Have Lost_ portrays the
social structure of pre-Industrial England, while Richard L. Hills's _Power in
the Industrial Revolution_ complements the lectures in several directions:
Chapter 2 provides a survey of the process of transforming raw fiber into
finished cloth, with an emphasis on the increasing difficulty of translating
the manual task into mechanical action; 10 analyzes the problem of bringing
power to the machines, with stress on the difficulties of measurement; and 11
describes the special difficulties of weaving by power.

**_Sources_**

In addition to Hills's comprehensive and well documented account, Walter
English's _The Textile Industry: An Account of the Early Inventions of
Spinning, Weaving, and Knitting Machines_ (NY, 1969) contains detailed
descriptions, supported by excellent diagrams and illustrations. Also helpful
for illustrations are Maurice Daumas (ed.), _A History of Technology and
Invention_ (NY, 1978; orig. _Histoire g enerale des techniques_, Paris, 1969),
vol. III, Part 7, Chaps. 1-2, and Wallace's _Rockdale_ (see following week).

The steam engine must be the best described machine in the history of
technology. Particular good explanations and illustrations can be found in
Eugene S. Ferguson's "The Origins of the Steam Engine", _Scientific American_
(Jan. 1964; repr. in Gene I. Rochlin (comp.), _Scientific Technology and
Social Change: Readings from Scientific American_ , San Francisco, 1974, Chap.
6); and D.S.L. Cardwell, _From Watt to Clausius: The Rise of Thermodynamics in
the Early Industrial Age_ (Ithaca, 1971). The classic account in English
remains Henry W. Dickinson, _A Short History of the Steam Engine_ (London,
1938; 2nd. ed. 1963). On Watt in particular, see the documentary history
assembled by Eric Robinson and A.E. Musson, _James Watt and the Steam
Revolution_ (Lond: Adams and Dart, 1969), which includes at the end color
reproductions of engineers' wash drawings pertinent to the various patents.

**Week 4, _The Factory and The Factory System_**

The two lectures of this week and the first of the next pick up the
agricultural society of the late Middle Ages and follow the transition to the
new industrial society of the mid-19th century. The central element of that
transition is the factory, viewed first as a system of production by machines,
then as an organization of human labor, and finally as a new social and
economic presence in British politics.

**_Readings_**

The readings provide supplementary and contrasting details for the lectures,
which perforce are quite general and schematic. Chap. 12 of Hills's book opens
the issue of how the machines themselves were produced.  J.T. Ward's _The
Factory System_ documents from contemporary sources the transition from
domestic to factory production in the textile industry. The readings selected
focus on artisans and domestic workers before the introduction of machines and
on the initial response to the new system from various perspectives. Ward
presents a seemingly bewildering potpourri of details, so it is important to
look for the structures that hold them together. The lectures should provide
some guidance.

Anthony F.C. Wallace's _Rockdale_ describes the construction (or
transformation) of a water-powered mill and reviews the constituent processes
of cotton production by machine, supporting his discussion with excellent
drawings. He pursues in some detail a question left open by the lectures,
namely how manufacturers got hold of the machinery for their factories.
Finally, he introduces readers to a group of families who worked in the mills.
His verbal descriptions come to life when supplemented by David Macaulay's
drawings in _Mill_ (NY, 1983).

**_Sources_**

Jennifer Tann's _The Development of the Factory_ (London, 1970) provides the
most useful guide to the subject. Tann, who is the editor of _The Selected
Papers of Boulton & Watt_ (Vol. I, The Engine Partnership, MIT, 1981), builds
her account on the B&W archives, from which she reproduces a rich selection of
drawings and layouts of early factories. As she characterizes her work, "One
of the themes which emerges from the following pages is that it was the same
few manufacturers who adopted the costly innovations such as fire-proof
buildings, who installed gas lighting, steam or warm air heating and fire
extinguishing apparatus; they were the giants, the ones who are most likely to
have left some record of their activities behind, yet in many respects, they
were uncharacteristic. They appear to have found little difficulty in
recruiting capital yet there were many smaller manufacturers who found
difficulty in obtaining long-term loans, to whom a fire-proof factory or gas
lighting would have seemed an unobtainable luxury. In this respect some of the
most valuable letters are from those manufacturers who decided against buying
a Boulton & Watt steam engine which was a good deal more expensive than an
atmospheric engine or a simple water wheel."(p.2)

Other useful studies include:

> William Fairbairn, _Treatise on Mills and Millwork_ (2 vols., London,
1861-63; 2nd ed. 1864-65; 3rd ed. 1871-74; 4th ed. 1878); as the several
editions suggest, this was the fundamental manual of mill design, covering the
building, the source of power, the transmission power, heating, lighting, etc.
Rich in illustrations.

>

> Brian Bracegirdle, et al., _The Archaeology of the Industrial Revolution_
(London, 1973), which contains magnificent black/white and color photos and
line drawings of mills and steam engines, together with a brief but choice
bibliography.

>

> J.M. Richards, _The Functional Tradition in Early Industrial Building_
(London, 1959); The many illustrations of early factories, water and wind
mills, etc. are more helpful than the text.

A variety of sources provide glimpses of the workforce that first entered the
new factories. Frank E. Huggett gives a short account built around extensive
quotations from original sources in _The Past, Present and Future of Factory
Life and Work: A Documentary Inquiry_ (London, 1973). For a shorter account of
the difficulties of adjustment to the regimen of the factory in its earliest
days, based on a sampling of documentary evidence reflecting the experience of
literate participants, see Sidney Pollard,, "Factory Discipline in the
Industrial Revolution", _Economic History Review_ **16** (1963), 254-271.
Humphrey Jennings has compiled a potpourri of original reports in
_Pandaemonium: The Coming of the Machine as Seen by Contemporary Observers,
1660-1886_ (NY 1985).

**Week 5, _The Formation of Industrial Society, Industrial Ideologies_**

In 1815 England was ruled by a constitutional monarch, a hereditary nobility,
and a landed gentry under a settlement worked out in 1689 after a half-century
of turmoil. National policy was limited to matters of trade and diplomacy,
with internal matters left to local government as embodied by Justices of the
Peace meeting in Quarter Sessions. Land was the basis of political power, even
as it was steadily losing in economic power to commerce and industry, the
interests of which were largely unrepresented in Parliament. Over the next
fifty years, that balance shifted radically, as the Constitution was reshaped
to extend political voice to an urban electorate and to respond at the
national level to the social and economic problems posed by rapid
industrialization. That the transformation occurred without major violence
makes it a remarkable chapter in British history. The first lecture traces the
main outline of that process. The second examines contemporary efforts to
explain the changes occurring at the time and to determine the basic structure
of the newly emerging society. The lecture emphasizes the contrast between the
political economists, who viewed industrialization as a perturbation in the
dynamical system of the market, and Marx, who saw it as a new stage in the
evolution of political society.

**_Reading_**

Charles Babbage's _On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures_ and Karl
Marx's "Machinery and Large-Scale Industry" ( _Capital_ , Vol.I, Chap.15.)
offer strongly contrasting views of the nature and future of the new
industrial system. The specific chapters in Babbage show him trying to think
out systems of production and looking forward to division of mental labor,
i.e. management, which will become a theme later in the course. Few people
have actually read Marx, who must rank as one of the greatest historians of
technology; this is an opportunity to meet him on his home ground. Finally,
E.P. Thompson's classic "Time, Work-Discipline, and Industrial Capitalism",
_Past and Present_ **38** (1960), 56-97, offers a glimpse into the changing
lives of industrial workers.

**_Sources_**

Histories of the Industrial Revolution in Britain abound. I have drawn mostly
on S.G. Checkland, _The Rise of Industrial Society in England, 1815-1885_
(London, 1971), E.P. Thompson, _The Making of the English Working Class_ (NY,
1963), and Phyllis Deane, _The First Industrial Revolution_ (Cambridge, 1965).
A recent study is Maxine Berg, _The Age of Manufactures, 1700-1820: Industry,
Innovation, and Work in Britain_ (Totawa, 1985/Oxford, 1986).

As an introduction to the history of economic thought, Robert L. Heilbronner's
_The Worldly Philosophers_ (NY, 1953; repr. in several editions since) is
succinct and readable. For a reconsideration of Marx's technological
determinism, see Donald Mackenzie, "Marx and the Machine", _Technology and
Culture_ **25** (1984), 473-502.

**Week 6, _The Machine in the Garden, John H. Hall and the Origins of the
"American System"_**

England was the prototype for industrialization. The rest of the world could
look to that country as an example of what to emulate and what to avoid. Some
saw a land of power and prosperity and wondered aloud whether God might after
all be an Englishman; others saw "dark, Satanic mills" and the "specter of
Manchester" with its filthy slums and human misery. Americans in particular
thought hard about industry and whether it could be reconciled with the
republican virtues seemingly rooted in an agrarian order. "Let our workshops
remain in Europe," urged Jefferson in his _Notes on Virginia_ in 1785, and he
was no happier for being wiser about the feasibility of that policy after the
War of 1812. Nor did all his fellow countrymen agree in principle. Some saw
vast opportunities for industry in a land rich in natural resources, including
seemingly endless supplies of wood and of waterpower. The debate between the
two views became a continuing theme of American literature, characterized by
Leo Marx as _The Machine in the Garden_ (NY, 1964).

The combination of abundant resources and scarce labor meant that
industrialization in America would depend on the use of machinery, and from
the outset American inventors strove to translate manual tasks into mechanical
action. For reasons that so far elude scholarly consensus, Americans'
fascination with machines informed their approach to manufacturing to such an
extent that British observers in the mid-19th century characterized machine-
based production as the "American System". Precisely what was meant by that at
the time is not clear, but by the end of the century it came to mean mass
production by means of interchangeable parts. The origins of that system lay
in the new nation's armories, in particular at Harpers Ferry, where John H.
Hall first devised techniques for serial machining of parts within given
tolerances.

**_Reading_**

New to the course for 2001 is Ruth Schwartz Cowan's _A Social History of
American Technology_ , which provides the background for lectures dealing with
case studies of the "republican technology" of the Lowell factories and the
beginnings of the "American System" of mass production at Harpers Ferry
Armory.

**_Sources_**

Chapter 2 of John F. Kasson's _Civilizing the Machine: Technology and
Republican Values in America, 1776-1900_ relates Lowell's great experiment in
combining automatic textile machinery with a transient female workforce to
avoid a permanent urban proletariat. As a social experiment to reconcile
industry with democratic values, Lowell has intrigued labor historians almost
as much as it did contemporary observers. The most comprehensive account,
based on payroll records and tax inventories, is Thomas Dublin, _Women at
Work: The Transformation Of Work and Community in Lowell, Massachusetts,
1826-1860_ (NY, 1979). His _Farm to Factory: Women's Letters, 1830-1860_ (NY,
1981) transmits the workers' own words about their lives, as does Philip S.
Foner's _The Factory Girls_ (Urbana, 1977), meant to counteract the rosy
picture painted in the factory-sponsored _Lowell Offering_ , which has
recently been reprinted. For a collection of original sources, factory views,
and maps, see Gary Kulik, Roger Parks, and Theodore Penn (eds.), _The New
England Mill Village, 1790-1860_ (Documents in American Industrial History,
II, Cambridge, MA, 1982).

Merritt Roe Smith's _Harpers Ferry Armory_ remains the standard account of
John H. Hall's system for producing rifles with interchangeable parts on a
scale large enough to be economical.   In addition to the technical details of
the machinery and managerial techniques that made an industry of gunsmithing,
Smith examines the political and social structure of the master gunmakers and
the threats that the new technology posed to their way of life. Elting E.
Morison's _From Know-How to Nowhere: The Development of American Technology_
(NY, 1974) is a thoughtful and provocative account of engineering from
colonial times to the early 20th century, emphasizing the loss of autonomy and
accountability that came with modern industrial research. Two more recent
accounts are David Freeman Hawke, _Nuts and Bolts of the Past: A History of
American Technology_ (NY, 1988), and Thomas P. Hughes, _American Genesis: A
Century of Invention and Technological Enthusiasm, 1879-1970_ (NY, 1989).
Brooke Hindle and Steven Lubar provide a richly illustrated survey of
industrialization in America in their _Engines of Change: The American
Industrial Revolution_ (Washington, 1986). The book is based on an exhibit at
the Smithsonian's National Museum of American History, the pictorial materials
for which have been recorded on a videodisc available on request from the
Museum. The now standard account of the development of mass production is
David A. Hounshell, _From the America System to Mass Production: The
Development of Manufacturing Technology in the United States_ (Baltimore,
1984). A shorter version of his main thesis, together with an account of the
armory system by Smith, is contained in Otto Mayr and Robert C. Post (eds.),
_Yankee Enterprise: The Rise of the American System of Manufactures_
(Washington, 1982).

**Week 7, _Precision and Production, Ford's Model T: A $500 Car_**

When Americans first began machine-based production, the United States had no
machine-tool industry other than the shops attached to the factories
themselves and the shops of traditional artisans such as clockmakers and
gunsmiths. Using traditional hand tools, machine builders worked to routine
tolerances of 1/100", and precision was achieved by fitting part to part. In
1914, the first full year of assembly-line production at Ford, rough surveys
revealed some 500 firms producing over $30,000,000 worth of machine tools
ranging from the most general to the most specific. Over the intervening
century, routine shop-floor precision increased from 1/100" to 1/10,000", and
the finest instruments could measure 1/1,000,000". Such precision does not
occur naturally, nor are the means of attaining it self-evident. Indeed,
Britain's leading machinist, Joseph Whitworth testified before Parliament that
interchangeability and full machine production were not possible in principle.
The achievement of the requisite precision over the course of the century is a
remarkable story, still not told outside the specialist literature, and the
first lecture is an effort to tell it.

Accuracy to 0.0001", achieved automatically by machines, was a prerequisite of
Ford's methods of production and hence of the automobile he designed to meet
the needs and means of the millions of potential owners. The second lecture
backs up to give an account of the invention of the internal combustion
engine, which, like the steam engine, was originally conceived as a stationary
source of power but was adapted to use in a vehicle. After a quick survey of
the earliest automobiles, the lecture "reads" Ford's design of the Model T,
first with respect to its intended user and then with respect to the methods
by which Ford could produce it at an affordable price. Appendix I is a version
of the second part of the lecture used with general audiences.

**_Reading_**

Cowan's book again provides general background for lectures on the origins of
consumer society in the move of machinery from the factory to the home.
Nathan Rosenberg's seminal article, "Technological Change in the Machine Tool
Industry, 1840-1910", _Journal of Economic History_ **23** (1963), 414-443,
reveals the characteristics of machine tools that facilitated, or perhaps even
made possible, the rapid diffusion of new techniques and levels of precision.
The later lectures on software hark back to Rosenberg's interpretation when
exploring the models of production informing current software engineering.

**_Sources_**

The essays by A.E. Musson, Paul Uselding, and David Hounshell in Mayr and
Post's _Yankee Enterprise_ provide accounts, respectively, of the British
background, the development of precision instrumentation, and the development
of mass production by means of interchangeable parts. In other years, I have
used the early chapters of Hounshell's _From the American System to Mass
Production_. Robert S. Woodbury, who first debunked "The Legend of Eli Whitney
and Interchangeable Parts" ( _Technology and Culture_ **1** (1960), 235-254),
made a start on a comprehensive history of machine tools in the 19th century,
working on a machine-by-machine basis, which he intended as prelude to a
history of precision measurement and interchangeable parts. His histories of
the gear-cutting machine, grinding machine, lathe, and milling machine,
combined in 1972 as _Studies in the History of Machine Tools_ , provide
technical details and illustrations. W. Steeds offers a comprehensive,
illustrated account in _A History of Machine Tools, 1700-1910_ (Oxford, 1969);
cf. also L.T.C. Rolt, _Tools for the Job: A History of Machine Tools_ (rev.
ed. London, 1986). Machine tools caught the particular attention of the 1880
census, for which Charles H. Fitch compiled under the title _Report on Power
and Machinery Employed in Manufactures_ (Washington, 1888) an extensive,
richly illustrated inventory of the tools then used in American industry.
Frederick A. Halsey's classic _Methods of Machine Shop Work_ (NY, 1914)
defines the terms and standards of the industry at the turn of the 20th
century. The Armington and Syms Machine Shop at Greenfield Village, Henry Ford
Museum, in Dearborn is a restoration of a 19th-century production shop,
powered by a steam engine through an overhead belt-and-pulley system.

Perhaps the best short account of the internal combustion engine is Lynwood
Bryant's "The Origin of the Automobile Engine" ( _Scientific American_ , March
1967; repr. in Gene I. Rochlin (comp.), _Scientific Technology and Social
Change: Readings from Scientific American_ , San Francisco, 1974, Chap.9),
focuses on Otto's development of the four-cycle engine on the basis of a
specious notion of "stratified charge". For greater detail, see his two
articles, "The Silent Otto", _Technology and Culture_ **7** (1966), 184-200,
and "The Origin of the Four-Stroke Cycle", _ibid._ **8** (1967), 178-198, and
for contrast, see his "Rudolf Diesel and His Rational Engine", _Scientific
American_ , August 1969 (repr. in Rochlin, Chap.10). On the early development
of the automobile, see James J. Flink, _America Adopts the Automobile,
1895-1910_ (Cambridge, MA, 1970). John B. Rae offers a brief general history
in _The American Automobile_ (Chicago, 1965).

Allen Nevins tells the story of the Model T, which realized Ford's vision of a
cheap, reliable car for the mass market, in Vol.I of his three-volume _Ford:
The Times, the Man, the Company_ (NY, 1954). However, the vehicle tells its
own story when viewed through photographs of its multifarious uses, diagrams
from the user's manual and parts list, advertisements by suppliers of parts
and options, and stories about the "Tin Lizzie". Floyd Clymer's _Historical
Motor Scrapbook: Ford's Model T_ (Arleta, CA, 1954) offers an assortment of
such materials, along with sections of the Operating Manual and Parts List.
Reproductions of the manual and parts list are also available at the Henry
Ford Museum in Dearborn. Several companies produced plastic and metal models
of the car in varying detail, though nothing beats seeing the car itself,
perhaps in the hands of a local antique car buff.

**Week 8, _Highland Park and the Assembly Line_ , _Ford and the Five-Dollar
Day_**

The first lecture moves from the Model T to the machines Ford designed to
produce it and to the organization of those machines in his new assembly-line
factory at Highland Park. With the machines in place and the pace of assembly
established, Ford faced the problem of keeping increasing numbers of people at
work tending the machines and keeping pace with the line. Although most jobs
required little or no skill, they did demand sustained attention to repetitive
tasks over a continuous period of time. The need to combat a 300% annual
turnover among his labor force, combined with $27 million in excess profits in
January 1914, induced Ford and his Vice-President James Cousins to introduce
the "Bonus Plan", by which the standard wage at Highland Park jumped overnight
from $2.30 to $5.00 for an eight-hour day. But the $5 day was only the most
striking of Ford's efforts to retain the loyalty of his workers. Through John
R. Lee and the Sociological Department, the company had already begun a
program of factory outreach, involving itself in the lives of its employees.
Although welcomed at first, the essentially paternalistic system led
eventually to an oppressive system of control and triggered the union strife
of the '30s which erased Ford's earlier benevolence from popular memory.

**_Reading_**

Henry Ford spoke for himself (through a ghost writer) in the article on "Mass
Production" that appeared in the 13th edition of the _Encyclopedia Britannica_
, and it is instructive, especially given the retrospectively critical stance
of current historians, to see how the system looked through his eyes.  Among
those historians is Stephen Meyer, whose book is the fullest historical
account of the labor policy surrounding the $5 day.

**_Sources_**

Ford's Highland Park Plant, built to produce the Model T by his new methods,
caught the attention of industrial engineers when it began full assembly-line
operation in 1914. As a result, journals of the day offered extensive
descriptions and illustrations of the plant. Perhaps the most informative
contemporary source, Horace L. Arnold and Fay L. Faurote, _Ford Methods and
the Ford Shops_ , began as a series of articles in _Engineering Magazine_.
Faurote, was a member of the Taylor Society and his account looks at Highland
Park from the perspective of Scientific Management, especially in its emphasis
on the paperwork involved in management of workers and inventory. David
Hounshell's account in Chapters 6 and 7 of _From the American System to Mass
Production_ draws liberally from the photo collection of the Ford Archives,
and the Smithsonian Institution has a short film loop depicting the assembly
line in action. Lindy Bigg's _The Rational Factory: Architecture, Technology,
and Work in America's Age of Mass Production_ (Baltimore, 1996) analyzes the
Ford plants as buildings in motion.

Allen Nevin's biography of _Ford: The Man, the Times, and the Company_ is a
useful counterbalance to Meyer's interpretation of the motives behind the $5
day. Eli Chinoy's _Automobile Workers and the American Dream_ (Garden City,
1955) pursues the long-term effects of Ford's system of production on the
workers it employed.

**Week 9, _Taylorism and Fordism, Mass Distribution: The Consumer Society_**

Since at the time Ford's methods were often associated with those proposed by
Frederick W. Taylor under the name of "task management" or, more popularly,
"Scientific Management", the second lecture examines Taylor's career as a
consultant on shop-floor organization and the nature and scope of his
_Principles of Scientific Management_ , published at just about the time Ford
was laying out Highland Park. In the end, the lecture emphasizes the quite
different assumptions of the two men concerning the role of the worker in
machine production and hence the essential incompatibility of Taylor's
principles with Ford's methods of production. Nonetheless, as Taylor's
followers found when they visited Highland Park, in matters of supervision and
inventory control the two systems had much in common.

The $500 car (which by 1924 cost $290) was the most recent of a host of
machines built for and sold to a new middle-class consumer society, which,
through the $5 day, came to include the automobile worker. Mass production
went hand-in-hand with mass distribution; indeed, the former made no sense
without the latter. The second lecture presents a survey of the developments
in communication, transportation, and management that made possible the
patterns of consumption and the concomitant restructuring of society and
politics noted by the Lynds in _Middletown_ (Muncie, IN) in 1924.

**_Reading_**

Cowan provides an overview of the newly emerging consumer society, and
selections from Robert S. and Helen Lynd's classic sociological study of
_Middletown_ offers a contemporary glimpse of that society as it was taking
shape.

**_Sources_**

The best source for understanding Frederick W. Taylor is his own tract, _The
Principles of Scientific Management_ (NY, 1911; repr. 1939, 1947, 1967). The
most recent and complete biography is Robert Kanigel's _The One Best Way:
Frederick Winslow Taylor and the Enigma of Efficiency_ (NY, 1997) _._ Daniel
Nelson's study of Taylor, _Frederick W. Taylor and the Rise of Scientific
Management_ (Madison, 1980) complements his earlier account of factory
management, while Samuel Haber's _Efficiency and Uplift: Scientific Management
in the Progressive Era, 1890-1920_ (Chicago, 1964) places Taylor in the
context of the conservation and efficiency movements of turn-of-the-century
America. Hugh G.J. Aitken's _Taylorism at Watertown Arsenal: Scientific
Management in Action, 1908-1915_ (Cambridge, MA, 1960) remains a classic study
of the development and implications of Taylor's ideas. While Ford himself
perhaps could honestly claim not to have known about Taylor's methods,
Hounshell shows that many of the people who worked with him in designing the
assembly line and organizing the Ford workers did have backgrounds in
Scientific Management. Alfred D. Chandler's magisterial _The Visible Hand: The
Managerial Revolution in American Business_ (Cambridge, 1977) puts Taylor and
Ford in the context of the development new managerial practices in American at
the turn of the century. Judith A. Merkle's _Management and Ideology: The
Legacy of the International Scientific management movement_ (Berkeley :
University of California Press, 1980), Stephen P. Waring's _Taylorism
transformed : scientific management theory since 1945_ (Chapel Hill :
University of North Carolina Press, 1991), and Nelson's _A Mental Revolution:
Scientific Management Since Taylor_ (Columbus: Ohio State University Press,
1992) bring the story down to the present.

The second lecture draws heavily from Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., _The Visible
Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business_ (Cambridge, 1977) and
Daniel J. Boorstin, _The Americans: The Democratic Experience_ (NY, 1973).

**Week 10, _From the Difference Engine to ENIAC; From Boole to EDVAC_**

The first lecture traces the dual roots of the stored-program digital
electronic computer viewed as the combination of a mechanical calculator and a
logic machine. Taking the first designs as both flexible and inchoate, the
second examines the groups of people who gave it shape by incorporating it
into their enterprises. In particular, the lecture looks at the means by which
the nascent computer industry sold the computer to business and industry, thus
creating the machine by creating demand for it.

**_Reading_**

Aspray and Campbell-Kelly provide perhaps the best historical account of the
computer, emphasizing the environments into which it was introduced when it
was new and the role they played in shaping its development.

**_Sources_**

Another recent history is Paul Ceruzzi's _A History of Modern Computing_
(Cambridge, MA, 1998), which provides considerable detail about the
development of the industry. For the development of the machine itself, Stan
Augarten's _Bit by Bit: An Illustrated History of Computers_ is a generally
reliable, engagingly written, and richly illustrated survey from early methods
of counting to the PC and supercomputer. Michael R. Williams's _A History of
Computing Technology_ (Prentice-Hall, 1985) takes a more scholarly approach to
the same material but emphasizes developments before the computer itself. In
407 pages of text, the slide rule appears at p.111 and ENIAC at p.271;
coverage ends with the IBM/360 series. Although once useful as a general
account, Herman Goldstine's still oft-cited _The Computer from Pascal to Von
Neumann_ (Princeton, 1973) retains its value primarily for its personal
account of the ENIAC project and of the author's subsequent work at the
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.

Martin Davis' _The Universal Computer:   The Road from Leibniz to Turing _(New
York, 2000) has recently joined Sybille Kramer's _Symbolische Maschinen: die
Idee der Formalisierung in geschichtlichem Abriss_ (Darmstadt, 1988) in
relating the origins of the computer in the development of mathematical logic.
William Aspray's dissertation, "From Mathematical Constructivity to Computer
Science: Alan Turing, John von Neumann, and the Origins of Computer Science"
(Wisconsin, 1980), covers the period from Hilbert's Program to the design of
EDVAC, as does Martin Davis's "Mathematical Logic and the Origin of Modern
Computers", in Esther R. Phillips (ed.), _Studies in the History of
Mathematics_ (MAA Studies in Mathematics, Vol.26; NY, 1987). The nineteenth-
century background belongs to the history of mathematics and of logic proper,
but the scholarly literature in those fields is spotty. Andrew Hodges's
biography, _Alan Turing: The Enigma_ (NY, 1983), is a splendid account of
Turing's work and served as the basis for a compelling stage play, _Breaking
the Code_. Aspray's _John von Neumann and the Origins of Modern Computing_
(MIT, 1990) explores in some detail von Neumann's work both in the design and
the application of computers.

Those who want to get right down into the workings of the computer should turn
to Charles Petzold, _Code: The Hidden Language of Computer Hardware and
Software_ (Redmond, WA, 1999).   Softer introductions may be found in Alan W.
Biermann's _Great Ideas in Computer Science_ (2nd ed., MIT Press, 1997) and
Jay David Bolter's _Turing's Man: Western Culture in the Computer Age_ (Chapel
Hill, 1984).

**Week 11, _The Development of the Computer Industry, The Software Paradox_**

In keeping with the dual origins of the computer, the development of the
industry since the early '50s has two distinct, though related aspects.
Through transistors, integrated circuits, and VLSI, computers themselves have
increased in power by a factor of 100 every five years, while dropping in
price at about the same rate. Rapid progress in the development of hardware
has made visionary devices commonplace within a span of five or ten years.
IBM, DEC, and Apple represent the successive stages by which computers were
transformed from specially designed capital investments to mass-produced
consumer items over the span of thirty years.

The software paradox is simply stated: programmers have successfully automated
everyone's job but their own. With the commercialization of the computer came
the need to provide customers with the programs that matched its power to
their purposes, either directly through application programs or indirectly
through programming languages, operating systems, and related tools. Both
industry and customers soon found themselves hiring and trying to manage large
numbers of programmers who had no previous training either in computers or in
systems analysis but whose programming skills gave them effective control over
their work. To address the resulting issues of productivity and quality
control, computer engineers and managers turned to earlier models of
production, in particular through automatic programming and the software
equivalent of interchangeable parts. So far, efforts to Taylorize or Fordize
the production of programs have been unsuccessful. Nonetheless, they testify
to the abiding impression that Taylor and Ford have made on American
engineering and thus give firm historical roots to modern technology.

**_Reading_**

The choice of Tracy Kidder's _The Soul of a New Machine_ is aimed directly at
continuing the theme of technology and the nature of work. In addition to
portraying the complex organization on which modern technological development
depends, it raises intriguing questions of power and exploitation.

**_Sources_**

The development of the computer industry is only now coming under the scrutiny
of historians, and most of the current literature stems from journalists. The
foremost exceptions are the recent books by Paul Ceruzzi and by William Aspray
and Martin Campbell-Kelly, both of which offer a much needed and long awaited
survey of the history of the industry from its pre-computer roots to the
present. For a review of the state of the field several years ago, see my
article, ["The History of Computing in the History of
Technology"](javascript:\(NewWin\("http://www.princeton.edu/~mike/articles/hcht/hchtfr.html"\)\)),
_Annals of the History of Computing_ **10** (1988), 113-125
[[pdf]](http://www.princeton.edu/~hos/mike/articles/hcht.pdf), updated in
["Issues in the History of
Computing"](javascript:\(NewWin\("http://www.princeton.edu/~mike/articles/issues/issuesfr.htm"\)\)),
in Thomas J. Bergin and Rick G. Gibson (eds.), _History of Programming
Languages II_ (NY: ACM Press, 1996), 772-81. The _Annals_ themselves
constitute one of the most important sources. Among the most useful accounts
are Augarten's _Bit by Bit_ ; Kenneth Flamm, _Creating the Computer:
Government, Industry, and High Technology_ (Washington, 1988); Katharine Davis
Fishman, _The Computer Establishment_ (NY, 1981); Howard Rheingold _Tools for
Thought: The History and Future of Mind-Expanding Technology_ (NY, 1985), and
Pamela McCorduck, _Machines Who Think_ (San Francisco, 1979). David E.
Lundstrom's _A Few Good Men from Univac_ (Cambridge, MA, 1987) provides a
critical look at the early industry, while the collaborative effort of Charles
J. Bashe, Lyle R. Johnson, John H. Palmer, and Emerson W. Pugh on _IBM's Early
Computers_ (Cambridge, MA, 1986) provides an exhaustively detailed account,
based on company documents, of IBM's entry into the market and the series of
machines up to the 360, which is the subject of a second volume now nearing
completion. Paul Freiburger and Michael Swaine's _Fire in the Valley: The
Making of the Personal Computer_ (Berkeley, 1984) remains one of the best
accounts of the early days of the PC industry.

The history of software remains largely unwritten and must be gleaned from the
professional literature.  For overviews see my articles, ["The Roots of
Software
Engineering"](javascript:\(NewWin\("http://www.princeton.edu/~mike/articles/sweroots/sweroots.htm"\)\)),
_CWI Quarterly_ , 3,4(1990), 325-34
[[pdf]](http://www.princeton.edu/~hos/mike/articles/sweroots.pdf) and
["Software: The Self-Programming
Machine"](javascript:\(NewWin\("http://www.princeton.edu/~mike/ieeetalk.html"\)\)),
in Atsushi Akera and Frederik Nebeker (eds.), _[From 0 to 1:  An Authoritative
History of Modern Computing](javascript:\(NewWin\("http://www.oup-
usa.org/search97cgi/s97_cgi?action=View&VdkVgwKey=%2E%2E%2F%2E%2E%2F%2E%2E%2F%2E%2E%2F%2E%2E%2Fdata%2Finfobox%2Fwww%2Fusa%2Fisbn%2F0195140257%2Ehtml&DocOffset=2&DocsFound=2&QueryZip=%28%5B%2E50%5D+catalog+%3Ccontains%3E+general+and+akera%29&Collection=oup&SearchUrl=http%3A%2F%2Fwww%2Eoup%2Dusa%2Eorg%2Fsearch97cgi%2Fs97%5Fcgi%3Faction%3DFilterSearch%26QueryZip%3D%2528%255B%252E50%255D%2Bcatalog%2B%253Ccontains%253E%2Bgeneral%2Band%2Bakera%2529%26Filter%3Dgeneralfilter%252Ehts%26ResultTemplate%3Dgeneralcatalog%252Ehts%26QueryText%3Dakera%26Collection%3Doup%26ResultStart%3D1%26ResultCount%3D10&"\)\))_
(New York: Oxford U.P., to appear 2002), as well as the entry "Software
History" in Anthony Ralston et al., Encyclopedia of Computer Science, 4th
edition (London, 2000).   For "A Gentle Introduction" to what software is
about, see Alan W. Biermann, _Great Ideas in Computer Science_ (Cambridge, MA,
1997).

There is a growing number of personal accounts and reminiscences by computer
people.  Among the most thought-provoking and least self-serving are Ellen
Ullman, _Close to the Machine: Technophilia and Its Discontents_ (San
Francisco, 1997), Richard P. Gabriel, _Patterns of Software:   Tales from the
Software Community_ (New York, 1996), and Robert N. Britcher, _The Limits of
Software:   People, Projects, and Perspectives_ (Reading, MA, 1999).

**Week 12, _Working Toward Choices, Where Are We Now?_**

The computer is only one of several technologies, which, spawned or encouraged
by the demands of World War II, rapidly transformed American society in the
twenty-five years after 1945, bringing a general prosperity thought
unimaginable even before the Depression. With that prosperity came new
problems and a growing sense that technology threatened society as much as, or
even more than, it fostered. The first lecture reviews the major elements of
modern high technology as it has developed since the war, and the second tries
to put the issues it raises into the perspective of the course as a whole. In
the end, the course has no answers to offer, but only questions that may prove
fruitful in seeking them.

**_Reading_**

Langdon Winner's "Do Artifacts Have Politics?" argues that indeed they do,
that is, that how technologies will be used is part of how they are designed.
Although that view does not preclude unintended consequences, it does place
responsibility for technologies on the people who create, maintain, and use
them. The readings throughout the course offer ample material for putting
Winner's thesis to the test.

**_Sources_**

Fred C. Allvine and Fred A. Tarpley, Jr. provide a brief survey of the major
changes in the U.S. economy since World War II in _The New State of the
Economy_ (Cambridge, MA, 1977). Peter Drucker, _The Age of Discontinuity_ (NY,
1968, 2nd ed. 1978), and John Kenneth Galbraith, _The New Industrial State_
(NY, 1967, 3rd ed., 1978), lay particular emphasis on new technologies and
their effect on our economic institutions, while Seymour Melman, _Profits
without Production_ (NY, 1983), and Michael Piore and Charles Sabel, _The
Second Industrial Divide: Possibilities for Prosperity_ (NY, 1984), question
how positive those effects have been.

Winner's _Autonomous Technology: Technics-out-of-Control as a Theme in
Political Thought_ (Cambridge, MA, 1977) is a fully developed statement of the
issues discussed in his article. Literature on the political assumptions
underlying technology abound; indeed, some of it provoked this course in the
first place. Among the more recent and more interesting are David F. Noble,
_Forces of Production: A Social History of Industrial Automation_ (NY/Oxford,
1986), Walter A. McDougall, _...The Heavens and the Earth: A Political History
of the Space Age_ (NY 1985), Shoshana Zuboff, _In the Age of the Smart
Machine: The Future of Work and Power_ (NY, 1988), and Paul N. Edwards, _The
Closed World: Computers and the Politics of Discourse in the Cold War_
(Cambridge, MA: MIT, 1996).

As of 1996, the Internet and the World Wide Web, especially when grouped
together under the concept of the National Information Superhighway, have
become prime subjects for political and cultural analysis along the lines
suggested by this week's readings and by the interpretive themes of the
course. An article written twenty five years ago retains its pertinence. In
"The Mythos of the Electronic Revolution" ( _American Scholar_ 39(1969-70),
219-241, 395-424), James W. Quirk and John J. Carey place the claims of the
1930s for a revolution of electrical power in the framework of Leo Marx's
_Machine in the Garden_ and showing how the notions of the "electronic
village" or the "technotronic era" fashionable in the last '60s are similarly
20th-century evocations of the middle landscape. Cyberspace would seem to be
the latest.

**Reading Period**

Albert Borgmann's _Holding Onto Reality: The Nature of Information at the Turn
of the Millennium_   is one of a spate of recent books attempting to place the
"information revolution" into some sort of historical perspective.  Others
include: Michael E. Hobart and Zachary S. Schiffman, _Information Ages:
Literacy, Numeracy, and the Computer Revolution_ (Baltimore, 1998); James J.
O'Donnell, _Avatars of the Word:   From Papyrus to Cyberspace_ (Cambridge, MA,
1998) _._ Less historical but nonetheless suggestive are John Seely Brown and
Paul Duguid, _The Social Life of Information_ (Boston, 2000) and Jay David
Bolter and Richard Grusin, _Remediation: Understanding New Media_ (Cambridge,
MA, 1999).   Books on the Internet abound; perhaps the most important is
Lawrence Lessig's _Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace_ (New York, 1999),
followed now by his _The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Commons in a
Connected World_ (New York, 2001).

**_Sample Examination Questions_**

The lectures and readings of this course tend to emphasize the ways in which
inventors, entrepreneurs, and workers looked upon machines as determinants of
their socio-economic life.  At several points, however, we have caught
glimpses of inventors and onlookers who have seen in machines expressions,
either direct or symbolic, of the ideals and aspirations of their society.
Using specific examples over the range of the course, explore the role of the
creative and esthetic imagination in determining the ways societies shape and
respond to their technologies.

"Although historians often speak of 'the industrial revolution' and 'the rise
of the factory system' in the singular, there have in reality been not one but
three such revolutions.  The first was the mechanization of the textile
industry in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, the second was the
mechanization of the consumer durables industry in the middle-to-late 19th
century through the 'American System', and the third was the growth of
'rational management' in the early 20th century.  In each of these
'revolutions' the tech

