#  Medieval Civilization

###  History 5361/4361

###  **Department of History--University of Central Arkansas**

**Spring Semester, 2001**

**[Dr. James W. Brodman](mailto:%20jimb@mail.uca.edu)**

Office: Main 29  
E-mail: jimb@mail.uca.edu  
Telephone:  450-5633  
Office Hours: Tues/Thurs: 11 am and 1:30 pm, or by appointment

* * *

#####  Course Objectives: Medieval Civilization will introduce you to the
history and culture of Western Europe between the years 1000 and 1400. It aims
at developing an understanding of the basic forces, ideas, events and
personalities which shaped the character of this society. You will learn basic
terminology and receive an introduction to the major historiographical
debates. An emphasis will be placed upon the reading and interpretation of
documents from the era. Students will be encouraged to explore the World Wide
Web as a resource for the study of history. The University of Central Arkansas
adheres to the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. If you
need an accommodation under this Act due to a disability, contact the Office
of Disability Support Services at 450-3135.

###

* * *

###  Course Requirements

#####  All Students:

  * 3 examinations @ 100 = 300 points
  * pop quizzes @? = 50 points
  * written assignment = 150 points
  * a UCA e-mail account
  * regular class attendance (more than four absences, plagiarism, cheating, and disruptive conduct are grounds for dismissal from class)

**Undergraduate students** : The written assignment can be fulfilled in one of
two ways: (a) through the completion of three book reports, prepared according
to the instructors [style
sheet](http://www.uca.edu/divisions/academic/history/bkrpt.htm); (b) through
the preparation of a research paper on a topic in social history approved by
the instructor. For both assignments you may use the [course
bibliography](http://www.uca.edu/divisions/academic/history/hb4361.htm) ,
[medieval links](http://www.uca.edu/divisions/academic/history/medvl.htm) on
the UCA History Department website, the bibliography in Tierney as well as the
resources of Torreyson library. A minimum of ten sources must be used; a
photocopy or printout of the first page of each source must be appended to the
paper; of the sources used, two must be journal articles and two must be
monographs. Web sources are permitted.

**Graduate students** : The written assignment will be fulfilled through the
preparation of a historiographical term paper prepared on a topic selected in
consultation with your instructor. In addition, graduate students will be
responsible for **one class presentation** , worth 100 points.

**NOTE** : The University of Chicago (Turabian) style is required for all term
papers.

**Important Deadlines** :

Book Reports: These will be due on February 8, March 15, April 26.

Term Papers: Initial topics are due on February 8. Outlines and bibliographies
are due on March 15. Final Papers are due on April 26.

Note: After a grace period of two days, late papers will suffer a penalty of 5
points per business day (i.e., Monday through Friday) calculated from the
initial due date.

**Reading Assignments:**

All assignments are due, and can be quizzed, on the date indicated below.
Readings are taken from:

  * Brian Tierney and , _Western Europe in the Middle Ages, 300-1475_
  * The World Wide Web (Note: The reading assignments can be reached via hyperlinks embedded in the electronic version of this syllabus. The electronic syllabus is available at: http://www.uca.edu/history/h4361.htm. There is also a link to it on the UCA History Department website: http://www.uca.edu/history/history.htm. For the faint of heart, a printed version of each assignment is on reserve in Torreyson Library.)

* * *

  


###  Schedule of Topics and Reading Assignments

January 9: Orientation and Introduction

January 13: The Year 1000; [Glaber on the Turn of the
Millennium](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/glaber-1000.html)

January 11: The Empire and Papacy, 1000-1122; Tierney, chapter 11

January 16: The New Monks;  [Foundation of
Cluny](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/chart-cluny.html)  
The Empire and Reform;  [Papal Election Reform,
1059](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/papal-elect1059.html)

January 18: The Gregorian Reform Movement;  [Gregory VII forbids lay
investiture](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/g7-reform2.html); [Henry IV
responds to Gregory
VII](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/henry4-to-g7a.html)

January 23: The Gregorian Program; [The Dictatus
Papae](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/g7-dictpap.html); [Concordat of
Worms](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/worms1.html)

January 25: European Expansion; Tierney, chapter 13; [Urban II summons the
First Crusade](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/urban2-fulcher.html)  
Expansion: Iberia;   [Bishko, The
Reconquest](http://libro.uca.edu/bishko/spr1.htm) , pp. 396-422

January 30: Expansion: Sicily and the Mediterranean, 196-97  
Palestine;  [The Capture of
Jerusalem](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/fulk2.html)

February 1: Expansion: Central Europe

February 6: Expansion: Internal;  [The Charter of
Lorris](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/lorris.html)  
The Rise of the Territorial Monarchy: Basic Ideas; Tierney, chapter 16

February 8: February 12: England, 1000-1150; [The Laws of William
I](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/will1-lawsb.html)

February 13: First Examination

February 15: Capetian France to 1180;  [Suger's Life of Louis the
Fat](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/sugar2.html)

February 20: The Plantagenet Empire:  [Constitutions of
Clarendon](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/cclarendon.html)

February 22: Germany under the Hohenstaufens;  
The Hohenstaufens in Italy;  [Barbarossa and the
Lombards](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/barbarossa-lombards.html)

February 27: The Renaissance of the Twelfth Century; Tierney, chapter 15

March 1: Peter Abelard vs. Bernard of Clairvaux; [Bernard on Loving
God](http://ccel.wheaton.edu/pager.cgi?file=b/bernard/loving_God/loving_God-
bod.html&up=b/bernard/loving_God/loving_God.html&from=15); [Abelard's History
of My Calamaties](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/abelard-sel.html)  
The Revolution in Law; [Gratian on
Marriage](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/gratian1.html)

March 6: Origins of the University;  [Jacques de Vitry on Student
Life](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/vitry1.html)

March 8: Art and Literature in the Twelfth Century; [Confessions of
Golias](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/golias1.html); [The Song of
Roland](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/roland-ext.html)

March 13: The Church in the Twelfth Century; Tierney, chapter 17  
The New Orders;  [Bernard of Clairvaux on the
Templars](http://orb.rhodes.edu/encyclop/religion/monastic/bernard.html)

March 15: Heterodoxy;  [The Conversion of Peter
Waldo](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/waldo1.html)

Spring Break: March 19-23

March 27: The Mendicant Orders;  [Testament of St.
Francis](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/stfran-test.html)  
Europe in the Age of Innocent III; [Canons of Lateran
IV](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/lat4-select.html)

March 29: Second Examination

April 3: _Stupor mundi:_ Frederick II; Tierney, chapter 18; [Frederick II's
Concession in Favor of the
Princes](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/fred2-princes.html); [Salimbene
on Frederick II](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/salimbene1.html)  
Collapse of the German Empire;  [Golden Bull of
1356](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/goldenbull.html)

April 5: Philip Augustus and the Creation of France; [Suppression of the
Etampes Commune](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/1200etampes.html)

April 10: Consolidation of the Capetian Monarchy; [St. Louis instructs his
son](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/stlouis1.html)

April 12: John of England and Magna Carta;  [Magna
carta](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/mcarta.html)  
English Expansion into Wales, Ireland and Scotland;  [Gerald of Wales on the
Conquest of Ireland](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/geraldwales1.html)

April 17: The Thirteenth-Century Reconquest in Iberia;  [Bishko, The
Reconquest](http://libro.uca.edu/bishko/spr1.htm) , pp. 422-437

April 19: The Birth of Parliaments;  [Three Summons to Parliament
(1295)](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/ed1-summons.html)

April 24: The Middle East in the Thirteenth Century;

April 26: The Schoolmen; Tierney, chapter 19; [Thomas Aquinas on the Existence
of God](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/aquinas1.html)  
Urban Culture in the Thirteenth Century;

May 1: The Fourteenth Century: A Malthusian Crisis? Tierney, chapters 21-22;
[The Florentine
Chronicle](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/osheim/marchione.html)

May 3: Political Turmoil in the Fourteenth Century; [Statute of Laborers
(1351)](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/seth/statute-labourers.html)  
Ecclesiastical Turmoil in the Fourteenth Century  
    


