Professor Todd Zywicki  
School of Law  
George Mason University  
Arlington, VA 22201  
(703) 993-8091[  
tzywicki@gmu.edu](mailto:tzywicki@gmu.edu) | Professor Peter Boettke  
Department of Economics  
George Mason University  
Fairfax, VA 22030  
(703) 993-1149  
[pboettke@gmu.edu](mailto:pboettke@gmu.edu)  
---|---  
  
FALL 1999  
Monday 7:20-10:00pm  
Arlington Campus _ **THE LEGAL FOUNDATIONS FOR A FREE-SOCIETY (1)** _

> > The purpose of this course is to explore first how the Western conception
of the rule of law emerged and became established, and then to explore how
Western prosperity through the industrial revolution and open international
trade became established. Our intent is then to explore the connection between
these two core concepts in the Western tradition of political and economic
liberty and finally to examine the "exportability" of these ideas to non-
Western countries and the former Soviet-type economies.

_**COURSE SCHEDULE** _

_August 30_

Week 1: WHY THE RULE OF LAW?

Boettke and Zywicki - introduction to the course

> Reading:

>

> Ronald Coase, _The Firm, the Market, and the Law_. Chicago, 1988, 1-31.

>

> Barry Weingast, "The Political Foundations of Democracy and the Rule of
Law," _American Political Science Review_ , 91 (2) 1997: 245-263.

>

> Nicholas Mercuro and Steven Medema, _Economics and the Law_. Princeton,
1997, 130-156.

_September 6_ NO CLASS - LABOR DAY

_September 13_

Week 2: POLYCENTRISIM AND THE CUSTOMARY FOUNDATIONS OF LAW

Zywicki

Reading:

> Harold Berman, _Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal
Tradition_. Harvard University Press, 1983, 520-558.

>

> Bruce Benson, _The Enterprise of Law_. Pacific Research Institute for Public
Policy, 1990, 11-83.

>

> Barnett, _The Structure of Liberty: Justice and the Rule of Law_. Oxford,
1998, 1-26; 41-83; 301-328.

>

> Hayek, _Law, Legislation and Liberty_. Chicago, 1973, 1-54; 94-144.

_September 20_

Week 3: **Guest Lecture - The Rise of the West**

David S. Landes, Harvard University (invitation)

Reading:

> David Landes, _The Wealth and Poverty of Nations_. Norton, 1998.

>

> Douglass C. North and Robert Paul Thomas, _The Rise of the Western World: A
New Economic History_. Cambridge, 1973.

>

> Douglass C. North and Barry Weingast, "Constitutions and Commitment: The
Evolution of Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century
England," _Journal of Economic History_ , 49 (4) December 1989, 803-832.

_September 27_

Week 4: MAX WEBER AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Boettke

Reading:

> Nathan Rosenberg and L. E. Birdzell, _How the West Grew Rich: The Economic
Transformation of the Industrial World_. Basic Books, 1986, 3-36; 113-143.

>

> Weber, _General Economic History_. Transaction, 1995[1927], 352-369.

>

> Weber, _The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism_. Charles
Scribners, 1958 [1904-05], 13-31; 47-78.

>

> Max Swedberg, _Max Weber and the Idea of Economic Sociology_. Princeton,
1998, 7-21; 54-107.

_October 4_

Week 5: CULTURAL AND INSTITUTIONAL PRE-CONDITIONS FOR PROSPERITY

Boettke

Readings:

> Joel Mokyr, _Levers of Riches._ Oxford, 1990, 151-192.

>

> David Landes, _The Wealth and Poverty of Nations_. Norton, 1998, 3-44;
512-524.

>

> Jared Diamond, _Guns, Germs and Steel_. Norton, 1997, 13-32; 405-425.  
>

_October 13_ (Monday classes meet on Wednesday this week)

Week 6: **Guest Lecture - Politics, Law, Entrepreneurship and Economic
Development**

Joel Mokyr, Northwestern (invited)

Reading:

> Joel Mokyr, _The Levers of Riches_. Oxford, 1990.

_October 18_

Week 7: CIVIL SOCIETY AND DEMOCRACY

Zywicki

Readings:

> Robert Puttnam, _Making Democracy Work_. Princeton, 1993, 3-16; 163-185.

>

> Ernest Gellner, _The Conditions of Liberty_. Penguin, 1994.

>

> Frances Fukuyama, _Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity_
, Free Press, 1995, 3-57.

_October 25_

Week 8: CIVIL SOCIETY AND THE MARKET

Zywicki

Readings:

> Daniel Klein, ed., _Reputation_. University of Michigan, 1997, 1-14; 29-46.

>

> Matt Ridley, _The Origins of Virtue._ Penguin, 1996, 37-66; 127-147;
249-265.

>

> Robert Axelrod, _The Evolution of Cooperation_. Basic Books, 1984, 3-24;
145-191.

>

> Paul Milgrom, Douglass North, and Barry Weingast, "The Role of Institutions
in the Revival of Trade: The Law Merchant, Private Judges and the Champagne
Fairs," _Economics & Politics_, 2 (March 1990): 1-23.

_November 1_

Week 9: **Guest Lecture - Social Capital, Civil Society and the Moral Order**

Michael Novak, AEI (confirmed).

Reading:

> Michael Novak, _The Spirit of Democratic Capitalism_

_November 8_

Week 10: CONSTITUTIONALISM AND THE REASON OF RULES

Boettke

Readings:

> F. A. Hayek, _The Constitution of Liberty_. Chicago, 1960, 133-249.

>

> James Buchanan and Geoffrey Brennan, _The Reason of Rules_ , Cambridge,
1985,

>

> James Buchanan and Roger Congelton, _Politics by Principle, Not Interest_.
Cambridge, 1998, 3-41; 147-153.

>

> Richard Epstein, _Simple Rules for a Complex World_. Harvard, 1995, 1-49.

>

> Barry Weingast, "The Economic Role of Political Institutions: Market-
Preserving Federalism and Economic Development," _Journal of Law, Economics
and Organization_ (April 1995): 1-31.

_November 15_

Week 11: CONSTITUTIONAL CONSTRAINTS AND ECONOMIC REGULATION

Zywicki

Readings:

> George Stigler, ed., _Chicago Studies in Political Economy._ Chicago, 1988,
3-84; 209-233.

>

> James Buchanan, Gordon Tullock and Robert Tollison, ed., _Toward a Theory of
the Rent-Seeking Society._ Texas A &M University Press, 1980, 39-50; 211-221.

>

> Richard Epstein, _Takings_. Harvard University Press, 1985, 3-31; 93-104;
263-282.

>

> Barry Weingast, "Constitutions as Governance Structures: The Political
Foundations of Secure Markets," _Journal of Institutional and Theoretical
Economics_ 149 (1) 1993, 286-311.

_November 22_

Week 12: WHY SOCIALISM AND UNCONSTRAINED DEMOCRACY VIOLATE THE RULE OF LAW

Boettke & Zywicki

Readings:

> F. A. Hayek, _The Road to Serfdom_. Chicago, 1944, 56-100; 134-152..

>

> James Buchanan, _The Limits of Liberty_. Chicago, 1975.

>

> Ludwig von Mises, "Economic Calculation in the Socialist Common-wealth." In
F. A. Hayek, ed., _Collectivist Economic Planning_. Routledge, 1935[1920],
87-130.

_November 29_

Week 13: **Guest Lecture -The Structure of Liberty**

Randy Barnett, Boston University (confirmed).

Reading:

> Randy Barnett, _The Structure of Liberty_. Oxford, 1999.

_December 6_

Week 14: WHAT HAVE WE LEARNED FROM THE EMERGING MARKET ECONOMIES?

Boettke

Readings:

> Peter Boettke, "Credibility, Commitment and Soviet Economic Reform," in
Edward Lazear, ed., _Economic Transition in Eastern Europe and
Russia:Realities of Reform_ (Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press, 1995):
247-275.

>

> Peter Boettke, "Promises Made and Promises Broken in the Russian
Transition," _Constitutional Political Economy_ , 9, no. 2 (1998): 127-136.

>

> Peter Boettke, "The Russian Crisis: Perils and Prospects for Post-Soviet
Transition," _American Journal of Economics & Sociology_ (July 1999)

>

> Robert Cooter, "The Rule of State Law and the Rule-of-Law State: Economic
Analysis of the Legal Foundations of Development," _Annual World Bank
Conference on Development Economics_ (1996): 191-217.

>

> Ugo Mattei, _Comparative Law and Economics_. University of Michigan Press,
1997, 201-222.

>

> Paul Rubin, _Promises, Promises: Contracts in Russia and Other Post-
Communist Economies_. Aldershot: Edward Elgar Publishing, 1997.

>

> Andrei Shleifer, "Government in Transition," _European Economic Review_ 41
(1997): 385-410.

_December 13_ (No in-class final)

Week 15: **Guest Lecture - Russia and the problem of Growing a Rule of Law**

Richard Pipes, Harvard University (invited).

Reading:

> Richard Pipes, _Property and Freedom_. Knopf, 1999.

**COURSE FORMAT**

Students are expected to have read the recommended reading _before_ class and
to have familiarized themselves with the basic thesis of the works listed in
association with the guest lectures so as to maximize the benefits from the
visit of these distinguished scholars. A set of readings and the books of the
guest lecturers will be available at both the Law School library in Arlington,
and Fenwick Library at the main campus in Fairfax.

During regular class meetings either Professor Boettke or Professor Zywicki
will give the primary lecture, with the other professor commenting on the
lecture or topic in general. The normal class procedure will be for the
lecture to go 50 minutes to 1 hour, short break, comment from the other
professor for 10 to 20 minutes, and then open discussion on the topic and
readings for the remaining time of the class.

The format for the guest lectures will be a 1 hour public lecture from our
guest speaker, followed by an open question and answer period of up to a half
hour. This will be followed by a short informal reception for the speaker and
members of our class so that you will have the opportunity to speak more
directly with our guests.

**COURSE GRADE**

  
Grades for this course will be determined on the basis of five commentaries
dealing with the relationship of the readings to the guest lecture, and a term
paper. The five commentaries will be worth 20 points each, and the term paper
will be worth 100 points. The commentaries should be no more than 6 to 8
double-spaced typed pages and will be due the next class meeting after the
guest lecture, except for the final commentary which will be due by Friday
December 17 th. Term papers are to be attempts to make a substantive
contribution to the literature in comparative law and economics, and are to
conform to the style of a professional journal in the field of law and
economics. You should choose your topic by the end of September in
consultation with either Professor Boettke or Professor Zywicki.

1\.  _This course is cross-listed in economics as: ECON 676 - COMPARATIVE
ECONOMIC SYSTEMS: Exploring the relationship between the rule of law and
economic prosperity. Graduate students in disciplines other than law and
economics are also welcomed to take the course for credit. Guest lectures will
be public lectures open to the university community._

