[![Return to
UConnWeb](http://www.sp.uconn.edu/~wwwciom/ucwebar.gif)](http://www.uconn.edu/)



Economics 201

### European Economic History



Fall 2001

MWF 9-9:50

HRM 303



[R. N. Langlois](mailto:Richard.Langlois@UConn.edu)

Room 322 Monteith

Office hours: MWF 11-12  
or by appointment





**Objectives.** This course studies the economic development of Europe from
prehistoric times to the early twentieth century. Although the course is
chronological, the vastness of such a history necessarily means that we will
be selective in our treatment, focusing on a few episodes and approaches.



In general, the course will try to explain the uniqueness of Western Europe.
Why was Western Europe (including Great Britain) able to achieve sustained
economic growth in a way that no other part of the world - including the great
civilizations of history - was able to do?



**Textbooks**. As there is no single text that covers the material in the way
I wish to present it, the lectures in this course will be extremely important.
(Do not expect to do well if you do not come to class religiously). The
closest thing we will have to a textbook is



，        Rondo Cameron, _A Concise Economic History of the World_. (Oxford,
1996.)



There are four other books at the bookstore from which I will assign readings.



，        Jared Diamond, _Guns, Germs, and Steel_. New York: Norton, 1997.



，        Douglass C. North, _Structure and Change in Economic History._ New
York: Norton, 1981.



，        Nathan Rosenberg and L. E. Birdzell, Jr., _How the West Grew Rich_.
New York: Basic Books, 1986.



，        Joel Mokyr, _The Lever of Riches_. New York: Oxford, 1990.



I have also placed some readings on reserve in Babbidge Library.

** **

**Internet.** Note that a number of readings below are available
electronically. Note also that, for copyright reasons, some links are
accessible only from computers connected to the Internet through the UConn
domain. If you live off campus and are connecting through a private ISP, check
with the computer center about something called a proxy server. Many articles
available on the web are in Adobe Acrobat (PDF) format. To read them, you will
need the Adobe Acrobat reader. This should already be installed on University
microlab computers. But if you don't have it, you can [download it for
free](http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep.html).



**Other useful links.** [EH.Net](http://www.eh.net/) maintains a website with
links to a wide range of resources related to economic history. The [Internet
Medieval Sourcebook](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/sbook1j.html) contains a
wealth of links on medieval economic history. I may add more links as the
semester progresses, so check back regularly.



**Course Requirements.** Your grade will be based on two midterms and a final.



Midterm 1

|

30%  
  
---|---  
  
Midterm 2

|

30%  
  
Final

|

40%  
  


The final will be cumulative, but will stress the material covered after the
second midterm. The exams will be mostly essay, but they may also contain some
matching, identification, or true/false components.

** **

** **

**Sequence of topics**.



1\. **Introduction: social institutions and economic development.**

** **

Douglass C. North, _Structure and Change in Economic History._ New York:
Norton, 1981, chapters 1-6.



Joel Mokyr, _The Lever of Riches_. New York: Oxford, 1990, chapters 7 and 11.



2\. **Prehistoric and Ancient Europe**.



Jared Diamond, _Guns, Germs, and Steel_ , as much as you can, but especially
the prologue and chapters 1, 3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13, and 14.



Rondo Cameron, _A Concise Economic History of the World_ , chapter 2.



North, _Structure and Change_ , chapters 7-9.



Bruce Bartlett, " **[How Excessive Government Killed Ancient
Rome](http://www.cato.org/pubs/journal/cjv14n2-7.html)," _The Cato Journal_
14** **(2), Fall 1994.**



3\. **Feudalism**.



Cameron, Chapter 3.



North, chapter 10.



Carl Dahlman, _The Open Field System and Beyond._ New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1980. ( **On reserve:** HD604.D33.)



Stefano Fenoaltea, "Transaction Costs, Whig History, and the Common Fields,"
in B. Gustafsson, ed., _Power and Economic Institutions: Reinterpretations in
Economic History_ , Aldershot: Edward Elgar, 1991, pp. 107-169 ( **On
reserve** : HC21.P68 1991.)





4\. **Mercantilism.**



Cameron, chapters 5 and 6.



Avner Grief, Paul Milgrom, and Barry Weingast, "[Coordination, Commitment, and
Enforcement: the Case of the Merchant Guild](http://www.jstor.org/cgi-
bin/jstor/viewitem/00223808/di980609/98p01844/0?config=jstor&frame=noframe&userID=89637ccc@uconn.edu/018dd5531e30ee885210aa2&dpi=3),"
Journal of Political Economy 102(4): 745-776 (1994).



Robert B. Ekelund and Robert D. Tollison, _Mercantilism as a Rent-seeking
Society : Economic Regulation in Historical Perspective_. College Station,
Tex. : Texas A &M University Press, 1981. ( **On reserve:** HB91.E4.)



5\. **The revival of trade**.



Douglass C. North and Barry W. Weingast, "[The Evolution of Institutions
Governing Public Choice in 17th Century England](http://www.jstor.org/fcgi-
bin/jstor/viewitem.fcg/00220507/di975689/97p0073l/0?config=jstor&frame=page&userID=89637c46@uconn.edu/cc993314005021a3c0&dpi=3&PAGE=0),"
_Journal of Economic History_ 49: 803-32 (1989).



Nathan Rosenberg and L. E. Birdzell, Jr., _How the West Grew Rich_ , chapter
4.



Meir Kohn, _[The Origins of Western Economic Success: Commerce, Finance, and
Government in Pre-Industrial Europe](http://www.dartmouth.edu/~mkohn). _
Manuscript, Dartmouth College. __

_ _

6\. **The Industrial Revolution**.



Cameron, chapter 7.



Mokyr, _,_ chapter 5.



Rosenberg and Birdzell, chapter 5.



7\. **The Factory System**.



Rosenberg and Birdzell, chapters 6-9.



Axel Leijonhufvud, "[Capitalism and the Factory
System](http://www.sp.uconn.edu/~langlois/axel.html)," in R. N. Langlois, ed.,
_Economics as a Process: Essays in the New Institutional Economics._ New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1986, pp. 203-223.



Richard N. Langlois, "[The Coevolution of Technology and Organization in the
Transition to the Factory
System](http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=86508)," in Paul L.
Robertson, ed., _Authority and Control in Modern Industry._ London: Routledge,
1999.



8\. **Britain in the nineteenth century.**



Cameron, chapters 8 and 9.



William Mass and William Lazonick, "The British Cotton Industry and
International Comparative Advantage: the State of the Debates," _Business
History_ **32** : 9-65 (October 1990). ( **On the third floor of Babbidge
Library**.)





 ![Icon](http://www.sp.uconn.edu/~langlois/square.gif) **[Back to courses
page](http://www.sp.uconn.edu/~langlois/courses.html)**  
  
---  
  
 ![Icon](http://www.sp.uconn.edu/~langlois/square.gif) **[Back to home
page](http://vm.uconn.edu/%7ELANGLOIS/index.html)**  
  




[![](http://www.sp.uconn.edu/~langlois/seal.gif)](http://www.uconn.edu/)





[![](http://fastcounter.bcentral.com/fastcounter?2640534+5281075)](http://member.bcentral.com/cgi-
bin/fc/fastcounter-login?2640534)  
[FastCounter by bCentral](http://fastcounter.bcentral.com/fc-join)

Since 8/24/01  
  

