### History 556  
Anglo-American History, 1607-1763

(Professor Carla Pestana)



_Course Description_ : This course will canvass the history of the English
mainland American colonies from roughly 1607 until 1763. We will focus on the
background to contact in both England and America; the initial colonization
ventures in three major regions; the interactions between Americans,
Europeans, and Africans (and their descendants); and the social, cultural,
political, and economic development of the colonies. Historiography--how
historians have treated a subject in the past--will play an important part in
our approach to the history of colonial America.

_Course Objectives_ : In addition to making students conversant with the major
events and trends in colonial history, this course will introduce students to
scholarly thought about that history. We will pay attention to historiography
(the study of the history) as well as to the events itself. Students will also
have an opportunity to hone writing skills in the course.

_Course Requirements_ : Students will be required to read five books and one
collection of articles. Regular discussions will be held on the assigned
readings. Two in-class examinations, a midterm and a final will be
administered; these exams will include both essay and short-answer
identification questions. Students will write a paper (eight to ten pages) on
a topic chosen from among those covered in the first thirteen chapters of
_Major Problems in American Colonial History_ , one of the assigned books.
Deadlines for all assignments are given below.

Graduate students will have the option of writing a longer (15-18 page) paper
that focuses on historiography in lieu of the usual paper assignment. Those
who choose this option will be exempted from the midterm examination. Graduate
student paper topics must be confirmed by the instructor no later than the
second week of class. Bibliographies are due by February 1.



_Required Reading_ : (Except for the Kinko's packet, all readings are
available for purchase at SBX, 1806 North High Street, and are on reserve in
the Main Library. The packet is available for purchase at Kinko's, 18 East
15th Avenue.)

  1. Bernard Bailyn, _The New England Merchants in the Seventeenth Century_ (1955) 
  2. Jack P. Greene, _Pursuits of Happiness_ (1988) 
  3. Karen Ordahl Kupperman, ea., _Major Problems in American Colonial History_ (1992) 
  4. Kenneth Lockridge, _The Diary, and Life, of William Byrd the Second of, Virginia 1674-1744_ (1987) 
  5. Edmund Morgan, _American Slavery, American Freedom_ (1975) 
  6. Kinko's packet, "The American Colonies: Selected Readings." 

In addition to the required reading, two optional books are available. Either
would be helpful for the student having difficulty following the lectures and
readings.

  1. Richard Middleton, _Colonial America: A History, 1607-1760_ (1992) 
  2. Gary B. Nash, _Red. White, and Black_ , third edition (1992) 



_Course Schedule_ : (Note that authors not individually listed under "Required
Readings" have articles in the Kinko's packet, "The American Colonies:
Selected Readings," referred to below as SR.)

    
    
    
    1-4:  Introduction
    
    
    **Founding Anglo-American Colonies**
    
    1-6:  America and Europe on the Eve of Colonization
    1-11: Colonization of the Chesapeake
    1-13: Colonization of New England
          DISCUSS FOSTER (SR)
    1-18: No class in honor of Martin Luther King, Jr.
    1-20: DISCUSS BAILYN
    1-25: Middle Colonies
          DISCUSS MERWICK, NASH (SR)
    
    
    **New World Societies Take Shape**
    
    1-27: Declension
          Religious Diversity
    2-1:  The Origins of Racial Slavery
    2-3:  DISCUSS MORGAN
    2-8:  Glorious Revolution and Colonial Rebellions
    2-10: MIDTERM
          Early American Witches
    2-15: Women in Early America: Historiographical Issues
          DISCUSS NORTON (SR)
    2-17: Native American/Colonial Relations
    2-22: DISCUSS LOCKRIDGE
    2-24: Family and Community
          DISCUSS LEVY (SR)
    
    
    **Toward the American Revolution**
    
    3-1:  Colonies within the British Empire
          PAPER DUE
    3-3:  Great Awakening
          DISCUSS STOUT, ISAAC (SR)
    3-8:  DISCUSS GREENE
    3-10: Tensions in Colonial Society Toward the American Revolution
    



_Course Policies_ :

_Grading:_ Credit for the course will be given only to those students who
fulfill all requirements. Grades will be apportioned according to the
following scale:

    
    
         Midterm:      20%
         Discussion:   10%
         Paper:        30%
         Final:        40%
    

_Missed deadlines:_ Make-up exams will not be administered without good cause
and prior approval of the instructor. Papers are due at the beginning of
class. Late papers will be marked down severely. No papers will be accepted
more than two days late, that is, after 5 p.m. on March 3rd.

_Tape recording:_ Except for students who are unable to take notes and have
received permission from the instructor, tape recording is not allowed in
class.

_Enrollment:_ All students must be officially enrolled in the course by the
end of the second full week of the quarter. No requests to add the course will
be approved by the department chairperson after that time. Enrolling
officially and on time is solely the responsibility of each student.



_Paper Assignment_ : All students must write a paper that looks at some aspect
of colonial American history (1607-1763) in detail. Undergraduates and those
graduate students who do not opt for the alternative paper assignment must
compose an 8-10 page paper based on their analysis of one chapter of the book
edited by Karen Kupperman, _Major Problems in American Colonial History._ Any
chapter may be chosen with the exception of the final one (chapter 14). The
assignment will involve dealing with both primary and secondary documents, as
every chapter includes both. The paper must bring this material together in a
coherent essay that argues a thesis of the author's own about the subject.
Those who are unfamiliar with the concept of a thesis or with how to develop
and defend one, should speak to the instructor at the earliest possible
moment.

For this essay, students should not conduct research beyond the materials
assigned in this course. It is necessary to document the source of quotations
used in your paper, with either footnotes or endnotes. Provide notes only as
needed, that is, whenever you are paraphrasing the unique ideas or quoting the
words of one of your source materials. Basic factual information that is
widely known--and not the result of an individual's research efforts--need not
be cited.

Plagiarism--the unattributed use of the words or ideas of another--is a
serious academic offense, and students are responsible to seek advice about
this matter if they are uncertain about it. _The Student Handbook_ includes a
discussion of this issue, and the instructor will be happy to speak with
anyone who remains confused regarding it.

For the proper format of notes, consult a standard reference work, such as
Kate Turabian's _Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses and Dissertations_
or Jules R. Benjamin's _A Student's Guide to History._ Both have been placed
on reserve in the library for use by students who do not have ready access to
such a guide.

All papers must be typed, double spaced, with standard-size font and one-inch
margins. A title page is not necessary, although a title is. Place your name,
the instructor's name and the quarter in the upper right corner of the first
page, and center the title slightly below that. Staple or paper clip the paper
together. Do not encase it in anything. A bibliography is not necessary. When
you turn in your paper, retain a copy for your records. Questions regarding
the paper format should be directed to the instructor or the grader.

Graduate students who opt for the longer paper should plan to discuss their
topics with the instructor and, possibly, in a specially scheduled meeting
with the instructor and the other graduate students in the course. This paper
will be fifteen to eighteen pages in length and should otherwise conform to
the guidelines given above.

