**LITERATURE AND THE ENGLISH CIVIL WAR  
** Professor Lois Potter  
office: 302-831-2298  
311 Memorial Hall  
FALL 1995

_Course description:_ What I hope you will get from this course is a taste for
the literature of the seventeenth century and some knowledge of its various
contexts: political, religious, artistic, etc. Because it is a 600-level
course and some of you are probably taking it primarily to prepare for an exam
in the period, I have broadened it to include major writers of the pre-war
era. On the other hand, I hope I have retained enough specialized material to
give you some idea of what it would be like to do scholarly research in the
period. As it is the first English period to overlap extensively with American
literature, those who are planning to specialize in American literature are
welcome to devise essay topics linking the two fields. I shall also be glad to
get essays putting literature into other contexts that particularly interest
you.  

_Note_ : Where a poem appears in both Fowler and the older Witherspoon and
Warnke collection (WW, below), I have generally indicated which to read, but
it doesn't really matter; you may find it useful to compare their notes and
commentary.  

**COURSE SCHEDULE**  

_Preliminary meeting: _Richard II__ _as prologue._ _Richard II_ (plus appendix
to Gurr's ed.:  "Homilie Against Disobedience"); James I's speech to
Parliament in 1610 (xerox to be given out).  

SEPT. 11 _Prologue, part two: Publications of 1633 (Donne and Herbert)_. Read
selections from both in WW and be prepared to speak about the assigned poem
for **10 minutes** only.  

_1\. Taking sides_  

SEPT. 18 _Style as politics._ Milton, _Lycidas_ , and Cleveland, "On the
Memory of Mr. Edward King" (WW p. 36); Quarles (Fowler 360).  

SEPT. 25 _The Cavalier Image and Anglicanism_. Ben Jonson,  "To Penshurst" and
"To the Immortal Memory" (Fowler); Donne, "At the Bier of a King" (WW, 106),
"To the Honorable Company of the Virginia Plantation" (107-8); Herbert, "The
Parson's Completeness" (WW 216); Fanshawe, "On His Majesty's Proclamation" (to
be given out); Thomas Browne, _Religio Medici_ (WW, 334-336); Herrick (Fowler
302-21); Suckling (selections in WW); Carew (selections in both Fowler and WW,
except for the poem to Jonson).  

_[Reading and discussion of _Perkin Warbeck_ Sept. 26, 9pm - midnight]_  

OCT. 2 _Divided loyalties_. _Perkin Warbeck_ ; Ann Fanshawe (xerox, beginning
to p. 116); Lucy Hutchinson (TBA); Clarendon, xerox 249-54 and "Character and
Death of Lord Falkland" (WW). **_[11 am: visit to Library Special Collections.
]_**  

OCT. 9 _The Puritan Image_. Lucy Hutchinson, _Memoirs of the Life of Col.
Hutchinson_ (3-15, 31-57, 86-7);  "The Zealous Puritan" (Fowler 554); Bunyan,
extracts from _Grace Abounding_ in WW; Sharpe (xerox); Rivers,  "Reformation
and Counter-Reformation" and "Protestant Theology". Milton, _An Apology
against a Pamphlet_ (in _Complete Prose Works_ , on reserve, PR3569.W6, Vol I,
pp 882, 1st para., to 893 btm.  

_2\. The War_  

OCT. 16 _Definitions of freedom_. Milton, _Areopagitica_ , _Doctrine and
Discipline of Divorce_ (CPW, Vol II, ch. iii (pp 248-50) and ix (pp 268-9);
"To Fairfax" (WW); Parker (Fowler 465); Anon (Fowler 614); selections from
Cromwell and pamphlets of 1640s (to be given out); Lovelace, selections in WW.
[ **1st paper due at start of this seminar.** ]  

_OCT 23 [No class: FALL BREAK]_  

OCT. 30 **1 hour exam.** While you recover: _Words and images_ (a slide
lecture): Herbert, "The Altar" and "Easter Wings"; emblem poetry (Quarles in
_W &W_, pp 831-3); Lovelace (Fowler 638), Marvell, "The Gallery", "The Nymph
Complaining", and "The Picture of Little TC" (WW).  

NOV. 6 _The King's execution._ "Charles I", _Eikon Basilike_ (extracts to be
given out); Herrick,  "Good Friday: Rex Tragicus" (Fowler 348); Milton, _On
the Tenure of Kings and Magistrates_ , CPR III, pp 197-222; _Eikonoklastes_
(chapters xv (497) and xix (528), answering the 2 chapters of _Eikon Basilike_
already given out, plus 360-66, which comment on  "Pamela's Prayer", and
342-44, which refer to the frontispiece of the _Eikon_ ); Marvell, "Horatian
Ode"; A. Brome, selections in Fowler; Lucy Hutchinson, pp 228-36.  

_3\. The Aftermath_  

NOV. 13 _Post-war political debate_ : Milton (Fowler, 514-21); Hobbes,
_Leviathan_ (selections in WW); marginal voices: Winstanley, Abeizer Coppe and
others (selections to be distributed).  

NOV. 20 _Retreat and retirement_. Marvell: Fowler 665, 666, 667, 669, 670;
"Upon Appleton House"; W&W ; Beaumont (Fowler 608); Vaughan, "The Bird", "The
Night", "The Book" (WW); Cavendish (Fowler 696); Browne, _Hydrotaphia, or Urn
Burial_ (Book 5, in WW); Walton, _Complete Angler_ ( _WW_ , chapter 1);
Rivers, "The Golden Age and the Garden of Eden".  

DEC. 4 _TBA [Possibly:_ The Restoration and summing up: Evelyn (entries for 3
Sept 1658-21 Dec 1663). Dryden's _Astrea Redux_ (extracts), _Hudibras_
(extracts in WW); Waller,  "On St James's Park" (Fowler 495); Bunyan, extracts
from _Pilgrim's Progress_ (first extract in WW, pp 503-9)]  

Dec. 15: **2nd paper due** \-- _put it under the door in my office. I will be
available on Tues. 19 Sept. to give them back and discuss them with you._  

**OTHER EVENTS**  

Tickets are now on sale in English dept. office (ground floor of Memorial
Hall) for _Macbeth_ (starring Stacy Keach) on Sept. 21 at the Lansburgh
Theatre, Washington, DC (450 7th St. NW). Only 18 seats available, so buy
yours early, preferably paying by check. Leave a contact address or phone
number with the office, and please also let them know whether you would be
willing to drive a carload of people down, and how many places would be
available. Note that there will be no refunds; if you can't use your ticket,
you'll need to make your own arrangements to get rid of it. If you can't go on
this day, you may be interested in booking for another performance yourself.
Call 202-393-2700.  

Sept. 12 at 7 pm: playreading of _Troilus and Cressida_ at 119 Manns Ave.  
  
Sept. 20 at 4 pm: Lena Orlin (Folger Shakespeare Library) will be speaking on
" _The Tudor Long Gallery and the Progress of Privacy "_. Highly recommended.  
  
Thurs. Sept. 21: Transportation leaves Memorial Hall at 4.30 pm for _Macbeth_
at the Lansburgh Theatre in Washington. Play starts at 7.30 pm.  
  
Thurs. Oct. 5: Rehearsed playreading of Wycherly's _The Country Wife_ , 110
Memorial. A chance to get a first-hand taste of Restoration comedy.  
  
Week of Nov. 6-11: ACTER, a superb group of English actors, will be giving 3
performances of _Romeo and Juliet_ as well as attending classes and offering
open workshops on acting. Do try to attend at least one of these events; they
are splendid.  
  
Throughout the semester: I generally hold a number of readings of plays and
poems, which are open to anyone who is interested.  
  
**ASSESSMENT**  

Responses 10% | 1 hour exam 10% | Presentation 25%  
---|---|---  
1st paper 20% | 2nd paper 30% | Misc 5%  
  
**_Responses_** : one-page papers (max) based on the week's reading. They may
take any form: close analysis of part of a text, questions about it,
explorations of something that may lead to a longer paper. Almost anything is
acceptable, provided that it shows evidence of genuine attention to the texts.
If you think your questions are of general interest, you can bring them up in
the discussion No responses will be due on the days when papers are due, in
the week of the 1-hour exam, or at the final meeting. This means that the
first one will be due Sept. 18, and you will do 7 in all. 5 of these should be
resubmitted at the final seminar meeting with a covering note showing how they
fit in with the development of your understanding of the course content. They
will receive a single grade based on my over-all impression.  
  
**_The exam_** : partly factual (I want to make sure that you know some basic
history) and partly an opportunity to draw together some of the work we have
done up to that point, as you will eventually have to do for Comps.  
  
**_The Presentation_** : about half an hour. You should present one of the
texts in the day's reading, or (if there are many texts) show how they can be
linked coherently. Use of illustrations, whether visual or aural, is welcome.
If two of you choose to work on the same day, you may EITHER devise a joint
presentation (of about an hour's length) OR work on your own. If you wish to
involve the rest of the group in any activity that needs advance preparation,
be sure to give out the necessary materials in the previous class or make
arrangements for getting these to the group shortly thereafter. Presentations
that go grossly over the allotted time will be penalized. (The shorter
presentations on Sept. 11 will not be graded; they are intended to give you
practice.)  
  
**_Papers:_ ** The first (due Oct. 16) should be 7-9 pp; the second (due at
the end of the semester) 10-12 pp. You have a free choice of topics but here
are suggestions which may help you get started:  
  
A comparison, for instance: Donne, "The Funeral" and Carew, "The Ribband";
_Lycidas_ and another elegy (not necessarily from the seventeenth century:
e.g., you might use Auden's  "In Memoriam W.B. Yeats"); Marvell's and
Beaumont's "The Garden"; Herbert and Vaughan; Lovelace and Cowley on the
grasshopper (Fowler).

Popular responses to the execution of Charles I

Political theory and poetry

The transformation of religious poetry

Problems of discussing prose style

Fuller exploration of an author or text of the period, whether on the course
or not

A project drawing on the University's special collections from this period  
  
I normally like to discuss your topic with you beforehand and will be happy to
suggest secondary reading.  

**_Misc.:_** This category exists, frankly, so that I can give grades that may
not correspond exactly to the arithmetical total of your grades for the
course. Those who wish may also earn an extra 5% by writing a poem of at least
B quality, in the metaphysical manner, on the subject  "Love and the U.S.
Congress", due at the last seminar of the course.  
  
  
READING LIST  
  
At present I am not planning to put any books on reserve, because the seminar
is small enough for everyone to find plenty of secondary reading. However, I
suggest that you report to the rest of the seminar when you take a relevant
book out of the library, so that anyone who wants it can go directly to you
rather than recalling it. I'd also be pleased if those of you who find books
that you consider particularly useful could let the rest of us know about
them.  
  
What follows is a very brief list of the most basic books under several
headings:  

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND  
  
S.R. Gardiner's multi-volume history is still the standard detailed one, along
with C.V. Wedgwood's history, the two volumes of which are called _The King's
Peace_ and _The King's War_ (there's also a volume on the trial of Charles I).
These should be consulted if you want to go into a particular episode in
detail. A good short book, by a Marxist historian, is Christopher Hill's
_Century of Revolution._ Most people tell me that they find this the best book
on the field, so why not order it for yourself? I also recommend reading more
fully in the works of those who lived through the period themselves (we shall
be looking at extracts from Hyde and Fanshawe, and a good deal of Hutchinson).
Try exploring the DA 400 section of the library for yourself. See also, for
more detailed aspects of the history:  
  
Hill, Christopher, _Society and Puritanism_ ; _Puritanism and Revolution_ ;
_The World Turned Upside Down_.  
  
Morrill, John, ed. _Reactions to the English Civil War, 1642-1649_.  
  
Thomas, Keith, _Religion and the Decline of Magic_.  
  
Underdown, David, _Revel, Riot, and Rebellion, Popular Politics and Culture in
England 1603-1660_.  
  
LITERARY BACKGROUND AND HISTORY OF IDEAS  
  
See the full, excellent and up-to-date reading list at the back of I. Rivers,
_Classical and Christian Ideas_. An important recent anthology: K. Sharpe and
S. Zwicker, _Politics of Discourse: the Literature and History of Seventeenth-
century England_. Wider in chronological scope but particularly interesting
for this period is Annabel Patterson's _Censorship and Interpretation: the
conditions of writing and reading in early modern England_. A great deal has
been written on seventeenth-century poetry, much of it very good, so I shall
let you find it for yourself. Two classic studies of the prose writers of the
period are Stanley Fish, _Self-Consuming Artifacts_ , and Joan Webber, _The
Eloquent "I": Style and Self in Seventeenth-Century Prose_. The only really
comprehensive account devoted exclusively to literature of the civil war era
is Nigel Smith's very recent _Literature and Revolution in England,
1640-1660_. See also the anthology by T. Healy and J. Sawday, _Literature and
the English Civil War_ , and Michael Wilding, _Dragon's Teeth, Literature in
the English Revolution_.  

