History of Christianity  
History 4230  
![](shepherd.jpg)  
"I am the good shepherd"

This course attempts to do the impossible. It is a survey of the history of
Christianity from the time of Christ to the present. The necessity of cramming
so much into so little time has forced me to make a number of editorial
choices in preparing it, choices about which you should know. At the same time
you should also know the ground rules for the class. Any discussion of
religion is fraught with potential conflict but if we spell out the rules of
the game before hand we can minimize it. This course will emphasize three
major themes:

> 1) how Christianity has shaped Western culture

>

> 2) how Western culture has shaped Christianity

>

> 3) how to analyze religious life and systems

Upon successful completion of the course you will be able to explain how
people at various times and places have defined and lived their lives as
Christians. The course progresses chronologically from the inception of
Christianity until modern times.

In organizing the course I have chosen to focus on the history of Christian
spirituality in the West rather than on the history of any particular
denomination or institution. By spirituality I mean the ways in which people
approach God, shaping their lives through their attempt to move in harmony
with Him. The history of spirituality rightly includes the formal liturgy--
whathappens in worship--but I have chosen to spend little time on that.
Instead I want you to understand how people at various times and places have
defined and lived a life in Christ. This requires that we pay attention to
theology, which is the formal definition of peoples' relationship with God and
of God's actions and intentions, as well as institutions, but I hope always to
return to the question of how theological ideals and religious institutions
are given life by those who accept them as true expressions of God's plan.

The framework on which I will hang my interpretations has three points of
reference: Truth, Authority, and Behavior. By definition a believer is one who
has accepted an ultimate, all-encompassing truth that gives meaning to life,
death and creation. In Christianity this Truth begins with the acceptance that
God so loved the world that he sent his son Jesus to redeem humans from their
sin. That basic Truth is applified by sacred writings which, in time, came be
identified with the Old and New Testaments (that has not always been the case,
and their content has varied, as we shall see). That Truth may also be
amplified in other ways. Direct revelation, mystical communion, and tradition
have all been accepted in some times by some people as extra-scriptural
sources of knowledge about God's will.

Although to be a Christian one must accept Christ, it is notoriously difficult
to know what accepting Him means, making the acceptance of a mediating
Authority essential. The divisions within Christianity, and the vast
differences in Christian lifestyles, arise from the fact that different people
accept different authorities for defining the meaning of their faith. The
Authority is usually a person or an institution which purports to explain the
Truth to the believer. Most people in a religious organization ask only that
the Authority's explanations be validatable by reference to the sources of the
Truth (scripture, tradition, revelation, etc., depending on the group, and in
any combination). Thus the Catholic and Lutheran may share the same scripture,
but the difference between them lies in the way their authorities have
interpreted the Truth on issues of church government (how Authority is
defined) and on the process of salvation. In every generation there will be
some,too, who recognize no human authority, insisting that they are competent
to understand the Truth for themselves, usually by means of mystical
conjunction with God. They, however, are a distinct minority because they do
not form religious institutions. If they did generalize their revealed
knowledge into a rule they would become Authorities; if a group continues in
the name of the charismatic leader or prophet authority becomes
institutionalized.

The individual believer, then, accepts Christ as explained by the Authority
the believer trusts. His or her lifestyle, choices, and social context is then
largely defined by the Authority which governs in the name of God's Truth.
Change the Authority and you may get radical shifts in lifestyles,
governments, and social institutions. An obvious example is the Protestant
Reformation which, in Protestant countries, ended the religious life of
pilgrimages, masses for the dead, veneration of the saints, alms giving, and
supremacy of the church, replacing them with an interior religion that denied
the efficacy of good works, placed the state over the church, and caused a
sharp decline in charity.

Of course the believer is constantly turning to religion to solve and explain
the problems he or she faces. Consequently the understanding of Authority and
Truth are elastic. They must provide answers to both eternal and efemeral
questions; if they do not they are ignored or discredited. Consequently the
history of Christian spirituality is fluid, constantly flowing around the
central, eternal Truth, as that Truth is expounded in order to meet
contemporary needs. As the course progresses we will keep refering to the way
different eras understood Truth and Authority in order to understand why
religious lives took the forms they did. In the process of examining
Christianity in the past we will constantly confront Christianity in the
present. The Christian faith is alive, well, and growing, full of meaning for
people today. Consequently you may, at some point in the course, be made very
uncomfortable by the history of some group to which you have given religious
allegiance, by ideas which challenge your own sacred assumptions, or by others
in the class who may say things that offend your beliefs. It takes a high
religious pain threshold to take an objective look at what you hold sacred. If
you are unwilling to bear the discomfort that the study of the history of
Christianity may cause you, you may want to withdraw from the course. For
those who are willing to bear it there are some basic rules to remember.

First, this is not a course about God. It is a course about what people have
believed about God and done in His name. As the teacher I am not an Authority
about the Truth; I am an authority on how people have thought and lived in the
past. I expect you to understand the what and why about the past, but your own
opinions about Authority and Truth are your own. You can understand the past
without having to believe what past people believed! Please do not ask me (as
people have) which, according to my studies, is the True Church, and be
prepared for the fact that your classmates have a different True Church.

Secondly, this is not a place to bear your testimony about the Truth. You may
explain your own beliefs and listen to others explain theirs, but we must
maintain an objective attitude toward the course material. Remember, one
person's "Church of the devil" is another's "True Church." And the believer
must be willing to tolerate the opinion of the atheist, just as the atheist
must tolerate the opinion of the believer. Your testimonial may be used by the
professor as an opportunity to use you as an example of a particular model of
Truth/Authority/ Behavior!

Third, all questions are welcome if they are asked in the spirit of scholarly
inquiry. I want you to ask, and I expect that you will have lots of questions.
We can discuss anything in this course so long as we allow one another the
right to an opinion, and a Truth.

As the teacher I am constantly aware that we must all walk a fine line between
our own beliefs and the acceptance of others' as legitimate. I try not to
interject too much of my own beliefs into the course. However, for the record,
I was raised a Methodist and am an Episcopalian. My special field of research
is the Reformation. I entered it because I was seeking answers in my own life
to the questions of Truth and Authority, and I continue to be fascinated by
the interface between faith and action. Two of my books have been about that
interface. One, Faith by Statute, was a study of the creation of the Anglican
Church by Parliament in 1559. Another, God and the Moneylenders, was on how
the traditional Christian prohibition of lending money at interest came to be
abandoned in favor of capitalism. A third, The Birth of Elizabethan Age,
attempts to explain how people reacted to rapid ideological change. My
scholarly strength, therefore, lies in the Medieval and Early Modern history
of Europe; when dealing with the classical and modern worlds I claim no
special expertise.

I teach this class because I enjoy it. I hope you will have as much fun as I
do with this fascinating subject.  
  [Theological Introduction](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/ti.htm)  
[Syllabus](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/syllabus.htm)

Christianity Hot Links:

  * [Christian Art and Architecture](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/art.htm) 
  * [The Early Christian Church](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/early.htm) 
  * [Christian Music](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/music.htm) 
  * [Christian Monasticism](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/monks.htm) 
  * [Christian Mysticism](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/mystics.htm) 
  * [Modern Christian Denominations](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/modern.htm) 
  * [The Bible On-Line](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/bible.htm) 
  * [References](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/referenc.htm) 

  
---  
These pages were originally developed by Seth Seyfried under the direction of
[Professor Norman L. Jones](mailto:njones@wpo.hass.usu.edu) during the week of
February 10-17, 1997. This page was last updated November 8, 2000.  Please
feel free to e-mail Professor Jones.

