History of Christianity  
Syllabus

Professor Norm Jones
History 4230  
Old Main 323
Spring  2000  
(435) 797-1293
T  R  3:00-4:15  
njones@hass.usu.edu
Main 301  
    
  Teaching Assistants: | Office Hours  
---|---  
|  
Lisa Cook - 750-7841 / SL0YH@cc.usu.edu  | Tue & Thur. 1:30 ~ 2:30 pm  
Matthew Winters - 757-0587/matthew@cc.usu.edu | Mon. 12:30 ~ 1:30, Merrill
Library 8~10pm and by appointment  
Nate Harris - SL834@cc.usu.edu |  
  
    


If you need an appointment please make it through the History secretaries at
x71290 or 71300. Students wishing to do an Honors contract for this course
should see me immediately.

  * Texts:  Tim Dowley, ed.  _Introduction to the History of Christianity_
  * The Reader, a xeroxed set of materials available in Copy Center 1 in the basement of Old Main.
  * The Syllabus for the course is available in Copy Center 1 in the basement of Old Main.

SEE THE COURSE WEB PAGE AT http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/christia.htm

* * *

  
Reading and Assignment Schedule

[Part 1:  The Beginnings](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/part1.htm) \-
January 9 -19  
    Jan. 16:  Document exercise on Acts due.   
    Jan. 18:  Critiques due.   
            [Jan. 13: _Feast of St. Hilary_ ] 

[Part 2:   Early Catholic
Christianity](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/part2.htm) \- January 23 -
February 1  
    Jan. 23: In-class discussion of Athanasius' _Life of Antony_   
    Jan. 30: Vocabulary essay on free will and grace due   
    Feb. 1:  Critique due   
            [Jan. 25: _Feast of the Conversion of St. Paul_. Feb. 2:   _Purification of the BVM aka Candelmas, and_   
_             Presentation of Christ in the Temple_]

[Part 3:   The Early Middle Ages ](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/part3.htm)
\- February 6 - 8  
    Feb. 6: Essay on "Callimachus" due.   
    Feb. 8:  Critique due. 

**Feb. 13 - 15:   Reading Week**

[Part 4:   Christianity in the High Middle
Ages](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/part4.htm)  \- February 20 - March 8  
    Feb. 20:  Document exercise on Medieval Christian life styles due.   
    Feb. 22:  Critique due.   
            [Feb. 27:  _Shrove Tuesday_ , Feb. 28:   _Ash Wednesday--Lent begins_ ] 

**March 8:   Midterm**

**Spring Break, March 12 - 16**

[Part 5:  The Late Medieval
Crisis](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/part5.htm)  \- March 20 - 29  
    Mar. 22:  Discussion on Erasmus, _Colloquia_   
    Mar. 27:  Vocabulary exercise on Luther and Calvin due.   
    Apr. 1:  Critiques due.   
            [March 26:  _Annunciation of the BVM aka "Lady Day"_ ] 

[Part 6:  The Aftermath of the
Reformations](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/part6.htm) \- April 3 - 12  
    Apr. 10:  Essay on John Wesley due.   
    Apr. 12:  Critiques due.   
            [April 8: _Palm Sunday_ ; _Passover Begins_ ; April 12: _Maundy Thursday_ ; April 13: _Good Friday_ ;   
            April 15: _Easter Sunday_ ] 

[Part 7:   Romantic Religion...Scientific
Revolution](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/part7.htm) \- April 16 - 21  
    Apr. 17:  Document exercise on John Henry Newman due.   
    Apr. 19:  Critiques due. 

[Part 8: Christianity in the Twentieth
Century](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/part8.htm) \- April 24 - 26  
    Apr. 24:  Document exercise due.   
    Apr. 26: Critiques due.   
            [April 23: _Feast of St. George;_ April 25: _Feast of St. Mark_ ] 

**April 30:   PORTFOLIO ESSAY DUE by 5:00 p.m. in History Department Office**

**April 30:   FINAL EXAM , 9:30**  

* * *

Each week's assignments are detailed in the syllabus. It has been designed to
make learning as easy and coherent as possible, if you know how to use it. The
short discussion of each week's material is really a summary of what I want
you to understand about that section of the course. The study questions are
designed to make you think about particular aspects of the week's work, to
read carefully, and to integrate what you read in to a single framework. You
will notice that I often ask you to use the evidence from the original sources
in answering the study questions, and that they often take their point of
departure from a scholar's observation. In preparing these I hope that you
will begin to understand how an historian derives a reasoned, coherent
knowledge of the past.

Before you attempt to outline the answers to the study questions work out the
definitions and significance of the vocabulary terms. Then match the terms
with the essays. You will find that most essay questions will require the use
of a few vocabulary words. When I grade I look for the vocabulary terms in the
essay; if they are not there you have not used the appropriate terminology (or
evidence), and your grade will suffer accordingly.

You will find an essay assignment made for most weeks. The point of these
exercises is to teach you to read an historical source as an historian would,
to write well, and to use the vocabulary. In writing the essays you ask
questions of the documents that will expand your knowledge of the subject.  

* * *

**TESTS AND GRADING**

Your grade in the course will be based upon a midterm worth 100 points, a
final, worth 100 points, and a rewritten and expanded "portfolio essay," worth
200 points, for a total of 400 possible points. In most weeks you will be
expected to write an essay which carries no points. These weekly essays are
"rough drafts" for the "Portfolio essay." However, you may also earn 5 extra
points if your weekly essay is chosen as one of the "best of the week."

_If an essay is not turned in you will lose 40 points for each missing paper.
If you do not participate in your peer response group you will lose 20 points
for each occurrence._

I do not grade on a curve; you will get exactly what you earn. If you earn
more than 93% of the possible points you will get an 'A'; 90-93% an 'A-';
87-90% a 'B+'; 83-87% a 'B'; etc.

The midterm, covering parts 1-4 and worth 100 points, will have two parts.
There will be one essay chosen from the study questions on the weekly syllabus
sheets, and another which will give you a set of vocabulary terms and ask you
to construct and answer a question that uses them. In writing your essay make
sure that it has an introductory paragraph that says what the answer will be,
a body in which evidence is mustered to demonstrate why the answer outlined in
the introductory paragraph is the right answer, and a conclusion which reminds
the reader of the question, the answer, and the evidence. I am aware that
books could be written on any of my questions, but I do not expect your essays
to be more than two pages in length.

The final, worth 100 points, will also have two parts. One will be an essay in
either of the forms described under the midterm. The other will be a
"portfolio essay," in which you will answer a question based upon the essays
in your portfolio, synthesizing the writing you have done throughout the
course. See the explanations for the 200 point "portfolio essay" below.  

* * *

**PEER RESPONSE GROUPS**

Rather than grade your weekly essays I am using peer group evaluation. When
you bring your paper to class one copy comes to me, and the other copies go to
the members of a peer response group, who will read and critique it, guided by
the same grading grid I would use if I was going to grade the essay (but
students will not be expected to assign a grade). The purpose of this is to
teach you how to read critically, asking questions about content, evidence and
style. In the process you will learn more history, about how to write history,
and about your own writing.

Question papers, vocabulary papers, and document exercises are due in class on
specified days. You must bring 5 copies of each paper on the due date and the
papers must be typed. One copy of the paper will go to the instructor, and the
other four copies will be given to your classmates. You will read the four
papers you receive, fill out the evaluation form, and come to class the next
day prepared to meet with the other three in your group in order to choose the
best of the papers. The name of the person writing the best one will be given
to me and he or she will be credited with 5 extra points. _Because they are
ungraded these writing these papers will not earn you any points, but if the
paper is late you will lose 40 points unless you have my permission, which
will only be granted for emergency reasons._

When the members of the group have read each paper and filled out a grid
indicating their reactions they will spend a few minutes in class choosing the
paper they believe is the best in the group. They will then give me the name
of the person who wrote the paper, and I will enter it as a "best paper,"
earning the author 10 points.

**Failure to turn in a paper will result in a penalty of 40 points, counted
against the possible number of points in the class. In short, failure to turn
one in may wreck your grade.** **_LATE PAPERS CANNOT BE ACCEPTED._**

**Participation in the reading and discussion of the essays is essential to
the operation of the class, so roll will be taken. Anyone who does not
participate in his or her group will lose 20 points for each missed meeting.**

**_Because this course expects a great deal of collegial interaction I cannot
grant any incompletes._** There would be no way to make up participation in
peer response groups. **IF YOU ARE HAVING TROUBLE IN THE COURSE SEE ME A SOON
AS POSSIBLE.**

If you have special needs due to some disability, please discuss them with me.  

* * *

**THE WRITING PORTFOLIO**

There will be four kinds of writing assignments in this course. The first
three, question papers, vocabulary papers, and document exercises will be
written as weekly essays. Any of these could be turned into a World Wide Web
Enriched paper. The fourth is the "portfolio essay," which is part of the
final. Each type is designed to teach you to think critically about historical
information while learning the history covered in the class.

The weekly essays will form the contents of your portfolio, or collected
works, which will become your "cheat sheet" for the final. You will have these
essays before you when you write your final, so the better they are, the
better your final grade may be. Please get a binder of some sort and keep them
in it, easily accessible so that if you need to consult the essays during the
final they will be ready to hand. **_IT IS YOUR RESPONSIBILITY TO KEEP
EVERYTHING YOU WRITE AND BRING IT WITH YOU TO THE FINAL._**

The various kinds of written exercises you must do are described below.

> 1\. [Question Papers](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/qp.htm)

>

> 2\. [Vocabulary Papers](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/vp.htm)

>

> 3\. [Document Exercises](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/de.htm)

>

> 4\. [Portfolio Essay](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/pe.htm)

* * *

**[Back to the Christianity Home
Page](http://www.usu.edu/~history/norm/christia.htm)**

