![](objects-images/wvclogo.gif)

* * *

* * *

* * *

* * *

##  ![](objects-images/washington.jpg)

#  U.S. History 17A Online

#  **Information and**

#  Course Syllabus

#####  Tom Gallup, Instructor

 ![](objects-images/starbutton.gif)[How to register for this
course](17aonlineregister.html)

 ![](objects-images/starbutton.gif)[Return to 17Aonline welcome
page](index.html)

 ![](objects-images/starbutton.gif)[Go to Tom Gallup's Homepage](gallup.html)

 ![](objects-images/starbutton.gif)[Sample Assignment](17aonlinesample.html)

  
  ![](objects-images/flagbar.gif)

* * *

**U.S. History 17A Online**

**3 Semester Units**

**Section #'s 13373 and 13374**

**Fall, 2002**

**Days and Time: online**

**Required Reading:**

**    Textbook:**

**       Davidson, _Nation of Nations_ , vol. I, 4th ed. **(available from the

         college bookstore. This book can be purchased over the phone and shipped to
         you for an additional charge for shipping and postage. (408) 741-2015.
**    Reader and Study Guide:**

**       Gallup, _And My Buffalo Have Found Me, 3rd_ ed. **(available

         from the college bookstore. This book can be purchased by phone. See above.)
**       Gallup, _Study Guide for U.S. History 17A_** (available online)

**Instructor: Tom Gallup**

  


* * *

**United States History, 17A** **Online**

U.S. History 17A Online is a survey of the political, economic, social and
cultural history of the United States from the pre-colonial period through the
Civil War. Topics covered include indigenous and European influences on the
development of the colonies, the causes and consequences of the War of
Independence, the origin and principles of the U.S. Constitution, westward
expansion, sectional conflict and the Civil War. This course is acceptable for
credit at the University of California, California State University as well as
other colleges and universities nationwide.

  

* * *

**Course Objectives**

At the end of the course, students will be able to:

1.) Locate on a map of the United States important historical and geographical
sites.

2.) Identify the dates of important historical events from 1600 to 1865.

3.) Explain the reasons for important historical events, identify and explain
the contributions of key historical figures, and describe the major
ideas/movements of the period from1500 to 1865.

4.) Describe the origin and structure of the Constitution, and its historical
applicability in United States history before the Civil War.

  

* * *

**Required Reading and Study Guide**

   The class is divided into twelve (12) assignments corresponding roughly to
twelve (12) chapters in the textbook, **Nation of Nations**. For each
assignment there is reading from one or more chapters in this textbook and
usually reading from the book, **And My Buffalo Have Found Me**.

    **** For each of the twelve (12) assignments there are questions in twelve (12) **Study Guides**. The questions on each Study Guide are designed to focus your reading for that assignment. The questions themselves are short -- sometimes a few sentences, sometimes only a date or a name or a term. They are set up to be found in the reading as you do it. They are not conceptual questions that require a lot of analyzing, comparing and contrasting. They are straight-forward questions designed to elicit factual responses.
   The amount of time that each assignment should take will vary from person
to person, but should be about the same amount of time as required for a
traditional class. For an idea of the kinds of questions you will need to
answer, go to the[ sample assignment ](17aonlinesample.html)page.

   The questions on the two (2) midterms and the final will be based on the
twelve (12) Study Guides. In order to prepare for these exams, you should do
the reading and answer the questions on the Study Guides.  The answers to
these questions are for you to study for the exams. When you are finished
answering the questions, e-mail the answers to me using the correct double-
spaced format.  The formatting will be explained in an introductory email that
I will send out at the beginning of the class. There will be a due date for
each of these emailed assignments. The due dates are listed on the assignments
page. You will receive 10 points for turning in a completed assignment. Points
will be deducted for incomplete assignments, incomplete answers or wrong
answers. No points will be awarded for late assignments. You may send the
completed assignments to me at any time before the due date.  On these
assignments, you must DO YOUR OWN WORK. Collaboration on assignments is not
allowed.  If I discover that you are collaborating with another student on
these assignments, or that you are using material previously assigned, YOU
WILL BE DROPPED FROM THE CLASS IMMEDIATELY.

  

* * *

**Tests**

After every four (4) assignments, you will take a test based on the questions
you have written out from the **Study Guides**. Each test will consist of some
questions from each of the four (4) previous assignments. The tests will be
due back to me within 24 hours. The dates when I will send these tests and
their due dates are listed on the **assignments** page. Altogether there will
be two (2) midterm tests and one (1) final test during the class. The tests
will count 3 **00 points each**.   They will consist of 100 multiple choice
and essay questions. There are no makeups for these tests.

  

* * *

  
**Grading Scale, Points and Semester Grades** Your grade for the course will
be determined according to the following scale:

  
     90- 100%   **A 900+**
   80 - 89%    **B 800 - 899**

   70 - 79%    **C 700 - 799**

   60 - 69%    **D 600 - 699**

   59 - 0       **    F 599 and below**

* * *

**Credit/No Credit**

This course may be taken on a Credit/No Credit basis. (A minimum equivalent
grade of C is required for a credit.) However, you must notify me via e-mail
before the end of the sixth (6th) week of the semester (second week in summer)
if you wish to do so,.

  

* * *

**Drop Policy**

If your name appears on my class roster, you are officially enrolled in the
class and will receive the grade you earn. If, for some reason, you need to
drop the class, you must do so officially through the office of Admissions &
Records.

  

* * *

**Contact Me**

Social Science Building

Office # 2C

Phone: 741-2540

Fax: 741-2121

Mailing Address: 14000 Fruitvale, Saratoga, Ca. 95070

e-mail: [tom_gallup@westvalley.edu](Mailto: tom_gallup@westvalley.edu)

  


    
    
    


![](objects-images/flagbar.gif)  
  ![](objects-images/sm-wvcbutton.gif)July 31, 2002

  
by Tom Gallup, e-mail address: tom_gallup@westvalley.edu  
[West Valley College](http://www.westvalley.edu)  
http://www.westvalley.edu/wvc/ss/gallup/gallup.html  
    


