## ![](../../webaccesssymbol.gif)

## Department of History  
University of California, Santa Barbara  

##

** HISTORY  131F,  ANTI- SEMITE  AND  JEW  IN  EUROPE  AND  AMERICA  
SPRING  QUARTER  2002 **

##  

Department of History  
University of California  
Santa Barbara, CA 93106-9410  
voice: 805-893-2991  
fax: 805-893-8795

#### Site Navigation

  * [UCSB History Home Page](http://www.history.ucsb.edu)
  * [Faculty Office Hours](../../facultyhours-txt.htm)
  * [TA Office Hours](../../graduatehours-txt.htm)
  * [Peer Advisor Hours](../../advising-txt.htm)
  * [Staff Hours](../../deptinfo-txt.htm)
  * [Fields of Study](../../fields/programs-txt.htm)
  * [Graduate Studies](../../grads/index-txt.htm)
  * [Undergraduates](../../ugrads/index-txt.htm)
  * [Departmental Events](../../events-txt.htm)
  * [Links](../../links-txt.htm)

* * *

Enrollment code: 49437  
Lecture Room: HSSB 1173  
MWF, 2:00-2:50

Prof. Albert S. Lindemann [faculty #33]  
Office: HSSB 4236: tel. 893-2267, 2991  
Office hours: M 12:-1:00,W 1-2:00, Fri 12:30-1:30 [and by appointment]  
E-mail: [lindeman@history.ucsb.edu](mailto:lindeman@history.ucsb.edu)  
Website: <http://www.history.ucsb.edu/faculty/lindemann.htm>

_**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

Students should study this course description very carefully (there will be a
quiz on it the second meeting of the course). In order to provide many options
and yet cover necessary material, the organization and the nature of the
assignments are complex in places. Students should be sure they understand
what is required, and if not, to ask me, either directly in class, in office
hours, or through electronic mail. Note especially that quizzes on the reading
start on the second day of class and that the midterm is scheduled for the
tenth meeting of the class (April 22). Students are invited, as part of the
orientation to the class, to visit my webpage (listed above), where I outline
my teaching philosophy, list my major scholarly works, provide texts of recent
publications, as well as an array of other materials-including "Lindemann's
Laffs," bloopers that students have made in my classes over the years.

_

The main focus of this course is on the history of hatred against Jews, or
anti-Semitism, in Europe and America, from the late nineteenth through the
twentieth century (25 of the 29 lectures). However, Jew-hatred in modern times
is not really understandable without at least a brief look far back into
history, to the very origins of the distinction between Jew and non-Jew.
Lectures and readings will be concerned to explore the following clusters: (1)
the many ways that Jews have viewed themselves as a "holy nation" ( _goy
kadosh_ ), (2) how non-Jews viewed this self-styled holy nation, and (3) how
Jews viewed non-Jews ("the [other] nations" [ _goyim_ ]). In short, the goal
is not only to study hatred of Jews but rather to arrive at a balanced and
global picture of the interplay of Jew and non-Jew in history-across time,
from country to country, and across academic disciplines. The course attempts
to be more than a "history of hate," since both groups over time have viewed
the other with complex and often paradoxical mixtures of aversion,
condescension, and admiration. The "over time" will receive special emphasis,
since significant evolution and shifts have occurred in the attitudes of the
two groups, even if certain underlying "timeless" themes may be discerned.

It is of course true that negative perception of others has been central to
the self-definition of most groups throughout history, but the hatred directed
at Jews over the centuries has been extraordinary-in a diversity of regions
and cultures, in duration, and in intensity. It thus has a special claim on
our attention, and offers provocative insights into the hatred directed at
other groups. A key interpretive point, one that has evoked considerable
controversy, will be the "uniqueness" of Jews, their historical experience,
and the hatred they have faced, especially in the Holocaust.

A course dealing with bigotry, hatred, violence, and finally mass murder will
not and should not be entertaining, or "info-tainment" of the Hollywood or
television variety. It can, however, be instructive and in certain ways
satisfying-if at the same time disturbing. Similarly, a superficial treatment
of these themes, a descent into the platitudes and apologetics that are found
in popular literature about Jewish history and anti-Semitism, cannot be
condoned in a university course worth its name. No course can (or should)
pretend to offer the "objective truth," or the ultimately "correct"
interpretations, but at the same time not all accounts or all interpretations
are of equal intellectual worth; the course will not shy away from attempting
evaluations of the many often controversial perspectives in scholarly and
popular literature.

The initial lectures and readings, Part I of the course, deal primarily with
interpretive matters, not only definitions and various theories about anti-
Semitism but also instructional method and purpose. The first weeks attempt,
in a related way, to gain a sense of what French historians have termed
_histoire a longue duree,_ a "long view" over the centuries, back into
antiquity, through the middle ages to early modern times, attempting to see
deeper structures, not _histoire ev enementielle_ ("event history," or history
lost in the details of the present and recent past).

Part II covers the late eighteenth to mid-nineteenth centuries, the immediate
background to the appearance of modern racial-political anti-Semitism (as
distinguished from pre-modern religious hatred, sometimes called "anti-
Judaism"). It considers in particular the issue of whether Jew-hatred has
remained "essentially" the same and "unique" over the centuries, or whether it
underwent fundamental changes in modern times, paralleling the fundamental
changes in Jewish self-definition in modern times.

Part III deals mostly with the 1870s and 1880s, years of economic depression,
when specifically modern (racial and political) forms of anti-Semitism made
their appearance, and indeed when the word "anti-Semitism" was coined.

Part IV is concerned with the generation before the First World War, sometimes
called the _Belle Epoque,_ or beautiful epoch-which was not always so
beautiful for Europe's Jews, although it was a time of rapid rise for them,
economically, demographically, and socially, especially in western and central
Europe. The period witnessed violent attacks on Jews in eastern Europe and
spectacular trials that developed into anti-Semitic  "affairs" in Hungary,
France, Russia, and the United States. Part IV also looks at the peculiarities
of anti-Semitism in Germany, where there were no violent outbursts nor anti-
Semitic affairs but where of course we now look for ominous beginnings of an
ensuing catastrophe. This part of the course scrutinizes the highly
controversial question, "Was there something special about German anti-
Semitism, so that the Holocaust was in some sense the logical culmination of
German history?"

Part V is devoted to the decade of war and revolution, 1914-24, a watershed
for European history as a whole, and certainly no less so for the relations of
Jews and non-Jews. This was the time of the Balfour Declaration, the Bolshevik
Revolution, the establishment of the Weimar Republic, and in many other
regards the emergence of Jews to a new visibility in Europe and America.

Part VI examines the years 1924-45, fascism and anti-Semitism, including the
mass murder of Europe's Jews. This part explores the evidence that the link
between fascism and Jew-hatred is more elusive and ambiguous than often
believed; many students will be surprised to learn that Jews were active in
the first fascist movement in Italy, and Mussolini had many close friendships
with Jews, indeed romances with Jewish women of more than a passing nature.
Nazism was clearly the more virulent form in terms of the Jews; the nature and
evolution of the Holocaust itself is examined in this part.

Part VII examines the world since 1945, a period that once again witnessed
fundamental shifts in the relationships of Jews and Gentiles, both because of
the establishment of the state of Israel and because of the "exceptional"
experiences of the Jews in the United States, who increasingly assumed a
leadership role in world Jewry and in many regards emerged from previous
powerlessness and denigration to an unparalleled position of influence and
esteem in the world. A large question now looms: Will the events of September
11, 2001 mark another significant watershed on Jewish-Gentile relations?

COURSE LECTURES

_Part I: Introduction, Overview, Definitions_

  1. Introduction _[questionnaire handed out, to be discussed in second session]_
  2. Defining anti-Semitism _[class begins with 5 minute quiz on the syllabus and the article by Hillel Halkin in the Feb. Commentary Magazine, in the RBR]_
  3. Defining Jew and "Other Nations"; anti-Jewish hostility in ancient and medieval times _[2nd quiz]_

_Part II: The Approach to Modernity, Late 18th to Mid-19th centuries_

  4. From premodern to modern times: "reforming" the Jews 
  5. Race and racism in the nineteenth century 
  6. Two worlds: Jews in eastern and in western Europe

_Part III: The Appearance of Modern Anti-Semitism (1870-1890)_

  7. Modern racial-political anti-Semitism in Germany 
  8. Anti-Semitism in a multinational empire (Austria-Hungary) 
  9. Sweet Exiles: Britain, the United States, Hungary

_Part IV: The Belle Epoque (1890-1914)_

  10. _Midterm Examination_ (Monday, April 22) 
  11. Three anti-Semitic affairs: Dreyfus, Beilis, Frank 
  12. Karl Lueger: "Insincere" political anti-Semitism 
  13. Herzl and Zionism: Inevitable Anti-Semitism? 
  14. Nicholas II's war against the Jews

_Part V: War and Revolution (1914-1924)_

  15. World War I: Patriotism and "Jew count"
  16. Jews, revolution, and communism 
  17. Peace settlement, Balfour Declaration, and Palestinian Mandate

_Part VI: Totalitarianism and Anti-Semitism (1924-1945)_

  18. Mussolini, fascism, and the Jews 
  19. The mental world of Adolf Hitler 
  20. Varieties of inter-war anti-Semitism in Europe and America 
  21. Nazism, from outside sect to party in power, 1928-1938 
  22. The Holocaust, 1939-1945

_Part VII: The Contemporary World (1945-2001)_

  23. A Jewish state, 1945-1967: Jewish power, powerlessness and anti-Semitism 
  24. Jews in America, a Time for Healing? 1938-61 
  25. The internationalization of Jew hatred 
  26. Anti-Semitism, assimilation, and multiculturalism 
  27. Reactions to the Khurbn: from "silence" to "Holocaustomania" _Book Review due, Monday, June 3 [5 extra points for early submission, in previous week]_
  28. Will Jews "disappear"? The dilemmas of cultural assimilation 
  29. Sept. 11: A new turning point in Jewish-Gentile relations?

**_COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND GRADING_**

  1. Weekly five-minute quizzes (two in the first week), usually on Fridays. Quiz scores potentially enhance the final course grade up to extra ten points (on a hundred-point scale). The quizzes will cover simple factual material from the reading, including map identifications.

  2. Mid-term examination (25% of course grade). An essay exam, with a map component, Monday, April 22, the tenth class meeting, the beginning of the fourth week of class.

  3. 3\. Book review (25% of course grade). A detailed description of the review will be provided on a separate handout. Ca. 2000 words, 8-10 pages in length. Due on Monday, June 3. Reviews handed in the week before (until Friday May 31) will receive 5 points extra credit (on a scale of 100); reviews handed in after June 3 (they are due _at the beginning of class_ on Monday and will be counted as late after that) will have 5 points deducted from their book-review grade.

  4. 4\. Final examination (50% of course grade). Long and short essays, with a map component, Saturday, June 8, 4-7 p.m. _Note that this is the **day after** the last day of class, Friday June 7._

**_READING ASSIGNMENTS FOR THE COURSE_**

Students are advised to look over the following list before making book
purchases. The six books for "required" and "supplementary" reading have been
placed on two-hour reserve in the Reserve Book Room in the Library, and should
be available in the Campus, Isla Vista, and many other bookstores. Books for
the "optional reading" list were not ordered at the Campus Bookstore, but they
too have been placed in the RBR. Students who would like personal copies of
them may of course order them, if they are in print, but even if out of print,
they may be available as used books at Amazon and other Internet outlets; for
used books in Santa Barbara, try The Book Den, 11 E. Anapamu. For those
students who find it difficult to use the RBR or who must strictly limit the
books they buy, I have personal copies of most of the books that I am willing
to loan on a one-week loan basis.

Obviously, all of this will require some careful planning on the part of
students, particularly in regard to which book students select as "optional"
and which will be their choice for the book review assignment. Ideally, these
choices should be made in the first week. The final examination will have
essay questions on both the required and optional reading (students will
indicate in the last week of class which optional book they have selected).
Again, planning!

**_Required Reading:_**

.

Albert S. Lindemann, _Anti-Semitism Before the Holocaust_ Longman (Seminar
Studies in History series) ISBN 0-582-36964-9 (paper)

Richard S. Levy, _Antisemitism in the Modern World: An Anthology of Texts_
D.C. Heath ISBN 0-669-24340-X (paper)

David Engel, _The Holocaust: The Third Reich and the Jews_ Longman (Seminar
Studies in History Series) ISBN: 0582327202 (paper)

Seymour Martin Lipset and Earl Raab, _Jews and the New American Scene_ Harvard
Univ. Press ISBN 0-674-47493-7 (paper)

_**Optional reading.** Students are to choose at least two of these, one for
final exam questions and one for the book review. Further possible titles for
the book review will be supplied in a separate handout, but the following are
recommended: _

Peter Schafer, _Judeophobia: Attitudes toward the Jews in the Ancient World,_
Harvard University Press, 1997, ISBN 0-674-48777-X

Samuel Sandmel, _Anti-Semitism in the New Testament?_ Fortress Press,
Philadelphia, 1978

Robert L. Wilken, _John Chrysostom and the Jews: Rhetoric and Reality in the
Late Fourth Century,_ UC Press, 1983

John Y. B. Hood, _Aquinas and the Jews_ Univ. of Penn. Press, 1995

Robert Chazan, _Medieval Stereotypes and Modern Antisemitism,_ UC Press, 1997.

Jeremy Cohen, _The Friars and the Jews: The Evolution of Medieval Anti-
Judaism_ Cornell Univ. Press, 1982

Arthur Hertzberg, _The French Enlightenment and the Jews_ New York, 1968

Franz Kolber, _Napoleon and the Jews,_ New York, 1975

Michael Stanislawski, _Tsar Nicholas I and the Jews: The Transformation of
Jewish Society in Russia, 1823-1855_ Philadelphia, 1983

Gregor von Rezzori, _Memoirs of an Anti-Semite_ Vintage Books; ISBN:
0679731822 [Amazon: $14.40, immediately available]

Albert S. Lindemann, _The Jew Accused_ [Cambridge University Press, ISBN
0-521-40302-2 (paper) ( _nb.: not for book review assignment_ )

Steven Beller, _Herzl,_ New York, 1991 [not for the book review since outside
reviews are not available]

George Clare, _Last Waltz in Vienna: The Rise and Destruction of a Family,
1842-1942,_ New York, Henry Hold, 1989

Alexander Stille, _Benevolence and Betrayal: Five Jewish Families Under
Fascism,_ New York, 1991

Ian Kershaw, _Hitler,_ Longman (Profiles in Power series), 1991 [not for book
review]

Peter Novick, _The Holocaust in American Life,_ New York, 1999

Geoffrey Wheatcroft, _The Controversy of Zion: Jewish Nationalism, the Jewish
State, and the Unresolved Jewish Dilemma,_ New York, 1996

John Murray Cuddihy, _The Ordeal of Civility_ Beacon Press ISBN 0-8070-3609-9
(paper) [out of print]

William and Hillary Rubinstein, _Philo-Semitism_ St. Martin's Press ISBN
0-312-22205-X

J. J. Goldberg, _Jewish Power: Inside the American Jewish Establishment,_ New
York, 1996

Benjamin Ginsberg, _The Fatal Embrace, Jews and the State: The Politics of
Anti-Semitism in the United States,_ Univ. of Chicago Press, 1993

Edward S. Shapiro, _A Time for Healing: American Jewry since World War II,_
1992

Joseph Bendersky, _The Jewish Threat: The Anti-Semitic Politics of the U.S.
Army_

_**Supplementary Reading** These reading selections provide a more
comprehensive and wide-ranging treatment of the topics in each the seven parts
of the course; the suggested selections for each part are given in the reading
assignments below. These are not required readings and will not be directly
tested in the exams, but students who read them will be better prepared for
the midterm and final examination. Students should make an effort to read at
least some of them, presumably those parts that students are most interested
in._

Albert S. Lindemann, _Esau's Tears: Modern Anti-Semitism and the Rise of the
Jews,_ Cambridge University Press, 1997; paperback 2000

Jacob Katz, _From Prejudice to Destruction: Anti-Semitism, 1700-1933,_ Harvard
University Press, 1980

**_Schedule of Assigned Reading:_**

The required reading for each Part should be completed at the point the
lectures are complete for that Part (refer to the list of lectures above). The
weekly quizzes are designed primarily to test how well students have mastered
that reading.

Each student should select at least two of the Course Parts in which s/he does
the optional reading; the final exam will have questions on each part, from
which students will answer according to the optional reading they have done.

**_For Part I:_**

Lindemann, _Anti-Semitism Before the Holocaust,_ chapters 1 and 2 (pp. 1-50)
for quiz on Friday; chapter 3, 4, and Conclusion (pp. 51-103) before Monday,
April 8.

Levy, _Antisemitism in the Modern World,_ pp. vii-viii, 1-26, 135-44

Optional: Schafer, Sandmel, Wilken, Hood

Supplementary: _Esau's Tears,_ Chap. 1, pp. 3-39

**_For Part II:_**

_Antisemitism in the Modern World,_ pp. 31-46

Optional: Chazan, Cohen, Hertzberg, Kolber, Stanislawski

Supplementary: _Esau's Tears_ : Chapter 2 (pp. 40 to 96), Katz, 1-92

**_For Part III:_**

_Antisemitism in the Modern World,_ pp. 49-93

_Optional:_ Rubinstein, von Rezzori

_Supplementary: Esau's Tears,_ Chapters 3 through 6 (pp. 97-205), Katz,
147-222

[The mid-term examination will cover the reading to this point, and lectures 1
through 9]

**_Reading for Part IV:_**

_Antisemitism in the Modern World,_ 97-133

_Optional:_ Lindemann, _The Jew Accused,_ Beller, Clare

_Supplementary: Esau's Tears,_ Chapters 7 through 11 (pp. 206-385)

**_Reading for Part V:_**

_Antisemitism in the Modern World,_ 178-99

_Optional:_ Stille, Kershaw

_Supplementary: Esau's Tears,_ Chapters 12 and 13 (pp. 387-460)

**_Reading for Part VI:_**

Lindemann, _Anti-Semitism before the Holocaust_ [re-read]

Engel, _The Holocaust: The Third Reich and the Jews_ [entire book]

_Antisemitism in the Modern World,_ 203-266

_Supplementary: Esau's Tears,_ Chapter 14, (461-503), 245-327

**_Reading for Part VII:_**

Lipset, _Jews and the New American Scene_ [entire book]

_Antisemitism in the Modern World,_ 166-177

_Optional:_ Shapiro, Ginsberg

_Supplementary: Esau's Tears,_ Epilogue and Conclusions

* * *

This site is best viewed at 800 x 600.  
If any of this material is not accessible to you, please contact our
department by telephone at 805.893.2991, by email at
salzgeber@history.ucsb.edu,  
or by mail at Department of History; University of California, Santa Barbara;
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 and we will provide alternatives.  
Site designed by Jason M. Kelly  
2001(C)

