
    ![
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
    HHHHHHHHHHH HH H EEEE TTTTT     Humanities
    HHHHHH    H  H H E      T       OnLine
    HHHHHH    H H  H EEE    T       Web Site
    HHHHHH    H HH H E      T       
    HHHHHH    H HH H EEEE   T       H-SHGAPE](/graphics/Logo.H-NetBare.GIF)

## SHGAPE Bibliographical Essays:  
Immigration in the Gilded Age and Progressive Era

by Donna R. Gabaccia  

Charles H. Stone Professor of American History  
The University of North Carolina at Charlotte

Immigration reached its historical peak in the Gilded Age and Progressive Era
(GAPE), as almost twelve million immigrants entered the U.S. between 1890 and
1910. Most historians of immigration refer to the years including the GAPE as
the years of "the new immigration," distinguishing this migration of southern
and eastern Europeans (and, to much lesser extent, Mexicans and Asians) from
the "old immigration" of northern and western Europeans and Chinese of the
years 1850-1880. Laws severely restricting immigration cut off this new
immigration between 1917 and 1924. Even today's immigration--which developed
after revision of U.S. policy in 1965--has not surpassed the relative,
absolute, or demographic impact of the new immigration of the GAPE. Thus, any
student of the GAPE, and any teacher of GAPE surveys or specialized topics,
needs to keep the theme of immigration within her purview.

Relatively few introductory studies of the new immigrants focus exclusively on
the Gilded and Progressive Era. One student-friendly survey for the GAPE is
Alan Kraut, _The Huddled Masses. More generally, John Bodnar, _The
Transplanted_ focuses on immigrants to urban America 1840-1820 while Donna
Gabaccia's _From The Other Side_ interprets the lives of immigrant women by
collapsing old and new immigrations together and comparing them to today's
immigrant women. Because the new immigration involved large numbers of
sojourners, Mark Wyman's _Round-trip to America_ is a necessary corrective to
U.S.-centered views that assume all new arrivals are immigrants. The
particular problems faced by Asians under exclusionary laws during this period
are best explored in Sucheng Chan's _Entry Denied_. These five books might be
considered the core library for GAPE specialists interested in expanding their
knowledge of the new immigrants, and viewing their lives in broader historical
context.

The new immigrants' initial contacts with American life, and the country's
responses to them, make immigration history central to our understanding of a
number of main themes of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era. On education, for
example, see Perlmann's _Ethnic Differences_; on labor, Dirk Hoerder's edited
collection, _"Struggle a Hard Battle"_. The burgeoning literature on the
social settlement movement, and to a lesser extent on social welfare, portray
gendered relations between native-born women reformers and working-class,
often immigrant women clients (see, for example, Crocker's _Social Work and
Social Order_ and Lissak's _Pluralism & Progressives-.) Studies of GAPE
radicalism, often focused on Yiddish-speaking activists (e.g. Sorin's
_Prophetic Minority_) also shed light on immigrant life, as do most
interpretations of the prohibition and Americanization movements of this
period. John Higham's _Strangers in the Land_ remains the best introduction to
nativist political movements aimed to curtail the new immigration of these
years.

For those interested in integrating materials on the new immigrants into GAPE
surveys, a good starting place is a syllabus exchange sponsored by the
Newberry Library and the Immigration History Society, _Teaching the History of
Immigration and Ethnicity_, compiled by Donna Gabaccia and James Grossman. The
publication, which is available from the Newberry Library, demonstrates how
historians of immigration approach GAPE as well as providing suggestions for
readings, film, and student assignments focused on immigrant life during and
after this time period.

Those GAPE specialists who wish to move beyond basic competence, will want to
explore the histories of particular immigrant groups and to get a sense of the
diverging methodologies characteristic of immigration history for this period.
The largest groups of immigrants, 1899-1924, include Italians (3,8 million),
Eastern European Jews (1,8 million), Germans (1,3 million) and Poles (1,5
million). During the same period more than 500,000 Scandinavians, British,
Irish, Anglo-Canadian, Slovak. Mexican, Croatian/Slovenian and Hungarian
migrations fell just under this volume. Huge literatures exist on the three
largest groups, and the Mexican migrations of this period are also
increasingly studied. For introductions to single groups, _The Harvard
Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups_ remains the best starting place. More
recent literature is accessible through Roger Daniels' _Coming to America_.

The rather rich literature on particular immigrant groups in particular
locations reflects the predominance of the community case study in social
history of the 1970s and 1980s. Students of GAPE immigration should know,
however, that immigration history's approach to the study of the new, and
other, immigrations to the U.S. are evolving in new directions. Generally,
historians of immigration find in the GAPE ideal opportunities to focus on
human mobility, on ethnic group formation, and on tensions between national
unity and cultural diversity in American history. Increasingly, however,
students of this era are adopting comparative, global and international
approaches. A useful survey that puts U.S. immigration history for this period
in comparative perspective is Walter Nugent, _Crossings_. Readers willing can
further explore methodological issues, should consult Hoerder (1985); Vecoli
(1991) and Yans-McLaughlin (1990). While not limited to studies of GAPE, all
three volumes highlight possibilities for comparative and global approaches
that incorporate U.S. immigration of this period.

## References

  * Bodnar, John (1985) The Transplanted: A History of Immigrants in Urban America. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
  * Chan, Sucheng (ed.) (1991) Entry Denied: Exclusion and the Chinese Community in America, 18812-1943 Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
  * Crocker, Ruth (1992) Social Work and Social Order: The Settlement Movement in Two Industrial Cities, 1889-1930 Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 
  * Daniels, Roger (1990) Coming to America: A History of Immigration and Ethnicity in American Life New York: HarperCollins. 
  * Gabaccia, Donna (1994) From the Other Side: Women, Gender, and Immigrant life in the U.S., 1820-1990 Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
  * Higham, John (1988) Strangers in the Land: Patterns of American Nativism, 1860-1925 2nd. ed. New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press. 
  * Hoerder, Dirk (ed.) (1986) Struggle a Hard Battle: Essays on Working-Class Immigrants DeKalb, Ill.: Northern Illinois University Press. 
  * Hoerder, Dirk, ed. (1985) Labor Migration in the Atlantic Economies, the European and North American Working Classes during the Period of Industrialization Westport: Greenwood. 
  * Kraut, Alan (1986) The Huddled Masses: the Immigrant in American Society, 1880-1921. Arlington Heights, Ill.: Harlan Davidson. 
  * Lissak, Rivka Shpak (1989) Pluralism & Progressives: Hull House and the New Immigrants, 1890-1919 Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989. 
  * Nugent, Walter (1992) Crossings: The Great Transatlantic Migrations, 1870-1914 Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
  * Perlmann, Joel (1988) Ethnic Differences: Schooling and Social Structure among the Irish, Italian, Jews, and Blacks in an American City, 1880--1935 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
  * Sorin, Gerald (1985) The Prophetic Minority: American Jewish Immigrant Radicals, 1880-1920 Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
  * Vecoli, Rudolph J. and Suzanne Sinke (eds.) (1991) A Century of European Migrations, 1830-1930 Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 
  * Wyman, Mark (1993) Round-trip to America: The Immigrants Return to Europe, 1880-1930 Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
  * Yans-McLaughlin, Virginia (ed.) (1990) Immigration Reconsidered: History, Sociology and Politics New York: Oxford University Press. 

  
[![](/graphics/listhome.gif)](file:///C:/My Documents/My Webs/SHGAPE/)
[Return](file:///C:/My Documents/My Webs/SHGAPE/) to H-SHGAPE Home Page.  

  
[![H-Net, Humanities OnLine](/graphics/hnet.gif)](/)  
| Generously Supported by: |  |  Comments to [Patrick D. Reagan](/cgi-
bin/mail?to=preagan@tntech.edu)  
Tennessee Technological University  
Copyright (C)1999, H-Net, Humanities OnLine  
  
---|---|---|---  
[![\[MICHIGAN

STATE UNIVERSITY\]](/graphics/msutrans.gif)](http://www.msu.edu) | & |
[![\[THE

NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE
HUMANITIES\]](/graphics/nehtrans.gif)](http://www.neh.gov/)

