American Studies 650 Course Syllabus The Political Economy of Labor and
Capital in the United States

* * *

  

**Class Formation and Struggle in the Industrializing United States**

In 1872, the International decided to relocate its administrative headquarters
from Europe to North America. Marx and his comrades justified this decision on
the basis of their prediction that the U.S. would become the leading
capitalist nation of the world and was, therefore, the place where the work of
the International was most sorely needed. With the benefit of historical
hindsight, it seems that the Marxists were somewhat premature. It was not
until after WW II that the U.S. emerged as the leading industrial nation,
having survived two bloody wars that effectively destroyed the European and
Asian competition. Nevertheless, history ultimately proved that they were
right on both counts. First, the U.S. did become the leading capitalist nation
of the globe. Second, there was and is no place that needs the International
more than the U.S.

The first half of this course will attempt to understand the development of
republican capitalism in the Nineteenth Century U.S. The first week or so will
be devoted to understanding the community based political and economic
institutions that were developed in the nineteenth century, along with the
process of capital accumulation and state-building. The critical question here
is, "How did the U.S. make the transition from semi-peripheral (colonial)
status to core political and industrial nation between 1850 and 1950? Once we
have a provisional answer to that question, we'll turn to the more important
question: What were the impacts of this rise of the United States to global
hegemony on the U.S. working class"? Specifically, we'll look at how the
economic and political development of the U.S., particularly in the late
nineteenth century, affected class struggle and, yet more specifically, the
U.S. labor movement. After spending a few weeks on the nineteenth century
roots of the "exceptional" U.S. labor movement, we'll move toward more
contemporary concerns, leading, ultimately, to the present and the problems
and prospects for a revitalized U.S. labor movement. As we shall see, there is
some reason for optimism, assuming that one is willing to be patient.

**Class Struggle in the Twentieth Century

**

In 1995, a new leadership team won control of the American Federation of
Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO). John Sweeney, Linda
Chavez-Thompson, and Richard Trumka promised to get labor moving again:
protecting the gains working people have achieved over the last fifty years;
organizing the unorganized; and even expanding the political presence of
organized labor in the political process. Much of this new face of organized
labor was stimulated by grass roots mobilization of working people who have
become less and less economically secure while the ranks of the organized have
dwindled.

The challenges labor faces are enormous. Along with the spread of economic
insecurity that workers have had to face over the last fifteen years has come
a decline in the percentage of workers organized in unions from a high of
about 35 percent in the 1950s to about 11 percent today. These trends have
resulted from and/or stimulated an almost qualitative transformation of the
U.S. and global system of capitalism from local to national to international;
from labor intensive to capital intensive; and from manufacturing to service
to finance.

The changing fortunes of working people in the United States are mirrored by
similar patterns in other industrial capitalist countries as well as poorer
countries of the Third World. And all this has occurred in the midst of
significant defeats for socialist, labor, and other progressive forces in
country after country.

The twentieth century dawned with spontaneous uprisings of anarchists,
socialists, and communists. The Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 launched a fierce
struggle between its supporters and its capitalist foes throughout the world.
How did the class struggles of the earlier part of the century lead to the
weakening of labor by the century's end everywhere around the globe but
particularly in the United States? At the same time that there are weaknesses,
there are signs that working people are beginning to rise up again. What are
the historic roots of this modest renaissance of labor organization and class
struggle?

This course will address a variety of questions about workers, labor
organization, and class struggle in the changing United States political
economy of the last two hundred years. It begins with class and class conflict
in western towns, examines nineteenth century efforts to organize craft and
industrial workers in the Knights of Labor, and looks at working people and
their self-organizations in the twentieth century in textiles, the auto
industry, meatpacking, and the public sector. It describes the noble efforts
to organize around the banners of the Industrial Workers of the World, the
American Federation of Labor, and the Congress of Industrial Organizations. It
analyses the role of the state in class struggle, the contradictory impulses
of class, race, and gender; free enterprise ideology and class consciousness;
the role of communism in the labor movement; ethnicity and class
consciousness; and organizing in the South, the North, the Midwest, and the
East; and immigration and class struggle.

In short, this is a course on the U.S. experience, addressed from the vantage
point of working people. It will be historical, theoretical, normative, and
emotive. It will be about economics, politics, society, and culture.

**The Seminar

**

The course will have two significant components. First, seminars will consist
of in-depth discussions of the readings listed below. Each student will
prepare one short book review that will be distributed one week before the
class is to discuss the reading. The review will serve as the first stimulus
for what will be vigorous discussion of the week's reading. The readings,
discussion, and reviews will provide a thorough grounding in the subject
matter of the course.

Second, each student will prepare a seminar paper that examines some aspect of
class struggle in the United States. These will be due the first day of final
week. The last session of the course will consist of brief student reports on
the major findings or conclusions from the seminar paper.

**Weekly Readings (available at Von's, except for Hogan, which will be
available in class)

**

15 Jan: orientation-no readings  
  
22 Jan: Richard Hogan, Class and Community in Frontier Colorado, Kansas, 1990.  
  
29 Jan: Kim Voss, The Making of American Exceptionalism: The Knights of labor
and Class Formation in the Nineteenth Century, Cornell, 1993.  
  
5 Feb: Melvyn Dubofsy, The State and Labor in Modern America, University of
North Carolina, 1994.  
  
12 Feb: David Montgomery, The Fall of the House of Labor: The Workplace, the
State, and American labor Activism, 1865-1925, Cambridge, 1989.  
  
19 Feb: Lizabeth Cohen, Making a New Deal: Industrial Workers in Chicago,
1919-1939, Cambridge, 1990.  
  
26 Feb: Roger Keeran, The Communist Party and the Auto Workers Union,
International Publishers.  
  
5 Mar: Michael K. Honey, Southern Labor and Black Civil Rights: Organizing
Memphis Workers, Illinois 1993.  
  
12 Mar: No Class--Spring Break  
  
19 Mar: Roger Horowitz, `Negro and White Unite and Fight!' A Social History of
Industrial Unionism in Meatpacking, 1930-1990, Illinois, 1997.  
  
26 Mar: Nancy F. Gabin, Feminism in the Labor Movement: Women and the United
Auto Workers, 1935-1975, Cornell, 1990.  
  
2 Apr: Elizabeth A. Fones-Wolf, Selling Free Enterprise: The Business Assault
on Labor and Liberalism, 1945-60, Illinois, 1994.  
  
9 Apr: Barbara Kingsolver, Holding the Line: Women in the Great Arizona Mine
Strike of 1983, Cornell, 1989.  
  
16 Apr: No Class-American Studies Spring Symposium  
  
23 Apr: Monthly Review, July/August 1997, Volume 49, No. 3 "Rising From the
Ashes? Labor in the Age of `Global'Capitalism."  
  
30 Apr: reports on term papers and general discussion-no readings

* * *

[Return to Rich Hogan's page](hogan.html) [Return to Faculty
page](../Faculty.htm) [Return Home](../../default.html)

