MARIST COLLEGE  
DEPT OF HISTORY  
INSTUCTOR: DR. NORKELIUNAS  
  
  

###  HIST 249: Early Modern European Period 1300-1800,  
An Age of Expansion and Revolution

  
  
  

INSTRUCTOR: DR. NORKELIUNAS  
OFFICE: FONTAINE 205  
OFFICE HOURS: EVERY TUESDAY AND THURSDAY  
           TUE - 9:30AM-12:45PM   
           FRI. - 9:30AM-10: 45PM   
PHONE: X2207  
EMAIL: JZFN@MARISTB.MARIST.EDU  
HOME PAGE URL:[ http//: www.academic.marist.edu/nork
](http://www.academic.marist.edu/nork)  
  
  

**REQUIRED READING TEXTS:**  
  
Atchity, Kenneth J. ed. _The Renaissance Reader._ New York: Harper Collins
Publishers, 1997.  
  
Koenigsberger, H.G. _Medieval Europe 400-1500._ New York: Longman, 1998.  
  
Zophy, Jonathan W. _Renaissance and Reformation Europe: Dances Over Fire and
Water._ 2 nd ed. New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1998.  
  
_Oxford Desk Dictionary and Thesaurus: American Edition._ Oxford, England:
Oxford University Press, 1999.  
  
  

**OBJECTIVES**  
  
The aim of the course is to introduce the student to the history of Early
Modern Europe. The topics to be covered are the Renaissance, Reformation,
Humanism, the Church and the Papacy, the Exploration of the New World, as well
as other relevant areas.  
  
  

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

  1. Reading of assigned material. 
  2. Participation in classroom discussions. 
  3. Announced and unannounced quizzes and tests. 
  4. A final examination. **
  5. A TERM PAPER. *** (see below)** 
  

**GRADE DISTRIBUTION POLICY:**

  1. Quizzes, tests and a final examination will be worth a total of 60% of the final grade. **
  2. THE TERM PAPER** will be worth a total of 40% of the final grade.***   
**Note:** The criteria for final grades as policy is found in the current
Marist College Catalogue under "Grading System". The policy is binding between
the professor and the student in this course. It is very important that you
consult the Catalogue regarding this matter.

  

**ATTENDANCE POLICY** Due to the brevity of the course-time span, only
"emergency" absences will be excused. All other excessive absences will be
treated in the loss of grade credit or course failure, relative to the length
of absence from class. In case of illness, verification will necessitate an
excuse from a nurse or a doctor; family emergencies, will have to be confirmed
through the Academic Dean's office (Dr. Artin Arslanian).  
  
**Command of the English Language:**  
  
Please take note, that Marist College has a policy of excellence in English,
namely command of reading, writing and speaking. This policy exists throughout
the curriculum. Anyone who is weak in these skills will find the course very
difficult. The requirement of the dictionary as a text is intended to help you
become a master at spelling. This will also help you to become an authority on
English vocabulary. Thus, you are required to use the dictionary for all of
your readings, as well as bringing it to every class.  
  
**Use of Computer:**  
  
A. Marist College E-mail  
  
Every student in class should have a Marist College e-mail address. Please
give this information to Dr. Norkeliunas the first week of the semester, or
send it via e-mail to Dr. Norkeliunas' address - jzfn@maristb.marist.edu
Questions and discussions regarding topics of written assignments will be
facilitated if you contact Dr. Norkeliunas through e-mail. Be sure to make
this a regular practice.  
  
B. Using Internet and World Wide Web  
  
This course is designed for optimal use of resources on the Internet. Dr.
Norkeliunas has created and authored a website for the sole purpose of
supplementing course topics through the use of World Wide Web. The current URL
is:[ http//: www.academic.marist.edu/nork](http://www.academic.marist.edu)
("THE RUSSIAN WEB AT MARIST"). It contains materials for his
history/literature courses taught in English, as well as sites dealing
exclusively with major/minor studies in Russian. Be sure to access the site to
gain further insight to every topic that is covered by the class lectures and
the required text readings.  

*** * * THE TERM PAPER:** The heavy grade emphasis on the semester research
paper [40% of final grade] _necessitates serious use of sources that are both
profound in depth and breadth regarding scholarship._ The sources on the
Internet are seldom "genuine scholarly treatises" for in-depth study of any
one individual historical topic. As a result, I recommend extensive use of
print sources located in the College Library/Libraries. The sources for your
term paper should utilize 90% of information found in books. Keep in mind that
the interlibrary loan service, available in our college library, can extend
your reference materials to a significant extent. 10% of sources may include
materials found on the Internet. The latter should be used in consultation
with Dr. Norkeliunas. In short, the final paper should be comprised of 90%
titles found in book print and 10% materials retrieved from the Internet. As
to the length of the term paper, it should consist of a minimum of 12, typed
written, double-spaced pages of text, excluding the pages of bibliography.

