Syllabus  **Syllabus**  
---  
  
## ![](/icons/purpleball.gif) Preface

Before anything else I need to tell you that, at its most fundamental level,
this course was an **experiment** , and even that has several important
meanings. In the first place, nothing like this had been offered at the
Hutchins School of Liberal Studies, or anywhere else by me. The applicability
of computer-mediated-communications (CMC) in the field of education has been
so fast and furious that I would hesitate to say that a course like this is
unique anywhere, but I don't know of another like it at this time.

The second meaning of **"experiment"** when describing this course was that
the majority of the course work consisted of actual class-experiments in
electronic community. Although the students were required to read an extensive
amount of literature, the experiments themselves were the majority of the
course work. These experiments were open-ended. There was no single correct
outcome to them, and the entirety of what the class discovered, individually
and collectively, constituted the more complete "text" on which this course
was based. In other words, this course and its content were under constant
construction and continue to be so.

The inspiration for this course came from another, very different, research
seminar taught at the Hutchins School of Liberal Studies in the Spring of
1993, called _"Biography of a Community."_ That course required students to
choose an actual, geographically-defined community in the North Bay region.
These chosen communities could be a small- to medium-sized town, an ethnic
enclave, a designed "intentional community," or some other organized space
that could be defined as a community. The point of this course was to discover
the extent to which the spaces we live in contribute to the formation of the
individuals we become.

Anatomy of a Virtual Community was designed to expand on the idea of
community, and one might even say of "lived-in space" itself. The course began
with an intensive investigation into the nature of community. The results of
these investigations were used to bring the students to a fuller understanding
of what might happen when the primary meeting space is virtual (electronic)
rather than physical. It was my hope that with an understanding of the ways in
which communities define themselves, the students might be able to discern
what aspects of community could be enhanced by the use of electronic networks.

The students were also expected to keep an electronic journal through the
entire course. They were encouraged to use their journal as a tool to enhance
their understanding of the materials addressed, as well as to express their
sense of being in the AVC electronic community. Each journal constituted the
primary record of not only each student's class work and participation, but
also their historical experience as a member of the AVC electronic community.
The collection of these journals was perhaps the most important record in the
pursuit of the "examined virtualife."

The syllabus below describes the readings and activities that each student in
this course followed. The result was a further understanding of CMC's ability
to enhance the educational experience. At least as significantly, the seminar
participants realized the potentials of Computer-Mediated Communications for
revitalizing and promoting new levels of interaction within lived-in
communities.

* * *

## ![](/icons/purpleball.gif)Syllabus

**Week 1** (Jan. 24): Introduction to course. Read and discuss (in class)
_"Between Solitude and Society."_

Assignment for next week: Read _The Life Stories of [undistinguished]
Americans_.

**Week 2** (Jan. 31): Seminar discussion of Life Stories... What do each of
these stories say about individual and community? What about the nature of
voice? How does one listen to life stories? Suppose you were doing oral
histories, how would you hear what is being said here; how could you elicit
this? What would you do to set the stage? What would you look for, while you
are listening?

Assignment for next week: Read Parts I and II of _The Power of Place_. (pp. 1
- 140.) Enter your reflections from the first two weeks' readings and
discussions in your electronic course journal. Browse through others' journal
entries. Bring observations of your own reflections and others as well to next
week's seminar.

**Week 3** (Feb. 7): Discuss Parts I, II of _The Power of Place_ , in context
of journal writing, and especially knowing that others are reading it.

Assignment for next week: Read Parts I and II of _Creating Community Anywhere_
(pp. 1- 149). Again, make journal entries on this reading, and browse each
others' entries.

**Week 4** (Feb. 14): Discuss _Creating Community Anywhere_ , parts I and II,
and your electronic, public journal experiences.

Assignment for next week: Read part III of _The Power of Place_ , and make
journal entries. Also, begin thinking about local communities for small group
investigation (to be done the following week). Also read the handout _"Point
of View"_ from the Jan. 20, 1995 Chronicle of Higher Education.

Note: I will hand out the following: _"Hijacked by the Information
Superhighway;"_ _"Point of View,"_ from Chronicle of Higher Education, Jan.
20, 1995 (Prof. Jesse Lemisch deals with Free Speech and the Internet, but
winds up revealing much more than he intends.); _"Snowballs in Cyberspace,"_
Time, Jan. 16, 1995; _"Hacker Homecoming,"_ Time, Jan. 23, 1995; _"Will Gates
Get the Net?"_ Time, Jan. 30, 1995.

**Week 5** (Feb. 21): Part I (hour 1): Discuss readings: Part III of _The
Power of Place_ , and the Chronicle piece. [The _Creating Community Anywhere_
portions we had read so far pointed out the absolute necessity of finding
connection to community, as well as many of the variations on community that
can be found and fostered.] This week's readings highlight, among other
things, how the practice of community can go very much astray.

Part II (hour two): In the second hour of class, Susan and I will present the
ideas behind the community reconaissance project that the class will be doing
this coming weekend (Feb. 25  & 26). We will also present some ideas for the
following:

1) communities to select (e.g., Sonoma, Santa Rosa, Sebastopol, Petaluma,
Guerneville)

2) techniques that will get us to unique and usually unnoticed qualities of
lived-in space, including: a) watching the flow and clusterings of pedestrian
traffic, including the nature of conversation in public spaces to the extent
it exists; b) photo-recon; c) looking people in the eye; d) having some
interview questions and asking them; e) the functioning of recon-teams should
include a brief time together for planning, a much longer time where each
student goes a separate way with a separate area and agenda (with notebook,
camera, recorder), and finally a re-assembling and debriefing time to
coordinate what was learned.

3) we will decide on the groupings and the towns, etc.

Part III (1/2 hr to 45 min.): Laboratory exercise: Morgan and I will have
prepared a list of BBSs and Listserves that will represent a brief tour of the
sorts of public network and discussion spaces that you can visit on the
Internet. This list will also include very simplified directions for how to
access these spaces, and during our lab time, you will experiment accessing
some of these.

It is important that you get an idea of what to look for in being able to
unpack and deconstruct the kinds of interchanges that they see.

Assignment for next week: Do the _"Biography of a Community"_ mini-survey.
Also, read Eudory Welty's _"The Little Store,"_ to get a sense of the
photographer's eye, and the empathetic transposition of being able to see
through different eyes, before you do your weekend experiment. Record
experiences in your course journal. Also, begin reading _Snow Crash_ (read pp.
1 - 163). It's a very fast read.

**Week 6** (Feb. 28): Discuss our experiences in the community reconaissance
experiment. This will take up the entire class. We will pay special attention
to what we have learned, and what we can apply from our physical community
research to our investigations of virtual communities. Note: please do not
discuss the novel _Snow Crash_ yet. I know this sounds odd, but there is a
reason for it.

Also I will give each of you an alias for the virtual seminar experiment that
will take place the following week. We will not meet in person the following
week. Your assignments are to:

1) Finish the novel _Snow Crash_ by Monday, March 6. It is essential that you
be finished by this date.

2) Participate in the virtual seminar and 3) Explore bulletin board systems
and listserves, and 4) Write in your journals.

**Week 7** (Mar. 7): Virtual Seminar. We will not meet in person this week.
Instead, we will hold a "virtual seminar," discussing the novel _Snow Crash_ ,
between March 7 (Tuesday) and March 12 (Sunday). During this time you will
have to be logged on, making comments to the seminar and reading others, for a
total of at least 3 hours. Follow the instructions in the course manual.

**Week 8** (Mar. 14): We will download the script of our virtual seminar and
discuss the process and the experience. Aliases will be revealed.

Assignment for next week: First, record your reflections on the virtual
seminar experience in Reflections. Second, read _The Virtual Community_ , pp.
1-196.

**Week 9** (Mar. 21): Discuss _The Virtual Community_.

Assignment for next week: You will spend a minimum of three hours touring
various networks and bulletin board systems (BBSs). See the course manual for
hints. Again, record your observations in your course journal. Also read,
_"Hijacked by the Information Superhighway."_ Also read the other Time
articles I have already handed out. Enter the seminar space and give each
other hints about particularly interesting BBSs to visit.

**Week 10** (Mar. 28): Discuss your experiences on the Internet.

Assignment for next week: Read _"Get in the MOOd,"_ and spend at least three
hours visiting several MOOs. See course manual for suggestions on protocol,
and things to notice. Enter the "seminar space" and give suggestions to each
other. Record your experiences in your course journal.

**Week 11** (Apr. 4): Discuss the MOO journies. We will begin brainstorming
for ideas about the structure of our own MOO.

Assignment for next week: Read part IV of _Creating Community Anywhere_. (pp.
207 - 305) Discuss the implications of this section on constructing "virtual
communities" with each other in the electronic "seminar space." Record your
own reflections about the qualities of a good, functioning "virtual community"
in your electronic course journal. Come prepared to design our own MOO.

**Week 12** (Apr. 11): Using all of our experiences and readings to date, we
will use this seminar to design our own "virtual community."

Spring Break: Yes, this is a break, but please use this time to work on your
journals, and especially to log-on for several hours in BBSs and MOO-spaces.
Meanwhile, several of us will be constructing the MOO that the class has
decided should be built.

**Week 13** (Apr. 25): We will test-drive the "Anatomy of a Virtual Community
MOO."

Assignment: For the next two weeks we will all spend 10 hours in the "AVC
MOO." Record your reflections of that experience in your course journal.

**Week 14** : Living in the MOO, continued.

**Week 15** (May 9): Final Meeting. The Virtual Community: Retrospect and
Prospect.

* * *

####  This course was designed and implemented into the Hutchins School of
Liberal Studies core requirements by Professor Nelson R. Kellogg and his
research assistant, Morgan Chase.

* * *

[![](/icons/purpleball.gif) AVC Home
Page](http://www.sonoma.edu/virtcomm/AVC.html)[![](/icons/purpleball.gif)S.S.U.
Home Page](http://www.sonoma.edu)

[GO MAIN PAGE](http://www.sonoma.edu/virtcomm/) \- [Anatomy of a Virtual
Community ](http://www.sonoma.edu/virtcomm/AVC.html)

[Meet the Team](http://www.sonoma.edu/virtcomm/G/STAFF.html)

[Internships](http://www.sonoma.edu/virtcomm/G/INTERNS.html) \- [Virtual
Volunteers](http://www.sonoma.edu/virtcomm/G/VV.html)

[Community Networks](http://www.sonoma.edu/virtcomm/G/CN.html) \-
[Newsletter](http://www.sonoma.edu/virtcomm/G/news.html) \- [Fall
Conference](http://www.sonoma.edu/virtcomm/G/conference.html)

[ ![](/icons/SSUlogo.gif)](http://www.sonoma.edu)  
mac 12/1/95

