**PIA 2193 Gender, Race and Public Policy  
Spring 1998

**  
Instructor: Iris Young  
Office: 3J 13 FQ  
Phone: 648-7432  
Hours: Tues 3-4, Wed 5-6, and by appt.  
Home phone (before 9 p.m.): 421-4218  
Email: irisy+@pitt.edu  

This course examines empirical, social, theorietical and normative dimensions
of some important public policy issues as they particularly affect women and
people of color, both in the United States, and in less developed countries.
We will inquire what social conditions are necessary for undermining sexism
and racism, and what policy agendas can help bring about such condiitions.
Among topics treated are: division of labor in the family; gay and lesbian
rights, violence against women and policy; gender, race and welfare policy;
racism and the U.S. Constitution; residential racial segregation; policies and
policy and indigenous people; gender and development policy.

**Course requirements** : You are expected to come to class having done the
reading listed on the syllabus for that day, and prepared to ask questions
about it and discuss it. Each student will prepare a presentation on some
issue in the readings for the previous week's class once during the semester.
Beginning January 20 and every other week until April 7 you will hand in a 2-4
page justified opinion paper. You are not required to hand in a paper on the
day around which you are scheduled to do a presentation. In addition to the
five justified opinion papers which are on the class readings, you will write
a 18-15 page term paper on a subject of your choice related to the course
material. See end of this syllabus for a more complete description of these
requirements.

**

Readings:

**

The following books are on sale at the Pitt Book Center and on reserve in the
GSPIA library. Some required readings will be drawn from each of them, though
we will read the entirety of only two.

Susan Okin, _Justice, Gender and the Family._

Jacquie Alexander and Chandra Mohanty, _Feminist Genealogies, Colonial
Legacies, Democratic Futures_.

Derrick Bell, _And We Are Not Saved_.

Douglas Massey and Nancy Denton, _American Apartheid_.

Joel Handler and Yeheskel Hasenfeld, _We the Poor People_.

Turshen and Holcomb, ed., _Women's Lives and Public Policy_.

Blumberg et al., _Engendering Wealth and Well Being_.

Daniels, ed., _Feminists Negotiate the State_.

McFate, Lawson, Wilson, _Poverty, Inequality and the Future of Social Policy_.



The following books are on sale at the Pitt Book Center and on reserve in the
GSPIA library as recommended readings:

Thomas Boston, ed., _A Different Vision_.

Steven Cahn, _The Affirmative Action Debate_.



The following additional books are on reserve in the GSPIA library. Some
required readings will be drawn from them:

Arturo Escobar, _Encountering Development_.

Haleh Afshar and Carolyne Dennis, _Women and Adjustment Policies in the Third
World_.

Iris Marion Young, _Intersecting Voices: Dilemmas of Gender, Political
Philosophy, and Policy_.

Annettee Jaimes, _The State of Native America_.



There are also several xeroxed articles on reserve in the GSPIA library in
folders.



**Course requirements** : You are expected to come to class having done the
reading assigned for that day. I will lecture some, but we will also discuss
the issues and arguments in the readings together. Each student will do one
class presentation on an issue in the readings of the previous week in a team
with one or two other students. Presentations will not be formally graded, but
they will be taken into consideration as part of overall class participation.
Written assignments will be four take home essay examinations and one research
term paper on a topic of your choice related to the course material. The last
two sessions of the course will be devoted to term paper presentations.



** TOPICS AND SCHEDULE



January 7: Introduction

**



**January 14: Justice, Gender and the Family**

Okin, Chapters 1, 5, 6, 7, 8. Okin criticizes theories of justice for not
paying attention to justice in the family; she considers the injustice of the
division of labor in the family and remedies for this injustice.



**January 21: Gay and Lesbian Rights**

Mohr, "Three Arguments for Gay Rights," xerox folder on reserve; Harvard Law
Review, "Constitutional Limits on Anti-Gay-Rights Initiatives," xerox folder
on reserve; Young, "Reflections on Families on the Age of Murphy Brown," in
_Intersecting Voices,_ on reserve.



**January 28:** **Violence Against Women**

Cynthia Daniels, whole book. Mandatory arrest policies; battered women's
defense; the U.S. Violence Against Women Act of 1994.



**February 4: Racism and the U.S. Constitution**

Bell, Prologue, Chap 1, 3, 4, 5 6. On voting rights, schools, reparations,
affirmative action; University Center for Urban and Social Research report on
Black well-being in Pittsburgh; Shiner, "Individuals, Groups and Reverse
Discrimination," and Nunn, "Reverse Discrimination," both in Cahn.
**Assignment due.**



**February 11: Residential racial segregation**

Massey and Denton, Chapters 1-5. The history of the development of residential
racial segregation in the U.S., and the role of public policy and private
enterprise in perpetuating that segregation; the harms that segregation
causes.



**February 18: Residential racial segregation**

Massey and Denton, Chapters 6-8. The future of public policy and residential
segregation. Wacquant, "The Comparative Structure and Experience of Urban
Exclusion: 'Race' , Class and Space in Chicago and Paris," in McFate, Lawson,
and Wilson.



**February 25: Native Americans and policy**

Guerrero, "Civil Rights Versus Sovereignty: Native American Women in Life and
Land Struggles," in Alexander and Mohanty; Ramborger, "Threatened Tribal
Sovereignty," Harris, Sachs, and Morris, "Native American Tribes and
Federalism: Can Government to Government Relations Between the Tribes and the
Federal Government be Institutionalized?" both on reserve in xerox folders.
**Assignment due.**



**March 11: Welfare Policy**

Handler and Hasenfeld, Chapters 1-4, "The Fixation on Work versus Welfare;"
McLanahan and Garfinkel, "Single Mother Families and Social Policy: Lessons
from the U.S. from Canada, France and Sweden," in McFate, Lawson and Wilson.



**March 18: Employment and Income Policy**

Handler and Hasenfeld, Chapters 5-9, "New Directions;" Katherine McFate,
"Trampolenes, Safety Nets, or Free Fall? Labor Market Policies and Social
Assistance in the 1980's," in McFate, Lawson and Wilson.



**March 25: Women and Development - Structural Adjustment**

Elson, "Male Bias in Structural Adjustment," in Afshar and Dennis; Engle,
"FatherGuatemala and Nicaragua," and Owon, "Gender and Health in Nigerian
Structural Adjustment: Locating Room to Maneuver," both in Blumberg; Escobar,
Chapter 5, "Power and Visibility: Tales of Peasants, Women and the
Environment, " in Escobar, _Encountering Development._ **Assignment due.**



**April 1: Women and Development - Violence**

Moma, "Sheroes and Villans: Conceptualizing Colonial and Contemporary Violence
against Women in Africa," Panjabi, "Probing Morality and State Violence:
Feminist Values and Communicative Interaction in Prison Testimonios in India
and Argentina," both in Alexander and Mohanty; Carillo, "Violence Against
Women: An Obstacle to Development," in Turshen and Holcomb; Narayan, "Thinking
about Dowry-Murders in India and Domestic-Violence Murders in the United
States," xerox folder on reserve.



**April 8: Women and Development** \- **Housing, Health, and Prostitution**

Garcia-Guadilla, "Gender, Environment, and Empowerment in Venezuela," Tinker,
"Beyond Economics: Sheltering the Whole Woman," both in Blumberg; Hartmann,
"The Impact of Population Control Policies on Health Policy," and Hull,
"Planning for Prostitution: An Analysis of Thailand



**April 15: Presentations - Assignment due.**

****

**April 24: Presentations**  

