**THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN**

* * *

Government 365 /MES 323K/TLC 321 |

  |

Instructor: Clement M. Henry  
---|---|---  
  
Spring 2001: unique nos. 34805/38115/44155 |

  |

422 Burdine,[ chenry@gov.utexas.edu](mailto:chenry@gov.utexas.edu)  
  
Seminar meets Tu, Th 3:30-5:00 p.m., Burdine 128 |

  |

Office hours Tu and Th 1:45-3:15 p.m., or by appointment (471-5121), or by
e-mail.  
**

* * *

GLOBALIZATION IN THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA**

* ASSIGNMENTS
* CALENDAR OF ACTIVITIES
* GRADING CRITERIA
* BOOKS AVAILABLE FOR PURCHASE
* TOPICS AND READINGS

This undergraduate seminar will survey the recent efforts of the countries of
the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) to adapt to the global economy. We
will compare their respective strategies of economic and political development
and discuss the possible interrelationships between economic and political
change. Each student will select a particular country in the region and be
ready to discuss policies with other students at Koc University, Istanbul.

* * *

**ASSIGNMENTS**

In the first six weeks of class you will be expected to
[contribute](mailto:glob-chat@mail.la.utexas.edu) regularly to our [class
chat](sp2000/chat) on the internet and to work on an issue area in the country
you select to study. Here are the policy areas (with their respective e-mail
addresses i.e. glob-trade@mail.la.utexas.edu and URLs, i.e.
www.la.utexas.edu/chenry/global/sp2001/trade) from which you are expected to
choose one:

Trade |

[glob-trade](mailto:glob-trade@mail.la.utexas.edu) |

at [trade](sp2001/trade)  
---|---|---  
  
Migration and labor policies |

[glob-migration](mailto:glob-migration@mail.la.utexas.edu) |

at [migration](sp2001/migration)  
  
Domestic economic reform |

[glob-ecoreform](mailto:glob-ecoreform@mail.la.utexas.edu) |

at [ecoreform](sp2001/ecoreform)  
  
Security |

[glob-security](mailto:glob-security@mail.la.utexas.edu) |

at [security](sp2001/security)  
  
Culture |

[glob-culture](mailto:glob-culture@mail.la.utexas.edu) |

at [culture](sp2001/culture)  
  
Promoting democracy and human rights |

[glob-democracy](mailto:glob-democracy@mail.la.utexas.edu) |

at [democracy](sp2001/democracy)  
  
You will be expected to cooperate with other students who have selected your
policy area. You can do so in a number of ways. You may take notes on some of
your required and recommended readings, type them on a computer, upload them,
and send them by electronic mail to the bulletin board you will share with
others working in your policy area. You may find a page on the WWW which
Netscape (configured properly) will allow you to mail to your policy group or
to our general class discussion. Whenever you post a source, please summarize
and evaluate it. Good starting points for your research would be
**[www.la.utexas.edu/chenry/mena](http://www.la.utexas.edu/chenry/mena) ** and
**[www.assr.org](http://www.assr.org/)**.

Think about the impact of globalization on a particular area of policy (trade
etc.) in the country you are studying. You will need to develop a short (1000
word) policy brief suggesting what your country needs to do to face up to the
challenges of globalization. You will then be ready to discuss possible policy
alternatives with your classmates and those in Turkey at Koc University,
Istanbul. Presumably your final paper will develop out of your initial
statement, though you may feel free to change topics as you acquire new
interests and knowledge in the course of the semester. You will be doing
research for your paper on some aspect of the economic or political problems
you are studying. First an annotated bibliography, then drafts as you work on
your paper due April 17, with a final draft due May 1. You will also be graded
on the quantity and quality of discussion with your classmates in the policy
area.

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

**Calendar of Activities**

> Feb. 1: Computer Lab Burdine 120 class hands on training Feb 15: Select a
research topic and country focus

    Feb. 22: Policy brief due (post to [glob-spaper](mailto:glob-spapers@mail.la.utexas.edu)s@mail.la.utexas.edu)

March 6: Annotated bibliography due (taken from the items you have already
posted to your policy group (post to [glob-bibs](mailto:glob-
bibs@mail.la.utexas.edu)). March 8: midterm exam   April 17: draft of final
policy paper due (post to [ppapers](mailto:ppapers@mail.la.utexas.edu)) May 2:
Final policy paper due (post to [ppapers](mailto:ppapers@mail.la.utexas.edu))

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

**GRADING CRITERIA**

>   * Midterm 20%

>   * Research activities 10%

>   * Policy brief 10%

>   * Policy discussions participation 10%

>   * Class Participation 15% (includes computer "chat" participation, pop
quizzes and a final in-class essay)

>   * Final policy paper 35%

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

**BOOKS AVAILABLE FOR PURCHASE**

A. Richards and J. Waterbury, _Political Economy of the Middle East_ , 2nd ed.
(Westview, 1996) -- REQUIRED John Gray, _False Dawn: The Delusions of Global
Capitalism_ (New Press, 1999) -- REQUIRED World Bank, _World Decelopment
Report 1999/2000_ \-- REQUIRED

The following are all OPTIONAL:

Kiren Aziz Chaudhry, _The Price of Wealth: Economies and Institutions in the
Middle East_ , Ithaca, NY: Cornell, 1997 Bradford Dillman, _State and Private
Sector in Algeria: The Politics of Rent-Seeking and Failed Development_ ,
Westview Press, 2000 Michael C. Hudson, ed., _Middle East Dilemma : The
Politics and Economics of Arab Integration_ , Columbia Univ Pr, 1999 Volker
Perthes, _The Political Economy of Syria under Asad_ , I B Tauris & Co Ltd,
1998 Timothy J. Piro, _The Political Economy of Market Reform in Jordan_ ,
Rowman & Littlefield, 1998 Henry, Clement M., _The Mediterranean Debt Crecent_
, UP of Florida, 1996; Cairo: AUC 1997 pb. - from the author for $20



[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

**Topics and readings**

_1st week_ (Jan. 16-18): INTRODUCTION

The challenges of economic globalization to the domestic economies of the
MENA. Is globalization a "golden straitjacket" (Thomas Friedman, 13.6.97 NYT
op ed) expanding economies and shrinking political space? Despite the
shrinking, there is still politics! Indeed, world politics, regional politics,
local country politics, and that is what this course is about in this
especially volatile region of the world. Our approach: globalization in the
post Cold War context of US hegemony is the independent variable, and we wish
to document and explain the region's varied responses. There are intervening
regional variables, such as the Arab-Israeli peace process, new alliances
within the region, and special relationships with the United States, the
European Community and other outside powers, that also impact upon the
individual countries of the region. Another set of intervening variables are
the institutions and social forces within each country which affect economic
policy making. The MENA states have adapted a variety of responses to
globalization--renewed statism and islamism as well as the Washington
Consensus. Their policies, in turn, are contributing to new forms of
capitalism and generating new social forces and backlashes. What are the
prospects for political change (and in which general direction, toward greater
democracy or authoritarianism?).

**Reading:**

     John Gray, False Dawn, pp. 1-21     Thomas Friedman, excerpts from [Lexus and the Olive Tree](coursemats/FriedmanLexi002-3105950-5969833.html)  
Henry and Springborg, our [draft proposal](../polec/draft.html) seeking [your
feedback](mailto:glob-chat@mail.la.utexas.edu) in the [class
chat](sp2000/chat).  
Richards and Waterbury, pp. 1-44

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

P.S. Here is an interesting article in the Jan/Feb 2000 issue of _Foreign
Affairs_ by a US labor leader, [Jay Mazur](coursemats/mazur.html) , citing
John Gray. You may also consult Wolfgang H.
[Reinicke's](coursemats/Reinicke.htm) article about NGO policy networks in the
Winter 2000 issue of _Foreign Policy_.

* * *

_2nd week_ (Jan. 23-25): The MENA: an economic backwater of the global
economy?

Let us establish present base-lines of economic performance to document the
proposition that the Middle East has, by its own and others' standards, been
an economic "underperformer" for at least a generation. Both diachronic and
synchronic data related to economic performance will be provided for MENA and
comparable countries. Special attention will be given to "pre-revolutionary"
patterns of development in selected MENA countries, as well as their
respective transitions to patrimonial statist models of development. Data will
be presented on both human and physical resource development, as well as on
aggregate output and equality. We will examine the data sets, comparing MENA
countries with other regions. Look at various indicators of development, how
MENA lags since the oil boom years.

**Readings:**

     Globalization in the MENA, [ch. 1](http://www.worldbank.org/wdr/2000/pdfs/engtable1.pdf)     Richards and Waterbury, pp. 45-102

**Practicum:** World Bank, World Development Indicators 2000, [Table
1-1](wdi/1-1ecosize.htm): size of economies.

**Optional** (good background reading, especially good chapter on Saudi
Arabia): Michael Field, _Inside the Arab World_ (Harvard 1994); also Roger
Owen, _State, Power, and Politics_ (Routledge, 1992). An excellent analytical
article about states and globalization is a recent
[address](http://www.apsanet.org/PS/dec99/waltz.cfm) given by Kenneth Waltz.

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

_3rd_ _week_ (Jan 30-Feb. 1): ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF THE WORLD ECONOMY UPON THE
MENA

Why has the MENA lagged? We look first at global factors. Oil rents and Lavish
aid (which can be carried further back to colonial times if Lisa Anderson is
correct - the Europeans paid off their dependents to keep them quiet) fueled
by the Cold War. Now the international rules have been changing since 1980s,
leaving MENA adrift or in the throes of adjusment. MENA still gobbles up much
of the world arms trade but appetites may be waning. US dual containment
policy helps US arms exports but may be changing...

The world has cared too much and too little about the MENA - too much in that
"the Eastern Question" amplified international rivalries (Carl Brown 1984
analysis, and now China's new oil drive); too little in that FDI shriveled
after brief oil boom flirtations of mid-1970s, apart from the oil sector,
which even so was partially disconnected from the major western companies in
the 1970s.

**Readings:**

     Globalization in the MENA, [ch. 2](coursemats/Book/Ch2.html)     Richards and Waterbury, pp. 103-172

**Practicum:** **Computer lab Burdine 120 on Thursday, Feb 1**

Examine recent trends in:  
Oil: look at [British Petroleum
statistics](http://www.bp.com/bpstats/index.html) on oil production, reserves,
prices.

Look at WDI [Table 4.5](wdi/4-5exports.HTM) (2 megs) giving the structure of
exports - note the high proportions of fuel exports=oil and gas.

**Optional:** L. Carl Brown, International Relations and the Middle East
(Princeton 1984)

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

_4th week_ (Feb. 6-8): Regional explanations of arrested MENA development

Regional dynamics have been peculiarly unconducive to economic growth,
political stability, and FDI. Arab Cold Wars and Arab-Israeli conflict, etc.
Heavy military expenditures, within a region more interdependent than most
because of transnational Arabism and Islam. The security states have had good
excuses to stay armed and statist. Rivalries prevent regional trade, much less
integration and functional specialization - everyone had to build a steel
industry. Rentier states: the priority of allocation over production.

Can we dismiss cultural arguments? Yes and no. Puritanism and Islamism are
both quite compatible with modernization, as even Ernest Gellner argues. But
cultural dualism and economic inequality can be especially combustible
mixtures in the big cities (comparisons with Latin America on rates of recent
urbanization, measures of economic inequality, and within MENA, comparing
countries where islamism seems relatively containable - Jordan, Yemen and
Morocco - with others?). MENA's social strains (becoming comparable to Latin
America's) and an emergent and unruly islamist civil society generate rising
costs of internal as well as external security. Compare O'Donnell's repressed
popular sectors with the repressed islamist sectors of the MENA. Burdened by
abnormally high security costs and police mentalities, many of the MENA's
states may be peculiarly ill adapted to cope with economic issues raised by
globalization.

**Reading:**

Richards and Waterbury, pp. 251-274, 366-390

World Bank, _World Development Report_ , start reading and get familiar with
it as you go along, focusing on chapters that may be of special interest to
you and also look at the stats in back.  

**Practicum:** Arms data: From Mena-politics
(http://www.la.utexas.edu/chenry/mena/) examine [Center for Defense
Information](http://www.cdi.org/) data base or go to Sipri (Sweden) at
<http://www.sipri.se/> and look for [military
expenditures](http://www.sipri.se/projects/milex/mex_cgraph_alpha.html) by
country.  
You might also look at the Federation of American Scientists
<http://www.fas.org/> and their [databanks](http://www.fas.org/databank.htm).

Start [policy
discussions](http://reserves.lib.utexas.edu/bboard.asp?CID=14&cname=GOV365n)

**Optional:**

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

5th week (Feb. 13-15): **LOCAL FACTORS OF POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC
UNDERDEVELOPMENT**

Statist legacies (weak but "fierce" states) which, to be fair, were not only
reflections of state weakness but also responses to older forms of
imperialism. Statism also fit the Bretton Woods era (1944-1971) of "embedded"
(or social justice oriented) liberalism. Statist political forces surviving in
the region: public sector officials, patronage networks, labor forces
preventing dismantling of the old order. Bureaucratic overgrowth and issues of
employment vs, privatization. Comparisons: peculiar convergence between the
radical nationalizers and the oil producers.

Focus on the crony capitalist and other rent-seekers: the enclave business
elites offer up resources to solidify the patronage networks. Why are the
results different from those of equally corrupt polities in East Asia? How
autonomous in these patrimonial regimes can economic policy makers be - look
at the roles of technocrats, Waterbury's economic teams, zero in on Egypt and
the final Gandzoury triumph after stagnation and paralysis under previous
ministries (cf Suharto's sound macro-economic management after earlier
mistakes). Maybe we can also find little change teams in Tunisia, Morocco,
Jordan but they are precarious because technocrats just don't have relative
autonomy in these patrimonial systems. Maybe more so in Egypt or Tunisia than
in Algeria (where even presidents can be assassinated) or Iraq (where the poor
petroleum minister had to flee in fall 1990 after being scapegoated for rising
prices at the pump)

**Readings:**

     Globalization in the MENA, [ch. 3](coursemats/Book/CH3.html)     Richards and Waterbury, pp. 173-221  
World Bank, [World Deveopment Report
1997](http://www.worldbank.org/html/extpb/wdr97/english/wdr97con.htm),
[summary](coursemats/wdr97su1.htm).

**Practicum:** WDI [Table 1-5](wdi/1-5change.HTM), structural changes of local
economies. 4.15-4.18, 2.11, 5.1, 5.4 voracious states but look how Algeria is
economically adjusting - budgetary and credit data useful here (to anticipate
the second half of this seminar focussed on individual countries)

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

_6th week_ (Feb. 20-22): Development, Democracy and Information

Is the MENA a political backwater (maybe explaining the poor quality of
economic policy-making?)? To carry the golden straightjacket analogy a step
further, is the MENA already especially undemocratic for its levels of
economic development and social change? Data will show that much of the region
is just reaching critical per capita GDP levels but of course these mean
little unless we can get some theoretical explanations behind the supposed
correlations between per capita income and type of political regime. How will
globalization affect the region's archaic patrimonial regimes? Maybe, though
economic development did not necessarily undermine dictatorship in the past
(cf Przeworski), globalization seen in its political and imperial as well as
economic ramifications puts ever increasing pressure on incumbent patrimonial
regimes. Countries can go democratic for geopolitical as well as for
modernization reasons. Does the Information Revolution present a new set of
threats and opportunities?

Finance: look at international perceptions of risk reflected in interest
rates.... Emerging stock markets and the rise of outside monitoring agencies.
Focus on comparisons with East Asia--Malaysia, Thailand , Indonesia...Manpower
disadvantages, poor technical training and functional illiteracy hurt
manufacturing - though cf. Tunisian textile FDI and subcontracting.

**Feb. 22: short policy paper (1000 words) due**

**Readings:**

     Richards and Waterbury, pp. 275-328

Henry, [Challenges of Global Capital Markets to Information-Shy
Regimes](coursemats/infoshy/INFOSHY.htm): The Case of Tunisia     WDR 1997,
[summary](http://www.worldbank.org/html/extpb/wdr97/english/wdr97su1.htm)
(including tables and figures).

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

_7th week_ (Feb. 27-March 1): Bunker Capitalists and Adjustment: Algeria,
Iraq, Libya, Syria, Yemen, and the Sudan

**No class this week! (Sessions to be made up)**

Data may show that these states are at least as well integrated into the world
economy as some of their neighbors, also the internal reforms may parallel
those of the IMF/IBRD "good" students even if the USA treats some of them as
rogues. For Iraq and Libya as much as for the GCC states, oil is a major
integrator. Comparisons with Indonesia will suggest, however, that they still
have much to do to diversify their economies. Sudan, an international basket
case, is the MENA's potential bread basket. Is globalization such a good thing
anyway - does Algeria maybe exaggerate its repercussions in the MENA?

**Readings:**

     Globalization in the MENA, [ch. 4](coursemats/Book/Ch4.html)     Richards and Waterbury, pp.222-250

Gray, pp. 55-99, 133-165 ** **

**Practicum:** debt and balance of payments data

**Optional** : Henry, The Mediterranean Debt Crescent

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

_8th week_ (March 6-8): Praetorian state capitalism: Egypt, Tunisia, and the
Palestinian Authority

The veiled bunkers - with heavy states and weak businesses and a phenomenon of
"deliberalization" shared by all three despite some efforts to privatize to
develop export sectors. Can Egypt and Tunisia dare further to liberalize their
financial sectors, a prime mechanism for patronage and support for ailing
public sector enterprises? And what about Palestine's nascent state
monopolies?

**March 6: annotated bibliographies due**

**[Midterm](coursemats/midterm01.htm) March 8**

**Readings:**

     Globalization in the MENA, [ch. 5](coursemats/Book/CH5.html)     Gray, pp. 100-132, 166-193

**Practicum:** Profiles of Egypt and Tunisia

**Optional:** Iliya Harik, Economic Policy of Reform in Egypt (UP of Florida,
1997)

    Yahya M. Sadowski, _Political Vegetables? Businessman and Bureaucrat in the Development of Egyptian Agriculture_ (Brookings, 1991)

Henry, The Mediterranean Debt Crescent

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

**Spring Break**

* * *

_9th week_ (March 20-22): Jordan and Morocco: political strategies of
adjustment

May the "German" (oligopolistic form of) capitalism support political
pluralism in the context of monarchy. For how long?

**Readings:**

     Globalization in the MENA, [ch. 6](coursemats/Book/CH6.html)     Gray, pp. 195-235

**Practicum:** WDI and GDF profiles of Morocco and Jordan. Recall Morocco's
gini coefficient (WDI Table 2.6), against the conventional wisdom that Morocco
has greater income inequalities than Tunisia.

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

_10th week_ (March 27-29): Recalcitrant Rentiers: The GCC monarchies

Common denominators of family regimes, big statist sectors, generous welfare
programs, and sustantial but now diminishing oil or strategic rents. Compare
and contrast their manpower, financial strength, oil revenues, stock markets,
ability to attract foreign capital (or bring back their own).

**Readings:**

> Globalization in the MENA, [ch. 6](coursemats/Book/CH6.html)

**Practicum:** WDI profiles of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, UAE
- meager data! New data on risk profiles and stock markets to be shown in
class.

**Optional:** Kiren Chaudhry, The Price of Wealth.

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

_11th week_ (April 3-5): Adjustment and Democracy: Israel, Turkey, Lebanon,
and Iran

What do Israel, Turkey, Lebanon, and Iran have in common? Lots of expatriates
and remittances but then so also do Algeria and Egypt. Less of a statist
legacy than recalcitrant Algeria and Egypt? But Israel and Turkey carry heavy
statist legacies (one Israeli commentator recently observed - Norton vol 2 -
that civil society only emerged in Israel in the 1970s). Both countries had to
crash (Turkey 1978-80, Israel 1982-83) before beginning to adjust - Jordan
(1989), too, for that matter. And now Iran? Lebanon had overadjusted, or
rather, failed to develop a statist legacy to reform (just as well, as
corruption is rampant).

**Reading:**

> Globalizationin the MENA, [ch. 7](coursemats/Book/ch7.html)

**Practicum:** WDI and GDF profiles are available for Turkey but the data on
the others are spotty.

**Optional:**

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

_12th week_ (April 10-11): Islamic capitalism and the Washington Consensus

Does Islam act as a shield, mitigating dilemmas between international openness
and social welfare? Algeria's reformers tried and failed in 1989-91 to
maintain a tacit alliance with the FIS. But Iran already seems well on the way
to combining the Washington Consensus with Islamist pluralism. Bonyads
(foundations) as sources of civil society? Islamic business sectors will be
examined in comparative perspective, including those of other conventional
MENA economies, such as Egypt, Jordan, Turkey and the Gulf states. Islamic
banking will be analyzed.

**Readings:**

     Globalization in the MENA, [ch. 8](coursemats/Book/Ch8.html)     Henry, [Introduction](coursemats/TIBRIntro4.html) to Special Issue on Islamic Banking, Thunderbird International Business Review, July 1999

**Practicum:** WDI and GDF profiles of any two of Iran, Iraq, Libya, and the
Sudan

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

_13th week and 14th weeks_ (April 17-26): Europe and the MENA: Conferencing
and evaluating your policy experiences

**April 17: 1st draft of paper due**

**Readings: Your own papers** (to be evaluated by each other) **.**

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

_15th week_ (May 1-3): The prospects for capitalism and political change in
the MENA

More economic accountability can just as well help to rationalize
authoritarian practices.We will develop some of the arguments connecting
economic to political development discussed in earlier weeks. Concluding that
rationalized authoritarianism or political disintegration may be the
consequence, intended or unintended, of the globalization hegamon. Or can the
United States take its Democratic Pluralism Initiatives more seriously,
developing those vital capitalist communications, and not be afraid of the
spillover into civic domains? This may require accepting the findings in week
12.

**May 3: final draft of paper due, in-class final exam (essay question).**

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

_Last updated 6 March 2001  
_[Department of Government](/depts/gov/home.htm) , [College of Liberal
Arts](http://www.dla.utexas.edu/),[](http://www.utexas.edu) University of
Texas at Austin.  
Questions, Comments, and Suggestions to
[chenry@gov.utexas.edu](MAILTO:chenry@gov.utexas.edu)

