THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

* * *

Government 390L /MES 381 |

  |

Instructor: Clement M. Henry  
---|---|---  
  
Fall 2002: unique nos. 35575/38905 |

  |

422 Burdine,[ chenry@gov.utexas.edu](mailto:chenry@gov.utexas.edu)  
  
Seminar meets Wednesdays 6:30-9:30 p.m., Burdine 128 |

  |

Office hours Tu 2-3:30, Th 9:45-10:45, or by appointment (471-5121), or by
e-mail.  
  


**POLITICAL ECONOMY  
OF THE MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA**

* ASSIGNMENTS
* GRADING CRITERIA
* BOOKS AVAILABLE FOR PURCHASE
* TOPICS AND READINGS

Are the MENA states as presently configured are capable of implementing
innovative and rewarding development strategies? How will they be integrated
into the global economy, and with what political as well as economic
consequences? This seminar will survey theories and practices of economic
development in the Middle East and North Africa, responding to the challenges
of globalization. The evolving guidelines of the "Washington Consensus" shared
by the United States, the European Community, and international financial
institutions, will be analyzed in light of the region's political and economic
realities and contrasted with other approaches to development articulated by
regional and international actors. Special attention will be paid to the
evolution of financial systems in the region.

You will acquire detailed understandings of at least two regimes and their
respective approaches to economic development in light of their regional and
international positions and domestic political strategies.

* * *

**ASSIGNMENTS**

Three oral presentations in class, no more than ten minutes long, accompanied
by a class handout of no more than one single-spaced page and/or spreadsheet.
The presentation may be a critical summary of a recommended collection of
articles or book (see the attached list for starters), or an analysis of
economic data to be downloaded from our seminar's home page. In addition you
are to prepare a 20-25 pp. research paper, focused on some theme (such as, do
free markets require free societies? or, what should the state be doing--or
not doing--to maximize economic development, either in general or in some
particular sector?) and analyzing one or two political economies of countries
of your choice to back up or illustrate your argument. The paper should be
based partly on assigned class readings and may also include materials you
have presented in class. You will be expected to download and utilize in your
paper some of the data from the World Bank, IMF, and/or ESCWA that have been
prepared for you on the WWW or in your computer accounts. A preliminary draft
is due Oct. 8.

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

**GRADING CRITERIA**

Oral presentations with one-page handouts: 10% each. Paper: 20% first draft
plus 40% final draft Quality (not quantity!) of discussion in class or via
internet: 10%

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

**BOOKS AVAILABLE FOR PURCHASE**

* _Abel's Course Packet_ (715 23rd St - University Towers parking - come with your syllabus and student ID)  Ray Bush, _Counter Revolution in Egypt's Countryside : land and farmers in the era of economic reform_ , London: Zed, 2002. Chaudhry, Kiren, _The Price of Wealth_ (Cornell, 1997).  Henry and Springborg, _Globalization and the Politics of Development in the Middle East_ (Cambridge UP, 2001)  Michael B. Hudson, ed., _Middle East Dilemma: the Politics and Economics of Arab Integration_ (Columbia UP, 1999). Volker Perthes, _The Political Economy of Syria Under Asad_ (I.B. Tauris, 1997).  A. Richards and J. Waterbury, _Political Economy of the Middle East_ , 2nd ed. (Westview, 1996)  Gregory White, _A Comparative Political Economy of Tunisia and Morocco: On the Outside of Europe Looking In_ , Albany: SUNY 2001\. 

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

**Topics and readings**

_1st week_ (Aug. 28): INTRODUCTION

The challenges of economic globalization to the domestic economies of the
MENA. Is globalization a "golden straitjacket" (Thomas Friedman, 13.6.97)
expanding economies and shrinking political space? Despite the shrinking,
there is still politics! Indeed, world politics, regional politics, local
country politics, and that is what this course is about in this especially
volatile region of the world. Our approach: globalization in the post Cold War
context of US hegemony is the independent variable, and we wish to document
and explain the region's varied responses. There are intervening regional
variables, such as the Arab-Israeli peace process, new alliances within the
region, and special relationships with the United States, the European
Community and other outside powers, that also impact upon the individual
countries of the region. Another set of intervening variables are the
institutions and social forces within each country which affect economic
policy making. The MENA states have adapted a variety of responses to
globalization--renewed statism and islamism as well as the Washington
Consensus. Their policies, in turn, are contributing to new forms of
capitalism and generating new social forces and backlashes. What are the
prospects for political change - and in which general direction, toward
greater democracy or authoritarianism?

**Reading:**  
_World Development Report 1997_ , [online
summary](../global/coursemats/wdr97su1.htm) about the importance of good
governance for development. This theme is again taken up in the _World
Development Report 2003_ \- see the draft online of the intro and chapter 7,
focusing on national governance and the problem of natural resources
"blessings or curses."

_World Development Report 1999/2000_ is also available for your examination
[online](data2000/WDR99-00/fullreport.html). Also you may look at one of Prof.
Joseph Stiglitz' farewell [speeches](02articles/boston.htm) ([in greater
detail](02articles/Stiglitz0100boston.pdf)) before he left the World Bank,
where he had served as chief economist and disagreed with many policies of the
Bank and the IMF.

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_2nd week_ (Sept. 4): The MENA: an economic backwater of the global economy?

Let us establish present base-lines of economic performance to document the
proposition that the Middle East has, by its own and others' standards, been
an economic "underperformer" for at least a generation. Both diachronic and
synchronic data related to economic performance will be provided for MENA and
comparable countries. Special attention will be given to "pre-revolutionary"
patterns of development in selected MENA countries, as well as their
respective transitions to patrimonial statist models of development. Data will
be presented on both human and physical resource development, as well as on
aggregate output and equality. We will examine the World Bank [data
sets](data2000/WDR99-00/fullreport.html), (with some [recent updates available
online](http://www.worldbank.org/data/dataquery.html)) comparing MENA
countries with other regions. Look at various indicators of development: does
MENA lag since the oil boom years (1973-83)? Freedom House announced the
"[Islamic world's democracy
deficit](http://www.freedomhouse.org/media/pressrel/121801.htm)" in December
2001 and offers a [Map of
Freedom](http://www.freedomhouse.org/pdf_docs/research/freeworld/2002/map2002.pdf)
that makes the MENA part of the world blush red!

What special challenges do MENA countries face in the new post Cold War global
order? What is "globalization" and how might current processes of political
and economic change be compared with the changes in the latter half of the
nineteenth century?

**Readings:**

UNDP, _Arab Human Development Report 2002_ , chaps 7 and 8 (Abel's pack)
and introducing the UNDP's [Program on Arab
Governance](http://www.pogar.org/), which will offer you many resources on
governance, arranged by country. Richards and Waterbury, pp. 1-102 Barbara
Stallings, ed. _Global change, regional response: the new international
context of development_ (Cambridge 1995), pp. 1-30 (Abel's)  Dani Rodrik,
"Sense and Nonsense in the Globalization Debate," _Foreign Policy_ (summer
1997), pp. 19-77 (Abel's)  Kenneth N. Waltz, [Globalization and
Governance](http://www.apsanet.org/PS/dec99/waltz.cfm) (1999 James Madison
Lecture, APSA).

**Optional** (good background reading, especially good chapter on Saudi
Arabia): Michael Field, _Inside the Arab World_ (Harvard 1994); also Roger
Owen, _State, Power, and Politics_ (Routledge, 2000); Ayubi, Nazih N., _Over-
stating the Arab State: Politics and Society in the Middle East_ , London:
I.B. Tauris, 1995\. On globalization's special place in the Middle East, see
Ellis Goldberg and Robert Vitalis, [The Arabian Peninsula: Crucible of
Globalization](02articles/GoldbergVitalisGlobal.htm), paper presented to
Second Mediterranean Social and Political Research Meeting, Florence, March
21-25, 2001. They try to distinguish between US hegemony, whichis for real,
and oldfashioned imperialism - what do you think?

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_3rd_ week (Wednesday, Sept. 11): The MENA's colonial legacies in comparative
perspective

It may seem odd to be comparing colonial situations in LA and the MENA but the
post-1982 era of structural adjustment has raised new perceptions of
dependency and imperialism in both regions. And each region has in fact been
highly dependent on outside powers and interventions for economic development.
The LA countries experienced a variety of post-"independence" nineteenth and
twentieth influences \- the British in Argentina etc. before the American
Century (1945-2005 or so). And in the MENA many countries became nominally
independent quite early - Egypt in 1922, Iraq in 1932 etc., and Iran, Turkey,
and Saudi Arabia were never formally colonized. Can Britain's "veiled"
protectorate over Egypt 1882-1952 be usefully compared with USA control over
various banana republics? I think we could try some interesting historical
comparisons of the evolution of various forms of capitalism - British, French,
etc. Populist breakthroughs -- Nasser and Peron or Vargas? What social forces
emerged and how were they contained by the various military regimes in the
regions Nasser 1952-70 and the Peruvian military in 1970s? Chavez today vs
rotten old bourgeois elites strikes a nice Middle Eastern ring, and the
Venezuelan hero did meet Saddam recently

**Readings:**

Henry and Springborg, [chapter 1](../global/coursemats/Book/Ch1.html) (draft,
and here are the original draft [Tables and
Figures](../global/coursemats/Book/data/index.html) , but the published book
is more up to date.)  
Richards and Waterbury, pp. 103-172 Theotonio Dos Santos, "The Structure of
Dependence," in _Development and Underdevelopment: the Political Economy of
Inequality_ , Boulder: Lynne Rienner, 1993, pp. 193-202 (Abel's) Barbara
Stallings, ed. _Global change, regional response: the new international
context of development_ (Cambridge 1995), pp. 143-173 (Abel's) Naim, Moises,
"[Washington Consensus or Washington Confusion?](abels00/Moises.pdf)" _Foreign
Policy_ , Spring 2000, pp. 87-103. (Abel's)       **Suggested:** Bill, James
A., and Springborg, Robert, _Politics in the Middle East_ , 5th edition,
Asddison Wesley, 2000. Brown, L. Carl, _International Politics and the Middle
East: Old Rules, Dangerous Game_ , Princeton University Press, 1984 El-
Ghonemy, M. Riad, _Affluence and Poverty in the Middle East_ , London:
Routledge, 1998. Hoogvelt, Ankie, _Globalization and the Postoclonial World:
The New Political Economy of Development_ , The Johns Hopkins Unievrsity
Press, 1997. Moore, Clement Henry, _Politics in North Africa_ , Boston:
Little. Brown, 1970, [chapter 2](02articles/Norafchap2.htm). Owen, Roger and
Sevket Pamuk, (1998) _A History of Middle East Economics in the Twentieth
Century_ (London: Tauris)  Joseph E. Stiglitz, _Whither Socialism?_ MIT Press,
1995.  _________, _Globalization and its Discontents,_ Norton 2002:
[excerpts](02articles/Stiglitz005124excerpt.htm). _________, [home page for
recent writings](http://www.globalpolicy.org/socecon/bwi-
wto/wbank/stigindx.htm). Williamson, John, ed., _The Political Economy of
Reform_ , Washington, DC: Institute for International Economics, 1994

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_4th week_ (Sept. 18): Economic impacts of the world economy upon the MENA

Why has the MENA lagged? We look first at global factors. Oil rents and lavish
aid (which can be carried further back to colonial times if Lisa Anderson is
correct - the Europeans paid off their dependents to keep them quiet) fueled
by the Cold War. Now the international rules have been changing since 1980s,
leaving MENA adrift or in the throes of adjusment. MENA still gobbles up much
of the world arms trade but appetites may be waning. US dual containment
policy helps US arms exports but may be changing...

The world has cared too much and too little about the MENA - too much in that
"the Eastern Question" amplified international rivalries (Carl Brown 1984
analysis, and now China's new oil drive); too little in that FDI shriveled
after brief oil boom flirtations of mid-1970s, apart from the oil sector,
which even so was partially disconnected from the major western companies in
the 1970s.

**Readings:**

Richards and Waterbury, pp. 173-221 Henry and Springborg, [chapter
2](../global/coursemats/Book/Ch2.html) Henry, _The Mediterranean Debt
Crescent_ , pp 26-41 (Abel's) For more on Barcelona, examine the EU home page
on [Euro-Mediterranean
Relations](http://europa.eu.int/comm/external_relations/med_mideast/intro/)
**Suggested:** Shafik, Nemat, ed., _Economic Challenges Facing Middle Eastern
and North African Countries: Alternative Futures_ , New York: St. Martin's,
1997. ________, ed., _Prospects for Middle Eastern and North African
Economies: From Boom to Bust and Back?_ , New York: St. Martin's, 1998
Gereffi, Gary, and Korzeniewicz, Miguel, _Commodity Chains and Global
Capitalism_ , Westport, CT: Praeger, 1994. Goddard, C. Roe, Passe-Smith, John
T., and Conklin, John G.. _International Political Economy: State-Market
Relations in the Changing Global Order_. Boulder CO: Lynne Rienner, 1996
Gray, John, False Dawn: _The Delusions of Global Capitalism_ , New York: The
New Press, 1998. Henry, Clement M., _The Mediterranean Debt Crescent: Money
and Power in Algeria, Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia, and Turkey_ , University Press
of Florida, 1996. Maxfield, Sylvia, _Gatekeepers of Growth: The International
Political Economy of Central Banking in Developing Countries_ , Princeton
University Press, 1997 Mittelman, James H., _Globalization: Critical
Reflections_ , Boulder CO: Lynne Rienner, 1996. Dani Rodrik, _Has
Globalization Gone Too Far?_ , Washington, DC: Institute for International
Economics, 1997.  Rogowski, Ronald, _Commerce and coalitions : how trade
affects domestic political alignments_ , Princeton University Press, 1989
Sachs, Jeffrey, and Warner, Andrew, "Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration," in Brainard, William C., and Perry, George L., _Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity,_ I, Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1995,
1-117.

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_5th week_ (Sept. 25): Regimes types, varieties of capitalism and economic
decision-making

Introducing our bunker states, bullies, monarchies, and "democracies." Regimes
condition the form and substance of economic decision-making, and capitalist
legacies, whether Anglo-American, French, or German, may also matter if they
survive the rapacious post-colonial regimes. Monarchies, themselves relics of
the colonial era, seem to preserve their western forms of capitalism better
than the more interventionist bunker or bully regimes of military officers.
Each type of regime, however, enjoys a different set of constraints and
opportunities in responding to the challenges of globalization.

**Readings:**

Richards and Waterbury, pp. 275-308. Henry and Springborg, [chapter
3](../global/coursemats/Book/CH3.html). [The Evolution of
Capitalism](../global/coursemats/VarietiesCapitalism.html) \- an interesting
little set of questions and typology discovered on a Washington, D.C. think
tank website in 1999.       **Suggested:** Ayubi, Nazih N., _Over-stating the
Arab State: Politics and Society in the Middle East_ , London: I.B. Tauris,
1995. Suzanne Berger and Robert Dore, eds., _National Diversity and Global
Capitalism_ , Cornell University Press, 1996. Haggard, Stephan, and Kaufman,
Robert R., eds., _The Politics of Economic Adjustment_ , Princeton University
Press, 1992 ____________________, eds., _The Political Economy of Democratic
Transitions_ , Princeton University Press, 1995. Haggard, Stephan, Lee, Chung
H., and Maxfield, Sylvia, eds., _The Politics of Finance in Developing
Countries_ , Cornell University Press, 1993. Leys, Colin, T _he Rise and Fall
of Development Theory_ , Indiana University Press, 1996. Linz, Juan J., and
Steppan, Alfred, _Problems of Democratic Transition and Consolidation:
Southern Europe, South America, and Post-Communist Europe_ , The Johns Hopkins
Unievrsity Press, 1996\. Loriaux, Michael, et al, _Capital Ungoverned:
Liberalizing Finance in Interventionist States_ , Cornell University Press,
1997\. Maxfield, Sylvia, and Schneider, Ben Ross, eds., _Business and the
State in Developing Countries_ , Cornell University Press, 1997. Przeworski,
Adam, _Democracy and the Market: Political and economic reforms in Eastern
Europe and Latin America_ , Cambridge University Press, 1991 Snider, Lewis,
_Growth, Debt, and Politics: Economic Adjustment and the Political Performance
of Developing Countries_ , Boulder, CO: Westview, 1996. World Bank, _World
Development Report 1997: The State in a Changing World,_ Oxford University
Press, 1997  Zysman, John, _Governments, Markets, and Growth_ , Cornell
University Press, 1983

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_6th week_ (Oct. 2): Rentier States: Developmental Blessing or Curse?
Comparisons with Latin America

The basic point about the oil rentiers in the predestination literature
(treating mineral wealth like original sin) is that the state receives an
uncertain flow of revenues, depending on international market prices, from an
economic enclave which is pretty well disassociated from the rest of the
economy. Less discussed are the various possible relationships between the
state and the rest of the economy, notably its private sector. Some rentier
states seem far more closely connected to them than others. Vast oil
treasuries do not ensure a state's relative autonomy or "embedded" (Evans
1997) synergies with business communities. Kiren Chaudhry (1997) has
demonstrated how difficult it was (and still is, despite gradual progress) for
the Saudis to reduce subsidies to their supposedly dependent, state-created
private sector. The (Najdi bureaucracy of the) Saudi state seemed organically
connected with the (disproportionately Najdi) beneficiaries of its generous
credit facilities.

**Readings:**

Terry Lynn Karl, _The Paradox of Plenty: Oil Booms and Petro-States_ ,
University of California Press, 1997, pp. 44-67, 236-242 (Abel's) Kiren
Chaudhry, _The Price of Wealth_ , esp. the chapters on Saudi Arabia. Robert
Vitalis, Review of Chaudhry book in _International Journal of Middle East
Studies 31_ (1999): 659-661. (Abel's)  Michael L. Ross, "The Political Economy
of the Resource Curse," _World Politics_ 51:2 (Jan 1999), 297-322 (Abel's)
________, "Does Oil Hinder Democracy?" _World Politics_ 53:3 (April 2001), pp.
325-361.  Przeworski and Limongi, "Modernization: Theory and Facts," _World
Politics_ , Jan 1997, 155-184 (Abel's).   Data: Oil: look at [British
Petroleum 2000 Review of World Energy
statistics](http://www.bp.com/worldenergy/) on oil production, reserves,
prices. For fuel as % exports from MENA states, see Henry and Springborg,
[Table 2-4.](../global/coursemats/Book/data/Tab2-4.html)       **Suggested** :
Hussein Mahdavi, "The Patterns and Problems of Economic Development in Rentier
States: the Case of Iran," in M.Cook, ed., Studies in Economic History of the
Middle East, Oxford, 1970. Terry Lynn Karl, _The Paradox of Plenty: Oil Booms
and Petro-States_ , University of California Press, 1997 John Waterbury, "From
Social Contracts to Extraction Contracts: The Political Economy of
Authoritarianism and Democracy," in John P. Entelis, ed., Islam, Democracy and
the State in North Africa, Indiana University Press, 1997 (Abel's).

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

7th week (Oct. 9): **First draft of paper due**.

The Bunker Regimes: Algeria, Iraq, Libya, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen

Statist legacies (weak but "fierce" states) which, to be fair, were not only
reflections of state weakness but also responses to older forms of
imperialism. Statism also fit the Bretton Woods era (1944-1971) of "embedded"
(or social justice oriented) liberalism. Statist political forces surviving in
the region: public sector officials, patronage networks, labor forces
preventing dismantling of the old order. Bureaucratic overgrowth and issues of
employment vs. privatization. Comparisons: peculiar convergence between the
radical nationalizers and the oil producers. Affinities between bunker states
and rentier economies? What is the distinction between a bunker regime and a
bully regime of radical interventionist military officers? Social forces?
Heterogeneity of the societies? Weakness of "civil society"?

**Readings:**

Richards and Waterbury, pp. 251-274 Henry and Springborg, [chapter
4](../global/coursemats/Book/Ch4.html)       **Suggested** : Al-Kikhia,
Mansour O., _Libya's Qaddafi: the Politics of Contradiction_ , Gainesville,
FL: University Press of Florida, 1997\. Batatu, Hanna, _Syria's peasantry, the
descendants of its lesser rural notables, and their politics_ , Princeton
University Press, 1999 Carapico, Sheila, _Civil Society in Yemen : the
political economy of activism in modern Arabia_ , Cambridge University Press,
1998. Dillman, Bradford, _State and Private Sector in Algeria: The Politics of
Rent-Seeking and Failed Development,_ Boulder, CO:Westview, 2000.  El-Kenz,
Ali, _Algerian reflections on Arab crises_ , Center for Middle Eastern
Studies, University of Texas at Austin, 1991\. Nashashibi, Karim, et al,
_Algeria: Stabilization and Transition to the Market_ , IMF Occasional paper
165, 1998. Perthes, Volker, _The Political Economy of Syria under Asad_ ,
Tauris, 1997 Quandt, William B., _Between ballots and bullets : Algeria's
transition from authoritarianism_ , Washington, DC: Brookings Institution,
1998. Vandewalle, Dirk, ed., _North Africa: Development and Reform in a
Changing Global Economy_ , New York: St. Martin's Press, 1996\. ___________,
_Libya since Independence: Oil and State-Building_ , Cornell University Press,
1998. Waldner, David, _State Building and Late Developmen_ t, Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1999 Willis, Michael, _The Islamist challenge in Algeria : a
political history_ , Reading UK: Ithaca Press, 1996. Zoubir, Yahia, ed.,
_North Africa in Transition: State, Society, and Economic Transformation in
the 1990s_ , University Press of Florida, 1999

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_8th week_ (Oct. 16): The Bully States: Egypt, Tunisia - and the PNA?

Focus on the crony capitalist and other rent-seekers: the enclave business
elites offer up resources to solidify the patronage networks. Why are the
results different from those of equally corrupt polities in East Asia? How
autonomous in these patrimonial regimes can economic policy makers be - look
at the roles of technocrats, Waterbury's economic teams, zero in on Egypt and
the final Gandzoury triumph after stagnation and paralysis under previous
ministries (cf Suharto's sound macro-economic management after earlier
mistakes). Maybe we can also find little change teams in Tunisia, Morocco,
Jordan but they are precarious because technocrats just don't have relative
autonomy in these patrimonial systems. Maybe more so in Egypt or Tunisia than
in Algeria (where even presidents can be assassinated) or Iraq (where the poor
petroleum minister had to flee in fall 1990 after being scapegoated for rising
prices at the pump)

**Readings:**

Richards and Waterbury, pp. 309-345 Henry and Springborg, [chapter
5](../global/coursemats/Book/CH5.html) _World Development Report 1999-2000_ ,
[chapter 8](data2000/WDR99-00/fullreport.html) , pp. 1-4 on Egypt. Ray Bush,
read whatever is available about his analysis of reform in the Egyptian
countryside. ** **

**Suggested:**

Amin, Galal A., _Egypt's economic predicament : a study in the interaction of
external pressure, political folly, and social tension in Egypt, 1960-1990,_
New York : E.J. Brill, 1995.  ________________, _Whatever happened to the
Egyptians? Changes in Egyptian Society from 1950 to the Present_ , American
Universityin Cairo Press, 2000 Brand, Laurie A., _Women, the state, and
political liberalization : Middle Eastern and North African experiences_ ,
Columbia University Press, 1998. Brown, Nathan J., _The Rule of Law in the
Arab World_ , Cambridge University Press, 1997 Hamidi, Muhammad al-Hashimi,
_The Politicisation of Islam : a case study of Tunisia_ , Boulder: Westview,
1998. Handy, Howard, et. al., _Egypt: Beyond Stabilization, Toward a Dynamic
Market Economy_ , Washington: IMF (May 1998) Iliya Harik, _Economic Policy of
Reform in Egypt_ (UP of Florida, 1997)  Harik, Iliya, and Sullivan, Denis,
eds., _Privatization and Liberalization in the Middle East_ , Indiana
University Press, 1992\. Murphy, Emma C., _Economic and Political Change in
Tunisia: From Bourguiba to Ben Ali,_ New York: St. Martin's Press, 1999.
Rocard, Michel, ed., _[Strengthening Palestinian
Institutions](http://www.cfr.org/public/pubs/palinstfull.html)_ , Washington,
DC: Brookings Institution, 1999. Sadowski, Yahia M., _Political Vegetables?
Buisnessman and Bureaucrat in the Development of Egyptian Agriculture_ ,
Washington, DC: Brookings Instittuions, 1991. Waterbury, John, _Exposed to
innumerable delusions : public enterprise and state power in Egypt, India,
Mexico, and Turkey_ , Cambridge University Press, 1993. I. W. Zartman, ed.,
Tunisia: _The Political Economy of Reform_ (Boulder: Lynne Rienner, 1991)

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_9th week_ (Oct. 23): The Oil and Other Monarchies

Morocco, Jordan, and the Recalcitrant Arabian Peninsula: the GCC countries

All of the GCC countries are now almost back to previous levels of oil income.
Whether rich or poor, they have stalled adjustment and rely on oil to keep
themselves afloat. Morocco and Jordan, with fewer rents, have made more
progress.

**Readings:**

Denoeux, "[The Politics of Morocco's 'Fight Against
Corruption,](http://www.mepc.org/journal/0002_denoeux.htm)'" _Middle East
Policy_ , February 2000  
Henry and Springborg, [chapter 6](../global/coursemats/Book/CH6.html) More
recent info on [Morocco](http://www.foreignpolicy.com/morocco/) \- an ad from
_Foreign Policy_ (summer 2000) with substantive articles.  Chaudhry, _The
Price of Wealth_ , review.

**Suggested:**

Aburish, Said K., _The Rise, Corruption and Coming Fall of the House of Saud,_
London, Bloomsbury, 1995.  Chaudhry, Kiren Aziz, _The Price of Wealth:
Economies and Institutions in the Middle East,_ Ithaca, NY: Cornell, 1997.
Crystal, Jill, _Oil and politics in the Gulf : rulers and merchants in Kuwait
and Qatar,_ Cambridge University Press, 1990\.  Fandy, Mamoun, (1999) _Saudi
Arabia and the politics of dissent_ (NY: St. Martin's)  Gause, F. Gregory III,
_Oil Monarchies: Domestic and Seccurity Challenges in the Arab Gulf States_ ,
New York: Council on Foreign Relations, 1993. Hammoudi, Abdellah, _Master and
Disciple: The Cultural Foundations of Moroccan Authoritarianism_ , University
of Chicago Press, 1997 Kostiner, Joseph, ed., _Middle East Monarchies: the
Challenge of Modernity_ , Boulder CO: Lynne Rienner, 2000. Piro, Timothy J.,
_The Political Economy of Market Reform in Jordan,_ London; Rowman and
Littlefield, 1998  John Waterbury, _Commander of the Faithful; the Moroccan
political elite - a study in segmented politics_ , Columbia University Press,
1970.

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_10th week_ (Oct. 30): Structural Adjustment - when and why and how?
Comparisons with Latin America

Cushioned by oil, directly or indirectly by aid from the oil states, many MENA
countries managed to delay their structural adjustment. Again, do political
factors, over and above FX crises, help to explain why some went further and
faster than the others? Looked at the other way, do economic transitions lead
to political ones?

What do Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Tunisia, and Turkey have in common?
Lots of expatriates and remittances but then so also do Algeria and Egypt.
Less of a statist legacy than recalcitrant Algeria and Egypt? But Israel and
Turkey carry heavy statist legacies (one Israeli commentator recently observed
- Norton vol 2 - that civil society only emerged in Israel in the 1970s). Both
countries had to crash (Turkey 1978-80, Israel 1982-83) before beginning to
adjust - Jordan (1989), too, for that matter. Even Tunisia had its mini
balance of trade crisis (partly a consequence of heavy military expenditures
in 1984 against the Libyan threat) in 1986. My tentative conclusion is that
noone really wants to adjust but some were better able than others to
incorporate it into their political strategies of survival - King Hassan's
Morocco leading the way. The "reform team" Waterbury idea only works with the
right crisis to concentrate patrimonial rulers' minds. And the early adjusters
have all limited their liberalization measures - trying to keep up social
expenditures as well for the sake of political survival. Lebanon had
overadjusted, or rather, failed to develop a statist legacy to reform (just as
well, as corruption is rampant).

**Readings:**

Richards and Waterbury, pp.222-250 Kurt Weyland, "The Political Fate of Market
Reform in Latin America, Africa, and Eastern Europe, _International Studies
Quarterly_ , 42 (1998), pp. 645-674 (Abel's). _World Development Report
1999-2000_ , [intro., chaps 1 and 2](data2000/WDR99-00/fullreport.html).
** **

**Practicum:** debt and balance of payments data

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_11th week_ (Nov. 6): Democratization or Deliberalization: Dilemmas of
Transparency - Development, Democracy and Information?

Is the MENA a political backwater (maybe explaining the poor quality of
economic policy-making?) because of its authoritarian regimes? To carry the
golden straightjacket analogy a step further, is the MENA already especially
undemocratic for its levels of economic development and social change? Data
will show that much of the region is just reaching critical per capita GDP
levels but of course these mean little unless we can get some theoretical
explanations behind the supposed correlations between per capita income and
type of political regime. How will globalization affect the region's archaic
patrimonial regimes? Maybe, though economic development did not necessarily
undermine dictatorship in the past (cf Przeworski), globalization seen in its
political and imperial as well as economic ramifications puts ever increasing
pressure on incumbent patrimonial regimes. Countries can go democratic for
geopolitical as well as for modernization reasons. Does the Information
Revolution present a new set of threats and opportunities? Here we compare the
achievements of the more promising authoritarian systems, such as Tunisia,
with the "democracies" of Iran, Israel, Lebanon, and Turkey (each of which is
not quite democratic in convnetional meansings of the temr, but a bit more so
than the others).

**Readings:**

Richards and Waterbury, pp. 309-328 Henry and Springborg, [chapter
7](../global/coursemats/Book/ch7.html)  
Henry, _Challenges of Global Capital Markets to Information-Shy Regimes: The
Case of Tunisia_ (Emirates Center for Strategic Studies and Research, 1998) -
(Abel's).  Human Rights Watch, _[The Internet in the Middle East and North
Africa](http://www.hrw.org/advocacy/internet/mena/index.htm)_ , June 1999

**Optional:** Nazih Ayubi, _Overstating the Arab State_ (London: Tauris 1995)

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_12th week_ (Nov. 13):  Islamic capitalism and the Washington Consensus

Does Islam act as a shield, mitigating dilemmas between international openness
and social welfare? Algeria's reformers tried and failed in 1989-91 to
maintain a tacit alliance with the FIS. But Iran already seems well on the way
to combining the Washington Consensus with Islamist pluralism. Bonyads
(foundations) as sources of civil society? Islamic business sectors will be
examined in comparative perspective, including those of other conventional
MENA economies, such as Egypt, Jordan, Turkey and the Gulf states. Islamic
banking will be analyzed.

**Reading:**

Richards and Waterbury, pp. 346-365 Henry and Springborg, [chapter
8](../global/coursemats/Book/Ch8.html) Henry,
I[ntroduction](../global/coursemats/TIBRIntro4.html) to Special Issue on
Islamic Banking, Thunderbird International Business Review, July 1999 Henry,
[Islamic finance in the dialectics of
globalisation](../global/coursemats/aussie122499.html): Potential variations
on the "Washington consensus" Henry, _Mediterranean Debt Crescent_ , pp.
123-132, 258-282 (Abel's)

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_13th week_ (Nov. 20): Financial Reform: Varieties of Capitalism?

There is a growing literature arguing for a diversity of capitalisms rather
than one Anglo-Saxon size-fits-all. In the financial sector - the commercial
banking systems that predominantly allocate the credit - we may be able to
discern the different anglo-american (competitive, predominantly private
sector banking), franco-japanese statist (concentrated and publicly owned
banks), and german (concentrated, private) systems and see how they display
different constraints and hesitations.

**Readings:**

_World Development Report 1999-2000_ , [chapter
3](data2000/WDR99-00/fullreport.html) on financial reform. Peter Evans, "State
Structures and Government-Business Relations," in Sylvia Maxfield and Ben Ross
Schneider, eds., _Business and the State in Developing Countries_ , Cornell,
1997, pp. 63-87.(Abel's) Eva Bellin, "Contingent Democrats: Industrialists,
Labor and Democratization in Late-Developing Countries," _World Politics_ , 52
(January 2000), 175-205 (Abel's)

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_14th week_ (Nov. 27): **Final draft of paper due (2 copies)**.

Issues of Regional Integration and Globalization

Does Islam act as a shield, mitigating dilemmas between international openness
and social welfare? Algeria's reformers tried and failed in 1989-91 to
maintain a tacit alliance with the FIS. But Iran already seems well on the way
to combining the Washington Consensus with Islamist pluralism. Bonyads
(foundations) as sources of civil society. Islamic business sectors will be
examined in comparative perspective, including those of other conventional
MENA economies, such as Egypt, Jordan, Turkey and the Gulf states. Islamic
banking will be analyzed.

**Readings:**

Richards and Waterbury, pp. 366-397 Michael Hudson ed., _Middle East Dilemma:
The Politics and Economics of Arab Integration_ , Columbia University Press,
1999, pp. 1-32, 217-319 plus a chapter on a specific region.

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_15th week_ (Dec. 4): The prospects for capitalism and political change in the
MENA

Transregional economic alliances and business groups deserve some discussion,
especially Israel and its neighbors but also the Islamic multinationals.

More economic accountability can just as well help to rationalize
authoritarian practices. Develop some of the arguments connecting economic to
political development discussed in earlier weeks. Conclude that rationalized
authoritarianism may be consequence, intended or unintended, of the
globalization hegamon. Or the United States can take Democratic Pluralism
Initiatives more seriously, develop those vital capitalist communications, and
not be afraid of the spillover into civic domains. This may require accepting
the findings in week 12.

**Readings:** each other's papers.

[Table of contents](syll.html) | [Main page](./)

* * *

_Last updated 21 August 2002  
_[Department of Government](/depts/gov/home.htm), [College of Liberal
Arts](http://www.dla.utexas.edu/),[](http://www.utexas.edu) University of
Texas at Austin.  
Questions, Comments, and Suggestions to
[chenry@gov.utexas.edu](MAILTO:chenry@gov.utexas.edu)

