**![](2k628.gif)**|

**[Main Page](index.html)| Syllabus | [Reference](ref.html) |
[Links](links.html) |[ Images](home.htm)| [Handouts & News](hdo.html) | [About
the Professor](prof.html)**

* * *  
  
---|---  
  
**S Y L L A B U S**

**AFROAM/HIST 628: HISTORY OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT - Fall Semester 2002**

TR 9:30-10:45 p.m.  
Professor Plummer  
bplummer@facstaff.wisc.edu  
Office: 5111 Humanities Building  
263-1845, 263-1800

**Course Description**. This course focuses on the civil rights movement led
by African Americans in the United States. It treats the historical background
to movement emergence, including industrial and demographic transition,
agricultural change in the South, the rise of the liberal coalition, and the
impact of World War II and the Cold War on race relations. It examines civil
rights litigation in the 1930s-1950s and the key events and consequences of
the civil rights decade, 1954-1964. Black radicalism is explored, as well as
civil rights in the urban North, the policies of the federal government, the
impact of world affairs, and the role of gender. The course probes the fight
against racial discrimination as it evolved in the 1970s to 1980. The
activities and life stories of individual participants as well as broad
historical forces are considered. The purpose of this course is to acquaint
upper-level undergraduate and graduate students with the events and issues of
the civil rights movement. The reading load normally consists of five books,
or four books and a photocopied reader. There is a midterm and a final
examination. Two short papers are required. There is also an attendance
requirement: students missing more than 8 classes without good reason cannot
get a grade higher than C in the course.

**Organization** : Class meetings will center on lectures and presentations,
discussion, and videos. Most of these will address assigned texts or scheduled
topics. Scheduled topics provide broad chronological and thematic continuity
and supply background material for students' own independent investigation.
Students are encouraged to use the Social Action Collections at the State
Historical Society of Wisconsin, which includes one of the finest civil rights
collections in the country. Wisconsin also has one of the most extensive
collections of newspapers, including the African American press. The course
offers an excellent opportunity to use these resources.

* * *

**Evaluation** : Grades will be based on the following:

  * Midterm: This will consist of an in-class exam (mixed essay, multiple choice, and short-answer). 25 percent of the grade. 
  * Two short papers (seven pages each). (See below for details) Each is 25 percent of the grade.
  * Final exam: (Mixed essay and short-answer take-home). 25 percent of the grade. Grades are not curved on exams.

What the grades mean:  
  
**A** (93-100) - Reports that are thoroughly researched, knowledgeable and
reflect mastery of the sources used. Thesis papers that have a well-defined,
logically developed argument and that take into account possible counter-
arguments.  Papers that show strong evidence of original thinking.  Papers
that are soundly structured, skillfully written, without grammatical,
punctuation, and spelling errors and that are careful about citations.  For
exams, excellent knowledge of facts as demonstrated by quantitative
performance on short answer and multiple choice sections.  Indication of
superior knowledge, ability to reason on the fly, and writing ability on essay
questions.  
  
**AB** (85-92) - Reports that are well researched but not exhaustively so, and
that indicate solid understanding of the sources used.  Thesis papers that are
well argued and do not simply mirror the conclusions of other authors. Papers
that are clearly written and that identify all sources used and cited, but are
not outstanding as far as writing style or insights are concerned.  A minimum
of grammatical, punctuation, and spelling errors. For exams, good knowledge of
facts as demonstrated by quantitative performance on short answer and multiple
choice sections. For essay sections, demonstration of sound knowledge,
capacity to sustain an argument, and the ability to write clearly and well
spontaneously.  
  
**B** (80-84) - Reports that have covered some but not most of the bases in
drawing factual information out of sources. Reports that have moderate
organizational problems. Thesis papers that make a good argument but do not
provide evidence to support all of it, or that may not be logical or well
organized throughout. Slippage with regard to citations and grammatical,
punctuation, and spelling errors. For exams, good knowledge of facts as
demonstrated by quantitative performance on short answer and multiple choice
sections. Essays show an adequate grasp of the subject but arguments are not
strongly supported, and writing is adequate but not impressive.  
  
**BC** (77-79) - Reports that do not cover enough factual ground to support
the second thesis paper.  Reports that have serious structural or
organizational problems.  Thesis papers with weak arguments or adequate
arguments that are weakly supported.  Papers with compositional problems.
Inadequate attention to grammatical, punctuation, and spelling errors. For
exams, borderline knowledge of facts as demonstrated by quantitative
performance on short answer and multiple choice sections. Essays that don't
fully answer the question, try to answer another question, or that are not
clearly written.  
  
**C** (70-76) - Reports that clearly indicate through inaccuracies or lack of
material that research was not adequately done. Writing problems serious
enough to confuse a reader.  Thesis papers that do not present a real
argument, or that do little to support an argument.  Extensive citation just
to fill up space with poor documentation of the citations. Little or no
attention to grammar, punctuation, or spelling.  For exams, limited knowledge
of facts as demonstrated by quantitative performance on short answer and
multiple choice sections. Essays skirt the questions asked, are not well
structured, show evidence of writing difficulties.  
  
**D** (69-65) - Reports that do not contain much information and that are
organized and written poorly. Thesis papers with no thesis. Extensive
difficulties with writing and documentation.  No attention to the  paper's
appearance and extensive grammatical, punctuation, and spelling errors. For
exams, deficient knowledge of facts as demonstrated by quantitative
performance on short answer and multiple choice sections. Essays indicate lack
of basic knowledge, have serious organizational and compositional problems.  
  
**F** (64) - Failure to carry out the minimum requirements of the papers or
exams as detailed above. Often a product of absence.

* * *

**DUE DATES:**

  * Optional submission of first draft for Paper 1- Oct. 10, 2002
  * Midterm - October 15, 2002
  * Paper 1- October 24, 2002
  * Optional submission of first draft for Paper 2 - Nov. 14, 2002
  * Paper 2 - Dec. 12, 2002
  * Final exam - (take home, due by December 17, 2002 at 4:45 pm

**Attendance** : Attendance is required. Attendance will be kept for each
class session. The reason is to protect the interests of students who
diligently come to class and help create a community by their presence. It is
based on the idea of a classroom as a social entity and education as a
commitment. Anyone can have up to 8 unexcused absences ( i.e., one month of
classes) without penalty. Students who are members of teams or involved with
University-sponsored activities that may occasionally take them away from
class, should provide a schedule of their absences to their professors.
Students with constant schedule conflicts, or those who have difficulty
getting up for morning classes, should make a decision about whether to take
the course.  Those otherwise missing more than 8 class sessions cannot earn
more than a C in the course.

**Student consultation.** All students are required to have one individual
consultation with the professor during the semester. Multiple visits are
welcome!

**Required texts** :

Daisy Bates, _The Long Shadow of Little Rock_

Dan Carter, _From George Wallace to Newt Gingrich_

Mary Dudziak, _Cold War Civil Rights_

Aaron Henry, _The Fire Ever Burning_

Course Reader ([Contents](hdo.html))

Books for purchase are at the Rainbow Bookstore Cooperative, 426 W. Gilman St.
All texts owned by campus libraries and the course reader are on reserve.

**Contact with professor** : My office is located in 5111 Humanities Building.
The telephone number is 263 1845\. Messages can be left with the History
Department, phone no., 263 1800, or with the Afro-American Studies Department,
phone no. 263 1642. A faster bet is E-mail. My E-mail address is
bplummer@facstaff.wisc.edu. If you have an E-mail account, feel free to make
use of it to contact me if you do not find me in my office. There will also be
a class e-mail list to which you will be automatically subscribed if your
registration is in order and you have a students.wisc.edu e-mail address. If
you haven't received any mail from the class list by the end of the second
week of the semester, please let me know. Students should also feel free to
use the list to communicate with one another and share information about the
course. E-mail is not a substitute, however, for class attendance and
participation.

The course also has a web page on the Learning Support Services server:
http://hum.lss.wisc.edu/bplummer/hist628/index.html

**Detail on papers.** Paper 1 is a descriptive and factual report on an aspect
of the civil rights movement. The emphasis is on providing factual
information. Paper 2 draws on--and supplements--that factual information, but
the accent in Paper 2 is on constructing an argument about how those facts
should be interpreted. Historians often call a paper that focuses on making an
argument a" thesis." Here are two examples of paper sets that treat aspects of
movement history:  
  
Example 1:  
Report--"The Chicago Freedom Movement, A Descriptive History"  
Thesis Paper and its argument--"The Chicago Freedom Movement."  _Argument:_
Tactics used by activists in the South had little success in large Northern
cities.  
  
Example 2:  
Report-- "A Factual Study of the Deacons for Defense"  
Thesis Paper and its argument--"Deacons for Defense."  Argument: In spite of
opposition from "moderates," the Deacons for Defense made it possible for the
1966 James Meredith march to proceed in peace.

Students will be provided with a list of paper sets they can choose from.
Those wishing to develop their own are free to do so after clearing the topic
with the professor.  Bear in mind that these papers are short, so topics
should not be overly broad. For all the papers, think practically. Are you
choosing a subject who can be researched and written within the time available
to you? Is your topic meaningful?

SOURCES: Make use of the University's excellent libraries and the State
Historical Society library. Consult online databases like JSTOR, Academic Full
search, ProQuest, and WilsonWeb. (If another borrower has a book you want,
consider the underutilized Madison Public Library. The downtown and Sequoya
branches have surprisingly good collections on contemporary issues.) Think
twice about inter-library loan, however, the time involved might slow you
down.

CONTENT:  A good short paper quickly identifies the subject matter, and the
issue or problem being addressed. Both papers should have introductions and
logical conclusions. For Paper 1, the introduction summarizes the report's
content and lays out the scope of the subject, making clear what is being
addressed. Paper 2 has a thesis statement that makes an argument that you then
back up with facts. In this paper, critical analysis and careful
interpretation are critically important. Paper 2 should be internally logical.
Plausible arguments should flow consistently from one point to another in
coherent paragraphs. The conclusion should clearly resolve the issues raised
in the body of the paper. Consider working from an outline that will help
guide your structure.

FORMAT: The paper should be typed, double-spaced. Every page should have text
from top to bottom. Margins should be no wider than 1 inches on any side. Type
(fonts) should be conventional: 9 to 12 points. Standard citation conventions
(MLA, Chicago, etc.) apply. Either footnotes or parenthetical references can
be used, but be consistent, don't use both. If you want to directly quote a
source in your text, use quotation marks and indicate the source of the
quotation. Any ideas not your own should also be identified as borrowed. The
purpose of grammatical and spelling conventions is to make your meaning clear.
It is to your advantage to proof-read papers for typing, grammar, and spelling
errors. Papers with serious errors or a lot of errors will be downgraded.  
  

* * *

**[Main Page](index.html)| Syllabus | [Reference](ref.html) |
[Links](links.html) |[ Images](home.htm)| [Handouts & News](hdo.html) | [About
the Professor](prof.html)**

