**Georgia Perimeter College (Decatur Campus) Summer 2001 (6 1/2 Weeks
Session)**

**HIST 1503- 300 World Civilization, 1500 to the Present  **

|

**Instructor: Salli Vargis**  
  
---|---  
  
**MTWRF 9:25 - 10:40 a. m. in SB 2190  **

|

**Office: SB 2267**  
  
**Office Hours: MTWRF: 8:00 - 9:20 a. m. and 12:10 \- 12:50 p.m.**

|

**Phone: (404) 244-2993**  
  
**Home
Page:**[http://www.gpc.edu/~svargis/](http://www.gpc.peachnet.edu/~svargis/)

|

**Email:**[svargis@gpc.edu](mailto:svargis@gpc.peachnet.edu)  
  
**  Course Description and Objective**

HIST1503-300 examines the origin and development of major world civilizations
from 1500 to the present. It will focus on political ideologies such as
Nazism, Fascism, Marxism, Imperialism, and Nationalism, and trace the
evolution of cultural, religious, and political institutions and their
significance in world history.

This course is intended to help the student understand and analyze the
evolution of world history from 1500 to the present. When a student completes
this course, he/she should be able to compare various political ideologies;
understand the reactions of non-western civilizations to western influences in
the sixteenth to the twentieth centuries, gauge the impact of the two world
wars and the cold war on different parts of the world; and comprehend the
significance of economic interdependence among nations of the world today.

Classes will be conducted as a combination of lecture, discussion, audio-
visual, and student presentations. Please stay current with the assigned
readings in order to participate meaningfully in class. Student participation
is essential in making this course interesting and useful.  Chapter Outlines
are available below by clicking on the chapter topics listed in the schedule.

**Required Textbook**

Duiker, William J. and Jackson J. Spielvogel, _World History: Volume II: Since
1500_ Third Edition. New York: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 2001\.

**Prerequisite**

Exit or exemption from Development Studies or ENSL 0090 with a "C" or better.

**Course Requirements**

1\. There will be **two class tests and one final examination**. Tests and
examination will consist of multiple choice and true or false statements.
Study Guides will be available online one week before a test or the final
examination. There will be one common make up test given at the end of the
semester if there are valid excuses. The instructor reserves the right to make
decisions regarding the makeup test.

2\. **Attendance, class participation, and discussion** are very important.
Classroom participation will help you perform better in the course and earn a
good grade. Disruptive behavior and tardiness will not be tolerated. Three
tardies count as one absence. The instructor reserves the right to withdraw a
student after three absences and this policy will be strictly adhered to. Any
student withdrawn after the midpoint (June 28) receives a grade of "WF".

3\. There will be a number of **quizzes** given during the course of the
semester. Quizzes are intended to test comprehension of the required readings
as well as class discussions. Quizzes will usually be administered during the
first ten minutes of the class. The average of these quizzes is worth twenty
(20) percent of the final grade. There will be no make up for a missed quiz.

**Cheating and Plagiarism**

The penalty for cheating on tests or the final examination and plagiarizing
assignments is as follows: **First offense - Zero for the test or assignment;
Second offense - F grade for the course**

**Special Needs**

If you are a student who requires assistance or support services, please seek
assistance through the Center for Disability Services. A CDS Counselor will
coordinate those services.

**Basis for Grading**

There will be a total of 100 points to be divided as follows:

Test One

|

  20  
  
---|---  
  
Test Two

|

  25  
  
Quiz

|

  20  
  
Final Examination

|

  35  
  
Total

|

100  
  
**Grades**

**A=90-100, B=80-89, C=70-79, D=60-69, F=59 and below**

**Reading Assignments**

**Date**

|

**Topic**

|

**Chapter**  
  
---|---|---  
  
June 7

|

Introduction

|

  
  
June 10, 11

|

[New Encounters](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter14.htm)

|

14  
  
June 12

|

[Religious Reform and State Building in
Europe](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter15.htm)

|

15  
  
June 13, 14

|

[Muslim Empires](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter16.htm)

|

16  
  
June 17, 18

|

[East Asian World](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter17.htm)

|

17  
  
June 19

|

[Intellectual Revolution in the
West](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter18.htm)

|

18  
  
June 20

|

[Europe on the Eve of a New World
Order](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter19.htm)

|

19  
  
**June 21**

|

**TEST I (One Hour)**

|

  
  
June 21, 24

|

[Industrialization, Modernization,
Nationalism](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter20.htm)

|

20  
  
June 25

|

[Nineteenth Century Society](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter21.htm)

|

21  
  
June 26, 27

|

[Imperialism and the Rise of
Nationalism](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter22.htm)

|

22  
  
June 28

|

[Imperialism in East Asia](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter23.htm)

|

23  
  
July 1

|

[Nationalism, Militarism, World War
I](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter24.htm)

|

24  
  
July 2, 3

|

[Africa, Asia, & Latin America in the Inter War
Years](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter25.htm)

|

25  
  
July 5

|

[World War II](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter26.htm)

|

26  
  
**July 8**

|

**[TEST II (One Hour)](../../HIST1503/StudyGuideII.htm)**

|

  
  
July 8, 9

|

[Cold War](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter27.htm)

|

27  
  
July 10

|

[Communism](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter28.htm)

|

28  
  
July 11

|

[Post-war Europe and the Western
Hemisphere](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter29.htm)

|

29  
  
July 12, 15

|

[Post Cold War life and Society in the Middle East and
Africa](../../HIST1503/ChapterOutlines/Chapter30.htm)

|

30  
  
July 16, 17

|

Nationalism in South and Southeast Asia

|

31  
  
July 18

|

Japan and the Little Tigers

|

32  
  
July 19

|

Review for Final Examination

|  
  
**July 23 (Tuesday)**

|

**FINAL EXAMINATION     8:00 - 10:00 a.m.**

|

  
  
**_This syllabus represents only a general outline for the course and may be
changed if warranted._**

