  

# Irish 280--Modern Irish Literature

![](ireland_flag.gif) Meets in Vaughan Literature Building 101, MWF 1 - 1:52
PM, and Rooke Chemistry 18, W 7 - 9:52 PM  
  
John Rickard  
Office Hours: MW 2:00-3:30 PM  
Office Phone: 717-524-1424  
E-mail address: [rickard@bucknell.edu](mailto:rickard@bucknell.edu)  
Homepage: <http://www.bucknell.edu/~rickard>  
  
  
**TEXTBOOKS**  
  

__Please try to obtain the editions listed below, so that we can all work with
the same texts and pagination. If you have a problem obtaining any of these
texts, please let me know. Texts are referred to by parenthetical
abbreviations in syllabus:

_Irish Literature: A Reader_. Ed. Maureen Murphy and James McKillop. Syracuse
UP, 1987. ( _IL_ )

_Modern Irish Drama_. Ed. John P. Harrington. Norton Critical Edition, 1991. (
_IL_ )

William Butler Yeats. _Selected Poems and Three Plays_. Third Edition. Ed. M.
L. Rosenthal. Collier, 1986. ( _WBY_ )

James Joyce. _A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man_. Penguin.

Anne Devlin. _Ourselves Alone_. Cornell University Press

Roddy Doyle. _Paddy Clarke, Ha Ha Ha_. Penguin

**COURSE OBJECTIVES:** This course will attempt provide a general introduction
to "Irish Studies" and to explore more specifically the complex relationships
between political nationalism and culture in modern Ireland. We will focus on
some central questions about the relationship between politics and language,
the nature and effects of "propaganda," the varieties of "revolution" in Irish
culture, the question of what it means to be an "Irish" writer in the 20th
century, the relation between the Irish present and the Irish past, and what
kinds of "narrative" modern Ireland needs and wishes to construct about
itself.

**CLASS FORMAT:** Although at times I will lecture in order to present
background information, I do expect class participation in discussion and in
other in-class activities. I will occasionally ask you to do in-class writing,
to work in small groups, or to prepare for class by responding in writing to
questions I assign. I expect you to keep up with the reading and to prepare
for class. __

**SYLLABUS**  
  
This is a **_provisional_** syllabus; changes will be discussed and announced
in class. We may decide we need to spend more time on some things and less on
others. You are responsible for learning of and responding to syllabus changes
during the semester.

**Films** will be shown on Wednesday evenings at 7:00 PM in VL 101.

Wednesday, January 22

Introduction to course

Friday, January 24

Backgrounds: History and Myth

READ: O'Brien, _Concise History_ and/or any of the histories on Reserve and
_IL_ , 3-18 and _IL_ , 148-53 (Lady Gregory), and Mary Dorcey (handout)

Monday, January 27

Backgrounds: History and Myth--Eary Poetry

READ: O'Brien, _Concise History_ and/or any of the histories on Reserve and
_IL_ , 22 ("Pangur Ban"), 24 ("Eve"), and 29-34 ("Madness of Sweeney")

Wednesday, January 29

Early Modern Poetry and Jonathan Swift

READ: _IL_ , 37-8 ("Kilcash"), 43-47 (Aogan O Rathaille), 49-67 (O'Connell and
Merriman), and Swift, , ["A Modest
Proposal"](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~benjamin/316kfall/316ktexts/swift.html)(Handout)

FILM: _The Secret of Roan Inish_

Friday, January 31

19th Century Poetry--Mangan, Moore, Davis **(Notebooks due)**

READ: Skim folk songs ( _IL_ , 68-87), Read _IL_ , 105-7 (Moore), 114-16
(Mangan), and 122-29 (Davis)

Monday, February 3

The Irish Literary Revival--Lady Gregory

READ: _Spreading the News_ , MID 40-54 and 377-398

Wednesday, February 5

The Irish Literary Revival--Lady Gregory

READ: _The Rising of the Moon,_ MID 54-63

FILM: _The Field_

Friday, February 7

The Irish Literary Revival--John Synge

READ: _Riders to the Sea_ , MID 63-73 and 447-451

Monday, February 10

The Irish Literary Revival--John Synge

READ: _Playboy of the Western World_ , MID 73-119

Wednesday, February 12

The Irish Literary Revival--John Synge

READ: _Playboy of the Western World_ , MID 73-119 and 451-459

FILM: _Playboy of the Western World_

Friday, February 14

William Butler Yeats--The Celtic Twilight **(Notebooks due)**

READ: Skim _WBY_ , Introduction, and read carefully 1-19, esp. **"The Stolen
Child,"** "Down by the Salley Gardens," **"Fergus and the Druid,"** "Lake Isle
of Innisfree," "When You are Old," "Who Goes with Fergus," and **"To Ireland
in the Coming Times"**

Monday, February 17

William Butler Yeats--The Celtic Twilight

READ: _WBY_ , 20-52, esp. "The Hosting of the Sidhe," "The Song of Wandering
Aengus," "The Folly of Being Comforted," **"Adam's Curse,"** **"No Second
Troy," "The Fascination of What's Difficult," "The Mask,"** **"September
1913,"** "Paudeen," "The Magi," **"The Dolls,"** "A Coat," and "The Wild Swans
at Coole"

Wednesday, February 19

Yeats and Nationalism

READ: _Cathleen ni Houlihan_ , MID 3-12 and MID 406-420

FILM: _How Many Miles to Babylon?_

![](1916.jpg)

Friday, February 21

The Easter Rising

READ: _IL_ , 223-41 and Yeats, "The People" and "Easter, 1916" ( _WBY_ 63-4
and 83-5)

****Due:[Paper 1](280Pap1.html)**

Monday, February 24

Yeats and War

READ: _WBY_ \--"An Irish Airman Foresees His Death" (55-6), "On Being Asked
for a War Poem (66), "On a Political Prisoner" (86), "The Second Coming,"
"Prayer for my Daughter," and "Meditation in Time of War" (89-93)

Wednesday, February 26

Yeats and the Irish Free State

READ: _WBY_ , 102-123--"Sailing to Byzantium," "The Tower," and "Meditations
in Time of Civil War," "Nineteen Hundred and Nineteen," "Leda and the Swan,"
and "Among School Children"

FILM: _The Informer_

Friday, February 28

Yeats in Purgatory **(Notebooks due)**

READ: MID, 33-39 and 406-14 and _WBY_ \--"Crazy Jane Talks with the Bishop"
(148-49), "Parnell's Funeral" and "Church and State" (172-74), and "The Great
Day" and "Parnell" (190-91)

Monday, March 3

Yeats and Old Age

READ: _WBY--_ "What Then?" and "Beautiful Lofty Things" (186-87), "The Spur"
(191), "Why Should Not Old Men be Mad" (196), "Under Ben Bulben" (199-202),
"Man and the Echo," "The Circus Animals' Desertion" and "Politics" (210-14)

Wednesday, March 5

James Joyce

READ: _A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man_ , Chapter 1

FILM: _The Dead_

Friday, March 7

James Joyce

READ: _A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man_ , Chapters 2 and 3

Monday, March 10

James Joyce

READ: _A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man_ , Chapter 4

Wednesday, March 12

James Joyce

READ: _A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man_ , Chapter 5

FILM: _My Left Foot_

Friday, March 14

James Joyce's Later Writings **(Notebooks due)**

Monday March 17 - F Mar 21 **SPRING BREAK!**

Monday, March 24

Short Story Writers--George Moore and Padraic O'Conaire

READ: Moore, _IL_ , 191-197; O'Conaire, _IL_ , 211-222

Wednesday, March 26

Short Story Writers--Seamus O'Kelly and Frank O'Connor

O'Kelly, "The Weaver's Grave" and O'Connor, "Guests of the Nation" (Handouts)

FILM: _The Playboys_

Friday, March 28

Sean O'Casey

READ: _Juno and the Paycock_ , MID 204-255 and 509-512

Monday, March 31

Sean O'Casey, Day II

****Due: Paper 2**

Wednesday, April 2

Irish Poetry--John Hewitt, Patrick Kavanagh

READ: Hewitt, _IL_ 300-02, and Kavanagh, _IL_ 308-13 and excerpts from "The
Great Hunger" (handout)

FILM: _Into the West_

Friday, April 4

Samuel Beckett

READ: _MID_ , 311-18 and 532-50 **(Notebooks due)**

Monday, April 7

Samuel Beckett, Day II and Introduce Seamus Heaney

Wednesday, Apr 9

Contemporary Poets--Seamus Heaney

READ: _IL_ , 380-87 and handouts

FILM: _The Run of the Country_ **(NOTE--Changed from original syllabus)**

Friday, April 11

Contemporary Poets--Seamus Heaney

READ: Selected handouts

Monday, April 14

Contemporary Poets--Ciaran Carson and Paul Muldoon

READ: _IL_ , 406-07, and selected handouts

Wednesday, April 16

Recent Poetry--Eavan Boland

READ: Selected handouts

FILM: _In the Name of the Father_

Friday, April 18

In-class film: _Mother Ireland_

Monday, April 21

Recent Poetry--Nuala Ni Dhomhnaill and Medbh McGuckian

READ: _IL_ , 403-05, 408-10, and selected handouts

Wednesday, April 23

Brian Friel, _Translations_

READ: _MID_ , 319-374 and 551-570

FILM: _The Crying Game_

![](nismall.jpg) Friday, April 25

Brian Friel, _Translations_ **(Notebooks due)**

Monday, April 28

Ann Devlin, _Ourselves Alone_

Wednesday, April 30

Anne Devlin, _Ourselves Alone_ and begin Roddy Doyle

READ: _Paddy Clarke, Ha Ha Ha_

FILM: _The Commitments_

****Due: Paper 3**

Friday, May 2

Roddy Doyle, _Paddy Clarke, Ha Ha Ha_

Monday, May 5

Roddy Doyle, _Paddy Clarke, Ha Ha Ha_

****Due: Reading Journal**

**ASSIGNMENTS**  
  

![](scribe.GIF) **Reading Notebook:** You must keep a reading notebook in
which you record (in order of their importance to me):

1) your own reading notes and responses to each day's readings;

2) responses class discussions and to questions and/or writing suggestions I
may give you at the end of class periods to prepare for discussion; and

3) a brief summary and response to any additional literature, critical
articles or books you read--either at my request or your own inspiration.

I will check the notebooks periodically (dates are listed on your syllabus) in
order to reassure and exhort you; they are due in to me on the last day of
class for their final grades. PLEASE BRING YOUR READING NOTEBOOK TO CLASS WITH
YOU EACH WEEK! Refer to the handout on "Keeping a Reading Notebook" for more
information about this important assignment.

**Papers:** (1) two short papers (approximately 5 pages), either exploring
historical or cultural elements related to the literature we are reading or
focusing on your own interpretation of a character, critical problem, crucial
passage, or a comparison of various readings; (2) one short "reaction paper,"
presented orally to the class and handed in to me in writing, that explains
your reaction as a reader to one work of literature on the syllabus (I will
pass around a signup sheet early in the term); and (3) a final essay,
approximately 10 pages in length, incorporating researched sources to support
an argument about one or more of the works we've read.

**Evaluation:** Paper 1 (Feb. 21) -- 15%

Paper 2 (March 31) -- 15%

Paper 3 (April 30) -- 25%

Reaction Paper -- 10%

Reading Notebook -- 20%

Class Participation (including quizzes) -- 15%

****There will be no final exams for this class****

Class participation is an important part of your grade for this course.
Everyone must participate for a class to work well; excessive absences will
lower your grade in this course. When you miss a class, you must contact me or
another student in the seminar to find out what you missed and what
assignments might be due the next week. **If you miss more than four classes,
you will be required to take a special final exam or receive an automatic
grade of F for the course.**

![](knot_2.gif)

