  

# Irish 226--Irish Literature

![](ireland_flag.gif)Meets in Vaughan Literature Building 102, MWF 10 - 10:52
am  
  
John Rickard  
Office Hours: MW 11:00 am - 12:00 pm, TR 2:30-3:30 pm  
Office Phone: 570-577-1424  
E-mail address: [rickard@bucknell.edu](mailto:rickard@bucknell.edu)  
Homepage: <http://www.facstaff.bucknell.edu/rickard>  
  

**TEXTBOOKS**  
  

Please try to obtain the editions listed below, so that we can all work with
the same texts and pagination. If you have a problem obtaining any of these
texts, please let me know. Texts are referred to by parenthetical
abbreviations in syllabus:

> William Butler Yeats. _Selected Poems and Four Plays_. Fourth Edition.Ed. M.
L. Rosenthal. Scribner, 1996. ISBN: 0684826461.  
>

>

> _Modern Irish Dram_ a. Ed. John P. Harrington. Norton Critical Edition,
1991. ISBN: 0393960633.  
>

>

> James Joyce. _Dubliners_. Penguin. ISBN: 0140186476.  
>

>

> _Modern Irish Poetry_. Ed. Patrick Crotty. Blackstaff Press. ISBN:
0856405612.

>

> RoddyDoyle. _Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha_. Penguin USA. ISBN: 0140233903.

**COURSE OBJECTIVES:** This course will attempt provide a general introduction
to "Irish Studies" and to explore more specifically the complex relationships
between political nationalism and culture in modern Ireland. We will focus on
some central questions about the relationship between politics and language,
the varieties of "revolution" in Irish culture, the question of what it means
to be an "Irish" writer in the 20th century, the relation between the Irish
present and the Irish past, and what kinds of "narrative" modern Ireland needs
and wishes to construct about itself.

**CLASS FORMAT:** Although at times I will lecture in order to present
background information, I do expect class participation in discussion and in
other in-class activities. I will occasionally ask you to do in-class writing,
to work in small groups, or to prepare for class by responding in writing to
questions I assign. I expect you to keep up with the reading and to prepare
for class.

**SYLLABUS**  
  
This is a **_provisional_** syllabus; changes will be discussed and announced
in class. We may decide we need to spend more time on some things and less on
others. You are responsible for learning of and responding to syllabus changes
during the semester.

Wednesday, January 16

Introduction to course and Irish history

Friday, January 18

Backgrounds: History and Myth

READ: [Selections from Irish history
online](http://www.facstaff.bucknell.edu/rickard/IrishHistory.html)

Also, O'Brien, _Concise History_ and/or any of the histories on Reserve

Monday, January 21

Backgrounds: History and Myth

READ: [Selections from Lady Gregory's
myths](http://www.belinus.co.uk/folklore/FaerypiecesGregory2.htm) (Online):
Read [Yeats's
Preface](http://www.belinus.co.uk/folklore/Files7/LGCPrefaceWBY.htm), ["The
Boy Deeds of
Cuchulain,"](http://www.belinus.co.uk/folklore/Files7/LGCBoyDeedsCuchulain.htm)
"[The Only Son of
Aoife,](http://www.belinus.co.uk/folklore/Files7/LGCOnlySonAoife.htm)" "[The
Death of
Cuchulain](http://www.belinus.co.uk/folklore/Files7/LGCDeathCuchulian.htm),"
and any others you care to look at

Wednesday, January 23

Early Modern Poetry and Jonathan Swift

READ: Early poetry handouts and Swift, ["A Modest Proposal"
](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~benjamin/316kfall/316ktexts/swift.html)(online
text)

FILM (Suggested): _The Secret of Roan Inish_

Friday, January 25

19th Century Poetry--Mangan, Moore, Davis (Handouts)

READ: Handouts

Monday, January 28

The Irish Literary Revival--Lady Gregory

READ: _Spreading the News_ , MID 40-54 and 377-398 and _The Rising of the
Moon,_ MID 54-63

Wednesday, January 30

The Irish Literary Revival--John Synge

READ: _Riders to the Sea_ , MID 63-73 and 447-451 and begin _Playboy of the
Western World_ , MID 73-119

FILM (Suggested): _The Field_

Friday, February 1

> READ: _Playboy of the Western World_ , MID 73-119 and 451-459

>

> **Discuss Yeats Focus Poem assignment**

Monday, February 4

The Irish Literary Revival--John Synge

READ: _Playboy of the Western World_ , MID 73-119

Wednesday, February 6

William Butler Yeats--The Celtic Twilight **(Bold-face titles indicate focus
poems--see focus poem assignment)**

READ: Read carefully 1-19, esp. **"The Stolen Child,"** "Down by the Salley
Gardens," **"Fergus and the Druid,"** "Lake Isle of Innisfree," "When You are
Old," "Who Goes with Fergus," and **"To Ireland in the Coming Times"**

Friday, February 8

William Butler Yeats--The Celtic Twilight

READ: _WBY_ , 20-52, esp. "The Hosting of the Sidhe," "The Song of Wandering
Aengus," "The Folly of Being Comforted," **"Adam's Curse,"** **"No Second
Troy," "The Fascination of What's Difficult," "The Mask,"** **"September
1913,"** "Paudeen," "The Magi," **"The Dolls,"** "A Coat," and **"The Wild
Swans at Coole "**

> Monday, February 11

> Yeats and Nationalism -- finish discussing poems from Feb. 11 class

>

> READ: _Cathleen ni Houlihan_ , MID 3-12 and MID 406-420

>

> FILM (Suggested): _How Many Miles to Babylon?_

Wednesday, February 13

> The Easter Rising

READ: Selected handouts from 1916 poets and Yeats, **"The People"** and
**"Easter, 1916"** ( _WBY_ 63-4 and 83-5)

FILM (Suggested): _Michael Collins_![](1916.jpg)

Friday, February 15

Yeats and War

READ: **"An Irish Airman Foresees His Death"** (55-6), "On Being Asked for a
War Poem (66), **"The Second Coming,"** **"Prayer for my Daughter,"** and ****
"Meditations in Time of Civil War"

> Monday, February 18

Yeats and the Irish Free State

READ: **"Sailing to Byzantium, " **"The Tower," "Nineteen Hundred and
Nineteen," and **"Leda and the Swan "**

FILM (Suggested): _The Informer_

Wednesday, February 20

Yeats in Purgatory

READ: _Purgatory_ , (MID, 33-39) and 406-14 and _WBY_ \-- **"Among School
Children,"** **"Crazy Jane Talks with the Bishop"** (148-49), "Parnell's
Funeral" and "Church and State" (172-74), and "The Great Day" and "Parnell"
(190-91)

Friday, February 22

> Yeats and Old Age

>

> READ: _WBY--_ "What Then?" and "Beautiful Lofty Things" (186-87), "The Spur"
(191), "Why Should Not Old Men be Mad" (196), "Under Ben Bulben" (199-202),
"Man and the Echo," **"The Circus Animals' Desertion"** and **"Politics"**
(210-14)

Monday, February 25

James Joyce

READ: _Dubliners_ : "The Sisters" and "Araby"

*****Due: Paper 1**

> Wednesday, February 27

> James Joyce

>

> READ: _Dubliners_ : "Eveline" and "The Boarding House"

> Friday, March 1

>

>> James Joyce

>>

>> READ: _Dubliners_ : "Counterparts" and "Ivy Day in the Committee Room"

>

> Monday, March 4

>

>> James Joyce

>>

>> READ: _Dubliners_ : "Clay" and "The Dead"

>

> Wednesday, March 6

> James Joyce

>

> READ: _Dubliners_ : "The Dead"

>

> FILM (Required): _The Dead_

> Friday, March 8

>

>> Finish discussing James Joyce--excerpts from _Ulysses_ and _Finnegans Wake_

>

>  
>

> Monday March 11 - F Mar 15 **SPRING BREAK!**

>

>  
>

> Monday, March 18

> Sean O'Casey

>

> READ: _Juno and the Paycock_ , MID 204-255 and 509-512

>

> FILM (Suggested): _My Left Foot_

>  
>

> Wednesday, March 20

>

>> Sean O'Casey

>>

>> READ: _Juno and the Paycock_ , MID 204-255 and 509-512

>>

>> FILM (Suggested): _My Left Foot_

>

> Friday, March 22

>

>> Irish Poetry--Austin Clarke and Patrick Kavanagh, from Crotty

>>

>> Focus especially on Clarke, "Penal Law" and "Martha Blake at Fifty-One" and
Kavanagh, "Stony Grey Soil," excerpts from _The Great Hunger_ and  "Epic"

>>

>> FILM (Suggested): _A Man of No Importance_



> Monday, March 25

> Contemporary Irish Poetry--Seamus Heaney section of Crotty

>

> Focus especially on "The Tollund Man," "Casualty," "Bog Queen,"
"Punishment," and "Limbo" (Handouts)

*****Due: Paper 2**

Wednesday, March 27

> Contemporary Irish Poetry--Seamus Heaney section of Crotty

>

> Focus especially on  "From the Frontier of Writing," From the Canton of
Expectation," "Wheels within Wheels," "Lightenings VIII and IX," and "Spring
Break" (Handout)

FILM (Suggested): _The Run of the Country_

Friday, March 29

> Contemporary Irish Poetry--Paul Muldoon, from Crotty

Focus especially on "Cuba," "Anseo," "Gathering Mushrooms," "Cauliflowers" and
selected handouts.

Monday, April 1

Contemporary Irish Poetry--Paul Muldoon, from Crotty

**MANDATORY: PAUL MULDOON POETRY READING, BUCKNELL HALL, 8 PM**

Wednesday, April 3

> Brian Friel, _Translations_

>

> READ: _MID_ , 319-374 and 551-570

Friday, April 5

> Brian Friel, _Translations_

Monday, April 8

> READ: Frank O'Connor, "Guests of the Nation" and Edna O'Brien, "Sister
Imelda" (Handouts)

>

> FILM (Suggested): _The Crying Game_

Wednesday, April 10 ![](nismall.jpg)

> Contemporary Poets--Ciaran Carson

>

> READ: Selections from Crotty and additional handouts

>

> FILM (Required): _In the Name of the Father_

Friday, April 12

> Contemporary Poets--Eavan Boland

>

> READ: Selections from Crotty and additional handouts

>

> FILM (Required): _Mother Ireland_

Monday, April 15

> Contemporary Poets--Nuala Ni Dhomhnaill

>

> READ: Selections from Crotty and additional handouts

Wednesday, April 17

Contemporary Short Stories--

READ: Anne Devlin, "Naming the Names" and Fiona Barr, "The Wall Reader" (ON
ELECTRONIC RESERVE--<http://eres.bucknell.edu/>)

Friday, April 19

> Contemporary Short Stories--

>

> READ: Bernard MacLaverty, "Walking the Dog" and Brenda Murphy, "A Social
Call" (ON ELECTRONIC RESERVE--<http://eres.bucknell.edu/>)

> Monday, April 22

> Roddy Doyle, _Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha_

>

> FILM (Required): _The Commitments_

> Wednesday, April 24

> Roddy Doyle, _Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha_

Friday, April 26

> Roddy Doyle, _Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha_

>

> FILM (Suggested): _The Butcher Boy_

> Monday, April 29

> Conclusions and Evaluations

****Due: Paper 3**



**ASSIGNMENTS**  

**Papers:** (1) two short papers (approximately 5-7 pages), either exploring
historical or cultural elements related to the literature we are reading or
focusing on your own interpretation of a character, critical problem, crucial
passage, or a comparison of various readings; (2) one short "focus paper"
explicating a poem by W. B. Yeats (see bold-faced titles above; I will pass
around a signup sheet early in the term); and (3) a final essay, approximately
10-12 pages in length, incorporating researched sources to support an argument
about one or more of the works we've read.

**Evaluation:** Paper 1 (Feb. 25) -- 20%

Paper 2 (March 25) -- 20%

Paper 3 (April 29) -- 35%

Yeats Focus Paper (due between Feb. 8 and Feb. 25--schedule to be determined)
-- 15%

Class Participation (including quizzes) -- 10%

****There will be no final exam for this class****



Class participation is an important part of your grade for this course.
Everyone must participate for a class to work well; excessive absences will
lower your grade in this course. When you miss a class, you must contact me or
another student in the seminar to find out what you missed and what
assignments might be due the next week. **If you miss more than four classes,
you will be required to take a special final exam or receive an automatic
grade of F for the course.**

![](knot_2.gif)

