![](http://cti.itc.virginia.edu/~bcr/okuyi.GIF) |

**African Art and the Web Museum  
An Undergraduate Course, University of Virginia  
Spring Semester 1998**  
---|---  
  
* * *

Last updated March,1998. Copyright (C) 1998 [Benjamin Caleb Ray](mail
to:bcr@virginia.edu) All rights reserved.

* * *

  * Course Description
  * Image Collections
  * African Art on the Web
  * Student Exhibitions
  * Student E-mail Correspondence
  * Guidelines for Labels & Exhibits
  * Check List For Final Exibitions
  * Course Syllabus 



**Course Description:**

Each student will design an exhibition of African art for presentation on the
World Wide Web, incorporating the results of the student's study of African
art. The exhibitions will contain an introductory explanation of the exhibit's
theme, a map of Africa locating the societies whose art objects are
represented, images of selected African art objects, relevant field-context
images, descriptive labels, and other explanatory textual materials. The
images students will use are taken from collections at the [Bayly Museum of
the University of Virginia](Bayly/Bayly.html), the [Fowler Museum of Cultural
History](http://jefferson.village.Virginia.EDU/uvamesl/search.html), the
[Hampton University Museum](Hampton/Hampton.html), and The Virginia Museum of
Fine Arts, and are used with copyright permission.

Monday and Wednesday classes will be devoted to illustrated lectures on
African art; Friday computer lab sessions will be used for computer
instruction, digital image processing, and Web page construction. The course
includes the following curricular components: a brief history of African art
studies; African ritual and cosmology; analysis of African art exhibition
catalogues; library research on selected art objects; the exhibition of
African art in museum contexts; training in Web skills and image processing.
The special challenge of the course is to create exhibitions of African art
that attempt to be true to the objects themselves while placing images of them
in a cultural environment of educational value to the exhibitor and the viewer
alike.

Go to Top of Page

**Image Collections:**

As a participant in the Museum Educational Site Licensing project, the
University uses images from the collection of the Fowler Museum of Cultural
History for instructional purposes, with certain copyright restrictions. These
images are available only for students in the course and may not be published
on the Web.

Students enrolled in the course also have access to collections of [images
shown in class](ClassReview/Intro.html). These images are intended for study
and review, and will not be incorporated into the student exhibitions. Access
to these collections is controlled by password.

Go to Top of Page

**[Student Exhibitions](studentwork/studentlist/studentlist.html):**

Examples from previos class, 1996.  
[ Jones, Atalaya](studentwork/jones/shell.html)  
[Matricardi, Jayne](studentwork/matricardi/exhibit.html)



**Exhibition Guidelines**

_Mid-Term Exhibits:_

Mid-term exhibits should consist of six images with descriptive labels. The
images may be left-justified or placed in any position on the Web page in
relation to the label. The images should be imported in both small gif form
and the larger jpeg format, so that the viewer can study the object in greater
detail. The exhibit should open with a title, followed by an opening
statement, two or three paragraphs in length, that explains the exhibit's
theme. A key image might follow immediately below the exhibition title (or
stand next to it) as a way of visually conveying the theme of the exhibition.
The six images should be taken from at least four different societies. A map
locating the societies represented in the exhibit is not necessary for the
mid-term.

_The well-written label:_  

Since objects of traditional African art are generally made for use in
specific contexts, which are often ritual or ceremonial, the museum exhibition
label describing the object should inform the viewer both about the object and
its context of use. This is done by referring to certain prominent features of
the object, its particular shape, formal properties, and artistic detail, and
explaining them in terms of contextual social, moral, and religious ideas and
actions. This helps the viewer to "see" the object within its own cultural
setting. The label thus educates the viewer's eye by explaining how the object
expresses important African moral and religious ideas and actions. If
possible, the label should quote a relevant statement (proverb, poetic verse,
myth text) taken from the society itself or an informant's words concerning
the object or context. The label must do this with a minimum of words for an
audience that possesses little or no knowledge of African art. The label, of
course, represents the exhibit curator's own knowledge and personal point of
view. The label is necessarily interpretive, and it should give the viewer
opportunity to think about the object and make some connections to it and
African culture.

** **

**Guidelines for the final exhibtions:**

Your final exibitions at the end of the semester should be expanded and
revised versions of your mid-term exhibitions, slightly more complex, with
more descriptive information, and about double in size, twelve images in all.

1. Exhibition theme  

Consider whether your exhibition theme should be slightly revised to include
about six more objects. You may also choose to reduce (or expand) the number
of societies represented in your exhibit (the final exhibitionshould present
images from at least three different societies). Your final exhibit should
engage in drawing some comparisons between the objects and their social,
moral, and religious contexts, as well as some pertinent comparisons with
aspects of Western culture and human life in general. Here is where your
exhibition can express a distinctive point of view in addition to conveying of
artistic and cultural information. Re-read Robbin Warren's article, "Making
the Galleries Sing: Displaying African Art," as well as the articles by Susan
Vogel and Ivan Karp.

2\. Design, structure, & organization  

The exhibition should have a separate title page, presenting the title (with
perhaps a subtitle), your name, and an image that conveys the general theme of
the exhibit. If there is enough space, you may also write a brief statement to
introduce the theme of the exhibit. The statement should be short enough so
that it appears on the title page, without scrolling too much down the page.
At the bottom of the title page there should be three or four links to the
various parts (pages) of your exhibition, each part having its own title.
These same links should appear at the end of each section of the exhibit so
the viewer can navigate from one to section to an other and return to the
title page.

As a general rule you should place your labels next to the images so that the
viewer can view the label and the image without having to scroll up or down
the page while reading the label and looking at the image. Each thumbnail
image (gif) should be linked to a more detailed jpg version of the image. This
can be done by wrapping the jpg image anchor around the gif or by mapping the
gif image so that it links to the jpg. If you would like to make your images
into transparancies and place them against a particular background, say an
African fabric, this will enhance the aesthetics of your exhibit. This is an
attractive but time consuming task, and should not be undertaken at the
expense of the research and writing components of your exhibit. Your exhibit
should contain a map of Africa locating the societies whose objects are
represented. The best solution might be to trace such a map from a book, type
in the names of the socieites in the appropriate locations, and scan the map.

3\. Textual content: making the label more complex, with links, and additional
library research.  

Each part of the exhibit should begin with a brief statement to explain how it
fits into the overall theme. You might also give a brief descriptive title to
the object in your image to attract the viewer's attention. Each label should
begin with the name of the object, the society or culture it comes from, and
the modern nation to which the society belongs. You should also include an
image source or museum credit line, for example, "Fowler Museum of Cultural
History." The labels should contain links to bibliographical references,
either at the end of the label or within the body of the text. There should
also be links to "further information" concerning some major point (or points)
that appear in the label. Be sure that there is a link at the end of this page
which returns the reader to the original label. Using Photo Shop, you might
find it useful in some cases to crop the jpg image and enlarge one of more
parts of it so that the viewer can focus on a specific feature (or features).
You should put a link within the text of the label to this part of the image,
and add a few more lines of text describing this feature next to the jpg; then
create a link that returns the viewer to the orginal label.

4\. Context photos:  

Since there are very few context photos in the Fowler images, it will be
necessay to scan them from published sources. One of the most extensive is The
Art, Ritual, and Drama of Africa by Michael Huet. Most of the recent books on
African art also contain excellent field photos showing the objects in
context. The journal African Arts is also full of field photographs, just
consult the index in your packet. But this is a time consuming process and
should be low on your list of priorities. There are  some scanned context
photos in the digitalized collection of "images shown in class." Take a look
at these, first.



5\. **Check list for the final exhibitions:**

_Artistic form_ : pay attention to the aesthetics of each object, describe its
basic artistic features, remark on its artistic quality -- say what you think
about it, why you selected it -- mention features of the objects that
transcend their culture and those that are a direct expression of it,
especially the object's symbolic aspects.

_Cultural content_ : describe and explain the object's cultural meanings and
use, its significance in general and in detail. Put just the right combination
of artistic and cultural explanation in the label next to the image, so that
the reader will want to click on a link in your label and read further to find
out more.

_Audience assumptions_ : think about some of the key assumptions in your
audience's mind that you want to address in your theme and in your object
labels and text. Address some of these assumptions explicitly, by way of
pointing out some similarities and differences between African societies and
ours.

_Web page design_ : this is your "museum" gallery, make its space work for you
so that the viewer is attracted to your objects and can appreciate their
design and beauty. The layout should also enable the viewer to read the text
easily while looking at the object and to navigate around your exhibition.

**Student E-mail Correspondence:**

Follow [this](mail.html) link for information on subscribing and posting to
the class mailing list.

Go to Top of Page

**African Art on the Web:**



  * [African Art: Aesthetics and Meaning,](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/dic/exhib/93.ray.aa/African.html) Bayly Art Museum, University of Virginia 
  * [The Art of the African Mask,](http://cti.itc.virginia.edu/~bcr/African_Mask.html) Bayly Art Museum, University of Virginia 
  * [National Museum of African Art,](http://www.si.edu/organiza/museums/africart/nmafa.htm) The Smithsonian Institution 
  * [The Artist's Eye, The Diviner's Insight,](http://www.amherst.edu/~mead/african.html/african.html) Mead Art Museum, Amherst College 
  * [Art and Life in Africa Project,](http://www.uiowa.edu/~africart/toc/index.html) University of Iowa 
  * [ Canadian Museum of Civilization, "Ritual Messengers" Tervuren Musem](http://www.civilization.ca/membrs/traditio/tervuren/ter00eng.html)
  * [University of Pennsylvania Museum](http://www.sas.upenn.edu/African_Studies/Sculpture/menu_Sculpt.html)
  * [Africa: The Art of the Continent, Guggenheim Museum](http://artnetweb.com/guggenheim/africa)
  * [Yoruba & Akan Work in Wood & Metal,](http://www.fa.indiana.edu/~conner/africart/home.html) Lake View Museum, Peoria,Illinois. 
  * [Baobab Project,](http://web-dubois.fas.harvard.edu/dubois/baobab/narratives/narrative.html) Harvard University 
  * [Carlos Museum, African Gallery,](http://www.emory.edu/CARLOS/african.gal.html)Emory University 
  * [Krannet Museum. African, Art Gallery](http://www.art.uiuc.edu/kam/Guide/African/african.top.shtml), University of Illinois 
  * [Allen Art Museum: African Gallery](http://www.oberlin.edu/~allenart/African-collection.html), Oberlin College Museum: African Art 

Go to Top of Page

**Course Syllabus: RELA 345/ARTH 345**

**Books for Purchase**

Sieber & Walker, _African Art in the Cycle of Life_  
Woodward, _African Art in the Virginia Museum of Fine Arts_  
Ray, _Rela 345/Arth 345: African Art_ (Brillig Books, Elliewood Ave.)  

* * *

Jan 14

  * Lecture: Types of African Art, Exhibiting African Art 

Jan 16

  * Lab: Web navigation, Searching image collections, Importing images, Zip disks, file trrasfers to unix account, setting up univx directory 

Jan 19  

  * Lecture: The Study of African Art 
  * Reading: Vogel, _Art/Artifact,_ Introduction" 

Jan 21  

  * Lecture: Exhibiting African Art 
  * Reading: Robbins, "Displaying African Art" 

Jan 23  

  * Lab: Constructing Web pages, importing images 
  * Review Bayly Exhibition Catalogue,"African Art: Aesthetics & Meaning"< 

Jan 26  

  * Lecture: Yoruba Art: Objects & Contexts 
  * Reading : Drewal, Pemberton, Abiodun, "Yoruba: Nine Centuries . . ." 

Jan 28

  * Lecture: Yoruba Aesthetic Principles 
  * Thompson, "Yoruba Art Criticism," Review African art Web sites 

Jan 30

  * Lab: Claris Home Page, Constructing Web pages, importing images 

Feb 2

  * Lecture: Yoruba Art: Objects & Contexts 
  * Reading: Sieber & Walker, _African Art_ (Yoruba objects) 
  * Woodward, _African Art_ (Yoruba objects) 

Feb 4

  * Lecture: Asante Art: Objects & Contexts 
  * Reading: Sieber & Walker, _African Art_ (Asante objects) 
  * Review African art Web sites 

Feb 6

  * Lab: [Setting up your own public_html account](Labs/New_account.html) 

Feb 9

  * Lecture: Asante Art: Objects & Contexts 
  * Reading: Woodward, _African Art_ (Asante objects) 

Feb 11

  * Lecture: Images of Ancestors 
  * Reading: Sieber & Walker, _African Art,_ Ch. 7, "Departure" 

Feb 13

  * Lab: [Image and Text Placement on Web pages](Labs/imagetest.html) 

Feb 16

  * Map quiz, Critiques of African art 

Feb 18

  * Critiques of African art Web sites --class presentations 

Feb 20

  * Lab: HTML topics: [anchors](Labs/links.html) and [lists](Labs/lists.html) 

Feb 23

  * Lecture: Masks I 
  * Reading: Sieber & Walker, _African Art_ (masks) 

Feb 25

  * Lecture: Masks II 
  * Reading: Woodward, _African Art_ (masks) 

Feb 27

  * Visit to the National Museum of AFrican Art 
  * Curator's Lecture 
  * Lecture: Masks III 

Mar 4

  * Mid-term: Web exhibitions due, class presentations, student evaluations 

Mar 6

  * Mid-term: Web exhibitions due, class presentations, student evaluations 

Mar 9th - 13th S p r i n g B r e a k  

Mar 16

  * Bayly Museum Visit -- The real, the fakes, and the reproductions 



Mar 18

  * Lecture: Exhibiting African Art 
  * Reading: Vogel, _Perspectives,_ "Introduction" 
  * Karp, "Culture & Representation" 

Mar 20

  * Lab: 

Mar 23

  * Lecture: Exhibiting African Art 
  * Reading: Karp, "Other Cultures in Museum Perspective" 
  * Vogel, "Always True to the Object, In Our Fashion" 

Mar 27

  * West Africa: Kingship 
  * Reading: Pemberton "Arts & Rituals for Yoruba Sacred Kings" 

Mar 27



  * Lab: [Image processing, part 2: Transparencies.](Labs/Transparencies.html) 

Mar 30

  * Lecture: Central Africa: Kuba 

Apr 1

  * Lecture: Formalistic Analysis 
  * Reading: Vogel, "African Sculpture, A Primer" 
  * Brenson, "Appraising African Art Through Western Eyes" 

Apr 3

  * Visit to Virginia Museum of Fine Arts (visit) 
  * Curator's lecture: Richard Woodward, "Spirit of the Motherland" 

Apr 6

  * Lecture: West Africa 

Apr 8

  * Lecture: Asante Textiles 

Apr 10

  * Lab: 

Apr 13



Apr 15



Apr 17

  * Lab: Web Exhibitions. Link to [maps of Africa](Labs/maps.html) 

Apr 20

  * Final Web exhibitions, presentations 

Apr 22

  * Final Web exhibitions, presentations 

Apr 24

  * Final Web exhibitions, presentations 

Apr 27

  * Final Web exhibitions, presentations 





Go to Top of Page

