Sociology 244

|

Professor Suzanne Model  
  
---|---  
  
Sociology of Immigration

|

Spring 2000  
  
COURSE OVERVIEW

OBJECTIVES:

This course focuses on the lives of voluntary immigrants and their descendants
in the United States from the mid-nineteenth century to the present. The
people we will study emigrated from Latin America, the Caribbean Basin, Asia
or Europe. The course focuses on the interaction between natives and
newcomers, asking: how is each transformed by the presence of the other? In
addressing this question, we begin by examining some of the theories that
sociologists have developed to describe and explain how newcomers are
incorporated into American society. Much of the rest of the course is devoted
to studying the experiences of particular groups. We begin with European white
ethnics, most of whom arrived at or before the turn of the century. We then
consider the adaptations of groups whose largest proportions are both non-
white and more recently arrived. In studying particular groups, we focus on
the questions: how well do sociological theories capture the immigrant
experience and how might such theories be improved.

COURSE MATERIALS:

The required readings are contained in a text and a course packet. Both are
available at the Textbook Annex (phone 545-3570). The text is _Origins and
Destinies: Immigration, Race, and Ethnicity in America_ , edited by Silvia
Pedraza and Ruben G. Rumbaut (Belmont, MA: Wadsworth Publishing, 1996). It
contains a variety of articles by several authorities on immigration. The
course packet contains additional articles not included in the text. One copy
of both the text and the packet are on reserve in the DuBois Library.



STUDENT EVALUATION:

One hour examination
...................................................................................................15
points

Intra-term
Project..........................................................................................................15
points

Class Attendance, Pop Quizzes,
Homework.................................................................10
points

Term
Paper...................................................................................................................25
points

Final
examination..........................................................................................................
_20_ points

Total..............................................................................................................................85
points



Please see separate handouts for the tasks associated with the intra-term
project and the term paper, both of which allow for student choice.



EXPECTATIONS:

Students are expected to arrive on time, to attend class regularly, to
complete the assigned readings and papers on time, and to participate in class
discussion. In order to enhance these outcomes, attendance will occasionally
be taken, pop quizzes will occasionally occur and students will occasionally
be assigned homework to hand in.

Papers are to be handed in at the _beginning_ of class on their respective due
dates. In the absence of a written and appropriate excuse, late papers will be
downgraded one grade for each class period they are late. Examples of
appropriate excuses include death in the family, travel under college
auspices, and illness. In the case of illness, verification by College Health
Services or a private physician is required, and such documentation must show
that the student was indisposed either the day before or the day of the class
obligation.

Academic dishonesty will be treated with the utmost seriousness. Academic
dishonesty includes but is not limited to cheating on tests and plagiarizing
the work of others. Students are urged to review the University's policies on
academic dishonesty, set out in pp. 66-71 in the pamphlet Undergraduate Rights
and Responsibilities, 1999-2000.



ASSISTANCE:

The TA is Jesse Barba, who has an office in Thompson 608. The TA's office
hours are Wednesdays from 3 to 4 pm. Messages can be left for him at the
Sociology Department's main number: 545-4059. The instructor's office hours
are Thursdays, 8:30-10:00 am in Machmer W-30. Students do not need an
appointment to come to office hours, and, if these hours are inconvenient, an
alternate time can be arranged. The instructor is always happy to meet with
students to discuss issues both course-related and not. Professor Model's
telephone number is 545-5975, and, when no one is in the office, an answering
device will record a message of considerable length.

ASSIGNMENTS:

The reading assignments listed UNDER a class date refer to the material that
will be discussed in class on that date. Please read this material BEFORE the
date listed. Although the course packet has no table of contents, the readings
are arranged in the order in which they are assigned. The expression "O & D"
refers to the text, _Origins and Destinies._ The expression "CP" refers to the
course packet.



Thursday, January 27

Introduction to the Sociology of Immigration



Tuesday, February 1

Origins and Destinies ... in American History

O & D, Chapter 1 (pp. 1-20), Silvia Pedraza



Thursday, February 3

A Socio-Biological Perspective on Racism

CP, van den Berghe, Pierre. _The Ethnic Phenomeon_. New York: Elsevier, 1981.
Chapters 1  & 2, pp. 1-36.



Tuesday, February 8

A Conflict Perspective on Racism

CP, Bonacich, Edna. "A Theory of Racial Antagonism: The Split Labor Market."
_American Sociological Review_ 37 (October 1972): 547-59.



Thursday, February 10

The Irish

CP, "Famine in Ireland", pp. 130-34 in Michael Kraus (ed.) _Immigration: The
American Mosaic._ New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1966.

CP, "Joseph McGrath", pp. 107-110 in Peter Morton Coan (ed.), _Ellis Island
Interviews: In Their Own Words_. New York: Facts On File Inc., 1997.

O & D, Chapter 12 (pp. 161-171), Hasia Diner



Tuesday, February 15

LIST OF PREFERENCES FOR INTRA TERM PROJECT DUE

Polish Immigrants

CP, "Irene Wieczorek", pp. 40-45 in John Bodnar, _Anthracite People_.
Harrisburg: Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission.

O & D, Chapter 15 (pp. 195-205), Dominic Pacyga



Thursday, February 17

The Causes and Consequences of Ethnic Entrepreneurship

CP, Bonacich, Edna. "A Theory of Middleman Minorities." _American Sociological
Review_ 38 (October 1973):583-94.



Tuesday, February 22

PRELIMINARY STATEMENT ON TERM PAPER DUE

Eastern European Jews

CP, "Emanuel 'Manny' Steen", pp. 116-127 in Peter Morton Coan (ed.), _Ellis
Island Interviews: In Their Own Words_. New York: Facts On File Inc., 1997.

O & D, Chapter 14 (pp. 182-194), Steven Gold and Bruce Phillips



Thursday, February 24

The Italians

CP, "Rosa Vartone", pp. 51-54 and Regina Rogatta, pp. 55-56 in Peter Morton
Coan (ed.), _Ellis Island Interviews: In Their Own Words_. New York: Facts On
File Inc., 1997.

O & D, Chapter 13 (pp. 172-181), Richard D. Alba



Tuesday, February 29

White Ethnic Economic Achievement in the 1970s

CP, Greeley, Andrew M. "The Ethnic Miracle", pp. 260-9 in Norman Yetman (ed.),
_Majority and Minority_ , 3rd edition. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1982. (see
next page for additional assignment for Feb. 29)

Hand-out, Model, Suzanne. "The Economic Progress of European and East Asian
Americans", _Annual Review of Sociology_ 14 (1988). Read pp. 363-366 and pp.
372-377 only.



Thursday, March 2

White Ethnic Assimilation

CP, Alba, Richard D. "On Interpreting the State of Ethnicity Among Whites",
Paper presented at the 1992 meetings of the Eastern Sociological Society.

O & D, Chapter 33 (pp. 444-449 only, up to Race Relations and Symbolic
Ethnicity), Mary C. Waters



Tuesday, March 7

TEST 1



Thursday, March 9

Origins and Destinies...in Contemporary America

O & D, Chapter 2 (pp. 24-42), Ruben G. Rumbaut



Tuesday, March 21

Puerto Rican

CP, "East Side Story", pp. 92-101 and "A Bicultural Experience", pp. 125-29 in
Thomas Dublin (ed.), _Becoming American, Becoming Ethnic: College Students
Explore Their Roots._ Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1996.

O & D, Chapter 7 (pp. 98-109), Hector Carrasquillo and Virginia Sanchez-
Korrol



Thursday, March 23

FIVE PAGE BOOK REVIEW DUE from students choosing this option

Immigrant Destinations: Miami

O & D, Chapter 27 (pp. 373-389), Guillermo Grenier and Lisandro Pirez



Tuesday, March 28

Cubans

CP, "Roberto Ortiz", pp. 318-324 and "Ramon Fernandez", pp. 324-327 in Joan
Morrison and Charlotte Zabusky, _American Mosaic,_ New York: E.P. Dutton,1980.

O & D, Chapter 20 (pp. 263-279), Silvia Pedraza



Thursday, March 30

TERM PAPER BIBLIOGRAPHY DUE

Undocumented Latinos



CP, "The Trip: Dolares, Conectes, Garitas Y Mordidas", pp. 62-69 in Sarah J.
Mahler, _American Dreaming: Immigrant Life on the Margins_. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1995.

O & D, Chapter 19 (pp. 250-262), Leo R. Chavez



Tuesday, April 4

Immigrant Destinations: New York

O & D, Chapter 25 (pp. 334-345), Frederick Binder and David Reimers



Thursday, April 6

Chinese

CP, "Separate but Friends", pp. 251-260 in Thomas Kessner and Betty Caroli,
_Today's Immigrants, Their Stories._ New York: Oxford University Press. 1981.

O & D, Chapter 8 (pp. 110-124), Esther Ngan-Ling Chow



Tuesday, April 11

Koreans

CP, "The Assimilation Problems of My Family in America", Pp. 171-179 in Thomas
Dublin (ed.), _Becoming American, Becoming Ethnic: College Students Explore
Their Roots._ Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1996.

O & D Chapter 23 (pp. 302-314), Pyong Gap Min



Thursday, April 13

British West Indians

CP, "Imogene Hayes", pp. 399-400 and "Hamilton Hayes", pp. 401-403 in Joan
Morrison and Charlotte Zabusky, _American Mosaic,_ New York: E.P. Dutton,1980.

CP, Johnson, Violet. "Culture, Economic Stability, and Entrepreneurship: The
Case of British West Indians in Boston", pp. 59-80 in Marilyn Halter (ed.)
_New Immigrants in the Marketplace: Boston's Ethnic Entrepreneurs_ , Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press, 1995.



Tuesday, April 18

Immigrant Destinations: Los Angeles

O & D, Chapter 26 (pp. 346-359), Mehdi Bozorgmehr, Georges Sabagh and Ivan
Light



Tuesday, April 25

TERM PAPER DUE



Thursday, April 27

Refugees from Indo-China

CP, "Leaving Home", Anh-Dao Nguyen, pp. 198-205 in Thomas Dublin (ed.),
___Becoming American, Becoming Ethnic: College Students Explore Their Roots_.
Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1996.

O & D, Chapter 24 (pp. 315-333), Ruben Rumbaut



Tuesday, May 2

Dominicans

O & D, Chapter 21 (pp. 280-292) Sherri Grasmuck and Patricia Pessar



Thursday, May 4

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION in HIGHER EDUCATION DEBATE



Tuesday, May 9

BILINGUAL EDUCATION DEBATE



Thursday, May 11

Class canceled

[BACK TO SOCIOLOGY 244 HOMEPAGE](index.htm)

