![](/~core/images/shield.gif)|

![Core Curriculum](/~core/images/core-curriculum-sa.gif)  
  
---|---  
  
[Core Home](/~core/index.html)  
[Announcements](/~core/announce.html)(7/29/02)  
  
[Core Curriculum Guide for students who entered between September 1999 and
September 2002](/~core/redbook.html)  
  
[7-Course Core Requirement Form](/~core/7course_form.html)  
  
[Core Curriculum Guide for students who enter in September 2002 and
thereafter](/~core/redbook_2002.html)  
  
_Areas_  
  [Foreign Cultures](/~core/areas/01-02/fc/index.html)  
  [Historical Studies](/~core/areas/01-02/hs/index.html)  
  [Literature & Arts](/~core/areas/01-02/la/index.html)  
  [Moral Reasoning](/~core/areas/01-02/mr/index.html)  
  [Quantitative Reasoning](/~core/areas/01-02/qr/index.html)  
  [Science](/~core/areas/01-02/sci/index.html)  
  [Social Analysis](/~core/areas/01-02/sa/index.html)  

(C) 2000, President and Fellows  
of Harvard University

|  

[[Description](/~core/descriptions/00-01/sa/index.html#sa54)] [[Course
Site](/~sa54/)]

## Social Analysis 54  
American Society and Public Policy

### Theda Skocpol

  

|

Professor Theda Skocpol

| Professor Mary Waters  
---|---  
  
William James Hall 470; 495-3851  

| William James Hall 530  
  
Littauer 233; 496-0966  

| Phones:  495-3713; 495-3947  
  
Hours:Wednesdays 2-3:30 pm or by appointment (5-3851)

| Hours:  Mondays 2-4pm  
  
E-mail:  ts@wjh.harvard.edu

| E-mail:  mcw@wjh.harvard.edu  
  
  

**AMERICAN SOCIETY AND PUBLIC POLICY**

Social Analysis 54, Spring 2001

Mondays and Wednesdays 11am-noon

Emerson 210

How do social problems get defined and redefined over time, and why do they
appear differently from the perspectives of variously situated groups?  How
are public policies about problematic social conditions debated, devised, and
changed? This course addresses these questions by bringing together social
science theories and evidence often segregated into separate disciplines and
specializations.  Analyzed together, demographic data about economic, social,
and political trends, survey and ethnographic data about people's everyday
lives and outlooks, and historical evidence about changing institutional
structures can help us to make sense of controversial societal issues.  Often
social scientists look at problems a-historically and through one theoretical
and methodological lens at a time; but more can be learned by combining styles
of empirical research into a historically grounded analysis.

Americans are debating issues about the well-being of families and children,
about immigration and citizenship, and about access to health care.  But such
controversies are not new.  They have arisen many times before in modern U.S.
history.  So we can use demographic, ethnographic, survey, and institutional
data to explore explanatory arguments and get some perspective on contemporary
political disputes.

For each problem area, we will survey long-term societal trends.  We will
probe into when and why certain aspects of societal trends, but not others,
have become politically visible or controversial.  We will explore public
policymaking in each area.  How have policies been devised in response to
societal trends and socially patterned controversies about family well-being,
immigration, and access to health care?  In what ways have earlier policies,
or their absence, contributed to later developments or controversies?

Students can expect to emerge from this course with important substantive
knowledge about several realms of U.S. social life, politics, and public
policy.  At the same time, they will gain a critical appreciation of how a
triangulation of social science approaches can help us to think clearly about
societal problems and alternative possible responses to them.

_  
_

_COURSE ORGANIZATION AND REQUIREMENTS_

Social Analysis 54 will have two one-hour lectures plus a one-hour discussion
section (to be arranged) each week.  Lectures and sections will not simply
repeat one another, so students must attend and participate in both.  Readings
must be completed on time throughout the semester, both to prepare for weekly
discussion sections and to lay the basis for short writing assignments.
Grades for the course will be calculated as follows:  40% for the Final Exam;
40% for the three papers described below; and 20% for section attendance and
participation.

Three short papers (of about 5 pages apiece) will be due at intervals
throughout the semester.  Each student should **do assignment number 1, plus
any two of the other three:**

(1)  Due by 2pm on Friday, March 2, in the Sociology Department Office,
William James Hall, 6th Floor, this first paper is **required of all class
members**.   It should use evidence and arguments from part I of the course to
offer a critical assessment of "What is happening to U.S. democracy?"  What
are key trends that emerge from the lectures and readings?  Where there are
different findings or emphases, how do you assess them?  Do we need new data,
or should we ask further questions?

(2)  Due by noon on Friday, March 23, in the Sociology Department Office,
William James Hall, 6th floor, this paper should use evidence and theories
from part II of the course to offer an assessment of either David Blankenhorn,
_Fatherless America: Confronting Our Most Urgent Social Problem_ (New York:
BasicBooks, 1995; HarperPerennial, 1996) or Stephanie Coontz, _The Way We
Really Are_ (New York: Basic Books, 1997).   Has the author you chose
accurately identified an important problem or set of problems in American
life?  How well does s/he explain the sources, nature, and effects of family
trends s/he chooses to discuss?  Does s/he marshal adequate evidence to
sustain his or her points, and how does the evidence stack up against the
evidence presented in this course?  Does the author offer solutions that are
likely to ameliorate problematic social trends?  Do you think that this book
should be influential in politics and public discussions?  Why or why not?

(3)  Due by 2pm on Friday, April 13, in the Sociology Department Office,
William James Hall, 6th floor, this paper should use evidence and theories
from part III of the course to offer an assessment of the clash of diagnoses
and prescriptions for America's immigration policy.  Using the websites on
immigration linked to the class website, describe what the advocacy groups are
debating about immigration.  What are the arguments for or against America's
current immigration policy?  What kinds of evidence and values are the
different sides appealing to?  How do these arguments compare to historical
debates about immigration?

(4)  Due before 2pm on Friday, May 5, in the Sociology Department Office,
William James Hall, 6th floor, this paper should consider David Hilfiker's
_Not All of Us Are Saints: A Doctor's Journey with the Poor_ (New York: Hill
and Wang, 1994; Ballantine Books, 1996), which combines ethnography and
personal reflection by a doctor who works for modest pay in a

 religiously sponsored social service organization.  Does Hilfiker's book
offer evidence, or raise questions, that speak to debates about U.S. health
policy -- and welfare programs -- today?  What do you see in this book that
confirms, or disconfirms, the evidence we have reviewed about  access to
health coverage in the United States?  How, if at all, does this book speak to
arguments between conservatives and liberals?

One kind of substitution is possible for one of the last two assigned papers.
A student involved in public or community service may propose to his or her
section leader a paper about

_COURSE ORGANIZATION AND REQUIREMENTS_ , continued

ways in which readings in this course have implications for service
experiences, or vice versa.  Guidelines will be provided on request.

There will be no mid-term exam in Social Analysis 54, but there will be a
three-hour final examination, in which students will be asked to answer short
factual questions and several essay questions.  The essay questions will be
selected from a list of questions handed out at the final lecture on May 2.
Students may study together to prepare for all of the possible essay
questions, but at the exam each person must write his or her own answers (
_without_ the assistance of any notes or outlines, which _may not_ be carried
into the exam). _  
ACCESS TO READINGS_

Books and articles for this course are on reserve at Lamont and Hilles.

A course pack of articles and chapters has been assembled and is available for
purchase in the Science Center.  Copies of the sourcebook have also been
placed on reserve at Lamont and Hilles libraries.

Students may want to purchase some or all of the following books on order at
the Coop:

Skocpol, Theda, and Morris Fiorina, eds.  _Civic Engagement in American
Democracy_.   Washington: Brookings Institution Press; New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 1999.

Hewlett, Sylvia and Cornel West.  The War Against Parents.  Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1998.

Hochschild, Arlie Russell.  _The Time Bind: When Work Becomes Home and Home
Becomes Work_.   New York: Metropolitan Books, 1997.

Skocpol, Theda.  _Social Policy in the United States: Future Possibilities in
Historical Perspective_.   Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995.

Heymann, Jody.  _The Widening Gap:   Why American Working Families Are in
Jeopardy and What Can Be Done About It_.  New York:  Basic Books, 2000.

Putnam, Robert D.  _Bowling Alone_.   New York: Simon and Schuster, 2000.

_Health Affairs_ , 20, No. 1 (Jan/Feb 2001).  Entire issue on "Expanding
Health Coverage." _(Availability at COOP or other source will be determined
later in semester.   On reading list for week 13.)_

_Books for Paper Assignments 2 and 4 (pick two):   _

_Assignment #2_

Blankenhorn, David.  _Fatherless America: Confronting Our Most Urgent Social
Problem_.   New York: Basic Books, 1995; Harper Perennial, 1996.

**_or_**

Coontz, Stephanie.  _The Way We Really Are: Coming to Terms with America's
Changing Families_.   New York: Basic Books, 1997 _._

_Assignment #4_

Hilfiker, David.  _Not All of Us Are Saints: A Doctor's Journey with the
Poor_.   New York: Hill and Wang, 1994; Ballantine Books, 1996.  _(This book
is currently out of print.   Pending copyright clearance at time of
publication of this reading list, photocopies of it will be available in
Science Center basement.)_

**  
**

**COURSE OUTLINE AND READING LIST**

**Week 1:   Overview**

Lecture (January 31):  Introduction to the Course (Skocpol and Waters)

**Week 2:   Why Combine Approaches to Understand Social Issues?**

Lecture (February 5):  Public Policy and Social Science (Waters)

Lecture (February 7):What Institutional and Historical Analysis Adds to
Explanations of Social Problems and Policies (Skocpol)

**I.   AMERICAN SOCIETY AND DEMOCRACY**

This section of the course provides the background we need to delve more fully
into particular societal problems in the next three sections.  We survey
recent changes in the occupational, income, and demographic components of the
population.  In addition, we survey transformations in patterns of political
participation from the late nineteenth century to the present.  Social trends
and policies to be examined more closely in the following parts of the course
reflect, in part, the long-term trends and basic social and political patterns
considered here.

**Week 3:   Social Change and Stratification in 20th-Century America**

Lecture (February 12):  Explaining Changes in Social Stratification (Waters)

Lecture (February 14): What Difference Does Growing Income Inequality Make?
(Waters)

Readings:

Wattenberg, Ben J.  "It's Not the Economy."  In _Values Matter Most: How
Republicans or Democrats or a Third Party Can Win and Renew the American Way
of Life_ , Ben J. Wattenberg, 75-96.  New York: The Free Press, 1995.  

**Week 3, continued**

Ehrenreich, Barbara.  "Nickled and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By in America."
_Harper's_ (January, 1999): 37-52.

Ellwood, David T.  "Winners and Losers in America: Taking the Measure of the
New Economic Realities."  In _A Working Nation: Workers, Work, and Government
in the New Economy_ , David T. Ellwood, et al, 1-41.  New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 2000.

Section Discussions:  Considering various dimensions, is America becoming more
equal or unequal; and why are these changes occurring?

**Week 4:   Political and Civic Transformations**

No class on Monday, February 19:  Presidents' Day holiday.

Lecture (February 21):  Political Parties and Voters Across Eras (Skocpol)

Readings:

Valelly, Richard.  "Vanishing Voters." _The American Prospect_ 1 (Spring
1990): 140-50.

Ganz, Marshall.  "Voters in the Crosshairs: How Technology and the Market are
Destroying Politics."  _The American Prospect_ 16 (Winter 1994): 100-109.

Get started on next week's readings!

Section Discussions: How has American electoral democracy changed?  

**Week 5:   Political and Civic Transformations (continued)**

Lecture (February 26):The Tocqueville Problem: Civic Engagement in America
(Skocpol)

Lecture (February 28):The Tocqueville Problem, continued (Skocpol)

Readings:

Skocpol, Theda and Morris P. Fiorina, eds.  _Civic Engagement in American
Democracy_.   Washington: Brookings Institution Press; New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 1999.  Chapters 2, 7, 8, and Part III (chapters 10-13).

Putnam, Robert D.  _Bowling Alone_.   New York: Simon and Schuster, 2000.
Sections I-III.

Section Discussions:  What is happening to participation in U.S. civic life
and politics, and why?

**Short paper #1 on U.S. democracy due on Friday, March 2, by 2pm, in the
Sociology Department Office, William James Hall, 6th floor.   Everyone in the
class must turn in this assignment.**  

**II.   THE WELL-BEING OF FAMILIES AND CHILDREN**

This section of the course starts by plunging in to contentious contemporary
debates about what is happening to families in the United States today, and
the role of government in exacerbating or ameliorating such problems.  Our
interest piqued, we examine demographic and statistical information on trends
in U.S. family structures and work-family relationships, considering debates
about the causes and effects of marriage patterns, female labor-force
participation, and child-rearing in or out of wedlock.  Ethnographic and
interview studies offer additional insights.  We survey the development of
U.S. public policies relevant to families, and then revisit current debates.
What do social science studies tell us about why social trends and policy
disputes have happened as they have -- and about what could happen next?

**Week 6:   Family Wars in U.S. Society and Politics**

Lecture (March 5):  A Clash of Diagnoses and Prescriptions (Skocpol)

Lecture (March 7):Men, Women, and Work (Waters)

Readings (a set of value-oriented analyses and prescriptions):

Whitehead, Barbara Dafoe.  "Dan Quayle Was Right." _  Atlantic Monthly_ (April
1993): 47-84.

Hewlett, Sylvia Ann and Cornel West.  The War Against Parents.  New York:
Houghton Mifflin, 1998.  Chapters 1-4, 7-9.

Bianchi, Suzanne.  "Changing Economic Roles of Women and Men."  In _State of
the Union: America in the 1990s_ , edited by Reynolds Farley.  Volume One,
_Economic Trends_ , 107-54.  New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1995.

Section Discussions:  A mock debate among diverse political actors.  

**Weeks 7 and 8 (first half):   Social Policies and American Families**

Lecture (March 12):Changing Family Structures and Experiences:  How and why
are they changing? (Waters)

Lecture (March 14):Families, Work, and Welfare Policies (Skocpol)

Lecture (March 19):Current Social Policy Debates (Skocpol)

Readings:

Skocpol, Theda.  _Social Policy in the United States_.   Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1995.  Chapters 1, 6, 8, and Conclusion.

Bennett, Michael J.  "The Law That Worked."  _Educational Record: The Magazine
of Higher Education_ (Special Issue: _The GI Bill's Lasting Legacy_ ) 75, no.
4

TENTATIVE FINAL EXAMNIATION TO BE SCHEDULED FOR FRIDAY, MAY 18, 2001



