COURSE:  | **HY 390: THE MODERN SOUTH** |  Fall, 1999  
---|---|---  
Instructor: | **Clarence L. Mohr 346 Humanities Building**  
Office Hours: Tuesday 2-3 p.m. Wednesday 11:00-12:00 AM  
or by appointment at other times  
---|---  
  
_SCOPE AND CONTENT_

Covering the years 1920-1990, this course explores the half century of
economic, political, cultural, and intellectual change that transformed the
American South in the wake of the Great Depression. After an initial effort to
define the South and isolate those things which make it "southern," the class
will proceed, through topical lectures, reading, reports and discussions, to
explore the paradox of continuing self-conscious regional identity in the face
of constant internal change. The outlines of the modern South took shape
gradually, beginning in most instances with changes set in motion by the New
Deal and subsequently accelerated or redirected by larger events such as World
War II, the Cold War, the Civil Rights Movement, and the technological
revolution of the past generation. Most of the themes to be examined in this
course including politics, reform ideology, race relations, and economic
development fit comfortably within the chronological boundaries just described
--provided that the patterns existing at the beginning of the Depression are
understood to be the product of a century or more of previous historical
development. Other subjects including evangelical religion, education, the
status of women, music and popular culture, and growth of literary and
intellectual modernism will require at least brief attention to changes that
began prior to 1930.

_OBJECTIVES_

Developing the intellectual tools and the habits of mind necessary for
understanding the contemporary South in a national and world context is the
central goal of this course. These tools include a foundation of basic factual
knowledge, an attitude of personal detachment toward all subject matter, an
awareness of the major external and domestic forces that have shaped the
South's recent development, and a grasp of the interpretative scholarly
literature bearing upon topics considered in reading and class discussion. Or,
to put the matter another way, the course seeks to understand Southern history
in terms of historical processes rather than linear relationships of cause and
effect. This means that students must give attention not simply to the facts
of recent Southern history but also to the strategies that historians employ
to arrange and extract meaning from those facts. Above all the course seeks to
encourage critical thought and questioning of unexamined assumptions (both
yours and mine).

_CLASS FORMAT_

Lecture/reading and discussion

_REQUIREMENTS_

All students must purchase and read the following books:

1\. Dewey W. Grantham, _The South in Modern America_. (New York: Harper
Collins, 1994)

2\. Paul Escott and David Goldfield, eds., _Major Problems in the History of
the American South_. Vol II, _The New South_

3\. Nancy MacLean, _Behind the Mask of Chivalry: The Making of the Second Ku
Klux_ _Klan_. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994)

4\. Willie Morris, _North Toward Home_ (Oxford, MS: Yoknapatawpha Press,1982
[reprint edition of 1967 work])

5\. Doug McAdam, _Freedom Summer_. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1988)

6\. H. G. Bissinger, _Friday Night Lights: A Town, a Team, and a Dream_. (New
York: Harper Collins, 1991)

_The South in Modern America_ by Dewey Grantham is a textbook. It is intended
to provide a framework for lectures and a convenient source for reviewing
basic "facts and dates." Relevant chapters should be read in advance of
lectures. _Major Problems in the History of the American South_ is a
compilation of interpretive articles and original documents. Most weekly
quizzes will be taken from assigned chapters of this volume.

The remaining books are scholarly works or first person accounts that examine
important themes in greater depth than a textbook can provide.

_PLEASE NOTE_ _Specific chapters from_ _The South in Modern America_ _and_
_Major Problems_ _will be assigned each week. There will also be out of class
assignments based upon other assigned reading. Brief factual quizzes or short
essays on assigned reading will precede most lectures. Occasionally oral
discussions of assigned monographs and autobiographies may replace weekly
quizzes._

TAKE HOME ASSIGNMENTS

The principal writing project of the course will consist of two short essays
(4-7 pages each) that explore the implications of one or more books assigned
for the course. . Essay #1 will focus on the economic, social, and political
significance of the Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s, as described in Nancy MacLean,
_Behind the Mask of Chivalry_. The first essay will be submitted on October 18
as part of the midterm exam. Essay #2 based upon Willie Morris, _North Toward
Home_ and H. G. Bissinger, _Friday Night Lights_ will ask students to compare
the nature of community life in small southern towns during the 1950s and the
1980s. This essay affords an opportunity to "do" history by drawing
conclusions from original evidence. You will also prepare this essay outside
of class and submit it as part of your final examination on December 10.
Shorter essay questions on the mid-term and final exam will allow you to
discuss _Freedom Summer_ and various articles in the _Major Problems_
anthology.

_GRADING_

Grades will be calculated on the following basis:  
  WEEKLY TESTS ON ASSIGNED READING AND PARTICIPATION IN CLASS DISCUSSIONS

_Please note that ** _no "makeup" tests are allowed on weekly quizzes_**. In
computing this component of your grade I will drop the two lowest scores. If
two quizzes were missed two "0" scores will be dropped. Additional missed
quizzes will be averaged in as zeroes_ |  33.3%  
---|---  
MID-TERM EXAM | 33.3%  
FINAL EXAMINATION | 33.3%  
  
_ATTENDANCE POLICY_  


Prompt and regular attendance is expected of all students. Class begins at
6:00 PM. There will normally be a brief break around 7:15 PM. Anyone who
anticipates arriving late or leaving class early on a frequent basis is
advised against registering for this course. Chronic absence will adversely
affect final grades.

_A FINAL NOTE_

This course will succeed to the extent that you become actively engaged with
the books and ideas we will be examining. All students should devote maximum
effort to the semester's reading and feel completely free to express their
candid opinions (and listen to other ideas) both in and out of class.

You are encouraged to consult with me on a regular basis to review test
performance, discuss out-of-class reading, and other matters related to the
course. If you are having difficulty with a book or need clarification of
points raised in lectures the time to come and see us is _before_ the next
quiz. Do not be concerned about "taking up my time." My job is to help you
learn.

