**Fall Quarter 1998 - "Investigative Journalism & People of Color: Race
Relations in L.A."**

African American Studies M195; class ticket number: 121-778-220

Asian American Studies M163; class ticket number: 104-840-200

**Tuesdays and Thursdays, 11 a.m. - 12:15 p.m. , Rolfe 2106**

[**Class Web Magazine**](webmag.html)  
---  
  
  
**Course Description**

This course looks at race relations in L.A., focusing on African Americans and
Asian Americans, and stresses the role that students trained in community
journalism can play in promoting education. Course work emphasizes learning by
doing - by the end of Quarter, students will share what they have learned by
writing articles for a Web Magazine that will be posted on the web site of the
Asian American Studies Center.

**Course Staffing**

**`Glenn Omatsu's office hours:`** Tuesdays, 9:30 - 10:45 a.m.; or by
appointment

Office: 3237 Campbell Hall; phone: 53415, direct line; or 52974, messages;

e-mail: [gomatsu@ucla.edu](mailto:gomatsu@ucla.edu)

**Course Goals**

The role of community journalism is "to comfort the afflicted and afflict the
comfortable."

This course has three goals: 1) to explore the state of race relations in Los
Angeles today; 2) to provide students with a critical perspective on race
relations by contrasting interpretations from mainstream media and community
media; and 3) to encourage students to use the tool of community journalism to
share what they are learning in the classroom with others.

This class is part of the legacy of the grassroots political movements of the
late 1960s that created Ethnic Studies - African American Studies and Asian
American Studies in particular. During the late 1960s, Third World people in
the U.S. and around the world forged alliances to fight struggles for
liberation and justice. Early classes in African American and Asian American
Studies reflected these alliances, with courses in each discipline sharing
resources and ideas with each other. However, as Ethnic Studies evolved,
practitioners have moved away from this founding tradition. Currently at UCLA,
this class is the only class cross-listed between African American Studies and
Asian American Studies.

This course explores the dimensions of power and oppression, race and
ethnicity, and civil rights and human rights in Los Angeles today. Through
readings, lectures, and classroom discussions, students will learn about the
distinguishing features of the Asian American and African American communities
as we near the twenty-first century.

We live in a critical period in Los Angeles history. According to

population data, people of color in Los Angeles have become the "new
majority." However, this "new majority" exists only in terms of population
numbers; by every measure of political and economic power, communities of
color still face oppression. Moreover, as illustrated by the 1992
Riot/Uprising, interethnic conflict is as much a feature of Los Angeles life
as interethnic cooperation.

Also shaping race relations in L.A. in the 1990s are two dangerous trends:
politicians' heavy reliance on racial "wedge issues" in elections, and the
growing gap between rich and poor in the region. Racial wedge issues have long
been a part of Los Angeles history, but the new emphasis by politicians must
be understood in terms of changing demographics and efforts to maintain the
political status quo. This is the context for understanding immigrant bashing,
the attack on bilingual education, the abolishment of affirmative action,
criminalization of inner-city youth through new laws such as "three strikes
and you're out," and the war against the poor through welfare reform. These
measures take on even more ominous meaning when we see them in relation to the
other dangerous trend today: the growing polarization between those who are
poor and those who are relatively well-off in the region.

In this class, we will analyze these dangerous trends and also the efforts of
people organizing at the grassroots level to fight for justice and equality.

**Grading**

The instructor does not use a class curve for grading. Grading is based on a
100 point scale:

A 91-100 points

B 81-90 points

C 71-80 points

D 61-70 points

F 60 points and below

**Assignments include the following:**

11 Homework Assignments (5 points each) 55 points

Field Assignment (due October 30) 15 points

Final Paper (due by December 9) 25 points

Attendance and participation 5 points

**`Late work will be accepted but penalized for each day beyond the due
date.`**` `

**Final Paper**

The Final Paper is an investigative article focusing on race relations in
L.A., suitable for publication in the class Web Magazine. The paper will be
evaluated according to criteria in Arthur Plotnik's The Elements of Editing: A
Modern Guide for Editors and Journalists - see last page of Reader).

**Extra Credit**

Students may obtain extra credit by writing additional piecesfor the Web
Magazine. All extra credit must be cleared with the instructor in advance.

**Field Assignment**

The purpose of the Field Assignment is to expand students' opportunities for
learning by getting them off campus to visit exhibits and events relating to
race relations in L.A. Students should use this assignment to experience
something new. Possibilities for the Field Assignment include the following:
Museum of Tolerance in West L.A., California African American Museum in
Exposition Park, Japanese American National Museum in Little Tokyo, Korean
American Museum in Koreatown, or La Plaza de Los Angeles (Olvera Street tour)
in downtown L.A. The instructor will provide additional places for this
assignment. Students will write an essay (two pages minimum) about what they
learned from their visit (please attach a dated ticket stub as proof of
attendance - 5 point penalty for essays handed in without ticket stubs).

**Attendance And Participation**

Attendance for this course is very important because each class session builds
on prior sessions, and each homework assignment helps students with the Final
Paper. More than three absences during the Quarter will result in lowering a
student's grade by one letter grade.

**Textbooks**

Due to rising student fees, I have tried different methods to cut student
expenses for classes I teach. The only required textbook for this class is a
Class Reader available from Course Reader Material (20-20 Copy Center), 1141
Westwood Blvd., (310) 443-3303. More than 95% of the Reader consists of
writings by students from my past classes.

**Groundrules For This Class**

1) You will get out of this class as much as you put into it. I am willing to
work with each student individually to improve her/his writing. But it is up
to each student to take the initiative to come to talk to me.

2) Don't be intimidated by the writing assignments in this class. Over the
past six years, 95% of the students taking this class had no prior writing
experience (i.e., they had not published any of their writings before taking
this class). The 5% who had previously published articles did not have an
advantage over others. I do not grade students on a curve; theoretically,
every student in this class could get an "A" \- although this has not yet
happened. 3) The content matter of this class deals with issues that are
controversial and political. Please try to remain open to new perspectives,
especially those from your fellow classmates. Within this classroom, we will
try to create an atmosphere of learning - where each person feels free to ask
questions and express opinions. 4) Use this class to develop your capacity for
critical thinking. There are no "right" or "wrong" answers in this class. It
is more important to learn how to ask good questions, such as "why" \- why in
L.A. today do we see the convergence of several dangerous trends?; "what" \-
what is behind these trends?; and "how" \- how can students use the tool of
community journalism to educate others about these developments? 5) Finally,
the most important goal of this class is to encourage you to share what you
are learning with others, especially in the off-campus community. In the late
1960s, the movements that created Ethnic Studies began with a vision of
education that linked classroom learning to responding to problems in the
community. This vision continues today. Students have a special responsibility
to share their knowledge with others in their communities, especially those
who will never be able to take Ethnic Studies classes in their lifetimes.
Journalism is one way that students can do this.

**Course Schedule**

**`WEEK 1: Thursday, October 1: Introduction to class`**

WEEK 1, Tuesday, October 6: 1) Overview of issues covered in this course
(mainstream and community media; rules of journalism); 2) student perspectives
on race relations in L.A.

Homework Assignment #1: Read the following student perspectives on race
relations Write a one to two page essay about your own perspective. Assignment
due on October 8.

Required readings:

Yin Tea, "We Are All Ingredients in a New American Melting Pot" Rosia Lana
Ivey, "Dissed by Your Own Mind: Neglected African Contributions to Asia"

Jennifer Sun, "Can Colors Unite? Students Fed Up with Racial Violence in L.A."
Julia Ha, "We Shall Overcome: Students Speak Out on the 'African-Korean'
Conflict'"

Thuy, "Cultural Crossroads: Being Vietnamese and African American" Kimberlee
Mar, "It's Time to Rethink Asian American Studies" Jaime Maldonado, "Can We
All Get Along? Explorando las relaciones entre los africanos y los latinos

Mike Byung Kwon, "Yellow Brick Reconstruction" Anna Dorman, "A Curriculum of
Their Own: Latino and African-American Teens Seek Multicultural Education"

Pa Xiong, "Race Relations in L.A.: The Blind Leading the Naked"

WEEK 1, Thursday, October 8: 1) How to write an article for publication _ step
one: researching your topic: where to find information; 2) Similarities and
differences: academic writing and journalism

Homework Assignment #2: Each student will write a one-page essay answering two
questions: 1) What does your name mean?, and 2) How did you get your name?
Students will share their essays in class on October 13.

Homework Assignment #3: How to find information on campus (assignment to be
handed out in class). Each student will write one page answering the questions
on the handout. Assignment due October 15.

Required readings:

"How to Write an Article for Publication" J. Otis Powell!, "By Any Other Name"

Michael Chung, "A Name Sandwich"

April Liening, "I Am Ecstatic about Being Filipina" Patria G. Abelgas, "Voices
on Paper: An Autobiography" Pamela sf Kong, "A North Campus Student Searches
for the Bio-Med Library"

**`WEEK 2, Tuesday, October 13: 1) Mainstream vs. community journalism; 2)
Racial stereotyping in mainstream media; and 3) Role of students trained in
community journalism`**

Homework Assignment #4: Demographic information on communities of color in
L.A., California, and U.S. (assignment to be handed out in class). Each
student will write one page answering the questions on the handout. Assignment
due October 20.

Required readings:

June Lee, "Mainstream Media Contributes to Cultural Stereotypes" Kelly Sutton,
"Latinos in the News?"

Pa Xiong, "Hmong Means Free, or Does It? Memoirs of the Hmong Dead" Roderick
Sasis, "Freedom and Justice for All? Filipino American Veterans 'Served but
Don't Deserve'"

Kimberly G. Allain, "UCLA After Affirmative Action: Who Will Respond to the
Needs of African American Students?"

Vy Nguyen, "Fear of an Asian Campus"

WEEK 2, Thursday, October 15: Researching your topic _ the importance of being
able to evaluate the information you find.

Homework Assignment #5: Internet assignment (to be handed out in class).
Assignment due October 22.

Required readings:

Leo W. Banks, "What Students Do Not Know Is What Counts in This Course"
Patrick Buchanan, "What Will America Be in 2050?" "Affirmative Action
Controversy in California" Grace Borrero, "Images of Pilipinas on the
Internet"

**`WEEK 3, Tuesday, October 20: 1) Demographic changes in the U.S.,
California, and L.A - what do these changes mean for people of color.; and 2)
Researching your topic - the role of interviews`**

Homework Assignment #6: Each student will interview another student from this
class (see class handout). Assignment due October 27.

Required readings:

Eric Sprague, "Everybody Wants to Be an Athlete" Claudia Martin, "Oranges and
Peanuts: Latino Immigrants Working to Survive" San To Duong, "The Street
Called Home: Talking to the Invisible Residents of Westwood"

Kariann Yokota, "Understanding Each Other: African and Asian Students"
Annalisa Enrile, "Domestic Violence and Pilipino Americans: A Problem
Requiring a Solution"

Sally Kim, "The New Generation: Children of Korean-American Merchants Speak
for Their Parents"

Jennifer Rose, "Samoans Wrestle for Justice: Police Brutality in Southern
California"

Matthew J. Endo, "What the Heck Is an Asian Greek? Living Off the Fruit or
Planting New Trees?"

Roderick Sasis, "My Interview with Tarek Captan: Race Relations in the Eyes of
Dusk"

WEEK 3, Thursday, October 22: 1) Restrictive covenants: the hidden history of
segregation in L.A.; 2) Writing an article for publication - identifying your
audience

Homework Assignment #7: Write one page about a Los Angeles community group (to
be assigned) involved in race relations. Assignment due October 29.

Required readings:

Cynthia Hamilton, "Apartheid in an American City: The Case of the Black
Community in Los Angeles"

Example of Restrictive Convenant: Forest Lawn Memorial Park (1931) Example of
Restrictive Covenant: Pasadena Homeowner's Contract (1950)

**`WEEK 4, Tuesday, October 27: Writing an article for publication -
identifying your audience`**

Homework Assignment #8: Write one page about one ethnic community

publication _ to be assigned. We will discuss each student's findings on
November 3.

Required readings:

Julia Ishimaru, "Reflection on FACE: An Asian American Women's Magazine"
Haruna Baba, "'Eat Shit and Die!' Racial Ignorance at UCLA, From Top to
Bottom"

Peter Rho, "Museum of Tolerance: Hope Lives When People Remember" Lisa
Basconcillo, "Free Your Mind: New Museum Teaches Tolerance" Dawn Miralle,
"Afflict the Comfortable"

WEEK 4, Thursday, October 29: Interethnic alliances

Required readings:

Sarah Chee, "Why I Got Arrested for Chicana/o Studies" Maia Jackson, "The
First A.M.E. Family: The Seven Days a Week Church" Kathy Cho, "The Lord's
Prayer: A South Central Experience" Debra Lew, "A Time for Healing in Los
Angeles" Christina Sun, "Working toward a Common Ground" Glenn Omatsu,
"Histories that Oppress vs. Histories that Liberate: Four Grassroots
Organizations Share Their Visions for a New L.A." Julia Song, "Immigrant
Voices Are Voices for Human Dignity" Paul Moon, "Community Empowerment:
Restricting Liquor Stores in South Central"

**`WEEK 5, Tuesday, November 3: The historic role of ethnic media in
communities of color`**

Required readings:

Laurien Alexandre, "Alternative Press Voices Dissident Views" Gloria
Hernandez, "Transforming the Student Media: Pacific Ties and the

'Alternative' News Magazine at UCLA"

Field assignment is due on Thursday, November 5

WEEK 5, Thursday, November 5: 1) Analyzing bias in the media _ the
relationship between "objectivity" and power in society; 2) student writings _
investigative journalism

Homework Assignment #9: Each student will select a topic for their Final Paper
and write three short paragraphs answering the following questions: 1) Why did
you choose this particular topic? Why are you interested in it? 2) To write
your article, what research do you need to do? (Remember: research in this
class also includes interviews.) 3) What difficulties _ if any - do you
foresee in writing this article? Assignment due November 10.

Required readings:

Shonda Hornbeck, "Prison and Liberation: The U.S. Government's Motive for
Imprisoning Africans"

Jo Yang, "Full Pockets and Empty Promises: The UCLA Campaign against
Diversity"

Gisele Fong, "U.S. Office of Civil Rights Finds Anti-Asian Bias in UCLA's Math
Graduate Program"

Mark E. Pulido, "Youth Gangs and the Pilipino Community" Viviana Trujillo,
"LAPD: How Can We Hold This Gang Accountable?" Daniel Friedman, "Out of Sight,
Out of Mind: Redistricting, Minorities and Politics"



**`WEEK 6, Tuesday, November 10: Economic restructuring in L.A.`**

Homework Assignment #10: Each student will write one page around the following
questions: 1) What do you like to read (specific magazines, newspapers,
writers)? Why? 2) Can you identity one article or book from your favorite
writings that can serve as a "model" for your own writing? How does the writer
handle basic topics we have discussed in this class (e.g., "lead," use of
imagery, use of quotations from people interviewed or characters, presentation
of facts and arguments, etc.)? Assignment due November 17.

Required readings:

Amanda Wong, "A Tale of Two Cities"

Kevin Nozaki, "Lost in Los Angeles: Urban Policy and the Neglected" Lara
Sterling, "Living Day to Day: Immigrant Workers Look for Work on Pico &
Sawtelle"

WEEK 6, Thursday, November 12: Case study: to be assigned

Homework Assignment #11: This assignment deals with reading the Los

Angeles Times. Follow the instructions on the class handout. Assignment due
November 19.

Required readings:

"How to Detect Bias in the News." From Media & Values Susan J. Douglas,
"Reading the News in More Than Black and White"

**`WEEK 7, Tuesday, November 17: Case study: Labor struggles in L.A.`**

Required readings:

Ryan Masaaki Yokota, "New Otani Hotel: Forming a Social Movement through
Labor"

James Gatewood, "Demanding Corporate Accountability for Workers and Our
Communities"

Nate Santa Maria, "Forging a Union: Local 11 Strives for a Broader, Stronger
Leadership"

Alyssa Kang, "Rags for Riches: The Exploitation of Immigrant Women Garment
Workers"

WEEK 7, Thursday, November 19: Overcoming problems in writing: the importance
of rewriting; the critical role of your "lead"; and finding a "model" for your
article.

Required readings:

Karen Ann Daniels, "From Mountain to Molehill: A Dialogue on Race and the
Entertainment Industry"

Sang H. Lee, "Import Motorsport: Evolution of an Asian Subsculture" Linda Loi,
"'So We Don't End Up Like Chop Suey': Searching for 'Authentic' Chinese Food
in L.A."

**`WEEK 8, Tuesday, November 24: Case study: Struggles for equality in
education`**

Required readings:

Angela Cobb, "Welcome to the Educational Institute of Inequality: Unfair
Differences in the Los Angeles Unified School District" Libby Wong, "Our
Center Sponsors First Ever Class on Pacific Island Studies" Vincent Schiraldi,
"Trading Books for Bars"

WEEK 8, Thursday, November 26: Thanksgiving Holiday

**`WEEK 9, Tuesday, December 1: Understanding art and culture as tools for
education`**

Required readings:

John Vorwald, "Responding Artistically: Exhibit Explores Uprising Through
Images of Malcolm X"

Artist Darryl Mar's interpretation of the 1992 L.A. Uprising Tim
Ratanapreukskul, "Students Propose Mural for Asian American Studies Center in
Campbell Hall"

WEEK 9, Thursday, December 3: Rewriting: the essence of all good writing

Required readings:

Namju Cho, "Check Out, Not In: Koreana Wilshire/Hyatt Take-Over and the Los
Angeles Korean Community"

**`WEEK 10, Tuesday, December 8: What do editors do?`**

Required readings:

Arthur Plotnik, "The Elements of Editing"

WEEK 10, Thursday, December 10: Final class session

