History 461
Richard H. Immerman  
Studies in Diplomatic History
Gladfelter 909  
Spring 2002
1-7466/610-645-5436  
TUCC--Tuesday, 7:45-9:45
rimmerma@temple.edu  
    


For more than two decades the field of U.S. Diplomatic History, or what its
practitioners prefer to call the History of U.S. Foreign Relations, has
undergone intense introspection and self-criticism. The objective has been to
reinvigorate the discipline by reducing the alleged "sterility" associated
with the Rankean tradition. Without claiming this goal has been achieved,
progress toward it is manifestly evident. Exploiting archives in many
different lands and languages, contemporary scholars are asking new questions
and applying interdisciplinary methodologies and innovative conceptual
frameworks to their investigations. These efforts have generated great
excitement while at the same time expanding the parameters of--some would
argue transforming and even redefining--the field itself. The end of the cold
war and fluidity of today's international environment (even before 911) has
provided further impetus to this phenomenon.  


The intention of this course, accordingly, is to broaden your familiarity with
the historiography as well as the history of U.S. foreign relations. To begin
this process you will all become intimately acquainted with the essays in
_Explaining the History of American Foreign Relations_. Collectively, they
represent neither a manual or recipe book (indeed, a revised edition is
scheduled for publication this calendar year). They should, however, stimulate
your own thinking--and imagination--about what has, should, can, and will be
written. Each of you will select, or I will assign, one of these  "think
pieces," about which you will prepare a **five-to-ten-minute** oral
presentation at our next--January 29--meeting. You should evaluate what you
consider the pros and cons of the author 's diagnoses and prescriptions, and
if possible, suggest what (if any) subject areas you believe might lend
themselves to the type of approach s/he recommends.

The subsequent session, on February 5, will launch our tour of the history of
U.S. foreign policy. Please note the tour's chronological parameters. This
semester's focus is on the pre-cold war years. With that in mind, commencing
with this class and extending to the semester's end, two or three of you
(depending on class size) will read, in addition to the book assigned to
everyone, one the others listed each week on the syllabus. In other words, for
that week the "chosen" few will read two books. S/he will in **750 words**
review critically (c.f. the brief guide on  "How to Write a Book Review" is
available on the course's web page; the url is
http://astro.temple.edu/~rimmerma/02his461.html)  the selection (comparing it,
when appropriate, to the one we all read and any other works that come to
mind). Please be sure to check the library for the book you will review in
ample time for me, should it not be available (a not uncommon occurrence at
Temple) and I not own a copy, to provide you with a substitute title.  
  
These reviews will provide the basis for an approximately **fifteen-minute**
oral presentation in which each presenter will have the opportunity to
supplement his/her review by providing illustrations from the book as well as
to clarify or expand upon criticisms and arguments. The guide to writing a
book review is a general guide--nothing more. Feel free to follow your own
instincts, as long as you do not end up writing a book report. The only other
proscriptions are misspellings, mistakes in grammar, contractions, and passive
voice.   Copies of this and all future reviews should be made for each class
member. I have arranged to open a file at the circulation desk in the TUCC
library, where copies of the review should be deposited at least one hour
(e.g., by 6:45) before our class meets. In the best of all possible worlds,
however, you should **e-mail** your reviews to me and the remainder of the
class by **4:30** that afternoon. Earlier, of course, is even better.  
  
This distribution and deadline is particularly critical for the week's
designated "commentators." What I mean by "commentators" is that, similar to
the convention at scholarly meetings, class members assigned to "comment" will
take about 10 minutes to analyze critically the review by pointing out the
strengths and weaknesses (of both the review and the book) and by posing
questions about the subject matter, arguments, sources, methodology, etc.
Because the commentator probably has (and need) not read the work(s) under
review, I will, if and when warranted, inject points of information and
clarification.

Further clarification will be provided during the "audience participation"
portion of the "panel" which will follow the presentations.  The "audience"
(class) will be well informed because you all will have read the "globally-
assigned" book and written a **one-page** review of it (those reviewing the
week's supplementary/complementary books must read but need not write a review
of the globally-assigned one). I will grade all reviews  "excellent,"
"satisfactory" or "unsatisfactory" ("check +", "check", or "check -").
Needless to say, failure to submit reviews on time will adversely affect the
quality of the commentaries and general discussion; thus I will not take
kindly to such behavior. You will pay the price.

The final assignment will be a comparative review essay of **four books**
(excluding those already reviewed in class). It should run eight to twelve
double-spaced pages.   The selections are yours to make and should, of course,
be related to one another in some manner. I encourage you to base your choices
on a theme, topic, or even individual that is of interest to you and/or is
valuable for your respective areas of research. As part of the assignment, I
want you to develop a list of **six books** that you consider potentially
appropriate for your comparative review essay, using the library, on-line data
bases, bibliographies, historiographic essays, footnotes from related works,
or any other means--just as you would if I asked you to prepare a research
paper. I will evaluate your list after you have compiled it and together we
will pare it down to four books. For this reason let's agree that you will
bounce your proposals off me. Because the papers will be due (at my office on
main campus)   no later than **3:00 p.m.** on **Tuesday, May 7** , you should
make an appointment with me, either at TUCC or the Main Campus, no later than
**April 9**.   When we meet we can also discuss your performance and progress.
In order that you can plan ahead, jot down on your calendar now that the class
will meet for a final time at my house on **Sunday, May 19** , where we can
collectively break bread to celebrate how far we have journeyed together.

On a more mundane level, as a normative guideline I will base your course
grade on an even division between your written and oral work. I may reward
exceptional performance in one area by giving it extra weight in my
calculations; don't count on it, however. Hence never rest on your laurels.
And FYI, I am a fanatic when it comes to class participation. The success of
any graduate course is contingent on the collective contributions of everyone.
If you are uncomfortable speaking out, or for that matter encounter any other
problems, see me sooner rather than later. Under any circumstances, feel free
to check with me whenever the spirit moves you.  
  
Required Reading (available at the TUCC Bookstore)  


Hogan, Michael & Thomas Paterson, _Explaining the History of American Foreign
Relations_  
Gilbert, Felix, _To the Farewell Address_  
Kaplan, Lawrence, _Thomas Jefferson_  
Nagel, Pau.l, _John Quincy Adams_  
Stephanson, Anders, _Manifest Destiny_  
Ninkovich, Frank, _The United States and Imperialism_  
Hunt, Michael, _The Making of a Special Relationship_  
Renda, Mary, _Taking Haiti_  
Kendrick, A. Clements, _Woodrow Wilson_  
Iriye, Akira, _The Globalizing of America_  
Dallek, Robert, _Franklin D. Roosevelt_  
Gallicchio, Marc, _The African American Encounter With Japan and China_  
Walker, J. Samuel, _Prompt and Utter Destruction_

**Schedule of Sessions**  


January 22    Introduction

January 29

Class Reading:  Hogan and Paterson

Reviews:   Individual essays

Commentaries:  Everyone  


February 5

Class Reading:  Gilbert

Reviews: Bemis, Sam Flagg, _Diplomacy of the Am. Rev_.  
Marks, Frederick, _Independence on Trial_  
Morris, Richard, _The Peacemakers_

Commentaries:

  


February 12

Class Reading:  Kaplan

Reviews:   Combs, Jerald, _The Jay Treaty_  
Horsman, Reginald, _Expansion and American Indian Policy_  
Tucker Robert W., and David C. Hendrickson, _Empire of Liberty_

Commentaries:  
    
    


February 19

Class Reading:  Nagel  (and Weeks essay)

Reviews:   Johnson, John, _A Hemisphere Apart_  
Stagg, J. C., _Mr. Madison's War_  
Weeks, William, _John Quincy Adams and American Global Empire_

Commentaries:  
    


February 26

Class Reading:  Stephanson (and Brauer essay)  
  
Reviews:  Graebner, Norman, _Empire on the Pacific_  
Haynes, Sam, _James K. Polk and the Expansionist Impulse_  
Hietala, Thomas, _Manifest Design_

Commentaries:  


March 5

Class Reading:  Ninkovich (and Crapol essay)

Reviews:   LaFeber, Walter, _The New Empire_  
May, Ernest, _Imperial Democracy_  
McFerson, Hazel, _The Racial Dimension of American Overseas Colonial Policy_  
Perez, Louis, _War of 1898_

Commentaries:  


March 12 Spring Recess  


March 19

Class Reading:  Hunt

Reviews:   Beale, _Howard, Theodore Roosevelt_  
Henning, Joseph, _Outposts of Civilization_  
Hoganson, Kristen, _Fighting for American Manhood_

Commentaries:

March 26

Class Reading:  Renda

Reviews:   Calder, Bruce, _The Impact of Intervention_  
Rosenberg, Emily, _Financial Missionaries to the World_  
Schoonover, Thomas, _United States and Central America_

Commentaries:  


April 2

Class Reading:  Clements

Reviews: Ambrosius, Lloyd, _Wilson and Diplomatic Tradition_  
Cooper, John Milton, _Breaking the Heart of the World_  
Levin, N. Gordon, _Woodrow Wilson_  
Widenor, William, _Henry Cabot Lodge_

Commentaries:  
    


April 9

Class Reading:  Iriye

Reviews:   Costigliola, Frank, _Awkward Dominion_  
Dingman, Roger, _Power in the Pacific_  
Fogelsong, David, _America 's Secret War against Bolshevism_  
Hogan, Michael, _Informal Entente_  


Commentaries:  


April 16

Class Reading:  Dallek

Reviews:   Heinrichs, Waldo, _Threshold of War_  
Thorne, Christopher, _Limits of Foreign Policy_  
Reynolds, David, _Creation of the Anglo-American Alliance_  


Commentaries:  


April 23

Class Reading:  Gallicchio

Reviews: Dower, John, _War Without Mercy_  
Kimball, Warren, _Forged in War_  
Stoler, Mark, _Allies and Adversaries_

Commentaries:  
    
    


April 30

Class Reading:  Walker

Reviews: Alperovitz, Gar, _The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb_  
Maddox, Robert, _Weapons for Victory_  
Sherwin, Martin, _A World Destroyed_  


Commentaries:  


