**HISTORY 650-1

A READINGS SEMINAR IN  
THE HISTORY OF APPALACHIA

With Dr. Ron Eller **

History 650-1 is a graduate readings seminar that explores the historiography
of Appalachia from the colonial settlement to the present. As an advanced
seminar, it assumes that participants have acquired a general knowledge of the
history of Appalachia from previous reading or introductory courses. In this
course participants will read broadly in the recent historical literature on
Appalachia and discuss the quality of that research, trends in historical
interpretation, and areas for potential new scholarship in the field. In the
process, participants will not only acquire a better understanding of the
forces that have shaped contemporary Appalachia but of the historiography of
recent American history in areas such as frontier culture, the market
revolution, the Civil War, labor history, the industrial revolution, economic
development, and the public policy programs of the Great Society. This course
is designed to assist students who will be teaching or conducting research on
the history of Appalachia, the South and other American sub-regions.

_Seminar Format_ : This seminar will be based upon the discussion of common
readings of five core texts and selected readings drawn from eleven categories
of historical literature on Appalachia. Discussion will be generated by common
readings of classic texts and by short (ten minute) oral reviews of selected
books from each category. In addition to the discussion of common readings,
each student will be expected to present two oral reviews, submit two three-
four page written review essays, and complete an 10-12 page historiographical
essay on an individually selected topic of interest in Appalachian history.
Combined readings should total a minimum of 3,000 pages. Historiographical
essays should be based on a minimum of five monographs in the subject area.
Committed students, of course, will read far more than the minimum
requirement. A list of books and articles read for the course will be
submitted with the final historiographical essay.

_Common Texts_ :

Pudup, Billings, and Waller, eds., _Appalachian in the Making: The Mountain
South in the Nineteenth Century_ (1995, University of North Carolina Press)

Henry Shapiro, _Appalachia on Our Mind: The Southern Mountains and
Mountaineers in the American Consciousness_ (University of North Carolina
Press)

Ronald D Eller, _Miners, Millhands and Mountaineers: The Industrialization of
the Appalachian South_ (1982, University of Tennessee Press)

David Whisnant, _Modernizing the Mountaineer: People, Power, and Planning in
Appalachia_ (University of Tennessee Press)

David Whisnant, _All That Is Native and Fine: The Politics of Culture in an
American Subregion_ (University of North Carolina Press)

_Evaluation_ : Grades will be based upon the following critieria:

    
    
    	Discussion and Oral Reviews				20%
    	Two Book Review Essays					40%
    	Historiographical Essay/Reading List			40%
    

_Review Essays_ : Students will prepare a written review and an oral
presentation on at least two major books during the course of the semester.
Review essays should be typed (double spaced), well organized, and written in
a lively rather than a wooden style. The essays should be evaluative rather
than just a summary of the contents of the book, and they should place the
book in the larger context of the historiography of the subject, i.e. contrast
or compare with something else written about the subject. A copy should be
submitted to the instructor and another copy should be brought to class for
use as a reference during the discussion. Headings for these essays should
list the complete title, press, and date of publication for the book reviewed.

_Historiographical Essay_ : An historiographical essay is a critical review of
the major literature on an historical subject, focusing on the major schools
of thought, conflicting interpretations and new directions for research.
Essays should not be summaries of the content of these books but a critical
evaluation of the major themes and ideas presented by the authors. Finally, an
historiographical essay is your evaluation of where the historical research on
this subject is at this time and where you think it needs to go. What
questions are yet to be asked? What sources are yet to be pursued? What
theories are yet to be analyzed? Essays should be limited to approximately ten
pages in length, double-spaced, and are due on the last day of the seminar.

**SEMINAR SCHEDULE

Spring 1998 Time: Tuesday 12:00-1:50PM **

    
    
    _Date_	_Topic_					_Common Reading_
    
    1/19	Class Orientation			
    
    1/26	No Class (reading day)
    
    2/2	The Appalachian Frontier		Pudup, Billings and Waller, Chps. 1-3
    
    2/9	Appalachia and the Civil War		Pudup, Billings and Waller, Chps 4-7
    
    2/16	Nineteenth Century Economy		Pudup, Billings and Waller, Chps  8-9
    						Eller, Chp.1
    
    2/23	Nineteenth Century Transformation	Pudup, Billings  & Waller, Chps 10-13
    						Eller. _Miners_ , Chp 2
    
    3/2	The Idea of Appalachia			Shapiro, all
    
    3/9	Missionaries and Mountaineers		Whisnant, _All That Is Native_ , 
    						all
    
    3/16	UK SPRING BREAK
    
    3/23	Industrialization of Appalachia		Eller, _Miners_ , Chps. 3-4
    
    3/30	Coal, Culture and Community		Eller, _Miners_ , Chps  5-6
    
    4/6	Appalachia At Mid-Passage		Eller, _Miners_ , Chp. 7
    						Whisnant, _Modernizing_ , Chps 
    						1-2
    
    4/13	Appalachia & Politics of Poverty	Whisnant, _Modernizing_ , Chps 
    						3-6
    
    4/20	Appalachia at the Millennium 		
    
    4/27	Historiographical Essays Due
    

* * *

**The Appalachian Center at the University of Kentucky  
624 Maxwelton Court, Lexington, KY 40506-0347  
Telephone (859)257-4852; FAX:(859)257-3903  
Write us via our [feedback form](feedback.htm) or e-mail our
[Staff](staff.htm) **  
---  
  
**

#####  [research](http://www.uky.edu/RGS/AppalCenter/research/) |
[service](service.htm) | [staff](staff.htm) | [publications](publis.htm) |
[home](welcome.html)

**

