## **Biology 115 Human Inheritance  
_Summer 1999_**

# **Course Syllabus**

* * *

[General Course Info](Bio115_Syllabus1.html#Info) | [Course
Description](Bio115_Syllabus1.html#Description) | [Course
Objectives](Bio115_Syllabus2.html) | [Course
Organization](Bio115_Syllabus3.html) | [Course
Requirements](Bio115_Syllabus4.html) | [Course
Resources](Bio115_Syllabus5.html) | [Statement on the Code of Academic
Integrity](Bio115_Syllabus6.html#Code) |
[Disclaimer](Bio115_Syllabus6.html#Disclaimer)

* * *

### Course Objectives

> The primary goal... of all general education courses [should be] to improve
students' decision-making abilities.
--Anonymous[1](Bio115_Syllabus2_fn.html#fn0)

>

> The purpose of the liberal arts core is to enable students to (1) establish
a foundation for further learning at the College, (2) develop the
proficiencies and perspectives essential for a lifetime of liberal learning
and informed citizenship in today's global society, and (3) reflect critically
on the ways of knowing and understanding embodied in particular disciplines.
--College of Wooster [2](Bio115_Syllabus2_fn.html#fn02)

As part of your liberal arts education, the overall goals of this course are
to:

  1. **Further develop your scientific literacy, an important subdivision of cultural literacy.**

> It is self-evident that we live in a society dominated by science and
technology and it is improbable that a person can adequately cope or be truly
"liberated" while being largely ignorant of them.... Thus science and
technology must become part of the liberal arts disciplines, now mainly
thought to be in the humanities, that are deemed necessary for an effective
and satisfying life.[3](Bio115_Syllabus2_fn.html#fn2)

_What is scientific literacy?_ While no one can be an expert in all areas of
science, the eminent biologist John A. Moore argues that "literacy in science
and technology consists of the ability to understand, in a general way, the
natural and man-made worlds. One should be curious about any observed
phenomenon of these two worlds, have some degree of understanding, and know
how to obtain deeper understanding."[3](Bio115_Syllabus2_fn.html#fn2) While a
scientist's curiosity, understanding, and ability to gain further knowledge on
scientific matters will obviously be greater that most individuals, the
general citizen can only fully participate in and appreciate today's world
with a certain level of scientific literacy.

_What knowledge is required for scientific literacy?_ As the College reviews
its general education requirements, the following language is being considered
with respect to the Natural Sciences:

> A liberally educated person should know how to describe, model, and predict
natural phenomena; to pose questions about the natural world; and attempt to
answer them within a self-consistent framework of observations, hypotheses,
and tests.

>

> Therefore, students should acquire the ability to:

>

>     * understand and use the scientific method to learn about nature;

>     * understand and apply mathematical analysis;

>     * be able to assess the validity of scientific claims;

>     * understand and appreciate connections among scientific disciplines;

>     * understand the role of science, technology and the scientist in
society; and

>     * appreciate science as a human endeavor involving intuition,
inspiration and creativity.



  2. **To develop a knowledge base in one area of science -- genetics, a central subdiscipline of biology.**

> [T]here can be no more fundamental process in biology than genetics, since
there is no more fundamental phenomenon of life than genetic replication.
Genetics first and foremost, including its long-term manifestation
--evolutionary biology-- is the integrator of all biological concepts and
data.[4](Bio115_Syllabus2_fn.html#fn3)

It's probably not possible to learn, particularly in a one-semester course,
every fundamental scientific, or even biological, principle and concept you
will need in today's world. However, genetics, as a central discipline of
biology, provides a strong starting point for understanding biology.
Furthermore, recent advances in genetic are having significant impacts on
medicine, agriculture, and the environment, promising significant gains in
these areas, but at the same time potentially creating significant problems.
The knowledge gained from this course should assist you in making critical
decisions important to you and your larger community.

** **

  3. **To further develop the critical inquiry skills required for academic success at the College and, more importantly, life-long learning.**

The skills that are required for critical inquiry are nicely summarized in the
description of the College's First-Year Seminar program. Of those listed, this
course should further develop your ability to do the following:

    * read a variety of texts, including those which present a sustained argument, with understanding and critical judgment;
    * write clearly and to use writing as a tool for the exploration and expression of ideas and arguments;
    * synthesize, in writing and in discussion, material from several sources, and to apply it in constructing an argument and expressing ideas;
    * understand the validity and uses of different kinds of evidence.... 

The Biology 115 Human Inheritance course assignments are designed to develop
many of these critical inquiry skills. Combined with your other course work,
this background should provide you with the necessary knowledge and skills for
pursuing Independent Study and ultimately a life of liberal learning.

* * *

General Course Info | Course Description | [Course
Objectives](Bio115_Syllabus2.html) | [Course
Organization](Bio115_Syllabus3.html) | [Course
Requirements](Bio115_Syllabus4.html) | [Course
Resources](Bio115_Syllabus5.html) | [Statement on the Code of Academic
Integrity](Bio115_Syllabus6.html#Code) |
[Disclaimer](Bio115_Syllabus6.html#Disclaimer)

* * *

Return to the _[Bio 115 Human Inheritance_ Home Page](default.html).

* * *

_Last Updated: May 1999_

William R. Morgan [wmorgan@acs.wooster.edu](mailto:wmorgan@acs.wooster.edu)

