**S** **yllabus**

**![](../artwork/gyrule.gif)**

**|** **Course Description** **|** **Texts** **|** **Requirements** **|**

**Instructor:** Dr. Stephen D. Mooney

|

**Office:** Shanks 337  
  
---|---  
  
**Office Hours:** TR 10-11  & 2-3

|

**E-Mail:** pinemtn@vt.edu  
  
**Office Phone:** 1-8449

|

**Home Phone:** 626-6130 (no calls after 9 p.m.)  
  
**Course Description and Goals**

**I** ntroduction to Appalachian Studies traces the "idea" or concept of
Appalachia in American and world consciousness and attempts to assess the
socio-cultural impact, both positive and negative, of that idea. We begin our
study of the region in the settlement era (though we could start much earlier)
and end with an examination of Appalachia in the contemporary era. Throughout
the course, we analyze how the idea of Appalachia has been constructed, and to
what effect, in each historical period. We also consider the degree to which
each of us perhaps constructs our "own" Appalachia, and to what effect.
Considerable effort is made, though, to move beyond ideological or mental
constructions of the region and to gain some understanding of the reality of
life and work in the region, both now and in the past.

**I** ntroduction to Appalachian Studies is also a course in cultural history,
in particular a course in what contemporary historians have come to call
"people's history" (see, for example, Howard Zinn's _A People's History of the
United States_ or the American Social History Project's two-volume U.S.
history _Who Built America?_ ). That is, it attempts to interpret the American
experience not merely from the viewpoint of the "winners," but also from the
viewpoint of the "losers," those whose voices and opinions consistently have
been marginalized or silenced altogether in the standard histories of America
(note the specialized use of the word"losers" here) and those whose cultures
and economies have been drastically altered -- arguably for the worse -- by
the processes of advanced technological capitalism.



**Required Texts**

  * _Thunder in the Mountains_ , Lon Savage
  * _The Unquiet Earth_ , Denise Giardina
  * _An Appalachian Studies Reader_ , available from Kopy Korner (corner of N. Main and Progress)



**Course Requirements, Policies-Procedures, Evaluation**

**_Attendance_**

Students may miss 4 class periods (two weeks of the course!) without penalty,
though the Instructor encourages students to keep absences to a minimum. For
each absence beyond 4, students will lose a letter from their final grade. At
absence number 8 automatic failure for the course occurs, no exceptions. It is
important for students to realize that no distinctions are made between
"Exused" and "Unexcused" absences.

**_Class Participation_**

Students are expected to keep up with reading assignments, to listen
attentively to lectures when lectures are the best method of instruction, to
contribute to class discussions when instruction is best served by that
method, and to participate in other class activities such as out-of-class film
viewings or field trips, if necessary.

**_Responsibility for Course Content_**

Students are responsible for the content of each class period, whether present
or absent. The instructor will not provide a second lecture or recreate
classroom activities for those absent on a given day. Finally, absence on a
prior day is not sufficient reason for lack of preparation on the day of
return or for failure to provide due assignments in a timely manner.

**_Exams_**

Students will take four exams. These exams cover reading assignments,
lectures, class discussions and presentations, films and documentaries, and
any other types of materials included in the course. The exams generally will
be made up of take-home essay questions. The final exam will not be
comprehensive. Exams cannot be made up or rescheduled except in extenuating
and documentable circumstances.

**_Essay_**

For the final portion of their course grade, students will write a 5-page
essay on Denise Giardina's novel _The Unquiet Earth_.. Topics may be selected
from a list of 10-15 assignments (link provided below). Other things to note
with regard to the essay:

  * Papers should be doublespaced and typed or word-processed with one-inch margins all around (top, bottom, left, right) and a typesize of 12 cpi. Font style should be Times New Roman. In the case of research-based papers, any standard style of documentation and bibliography (MLA, APA, Chicago, for example) is permitted.The instructor will lower the grades of essays with larger typesizes, margins and/or longer spacing between lines.

**_Late Submission of Essays_**

The essay is due at the beginning of class on the specified day. Late essays
not accompanied by a physician's note, note from team sponsor, or
documentation of some other considerable difficulty will be penalized one full
letter grade for each day they are late (this is per day, not per class
period; weekend days are included). Please note that computer or printer
problems are not acceptable reasons for the late submission of essays. Neither
are tests, papers, or projects due on the same day in other classes. Finally,
when composing on a word-processor or personal computer, students should
always save frequently and should make backup copies of their documents (in
fact, students should make backups of their backups!).

**_Grading Scale_**

|



  * A 100-95
  * A- 94-90
  * B+ 89-87
  * B 86-84
  * B- 83-80
  * C+ 79-77

|



  * C 76-74
  * C- 73-70
  * D+ 69-67
  * D 66-64
  * D- 63-60
  * F 59-0

  
---|---  
  
|  
  
**_Final Grades_**

Final grades will be tabulated according to the following percentage values.
Final grades will conform to the +/- system found in the Virginia Tech
Undergraduate Catalogue.

  
Exam 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 %  
Exam 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 %  
Exam 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 %  
Exam 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 %  
Giardina Essay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 %

**_Honor Code_**

The University Honor Code will be in effect and enforced throughout the
course. If you are unfamiliar with the Virginia Tech Honor Code, it is your
responsibility to acquaint yourself with its regulations.

![](../artwork/chsqr12.gif) [**Back**](contents.htm)
![](../artwork/chsqr12.gif)

![](../artwork/gyrule.gif)



