|

The following references give bibliographic information and/or links to
readings related to the seminar topics. Note that the online resources I have
given you are not reflected in this list (that is coming).

**Introductory Readings **

Aronowitz, Stanley, and DiFazio, William. (1994). **The jobless future: Sci-
Tech and the dogma of work**. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. ch
8: A taxonomy of teacher work.

Bromley, Hank, and Apple, Michael W. (Eds.). (1998).
**Education/technology/power: Educational computing as a social practice**.
Albany: SUNY. Bromley's Introduction. 1-25.

Brown, John Seely, and Duguid, Paul. (2000). **The social life of
information**. Cambridge: Harvard Business School Press.

Gumport, Patricia J., and Chun, Marc. (1999). Technology and higher education:
Opportunities and challenges for the new era. In Philip G. Altbach, Robert O.
Berdahl, and Patricia J. Gumport (eds.), **American higher education in the
twenty-first century: Social, political, and economic challenges** (pp.
370-95). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.

Khan, Badrul H. (Ed.). (1997). **Web-based instruction**. Englewood Cliffs:
Educational Technology Publications.

Sofia, Zoe. (1998). The mythic machine: Gendered irrationalities and computer
culture. In Bromley and Apple. 29-52.

**Cultures of Technology**

Cairncross, Frances. (1997). **The death of distance: How the communications
revolution will change our lives**. Cambridge: Harvard Business Press. ch 9

Fiske, John. (1991). Moments of television: Neither the text nor the audience.
In Ellen Seiter et al. (eds.), **Remote control: Television, audiences, and
cultural power** (pp.56-78). London: Routledge.

Norman, Donald A. (1998) **The invisible computer**. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Plant, Sadie. (1996). On the matrix: Cyberfeminist simulations. In Rob Shields
(ed.), **Cultures of the internet** (pp. 170-83). London: Sage.

Rifkin, Jeremy. (2000). **The age of access: The new culture of
hypercapitalism where all of life is a paid for experience**. New York:
Tarcher/Putnam.

Rushkoff, Douglas. (1996). **Playing the future: What we can learn from
digital kids**. New York: Riverhead Books.

Tapscott, Don. (1998). **Growing up digital: The rise of the net generation**.
New York: McGraw-Hill. ch 7.

**Theories of Technoculture**

Deibert, Ronald J. (199-). **Parchment, printing and hypermedia: Communication
in world order transformation**. New York: Columbia University Press.

Hayles, N. Katherine. (1999). The condition of virtuality. In Peter Lunenfeld
(ed.), **The digital dialectic: New essays on new media** (pp.68-94).
Cambridge: The MIT Press.

Jordan, Tim. (1999). **Cyberpower: The culture and politics of cyberspace and
the internet**. London: Routledge.

Morse, Margaret. (1998). **Virtualities: Television, media art, and
cyberculture**. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Poster, Mark. (1995). **The second media age**. Polity press.

**Globalization Narratives and Postcolonial Theories**

Anderson, Sarah, and Cavanagh, John. (2000). **Field guide to the global
economy**. New York: The New Press.

Bhabha, Homi K. (Ed.). (1990). **Nation and narration**. London: Routledge.

Friedman, Susan Stanford. (1998). **Mappings: Feminism and the cultural
geographies of encounter**. Princeton: Princeton UP.

Giroux, Henry A. (199-). Border crossings: Cultural workers and the politics
of education.

Scott, Matthew S. (2000, July). Are you on the right side of the digital
divide? New Voice, 31-35.

Slaughter, Shiela, and Leslie, Larry L. (1997). **Academic capitalism:
Politics, policies, and the entrepreneurial university**. Baltimore: The Johns
Hopkins University Press. ch 2

Soja, Edward W. (2000). **Postmetropolis: Critical studies of cities and
regions**. London: Blackwell. ch 7

Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. (1993). **Outside in the teaching machine**.
London: Routledge. ch 4  "Woman in difference"; ch 9 "The politics of
translation."

**Institutions, Education & Administration**

Crowley, Sharon. (1998). **Composition in the university: Historical and
polemical essays**. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. ch 12.

Porter, James E., Sullivan, Blythe, Grabill, and Miles. (2000).

Roblyer, M.D., and Edwards, Jack. (2000). **Integrating educational technology
into teaching**. 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall.

Selfe, Cynthia L. (1999). **Technology and literacy in the twenty-first
century: The importance of paying attention**. Carbondale: SIU Press.

**Distance/Education Technologies**

Bryson, Mary, and DeCastell, Suzanne. (1998). Telling tales out of school:
Modernist, critical, and postmodernist "true stories" about educational
computing. In Bromley and Apple. 65-84.

Goldberg, Murray W. (1997). Using a web-based course authoring tool to develop
sophisticated web-based courses. In Badrul H. Khan (ed.), **Web-based
instruction** (pp. 307-12). Englewood Cliffs: Educational Technology
Publications.

Haynes, Cynthia, and Holmevek. (Eds.). (1998). **High Wired**. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.

Khan, Badrul H. (Ed.). (1997). **Web-based instruction**. Englewood Cliffs:
Educational Technology Publications.

Palloff, Rena M., and Pratt, Keith. (1999). **Building learning communities in
cyberspace: Effective strategies for the online classroom**. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.

Welsh, Thomas M. (1997). An event-oriented design model for web-based
instruction. In Badrul H. Khan (ed.), **Web-based instruction** (pp. 159-65).
Englewood Cliffs: Educational Technology Publications.

**Writing Technologies**

Hawisher, Gail E. (1994). Blinding insights: Classification schemes and
software for literacy instruction. In Cynthia L. Selfe and Susan Hilligoss
(eds.), **Literacy and computers: The complications of teaching and learning
with technology** (pp. 37-55). New York: MLA.

Joyce, Michael, and Bolter, Jay David. (1999-2000). Ourselves own images:
Post-hypertextial and new media. **Works and Days** , 17 & 18, 33/34, 35/36,
311-29.

Spender, Dale. (1995). **Nattering on the net: Women, power, and cyberspace**.
North Melbourne: Spinifex. ch 5: education.

**Distance Education History and Theory**

Simonson, Michael, Smaldino, Sharon, Albright, Michael, and Zvacek, Susan.
(2000). **Teaching and learning at a distance**. Upper Saddle River: Prentice
Hall. ch 2 and 3



**The Computerized Writing Class(room)**

Fanderclai, Tari Lin. (1996). Like magic, only real. In Lynn Cherny and
Elizabeth Reba Weise (eds.), **Wired_women: Gender and new realities in
cyberspace** (pp. 224-41). Seattle: Seal Press.

Lankshear, Colin, Peters, Michael, and Knobel, Michele. (1996). Critical
pedagogy and cyberspace. In Giroux, Lanshear, McLaren, and Peters,
**Counternarratives: Cultural studies and critical pedagogies in postmodern
spaces** (pp. 149-85). New York: Routledge.

Mehlenbacher, Brad. (1997). Technologies and tensions: Designing online
environments for teaching technical communication. In Stuart A. Selber (ed.),
**Computers and technical communication: Pedagogical and programmatic
perspectives** (pp. 219-38). Greenwich, CT: Ablex.

Palmquist, Michael

Peterson, Patricia Webb. (1999/2000). Whose stories? Whose realities? The
materiality of narratives in the electronic writing classroom. **Works and
Days** , 17 & 18, 33/34, 35/36, 349-72.

Relan, Anju, and Gillani, Bijan B. (1997). Web-based instruction and the
traditional classroom: Similarities and differences. In Badrul H. Khan (ed.),
**Web-based instruction** (pp. 41-6). Englewood Cliffs: Educational Technology
Publications.

**Accounts of Distance Ed Pedagogies/Experiences**

Allen Nancy, and Wickliff, Gregory A. (1997). Learning up close and at a
distance. In Stuart A. Selber (ed.), **Computers and technical communication:
Pedagogical and programmatic perspectives** (pp. 201--18). Greenwich, CT:
Ablex.

Bowen, Betsy A. (1994). Telecommunications networks: Expanding the contexts
for literacy. In Cynthia L. Selfe and Susan Hilligoss (eds.), **Literacy and
computers: The complications of teaching and learning with technology** (pp.
113-29). New York: MLA.

Chadwick, Scott A., and Dorbolo, Jon. (1998). InterQuest: Designing a
communication-intensive web-based course. In Donna Reiss, Dickie Selfe, and
Art Young (eds.), **Electronic communication across the curriculum** (pp.
117-28). Urbana: NCTE.

Duin, Ann Hill. (1998). The culture of distance education: Implementing an
online graduate course in audience analysis. **Technical Communication
Quarterly** , 7 (4), 365-98.

Duin, Ann Hill, and Archee, Ray. (1997). Distance learning via the world wide
web: Information, engagement, and community. In Stuart A. Selber (ed.),
**Computers and technical communication: Pedagogical and programmatic
perspectives** (pp. 149-69). Greenwich, CT: Ablex.

Tebeaux, Elizabeth. (1995). Technical writing by distance: Refocusing the
pedagogy of technical communication. **Technical Communication Quarterly** , 4
(4), 365-393.

**Theories of Space/Cyberspace**

Harvey, David. (2000). **Spaces of hope**. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

Mitchell, William J. (1999). **e-topia: "Urban life, Jim -- but not as we know
it." ** Cambridge: The MIT Press. ch 8.

Soja, Edward W. (2000). **Postmetropolis: Critical studies of cities and
regions**. New York: Blackwell Publishers. ch 8

**Theories of Interaction/Community**

Burnett, Rebecca E., Clark, David, et al. (1997). Shaping technologies: The
complexity of electronic collaborative interaction. In Stuart A. Selber (ed.),
**Computers and technical communication: Pedagogical and programmatic
perspectives** (pp. 171-99). Greenwich, CT: Ablex.

Collis, Betty. (1997). Supporting project-based collaborative learning via a
world wide web environment. In Badrul H. Khan (ed.), **Web-based instruction**
(pp. 213-19). Englewood Cliffs: Educational Technology Publications.

Forman, Janis. (1994). Literacy, collaboration, and technology: New
connections and challenges. In Cynthia L. Selfe and Susan Hilligoss (eds.),
**Literacy and computers: The complications of teaching and learning with
technology** (pp. 130-43). New York: MLA.

Gance, Stephen, and Caughlan Samantha. (1999/2000). Seated around the virtual
table. **Works and Days** , 17 & 18, 33/34, 35/36, 373-99.

Lupton, Deborah. (2000). The embodied computer/user. In David Bell and Barbara
M. Kennedy (eds.), **The cybercultures reader** (pp. 477-88). London:
Routledge.

Sproull, Lee, and Kiesler, Sara. (1991). **Connections: New ways of working in
the networked organization**. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Turkle, Sheri.(1995). **Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the
internet**. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Wahlstrom, Billie J. (1997). Teaching and learning communities: Locating
literacy, agency, and authority in a digital domain. In Stuart A. Selber
(ed.), **Computers and technical communication: Pedagogical and programmatic
perspectives** (pp. 129-46). Greenwich, CT: Ablex.

Wilbur, Shawn. (2000). An archaeology of cyberspaces: Virtuality, community,
identity. In David Bell and Barbara M. Kennedy (eds.), **The cybercultures
reader** (pp. 45-55). London: Routledge.

Willson, Michele. (2000). Community in the abstract: A political and ethical
dilemma? In David Bell and Barbara M. Kennedy (eds.), **The cybercultures
reader** (pp. 644-57). London: Routledge.

**Students**

Bonk, Curtis Jay, and Reynolds, Thomas H. (1997). Learner-centered web
instruction for higher-order thinking, teamwork, and apprenticeship. In Badrul
H. Khan (ed.), **Web-based instruction** (pp. 167-79). Englewood Cliffs:
Educational Technology Publications.

Dey, Eric L., and Hurtado, Sylvia. (1999). Students, colleges, and society:
Considering the interconnections. In Philip G. Altbach, Robert O. Berdahl, and
Patricia J. Gumport (eds.), **American higher education in the twenty-first
century: Social, political, and economic challenges** (pp. 298-322).
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.



**Writing/Instruction/Theory**

Brodkey, Linda. (1996). **Writing permitted in designated areas only**.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.  "Poststructural theories,
methods, and practices"

Giroux, Henry A. (1992). **Border crossings: Cultural workers and the politics
of education**. New York: Routledge. ch 2 and 3.

Gore, Jennifer. (1993). **The struggle for pedagogies: Critical and feminist
discourses as regimes of truth**. New York: Routledge.

Ong, Walter J., S.J. (1977). **Interfaces of the word: Studies in the
evolution of consciousness and culture**. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. ch
5  "I see what you say".

**Distance Education and Digital Economies**

Aronowitz, Stanley, and DiFazio, William. (1994). **The jobless future: Sci-
tech and the dogma of work**. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. Ch.
8: A tasxonomy of teacher work.

Castells, Manuel. (1997). **The information age: Economy, society, and
culture**. Vol 1: The rise of the networked society. London: Basil Blackwell.
chs 5 and 6

Cairncross, Frances. (1997). **The death of distance: How the communications
revolution will change our lives**. Cambridge: Harvard Business Press. ch 8

Kroker, Arthur. (1996). Virtual capitalism. In Stanley Aronowitz, Barbara
Martinsons, and Michael Menser (eds.), **Technoscience and cyberculture** (pp.
167-79). New York: Routledge.

Tapscott, Don. (1996). **The digital economy: Promise and peril in the age of
networked intelligence.** New York: McGraw-Hill.

  
  
---  
  




References

[ [top](680desyll.html) | [description](680dedes.html)
|[activities](680deacts.html) | [schedule](680desched.html) | references ]  
  
  
  
English 680d: Distance Education and Writing Theory  
Purdue University  
Fall 2000  
Patricia Sullivan, instructor

