###  HY345 History of Eastern Europe  
Fall Semester 2001

  
Professor Paul Steeves  
Office: 310 Elizabeth Hall  
Office hours: daily at 11:00 a.m.; other times by appointment  
[e-mail: psteeves@stetson.edu](mailto:psteeves@stetson.edu)   (e-mail
communication is encouraged)

This is the syllabus for the course. The subjects covered in it are the
following:

> Grading  
> Participation  
> Writing assignments  
> Examinations  
> [Calendar of Topics](0201_345.cal.html)

* * *

This class deals with the history of the Eastern European area mostly in the
nineteenth and twentieth century, with some attention given to preceding
centuries.

Textbook: _The Making of Eastern Europe_ , by Philip Longworth

###  GRADING

Students will be assessed in this course on the basis of their active
participation in the educational process (about 50 percent of final grade) and
their mastery of content demonstrated through five map essays (about 20%)  and
three examinations (about 30%).

Grading in this course: At the end of the semester the instructor gives the
student a grade that indicates the instructor's evaluation of that particular
student's work in the class, based on the standard of Stetson University's
definition of grades:

> "Grades . . . represent the instructor's final estimate of the student's
performance in a course. The grade of A (+ or -) may be interpreted to mean
that the instructor recognizes exceptional capacity and exceptional
performance. The grade of B (+ or -) signifies that the student has gained a
significantly more effective command of material than is generally expected in
the course. The grade of C or C+ is the instructor's certification that the
student has demonstrated the required mastery of the material." (Stetson
University Bulletin, _2000-2001 Bulletin_ , 42).

In its most natural interpretation, this statement is understood to mean that
C is the grade that most students should expect to earn for fulfilling the
course requirements. To merit a higher grade, the student will take the
initiative to find and master more material than is assigned formally and to
show evidence of doing extraordinary work. That something extra could include
demonstration of such things as mastering alternative interpretations of
historical questions, helpfulness toward other students, active intellectual
curiosity in class, acute critical thinking, and creative perspectives on
concepts.

Participation. In 1999 the faculty of Stetson University adopted a mission
statement that asserted that at our school

"The art of learning is enhanced through small interactive classes, close
student-faculty alliances, and collaborative approaches that provide the
foundation for rewarding careers and advanced study in selective graduate and
professional programs. We embrace diverse methodologies to foster effective
communication, information and technological literacy, and aesthetic
appreciation."

In HY 345 the commitment to "collaborative approaches" is taken to mean that a
Stetson student is expected to participate vigorously in the learning process
and the instructor evaluates the involvement of the student when determining
the semester grade. The instructor understands collaborative learning to
include expressing one's opinion, criticizing others' opinions in a humane and
reasonable manner, raising questions about materials that have been read,
contributing supplementary information to the class, making constructive
suggestions about the academic work of colleagues, cooperating on assignments
as appropriate, cultivating interest and curiosity, and, of course, being
prepared for class regularly. The student who does not do these things is
falling short of the standards of performance expected of a Stetson student.

While recognizing the appropriateness of other teaching methodologies, the
instructor in this course prefers the discussion format. That means that he
does not perceive the class time as an exercise in unidirectional information
delivery, that is, lecture, but as a multidirectional engagement with ideas,
that is, discussion. Thus he intends not to make lectures but to stimulate
verbal interchange among all persons in the room. Involvement in that
discussion is expected of all students and is graded.

The student's daily participation grades comprise three components:
attendance, preparation, active contribution to class.

Attendance. You can participate effectively only if you attend class. Your
collaboration in the intellectual process will be evaluated for every class.
The instructor applies the traditional university standard that a number of
absences greater than the credit hours of the course is unsatisfactory
participation. That is, for a three credit class that meets two times per
week, more than two absences is unsatisfactory. Accordingly, in the case of a
three credit class that meets on the Monday-Wednesday sequence that means that
more than two absences is unsatisfactory. At Stetson University there are no
"excused" absences. If you miss a class, it would be to your advantage to
explain to the instructor why you were absent.

Preparation: Regular reading assignments are provided; the student will be
expected to give evidence that the reading has been done.

Contribution: You are expected to take responsibility for your involvement in
this class. You can contribute by sharing information that you have discovered
and by raising questions that lead class members to think about topics under
investigation. You also will make a particular contribution through the five
oral reports that are scheduled.

Tardiness. People who arrive late usually disturb the continuity of the class.
Such disruption is not conducive to the learning process and therefore is a
form of bad participation and will be evaluated as such.

Writing assignments: Writing is an essential part of history. The writing
activity in this class consists principally of the five map reports. The
expectations for these reports may be accessed by following the links on the
[Calendar of Topics.](0201_345.cal.html)

The generic assignment for the map reports is to produce an illustrated
discussion of boundary changes. This means that you should have brief written
material, perhaps an essay, accompanied by some illustration(s) that you have
drawn.

Reports must be documented properly by a system which is consistent and
adequately informative (i.e. it must show where information comes from, who
provided it, when it was written, how it can be checked, etc.). The preferred
system is explained in "[Documentation
Style](documentationstyle.html)[.](housekeeping%2001_01/documentationstyle.html)"

You may submit your map reports either electronically or in hard copy.  Map
reports require some imaginative creativity. The appearance you give to your
report will perhaps dictate how you submit it.

(1) Electronically: An electronic submission could be a web page that you
design and construct. If you create a web page, send an [e-mail to the
instructor](mailto:psteeves@stetson.edu) that explains how the page is to be
accessed. An electronic submission could be a document file sent as an at as
an attachment to an [e-mail sent to the
instructor](mailto:psteeves@stetson.edu). It is essential that the document
file be in proper format; it must be a Microsoft Word document saved in RTF
format so that it appears as a double-spaced document with illustrations
citations at the appropriate places in proper form. The filename under which
you save your essay mujst be in the form "studentnamepapernumber.rtf". That
is, if your name is Elizabeth Perkins and you are writing your second paper,
name your file "perkins2.rtf" (or "eperkins2.rtf").  When you send your paper,
you must provide a "subject" for your e-mail that reads "HY344 filename" (in
the example, "HY344 perkins2.rtf"). The graded paper will be returned by
e-mail with instructor's comments.

(2) Hard copy: Submit your essays in a card-stock two-pocket folder, without
binding clips. There is no need for a cover page; save the trees. Graded
papers will be returned at the next class meeting following the submission,
provided the paper was submitted by the due date.

Resubmissions. Any map report project which has been submitted by the
announced due date may be revised and resubmitted for a second evaluation. The
grade assigned for the revisedn version is the one that will count for the
semester grade.

Late Written Work. No extensions of deadlines are granted. No specific penalty
(e.g., reduction of grade)  is attached to the late submission of a paper, but
a regular pattern of tardiness may be viewed as indicative of inadequately
conscientious work.

Examinations: The midterm examinations for this course are on 3 October and 14
November; the final examination for this course will be on 11 December, from 4
to 6 p.m.  


