American Government, Syllabus [![PS 201, Introduction to American
Government](ps201a.jpg)](index.htm)  
[ ![ \[Home\] ](redbar2.jpg)](index.html) [ ![ \[Syllabus\]
](nav1.jpg)](201syl.htm) [ ![ \[Textbook\] ](nav2.jpg)](textsite.htm) [ ![
\[Links\] ](nav3.jpg)](inet.htm) [ ![ \[Lab\]
](nav4.jpg)](http://hcl.chass.ncsu.edu/ssl/ssl.htm) [ ![ \[Instructor\]
](nav5.jpg)](http://www2.chass.ncsu.edu/garson/pa765/garson.htm) [ ![ \[Home\]
](redbar2.jpg)](index.html)  
---  
  
# Introduction to American Government

**PS 201- Internet  
Website: http://hcl.chass.ncsu.edu/garson/ps201/  
Instructor: David Garson  
Telephone: 919-515-3067  
Fax: 919-515-7333  
Office hours: None, but feel free to e-mail or phone**  
  

**Fall 2002**  
PS 201  
Section 601 (Internet)  
Midterm: 5:30 - 8:30 pm, Thursday, October 17  
Final exam: 5:30 - 8:30 pm, Tuesday, Dec. 10  
**

* * *

### What?

_For Internet students, any term:_ When the course is taken as a distance
education course through the McKimmon Center, there are no live sessions.
Substitute exploratory activities on the web should be undertaken instead.
These activities are found in the "Politics in Action" and other sections of
the class website.

_For Summer School regular sessions:_ This section is a _lab course_ , which
means that much of what you do will be in the Social Science Computing Lab,
third floor Winston Hall (call 515-3791 for times), _or_ on the web from your
home, dorm, or office. This course is taught in first summer sessions as a
partly-on-the-web course which, contrary to what it may say in the Summer
School catalog, will _not_ meet on a daily lecture format, as do other
sections. Concurrently, usually it is also taught as an Internet-only course
each semester. Internet-only students will not be expected to attend the
scheduled Tuesday and Thursday sessions.

**Note:** For all students, regardless of term or Internet status, the weekly
reading, homework, and test assignments are found by clicking on "Weekly
Assignments" at the class website at
<http://hcl.chass.ncsu.edu/garson/ps201/>.

_Textbook_ The course textbook is Burns, Peltason, Cronin, and Magleby, [
_Government by the People, Brief Fourth
Edition_](http://cw.prenhall.com/bookbind/pubbooks/burns4/) (Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001).

_Schedule_

The fall and spring semesters are fifteen weeks long, and since there are 16
chapters in the textbook, you need to be covering about one chapter a week,
correlated with the 15 "Weekly Assignments" on the course web page main menu.

The midterm and final dates are at the top of this syllabus. You _must_ be at
your computer for these exams. If you do not receive the exam by email within
five minutes of the appointed hour, call the instructor immediately at
1-919-515-3067. Warning: You will receive a failing grade on the exam if you
mail it back to the class listserv instead of to the instructor. Exams must be
mailed directly to David_Garson@ncsu.edu. Save a backup copy on your computer
also!

Although the workbook is online, the textbook itself can be purchased as usual
through the campus bookstore. Note the midterm and final are not limited to
the workbook questions, but also cover the readings, discussions, lectures,
and other information encountered in the course..

* * *

### Where?

You _must_ join the class online discussion list. Click [here](listserv.htm)
for more information. Commentaries, tests, and all important course informatin
will be distributed through the list! (If reading this in print, go to
http://hcl.chass.ncsu.edu/garson/PS201/listserv.htm and
http://www.ncsu.edu/it/pub/lists/subscribe.html).

During regular terms, there are no physical meetings. However, you are welcome
to also visit and use Winston 133, the lab room available for our use, or you
may use Winston 133 or the Social Science Lab (Third Floor Winston) or at any
computer in the world if linked to the the web. The instructor will be
available by email or telephone to help with lab work questions.

* * *

### How?

You will complete this course by accomplishing the following objectives:

  1. Successfully passing the midterm and final. Preparation for these examinations is best accomplished by completing the "Review I and II" and "Key Terms" sections of the online workbook, and by doing one reading per chapter (summarize the main points and be able to relate it to the chapter). You must do the main listed reading unless unavailable due to the changing nature of the web, in which case you may do one of the alternate readings listed. 
  2. Completing and handing in hard copy of two writing assignments on a topic to be selected by you but related to one of the chapters in the textbook. For additional ideas, note the writing assignments in the Internet Research component of the online textbook and the writing assignments in the Review, Essay, section of the online textbook. One writing assignment is due by the midterm and the other by the last day of class (not the finals date). A late penalty will be attached to first papers not turned in by the midterm. _Commentaries and papers will not be accepted after the last day of classes._

Keep in mind the following paper criteria, which also apply to news
commentaries, although commentaries are much briefer and can accomplish less.

    * Please indicate your topic clearly. The paper should have a clear question introduced in the first paragraph. It should be a question about which intelligent people might disagree. 
    * Then, of course, you should organize your paper around this question, which should raise an issue in political science (not journalism, history, psychology, etc.). Do not, for instance, simply have a topic that you talk "around" without a clear focus. Rambling is one of the most common problems in student papers. Avoid the "look at this, look at that" or long-list-of-quotes approaches but instead be telling a "story" in a logical order. A description of Congress or some other political institution is not an analyis. 
    * . The introduction should provide the "roadmap" for the paper; there should be internal headings to guide the reader along, with transitional paragraphs linking sections; and the ending should summarize the argument and conclusions. 
    * Discuss both sides of an issue, even though you may be favoring one side. Discuss both pros and cons for your issue. Give quite a bit of attention to presenting arguments which run counter to your opinions. Avoid creating oversimplified "straw men" to attack but instead be fair about opposing viewpoints. It's good to have a point of view, but it is more effective if you anticipate and rebut the other side. Failing to do this is also one of the most common mistakes of beginning political science writers. 
    * Include facts, analysis, and your opinion -- not just descriptive facts and your opinion. An _analysis_ weighs evidence on both sides of an issue, so you must seek to have empirical evidence, not just opinions and ideological arguments. 
    * Relate the paper to themes of the textbook and course. This is a political science course, not one in history, journalism, or creative writing. Do not let the bulk of the paper be an historical narrative or case account, but instead try to analyze a political issue or question. 
    * If you have a quote, you should have a cited reference in the back. This should be a complete, formal citation. 
    * Some research is expected, say half a dozen sources/citations. If you have direct quotes or tables, you must cite. Please also cite your sources for any assertions of fact which are in dispute between the pro and con sides of the issue. 
    * This is a political science course; use political science literature in your citations for at least some of your citations. 
    * Even though these are short papers (about 10 pp.), use of headings and subheadings for your points is a good idea. 
    * Be careful: use a spell-checker and proofread too. 

One paper is due at the midterm and one by the last day of class. Please note:
Grade only, without markup, is assigned for papers turned in on the last day
of class. You may turn the second paper in earlier if you wish. Internet
students should email the instructor if feedback is wanted about grading or
their papers as Internet-submitted files are not returned to students with
markup.Note: Save copies of all your work in case there are problems with
e-mail!!!

  3. Participating in the discussion sessions.

_On-site regular section students_ : You are expected to participate during
regular classroom discussions, as in any regular course in the social
sciences. Discussion participation will count in the final grade. There is no
requirement to participate in the online discussions, though as a subscriber
to the PS201 listserv, you will see the commentaries of Internet students and
are welcome to participate in that venue as well.

_Internet distance education section students_ : You must comment to the class
listserv on a current newspaper or Internet news source topic, doing so at
least four times during the semester (one per week starting week 2 of summer
sessions, one every three weeks in regular sessions starting week 2. Please
number your commentaries 1 through 4. Late commentaries are down-graded. No
newsbreaks should be submitted and none will be graded after the end of the
next-to-last week of classes, and no commentaries on the newsbreaks of others
will be graded after the last week of classes. Of course, you are free to send
any additional commentaries or responses you wish to the listserv on a non-
graded basis.

Note: With regard to news commentaries, you may find it helpful to look at
real news commentaries by columnists. Any news topic is okay. Two sites that
link to columnists are <http://www.drudgereport.com> (Drudge Report) or
<http://www.blueagle.com/> (Blue Eagle). Your commentary should be about the
same length as a newspaper columnist's commentary. _However_ , unlike a news
columnist, you should seek to relate the specific news story to a general
theme in a chapter in our class textbook (ex., relating California's electric
energy crisis to the general issue of deregulation). Thus, take a current
event and relate it to a general theme in the textbook. I am looking for
making this specific-to-general connection, for presenting both sides fairly,
for insightful analysis, and general professional tone. Grading criteria to
keep in mind: interesting topic, presenting both sides, having extended
analysis, not just description or opinion weighing empirical evidence,
relating to broad themes in the textbook, grammar, spelling; needs to be
analytical (analytic means your topic has an issue about which people can
disagree, you present both sides fairly, you get evidence on both sides -- not
just opinion, you evaluate, you come to a conclusion); have full citation of
source; extra research avoid factual errors.

Note: Save copies of all your work in case there are problems with e-mail!!!
The newsbreak commentaries are to promote discussion: this cannot be done if
they are turned in at the very end of the course, hence these timed deadlines!
Some bonus points will be given for commenting on the commentaries of others.

_Grading_ : Midterm 30%, Final 40%, Papers 10% each, Discussion 10%.

Incompletes are not accepted except for medical reasons. Attendance is not
graded. Makeup work, if any, must be arranged within two weeks of due date at
the option of the instructor, prior to two weeks before the end of classes.

**_Academic Integrity Statement_**

Please note the existence of the University policy on academic integrity found
in the Code of Student Conduct (found in Appendix L of the Handbook for
Advising and Teaching). Academic misconduct will not be tolerated in this
class. Academic misconduct may be defined as "any activity which tends to
compromise the academic integrity of the institution, or subvert the
educational process". I expect complete honesty in the completion of tests and
assignments. It is my understanding that the student's signature on any test
or assignment means that the student neither gave nor received unauthorized
aid. Beyond cheating on quizzes or exams, academic misconduct also includes
the submission of plagiarized work for an academic requirement. Plagiarism is
"the representation of another's works or ideas as one's own; it includes the
unacknowledged word for word use and/or paraphrasing of another person's work,
and/or the inappropriate unacknowledged use of another person's ideas". Thus
each argument made in the research papers which is not completely the
student's own, must be footnoted or otherwise referenced to indicate its
source. Students found guilty of academic misconduct will _at a minimum_
receive a 0 for the assignment.

**_Statement Regarding Students with Disabilities_**

Every attempt is made in this course to conform to university policy on
disabilities, as described at
<http://www2.ncsu.edu/ncsu/provost/info/hat/current/appendix/appen_k.html>. If
you have disability-related needs, please inform the instructor of them
immediately.

* * *

### Who?

[Prof. G. David Garson](http://www2.chass.ncsu.edu/garson/pa765/garson.htm)  
206 1911 Building  
NCSU Box 8102  
Raleigh, NC 27695  

Tel. 919-515-3067  
Fax 919-515-7333  
Email David_Garson@ncsu.edu  

* * *

