**History H105  
United States I, to 1865  
** Section C550

[**(home)**](index.htm)

Sunday, 1 - 3:40 pm  
Cavanaugh 215

Andrew Denson

adenson@indiana.edu  
283-6520 (home number--no calls after 9pm)

Office Hours: TBA



Introduction:



Welcome to H105, the first half of the IUPUI American history survey. This
class is designed to introduce students to some of the major themes, events,
and developments of the period from roughly 1492 to the end of the Civil War
in 1865 (although in fact I like to start much earlier than 1492). That is a
long stretch of time, so we will be moving pretty quickly. Subjects that will
receive particular attention will include Native American history, religion in
early America, the creation and elaboration of the American political system,
the institution and experience of slavery, and the influence of broad economic
changes on American culture and society. In so broad a course, it is
impossible to be exhaustive. I have tried to strike a balance between the need
to cover a variety of topics and my desire to go into detail about certain
subjects I consider particularly important or interesting. If there is a topic
you believe I am ignoring or about which you want to know more, tell me. I am
usually happy to change directions (within reason, of course) in response to
student questions.

This syllabus contains the schedule and policies by which the course will be
run. Read it over carefully. I will hold you responsible for understanding all
of the information contained in this document. If there is something in it
that you feel you may not understand, ask me to explain it further.

This document can be found on the IUPUI History Department world wide web
site.



Required Readings:

Brinkley, Alan, _The Unfinished Nation: A Concise History of the American
People, Vol. I_ (2nd ed., 1996).

Demos, John, _A Little Commonwealth: Family Life in Plymouth Colony_ (1970).

Rakove, Jack, ed., _Declaring Rights: A Brief History with Documents_ (1998).

Johnson, Paul E. and Sean Wilentz, _The Kingdom of Matthias_ (1994).

Jacobs, Harriet, _Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl_ (reprint, 1988).



All of these books are available at the IUPUI bookstore.



Course Schedule:



August 30  
Course Introduction  
North America Before European Colonization

Begin Reading Demos, A Little Commonwealth.



September 6  
The European Background to Colonization  
Colonial Beginnings in North America

Reading: Brinkley, chapters 1 and 2



September 13  
Puritans and Planters  
Patterns of Colonial Society

Reading: Brinkley, chapter 3



September 20  
In-class essay on Demos, A Little Commonwealth.  
Native Americans: From Contact to the "Middle Ground"  
Slavery and Colonial America



September 27  
Exam One  
Rationalism and Revivalism in Colonial America

Begin Reading Rakove, ed., Declaring Rights.



October 4  
The Coming of the American Revolution

Reading: Brinkley, chapter 4



October 11  
The Revolution and American Culture and Society: What Changed?

Reading: Brinkley, chapter 5



October 18  
Quiz on and discussion of Rakove, Declaring Rights.  
State and National Governments after the Revolution  
The Making of the United States Constitution

Reading: Brinkley, chapter 6



October 25  
Federalists and Republicans: The Emergence of Political Parties  
The Revolution of 1800 and the Jeffersonians

Reading: Brinkley, chapter 7



November 1  
Exam Two  
Nationalism and Expansion

Reading: Brinkley, chapter 8  
Begin reading Johnson and Wilentz, Kingdom of Matthias and Jacobs, Incidents
in the Life of a Slave Girl.



November 8  
Mass Politics and the Rise of Andrew Jackson  
The Jackson Presidency

Reading: Brinkley, chapter 9



November 15  
In-class essay on Johnson and Wilentz, Kingdom of Matthias.  
The Market Revolution: Economic Expansion and Social and Cultural Change

Reading: Brinkley, chapter 10



November 22  
Slavery and Slave Life in the South

Reading: Brinkley, chapter 11



Thanksgiving Recess



December 6  
Quiz on and discussion of Jacobs, Incidents.  
Reform and Reaction in Antebellum America  
The Deepening Sectional Crisis

Reading: Brinkley, chapter 12 and chapter 13, 325-345



December 13  
The Political Crisis of the 1850s  
The Civil War

Reading: Brinkley, chapter 13, 345-362, and chapter 14



December 20  
Final Exam



Course Requirements:



You are expected to attend all class meetings. There will be three hour exams,
each of which will be worth 20% of the final grade. In addition, you will
write two short essays in class--one on the Demos book, one on the Johnson /
Wilentz book. Each of these essays will be worth 10% of the final grade. There
will be quizzes, each worth 5% of the final grade, on the Rakove book and the
Jacobs book. The remaining 10% of the grade will cover participation in class.

Exams will involve essay questions designed to test students' knowledge of
both lecture material and the readings. You will answer three questions out of
a choice of six to nine. A good exam essay will make some kind of coherent
argument and proceed in a logical manner. That is, it will not be simply a
string of facts recalled from lectures and reading. Facts are important, but
in order to demonstrate that you have mastered the material you must integrate
the facts into a clear argument that directly answers the question. Before
beginning to write, it is generally best to pause and think through your
answer and perhaps sketch out a few quick notes.

In addition to essay questions, you will have a choice of several
"identifications." An identification is a short-answer exercise in which
students identify and explain the historical significance of a person, place,
event, or term. So if "John Winthrop" appeared on an exam, one would identify
the person by stating that Winthrop was the first governor of the
Massachusetts Bay Colony and giving at least a rough idea of when he occupied
this position. One would then say something about his historical significance.
Winthrop played an important role in establishing Puritan communities in New
England. Also, he offered what was probably the best statement of the early
Puritan settlers' vision, the "city on a hill" sermon of 1630. The goal when
answering an identification problem is to connect the specific person, event,
or concept to the broader historical themes and developments.

The in-class essays will be similar to exam essays, only you will be writing
about a specific reading assignment. The first in-class essay will be on the
Demos book, the second on the Johnson / Wilentz book. On the days set aside
for the in-class essays, you will receive a sheet of paper with one or two
questions about the book and space to write one answer. You will receive about
twenty minutes to answer one question. You will not be allowed to use books or
notes.

On the History Department world wide web site I have posted an exam and an in-
class essay assignment I used last semester (the documents are titled "exam"
and "in-class q"). These examples are from H106, the second half of the United
States history survey, so they deal with material from the 20th century.
However, they should give you an idea of what to expect.

You will take the exams during the first half of the class meetings indicated
in the course schedule. After the exams, we will forge ahead into the next
part of the course (so don't leave). Likewise, the in-class essays and quizzes
will be given first thing on the days indicated above.



Reading Assignments:



Students should have each reading assignment completed before the class
meeting to which it pertains. In my lectures and in discussion, I will assume
that you have done the assigned reading ahead of time. Thus, it is very
important that you keep up with the reading. Do not wait until an exam is
looming to do the reading. Waiting to read the assignments is not only a bad
test-preparation strategy, but it also will make it more difficult for you to
understand the lectures and participate in class discussions.



Documents:



From time to time, I will ask students to read short documents that we will
then discuss in class. These will be what historians call "primary sources"--
writings from individuals who participated in or observed first hand a
particular historical event or development. These documents will be posted to
the History Department world wide web site. Students will have to print out
copies from the web site for their use.



Attendance Policy:



I will be taking attendance. In order to help me do this quickly, you will be
required to choose a seat for the semester after the first meeting. You will
be allowed one unexcused absence for the rest of the semester. After that,
each unexcused absence will count 2% off of your course grade.



In order to excuse an absence, you must contact me at the latest within 24
hours of the class that you have missed. It is preferable that you contact me
before the class meets, although I understand that this is not always
possible. Contacting me promptly is particularly important if you are going to
miss an exam, essay, or quiz.



Cheating and Plagiarism:



Students discovered to be cheating on an exam or plagiarizing in writing an
essay will receive a zero on the assignment in question. For the definitions
and rules in these matters, see Indiana University Bulletin, 1996-1998, School
of Liberal Arts, Indianapolis Campus, pp. 18, 21-22.



Dates:



At the beginning of classes like this one, students tend to worry about how
much effort they should put into remembering dates. I do not want you to spend
a great deal of time memorizing dates, but it is important that you know how
various historical events and developments fit together chronologically. That
means that you will need to remember the dates of some events or at least be
able to come close. Thus, it is not crucial for you to remember that the
Kansas-Nebraska Act became law in precisely May, 1854, but you should be able
to place it in the 1850s and preferably in the middle 1850s. If you tell me
that it became law in the 1860s--after the beginning of the Civil War, which
the Kansas-Nebraska Act helped to bring about--I will probably conclude that
you do not understand the course material. Again, the goal when it comes to
dates is for students to learn how various events, people, and developments
fit together in time.



If Things Start to Go Badly:



It is very important that you talk with me if you are disappointed with your
grades or if you suspect that you are not fully understanding some aspect of
the course. Often, problems can be addressed fairly easily. Unfortunately,
students frequently wait until the end of the semester before seeking help,
and by the end of the semester it is generally too late for them to improve
their grades by very many points. Thus, you should contact me as soon as
possible if you feel that things are going badly. This will not only help you,
but it also will help me become a better teacher.



Exam Preparation:



Each student develops his or her own method of studying for exams, but I want
to offer some general advice. First, you should start reviewing as early as
possible. That way, you will have an opportunity to find out which topics you
do not fully understand and time to re-read portions of the books or ask
questions. Second, you should start preparing by thinking about the major
themes addressed in the books and lectures. Often, students become bogged down
in the facts, and instead of seeing coherent narratives, pictures, and cause-
and-effect relations all they see is a pile of data. Before getting down to
the particulars, try to identify the major themes covered in the course
materials. If you can do that, you can then connect the facts and specifics to
the general themes and hopefully end up with a sense of how things fit
together. Third, try talking with someone about the topics covered in the
course. Students often complain after exams that they knew what they wanted to
write but had trouble getting what was in their brains down on the page. If
you can talk to someone about a given topic, however, you can usually write
about it too. Finally, do not hesitate to ask me questions about the course
materials.



