**PAPER TOPIC OPTIONS: HISTORY 350         **[(back to
syllabus)](http://darkwing.uoregon.edu/~dapope/350syllabus.htm) **

**

This handout describes several choices for the short paper requirement for
History 350. Please look over the general instructions and the options
described below **soon** and begin to consider which topic you wish to choose.

_General Instructions

_

1\. Papers are due by class time **Wednesday, Nov. 21**.    Late papers will
be accepted if submitted by class time Friday, Nov. 30, but they will be
penalized in the grading, the size of the penalty depending on how late they
are. Papers will _not_ be accepted after 2 p.m. Nov. 30.

2\. Papers should be about 4 to 7 pages, typed double-spaced with reasonable
margins. The 4-7 page length is not a rigid requirement, but if you find
yourself going far over or under these lengths, you may be having a problem
organizing the material or understanding the assignment.

3\. You _must_ cite your sources. If you are writing an essay on a book, be
sure to give author, title, place of publication, publisher and date of
publication. You _must_ have a reference for all direct quotes and
paraphrases. (Page numbers in parentheses following the quotes will be
adequate. In these assignments, you aren't required to follow conventional
footnoting form, but be sure the information is available to your reader.
For web-based assignments, give the URL for any quote or paraphrase.)

4\. I am willing to look over rough drafts, outlines, partially-completed
papers, etc. to offer advice before your final version if you give me enough
time in advance of the due date for this to be feasible for me and useful for
you.

5\. Regrettably, I need to remind everyone that plagiarism is absolutely
unacceptable.  The work you submit **must** be your own.   For information on
the University's policy, see the summary of the Student Conduct Code in the
Schedule of Classes.

**Option One: "History from the Bottom Up"**

Much of the most interesting recent historical research involves groups (the
poor and powerless, the illiterate, minorities, women) who have been neglected
or slighted in many history books. It is hard to study the actions and ideas
of these groups, but the results can be rewarding. One example of this kind of
research is an article on a group of workers in Philadelphia before the
American Revolution known as the White Oaks. This article, by James Hutson,
provoked angry replies from two other scholars, Jesse Lemisch and John
Alexander. Hutson in turn answered their accusations.

Reprints of these articles on the White Oaks are at the UO Bookstore for this
course; look the packet for History 350. For this option, read the material in
the packet and write an essay analyzing the clash of viewpoints, the nature
and quality of the evidence and reasoning on both sides, and the implications
you see in the debate for broader issues. Be sure to indicate which side, in
your judgment, has the more persuasive position in the controversy.

Note that for this assignment you are not expected to do other research on
pre-Revolutionary Philadelphia, early American labor history, etc. A careful
reading of the articles should yield insight into the issues and the
information you need to write a judicious paper.

**

Option Two: Fiction and History--Nat Turner

**

Nat Turner's slave revolt of 1831 inspired the 1967 novel _The Confessions of
Nat Turner_ , by William Styron. The novel, in turn, provoked heated
controversy about the real nature of slave revolts, Styron's views on race,
and the political significance of historical fiction. For this option, read
_The Confessions of Nat Turner_ and write an essay comparing the novel with
the picture of Turner and his rebellion that you got from _The Fires of
Jubilee_. You may also want to make some more general observations about the
role of fiction in understanding (or misunderstanding) history, about the
political implications of Styron's novel, etc. Don't, however, make such
general comments the main focus of your paper; concentrate on the comparison
between Styron's portrayal and Oates's version.   Which of these books do you
feel provides greater insight into Turner and the rebellion?

I have ordered copies of Styron's novel at the UO Bookstore.  Used copies are
likely to be available locally as well.

**

Option Three: A General Interpretation

**

Staughton Lynd, _The Intellectual Origins of American Radicalism,_ published
originally in 1968, is one of surprisingly few books that attempt to trace a
distinctly American radical tradition. Lynd maintains that there are common
themes among radicals from before the Revolution through the nineteenth
century and even in recent years.

For this option, read _The Intellectual Origins of American Radicalism_ and
write an essay that describes and analyzes his interpretations in light of
your own understanding of the people and movements we have studied this term.

Unfortunately it is out of print. Some used copies may also be available in
town.  I'll put the library=s copy on reserve. You may also be able to borrow
a copy through the Orbis group of Northwest libraries.

**

Option Four: Consensus History and American Radicalism

**

Daniel Boorstin's 1953 book of essays, _The Genius of American Politics_ ,
offers an interpretation of American history and political thought which
stresses consensus and continuity. For this assignment, read _The Genius of
American Politics_ (Introduction, chapter 1, and ch. 3-6 are required; ch.2 is
optional) and write an essay analyzing it in light of the topics and ideas
which we have studied in this class.

I will put at least one copy of _The Genius of American Politics_ on reserve
for this course. There should be a fair number of copies at Smith Family
Bookstore, either in the American History or the Political Science section.

**

Option Five: Radical Popular History

**

Howard Zinn's _A People's History of the United States: 1492-Present_ (Revised
and Updated Edition, 1995) first appeared in 1980 and has been very successful
in reaching a non-academic readership with a radical interpretation of U.S.
history. For this assignment, read the chapters of _A People's History_ which
cover the time period and some of the topics we have been studying this term.
In the 1995 edition, this would be chapters 3 ("Persons of Mean and Vile
Condition") through 11 ("Robber Barons and Rebels"). I don't have the 1980
edition, but the chapters probably have a similar organization.

Write an essay analyzing these chapters in light of the topics and ideas which
we have studied and read about in this class. You will, of course, find that
Zinn discusses many subjects which we have not mentioned, and that,
conversely, we have given greater attention to certain topics than he does in
his overview. Your paper, rather than focusing on what is or isn't covered,
should consider the ideas and interpretations he presents. You are certainly
encouraged to evaluate _A People's History_ in comparison with your own views
as well as those presented in class sessions and readings this term. I also
want to make it clear that your grade will **not** depend on whether you agree
or disagree with the ideas and opinions which I've expressed or with his. (Of
course, that holds true for all the other paper options as well.)

I didn't order copies of Zinn's book this term, but it should be widely
available, new and used, in bookstores around town.

**

Option Six: _Amistad_ on the Web

**

The revolt of slaves on the Spanish ship _Amistad_ in 1839 and its aftermath
constitute a dramatic episode in the history of slavery and anti-slavery.
Steven Spielberg =s 1997 movie introduced many viewers to these events. One
World Wide Web site, Exploring Amistad
(<http://amistad.mysticseaport.org/main/welcome.html>), brings together a wide
variety of sources on the _Amistad_ revolt and the legal struggles that
followed.

For this assignment, investigate the material on the Exploring Amistad site
and write an essay on **either** of the following two topics making use of the
relevant information that you find there. You may also want to follow some
links to other relevant web sites.   One fairly recent scholarly book on the
_Amistad_ is Howard Jones, _Mutiny on the _Amistad__ which I will put on
reserve in the library for you to refer to if you wish. It =s not required
reading for this assignment:

1\. The mutiny as a slave revolt: How does the _Amistad_ mutiny compare with
broader patterns of resistance to slavery among Africans and African-
Americans? In particular, you may want to compare it to Nat Turner =s revolt.
You may want to comment on such elements as: motives, strategies and tactics,
short and long run goals, opposition, success and failure.  
                                                                        **OR**  
2\. Abolitionism and the _Amistad_ case: How did abolitionists respond to and
participate in the _Amistad_ events? Did the case advance the cause of anti-
slavery in the United States? Do the events help us to evaluate the conflicts
within the anti-slavery movement between Garrisonian  "moral suasion" and
political abolitionism?

History 350  
Fall 2001

