Analysis of Contemporary Social Policy Issues

![Text Box: description

evaluation

objectives

outline

overview

policy

requirements

standards

text

](./sw4350_files/image001.gif)Social Work 4350

Syllabus  
  
---  
| ![Text Box: Instructor:   Francis J. Powell, MSW

Office Hours:   As posted

Office Phone:   357-6126

E-Mall: renfran@centuryinter.net

or

mailto:nfpowellf@alpha.nsula.edu



](./sw4350_files/image002.gif)  






















  

**Required Text:**

Krager, Howard J. and Stoez, David. _American Social Welfare Policy: A
Pluralist Approach, 3 " ed_., Longman Publishers: New York, 1998.



**_Return to Top_**



**Course Description** **:**

Contemporary social policy issues will be examined and analyzed from varying
perspectives. Evaluation of the implementation of these contemporary policies
will be examined in relationship to populations at risk.



**_Return to Top_**



**Course Overview** **:**

Analysis of contemporary social policy issues prepares students to be able to
analyze current social policy in **Micro, Mezzo, and Macro** levels with the
context of historical and contemporary factors that shape policy. Emphasis is
placed on enhancing the understanding of **cultural diversities** and
**populations at risk** and how social policies impact these groups. Issues of
**social and economic justice and** the rural perspective are addressed.



**_Return to Top_**



**Standards:**

The students are responsible for their learning, and should be prepared to
regulate their time such that they receive an adequate education. You are
expected to participate in class discussion and assignments are accepted only
on the date assigned.



**_Return to Top_**



**Course Objectives:** ****

1.      To assess and comprehend knowledge of the historical development of our present social welfare system.

2.      To analyze the historical background of current social work practice, values, and ethics, and the development of social work as a profession.

3.      To be able to identify racism, sexism, classism, ageism, and homophobia and the impact of discrimination, economic deprivation, and oppression as these have permeated American society and social welfare practice and policy.

4.      To be able to evaluate the political and organizational process used to influence policy, the process of policy formation, and the frameworks for analyzing social policies in light of the principle of social and economic justice.

5.      A comprehensive knowledge of the history and **** current patterns of provision of social welfare services, the role of social policy in **** helping or deterring people in maintaining or achieving optimal health and well-being, and the effect of policy on social work practice.

6.      The acquisition of beginning level skill in the analysis of social welfare policy.

7.      To develop an **** appreciation of the interplay between the government, corporate, and voluntary sectors in the structure of social programs and the delivery of services in a Micro, Mezzo, and Macro **** perspective.

8.      A comprehensive knowledge of the major components of today's social welfare system, including social insurance, public assistance, and employment programs.

9.      Provide content about policies related to rural social work.





**_Return to Top_**



**Course Requirements:** ****



  1. A policy analysis paper of a national, state, local, or agency policy regarding a selected social problem. It should be no less than eight, double-spaced typed pages. An APA format writing style will be required.



**This assignment is related to objectives: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, & 8.**

The policy paper analysis outline is as follows:





Framework For Policy Analysis Outline



1)      What is the policy to be analyzed?

(a)    Brief description of the policy



2)      What is the nature of the problem being targeted by the policy?

(a)    How is the problem defined?

(b)   For whom is it a problem? (i. e. population effected by the problem,
size, and defining characteristics)



3)      Development of the policy (policy history)

(a)    How did this policy develop? (Is it federal, state, or local?)

(b)   Which individuals/groups promote the policy? (optional - which oppose
the policy?)

(c)    Does the policy replace some earlier policy? If so, describe.



4)      Goals and outcome of the policy

(a)    What are the manifest (recognized, generally agreed upon goals of this
policy")

(b)   If applicable, what are the latent (generally unrecognized, or at least
not officially advertised ) goals?

(c)    What are the manifest and latent outcomes or effects of this policy?
(i.e. does the policy achieve its intended goals? How do you know? What are
the indirect, unintended, or side effects of the policy?)



5)      Policy Implementation

(a)    What types of benefits are provided - cash, material goods, or services
(including information?)

(b)   On what basis are these allocated - universality or selectivity?

(i)      Are categories used?

(ii)    Is there any discrimination, especially informal, in the way benefits
are given out?

(c)    Are benefits mandatory or voluntary?

(d)   Optional \- is the policy cost effective?



6)      Political and value context of the policy

(a)    What basic values does the policy reflect

(i)      Within the agency

(ii)    Within the broader community

7)      What interest groups and power bases support or oppose the policy and
what is their respective strength?



8)      Critique of the policy

(a)    Does the policy create problems for: clients, workers, agency
reputation, cohesion, strength?

(b)   Is the policy a good one, in your view? Should parts or all of it be
chanced.?





2. Three one hour examinations and a comprehensive final exam are schedule during the semester. Exams will be constricted from class lectures, assigned reading, and the text.



**This assignment is related to objectives: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, & 8.**





**_Return to Top_**







**Evaluation:** ****



Exams: First exam 100

Second exam 100

Third exam 100

Final exam 100

Policy Paper _100_

Total: _500_



A= 500-460 B= 459 \- 420 C= 419 - 380 D= 379 - 340





**_Return to Top_**





**Course Outline**



I.                    American Social Welfare Policy

A.                 Social Policy And The American Welfare State

                                                            1.      Definition Of Social Welfare Policy

                                                            2.      Social Problems And Social Welfare Policy

                                                            3.      Value And Ideology, And Social Welfare Policy

                                                            4.      The Political - Economy Of American Social Welfare

                                                            5.      The American Political Continuum

                                                            6.      Structural Interest Within Social Welfare



**Required Reading: Text: Chapter I**



B.                 Social Welfare Policy Research

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-left:1.5in;text-indent:-1.5in;mso-text-
indent-alt: -9.0pt;mso-list:l1 level3 lfo11;tab-stops:list 1.5in;mso-layout-
grid-al

