### HISTORY 516  
MODERN ITALY (1848-PRESENT)

(Professor Claudio Fogu)



**Objectives:** This course will simultaneously focus on the socio-political
history of the Italian nation state from its mid- 19th-century origins to the
present. and on the formation of historical consciousness in response to the
major historic events which have characterized this history: the Risorgimento,
the Great War, Fascism, and 1968. As my lectures will seek to clarify, the
historical processes which have characterized the development of Italian
nationhood cannot be separated from the peculiar role that intellectual and
cultural elites have played in the formation of competitive versions of
Italy's past, present, and future at crucial points in its historical
development. While some of the readings (Clark, De Grand, Ginsborg) will
provide you with historical narratives that cover the entire period under
consideration, the core readings for this class will consist of selected
primary sources, both documentary and literary. My hope is that this course
will not only introduce you to the history of Italy's recent past and present,
but also allow you to grasp the crucial role that traumatic events play in the
dialectic between historical and generational forms of consciousness.



**Requirements and grading:** Since there is no basic textbook for this class,
you are strongly encouraged to attend all lectures. There will be two
assignments for this class: I) A one-hour in-class mid-term on the first
lecture day of week 6 (1/3 of final grade); 2) A final take home essay (10-15
pages) to be written in the form of a short "Introduction" to a hypothetical
history of Italy you may want to write (2/3 of final grade), due during final
exam week.



**Readings:**

  1. Calvino, _The Watcher and Other Stories_
  2. A. De Grand, _Italian Fascism_
  3. G. Di Lampedusa, _The Leopard_
  4. P. Ginsborg, _A History of Contemporary Italy: Society and Politics 1943-1988_
  5. C. Levi, _Christ Stopped at Eboli_ (*choose one or the other) 
  6. I. Silone, _Bread and Wine_ (*choose one or the other) 
  7. D. Forgacs & R. Lumley eds., _Italian Cultural Studies_
  8. Reader on sale at Cop-Ez Bricker Hall, containing: selections from the following texts: 
    * S. Clough and S. Saladino eds., _A History of Modern Italy_
    * D. Mack Smith, _The Making of Italy 1796-1866_
    * E. Tannenbaum and E. Noether eds., _Modern Italy_
    * B. Croce, _A History of Italy 1871-1915_
    * M. Clark _Modern Italy 1871-1982_
    * A. Gramsci. _Pre-Prison Writings, Selections from Political Writings (1910-1920), Selections from the Prison Notebooks, Selections from Cultural Writings_
    * F. T. Marinetti. _Let's Murder the Moonshine. Selected Writings_
    * A. Lyttelton, _Italian Fascisms_
    * R. De Felice. _Fascism_
    * R. Lumley _States of Emergency_ 



**Course schedule:**

    
    
      _WEEK 1_
    
         INTRODUCTION
    
         ITALY: A GEOGRAPHIC EXPRESSION?
            _The Leopard_ (Begin)
            Mack Smith: 42-50, 67-70, 74-84, 123-4
            Clough: 35-38, 96-101
    
    
      _WEEK 2_
    
         THE RISORGIMENTO -- A PASSIVE REVOLUTION?
            _The Leopard_ (Continue)
            Gramsci, _Notebooks_ : 97-114
            Tannenbaum: 1-24
            Mack Smith: 224-27, 261-5, 309-14, 324-5, 341-45
    
         A STATE IS BORN
            _The Leopard_ (Finish)
    
    
      _WEEK 3_
    
         THE NATIONALIZATION OF ITALIANS
            Clark: 12-91
            Clough: 136-40, 170-3, 182-6, 204-7
    
         THE LIBERAL REGIME
            Croce: 1-24
            Gramsci, _Notebooks_ : 118-20
            Tannembaum: 355-76
    
    
      _WEEK 4_
    
         THE GIOLITTIAN ERA
            Clark: 91-160
            Clough: 280-89
    
         THE GREAT WAR AND ITS AFTERMATH
            Clark: 180-205
            Gramsci, _Political Writings_ : 6-9, 310-20, 372-4
            Marinetti: 47-52, 70-1, 87-91
    
    
      _WEEK 5_
    
         REVOLUTIONARY FASCISM?
            _Bread and Wine_ or _Christ Stopped at Eboli_ (Begin)
            De Grand: 22-57
            Marinetti: 156-67
            _Fascisms_ : 216-21, 225-41
            Clough: 474-77
    
         THE FASCIST REGIME
            _Bread and Wine_ or _Christ Stopped at Eboli_ (Continue)
            De Grand: 58-102
            _Fascisms:_ 39-57, 301-15
            Gramsci, _Pre-Prison Writings_ : 288-300
            Clough: 431-33
    
    
      _WEEK 6_
    
         OPPOSITION, CONSENSUS, ENTHUSIASM
            _Bread and Wine_ or _Christ Stopped at Eboli_ (Continue)
            De Grand: 105-57
            Clough: 491-505
    
         MID-TERM AND SLIDE LECTURE
    
    
      _WEEK 7_
    
         THE INTERPRETATIONS OF FASCISM
            _Bread and Wine_ or _Christ Stopped at Eboli_ (Continue)
            De Felice: 7-20, 36-115
    
         WAR: RESISTANCE OR CIVIL WAR?
            _Bread and Wine_ or _Christ Stopped at Eboli_ (Finish)
            Ginsborg: 8-71
    
    
      _WEEK 8_
    
         THE FIRST REPUBLICAN REGIME
            Ginsborg: 72-120
            Forgacs: 105-177
    
         THE BOOMING 50s AND 60s
            _The Watcher_ (Begin)
            Ginsborg: 186-209, 254-297
    
    
      _WEEK 9_
    
         THE EXPLOSIVE 70s
            _The Watcher_ (Finish)
            Lumley: 9-61
            Ginsborg: 348-405
    
         THE ERODING 80s AND 90s
            Ginsborg: 406-425
            Forgacs: 183-260
    
    
      _WEEK 10_
    
         YESTERDAY, TODAY, TOMORROW
            Forgacs: 1-104, 271-343
    
    

