ME 4180 Syllabus[![](../../../smallsrl.gif)](http://srl.marc.gatech.edu/)

#  ME 4180 - Mechanical Engineering Design II

**(Fall 1994)**

****

**Professor:** Bert Bras

**Office:** MaRC 253 (894-9667)

**Class hours** : MWF 8:00 - 9:00

**Text:** _Mechanical Engineering Design_ , 5th Ed., by Shigley & Mischke

##  Class content:

In this class, fundamentals of mechanical engineering design are applied to
analyze, design and/or select components which are commonly used in the
designs of complete mechanical systems. The class forms a bridge between the
ME 3110 and 4182 classes. In ME 3110, fundamentals of design and design
processes are taught, but no detailed analyses are done. In ME 4182, you will
have to do a full blown design project. In this class, ME 4180, material from
other ME courses is combined and utilized in the design of components.
Components are small and well understood mechanical systems. Understanding and
practicing how to design and use such components will prepare you for more
complex design and system integration tasks such as in ME 4182 and in
industry. In a project, you will have to apply the class material to the
design of a real world mechanical system.

It is my goal to teach you the course material in a way which fosters your
understanding.

##  Topics:

  1. Short overview of fatigue analysis Chapter 7 
  2. Bolts and joints Chapter 8 
  3. Springs Chapter 10 
  4. Rolling element bearings Chapter 11 
  5. Gears Chapter 13 and 14 
  6. Shafts Chapter 18 
  7. Other special topics

##  Grading:

  * Assignments: 20% 
  * Project: 35% 
  * Midterm exam: 20% 
  * Final exam: 25%

##  Exams:

The midterm exam will be somewhere around the last day to drop. The exact date
depends on what is most suitable for both you and me. There will be a final
exam at the date and time specified in the University schedule.

##  Assignments:

I will give you various individual assignments. Most of them will be homework
problems which help you prepare for the exams. I will also give some
assignments which deal with the writing of small computer programs.
Additionally, I may give you some technical drawing assignments in order to
boost the (lacking) technical drawing interpretation skills.

All assignments are due in class on the day of submission specified. Problems
must be written up and submitted in the prescribed format. To some extent I
will accept late submissions, but it will cost you points. STAPLE YOUR
SUBMISSIONS!

##  Project:

There will be a group project. You are free to form your own groups, but each
group should consist of four members. I will allow different group sizes only
if you have a very good reason. I have a number of project topics you can
choose from (see next pages), but you are also free to identify a project
topic on your own. Each group has to submit a project proposal (date to be
announced). In the proposal, you have to specify

  * what you are going to do, 
  * why you are going to do it, 
  * how you are going to do it, and 
  * what you have done so far.

You should write it as a real-world proposal from an engineer to a customer. I
am the customer and you are trying to sell me your project. I will grade this
proposal based on whether I would feel like "funding" your project. The
purpose of writing this proposal is 1) to get you going on your project and 2)
to give you some writing practice which you will need a lot in your future
career.

No matter what project you choose, I would like to see you demonstrate your
ability in applying the material learned in class. That does not mean you have
to cover _all_ material learned, but I want to see whether you can actually do
the detailed design work. The best way to approach the project is as follows.
Consider you are a Research and Development group and your project is a
consulting job for a client. The deliverable is a report in which you have to
justify the correctness of your recommendations and final design to your
client.

The final project report is due at the last day of class. You will be graded
based on

  * technical content (about 50%), 
  * originality/difficulty (about 30%), and 
  * presentation of the report (about 20%).

On the next pages, some potential projects are given.

* * *

##  Potential Projects

**Handicap Vehicle Design**

****A number of projects are available pertaining to the design and
construction of a prototype automobile which is currently being designed and
build as personal transportation for both disabled and able-bodied persons.
This vehicle has the following distinctive attributes.

  1. The design should accommodate both disabled and able-bodied persons in a variety of driving and passenger configurations ranging from four persons in electric wheelchairs to six able-bodied persons. 
  2. It is to be fitted with interchangeable driving devices for the general market and assistive devices for disabled persons. 
  3. Preferably, it should be produced by small industries in Georgia using batch production techniques and existing technology.
The main technological challenges are

  * to modularize the vehicle's components to enable easy manufacturing, maintenance, repairs, and upgrades to all models, 
  * to make it suitable for both IC engine and cleaner electric propulsion systems, 
  * to develop the base set of propulsion control systems for a variety of disabled persons, 
  * to minimize the weight of the overall vehicle, and 
  * to pursue a 100% recyclable vehicle in order to decrease its environmental impact.
In this context, various projects are available:

  * **Rear suspension design:** The entire rear of the car is to be lowered and raised to allow easy access. This requires a "non-traditional" rear suspension. Two concepts have been identified and you would have to do the detail design. I would recommend that a group focuses on one concept rather than trying to tackle both concepts. 
  * **Rear access door design:** The design of the rear door is an open issue. A handicapped person should be able to open it, either with or without powered support. Also, we would like to keep the area swept by opening and closing the door to a minimum. 
For more information and other potential projects, contact professor Dick
Martin (Industrial Design) at 894-4884.

**Padnos Design Competition for Environmentally Conscious Design**

****I have attached a copy of the Padnos Design Competition. The main issue is
to address the environmental aspect of product design. To increase your
chances, you may want to think about a product which is a) environmental
friendly, and b) helps cleaning up the environment. It is a neat project in
case you want to exercise you creativity in reducing the environmental impact
of engineering systems. But remember, in addition to the environmental
aspects, I also want to see the engineering details addressed.

**Firestone Air Spring Design Competition**

****Attached is also a copy of a Firestone design competition with respect to
new applications for air springs. I have more detailed info available for
those who are interested. This is also a suitable project topic, but I will
not accept merely a conceptual sketch/idea on a new application. I want to see
some detailed calculations as well.

**GT Motorsports projects**

****Some projects will most likely be offered by GT Motorsports. However, I
still need to receive them and I will pass them on to you as soon as possible.
Feel free to ask the GT Motorsports group for suitable projects. Dr. Cunefare
(894-4726) is the GT Motorsport faculty advisor.

**GT Electric Motorsports projects**

****Likewise, some projects are probably available from the GT Electric
Motorsports group. However, I still need to receive them and I will pass them
on to you as soon as possible. Dr. Dickerson (894-3255) is the GT Electric
Motorsport faculty advisor.

**Aerial Robotics Projects**

****The Aerial Robotics Team may also be offering some projects. Contact Dr.
Dickerson (894-3255) for contact names and potential projects.

