|

![](../images/logo.gif)

| ![](../images/banner.gif)  
---|---  
  
| [![](../images/home.gif)](../index.html)  
---  
[![](../images/about.gif)](../about/index.html)  
[![](../images/assessment.gif)](../assessment/index.html)  
[![](../images/examples.gif)](../assessment/index.html)  
[![](../images/process.gif)](index.html)  
[![](../images/newsletter.gif)](../news/index.html)  
[![](../images/participants.gif)](../participants/index.html)  
[![](../images/links.gif)](../links.html)  
[![](../images/aahe.gif)](../aahe/index.html)  
  
[Peer Consultation Process](index.html): [Interaction 1:](interact1.html)
Example 1

## Interaction 1: Reflections on a Syllabus, Example 1

|

  * [Introduction](processIntro.html)
  * [Interaction 1: Reflections on Syllabus](interact1.html)
    * [Example 1](eg1.1.html)
    * [Example 2 ](eg1.2.html)
  * [Interaction 2: Particulars of Course](interact2.html)
  * [Interaction 3: Student Learning](interact3.html)
  * [Seminar with Colleagues](seminar.html)
  * [Reflective Document](reflection.html)

  
---  
  
**Amy Burnett**

**Assignment 1: Commentary on Syllabus**

**History 220: History of Christianity**



**Purpose and Goals of Course**

This class is intended as an overview of the history of Christianity from its
founding to the present, focusing primarily in the West, but with some
exposure to Christianity elsewhere (the Orthodox tradition). The class
proceeds chronologically by period, and within each period (ancient, medieval,
Reformation and modern) I cover several different topics. I spend the first
lecture giving the students an overview of this chronological and topical
arrangement, and over the course of the semester I distribute time-lines to
help them keep straight the chronological relationship between the people,
events and developments that I discuss in class.

**Course Structure and Texts**

Because this is a large class (over 100 students), I feel limited to a lecture
format, although I frequently pause and encourage students to ask questions.
Ideally, I would require the students to read primary texts, and I have done
so with smaller classes, but this semester I chose instead to require a basic
text and three supplementary books that focused on different periods of church
history.

I have always had problems finding suitable texts for a one-semester survey of
the history of Christianity. Most texts are written for two-semester sequences
taught in seminaries, which assume both greater background knowledge and more
academic experience than is found in a 200-level survey course at UNL.
Moreover, most of the texts are older and focus on history of doctrine; they
do not look at newer emphases that I incorporate into the class, such as
popular religion, cross-cultural transmission of values and beliefs, the
social and economic roots of heresy, etc. The texts I used this semester were
for the most part newer works that do reflect recent research, which is why I
chose them, but it was clear fairly early in the semester that they were too
demanding for most students. The one book they did like was a very elementary
text for a survey course in Christianity as religion (i.e. Religious Studies,
rather than History), and their hostility to the other texts came out clearly
in the teaching evaluations. Although I may use this last text the next time I
teach this course, I will not use the other texts again.

**Methods of Evaluation**

I am still trying to figure out an effective means of evaluating student
learning. I have followed the traditional format of two mid-terms and a final,
and added the book review and book quizzes, but I would prefer to have a
series of smaller and more frequent tests or quizzes. I would also like to
require more writing, but I have yet to find a method of grading writing
assignments that is not too time-consuming to grade for a class this size.
This semester I required the students to write a book review, summarizing the
contents and analyzing the arguments of the most difficult of the required
texts. Although the students hated both the book and the assignment, the
assignment was an extremely valuable tool to force them to learn to read
closely. Having said that, however, I learned that requiring a book review is
not practicable for a class of this size. It took me much too long to grade
and write constructive comments for each review. I gave quizzes on two of the
other texts to make sure students read them.

**Broader Issues**

Because my training and interests lie in the pre-modern period, I spend most
of the semester on the period up to and including the Reformation. It would
certainly be possible to cut back on the earlier periods of church history and
spend more time on the modern era. This semester I added a lecture on the
Orthodox church in the Middle Ages, and the next time I teach the class I
would like to add lectures on the spread of Christianity to the non-western
world, both in the early modern and modern era. This will probably require
abridging a few of my lectures on the early and medieval church.

The class draws students from a variety of religious/non-religious
backgrounds. Some of the students are very familiar with Christian doctrine,
while others know absolutely nothing about Christianity. I require them to
read the introductory text on Christianity as a means of "evening out" the
general level of knowledge about the Christian religion. When it comes to the
history of Christianity, however, I have found that most students know next to
nothing, even about the development of American Christianity or their own
denominational tradition (if they have one). One of my goals for the latter
part of the course is to help them understand how and when the various
Christian denominations originated and how they differ from each other. This
is probably the part of the course that has the greatest practical application
for most students. Given the influence of the church throughout most of its
history on western culture, the course also lays a foundation of historical
knowledge that should serve students in any higher level history class and in
their appreciation of the western musical and artistic tradition.

**Emily Greenwald, Spring 1998**

**Response to Amy Burnett's Syllabus Memo**

Dr. Amy Burnett makes a significant contribution to the History Department and
the College of Arts and Sciences through her History of Christianity course.
As an introductory survey, the course offers students with little or no
background in history or religious studies an accessible overview of
Christianity with a surprising amount of depth for a large lecture course. Dr.
Burnett clearly cares a lot about this course, and she continues to refine the
syllabus and assignments each year. She covers topics and events crucial to
understanding not just Christianity but religion generally.

The course covers the history of Christianity from its origins to the present.
It focuses on theology, church structure, popular religious movements, and
religious expression in other dimensions of culture (particularly art and
music). Students undoubtedly will appreciate the focus on America and
twentieth-century Christianity toward the end of the course, which will help
them connect the deep historical roots of Christianity to the modern
experience.

Dr. Burnett widens the relevance of the course by showing how art and music
relate to religious ideas. While she does this in the context of Christianity
specifically, she offers a model for students to place other religions in
their appropriate historical and cultural contexts. This performs a great
service for the Religious Studies program in the college because it supplies
students with tools to use in other Religious Studies courses.

Actively engaged in trying to improve the course, Dr. Burnett has faced her
greatest challenge in finding suitable readings for the students. She has
organized her lectures, in part, to function as the principal text because no
adequate survey text exists in this field. Dr. Burnett supplies students with
outlines for each lecture topic, so during the semester they expand these
outlines with their in-class notes. I would imagine that students' notes for
the course are a clearer and better-organized reference tool than any survey
text they might find.

The class size is very large, which poses additional challenges in terms of
choosing assignments. Dr. Burnett is committed to including paper assignments
as part of the graded work, and she continues to experiment with what form of
paper would be practical in such a large class. Her commitment to making
writing part of student learning and assessment is admirable, and it
undoubtedly enhances the students' experience with the course.  
  
  |

* * *

  
Peer Review of Teaching * 214 Burnett Hall * University of Nebraska-Lincoln *
Lincoln, NE * 68588-0308  
Ph. 402 472-1753 * E-mail [PeerReview@UNL.edu](mailto:PeerReview@UNL.edu)

