SYLLABUS

PACIFIC UNION COLLEGE

Department of History

**HIST 102 A HISTORY OF WORLD CIVILIZATIONS**

Spring Quarter, 2002

10:00-10:50 MWThF

Teacher: K. A. Francis

**A. OFFICE HOURS**

MWThF 10:55 a.m. - 11:55 p.m.

MTh 14:00 - 16:00

Irwin Hall 209B (965-6302)

E-mail Address: [kfrancis@puc.edu](mailto:kfrancis@puc.edu)

**B. COURSE OBJECTIVES**

1\. To acquaint students with the main developments in the world's major
civilizations from the fifteenth century to the present. (Readings from
political, philosophical and religious writing will supplement the textbook
and provide practical examples of how some people have dealt with the
perennial problems facing humankind.)

2\. To draw attention to the main characteristics of the major world
civilizations--in areas of culture such as art, philosophy, religion,
government--and the factors that contributed to their uniqueness.

3\. To address some of the perennial questions humankind has asked and analyze
the implications of the answers to these questions.

4\. To acquaint students with the way historians work, the importance of the
methodologies used, how these methodologies are similar to and different from
other disciplines in the social sciences, and the ways in which the telling or
writing of history is affected by the approaches and methods historians use.

5\. To develop the following skills:

a. The ability to gather information efficiently and critically;

b. The ability to think critically about what is heard or read;

c. The ability to form judgments which are consistent with the evidence;

d. The ability to communicate, in spoken and written form, those judgments
clearly and cogently.

**C. METHODS**

1\. Lectures and/or discussions, normally four times a week.

2\. Reading and note-making by the student: Lectures are guides to, rather
than exhaustive analyses of, a topic. Wide and intelligent reading is
necessary if the student is to be well-informed.

3\. Tests and Quizzes: These will give students an opportunity to see how well
they are meeting the course objectives.

4\. Essays: These will allow the student to analyze and discuss specific
topics or questions in a more detailed manner.

5\. Final examination: A final demonstration of the student's progress.

**D. REQUIREMENTS**

1\. Reading: You should aim to spend at least three hours each day reading,
making notes and preparing for the appropriate assignments.

2\. Quizzes: these may be given at the beggining of any class (worth 25% of
the grade).

3\. Essays: six times during the course 'problems' in history based on primary
texts as well as from the books _Sources of World History_ and _Discovering
the Global Past_ will be discussed in class. Essays will be set based on the
class discussion and the readings. (These essays are worth 20% of the grade.)

4\. Tests: lasting one hour on August 1 & 13 (worth 20% of the grade).

5\. Final Examination: Thursday, August 16, 8:00-10:00.

**E. REQUIRED READING**

Albert M. Craig et al., _The Heritage of World Civilizations_ , 5th edition,
Macmillan.

Cited below as 'Craig'

Alfred J. Andrea, _The Human Record_ , 4th edition, Volume II, Houghton
Mifflin.

Cited below as 'Andrea'

Merry E. Wiesner et al., _Discovering the Global Past_ , Volume II, Houghton
Mifflin.

Cited below as 'Wiesner'

**F. GRADING**

Students may choose to have their grade calculated in either of the following
ways:

1\.

Best Test = 20%

Best 2 Essays = 20%

Best 2 Short Essays = 10%

Best 4 Quizzes = 10%

Final Examination = 50%

2\.

Solely based on the final examination (provided all course work is completed).

Students should note that essays may not be handed in late nor the test or
examination taken at an alternative time without a valid excuse. The penalty
for tardiness will be a 25% reduction of the grade given.

**Table of Numerical Value of Letter Grades**

**A** |  91-100 | **B-** |  70-75 | **D+** |  50-55  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
**A-** |  85-91 | **C+** |  65-70 | **D** |  45-50  
**B+** |  80-85 | **C** |  60-65 | **D-** |  40-45  
**B** |  75-80 | **C-** |  55-60 | **F** |  Below 40  
  
**G. CLASS SCHEDULE**

_Section A: INTRODUCTION_

1 April What is the 'Modern Age'? An Introduction to the Course

3 The World in 1400: An Introduction to 'World Civilization'

_Section B: THE BEGINNINGS OF THE 'MODERN AGE'/THE RENAISSANCE_

8 April Comparisons . . . The Ming Dynasty and the Ottoman Empire

_Craig, 544-563, 636-644_

4 The (European) Renaissance

_Craig, 434-446, 453-454_

5 The 'Age of Exploration': What was 'Discovered'?

_Craig, 449-452 & 518-530_

10 DISCUSSION: The Columbus Question

_Wiesner, Chapter 2_

_Section C: THE REFORMATION AGE_

11 April The Reformation Age

_Craig, 452-467, 470-478 & 484-485_

12 India, Korea, and Japan 1500-1800

_Craig, 558-581, 648-652_

15 DISCUSSION: The Genius of Asian Culture

_Wiesner, Chapter 5_

_Section D: THE AGE OF REASON, AFRICA, AND NEW FORMS OF GOVERNMENT_

17 April The Scientific Revolution and The Age of Reason

_Craig, 662-668_

18 Africa and the Slave Trade

_Craig, Chapter 18 & 532-542_

19 The Enlightenment

_Craig,668-682_

_Section E: THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE AGE OF REVOLUTIONS_

22 Revolution in the Americas

_Craig, 688-692, 708-717_

1 The French Revolution(s)

_Craig, 692-708_

25 DISCUSSION: What is a Good Revolution?

_Wiesner, Chapter 6_

26 **TEST**

29 The American Civil War: Revolution Over Slavery?

_Craig, 726-730 & 764-767_

1 May The Industrial Revolution

_Craig, 730-736, 780-783, 797-798_

2 Karl Marx and 'Scientific Socialism'

_Craig, 736-738 & 792-797_

_Section F: THE ENLIGHTENMENT AND THE AGE OF REVOLUTIONS_

3 European Nationalism and Imperialism

_Craig, Chapter 31 & 921-924_

6 Africa, Asia, and Imperialism

_Craig, Chapter 31 & 32

_

8 The Changing Role of Women

_Craig, 783-791 & 821-824_

9 DISCUSSION: Exploring Women's Sphere: Women & the Peace Movement

_

Wiesner, Chapter 14_ ,

10 New Directions in Thought: Freud, Nietzsche, Einstein and Company

_Craig, Chapter 29_

_Section G: THE END OF LIBERALISM_

13 The European 'System' Falls Apart: The Origins of World War One

_Craig, Chapter 33_

8 Consequences of WWI: The Making of the Modern Middle East

_Craig, 1066-1074_

_Section H: THE DECLINE OF THE WEST?_

16 The Great Depression

_Craig, 947-949, 964-969_

17 Totalitarianism: Communism and Fascism

_Craig, 949-964_

20 DISCUSSION: 'Hitler and Stalin: Ideas or Personality?'

_Andrea, 394-404_

22 World War Two: Global Conflict

_Craig, Chapter 35_

23 Decolonization: Rejecting the West, Embracing 'Our' Traditions?

_Craig, 1058-1066 & 1074-1085_

24 **TEST**

29 DISCUSSION: 'M.K.Gandhi and Ho Chi Minh: Paths to Independence'

_Andrea, 438-446_

_Section I: THE GLOBAL VILLAGE_

30 The Emergence of Superpowers: The Cold War and Aftermath

_Craig, 999-1005 & 1013-1031_

31 From OEEC to EU: Europe Since 1947

_Craig, 1006-1010_

3 June Is 'Success' Economic Success? Japan, Korea, China, and South-East Asia

_Craig, Chapter 37_

5 Comparisons: Africa and Latin America in the Late Twentieth Century

6 Comparisons: The Middle East and Western Asia in the Late 20th Century

7 Review

* * *

[Back to: Keith Francis's
Page](http://www.puc.edu/Faculty/Keith_Francis/Hist_102/wwwkf.html)

