[![](logotiny.jpeg)](index.html) | Dr. Andrew Wood  
Office: HGH 210; phone: (408) 924-5378  
Email: [wooda@email.sjsu.edu](mailto:wooda@email.sjsu.edu)  
Web: <http://www.sjsu.edu/faculty/wooda>  
---|---  
  
[Introduction](intro.html) : [Course Calendar](syllabus.html) :
[Policies](policies.html) : [Readings](readings.html) : [Exam
Review](review.html)[  
Assignments](assignments.html) : [Check Your Grades](grades/index.html) :
[Return to Frontpage](index.html)

## Sept 10, 12 - Theorizing Tourism 2

**[![](sobpedro.jpeg)](http://www.sjsu.edu/faculty/wooda/motelsouthcarolina.html)Reading**
: Liebs, C.H. (1985). _Main street to miracle mile: American roadside
architecture_. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.

**Quiz study guide** : Focus on (1) the tripartite form of turn of the
twentieth-century main street storefronts, (2) most common architectural form
for roadside businesses in the interwar years, (3) inspiration for art deco
architecture, (4) basic components of Moderne architecture, and (5) components
of exaggerated Modern.

Chester H. Liebs helps us understand the impact of automobile transportation
on urban life by providing an historic and conceptual survey of downtown
commercial architecture in the twentieth century. In his chapter,
"Architecture for Speed-Reading" (pp. 39-73), Liebs discusses the tripartite
form of main street storefronts at the turn of the twentieth-century: sidewalk
shop fronts, one to several stories of flat wall, and some sort of cornice
(typically ornamental). Liebs notes that the Main Street storefront, whether
in a small town or metropolitan city, confronted the emergence of rapid forms
of transportation which began with trolleys and streetcars. The result was
larger and more eye-catching advertisements designed to attract eyeballs
within a second or two. The impact of the automobile upon architecture,
however, was more pronounced away from Main Street, along the newly laid
roadways. Here, buildings did not simply display advertisements; they became
them.

[![](lucytiny.jpeg)](lucy.jpeg)Hereafter, Liebs concentrates on various types
of imagery that dominated roadside architecture. After World War One, the
dominant style was **domestic**. Images of homes and cabins - including picket
fences and front window geraniums - appealed to motorists, many of whom feared
for their own domestic security during the Depression. During the same period,
"fantastic" design, the use of oversized objects, and **mimetic** architecture
- structures disguised as other objects - began to compete with domestic
architecture. Naturally, these structures had, for centuries, been a part of
the urban scene. However, buildings shaped like hot dogs, windmills, and even
elephants (image right) became more common in the 1920s. A third architectural
style was **regional/historic** \- buildings that affirmed stereotypical and
caricatured visions of "local" forms and referents. Thus, "teepees" sprouted
in the Southwest, while "colonial revival" buildings appeared along the
Atlantic.

Thus far, these styles - domestic, mimetic, and regional/historic - share in
common the desire to affirm traditional expectations through literal
depictions of objects. Even the oversized, fantastic imagery of the mimetic
elephant-hotel tried to relate its product to the natural world in some way.
In contrast **Moderne** (roadside or otherwise) is most noted for its
willingness to replace literal forms with abstract design. Moderne
architecture is a combination of deco (noted by geometric flora and fauna),
streamlined (noted by the teardrop motif), and International style (noted by
flat roofs and corner windows). Moderne buildings abandoned traditional forms,
selling promises of "the future" as sleek, clean, and efficient - thoroughly
"new." As such, it was a perfect compliment to the automobile whose challenge
to urban life was nothing less than revolutionary. Even so, after World War
II, Moderne began to appear dated to architects and consumers. Thus,
exaggerated modern (also known as googie, populuxe, and doo wop, and boomerang
modern) emerged with huge plate glass windows, exposed structural components,
and oversized roofs (think: 60s-era Denny's Restaurant).

As postwar-values shifted (and fears of environmental collapse intensified),
Moderne roadside architecture quickly became viewed as tacky, ugly, and
depressing. In its place (of, more frequently, tacked on top), overhanging
slopped roofs, wood and earth tones, began to comprise an environmental style.
As well, many architects rebelled against the anti-historic anti-regional
architecture of the Moderne. Instead they began to playfully mix and match
historical and regional references in a manner dubbed "postmodernism "
(explored in more detail by [Rothman](syllabus4rothman.html)). Liebs concludes
his chapter with a brief discussion of the "high tech" look that may yet enter
the popular lexicon of architectural styles.

[![](autocourttiny.jpeg)](autocourt.jpeg) |   |
[![](wigwamtiny.jpeg)](wigwam.jpeg)  
---|---|---  
  
Domestic

|   |

Mimetic  
  
[![](missiontiny.jpeg)](mission.jpeg) |   |
[![](googiemoteltiny.jpeg)](googiemotel.jpeg)  
  
Regional/historic

|   |

Moderne  
  
**Activity**

> Grab a camera and head downtown where you live. Photograph an example of
commercial architecture that is either domestic, fantastic/mimetic,
regional/historic, Moderne (note deco, streamlined, international, and/or
exaggerated style), environmental, or postmodern style. In a one page essay,
explain what style this building represents and identify at least three ways
to support your analysis. Of course, remember: when analyzing roadside
architecture, it's important to seek out designers and owners efforts to
creatively blur otherwise distinct styles. If possible, seek examples in which
buildings adapt themselves to changing times.

**Supplemental Websites**

> [San Jose Architecture](syllabus3sanjose.html)
<<http://www.sjsu.edu/faculty/wooda/195/syllabus3sanjose.html>>\- my growing
collection of local styles that illustrate this reading.

>

> To see examples of local Moderne architecture, I strongly recommend that you
examine my [South Bay
Deco](http://www.sjsu.edu/faculty/wooda/southbaydeco/splash.html)
<<http://www.sjsu.edu/faculty/wooda/southbaydeco/splash.html>> website. You
might also explore sub-pages dedicated to postcard images of: [bus
depots](http://www.sjsu.edu/faculty/wooda/busdepot/) and [auto
courts](http://www.sjsu.edu/faculty/wooda/decomotel/).

>

> [Last Class](syllabus2.html) : [Next Class](syllabus4.html)

>

>  

