![Distance Education Systemwide Interactive Electronic Newsletter--Your
Distance Education Connection](../../graphics/desienlogo.gif)



D E S I E N  
Volume 4.6  
June, 1999 |

_Text Version: DESIEN Volume 4.6  
June, 1999_

**THEME -** Technology Support and Training  **UPFRONT -** Aligning Training
with the Organization  
**FOCUS -** A Perspective on Technology/Learning Training Decisions '99  
**NEW TECH -** A New Breed Of Thinking Computer? Designing Web Pages for Sight
Impaired Users  
**DID YOU KNOW? -** Unext Enters OnLine Graduates Course Field; More on Unext;
Web Storage Sites Loom as Next Big Thing  
**TECH LAW -** Senate Committee OK's Digital Signature Bill  
**TECH READS -** Study on Distance Learning in Higher Ed; Currents in
Electronic Literacy; Online Reviews Raise Questions in CyberSpace; No
Significant Difference  
**TECH TRENDS -** New from PictureTel, eVideo Services; More Projects, Less
Time; Online Course on Online Courses  
**TECH POSITIONS -** UW-Madison, WI; Valley City State University, ND; St.
Louis Community College, MO  
**NEW ON THE LIST -** Welcome to New Subscribers  
**FYI -** News, Conferences, Institutes, Events  



**UPFRONT -** _FOCUS Introduction_  

Training and support are integral to teaching and training via technology.
Without these two components, successful courses and programs just won't
happen. Instructional Communications Systems (ICS), located in The Pyle Center
on the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus is a successful example of this
critical combination.

  
  
**FOCUS**  
Where Training and Support Meet - ICS at The Pyle Center  
Bruce Dewey  
InfoSource Manager/Distance Education Specialist  
Rosemary Lehman  
Senior Outreach/Distance Education Specialist  
Instructional Communications Systems, UW-Extension (ICS)  

For over a century, the people of Wisconsin have looked to the University of
Wisconsin - Extension (UWEX) as their gateway to the University. Extension is
the "Wisconsin Idea" - extending the resources of the University to the State
borders and beyond - truly the people's University connection. Through its
programming divisions, and its collaborative relationships with the 26 UW
universities and colleges, the 72 Wisconsin counties, and countless local,
state, and federal agencies and groups, Extension provides a spectrum of
lifelong learning opportunities for Wisconsin citizens

The size of the effort is extensive. Each year, more than one million
Wisconsin residents participate in extension programs, through a wide variety
of delivery methods, from workshops and one-on-one counseling to interactive
networks and correspondence study - all designed to make education accessible.
Supporting these programs, faculty, and staff is an array of administrative
and program support services, including our unit - Instructional
Communications Systems (ICS). ICS is an academic support unit of UWEX. In
1965, ICS began by launching the Educational Teleconference Network (ETN),
linking 200 sites throughout the state via two-way audio contacts with
speakers anywhere in the world. In 1969, the Statewide Extension Education
Network (SEEN) added video to the telephone system to present slides,
graphics, and other visual materials in continuing education and credit
classes at 26 sites. The UWEX teleconference networks, which now include the
WisLine dial-up teleconference service linking phones anywhere in the world,
and compressed videoconferencing, are widely acknowledged as the world models
for national and international teleconference systems in business, industry,
government, and education.

In 1995, the state budget authorized construction of a $13 million renovation
and a state-of-the-art addition to the Wisconsin Center conference facility.
In 1997, Thomas and Judith Pyle of Madison presented a naming gift of over $2
million for the renovation of and an addition to the Wisconsin Center-
Extension's flagship continuing education conference and distance education
facility now known as The Pyle Center.

Director, Marcia Baird, and Assistant Director/Technical Director, Denny
Gilbertson provide the leadership for Instructional ICS. Six unit managers
oversee: Audio Production, Computer Services, Electronic Publishing,
Scheduling  & Program Coordination, Technical Services & Development and
Teleconference & Classroom Operations. In addition, there is an Instructional
Design and Training Services Team that works directly with faculty and staff
to utilize the technologies most effectively. In total there are more than 35
full time staff and more than 20 student workers. The major systems supported
by ICS include: * Interactive Compressed Videoconferencing, as part of this
support, ICS also operates the bridging service that connects other sites can
be connected on a course-by-course basis, worldwide; * The Educational
Teleconference Network links 100 classroom sites statewide; WisLine
Teleconferencing Service link up to 140 telephone lines anywhere in the world;
* The WisView Audiographics network combines audio teleconferencing with
computer graphics; * Satellite Services includes a variety of services to
support satellite videoconferences. ICS also supports WisSat, the UWEX
Cooperative Extension system of satellite downlink sites everyone of the 72
county Extension Offices in Wisconsin. * InfoSource is a user-friendly
educational service, allowing consumers to access more than 600 short messages
via the telephone and the World Wide Web. * Web Based Support Services, a unit
that provides support to several Web based operations throughout Extension and
the UW System, including The Distance Education Clearinghouse. * Technical
Support Services provides technical consultation and demonstrating of
equipment, testing emerging technological equipment and systems and evaluating
project proposals

With the development of its Instructional Design and Training Services Team,
in 1995, ICS expanded its support for UW System faculty, UW distance education
teams and state agencies. Reaching beyond the borders of the state, this team
is also providing training, consulting, information sharing and materials
nationally and internationally. The past four and a half years have been
ambitious, progressive and rewarding ones for the team. Activities have
included: 1) the development of training sessions, workshops and individual
consultations; 2) involvement with conferences, presentations and papers; 3)
participation in leadership and liaison roles; 4) the development of resources
and information sharing; 5) the creation of products and materials; and 6)
participation in professional development programs.

1) Training for the UW System institutions has been a top priority for the
Instructional Design and Training Services Team, working with UW faculty to
assist them in learning about audioconferencing, audiographics,
videoconferencing and the blended use of technologies. With the University of
Wisconsin System and UWEX's critical interest in K-12 professional
development, the team is now developing plans to work with K-12 teachers
through a number of the fiber networks. Reaching beyond the university, the
team has also assisted state governmental agencies that include: the Public
Service Commission, the Quality Improvement Network, the Division of Workforce
Development, the Department of Health and Family Services, the State Adoption
Network and the Governmental Affairs Commission, to help them assess needs,
become familiar with a spectrum of technology and media and experience and
develop training and meeting strategies. Through an Alliance collaboration
with AT and T, The Pennsylvania State University and Indiana University, ICS
works in the development of workshops and training materials. The team has
also become involved with national training and mentoring with clients that
include: Webster University- MO; Pennsylvania Power and Light-PA; Bell
Atlantic Learning Labs-MD, PA & WVA; Owens Corning-OH; The Federal Highway
Administration-DC; the Chicago Consortium of Higher Education-IL; and Pershing
Securities.

2) Team members have reached state, national and international audiences, as
well, through presentations and papers at a wide spectrum of conferences,
seminare and symposia.

3) In addition, they provide leadership and serve as liaisons between a wide
variety of groups and the Chancellor's and Dean's offices.

4) A variety of resources have been developed that provide opportunities for
information sharing statewide, nationally and internationally: the DESIEN
electronic newsletter, the Univesity of Wisconsin Distance Learning URL book,
an ICS quarterly newletter, a systemwide Distance Learning Catalog, InfoSource
and the Distance Education Clearinghouse.

5) Highlighting the past several years has been the development of a variety
of new technology training materials: "Successful Uses of Video Conferencing"
- fact sheets describing various applications; four AT and T "Client Case
Studies;" twelve Case Studies that include higher education academic
experiences, K-12 experiences and experiences in government and the private
sector; "Breaking New Ground: Faculty Perspectives," a videotape/print package
about the experiences of five UW System faculty; and "The Essential
Videoconferencing Guide: 7 Keys to Success." The Guide is a valuable component
to systemwide faculty and team training sessions. Both "Breaking New Ground"
and "The Essential Videoconferencing Guide" are being successfully marketed
nationally and internationally. A new book "Videoconferencing \- Designing the
Environment * Designing the Experience" is in progress and will be published
in spring of 2000.

6) To continue to grow in their work and prepare for ongoing changes in
instructional technology, team members are continually involved in their own
professional development programs. These have included training in the use of
new technologies, new technology applications for education and training,
leadership roles in distance education and distance education and cultural
diversity.

The Pyle Center provides a unique teaching, learning and support facility
enabling learners and instructors to keep pace with the rapidly changing face
of education in the information age and offering tools and services for
flexible education choices for the 21st Century.

  
  
**NEW TECH -** _A New Breed of Thinking Computer?_

A team of researchers at the Georgia Institute of Technology and a handful of
other groups are working to develop hybrid biocomputers that marry living
nerve cells with silicon circuits to create smarter computers. If they
succeed, they could set the foundation for brain-like computer systems that
could find solutions on their own, with no need for step-by-step programming
instructions. So far, researchers have joined two neurons from leeches and
linked them to a personal computer, which sent signals to each cell and
correctly extracted the answer to a simple addition problem. The program that
links the neurons and the PC, dubbed "wetware," is based on chaos theory,
using the results to tune the neurons and alter the way they communicate.
Ultimately, brain-like chips will be more creative and may mirror both the
good and bad aspects of human thinking. William L. Ditto, who heads the
project at the Georgia Institute of Technology, says it will be 10 years or
more until biocomputers are commercially available. (Business Week 06/21/99 -
Edupage 21 June '99)

DESIGNING WEB PAGES FOR SIGHT IMPAIRED USERS - If you are involved in making
Web pages accessible for users with sight impairments, check out "Disabled
Accessibility: The Pragmatic Approach," by Jakob Nielsen ("The Alertbox," June
13, 1999 issue). Nielsen includes a link to the W3 Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines 1.0, the W3's prioritized list of design rules, and a very useful
checklist for Web page designers. The article is available at [
http://www.useit.com/alertbox/990613.html; "The Alertbox: Current Issues in
Web Usability"](http://www.useit.com/alertbox/990613.html) is a biweekly
column by Dr. Jakob Nielsen, of the Nielsen Norman Group. Back issues are
available on the Web at: <http://www.useit.com/alertbox/> (CIT INFOBITS June
1999 )

  
  

**Did You Know?**

UNext ENTERS ONLINE GRADUATE COURSE FIELD - [ UNext.com](http://www.UNext.com)
has struck deals with the University of Chicago, Stanford University, Carnegie
Mellon University and the London School of Economics and Political Science.
Along with Columbia University's business school, the first school that signed
on, each school plans to help UNext.com create course materials that it can
sell to major corporations for employee training and education.

International Business Machines Corp. was the first company to sign up as a
customer of what UNext.com describes as an "online business-education
community called Cardean" - named for a Roman goddess - that will allow
employees to take courses electronically on their own schedule, from work or
home or even while traveling. The courses will be delivered through a product
created by IBM's Lotus Development unit called LearningSpace, and Lotus's
sales force will sell the educational materials to its corporate customers
around the world. The web site is: [http://www.unext.com
](http://www.unext.com )(TechLearn Trends, #131, 14 June 99)

MORE ON Unext - Ultimately, UNext.com wants to gain accreditation as an online
business school with the authority to grant MBA degrees. UNext.com will
compete with Caliber Learning Network, a company with similar goals that has
already signed up the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School and Johns
Hopkins University. IBM is UNext.com's first Cardean online business education
customer. As a Cardean customer, employees will be able to take courses online
from remote locations. The courses will be delivered to employees using Lotus'
LearningSpace. (Wall Street Journal 06/23/99 - Edupage 23 June 99)

WEB STORAGE SITES LOOM AS NEXT BIG THING - A number of Internet companies are
offering online file storage to attract users who may want to access their
files from any networked computer. Although Apple first declared the floppy
disk drive to be obsolete by excluding it from its iMac, it took the
innovation of a number of companies, such as NetFloppy.com, My Docs Online,
and Visto to offer an alternative to floppy drives. Most of these companies
provide free storage of 15 MB to 20 MB of data that can be accessed through
the Internet. Although Web-based file storage has yet to achieve notable
success, the companies cite the popularity of free e-mail and online
calendaring services as a sign that the service will catch on. My Docs Online
has used its file-sharing feature to attract customers; as current customers
post files, those who access the files instantly learn about the service. My
Docs has attracted 40,000 registered users in over 40 countries since its
launch in March. (C|Net 06/24/99 - Edupage 25 June 99)

  
  

**TECH LAW -** _Senate Committee OK's Digital Signal Bill_

A nationwide standard for electronic signatures moved one step closer to
reality this week when the Senate Commerce Committee unanimously passed a bill
that would make electronic signatures as valid as handwritten signatures.
Several states have already passed laws that validate electronic signatures,
but Sen. Spencer Abraham (R-Mich.), the Senate bill's sponsor, says federal
guidance is needed. Abraham says, "If we're going to be able to move forward
and experiment with the Internet, the key vehicle we need is electronic
verification methods." The bill, which doesn't endorse a specific technology,
follows legislation passed last year by Congress requiring the federal
government to use digital signatures for electronic transactions. The bill is
expected to receive the endorsement of the Clinton administration. (Bloomberg
06/23/99 - Edupage 25 June 99)

  

* * *

  

**TECH READS -** _Study on Distance Learning in Higher Ed; Currents in
Electronic Literacy; OnLine Reviews Raise Questions in CyberSpace; No
Significant Difference_

According to a recent study published by Primary Research Group, Inc., an
estimated 93 percent of distance learning (DL) programs in North American
colleges and universities use email as their DL medium. The study, "The Survey
of Distance Learning Programs in Higher Education," is based on a random
sample of sixty-one college and university distance learning programs
throughout the United States and Canada. The report provides a comparison of
data reported in 1997 and 1998. Findings show that 36.68 percent of DL
instructors in 1998 were adjunct faculty, compared with 1997 in which 27.34
percent of the instructors were adjunct faculty. Instructor/tutor salaries
account for the highest percentage of the DL programs' total costs and
expenditures - 31.72 percent. In 1997, instructor/tutor salaries accounted for
37.21 percent of the total costs and expenditures. (CIT INFOBITS June 1999)

CURRENTS IN ELECTRONIC LITERACY - The Computer Writing and Research Lab (CWRL)
of the Division of Rhetoric and Composition at the University of Texas at
Austin is publishing a new, free electronic journal, CURRENTS IN ELECTRONIC
LITERACY. Currents is a "scholarly discussion of issues pertaining to
electronic literacy . . . addressing the use of electronic texts and
technologies in reading, writing, teaching, and learning in . . .literature,
rhetoric and composition, languages, communications, media studies, and
education. The focus of the first issue (Spring 1999) is "Electronic Pedagogy
in Literature Classes." You can read Currents at:
<http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/currents/> Currents [ISSN 1524-6493] is published
two times a year, in the spring and fall. For more information, contact John
Slatin, General Editor, or David Barndollar, Coordinating Editor, c/o Computer
Writing and Research Lab, Parlin 3, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
78712 USA; email:
[@lists.cwrl.utexas.edu](MAILTO:ejournal@lists.cwrl.utexas.edu) CWRL also
provides links to the online edition of Computers and Composition: An
International Journal for Teachers of Writing (published by Ablex Publishing
Corporation.) For more information about CWRL, see their Website at:
<http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/> (CIT INFOBITS June 99)

ONLINE REVIEWS RAISE QUESTIONS IN CYBERSPACE - Anonymous public commentary on
commercial Web sites such as Amazon.com is a growing problem, say authors and
members of the publishing industry. Publishers say that, because of
Amazon.com's high profile, reviews on the site can make or break a book. Tim
O'Reilly, CEO of book publisher O'Reilly  & Associates, says the reviews at
Amazon.com are "increasingly significant as a measure of what's important out
there." The site uses more than 2.5 million customer reviews, according to a
company spokesman. However, the site does not pre-screen anonymous reviews and
rarely removes negative reviews. Some publishing industry insiders suggest
that some publishers could be using the anonymous reviews to slam competitors'
books. (Los Angeles Times 06/29/99 - Edpage 30 June 99)

NO SIGNITICANT DIFFERENCE \- The "No Significant Difference Phenomenon" site
has changed to: <http://teleeducation.nb.ca/nosignificantdifference/> Since
the publication of the book version, the web site no longer includes the
complete collection of individual listings. Instead, there is a representative
listing of studies conducted on a variety of technologies through the decades,
starting with the 1920s. The book is fully indexed and includes a foreword by
Richard E Clark. The previous web-based version contained 248 titles. The
book, copyright 1999, lists 355. Many of the 107 additional entries concern
the "newer" technologies. The site will have a new section featuring
comparative studies which DO find significant differences. Studies are being
solicited for inclusion in either section - both significant differences and
no significant differences. Please send all submissions to
[Tom_Russell@NCSU.edu](MAILTO:Tom_Russell@NCSU.edu) For information about
obtaining copies of the book,go to: <http://www2.ncsu.edu/oit/nsxflyer.jpg> or
contact the author at: [Tom_Russell@NCSU.edu](MAILTO:Tom_Russell@NCSU.edu)

  

**TECH TRENDS -** _New from PictureTel, eVideo Services; More Projects, Less
Time; Online Course on Online Courses_

On June 28, PictureTel introduced a comprehensive services solution for
streaming-media applications over IP networks. The first eVideo Services
offerings are PictureTel eVideo Streaming Service, PictureTel eVideo Streaming
System and PictureTel eVideo Consulting Service. These services are the first
from the recently announced strategy of Visual Collaboration for the Net.
eVideo Services are designed to complement desktop, compact and group
videoconferencing systems, as well as streaming-media products.

eVideo Streaming Service features high and low bit-rate streaming based on a
variety of standards, including broadcast, rebroadcast, video archiving,
video-on-demand and various pre- and post-production services. eVideo
Streaming System is designed for customers who want to control their own
systems and take advantage of high-bandwidth local area networks. Each system
provides support for multiple, simultaneous bit-rate streams, ranging from
28.8 kbps to MPEG, enabling organizations to reach audiences with the highest
quality video image that various network segments will sustain. eVideo
Consulting Service complements these services by offering PictureTel ProStart,
an IP-centric service that identifies the steps necessary for success.

eVideo Streaming Service will be generally available on July 6. eVideo
Streaming System is currently available worldwide for on-site enterprise
installation in conjunction with eVideo Consulting Service. Service pricing
starts at $1,000 per broadcast hour for low bit-rate streaming. Optional
services, such as presentation slides, chat-back capability, rebroadcast and
high bit-rate streams are individually priced. Typical enterprise costs are
likely to be priced between $2,000 to $4,000 per streamed hour, depending on
services selected. (PictureTel User's Group Electronic News - 29 June 99)

MORE PROJECTS, LESS TIME \- IT executives are finding they have to reset their
priorities much more frequently than in the past, as the pace of change in
business continues to increase exponentially. According to a recent
Information Week poll, 75 percent of IT executives are resetting their
priorities more frequently, with some changing priorities as often as once a
month. Among the reasons for the urgency, they say, are the Internet,
deregulation, globalization, ever- changing technologies, and more
technologically sophisticated customers, suppliers, and partners. Further, IT
has evolved to take on a more central role in business, and is no longer
simply an enabling unit. Indeed, in their list of IT priorities, respondents
said the top three were understanding and meeting customer needs, improving
customer service, and streamlining business processes - more business-related
goals than traditional technology objectives. (InformationWeek 06/14/99 -
Edupage 21 June '99)

ONLINE COURSE ON ONLINE COURSES - World Campus 101 is an orientation for
students taking online courses at Pennsylvania State University. It acquaints
students with the skills they need to be a successful participant in a virtual
classroom. Although the materials are focused on Penn State's specific
computer systems, some of the topics are applicable for use at any campus: the
differences between online courses and on-campus classes, "Netiquette" for
online communication, and the use of Web-based resources. World Campus 101 is
available at <http://www.worldcampus.psu.edu:8900/public/wc101/> (CIT
INFORBITS June 99)

  
  

**TECH POSITIONS**

**DISTANCE EDUCATION OUTREACH SPECIALIST, UW-Madison. For information visit: [
http://www.wisc.edu/depd/html/position.htm](http://www.wisc.edu/depd/html/position.htm)
Application deadline July 9, 1999 (PVL#31904)

The University of Wisconsin-Madison seeks an individual with experience in
developing and implementing continuing education programs in distance
education. This is a 50% to 100% time academic staff position in Continuing
and Vocational Education (CAVE) and School of Education Outreach.

Contact: Christine Olgren, UW-Madison, B136 Lathrop Hall 1050 University
Avenue, Madison, WI 53706 - Phone:608-262-8530; Fax: 608-262-7751; Email:
[cholgren@facstaff.wisc.edu](mailto:cholgren@facstaff.wisc.edu) UW-Madison is
an Equal Opportunity Employer.

** DIRECTOR OF CUSTOMIZED AND DISTANCE LEARNING - Valley City State
University, Valley City, North Dakota. For full information visit:
<http://www.vcsu.nodak.edu> Application deadline July 30, 1999.

The Director of Customized and Distance Learning will be responsible for
overall coordination of university policies, procedures and systems supporting
learning activities that vary by time, place and mode of delivery. The
Director of Customized and Distance Learning will identify and facilitate
relationships with potential partners and work with academic and
administrative departments to meet customer-identified needs. This position is
initially funded by a five-year Title III grant.

Contact: Dan Pullen, Chairperson, Director of Customized Learning Search
Committee, Valley City State University, 101 College Street SE, Valley City,
ND, 58072. VCSU is an EE/AAE.

** DIRECTOR OF TELELEARNING SERVICES - St. Louis Community College. Review of
application materials will begin June 4. For full information see website: [
www.stlcc.cc.mo.us](http://www.stlcc.cc.mo.us)

Provides Collegewide vision, leadership, advocacy and coordination for all
distance learning technology enhanced instruction; plans for appropriate
training and support of faculty and staff for effective development and
delivery of courses and programs. Plans for the implementation of technical
and programmatic support for telecourses, teleconferencing, interactive video
classes, web-based courses, videoconference production and marketing, and
enhances availability of educational programs through partnerships and
collaboration with other institutions.

Send to St. Louis Community College, Human Resources Dept., 300 S. Broadway,
St. Louis, MO 63102 FAX: 314/539-5493 TDD: 314/539-5397 email:
[mroberts@cc.stlcc.cc.mo.us](mailto:mroberts@cc.stlcc.cc.mo.us ) AA/EOE:

  

**NEW ON THE LIST -** _Welcome to New Subscribers_

Welcome to: Stacey Stoffer, Phyllis Tichi, Arthur Jones,Dean Care, Bobbi
Warner, Ryan Walter, Mary Montz, Fairfax O'Riley, Ron Irvine, Patrick Hickey,
Barb Shopland, Steve Douglas, Dana Hudspeth,Elena Gorbunova, Anneliz
Mancillas, Richard Pauli, Hilde Reno, Terry Thompson, Jim Mazoue, Theresa Ott,
Rod Davies, James Moulder, Mohamed Kassem, Erik Buelinckx, Shariem Saterfield
and Jack McClymont.

  
  

**FYI -** _News, Conferences, Institutes, Events_

* The 1st Annual Syllabus Institute will be held in conjunction with the Syllabus99 Conference during the post-conference at the Santa Clara Convention Center July 28-30, 1999, Santa Clara, CA. The Institute is an invitational seminar for practitioners at the forefront of today's educational information technologies and will provide a unique opportunity for attendees to discuss and explore a number of issues confronting faculty at the beginning of the new millennium. Issues include curricular change and development, faculty rewards and evolving roles, technology developments, and assessment criteria. For more information on the Syllabus Institute, including detailed track descriptions and online registration forms, go to: [ http://www.syllabusinstitute.org](http://www.syllabusinstitute.org)

* Register now for DISTANCE LEARNING '99 - the 15th Annual Conference on Distance Teaching and Learning August 4-6, 1999, Marriott Madison West, Madison, WI. Keynote Speakers this year are: Dr. Peter Cochrane, University of Kent and Dr. Brandon Hall, editor and publisher of the Multimedia and Internet Training Newletter. For the complete program, visit the Web site at: <http://www.uwex.edu/disted/conference/> To receive a printed brocure e-mail [distel@education.wisc.edu](mailto:distel@education.wisc.edu) or call 608-265-4159. Include your postal address. 

* The The Inter-American Distance Education Consortium (C.R.E.A.D. Conference "Engaging Partnerships" is being held September 21-23, 1999, in downtown Vancouver at The Empire Landmark Hotel and Conference Centre. C.R.E.A.D. seeks to increase access to education worldwide and acts to encourage international partners to move forward together in confronting some of the most important political, economic and social problems. For up-to-date information visit: Web site: <http://cread.cstudies.ubc.ca>

* It's time to register for GWETC '99 - The 1999 Governor's Wisconsin Educational Technology Conference (GWETC '99), scheduled for October 12-14, 1999 at the Midwest Express Center in Milwaukee, WI. Keynote Speakers this year are: Alan Chute, Director of the Center for Excellence in Distance Learning, Lucent Technologies; Rick Inatome, Chairman of Inacom Corporation and Janice Gordon, Team Leader of the Laptop Programme. For complete information on the Conference visit the Web site at: [ http://www.gwetc.org](http://www.gwetc.org) To receive a printed brochure call 608-264-9689. Include your postal address. 

* Adult Education Research Conference from Generation to Consolidation will be held March 16-18, 2000 at the Penn Stater conference Center Hotel, State College, PA. Proposal submissions will be accepted in three categories: Papers, roundtables and symposia. All proposals are due by October 1, 1999. For up-to- date information, visit: [http://www.outreach.psu.edu/C&I/EasternAdultEducation/](http://www.outreach.psu.edu/C&I/EasternAdultEducation/)

  
Owner: [lehman@ics.uwex.edu](mailto:lehman@ics.uwex.edu)  
Copyright 1997 ICS, UWEX

Volume 4.6  
June, 1999

[Return to Table of
Contents](http://www.uwex.edu/disted/desien/1999/9906/index.html)

* * *

[![Distance Education Clearinghouse
logo](../../graphics/smpyr.gif)](http://www.uwex.edu/disted/home.html)[Distance
Education Clearinghouse](http://www.uwex.edu/disted/)

* * *

  
http://www.uwex.edu/disted/desien/

Owner: [ lehman@ics.uwex.edu](mailto:lehman@ics.uwex.edu)  
Copyright (C) 2001 Board of Regents, University of Wisconsin.

[![Bobby Approved](../../graphics/approved.gif)](http://www.cast.org/bobby/)
[![Valid HTML 4.01!](../../graphics/valid-
html401.gif)](http://validator.w3.org/check/referer)  
---|---  
![ ](../../graphics/b.gif) |  

