### History 557.01  
American Revolution and New Nation, 1763-1789

(Professor Margaret Newell)



**Objectives:** This course will examine the social, economic, cultural, and
political changes in 18th century America that culminated in revolution and
the creation of the republic.



**Required Texts:**

  1. David Hackett Fischer, _Paul Revere's Ride_ (Oxford) 
  2. Eric Foner, _Tom Paine and Revolutionary America_ (Oxford) 
  3. Rhys Isaac, _The Transformation of Virginia_ (Norton) 
  4. Gary Nash, _Race and Revolution_ (Madison House) 
  5. Gordon S. Wood, _Creation of the American Republic_ (Norton) 
  6. Xerox packet (available at Cop-Ez in the basement of Bricker Hall) 

Copies of these books and the Cop-Ez Xerox packet will also be available on
closed reserve at the Undergraduate Library.



**Assignments:** There will be an in-class midterm Tuesday April 23, and a
comprehensive final examination on Monday June 3 at 1:30 p.m. For his/her out-
of-class assignment, each student will write an 8-10 pp. paper based upon
original newspaper research; a special handout will describe this project in
greater detail. The paper must be typed, double-spaced, and written in clear,
correct prose; no paper will be accepted after the Tuesday May 21 due date
unless _prior_ agreement has been reached with Prof. Newell. Late papers will
be penalized. Be aware of University guidelines regarding plagiarism, i.e.
borrowing the words or ideas of others without proper acknowledgment.

After the first meeting, each class period will include both lecture and
discussion. Students should consult the syllabus, complete the appropriate
reading assignment _before_ class, and come prepared to participate actively
and intelligently in the discussion. Students are also required to keep a
journal of their reactions and comments regarding the reading assignments (1
pg., handwritten or typed), to be handed in each Tuesday beginning April 2. I
will read your journals and comment upon them, but will not grade individual
entries; your discussion grade will reflect in part the quality of your
journals. Failure to attend class, to turn in journals, and to participate in
discussion regularly will significantly lower your grade.



**Evaluation:** Course grades will be computed as follows: 20% for the
midterm; 15% for journals and class discussion; 35% for the paper; and 30% for
the final exam.



**Schedule:**

Tues. March 26 -- Introductory Session: The Historiography of the American
Revolution.

Thurs. March 28 -- Colonial Origins.     Read Isaac, _Transformation of
Virginia,_ pp. i-57.

Tues. April 2 -- England, the Empire, and Provincial America.     Read Isaac,
_Transformation_ , pp. 58-142, and Fischer, _Paul Revere,_ pp. i-29.

Thurs. April 4 -- The Great Awakening and the Enlightenment.     Read Isaac,
_Transformation_ , pp. 143-208, 243-266

Tues. April 9 -- Colonial American Political Culture.     Read documents by
James Otis, Patrick Henry, Daniel Dulany, Soame Jenyns, Sir Francis Bernard,
and Sir William Blackstone in the Xerox packet, part I; and Wood, _Creation of
the American Republic_ , pp. 1-45

Thurs. April 11 -- The Social Origins of the Revolution.     Read Fischer,
_Paul Revere_ , pp. 30-92; and documents by George Grenville, William Pitt,
John Dickinson, Daniel Leonard, John Adams, and Edmund Burke, and the Conway
Resolutions in the Xerox packet, part I

Tues. April 16 -- The Imperial Crisis: from Resistance to Revolution.     Read
Fisher, _Paul Revere_ , pp. 93-201.

    _paper topics due_

Thurs. April 18 -- Republicanism I.     Read Foner, _Tom Paine_ , pp. xi-70;
and selections from Paine, _Common Sense_ , and Jefferson, The Declaration of
Independence in Xerox packet, part I.

_Tues. April 23 -- Midterm Examination._

Thurs. April 25 -- The War of Independence.     Read Fischer, _Paul Revere_ ,
pp. 202-280; Joseph Martin, "Private Yankee Doodle," Xerox packet, part II.

Tues. April 30 -- Republicanism II: The Radical Impulse of the Revolution.
Read Foner, _Tom Paine_ , pp. 71-144, and Gary Nash, _Race and Revolution_ ,
pp. vii-24, 91-132.

Thurs. May 2 -- Music and Art of the Revolution.     Read Wood, _Creation_ ,
pp. 46-124

Tues. May 7 -- Women in Early America.     Read Part III, all, of Xerox packet

Thurs. May 9 -- The Revolution Considered as a Social Movement.     Read Nash,
_Race and Revolution_ , pp. 25-56, 133-166, and Isaac, pp. 273-295

    _optional rough draft of term paper due_

Tues. May 14 -- Creation of the American Republic I: The Sovereign States.
Read Wood, _Creation_ , pp. 125-132, 162-256.

Thurs. May 16 -- Creation of the American Republic II: The Articles of
Confederation.     Read Wood, _Creation_ , pp. 319-383, and Private
correspondence of the founders in Xerox part IV.

Tues. May 21 -- The Crisis of the New Order: Economy, Politics, and Virtue.
Read Foner, _Tom Paine_ , pp. 146-209; Wood, _Creation_ , pp. 391-463.

    _Term papers due_

Thurs. May 23 -- Creation of the American Republic II: The Constitution.
Read Wood, _Creation_ , pp. 469-565; and The Constitution and Bill of Rights,
Xerox packet, part IV

Tues. May 28 -- The Federalist/Antifederalist Debate.     Read The Federalist
Papers, nos. 1, 6, 9, 10, 14, 15, 47, 48, 51, 62, 84, 85, and the
Antifederalist Writings in Xerox packet, part IV

Thurs. May 30 -- The Meaning of the Revolution.     Read Fischer, _Paul
Revere_ , pp. 281-295, and Nash, _Race and Revolution_ , pp. 57-90, 167-201.

_Mon. June 3, 1:30 p.m. -- Final Exam_

