Syllabus for American Politics and Issues

Western Carolina University

Political Science 106

American Politics and Issues

Gordon E. Mercer Ph. D. / Professor of Political Science

Office: 106 A Stillwell

Phone: 227-7475

Email: [GMERCER@wpoff.wcu.edu](mailto:GMERCER@wpoff.wcu.edu)

Internet Office Hours: At 4:00pm most days the Professor will spend time
dealing with issues or problems. A visit to his office by e-mail is an easy
way to ask about assignments or issues. Regular office hours are during the
first hour after class or during an arranged appointment. A course electronic
bulletin board will enable students and the Professor to discuss academic
issues related to the class materiel and differing views of American
Government. For example is American Government more elitist or more pluralist?
In posting items please follow academic policies and academic netetiquette.

Goals:

We will become familiar with the structure and process of the American
Governance System and will discuss the issues and problems related to the
effectiveness and realities of American Government. This course will approach
government in an active and collaborative framework, where students get
involved, as we need to in real government.

In order to become more knowledgeable we will focus upon:

  1. Solving problems
  2. Discussing issues
  3. Developing position papers involving research
  4. Debating issues

Text: Alan Gitelson, Robert Dudley, and Melvin Dubnick, _American Government_
(Fourth Edition)

Assignments should use the Internet, text and library to help you gain facts,
current data and ideas.

Utilize search engines like [Yahoo](http://www.yahoo.com/), which has named
Western Carolina University as the most wired town in North Carolina. If you
have difficulty with search topics see the Professor for help. This class is
an applied class, where real problems will be discussed and applied exercises
will be utilized.

Assignments and Readings

  1. Myth and Reality

Gitelson-1

Issue: Are we an elitist or pluralist form of government?

Post your opinion on the [bulletin](http://www.wcu.edu/Forums/MercerPS/)
board. (Optional)

  2. Constitutional Foundation

Gitelson-2

Assignment: We will have a class Constitutional Convention

Post one of your ideas on the [bulletin](http://www.wcu.edu/Forums/MercerPS/)
board. (Optional)

  3. Public Opinion and Participation

Gitelson-5

Assignment: Make a presentation to the class of one way to improve American
Government. You could focus on the Constitution, governance or a legal change.

Post your basic idea on the [bulletin](http://www.wcu.edu/Forums/MercerPS/)
board. (Optional)

  4. Political Parties

Gitelson-6

Assignment: Design your own political party or third party and be prepared to
discuss it with the class. What will its stances be? How will you get it
organized and going?

Post the name of your political party on the
[bulletin](http://www.wcu.edu/Forums/MercerPS/) board. (Optional)

  5. Elections

Gitelson-7

Assignment: Interview one elected official by phone. It might be City Council
Member, Mayor, Legislator, School Board Member or another elected official.
Prepare a questionnaire to show the Professor before the interview. Present
your findings to the class.

  6. Interest Groups

Gitelson-8

Assignment: Design and give a name to an interest group you would like to
organize. Develop a strategy, position and a policy area you would like to see
the group change. Make a presentation to the class.

Post something about your interest group on the
[bulletin](http://www.wcu.edu/Forums/MercerPS/) board. (Optional)

  7. Media and Politics

Gitelson-9

Debate Topic: Does the American Media do an effective job in keeping the
public up with issues, analysis and coverage in helping our political system
function better or is the case reversed?

  8. Congress

Gitelson-10

Assignment: Prepare one bill you would like to see introduced in Congress.

Post a couple of sentences about your bill on the
[bulletin](http://www.wcu.edu/Forums/MercerPS/) board. (Optional)

  9. The Presidency

Gitelson-11

Assignment: Prepare a presentation of your ideas on who has been the best
President of this century and why you think this president is the best. Gather
information to support your position.

Special Assignments: When asked to write a position paper, please do some
research in the library and Internet to support your position. These will be
presented in class. Also during the semester, every student will be asked to
interview one political figure on his or her duties and ideas. Students will
also be asked to participate in problem solving groups and asked to share
their ideas in solving the problem. The groups will present their conclusions
to the class. In tests and examinations; plus-minus grading will be used.

So the class will be more collaborative, share some of your ideas on the
[bulletin](http://www.wcu.edu/Forums/MercerPS/) board. Please follow
university etiquette and policies and show respect for others even though you
may disagree with their positions.

