> [[The Kitchen](../index.html)] |  [[The Bookshelf](../contents/index.html)]
|  [[The Mailbox](mailto:phillips@charlie.cns.iit.edu)]  
> ---|---|---  
>  
> # WHAT A WITCH SHOULD KNOW

>

> ### A brief syllabus for the practice of Magick.

>

> By Mama Rose.

>

> _(A
complete[Syllabus](http://www.geocities.com/Area51/Vault/7654/sylvan_outline.html)
for Sylvan Wicca, complete with exercises, is available from [Circle of
Winter](http://www.geocities.com/Area51/Vault/7654/).)_ None of what follows
is about the religion of Wicca; it is about the practice of Witchcraft. One
may follow the religion (which is described by other people,
[elsewhere](../contents/testintro.html)) and still not be a Witch, a
practitioner of magic and priest/ess of the Gods. A different, shorter, and
older version of this is called [Thirteen Goals for
Witches.](http://www.lts.net/~merlyn/13goal.html) These
[musings](http://members.aol.com/swoodsong/brew3.html) on the whole question
by Morgan Ley are also of value.

>

> Like Greek for Christian priests, these are the tools of our Craft. This is
what I learned, and what I believe.

>

> * * *

>

> #### The first set of things prepare the mind.

>

> Top  
> ---  
>  
>

>

> know how to [meditate](../contents/testref.html#Meditation)     This is the
art of stilling the jumble of thoughts that distract a person from hir
purpose. In order to work magick a person must know exactly what it is that
s/he desires to occur. A person must have a single clear thought. Meditation
clears the playing field of all other desires. be ruthless about knowing one's
self and one's own psychology     Because a person needs to know exactly what
it is that s/he wants to accomplish, s/he must know what s/he really wants,
and why. Most of us hold completely contradictory desires on many issues. A
great deal of time and energy can be wasted, for example, on trying to achieve
high public office when a person doesn't really want the responsibility but
DOES want the approval of hir parent. Top  
> ---  
>  
>  know how to be flexible     Because we live in a
[chaotic](http://www.students.uiuc.edu/~ag-ho/chaos/chaos.html) and shifting
world, trying to take _rules_ from one spot to another will only result,
finally, in standing with Canute before the waves -- and lacking even his
sense of humor about the situation.  
>  Imagine the child's song "Twinkle, twinkle, little star." Without a doubt
you can imagine it for a single voice, or two voices.  
>  Now imagine it being played by a flute.  
>  Now, imagine it being set for an orchestra.  
>  Try it as jazz. And as Zydeco.  
>  This is the kind of flexibility that must be brought to the practice of
magic, if it is to be effective and meaningful.  know how to [ ground and
center](http://www.thedance.com/wicca101/enbasics.htm) one's self     ~To
[ground](ground2.html) is to link a person's own energy field and sense of
self to that of the Universe. In a sense it is like an electrical
[ground](ground.html): there is a safe place for excess energy to flow to,
preventing burnout and/or irritability. In another sense, it also duplicates
an electrical outlet, providing a much larger pool of energy from which to
draw than the resources of a person's own body. This obviously helps prevent
or lessen exhaustion.  
>  ~To center is to stabilize on a person's own axis: to perceive one's own
self AND one's own body, and bring the two into parallel congruence. To be
less formal, this is the act of stopping the lopsiding of the aura, smoothing
down all the peaks and pulling everything back to the center. It is done with
perception and imagination: perceive how one really feels, and then firmly
imagine that coming back into balance. Experience has shown that magick works
better when the magician is centered. Top  
> ---  
>  
>  know how to shield     Shielding is the act of protecting the soul from
outside influences. It is done after grounding and centering, and there are
several techniques. One is to imagine a solid ball in a person's core. I like
silver; others work with swirling color, or no color. The ball is then
expanded and hollowed, passing through the body of the person until it
surrounds hir. In its expansion, it pushes out all outside influence with it.
The person then imagines a locking device -- I use a knot being tied, others
use a padlock clicking shut, some use a door closing -- which, when locked,
holds the shield in place until the person takes it down. This is a solid
shield. [There are other types.](../contents/testref.html#Banishments)

>

> #### The second set of things prepare for the actual working of magick.

>

> Top  
> ---  
>  
>

>

> be well-grounded in [interpersonal ethics](ethics.html)     Starting from
the Three-fold Law -- everything a person does returns to hir three-fold --
and from the [ Wiccan Rede](../lore/fullrede.html) \-- Harm none, and do what
thou wilt -- it is necessary to develop a sense of what is proper between
people, and why, BEFORE one goes into what is [proper](http://inner-
sanctum.com/BoS/Mtoc/f110.html) to
[work](http://members.aol.com/swoodsong/values.htm) for magically, and
[why](http://www.robinwood.com/Books_Set.html). Knowing before one begins
whether or not one's purpose will exact a cost, and what manner of cost it
will exact, goes a long way toward eliminating unexpected headaches. Among
other things. Top  
> ---  
>  
>  be well-grounded in interpersonal and interspecies [politeness](manners-
pagan.html).     This also goes back to the Wiccan Rede: rudeness harms other
people, and thus (by the threefold law) harms the rude person. Courtesy toward
all is a good way to begin; [courtesy toward fellow practitioners](manners-
moon.html) is necessary; and courtesy to [non-
humans](../contents/testref.html#Unseen) is vital. Immediate non-humans to
consider are the Elements and the Goddess and the God; less obvious are place-
spirits, household spirits, and the resident spirits in each separate thing;
most spectacular are those non-humans inaccurately called demons, or Big Black
Nasty Dark Things (tm), or, by me, Critters. Knowing politeness gives one
more, not fewer, options in dealing with all of them. know how to [raise
energy](http://members.uss.net/liedel/www/witch/raisingmagick.htm)     Energy
is necessary for all magickal workings, and can come from within the person,
from the Universe, from music or dance or chanting, from sex, or from other
sources. A person raises energy preparatory to channeling it into a working.
know how to move energy     Channeling the energy a person has just raised is
the most obvious method and purpose of moving energy; another method and
purpose is to imagine it passing around you as water passes around a ship, so
as not to be caught in it; a third is to comb it with your fingers over a
person's body, in order to smooth out tangles in that person's own energy
field. There are, of course, many other methods and purposes. Top  
> ---  
>  
>  know how to ground energy     Here's where a person uses hir ground to the
Universe. The purpose is to dump excess or tainted energy that would not or no
longer be useful where it currently is. The method is to imagine that energy
running down one's body into the earth, or up into the stars. I personally
like putting my hands on the ground and letting it flow that way. I do have an
objection to "dissipating" it into the air, as people may pass through and
pick it up accidently. Grounded to Earth or to Stars, the energy gets cleaned
and re-used. know the [Elements](../contents/testref.html#Correspondences) and
their symbolisms     Earth, Air, Fire and Water are the four Elements,
deriving from and supporting the fifth Element, Spirit. Each has its own
symbol, its own area of governance, its own direction, its own proper Dieties.
Working with the Elements and their symbology helps keep us physical as well
as mental, and reminds us of the overwhelming importance of the Universe. be
aware of the [Laws of Magic.](http://www.neopagan.net/AT_Laws.HTML)     Energy
does flow in certain routes, and these routes seems to be fairly well agreed-
upon cross-culturally. know a few Names of the [Goddess and of the
God](http://www.pantheon.org/mythica/)     Each Name of the Goddess reflects a
different facet of Her, as each Name of the God reflects a different facet of
Him, as the [God and the Goddess](http://www.clubi.ie/lestat/menu_gods.html)
both reflect different facets of the Universe \-- and not necessarily the only
two, either. Because this is true, and because we work only with a little bit
at a time, knowing the Names of the Goddess and the God that reflect the area
in which we are currently working helps us focus our attention more closely on
what we're doing. Top  
> ---  
>  
>  know how to establish a circle     A circle is a magical working space. It
acts like a shield, so that you can work without your personal shields in a
larger space. I once developed, with an enquirer, the analogy that shields are
like a suit of armor, while a circle is like a defended room. My circles
consist of these elements (always moving clockwise):

>

>   * a circle around the area in which I plan to work, drawn three times
(once for each face of the Goddess) with a blade or a wand or my own body

>   * sprinkling the circumference with salt water

>   * spreading the smoke of incense around the circle

>   * carrying a candle around the circle

>   * invoking the elements, each at their own Watchtower,

>   * invoking the Goddess and lighting Her candle

>   * invoking the God and lighting His candle

Top  
> ---  
>  
>  know how to create
[ritual](http://users.aol.com/chandonn/haven/creatrit.htm)
[Rituals](http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Acropolis/9908/finer.html) are
[recipes](ritform.html) for transforming reality in accordance with will. Not
every situation will be covered in a cook-book or grimoire, nor should any
existing recipe be used without altering it in accordance with the situation.
Knowing the [basic elements
](http://www.necronomi.com/magic/hermeticism/mag7.basic_ritual.txt) that go
into a ritual, and the ways they vary according to circumstance, allows a
Witch to have a suitable ritual for any occasion resident within hir own head.
be able to deal with the manifestations of each Element with respect
(i.e., what you do with Fire when you're done with it, and how you deal with
stones.)  
>  This goes back to politeness. Remember that everything one uses and invokes
is NOT a servant, but an ally. Top  
> ---  
>  
>  know some basic normal individual psychology and some basic normal [group
psychology](http://members.aol.com/swoodsong/covendym.html) (NOT abnormal:
that's for specialists)     This is necessary for creating good ritual: what
effects are desired, and how best can one
[achieve](http://members.aol.com/JehanaS/c_basics/behave.html) them? It
depends on how the person to be affected reacts, and on how the group working
together interacts. It is also, and more importantly, necessary for
maintaining a working group.

>

> #### The next set of things are background skills.

>

> Witches have traditionally been the interceders between humans and both the
spiritual and the physical world. These skills are the tools for doing that.

>

> know at least one [divinatory system](../contents/testdiv.html)
Divination, at its heart, is a map of influences. Some such influences are
psychological, some are Fateful, some are physical. Divination can help to
determine whether a ritual is necessary, and, if so, of what sort; it can help
determine the motivations of all the people involved, and so helps as a
counseling tool by itself; it can help warn of consequences in time to prepare
for them or to avert them; and so forth. know the processes for dealing with [
herbs](../contents/testbot.html) in both a magical and a medical sense     The
magical derives from and interacts with the medical. If one knows how to
prepare an infusion, an extraction, and a poultice, and how to prepare a charm
bag, a dream pillow, and a bath scrub, s/he can make a more long-term
intercession for hirself or for others. S/he also will make more of a linkage
to hir roots, which is good for grounding and centering. know a little [first
aid](http://expage.com/page/lacieking)     We were the first, and in some
places the only, [line of
defence](http://www.parasolemt.com.au/afa/index.html) against death from
[wounds and sickness](http://library.advanced.org/10624/index.html). This
links with the herb work, and for the same reason. But the following is very
obvious and basic.

>

>   * Be able to keep calm in the presence of blood

>   * Know how to clean and bandage a wound

>   * Know when and how to call for help.

Anything more one learns how to do is all to the good; but at least know this
much.

>

> Top  
> ---  
>  
>

>

> #### The last set are the scholarly skills.

>

> These are necessary in this time because of the fact that we live in the
midst of other religions and thought-systems, some of which are hostile to us,
others of which are ignorant of us, and many of which have things to teach us.

>

> be able to tell the difference between [ myth and libel](BurningTimes.html)
Myths are teaching stories, told to illustrate or illuminate a situation.
Unfortunately, both our enemies and we ourselves have developed "myths" which
lie about the actions and the motivations of the others, not from evilness,
but from anger, from lack of knowledge, and from misapprehensions. In order to
work for harmony, however chaotic or ordered, we must be able to recognize the
difference no matter who speaks it, and challenge it. When we challenge on
behalf of ourselves, we gain strength; when we challenge on behalf of others,
we gain allies and harmony. Top  
> ---  
>  
>  study a little history of religion and a little [history of
nations.](../contents/medhis.html)     This interacts with the "myth"
necessity, above, by replacing some myth with 'historical fact.' It also
teaches how and why tolerance and intolerance occur, and that certain things
are the result of law and not nature. As we understand how the Web is woven,
we can act more surely within the Web. be aware of current scientific thought
concerning energy.     This last acts to train our own skills in working with
energy. The work that is currently being done, especially with [Chaos
Theory](http://www.students.uiuc.edu/~ag-ho/chaos/chaos.html), validates what
we have been doing; at the same time it teaches us the pattern of it in a
larger sense.

>

> To be a Witch is to commit to learning forever; to commit to acting for the
best we can perceive; to be a force for the Gods in the world, and a force for
the world with the Gods.

>

> This is how I learned it, and this is what I hold to.

>

> ### [Pop Quiz!](../lore/to-know.html)

>

> * * *

>

> * * *

>

> [[The Kitchen](../index.html)] |  [[The Bookshelf](../contents/index.html)]
|  [[The Mailbox](mailto:phillips@charlie.cns.iit.edu)]  
> ---|---|---

