[![](http://honors.uop.edu/images/intro2.gif)](http://honors.uop.edu)  
|

[program](/index.shtml#program)  |

|

[news & events](/index.shtml#news)  |

|

[resources](/index.shtml#resources)  |

|

[director](/index.shtml#director)  |

|

[students & faculty](/index.shtml#students)  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
A man may be a heretic in the truth; and if he believe things only because his
pastor says so, or the assembly so determines, without knowing other reason,
though his belief be true, yet the very truth he holds becomes his heresy.

\-- John Milton

English 51 - American Authors I: American Literature to 1865

COURSE DESCRIPTION: This course is a broad survey of American literature from
the very beginnings up to the first rich flowering of American fiction, the
so-called American Renaissance of the 1850s. As such, it will cover too much
literature too quickly for us to cover every aspect of the literature we will
read. I will concentrate on some of the large ideas that have contributed to
American culture. If you wish to spend more time than I do on literary
artistry or other belletristic concerns, please bring up your questions and
observations, and we'll let you shape a significant part of the course. But
don't hesitate to take further courses in American literature should this
course not answer all of your questions. Indeed, I hope merely to introduce
you to America's literature here, not to give you a sense that you've covered
it. What I hope primarily to do is to give you some basic tools you'll need to
develop an analytical awareness of some of the recurrent ideas that constitute
what the world calls American culture. Such tools will improve your
understanding of the culture that surrounds you today.

As you examine the syllabus that follows, you will notice that the readings
are not always in chronological order, nor have I assigned as much reading
from the colonial period as from the first century of the United States. I
have arranged the selections according to a several step plan. First, I want
to reveal the dominant world views that have been in competition and
cooperation in the Euro-American settlements that became the United States.
Secondly, I want to show how the various proponents of these fundamental world
views perceived and confronted an alien world. What I hope will become clear
is how far the colonists were from having even a single European identity to
draw on and how much in conflict they were with each other as well as with the
indigenous peoples or with their European homelands. Having covered the
colonial period briefly with this agenda in mind, we will then move on to the
literature of the United States to see how writers tried to find in this mixed
background a common cultural identity. In the case of Transcendentalism, we
will return briefly to the philosophical and political writing that dominates
the colonial period, but we will also extend our reach into some great works
of fiction and poetry that tried to grapple with these large questions in more
synthetic modes.

As the syllabus will focus primarily on ideas, it will be your responsibility
to keep track of the primarily historical concerns of chronology and the
artistic concerns of genre, etc., all of which have a tremendous impact,
finally, on how you make what we read meaningful to you.

GENERAL EDUCATION: This course fulfills G.E. Category I-B, Society and
Cultures in the United States. It is a lower division survey designed to
introduce you to some of the fundamental concerns of American culture through
its literature. You will gain a deeper understanding of the origins of
American pluralism, American idealism, and American myths of exceptionalism.
The course is based on the premise that the literature we study exemplifies
certain strains of thought that have come together, often easily blending,
often in fundamental conflict, to create America's essentially multi-cultural
culture. In addition, the heavy reading, writing and speaking demands this
class places on you will enhance your communication and critical thinking
skills.

REQUIREMENTS:

  * Five Short Essays, 50% (of final grade)
  * Class Participation, 30%
  * Final Examination, 20%

1) Short Essays:

I have divided the syllabus into five groups. The days labelled "lec" are days
on which I will lecture; no essays will be due on these days. The other days
are labelled a, b, c, or d, and I will divide the class into four
corresponding writing groups. Generally speaking, each student in "a" group
will have an essay ready for class on each day labelled "a"; each student in
"b" group will have an essay ready for each class labeled "b," etc. This
schedule gives each student six opportunities to write five essays, giving
each of you the choice of skipping a week of your choosing, or of writing all
six essays so that I can throw out your lowest grade.

These essays will each be between two and three pages long (700 WORDS
MAXIMUM). On any given day, I will call on several students to read their
essays aloud to the class. We will build our class discussion in response to
these essays. I want these papers, then, to reflect not only your interest in
the reading and in the class discussion as it has developed, but to reflect
your sense of where you want class discussions to go. These are your
opportunities to shape class discussion. Do NOT consider these essays merely
as "response papers." They are not meant merely to echo your immediate
reactions to the reading. They should be essays in the broadest sense,
attempts to communicate what you think matters about the literature we are
reading and about how we have been reading it so far. Try to make them
analytical, synthetic, and provocative. They may engage in close reading, or
they may take broader thematic, political, historical, or philosophical
concerns in hand. In other words, follow your interests, and, in the process,
challenge yourselves. I expect to see your engagement in the material
reflected in your rhetorical flexibility. These are, after all, to be "essays"
rather than "papers."

In other words, I care as much about the quality of the writing as the quality
of your thought. Perhaps a better way to put it is to refuse to distinguish
between presentation and content. In this sense, good writing is a complicated
compromise between three poles in dialectical tension: (1) purpose(s) (2)
argument (thesis and support in logical relationship) and (3) audience (level
of knowledge, biases, conventions, fundamental values, etc.). You need to be
self-conscious in all three dimensions in order to write well, that is to be
effective at fulfilling your intentions in communicating your argument.

It would be futile to deny that for students one important purpose is to
please a teacher in order to get a good grade. Such practical concerns are
always part of writing and not altogether bad. The effort to please a teacher
suggests awareness of audience, one of the fundamentals of effective writing.
But this is not the main purpose I'd like to see you express in your writing;
rather I'd like to see your papers manifest some of my intentions in teaching
you (teachers are egotistical that way). My purposes in teaching you to read
literature and to write about it are manifold, but can be grouped under three
heads. I want you to engage in:

  * Exploration
    * Seek self-consciousness of motives:
      * of circumstances
      * of time and place
      * of human connection
      * of history
      * of manipulative claims
      * of values
    * Exploration requires flexibility, openness to new ideas, a willingness to change and grow. It is in creative tension with (2) and (3).
  

  * Advocacy
    * Promote your values by convincing others of the value of your positions.
    * Defend your values by understanding the claims made by others.
  

  * Practice
    * The study of literature gives you an opportunity to experiment, with little risk, with rhetorical, logical, and ethical forms and usages in order to develop a level of competence with (1) and (2)

I hope to see some of these purposes manifested in your essays.

Much of what I do in class is to convey information that will give you
background knowledge of the fundamental values on which our culture is
predicated, to give you a history of development of those ideas so you can
adjudicate their legitimacy, to model careful readings so that you can explore
the complexities of motive in human expression, and to some degree to advocate
my own sense of the value of this exercise in self-consciousness by practicing
it. The academic study of literature is substantially an exercise in
distancing--it is a way of vicariously experiencing human behavior so that it
is a safe exercise in possibility, and a safe exercise in analysis. When we've
finished with analysis, we in turn are free to apply what we've learned to our
own situations. So we have a three-fold process in reading. We begin in an
emotional engagement, work toward intellectual detachment, and then return to
intellectual and emotional engagement. You may legitimately reflect any part
of this process in your writing.

Within the parameters I've given here, you are free to choose almost any topic
as long as it begins in analysis of some of the literature we have read this
term. You may concentrate as narrowly as on a single passage from a single
author or as broadly as on a comparison between the works of several. And
while the literature we read in common must be a starting point for your
writing, there is no reason for you to exclude either your personal voice or
your personal experiences from your essays. The entire range of essay
strategies is available to you; just remember that many of these essays will
be read to class, so the content as well as the style should be appropriate to
the audience and the setting. To put it simply, be neither dull nor crass.

Do not assume, either, that because these essays should be lively and may use
the first person and even some personal experience, that they may be formless.
Every essay must have a thesis and work to support that thesis. Since the
essays you'll be writing will be short, that is 700 WORDS MAXIMUM, you'll need
to be concise in developing your main idea.

2) Class Participation:

  * Reading. Finish the day's reading BEFORE class. There is no anthology for this course; most of the reading selections are in separate volumes already available in the bookstore, the rest I will distribute in class.

A WARNING AND A CHALLENGE: Much of the material we will read, especially at
term's beginning, will seem alien, difficult and very dry until you have built
up a large enough reservoir of understanding to find this reading
intellectually refreshing. Once you do, you will find the echoes and influence
all around you, and will, I fervently hope, find your experience of life in
this culture enriched in ways you cannot now imagine. This final result will
require some grit on your part as you work through the most difficult aspects
of early American literature.

  * Regular class participation. Be prepared to talk to the point.

  * Presentation of short essays. I will expect you to learn how to read well in public by term's end. You'll probably be surprised to find how difficult this skill is, but with coaching, you will master it.

  * Formal responses to essays. This is perhaps the most important and most difficult aspect of class participation. For each essay that one of you reads, I will randomly assign someone else from the class to give a 4-6 minute impromptu response. This need not be antagonistic--the class is not meant to be a debate. Our purpose is to explore the meanings and values of this literature. But respondents should be able to uncover the fundamental ideas behind an essay and should be able to build a response on the basis of those fundamental concepts. Respondents _may_ choose to disagree, and in fact disagreement is often the easiest intellectual response to a paper. But respondents may also express agreement. If they do, they will need to show mastery of the concepts with which they agree by applying them to different evidence, by extending them to different texts, etc.

I find it difficult to characterize the possibilities of a formal response to
an essay because the range of possible responses is so great. _But regardless
of where a respondent ultimately leads the discussion, the response must begin
with the respondent restating the thesis of the essay under discussion and
recapitulating the basic support for that thesis._

3) Final Examination:

While the final exam will be comprehsive, it will stress how well you can use
what you've learned over memorization.

Students will be expected to adhere to the honor code, a complete statement of
which can be found in the Student Handbook, _Tiger Lore_.

* * *

Schedule of Readings

The books are available at the bookstore. Other readings will be in
photocopied readers that I will distribute.

August 30 Introduction

September 1 John Winthrop, "A Model of Christian Charity," (photocopy).

4 Labor Day holiday

6 Jonathan Edwards, "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God," (photocopy).

8 Anne Bradstreet, "To the Memory of My Dear ... Father," through "The Flesh
and the Spirit," in photocopied handout.

11 Anne Bradstreet, "The Author to Her Book," through "To My Dear Children."

13 Anne Bradstreet and Edward Taylor

15 Franklin, Letter to Peter Collinson, July 11, 1747, pp 228?34; first half
of Autobiography.

18 Franklin, finish the Autobiography.

20 Franklin, "The Way to Wealth," "An Edict by the King of Prussia" etc,
261-272; "The Declaration of Independence" (photocopy).

22 Crevecoeur, Letters From an American Farmer, pp. 66?105.

25 Crevecoeur, pp. 155?186.

27 Crevecoeur, pp. 200-227.

29 Emerson, "Nature."

October 2 Emerson, "Self-Reliance," "The Snowstorm (photocopy);" Whittier,
"Snowbound" (photocopy).

4 Whitman, "Song of Myself."

6 Whitman, "From Pent-up Aching Rivers," "I Sing the Body Electric," "A Woman
Waits for Me," "Spontaneous Me," "A Noiseless Patient Spider."

9 Whitman, "Out of the Cradle," "Vigil Strange."

11 Thoreau, Walden, chaps. 1-11.

13 Fall break

16 Thoreau, Walden, to end.

18 Thoreau, "Civil Disobedience."

20 Hawthorne, "Young Goodman Brown," "The Maypole of Merrymount," "The
Minister's Black Veil."

23 Hawthorne, "Rappaccini's Daughter," "The Birthmark," "My Kinsman, Major
Molineux," "Roger Malvin's Burial."

25 Hawthorne, "Wakefield," "The Celestial Rail-road," "The Artist of the
Beautiful," "Ethan Brand."

Stowe, Uncle Tom's Cabin, chaps 1-12.

30 Halloween interlude: Irving, "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow;" Poe, "The
Raven," "The Premature Burial."

November 1

3 Stowe, chaps 13-23.

6 Stowe, chaps 24-34.

8 Stowe, to end.

10 Douglass, My Bondage and My Freedom, chaps 1-9.

13 Douglass, chaps 10-18.

15 Douglass, chaps 18-25.

17 Melville, "Cock-a-Doodle Do!" "I and My Chimney," "The Apple-Tree Table."

20 Melville, "The Town-Ho's Story." "Bartleby the Scrivener."

22-24 Thanksgiving Break.

27 Melville, "The Fiddler," "The Paradise of Bachelors," "Benito Cereno."

29 Humor selections.

December 1 More humor.

4 More humor yet.

6 Conclusion.

8 Review.

11-15 Reading period.

