* * *

**T HE WESTERN HERITAGE** first semester

* * *

HIST 001 PENN STATE MONT ALTO *** Dr. Kurt L. Noll kxn12@psu.edu
ktnoll@blazenet.net **** THIS PAGE IS UNDER RECONSTRUCTION. **** Office Hours:
MWF 9:00-9:50 a.m. **** Office Location: Bookstore Building, Lower Level,
Offices Suite;  First Door on Your Left. (If the door is open, I'm there.)

* * *

  * Course Description and Objectives
  * Syllabus
  * Study Guides
  * Web Sites of Interest

* * *

  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


* * *

Course Description and Objectives

This is the first half of a humanities course that surveys the social and
political history of the West.  The title of the course is the Western
_Heritage_ , and that term includes within it the philosophical, artistic and
cultural inheritance derived from the "West," including the ancient Near East,
Greece, Rome, Byzantium and Europe.  Therefore, we will study wars and kings
to be sure, but a substantial portion of class discussion will be devoted to a
survey of the world views, religions, sciences and arts that have,
collectively, shaped the modern Western (and, increasingly, non-Western)
world.

**Objectives:**  
You are expected to do each of the following:

(1) Develop a full comprehension of chronological history from the Paleolithic
era until the late Medieval period.

(2) Develop a full comprehension of the geography of the Western world.

(3) Recognize and discuss individuals and groups who have played significant
roles during the course of Western history.

(4) Recognize and discuss significant intellectual trends, cultural artifacts
and artworks of the Western heritage.  
    
    


* * *

Return to Top

* * *



          
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


* * *

Syllabus

**Student Requirements:**  
You are required to:

(1) Attend every class session and participate in class discussion.

(2) Read every assignment prior to the date for which that assignment is
scheduled (see Calendar).

(3) Pass four scheduled exams and a comprehensive final exam during Finals
Week.  Note:  Students who achieve an averaged score of 91% or higher on the
four scheduled exams are exempt from the final exam.  


**Student Evaluation:**  
Your grade will be based on a percentage system.  The math is easy.  Add the
total number of possible points listed on each exam.  Then add the total
number of points you have earned.  Then do simple division  \--  Total Earned
divided by Total Possible.  This is your grade as a percent of points earned.
A = 91% or above.   B = 81% - 90%.   C = 71% - 80%.   D = 61% - 70%.  F = Less
than 61%.

**Class Participation:**   I take attendance at most sessions.  If you show a
pattern of absence, your grade might drop by as much as one letter grade.
_However,_ if you show a pattern of presence and participation, your grade
will rise one letter grade.   (Come to class!  Pay attention!  Get involved!)

**Unannounced Quizzes:**   There might be an occasional Bonus Quiz.  Bonus
quizzes cannot hurt your grade, but can help your grade.  Come to class!

**Scheduled Exams:**   There will be four exams during the semester, then one
comprehensive final exam during Finals Week.  Study Guides will be posted for
each exam.  Students who achieve an "A" (91% or higher averaged score) for the
four regular exams are exempt from the final exam.  


**Required Text:**  
Alcock, Antony, **_A Short History of Europe:   From the Greeks and Romans to
the Present Day_**  (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1998).  


**Calendar:**  
The reading assignments for this course are relatively light.  You are
expected to read each assignment carefully, several times through.  Study the
following portions of the textbook **before** the date indicated for each:

**schedule to be announced**   \--  this page is under reconstruction

**FINAL EXAM**   \--  Finals Week, Dec. 11-15.  Date and Time will be posted
on the PSU Mont Alto [Information
Page](http://www.ma.psu.edu/level2/geninfo.html).  Please note:  The Final
Exam covers all materials from the entire semester.  Emphasis will be placed
on the second half of the semester, but material from the first half of the
semester will appear also.

* * *

Return to Top

* * *

Study Guides

THIS SECTION WILL BE UPDATED  \--  this page is under reconstruction



* * *

 Return to Study Guides

* * *

Return to Top

* * *

  




Web Sites of Interest  


  * [Resources for the Study of the Ancient Near East](http://www-oi.uchicago.edu/OI/DEPT/RA/ABZU/ABZU.HTML)
  * [Resources for the Study of Greece and Rome](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/)
  * [Resources for the Study of Byzantium](http://www.bway.net/~halsall/byzantium.html)
  * [Resources for the Study of Medieval Europe](http://netserf.cua.edu/)

  * [Penn State Mont Alto Home Page](http://www.ma.psu.edu/)
  * [The University Libraries at Penn State](http://www.libraries.psu.edu/)
  * [HIST 002 The Western Heritage II](http://egghead.psu.edu/~kxn12/his002/)
  * [HIST 100 Ancient Greece](http://egghead.psu.edu/~kxn12/his100/)
  * [HIST 102 Canaan and Israel in Antiquity](http://www.ma.psu.edu/~kxn12/his102/)
  * [RL ST 004 Foundations of Judaism and Christianity](http://egghead.psu.edu/~kxn12/rlst004/)

    


* * *

Return to Top

* * *

                                                                    The past is the heritage of all, the possession of none.

