Western Michigan University

History Department

  
  

**Women in U.S. History**

  
  

History 316 Office: 4406 Friedmann, before/after class by appt.

Spring 2002 Phone: 7-4641/616-233-9843 (home-GR)

Dr. Coryell email: coryell@wmich.edu (best way to reach me)

  
  

This is a survey level course examining the lives of women in American history
from discovery through the modern era. By the end of this course, you should
be familiar with important people and events in women's history. You will also
have gained, I hope, a sense of how historians work and what is important
about the discipline of women's history.

  
  

One thing historians provide is a "framework" for interpreting historical
events. Frameworks provide ways of sorting through massive amounts of data in
order to get to a narrative, or story, and thus provide some degree of
understanding. The framework for this course is the notion that the history of
women's lives are affected by cultural images and the degree to which those
images reflect the reality of their lives. Lectures will frame the
interpretation of historical events through this idea. Most lectures will
contain an "image" of women popular in American culture at that time, and then
will discuss the realities of women's lives that took place at the same time
the image was popular.

  
  

Class meetings will contain lectures with a thematic approach to covering
events and eras of importance to most American women. There will be some
visual material that will provide additional coverage of materials and
analysis of ideas expressed in lectures or the readings. You will need to
synthesize all materials in your understanding of women's history.

  
  

Readings will consist of a textbook and some primary source documents. The
books have been ordered and should be available at the university bookstores.
You will also need to invest in a good dictionary to define terms in the
primary sources you may not be familiar with. This is particularly true in the
first half of class, as we deal with documents from the 17th, 18th and early
19th centuries.

  
  

Due to the compressed nature of this course, I strongly recommend that you do
not fall behind. Keep up with the reading. Expect to spend between 1-3 hours
per class session preparing for the time you spend in class.

**What to Purchase:**

Glenda Riley, **Inventing the American Woman** , vols. I & II, or the combined
volume

**Writing Women's Lives** , edited by Markman, Boe & Corey

  
  

Glenda Riley's book serves as our textbook, so read it with that in mind. You
will also find it useful to have access to a standard American history survey
book to help provide the historical context you need to understand the events
we discuss. **Writing Women's Lives** ( **WWL** ) contains documents written
by American women over the last 300+ years to give you a glimpse inside their
private worlds so you can see how public events had an impact on their lives.
Read them with that in mind.

**Lectures and Reading Schedule**

(Read the listed items **BEFORE** class)

  
  

May 7: Introduction: Framework and Historiography, followed by a short

****BREAK****

If you decide to drop the course at this point, please do so immediately. This
is a popular general education class and a number of people are waiting to get
in.

**Then:**

**Lecture:** Pocahontas; or, Babe in the Woods

  
  

May 9: The Colonial Era: Witches & Goodwives

**Read:** Chapter 1, Riley; _Writing Women's Lives_ **(WWL** ): selections:
1-5

**Lectures:** 1) Witches; or, The Devil in the Shape of a Woman

2) Goodwives; or, The Colonial Supermom

**Watch:** _Monty Python and the Search for the Holy_ Grail (clip); The
_Witches of Salem: The Horror and the Hope_

  
  

May 14: Midwifery: The Common Lot of Women

**Read** : Chapter 2 of Riley; **WWL** , 6-11, 20, 22

**Lecture:** Revolution and Republican Motherhood

**Watch:** _The Midwife's Tale_

  
  

May 16: Industrialization:

**Read:** Chapter 3 of Riley; **WWL** : 12, 19, 24

**Lecture:** Ideology, Employment & Invention

**Watch:** _Sins of Our Mothers_

  
  

May 21: **FIRST HOUR EXAM** , then a short

****Break** **

**Then:** Western Women: The Second Shift

**Read:** **WWL** : 14, 16, 23, 26, 31-33, 40

**Lecture:** Westering Women ****

****

May 23: Southern Ladies and Southern Women

**Read:** Riley, chapter 4; **WWL** : 15, 28, 29

**Lectures** : 1) Southern Ladies: The Iron Fist in a Velvet Glove

2) Southern Women: Black and White

**Watch:** _Gone with the Wind_ clip; _Two Marys_

  
  

May 28: Charging into Changes

**Read:** Riley, Chapter 5; **WWL** : 18, 25, 30

**Lectures:** 1) Reformers, Part One: Civil Rights

2) Civil War and Domestic Warfare

  
  
  
  

May 30: Give Us the Vote!

**Read:** Riley, chapter 6; **WWL** : 35, 39

**Lecture:** Struggling for the Franchise

**Watch:** _How We Got the Vote_

June 4: Women Wage Earners

**Read** : Riley, chapter 7; **WWL** : 41-46

**Lecture:** Reformers, part 2: Social Reform

**Watch:** _Ida B. Wells: A Passion for Justice_

  
  

June 6: **SECOND HOUR EXAM** , then a short

****Break** **

**Then: Watch _:_** _Margaret Sanger_

  
  

June 11: **** 1920s & 1930s

**Read** : Riley, Chapter 8; **WWL** : 47-54

**Lecture:** 1) Flappers: The Twenties Roar

2) The Depression: Men on Top

**Watch:** _Imitation of Life_ clip

  
  

June 13: WWII and post & 1950s

**Read** : Riley, Chapter 9; **WWL** : 55-58

**Lecture:** The Anomaly of the Fifties: Why We Loved Lucy

**Watch:** _The Life & Times of Rosie the Riveter_; _I Love Lucy_ episode

  
  

June 18: The Women's Rights Movement

**Read:** Riley, Chapter 10; **WWL** : 59-64

**Lecture:** 1) Reformers, part 3: Civil Rights Again

2) Women's Liberation Movement

**Watch** : _The Long Walk Home_ clip

  
  

June 20: The Modern Era

**Read** : **WWL** : 65-69

**Lecture:** Anti-Feminism and Backlash

**Watch:** _TBA_

  
  

June 25: Final Exam

**Evaluative methods**

****

**Attendance** : As Woody Allen once said, "90% of life is just showing up."
Please come on time.

**Concretely** : 150 possible points, 10 for each day of class. This grade
measures how much material you expose yourself too. Half the points are for
attending; half for participating in the "fair five" terms (see " **Every
single class"** section below).

  
  

**Three exams** : **MAY 21; JUNE 11; JUNE 23.**

**** Tests are objective, BUT THEY DO REQUIRE YOU TO UNDERSTAND THE TERMS IN
THEIR HISTORICAL CONTEXT.

**Concretely** : 300 possible points for the first two exams; 450 for the
final. **All questions will be drawn from the list of terms given at the
beginning of every class, so please be on time. Part of the final will be
cumulative.**

  
  

**Every single class:** I'll ask you to list five items that are fair game for
the exams. The most popular twenty terms will be used to make up the exams. At
least two of the five need to be from the readings, at least two from the
previous time's class lecture, movie, or whatever. Your participation here
will affect your attendance grade. Miss it, give terms from past classes or
from your seat mate's paper, you lose attendance points. There are **no
makeups** for the in-class "fair five." That means if you are late, if you
forget to hand it in, whatever, then you lose those five points. **To be sure
you are counted, sit in your assigned seat!**

  
  

**Required work** : all of it. If you don't turn an exam, you fail the course
automatically. Excused absences are only for subpoenas, military service, and
illness with documentation. Exam dates will not change. Having to attend a
wedding is NOT an excused absence and I will not give a makeup for it.

  
  

**Grading scale:**   This class can earn you up to 1,200 points over the
course of the semester. Equivalent letters grades are on the following scale:
1104-1200=A; 1044-1103=BA; 984-1043=B; 924-983=CB; 864-923=C; 804-922=DC;
744-803=D; >743 or fewer=E.

  
  

**How to read/study/prepare** : Educational theory has it that for every hour
in class, the perfect student spends a minimum of three hours outside of class
doing work for it.

Actually, it shouldn't take you that long. First, read Riley to follow along
with the lectures, **BEFORE** you show up to class so when I mention Eliza
Pinckney, you'll know more or less who she is. Then, read the selections in
the **Writing Women's Lives** book that correspond to the same time-frame. The
people in those writings are fair game for the questions: in fact, at least
two of your terms should be taken from Riley and **WWL** each time.

**TAKE NOTES** on your reading, as well as class lecture notes. Notes are a
lot easier to study from, and if you write items down into your own words,
you've engaged the brain to puzzle out what it means and translate into
something you understand. Some students have used flash cards to prepare for
the exam and found them very useful, but be sure they contain the context for
the term, or they won't be.

  
  

**Just for your information** : I, too, think big classes are less than
optimal ways of presenting material to students, BUT: since we have no other
alternatives, please follow these behaviors as listed to make life easier for
everyone:

  
  

1) Please come on time. It disrupts my lecture and thus the class if you are
late. If lateness is unavoidable, please sit in the back instead of your
assigned seat until the break. Be sure that the TA records your presence.

  
  

2) Please do not chat with your neighbors during class. Acoustics are dreadful
in this classroom, and I have hearing problems, so I cannot hear myself or
students with questions if there is a low murmur in the room (which is what
chatting sounds like from up front).

  
  

3) Please ask questions. Big classes can be intimidating to raise hands in. If
you are more comfortable asking on email, ask there.

  
  

4) Please don't eat or drink anything that can attract bugs in the classroom.
There will be a short break each class so you may refresh yourself, so please
save food consumption for then. Drinks without sugar are ok.

  
  

5) Please communicate with me or my TA if there is a problem so we can fix it.
The best way to reach me is by email. I tend to read my email early in the
morning, but do not always check it before each class, though I will attempt
to do so. I do not hold formal office hours during spring or summer courses,
and but I'm in my office before and after class. Stop by or make an
appointment if you want to be sure I'm there.

