**WOMEN'S STUDIES PROGRAM**

**ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY**

  

**WST 394-- Women As Healers**

**SPRING 2000**

Instructor: Ann Hibner Koblitz

Office: Engineering A, 205

Phone: 480-965-8483

E-mail: koblitz@asu.edu

Office Hours: Monday 12:30-1:30 and 4:30-6PM; Tuesday 2-4PM; and by
appointment (NOTE: I tend to spend a lot of time in my office. If the door is
open, feel free to come in.)  


**Readings Available in Bookstore:**

Jeanne Achterberg, _Woman as Healer_

John Riddle, _Eve's Herbs_

Bobette Perrone, H. Henrieta Stockel, Victoria Krueger, _Medicine Women,
Curanderas, and Women Doctors_

Carol Shepherd McClain, ed. _Women as Healers_

Thomas Neville Bonner, _To the Ends of the Earth: Women's Search for Medical
Education_  


**Reading Available from me:**

L. Timmel Duchamp, "The Man Who Plugged In"  


**Course Content and Goals:**  


This course will examine the roles of women as informal caregivers, healers,
physicians, midwives, and nurses across cultures and historical periods. Among
the topics to be addressed are: gender segregation by status and field, the
impact of changing biological and medical theories of gender upon women's
lives, medical professionalization and female marginalization, women and
indigenous (non-western) medical knowledge, feminist theories of gender and
medicine, gender and biological determinism, biotechnology and reproductive
rights, etc. We shall ask such questions as: How does gender relate to
healing? Which cultural circumstances seem conducive to an acceptance of women
as healers? Under what circumstances do women become formal, licensed
physicians? How does the medical establishment react to attempts of women to
enter its ranks? How have women carved places for themselves in the healing
professions across cultures and time periods? How have women healers
confronted/controlled/dealt with issues of sexuality and reproduction?  


**Format and Ground Rules:**  


COURSE DOCUMENTS, INCLUDING THE SYLLABUS, ESSAY SUGGESTIONS, AND A 5-PAGE
WRITING HANDOUT, WILL SOON BE AVAILABLE ON-LINE AT ASU'S BLACKBOARD SITE:
http:// blackboard.is.asu.edu/ You need to enroll in the site BEFORE you
access courses by clicking on "create account."  


This is a relatively small 300-level class which I hope to run more or less as
a seminar. In the beginning I shall lecture some, but as time goes on and we
get more into the readings, I shall expect you to become actively involved.
Small classes can in some ways be more difficult than large ones: it is
difficult to melt into the crowd, your peers immediately notice your absence
or failure to do the readings, etc. A small class can be immensely satisfying,
however, provided that: 1) we all do the readings; 2) we all participate in
class; 3) we come to class promptly and attend regularly; 4) we are all
courteous and respectful to one another, even in cases of disagreement; 5) we
keep our sense of humor.  


NOTE: _Please refrain from coming late, leaving early, and wandering in and
out of the classroom at will. Also, please switch off all cell phones, pagers,
and alarm watches while in class._  


**Academic Honesty:**

Academic dishonesty in any form will not be tolerated. You are expected to
conduct yourself ethically during all activities associated with this class.
Any attempt to represent the work of someone else as one's own or any other
form of academic dishonesty will result in a grade of E (0 points) on the
assignment. Please read the department's detailed policy on academic honesty
attached to this syllabus.

**NOTE WELL:** **The appropriation of information without proper citation from
the Internet, the World Wide Web, and/or other electronic media constitutes a
violation of our policy on academic honesty. If you are in doubt about the
correctness of your methodology, please ask me in advance.**  


**Course Requirements:**  


\-- Class participation is worth a total of 30 points. Since participation is
very important, you **must** attend regularly, and join discussion frequently.
You are allowed **THREE** free absences. After that, I shall deduct points
from your participation grade for each unexcused absence. If you are absent
eight times or more, your participation grade will be an automatic E. **NOTE**
: Attendance is not enough to guarantee a good participation grade. You
**must** be actively engaged in the class, or at least coming to see me in
office hours. Also, excellent class participation can erase an absence, BUT:
_two late appearances in class equal one absence._  


\-- You will be asked to present in class three times during the course of the
semester. Each presentation will be worth up to a total of 20 points, or 60
points for all three. At least one of the three individual presentations must
be taking responsibility for facilitating discussion of the day's reading. The
other two may be either reading facilitation, a Netscape/Internet critique, or
presentation of an outside topic of interest to the class. The latter two
alternatives will be discussed further in a handout TBA. The criteria for a
good presentation are: 1) you must involve the class as a whole in substantive
discussion; 2) you must critically analyze as well as describe (i.e., if you
are taking responsibility for a class reading, you should assume that the
class as a whole has read the assignment, and go on from there); 3) you must
tie in your presentation to the readings, lectures, and other course
materials.  


\-- You have a choice of doing two shorter (4-6 pp.) papers (each worth a
maximum of 30 points) or one longer (15 pp.) paper (worth up to 60 points).
Suggestions for topics will be passed out soon. If you choose the alternative
of the research paper, you must hand in a description of your topic and a
bibliography on 8 March, when the first short paper is due. There is a 5-page
handout on writing on the course website at http://blackboard.is.asu.edu.
Please familiarize yourself with the information on the handout; if you make
any of the errors outlined on those sheets you will be heavily penalized.  


\-- Each week I shall give a short quiz covering lecture and discussion of the
previous week and/or the reading due since the last quiz. The quizzes will be
graded on an 8-point scale, and you may receive up to 50 points total for the
semester. You may choose to take as many or as few quizzes as you wish. In
other words, if you do very well on the first 6 or 7 quizzes, you do not need
to take any more of them. If you are having difficulties, however, you will
want to continue to take them to build up points. Please come on time-- if you
are more than five minutes late you will not be permitted to take that day's
quiz.  


\-- Final group project: At the end of the semester, you may choose to get
together with one to three of your classmates for some sort of a group
project. This can be a debate, a role play, a presentation of some research
topic, the exposition of a website, or whatever. The only criteria are that
the project must be discussed with me in advance, you all must participate
equally, and you must involve the class as a whole. The final group project is
worth a maximum of 20 points.  


**Grading Scale:**  


180-200 = A

179-160 = B

159-140 = C

139-120 = D

Below 120 = E  
    
    
  

**__BAD DAY RULE/RESPONSIBILITY ALERT!!!__**

  
  

**_Note that the total points possible for this course add up to 220\. In
other words, it is possible to get an A even if you have missed 40 points
worth of assignments. For this reason, I do NOT accept late work under any
circumstances, though there is a 48-hour grace period during which I accept
written assignments with an automatic mark-down of 5 points. THERE ARE NO
EXCEPTIONS TO THIS POLICY, so plan carefully._**  


**_On the bright side: if you need to miss an assignment (or even, fates
forfend, two) for some reason, you can theoretically still receive a B or
possibly even an A if you do well on all other work._**  
    
    


**Criteria for Grading:**  


A: Outstanding. Written work is careful and nuanced, conforms to standard
_written_ English, and displays consistency of usage and style. Student
demonstrates near total familiarity with the readings. Student shows wide-
ranging ability to make connections across readings and understand subtlety of
argument. In addition, in classroom discussions s/he participates
enthusiastically and with due attention to the readings.  


B: Very good. Written work is clearly above average, with consistency of style
and usage and only minor flaws. Participation is pertinent and thoughtful. The
student demonstrates an ability to make linkages across disciplines and kinds
of experience, and has clearly read all or nearly all of the assigned
material.  


C: Average. Directions followed. Student met minimal expectations, but missed
assignments and did not always appear to keep up with the readings. Written
work has many flaws. Student shows reasonable grasp of most concepts and
demonstrates some ability to integrate experiences inside and outside of the
classroom. There is at least some class participation.  


D: Below expectations. Below what one would normally expect from a student at
the 300-level. Writing has major problems that impede understanding. Student
fails to participate appropriately in the classroom, fails to turn in work,
has excessive absences.  


E: Well below expectations. Written work consistently falls below the college
level, directions are ignored or misunderstood, help is not sought, absences
and missed assignments are frequent, participation is inappropriate or
nonexistent. Shows little or no grasp of concepts, and is unable to relate
material from inside and outside of the classroom.  


**Appeals:**  


It is a good idea to hold onto all graded work in case there is a question
about your grade. _Grades are **NOT** negotiable, and no extra credit (other
than that built into the point scale above) will be given._ If you dispute a
grade given to you, **written** complaints can be submitted within **one
week** of receiving the grade. Be forewarned, however, that a disputed grade
is just as likely to be **lowered** as anything else.  


**CALENDAR AND SCHEDULE OF REQUIRED READINGS ( _readings are due on the dates
noted)_**  


**Please note that there is considerable unevenness in the reading assignment
length. That can't be helped if we want to preserve topical unity.**  
  **MONDAY** | **WEDNESDAY**  
---|---  
**17 January**  


No class-- Martin Luther King, Jr. Holiday | **19 January  **

course introduction, discussion of concepts, preconceptions, definitions,
approaches to the topic; review of syllabus, conversation about expectations  
**24 January**

definitions continued; creation myths and pre-history

Achterberg, pp. 1-28; Riddle, pp. 1-34 | **26 January**

ancient and medieval contraceptive knowledge

Riddle, pp. 35-63  
**31 January**

ancient and medieval women healers

Achterberg, pp. 29-59 | **2 February**

biomedical beliefs about women; women as witches

Riddle, pp. 64-90  
**7 February**

women as healers, women as witches

Achterberg, pp. 63-98 | **9 February**

witches, healers, and the Scientific Revolution

Achterberg, pp. 99-112  
**14 February**

witches, healers, and the Scientific Revolution II

Riddle, pp. 91-125 | **16 February**

apothecaries and alchemists

Riddle, pp. 126-166  
**21 February**

feminist theory, demography, and the demise of the woman healer

Riddle, pp. 167-205 | **23 February**

gender and the health professions: from healers to midwives to nurses

video: A Midwife's Tale

begin reading Bonner-- we shall discuss the whole book on 6 and 8 March  
**28 February**

contested bodies, contested professions

Riddle, pp. 206-259 | **1 March**

contested bodies, contested professions II

Achterberg, pp. 133-168  
**6 March**

women's search for formal education in medicine  


Bonner (entire book) | **8 March**

what Bonner left out: more on the Russian women physicians

**_FIRST ESSAY OR LONGER PAPER BIBLIOGRAPHY DUE IN CLASS_**  
**13 March  **

**_SPRING BREAK_** | **15 March**

**_SPRING BREAK_**  
**20 March**

"Doctor Mom" and 20th century medicine

Achterberg, pp. 171-205 | **22 March**

20th century healers and medicine women

Perrone et al., pp. 3-54  
**27 March**

shamans, priestesses, and healers

Perrone et al., pp. 57-82, 169-196 | **29 March**

"informal" healers and medical anthropology

McClain, pp. 1-57  
**3 April**

_curanderas y parteras_

Perrone et al., pp. 85-119; McClain, pp. 219-238 | **5 April**

_curanderas y parteras_

McClain, pp. 58-114  
**10 April**

contemporary women physicians and healers

Perrone et al., pp. 123-165  | **12 April**

metaphor and story in healing

McClain, pp. 115-156  
**17 April**

gender roles and healers' strategies

McClain, pp. 157-218 | **19 April**

future prospects, values, and medicine

Duchamp, "The Man Who Plugged In"

Perrone et al., pp. 197-229  
**24 April**  


FINAL PROJECTS | **26 April**  


FINAL PROJECTS  


**_SECOND ESSAY OR LONGER PAPER DUE_**  
**1 May**  


FINAL PROJECTS | **3 May  **

**_READING DAY_**  
  
**_NOTE: Final projects will continue  _** |

**_into our exam period._**  
  


