**Dickens and Wilde**

**English 482.03; Winter 2002**

Professor David Thomas

Office: 4171 Angell

Office Hours: Thursdays 1-3

Office Tel: 764-4140

E-Mail: dwthomas@umich.edu

Charles Dickens was the Shakespeare of Victorian Britain, a prolific creator
of memorable characters and incidents, at once comic and tragic.  But post-
Victorian critics sometimes tend to see him as a prime exponent of Victorian
earnestness, sentimentality and even hypocrisy.  And Oscar Wilde was, well,
the Wilde of Victorian Britain.  In his writings and in his own life, he was
so dazzling that even those who wished to hate him had to give up and laugh
with him.  But his life took a classically tragic form after his public
humiliation and imprisonment for homosexual offences.

This double-author course showcases two very different literary stylists; it
explores historical differences between the early- and mid-Victorian moment of
Dickens and the late-Victorian, _fin-de-si ecle _moment of Wilde; and it
considers critical uses to which these two authors are put today.  If we learn
enough, we might discover the genuine complexity of Dickens's human vision and
the surprising earnestness of Wilde's.

Regularly graded coursework includes three papers and regular reading quizzes,
with the weighting as follows: the first two papers are 25% each; the third
paper is 30%; quizzes are 10%; another 10% of the final grade reflects general
participation and your completion of assorted ungraded efforts (fact-seeking;
fashioning of discussion prompts, etc.).

The first paper follows on our reading of _Bleak House_ ; the second paper
follows on _Our Mutual Friend_ , and the final paper follows on our
examination of Oscar Wilde.  For the final paper, you are likely to privilege
either an historical or a biographical focus, and you may concentrate on Wilde
alone, on Wilde and Dickens, or on some element of Victorian culture that you
mean to explore in terms of Dickens and/or Wilde.

The recommended editions of our texts are available at Shaman Drum.

Book Texts at Shaman Drum:

            Charles Dickens: 

_Bleak House_ (Penguin);

### Our Mutual Friend (Oxford).

            Oscar Wilde: 

_Oscar Wilde: The Major Works_ , Ed. Isobel Murray (Oxford);

_Oscar Wilde: The Soul of Man Under Socialism and Prison Writings_ , Ed.
Isobel Murray (Oxford).

A series of coursepacks provides supporting material.  Look for the
coursepacks at Accu-Copy on East William, near the Cottage Inn restaurant.

**  
**

**Syllabus**

Selections with an asterisk (*) are in coursepacks.

JAN     7          Introduction to the Course

            9          Dickens, "A Christmas Carol"*

                        The _Victorian Britain_ articles:  "Children" and "Family"*

                        ------------------

            14        Dickens, _Bleak House_ , Author's preface and chapters 1-11 (5-181)

                        The _Victorian Britain_ articles:  "Law Reform"; "Philanthropy"*

            16        _Bleak House_ , Chs. 12-19 (181-315)

                        ------------------

            21        MLK Day

            23        _Bleak House_ , Chs. 20-30 (315-486)

                        The _Victorian Britain_ article:  "Vaccination and Smallpox"

                        ------------------

            28        _Bleak House_ , Chs. 31-40 (486-651)

            30        _Bleak House_ , Chs. 41-49 (651-768)

                        ------------------

FEB     4          _Bleak House_ , Chs. 50-58 (768-900)

            6          _Bleak House_ , Chs. 59-end (901-989)

                        ------------------

            11        Dickens, _Our Mutual Friend_ , Bk. I, Chs. 1-10 (1-127)

            13        _Our Mutual Friend_ , to end of Bk. I, Chs. 11-17 (128-213)

            15        **Friday: First Paper Due by 3pm** , under my office door: 4171 Angell

                        ------------------

            18        _Our Mutual Friend_ , Bk. II, Chs. 1-12 (214-364)

            20        _Our Mutual Friend_ , to end of Bk. II; Bk. III, Chs. 14-6 (379-490)

                        ------------------

            25        VACATION

            27        VACATION

                        ------------------

MAR   4          _Our Mutual Friend_ , to end of Bk. III; Bk. IV, Chs. 1-4
(491-671).

            6          _Our Mutual Friend_ , to end (672-822)

                        ------------------

            11        **Second Paper Due in Class** ; Introducing Oscar Wilde 

            13        Wilde, _Major Works_ : "Decay of Lying" (215ff.); "The Portrait of Mr. W.H."*

                        ------------------

            18        Wilde, _Major Works_ : _Picture of Dorian Gray_ , "Preface" and Chs 1-10 (48-142);

                        Walter Pater, "Conclusion" to _The Renaissance_ *

            20        _Dorian Gray_ , Chs 11-end (142-214)

                        ------------------

            25        Wilde, _Major Works_ : _Salome_ (299ff.); Secondary reading: from Bram Dijkstra, _Idols of Perversity_ *

MAR   27   |  Late-Victorian Science and Materialism: T.H. Huxley, "On the
Physical Basis of Life"*; and John Tyndall, "Belfast Address"*; Late-Victorian
Psychology and Sexology: Richard von Krafft-Ebing, from _Psychopathia
Sexualis_ *; Edward Carpenter, from "The Intermediate Sex"*  
---|---  
  
                        ------------------

APR    1          Wilde, _Major Works_ : _Lady Windermere's Fan_ (331ff.)

                             Secondary reading: Sos Eltis, from _Revising Wilde_ *

            3          Wilde, _Major Works_ : _An Ideal Husband_ (389ff.)

                        ------------------

            8          Wilde, _Major Works_ : _The Importance of Being Earnest_ (477ff.)

                             Secondary reading: Jonathan Dollimore, from _Sexual Dissidence_ *

            10        Wilde, in _Soul of Man_ volume:  "The Soul of Man Under Socialism" (1-37); William Morris, "How We Live and How We Might Live"*; George Bernard Shaw, "The Economic Basis of Socialism"*

                        ------------------

            15        Wilde, _Soul of Man_ volume: _De Profundis_ (38-158)

            17        Wilde, _Soul of Man_ volume:  "Ballad of Reading Gaol" and the two post-prison letters to the _Daily Chronicle_ (best to read straight from 159-96)

**Final Paper (5-8 pages) due by Noon, Monday, April 22;**

**Under my office door at 4171 Angell**

