**_Syllabus_**  
**History 211, Sec. 1**  
**United States History to 1865**  
**Fall 1999**  
**TRF 8:00-8:50, CCC 101**

**Introduction** |

**Course Materials** |

**Attendance** |

**Office Hours** |

**Tests**  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
**Readings** |

**Grading** |

**Class Preparation** |

**Extra Points** |  
  
_I know of no safe depository of the ultimate powers of the society but with
the people themselves; and if we think them not enlightened enough to exercise
their control with a wholesome discretion, the remedy is not to take power
from them, but to inform their discretion through instruction._ Thomas
Jefferson, 1820

**_Introduction_**

This course is a survey of United States history from the beginning of the
Columbian Exchange to the end of the Civil War. This semester we will consider
political, economic, religious, diplomatic, cultural, ethnic and social
aspects of early American and United States history.

In one semester, you can not learn everything there is to know about early
American history, and no one expects you to do so. We do expect you to learn
some of the basic facts of early American history: the important people,
institutions, and events that have shaped the world we live in today. Just as
important as learning important information concerning early American and
United States history, however, is learning how to ask important questions of
our history. Fact without meaning is worse than useless, it is dangerous.

In this class we will take advantage of the communication infrastructure
available on campus in a number of ways. This syllabus and the course outline
and study guide, and other materials as well, will be available from my
history department web page. In addition to making announcements in class
about schedule changes, opportunities for extra credit work, or other items of
interest, I will regularly communicate with you through campus email, and I
expect you to communicate with me through the same medium. There are enough
labs in the academic buildings and residence halls on campus to give every
student access to this technology on a daily basis. If you're not using these
resources regularly, you should be. If you don't know how to access your email
and the campus network in the labs, see me immediately.

##### Top

* * *

|  
---|---  
  
**_Course Materials_**

**Textbook (rental):**  
Faragher, John Mack et al. _Out of Many,_ 2d combined ed.  

**Readings (purchase):**  
Franklin, Benjamin. _The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin._ Ed. by L. Masur.
1993.  
Nicholls, Roger. _Black Hawk and the Warrior's Path_. 1992.  
Brent, Linda. _Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl_. Ed. by Walter Teller.
1973.  

**Top**  

* * *

|  
  
**_Attendance_**

I require and expect you to attend all class meetings. I will take attendance
at all meetings by attendance sheet. You may lose up to three points off of
your final grade for an unreasonable number of absences (except in very
special circumstances, anything over three).

Do not call me ahead of time to tell me that you will miss class, unless you
expect to miss several classes in a row. But in timely fashion I do expect you
to submit to me a formal written note or email which explains the absence and
states the date or dates involved. These notes make record-keeping easier, and
together with your signature on the sign-up sheet constitute your record of
attendance, on which part of your final grade depends.

If you come in late, please sit near the door and remember to sign the
attendance sheet.

You are responsible for all assignments, announcements, and lecture or
discussion material covered in every class meeting, and for all information
conveyed to you through email.

**Top**  

* * *

|  
  
**_Office Hours_**

I encourage you to come to my office to talk about any concerns you have
regarding course material, preparation for tests, studying, writing, etc. You
do not need an appointment during posted office hours; if you need to see me
outside posted office hours, arrange for an appointment beforehand.

Please do not feel shy about coming to my office. I get paid to help you learn
about history, but more than that to help you learn how to read, and write,
and think with some clarity and informed judgment. If I can help you with that
one-on-one I will be glad to do it.

We can work out almost any problem (i .e., deadlines, assignments, test
preparation) if you come to me beforehand or immediately after a problem
occurs. If you let a problem remain unresolved until the end of the semester,
however, it will be too late to take corrective measures. Taking tests at the
appointed time is important; I will allow a make-up only for a valid excuse.
If you miss a test or assignment, it is your responsibility to ensure that you
complete it in a timely manner. Except in extraordinary circumstances, any
test or assignment not completed before the next one is due will receive a
zero.

If you need to speak to me call my office; if I am not in leave a message on
the Audix service, which is available twenty-four hours a day, or leave an
email. You must follow-up on phone messages regarding absences with a note or
email on your return to class.

**Top**  

* * *

|  
  
**_Tests_**

There will be three major exams, each covering roughly one-third of the course
material. Exams will consist of four brief identifications (10 points each), a
short essay on the required reading (20 points), and an essay question (40
points). I will choose test materials from the study guide. I will assign one
brief identification that everyone must identify, and you will have a choice
concerning three others; you will also have a choice of one of two essay
questions for each essay section. You must write brief identifications in
complete sentences, without abbreviations, listing, or other shortcuts; the
essay requires the above and essay form. Because of the time afforded for
preparation of the test, I expect that you will organize your essay according
to standard essay format, and that you will effectively support the
conclusions you present.

**Top**  

* * *

|  
  
**_Readings_**

I have chosen the three supplemental readings because each tells the story of
one American's life during one of the three subdivisions in this course. Each
of these individuals was remarkable in his or her own way, but was also a
product of a particular place and time; although each distinguished himself or
herself on the national stage, he or she did so within the same structures of
culture, society, economy, as did millions of other American of European,
African, and Indian origin.

Read each of these books as you read the chapters in the textbook, and look
for the interplay of the subject's unique character and circumstances with the
impersonal factors of the world in which he or she and those around him or her
lived. You must of course remember a certain amount of detail--Benjamin
Franklin lived in Philadelphia, not Annapolis, and Black Hawk was not a
_generic_ Indian but a Sauk-- but the test questions will require that you
also see the  "big picture" of American history. You will have to answer one
of two questions that relate the book to the larger course content.

**Top**  

* * *

|  
  |  
  
**_Grading_**

The grade for the course is based on 320 points and the standard ten percent
scale. Each test is worth 100 points; attendance and general classroom
demeanor are each worth 10.

Demeanor refers to your conduct in the classroom; I expect you to remain
silent except when asking questions or participating in discussion. It is
almost impossible to whisper loud enough for the person sitting next to you to
hear without me hearing it. Misconduct can result in lowering your final grade
by one-third to two-thirds of a letter grade.

I encourage classroom participation, which includes such things as asking
questions regarding text or lecture material and participating in classroom
discussions.

Your writing--as opposed to the content your writing conveys--is a component
of every assignment, and is an integral part of your grade. University
education is not just about mastering factual material--which is important--
but also about developing the ability to communicate information. In other
words, how you express your ideas is as important in formulating your grade as
having good ideas and information to convey. "A"-level work, whether on extra-
point essays, brief identifications, or essays, presupposes a good physical
presentation and a minimum of grammar and usage problems.

**Top**  

* * *

|  
  
**_Class Preparation:Outline/Study Guide_**

I have placed an outline of the lecture material for each chapter on reserve
in the library, and it can be found on my web page at
[http://www.uwsp.edu/history/faculty/FORET/hist211sec1.htm](http://www.uwsp.edu/history/faculty/FORET/hist211sec1.htm).
Although we may deviate from the outline due to classroom discussion or
unexpected absences on my part, in general I will cover the material in the
order and manner in which it is listed in the outline. I encourage you to
photocopy or print out the outline so that you can use it both in and out of
class for studying the book and note taking.

I have organized lectures into "units" that are coterminous with but not
identical to chapters in the textbook. I will reinforce some material from the
book in lecture, but also introduce new material or perspectives which are not
in the book at all.

I have placed brief identification items and essay questions at the end of
each chapter's outline, as well as questions on the outside reading book at
the end of each major section, i.e., at test time. I will choose test items
from this part of the study guide.

The best way to prepare for class is to read the chapter and to review the
outline before the date on which we will cover the corresponding unit. This
will reinforce the subject matter in your mind and enable you to participate
better in class both quantitatively and qualitatively as well. You may even
want to have the outline in front of you as you take notes in class. Do not
hesitate to ask questions at any time in class or in my office. There are no
dumb questions, and you can not "disturb" me by coming to my office.

I am always prepared to lecture, but the class will be much more enjoyable for
all of us if you ask questions that generate discussion. Not only does it
break up the class--I get tired of hearing myself just like you do--but it
often leads to insights and observations that reveal the larger truth we are
striving to find.

**Top**  

* * *

|  
  
**_Extra Points_**

You may earn three extra points (up to one-third of a letter grade) in one of
two ways.

The first is to attend a campus presentation relating to history or culture in
the United States and write a report about it. I will announce suitable
presentations in class; you may bring any campus presentation to my attention
for approval.

The second is to find a web site suitable to American history or culture to
1877 and write a report about it. Your report should be about the site, not
simply a printing of it, though you may include photographs, charts, or other
illustrative materials in your report. My web page will have appropriate sites
listed on it; you may want to write a report about a site that it is not on my
list but to do so you must get my prior approval. If it is a good site, I will
add it to my links.

You may earn one extra point for each report, which I will add to your final
grade at the end of the semester, for up to three points. To gain credit for a
campus presentation, your essay must contain a well-written summary of the
presentation and some thoughts on what the speaker had to say; for a web site,
summarize the material and write about how it relates to the themes we explore
during the semester. Extra-point work should be two to three double-spaced,
typed pages and present a neat, professional appearance; you must also append
any notes you took during the presentation or as you explored the web site,
which will presumably serve as the basis for your essay.

**Top**  

* * *

|  
[![](backled1.gif)](hist211sec1.htm)

