[![Tree](images/tree.gif)](http://www.dartmouth.edu) ![Title
Image](images/banner.gif) [![Tree](images/tree.gif)](http://www.dartmouth.edu)  
---  
  
**[Home](index.html) **

**[Publications](pubs.html) **

**[Research](research.html) **

**[Resume](resume.html) **

**[Courses](courses.html) **  
| ![](images/green_ball.gif) | Envs 2  
---|---  
![](images/green_ball.gif) | Envs 12 | ![](images/green_ball.gif) | Envs 30  
![](images/green_ball.gif) | Envs 89  
![](images/green_ball.gif) | Envs 79  
![](images/green_ball.gif) | Envs 1  
![](images/green_ball.gif) | EEES 119  
  
|  **Course** |  **Course Title** |  **Offered** |  **Syllabus**  
---|---|---|---  
Envs 2 |  Intro to Environmental Science  |  Fall  |
[Syllabus](courses/envs2.html)  
Envs 12 |  Energy and the Environment (team-taught)  |  Winter  |
[Syllabus](courses/es12.html)  
Envs 30 |  Global Environmental Science  |  Spring  |
[Syllabus](courses/envs30.html)  
Envs 89 |  Forest Biogeochemistry  |  Alt. Spring  |
[Syllabus](courses/envs89.html)  
[Projects](http://www.dartmouth.edu/artsci/envs/courses/envs89.html)  
Envs 79 |  Soil Science  |  Alt. Spring  |  [Syllabus](courses/envs79.html)  
Envs 1 |  People and Nature in America (Interdisciplinary course team-taught)
|  Winter  |  [Syllabus](courses/envs1.html)  
EEES 119 |  Proposal Development and Grant Writing (team-taught)  |  Alt.
Winter  |  [Syllabus](courses/eees119.html)  
  
**Envs 2 - Intro to Environmental Science **

To understand current environmental problems, we need to consider physical,
biological, chemical and other natural science processes that are often the
basis of those problems. This course will give you the skills necessary to ask
intelligent questions about--and perhaps obtain answers to--some of the
environmental problems we are facing today by examining scientific principles
and the application of those principles to environmental science. This course
is a survey which covers a wide variety of topics at a moderate level of
intensity. It is designed to introduce you to a number of topics, many of
which you can explore in greater depth in other courses.

There will be two hour-exams (during class time) and a final exam. Three
environmental problem sets will be assigned to give hands-on experience in
examining environmental issues, making calculations and reaching a conclusion.
A community profile for your home town will help you gain an in-depth
understanding of one aspect of the operation of a community you are familiar
with.

**Envs 12 - Energy and the Environment **

Every few years, it seems there is another "energy crisis." In the 1970s, the
interruption of oil supplies from the Persian Gulf caused economic upheaval in
the United States and other oil-importing nations. Since that time, dueling
experts have argued about whether existing energy supplies will be sufficient
to satisfy long-run demand, as well as the need for public policies to promote
increased supply and/or enhanced energy efficiency. In addition, energy
production and use play key roles in a variety of environmental issues such as
urban air pollution, acid deposition, the contamination and eutrophication of
coastal ecosystems, and global climate change. Hence a "sustainable" energy
system must address questions of both resource scarcity and the long-term
environmental impacts of energy technologies. This course provides an overview
of how energy issues have developed since the 1970s and, especially, the major
challenges that lie ahead. Drawing on concepts and methods from energy
engineering, environmental science, and economics, the course will teach
students to analyze alternative energy futures from a cross-cutting,
interdisciplinary perspective.

There will be one hour exam for the course. An Energy/Carbon Audit and
Analysis and an Energy Policy Brief will also be assigned to test your
understanding of the concepts and allow you to further research a topic that
particularly interests you.

**Envs 30 - Global Environmental Science **

This course examines human influences on the major global biogeochemical
cycles (water, carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, metals). We will emphasize cycling
processes in terrestrial, marine, and--to a lesser extent--aquatic systems in
an attempt to understand how human activities such as air pollution,
deforestation, desertificaton and soil erosion alter these cycles. You may
recall that Envs 2 is a survey course which covers a wide variety of topics at
a moderate level of intensity. This course is designed to allow you to explore
a few of those topics in greater detail.

There will be one in-class hour exam and a take-home final. The take-home exam
might take up to two full days to complete. Two environmental problem set
simulations will be assigned to give hands-on experience in understand the
dynamics of change in biogeochemical systems. Each class member will prepare a
200-word abstract on a recent development in a topic we have discussed during
the term. Two students will present their abstracts at the end of each class
throughout the last four weeks of the term.

**Envs 89 - Forest Biogeochemistry **

This course will examine elemental cycling and related biogeochemical
processes in terrestrial ecosystems, with a primary focus on forests of the
temperate zone. We will cover many aspects of major and trace element cycles.
The impact of air pollution on elemental cycling processes will be an area of
interest throughout the term.

The required text will serve as a useful reference. There are no assigned
pages--you are expected to find the appropriate sections for each topic and
read them. I will be glad to provide guidance to anyone who wants help
determining the reading for a given week. This class will be taught somewhat
like a "graduate seminar." More class time will be spent discussing articles
from the peer-reviewed literature (with presentations by members of the class)
than in lecture.

**Envs 79 - Soil Science **

This course will explore the nature and properties of soils and examine soil
processes in natural and human-manipulated systems. Throughout the course, the
soil will be considered as an integral component of the ecosystem. We will
begin by developing an understanding of the physical, geological, biological
and chemical processes that lead to soil formation and the development of
specific soil properties. We will also examine the relationship between soils
and underlying bedrock and overlying vegetation and the role of soils in
ecosystems. Towards the end of the course, we will examine the situations in
which soils impact human beings and in which human beings impact soils.

Problem sets and combined field trip/laboratory reports will be assigned.
Students will collect samples during some of the field trips; these samples
will be brought to the lab in 408 Steele and analyzed for a variety of
physical and chemical properties. Results of these labs will be submitted as
part of the field trip report.

**Envs 1 - People and Nature in America **

This course will discuss the interactions between humans and nature in North
America (primarily the USA) from literary, scientific and historical
perspectives. When one asks the question: "What is nature?" or "Why does
someone care about a particular place" it can be answered from many different
perspectives. These perspectives have changed radically during our history.
This course will consider both the literary and scientific aspects of these
questions and consider possible responses as we read the following material:

  * Genesis 1-3; "Four Worlds: The Dine Story of Creation"
  * John McPhee, _Encounters with the Archdruid_ (1971)
  * Meriwether Lewis and William Clark, _Journals_ (1804-1806)
  * Toni Morrison, _Beloved_ (1987)
  * Leslie Marmon Silko, _Ceremony_ (1977) 
  * Annie Dillard, _Pilgrim at Tinker Creek_ (1974) Chaps 1-4, 6, 8, 10, 11
  * Edward Abbey, _Desert Solitaire_ (1968)
  * Terry Tempest Williams, _Refuge_ (1991)
  * Anne Matthews, _Where The Buffalo Roam_ (1992)
  * Occasional short readings (articles and poems) throughout the term.

**EEES 119 - Proposal Development and Grant Writing **

This graduate seminar and practicum focuses on the design and development of
scientific research proposals in the Earth, Ecosystem and Ecological Sciences.
Emphasis is on the formulation and design of testable scientific ideas and the
development of these ideas into feasible projects. Each student is responsible
for the development and execution of a realistic research proposal (typically
following NSF proposal format). Students and faculty provide critical
evaluation of each other's ideas and written work throughout the course. Class
meets twice weekly for 2 hours each session.  
  
  |

Last updated on 03/18/2002  
(C)2002 [Andrew J. Friedland](mailto:andy.friedland@dartmouth.edu)

