![craig roland](images/name.gif)

|

[research](research.html)  
[links](stepping_out.html)  
  
---|---  
  
* * *  
  
Courses I Teach at The University of Florida

  
**ARE 4314 / Art Education in Elementary Schools**

The purpose of this course is to prepare preservice classroom teachers in
teach art in elementary schools. Course lectures and assignments focus on such
topics as comprehensive art education, curricular integration, various art
educational philosophies and theories, developmental theories in art,
instructional strategies involving art production and dialogue, alternative
assessment strategies, and the role and importance of art in the elementary
school curriculum.

For more information on ARE 4314, go to the
[syllabus.](courses/elem_methods/ARE4314.html) To see art work produced by
students in this class, go to the [ARE 4314 Student Art
Gallery](courses/elem_methods/gallery/are4314_gallery.html).

* * *

#### ARE 2045 / Introduction to Art Education

This course provides an overview of the art teaching field with particular
emphases on rationales for teaching art, contemporary art teaching practices,
community art experiences, and alternative career options. Students begin to
engage in personal reflection and critical analysis of the teaching/learning
process through journal-keeping, teacher portfolio development, writing
reaction papers and by participating in group discussions of selected readings
and field experiences in local public schools. Coreq: [ARE
4900](courses/ARE4900.html).

For more information on ARE 2045, go to the [syllabus](courses/ARE2045.html).

* * *

#### ARE 4242 / Teaching Art: The Study of Practice

This course is designed to assist pre-service art teachers in developing
confidence, knowledge and skills in the practice of teaching art in schools.
Course topics include art curriculum planning, motivational strategies,
artroom management, and alternative methods of evaluation in art. Coreq: [ARE
4900](courses/ARE4900.html).

For more information on ARE 4242, go to the [syllabus](courses/ARE4242.html).

* * *

#### ART 3807c / Expanded Contexts: Art and Community (No longer offered)

This course explores aesthetic, sociocultural, political, and ecological
issues involved in creating art that engages community and affects positive
change. Emphasis is on creative thinking, community involvement, collaborative
enterprise, research, and the creation of art works honoring aesthetic,
ecological and cultural values.

For more information on ART 3807c, go to the [Art and
Community](art&community/ac_home.html) website.

* * *

#### ART 4930 / Computers in Art Education

This course is designed to introduce students to applications of computers in
the field of art education. Emphasis is on the use of computer hardware and
software for individual creative expression. The use of the Internet as a
teaching and learning tool is also explored.

For more information on ART 4930, go to the [syllabus](courses/art4930/).

* * *

#### ARE 6148 / Curriculum in Teaching Art

This course is structured to assist graduate art education students in
developing an understanding of various theories and approaches to structuring
art curricula. Emphasis is on identifying the basic elements of curriculum
construction as well as linking contemporary theories and curricular practices
in art education with their historical antecedents and roots.

For more information on ARE 6148, go to the [syllabus](courses/ARE6148.html).

* * *

#### ARE 6141 / History of Teaching Art

This course is structured to assist graduate art educaton students in
developing an understanding of the philosophical foundations of art education.
Emphasis is on linking personal and cultural belief systems about the nature
of art education to their historical antecedents and roots.

For more information on ARE 6141, go to the [syllabus](courses/ARE6141.html).

* * *

#### ARE 6933 / Art in Cyberspace

This course will be offered for the first time in the Spring 2001 term and
will explore concepts, applications and hands-on techniques involving the use
of telecommunications technologies in the visual arts. The emphasis will be on
examining the multitude of ways in which art is created, exhibited,
reproduced, disseminated, studied, and marketed through the Internet and World
Wide Web. Recommended for graduate students in art, art history, and art
education.

For more information on ARE 6933, go to the
[syllabus](courses/are6933/syllabus.html).

* * *

#### ARE 6933 / Teaching Art in Higher Education

This course is designed to introduce graduate art students to the teaching of
art at the post-secondary level. In addition to weekly seminars, opportunities
for classroom observation and directed teaching are provided. A significant
portion of this course is completed through an individualized program of study
which includes readings, curricular development and observations related to a
specific studio area.

For more information on ARE 6933, go to the [syllabus](courses/ARE6933.html).

* * *

top of page.  
  
| [home](homepage.html) | [research](research.html) |
[links](stepping_out.html) |

