![](images/spacer.gif) |

![photo, Italian immigrant family arriving at Ellis Island, ca.
1900](H3821immigrants.jpg)

**HIST 3821**  
3 credits/Fall 2001  
T/Th 11:15AM-12:30PM  
Anderson 270

**Professor Barbara Welke**  
752 Social Sciences Tower  
Office Hours:  
T/Th. 3:00-4:30 p.m.  
tel: (612) 624-7017  
[welke004@tc.umn.edu](mailto:welke004@tc.umn.edu)



| ![](images/spacer.gif) |  [![](H3821header.gif)](H3821.htm)  
| [Syllabus](3821syl.htm) | | | **Schedule** |  | | [Lectures](3821lec.htm) |
| | [Internet Resources](http://www.hist.umn.edu/%7Ehist20c/internet/index)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
  **Lecture and Reading Schedule**



**INTRODUCTION TO COURSE AND THEMES**

**T. 9/4** COURSE OVERVIEW

**Th. 9/6** _THE GREAT ARIZONA ORPHAN ABDUCTION_ : A TELLING STORY

**Assigned Reading:** Linda Gordon, _The Great Arizona Orphan Abduction_ , pp.
Preface-108.

**Short Paper Assignment #1 (Part 1):** In 1-2 pages reflect on (1) how _The
Great Arizona Orphan Abduction_ is like or different from other history books
you have read; (2) what the book is "about," and (3) what you like or don't
like about the book.

**T. 9/11** GENDER, RACE,  & THE INDUSTRIAL FRONTIER: DOING HISTORY

**Assigned Reading:** Gordon, pp. 109-208 (plus photographs)

**Short Paper Assignment #1 (Part 2):** Photographs are one kind of primary
source that historians use in writing history. Select two of the images Gordon
includes and consider how they provide evidence for the argument Gordon
develops in the two chapters on the Mexican and Anglo women in Clifton. What
kinds of information would you want to know about a photograph in using it as
a source? Are photographs different from other primary sources you can
imagine? Explain. (2 pages)

**Th. 9/13** LAW, LABOR, FAMILY, AND RACE: REFLECTING ON AMERICA

**Assigned Reading:** Gordon, pp. 209-318

**Short Paper Assignment # 1 (Part 3):** As a whole, what's your reaction to
the tale Gordon relates here? How does it reinforce or challenge your
understanding of American history at the beginning of the 20th century? (1-2
pages)



**PART I:**

**PROGRESSIVE STATECRAFT** **,** **1896 \- 1919**



**RECONSTRUCTING A WHITE NATION:** **RACE, NATION, AND EMPIRE**

**(Who Built America?, ch. 3, pp. 120-165)**

**T. 9/18** LESSONS IN CITIZENSHIP IN BLACK AND WHITE:  "JIM CROW,"
DISFRANCHISEMENT, LYNCHING AND THE AFRICAN-AMERICAN RESPONSE

**Assigned Web-Link Readings:**

  * [Ida B. Wells, _Southern Horrors. Lynch Law in all Its Phases_ (1892)](http://womhist.binghamton.edu/aswpl/doc3.htm)
  * [Booker T. Washington, The Atlanta Exposition Address (1895)](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/r?ammem/murray:@field\(FLD001+90898322+\):@@@$REF$)
  * [W. E. B. Dubois, "Of Mr. Booker T. Washington and Others" in _The Souls of Black Folk_ (1903)](http://historymatters.gmu.edu/search.taf?_function=detail&layout_0_uid1=32828&_UserReference=BDDC6D36C935E2A9BF36479F)

**Short Paper Assignment # 2:** Write a 3-4 page paper reflecting on the
assigned web-link readings. As you read these sources, consider the following
questions: (1) what are the main points each author or speaker is making;( 2)
How does each author or speaker use history?; (3) What is the relationship
among self-help, manhood, and African-American progress in each author's
argument?; (4) How does each author see the current state of and future
prospects for white/black relations?; (5) Are there points of agreement among
the authors?; (6) Which argument(s) do you find most/least compelling and why?
These questions are intended to guide, not dictate as you reflect critically
for yourselves on what Wells, Washington, and Dubois have to say.

**Th. 9/20** "GATEKEEPING " AND AMERICAN IMMIGRATION

**T. 9/25** SHOULDERING THE  "WHITE MAN'S BURDEN": THE SPANISH-AMERICAN WAR
AND THE ROAD TO EMPIRE

**ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION AND DAILY LIFE**

**(Who Built America?, ch. 4, pp. 166-205)**

**T. 10/2** CORPORATE CONSOLIDATION AND MASS PRODUCTION

**Th. 10/4** THE IDEAL OF  "SELF-OWNERSHIP" AND THE REALITIES OF THE
INDUSTRIAL WORKPLACE

  * [Photographs by Lewis Hine, Child Labor in America, 1908-1912](http://www.historyplace.com/unitedstates/childlabor/index.html)
  * [Upton Sinclair, _The Jungle_ (ch. 11)](http://xroads.virginia.edu/%7EHYPER/SINCLAIR/front.html)
  * [The Triangle Shirtwaist Factory Fire (1911)](http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/trianglefire/)

**Short Paper Assignment #3 (Option 1):** Antislavery advocates in the 19th
century held out wage labor as the antithesis of slavery. They saw the wage
relationship as based on self-ownership and voluntary exchange between
individuals who were equal and free. How did the realities of wage labor at
the beginning of the 20th century challenge that ideal?

The primary documents for this assignment represent a wide range of sources,
including documentary photographs, a chapter from a novel, workers'
testimonies, governments reports, newspaper and magazine stories and
photographs, etc. Use these documents to write a 4-page essay addressing the
question noted above. Your essay should use material from each of the
readings. You most certainly will not be able to use all of the evidence
provided by these sources. The evaluation of your essay will in part depend on
your sensitivity to the kinds of questions that each source allows you to
address and to how well you mobilize particular evidence in support of your
argument. Keep direct quotes to a minimum and use parenthetical citations for
source references.

Note: You are required to complete either Option #1 or Option #2 (see 10/11
below). If you wish to write both papers, I will take your best grade on the
two papers as your grade for Short Paper #3.

**Th. 10/4** THE URBAN/SUBURBAN LANDSCAPE

**Assigned Web-Links Readings:**

  * [ Jacob Riis, _How the Other Half Lives?_](http://tenant.net/Community/Riis/title.html) (1890)
  * [Hyde Park Houses (photographs)](http://www.lib.uchicago.edu/ecuip//diglib/social/hydeparkhouses/index.html)

**T. 10/9** THE CHALLENGE TO VICTORIAN CULTURE: LEISURE AND THE BIRTH OF MASS
CULTURE

**REGULATING THE NEW INDUSTRIAL ORDER**

**(Who Built America?, ch. 5, pp. 206-253)**

**Th. 10/11** THE  "PROGRESSIVE" IMPULSE AND THE MOVEMENT FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE

  * [Jane Addams, _Twenty Years at Hull House_ , ch. 5 ("First Days at Hull House"), ch. 6 ("The Subjective Necessity for Social Settlements"), and ch. 10 ("Pioneer Labor Legislation in Illinois](http://xroads.virginia.edu/%7EHYPER/ADDAMS/title.html)")
  * [Florence Kelley (Document 10, Testimony on the Sweating System; and Document 11, Kelley's Recommended Bill)](http://www.binghamton.edu/womhist/factory/intro.htm)
  * [Jacob A. Riis, _How the Other Half Lives_ , ch. XXV ("How the Case Stands?")](http://www.cis.yale.edu/amstud/inforev/riis/title.html)
  * [Triangle Shirtwaist Fire (Report to the Legislature of the State of New York; Fire Hazard in Factory Building; Recommendations of the Commission - go to Documents, Reports)](http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/trianglefire/)

**Short Paper Assignment #3 (Option 2):** By the turn of the century the human
costs of industrialization had become painfully clear to many Americans. They
turned their attention to alleviating suffering, advocating fundamental reform
of the American political, economic, and social order. Above all, they
demanded a new kind of American state.

Write a 4-page essay reflecting on the kinds of changes advocated in the
readings for today. What did these authors see as the fundamental problem?
What did they assume Americans should be able to take for granted? What role
did they see for the state? How did the problems they saw and the reforms they
advocated capture the tension between personal freedom and regulatory
governance? Your analysis should incorporate all of the readings. Keep direct
quotations to a minimum. Use parenthetical references for cites to sources.

**T. 10/16** FACTORY REFORM, ANTITRUST, AND AMERICAN LABOR

**Th. 10/18** REFORM POLITICS

**OVER HERE & OVER THERE: ****THE U. S. & THE "GREAT WAR"**

**(Who Built America?, ch. 6, pp. 254-313)**

**T. 10/23** DEMOCRATIC VALUES IN A NATION AT WAR

**Th. 10/25** VERSAILLES AND AFTER: RETREAT TO ISOLATIONISM AND REPRESSION AT
HOME

**Assigned Web-Links Readings:**

  * [Woodrow Wilson, Fourteen Points (1918)](http://www.lib.byu.edu/%7Erdh/wwi/1918/14points.html)

**T. 10/30 MIDTERM EXAM**



**PART II:**

**1920-1945**



**THE 1920s**

**(Who Built America?, ch. 7, pp. 314-365)**

**Th. 11/1** THE CONSUMER REVOLUTION

**T. 11/6** THE BOUNDARIES OF BELONGING

**THE GREAT DEPRESSION AND THE NEW DEAL**

**(Who Built America?, ch. 8, pp. 366-423)**

**Th. 11/8** THE ONSET OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION

**T. 11/13** HARD TIMES: DAILY LIFE IN THE GREAT DEPRESSION I

**Th. 11/15** HARD TIMES: DAILY LIFE IN THE GREAT DEPRESSION II

**(Who Built America?, ch. 9, pp. 424-481)**

**T. 11/20** THE NEW DEAL AND AMERICAN LABOR

**Short Paper Assignment # 4:** Using the internet links page, class notes,
and your survey text, write a 3-4 page paper comparing two major labor
conflicts. Your two strikes should have significant points of difference in
time , gender, race, or ethnicity of workers, geography, and/or industry.
Possibilities include the 1899 silver miners strike in Couer d' Alene, Idaho;
1909 N.Y. garment workers strike; 1912 "Bread and Roses" strike in Lawrence,
Massachusetts: 1913 strike in the Colorado coalfields; 1936 GM sitdown strike;
general textile strike. At least one of the strikes you focus on must have
taken place during the Depression or WWII. The questions you should consider
include: (1) What were the workers chief complaints in each case? (2) How did
workers decide to strike and how did companies respond to the strikes once
they started? (3) How long did each strike last? (4) Were there violent
incidents associated with them? (5) What was the public response to the
strikes; (6) What were the lasting outcomes of the strikes? (7) How did the
specific time and place in which each strike took place influence the outcome?
(8) How did other points of difference (gender, race or ethnicity, etc.)
between the strikes you're considering shape each of these questions? (9)
Evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of the sources available to you to
evaluate the two strikes. What questions did the sources leave you with or
raise for you? (10) What conclusions did you draw from studying these two
labor conflicts? Your paper should clearly identify the two strikes you are
comparing and the sources on which you rely. You should include footnotes or
parenthetical references for citations to primary sources and secondary
materials.

**Th. 11/22 NO CLASS - THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY**

**T. 11/27** THE NEW DEAL AND THE TRANSFORMATION OF AMERICAN FEDERALISM

**A NATION TRANSFORMED: THE UNITED STATES IN WORLD WAR II**

**(Who Built America?, ch. 10, pp. 482-539)**

**Th. 11/29** A WORLD AT WAR AND  "THE WAR OF THE WORLDS"

**T. 12/4** THE  "ARSENAL OF DEMOCRACY": WORLD WAR II, AMERICAN INDUSTRY, AND
DEMOGRAPHIC TRANSFORMATION

**Assigned Web-Link Readings:**

  * [Franklin D. Roosevelt, The Four Freedoms (1941)](http://www.wwnorton.com/college/history/ralph/workbook/ralprs36b.htm)

**Th. 12/6** (RE)DRAFTING GENDER: FIGHTING MEN AND ROSIE THE RIVETER

**T. 12/11** RACE  & WAR: ON THE HOMEFRONT AND ON THE BATTLEFIELD

**Short Paper Assignment #5:** Write a 3-4 page paper on some aspect of the
American experience of World War II using 3 letters of your choice from each
"Book" (total of 12) of Studs Terkel, "The Good War": An Oral History of World
War II. The focus of your paper is up to you. It is important though that your
paper have a point to make. For example, you might focus on differences
between and among men and women in their experience and memory of the war, or
you might focus on how the war changed America's position in the world as
reflected in Terkel's oral interviews, or you could reflect on the war and its
implications for civil rights, or you might consider how reading oral
interviews changed your understanding of the war . The possibilities are
really limitless. Be creative. Bear in mind that writing a good paper, will
require reading far more than 12 interviews. Your selection should reflect
care in framing a topic. Your paper should draw on relevant chapters from the
survey text and from class lecture and discussions. Please include a list of
the interviews on which you rely at the end of the paper (not included in page
limit). As always, keep direct quotations to a minimum. Citation format may be
either footnotes or parenthetical references.

**Th. 12/13** THE ATOMIC BOMB, DEMOBILIZATION, AND THE ROAD TO THE COLD WAR

**Th. 12/20 FINAL EXAM DUE** (no later than 5:00 p.m., 752 SST)

[Main](H3821.htm) | | | [Syllabus](3821syl.htm) | | | [Lectures](3821lec.htm)
| | | [Internet Resources](http://www.hist.umn.edu/%7Ehist20c/internet/index)
| | | top  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  |   |   |  

