**HIST 102: WORLD CIVILIZATION, 1100 to 1800**

**SYLLABUS, Spring 1998**



Carol Loats
Office Hours:  
Office: Psych 117
MW 10-12, W 3-4, T-Th 2-3  
549-2348
and by appointment

  **Important** : This syllabus spells out explicitly what you can expect from
this class, and what will be expected of you. Read everything on these pages
carefully, refer back to these pages frequently, and **complete all
assignments which are listed here** , unless otherwise instructed. If there is
anything which you do not understand, be sure to ask for clarification. If you
miss class, you are responsible for finding out about any additional
assignments or any changes in the syllabus.

_Course Description:_  

            "Nothing capable of being memorized is history. "  
                       R.G. Collingwood

            Covering the time period from approximately 1100 to 1800, this course selectively examines places and events which reveal the complexity of the past and its relevance to the present. The course is not about memorizing dates, events, or people's names. The course is about understanding the past by seeing connections and relationships between events, and by understanding the experiences of people who lived in different times and places, and had different perspectives. The structure and content of the course require you to learn by reading and listening, discussing and writing.

            Written assignments and exams will ask you to think, to organize your thoughts, and to write careful analyses; the focus will be on making connections, and understanding and expressing the complexity of the past, In essays written outside of class you will be asked to show your comprehension of some part of the past by responding to an assigned topic with your own words. Exams will cover both readings and lecture material through short and longer essays.



**_Readings:_**

1.            McKayl Hill, and Buckler, _A History of World Societies_ , custom version of Volume B, chapters 9 through 23, 4th edition, 1996. Below, this is referred to as "McKay."  
2.            Other required readings, usually on reserve, will be assigned for each discussion scheduled during the semester. Watch for handouts about these assignments,  
3.            Optional books available in the bookstore: A study guide, highly recommended, is specifically geared toward this course and the McKay text. _A Student's Guide to History_ , by Benjamin, is useful for success in any history course.



**Important Note** : Be sure that you have the custom version of volume B of
the McKay, with chapters _9_ through 23 (not the version that starts with
chapter 13).



**_Schedule and Reading Assignments_**

**     **READINGS ARE TO BE DONE BY THE DATE THEY ARE LISTED****

Jan. 12             INTRODUCTION

Jan. 14             Introduction and Background  
                         Read: Handout titled:    "How to Read the Evidence,  
                                                              from Andrea/Overfield, pp. P-l through P-16

 UNIT I             THE WORLD from about 1100 to about 1500

                          Jan. 16 The Islamic World (Southwest Asia, North Africa, Central Asia, etc  
                          Read: McKay, Ch. 9, with attention to pp. 262-283

Jan. 19               The Islamic World (cont.)  
                          Prepare a Culture Summary Worksheet for the Islamic world \- -see handouts

Jan. 21               South and East Asia. (India and China)  
                          Read : McKay, with attention to pp. 317-321, 325-333, and 336-343

Jan. 23               East Asia, Cont. (China and Japan)  
                          Prepare Culture Summary Worksheets for India and China see handouts

Jan. 26               Asia (cont.)  
**                          Discussion 1: Comparing Cultures** see
instructions  
                         Discussion worksheets due - see handouts

Jan. 28               Africa  
                          Read: McKay, Ch. 10, with attention to pp. 292-309  
                          Andrea/Overfield, pp. 48-52

Jan. 30               Africa (cont.)  
                           Prepare a Culture Summary Worksheet for Africa south of  
                           the Sahara - see handouts

Feb. 2               Europe: The Periphery, with attention to PP. 359-394  
                         Read: McKay, Ch.  
                         Prepare a Culture Summary Worksheet for Europe in about  
                         1300 \- see handouts; add to it as you learn  
                         more from McKay, Chapter 13

Feb. 4               Europe (cont.)  
                         Read : McKay, Ch. 13

Feb. 6               Europe (cont.)

Feb. 9                **Discussion 2: Court Chronicles**  
                         Read: on reserve, as assigned  
                         Discussion worksheets due - see handouts

Feb. 11            Americas  
                        Read : McKay, Ch. 14

Feb. 13           Americas (cont.)  
                       Prepare a Culture Summary Worksheet for the Americas  
                       see handouts

Feb. 16           **Discussion #3: Conceptions of "Barbarians"**  
                      Read: on reserve, as assigned  
                      Discussion worksheets due - see handout.

UNIT II        EUROPE from about 1500 to about 1800

Feb. 18         Europe - Intellectual and Religious Changes

Feb. 20         **FIRST MIDTERM**

Feb. 23        Europe - Intellectual and Religious Changes (cont.)  
                    Read : McKay, Ch. 15

Feb. 25       Europeans Join the World Economy  
                   Read : McKay, Ch. 16

Feb. 27       Europeans Join the World Economy (cont.)  
                   Begin worksheets for Europe, 1500 to 1800 see handouts

March 2     Europeans Join the World Economy (cont.)  
                    **Discussion #4: Clash of Cultures**  
                   Read: on reserve, as assigned  
                   Discussion worksheets due - see handout

March 4    European Politics  
                  Read : McKay, Ch. 17

March 6    European Politics (cont.)

March 9    Europe: Intellectual Changes  
                  Read : McKay, Ch, 18

March 11   Europe: Intellectual Changes (cont.)  
                   First formal essay due see handout for instructions

               UNIT III THE REST OF THE WORLD from about 1500 to 1800

March 13     Africa: Change and Continuity  
                     Finish Worksheets for Europe, 1500-1800

March 16     Africa (cont.)  
                     Read : McKay, Ch. 20

March 18     Africa (cont.)

March 20      **SECOND MIDTERM**

Mar. 24-28    SPRING BREAK

March 30      Islamic World: Glory and Decline in Three Empires  
                      Prepare Worksheets for Africa, 1500-1800 see handouts

April 1          Islamic World (cont.)  
                     Read: McKay, Ch. 21

April 3         Islamic World (cont.)  
                    Second formal essay due - see handout

April 6        Islamic World (cont.)  
                   Prepare worksheets for Islamic World, 1500-1800

April 8        East Asia: China  
                    Read: McKay, Ch. 22  
                    Andrea/Overfield, pp, 109-110, 226-229

April 10      East Asia (cont.)  
                    **Discussion #5: Travelers Tell Their Tales**  
                    Read: on reserve, as assigned  
                    Discussion written work due - see handout

April 13      East Asia (cont.)  
                   Prepare Worksheets for China, 1500-1800

April 15       East Asia: Japan  
                    Prepare Worksheets for China and Japan

April 17      Americas: Changes and New Connections

April 20      Social Structures in Comparative Perspective  
                    **Discussion #6: Comparing social Structures**  
                   Read: on reserve, as assigned  
                   Discussion written work due - see handout

April 22       Recap - Around the World

April 24       Conclusion

May 1         FINAL, EXAM, 8 am (be sure to check the official exam  
                    schedule to verify this)

**_Course Objectives :_**

1\.               The course will promote a basic familiarity with the history
of  
                  six regions of the world between 1100 and 1800.

2\.               The course will provide students with an experience of the  
                  process of history through the study of primary sources.

3\.               The course will encourage students to learn to read and
think  
                  more critically about the past, to develop skills of synthesis and                               
                  analysis, to make connections and see relationships between events of                               
                  the past, and to compare various societies, identifying key                               
                  similarities and differences.

4\.               The course will promote student consideration of issues of  
                  causation, both long and short term, and engage students in an                               
                  explicit analysis of change and continuity as simultaneous features                               
                  of human history.

5\.               The course will guide students to speak and write more
effectively.

6\.               The course will allow students to learn from each other by  
                  sharing insights and questions with one another in small discussion groups. 

Additional Important Information:

1)               Your grade in the course will be calculated as follows:

                            10 % discussions and related worksheets, etc.  
                            20 % two essays, 10% each  
                            10 % quizzes and miscellaneous  
                            10 % worksheets and  
                            30 % 15 % each Midterm  
                             _20 %_ Final  
                            100 %

2)               Discussions: Students participate in scheduled discussions in
small groups to analyze and evaluate selected topics based partly on primary
sources. Everyone will be a leader at least once, and a participant in each of
the other discussions.  
                            Students will be responsible for advance preparation for discussions. For each discussion scheduled, whether you are a leader or a participant, you are required to attend, and to bring with you worksheets which you have prepared according to instructions handed out in class. Be sure that you set handouts on the readings packets and discussion process early in the semester, as well as instructions for each individual discussion

3)               Attendance and Promptness: After assessing the successes of
students in previous history classes, it is apparent that those students who
come to class on a regular basis and do their reading assignments in a timely
fashion consistently show evidence of significant learning, and get good
grades. Only through regular attendance will you be on top of the material and
be able to fulfill the objectives of the class. Therefore, I expect you to be
here. Attendance will be taken frequently during the semester. Attendance is
required (no unexcused exceptions) for the scheduled discussions.  
                            The most important moments of each class session are usually the first and last few moments when upcoming assignments are mentioned and the day's material is introduced or summarized. For your own benefit, and as a courtesy to the instructor and to the rest of the class, you are expected to be present promptly at the beginning of the period and to stay throughout the period.

4)               Plagiarism is the act of using someone else's exact words, or
extensively paraphrasing someone else's ideas, as if they were yours (that is,
without giving credit to the author, book, or person you are "stealing" from).
Plagiarism is not allowed, and results in an F on an essay assignment. Your
essays should reflect your understanding of the material, and should be
written from your own head, after consulting with your notes and texts for
content (i.e., write with the book closed).

5)               Reminder: For this (and any) course at the university level
you can expect to work about 2 hours out of class for each hour in class, or
an average of 6 hours per week.

6)               If you need assistance in understanding anything on this
syllabus, or in fulfilling any of the requirements for the course, please see
me. Any student eligible for and needing academic adjustments or
accommodations because of a specific physical, psychiatric, or learning
disability is requested to speak with me about it no later than the end of the
second week of classes. I hope to see all of you regularly in my office as we
explore history together.

