**Introduction to Fatherhood: the Parent Role**

By using the term **father role** , we mean to invoke a strict sociological
definition, which is:

1) the **expected behavior** of one who holds or occupies father status (the
social position of father)  
2) the **actual behavior** exhibited by one who fills the father role.

The basic approach that we use in teaching and doing research on the family
makes use of these sociological devices because they allow us to illustrate
the reality of human social life using a type of conceptual shorthand. It goes
like this.

Individuals, when they are behaving purely like individuals, are pretty
useless for explaining the way life is. _However,_ when they are **performing
social roles** (i.e., mother, father, police officer, college professor,
student, administrator, politician, etc.) their behavior is as predictable as
their role demands. While we, as a society, carefully guard the rights of the
individual, in reality we are much more concerned with the welfare of the
whole group. It often seems like the opposite is true.

The reason for our concern over the welfare of the group has to do with our
need to feel safe and secure. **Individuals are socialized to perform many
highly specified roles** , one of which is that of spouse (one side of a
romantic dyad). Another is to fill roles in a family (a procreation group).
While your procreation group may have lived on a leafy street in the suburbs
of some urban center in America, or on a side street in an apartment in the
inner city, your family has a lot in common with all families living under
extremely different conditions in places here at home and far away. We have
phrases in our cultural language that point these **commonalities** out to us:

_"It's something every mother knows."_  
_"No father wants his children to go to war."_  
_"It doesn't matter that all your friends get to do it, you're my kid and the
answer is still 'No'."_  
_"You'll understand when you have children of your own!"_

Whether you live in a small town or big city, you have been socialized your
whole life to take up roles and act them out. Playing "house" as a child was
preparation (i.e., sociologists call this _anticipatory socialization_ ) for
the day when you might actually have a house, a spouse, and children of your
own to interact with for real. The movies you've watched, the television
programs you see, the books you've read, your whole culture is partially
geared toward mate selection, settling down, becoming productive, reproducing,
and sticking around for your children to take up their roles, first as
children, then as siblings, then teenagers with a strong sense of romanticism
and sensuality, lovers as part of a couple, part of a new family, and so on
until you are very old and wise grandparents. We even give you family oriented
toys to play with - well, we give girls such toys.

In virtually every culture since we've been documenting them, children are
given small versions of adult _role equipment_ to play with. Girls have some
kind of doll to play with, whether it is an expensive one that cries and wets
or a few corn shucks tied together with string. Boys are usually given toy
weapons and tools. On the face of it, this seems like society is "teaching"
girls to be mommies and boys to be providers; and if we look only at one or
two generations of children, the analysis stops there.

However, if we can manage to see the history of childhood with a wider lens,
and take in other cultures and other times into our analysis, the differences
we perceive between boys and girls makes a little more sense.

For example, in "primitive societies", little boys are shown how to make tiny
bows and arrows which they use to play "hunting" games (in anticipation of the
day when they will have to become providers for their family group). It could
be argued that these weapon-toys are really more tool than destructive
implement. The tools of adults in hunting and gathering societies are weapon-
like, while the tools of an industrialized society might be a little less
weapon, and a lot more tool in form and function. As societies advance into
industrialized modes, the weapon-toy remains, and is diversified as the
knowledge base (what a culture knows about the rest of the world) increases.
Parents can still purchase toy archery sets for their children, but they can
also purchase more complicated tool-toys, such as professional "kits" like
construction toys, tool boxes, chemistry sets, and medical bags.

When society takes a turn _away from industrialization toward the information
age_ , the weapon-toys persist, as do the tool boxes, but new advances are
added, such as electronic toys that teach life skills for a technological age
- personal computers, a plethora of children's media (i.e., books, story
cassettes, videotape). Girls still have dolls and kitchen equipment, but they
also compete for use of the family computer. Today, while gender roles have
merged to some degree, society still hangs on to the notion of boys taking on
the traditional role of becoming providers, girls one day becoming fairly
traditional nurturers, and both entering into a family commitment.

Toys are but one means by which society attempts to insure that children will
be prepared to have their own families, and will want to have their own
families. The family is important to all societies because it is the **central
group** in all societies. **Groups make up Institutions** where social codes
for behavior are defined, and Institutions comprise a **Society**. In a
paradoxical way, society is set up _so that most individual needs are met
through the institution of the family_. Child becomes adult because of the
nurturance, instruction, skill development, and training received as a result
of being a family member. This is the design of society: ![](parsons.gif)

In return for loyalty to government, families are protected from harm. By and
large, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration sees to it that parents can trust
the food they buy for their family's consumption. By and large, the Government
is designed to reduce the chance of catastrophe, and increase the opportunity
for the "pursuit of happiness".

In return for faith in Religious tenets, families are provided with comfort
when things happen to them that they cannot understand. In return for our
labor, the Economy provides us with the means to buy goods and services that
we perceive as necessary.

In return for our support of Education, families are assured that their
children will be trained in skills they can sell to elements of the economy.
Of course, the model doesn't work for every single individual; however, it is
designed to do so.

Individuals are concerned with **their own personal development and individual
needs**. They are, by definition, selfish. People acting out roles in couples
are concerned with the development of their relationship and interpersonal
needs. They are, by definition, oriented toward each other. **Couples with
children are concerned with the development of the group and family needs.**
The family has to have a wider vision by which to view its purpose and
meaning.

Institutions are concerned with the development of large scale entities, such
as THE FAMILY as a working concept. Here rules for initiating, maintaining and
ending family relationships are held. Finally there is Society, which is
interested in social development on an even larger, global scale. Now, one of
the ways society tries to insure that individuals are given opportunities to
develop is by **evolving functional roles through institutions for groups to
follow and teach to individuals**.

Think about social development from the individual's point of view. Over time,
individual members of society seek to achieve social positions ( **status)**
in many areas. **With each new status acquisition comes new role
expectations** (i.e., child, sibling, student, scholar, athlete, lover,
spouse, political activist, skilled worker, expert in one's field, etc.).
Depending on the quality and extent of individual development and anticipatory
role training, a person may enter into a relationship in a given society, with
given cultural expectations for each and every one of its members. If that
role relationship is well defined and accurately depicted during
socialization, chances are the individual will successfully complete training
and be able to perform the role adequately.

At the individual level, there are certain needs that must be met for normal
maturation and development to take place. Almost immediately, the infant needs
sensory contact with other human beings. This is the infant's need for social
interaction. Therefore, closely tied to individual needs are interpersonal
needs. In fact, our society takes interpersonal needs into account by
providing approved rules and regulations for social roles such as father,
mother, husband, and wife.

**There are problems with all this.** The biggest one is that the approved
rules and regulations aren't written down anywhere, except for the broadest of
legal proscriptions. Therefore, they change from generation to generation, and
by nuance from subculture to subculture.

For example,  
In 1880, social science was absolutely sure that males of all species were
physiologically incapable of nurturing the offspring. In 1945, we were
completely sure that "maternal deprivation" was the cause of maladaptive
behavior in adolescents and other criminals. As the new century approaches,
social science is now absolutely sure that the absence of a father in the life
of a child is the single most powerful predictor of a whole host of bad
endings.

**Another big problem** is that _society's needs often are in conflict with
the needs of families and family members (individuals)_. We continue to assert
the importance of full time parenting for optimal child development, which is
generally taken to mean full time motherhood. Several times in our nation's
history, we have asked women to bear half or more of the production force of
our economy, while still being responsible for the development of their
children. Currently, in order to fight inflation of the dollar, _the U.S.
economy requires both husband and wife in intact families to work full time to
maintain middle class status_.

This means that mothers might have to work outside the home and NOT be
available for enhancing developmental experiences for their children. This
would be just fine if fathers would simply do their part of the parenting ...
but the don't seem to be willing. In other words, what is good for the
economy, or the government, or religion, or the educational system is often
not good for families.

In 1945, we thought we knew exactly what men and women, husbands and wives,
fathers and mothers were supposed to do and how they were supposed to behave
in public and private. Today, we know that any human being of adolescent age
or older is _capable of learning_ the skills necessary to nurture healthy,
happy infants to maturity. Gender of the caregiver has nothing to do with
one's ability to parent. **Adequate training for the occupation of the status
of parent is the key.** In other words, the "facts" are constantly changing.

The role of the father is discussed at length here, using the sociological
principle of social roles as a guide. By the end, the reader will have been
exposed to a wide range of theory and research dealing with the father and his
place in the family, and will have read an approximate history of the
evolution of the role of father in America. All this information is intended
to foster a further understanding of fathers, mothers, children, and families.
The reader will also have traced the past, present and future direction that
the family and our society are heading.

* * *

  
**Role of Fathers in the Family, 1992**  
Center for Early Education, University of Minnesota, 226 Child Development, 51
E. River Road, Minneapolis, MN 55455 Phone: 612/624-5780 MN Children, Youth &
Family Consortium Electronic Clearinghouse. Permission is granted to create
and distribute copies of this document for non-commercial purposes provided
that the author and MN CYFCEC receive acknowledgment and this notice is
included. Phone: 612/626-9582;
EMAIL:[cyfcec@staff.tc.umn.edu](mailto:cyfcec@staff.tc.umn.edu) from Early
Report Volume 20, Number 1 Fall, 1992

About Fathers by Charles L. Smith, Jr.

The Prenatal Exposure to Drugs (PED) Program recently made a commitment to
expand its primary focus on young children and mothers to include
consideration of the role of fathers in the family. Because none of the
fathers of the children in the program serves as the primary parent, our goal
was to discover the factors keeping these fathers from their significant
others. We wanted to explore such factors as drugs, unemployment, lack of
education, the system, or a lack of motivation and responsibility.To learn
about the fathers in the PED Program, I interviewed seven men, asking
questions about their perspectives of their role as "father."

All seven were chemically dependent; each had come to a point when he had to
go through drug treatment. They were from dysfunctional families, some did
drugs with family members, and most of the men had been incarcerated for one
reason or another. Many never had their fathers in the home-their mothers had
total responsibility. The interview questions were very difficult for these
young men to answer. Having no role models and few parenting skills, many were
in situations where the child's mother had total responsibility. The men
wanted to change that, but they had no idea how to do it.

  1. When asked what they know about young children, participants felt they didn't know much about parenting, but felt children needed love. They all said that children learn from what they see. They were concerned about their children's environment, but when drugs were their primary concern, their children's safety, well-being, and environment lost importance.
  2. Regarding who should be responsible for protecting and nurturing their children, each said both parents have responsibility.
  3. They saw the major role of parents as nurturing, protecting, and making things better. One father responded, "Being there." When I asked why they weren't there, they said drugs made them do it. Many are currently going to parenting classes.
  4. They all want to accept the responsibility of being a father and be the provider, protector, and teacher. At the time of the mothers pregnancies, many used drug dealing as a means to provide a lifestyle without considering consequences. They claimed they gave love, but none of them accepted the responsibility of building a solid foundation by changing his lifestyle. None of these fathers are currently married.
  5. When asked who assumes responsibility for nurturing, protecting, and guiding, those still with the mother said both did. Those not with the mothers said they both should be but agreed the mother actually has total responsibility. For most, these responses have been learned recently in parenting classes, during which joint responsibility is discussed.
  6. When comparing the family structure when they were children to that of their children's present family structure, many said it was the same_no father present in the home. One participant who has children in multiple relationships said, "It's not nearly the same. I'm there for her (the baby), and me and her mother are raising her. My two sons situation is the same as mine when I was a kid. I'm giving time, but not as much as I want."
  7. With respect to how the service delivery system is helping them to become better parents, the men felt the system stifles them with rigid rules and regulations. Many felt they received no assistance in developing or maintaining relationships to keep their families together in a self-sustaining fashion.
  8. According to the fathers, drugs, greed, machoism, and the system prevented them from establishing a family with the children's mothers. Some had specific issues with women and were mad at their mothers and sisters. Some had unstable relationships with the children's mothers.
  9. As a final question, the fathers were asked what they could do at this time to bring them together with the mothers. The answers varied widely. Some said parenting groups and family counseling could help. One said he no longer had a relationship with the mother, and any attempt would be a waste of time. One participant attempting to make a relationship work responded by stating, "Understanding that everyday will not be a good day. Being patient and not expecting things to always go my way." and "Marriage."

This group of men feels ill-equipped to fulfill the role of father, having had
poor role models growing up. The pressures of day-to-day life, including
exposure to the drug culture, interfere with establishing a strong family
base. The interactions the fathers have with their children do not encompass
all of the responsibilities of parents. The fathers role is often unreal and
becomes self-serving. They visit, bring gifts, and play. Mothers are
responsible for discipline and establishing regulations. This, in turn, leads
to disagreements between the mothers and fathers and disintegration of the
family structure. Finally, these fathers felt the service delivery system was
rigid and controlling and lacked adequate focus on long-term maintenance of
family relationships.

* * *

  
**Raising the Standards for Good Fathering.**  
by Glen F. Palm.  
Published in Family Information Services, September, 1995.  
Resources for professionals who work with parents and families 800 852 8112

There are many current efforts to illuminate and support good fathering in
contemporary US culture. The "raising of standards" for fathers has been a
theme promoted by many different groups including the Promise-Keepers (1995),
Jesse Jackson (1994), Blankenhorn (1995) and the National Fatherhood
Initiative. The confusion about good fathering has been exacerbated by social
changes and the recent emphasis on family and cultural diversity. Family
professionals may find themselves caught between various perspectives about
good fathering.

The emphasis on cultural and family diversity moves us towards a relativist
view (Kipnis, 1987) of good fathering (e.g., Hanson & Bozett, 1985). From a
relativist perspective we may be reluctant to make a judgment about good
fathering unless a father has clearly crossed the boundaries of abandonment or
abuse. Feminist perspectives (e.g., Hochschild, 1989 and Ehrenseft, 1990)
suggest a new standard based on the ethic of gender equality with equal
household work and child care work as a measure of good fathering.

Blankenhorn (1995) in his social critique of contemporary fatherhood
reconstructs "the good family man" as his definition of the good father. This
view begins to move us towards a more Absolutist view of good fathering. The
"good family man" must be a provider, protector, partner in the family
workload and is a spiritual/moral leader. Blankenhorn's view raises a specific
set of standards that incorporates many of the roles fathers have played
throughout history. He pushes us towards a more Absolutist view by prescribing
roles that appear to exclude men who do not fit rigid definitions of the best
family structure and religious beliefs. The standards are clear and high and
include a number of important functions of good fathering yet they may exclude
men who are striving to do good fathering in difficult circumstances. Both
Blankenhorn and the Promise Keeper's movement remind us of the importance of
raising standards for good fathering at a time when our standards are fuzzy at
best.

As family educators we need to work towards a middle ground understanding that
doesn't prescribe good fathering from a narrow moral perspective yet does not
avoid the task of clarifying good fathering because family life is too complex
and too diverse to develop meaningful standards. This article will begin to
address the issue of raising standards by defining good fathering as an
ethical issue and exploring the roles and strategies that family educators can
employ to support a careful examination of good fathering.

One of the important learnings about fathering has been to define fathering as
a process. The ethics of good fathering has to recognize that the focus of
fathering is on the evolving relationship between father and child not a
static set of roles. I have found myself challenged by experiences with a
variety of men who do not meet the role requirements of a "good family man"
yet appear to be working towards good fathering. For example the seventeen
year old father in prison who brightens when he talks about his 6 week old
daughter. His toughness begin to melt as he describes his recent visit with
her and his delight with her first smiles. The depth of his caring is apparent
as is his inability to be a provider or to share in the day-to-day care
taking. I begin to ask myself, "Can men do good fathering from behind bars?"

When I reflect on Blankenhorn's set of roles as an effort to set high
standards and I agree with the general thrust yet they miss this budding
expression of good fathering. The dilemma here is wanting to set high
standards for all fathers and wanting to affirm and support the efforts of the
seventeen year old father in prison. It becomes clear that we need more than
role prescriptions to help us to define, understand and support good
fathering.

* * *

**Good Fathering as an Ethical Issue** \- Recent work with ethics in family
education (Palm, 1994) has emphasized the importance of bringing different
perspectives to understanding ethical issues. Three very different approaches
to ethics were identified and can be applied to the ethical question "What is
good fathering?"

  1. Relational ethics can help to describe the caring relationship that all fathers should both initiate and nurture with their children.
  2. Virtue ethics cafe help to think about good fathering in terms of dispositions that men need to do good fathering. More specifically, what are the critical characteristics that help men in a variety of family contexts to do good fathering.
  3. Ethical guidelines are those general principles that guide men towards good fathering.

These guidelines may be the closest to the current interest in setting higher
standards for fathers and father involvement. These three views of ethics can
help us to reflect on good fathering in a constructive manner. They will not
eliminate complexity or controversy but they do provide guidance and describe
virtues that assist men in good fathering even in difficult situations.

Some examples of specific applications of these perspectives will serve as a
heuristic device to stimulate thinking about the ethical issue of defining
good fathering. A. Relational Ethics - The principles of relational ethics for
good fatherhood might include:

  1. The father as an adult has the responsibility to initiate a caring relationship and to work to maintain a positive relationship with his children.
  2. The father should be sensitive to the developmental needs of the child and adjust his support to reflect growing independence and interdependence.
  3. The father-child relationship exists in the context of a larger family system. Fathers have a responsibility maintain and nurture a healthy family system.

Virtue Ethics - What are the dispositions that fathers would find essential in
contemporary society to do good fathering? 1\. Commitment  
2\. Caring  
3\. Moral Leadership

Ethical Principles for Good Fathering. These are general guidelines for the
conduct of good fathering.

  * 1\. Relationships with Children
    * a. Children need a stable base of unconditional love from fathers
    * b. Children need moral leadership and guidance from fathers.
  * c. Fathers must respect and be sensitive to a child's individual needs and differences.
  * 2\. Relationships with Partner (Child's Mother)
    * a. Responsibility for children must be shared in an equitable manner where partners negotiate the meaning of equity.
    * b. Differences in child rearing styles should be resolved in a respectful manner.
    * c. Clear and ongoing communication with partner is essential.
  * 3\. Relationships with Community
    * a. Father has a responsibility to provide for child's physical and psychological needs.
    * b. Father has the responsibility to provide a safe environment for children at home and in his neighborhood.

These are just a few examples of how each different approach to ethics could
be used to describe concrete standards for good fathering behavior. The three
approaches provide a way to address and raise standards that balances the
tendency towards either relativism or absolutism.

Responsibilities of Family Educators -The primary responsibility of family
educators is to begin to collaborate with parents, especially fathers in
exploring the ethics of good fathering. Raising the standards for good
fathering should not be the domain of professional experts or spiritual
leaders but should involve all members of the community especially fathers.
The following list of roles and strategies is provided as a place to begin the
discussion of higher standards.

  1. Engage men in a dialogue about good fathering. This can be done as a specific topic or can be interwoven throughout a series of classes. The concepts of absolutist versus relativist perspectives should be introduced so a informed and respectful dialogue can take place that avoids the pitfall of these extremes.
  2. Explore the dilemmas about the meaning of good fathering in a variety of family contexts. provide stories or case studies to point out the importance of the process of good fathering versus prescribed roles.
  3. Discuss the virtues that men need to be good fathers in contemporary society. Ask the group to generate a list of virtues and then focus on the 3-4 most important characteristics that men need to do good fathering. This view supports men to strive to be virtuous and realize that good fathering is an ongoing developmental process that needs constant attention. A description of virtues also can be affirming to fathers.
  4. Advocate for both formal and informal support systems that will assist fathers in a variety of family contexts and situations to practice good fathering. Maintaining positive relationships between father and children can be difficult in the best of situations. Non-custodial, fathers, single fathers, fathers in prison, fathers who are unemployed may all need additional support and information to do good fathering.
  5. Initiate a community dialogue that goes beyond absolutist prescriptions as the only recipe for raising standards for good fathering. This process should include other professional, community leaders and fathers in affirming the need for good fathering and raising the expectations for men in concrete ways. An inventory of community resources for fathers may also become part of this process. Raising standards for good fathering must be accompanied by communities providing education and support for men as they strive to do good fathering.

* * *

  
**The Father and the Masculine Life Cycle** by David Gutmann November 1991 An
Institute for American Values Working Paper for the Symposium on Fatherhood in
America. Publication No.: W.P. 13 _The Human Father and the Masculine Life
Cycle Introduction: An Approach to the Natural History of Fatherhood._

The main argument of this paper is that fathers are not only important in the
early years of a man's life; rather, fathers are necessary to men's well-being
and civility at all major transition points across the whole masculine life-
cycle. The versions of the father vary, depending on the season of life. Thus,
the phrasings of paternity vary from the biological father in childhood to the
collective fathers, the "city fathers," in young manhood, and the fathers of
all creation, the immortal gods, in old age. As life goes on, the fathers
become more abstract and more remote; but whatever their nature, all of these
fathers play a common role: they kindle in males the psychic strength that
they need to accomplish vital transitions, across the life span.

This thesis is based on evidence from developmental psychology, from
psychoanalysis, and from cultural anthropology, including my own comparative
field work among Amerindian, Mayan, and Middle-Eastern groups (Gutmann, 1987).
I have relied on special perspectives to highlight the great regularities
around fatherhood that are latent in such data. In particular, I use the
psychoanalytic perspective on human development; I will start this essay by
discriminating that perspective from other viewpoints and by justifying its
use in this case.

**Three Approaches to Understanding Fatherhood**

The great anthropologist Ralph Linton once remarked (194S), "In some ways,
each man is like all other men; in some ways, each man is like some other men;
and in some ways, each man is like no other men." (Nowadays, Linton's language
has a sexist ring, but that's how the man said it.) Linton was referring to
the major orders of human experience. His first level _ each man like all men
_ refers to our common, universal ways of underwriting individual and species
survival. Linton's second level _ each man like some others _ refers to the
fact that we share common language, common culture, and common ways of
achieving language and culture with a few socially selected members of our
species. This level refers also to the ways in which we act so as to preserve
society and to maintain ourselves as social beings in the eyes of our fellows.
Linton's Level Three _ each man like no others _ refers to the ways in which
we experience ourselves and maintain ourselves as unique and special,
different even from those with whom we share a common culture.

For reasons that I hope to make clear, the father's most crucial functions
must be studied via the methods and instruments that are fitted to the
universals, to Level One. However, Level One perspectives are currently out of
fashion: they remind us of forces that operate beyond conscious control, even
as they influence the direction and content of awareness and conscious
thinking. The tectonic forces that drive Level One experience signal us that _
as Bruno Bettelheim once said _ "We are not the masters even in our own mental
house." To consider Level One phenomena is to receive a narcissistic wound;
and so in our narcissistic age these levels of experience are avoided and left
out of our usually orthodox behavioral science. Instead, the father's role is
critiqued from the discipline and methods of Level Two, which is sociology and
cultural anthropology, or from the ideology (actually, the politically correct
theology) of Level Three, which is Humanistic Psychology. According to the
sociologists of the family, fathers who insist on playing a special,
authoritative role, distinct from mothers, are not serving their children,
they are oppressing their women. And humanistic psychologists also deplore the
authoritative father: he is, they fear, expressing masculine needs to be
dominant and "phallocentric" at the expense of his wife's individuality and
"self actualization."

Thus, on the best campuses (and especially the best) biological paternity _
the special male role in procreation _ has been split off in theory from the
social condition of fatherhood. Biological paternity is admittedly a fact of
nature; but fatherhood, as a special condition with its own scope, powers, and
responsibilities, is regarded by mainstream social scientists as a purely
social invention: a ploy of corrupt patriarchy, a violation of nature.

And now we find that too many men, happy to be let off the hook, have heard
the liberating message from academia: they are helping to conceive more babies
and more candidates for abortion than ever before, but they are too often
refusing to be trustworthy, strong, and responsible fathers. According to the
new dispensation, this liberation of men from bondage to the patriarchal ideal
should lead to the liberation of women. It has not: for as men defect from
traditional versions of fatherhood, they also defect from the tested
arrangements of marriage _ and from marriage per se. As a consequence, too
many women are left alone with the kids in single-parent families. Women are
more oppressed than ever: the patriarch has gone, but so are the special
rations of security and companionship that he provided. Clearly then, the
sociological and humanistic revisions of fatherhood are not working. Instead,
it seems that the traditional phrasings of fatherhood were more than
expressions of oppressive male politics; it appears that they too were an
extension rather than a refutation of the same kinds of natural law that also
governed biological paternity.

Clearly, if we are going to develop some real answers, beyond political
correctitude, to the important questions _ what is the father's special
contribution to parenting; and what do men get out of fathers? _ we will have
to forage through the data of Level One, the grammar of human universals.

**Fatherhood: Closeness through Distance**

Species Survival _ the major issue of the first level _ is underwritten by
adequate patenting, by the kind of parenting that raises children to be good
parents in their turn, down the generations. Erik Erikson once remarked that
the long dependency of the human child is the crucial agenda for human
development at all ages. The unique features of human parenthood, including
the distinctive features of patemal and matemal roles, are also shaped by that
same great constant _ the unique vulnerability of our children. A guiding idea
of this paper is that the forms of paternity and maternity are not expressions
of power politics between the sexes but are evolved adaptations to the special
requirements of the weak and needy human child. Appropriately then, before we
address the matter of fatherhood, we should first address its larger context:
the special needs, universal across our species, of our at-risk offspring.

Different societies do aim at their own distinctive child rearing goals, but
they nevertheless maintain common understandings about the basic needs that
must be addressed by any child-care regime. Thus, if it is to thrive by any
reasonable criteria, the vulnerable human child must be assured of two kinds
of parental nurturance: it must be given some assurance of physical security
and also of emotional security. There is also a general recognition, across
our species, that the same parent cannot adequately provide both kinds of
security. The child's physical security ultimately depends on activities
carried out far from home: warfare, hunting (including the modern version of
the hunt, for business and clients), and the cultivation of distant tillage.
Far from home on their lawful occasions, fathers cannot be reliable sources of
emotional nurture. Men are generally assigned the task of providing physical
security on the perimeter, not because they are more privileged, but because
they are more expendable. Thus, in the hard calculus of species survival,
there is typically an oversupply of males, in that one man can inseminate many
females, but women, on the average, can gestate only one child about every two
years during their relatively brief period of fertility. The surplus males,
those over the number required to maintain viable population levels, can be
assigned to the dangerous, high-casualty "perimeter" tasks on which physical
security and survival are based. "When it comes to slaughter, you do not send
your daughter" is one of our most predictable human rules; and there are
unassailably good reasons for it. By the same token, the sex on whom the
population level ultimately depends is less expendable; thus, women are
generally assigned to secure areas, there to supply the formative experiences
that give rise to emotional security in children.

George Murdoch's (1935) tables, based on ethnographic data from 224
subsistence-level societies, indicate that any productive or military activity
requiring a protracted absence from the home _ hunting, trapping, herding,
deep-sea fishing, offensive and defensive warfare _ is performed almost
exclusively by males. Activities carried out closer to home _ dairy farming,
erecting and dismantling shelters, harvesting, tending kitchen gardens and
fowl are sometimes exclusive to men, more often exclusive to women, but are in
most instances carried out by both sexes. However, hearthside activities,
particularly those having to do with preserving and preparing food, are almost
exclusively the province of women.

These Murdoch findings cannot be adequately interpreted by Level Two thinkers;
a work site by gender distribution that is so predictable, across so many
different kinds of societies, cannot be explained by sociology alone. These
findings can only point to a species regularity, an expression of our bio-
psychological nature, and not to some pan-social masculine conspiracy to keep
women in their place. Incontestably, men are creatures of the perimeter; and
in the remainder of this paper we will consider the ways in which this and
other central dimensions of masculinity play out in the versions of fatherhood
that are encountered and enacted across the life cycle of men. This special
role of the father, to be close from a distance, reveals itself soon after the
infant's birth. Thus, basing her argument on cross-cultural research, Niles
Newton (1973) asserts that mothers are central in the experience of the infant
_ whether a boy or a girl _ and that fathers play an auxiliary, supportive
post-natal function. Newton argues that coitus, birth, and lactation _ the
three major expressions of female sexuality _ are also strikingly vulnerable,
prone to shut down in the face of outer threat. In order to reach their
reproductive goal, these maternal activities all require external buffering
and protection, most often provided by men. Newton cites ethnographic
descriptions of young mothers in South Africa, the Middle Eastand China, all
pointing to a standard pattern of matemal engrossment with the infant, in an
intense bond that can persist through the first years of the child's life. At
all these sites, the infant sleeps next to the mother, is nursed at the first
sign of restlessness- and nursing takes precedence over any potentially
competing activity. The mother can devote herself almost exclusively to
nurturing the child because she herself is being nurtured, "mothered" by her
husband. The father's task is to maintain a protected zone, one in which his
gratified and secure spouse can bring about the mother-child enmeshment that
is so necessary to the infant's early emotional development. The father may
not be on the physical periphery of his community, but he is, at this point,
on the emotional periphery of his family, relatively excluded from the intense
mother-infant link. At this early but crucial period, the father connects to
the mother-infant dyad through intermediaries: he tends to identify,
vicariously, with the mothering that his child receives from his wife _ and
with the "mothering" that his wife receives from him.

**Achieving Distance via the Father**

At the outset of life, this mother-child merger _ a continuation in
psychological terms of the intrauterine umbilical link _ is necessary for the
infant's future psyche-social development, which must be away from the mother.
Assured of a stable home base, the infant can begin to explore its world and
to provoke change in it. Thus, human development proceeds by paradox, in a
dialectical fashion: the almost exclusive mother-child bonding that is so
crucial in the first year of life prepares for its own negation, in the period
of early autonomy, during which the child practices psychological and physical
separation from the mother. During this pivotal exploratory period, the linear
arrangement of the family _ father tends the mother, mother tends kids _
begins to break down and the father, because he is different from the mother,
because he betokens the desired distance from Mom, and because in his own way
he also nurtures, becomes a psychological "object," a presence in the
emotional life of the separating child. The linear arrangement gives way to
the family triangle: daughters fall in love with their daddies; and sons _
even while they revere him _ take the father as a kind of rival for the
mother's affection. In either case, in step with the child's development, the
father's role in the family has taken on a new and special meaning: as an
alternate, less proximal figure of strength and provision, one who matches the
child's growing need for distance, he becomes a magnet, a way station on the
child's road outward to the world, and away from an unboundaried union with
the mother.

The father is still majorly responsible for providing physical security, but
at this point _ even under conditions of affluence and assured supplies _ he
can become a vital agent in the child's emotional life. If the father can
maintain a vivid and distinctive presence, then at this time of early mother-
child separation, he will support the maturation of daughters as well as sons.

But on the whole, sons have a more pressing need to separate psychologically
from the mother. There are good reasons for this gender difference: if the
species is to continue, daughters are much more likely than sons to follow _
at least for some significant period _ the mother's domestic and biological
destiny; the daughter can continue to know herself as the mother's daughter
without significantly prejudicing her future adult role, as a mother in her
own right. But sons are pointed towards a different fate, towards a life on
some version of the perimeter, beyond the edge of the mother's domestic world.
From here on, we will concentrate on the male career, and on how he gets
there.

Like daughters, boys start out as creatures of the domestic world, as sons of
their mothers; but early on, they must diminish their ties to her and prepare
for the extra-domestic paternal role, in large part among men. At some point,
the son has to redefine himself, from being the son of his mother to being the
son of his father. This crucial baptism can only come about if the father is
strong in his own right, and different from the mother. Because he is strong,
because he has exclusive sexual rights with the mother, because he is invested
in the son, then he is worthy of the son's love, but also of his envy.
Eventually, realizing that he cannot defeat the father and that it is too
dangerous to even try, the son will abandon the Oedipal rivalry, and will
attempt instead to acquire the father's envied strength in more realistic
ways: through identification, imitation, and apprenticeship, rather than by
conquest. He comes to terms with the paradox of male power: by submitting to
the father's discipline and authority, the son can eventually inherit his
power. Given some assurance, via his internal "father," the super ego, that he
is in touch with the father's powers, the son begins to feel the glow of
strength and resource in himself. Given this assurance, that he could survive
_ psychologically, at least _ on his own, the son can begin to accomplish the
necessary detachment from the mother: he will still love and respect her; but
he will no longer desperately need her.

Summing up, in order to separate from the mother, in order to eventually be a
provider to others, the son needs a father whose strengths distinguish him
from the mother's, and in spheres that are socially separate, and often
physically distant, from the mother's domain.

A recent study by Gutmann and Huyck (1991) based on in-depth data from older,
stable families in a Chicago suburb, supports the argument: fathers who are
absent in the emotional sense, fathers who are "maternal" rather than
distinctively paternal, fathers who are the mother's androgynous twin cannot
foster the boy's developmental transition from being mother's son to being
father's son. Sons of physically or psychologically absent fathers do separate
from the mother in the physical and social sense: they leave home, they find
girlfriends or wives; but because they have not separated in the psychological
sense, they bring the maternal transference with them into the marriage, and
turn their spouse into another "mom." This special arrangement can stabilize
these dependent men, but only if the wife cooperates and only as long as the
supply of maternal surrogates lasts. But even crisis, in the form of
aggravated adolescent rebellion. Particularly in traditional societies, the
whole age-grade of male elders is mobilized to back up the father's threatened
authority, to help the boy complete the migration away from the mother, and to
turn him back towards the perimeter and towards the ways of men. The
biological father helps the son achieve the first vital separation, from the
mother; the collective fathers are required to bring about the second great
separation: from the family as a whole and even from the physical precincts of
the home community.

Now, the pubertal son deals not only with his own father but with his father's
colleagues, the elders and fathers of his community _ and ultimately, through
them, with the ancestral fathers of his people. The collective fathers arrange
an ordeal, a rite de passage, through which the pubertal son is consecrated to
these various forms of paternity. The rite de passage takes as many forms as
there are distinct cultures; it can range from penile subincision with cowry
shells as practiced by Papuan natives, to the Bar Mitzvah ceremonial of
Orthodox Jews. But in all cases, the young candidates are exposed to a trial,
usually under the attentive, critical gaze of the assembled senior men, who
watch for signs of weakness. Whiting and Child (1953) found that the severity
of the ordeal varied, across cultures, with the length of the breast-feeding
period. Because the ritual is a passage away from the mother, and since late
weaning implies a strong maternal bond, then a stringent ordeal is required to
break it. By the same token, if the boy is too visibly frightened or tearful,
then he has not passed the test: he has cried for his mother, he still belongs
to her world, and he has not been reborn _ as a father's son and junior
colleague _ into the company of men. But if the lad endures with some grace
and fortitude, then he has begun to make it as a man: he is one of the "twice
born," adopted as a son of the collective fathers and as an age-grade brother
of the initiates who have endured with him. Success in the passage ritual
demonstrates that the young man has the fortitude necessary for risky
assignments beyond the boundaries of the community. But besides testing his
fitness, the rite de passage provides the initiate with "brothers": the age
class of young men who are bonded to him through the ritual, and who represent
the piece of the community that will go with him on his journeys beyond its
borders.

But even more important, the ritual begins the attachment to some totemic
sponsor, whose-supernatural powers _ his "medicine" or his mana _ will also
provide the initiate with luck and protection on the road. In other words, the
rite de passage extends the idea of paternity beyond the biological father,
into the collectivity of community elders, andfinally beyond them to the
ultimate fathers _ the spiritualized ancestors and the mythic fathers of the
people and their world.

Typically, a culture is rooted in an origin myth: a story of how the People,
at a time of trial and supreme danger were sponsored, rescued, and rendered
special by the intervention of unordinary _ usually supernatural _ beings. The
typical puberty ritual recapitulates this drama: like his people in the origin
myth, the candidate is also in a liminal condition, a state of emergency, and
if he survives the ordeal, it is because he too _ like his folk in the
founding myth _ has found favor with a totemic sponsor. As a young child, he
became for a time the son of his natural father; now, as a youth, he becomes _
via the ritual _ the protege of some favoring deity. The earlier, post-Oedipal
alliance with the biological father endowed the son with some sense of inner
resource, allowing him to separate from the protective mother. This later
affiliation with the spiritual fathers gives the son the courage that he needs
to separate, physically, from the community as a whole: from the nurturing
mothers again, from the biological fathers, and from the community foster
fathers, as well. More importantly, the cosmic connection refreshes the
candidate's sense of inner resource _ the conviction of having captured some
substance of the totemic fathers _ that will help him to become, with
confidence, a father in his own right. Knowing that he can leave the home and
the community, knowing that he can live off his own psychic substance, and
even be a source of security for others, the son can look towards mating,
marriage, and fatherhood.

Like his father before him, he can court a woman, he can attempt the
frightening but exciting voyage into her body, and _ secure in his manhood _
he can return to the domestic world, the world of women, of the mothers, not
as a needy child, but as a mate and as a providing father.

Erik Erikson once remarked that deprivation per se is not psychologically
destructive; it is only deprivation without meaning, without redeeming
significance, that is psychologically destructive. Human cultures, whatever
particular forms they might take, have a great and universal function: to
endow the routine sacrifices of human parenthood with high significance and
dignity. Without culture _ as we can see all around us _ children are at risk,
and too often from their own resentful parents. But when the young man has
been linked _ through his father and through the rituals managed by the
fathers _ to some part of the myth on which his culture is founded, then he
too can become an adequate father. Rather than seeming to limit his freedoms,
the state of fatherhood will grant him a special dignity, an identity,
precisely because of the significant sacrifices that this condition demands.

**The World without Fathers**

I have briefly outlined the developmental stages and the universal practices
whereby biological, social, and totemic fathers turn sons in their turn into
fathers. But what happens when _ as in our American case _ this transmission
belt of the father's substance into the sons breaks down?

There appear to be four major outcomes; and minor qualifications aside, none
of them are good. Thus, poorly fathered sons are less likely to separate from
their mothers; as a consequence, fearing entrapment, young men become so
vulnerable to women that they end by avoiding them, brutalizing them, or both.
Inadequately fathered young men inseminate women but avoid fatherhood. Lacking
a good superego, these men find strength not in the law but in criminality,
and much of their violence is pointed at women. Father's sons may patronize
women, but they also protect them; it is the "Mama's boys" who are most likely
to prove their manhood _ as in the "fatherless" inner city _ by savaging
women. They violate those who represent, outwardly, the shameful, feminine
part of themselves.

Finally, in ever increasing numbers, young men stay home with their mothers,
but they do not _ by becoming fathers in their own right _ help daughters in
their turn to become mothers.

The deconstruction of fatherhood in our own society can lead to abortive,
often destructive attempts to achieve separation from the mother and to gain _
without fathers _ the sense of inner resource usually provided by adequate
sires. Thus, when sons cannot achieve psychological distance from the mother,
they will either cling to her and her surrogates or they will in compensation
amplify, often violently, their physical and social distance from her. They
may become vagrants and swell the ranks of the homeless; through delinquency,
they may shock and provoke the mother to the point where she drives them out
of the home; or they might find impersonal replacements for the mothers in the
form of addicting substances. Booze and drugs can provide, at least
temporarily, the sense of inner resource, of "high," that makes it possible
for sons _ at least temporarily _ to tolerate the sense of separation from the
mother. When there is no strong father to aid the son in this developmental
task, then he will too often turn to the kinds of "righteous" substances which
_ temporarily at least _ fill him with the sense of strength and goodness. In
our addictive society, drugs substitute for fathers to bring about token
separations from the mother.

Men who have not separated psychologically from their mothers find it hard to
enter into closeness with women. Such intimacy always carries the risk of
losing the intimate other, the unique other who cannot be replaced. Better to
look for good feelings in impersonal substances _ booze and drugs _ that
cannot be used up, that can always be replaced. Heavy drinkers "kill the
bottle" and call the emptied flask a "dead soldier," but _ unlike the mother,
unlike the girl friend _ the bottle will never really leave or die; the bottle
always comes back, gleaming in its unchanging regimental colors, ready to
serve and die again. It is not the bottle or the syringe that finally dies,
but the user.

Multitudes of young men have recently discovered another, more drastic means
for achieving social distance from their mothers, while at the same time
avoiding fatherhood: the homosexual community. Again, like liquor bottles or
drug vials, homosexual sex tends to be impersonal and its participants tend to
be replaceable to each other. In the gay community, as with other centers of
addiction, one can find pleasure without risking intimacy and the possibility
of irreplaceable loss. At the same time, distance has been gained from the
mothers: the homosexual world is a camp of men that excludes _ even mocks and
caricatures _ the "breeders," the dangerous mothers.

Finally, in the absence of reliable fathers and elders, young men try to
create their own puberty rituals and administer to each other their own
initiations. In the parental society, the tests of manhood are administered by
the male elders; and are in the service of lawfulness, order, and male
productivity. But when the tests are conducted by unsupervised gangs of
adolescent males, the candidates must prove courage, usually through their
defiance of the law; their passage is not into responsible manhood but too
often into the world of the criminal. Instead of curbing anti-social
rebellion, the puberty rites of teen-age gangs too often augment it.

**The Ultimate Fathers and the Final Passage**

We have seen that the biological father sponsors the separation from the
mother, within the family. Later, teachers and mentors sponsor some separation
from the family as a whole, though still within the ambit of the larger
community. The massed social fathers underwrite the physical separations from
the familiar community _ the separations that are essential to the male role
on some vital perimeter.

Finally, fatherly beings, spiritual in nature, stationed in their own realm
beyond the pragmatic community, are necessary to endorse the final passage of
the male lifecycle: from vigorous manhood to old age, and finally from life
into the farthest country of death.

In the traditional community, senior post-parental men can achieve great
status, not because of their physical strength and ferocity but,
paradoxically, because of their relative mildness. Typically, they , rather
than young men, are interlocutors between the community and its gods. If your
community is in trouble, you do not send young Prometheus to ask for God's
mercy. He will steal God's fire and make matters worse; but old men, instead
of offending, will humbly pray for divine grace and _ as in the founding myth
_ the weak elders become recipients and vessels of the healing powers.

There exists, then, a generational rule of some universality that compensates
the traditional aged for their losses of physical power, by the acquisition of
supernatural power. Young men kill with edged weapons, but older men can kill
with a curse. Thus Lucien Levy-Bruhl (1928) observed that in the preliterate
folk society the old man is "encircled by a kind of mystic halo," an essence
so pervasive that his body parts and even his excrement can become the
residence of tabu power.

The ethnogerontologist Simmons (1945) provides this observation:

_It was not strength or brawn alone that won in battle or staved off bad luck
or healed the dreaded disease; it was a special power, mysterious and most
potent in the hands of old men and old women who have survived all these
dangers ... Not all magicians were old, but superannuation and the
supernatural were very commonly and closely linked._

In illustration, Simmons reports many examples of the older man's awesome tabu
powers, the most striking coming from the Hottentot of Africa, where the old
men initiate young men, who have passed their early life among women, into
manhood. The climax of the rite comes when the old man urinates on the
candidate, who receives the urine with joy, rubbing it vigorously into his
skin. His old sponsor then tells the candidate that he will increase and
multiply and that his beard will soon grow. Clearly, in this case, even the
urine of the old man has heroic power, the mana of the patriarchal phallus
through which it passed. In the most concrete sense, it "marinates" the young
man with the powers of the old man, thus bringing the lad in his turn to
manhood. Here we see, unequivocally, the strong face of aging, the face that
is hidden from us in our own secular, contra-parental, contragerontic society.

In sum, whether by virtue of their special weakness or their special strength,
traditional elders are elected. While young men live on the physical perimeter
of the community, to contain and capture the forces of ordinary nature, the
old men retreat physically to the interior, domestic zone. But once having
established a secure home base, they can again move out, not to the physical
borders, but to the spiritual perimeter of the community; there to fend off
the bad power and to harvest the good power of the gods. As in most
developmental sequences, the seeming withdrawal into domesticity is a stage in
the dialectic, the precondition for a subsequent advance _ an imaginative leap
outward, to the supernaturals.

Thus, as men give up the ways of the warrior and their stations on the
community's perimeter, they move back toward the domestic world, there to
rekindle qualities of sensuality, emotionality, and mildness repressed during
their days of fighting and fathering. Rather than restlessly seeking and
provoking change on the perimeter, they seek constancy of place, person, and
nutriment at the protected center. But often, as masters of ritual, the old
fathers move out to the spiritual perimeter, to confront the powerful and
empowering parental gods. Older men discover in the supernatural fathers the
strength that they no longer find within themselves; they use prayer to
beseech, for themselves and for the people, their fire from the gods. But when
older men lose _ usually under conditions of secularization and urbanization _
their cosmic connection, they also lose the sense of an assured center, within
themselves; and they fall away from the high status of elder, down to their
modern condition: "the aged."

Aging men, by contrast to elders, lack the sense of connection to the totemic
fathers; and without that inner assurance, they cannot easily decouple from
tokens of prestige and vitality that originate outside of themselves, for
example, in their employment and social roles. Thus, they do not suffer
illness _ the loss of the body _ easily; and they do not easily retire from
the occasional powers and honors that come from gainful work. The late life
depressions that afflict many of our aged express, symptomatically, their
sense of post-retirement and post-potency emptiness. These aged do not inspire
or strengthen younger men; on the contrary, they may frighten and even disgust
them.

But the elders of traditional societies _ or of traditional sub-cultures
within our secular society _ because they are bridgeheads between the
community and its father-gods _ can give up the lesser potencies of youth.
They can even endure, with some grace and courage, the final separation, from
life. As they accomplish these final transitions, senior men, elders, become
the social "fathers" that young men need as they face their own life tasks and
their own entry into fatherhood.

* * *

[Go Forward to Fatherhood: Myths and Realities](parke1.htm)

Go back to [Syllabus](father.html)

* * *

**References**  
Blankenhorn, D. (1995). Fatherless America. New York: Basic Books.  
Ehrenseft, D. (1990). Patenting Together. Chicago: University of Illinois  
Press.  
Gutmann, D. L, Reclaimed Powers. Towards a New Psychology of Men and Women in  
Later Life (NY: Basic Books, 1987).  
Gutmann, D. L., and M. H. Huyck, "Good outcomes and pathological consequences  
of post-parental androgyny," unpublished manuscript, Department of  
Psychiatry, Northwestern University Medical School.  
Hanson, S. & Bozett, F. (1985). Dimensions of Fatherhood. Beverly Hills, CA:  
Sage.  
Hochschild, A. (1989). The Second Shift. New York: Viking.  
Jackson, Jesse (1994). Keynote Address to the Family Re-Union III: The Role of  
Men in Children+s Lives. Nashville, TN. July, 1994.  
Kipnis, K. (1987). How to discuss professional ethics. Young Children. 42  
(4), 20-21.  
Kardiner, A., and R. Linton, The Psychological Frontiers of Society (NY:  
Columbia University Press, 1945).  
Levy-Bruhl, L., The "Soul" of the Primitive, (London: Allen and Unwin, 1928).  
Murdoch, G., "Comparative data on the division of labor by sex," Social
Forces,  
15 (1935), pp. 551-553.  
Newton, N., "Psycho-social aspects of the mother/father/child unit," paper  
presented atmeetings of the Swedish Nutrition Foundation, Upsala, 1973.  
Palm, G. (1994). Developing ethical guidelines for family educators. Views,  
(winter,1994), 12-13.  
Promise Keepers. (1995). Raise the Standard 1995. (Conference Booklet) Men's  
Conference, Mpls, MN. July 1995.  
Simmons, L. W., The Role of the Aged in Primitive Society, (New Haven, CT:  
Yale University Press, 1945).  
Whiting, J. W., and I. Child, Child Training and Personality: A Cross-Cultural  
Study, (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1953).  

* * *

</h

