The Challenge of Blackness WE ARE ABOUT the task of defining, defending, and
illustrating blackness.' This means that we are about the truth of this world.
For we see blackness in America merging with the blackness and the brownness
of the Third World and becoming the world. Which is another way of saying that
blackness is a，~ truth which stands at the center of the human experience, and
that all who reflect the rays of that dazzling darkness reflect a truth which
is close to the truth of man. For if truth, as Jean-Paul Sartre noted, is the
perspective of the truly disinherited, then the black man is the truth or
close to the truth. We believe that the black man is the tmth or close to the
tmth, that blackness constitutes the truth of the tmth, and that black studies
is the revelation of that truth and the search for the true meaning of
blackness. 1\. Speech, first national conference, Black Studies Directors,
Institute of the Black World, November, 1969. What is the true meaning of
blacknessT It is too soon to say. Let us say, provisionally, that blackness is
that universe of values and attitudes and orientations which rises, like dew,
from the depths of our ancestral experience and pulls us toward the distant
shores of our destiny. Let us say, provisionally, that it is a totalizing and
enveloping force, an ambiance, and a milieu. But let us also say that there
are depths beneath the depths in blackness and that the first challenge of
blackness is the challenge of defining blackness. We believe that this
challenge will require the long and careful collaboration of many minds, and
that we can no longer afford the luxury of doing our own things in our own
private pastures. By this we mean to say that we believe in the community of
the black dead and the black living and the black unborn. We believe that that
community has a prior claim on our time and our talents and our resources, and
that we must respond when it calls. We have come together because we believe
at this particular moment that the exigencies of blackness require a
collective and communal effort to define and control our experience, and from
within that perspective we say that the first challenge of blackness is the
challenge of defining it. That challenge, of course, raises the whole question
of agency. Who is going to defineT We say, without reserve or apology, that
blacks must define and control blackness. As we look back on our own
experiences, and as we read the reports from various colleges, we see the
extraordinary potential of black studies. But we also see blackness and black
studies threatened by politicians, conservative administrators, and the
hostility of the white culture structure. We also see the bad faith of some
Negroes who don't believe we mean what we say, and the indifference of some
students and teachers who want to play. So we think we o~~e it to black men
and women now dead and to children \ct unborn to come together at this crucial
hour to pool our esperiences and our collective knowledge. But let me say here
at the very beginning that we do not say that we have the tnlth, but that we
are seeking the truth. We believe that no one man has the answer, but we
believe that all of us working together can produce an answer. I WILL NOT
ANTICIPATE the resalts of the collective quest, t,rlt I will say that
blackness is a challenge to our will and determination and vision. We are
moving to meet that challenge on six levels. We are moving, first of all, to
create the basic tools, the organic conditions and possibilities, for in-depth
work in the field of black studies. And by all this we simply mean that we are
trying to create the bibliographies, the card indexes, the tapes and the
special collections of books and documents that will make further work
possible and prof-. itable. We are moving, secondly, to create a new pool of
claLifying concepts which will permit us to see and handle our own reality. In
our opinion, the question of concepts is decisive. The overriding need of the
moment is for us to think with our own mind and to see with our own eyes. We
cannot see now because our eyes are clouded by the concepts of white
supremacy. We cannot think now because we have no intellectual instruments,
save those which were designed expressly to keep us from seeing. It is
necessary for us to develop a new frame of reference which transcends the
limits of white concepts. It is necessary for us to develop and maintain a
total intellectual offensive against the false universality of white concepts,
whether they are expressed by William Styron or Daniel Patrick Moynihan. By
and large, reality has been conceptualized in terms of the narrow point of
view of the small minority of white men who live in Europe and North America.
We must abandon the partial frame of reference of our oppressors and create
new concepts which will release our reality, which is also the reality of the
overwhelming majority of men and women on this globe. We must say to the white
world that there are things in the world that are not dreamt of in your
history and your sociology and your philosophy. Carter Woodson raised the
question in the thirties (in The Mis-Education of the Negro ), and it needs to
be raised once again: By what right do we, the victims of Western
civilization, grant a privileged position to the values and concepts of a
civilization which defines us as anti-valuesT Blackness is a challenge because
it raises the whole question of values and because it tells us that we must
rise now to the level of teaching this profoundly ignorant and profoundly sick
society. In order to do that, we must create a new rationale. We must create a
new rationality, a new way of seeing, a new way of reasoning, a new way of
thinking. Our thinking--and the scholarship which undergirds that thinking--is
Europe-centered, white-centered, property, and place-centered. We see now
through a glass whitely, and there can be no more desperate and dangerous task
than the task which faces us now of trying to see with our own eyes. Beyond
all that, we must redefine the whole concept of knowledge within the
perspective of our own needs and interests. Contrary to the European
assumption, knowledge is action, not contemplation. There can be no knowing
\~，ithollt doing. And to know, that is to say, to dig, is to do. h'nowledge
that is only contemplation is at best of aesthetic \，alue, which is to say
that it is useless in a situation of oppression. \Ve must conceive,
conceptualize and fight for a new rationality based on a new philosophy of
education, conceived broadly as an instrument of social and personal change. A
new philosophy of education would charge scholars with the responsibility of
finding solutions for poverty, war, injustice, and oppression. A new
philosophy of education would conceive of black schools as centers of applied
knowledge and guides to action, would relate learning to black culture and the
black community, and would develop the capacities for growth in the context of
the live problems of the day. We are moving to deal with that question. We are
moving to deal with the whole question of philosophy and orientations and
concepts. And we are moving, thirdly, toward a new relation to the black
community, for we believe that the black community must help define what an
intellectual is and what intellectuals should do. Not only that: we believe
that the black community is an informal educational medium whichmust be
utilized to transform the thinking and acting of black Americans. Our fourth
concern is the creation of a cadre of organic intellectuals who will live and
think within a perspective of blood and pain and want. Our fifth concern is
the whole question of the institutionalization of the black experience. On
this level, the challenge of blackness is the challenge of making blackness a
presence in the land, the challenge of making it more than a theme for
'apping, the challenge of giving it visible body and form so that black people
can plug into it and absorb the energy they need. We are moving, finally, to
redefine American in order to remake American society. WE ARE COIMMITI~ED to
these major tasks and others. And we are committed within the perspective of
struggle. We reject the traditional distinction between culture and politics.
We say that struggle and scholarship, the streets and the classrooms,
demonstrations and images are--and must be--related. We Say further that there
is a politics of thinking as well as a thinking of politics, and that to teach
the good society without trying to make the existing bad society good is to
teach and accept the bad society. And so we are not hung up over the European
distinction between politics and culture. We have returned to the wisdom of
our African fathers, who recognized that men also vote by ~ dancing, singing,
fighting, and making love. LET ME SAY ALSO that we are committed to these
tasks because we believe blackness is a total challenge, and because of the
fact that at a certain]evel, basic con~icts of interests express themselves as
co~icts of rationalities. We see the rationality of blackness as a total
challenge to the world. Out of our arrogance and ignorance, we speak of the
Renaissance, which should be called the white Renaissance. For the Renaissance
of man, the Renaissance of all mankind, has not yet come. We do not know yet
what man is. How could we know, when three-fourths of manldnd have been
excluded from the definition of manT The role of the black man at this
critical moment is to join hands with all expenence the "wretched of the
earth" in order to define for the first time the full dimensions and the full
height of man. And that means that everything is up for grabs, that
e~，erything remains to be said and done. In the field of history, for example,
people are always talking about "integrating" Negro history into American
history. What these people don't seem to recognize is that American history
does not now exist and that it is impossible to integrate into a mythical
whole that was created by ignoring two essential parts, the African and the
Indian elements. So we are obliged to remind America that American history
noes not exist, and that it cannot be created if we do not start all over
again and view American history from the standpoint of the Blacks and Reds.
The method nowadays in history is to take a white syllabus and create an
instant Negro syllabus by adding the words, "The Negro in." For example: "The
Negro in the Colonial Period" or "The Negro in the Westward Movement." But the
Negro did not live in some of these periods. In fact, it is. even doubtful
whether whites lived in them. The point I'm trying to make here is the very
simple one that George Washington and George Washington's slaves lived
different realities, knd if we extend that insight to all the dimensions of
white American history, we will realize that blacks lived a different time and
a different reality in this country. And the terrifying implications of all
this (terrifying to whites) is that there is another time, another reality,
another America, if you please. We cannot deal with black experience until we
realize that the black experience raises fundamental questions about the total
historical process, and that it requires a radical reevaluation of our ideas
about history and man. In its essence, the black experience is a radical
reappraisal of a society from the standpoint of the men on the bottom. And
this means that blacks have experienced violation and violence and
exploitation as their truth and as the truth of the American experience.
Because of who they are and what they have been through, because of the
irrefutable evidence of their scars, they are the creative negation of all the
placid myths about American society. For if black reality is not what America
said it was, then obviously America is not what it claims to be. Blackness is
a challenge, then, to America and to all its institutions and values. WE CAN
SEE that challenge in its dearest form in the educational field. For blackness
raises total questions about the meaning of education in a situation of
oppression. And in the light of that challenge we can see clearly that an
educator in a situation of oppression is either an oppressor or a liberator. I
am not speaking now of subjective dispositions and attitudes; I am suggesting
that this is an objective requirement of the system. And I am suggesting that
blackness confronts that cruel exigency by raising dangerous questions about
the meaning of education in America. Blackness is a challenge to the
educational system because it is impossible for an institution to have a
viable black studies program if that institution does not confront itself and
reevaluate what it is doing and what it has done to perpetuate racism and
ignorance. And this requires a total confrontation with the meaning and the
limitations of white-oriented education. On the level of race, the white-
oriented educational system assumes the superiority of whites and their system
of values and includes blackness only as a negative pole of reference. In
white-oriented schools, blacks are taught to despise themselves and their
possibilities. In white-oriented schools, we are educated away from ourselves
--away from our people, away from our rhythm, away from our genius, away from
our soul. The point is that blacks ought to be educated from the inside, from
the center of themselves. For in the final analysis, what we seek is not in
Plate or Aristotle. What we seek is our wholeness, our authenticity, our
truth. And our truth is not in white American libraries. If we do not carry
our truth into them, what we bring out will be false. This is an elementary
idea. And yet some men oppose it. One Negro leader went so far as to say that
it is folly for black youths to concentrate on black studies. He suggested
that black students should learn "what the white boys are learning since they
are going to be operating in a white world after their graduation." With all
due respect to the proponents of this idea, I must say that it is a curious
and destructive one. For education is creation, not limitation. White students
are learning some things in America that black students don't need to learn.
And white students are not ]earning some things that black students must learn
if they are to survive. One should also note that the statement ignores the
special gifts and insights of black people. If black boys and girls had only
]earned what white boys and girls learned, America would have nothing to sing
and nothing to dance. If black boys and girls had only learned what white boys
and girls were learning, there would be a vacuum in the dreaming and desiring
of man. If Charles Drew and Daniel Hale Williams had only learned what the
white doctors were learning, American medicine would be poorer. If Benjamin
Mays had not learned something different, he wouldn't have had anything new to
say to Martin Luther King Jr. And if Martin Luther King Jr had only learned
what the white boys were learning, he wouldn't have been able to extend the
horizons of the world. We need an education adapted to our needs and interests
and requirements. And it is neither separatist nor militant to say so.
Blackness is a challenge to white America, and to the educational
establishment. But it is also a challenge to black America. Blackness
challenges our easy acquiesence in the myths and lies of this society. It
challenges us to renew ourselves and to rise to the level of circumstances by
creating new black institutions. Most of all, it challenges all "salvageable"
Negroes and blacks to forget petty differences and to come together at all
levels to do now what must be done. I have tried to list some of the dominant
challenges of blackness, as I see them. I have not meant to suggest that we
have mastered these challenges and that we have easy, one-two-three answers
for packaging and distribution. I meant only to suggest that we see these
challenges as total demands on our time and energy. So, in conclusion, I want
to say that blackness is a personal challenge. It is a challenge to respect
ourselves and to take the black experience seriously. At the Institute of the
Black World we not only praise black manhood and black womanhood, but we live
it by speaking to each other without reserve or false modesty, but also
without pettiness and the childish desire to score points. We feel that if
blackness is worth studying it is worth living, and that he who does not try
to live it has no business trying to teach it. The challenge of blackness is
the challenge of living today in tomorrow's truth. It is the challenge of
situating oneself now on the terrain of what Brother Vincent Harding calls the
"New Land." It is the challenge of internalizing and carrying around with us
the rebom black community. It is the challenge, as our fathers used to say, of
letting our light shine, not only because it is our light, but also because in
the world in which we live, the black light we reflect is the only light left.

