###

## THEATRE 203  
AMERICAN THEATRE  
Sandy Moffett, Fine Arts 268, Ext 3128

##

* * *  
  
---  
  




[**Syllabus**](../syllabus.html)

**Articles**

  * [ Eugene O'Neill and the American Canon](american_canon.html)
  * [Images of the Frontier in the American Drama](images_frontier.html)
  * [The Chinese Dream Still Lives](chinese_dream.html)
  * The Unbroken Women 

[**Bibliography**](../bib.html)

[**Seminar Reports**](../seminar_reports.html) |  |

## The Unbroken Women: Survivors In The Plays Of Tennessee Williams  
  
  
---  
  
The survival of the characters in Tennessee William's plays depends upon their
ability to reconcile two extreme worlds: the spiritual dream world and the
physical, real world. It is impossible to live completely in either of these
two worlds. Life in the dream world is a fragile fantasy, a rarefied pretense
which must be carefully maintained and protected from the blows of reality.
Life in the "real", the too real world, is degrading, less than human,
bestial. Hope lies in a recognition of both these worlds and the formation of
a compromise between them. From this compromise is created the third,
habitable world, where people can live, not as angels or animals, but as
humans.

Williams' plays are full of the fragments of characters who cannot find the
middle ground of humanity and conventional Williams criticism has tended to
concentrate on these characters. Some cling too desperately to the spiritual
dream world and avoid, never embrace, or even acknowledge the existence of the
world of physical reality. Blanche DuBois in **_A Streetcar Named Desire_** is
crushed between the fantasy memory of her life at Belle Reve and the reality
of Stanley Kowalski's sexuality. She reaches for Mitch, the middle ground, but
she is too ensconced in her dream world make the connection. Laura in **_The
Glass Menagerie_** is too intimidated by the harsh noise and clatter of
Rubicam's Business College and the streets of St. Louis to venture out of her
fragile dream. The surprising sensitivity of Jim O'Connor allows her a brush
with the middle world, but the gentleman caller is too human to stay in
Laura's collection of crystal. Laura's mother, Amanda, is stronger than
Blanche or Laura. She lives, as does Shannon in **_The Night of the Iguana_**
, "on the fantastic level, but has to operate on the realistic one." And
Amanda does "operate," expending her strength, making her pretty but necessary
phone calls and enrolling Laura in business college. But she is at home, she
_lives_ , only in the dream world of "malaria fever, jonquils, and that boy."
Still others--Princess Kosmonopolis, Mrs. Goforth, and Mrs. Stone--jump from
the dream world to the too physical one, never considering a compromise. But
life for them is just as impossible as it is for their more spiritual sisters.

Hannah Jelkes in **_The Night of the Iguana_** and Alma Winemiller in
**_Summer and Smoke_** come closer to compromise, but neither is able to bring
the worlds of physical reality and spiritual dream together. Each woman lives
too much in her dream; each is associated often with religion, the ethereal;
each is compared to an angel. Yet in these two women is a strength and courage
that Blanche and Laura cannot find, that Amanda cannot collect. Hannah and
Alma can see the dream world, the real world, and the human world between--
Hannah throughout her play and Alma at the end of hers. But Hannah can only
look at, sympathize with, and administer to the real and human worlds. She has
lived too long in the spiritual dream world with her 97-years-young
grandfather poet to inhabit any other. And Alma also sees the other worlds too
late. However, with the exception of Alma's too late discovery, none of these
women realize, as does Maxine in **_Iguana_** , that human beings reach "a
point where we've got to settle for something that works for us in our lives--
even if it isn't on the highest kind of level."

In **_A Streetcar Named Desire_** Stella is commonly viewed as only the little
sister; weaker, or at least duller and much less interesting than Blanche, who
has somehow managed to get herself trapped in an impossible situation by
Stanley Kowalski. She is his slave, giving him everything, receiving only
sexual payment, along with an occasional package of  "bloody meat." Her senses
have been numbed to the extent that she believes these favours make her
existence worthwhile, or to the extent that she does not think at all. In
other words, Stella is looked on as one who has abandoned the spiritual dream
all together, who has descended to and now wallows in the physical and the
bestial. Quite the contrary, it can be argued that Stella is one of the most
successful of William's survivors. She has found her compromise combination of
reality and dream.

To really see Stella Dubois Kowalski, it is helpful to alter the conventional
way of viewing her play. Imagine **_A Streetcar Named Desire_** in a different
genre as a situation comedy with Stella as the central character. The play
then becomes the story of a young Southern plantation gentlewoman who, having
the sense to realize that her improvident relatives are in the final stages of
frittering away the material manifestations of her family's once opulent past,
and that any attempt to stop this process would not only be futile, but would
be a move toward a dead past instead of a living future, decides to strike out
on her own and become the happy, pregnant young wife of a handsome Polish ex-
Army sergeant, and live contentedly ever after in their kooky, lusty,
picturesque, lower middle-class neighborhood. Before forcing further what
might initially seem to be an inappropriate exercise, we might look at some of
Williams' character and place descriptions and see if they suit such an
approach. Stanley:  "He is of medium height, about five eight or nine, and
strongly, compactly built. Animal _joy_ in his being is implicit. . . . Since
earliest manhood the center of his life has been pleasure. . . . Branching out
from this complete and satisfying center are all the auxiliary channels of his
life, such as heartiness with men, his appreciation of rough humour, his love
of good drink and food and games, his car, his radio, everything that is his.
. . " The neighborhood: "a street in New Orleans which is named Elysian Fields
and runs between the L & N tracks and the river. The section is poor, but
unlike corresponding sections in other American cities, has a certain raffish
charm . . ." And Stella: "a gentle young woman about twenty-five, and of a
background obviously quite different from her husband." So far nothing ominous
or particularly foreboding. This "conventionality" continues with Stella's
first appearance.

STAN: Hey Stella, baby.  
STEL: (Mildly) Don't holler at me like that. Hi, Mitch.  
STAN: Catch.  
STEL: What?  
STAN: Meat.  
(He heaves the package at her. She cries out in protest but manages to catch
it; then she laughs breathlessly . . .)  
STEL: Stanley. Where are you going?  
STAN: Bowling.  
STEL: Can I come watch?  
STAN: Come on.  
STEL: Be over soon. Hello, Eunice. How are you?  
EUN: I'm all right. Tell Steve to get him a poor boy's sandwich 'cause there's
nothing here.  
(They all laugh; the colored woman does not stop. Stella goes out.)  
C.W. What was that package he th'ew at 'er.  
(She rises from the steps, laughing louder.)  
EUN: You hush, now.  
C.W. Catch what?  
(She continues to laugh.)

Not substantial enough, of course, to be a complete picture of domestic
tranquillity, but it is certainly a positive glimpse. A happy first scene.

Then "Blanche comes around the corner." Here it is necessary, in order to
maintain this new perspective, to diminish the script's emphasis on Blanche,
and to treat her somewhat superficially until the point is made. By ignoring
some of what is later learned about her, and keeping the focus on Stella,
Blanche can be viewed simply as the old maid older sister; an unwelcome,
prying, spinster school teacher, always criticizing, unrealistic, imposing her
own problems into Stella's life, a problem in an otherwise satisfactory
existence.

Blanche wastes no time letting her sister know how unhappy she, Stella, should
be. She comments on the neighborhood: "only Poe. Only Mr. Edgar Allen Poe
could do it justice. Out there I suppose is the ghoul haunted woodland of
Weir," to which Stella replies with a comic one-liner, "No, honey. Those are
the L and N tracks." Stella repeatedly tries to communicate to Blanche that
things are O.K.; that she is completely happy with her life and totally in
love with Stanley. Things are, of course, different from Laurel, Mississippi,
and Stan and his friends are different from their teen aged beaus, but things
are indeed fine and she doesn't really care what has happened to Belle Reve or
what is past. Even Stanley's first reaction to Blanche is secure and friendly.

In the poker night scene, in spite of its violence, we see Stella at home with
her compromise. Here too, the tone could be comic: A good lusty brawl during
which the earthy Polack ("something like Irish...only not so highbrow"), after
too many beers, finally blows his top, throws the radio out the window and
ends up, after being dumped by his buddies in a cold shower, howling like a
lost puppy for his wife who has escaped to the apartment upstairs. Stella
knows this situation and is at home with the solution, and later in the night
this woman, late descended from the mansion of Belle Reve, descends the fire
escape of the neighbors' flat to do what needs to be done to make things right
for both of them.

It is the next morning that the gap between the sisters appears at its widest.
Stella is completely happy. The stage directions say, "She is lying down in
the bedroom. Her face is serene in the early morning sunlight. Her eyes and
lips have that almost narcotized tranquillity that is the face of Eastern
idols." Blanche is distraught. "Why, I've been half crazy, Stella. When I
found out you'd been crazy enough to come back here after what happened."
Blanche composes a telegram, "Sister and I in desperate situation." For Stella
things are under perfect control. She tells her sister, "You're making too
much fuss about this. He was as good as a lamb when I came back and he's
really very, very ashamed of himself." Three times she tells Blanche she is
not in anything she wants to get out of. None of this works, and the intruding
sister again voices her condemnation. In one of her best known speeches she
calls Stanley and his friends "apes," "Survivors from a stone age," ending
with a final bit of unwanted advice to Stella, "Don't--Don't hang back with
the Brutes."

It is at this point that Blanche's destruction becomes inevitable. Stella and
Stanley, as well as Stella, has heard this speech; both in their own way
realize that Blanche cannot remain in the habitable reality that is theirs.
Williams makes this clear. "Stella has embraced him with both arms, fiercely,
and in full view of Blanche. He laughs and clasps her head to him. Over her
head he grins through the curtain at Blanche." If Stella could really have
been the protagonist and successfully used Harold Mitchell to remove the
unwanted sister from their home, the new comedy might still continue. But this
cannot be. The comedy is over. Stanley and Stella fight for their habitation
and the playwright has chosen destruction as their means.

Stella from the beginning has something that she wants to keep, and is willing
to struggle for. In Blanche's view she has fallen. In Stella's view she has
come to terms with the reality of her life and she wants to stay there.
Blanche thinks she has lost the dream, abandoned the spiritual, "such things
as art, poetry, music...new light...tender feelings." Stella senses that she
has her dream when she says, "There are things that happen between a man and
woman in the dark--that sort of make everything else seem--unimportant."

And so she does what she must to keep what she has. She tries to explain to
Eunice as they take Blanche to the sanitarium, "I couldn't believe her story
and go on living with Stanley." Eunice replies, "Don't ever believe it. Life
has got to go on. No matter what happens, you've got to keep on going." Life
does go on. Stella's relief at being freed from Blanche's impossible dream is
obvious in Williams' final stage direction. In Stanley's arms "she sobs with
inhuman abandon. There is something luxurious in her complete surrender to
crying now that her sister is gone."

Serafina in The Rose Tattoo is also faced with the spiritual dream at one
extreme and the physical reality at the other. Interestingly, Serafina's
spiritual dream has had a very physical side. She and her husband Rosario have
"had love together every night of the week," and "never skipped one from the
night...[they were] married till the night he was killed in his fruit truck."
She had, she tells Bessie and Flora, 4,380 nights with her Rosario. But there
is a strange lack of reality, an unearthliness about this beautiful marriage.
We never see Rosario; he is killed in his truck on the night the play opens,
and only a picture remains. Serafina, waiting for Rosario that night, is not
natural. She seems to be acting out a part she is not quite comfortable in.
She looks like "a plump little Italian opera singer in the role of Madame
Butterfly." She has obviously forced her round figure into a tight girdle; she
sits with "forced composure" as if she were "posing for a picture."

With Rosario's death, the act is over; the reason for the act is gone. When we
see her again three years later, Serafina has discarded her costume--the tight
girdle, the silk gown, the elaborate hair-do. She appears on the porch of her
house in "a soiled pink slip and her hair is wild." Serafina has swung from
the spiritual dream of her role as Rosario's wife to the painful physical
reality of life as a widow, a woman alone. Her very nature has changed. Gone
is the composure, and any suggestion of the sublime or "seraphic" in Serafina.
She is more like a crazed beast. She responds to her clamoring neighbors with
a long animal howl of misery. Her daughter Rosa can tell her truthfully,
"Mama, you look disgusting." She "mutters savagely" when her dress sticks on
the dummy, and hurls the girdle angrily away when she can't pull it over her
hips. Later Father Leo tells her, "...you are not a woman. You are an animal";
and Rosa finally tells her she is a pig.

Serafina's drastic reversal has been caused by her great loss. But the loss is
more devastating than the loss of a husband and an intense physical love. In
losing Rosario, Serafina has lost the object of her spiritual belief, her
religion. Serafina never regarded Rosario simply as a man; in fact, men as
real mortals seem to disgust her. She tells Bessie and Flora, "I am not at all
interested, I am not interested in men getting fat and bald in soldier-boy
play suits." She could not go to "...some middle-aged man...getting a pot
belly on him and smelling of sweat and liquor..." Rosario has been Serafina's
god. Their relationship, including its physical side, has been a spiritual
dream. Rosario has been the idol, and Serafina, the worshipper, the devotee,
who has carefully nurtured the myth of their love, keeping it pure and
untainted by anything as earthy as sweat or middle age. Father Leo calls this
worship "pagan idolatry"; Serafina's equal reverence toward Rosario's ashes
and the shrine of the Madonna means blasphemy to the priest. But the doctor,
called when Serafina loses Rosario's child, has seen this worship before. He
tells Father Leo that these people"...find God in each other. And when they
lose each other, they lose God and they're lost."

Serafina could hardly expect Bessie and Flora, the two very real and earthy
"female clowns," to understand her religion, but she cautions them to watch
their language in her house because they are "...sitting in the same room with
Our lady and with the blessed ashes of my husband!" And she tells them
"Suddenly and religiously" of the love she and Rosario had before he was
killed. Serafina sounds like an ecstatic priestess when she insists, in the
face of Bessie and Flora's obvious doubt, that Rosario was "Never touched by
the hands of nobody! Nobody but me!--Just me!" She cannot afford to hear the
truth that Bessie and Flora would be all too glad to tell her--that at the
time of his death, Rosario had been having a "steady affair" with Estelle
Hohengarten, "the blackjack dealer from Texas." Later, she tries again to make
Father Leo understand the "glory" that was part of her love for Rosario. She
tells the priest, who is none too eager to hear, that for her, "the big bed
was beautiful like a religion." And she describes Rosario as "the rose of the
world," a description Father Leo would associate with Christ. Father Leo too
tries to tell her the "known facts" about Rosario but Serafina cannot allow
such a reality to touch her dream.

Just before Alvaro's entrance, Serafina's world has become uninhabitable. The
dream world where she lived has been irreparably damaged by a truth she cannot
admit but cannot deny. But because she has lived exclusively and for so long
in her carefully protected world of dreams where Rosario was a Baron, a god,
and she, a Baronessa, an angel, she cannot face a real world peopled with
Bessie's and Flora's who shout suggestively out the window at Legionnaires.
Both the spiritual dream world and the physical real world have closed to her
and she cannot imagine a compromise.

But it is compromise personified who enters her life when Alvaro Mangiacavallo
--stops his banana truck in front of her house. Alvaro has about him the
suggestion of the physical animal. He is described as "one of those
Mediterranean types that resemble glossy young bulls," and he tells Serafina
that his name means "Eat-a-horse." He is no hero, no god. He sweats, like
Mitch, another compromise, he blows his nose between two fingers, and he
"always (cries) after a fight." But he is sensitive, he is clumsily romantic.
He can say, looking at the ashes of Rosario and understanding, "The body
would've decayed, but ashes always stay clean." Serafina recognizes the
combination: "Madonna Santa! My husbands body, with the head of a clown!" She
is able to say, as she could not have said before, "A man is no different from
no one else..." and "for the first time she begins to weep," a reaction not of
an angel or an animal, but a human.

Alvaro is Serafina's answer, the inhabitable middle ground between the
spiritual dream and they physical reality, but she cannot come to live there
easily. She tries to put her relationship with Alvaro on the same spiritual
plane as the one she had with Rosario. Before Alvaro's next visit she has put
her girdle on again. She finds his clumsiness and vulgarity unbearable. He
tries to speak poetry to her, to hold her hand, abut in the process drops the
condom he has in his pocket to the floor. When he tries to catch her, the
chase is "grotesquely violent and comic." Serafina finally addresses him as
"you village idiot's grandson," a far cry from Rosario, the Sicilian Baron.
Later, when she finds him crouching over Rosa, she immediately assumes that he
has the "lowest" intentions and, in spite of his protestations ("Baronessa, I
love you."), drive him wordlessly and violently out of the house.

But during the time they have spent together, he has shown her two other
truths besides his own clumsy animalness. One is a truth of fact: He has
called Estelle Hohengarten so that Serafina can know, finally, the truth about
Rosario. Serafina's already damaged spiritual world is completely destroyed
when she hears Estelle say, "But if you think I'm a liar, come here and let me
show you his rose tattooed on my chest!" Because she has worshipped Rosario
and the Madonna together, when she sees Rosario as he really was she also sees
the status of the Virgin as it "really" is: "I don't believe in you, Lady!
You're just a poor little doll with the paint peeling off. I blow out the
light and I forget you the way you forget Serafina!" The other truth is a very
human truth: "Love and affection," he tells her, "is what I got to offer on
hot or cold days in this lonely old world and is what I am looking for. I got
nothing else."

In the end Serafina accepts hi offer. The urn containing the ashes is broken
and she discovers there is nothing inside: "The wind has blown them away." She
relights the Madonna's candle. She will have part of her spiritual world. She
will have her dream. The rose tattoo announcing conception has burned her
breast again. And she will have her reality. "Vengo, vengo, amore!" she calls
to Alvaro, the village idiot's grandson with the body of Rosario and the head
of a clown. Serafina has found her middle ground. She will survive.

Of all Tennessee William's women who try to reconcile the spiritual dream
world with the physical read world, it is perhaps Maggie the Cat who is the
most impressive in fighting for her successful survival. Cat on a Hot Tin Roof
is a play about two kinds of truth - the terrible real facts from the physical
world and a more complex truth, a truth of necessity, a human creation made of
a combination of hard, unadorned reality and delicate fantasy. Maggie is the
possessor of both truths.

Maggie doesn't belong to the spiritual world. No one ever calls her an angel.
When she refers to the "Martyrdom of St. Maggie" she is conscious of and
enjoys the irony. Her martyrdom is the chastity which Brick has forced upon
her, and which she is doing all she can to terminate. There is also delightful
irony in Maggie's picture of herself as Diana, the goddess of virginity,
hunting deer with her bow and arrow on Moon Lake. It is her husband Brick,
cool and golden, who resides in the hazy world of a dream, and Maggie concedes
that he belongs there. She can see Brick as a "superior creature, a godlike
being" whose natural setting is a Greek legend.

It is the factual truth that Maggie faces when she asks, "Truth, truth. What's
so awful about it? I like it, I think the truth is - yeah!" "That's the
truth," she tells Brick often, trying to force him to meet and acknowledge it.
"I'm honest," she says, "I'm facing the facts." The naked facts are that Big
Daddy is dying of cancer, that Brick has a "drinking problem," and is confused
about his sexuality, that Maggie has borne no children, that Brick's best
friend Skipper was "homosexual," and that Big Daddy's children, with the
exception of Brick, are scrapping over his estate like animals over fresh
meat. These are hard facts to face; they are straight out of the real physical
world. Brick can't face them. Ironically the mendacity that so disgusts him in
others is a very necessary part of his own existence. Skipper couldn't face
them. The facts that Maggie forced him to face destroyed him; he "broke in two
like a rotten stick." It is the job of the very strong, like Maggie, to couple
real facts with dreams and create a bearable human truth, "something that
works for us in our lives."

Part of the reality that Maggie can accept, the unadorned truth from the real
world, is sexual reality, and this reality she not only accepts, but embraces.
She doesn't want sex to be merely bestial. She is repulsed by Gooper and Mae,
the "monster of fertility" and their five "no-neck monsters." These children
are little beasts, pigs at a trough, with dogs' names. But she is not ashamed,
is proud in fact, that Big Daddy has a lech for her, that "he always drops his
eyes down my body when I'm talkin' to him, drops his eyes to my boobs an'
licks his old chops." She is proud that other men still want her and that
Sonny Boy Maxwell tried "to force his way inside the powder room" with her.
She enjoys sex in bed. She is, as Brick admits, "great, the greatest!" And,
unlike Brick who was "indifferent to it", sex, physical love is very much a
part of the human truth she is constructing for herself. She and Brick "hit
heaven together every time that they loved." And the construction of this
human truth is Maggie's compromise; like Stella, like Serafina, she can fuse
the real world and the dream world into a habitable middle ground.

It is significant that Maggie is on her way up to this livable, acceptable
ground. What she has come from was un acceptable to her: her alcoholic father,
her hand-me-down ball gowns, being "poor as Job's turkey," having to "suck up
to relatives that [she] hated because they had money. She has had her years of
training in deciding what she wants. She has had time to determine what would
be acceptable to her, what she could live with and what she couldn't live
without. This is no Blanche on a fatal downhill slide from a once-real, now-
fantastic fairy-land past. This is no Laura, so drawn into her own world of
spun glass that she has become just another crystal animal, waiting fort he
passing traffic to shake her from her shelf and shatter her against a reality
as commonplace as an everyday street. This is no Amanda, trying desperately to
force the reality that faces her into the dissolved dream of another time that
can no more be held on to than rain or melting snow. This is Maggie the
fighting, clawing, sometimes screeching cat, street wise, at home in the real
world, bending this real world, with the strength of her will and
determination, to make contact with her dream world. And she is alive, alive
among the dead, with the power of life. Brick says to her, "you're a live cat,
aren't you," and she answers, "you're dam' right I am." Big Daddy says, "This
girl has life in her body, that's no lie." Williams too felt what a positive
character Maggie had become. In an explanatory note dealing with a second
version of the play's third act that he wrote at Elia Kazan's suggestion for
the Broadway premier, he says that although in retrospect he regrets some of
the changes he made, he was glad he added strength to the character of Maggie,
because in writing the play he had grown to see her as a more important
person.

It may initially seem ironic then that Maggie, the lover of and believer in
the truth, should have used a "lie" as the final weapon in her battle to
construct for herself a livable life, a habitable world. Yet it is in this
lie, and all the others like it, that we can see the key to the survivors of
Tennessee William's world. For this is the true lie, the appropriate lie, the
necessary lie. The lie may be an out and out fabrication like Maggie's
announcement of her pregnancy, or a careful, judicious blurring of a part of
reality. (that Alvaro is not the "dream Rosario," that Stanley raped Blanche
on the night her child was born). It can be called compromise, coming to terms
with, learning to live with, any number of things. But it must take place if
life is to go on; and life must go on. The world of Tennessee Williams is the
world we all inhabit. In which there will always be realities that cannot be
lived with, dreams that must be released, and compromises that must be sought
by those that survive.



Betty and Sandy Moffett  
October, 1976

