| ![](images/catalog_header.gif)  
---  
| [![Search](images/catalog_menu_ba_r1_c1.jpg)](http://web.reed.edu/search/)  
---  
[![Reed Home](images/catalog_menu_ba_r2_c1.jpg)](http://web.reed.edu/)  
[![Catalog Homepage](images/catalog_home.jpg)](index.html)  
![](images/catalog_menu_ba_r3_c1.jpg)  
  |  |  
---  
  
History

Michael Breen

Early modern France; Renaissance Italy; political, cultural, and legal
history.

Cynthia Cumfer

Intellectual, cultural, and legal history; history of the American West;
Native American history.

Jacqueline Dirks

American social and cultural history, U. S. women's history.

Ralph Drayton

Early modern Europe, history of science and medicine.

Douglas L. Fix

Modern China and Japan.

Jason Freitag

South Asian history, British Empire in India.

David T. Garrett

Early modern Latin America and Iberia, intellectual and social history. On
leave 2002-03.

Anthony Iaccarino

American political and cultural history. On leave 2002-03.

Christine L. Mueller

German and Austrian institutional,social, and cultural history.

David Sacks

Early modern Britain and Europe,Atlantic world. On sabbatical and leave
2002-03.

Edward B. Segel

Nineteenth- and twentieth-century Europe, diplomatic history, war and society,
the cold war.



At Reed, history is treated as a basic component of general education. The
department attempts to include in its course offerings as many periods and
areas of study as student enrollment and available faculty make possible. The
priority, however, is on diversity of approach--constitutional, intellectual,
economic, social, diplomatic, cultural--rather than on specific coverage of
conventional fields. The aim is to arouse sufficient interest in history to
stimulate a student's independent inquiry and the necessary analytical thought
and perspectives that go with historical study.

The department tries to inculcate students with a sense of history--to impress
them with the legacy, conscious or unconscious, that each present has
inherited from its past, as well as the many perspectives one can have on that
legacy. While many graduates have become prominent as professional historians
and teachers of history, it is even more as a fundamental contribution to
liberal, humanistic education and the development of a critical intelligence,
carried through in many different professions and ways of life, that the
department program is conceived and directed to majors and non-majors alike.

The junior qualifying examination in history is a critical essay dealing with
a given issue or problem within a particular historical field and period. The
department expects students to develop some competence in various periods and
areas of history, as specified in the course requirements below. The
department administers the junior qualifying examination only in November and
April of each academic year. Exceptions are made only for students returning
from leave away from campus, or for other circumstances beyond the student's
control. The department encourages but does not require its students to pursue
the study of a foreign language.

For students who wish to combine American history, literature, economics, and
government, Reed offers an American studies major. Among other possible
programs are interdisciplinary majors involving history, such as history-
literature and international and comparative policy studies.

Requirements for the Major

  1. Humanities 210, 220, or 230. This course is considered part of the major field of study and may not be used to satisfy the Group A or Group B requirement. 
  2. Six semesters (six units) of history courses. (Lower-division history courses taken outside Reed College may be included only with the consent of the department.) These history courses must be distributed so as to include, chronologically, at least one unit before 1800 and one unit after 1800, and geographically, at least one unit in each of the following areas: 
    1. Europe

    2. United States

    3. Areas outside Europe, the United States, and Canada

The same course may fill both a geographical and a chronological requirement.
No more than two cross-listed courses from other departments may be included.

  3. One semester of a junior seminar, to be taken during the junior year (History 411 or 412). (The junior seminar counts as one of the six required units in history.) 
  4. History 470.

**Note: 300-level history courses are ordinarily open to sophomores, juniors,
and seniors, and to freshmen only with the consent of the instructor.**

220 Late Imperial China

Full course for one semester. This course surveys the history of late imperial
China (sixteenth through nineteenth centuries) by examining several critical
issues in the historiography of this period. Weekly discussions will address
the following topics: despots, ritualized rulers and the growth of a
"bureaucratic monarchy"; global economic crisis, peasant rebellion and the
Ming-Qing cataclysm; ethnicity, violence, and exchange on Chinese frontiers;
lineage formation, strategic marriages, and the consolidation of gentry rule;
local magistrates and scholars and their popular tales; migration, mobility,
and social anxiety in a prosperous age; gender and sexuality in Qing Confucian
ideology; exploration, trade, and emigration on the south China coast; and the
challenge of sea-born imperialists in the nineteenth century. Conference. Not
offered 2002-03.

221 Modern China

Full course for one semester. This course examines the numerous
transformations in nineteenth- and twentieth-century China from the
perspective of both Euro-American and Sinified modernities. We will begin by
rethinking both "modernity" and "nation," locating via that process new
enigmatic local subjects for historical study, such as _nuxing_ /women,
_qingnian_ /youth, _nongming_ /peasants, or _renmin_ /people. Major discussion
topics will include imperialist wars, semi-colonialism, and anti-imperialist
movements; the rise of a new historical consciousness; constructions of
Manchu, Chinese, and other ethnic identities; contested nationalisms; peasant
rebellions and recurring political revolutions; cultural iconoclasm and
cultural revolution; Communist mobilizing in rural and urban settings; and
Chinese socialism and socialist China. Conference.

275, 276 Culture and Society in Nineteenth- and Twentieth-Century America

Full course for one year; semesters may be taken separately. Chronological
survey of selected social, cultural, and political developments in the United
States, 1820s to the 1940s. We will be especially concerned with the
interaction of the society (defined here as social, economic, and political
institutions) and culture (the values, ideals, and structures of meaning)
through which Americans understood and interpreted private and public life.

First semester covers the 1820s to the 1890s. Topics include evangelical
revival and reform; slave labor in the agrarian South and wage labor,
industrialization, and urbanization in the North; the Western frontier as
place and myth; the coming of civil war and the legacies of Reconstruction;
the populist moment and subsequent decline of popular politics; the growth of
corporations and labor strife; the significance of the 1893 World's Fair;
urban evangelical crusades; and the commercialization of leisure at the turn
of the century.

Second semester covers the 1890s through the 1940s. Topics include the ideals
and reforms of the Progressive era; a comparison of World War I and the
influenza pandemic; the 1919 race riot in Chicago; domestic culture in the
1920s; the respective economic and cultural effects of the Great Depression,
Dust Bowl, and New Deal; U.S. prosecution of World War II abroad and its
effects on the homefront; and the global and domestic legacies of the war.

The course is open to sophomores considering the history major and transfer
students; others, including students in their first year, will be admitted as
space permits by consent of the instructor. Conference with occasional
lectures.

301 European Diplomatic History: 1848-1914

Full course for one semester. A study of the development of international
relations and the foreign policies of the Great Powers from the mid-nineteenth
century to World War I. Topics include the rise of nationalism and its effects
on European society and diplomacy, Bismarckian diplomacy, imperialism, the
growth of the alliance system, and the coming of the war. Lecture-conference.

302 European Diplomatic History Since 1914

Full course for one semester. An examination of international relations and
foreign policies of the Great Powers from the outbreak of World War I to the
Cold War and the "New Europe." Major emphasis is on the origins of World War
II and the cold war; the interaction of strategic, ideological, economic,
social, and other factors in foreign policy; and problems of historical
interpretation. Lecture-conference. Not offered 2002-03.

303 The Cold War

Full course for one semester. A survey of the diplomatic, strategic, and
ideological conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union, from the
last years of the Second World War through the breakup of the Soviet Union in
1991. The course will emphasize the early years of the cold war and the
sources of the Soviet-American antagonism; other topics will include the
atomic bomb in 1945 and the subsequent nuclear arms race; the cold war in
American society and politics; the Cuban missile crisis of 1962; the Vietnam
war; and in general the role of ideology, public opinion, military strategy,
and domestic politics in American and Soviet policy-making. There will be
discussion throughout of the controversies among historians. Conference. Not
offered 2002-03.

304 Rise of the Modern State?: The Theory and Practice of Monarchy in Late
Medieval and Early Modern Europe

Full course for one semester. Starting with the conceptual foundations of
royal power, we will trace the emergence of the national monarchy in Europe,
examining how kings (and queens) tried to establish their authority over
powerful rivals, including nobles, representative assemblies, and privileged
corporations (such as cities and the clergy). Was the expansion of royal power
achieved through coercion or cooperation? Were these new monarchies
centralized modern states, or did they resemble more closely their
decentralized medieval predecessors? In thinking about these questions, we
will examine institutional developments and elements of late medieval and
early modern political culture, including public rituals and ceremonies,
clientage, gender ideologies, and court culture. Conference.

307 War and Society in Europe from the Eighteenth to the Twentieth Century

Full course for one semester. The course will trace developments in war
preparation and war fighting, the inter-relationships between armed forces and
the state and society from which they emerged, in the Great Powers of Europe
from the Old Regime in the eighteenth century through the French Revolution
and industrialization to the emergence of "total war" and the "home front" in
World War I. Themes of the course will include civil-military relations; the
economic side of war; the internal structures and values of military forces in
relation to their society; the effect of industrialization, political and
social democratization, and technological change; ideas and doctrines of war
(including Clausewitz and Mahan); and the mutual impact of armed forces with
state power and political and social institutions and values. Recommended but
not required: Humanities 210 or 220. Conference. Not offered 2002-03 **.**

308 Special Topics: War and Society in the Twentieth Century: The Vietnam War

Full course for one semester. In each semester a different specific topic
within twentieth-century history will be used to examine how modern Western
societies have experienced war, hot and cold, and the inter-relationships
between armed forces and the states and societies from which they have
emerged. Questions will include civil-military relations in a period of mass
democracy and totalitarianism; the effect of advanced industrialization and
technological change on war preparation and war fighting; the role of
institutions, values, and ideologies in civilian and military policy-making;
and how far one can speak of the "militarization" of modern society. Special
topic for 2002-03: the Vietnam War. An examination of different aspects of
"America's longest war": its historical and diplomatic background, its
connection to the cold war and to indigenous political and social factors in
southeast Asia, the battlefield experience for Americans and Vietnamese, the
course and dynamics of American policy-making, and the traumatic interaction
between the war and American society and politics.Conference.

314 Medicine and Society in Europe, 1300-1700

Full course for one semester. This course examines ways that Europeans
understood health and illness from the later Middle Ages through the
Scientific Revolution, focusing primarily on two themes: the changing
intellectual formation and social status of the learned physician, and the
changing systems of public health care that developed in response to new
epidemic diseases, religious and political upheaval, and the conquest of the
New World. Conference.

321 Conflicts and Controversies in Modern South Asia

Full course for one semester. This course deals with the most important
conflicts in the history and historiography of modern South Asia. Topics
covered will include caste and its colonial and indigenous representations,
the growth of nationalism and its possible characterizations, colonialism and
its workings and interpretations, gender and approaches to it, and religions
and their place in political and civil society. The aim of the course is to
survey South Asian history from the 1750s to the 1950s, as well as to
familiarize students with the debates on the writing of this history.
Conference. Not offered 2002-03.

322 Subaltern Studies Historiography

Full course for one semester. This course will be a critical examination of
the historical writings of the neo-Marxist, "post-colonial" Subaltern Studies
group. Since 1982, and the publication of its first anthology, this India-
centered research group has had an increasing influence on the study of South
Asia and the field of comparative colonialism. Rejecting the conclusions of
neo-colonial and liberal historiography, the Subaltern Studies group evoked a
"subaltern perspective" from which to examine the failures of the Indian
nationalist movement. Initially concerned with subaltern resistance to
colonial rule, the group has extended its focus to probe the nature of
colonial modernity and the limits of colonial domination, to critique the
romanticism in nationalist historiography, and to theorize the possibility of
vernacular history and postcolonial scholarship. Prerequisites: sophomore
standing and one history course. Conference. Not offered 2002-03.

323 Japanese Modernities

Full course for one semester. A historical investigation of Japan's competing
modernities, 1870-1960. Major topics will include Meiji Westernization and its
critics, statist narrations of modern Japanese subjectivity, hierarchy and
individualism in modernist reform ideologies, territorial and ethnic
displacements within the Japanese empire, cosmopolitan literariness and
nostalgia for cultural and spiritual homelands, ethnic nationalism in the
cultural sciences, and transcendence of the past in Japanese painting and
films. Prerequisite: sophomore standing. Conference. Not offered 2002-03.

324 Rural China

Full course for one semester. This course examines peasants and peasant
society in China from the fifteenth century to the present, focusing on
interactions between peasants and the state, relationships that have been
mediated by rural elites, political activists, and market forces, among
others. Our first objective will be a historical understanding of peasant
families, rural economies, and village society and culture in different areas
of China since the mid Ming Dynasty. We will then employ this knowledge to
reassess theoretical models that have attempted to explain peasant protests
and uprisings, state penetration and rural defense, and various rural
transformations stimulated by market forces, industrialization, and radical
political change. Prerequisite: sophomore standing. Conference.

325 The Family in China and Japan

Full course for one semester. This course will explore the visions and myths,
manifestations and transformations of the family in China and Japan from the
seventeenth century to the present. Major topics will include demographic
change and family "life cycles"; marriage and adoption paradigms; familial
authority, inheritance practices, and management strategies; gender and
generational conflicts; household and lineage interactions; family rituals;
the family as paradigm for conceptualizing society and government; and the
effect of modern revolutions on the family and its manifestations.
Prerequisites: sophomore standing; prior coursework in Asian history or
anthropology would be useful. Conference.Not offered 2002-03.

326 Imperialism and Colonialism in East Asia

Full course for one semester. This course will introduce some of the
theoretical literature on imperialism and colonialism prior to examining East
Asian experiences with such exploitation and control in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries. Major topics will include imperialist policies; economic
imperialism; colonialism as a system of values and social relations; the
relationship of culture and power in the colony; colonial elites and
nationalist movements; gender, race, and class in both colonial and
nationalist agendas; colonial writers and their literature; and the promises
of decolonization and postcoloniality. Prerequisite: sophomore standing; prior
coursework in East Asian history is highly recommended. Conference. Not
offered 2002-03.

327 Meiji Restoration/Revolution

Full course for one semester. Few events in Japanese history receive more
attention than the Meiji Restoration (or Revolution). A critical marker in
Japanese political history, the restoration is also perceived as a major
watershed in economic, social, and cultural developments. This course will
examine the specific drama of imperial restoration, the modernizing revolution
initiated from above thereafter, and the historical contexts that help to
explain both. Major topics will include agrarian uprisings, new religious
movements, and _ee ja nai ka_ dancing; nativism and world rectification
thought; the "opening" of Japan and the effect of international trade and
diplomacy on internal Japanese conflicts; bakafu attempts at political reform
and the avoidance of foreign invasion, the military rebellion of "loyalist"
samurai; and the transformative changes initiated by the Meiji oligarchy after
1868. Readings will include both participant observations and post-Meiji
assessments. Prerequisite: sophomore standing. Conference.

328 Chinese Frontiers

Full course for one semester. After 1400 Chinese explorers and traders
increasingly extended the limits of the "known world" in their search for
profit, knowledge, tribute, and exotica; large-scale Chinese emigration
followed in their footsteps. Conceptual and physical boundaries were also
challenged by Manchu troops from the north and European traders and diplomats
from the south. This course will explore the nature of this geographical and
epistemological boundary transgression from 1400 to 1800. After a brief
examination of Zheng He's great explorations in the early fifteenth century,
we will discuss Chinese practices of charting and mapping physical frontiers.
Official and private attempts to represent and domesticate cultures and
societies on China's periphery will be the focus of our second exploration,
and the effect of this conceptual and physical "travel" upon accepted notions
of ethnicity, gender, and self-identity will make up the final leg of our
voyage. Conference. Not offered 2002-03.

330 Community, Authority, and Culture in Europe's "Wars of Religion,"
1500-1700

Full course for one semester. Concentrating on the history and culture of
northern Europe (especially the British Isles, France, and the Netherlands),
this course focuses on the formation of the characteristic ideologies and
mentalities regarding society, politics, religion, culture, and the person in
the era of Europe's "Wars of Religion." Particular attention will be given to
the close examination in context of significant texts from the period.
Conference. Cross-listed as Religion 330. Not offered 2002-03.

332 Early Modern British Social History: Villages, Towns, and Cities,
1500-1700

Full course for one semester. This course centers its attention on the history
of rural and urban communities in the context of the great religious,
political, social, and cultural upheavals of the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries: the Reformation, the political revolutions of the seventeenth
century, and the development of commercial society and empire. Drawing on a
wide range of historical and literary sources, special attention will be given
to examining the processes of social, political, and cultural change that
helped the British Isles emerge from the seventeenth century with a powerful
state and a modernizing economy, both centered in England. Conference. Not
offered 2002-03.

333 Caste, Class, and Race in South Asia

Full course for one semester. This class will examine the notions of caste,
class, and race in the South Asian context. The course will examine the
classical treatments of caste in religious primary sources; the social
operation of caste in relation to eighteenth- and nineteenth-century ideas of
race and the racial analyses at the base of British colonial ethnology,
historiography, and administration; and the modern intersection of caste and
class in the secular state, and the political ramifications of the ongoing
operation of caste. Specific historical topics will include the first British
census of India; the "martial races"; the nationalist movement, Gandhi, and
the Constitution of India; and the recently rekindled class-race debate
concerning David Cannadine's _Ornamentalism_. Conference.

335 The Development of Britain, c. 1680-1830

Full course for one semester. This course focuses on British sociocultural and
political history, and to a lesser extent British religious and intellectual
history, as Britain changed from an agrarian and pre-industrial society in the
seventeenth century to a commercial and industrial society in the early
nineteenth century. It analyzes the development of the British state and
British empire during the "long eighteenth century," focusing especially on
the formation of political hierarchies and social classes and the growth of
characteristic political, economic, and cultural institutions from the
Revolution of 1688 to the Napoleonic wars and the beginnings of Reform.
Conference.Not offered 2002-03.

341 The Nineteenth-Century American Frontier and West

Full course for one semester. This course explores frontier and Western
history as several interlocking themes by conceptualizing the West as a
multicultural region of men and women and as a changing frontier characterized
by U.S. expansion, governmental control, and capitalism. We will assess
critically questions about the location of the West and the distinctiveness of
the West as a region and will examine the native Americans, Hispanics,
immigrants, and slaves who populated the West; the many meanings of gender;
and the relationship between government, business, and the West. We will also
analyze the construction of historical memory and the mythologies that
Americans have fashioned about the nineteenth-century West. Conference.

343 The Third Reich

Full course for one semester. A study of society, culture, economy, and regime
in the Hitler state. Topics will include the Weimar crisis, the origins,
structure, and evolution of the National Socialist regime,Hitler and the
Hitler myth, Nazi culture, daily life, total war, and the Holocaust. Special
attention will be given to the question of complicity and to the
historiographical controversies associated with the Nazi question including
their sources in social theory. Conference.

345 Weimar: State, Society, and Culture

Full course for one semester. A discussion of Germany's contested modernity
during the Weimar period, beginning with the Wilhelmine monarchy, World War I,
and the Revolution of 1918 and concluding with the National Socialists'
destruction of the Republic. Readings focus on the problems of state structure
and political practice, social and economic change, conflicts in culture, and
the relations among these spheres. Conference. Not offered 2002-03.

347 Interpreting the Scientific Revolution

Full course for one semester. This course examines the concept of the
"Scientific Revolution" and its usefulness as an interpretive framework for
understanding the innovations in natural science during the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, the era of Copernicus, Galileo, Harvey, and Newton. The
course will consider classic texts by historians who constructed the concept,
as well as more recent studies that have challenged it from a variety of
methodological and interpretive standpoints, such as sociological and cultural
perspectives. Conference.

350 State, Culture, and Society in Renaissance Italy (c. 1200-1527)

Full course for one semester. This course will examine the social, political,
and cultural developments associated with the rise of the Northern Italian
communes and the gradual development of the territorial city-state system
during the trecento and quattrocento. Drawing on a wide range of historical
sources and current scholarship, we will examine the interplay between family
and social relations, political theory and practice (in both republics and
signories), economic expansion, and the flourishing artistic and literary
production of the "Renaissance." Particular attention will be devoted to the
rise of humanist culture in both Republican and courtly settings. Conference.
Not offered 2002-03.

352 Culture and Society in Old Regime France 1600-1750

Full course for one semester. The course focuses on selected topics in French
cultural and social history, with the particular topic changing from year to
year. Conference.Not offered 2002-03.

353 The French Revolution, 1775-1800

Full course for one semester. Within a generally chronological framework, the
course will focus on the social and cultural history of the French Revolution.
Particular attention will be given to the ideological origins of the
Revolution, the question of class, the popular movement, revolutionary
culture, gender and citizenship, the role of terror, and the nature of
counter-revolution. Another focus of the course will be the historiography of
the French Revolution. Works from both traditional historiography and
contemporary revisionist historiography will be included on the syllabus.
Conference. Not offered 2002-03.

356 The Republic of Letters: Topics in the French Enlightenment

Full course for one semester. The major focus of the course will be on the
close reading of selected texts by leading figures of the eighteenth-century
French Enlightenment--Montesquieu, Voltaire, Diderot, and Rousseau--as well as
representative "minor" texts. These works will be contextualized through the
reading of modern interpretive studies of the social and cultural history of
the Enlightenment by such historians as Robert Darnton, Dena Goodman, Daniel
Gordon, and Sarah Maza. The course will also consider certain theoretical
issues of the study of the Enlightenment and as posed notably by Kant,
Habermas, and Foucault. Conference.

359 Native Americans in the United States, 1787-1887

Full course for one semester. In this course we will examine the history of
indigenous peoples who lived in the territory claimed by the United States
during the first century of American nationhood. We will analyze the meeting
of Native Americans and immigrants from the perspective of each group.
Conference participants will consider U.S. Indian policy, the importance of
the construction of "Indianness" to the formulation of a white American
identity, and the linkage between policy and identity in re-imagining the
legal meaning of sovereignty. We will probe critically the native responses to
U.S. policies and to Anglo, Hispanic, and Asian migrations onto Indian lands
through readings that examine the many cultures of the first peoples, native
formulations of their own identities, and the varied Indian responses to white
pressure to adopt American standards. Conference.

361 Colonial America

Full course for one semester. This course will examine the cultural conflict
and creative adaptations that occurred as Indians, Europeans, and Africans
encountered each other on the North American continent. While exploring
patterns of cultural interaction we will pay particular attention to the
social construction of race and gender. We will also investigate the changing
nature of religious belief and the relationship between politics, economy, and
society. Conference. Not offered 2002-03.

362 Revolutionary America

Full course for one semester. In the late eighteenth century Americans severed
their colonial relationship with England, formed an independent nation, and
laid the foundations for many of the political institutions and social norms
that persist to this day. This course will focus on the causes of the War of
Independence and the meaning of American revolutionary ideology. We will
address some of the major tensions that characterized the era, including the
conflict between liberty and slavery, enlightenment rationalism and
evangelical religion, private property and communal interests, and Indian
sovereignty and westward expansion. Particular attention will be paid to the
debates over the drafting and ratification of the Federal Constitution and the
subsequent rise of partisan politics in the new nation. Conference. Not
offered 2002-03.

364 Civil War and Reconstruction

Full course for one semester. This course will examine the causes, conduct,
and consequences of the Civil War. First we will compare antebellum society in
the North and South and analyze the sectional political conflict leading to
the secession crisis. Second, we will study the Civil War itself, examining
not only wartime politics and military strategy but the social history of the
conflict as well, paying close attention to the experience of common soldiers,
fugitive slaves, and women. Third, we will explore the dramatic attempt to
build an interracial political democracy after the destruction of slavery and
the defeat of the Confederacy. Conference. Not offered 2002-03.

365 Consumer Cultures in Historical Perspective

Full course for one semester. We will examine the ways in which historians
have employed various theories about the economic, social, and culture
meanings of consumption and commodities to describe the material worlds and
mentalities of the past. Historians' debates about when identifiable consumer
cultures emerged will be explored, with emphasis on how these debates
illuminate our understanding of the development of Western capitalism. We will
consider changes in production as well as consumption, and how such
developments altered peoples' understandings of self, class, and community.
Readings focus on cases in United States in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, with some comparative material from earlier periods and Britain.
The course is open to sophomores, juniors, and seniors, with preference given
to majors in history and the social sciences. Conference. Not offered 2002-03
**.** ~~~~

367 Gender and History

Full course for one semester. The course will examine selected works of
American history that illuminate the social construction of gender in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Topics include the historiographical
problem of "separate spheres" as it has emerged in women's history, the
political uses of men's and women's organizations (such as female voluntary
associations and male fraternal brotherhoods) and of ideologies of womanhood
and manhood, transformations in the understanding of sexuality and sexual
identity, and changes wrought in the sexual division of labor by
industrialization. Conference.

369 American Slavery

Full course for one semester. In this course we will investigate the origins
and development of slavery in Colonial British North America and the United
States. We will explore the creolization of the slave population, the
evolution of African American religious culture, the impact of slavery upon
slave families, the nature of slave resistance, the relationship between
masters and slaves, and the social construction of racial ideology.
Conference. Not offered 2002-03.

375 Empire and Nation in South Asia

Full course for one semester. The Mughal and British Empires have left strong
and lasting impressions on the modern nations of South Asia: India, Pakistan,
and Bangladesh. This course will survey the history of imperialism in South
Asia, then specifically examine aspects of the historical, political, social,
and cultural entities that were the Mughal and British empires, and how these
historical traces exert themselves today. The course will pay particular
attention to the continuities and disjunctions between the Mughal and British
empires, the construction of national and communal identities with the end of
the British empire, and the partition into Pakistan and India, ending with
coverage of the Ayodhya controversy, from its supposed Mughal origins to
today's communal violence. Conference.

379 Politics, Society, and Culture in the United States, 1929-1979

Full course for one semester. This course examines a key 50 years in
twentieth-century U.S. history, from the Great Depression through the Carter
administration. In addition to examining the immediate social, cultural, and
political effects of events such as the Depression and World War II, we will
study the long-term changes they helped to bring about. Topics include
internal population migration, the rise and fall of organized labor, the
emergence of the civil rights movement, and changes in the status of women in
the work force and politics. We will consider how the cold war, U.S.
involvement in Vietnam, and other global political and economic events shaped
domestic culture. We will pay particular attention to the different narrative
frameworks and methods of analysis historians have used to characterize and
understand this period. Prerequisite: one Reed course in history, political
science, or sociology, or consent of the instructor. Conference. Not offered
2002-03.

381 Rebellion, Revolution, and Independence in Latin America

Full course for one semester. This class examines the breakdown of colonial
rule in Latin America from the 1750s through independence in the 1820s.
Starting with a brief examination of the late colonial societies and economies
of Latin America and the Caribbean, and their relations to European powers,
the course focuses on violent opposition and resistance to the colonial order
by different sectors of society. We will study in detail indigenous and
peasant rebellions in central Mexico and highland Peru, the slave rebellion
and struggle for independence in Haiti, and the wars of independence in
Spanish America. The course pays particular attention to the different social,
economic, and political objectives of the various movements, the different
manners in which they articulated their grievances and demands, and the
complex interplay between racial and class dynamics within Latin American
societies and tensions in the metropolis-colony relationship. Prerequisite:
sophomore standing. Conference. Not offered 2002-03.

384 Mexico from Independence through Revolution

Full course for one semester. This course examines the history of Mexico from
independence through the "institutionalization" of the Mexican Revolution in
the 1930s and 1940s, paying particular attention to political, economic, and
social issues. The class will focus on the emergence and development of the
nation-state. During the first half of the class particular attention will be
given to the relationship between the nation and its constituent regions and
societies; the definition of citizenship and the divisions of ethnicity,
class, and gender in Mexican society; the role of foreign powers and capital
in nineteenth-century Mexico; and the economic development and growing social
tensions during the rule of Porfirio Diaz. The latter half of the class will
focus on the Mexican Revolution and its effects on the Mexican economy,
politics, and culture from its outbreak in 1910 until World War II.
Prerequisite: sophomore standing. Conference.Not offered 2002-03.

386 Mexico and the Spanish Conquest

Full course for one semester. This course focuses on central Mexican society
from the rise of the Culhua Mexica (Aztec) in the fourteenth century through
the Spanish conquest and the establishment of the colonial order in the 1500s.
Topics include the political and material organization of the Aztec empire,
ideology and religious practice, and the effects of conquest and disease on
the indigenous societies of Mexico. The last section of the class examines the
effects of Spanish attempts to "re-form" Indian societies by the forcible
introduction of Catholicism and Spanish understandings of property and
exchange, and by the dismemberment and reorganization of indigenous polities.
Readings include academic literature and sixteenth-century texts (in English
translation). Prerequisite: sophomore standing. Conference.Not offered
2002-03.

389 Golden Age Spain

Full course for one semester. A study of Spain from its meteoric rise as a
global power in the sixteenth century to the catastrophic crises of the 1640s,
this course examines in depth central issues in early modern European history,
among them the emergence of the absolutist state, the economic and political
effects of transatlantic imperialism, growing religious orthodoxy and
intolerance, and the intellectual and aesthetic complexity of the Baroque.
Specific topics will include regional and class tensions within Iberia and how
they served as checks to monarchic power; the rise of transatlantic trade,
Seville, and Madrid, and the crippling repercussions for Spanish industry and
the medieval cities of Castile; the dynastic and diplomatic politics of the
Habsburgs; the institutional manifestations of Spanish Catholicism (such as
the Inquisition and the Jesuits); the explosion of mystical (and largely
female) religiosity; and the extraordinary cultural flourishing of the Spanish
Baroque. Sources will include the current historiography and primary texts.
Prerequisite: sophomore standing. Conference. Not offered 2002-03.

391 Ancient History: Greece

See Classics 371 for description.

393 Ancient History: Rome

See Classics 373 for description.

394 Special Topics in Roman History

See Classics 374 for description.

396 Special Topics in Greek History

See Classics 372 for description.

397 Chinese Intellectual History

See Chinese 351 for description.

411 Junior Seminar: The Depression-Era United States

Full course for one semester. The Great Depression (1929-41) was a watershed
event of the twentieth century. Students will explore a range of secondary
texts and primary documents that focus on key events and different historical
approaches to the study of this era. Topics include the expansion of executive
power under FDR, the establishment of federal programs and agencies to deal
with the effects of the Depression, and the growth of labor unions. We will
also examine political and popular culture in this period, including
documentary photography and art produced under the auspices of federal
programs, Hollywood movies, and literature of the Popular Front.
Prerequisites: declared major with junior standing in history (or declared
major with junior standing in American studies with a history concentration)
and two units completed in history. Conference.

412 Junior Seminar: Weimar Culture

Full course for one semester. German culture during the period of the Weimar
Republic, 1918-33, is a focal point of studies of the culture of European
modernity, both for the phenomena to be examined as well as for the
theoretical writings about culture that are still viable today. We will
examine expressions of Weimar culture on a broad basis, including "high,"
"popular," and "low" culture, as well as cultural aspects of politics, gender,
ethnicity, and social and economic life. Our aim will be to establish what
"cultural history" ought to be and how to write it. Prerequisites: ordinarily
open to junior history majors; two units completed in history. Conference.

470 Thesis

Full course for one year.

481 Individual Study

One-half or full course for one semester. Individual study in fields either
more specialized than the regular courses or not covered by them. Individual
reading also may be done in connection with a regular course for one or two
units additional to the course. Prerequisites: junior or senior standing and
approval of instructor and division.

  
  
  
![Reed College 3203 SE Woodstock Blvd., Portland, OR 97202-8199 Phone
503-771-1112 Fax 503-777-7769](images/cat_footer_r1_c1.gif) | [![Reed
Logo/link to Reed home](images/cat_footer_r1_c2.gif)](http://web.reed.edu/)  
---|---  
  
  

