**

SEVENTY YEARS OF LIFE AND LABOR

**

  

**

CHAPTER XXVI

MY ECONOMIC PHILOSOPHY

**



The first economic theory that came under my eyes was not calculated to make
me think highly of economists. My mind intuitively rejected the iron law of
wages, the immutable law of supply and demand, and similar so-called "natural
laws." As a matter of fact the laws had no connection with nature or economic
forces, nor were they laws but merely theories which sought to justify
existing practices. Everywhere those directing industries were seeking to
bring about a control that served their purposes. Those who did not
participate in determination of policies were treated as industrial spoils. It
was revolting to me that human beings should be used without regard to their
needs or their aspirations as individuals. I love men and a sort of passion
surges in me when I see them treated unjustly or forced to forego freedom in
their own lives. As the control built up by holders of capital rested upon
strategic economic advantage, I saw no reason why it was not just as practical
for employees to mobilize and control their economic power as a counter-move.
The force of such economic organization would interpose a protecting barrier
against arbitrary employers who failed to understand that those who supplied
human labor for industries were human beings, and thus make possible the
development of constructive methods.

Organization of wage-earners brought together economic power that could force
recognition of human interests. If the employer refused to recognize the needs
of the workers, the result was conflict of forces. Until there is acceptance
of mutual rights, the labor movement is of necessity a militant movement, and
as I have often quoted, "Eternal vigilance is the price of freedom." Knowing
how much depended upon the virility and the sustained efficiency of our
organized economic force, I have vigilantly guarded against moves to curb or
restrict economic action.

In my conception, the spirit of militancy expresses sustained consecration to
a high purpose. My counsel has consistently been against assuming
responsibilities that would introduce any intimation that the purposes of
labor were not solely humanitarian. There were many efforts, good in
themselves, which labor could help, but I have been jealous that the American
labor movement should retain the character of a crusade for human justice. I
know men and I love them and I also know that the effort to secure justice for
the under-man must be a fight. I also keep myself in fighting trim-mentally
and spiritually. My enemies say that I take blows as well as I give them. I
never ask quarter nor do I hesitate to attack anyone making proposals
subversive of the freedom of workers. I have fought many a fight in support of
the principles of voluntary institutions.

My unfailing support of voluntary principles reflects my aversion to any
theory of economic fatalism. Through years of study, observation, and work has
grown my conviction that economic organization must be based upon an
understanding of all factors concerned in production-materials, power, and
human workers, and that research holds the key to additional scientific
information. Experience has disclosed to me the potency of information and
intelligence in directing economic development. I have seen this intelligence
in the making.

My span of life includes a series of industrial periods marked by panics,
business depression, and wide-spread unemployment followed by a period of
recuperation leading gradually to a return of "prosperity," better wages, and
general employment. The period of depression was often called a period of so-
called overproduction, which was really a period of underconsumption for the
people I knew, a period of hard times. When I came to the United States in
i863, war-time high prices were developing. I was too young and too new to the
country to get much of the meaning of things. But when the crash of 1873 came,
I could see the whole industrial structure stagger, shattered by the forces of
contraction. The puny trade unions of that day were ground to powder by me
national force that seemed above control. Our wages kept on going down until
1877 when we undertook drastic action to stabilize conditions. A period of
slow upbuilding followed. Then came the panic of 1893 followed by that of 1907
and the depression of 1921and 1922.

In a country as big and as fertile as ours, with so many willing workers
seeking the chance to give service, the periods of unemployment accompanying
depression in the business cycle have seemed to me an unnecessary blot upon
American institutions, presenting a challenge to all our claims to progress,
humanity, and civilization. Unemployment means irrecoverable waste of forces
and materials-human as well as economic-not only of production but of all
civilization.

When the panic of 1893 crashed down upon us, I was holding a responsible labor
position and consequently was in touch with attempts to meet resulting
problems. In New York, distress from unemployment was acute.

When late in the summer of i893 abnormal conditions of unemployment became
alarming, I wrote Governor Roswell P. Flower, urging him to call a special
session of the Legislature to consider the unemployment and to determine upon
relief measures. But the Governor-who was a banker-did not decide favorably
upon the suggestion and the great industrial state of New York devised no
constructive policy with which to meet the emergency.

I suggested to the labor organizations of New York that we arrange an
unemployment demonstration to be held in Madison Square Garden. This place was
chosen to typify the size of the problem. The meeting was held and an immense
crowd gathered. When the speaking began another problem was manifest. Henry
Weismann was the first speaker. Weismann was splendidly developed physically,
and had a stentorian voice which never modulated whether speaking of human
freedom or the death of a fly. He made a brilliant beginning, but only lasted
a few minutes. Then Dr. Felix Adler spoke, but not a word was heard. Others
had the same fate. The audience waited patiently perhaps because they had no
employment elsewhere. When my time came, no one expected to hear me, but
without an effort every word of mine rang through the immense building. It
reminded me of a mass meeting years before called by the cigarmakers. The
Socialists had organized a concerted effort to prevent any speaker from being
heard. One man tried to speak, but couldn't be heard. I was standing by him
and knowing the impatience of the crowd, I said to him, "Talk or-." "I can't
be heard," he replied. "Get away then and let me talk," I rejoined and
sweeping him aside I earnestly discussed the issues. It was not ruthlessness
or lack of consideration on my part. I was simply too much engrossed with the
cause to consider anyone or anything. That Madison Square speech was one of
the few in which passion dominated my judgment. I was seething against
injustice done to human beings. I deeply resented the conditions of life which
permitted children of tender years to be employed in trades and callings, and
exemplified in my own life when I was permitted to go to work at a trade when
I was a little more than ten years of age. When put to work at that age, I had
no understanding of the wrong done to childhood, but the inhumanity of it I
have felt more keenly with every year of my life. This realization accounts
for the intensity of feeling in all my activities to safeguard the child life
of my country and of all the countries of the world.

Next to the intensity of my desire to protect child life was my resentment of
unemployment, particularly unemployment in the United States. In such a
country with all its resources, richness of its soil, almost boundless areas
of its territory, with all the achievements of past ages, utilized in the high
development of modern production, that millions of men and women, willing to
work, to produce and to give service not only for their own maintenance and
those dependent upon them but service to the whole country and to the people
of the entire world, were denied the opportunity to give that work and
service, was a blight upon our boasted intelligence and civilization.

The factory and mines were there, tools and machinery were at hand, raw
materials were waiting to be converted into articles of service, human workers
were clamoring for work and opportunity to earn a living, but some blighting
power halted industry, and men, women, and children must suffer want. It was
brutally stupid.

The whole situation had forced upon me a feeling of outrage. If a blight came
as an act of nature or what is termed an act of God, there could be no just
cause for criticism or complaint or protest. But in a country such as ours,
rich as a nation could be, when large masses of our citizenship were forced to
endure hunger because unemployed, my protest knew no bounds.

Such was my state of agonized feeling in my early manhood I would not have
hesitated in entering into any under-taking that would bring about a radical
change and make amends for a state so horrid in a country of intelligence and
civilization.

At that great mass meeting, of the unemployed I indulged myself in an attack
upon the conditions, misery, and poverty by which we were surrounded and of
which I was at times one of the victims. In the bitterness of my soul, in the
course of my speech I rendered with the most dramatic inflections I could
command the following lines:

  
Oh, that a poor man's son as has been said,  
Became a convict to earn his bread,  
That a poor man's daughter to earn a crust  
Became a victim of some rich man's lust.  
Oh, angels shut thine eyes,  
Let conflagration illumine the outraged skies!  
Let red Nemesis burn the hellish clan  
And chaos end the slavery of man!

  
The state of mind of the audience, nearly half of whom were unemployed, was
such that at the conclusion of my address I doubt if there was one person who
was not on his feet, cheering and shouting his approval. It was a wild scene,
there was not one among them but was in an ugly frame of mind. I could not
imagine the lengths to which, under the influence due to their own misery and
my harangue, they might have gone. The responsibility of my utterance haunted
me not only that night but for many a day after.

When I now contemplate the exploitations of child life to satiate greed of
exploiters, when I think of the unemployment of millions of willing workers,
there is no abatement of my feeling of resentment, but I realize that relief
of such conditions will not come by burning the "hellish clan" but by
constructive effort and gradual upbuilding. I have tried to impress upon my
fellow-workers to organize for self-protection and promotion of their rights
and interests and to make these organizations strong and effective.

The same deep sentiment and resentment which the exploitation of child life
and imposition of idleness upon millions of people rouse in me I feel too in
respect to the demands which have so frequently been made to impose compulsory
labor in any form upon the people. As an eleven year old boy in a factory in
England, I heard from my elder shopmates the denunciation of slavery in
America. I had learned the anti-slavery songs and sang them in resonant tones.
When I was brought with my parents and brothers to the United States July 29,
1863, the spirit for the abolition of slavery had already found its lodgment
within me. I prepared as a boy to use whatever influence I had that slavery
not only be abolished in the United States but never re-established-at least,
not without my most emphatic protest no matter where that protest might lead.

During the fall and winter of 1893, there was widespread unemployment such as
I had never seen before.

When the convention of the Federation met in Chicago in the fall of 1893, we
held our sessions in the old City Hall. When the session of the convention
ended for the day, there were hundreds of homeless, workless men seeking
refuge in the corridors. When we held evening sessions, as the elevators did
not run at night, we had to walk down the stairs very carefully for we had to
pick our way over men who were lying on the steps and on the floor with only
newspapers for protection. It was a scene that burned into my mind. But the
labor unions weathered the storm and industrial standards were not completely
overthrown. The unemployment was terrible, but the idea that panics were the
result of uncontrollable and unknowable forces was passing.

When the session of the New York Legislature began the winter of i893, I
watched its deliberations carefully. Thomas C. Platt, president of the United
States Express Company, was then a member of the Senate and controlled the
Republican state party machine. When adjournment was approaching, there was no
evidence of any constructive thought upon the unemployment problem. Even the
appropriation bills carrying funds for public works were unpassed. Now I had
no love for Platt and knew he had none for labor-but regardless of this, if
Platt could do anything for the unemployed I was willing to use him as an
instrumentality. I wrote him, asking that he consider the advisability of
enacting legislation to appropriate money for public work, for I reminded him
it would be bad policy to add to unemployment by failure to act upon the
measure.

As I considered these facts, they seemed to me to indicate the necessity for a
sustained policy of wage-increases in order that consumption levels should be
maintained commensurate with the increases in production levels, and that
credit control should be based upon production needs rather than upon
speculative gain.

General stagnation of business which followed the financial storm was
terrific, and was manifest in industry, construction, and all employing
concerns, which slowed down if they did not stop. Family bread-earners walked
the streets. There was an appalling amount of destitution and suffering. All
kinds of people were without work. There was a curious money scarcity. There
seemed to be plenty of everything but money and confidence or credit. Those of
us who had no Wall Street connections were somewhat blindly sure there was a
money trust somewhere and that we were its victims. Our whole economic
structure was paralyzed. Workingmen all over the country found themselves
without work or money. They were helpless in the clutches of some invisible
power.

In the West where there had been rapid building of railroads, numbers of men
from the East suddenly found themselves adrift. There was nothing to do
anywhere, so the men determined to come East. Men traveling the road without
money naturally fell into step together. They shared the benefits of their
ingenuity as well as their common misfortune. Outwardly, they were bands of
homeless vagabonds roaming the country. There was a picturesque element in the
situation that lent itself to publicity. The newspapers gave it much space.
Someone conceived the idea of utilizing the eastward movement of the
unemployed as a national demonstration to focus attention on the need for
relief measures.

By some mysterious folk-agreement in all parts of the country, there was a
general determination to take the problem to Congress-to present a "petition
in boots". Men wanted work and a financial system that would function. They
had faith in the power of Congress. Some one of the bands called itself the
Army of the Unemployed. The idea caught popular favor. Each group of marchers
was called an army and leaders appeared. There were Frey of California, Kelly
from the Northwest, Coxey from Ohio. The men who rallied to these standards
were not all fanatics, vagrants, or professional hoboes. The men were for the
most part earnest, thoughtful men, skilled workmen, and only the minority
belonged to the migratory element. There were expert machinists, miners, and
practically every kind of craftsman.

As the armies went eastward through the country, their approach was heralded
days in advance of their appearance. In some localities they were treated
kindly, fed, and given other hospitality. In other places, they were not
permitted to enter towns, but were hastened onward by police. The "powers that
be" were watching anxiously. If the armies ever broke through the ludicrous
interpretation which the press fastened upon them, there were present some of
the elements of which revolutions are made.

General Coxey of Ohio who had a specific plan for good roads and the
inauguration of a system of long-needed public works, became the central
figure of the movement. He had a fine stock farm at Massillon, Ohio.
Associated with him was Carl Brown from the Pacific Coast who had married the
daughter of General Coxey. I had met Brown in California. He was a man of
parts, a big-hearted lover of men, a dreamer and an idealist. Early in the
spring, Coxey and Brown were in Indianapolis where headquarters had been
established at the Circle House. A mass meeting in Indianapolis was addressed
by Debs and Howard of the American Railway Union. The provisional committee
had planned for a march of all bands to Washington and a National Labor
Congress in that city on July 4, 1894They were soliciting the co-operation of
all labor organizations in that Congress. I had several letters from both
Brown and Frey asking me to endorse the plan and seeking to show that the
Chicago Convention of the A. F. of L. had endorsed the Coxey good-roads plan.
I never officially endorsed their program, but I went to Washington to consult
with General Coxey and to help him get a hearing. On behalf of his good-roads
project I went personally to many Representatives and Senators and urged the
right of petition. I held that the unemployed had come to Washington to
exercise the rights of free citizens, to present their grievances and ask for
redress, and that they had the right to a hearing. I spoke to several
divisions of the army camped outside of Washington. At one time when I was
speaking to the army, a collection was gathered to relieve the urgent physical
needs of the unemployed. I emptied my pockets without a thought as to my own
needs. I had to walk back to town and go to my son's house. Then I got supper,
stayed all night, and borrowed enough money to take me back to New York. An
arrangement was made for a parade and a great open air meeting to be held in
the Capitol grounds where Coxey spoke from the steps. A little later a few of
the "soldiers" of the unemployed stepped on the grass and were arrested and
the army began to melt away. This was the only answer the government gave to
an urgent problem which lay at the very foundation of national progress.

Coxey returned to his stock farm. Brown went to Sacramento where he huddled in
a shack, working over a flying machine he was perfecting. I met him there
during one of my trips and he told me all about his invention. After it was
completed he brought it to Washington for a demonstration in order to realize
on his work. On that long protracted mission Brown became a well-known figure
in the halls of the Capitol and on the streets of Washington where he was a
frequent speaker in open-air meetings. The organized labor movement kept on
working to alleviate unemployment and to better conditions of employment.

Wage-earners had to bear the consequences of the mismanagement and wrong-
doings of others. Though I felt that industry was responsible, there was not
at the time sufficient data to establish the case-unemployment attending the
period of depression was then considered unavoidable. The theory was
repeatedly advanced, that the cause of the situation was to be found in the
money question, but I felt sure there was some more fundamental cause. I felt
that there was some maladjustment in industry that was responsible. In 1897 I
wrote for the Forum:



During the industrial stagnation of the past four years, the organizations of
labor have performed a service to the people of our country for which they
have never received recognition, and for which, perhaps, they will never
receive the gratitude to which they are justly entitled. One of the great
causes of this stagnation -if not the greatest cause-was undoubtedly the fact
that the productive power of the workers progressed at a greater ratio than
their ability-or rather their opportunity-to consume. In other words, there
exists in our economic system the evil sometimes called "overproduction" but
which might be more correctly termed "underconsumption." For, were the
consumptive power of the workers to keep better pace with their productive
ability, the anomalies of a people going a-hungered with ever-recurring
industrial, commercial, and financial panics, crises, and stagnation-in the
midst of plenty -would be unknown.



In 1903 1 noted indications of a recurring period of depression and in my
report to the Boston Convention declared it the height of economic unwisdom to
curtail the consuming power of the masses, because no industry or country
could become great if founded upon poverty. Based upon my conception that wage
rates can be used as a stabilizing force, I recommended that the working
people should resist any attempt to reduce their wages or increase their hours
of work, and embodied that slogan in the parody:

It is better to resist and lose  
Than not to resist at all.

A short time after the convention the annual meeting of the National Civil
Federation was held. Somehow I felt that that meeting was especially called so
that I might have the opportunity of revising the thought which I had
recommended to the Boston Convention, and that the hope was entertained that
through the influence of my surroundings I would modify my declarations or the
declaration of the convention.

With that feeling strong within me, and in resentment of that assumption, in
the most emphatic terms I repeated the declaration that labor would resist
reductions in wages, let the consequences be what they may. During my talk the
scenes that I witnessed in several places and particularly in Chicago came to
me vividly and I portrayed them as best I could: the thousands upon thousands
of unemployed, hungry workmen, protesting, demanding work instead of charity
or the soup houses, and all that damnable situation which brought millions of
our people into a state of unemployment, without homes and hungry. To finish I
said something like this: "And by the gods, such a condition of affairs shall
never be repeated in the United States if I can help in any way to prevent
it." With the finishing of this sentence Bishop Potter, who was in the
meeting, picked up his hat and hurriedly walked out with a very much flushed
face. I learned that he understood that I had blasphemed and taken the name of
the Lord in vain.

When the business crisis came in 1907, 1 was prepared to make good use of my
experiences. One of the functions of the annual meetings of the National Civic
Federation is a dinner which is attended by important employers, big
financiers, trade unionists, and many people well known nationally. The dinner
furnished an extraordinarily advantageous stage from which to make a
declaration for which I wanted national consideration. There were fully four
hundred there talking conventionalities, men and women in evening clothes, the
women gorgeous in gleaming jewels. Never have I felt more peculiarly alone. I
was conscious that I was the spokesman of the "working class" and I didn't
care how I startled or shocked the millionaires if I protected my fellows. I
was ruthless in what I intended to do. The fire of the revolutionary was
burning through me as I rose to make labor's reply to the careful, smug
suggestions of retrenchment and wage reductions as the way out of the
industrial stagnation. I fairly flung defiance at the buccaneers of industry
as I declared, "Labor will not submit to any wage reductions."

That dinner party gasped. On the days that followed Wall Street considered.
Wage-earners throughout the country heard the rallying call, and stiffened
their backbones. Up and down the country went the slogan, "No wage
reductions," like a fiery cross. A stabilizing element was injected into
cumulative forces that like witches were stirring the cauldron of panic.

The Carriage and Wagon Drivers of New York were out on strike at that time.
Marcus M. Marks was chairman of the Committee on Conciliation of the National
Civic Federation and he called the employers and the drivers into conference.
I knew of this conference, but I could not participate in it because of my
other activities. Mr. Marks was a fairly liberal employer and was always
helpful in conciliating and adjusting disputes between employers and unions of
workmen, but he was seldom helpful in his own industry.

In the dispute to which I have referred, the union of the drivers had been
suspended from the Brotherhood of Teamsters and Stablemen and it was therefore
not in direct or indirect affiliation to the A. F. of L. Mr. Marks came to me
one evening just at the close of the meeting of the day and said, "Mr.
Gompers, I have some interesting information to give you. You know of the
conferences which have been held for the purpose of adjusting the differences
between the drivers and their employers. Notwithstanding the fact that they
are not part of your Federation, with the opening of the proceedings the
spokesman for the union announced: 'We will arbitrate everything except wages.
Our chief, President Gompers, has declared that we are forbidden to accept any
reduction in wages.' "

The dispute between the union and their employers was adjusted by Mr. Marks
without any change in the wages of the men.

The result of the 1907 experience convinced me that panics and business
depression can be controlled, perhaps avoided, if we know contributing causes.
I felt there must be certain fundamental principles of industrial order to
which we could cling at such times. But I had to wait many years before I saw
a comprehensive effort launched to study periods of depression and to
determine principles of intelligent control. That came with the World War
aftermath. Again labor opposed wage reductions and was fairly successful in
holding normal increases. By this time management had begun to appreciate that
maintaining wage levels means maintaining a stable purchasing demand and hence
is a stabilizing force. Wage reductions by decreasing demand adds impetus to
the trend toward business depression. On the other hand, gradual wage
increases tend to absorb increases in production. It is my opinion based upon
six decades of experience that the future will bring progressively high wage
levels with gradual price decreases. Our financial problems during the
transition from war to peace organization were handled by the Federal Reserve
Board in such a way as to avoid any financial crash, but the period was
ushered in by wide-spread depression and unemployment. In the Unemployment
Conference that was called under the leadership of Herbert C. Hoover,
Secretary of Commerce, attention was turned to the problem of major
consideration-how to organize industry so as to achieve stability of
employment.

I went into the conference hopeful that something could be done to promote
that spirit of co-operation necessary for working out the problems of
industry. The representatives of reaction predominated in the conference and
they opposed every suggestion I made with a systematic if not intelligent
consistency, characteristic of the "open-shop" movement, then at its height.
In the Committee on Manufactures on which I served, I introduced three
resolutions which could not be designated as destructively revolutionary. The
resolutions advocated: first, uniform system of cost accounting so there might
be available comparable bases of production information; second, that all
parties accept the challenge implied in the report on the Elimination of Waste
in Industry by the Federated American Engineering Societies and join in the
practical work of eliminating causes of high production costs in industry; and
third, the compilation of unemployment statistics by government agencies.

The employer members of my committee as a unit opposed my proposals. When I
saw their attitude, I determined to test them to the limit and I resorted to
every rule of parliamentary tactics to try their metal. They defeated my
resolutions, but they did not contribute credit to their own cause. They made
it impossible for the conference to make recommendation embodying the most
enlightened thought on industrial problems. When I contrast industrial
conditions of the ten years following the war between the states and the
conditions now, I am convinced that tendencies can be controlled in accord
with principles developed through experience and study. As our knowledge
widens, we shall be able to establish a stable industrial order in which
organizations of wage-earners will be an integral part.

At no time in my life have I worked out definitely articulated economic
theory. As there has been need for practical action in various fields, I have
always squared proposals upon the few fundamental principles that determine
all my judgments. I am very frankly a partisan-union man-not a half-hearted
advocate who may be swayed either to the one side or the other. I repeat and
emphasize the statement, that in so far as the organization of labor in trade
unions is concerned, the general policy they pursue, their purposes and
aspirations, I am unalterably with them, yea, even to the extent of their
errors, their mistakes. If I cannot advocate or defend publicly an error or
mistake made, I shall try to find an excuse and apologize for it. I have
criticized and will criticize and attack a union to the union itself; endeavor
to influence it to avoid error, to rectify a mistake, to undo a wrong, without
regard whether they were aimed at a fellow-unionist, a non-member, or an
employer. But to the other world, the large world, the world of selfish
antagonism to the defenders and protectors of the workmen's rights and
interests, the trade unions, I am a union man, and one who even under most
adverse, conditions will defend the trade union movement.

My experience has extended over periods in economic development in which the
whole nature and organization of industry have been transformed. Within my
span of life have come inventions that have been revolutionizing in effect.
Electricity both for lighting and power, the telephone, the wireless, the
submarine cable, the radio, the transcontinental railroad, aeroplane, electric
street cars, internal combustion engine, cold storage, are a few of the
changes that I have seen come. Methods of work, methods and agencies of
communication, and facilities for travel have brought society so close
together that merging of economic interests and activities has been an
inevitable result. The consolidation came so gradually that many did not see
the trend of development until some of the new trusts were exercising their
newly found and rapacious powers. The spring of 1884 gave to New York an
inkling of the nature of a packers' trust. Up until that time the meat for the
New York market had been prepared either in New York State or New Jersey and
there were a number of butcher workmen in New York City. New York had killed
weekly from ten to thirteen thousand head of cattle and Chicago only one
thousand, but with changes in transportation and in other economic factors the
Chicago packers were able to put meat into New York markets at a lower price.
The immediate result was the development of the Chicago Packing Trust. New
York butcher workmen did not understand the economic meaning of their enforced
unemployment and they launched a campaign against the importation of foreign
meat. They held a big mass meeting in Cooper Union and asked their fellow-
workers to join in boycotting Chicago meat. But the butcher workmen were
fighting industrial forces too powerful to be checked by their protest. The
economies of the Chicago packing houses and the power of their economic
organization soon wiped out small independent firms. On the other hand, the
corporation is a method of group ownership accompanying quantity production
which in turn necessitates the dividing of work into operations so that groups
performed what was formerly the work of an individual. The change brought
danger to the individual workers until they learned to protect their
individual rights and opportunities through organized activity in groups. The
trust was a part of this general movement to associated effort that is a
distinctive feature of our present economic organization. The trade union
movement is labor's constructive contribution to democratic regulation of
large scale production. I believe that industry can devise and operate
economic principles of administration that will result in constructive control
and continuous progress. So I hold that trusts should not be suppressed, but
regulated and helped to develop constructive control. The trust movement came
with the development of quantity production. In their infancy these Gargantuan
creatures were conscious only of their power and were unrestrained by ethics
or experiences. They developed with ruthless disregard of competitors and
without understanding or care for the human agents that were necessary in
developing the network of creative force necessary to make the economic
structure a going machine. The trusts and the large-scale industries generally
made the mistake of thinking they could treat employees as impersonally as
they did material things. The corporation form of ownership had replaced the
system of individual ownership and personal management. Expansion of credit
revolutionized methods of financing. The early trust seemed only a devouring
monster for those without practical industrial experience.

American spirit rebelled against it as a new form of tyranny and the trust
problem became a foremost issue in public discussion. The reformers in state
Legislatures and Congress began to discuss legislation to protect the people.
Most of the politicians seemed to think that by making a law they could
prohibit trusts.

From the first I mistrusted the proposal to take the trust problem into the
political field. It seemed to me we could not safely trust policies of
repression, and further more, the economic field was competent to deal with
policies of regulation. Just what the procedure would be I did not attempt to
foretell, but I considered organization of all factors concerned an essential
prerequisite to orderly development. Organization would assure opportunity for
co-operation in working through the problems that concerned all.

Regardless of anti-trust agitation, consolidation remained the trend. Quite
contrary to the prevailing economic dogma that free competition was the
necessary basis to industrial progress, the economies and efficiency of
consolidation presaged tremendous strides.

When both in transportation and industrial organization there came pooling or
merging of interests, the problem of financing the combines made the older
financial game seem like child's play. Only central banks were competent to
finance the large-scale undertakings, so the control of industry gravitated
into the hands of Wall Street. The development seemed to me natural. I
believed absolutely that the organized labor movement was the efficient way to
protect and to promote the interests of wage-earners. It seemed to me
perfectly logical that employers should recognize the relation between
organization and orderly development in their business. I did not condone the
evil practices which marked the evolution of the trust system (on the contrary
I severely condemned them) but I believed the cure for those evils would
develop most effectively through voluntary recognition that better practices
bring more permanent and more satisfactory progress. I hold that good
practices must be self-justifying.

The trust was a phase of the new industrial organization where groups replaced
individual effort. Our problem was not to try to prevent a normal development
but to find the principles and technique for utilizing group action and group
production in furtherance of general welfare. It is a problem to whose
solution the groups concerned should jointly contribute. The organization of
management, finance, and producing workmen is the way to develop discipline
and information within those groups. The next step, to my mind, is co-
operation of all the groups with the pooling of information to determine
control of the industry. The industry would thus become self-regulated and
disciplined while checks interposed by organized consumers would deter non-
social tendencies. As my contribution to this development, I have promoted the
organization of workers and opposed attempts of politicians to bungle the
economic development.

Organization was response to economic forces, and therefore I did not believe
that arbitrary limitations especially by law could prevail against it. When
the Sherman Anti-Trust Law was proposed, I did not believe it would be
effective in curbing trusts, but fearing that attempts would be made to use
the law against collective action by wage-earners, I went to several members
of Congress and told them my fears. The bill originally introduced by Senator
Sherman considered in the debates of 1890 was an anti-monopoly bill intended
to restore full and free competition. I was very apprehensive that such a law
would be used against labor organizations and I presented this point of view
to a number of Senators. Senators Teller, Morgan and Stewart expressed the
same point of view in a debate in the Senate. Senator Sherman did not share
their apprehension, but in order to avoid confusion accepted a proposal made
by Senator George which specifically excluded arrangements, agreements, and
combinations between laborers made with a view of lessening the number of
hours or increasing their wages. Similar exemptions were provided for persons
engaged in horticultural or agricultural pursuits who were seeking to increase
the prices of agricultural or horticultural products. The Sherman Anti-
Monopoly proposal with the exemption proviso was referred back to the
Committee on the Judiciary with instructions to report within twenty days.
When the bill was reported at the end of that time, it had been changed from
an anti-monopoly to an anti-combination bill. In view of this change the
Senators did not believe it necessary to include the labor exemption proviso.
Senators George, Hoar and Stewart were sympathetic with the position that
there was a fundamental difference between labor organizations and
organizations for profit. However, Senator Hoar had so clearly defined in his
own mind the fundamental difference between these two organizations that he
failed to appreciate the confusion that might be in the minds of others and
the measure was finally reported from his committee without the George
proviso.

Events soon demonstrated that the law was to be applied to labor unions and
that it was not effective in curbing trusts. After the Sherman Anti-Trust Law
had been in effect about nine years, a four-day conference on trusts was held
in Chicago for the purpose of assembling opinion and information upon the
results of the law. In my statement in the conference I declared that the
state is not capable of preventing the development or the natural
concentration of industry and that all propositions to accomplish that purpose
react for the greater injury to wage-earners than to trusts. At another time
in expressing myself upon the issue I declared, "I am not going to join the
howl against trusts; all I ask is to give us the freedom we want to work out
our own salvation and to give industry the same opportunity." Economic law and
necessity are stronger than legislation or police power. To my mind only
development based on voluntary institutions holds promise of permanent
progress, for such development is responsive to developing technology and
cultural advance of individuals and group activity.

In addition to proscription of trusts, our government began to develop a
system of state regulation of privately owned and operated enterprises-such as
railways. To this effort I gave my hearty support and co-operation, but I have
resisted unswervingly all proposals to inaugurate government ownership and
operation for two reasons: first, because I believe our main dependence lay in
individual initiative; and secondly, because I believe the economic field is
essentially different from the political and the legal.

I reached this conclusion gradually after discarding proposals to which I
temporarily subscribed. Some which I have discarded have not infrequently been
suggested again by "Progressives" who dub me "conservative" or even
reactionary. My method of evolving my philosophy has been intuitive.

The principles of political freedom worked out in our Republic have been based
upon political equality. If the rights of any individual are infringed, he has
the right of counsel. But where political conditions touch a man's daily life
once, economic conditions will affect it fifty times. To insure economic
justice, therefore, I hold that the principle of the right of counsel
maintains. By economic counsel I mean an agent expert upon the matters in
question selected with the approval of the individual. Thus the economic
organization of the workers is basic. This economic organization, in addition
to its defensive service, is free to develop constructive functions as soon as
it is accepted by the management and its spokesmen admitted to conferences
considering various problems in which their work is concerned. This procedure
provides a way to utilize the experience and the information of workmen which
in turn can be collected and systematized only through organization.

The next step is organization of the shop, thus creating a trade council in
which all factors in the industry have representation, and then organization
of the whole industry along the same lines. This is a natural development
which we see now in the making. Ultimately perhaps, those things which concern
all industry may be determined by a national economic body, truly
representative, competent to make decisions and to secure compliance, or
political regulation must develop a new technique and more competent
personnel.

The methods and the agencies for progress in the economic world must be
evolved out of economic experience and life. It is a serious mistake to
confuse the two fields or to carry the problems of one into the other.

The evident decline of the Legislature in recent years confirms my belief that
the economic world must work out its own procedure and principles of order.
Trade unions or voluntary associations of wage-earners constitute one of the
essential agencies for establishing procedure of control. The development of
large-scale production, the increasing authority of science in determining
processes, and the more recent investigations of management for the purpose of
making it truly scientific, together with the marked tendency toward trade
associations, are to me a most gratifying exemplification of my thought that
discernment of the essential difference between the economic and the political
clarifies the problem of progress.

I have often allowed myself to dream of the possibilities of production if all
were free to work unretarded by the existing restraints. The tremendous
increase in output, together with sustained advancement in quality or
workmanship, would transform standards of material welfare for the whole
world. But more important than the material results would be the satisfaction
of the higher qualities of men and women.

Several times the plain question has been put to me by members of the Senate
Committee on Judiciary: "Mr. Gompers, what can we do to allay the causes of
strikes that bring discomfort and financial suffering to all alike?" I have
had to answer, "Nothing." My answer has been interpreted as advocating a
policy of drift. Quite the contrary to my real thought. Foremost in my mind is
to tell the politicians to keep their hands off and thus to preserve voluntary
institutions and opportunity for individual and group initiative and leave the
way open to deal with problems as the experience and facts of industry shall
indicate. I have, with equal emphasis, opposed submitting determination of
industrial policies to courts. But it is difficult for lawyers to understand
that the most important human justice comes through other agencies than the
political. Economic justice will come through the organization of economic
agencies, the increasing adjustment of economic relationships in accord with
principles evolved by experience, the formulation of material scientific
standards, and development of the principles and coordinating functions of
management, based upon understanding of human welfare. Just where this sort of
endeavor will carry us-who can say? But of this I am certain, it means
progress toward a better day. Though frequently impatient with existing
wrongs, I am not impatient with what sometimes seems the slow progress of the
labor movement.

My patience has rested upon realization of facts, not upon lack of idealism or
sentiment. I realized that since the labor movement is a living, sentient
thing, growth comes from life within. It can be aided, directed, but not
forced. Just as a plant may be cultivated and pruned, cared for in every way,
still it cannot be compelled to grow or flower, so the labor movement cannot
be handled or computed as material quantities. The degree or extent of
organization is a relative term. There is a potential or temporary
organization which may become permanent as soon as two men come together and
discuss organization. Latent possibilities are quickened and one of the stages
that leads to permanent organization exists. So, when a great mass of workers
ceases to be indifferent to organization, that is the first indication of
organization viewed as evolutionary process. These facts I knew intuitively
and have turned them about in my mind during the decades I have been in the
movement, but it is an understanding that those outside of the movement rarely
grasp.

This shifting and indeterminate line of demarcation between labor and
organized labor I have also used for another purpose. Whenever an achievement
has been accomplished, I claim it for organized labor. Anything for the
benefit of the workers I may claim by emphasizing organized labor. Wherever
there is doubt, I let all labor share the responsibility.

I have worked a lifetime for the labor movement and I feel that I know it as
few others do. Out of that knowledge is born faith in its destiny and its high
service.

* * *

**[Return to History 316Z Syllabus](his316f2000.html#Unions and Workers, I)**

