##

## ![](images/barnone.gif)

## _17.554 Syllabus (2001)_

##  

[_Home/Contact_](index.html) \- [_Syllabus_](syllabus.html) \- [_Readings by
Week_](readings.html) \- [_Useful Links_](weblinks.html) \- [_Examples of Good
Work_](papers.html) \- [_Class e-mail List_](classlist.html) \- [_Syllabus and
Calendar in PDF Format_](17.554_syllabus.pdf)

Home/Contact Syllabus Readings by Week Useful Links Examples of Good Work
Class e-mail List Syllabus and Calendar in PDF Format

##  

#####

##### PURPOSE

This course is designed for graduate students in political science. Although
doctoral students specializing in Latin America will presumably do outside
reading, the class itself should be sufficient to prepare students for field
exams. In case of unusually high enrollment, preference will be given to
doctoral students over other students, and to students at MIT over those at
other universities.

##### PREREQUISITES

The course assumes some familiarity with the history and geography of Latin
America, as well as with comparative political science. For the uninitiated,
useful sources on the region include _The Cambridge History of Latin America_
, Thomas Skidmore and Peter Smith's _Modern Latin America_ , Gary Wynia's _The
Politics of Latin American Development_ , or John Sheahan's _Patterns of
Development in Latin America_. There are also a number of widely available
readers for those who feel the irrepressible urge to brush up on comparative
politics.

Knowledge of Spanish or Portugese is not required for this course. All course
readings are in English, class discussions will be conducted in English, and
papers should be written in English. However, non-native speakers who wish to
read some of the course materials in their native language should see me
during office hours, as many of the core readings are available in translation
or were originally written in other languages.

##### COURSE READINGS

Weekly required readings average 175 pages. These readings are designed to
acquaint you with the core paradigms in Latin American politics, as well as
some of the most well known or well done empirical studies. They obviously
leave out a lot. For this reason, there is an extensive list of recommended
readings each week, listed in order of relevance for the course. Keep in mind,
though, that these recommended readings are intended for two categories of
people: (1) those who plan to write a review essay that week, an option
discussed below, and (2) the type of crazy overachievers who think it is "fun"
to run marathons. If you don't fit into one of these categories, don't fret
about the recommended readings.

Most weeks are accompanied by a "literary overlay" of novels, essays, or films
that treat themes raised by the required readings. These additional materials
will not be discussed in class explicitly and you should not worry about them
in your papers. They are on the syllabus because they are classics, and those
of you who plan to concentrate on the region will find them worth the
investment. Others may just want to rent a movie or two in the course of the
semester. Regardless, please remember that the purpose of these materials is
to lighten your mood by offering you a different perspective on the course
themes, not to oppress you further.

Your course reader will have most of the required articles and book chapters.
Required readings also include selections from books (listed below) which are
_not_ in the course reader. Those of you who plan to focus on the region will
eventually want these books for you own library, so you should probably just
grit your teeth and buy them. Those who are not planning to focus on Latin
America may prefer to but the first two and read the rest on reserve. In any
case, they are listed in descending order of priority for the class, so you
can decide for yourselves which you want to purchase.

  * Moises Naim, _Paper Tigers and Minotaurs: The Politics of Venezuela's Economic Reforms_ (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment, 1993).

  * Alfred Stepan, _Rethinking Military Politics: Brazil and the Southern Cone_ (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1988).

  * Larry Diamond, Juan Linz, and Seymour Martin Lipset, _Democracy in Developing Countries: Latin America_ (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1989).

  * Jorge I. Dominguez and Abraham F. Lowenthal, eds., _Constructing Democratic Governance: The New South American Democracies_ (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996).

  * Stephan Haggard and Robert R. Kaufman, eds., _The Politics of Economic Adjustment: International Constraints, Distributive Conflicts, and the State_ (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, c1992).

  * Dietrich Rueschemeyer, Evelyne Huber Stephens, and John D. Stephens, _Capitalist Development and Democracy_ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992).

  * Juan Linz and Alfred Stepan, _Problems in Democratic Transition and Consolidation: Southern Europe, South America, and Post-Communist Europe_ (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 1996). 

Finally, as you will see, this syllabus contains several more weeks of reading
than we actually have. Weeks will be rotated in different semesters, depending
on student interest.

##### CLASS PRESENTATIONS AND SUMMARIES

Each class will begin with a presentation discussing and critiquing the
readings. You should choose a week (or, in the case of enrollment under ten
people, two weeks) for your presentation. Bear in mind that the goal of your
presentation is to refresh people's memories about the readings, to highlight
the key areas of disagreement in the readings, and to stimulate class
discussion; you should _not_ feel compelled to mechanically summarize every
article.

#####  WRITTEN REQUIREMENTS

You have the option of writing one of the following: (1) five short papers
_OR_ (2) three short papers plus one review essay _OR_ (3) one long research
paper.

Short papers should be 1,000-1,500 words and should address some of the
required readings from the week in a coherent way. They should _not_ be
composites of separate critiques of the readings. Rather, they should use the
course readings to develop a broader argument about a particular topic from
that week - e.g., dependency theory, state formation, democratization in the
southern cone, new social movements, etc.

Review essays should be 2,500-3,000 words and should cover the relevant
required and recommended readings for that week, as well as any other
materials you deem appropriate. They should summarize the main arguments from
the materials you address in a way that culls from them a series of testable
hypotheses - along with the evidence for each. Keep in mind that these review
essays are not "book reviews," and they do not need to address each article or
book individually. Rather, they should be abridged versions of the sort of
literature review you would do for a dissertation.

Both short papers and review essays are due to my mailbox in the political
science department by 4 p.m. the day before class. I'd like to practice blind
grading, so please don't include a title page or put your name in the footer.
Also, at the risk of stifling self-expression and generally sounding like a
pain, I ask that all essays and short papers be double-spaced and submitted in
Times font. (Otherwise I learn people's fonts after the first paper, which
defeats the purpose of blind grading.)

Research papers should be approximately 6,000 words. They may be either: (1) a
much more extensive version of a review essay or (2) a presentation of
original research related to the course themes. If you choose to write a
research paper, you must meet with me to discuss your topic as soon as
possible. You must then submit a one paragraph abstract _within ten days of
the first class_ , a reading list by the third class, a draft paper at least
three weeks before grades are due, and the completed paper at least one week
before grades are due. I strongly encourage those of you who wish to write a
research paper to choose a topic related to your dissertation or some other
larger project. Just make sure, though, that anything you submit for this
class is substantially different from work you have turned in or will turn in
for other courses.

##### TOTAL WORKLOAD

Counting reading, preparation for class, presentations, and writing, students
should expect to spend approximately 12 hours per week on the course.

##### GRADING

Half of your grade (50%) will be based on class participation, including your
presentation(s). For grading purposes, each presentation will count as three
class sessions - that is, about 10% of your overall grade. My somewhat odd
habit is to record letter grades for each student after each class, so regular
class participation is taken seriously. However, each student is entitled to
one unexcused absense or "uprepared" over the course of the semester (i.e.,
your grade for that will will not be counted).

The other half of your grade will be based on your written work. Short papers
will all count equally (10% each), and the review essay \- if you select this
option - will count as two papers. If you are feeling wildly ambitious and
want to write more than the requisite number of papers, the highest of your
grades will be counted.  
  
---  
  


![](images/barnone.gif)

[Back to Top](syllabus.html)

