## Selection from W. E. B. DuBois' _The Souls of Black Folks_ Part 1, 1903
(1901)

* * *

### I. Of Our Spiritual Strivings

O water, voice of my heart, crying in the sand,  
All night long crying with a mournful cry,  
As I lie and listen, and cannot understand  
The voice of my heart in my side or the voice of the sea,  
O water, crying for rest, is it I, is it I?  
All night long the water is crying to me.

Unresting water, there never shall be rest  
Till the last moon droop and the last tide fail,  
And the fire of the end begin to burn in the west;  
And the heart shall be weary and wonder and cry like the sea,  
All life long crying without avail,  
As the water all night long is crying to me.  

\- Arthur Symons

 Between me and the other world there is ever an unasked question: unasked by
some through feelings of delicacy; by others through the difficulty of rightly
framing it. All, nevertheless, flutter round it. They approach me in a half-
hesitant sort of way, eye me curiously or compassionately, and then, instead
of saying directly, How does it feel to be a problem? they say, I know an
excellent colored man in my town; or, I fought at Mechanicsville; or, Do not
these Southern outrages make your blood boil? At these I smile, or am
interested, or reduce the boiling to a simmer, as the occasion may require. To
the real question, How does it feel to be a problem? I answer seldom a word.

 And yet, being a problem is a strange experience,--peculiar even for one who
has never been anything else, save perhaps in babyhood and in Europe. It is in
the early days of rollicking boyhood that the revelation first bursts upon
one, all in a day, as it were. I remember well when the shadow swept across
me. I was a little thing, away up in the hills of New England, where the dark
Housatonic winds between Hoosac and Taghkanic to the sea. In a wee wooden
schoolhouse, something put it into the boys' and girls' heads to buy gorgeous
visiting-cards--ten cents a package--and exchange. The exchange was merry,
till one girl, a tall newcomer, refused my card,--refused it peremptorily,
with a glance. Then it dawned upon me with a certain suddenness that I was
different from the others; or like, mayhap, in heart and life and longing, but
shut out from their world by a vast veil. I had thereafter no desire to tear
down that veil, to creep through; I held all beyond it in common contempt, and
lived above it in a region of blue sky and great wandering shadows. That sky
was bluest when I could beat my mates at examination time, or beat them at a
foot-race, or even beat their stringy heads. Alas, with the years all this
fine contempt began to fade; for the worlds I longed for, and all their
dazzling opportunities, were theirs, not mine. But they should not keep these
prizes, I said; some, all, I would wrest from them. Just how I would do it I
could never decide: by reading law, by healing the sick, by telling the
wonderful tales that swam in my head,--some way. With other black boys the
strife was not so fiercely sunny: their youth shrunk into tasteless
sycophancy, or into silent hatred of the pale world about them and mocking
distrust of everything white; or wasted itself in a bitter cry, Why did God
make me an outcast and a stranger in mine own house? The shades of the prison-
house closed round about us all: walls strait and stubborn to the whitest, but
relentlessly narrow, tall, and unscalable to sons of night who must plod
darkly on in resignation, or beat unavailing palms against the stone, or
steadily, half hopelessly, watch the streak of blue above.

 After the Egyptian and Indian, the Greek and Roman, the Teuton and Mongolian,
the Negro is a sort of seventh son, born with a veil, and gifted with second-
sight in this American world,--a world which yields him no true self-
consciousness, but only lets him see himself through the revelation of the
other world. It is a peculiar sensation, this double-consciousness, this sense
of always looking at one's self through the eyes of others, of measuring one's
soul by the tape of a world that looks on in amused contempt and pity. One
ever feels his two-ness,--an American, a Negro; two souls, two thoughts, two
unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged
strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.

 The history of the American Negro is the history of this strife,--this
longing to attain self-conscious manhood, to merge his double self into a
better and truer self. In this merging he wishes neither of the older selves
to be lost. He would not Africanize America, for America has too much to teach
the world and Africa. He would not bleach the Negro soul in a flood of white
Americanism, for he knows that Negro blood has a message for the world. He
simply wishes to make it possible for a man to be both a Negro and an
American, without being cursed and spit upon by his fellows, without having
the doors of Opportunity closed roughly in his face.

 This, then, is the end of his striving: to be a co-worker in the kingdom of
culture, to escape both death and isolation, to husband and use his best
powers and his latent genius. These powers of body and mind have in the past
been strangely wasted, dispersed, or forgotten. The shadow of a mighty Negro
past flits through the tale of Ethiopia the Shadowy and of Egypt the Sphinx.
Throughout history, the powers of single black men flash here and there like
falling stars, and die sometimes before the world has rightly gauged their
brightness. Here in America, in the few days since Emancipation, the black
man's turning hither and thither in hesitant and doubtful striving has often
made his very strength to lose effectiveness, to seem like absence of power,
like weakness. And yet it is not weakness,--it is the contradiction of double
aims. The double-aimed struggle of the black artisan--on the one hand to
escape white contempt for a nation of mere hewers of wood and drawers of
water, and on the other hand to plough and nail and dig for a poverty-stricken
horde--could only result in making him a poor craftsman, for he had but half a
heart in either cause. By the poverty and ignorance of his people, the Negro
minister or doctor was tempted toward quackery and demagogy; and by the
criticism of the other world, toward ideals that made him ashamed of his lowly
tasks. The would-be black savant was confronted by the paradox that the
knowledge his people needed was a twice-told tale to his white neighbors,
while the knowledge which would teach the white world was Greek to his own
flesh and blood. The innate love of harmony and beauty that set the ruder
souls of his people a-dancing and a-singing raised but confusion and doubt in
the soul of the black artist; for the beauty revealed to him was the soul-
beauty of a race which his larger audience despised, and he could not
articulate the message of another people. This waste of double aims, this
seeking to satisfy two unreconciled ideals, has wrought sad havoc with the
courage and faith and deeds of ten thousand thousand people,--has sent them
often wooing false gods and invoking false means of salvation, and at times
has even seemed about to make them ashamed of themselves.

 Away back in the days of bondage they thought to see in one divine event the
end of all doubt and disappointment; few men ever worshipped Freedom with half
such unquestioning faith as did the American Negro for two centuries. To him,
so far as he thought and dreamed, slavery was indeed the sum of all
villainies, the cause of all sorrow, the root of all prejudice; Emancipation
was the key to a promised land of sweeter beauty than ever stretched before
the eyes of wearied Israelites. In song and exhortation swelled one refrain--
Liberty; in his tears and curses the God he implored had Freedom in his right
hand. At last it came,--suddenly, fearfully, like a dream. With one wild
carnival of blood and passion came the message in his own plaintive
cadences:--

"Shout, O children!  
Shout, you're free!  
For God has bought your liberty!"  

  Years have passed away since then,--ten, twenty, forty; forty years of
national life, forty years of renewal and development, and yet the swarthy
spectre sits in its accustomed seat at the Nation's feast. In vain do we cry
to this our vastest social problem:--

"Take any shape but that, and my firm nerves  
Shall never tremble!"  

 The Nation has not yet found peace from its sins; the freedman has not yet
found in freedom his promised land. Whatever of good may have come in these
years of change, the shadow of a deep disappointment rests upon the Negro
people,--a disappointment all the more bitter because the unattained ideal was
unbounded save by the simple ignorance of a lowly people.  
 The first decade was merely a prolongation of the vain search for freedom,
the boon that seemed ever barely to elude their grasp,--like a tantalizing
will-of-the-wisp, maddening and misleading the headless host. The holocaust of
war, the terrors of the Ku-Klux-Klan, the lies of carpet-baggers, the
disorganization of industry, and the contradictory advice of friends and foes,
left the bewildered serf with no new watchword beyond the old cry for freedom.
As the time flew, however, he began to grasp a new idea. The ideal of liberty
demanded for its attainment powerful means, and these the Fifteenth Amendment
gave him. The ballot, which before he had looked upon as a visible sign of
freedom, he now regarded as the chief means of gaining and perfecting the
liberty with which war had partially endowed him. And why not? Had not votes
made war and emancipated millions? Had not votes enfranchised the freedmen?
Was anything impossible to a power that had done all this? A million black men
started with renewed zeal to vote themselves into the kingdom. So the decade
flew away, the revolution of 1876 came, and left the half-free serf weary,
wondering, but still inspired. Slowly but steadily, in the following years, a
new vision began gradually to replace the dream of political power,--a
powerful movement, the rise of another ideal to guide the unguided, another
pillar of fire by night after a clouded day. It was the ideal of "book-
learning"; the curiosity, born of compulsory ignorance, to know and test the
power of the cabalistic letters of the white man, the longing to know. Here at
last seemed to have been discovered the mountain path to Canaan; longer than
the highway of Emancipation and law, steep and ragged, but straight, leading
to heights high enough to overlook life.

  Up the new path the advance guard toiled, slowly, heavily, doggedly; only
those who have watched and guided the faltering feet, the misty minds, the
dull understandings, of the dark pupils of those schools know how faithfully,
how piteously, this people strove to learn. It was weary work. The cold
statistician wrote down the inches of progress here and there, noted also
where here and there a foot had slipped or some one had fallen. To the tired
climbers, the horizon was ever dark, the mists were often cold, the Canaan was
always dim and far away. If, however, the vistas disclosed as yet no goal, no
resting-place, little but flattery and criticism, the journey at least gave
leisure for reflection and self-examination; it changed the child of
Emancipation to the youth with dawning self-consciousness, self-realization,
self-respect. In those sombre forests of his striving his own soul rose before
him, and he saw himself,--darkly as through a veil; and yet he saw in himself
some faint revelation of his power, of his mission. He began to have a dim
feeling that, to attain his place in the world, he must be himself, and not
another. For the first time he sought to analyze the burden he bore upon his
back, that dead weight of social degradation partially masked behind a half-
named Negro problem. He felt his poverty; without a cent, without a home,
without land, tools, or savings, he had entered into competition with rich,
landed, skilled neighbors. To be a poor man is hard, but to be a poor race in
a land of dollars is the very bottom of hardships. He felt the weight of his
ignorance,--not simply of letters, but of life, of business, of the
humanities; the accumulated sloth and shirking and awkwardness of decades and
centuries shackled his hands and feet. Nor was his burden all poverty and
ignorance. The red stain of bastardy, which two centuries of systematic legal
defilement of Negro women had stamped upon his race, meant not only the loss
of ancient African chastity, but also the hereditary weight of a mass of
corruption from white adulterers, threatening almost the obliteration of the
Negro home.

 A people thus handicapped ought not to be asked to race with the world, but
rather allowed to give all its time and thought to its own social problems.
But alas! while sociologists gleefully count his bastards and his prostitutes,
the very soul of the toiling, sweating black man is darkened by the shadow of
a vast despair. Men call the shadow prejudice, and learnedly explain it as the
natural defence of culture against barbarism, learning against ignorance,
purity against crime, the "higher" against the "lower" races. To which the
Negro cries Amen! and swears that to so much of this strange prejudice as is
founded on just homage to civilization, culture, righteousness, and progress,
he humbly bows and meekly does obeisance. But before that nameless prejudice
that leaps beyond all this he stands helpless, dismayed, and well-nigh
speechless; before that personal disrespect and mockery, the ridicule and
systematic humiliation, the distortion of fact and wanton license of fancy,
the cynical ignoring of the better and the boisterous welcoming of the worse,
the all-pervading desire to inculcate disdain for everything black, from
Toussaint to the devil,--before this there rises a sickening despair that
would disarm and discourage any nation save that black host to whom
"discouragement" is an unwritten word.

 But the facing of so vast a prejudice could not but bring the inevitable
self-questioning, self-disparagement, and lowering of ideals which ever
accompany repression and breed in an atmosphere of contempt and hate.
Whisperings and portents came borne upon the four winds: Lo! we are diseased
and dying, cried the dark hosts; we cannot write, our voting is vain; what
need of education, since we must always cook and serve? And the Nation echoed
and enforced this self-criticism, saying: Be content to be servants, and
nothing more; what need of higher culture for half-men? Away with the black
man's ballot, by force or fraud,--and behold the suicide of a race!
Nevertheless, out of the evil came something of good,--the more careful
adjustment of education to real life, the clearer perception of the Negroes'
social responsibilities, and the sobering realization of the meaning of
progress.

  So dawned the time of Sturm und Drang: storm and stress to-day rocks our
little boat on the mad waters of the world-sea; there is within and without
the sound of conflict, the burning of body and rending of soul; inspiration
strives with doubt, and faith with vain questionings. The bright ideals of the
past,--physical freedom, political power, the training of brains and the
training of hands,--all these in turn have waxed and waned, until even the
last grows dim and overcast. Are they all wrong,--all false? No, not that, but
each alone was over-simple and incomplete,--the dreams of a credulous race-
childhood, or the fond imaginings of the other world which does not know and
does not want to know our power. To be really true, all these ideals must be
melted and welded into one. The training of the schools we need to-day more
than ever,--the training of deft hands, quick eyes and ears, and above all the
broader, deeper, higher culture of gifted minds and pure hearts. The power of
the ballot we need in sheer self-defence,--else what shall save us from a
second slavery? Freedom, too, the long-sought, we still seek,--the freedom of
life and limb, the freedom to work and think, the freedom to love and aspire.
Work, culture, liberty,--all these we need, not singly but together, not
successively but together, each growing and aiding each, and all striving
toward that vaster ideal that swims before the Negro people, the ideal of
human brotherhood, gained through the unifying ideal of Race; the ideal of
fostering and developing the traits and talents of the Negro, not in
opposition to or contempt for other races, but rather in large conformity to
the greater ideals of the American Republic, in order that some day on
American soil two world-races may give to each those characteristics both so
sadly lack. We the darker ones come even now not altogether empty-handed:
there are to-day no truer exponents of the pure human spirit of the
Declaration of Independence than the American Negroes; there is no true
American music but the wild sweet melodies of the Negro slave; the American
fairy tales and folk-lore are Indian and African; and, all in all, we black
men seem the sole oasis of simple faith and reverence in a dusty desert of
dollars and smartness. Will America be poorer if she replace her brutal
dyspeptic blundering with light-hearted but determined Negro humility? or her
coarse and cruel wit with loving jovial good-humor? or her vulgar music with
the soul of the Sorrow Songs?

  Merely a concrete test of the underlying principles of the great republic is
the Negro Problem, and the spiritual striving of the freedmen's sons is the
travail of souls whose burden is almost beyond the measure of their strength,
but who bear it in the name of an historic race, in the name of this the land
of their fathers' fathers, and in the name of human opportunity.

  And now what I have briefly sketched in large outline let me on coming pages
tell again in many ways, with loving emphasis and deeper detail, that men may
listen to the striving in the souls of black folk.

* * *

### XIV. Of the Sorrow Songs

I walk through the churchyard  
To lay this body down;  
I know moon-rise, I know star-rise;  
I walk in the moonlight, I walk in the starlight;  
I'll lie in the grave and stretch out my arms,  
I'll go to judgment in the evening of the day,  
And my soul and thy soul shall meet that day,  
When I lay this body down.  

Negro Song

 They that walked in darkness sang songs in the olden days--Sorrow Songs--for
they were weary at heart. And so before each thought that I have written in
this book I have set a phrase, a haunting echo of these weird old songs in
which the soul of the black slave spoke to men. Ever since I was a child these
songs have stirred me strangely. They came out of the South unknown to me, one
by one, and yet at once I knew them as of me and of mine. Then in after years
when I came to Nashville I saw the great temple builded of these songs
towering over the pale city. To me Jubilee Hall seemed ever made of the songs
themselves, and its bricks were red with the blood and dust of toil. Out of
them rose for me morning, noon, and night, bursts of wonderful melody, full of
the voices of my brothers and sisters, full of the voices of the past.

  Little of beauty has America given the world save the rude grandeur God
himself stamped on her bosom; the human spirit in this new world has expressed
itself in vigor and ingenuity rather than in beauty. And so by fateful chance
the Negro folk-song--the rhythmic cry of the slave--stands to-day not simply
as the sole American music, but as the most beautiful expression of human
experience born this side the seas. It has been neglected, it has been, and
is, half despised, and above all it has been persistently mistaken and
misunderstood; but notwithstanding, it still remains as the singular spiritual
heritage of the nation and the greatest gift of the Negro people.

  Away back in the thirties the melody of these slave songs stirred the
nation, but the songs were soon half forgotten. Some, like "Near the lake
where drooped the willow," passed into current airs and their source was
forgotten; others were caricatured on the "minstrel" stage and their memory
died away. Then in war-time came the singular Port Royal experiment after the
capture of Hilton Head, and perhaps for the first time the North met the
Southern slave face to face and heart to heart with no third witness. The Sea
Islands of the Carolinas, where they met, were filled with a black folk of
primitive type, touched and moulded less by the world about them than any
others outside the Black Belt. Their appearance was uncouth, their language
funny, but their hearts were human and their singing stirred men with a mighty
power. Thomas Wentworth Higginson hastened to tell of these songs, and Miss
McKim and others urged upon the world their rare beauty. But the world
listened only half credulously until the Fisk Jubilee Singers sang the slave
songs so deeply into the world's heart that it can never wholly forget them
again.

  There was once a blacksmith's son born at Cadiz, New York, who in the
changes of time taught school in Ohio and helped defend Cincinnati from Kirby
Smith. Then he fought at Chancellorsville and Gettysburg and finally served in
the Freedman's Bureau at Nashville. Here he formed a Sunday-school class of
black children in 1866, and sang with them and taught them to sing. And then
they taught him to sing, and when once the glory of the Jubilee songs passed
into the soul of George L. White, he knew his life-work was to let those
Negroes sing to the world as they had sung to him. So in 1871 the pilgrimage
of the Fisk Jubilee Singers began. North to Cincinnati they rode,--four half-
clothed black boys and five girl-women,--led by a man with a cause and a
purpose. They stopped at Wilberforce, the oldest of Negro schools, where a
black bishop blessed them. Then they went, fighting cold and starvation, shut
out of hotels, and cheerfully sneered at, ever northward; and ever the magic
of their song kept thrilling hearts, until a burst of applause in the
Congregational Council at Oberlin revealed them to the world. They came to New
York and Henry Ward Beecher dared to welcome them, even though the
metropolitan dailies sneered at his "Nigger Minstrels." So their songs
conquered till they sang across the land and across the sea, before Queen and
Kaiser, in Scotland and Ireland, Holland and Switzerland. Seven years they
sang, and brought back a hundred and fifty thousand dollars to found Fisk
University.

  Since their day they have been imitated--sometimes well, by the singers of
Hampton and Atlanta, sometimes ill, by straggling quartettes. Caricature has
sought again to spoil the quaint beauty of the music, and has filled the air
with many debased melodies which vulgar ears scarce know from the real. But
the true Negro folk-song still lives in the hearts of those who have heard
them truly sung and in the hearts of the Negro people.

  What are these songs, and what do they mean? I know little of music and can
say nothing in technical phrase, but I know something of men, and knowing
them, I know that these songs are the articulate message of the slave to the
world. They tell us in these eager days that life was joyous to the black
slave, careless and happy. I can easily believe this of some, of many. But not
all the past South, though it rose from the dead, can gainsay the heart-
touching witness of these songs. They are the music of an unhappy people, of
the children of disappointment; they tell of death and suffering and unvoiced
longing toward a truer world, of misty wanderings and hidden ways.

  The songs are indeed the siftings of centuries; the music is far more
ancient than the words, and in it we can trace here and there signs of
development. My grandfather's grandmother was seized by an evil Dutch trader
two centuries ago; and coming to the valleys of the Hudson and Housatonic,
black, little, and lithe, she shivered and shrank in the harsh north winds,
looked longingly at the hills, and often crooned a heathen melody to the child
between her knees, thus:

Do ba-na co-ba, ge-ne me, ge-ne me!  
Do ba-na co-ba, ge-ne me, ge-ne me!  
Ben d'nu-li, nu-li, nu-li, nu-li, ben d'le.  

  The child sang it to his children and they to their children's children, and
so two hundred years it has travelled down to us and we sing it to our
children, knowing as little as our fathers what its words may mean, but
knowing well the meaning of its music.

  This was primitive African music; it may be seen in larger form in the
strange chant which heralds "The Coming of John":

"You may bury me in the East,  
You may bury me in the West,  
But I'll hear the trumpet sound in that morning."  

\--the voice of exile.

  Ten master songs, more or less, one may pluck from this forest of melody--
songs of undoubted Negro origin and wide popular currency, and songs
peculiarly characteristic of the slave. One of these I have just mentioned.
Another whose strains begin this book is "Nobody knows the trouble I've seen."
When, struck with a sudden poverty, the United States refused to fulfill its
promises of land to the freedmen, a brigadier-general went down to the Sea
Islands to carry the news. An old woman on the outskirts of the throng began
singing this song; all the mass joined with her, swaying. And the soldier
wept.

 The third song is the cradle-song of death which all men know,--"Swing low,
sweet chariot,"--whose bars begin the life story of "Alexander Crummell." Then
there is the song of many waters, "Roll, Jordan, roll," a mighty chorus with
minor cadences. There were many songs of the fugitive like that which opens
"The Wings of Atalanta," and the more familiar "Been a-listening." The seventh
is the song of the End and the Beginning--"My Lord, what a mourning! when the
stars begin to fall"; a strain of this is placed before "The Dawn of Freedom."
The song of groping--"My way's cloudy"--begins "The Meaning of Progress"; the
ninth is the song of this chapter--"Wrestlin' Jacob, the day is a-breaking,"--
a paean of hopeful strife. The last master song is the song of songs--"Steal
away,"--sprung from "The Faith of the Fathers."

  There are many others of the Negro folk-songs as striking and characteristic
as these, as, for instance, the three strains in the third, eighth, and ninth
chapters; and others I am sure could easily make a selection on more
scientific principles. There are, too, songs that seem to be a step removed
from the more primitive types: there is the maze-like medley, "Bright
sparkles," one phrase of which heads "The Black Belt"; the Easter carol,
"Dust, dust and ashes"; the dirge, "My mother's took her flight and gone
home"; and that burst of melody hovering over "The Passing of the First-
Born"--"I hope my mother will be there in that beautiful world on high."

  These represent a third step in the development of the slave song, of which
"You may bury me in the East" is the first, and songs like "March on" (chapter
six) and "Steal away" are the second. The first is African music, the second
Afro-American, while the third is a blending of Negro music with the music
heard in the foster land. The result is still distinctively Negro and the
method of blending original, but the elements are both Negro and Caucasian.
One might go further and find a fourth step in this development, where the
songs of white America have been distinctively influenced by the slave songs
or have incorporated whole phrases of Negro melody, as "Swanee River" and "Old
Black Joe." Side by side, too, with the growth has gone the debasements and
imitations--the Negro "minstrel" songs, many of the "gospel" hymns, and some
of the contemporary "coon" songs,--a mass of music in which the novice may
easily lose himself and never find the real Negro melodies.

  In these songs, I have said, the slave spoke to the world. Such a message is
naturally veiled and half articulate. Words and music have lost each other and
new and cant phrases of a dimly understood theology have displaced the older
sentiment. Once in a while we catch a strange word of an unknown tongue, as
the "Mighty Myo," which figures as a river of death; more often slight words
or mere doggerel are joined to music of singular sweetness. Purely secular
songs are few in number, partly because many of them were turned into hymns by
a change of words, partly because the frolics were seldom heard by the
stranger, and the music less often caught. Of nearly all the songs, however,
the music is distinctly sorrowful. The ten master songs I have mentioned tell
in word and music of trouble and exile, of strife and hiding; they grope
toward some unseen power and sigh for rest in the End.

  The words that are left to us are not without interest, and, cleared of
evident dross, they conceal much of real poetry and meaning beneath
conventional theology and unmeaning rhapsody. Like all primitive folk, the
slave stood near to Nature's heart. Life was a "rough and rolling sea" like
the brown Atlantic of the Sea Islands; the "Wilderness" was the home of God,
and the "lonesome valley" led to the way of life. "Winter'll soon be over,"
was the picture of life and death to a tropical imagination. The sudden wild
thunder-storms of the South awed and impressed the Negroes,--at times the
rumbling seemed to them "mournful," at times imperious:

"My Lord calls me,  
He calls me by the thunder,  
The trumpet sounds it in my soul."

  The monotonous toil and exposure is painted in many words. One sees the
ploughmen in the hot, moist furrow, singing:

"Dere's no rain to wet you,  
Dere's no sun to burn you,  
Oh, push along, believer,  
I want to go home."  

  The bowed and bent old man cries, with thrice-repeated wail:

"O Lord, keep me from sinking down,"  
and he rebukes the devil of doubt who can whisper:  
"Jesus is dead and God's gone away."

Yet the soul-hunger is there, the restlessness of the savage, the wail of the
wanderer, and the plaint is put in one little phrase:

My soul wants something that's new, that's new

  Over the inner thoughts of the slaves and their relations one with another
the shadow of fear ever hung, so that we get but glimpses here and there, and
also with them, eloquent omissions and silences. Mother and child are sung,
but seldom father; fugitive and weary wanderer call for pity and affection,
but there is little of wooing and wedding; the rocks and the mountains are
well known, but home is unknown. Strange blending of love and helplessness
signs through the refrain:

"Yonder's my ole mudder,  
Been waggin' at de hill so long;  
"Bout time she cross over,  
Git home bime-by."

Elsewhere comes the cry of the "motherless" and the "Farewell, farewell, my
only child."

  Love-songs are scarce and fall into two categories--the frivolous and light,
and the sad. Of deep successful love there is ominous silence, and in one of
the oldest of these songs there is a depth of history and meaning:

Poor Ro-sy, poor gal; Poor Ro-sy,  
poor gal; Ro-sy break my poor heart,  
Heav'n shall-a-be my home.

A black woman said of the song, "It can't be sung without a full heart and a
troubled sperrit." The same voice sings here that sings in the German folk-
song:

"Jetz Geh i' an's brunele, trink' aber net."

  Of death the Negro showed little fear, but talked of it familiarly and even
fondly as simply a crossing of the waters, perhaps--who knows?--back to his
ancient forests again. Later days transfigured his fatalism, and amid the dust
and dirt the toiler sang:

"Dust, dust and ashes, fly over my grave,  
But the Lord shall bear my spirit home."

  The things evidently borrowed from the surrounding world undergo
characteristic change when they enter the mouth of the slave. Especially is
this true of Bible phrases. "Weep, O captive daughter of Zion," is quaintly
turned into "Zion, weep-a-low," and the wheels of Ezekiel are turned every way
in the mystic dreaming of the slave, till he says:

"There's a little wheel a-turnin' in-a-my heart."

  As in olden time, the words of these hymns were improvised by some leading
minstrel of the religious band. The circumstances of the gathering, however,
the rhythm of the songs, and the limitations of allowable thought, confined
the poetry for the most part to single or double lines, and they seldom were
expanded to quatrains or longer tales, although there are some few examples of
sustained efforts, chiefly paraphrases of the Bible. Three short series of
verses have always attracted me,--the one that heads this chapter, of one line
of which Thomas Wentworth Higginson has fittingly said, "Never, it seems to
me, since man first lived and suffered was his infinite longing for peace
uttered more plaintively." The second and third are descriptions of the Last
Judgment,--the one a late improvisation, with some traces of outside
influence:

"Oh, the stars in the elements are falling,  
And the moon drips away into blood,  
And the ransomed of the Lord are returning unto God,  
Blessed be the name of the Lord."

And the other earlier and homelier picture from the low coast lands:

"Michael, haul the boat ashore,  
Then you'll hear the horn they blow,  
Then you'll hear the trumpet sound,  
Trumpet sound the world around,  
Trumpet sound for rich and poor,  
Trumpet sound for Jubilee,  
Trumpet sound for you and me."

Through all the sorrow of the Sorrow Songs there breathes a hope--a faith in
the ultimate justice of things. The minor cadences of despair change often to
triumph and calm confidence. Sometimes it is faith in life, sometimes a faith
in death, sometimes assurance of boundless justice in some fair world beyond.
But whichever it is, the meaning is always clear: that sometime, somewhere,
men will judge men by their souls and not by their skins. Is such a hope
justified? Do the Sorrow Songs sing true?

The silently growing assumption of this age is that the probation of races is
past, and that the backward races of to-day are of proven inefficiency and not
worth the saving. Such an assumption is the arrogance of peoples irreverent
toward Time and ignorant of the deeds of men. A thousand years ago such an
assumption, easily possible, would have made it difficult for the Teuton to
prove his right to life. Two thousand years ago such dogmatism, readily
welcome, would have scouted the idea of blond races ever leading civilization.
So woefully unorganized is sociological knowledge that the meaning of
progress, the meaning of "swift" and "slow" in human doing, and the limits of
human perfectability, are veiled, unanswered sphinxes on the shores of
science. Why should Aeschylus have sung two thousand years before Shakespeare
was born? Why has civilization flourished in Europe, and flickered, flamed,
and died in Africa? So long as the world stands meekly dumb before such
questions, shall this nation proclaim its ignorance and unhallowed prejudices
by denying freedom of opportunity to those who brought the Sorrow Songs to the
Seats of the Mighty?

Your country? How came it yours? Before the Pilgrims landed we were here. Here
we have brought our three gifts and mingled them with yours: a gift of story
and song--soft, stirring melody in an ill-harmonized and unmelodious land; the
gift of sweat and brawn to beat back the wilderness, conquer the soil, and lay
the foundations of this vast economic empire two hundred years earlier than
your weak hands could have done it; the third, a gift of the Spirit. Around us
the history of the land has centred for thrice a hundred years; out of the
nation's heart we have called all that was best to throttle and subdue all
that was worst; fire and blood, prayer and sacrifice, have billowed over this
people, and they have found peace only in the altars of the God of Right. Nor
has our gift of the Spirit been merely passive. Actively we have woven
ourselves with the very warp and woof of this nation,--we fought their
battles, shared their sorrow, mingled our blood with theirs, and generation
after generation have pleaded with a headstrong, careless people to despise
not Justice, Mercy, and Truth, lest the nation be smitten with a curse. Our
song, our toil, our cheer, and warning have been given to this nation in
blood-brotherhood. Are not these gifts worth the giving? Is not this work and
striving? Would America have been America without her Negro people?

  Even so is the hope that sang in the songs of my fathers well sung. If
somewhere in this whirl and chaos of things there dwells Eternal Good, pitiful
yet masterful, then anon in His good time America shall rend the Veil and the
prisoned shall be free. Free, free as the sunshine trickling down the morning
into these high windows of mine, free as yonder fresh young voices welling up
to me from the caverns of brick and mortar below--welling with song, instinct
with life, tremulous treble and darkening bass. My children, my little
children, are singing to the sunshine, and thus they sing:

Let us cheer the weary traveller,  
Cheer the weary traveller,  
Let us cheer the weary traveller  
Along the heavenly way.

And the traveller girds himself, and sets his face toward the Morning, and
goes his way.  

* * *

[

### ![](home.gif)History 316 Syllabus](H316F97SYL.html)

