![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif)  
****Domingo Faustino Sarmiento  
_Life in the Argentine Republic in the Days of the Tyrants_ , 1868 **  
[Original Electronic Texts
](http://www.umich.edu/~proflame/mirror/etext/sarmient.html)at the web site of
the Buried Mirror.
![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif)  
  
**

Editor's introduction: _The caudillo appeared in many guises. A common type in
the first period after independence was the barbarian chieftain, whose rule
represented dictatorship in its crudest, most lawless form. A specimen of this
breed was Juan Facundo Quiroga, master under Rosas of the Argentine province
of San Juan, and the terrible hero of a memorable book by Domingo Faustine
Sarmiento (1811-1888).

_ FACUNDO, as he was long called in the interior, or General Don Facundo
Quiroga, as he afterwards became, when society had received him into its bosom
and victory had crowned him with laurels, was a stoutly built man of low
stature, whose short neck and broad shoulders supported a well-shaped head,
covered with a profusion of black and closely curling hair. His somewhat oval
face was half buried in this mass of hair and an equally thick black, curly
beard, rising to his cheek-bones, which by their prominence evinced a firm and
tenacious will. His black and fiery eyes, shadowed by thick eyebrows,
occasioned an involuntary sense of terror in those on whom they chanced to
fall, for Facundo's glance was never direct, whether from habit or intention.
With the design of making himself always formidable, he always kept his head
bent down, to look at one from under his eyebrows, like the Ali Pacha of
Monovoisin. The image of Quiroga is recalled to me by the Cain represented by
the famous Ravel troupe, setting aside the artistic and statuesque attitudes,
uhich do not correspond to his. To conclude, his features were regular, and
the pale olive of his complexion harmonized well with the dense shadows which
surrounded it.

The formation of his head showed, notwithstanding this shaggy covering, the
peculiar organization of a man born to rule. Quiroga possessed those natural
qualities which converted the student of Brienne into the genius of France,
and the obscure Mameluke who fought with the French at the Pyramids, into the
Viceroy of Egypt. Such natures develop according to the society in which they
originate, and are either noble leaders who hold the highest place in history,
ever forwarding the progress of civilization, or the cruel and vicious tyrants
who become the scourges of their race and time.

Facundo Quiroga was the son of an inhabitant of San Juan, who had settled in
the Llanos oE Lo Rioja, and there had acquired a fortune in pastoral pursuits.
In 1779, Facundo was sent to his father's native province to receive the
limited education, consisting only of the arts of reading and writing, which
he could acquire in its schools. After a man has come to employ the hundred
trumpets of fame with the noise of his deeds, curiosity or the spirit of
investigation is carried to such an extent as to scent out the insignificant
history of the child, in order to connect it with the biography of the hero:
and it is not seldom that the rudiments of the traits characteristic of the
historical personage are met amid fables invented by flattery. The young
Alcibiades is said to have lain down at full length upon the pavement of the
street where he was playing, in order to insist that the driver

oE an approaching vehicle should yield the way to avoid running over him.
Napoleon is reported to have ruled over his fellow-students, and to have
entrenched himself in his study to resist an apprehended insult. Many
anecdotes are now in circulation relating to Facundo, many of which reveal his
true nature. In the house where he lodged, he could never be induced to take
his seat at the family table; in school he was haughty, reserved, and
unsocial; he never joined the other boys except to head their rebellious
proceedings or to beat them. The master, tired ot contending with so untamable
a disposition, on one occasion provided himself with a new and stiff strap,
and said to the frightened boys, as he showed it to them, "This is to be made
supple upon Facundo." Facundo, then eleven years old, heard this threat, and
the next day he tested its value. Without having learned his lesson, he asked
the headmaster to hear it himself, because, as he said, the assistant was
unfriendly to him. The master complied with the request. Facundo made one
mistake, then two, three, and four; upon which the master used his strap upon
him. Facundo, who had calculated everything, down to the weakness of the chair
in which the master was seated, gave him a buf'fet, upset him on his back,
and, taking to the street in the confusion created by this scene, hid himself
among some wild vines where they could not get him out for three days. Was not
such a boy the embryo chieftain who would afterwards defy society at large?

In early manhood his character took a more decided cast, constantly becoming
more gloomy, imperious, and wild. From the age of fifteen years he was
irresistibly controlled by the passion for gambling, as is often the case with
such natures, which need strong excitement to awaken their dormant energies.
This made him notorious in the city, and intolerable in the house which
aflorded him its hospitality; and finally under this influence, by a shot
fired at one orge Pena, he shed the first rill of blood which went to make up
the wide torrent that marked his way through life.

On his becoming an adult, the thread of his life disappears in an intricate
labyrinth of bouts and broils among the people of the surrounding region.
Sometimes lying hid, always pursued, he passed his time in gambling, working
as a common laborer, domineering over everybody around him, and distributing
his stabs among them....

The most connected account of this obscure and roaming part of his life that I
can procure is as follows:

Towards 1806, he went to Chili with a consignment of grain on his parent's
account. This he gambled away, as well as the animals, which had brought it,
and the family slaves who had accompanied him.

He often took to San Juan and Mendoza droves of the stock on his father's
estate, and these always shared the same fate; for with Facundo, gambling was
a fierce and burning passion which aroused the deepest instincts of his
nature. These successive gains and losses of his must have worn out his
father's generosity, for at last he broke off all amicable relations with his
family.

When he had become the terror of the Republic, he w as once asked by one of
his parasites, "What was the largest bet you ever made in your life, General?"
"Seventy dollars," replied Quiroga, carelessly, and yet he had just won two
hundred dollars at one stake. He afterwards explained that once when a young
man, having only seventy dollars, he had lost them all at one throw. But this
fact has its characteristic history. Facundo had been at work for a year as a
laborer upon the farm of a lady, situated in the Plumerillo, and had made
himself conspicuous by his punctuality in going to work, and by the influence
and authority which he exercised over the other laborers. When they wanted a
holiday to get drunk in, they used to apply to Facundo, who informed the lady,
and gave her his word, which he always fulfilled, to have all the men at work
the next day On this account the laborers called him "the father." At the end
of a year of steady work, Facundo asked for his wages, which amounted to
seventy dollars, and mounted his horse without knowing where he was bound, but
seeing a collection of people at a grocery store, he alighted, and reaching
over the group around the card-dealer, bet his seventy dollars on one card. He
lost them and remounting, went on his way, careless in what direction, until
after a little time a justice, Toledo by name, who happened to be passing,
stopped him to ask for his passport. Facundo rode up as if about to give it to
him, pretended to be feeling for something in his pocket, and stretched the
justice on the ground with a stab. as he taking his revenge upon the judge for
his recent loss at play? or was it this purpose to satisfy the irritation
against civil authority natural to a gaucho outlaw, and increase, by this new
deed, the splendor of his rising fame? Both are true explanations. This mode
of revenging himself for misfortunes upon whatever first offered itself, had
many examples in his life. When he was addressed as General, and had colonels
at his orders, he had two hundred lashes given one of them in his house at San
Juan, for having, as he said, cheated at play. He ordered two hundred lashes
to be given to a young man for having allowed himself a jest at a time when
jests were not to his taste; and two hundred lashes was the penalty inflicted
on a woman in Mendoza fo having said to him as he passed, "Farewell, Gen
eral," when he was going off in a rage at not having succeeded in intimidating
a neighbor of his, who was as peaceable and judicious as Fa cundo was rash and
gaucho-like.

Facundo reappears later in Buenos Aires, where he was enrolled in 1810 as a
recruit in the regiment of Arribenos, which was commanded by General Ocampo, a
native of his own province, and afterwards president of Charcas. The glorious
career of arms opened before him with the first rays of the sun of May; and
doubtless, endowed with such capacity as his, and with his destructive and
sanguinary instincts, Facundo, could he have been disciplined to submit to
civil authority and ennobled in the sublimity of the object of the strife,
might some day have returned from Peru, Chili, or Bolivia, as a General of the
Argentine Republic, like so many other brave gauchos who began their careers
in the humble position of a private soldier. But Quiroga's rebellious spirit
could not endure the yoke of discipline, the order of the barrack, or the
delay of promotion. He felt his destiny to be to rule, to rise at a single
leap, to create for himself, without assistance, and in spite of a hostile and
civilized society, a career of his own, combining bravery and crime,
government and disorganization. He was subsequently recruited into the army of
the Andes, and enrolled in the Mounted Grenadiers. A lieutenant named Garcia
took him for an assistant, and very soon desertion left a vacant place in
those glorious files. Quiroga, like Rosas, like all the vipers that have
thriven under the shade of their country's laurels, made himself notorious in
after-life by his hatred for the soldiers of Independence, among whom both the
men above named made horrible slaughter.

Facundo, after deserting from Buenos Aires, set out for the interior with
three comrades. A squad of soldiery overtook him; he faced the pursuers and
engaged in a real battle with them, which remained undecided for awhile,
until, after having killed four or five men, he was at liberty to continue his
journey, constantly cutting his way through detachments of troops which here
and there opposed his progress, until he arrived at San Luis. He was, at a
later day, to traverse the same route with a handful of men to disperse armies
instead of detachments, and proceed to the famous citadel of Tucuman to blot
out the last remains of Republicanism and civil order.

Facundo now reappears in the Llanos, at his father's house. At this period
occurred an event which is well attested. Yet one of the writers whose
manuscripts I am using, replies to an inquiry about the matter, "that to the
extent of his knowledge Quiroga never attempted forcibly to deprive his
parents of money," and I could wish to adopt this statement, irreconcilable as
it is with unvarying tradition and general consent. The contrary is shocking
to relate. It is said that on his father's refusal to give him a sum of money
which he had demanded, he watched for the time when both parents were taking
an afternoon nap to fasten the door of the room they occupied, and to set fire
to the straw roof, which was the usual covering of the building of the Llanos!

But what is certain in the matter is that his father once requested the
governor of La Rioja to arrest him in order to check his excesses, and that
Facundo, before taking flight from the Llanos, went to the city of La Rioja,
where that official was to be found at the time, and coming upon him by
surprise, gave him a blow, saying as he did so, "You have sent, sir, to have
me arrested. There, have me arrested now!" On which he mounted his horse and
set off for the open country at a gallop. At the end of a year he again showed
himself at his father's house, threw himself at the feet of the old man whom
he had used so ill, and succeeded amid the sobs of both, and the son's
assurances of his reform in reply to the father's recriminations, in
reestablishing peace, although on a very uncertain basis.

But no change occurred in his character and disorderly habits; races, gambling
parties, and expeditions into the country were the occasions of new acts of
violence, stabbings, and assaults on his part, until he at length made himself
intolerable to all, and rendered his own position very unsafe. Then a great
thought which he announced without shame got hold of his mind. The deserter
from the Arribenos regiment, the mounted grenadier who refused to make himself
immortal at Chacabuco or Maipu, determined to join the montonera of Ramirez,
the off-shoot from that led by Artigas, whose renown for crime and hatred for
the cities on which it was making war, had reached the Llanos, and held the
provincial government in dread. Facundo set forth to join those buccaneers of
the pampa. But perhaps the knowledge of his character, and of the importance
of the aid which he would give to the destroyers, alarmed his fellow
provincials, for they informed the authorities of San Luis, through which he
was to pass, of his infernal design. Dupuis, then (1818) governor, arrested
him, and lor some time he remained unnoticed among the criminals confined in
the prison. This prison of San Luis, however, was to be the first step in his
ascent to the elevation which he subsequently attained. San Martin had sent to
San Luis a great number of Spanish officers of all ranks from among the
prisoners taken in Chili. Irritated by their humiliations and sufferings, or
thinking it possible that the Spanish forces might be assembled again this
party of prisoners rose one day and opened the doors of the cells of the
common criminals, to obtain their aid in a general escape. Facundo was one of
these criminals, and as soon as he found himself free from prison, he seized
an iron bar of his fetters, split the skull of the very Spaniard who had
released him, and passing through the group of insurgents, left a wide path
strewn with the dead. Some say that the weapon he employed was a bayonet, and
that only three men were killed by it. Quiroga, however, always talked of the
iron bar of the fetters, and of fourteen dead men. This may be one of the
fictions with which the poetic imagination of the people adorns the types of
brute force they so much admire; perhaps the tale of the iron bar is an
Argentine version of the jaw-bone of Samson, the Hebrew Hercules. But Facundo
looked upon it as a crown of glory, in accordance with his idea of excellence,
and whether by bar or bayonet, he succeeded, aided by other soldiers and
prisoners whom his example encouraged, in suppressing the insurrection and
reconciling society to himself by this act of bravery, and placing himself
under his country's protection. Thus his name spread everywhere, ennobled and
cleansed, though with blood, from the stains which had tarnished it.

Facundo returned to La Rioja covered with glory, his country's creditor: and
with testimonials of his conduct, to show in the Llanos, among gauchos, the
new titles which justified the terror his name began to inspire; for there is
some thing imposing, something which subjugates and controls others in the man
who is rewarded for the assassination of fourteen men at one time.

Something still remains to be noticed of the previous character and temper of
this pillar of the Confederation. An illiterate man, one of Quiroga's
companions in childhood and youth, who has supplied me with many of the above
facts, sends me the following curious statements in a manuscript describing
Quiroga's early years: "His public career was not preceded by the practice of
theft; he never committed robbery even in his most pressing necessities. He
was not only fond of fighting, but would pay for an opportunity, or for a
chance to insult the most renowned champion in any company. He had a great
aversion to respectable men. He never drank. He was very reserved from his
youth and desired to inspire others with awe as well as with fear, for which
purpose he gave his confidants to understand that he had the gift of prophecy,
in short a soothsayer. He treated all connected with him as slaves. He never
went to confession, prayed, or heard mass; I saw him once at mass after he
became a general. He said of himself that he believed in nothing." The
frankness with which these words are written prove their truth.

And here ends the private life of Quiroga, in which I have omitted a long
series of deeds which only show his evil nature, his bad education, and his
fierce and bloody instincts. The facts stated appear to me to sum up the whole
public life of Quiroga. I see in them the great man, the man of genius, in
spite of himself and unknown to himself; a Caesar, Tamerlane, or Mohammed. The
fault is not his that thus he was born. In order to contend with, rule, and
control the power of the city, and the judicial authority, he is willing to
descend to anything. If he is offered a place in the a y, he disdains it,
because his impatience cannot wait for promotion. Such a position demands
submission, and places fetters upon individual independence; the soldier's
coat oppresses his body, and military tactics control his steps, all of which
are insufferable! His equestrian life, a life of danger and of strong
excitements, has steeled his spirit and hardened his heart. He feels an
unconquerable and instinctive hatred for the laws which have pursued him, for
the judges who have condemned him, and for the whole society and organism from
which he has felt himself withdrawn from his childhood, and which regards him
with suspicion and contempt. With these remarks is connected by imperceptible
links the motto of this chapter, "He is the natural man, as yet unused either
to repress or disguise his passions; he does not restrain their energy, but
gives free rein to their impetuosity. This is the character of the human
race." And thus it ap pears in the rural districts of the Argentine Re public.
Facundo is a type of primitive barba rism. He recognized no form of
subjection. His rage was that of a wild beast. The locks of his crisp black
hair, which fell in meshes over his brow and eyes, resembled the snakes of
Medusa's head. Anger made his voice hoarse, and turned his glances into
dragons. In a fit of passion he kicked out the brains of a man with whom he
had quarreled at play. He tore off both the ears of a woman he had lived with,
and had promised to marry, upon her asking him for thirty dollars for the
celebration of the wedding; and laid open his son Juan's head with an axe,
because he could not make him hold his tongue. He violently beat a beautiful
young lady at Tucuman, whom he failed either to seduce or to subdue, and
exhibited in all his actions a low and brutal yet not a stupid nature, or one
wholly without lofty aims. Incapable of commanding noble admiration, he
delighted in exciting fear; and this pleasure was exclusive and dominant with
him to the arranging all his actions so as to produce terror in those around
him, whether it was so ciety in general, the victim on his way to execution,
or his own wife and children. Wanting ability to manage the machinery of civil
gov ernment, he substituted terror for patriotism and self-sacrifice.
Destitute of learning, he sur rounded himself with mysteries, and pretended to
a foreknowledge of events which gave him prestige and reputation among the
commonalty, supporting his claims by an air of impenetra bility, by natural
sagacity, an uncommon power of observation, and the advantage he derived from
vulgar credulity.

The repertory of anecdotes relating to Qui roga, and with which the popular
memory is replete, is inexhaustible; his sayings, his expedi ents, bear the
stamp of an originality which gives them a certain Eastern aspect, a certain
tint of Solomonic wisdom in the conception of the vulgar. Indeed, how does
Solomon's advice for discovering the true mother of the disputed child differ
from Facundo's method of detecting a thief in the following instances:--

An article had been stolen from a band, and all endeavors to discover the
thief had proved fruitless. Quiroga drew up the troop and gave orders for the
cutting of as many small wands of equal length as there were soldiers; then,
having had these wands distributed one to each man, he said in a confident
voice, "The man whose wand will be longer than the others tomorrow morning is
the thief." Next day the troop was again paraded, and Quiroga proceeded to
inspect the wands. There was one whose wand was, not longer but shorter than
the others. "Wretch!" cried Facundo, in a voice which overpowered the man with
dismay, "it is thou!" And so it was; the culprit's confusion was proof of the
fact. The expedient was a simple one; the credulous gaucho, fearing that his
wand would really grow, had cut off a piece of it. But to avail one's self of
such means, a man must be superior in intellect to those about him, and must
at least have some knowledge of human nature.

Some portions of a soldier's accoutrements having been stolen and all
inquiries having failed to detect the thief, Quiroga had the troops paraded
and marched past him as he stood with crossed arms and a fixed, piercing, and
terrible gaze. He had previously said, "I know the man," with an air of
assurance not to be questioned. The review began, many men had passed, and
Quiroga still remained motionless, like the statue of Jupiter Tonans or the
God of the Last Judgment. All at once he descended upon one man, and said in a
curt and dry voice. "Where is the saddle?" "Yonder, sir," replied the other,
pointing to a thicket. "Ho! four fusileers!" cried Quiroga. What revelation
was this? that of terror and guilt made to a man of sagacity.

On another occasion, when a gaucho was answering to charges of theft which had
been brought against him, Facundo interrupted him with the words, "This rogue
has begun to lie. Ho, there! a hundred lashes!" When the criminal had been
taken away, Quiroga said to some one present, "Look you, my master, when a
gaucho moves his foot while talking, it is a sign he is telling lies." The
lashes extorted from the gaucho the confession that he had stolen a yoke of
oxen.

At another time he was in need of a man of resolution and boldness to whom he
could intrust a dangerous mission. When a man was brought to him for this
purpose, Quiroga was writing; he raised his head after the man's presence had
been repeatedly announced, looked at him and returned to his writing with the
remark, "Pooh! that is a wretched creature. I want abrave man and a
venturesome one!" It turned out to be true that the fellow was actually good
for nothing.

Hundreds of such stories of Facundo's life, which show the man of superior
ability, served effectually to give him a mysterious fame among the vulgar,
who even attribute superior powers to him.

Keen, Benjamin (ed.) _Readings in Latin American Civilization. 1492 to the
Present._ Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1955.  
From Domingo Faustino Sarmiento. _Life in the Argentine Republic in the Days
of the Tyrants, or Civilization and Barbarism._ New York, 1868.  
Facundo: Barbarian Caudillo  
  
![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif)  
[Return to the syllabus. ](http://history.hanover.edu/courses/261w99lu.html)  
[Return to the History Department.](http://history.hanover.edu)
![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif) **

