## Selections from _The History of Herodotus_  
George Rawlinson (trans.)

##### _Provided by The Internet Classics Archive. See bottom for copyright.  
Available online at
[http://classics.mit.edu//Herodotus/history.html](http://classics.mit.edu/Herodotus/history.html)_

[My comments in square brackets - JL]

[Below are selections from the work of the Greek writer, Herodotus. The Greek
word from which our word "history" comes means "to investigate, inquire."
Herodotus's work is not a history in our sense, but is an enquiry into the
customs and achievements of Greeks and 'barbarians'. A main interest of his
are the wars the Greeks fought against the Persians - the impact of which
would be hard to overestimate. We have to take much of what Herodotus says
about the customs of other peoples with at least a grain of salt. What is
useful for us is to notice the way he sets up Greeks as the model against
which he measures other ethnic groups, and his views on women, particularly in
relationship to power].

**from Book II**

**[The Egyptians - the world upside-down]**

Concerning Egypt itself I shall extend my remarks to a great length, because
there is no country that possesses so many wonders, nor any that has such a
number of works which defy description. Not only is the climate different from
that of the rest of the world, and the rivers unlike any other rivers, but the
people also, in most of their manners and customs, exactly reverse the common
practice of mankind.

The women attend the markets and trade, while the men sit at home at the loom;
and here, while the rest of the world works the woof up the warp, the
Egyptians work it down; the women likewise carry burthens upon their
shoulders, while the men carry them upon their heads. They eat their food out
of doors in the streets, but retire for private purposes to their houses,
giving as a reason that what is unseemly, but necessary, ought to be done in
secret, but what has nothing unseemly about it, should be done openly. A woman
cannot serve the priestly office, either for god or goddess, but men are
priests to both; sons need not support their parents unless they choose, but
daughters must, whether they choose or no.

In other countries the priests have long hair, in Egypt their heads are
shaven; elsewhere it is customary, in mourning, for near relations to cut
their hair close: the Egyptians, who wear no hair at any other time, when they
lose a relative, let their beards and the hair of their heads grow long. All
other men pass their lives separate from animals, the Egyptians have animals
always living with them; others make barley and wheat their food; it is a
disgrace to do so in Egypt, where the grain they live on is spelt, which some
call zea. Dough they knead with their feet; but they mix mud, and even take up
dirt, with their hands. They are the only people in the world- they at least,
and such as have learnt the practice from them - who use circumcision. Their
men wear two garments apiece, their women but one. They put on the rings and
fasten the ropes to sails inside; others put them outside. When they write or
calculate, instead of going, like the Greeks, from left to right, they move
their hand from right to left; and they insist, notwithstanding, that it is
they who go to the right, and the Greeks who go to the left. They have two
quite different kinds of writing, one of which is called sacred, the other
common.

They are religious to excess, far beyond any other race of men, and use the
following ceremonies: They drink out of brazen cups, which they scour every
day: there is no exception to this practice. They wear linen garments, which
they are specially careful to have always fresh washed. They practise
circumcision for the sake of cleanliness, considering it better to be cleanly
than comely.

The priests shave their whole body every other day, that no lice or other
impure thing may adhere to them when they are engaged in the service of the
gods. Their dress is entirely of linen, and their shoes of the papyrus plant:
it is not lawful for them to wear either dress or shoes of any other material.
They bathe twice every day in cold water, and twice each night; besides which
they observe, so to speak, thousands of ceremonies. They enjoy, however, not a
few advantages. They consume none of their own property, and are at no expense
for anything; but every day bread is baked for them of the sacred corn, and a
plentiful supply of beef and of goose's flesh is assigned to each, and also a
portion of wine made from the grape. Fish they are not allowed to eat; and
beans - which none of the Egyptians ever sow, or eat, if they come up of their
own accord, either raw or boiled - the priests will not even endure to look
on, since they consider it an unclean kind of pulse. Instead of a single
priest, each god has the attendance of a college, at the head of which is a
chief priest; when one of these dies, his son is appointed in his room.

![](images/bartransp.gif)

**from Book IV**

**[Women and slaves - a case history in Scythia]**

After the taking of Babylon, an expedition was led by Darius [the Persian
king] into Scythia [a land north of Greece]. Asia abounding in men, and vast
sums flowing into the treasury, the desire seized him to exact vengeance from
the Scyths, who had once in days gone by invaded Media, defeated those who met
them in the field, and so begun the quarrel. During the space of eight-and-
twenty years, as I have before mentioned, the Scyths continued lords of the
whole of Upper Asia. They entered Asia in pursuit of the Cimmerians [another
people of the far north], and overthrew the empire of the Medes, who till they
came possessed the sovereignty. On their return to their homes after the long
absence of twenty-eight years, a task awaited them little less troublesome
than their struggle with the Medes. They found an army of no small size
prepared to oppose their entrance. For the Scythian women, when they saw that
time went on, and their husbands did not come back, had intermarried with
their slaves.

Now the Scythians blind all their slaves, to use them in preparing their milk.
The plan they follow is to thrust tubes made of bone, not unlike our musical
pipes, up the vulva of the mare, and then to blow into the tubes with their
mouths, some milking while the others blow. They say that they do this because
when the veins of the animal are full of air, the udder is forced down. The
milk thus obtained is poured into deep wooden casks, about which the blind
slaves are placed, and then the milk is stirred round. That which rises to the
top is drawn off, and considered the best part; the under portion is of less
account. Such is the reason why the Scythians blind all those whom they take
in war; it arises from their not being tillers of the ground, but a pastoral
race.

When therefore the children sprung from these slaves and the Scythian women
grew to manhood, and understood the circumstances of their birth, they
resolved to oppose the army which was returning from Media. And, first of all,
they cut off a tract of country from the rest of Scythia by digging a broad
dyke from the Tauric mountains to the vast lake of the Maeotis. Afterwards,
when the Scythians tried to force an entrance, they marched out and engaged
them. Many battles were fought, and the Scythians gained no advantage, until
at last one of them thus addressed the remainder: "What are we doing,
Scythians? We are fighting our slaves, diminishing our own number when we
fall, and the number of those that belong to us when they fall by our hands.
Take my advice - lay spear and bow aside, and let each man fetch his
horsewhip, and go boldly up to them. So long as they see us with arms in our
hands, they imagine themselves our equals in birth and bravery; but let them
behold us with no other weapon but the whip, and they will feel that they are
our slaves, and flee before us."

The Scythians followed this counsel, and the slaves were so astounded, that
they forgot to fight, and immediately ran away. Such was the mode in which the
Scythians, after being for a time the lords of Asia, and being forced to quit
it by the Medes, returned and settled in their own country.

![](images/bartransp.gif)

**[Scythians and Amazons]**

It is reported of the Sauromatae [a tribe of Scythians], that when the Greeks
fought with the Amazons, whom the Scythians call Oior-pata or "man-slayers,"
as it may be rendered, Oior being Scythic for "man," and pata for "to slay" \-
it is reported, I say, that the Greeks after gaining the battle of the
Thermodon, put to sea, taking with them on board three of their vessels all
the Amazons whom they had made prisoners; and that these women upon the voyage
rose up against the crews, and massacred them to a man. As however they were
quite strange to ships, and did not know how to use either rudder, sails, or
oars, they were carried, after the death of the men, where the winds and the
waves listed. At last they reached the shores of the Palus Maeotis and came to
a place called Cremni or "the Cliffs," which is in the country of the free
Scythians. Here they went ashore, and proceeded by land towards the inhabited
regions; the first herd of horses which they fell in with they seized, and
mounting upon their backs, fell to plundering the Scythian territory.

The Scyths could not tell what to make of the attack upon them \- the dress,
the language, the nation itself, were alike unknown whence the enemy had come
even, was a marvel. Imagining, however, that they were all men of about the
same age, they went out against them, and fought a battle. Some of the bodies
of the slain fell into their hands, whereby they discovered the truth.
Hereupon they deliberated, and made a resolve to kill no more of them, but to
send against them a detachment of their youngest men, as near as they could
guess equal to the women in number, with orders to encamp in their
neighbourhood, and do as they saw them do - when the Amazons advanced against
them, they were to retire, and avoid a fight - when they halted, the young men
were to approach and pitch their camp near the camp of the enemy. All this
they did on account of their strong desire to obtain children from so notable
a race.

So the youths departed, and obeyed the orders which had been given them. The
Amazons soon found out that they had not come to do them any harm; and so they
on their part ceased to offer the Scythians any molestation. And now day after
day the camps approached nearer to one another; both parties led the same
life, neither having anything but their arms and horses, so that they were
forced to support themselves by hunting and pillage.

At last an incident brought two of them together - the man easily gained the
good graces of the woman, who bade him by signs (for they did not understand
each other's language) to bring a friend the next day to the spot where they
had met - promising on her part to bring with her another woman. He did so,
and the woman kept her word. When the rest of the youths heard what had taken
place, they also sought and gained the favour of the other Amazons. The two
camps were then joined in one, the Scythians living with the Amazons as their
wives; and the men were unable to learn the tongue of the women, but the women
soon caught up the tongue of the men. When they could thus understand one
another, the Scyths addressed the Amazons in these words: "We have parents,
and properties, let us therefore give up this mode of life, and return to our
nation, and live with them. You shall be our wives there no less than here,
and we promise you to have no others." But the Amazons said- "We could not
live with your women- our customs are quite different from theirs. To draw the
bow, to hurl the javelin, to bestride the horse, these are our arts of womanly
employments we know nothing. Your women, on the contrary, do none of these
things; but stay at home in their waggons, engaged in womanish tasks, and
never go out to hunt, or to do anything. We should never agree together. But
if you truly wish to keep us as your wives, and would conduct yourselves with
strict justice towards us, go home to your parents, bid them give you your
inheritance, and then come back to us, and let us and you live together by
ourselves."

The youths approved of the advice, and followed it. They went and got the
portion of goods which fell to them, returned with it, and rejoined their
wives, who then addressed them in these words following: "We are ashamed, and
afraid to live in the country where we now are. Not only have we stolen you
from your fathers, but we have done great damage to Scythia by our ravages. As
you like us for wives, grant the request we make of you. Let us leave this
country together, and go and dwell beyond the Tanais." Again the youths
complied.

Crossing the Tanais they journeyed eastward a distance of three days' march
from that stream, and again northward a distance of three days' march from the
Palus Maeotis. Here they came to the country where they now live, and took up
their abode in it. The women of the Sauromatae have continued from that day to
the present to observe their ancient customs, frequently hunting on horseback
with their husbands, sometimes even unaccompanied; in war taking the field;
and wearing the very same dress as the men. The Sauromatae speak the language
of Scythia, but have never talked it correctly, because the Amazons learnt it
imperfectly at the first. Their marriage-law lays it down that no girl shall
wed till she has killed a man in battle Sometimes it happens that a woman dies
unmarried at an advanced age, having never been able in her whole lifetime to
fulfil the condition.

**from Book VII**

**[Greeks and Persians - free men vs. slaves]**

Now after Xerxes [a Persian king who eventually invaded Greece] had sailed
down the whole line and was gone ashore, he sent for Demaratus [a Greek
advisor of Xerxes] the son of Ariston, who had accompanied him in his march
upon Greece, and bespake him thus:-

"Demaratus, it is my pleasure at this time to ask thee certain things which I
wish to know. Thou art a Greek, and, as I hear from the other Greeks with whom
I converse, no less than from thine own lips, thou art a native of a city
which is not the meanest or the weakest in their land. Tell me, therefore,
what thinkest thou? Will the Greeks lift a hand against us? Mine own judgment
is, that even if all the Greeks and all the barbarians of the West were
gathered together in one place, they would not be able to abide my onset, not
being really of one mind. But I would fain know what thou thinkest hereon."
Thus Xerxes questioned; and the other replied in his turn,- "O king! is it thy
will that I give thee a true answer, or dost thou wish for a pleasant one?"

Then the king bade him speak the plain truth, and promised that he would not
on that account hold him in less favour than heretofore. So Demaratus, when he
heard the promise, spake as follows: "O king! since thou biddest me at all
risks speak the truth, and not say what will one day prove me to have lied to
thee, thus I answer. Want has at all times been a fellow-dweller with us in
our land, while Valour is an ally whom we have gained by dint of wisdom and
strict laws. Her aid enables us to drive out want and escape thraldom. Brave
are all the Greeks who dwell in any Dorian land; but what I am about to say
does not concern all, but only the Lacedaemonians. First then, come what may,
they will never accept thy terms, which would reduce Greece to slavery; and
further, they are sure to join battle with thee, though all the rest of the
Greeks should submit to thy will. As for their numbers, do not ask how many
they are, that their resistance should be a possible thing; for if a thousand
of them should take the field, they will meet thee in battle, and so will any
number, be it less than this, or be it more."

When Xerxes heard this answer of Demaratus, he laughed and answered:- "What
wild words, Demaratus! A thousand men join battle with such an army as this!
Come then, wilt thou- who wert once, as thou sayest, their king- engage to
fight this very day with ten men? I trow not. And yet, if all thy fellow-
citizens be indeed such as thou sayest they are, thou oughtest, as their king,
by thine own country's usages, to be ready to fight with twice the number. If
then each one of them be a match for ten of my soldiers, I may well call upon
thee to be a match for twenty. So wouldest thou assure the truth of what thou
hast now said. If, however, you Greeks, who vaunt yourselves so much, are of a
truth men like those whom I have seen about my court, as thyself, Demaratus,
and the others with whom I am wont to converse- if, I say, you are really men
of this sort and size, how is the speech that thou hast uttered more than a
mere empty boast? For, to go to the very verge of likelihood- how could a
thousand men, or ten thousand, or even fifty thousand, particularly if they
were all alike free, and not under one lord- how could such a force, I say,
stand against an army like mine? Let them be five thousand, and we shall have
more than a thousand men to each one of theirs. If, indeed, like our troops,
they had a single master, their fear of him might make them courageous beyond
their natural bent; or they might be urged by lashes against an enemy which
far outnumbered them. But left to their own free choice, assuredly they will
act differently. For mine own part, I believe, that if the Greeks had to
contend with the Persians only, and the numbers were equal on both sides, the
Greeks would find it hard to stand their ground. We too have among us such men
as those of whom thou spakest- not many indeed, but still we possess a few.
For instance, some of my bodyguard would be willing to engage singly with
three Greeks. But this thou didst not know; and therefore it was thou talkedst
so foolishly."

Demaratus answered him- "I knew, O king! at the outset, that if I told thee
the truth, my speech would displease thine ears. But as thou didst require me
to answer thee with all possible truthfulness, I informed thee what the
Spartans will do. And in this I spake not from any love that I bear them - for
none knows better than thou what my love towards them is likely to be at the
present time, when they have robbed me of my rank and my ancestral honours,
and made me a homeless exile, whom thy father did receive, bestowing on me
both shelter and sustenance. What likelihood is there that a man of
understanding should be unthankful for kindness shown him, and not cherish it
in his heart? For mine own self, I pretend not to cope with ten men, nor with
two- nay, had I the choice, I would rather not fight even with one. But, if
need appeared, or if there were any great cause urging me on, I would contend
with right good will against one of those persons who boast themselves a match
for any three Greeks. So likewise the Lacedaemonians, when they fight singly,
are as good men as any in the world, and when they fight in a body, are the
bravest of all. For though they be free-men, they are not in all respects
free; Law is the master whom they own; and this master they fear more than thy
subjects fear thee. Whatever he commands they do; and his commandment is
always the same: it forbids them to flee in battle, whatever the number of
their foes, and requires them to stand firm, and either to conquer or die. If
in these words, O king! I seem to thee to speak foolishly, I am content from
this time forward evermore to hold my peace. I had not now spoken unless
compelled by thee. Certes, I pray that all may turn out according to thy
wishes."

Such was the answer of Demaratus; and Xerxes was not angry with him at all,
but only laughed, and sent him away with words of kindness.

![](images/bartransp.gif)

_Copyright statement: The Internet Classics Archive by Daniel C. Stevenson,
Web Atomics. World Wide Web presentation is copyright (C) 1994-1998, Daniel C.
Stevenson, Web Atomics. All rights reserved under international and pan-
American copyright conventions, including the right of reproduction in whole
or in part in any form. Direct permission requests
to[classics@classics.mit.edu.](mailto:classics@classics.mit.edu)_

[**_Return to Classics 308 Syllabus_**](308syllabus.html)

