W O R L D  C I V I L I Z A T I O N   I | UGC 111D : Professor Bono  
---|---  
  
* * *

| [SYLLABUS](syllabus.html) | [SCHEDULE](schedule.html) |
[COMMUNICATION](discussion.html) | [HELP](help.html) | [Site
Map](sitemap.html)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
.  
---  
  
|

| World Civilization I: UGC 111D  
---  
Fall 2002, , TTh 8:30-9:20 A.M., 201 Natural Sciences Complex (NSC)  
  
  | .  
---|---  
Instructor Information  
  | Instructor:  Dr. James J. Bono
[hischaos@acsu.buffalo.edu](mailto:hischaos@acsu.buffalo.edu)  
  | Office:  533 Park Hall, Department of History  
  | Hours:  Tuesday, 10:00-11:00 a.m.; Thursday, 12noon-1 p.m.; and by
appointment  
  | Phone:  645-2282 x533 (office) and 834-7880 (home: before 11 P.M.)  
  | Teaching Assistants: April Kiser
[kiser@acsu.buffalo.edu](mailto:kiser@acsu.buffalo.edu)  
  |                                        Derek Maxfield
[dmaxfield1@juno.com](mailto:dmaxfield@juno.com)  
  |                                        Meghan Reynolds
[mer7@acsu.buffalo.edu](mailto:mer7@acsu.buffalo.edu)  
  |  
  | .  
Required Readings  
  | See [schedule](schedule.html) for specific reading assignments.  
  | All the "readings" are required and must be completed on schedule. The
readings for some weeks are _considerably_ more than for others. You must
_plan ahead_ to get all reading assignments done on time if you wish to pass
this course.  
  |

The following required books can be purchased from the University Bookstore:  
    1.  Natsume Soseki, _Kokoro_ , trans. Edwin McClellan (Regnery Publishers)   
    2.  Shakespeare, _The Tempest_ (Signet Classics)    
     3\. _The Koran_ (Penguin Classics)    
     4\. Dante Alighieri, _The Inferno_ , translated by John Ciardi (Signet Classic)  
  
  | In addition, virtually **all other** **required readings are available in
electronic form and can be accessed through links found on this course
website.**  
  | .  
Expectations  
  | 1\. Students are responsible for all required reading materials listed in
the class schedule.  Unless otherwise informed by the instructor, students
must read the required materials for a particular week by the beginning of the
week or by the date specified.  
  | 2\. Students are responsible for all significant information and major
themes, ideas, arguments, and interpretive viewpoints discussed by the
instructor in class.  Because of the nature of the approach taken in this
course, students should be forewarned that no outside readings can substitute
for the lectures and analysis provided by the instructor.  **Students must
attend lectures and sections: failure to attend faithfully will leave you
without the knowledge you will need to pass this course.**  
  | 3\. Students are expected to take an active and lively part in the course,
especially the recitation sections.  
  | .  
Assignments and Grades  
  | See [schedule](schedule.html) for due dates and links to descriptions of
assignments.  
  | 1\. _Response Papers and Electronic Forum_ :       20%  
  | 2\. _Midterm Examination_ :         15%  
  | 3\. _Final Examination_ :          25%  
Examinations will cover the content of the required readings and course
lectures. Exams will stress understanding and interpretation as well as
essential factual knowledge.  Will combine brief answers and longer essays.
**The Final Exam will cover the entire semester's work.**  
  | 4\. _Formal Papers_ :         40%  
Each student will be required to write two short papers  [approximately 3 to 5
pages each] on texts and topics assigned by the instructors and teaching
assistants. Detailed instructions for these assignments will be provided on
the course website and will be discussed at appropriate points during the
semester.  
  | 5\. _Course Participation_ :  
Active participation and thoughtful contributions to discussions can enhance
one's grade, particularly in situations where the cumulative grade falls just
short of a higher letter grade. Poor participation can lead to a reduction in
one's grade.  
  | NOTE: The +/- grading option shall be observed in this class.  
  | .  
Regulations  
  | 1\. No make-ups for examinations unless _written evidence_ by a physician
(or other acceptable authority) attests to serious illness or death in
immediate family.  
  | 2\. All other assignments, including informal and formal papers, must be
completed on schedule. Consult the course schedule, the Professsor, and your
section leader for specific deadlines, assignments, and rules for completion
and submission.  
  | .  
Class Attendance and Participation  
  | Students are expected to attend all lectures and recitation sections. I
**promise** that I'll rig the midterm and final exams in such a way that
**poor or mediocre lecture attendance will produce lousy exam grades**.
Attendance will be checked to keep track of chronic absenteeism.  _Absence
from more than a few classes [lectures and/or discussion sections] during the
semester may result in a grade of "F" for the course_.  The professor's
lectures will provide essential information and contexts for understanding the
subjects treated in this course.  
  | .  
Incomplete Policy  
  | Incompletes will not be casually given.  University regulations stipulate
that they are to be granted only if the instructor is satisfied that the
student will be able to complete the work.  I interpret this regulation to
mean that the major portion of the semester's work must already be
satisfactorily completed. The student must consult with me about the proposed
incomplete well in advance (except in unusual circumstances).  
  | .  
Plagiarism  
  | Don't do it!  Plagiarism is unacknowledged dependence on some secondary
source or on someone else's work. Indebtedness can range from direct (but
unacknowledged) quotation to the use of certain key phrases, to the paraphrase
of certain central ideas. _If you do use someone else's work, please document
your use of such work carefully_.   The _MLA Handbook_ (available at many
local bookstores) is a useful guide in these matters. When in doubt, please
ask me or your discussion section instructor how to footnote/endnote, compile
a bibliography, etc. If I suspect unacknowledged dependence on outside sources
--including internet and world wide web sites and source--be assured that  I
shall investigate it thoroughly and prosecute to the full extent of university
regulations.  ALL OF YOUR WORK MUST BE YOURS ALONE,  except in cases where we
ask you to work on projects with other students. There must be no
collaboration between you and other people on tests, homework, or papers. We
assume you to be competent and creative enough to do your own work and not to
copy from books or anyone else's paper or tests.  If there is a breach in
honesty, you will fail the course.  
  | .  
NOTE TO STUDENTS  
  | The above schedule and procedures in this course are subject to change in
the event of extenuating circumstances.  In addition, legitimate pedagogical
concerns may make it necessary to alter the course schedule, content, readings
assignments, or other aspects of this course. **It is the student's
responsibility to become aware of all changes, specific assignments, and
requirements that may be announced in lecture classes or in discussion
sections, or posted later to this website.** Absence from specific classes is
not an acceptable excuse for failing to fulfill the requirements of the
course.  
  
  
  Top  
  
.  
---  
  
Page last updated: 08/24/2002 cat  
URL:
[www.pluto.fss.buffalo.edu/classes/his/hischaos/syllabus.html](http://www.pluto.fss.buffalo.edu/classes/his/hischaos/syllabus.html)  
Send comments to:
[hischaos@acsu.buffalo.edu](mailto:hischaos@acsu.buffalo.edu)  
[World Civilizations: Student Resources](http://www.world-
civ.buffalo.edu/students) | [![College of Arts &
Sciences](http://wings.buffalo.edu/cas/images/logo.jpg)](http://wings.buffalo.edu/cas)
[![](box_wings2.jpg)](http://wings.buffalo.edu)  
---|---  
  | [![History Department](http://wings.buffalo.edu/soc-
sci/history/Welcome/Events/a_UBhist_1.gif)](http://wings.buffalo.edu/soc-
sci/history/)

