[Prof. Warren Metcalf](mailto:wmetcalf@ou.edu) Office: 313 Dale Office Tower

Telephone: 325-6370 Hours: M-W-F, 10:30-11:30 a.m.

  
  
  
  

The United States: 1865 to the Present

Course Syllabus: History 1493 (Sec. 003)

M-W-F, 11:30 a.m. to 12:20 p.m., Spring Semester 1999

  
  

_Course description_ : History 1493 examines several themes relevant to United
States history since the Civil War period. The purpose of the course is to
provide a general survey of significant events, as well as to provide a
conceptual basis for understanding and interpreting social, political,
economic, and cultural trends in the American past.

  
  

_Required reading_ : The assigned text is _America Past and Present_ , Vol.
II, Fifth edition, by Robert A. Divine, et al. Please complete the assigned
reading before class on the date listed in the class schedule, so that you
will be prepared to contribute to class discussions. In addition, four
supplementary books are required:

  
  

Jacqueline Jones Royster, ed., _Southern Horrors and other Writings: the Anti-
Lynching Campaign of Ida B. Wells, 1892-1900._

Anzia Yezierska, _Bread Givers_.

Monica Sone, _Nisei Daughter_.

Martin Luther King, Jr., _Why We Can't Wait._

These supplementary books are available in the usual local bookstores, as well
as the University Bookstore. Don't wait to purchase them, as you may find that
they have been sold or returned to the publisher.

  
  

___Papers_ : After reading each of the four supplementary texts (listed
above), you will be required to write a brief interpretive essay. Each paper
should be a minimum of 2 pages in length (typed and double-spaced) to a
maximum of 3 pages - no more, no less. The essay questions will be distributed
in class. Do not collaborate with classmates on these papers. They are, in
essence, take-home essay examinations. The schedule for completing each book
and companion essay is as follows:

  
  

Royster: reading completed and paper due February 1st.

Yezierska: reading completed and paper due March 3rd.

Sone: reading completed and paper due March 26th.

King: reading completed and paper due April 19th.

  
  

_Exams:_ The course includes two midterm examinations and a final,
administered in class. The exams are not comprehensive, and consist of
approximately 50 multiple choice questions.

  
  
  
  

___Grading Policy_ : Grades in this course are determined by a criterion-
referenced system, which means that letter grades correspond to set
percentages. Scores of 90% and above = A, 80% = B, etc. Final scores are not
curved. Point distribution is as follows:

  
  

4 Essay papers (50 points each): 200 points

3 Exams (100 points each): 300 points

\----------

Total points possible: 500 points

  
  

_Attendance and student conduct_ : Attendance is not taken in this class but
is highly recommended. Also, students should not leave class early without
notifying me beforehand. Such behavior is disruptive and discourteous to other
students and to me.

Cheating on exams and papers will not be tolerated under any circumstances.
Students caught cheating will be reported to the academic standards office.

  
  

_Consultation and related matters_ : Students are welcome to visit and discuss
any relevant topic with me. Please feel free to see me during my consultation
hours, or at another time by appointment. Also, students wanting grade
information should ask me for a printout of their scores. I will cheerfully
make the necessary computations and provide the requested information at the
next scheduled class. Students with disabilities should contact me as soon as
possible to discuss accommodations necessary to ensure full participation and
to facilitate the educational experience.

  
  

_Regarding final grades_ : If you would like to know your final grade prior to
the distribution of official grade reports, bring a self-addressed, stamped
envelope to the final exam and I will mail your scores to you. Grades will not
otherwise be posted.

  
  

I highly recommend that you retain all papers and examinations. If there is a
dispute over a score, the burden of proof rests with you - I will not change a
grade without the actual exam, paper or other incontrovertible evidence of a
scoring error.

  
  

Incomplete grades will only be granted in strict conformity to the university
guidelines. This means that they will only be given to students who are
otherwise passing the class but are unable to complete the course due to
illness or other conditions beyond their control. Failing the course is not
grounds for receipt of an incomplete grade.

  
  
  
  

_Class Schedule:_

**_Part one: Reconstruction, Industrialization, and Expansion._**

  
  

Assigned reading:

Robert A. Divine, et al., _America Past and Present_ , chapters 16 through 21.

Jacqueline Jones Royster, ed., _Southern Horrors and other Writings: the Anti-
Lynching Campaign of Ida B. Wells, 1892-1900._

  
  

Scheduling notes:

Class will not be held on the Martin Luther King Holiday, January 18th.

Royster essay due Monday, February 1st.

  
  

Class discussion topics:

1\. Reconstruction: Challenge to the American system.

2\. The Indian dilemma and western settlement.

3\. The Industrial Age.

4\. The crisis of labor.

5\. The world of immigrants and ethnic divisions.

6\. Politics in the Gilded Age.

7\. The agrarian protest, free silver and Populism.

8\. American imperialism and the Spanish-American War.

  
  

First midterm examination: _Tentatively_ scheduled for Friday, February 12th.

__

**_Part two: Reform, Depression, and World War._** __

  
  

Assigned reading: __

__ Robert A. Divine, et al., _America Past and Present_ , chapters 22 through
27.

Anzia Yezierska, _Bread Givers_.

Monica Sone, _Nisei Daughter_.

  
  

Scheduling notes:

Class will not be held during the week of March 15-19, due to Spring Break.

__ Yezierska essay due Wednesday, March 3rd.

Sone essay due Friday, March 26th. __

  
  

Class discussion topics:

1\. The progressive impulse.

2\. Progressive politics: Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson. and social activism.

3\. The Great War and the American dilemma.

4\. Wilson and Versailles.

5\. Action and reaction in the 1920s.

6\. Harding, Coolidge, Hoover, and the consumer age.

7\. The Great Depression, FDR, and the New Deal.

9\. The coming of the Second World War.

10\. The United States at War. ****

  
  

Second midterm examination: _tentatively_ scheduled for Wednesday, March 31st.

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

____

**_Part three: Post-war America_**

  
  

Assigned reading:

__ Robert A. Divine, et al., _America Past and Present_ , chapters 27 through
33.

Martin Luther King, Jr., _Why We Can't Wait._

  
  

Scheduling notes:

King essay due Monday, April 19th.

The last day of class is Friday, April 30th.

  
  

Class discussion topics:

1\. Cold War: Truman, Kennan, containment and crisis.

2\. Post-war material culture.

3\. The Civil Rights movement.

4\. Eisenhower and the Cold War.

5\. The Kennedy Legacy.

6\. LBJ and the "Great Society."

7\. Johnson's war in Vietnam.

8\. The Youth protest movement and the counter-culture.

9\. Nixon, Vietnam, and the Watergate scandal.

10\. Ford, Carter, and the malaise of the '70s.

11\. The Reagan "Revolution."

  
  

Final (last) examination: Wednesday, May 5th, 1:30 - 3:30 p.m.

__

* * *

  
[About OU's Web](http://www.ou.edu/web/about/)  
[Disclaimer](http://www.ou.edu/ouweb/disclaimer/)  
![OU Logo](http://www.ou.edu/images/official.gif)  

