### _**History Courses**_

The following is a list of the department's History courses along with online
resources and **tentative** scheduling information.   Owing to occasional
changes in staffing and enrollment, we cannot always guarantee that a class
will be offered in a given semester, but the information below is generally
reliable. **

**

**HIST 121 - World History I (3 credit hours)  
**  
A survey of the major societies and civilizations of Asia, Africa, the Middle
East, and the West -- their geography, major economic and social structures,
political systems, religions, and philosophies.   The course covers the period
from pre-history to about 1500 C.E.  Required for all History majors.

Normally offered each fall and spring.  
  
**HIST 122 - World History II (3 credit hours)**

A survey of the major societies and civilizations of Asia, Africa, the Middle
East, and the West--their geography, major economic and social structures,
political systems, religions, and philosophies. The second semester covers
from 1500 to the present.  Required for all History majors.

Normally offered each fall and spring.

**HIST 2010 - American History I (3 credit hours)**

A study of the development of cultural, economic, and political institutions
in America. The course covers the pre-Columbian period to 1877.  General
education requirement.

Normally offered each fall, spring, and summer.  
  
Links:  [Syllabus](syllabi/2010syllabus.htm), [Course Home Page](survey.htm)

**HIST 2011 - Honors American History I (3 credit hours)**

An intensive and extensive study of American history.  The first semester
covers the pre-Columbian times to 1877.   Limited to students in the
University Honors Program.

Normally offered each fall.

**HIST 2020 - American History II (3 credit hours)**

A study of the development of cultural, economic, and political institutions
in America.  The course covers the time period 1877 to the present.  General
education requirement.

Normally offered each fall, spring and summer.

Links:  [Syllabus](syllabi/2020syllabus.htm), [Course Home Page](survey.htm)

**HIST 2021 - Honors American History II (3 credit hours)**

An intensive and extensive study of American history.  The second semester
covers the period from 1877 to the present.   Limited to students in the
University Honors Program.

Normally offered each spring.

**HIST 2030 - Tennessee History (3 credit hours)**

A study of the state from Neolithic time until the present day.  It includes a
survey of social, cultural, economic, and political developments that have
influenced Tennessee's growth and development.  Course may be substituted for
either HIST 201 or 202 in satisfying the University's American history
requirement.

Normally offered each fall, spring, and summer.

**HIST 301 - Europe, 1648-1789 (3 credit hours)**

A survey of early modern Europe from the Treaty of Westphalia to the French
Revolution.  The course examines such themes as the rise of the modern state
system in Europe, the creation of colonial empires, and the impact of science
and the Enlightenment.

Tentatively scheduled for fall 2001 and fall 2003.

Links:  [Syllabus](http://www.tnstate.edu/jdark/hist301/syllabus.htm),
[Instructor's Home Page](http://www.tnstate.edu/jdark)

**HIST 302 - Europe, 1789-1871 (3 credit hours)**

A survey of European history from the French Revolution to the unification of
Italy and Germany.  This course examines the transformation of Europe through
the influence of revolutionary movements and new ideologies as well as the
social and economic forces of urbanization and industrialization.

Tentatively scheduled for spring 2002 and spring 2004.

Links:  [Syllabus](http://www.tnstate.edu/jdark/hist302/syllabus.htm),
[Instructor's Home Page](http://www.tnstate.edu/jdark)

**HIST 303 - Europe, 1871-1945 (3 credit hours)**

A survey of Europe from the height of its power and influence to the crisis of
its civilization in the First and Second World Wars.  The course examines the
nature of European imperialism, the growth of international rivalry, the rise
of Fascism and Communism, and the great military conflicts of the twentieth
century.

Tentatively scheduled for fall 2002 and fall 2004.

Links:  [Instructor's Home Page](http://www.tnstate.edu/jdark)

**HIST 304 - Europe Since 1945 (3 credit hours)**

A survey of European history during and after the Cold War. The course
examines the end of European empire, the division of Europe in the struggle
between the Soviet Union and the United States, the quest for European unity,
the collapse of Communism, and the challenges of the new century.

Tentatively scheduled for spring 2003 and spring 2005.

Links:  [Instructor's Home Page](http://www.tnstate.edu/jdark)

**HIST 318A, B, C - Cooperative Education (3 credit hours)**

Supervised and approved program of learning experiences undertaken by students
in governmental, business, or industry setting.  Formal proposals, project
objectives, and learning plans are reviewed and approved by faculty.  Student
activity and progress are monitored, evaluated, and graded by a full-time
faculty member.  Permission of department required for enrollment.

Normally offered each summer.

**HIST 331 - American Colonial History (3 credit hours)**

A study of the economic, social, cultural, and political history of North
America and the early United States from 1492 to 1789.

Tentatively scheduled for spring 2003 and spring 2005.

**HIST 332 - The Early Republic, 1789-1836 (3 credit hours)**

An in-depth study of the American Republic from its beginnings under George
Washington through the presidency of Andrew Jackson.

Tentatively scheduled for fall 2001 and fall 2003.

**HIST 333 - The Late Republic, 1836-1860 (3 credit hours)**

The history of the United States during the mid-nineteenth century.  Topics
include territorial expansion, sectional conflict, the debate over slavery,
and the coming of the Civil War.

Tentatively scheduled for spring 2002 and spring 2004.

**HIST 334 - Civil War and Reconstruction (3 credit hours)**

A study of the sectional disputes dividing the nation, the course of the Civil
War, the Constitutional problems of Reconstruction times, the condition of the
freedmen after the war, and the political history of the nation to 1877.

Tentatively scheduled for fall 2002 and fall 2004.

**HIST 335 - United States, 1877-1920 (3 credit hours)**

An analysis of the political, economic, and cultural evolution of the United
States.  Key issues include the end of Reconstruction, end of frontier
America, rise of big business, imperialism, the Spanish-American War, the
Progressive Era, and World War I.

Tentatively scheduled for spring 2003 and spring 2005.

**HIST 336 - United States, 1920-1945 (3 credit hours)**

A study of the political, economic, and cultural development of the American
people from the end of World War I through World War II.  Topics include the
Roaring Twenties, the Great Depression, the New Deal, and World War II.

Tentatively scheduled for fall 2001 and fall 2003.

**HIST 337 - America Since 1945 (3 credit hours)**

An intensive investigation of the American nation since World War II.  Topics
include domestic politics, America's involvement in post-war world affairs,
and economic, cultural, and social developments.

Tentatively scheduled for spring 2002 and spring 2004.

**HIST 338 - Cultural History of the United States (3 credit hours)**

A study of selected cultural aspects of America from colonial times to the
present day.  The principal topics include folklore, mythologies, music, art,
literature, popular culture, and fads.

Tentatively scheduled for spring 2003 and spring 2005.

**HIST 350 - History Workshop (3 credit hours)**

An introduction to history as an academic discipline and professional
vocation.  The course traces the development of history as a specialized
field, explores its philosophical foundations, and introduces students to the
methods, practices, and career opportunities of professional historians.
Students should typically take the course during the fall semester of their
junior year.  Required for all History majors beginning fall 2002.

Tentatively scheduled for fall 2002 and each fall semester thereafter.

**HIST 361 - Introduction to the Philosophy of History**

A study of the philosophy of history and historical literature from the time
of the Greeks to the present.  Course includes such writers as Thucydides,
Herodotus, Tacitus, St. Augustine, Vico, Voltaire, Hegel, von Ranke, Marx,
Turner, Beard, and Toynbee.

Not presently scheduled.

**HIST 363 - History of Science and Technology (3 credit hours)**

Selected topics and sources in the historical development of modern science
and technology from the Renaissance to the present.  It includes the
developments in mathematics, physical sciences, earth sciences, biological
sciences, medicine and technology.

Tentatively scheduled for fall 2002 and fall 2004.

**HIST 371 - Teaching History and Social Science (3 credit hours)**

The methods, strategies, and materials of the secondary teaching of social
studies.  The philosophical and definitional literature of the social studies
and their relationship to pedagogy are explored.  Clinical and field-based
experiences, which call for active participation by students, are part of the
course requirements.  Required of all History majors in the Teacher Education
Program.  Prerequisite:  official admission to the Teacher Education Program.

Normally offered each fall.

**HIST 384 - Ancient History (3 credit hours)**

An examination of ancient civilizations, including Egyptian, Roman, Hellenic,
and Hellenistic cultures.   Materials in this course include archaeological
evidence, philosophical writings, and political institutions.

Tentatively scheduled for spring 2002 and spring 2004.

**HIST 386 - Middle Ages and Renaissance (3 credit hours)**

An intensive study of Western Europe from 500 to 1600.  The course focuses on
the political, economic, social, and cultural developments of the Middle Ages,
the twelfth-century Renaissance, and the Italian and Northern Renaissance.

Tentatively scheduled for fall 2002 and fall 2004.

**HIST 387 - Reformation (3 credit hours)**

An investigation of the religious, political, and social events from 1517 to
1648 that led to conflicts and resultant major changes in Europe.  Both
theological and political controversies are noted, along with the various ways
religion in Europe experienced change.

Tentatively scheduled for spring 2003 and spring 2005.

**HIST 401 - Foundations of Contemporary World History I (3 credit hours)**

The third in a series of courses (HIST 301, 302, 401, and 402) on the history
of modern Europe.  Beginning in the mid-nineteenth century, the course
examines the major themes and events of European history through the outbreak
of the First World War in 1914.  Topics include the rise of nationalism,
liberalism, and socialism, the development of modern politics, the impact of
European imperialism in Asia and Africa, and the crisis of international
diplomacy which ultimately led to World War I.

This course is being replaced by HIST 303.

Links:  [Syllabus](http://www.tnstate.edu/jdark/hist401/syllabus.htm),
[Instructor's Home Page](http://www.tnstate.edu/jdark)

**HIST 402 - Foundations of Contemporary World History II (3 credit hours)**

The fourth in a series of courses (HIST 301, 302, 401, and 402) on the history
of modern Europe.  Beginning with the outbreak of the First World War, the
course examines the major themes and events of European history from 1914 to
the present.   Topics include the two world wars, the rise of totalitarian
ideologies, the Cold-War division of Europe, the collapse of Communism, and
the challenges of the new century.

This course is being replaced by HIST 304.

Links:  [Syllabus](http://www.tnstate.edu/jdark/hist402/syllabus.htm),
[Instructor's Home Page](http://www.tnstate.edu/jdark)

**HIST 432A, 432B, 432C, 432D - Vital Topics in History (3 credit hours)**

Designated topics focusing on specialized historical fields, allowing students
to become aware of the expanding frontiers of historical investigation and to
participate in an intensive research experience.

Tentatively scheduled for fall 2001 and fall 2002.

**HIST 450 - Senior Project (3 credit hours)**

A one-semester research and writing project for seniors majoring in History.
The course represents the culmination of the undergraduate program in History
and should be taken during the fall or spring semester of a student's senior
year.  Students wishing to enroll under other circumstances must seek prior
approval by the Department.  Required for all History majors.

Normally offered each fall and spring.

Links:  [Syllabus](http://www.tnstate.edu/jdark/hist450/syllabus.htm),
[Instructor's Home Page](http://www.tnstate.edu/jdark)

**HIST 451 - Latin American History I (3 credit hours)**

An examination of the general history of the civilization of Latin America.
The first semester covers Indian times through the Portuguese-Spanish
colonization period.

Not presently offered.

**HIST 452 - Latin American History II (3 credit hours)**

An examination of the general history of the civilization of Latin America to
the present.  The second semester covers the period from 1800 to the present,
including revolution, independence, nationhood, and international relations.

Not presently offered.

**HIST 458 - Public History Administration Internship (3 credit hours)**

A practicum or internship with a history-related agency (public or private) to
provide the student with on-the-job experiences.  The details of the
internship are negotiated among student, agency, and instructor.  A major
paper is required for successful completion of course, as well as a
satisfactory evaluation by both instructor and internship agent.

Not presently offered.

**HIST 472S - Student Teaching (12 credit hours)**

A semester-long, supervised student teaching experience divided between middle
school and high school.  Required of all students seeking certification in
teaching history or government.   Prerequisite: successful completion of all
certification courses except EDCI 470A, which is taken concurrently.

Normally offered each spring.

**HIST 481 - Asian Civilizations I (3 credit hours)**

An investigation of civilizations of the Indian subcontinent and the Far East,
especially China and Japan.  The first semester covers the time from the
development of the classical period to Western domination.

Not presently offered.

**HIST 482 - Asian Civilizations II (3 credit hours)**

An investigation of civilizations of the Indian subcontinent and the Far East,
especially China and Japan.  The second semester covers the period from the
age of imperialism to the present.

Not presently offered.

**HIST 485 - History of Africa I (3 credit hours)**

An examination of the history of Africa from ancient times to the recent
period of African nationalism.  The first semester addresses the major events
and leaders in African history to the beginnings of European colonization.

Tentatively scheduled for fall 2001 and fall 2003.

**HIST 486 - History of Africa II (3 credit hours)**

An examination of the history of Africa from ancient times to the recent
period of African nationalism.  The second semester covers the period from the
age of imperialism to the present.

Tentatively scheduled for spring 2002 and spring 2004.

**HIST 488 - Africa and the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade (3 credit hours)**

A study of the trans-Atlantic slave trade from its beginnings in the fifteenth
century to its suppression in the 1800s.   The course examines the origins of
the slave trade, its extent, and its impact on the African continent and the
African diaspora.

Tentatively scheduled for fall 2002 and fall 2004.

**HIST 489 - Modern Africa, 1960-Present (3 credit hours)**

A study of Africa in the post-independence period.  Topics include the
challenges of economic development, issues of the environment and population,
the dilemmas of nation building, and the impact of international politics on
emerging African states.

Tentatively scheduled for spring 2003 and spring 2005.

**HIST 491 - African American History I (3 credit hours)**

A study of the integral role and contributions of African Americans to the
history and development of the United States.   This course covers the period
from the history of African kingdoms to the end of American slavery.

Normally offered in the fall.

**HIST 492 - African American History II (3 credit hours)**

A study of the integral role and contributions of African Americans to the
history and development of the United States.   This course covers the period
from 1865 to the present.

Normally offered in the fall and spring.  May also be offered during the
summer.

**HIST 493 - Civil Rights Movement in the United States (3 credit hours)**

A study of movements in America from 1900 to the present, including African-
American, Mexican-American, Native American, and women's organizations.

Tentatively scheduled for fall 2001 and fall 2003.

