# History H105/United States History to 1865/Sections C298 and C299/Spring
2002

Professor Ashendel

Office: CA243C

Office Hours: Monday and Wednesday 2:00-3:00 and by appointment

Office Telephone:

Email:



Required Readings:

_Nation of Nations_ , Volume 1, by Davidson _et al_.

_Changes in the Land_ by Cronon

_Benjamin and William Franklin_ by Skemp

_The Battle for Christmas_ by Nissenbaum



Course Description and Objectives: Despite all opinions to the contrary,
history survey courses such as this one are not designed to make
undergraduates jump through hoops or torture them with requirements to learn
useless information and meaningless dates, all irrelevant to the students'
futures. Instead, a survey course is meant to give students a framework for
understanding how both the present and future unfold within structures largely
defined by the past. Even the fast-paced, technology driven, global society we
find ourselves in these days has roots in historical precedents that are still
shaping its development.

The course will focus on the usual themes of politics and economics, but will
also show how ordinary people shaped these forces. History is not just a
mountain of facts (although you must remember those), but is instead a
sequence of interconnected events. Understanding those connections and
explaining them through the use of facts is one way to sharpen your analytical
skills, improve your ability to communicate with others, and, hopefully, to
learn something to apply to your own life.



Attendance: An attendance sheet will be circulated at each class meeting. You
may miss three classes without an excuse. After three absences, you will lose
2 points from your total final points for each absence. If you must miss more
than three classes due to circumstances beyond your control, please see me.



Classroom Procedures: Please arrive on time. If you arrive late, please enter
quietly through the back of the room. Listening carefully and taking good
notes are important skills. Therefore, no tape recorders are allowed unless
documentation is presented from the office of student services.



Cheating and Plagiarism: Don't do it. You will earn a zero on the work in
question. For further information, consult the _Campus Bulletin, 2000-2002:
IUPUI_, p. 36.

_ _

Assignments: Students will take three examinations. These exams will consist
of 5 identifications and an essay. A study guide will be distributed in class
one week prior to each exam. The actual exam will be taken from that study
guide. There will also be a quiz on each of the three readings. The study
questions for these quizzes are at the end of this syllabus. Each quiz will be
taken from those study questions.



Grading:

3 exams @ 100points 300 points

3 quizzes @ 50points 150 points

Total: 450 points



Grades are based on a straight scale (90% and up = A; 80% and up = B, etc.).
Be sure to complete all of the examinations and quizzes. A zero has a greater
negative impact on your final grade than at least some attempt to complete an
assignment. Make-up exams and quizzes are strongly discouraged. No make-up
exam or quiz will be given without documentation proving an extreme emergency.
Documentation includes doctors' forms, funeral notices, accident reports, and
similar verifiable papers. The instructor reserves the right to refuse to
grant a make-up exam or quiz if the documentation is not presented. If a make-
up is given, it must be taken within one week of the original exam.
Incompletes are strongly discouraged and rarely given. It is not fair to the
rest of the class to request extra time to complete the work.



Schedule of lecture topics, readings, quizzes, and examinations. Please
complete the readings before class.



January 7: Introduction to the Course/Age of Exploration

Begin to read _Changes in the Land_

January 9: Early Colonial Settlements

Read: NON, Chapters 1 and 2

January 14: Colonial Settlements and the Development of Slavery

January 16: The Puritans

Read: NON, Chapter 3

January 21: HOLIDAY---NO CLASS

January 23: Discuss _Changes in the Land_ and **QUIZ**

January 28: Witches and Historians

### January 30: Colonial Governments and Colonial Changes

Read: NON, Chapter 4

February 4: Reason and Religion

February 6: **EXAM**

February 11: Imperial Policy and Colonists Rights

Begin reading _Benjamin and William Franklin_

Read: NON, Chapter 5

February 13: Making a Rebellion

Read: NON, Chapter 6, pp. 170-176, 192-195

February 18: The Social Significance of War

February 20: Discuss _Benjamin and William_ and **QUIZ**

February 25: Constitutional Convention and Ratification Debates

Read: NON, Chapter 7

February 27: The Federalists

Read: NON, Chapter 8



March 4: The Jeffersonians

Read: NON, Chapter 9

March 6: **EXAM**

March 11 and 13: **SPRING BREAK NO CLASSES**

March 18: New Ways to Live and Work

Begin reading _The Battle for Christmas_

Read: NON, Chapter 10

March 20: New Ways to Live and Work

March 25: Southern Society and Slave Culture

Read: NON, Chapter 13

March 27: The Limits of Liberty

April 1: Reform: The Cure for Liberty

Read: NON, Chapter 12

April 3: Reform: The Cure for Liberty

April 8: Discuss _The Battle for Christmas_ and **QUIZ**

April 10: The Common Man and Politics

Read: NON, Chapter 11

April 15: Manifest Destiny

Read: NON, Chapter 14

April 17: The Civil War

Read: NON, Chapter 15; Chapter 16, pp. 488-492, 497-513, 522-530

April 22: The Civil War

April 24: Reconstruction and Review

Read: NON, Chapter 17

## FINAL EXAMINATIONS: C298/Friday, May 3, 8-10 a.m./CA 215

**C299/Wednesday, May 1, 10:30-12:30/LE 103**



Study Questions for _Changes in the Land_

1.      Describe the environment that Europeans encountered in New England--include fish, forests, seashore, and other examples.

2.      How did Native American groups guarantee they had abundant supplies of food? What does this have to do with gender roles? How did Europeans react to this?

3.      How did the English rationalize taking land from the Native Americans? How did Native American politics and means of land ownership operate? How did Native Americans and Englishmen differ in their perceptions of transfer of land rights? What type of complications arose from this?

4.      Describe the effects on Native Americans of diseases, trade, and the loss of animals such as the beaver.

5.      What were some of the results of deforestation?

6.      How did Europeans recreate the world of grazing animals and plows? What were the long-term consequences?









Study Questions for _Benjamin and William Franklin_ You DO NOT have to read
the documents.

1.      Compare and contrast the personal and professional lives of Benjamin and William Franklin. Did they have similar childhoods? Marry similar women? Move up in their careers in the same manner?

2.      What was the Albany Plan? Was it successful? What other role did Benjamin Franklin play in Pennsylvania during the French and Indian War?

3.      How did the trip to England from 1757-60 alter the views of Benjamin and William toward the British government?

4.      Why did Benjamin Franklin not realize, at first, the importance of the Stamp Act?

5.      Why did Benjamin become a Patriot?

6.      Why did William become a Loyalist?

7.      Did Benjamin and Will reconcile after the war? Why or why not?









Study Questions for _The Battle for Christmas_

Chapter 1: Why did the Puritans outlaw Christmas?

Chapter 2: How did Washington Irving, John Pintard, Clement Moore, and the
Knickerbockers change Christmas? What do you think about the author's theory
on the parallels between "The Day of Doom" and "A Visit from St. Nicholas?"
How did Moore integrate the "social classes in a scene of shared festivity
where the poor posed no threat and gratefully accepted their place?"

Chapter 3: How did newspapers play a role in the creation of Christmas?

Chapter 4: Why did Christmas become commercialized? How? How does the story of
the Sedgwicks explain the commercialization of Christmas? Was Santa Claus
commercial at first? Why?

Chapter 5: How did the "introduction of Christmas trees" represent "an effort
to cope with the problems posed by the child-centered Christmas?" What were
those "problems?"

Chapter 6: Explain the changing relationship between Christmas and charity in
the United States.



