**HUMAN RIGHTS AND WORLD POLITICS**

**![](globe\(1\).gif)**

**POLS 173  
Fall Semester 2001  
MW 11:00-12:15  
Debra L. DeLaet, Instructor  
Associate Professor, [Department of Politics and International Relations  
](http://www.drake.edu/artsci/PolSci/PolSci_Home_Page.html)Office: 210
Meredith  
Office Hours: MW 9:00-11:00; M 3:15-4:15  
phone: (515) 271-1844  
[debra.delaet@drake.edu](mail%20to:/debra.delaet@drake.edu)**

Course Description  
Course Objectives  
Course Requirements  
Grading Scale  
Required Texts  
Human Rights Research Resources  
Reading Assignments and Schedule



**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

The basic thematic focus of this course will be on the tension between
sovereignty and human rights in world politics. The international legal
principle of sovereignty has been a defining element of international
relations for centuries. In contrast, the concept of human rights did not
enter popular discourse until after WWII when growing awareness of Nazi
atrocities generated unprecedented support for the idea that a state's ability
to act with impunity within its borders is limited by the basic human rights
of individuals living within the state's territory. Growing support for human
rights after WWII was manifested in the UN Charter which mandates that the
organization promote universal respect for human rights. However, the UN
Charter also enshrines the international legal principle of non-intervention
in the jurisdiction of member states. Thus, in spite of an emerging human
rights regime, state sovereignty remains a fundamental norm shaping world
politics. The tension between sovereignty and the promotion and protection of
human rights remains one of the primary issues in world politics in the post-
Cold War world. Indeed, human rights issues have been central to many of the
top international news stories in recent years, including "ethnic cleansing"
in Kosovo and Bosnia, humanitarian intervention in Somalia, genocide in
Rwanda, and U.S.-China relations to name a few. The way in which the
international community has responded to each of these examples demonstrates
the complex relationship between sovereignty and human rights in world
politics. In this course, we will explore many current global problems as we
examine the tension between human rights and sovereignty and as we consider
the potential for improving the status of global human rights in the post-Cold
War era.

Return to top of page.

**COURSE OBJECTIVES**

The Department of Politics and International Relations seeks to induct
students into the community of liberally educated individuals who are capable
of understanding government and politics in terms of the theories, concepts,
and tools of sophisticated political analysis which characterize the
discipline of political science. The liberal-arts dimension of our mission
stems from our belief that all people are embedded in a political environment
which acts upon them in ways they must understand if they are to function
effectively as active participants in a democratic society. Our goal,
therefore, is not to train professional political scientists, but rather to
produce the liberally educated citizen who is fluent in the language of
politics and political analysis and thereby has a foundation for both
citizenship in a democratic society and successful training in a job, in a
graduate school, or in a professional school. Such a person has the capacity
to recognize and evaluate assumptions, implications, and causal relationships
pertaining to government and politics and, by extension, to other realms of
human experience. Go to the home page of the [Department of Politics and
International
Relations](http://www.drake.edu/artsci/PolSci/PolSci_Home_Page.html) for more
information on the basic objectives of the general program and upper-level
courses in the department.

Additional course-specific objectives include the following:

1\. To explore the philosophical underpinnings of the concept of human rights
and various critiques of this concept

2\. To understand the potential tension between the protection of state
sovereignty and the promotion of human rights

3\. To understand the strengths and weaknesses of efforts to promote and
protect international human rights by individuals, non-governmental
organizations, states, and international organizations

4\. To help students develop and improve their written and verbal
communication skills

Return to top of page.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

1\. **Essays** (45%): At the end of each section of the course, we will
participate in simulations and/ or debates based on cases provided by the
project Teaching Human Rights Online. Each of these cases provides essay
questions, and I will require each student to write essays in response to
these questions. Your essays must be 7-10 double-spaced pages with standard
margins and font. Essays will be graded for content, grammar, and style. Each
essay is worth 15% of your final course grade. Grades on late papers will be
lowered by 1% of your final course grade per day. Further details about this
assignment will be provided in class.

2\. **Two exams** (40%): Students will take a midterm exam during the semester
and a final exam at the end of the semester. These exams will consist of essay
questions and, perhaps, short answer questions. The exam questions will
require students to think analytically about the course material and to
integrate information from readings, lectures, classroom discussions, and
where relevant, current events in world politics related to human rights. Each
exam will be worth 20% of your final grade. Exams will be graded for content,
grammar, and style. I also will expect you to incorporate explicit references
to the required readings. Though the final exam questions will focus largely
on the course material covered since the midterm, they also will require
students to build upon the cumulative knowledge they have gained throughout
the course.

**Make-up exams will be given only in the case of family emergencies and
serious illness, and I will require you to document your illness or emergency.
In order to take a make-up exam, you must have a legitimate, verifiable family
emergency or illness, and you must contact me in advance of the exam. Make-up
exams must be taken within five days of the original exam date unless
exceptional circumstances warrant a longer extension.

3\. **Class Attendance and Participation** (15%): Class attendance and
participation will be worth 15% of the final course grade. Your participation
grade will be based on four components: your preparedness for and
contributions to class discussion, participation in the simulations and/ or
debates associated with the Teaching Human Rights Online cases, completion of
periodic homework assignments, and attendance.

In regards to class participation, students should come to class prepared to
ask and answer questions on the assigned readings. You need to participate
actively in the class, but you should not attempt to dominate class
discussion. I expect that students often will disagree with each other and
with me. I will encourage an atmosphere in which we are free to challenge and
criticize each other's arguments, but I expect all of us to be respectful and
civil in our disagreements. Your participation grade will reflect the extent
to which you come to class prepared to discuss the assigned readings in a
thoughtful, productive, and civil manner. **I reserve the right to give "pop-
quizzes" at any time during the semester**. I have done so in the past when
students are not prepared for class.

At the end of each section of the course, we will hold simulations and/ or
debates associated with cases provided by the project Teaching Human Rights
Online. I will assign students to groups representing different actors
involved in the cases, and the groups must come to class prepared to represent
their actor in the simulation or debate. Your grades on these assignments will
be based on my evaluations of your participation in the simulation or debate
as well as peer evaluations of your contributions to the group work.
Accordingly, I will require that each student submit a brief evaluation of
each member of their group on the final day of the simulation or debate.

At times throughout the course, I will ask you to complete brief homework
assignments in preparation for class. I will ask you to turn in these
assignments to ensure that you have completed them. Late work will not be
accepted. Your performance on these assignments will be factored into your
final participation grade.

Finally, in regards to attendance, you will be allowed two unexcused absences.
After that, your participation grade will be lowered by 1% point off of your
final course grade for each unexcused absence. An absence is excused only in
the case of personal illness or family emergency. You must notify me in
advance for your absence to be excused, and I may require you to document your
illness or emergency. (Student athletes, musicians etc. also will be excused
to participate in university-sponsored events but must provide me with the
appropriate documentation forms.)

In accordance with the emphasis on student-centered learning in Drake's
mission statement, this course will stress active student learning. I expect
that your consistent attendance and participation will facilitate your
understanding of the course material. Moreover, because you will be required
to integrate information from readings, lectures, and classroom discussions on
the midterm and the final, your performance on the exams should benefit from
consistent attendance and participation.

4\. **Cheating and plagiarism will not be tolerated.** Plagiarism is the act
of trying to pass off someone else's ideas, words, thoughts or inventions as
one's own. Plagiarism may be intentional or unintentional, but it is a
violation of academic integrity in either case. You must acknowledge your use
of other's work when you quote them word for word (you must use quotation
marks in the case of direct quotations), paraphrase, borrow ideas, incorporate
factual information from someone else's work, or rely on another person's
organization of material. You do not need to provide citations for common
knowledge, but it is better to err on the side of caution if you have any
doubts. If your paper includes uncited information and/or I suspect
plagiarism, I will not grade your paper until you provide satisfactory
documentation of your sources. If I discover a case of cheating or plagiarism,
I will impose the most serious penalty allowed under university regulations
and contingent on the nature of the violation. See the statement on [Academic
Honesty and
Integrity](http://www.drake.edu/artsci/PolSci/PolSci_Home_Page.html#Honesty)
at the Department of Politics and IR homepage for further details. Also, see
me if you still have questions about academic dishonesty.

Return to top of page.

**GRADING SCALE**

A 90-100 (Excellent)  
B 80-89 (Good)  
C 70-79 (Satisfactory)  
D 60-69 (Poor)  
F 0-59 (Failure)

Return to top of page.

**REQUIRED TEXTS**

1\. Brown, Seyom, _Human Rights in World Politics_ (New York: Longman, 2000)

2\. Forsythe, David P., _Human Rights in International Relations_ (Cambridge
University Press, 2000)

3\. Peters, Julie and Andrea Wolper, _Women's Rights, Human Rights:
International Feminist Perspectives_ (New York: Routledge, 1995)

4\. Scott, Gregory M. and Stephen M. Garrison, _The Political Science Student
Writer's Manual_ (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1995)

5\. United Nations Development Programme, _Human Development Report_ (Oxford
University Press, 2001)

6\. Your understanding of international human rights issues will be enhanced
if you keep abreast of current world politics. I will require you to subscribe
to _[The Christian Science Monitor](http://www.csmonitor.com/)_ , which has an
innovative student/ classroom program that will enable you to receive e-mail
notifications of articles on human rights and other topics in world topics, to
interview reporters writing on these issues, and to access links to
information sources used in writing articles. I also recommend that you follow
other national daily newspapers, such as _[The New York
Times](http://www.nytimes.com/)_ , _[The Washington
Post](http://www.washingtonpost.com/)_ , that provide far more thorough
political coverage than local dailes. You also can obtain at least basic
information in some weekly newsmagazines or by following
[CNN](http://www.cnn.com/). In addition to these examples, most national
newspapers and television networks maintain on-line sources of news. Finally,
you can use the [Resources and Reference
Page](http://www.lib.drake.edu/reference/index.html) of Cowles Library to
research specific issues in current world politics. At this site, you can find
access to full text newspaper articles as well as a variety of other political
and legal resources.

Return to top of page.

**HUMAN RIGHTS RESEARCH RESOURCES**

1\. See Chapter 4 of the writer's manual by Scott and Garrison for a wide-
ranging list of sources of information for research in politics and
international relations.

2\. Online research resources:

[_Human Rights
Quarterly_](http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/human_rights_quarterly/)  
[UN High Commissioner for Human Rights  
](http://www.unhchr.ch/)[UN Human Development Report  
](http://www.undp.org/hdro/report.html)[Minnesota Human Rights
Library](http://www.umn.edu/humanrts)  
[Project DIANA at Yale University](http://diana.law.yale.edu/)  
[University of Cincinnati College of Law](http://www.law.uc.edu/Diana)  
[Women's Human Rights Resources](http://www.law-lib.utoronto.ca/diana)  
[Amnesty International homepage](http://www.amnesty.org/)  
[United Nations homepage](http://www.un.org/)  
[U.S. State Department Country Reports on Human Rights  
](http://www.state.gov/www/global/human_rights/hrp_reports_mainhp.html)[UN
page for the Vienna World Conference on Human Rights  
](http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu5/wchr.htm)[5 Year Review of the Vienna World
Conference on Human Rights  
](http://www.hri.ca/vienna+5/)[Foreign Affairs Online (links to sites in
international law, human rights, and the
UN)](http://www.people.virginia.edu/~rjb3v/rjb.html)

3\. **Online Journals/ Academic Universe/ Lexis-Nexis** : You can access a
variety of resources on human rights and world politics, including full text
newspaper articles, legal resources, and reference information on specific
countries, on the [Resources and Reference
Page](http://www.lib.drake.edu/reference/index.html) of Cowles Library.

Return to top of page.

**READING ASSIGNMENTS AND SCHEDULE**

**PART I Philosophical Underpinnings of the Concept of Human Rights** : In
this part of the course, we will attempt to define human rights and will
consider problems associated with efforts to reach international consensus on
a basic definition. We will explore various moral and philosophical arguments
both for and against the concept of human rights. In doing so, we will
consider whether human rights standards are and/or should be considered
universal or whether different cultural standards or interpretations of human
rights are acceptable. Additionally, we will examine how considerations of
gender challenge and/or broaden traditional ways of looking at human rights.

8/27 Introduction to course

8/29 Brown, Chpt. 1 and Forsythe, Chpt. 1; Film: _Night and Fog_

9/3 **Labor Day, classes do not meet**

9/5 Brown, Chpt. 2 and Forsythe, Chpt. 2; Film: _Human Rights: Universal and
Supreme?_

9/10 Brown, Chpt. 3

9/12 Guest lecture: Michael Luick-Thrams, "Implications of the Holocaust";
**8:00 p.m. presentation: Michael Luick-Thrams, "Drake University's Direct
Responses to the Holocaust" (location to be announced)**

9/17 Peters and Wolper, Chpts. 18 and 19

9/19 Brown, Chpt. 4; Skim the [UN
Charter](http://www.un.org/aboutun/charter/index.html), the [Universal
Declaration of Human Rights](http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html), the
[International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights](http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/a_ccpr.htm) , and the [International
Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural
Rights](http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/a_cescr.htm). Come to class prepared
to discuss the following questions: 1) Are human rights a priority in the UN
Charter? 2) Under what circumstances may a state legally derogate from human
rights norms?

9/24 Peters and Wolper, Chpts. 13-17

9/26 Teaching Human Rights Online Case, [_Shah Bano_ : Muslim Women's
Rights](http://oz.uc.edu/thro/shahbano/index.htm)

10/1 Teaching Human Rights Online Case, [_Shah Bano_ : Muslim Women's
Rights](http://oz.uc.edu/thro/shahbano/index.htm); **Essay #1 due**

**PART II** **Human Rights Abuses and State Sovereignty** : In this section of
the course, we will examine the tension between the protection of state
sovereignty and the promotion of human rights by looking at specific cases in
which basic human rights are threatened. We will examine both "civil and
political rights" and "economic, social, and cultural rights" as well as the
ways in which these categories may overlap.

10/3 Human Development Report, Chpt. 2; Read the [International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights](http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/a_ccpr.htm)

10/ 8 Brown, Chpt. 6 (pp. 122-132); Human Development Report, Chpt. 3

10/10 Brown, Chpt. 6 (pp. 132-137); Peters and Wolper, Chpt. 23

10/15 **Fall recess, classes do not meet**

10/17 Brown, Chpt. 6 (pp. 137-148); Peters and Wolper, Chpt. 21; Film:
_Calling the Ghosts_

10/22 DeLaet, "Don't Ask, Don't Tell: Where is the Protection Against Sexual
Orientation Discrimination in International Human Rights Law?" _Law and
Sexuality: A Review of Lesbian and Gay Legal Issues_ Vol. 7 (1997); " Peters
and Wolper, Chpt. 30

10/24 **MIDTERM EXAM**

10/ 29 Human Development Report, Chpts. 1 and 4; Peters and Wolper, Chpts.
26-28; Read the [International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural
Rights](http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/a_cescr.htm)

10/31 Human Development Report, Read the glossary (pp. 16-18), the "Note on
statistics in the Human Development Report (pp. 141-146), and "What do the
human development indices reveal?" (pp. 147-155). Skim pages 157-268 to
familiarize yourself with the indicators presented in the report. We will
spend the next two class periods on exercises related to these indicators.

11/5 Human Development Report, Chpt. 5

11/7 Teaching Human Rights Online Case, [Prime Minister Rao's
Dilemma](http://oz.uc.edu/thro/dilemma/index.html)

11/12 Teaching Human Rights Online Case, [Prime Minister Rao's
Dilemma](http://oz.uc.edu/thro/dilemma/index.html); **Essay #2 due**

**PART III The Promotion and Protection of International Human Rights** : In
this section of the course, we will examine the existing mechanisms for the
implementation of human rights by international organizations, states, and
non-governmental organizations. We will discuss the way in which an emphasis
on state sovereignty has thus far limited the types of actions that have been
taken, especially by international and state actors. We also will explore the
potential for improving the status of global human rights in the post-Cold War
era.

11/14 Brown, Chpt. 5; Forsythe, Chpt. 3; Peters and Wolper, Chpt. 3

11/19 Forsythe, Chpt. 4; Film: _The Legacy of Nuremberg_

11/21 **Thanksgiving recess, classes do not meet**

11/26 Brown, Chpt. 7; Forsythe, Chpt. 6

11/28 Forsythe, Chpt. 8; Kaufman and Gonzalez, "Labor Standards Clash with
Global Reality," _The New York Times_ April 24, 2001; Audio tape: Charles
Kerneghan,  "Ending Child Labor and Sweatshop Abuses in the Global Economy"

12/3 Forsythe, Chpt. 7; Peters and Wolper, Chpt. 20; Film: _Mississipi: Is
this America? (1962-1964)_ [from series, _Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil
Rights Years_ ]

12/5 Teaching Human Rights Online Case: [A Just War? President Clinton's
Decision to Bomb Kosovo](http://oz.uc.edu/thro/Kosovo/JWMain.html)

12/10 Teaching Human Rights Online Case: [A Just War? President Clinton's
Decision to Bomb Kosovo](http://oz.uc.edu/thro/Kosovo/JWMain.html); **Essay #3
due**

12/12 Brown, Chpt. 8; Forsythe, Chpt. 9; Human Development Report, Overview
(pp. 1-13) and Chpt. 6; **Take-home final exam distributed; class
evaluations**

**TAKE-HOME FINAL DUE IN MEREDITH 227 NO LATER THAN NOON ON WEDNESDAY,
DECEMBER 19, 2001.**

Return to top of page.

