![](/News_Bureau/Home_Pages/GIFS/update_logo.gif)

#### April 2, 2001 Vol. 30, No. 13

  
  

## Up Front

#### UNLV HONORS CONVOCATION CANCELED

The UNLV Honors Convocation previously scheduled for April 12 has been
canceled due to event scheduling conflicts.

"While I am very sorry that we have had to cancel this year's Honors
Convocation, I am at the same time looking forward to next year when we will
be hosting an improved ceremony in a wonderful new campus facility," said UNLV
President Carol C. Harter.

"Next year, the Honors Convocation will be held in the new Cox Pavilion, which
will be the perfect venue for this important academic event," she said. "Also,
we will be moving the ceremony to evening hours so that even more parents and
community members can join us in recognizing our most outstanding students and
faculty members."

  
  

## Take Note

#### PRESIDENTIAL HISTORIAN DORIS KEARNS GOODWIN TO SPEAK AT UNLV

Presidential historian and Pulitzer-Prize-winning author Doris Kearns Goodwin
will speak at UNLV on April 17 as part of the Barrick Lecture Series.

Her presentation, "Shared Memories," is scheduled for 7:30 p.m. in Artemus W.
Ham Concert Hall. The event is free, but tickets are required. Tickets my be
picked up by faculty, staff, and students beginning Wednesday, April 4, at the
Performing Arts Center box office at Ham Concert Hall. For more information,
call ext. 2787.

Goodwin, well known to television viewers for her frequent appearances on news
shows to discuss presidents -- both current and past -- also is a baseball
aficionado, having grown up as a rabid fan of the Brooklyn Dodgers.

She will draw on both of these interests for her "Shared Memories"
presentation at UNLV.

Goodwin won the Pulitzer Prize in 1995 for her book, _No Ordinary Time:
Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt: The American Home Front During World War II._

A former assistant to President Lyndon Johnson, Goodwin wrote about Johnson in
her book, _Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream._

She also is the author of _The Fitzgeralds and the Kennedys_ and _Wait Till
Next Year: A Memoir._ The latter recounts her childhood and her obsession with
the Brooklyn Dodgers.

All four of the books spent time on the New York Times' bestseller list.

Goodwin is a regular panelist on _The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer_ on PBS and
also frequently is seen as a commentator on NBC.

Among the many honors she has received are the National Humanities Medal and
the Sara Josepha Hale Medal.

Goodwin, who earned a doctoral degree in government from Harvard University
and a bachelor's degree from Colby College, was a government professor at
Harvard for 10 years.

She also worked for Johnson during his last year in the White House and later
assisted him on the preparation of his memoirs.

Over the years, she has served as a consultant and as an on-air person for PBS
documentaries on Johnson, the Kennedy family, and Franklin Roosevelt, as well
as on Ken Burns' _The History of Baseball._

She was the first woman journalist to enter the Red Sox locker room.

The Barrick Lecture Series, funded through a grant from philanthropist
Marjorie Barrick, presents nationally and internationally known speakers from
a variety of fields each year at UNLV. The presentations are free and open to
the public.

For additional information, call ext. 2787.

  
  

#### PSYCHOLOGY PROFESSOR SEEKS RESEARCH SUBJECTS

Dr. Mark Floyd, a psychology professor at UNLV, is looking for volunteers to
participate in research on treatments for three problems experienced by many
older adults: excessive worrying, chronic pain due to osteoarthritis, and
depression.

According to Floyd, volunteers will benefit by receiving free treatment for
one of these problems. And, he said, older adults in general will benefit
because this research will help improve the understanding and treatment of
these problems.

These research projects have been reviewed and approved by the University of
Nevada, Las Vegas Institutional Review Board for the protection of Human
Subjects.

For more information, call Floyd at ext. 0109.

  
  

#### UPCOMING FORUM LECTURES TO FEATURE MUSIC AND A LOOK AT E-COMMERCE

Musicians Tom Flagg, George Rhee, and Myron Stewart will present "An Evening
of Acoustic Music" during the April 10 University Forum lecture at UNLV.

This dynamic local trio blends Celtic melodies with African rhythms and
American jazz, folk, and blues into a style they call "World Acoustic Fusion."
Flagg is the director of UNLV's Office of News, Public Information, and Photo
Services. Rhee is an associate professor of UNLV's physics department and
Stewart is a professional musician. Their music will be performed on guitar,
bass, and violin. After the performance, the musicians will be happy to
discuss their work with the audience.

On April 18, Hal Berghel, professor and chair of UNLV's computer science
department, will provide "An Inside Look at Electronic Commerce." During his
lecture, Berghel will discuss what it takes for an E-commerce company to
survive in today's fast-moving economy. He also will talk about the social
implications of E-commerce.

Both lectures are set for 7:30 p.m. in the auditorium of the Marjorie Barrick
Museum of Natural History. All University Forum lectures are free and open to
the public.

The University Forum lecture series is sponsored by the College of Liberal
Arts and is underwritten by the UNLV Foundation. For more information on the
series, call ext. 3401.

  
  

#### HAUSCH RECIPIENT OF NEVADA WOMEN'S ROLE MODEL AWARD

Mary Hausch, assistant professor in the Hank Greenspun School of
Communication, received the Nevada Women's Role Model Award during a recent
ceremony held at UNLV.

Hausch and six other women from Southern Nevada were recognized for their
achievements and positive impact on society.

Attorney General Frankie Sue Del Papa presented the awards.

"These women are being recognized for making a difference in their community,"
Del Papa said. "They were selected from among a very distinguished group of
women nominated for a Women's Role Model Award by their peers."

Hausch spent 21 years in the newspaper industry and was the first female city
editor and managing editor for the _Las Vegas Review-Journal._ She has taught
journalism courses at UNLV for 10 years and is the founding president of the
UNLV Women's Sport Foundation, a founding board member of the UNLV Women's
Center, and served as development director of the School Computer Writing
Labs.

She was nominated for the award by her husband Sen. Bob Coffin (D-Las Vegas).

"I am proud of the difference she makes in the lives of her students, and of
the quiet way she does it without seeking recognition or praise," Coffin said.
"Perhaps that is why she is so deserving of this honor."

  
  

#### FLAHERTY NAMED TO ASU COLLEGE OF BUSINESS FACULTY HALL OF FAME

Arizona State University recently named UNLV College of Business Dean Richard
Flaherty to the ASU College of Business Faculty Hall of Fame.

Flaherty served on ASU's faculty for 21 years before coming to UNLV in 1999\.

Larry Edward Penley, dean of the ASU College of Business, said, "An
outstanding college of business is achievable only through the efforts of its
faculty. Dr. Richard Flaherty warrants this honor for his many and valued
contributions that have moved our college forward toward the vision that all
of us hold."

Flaherty, who served as director of ASU's School of Accountancy for three
years, received his bachelors, masters, and doctoral degrees at the University
of Kansas. His articles on financial accounting theory and practice have been
published in several journals. He has served on numerous committees and is a
member of the American Accounting Association and the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants.

  
  

#### GLBT TRAINING SERIES RECEIVES NATIONAL RECOGNITION

Michele Taylor, director of campus community development, recently was
notified that a proposal she submitted titled "The Division of Student Life's
Gay, Lesbian, Bi-Sexual, and Transgender (GLBT) Training Series" has received
national and international recognition from the National Association of
Student Personnel Administrators (NASPA) as one of the top ten Exemplary
Programs of the Year 2001.

The training series program will be published in NASPA's annual Publication,
_Bridges to Student Success,_ and will appear on the NASPA website.

According to Taylor, the interactive, three-part training series was developed
by the Student Life GLBT Steering Committee in an intentional effort to help
raise the cultural and personal awareness and sensitivity amongst faculty and
staff within the Division toward GLBT student issues.

"The format of the series' design provides a natural progression by which to
address the issues, perspectives, and challenges facing our GLBT student
population," Taylor said.

Participants who complete the training series receive a comprehensive local,
regional, and national Resource Manual for their respective offices, and are
invited to join the Safe Zone Project.

Taylor said collaborative planning currently is underway to make the training
available campus-wide for all faculty, staff, and students attending UNLV.

In addition to Taylor, the founding members of the GLBT Steering Committee
include: Dr. Terry Piper, chair (former associate vice president for student
life); Dr. Ken Swartz (Counseling Psychologist); Phil Pownall (Service
Coordinator, Disability Resource Center); Suzanne Onorato (Area Coordinator,
Campus Housing); Eva Choy (Clinical Lab Technologist, Student Health
Services); Pete Glass (Program Coordinator, Greek Life); and Conee Spano
(Director, Women's Center).

  
  

## Planning Ahead

**April 2  
Workshop:** Deborah Wicker Wright, a motivational speaker and trainer and a
graduate of the UNLV College of Education, will present a workshop titled
"Communication and Speaking With Authority." It will be held 6-7:30 p.m. in
the Classroom Building Complex, Room A-112. Light refreshments will be served.
The workshop is free and open to the public. Registration is recommended. For
more information, contact the Women's Center at ext. 4475.

**April 2  
Engineering Education Seminar:** The Howard R. Hughes College of Engineering
will host a seminar, "Cooperative Learning and the New Paradigm for
Engineering Education," presented by Karl A. Smith, distinguished professor of
civil engineering at the University of Minnesota. The seminar, which is free
and open to the campus community, will be held at noon in the Thomas T. Beam
Engineering Building, Room B-176. For more information, call ext. 3699.

**April 3  
Teaching Seminar:** The next meeting of the College of Liberal Arts "Talking
About Teaching" seminar will begin at noon in John S. Wright Hall's Gold Room.
Tom Wright of the history department and Leon Coburn of the English department
will host a discussion on the subject of dealing with academic dishonesty in
term papers and similar assignments. Discussion will include information on
how this age-old problem has evolved in the age of the Internet. Anyone with
an interest in this subject is invited to attend this one-hour, brown-bag
seminar. This seminar series is sponsored by the College of Liberal Arts
Teaching Committee. For more information, call Steve Parker at ext. 3710.

**April 4, 5, 9 &10  
TLC Teaching Workshops:** The University Teaching and Learning Center
workshops on "Practicing the Seven Principles of Good Teaching with
Technology," will be held noon-1:30 p.m. in the Amargosa Room in the Lied
Library. To register for one of the sessions, call Debbie Porrello at ext.
4960\.

**April 5  
Forum Lecture:** Martin Ott, superintendent of Zion National Park, will
present a slide-illustrated lecture titled "Back to the Future." Ott will
discuss Zion National Park's history and explain how efforts, such as the new
shuttle transportation system, are being made to return the park to the way it
looked during its early history. The lecture is set for 7:30 p.m. in the
auditorium of the Marjorie Barrick Museum of Natural History. All University
Forum lectures are free and open to the public. The University Forum lecture
series is sponsored by the College of Liberal Arts and is underwritten by the
UNLV Foundation. For more information on the series, call ext. 3401.

**April 6  
Teaching Online Seminar:** Susan Shaw, co-director of the women's studies
program at Oregon State University, will give a presentation on "Teaching
Introductory Courses Online." The seminar will be held 2-4 p.m. in John S.
Wright Hall, Room 112. Professor Shaw's presentation, which is co-sponsored by
the College of Liberal Arts and the women's studies department, will address
issues such as the motivations for putting courses online, preserving good
pedagogical practices in a technological environment, and providing
technological support for faculty who wish to put their courses online. For
more information about this event, call the women's studies department at ext.
0837.

**April 6  
Library Presentation:** Members of the Instructional Services Section of the
Lied Library will give a presentation to instructors on "Enhancing Your
Syllabus with Online Resources." The presentation will be held from 11 a.m. to
noon at the Collaborative Learning Center, located on the first floor in the
Lied Library. For more information or to reserve a seat, call ext. 2123.

**April 7  
Plant Sale:** The UNLV Arboretum will host its sixth annual plant sale from 8
a.m. to 4 p.m. in the parking lot of the William S. Boyd School of Law,
located on the southeast corner of Tropicana Avenue and Swenson Street. For
more information, call the Arboretum at ext. 3392.

**April 7-8  
Rebel Recycling Spring Yard Sale:** The UNLV Rebel Recycling Program is
holding its Spring Yard Sale from 7 a.m. to 4 p.m. The proceeds from the sale
will go to support the UNLV recycling effort. Items for sale will include
clothing, linen, knickknacks, school/office supplies, and books. The sale will
take place at the recycling trailers located on the southwest corner of
Flamingo Road and Swenson Street. For more information, call ext. 3760.

## Faculty/Staff Spotlight

Individuals may submit one Faculty/Staff Spotlight item per issue. The word
limit is 75 words.

**Sterling Saddler** (Educational Leadership) recently was awarded the College
of Education Outstanding New Faculty Award. Saddler is the director of the
newly funded Center for Workforce Development and Occupational Research.

**Joanne Goodwin** (History and Women's Research Institute of Nevada) recently
completed a nine-part video series titled _Looking Back at Nevada Women._ The
series showcases the important role that women have played in the history of
Nevada. The series will soon be broadcast on Clark County's TV Cable Channel
4.

**Robert Boehm** (Center for Energy Research and Mechanical Engineering)
recently attended the National Hydrogen Association's annual meeting held in
Washington, D.C. At the meeting he presented a paper, "Status Report on
Progress on a Hydrogen-Fueled Hybrid-Electric Bus," which he co-authored with
Yahia Bagzhouz (Electrical Engineering), and students Jonathan Fiene, Linda
Shi, Troy Braithwaite, Jade Gaal, and Terry Kell of Kells Automotive.

**Christopher Bryant's** (Law) article, "Remanding to Congress: The Supreme
Court's New 'On the Record' Constitutional Review of Federal Statutes," which
he co-authored with Villanova professor Timothy J. Simeone, was recently
published in the _Cornell Law Review._

**Dennis Swartzell** (Landscape, Grounds, and Arboretum) recently made two
presentations, "The Perils of Tree Staking," and "A Palm Tree Primer," at the
Southern Utah Green Conference, which was held in St. George, Utah, for the
Utah Shade Tree Board.

**Patricia M. Steubing** (Biology) has been awarded the UNLV Distinguished
Teaching Award.

**Dale G. Andersen** (Educational Leadership) recently participated in two
sessions of the annual meeting of the American Association of Colleges for
Teacher Education. During the first session he was a critic/discussant for a
panel presentation by four deans of education on "The Impact of University
Structure on Teacher Education." At the second session he presented a paper,
"Many are Called But Few Have the Right Stuff," as part of a symposium on
"Mixing Metaphors for Leadership and Decision-Making."

**Ann McDonough's** (Theatre/Gerontology) book review of _Senior Theatre
Connections_ was published in the March 2001 edition of _Theatre Journal._

**P. Jane Hafen** (English) authored a chapter, "Gertrude Bonnin: Yours for
the Indian Cause," which appears in the book _Sifters: Native American Women's
Lives._

**Thomas R. Mirkovich** (Library) and Allison Cowgill of Colorado State
University have signed a contract with Scarecrow Press to write a reference
book on casino gaming. The topic will include casino gaming in both the United
States and Canada. Publication is set for 2002.

**Alan Zundel** (Political Science, Ethics, and Policy Studies) presented his
paper, "The Living Wage Debate: Politics as Ethics by Other Means," at the
Western Political Science Association Annual Meeting held recently in Las
Vegas.

**Dave Anderson** (Custodial Night Supervisor) recently completed an extensive
educational program for certification as an Executive Housekeeper. The
certification program is administered by the International Executive
Housekeeping Association.

UNLV's News  & Public Information Office produces _Update_ each Monday for
UNLV faculty and staff. All items are run on a space-available basis, with the
final decision resting with the editor. In most cases, items submitted by the
2 p.m. Tuesday deadline will appear in the following Monday's issue. Items can
be sent via our World Wide Web submission form
(http://www.unlv.edu/News_Bureau/), by campus mail (1012), or by E-mail
(update@ccmail.nevada.edu). They may also be hand delivered to FDH 716. Items
must be neatly typed in both upper and lowercase letters on white paper.
(Sorry, because scanning equipment is used to process submissions, information
typed in all caps, handwritten items, faxes, and fliers cannot be accepted.)
Word limits: Up Front, Take Note, Planning Ahead, and Employee News -- 100
words; Faculty/Staff Spotlight -- 75 words. All items will appear one time
only. According to _Update_ policy, the editor reserves the right to edit any
and all copy into _Update_ style. _Update_ is also distributed via the
"unlvnews" mailing list and the University News  & Public Information Website
at http://www.unlv.edu/News_Bureau/. To subscribe to the "unlvnews" mailing
list, send an E-mail to listproc@nevada.edu. In the body of the message, type
the following command: subscribe unlvnews <your real name>. The Electronic
Classified Ad Bulletin Board, located at www.unlv.edu/classifieds/, has
replaced the former Classified Ad section in _Update._

* * *

Maintained by the office of UNLV News and Public Information. Send questions
or comments to the [News Bureau](mailto:dibella@ccmail.nevada.edu). Last
updated Monday, 02-Apr-2001 15:46:03 PDT.

[![Back to UNLV Home
Page](http://www.unlv.edu/Images/StickyNote.gif)](http://www.unlv.edu/)
[![Back to Update
Index](/News_Bureau/Home_Pages/update/issues/nr_index_btn.gif)](../)

