|

Prof. John J. Bukowczyk  
Office: 3125 F/AB  
Telephone: (313) 577-2799  
Hours: to be announced  
Semester: Fall 2000

  
---|---  
  
**HISTORY 2050: MODERN AMERICA, U.S. SINCE 1877 (26489)**

(MW, 10:40 am - 12:30 pm, 131 State Hall, 4 credits)



_Instructor's Statement_ :  The period from the late 1870s through the late
1990s easily could be called "America's turbulent century."  During this time,
Americans vied with each other over two gripping questions:  what was America
and what should it become?  Following a lecture/discussion format, this course
will examine the interweaving themes that underlay so much of the turbulence--
immigration, urbanization, economic and technological change, war,
imperialism, racism, gender, and popular protest movements.  Course procedures
are outlined below.

  _Goals and Objectives_ :  Teaching and taking a course is a shared project
involving an instructor and his/her students, and achievement of course goals
and objective depends upon both discharging their respective pedagogical
duties, obligations, and responsibilities.  The goals of the course include
development of the following skills: reading, note-taking, analysis and
critical thinking, understanding historical process, understanding historical
causation, expository historical writing, and oral communication.  Course
objectives include imparting historical information, developing historical
themes and arguments, familiarizing students with American civic culture, and
discussing recent political, social, cultural, and economic developments
involving post-1876 United States history.

  _Readings_ : All books have been placed on reserve at Purdy/Kresge Library;
_required_ books also have been ordered at Marwil's Bookstore (corner of Cass
and Warren).   _Required_ readings for the course include the following books:



  * Alan Brinkley, _et al._ , _American History: A Survey_ , Vol. 2 (Since 1865) (paperback)
  * Anne Moody, _Coming of Age in Mississippi_
  * Upton Sinclair, _The Jungle_

Specific reading assignments are listed next to the date on which we shall
begin to discuss them, and these should be considered "due dates."  In
addition to these titles, four other books are _recommended_ (browse--or read
(!)--at your pleasure).   Unfortunately, library reserves policy has prevented
me from placing these on reserve.  Recommended books include the following:

  * Jules R. Benjamin, _A Student's Guide to History_
  * Samuel P. Hays, _The Response to Industrialism_
  * Walter LaFeber, _America, Russia, and the Cold War, 1945-84_ , 5th or later edition
  * Dennis A. Trinkle and Scott A. Merriman, _The History Highway 2000: __A Guide to Internet Resources,_ 2nd ed.

Students needing greater familiarity with U.S. or world geography should
consult a world atlas.  Copies are available at the library and most
bookstores.  It is also _strongly recommended_ that students read a good daily
newspapers like the _New York Times_.

  _Requirements_ : A substantial portion of the graded written work required
in this course will consist of written compositions.  Graded written
assignments will include the following: two mini-papers (1-page each), two
"midterms," and one short paper/take-home final (2 pages in length).  An
extra-credit option, as described below, also will be available.  Students are
strongly urged to take notes in class, since they prove very helpful in
preparing for exams and other written assignments.  _In addition to the above,
class attendance and informed participation also are required._

          Students are _not_ permitted to turn papers in via e-mail.   Students also are expected to familiarize themselves with the [ History Department's policy on plagiarism ](../../holding/plagiarism.htm) (please see attachment).

_Extra Credit_ : For extra credit, students are invited to design a web
project or assignment aimed at an "advanced placement" class of high school
seniors (or a History 2050 class!).  This is the only formal extra-credit
option offered in this course.  The project should focus on an issue, problem,
or topic in 20th-century U.S. history.  The project should be able to stand
alone (i.e., be self-contained and self-explanatory and not need a full class
period in order to introduce or describe it to students to which it might be
assigned).  The work that "your" students would do for it also should be
gradable (i.e., it should not simply ask students to "learn about" the web or
visit a web site, but have them produce and turn in a gradable product
resulting from their efforts).  Possibilities range from designing your own
website (if you come with or are willing to acquire the skills to do so) or
finding sites on the web or projects based on web resources that students
could pursue.  You cannot simply turn in a URL (web address) and tell your
instructor to go there (like www.hell.com), but you need to build an exercise
around it.

          This _optional_ extra credit web assignment will be graded (so just throwing something together doesn't get rewarded).   All extra-credit web assignments are due Wednesday, December 13, in class (no extensions).  On the belief that teaching tools should be put to the common good, a condition of this extra-credit option is that students will allow their web projects to become a teaching resource in the public domain.

  _Grades_ : The two mini-papers will each count 5%.  Since the papers are
intended as a learning tool, students are required to do both papers; but
taking the grade received on the first assignment will be optional and
students may elect to waive it.  The first midterm will count 35%; and the
second midterm, 45% (50% if students have opted not to take the grade received
on the first paper).  The short paper/take-home final will count 10%.
Finally, the graded extra-credit assignment may add up to 5% to your course
grade.

          Assigned readings and other course materials will form the basis for all course papers.  Grading of written work will be based upon clarity, organization, completeness, writing, argument, and content.  Class attendance and informed participation also will be taken into consideration in assigning a grade for the course, and students may be graded down for missing or disrupting classes.  Please note the university now uses "pluses" and "minuses" in the grading system.

_Make-ups/Incompletes_ :  Single, specific make-up dates will be available for
the two midterms.  Late papers will not be accepted and will result in no
credit for the assignment.  The first paper must be turned in, but students
may opt to have the grade not count (i.e., they may waive it).  _Failure to
turn in the first paper will result in a 5% penalty._  

          Prior approval of the instructor is required for a grade of "incomplete."  The last day to drop the class is Thursday, December 14.  (The History office may sign you out of the class; if required, show this syllabus as authorization.) 

_Consultations_ : If anyone has any questions or concerns about the course at
any time during the semester, please talk them over with the instructor as
soon as possible. _ _

_Tape-Recording_ :  Unfortunately, for legal and privacy considerations,
normally students will not be permitted to tape-record classes.  Exceptions
will be made for students with documented physical or medical reasons.  Prior
permission of the instructor is required.

_Special Information_ : Each year, new drop/add/withdraw procedures may be in
place.  Please consult the _Schedule of Classes_ booklet for deadlines, fees,
rules, and regulations.

The specific dates on which course topics will be covered (see below) may
shift or vary, depending on our pace, unexpected class cancellations, and the
special needs of the class.  Information on the syllabus is subject to
correction as necessary.

For your convenience, a copy of this syllabus is also available on the History
Department's website.



**                                                                 _COURSE
OUTLINE_**



The course will consist of both lecture and discussion.  The major divisions
and sub-sections of the course (listed below) feature a combination of
chronological, topical, thematic, and analytical elements.

INTRODUCTION



_Postwar National Development: The South and the West_

Sept.  6       (W):  The South and the West: Myths, Reality, and National
Themes

 AGE OF INDUSTRY AND EMPIRE

  _Economic Growth and Development and Their Social Impacts, 1876-1914_



          11  (M):       The Post-War Economy, 1865-1893: Robber Barons and Capitalist

                                Industry (Brinkley, Ch. 15-17)

          13  (W):       Technology and Labor

          18  (M):       Cities and Urbanization  (Brinkley, Ch. 18)

          20  (W):       Class will not meet in order to allow you to get caught up on your reading and to write the first paper.

          25  (M):       Mass Migration  **(first mini-paper due)**

                                ( _The Jungle_ , entire)

_Politics and Protest in the Gilded Age: Causes, Patterns, and Consequences_

          27  (W):       Voices of Protest: Politics in the Gilded Age (Brinkley, Ch. 19)

Oct.   2  (M):        Populism, Race, and the "New South"

                                               _Expansion and Reform at Home and Abroad_

           4  (W):        Spanish-American War and American Imperialism  (Brinkley, Ch. 20)

           9  (M):        American Women at the Turn of the Century (Brinkley, Ch. 21)

          11  (W):       The "Progressive" Era  (Brinkley, Ch. 22)

        16   (M): **       FIRST MIDTERM**

 THE AMERICAN CENTURY

                                           _America in the Era of the Great War_

          18  (W):       The Great War  (Brinkley, Ch. 23)

          23  (M):       The Twenties (Brinkley, Ch. 24)

_From Depression to War: 1929-1945_

          25  (W):       The Stockmarket Crash and the Great Depression  (Brinkley, Ch. 25)

          30  (M):       The New Deal (Brinkley, Ch. 26)

                              _America and the Cold War: Economy, Society, Culture, and Politics_

Nov.  1  (W):        The Second World War (Brinkley, Chs. 27 and 28)

           6  (M):        Origins of the Cold War (Brinkley, Ch. 29)

           8  (W):        Postwar Politics: From Truman to Eisenhower  (Brinkley, Ch. 30)

          13  (M):       Society and Economy in the 1940s and 1950s

THE END OF THE POST-WWII WORLD ORDER

  _Into the 1960s: Social Change and Political Ferment_

          15  (W):       African Americans and Civil Rights **(second mini-paper due)**

                                (Discussion: _Coming of Age in Mississippi_ )

          20  (M):       The New Frontier and the Great Society (Brinkley, Chs. 31 and 32)

       22  (W):       Class will not meet/day counts as a Friday

Nov.  23 - 26:        Thanksgiving Recess

       27  (M):       The Vietnam War

        29  (W):       Social Change and Ferment  (course evaluation/please bring a no. 2 pencil)

             _Economic Retrenchment and Political Reaction: The 1970s and Beyond_

Dec.   4 (M): **          SECOND MIDTERM**

           6  (W):        The 1970s: Economic Retrenchment and the End of the New Deal Order  (Brinkley, Ch. 33)                                                    

          11  (M):       Reagan and Beyond: America and the World into the 1980s  (Brinkley, Ch. 34)

          13  (W):       The Limits of Power and the 21st Century 

          **(Short paper/take-home final and extra-credit assignment both due at ** **beginning of class)**



Have a good holiday season!!!

