![](faculty_ban.gif)

  

## Girls' Circle

**

Female Development: Practice with Theory  
Spring Service Learning Course  
(to enroll in while conductiong a Girls' Circle)  
Psychology / Education / Women's Studies  
University of Minnesota, Morris  
Spring 2001

__

Introduction__  
_This is a service learning course, organized around the ideal of integrating
"classroom learning" with "real" life. This course actually began with our
desire to be of service, to contribute to the community, and because of our
commitment to helping girls. In realizing our desire to be of help, we realize
our own need to extend our academic learning. The optimal experience during
this course would be to place reading and reflection hand-in-hand with
experiences based on and informed by such reading. Furthermore, such
experience, or service, is not merely to help the community but circles back
to us, leading us to more questions, reading, and personal development.

_

Service__  
_Our service experience is a program called Girls' Circle. Each student
enrolled in this course will co-facilitate, with another student, a peer
interaction group for junior high girls. The group will be composed of 8-10
girls and will last 12 weeks. Each session has a theme (e.g., dreams and
goals) and consists of opening time for sharing, an activity, and then time
for each girl to share her thoughts about the theme. The students, as
facilitators, will guide the group and be responsible for creating a climate
of listening. It is also her responsibility to ensure that each girl has
opportunities to speak._

__

Reading__  
_The other important part of the course is reading. We will be reading classic
and contemporary works in the area of female development. Some of these inform
us regarding traditional, accepted notions of development such as independence
and autonomy; others challenge these ideas by radically revisioning girls'
development as centered around relationship and connection. You will be
responsible for choosing three books to read and journal on during the spring
semester._

__

Reflection__  
_Both the service component and the reading component of this class shall be
documented by oral and written reflection. In the particular context of this
course, given that you are women working with/among girls, the metaphor of
voice is especially compelling to me. Therefore, class time is for the sole
purpose of students raising their questions, concerns, and responses. I want
us to listen to one another, challenge one another, and support each other's
growth, personal and intellectual. There will also be a written reflection
component to this course; this will take the form of a weekly journal.

_

  

**__

# Course Specifics

__**

  

Professor: Norrine L. Ostrowski, Ph.D,  
Phone: 589-6229 w  
589-8892 h  
Office: Room 39 in Social Sciences  
  
Administrative Brielle Wacker  
Intern for wackerb@mrs.umn.edu  
Girls' Circle: 589-6601  

Meeting times: We will continue to meet, as we did last semester, once a week
for discussion and supervision. The place is negotiable--we know learning
takes place outside the classroom! You will also meet with your Girls' Circle
at your individually designated time and place.

Our meetings: One aspect of our meetings is providing time for each pair of
co-facilitators to share their latest experience with their circle and for
others to provide feedback and evaluation. The second important aspect of our
meetings is to discuss the readings. Be prepared to share your reactions to
the readings as well as critically evaluate them, especially in light of your
experience leading a Girls' Circle.

Reading: I have attached a list of possible readings for this course. By the
time of the first meeting in January, please make a tentative decision about
what you are going to read. This is a somewhat radical departure from more
traditional courses in which you are assigned certain reading. I have compiled
readings that are relevant to your experience. You will need to look at the
possibilities and contract with me about what you are going to read. I want
you to be able to tailor this course to your interests and goals, hence the
autonomy and independence.

Workshop: Saturday, January 20, 1999; 9:00am to 5:00pm    Mandatory

_

Course Schedule_

_

Week 1_

> Need to order journals for each group.

> Discuss what to bring to workshop.

> Identify books to read this term.

_

Workshop_ Saturday, January 20,   - MANDATORY -

_

Week 2_

> Girls' Circles begin

_

Week 3_

> Discussion topics: Using relational theory in group

> Processing group events with your partner

> Taking care of ourselves as facilitators

> Reading: Workbook 1, Unit VII

_

Week 4_

> Discussion topic: Holding good discussions

> Reading: Workbook 2, Unit II

_

Week 5_

> Discussion topic: Integrating your reading

> ***Book 1 should be completed

_

Week 6_

> Discussion topic: Building listening skills in group

> Reading: Workbook 2, Unit III

_

Week 7_

> Discussion topic: Dealing with conflict in group

_

Week 8_

> Discussion topic: Keeping the energy flowing in group!

_

Week 9_

> Discussion topic: Integrating your reading

> ***Book 2 should be completed

_

Week 10_

> Discussion topic:

_

Spring Break

Week 11_

> Discussion topic: Preparing for the end of group

_

Week 12_

> Discussion topic: Integrating your reading

> ***Book 3 should be completed

_

Week 13_

> Girls' Circle ends

_

Week 14_

> Girls' Circle Final Curriculum Report due

_

Week 15_

> Journal due

  

**

## 1\. BOOKS

**

  
  
Relational Theory (Girls  & Adolescence)

> Brown, L.M. (1998). _Raising their voices: The politics of girls' anger._
Cambridge: Harvard University.

> Brown, L. M. & Gilligan, C. (1992). _Meeting at the crossroads: Women's
psychology and girls' development._ Cambridge: Harvard University.

> Gilligan, C., Rogers, A, & Tolman, D. (1991). _Women, girls, and
psychotherapy: Reframing resistance._ New York: Haworth.

Relational Theory (Women's development)

> Belenky, M. F., Clinchy, B. M., Goldberger, N. R., & Tarule, J. M. (1986).
_Women's ways of knowing._ New York: Basic Books.

> Gilligan, C. (1982). _In a different voice: Psychological theory and women's
development._ Cambridge: Harvard University.

> Goldberger, N. R., Tarule, J. M., Clinchy, B. M., & Belenky, M. F. (1996).
_Knowledge, Difference, and power: Essays inspired by Women's Ways of
Knowing._ New York: Basic Books.

> Josselson, R. (1996). _Revising herself: The story of women's identity from
college to midlife._ New York: Oxford.

> Stone Center. (1991). _Women's growth in connection._ New York: Guilford.

> Stone Center. (1996). _Women's growth in diversity._ New York: Guilford.

Philosophy: An Ethic of Care and Epistemology

> Code, L. (1991). _What can she know? Feminist theory and the construction of
knowledge._ Ithaca, NY: Cornell University.

> Garry, A. & Pearsall, M. (1989). _Women, knowledge, and reality: Exploration
in feminist philosophy._ Boston: Unwin Hyman.

> Larrabee, M. J. (Ed). (1993). _An ethic of care._ London: Routledge.

> Wood, J. (1994). _Who cares? Women, care, and culture._ Carbondale, IL:
Southern University Press.

Sexuality, Body Issues, Psychological Health

> Brumberg, J. (1997). _The body project._ New York: Random House.

> Daniluk, J. C. (1998). _Women's sexuality across the life span: Challenging
myths, creating meanings._ New York: Guilford Press.

> Hancock, E. (1990). _The girl within._ New York: Ballantine.

> Herbert, C. (1989). _Talking of silence: The sexual harassment of
schoolgirls._ Brighton, UK: Falmer Press.

> Heshe-Biber, S. (1996). _Am I thin enough yet?_ Oxford University Press.

> Pipher, M. (1995). _Reviving Ophelia._ New York: Ballantine Books.

> Tasker, F. L. & Golombok, S. (1997). _Growing up in a lesbian family:
Effects on child development._ New York: Guilford Press.

> Wolf, N. (1997). _Promiscuities._ New York: Random House.

Girls & School Climate

> Orenstein, P. (1994). _Schoolgirls: Young women, self-esteem, and the
confidence gap._ Doubleday: New York.

> Sadker, M. & Sadker, D. (1992). _Failing at fairness._ New York: Simon  &
Schuster.

Women and Girls of Color

> Bhattacharya, G. (1998). Drug Use Among Asian-Indian Adolescents:
Identifying Protective/Risk Factors. _Adolescence,_ 33, 169-181.

> Blake, E.B. (1995). Broken silences: Writing and the construction of
'cultural texts' by urban, preadolescent girls. _Journal of Educational
Thought,_ 29, 165-180.

> Carvajal, S.C., Garner, R.L., Evans, R.I. (1998). Dispositional optimism as
a protective factor in resisting HIV exposure in sexually active inner-city
minority adolescents. _Journal of Applied Social Psychology,_ 28, 2196-2211.

> Graham, S., Tayolor, A.Z., Hudley, C. (1998). Exploring Achievement Values
Among Ethnic Minority Early Adolescents. _Journal of Educational Psychology,_
90(4), 606-620.

> Malgady, R.G., Costantino, G. (1999). Ethnicity and culture: Hispanic youth.
In Silverman, W.K., Ollendick, T.H. (Eds.), _Develpmental issues in the
clinical treatment of children_ (pp. 231-238). Boston, MA: Allyn  & Bacon.

> Phinney, J.S., Ferguson, D.L., Tate, J.D. (1997). Intergroup Attitudes among
Ethnic Minority Adolescents: A Causal Model. _Child Development,_ 68(5),
955-969.

> Savin-Williams, R.C., Diamond, L.M. (1999). Sexual orientation. In
Silverman, W.K., Ollendick, T.H. (Eds.), _Developmental issues in the clinical
treatment of children_ (pp. 241-258). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.

> Shih, T.A. (1998). Finding the niche: Friendship formation of immigrant
adolescents. _Youth & Society,_ 209-240.

> Weiler, J. (1997). _Career Development for African American and Latina
Females_ New York, NY. (ERIC Clearinghouse on Urban Education No. ED 410 369.

Psychology of Women: General

> Barbieri, M. (1996). _Sounds from the heart._ Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.

> Eichenbaum, L. (1999). _What do women want: exploding the myth of
dependency._ New York: Berkley Books.

> Franz, C.E. & Stewart, A.J. (1994). _Women creating lives: Identities,
resilience and resistance._ Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

> Hartsock, N. C. M. (1998). _Feminist standpoint revisited, and other
essays._ Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

> Herdt, G. (1997). _Same sex, different cultures: Exploring gay and lesbian
lives._ Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

> Meyers, D. T. (1997). _Feminists rethink the self._ Boulder, Co. Westview
Press.

> Rosoff, I. (1996). _The Woman Source catalog and review: Tools for
connecting the community of women._ Berkely, CA: Celestial Arts.

> Strong, M. (1998). _The bright red scream: self-mutilation and the language
of pain._ New York: Viking.

> Tavris, C. (1992). _The mismeasure of woman._ New York: Simon  & Schuster.

> Walsh, M.R. (1987). _The Psychology of women: Ongoing debates._ New Haven,
Connectitcut: Yale University Press.

Books for Girls & Parents

> Dee, C. (1997). _The girls' guide to life: How to take charge of the issues
that affect you._ Boston: Little, Brown.

> Folkers, G. & Engelmann, J. (1997). _Taking charge of my mind and body: A
girls' guide to outsmarting alcohol, drugs, smoking, and eating problems._
Minneapolis, MN: Free Spirit.

> Mackoff, B. (1996). _Growing a girl: Seven strategies for raising a strong,
spirited daughter._ New York: Dell Publishers.

> Rutter, V.B. (1996). _Celebrating girls: Nurturing and empowering our
daughers._ Berkely, CA: Conari Press.

***A list of references relevant to boys' development and the psychology of
men is also available from me.

**

[**Back to Crossroads Grant**](grant.html) **

The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and employer.  
Last Modified Friday, December 22, 2000  
http://www.mrs.umn.edu/academic/fclt/ostrowskisyll.html

**

