  
  
  
  
  
  

Prof. Beth Bailey Fall 2000  
Am St 341/541

SEX/GENDER/FILM/HISTORY

_"When we act in everyday life we do not merely re-act to indicative stimuli,
we act in frames we have wrested from the genres of cultural performance."
-Victor Turner_



In this class we will be studying the history of sex and romance in America
and analyzing Americans' struggles over what it means-or _should_ mean-to be a
man or a woman in our society. Therefore, this class is not a traditional film
studies class. We will be analyzing films, but we won't be considering them
primarily in the context of film history, technique, or aesthetics. Instead,
we will view very popular, mainstream films (some of which are not at all
noteworthy in cinematic history) and treat them as _cultural texts_ , produced
and consumed in specific historical eras.

We will be focusing on a volatile and complicated period in America's history:
the years from World War II through the present. In those years, America's
social-sexual mores and our ideas of masculinity and femininity (as well as
our definitions of appropriate gender roles) have changed dramatically, but
not without controversy. In watching and analyzing films that millions of
Americans saw when they were first released, we will be trying to understand
how these films fit into ongoing conversations about sex and gender in
specific historical eras. We will discover what people said about a film when
it was first released, and why those comments made sense at the time. We will
discuss how these films worked to create "frames" for behavior and beliefs. We
will then attempt to understand what premises and assumptions and conventions
audiences at the time may not have noticed or remarked upon, if only because
they so completely took those understandings for granted.

******COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

PARTICIPATION

This class will require active participation, both in our class meetings and
in preparing for them. I expect you to do the readings carefully, to watch
films analytically, and to participate in class discussions. We will be
watching most of these films during the class period itself, though I will ask
that you watch a small number outside class time. Each class will begin with a
short lecture to contextualize the film, and we will discuss the film after we
view it. There will be weeks in which class runs over the allotted 7-9:30 time
slot.

ATTENDANCE

I expect you to be in class. It is not enough to rent the video as a
substitute for coming to class. I will take attendance each week, so if you
are too ill to attend class or have a family emergency, please notify me
before the class period (if possible), either by email or voicemail. More than
one unexcused absence will lower your final grade by 5 points.

FILM JOURNAL

Each student will keep a film journal, which I will review in mid-semester and
at the end of the semester. Full information about the journal assignment is
included later in this syllabus.

PROJECT

Group Presentations in Class November 21 and 28th; Analysis of sex/sexuality
and gender in animated Disney films from 1940s-1990s.

EXAMINATIONS

There will be a take-home midterm, consisting of two essay questions. You will
have a week to complete the exam, with no other readings or assignments due.
Answers will consist of two short (3-4 pp.) analytic papers, demonstrating
mastery of course material including readings and discussions. The final
examination will be in-class, and consist of short-answer and short essay
questions.

GRADING: 100 point scale; corresponds as usual to letter grades

> PARTICIPATION: 20 POINTS (including project)

>

> FILM JOURNAL: 40 POINTS

>

> MIDTERM: 20 POINTS

>

> FINAL: 20 POINTS

**GRADUATE STUDENT REQUIREMENTS**

Graduate students will create a syllabus (films and readings only) for course
on gender, sexuality, and film in place of the final examination. Film journal
work will include (in addition to undergraduate assignments) constructing a
bibliography of scholarly work on two films of your choice. I will meet
separately with graduate students to discuss these assignments. ****

**"HOMEWORK"**

Preparation for class includes readings, journal assignments, and,
occasionally, viewing a film. I have ordered two books for the class; other
readings are on reserve at Zimmerman library. Several times during the
semester you are assigned to view a film outside class time. You may rent the
film and view it at home if you wish; a copy will also be on reserve for
viewing at the university. Please speak to me or to Joe Renouard, the course
teaching assistant, if you have problems getting access to these films.  

**ADVANCE WARNING OF SOME SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALS**

All the films we will be viewing in this class were mainstream, widely-
released movies. None are currently X-rated. However, a few of them have
sexually explicit language and situations. They are required viewing, and by
taking this class (which is not required for any major or program) you are
giving your consent to view these films.

**ACADEMIC HONESTY**

The UNM policy regarding academic dishonesty is reproduced at the end of this
syllabus, and will govern all work done in this course. Take-home examinations
should **NOT** be done with assistance from anyone else, whether he or she is
a student in this class or not. You are encouraged to discuss the films
outside class; film journal entries definitely **may** reflect those
discussions.

  

**CLASS SCHEDULE**

Aug. 22: Introductions

**_Section I: Gender Anxiety_**

August 29:

  * _Mildred Pierce,_ 1945 

Read: _Celluloid Mirrors_ (CM), pp. 1-25  
Elaine May, _Homeward Bound_ , pp. 58-91 (Grad: 114-34 also)  
Primary document: Wylie, _Generation of Vipers_ [~]

Sept. 5:

> _Rebel without a Cause_ , 1955

>

> Read: _CM_ , 27-66  
>  William Graebner, _Coming of Age in Buffalo_ , pp. 11-85 (much of this is
illustrations)

>

> **Journal: 2 magazine/newspaper reviews and analysis mandatory**  
>

Sept 12:

> _Some Like it Hot_ , 1959

>

> Read: _CM, pp. 67-95_ (not directly related to film; general context)  
>  Beth Bailey, "The Etiquette of Masculinity and Femininity"  
>  Primary source: "The American Male: Why do WOMEN Dominate Him?" _Look,_ 4
February 1958

**Section II: Sexual Revolution(s)**  

Sept. 19:

  * _Splendor in the Grass_ , 1961 

Read: _CM_ , pp. 177-90  
Susan Douglas, _Where the Girls Are_ , "Sex and the Single Teenager"  
Primary source: __ Lundberg & Farnham, _Modern Woman_ , 263-88

**Journal: 2 magazine/newspaper reviews and analysis mandatory**

Sept. 26:

> _Where the Boys Are_

>

> Read: (Primary source): E. Duvall, Ph.D., _Why Wait Till Marriage,_ pp. 1-23

Oct. 3:

> _The Graduate,_ 1967

>

> Read: CM, pp. 190-197

Oct. 10:

  * _Love Story_ , 1970 

Read: (Primary source) Linda LeClair case documents  
_CM_ , 97-116; 126-131  
**Journal: 2 magazine/newspaper reviews and analysis mandatory**  

**FILM JOURNAL DUE** (Consult assignment sheet for specifics) ****

**MIDTERM EXAM DISTRIBUTED**

Oct. 17:

  * _Midnight Cowboy_ , 1969

**MIDTERM EXAM DUE**  

Oct. 24:

  * _The Boys in the Band,_ 1970 

Read: Allyn, _Make Love Not War_ , pp. 145-165  
**Journal: 2 magazine/newspaper reviews and analysis mandatory**

  
Oct. 31:  

  * _Looking for Mr. Goodbar_ , 1977 

Read: Bailey, "Sexual Revolution(s)" in D. Farber, ed. _The Sixties_

**Section III: Nightmares and Fairytales**

Nov. 7:

> _Fatal Attraction_ , 1987

>

> Read: choose three articles from _Journal of Popular Culture_ issue on
_Fatal Attraction_ (Winter 1992)  
>  Journal: 2 magazine/newspaper reviews and analysis mandatory

Nov. 14:  

> _Pretty Woman, 1990  
>  
>  _ Read: _From Mouse to Mermaid_ , chapter 14  
>  **Journal: review or article and analysis**  
>

Nov. 21:

  * Project Presentations: _Disney Animated Films,_ excerpts, 1940s-90s 

Read: _From Mouse to Mermaid_ , esp. intro., chapters 1,2,6,7,10,11  
**Journal: one review pre-80s; one review from 80s or 90s**

Nov. 28:  

  * Project Presentations Continued

**Conclusions**  

Dec. 5:

> _Boys Don't Cry_ (1999)  
>

**FILM JOURNAL ASSIGNMENT**

The largest single assignment and the greatest portion of your grade will
consist of a film journal. Use a lightweight notebook or folder in which you
can clip or insert your work.

Put your name on the outside. Handwritten work is not acceptable; treat the
journal as a series of short papers. You are welcome to be creative in your
presentation of materials, though neat but unembellished journals are
completely appropriate. _Your journal will be due at two points during the
semester; it must be complete and up-to-date when you turn it in._

**ENTRIES**

You will have an entry/section for each week of the course. Include **basic
information** about the film (furnished in class) and a **one-page response
paper** about it. (I'll accept up to three pages, but that is not necessary.)
Unless the syllabus specifies "reviews" that week, you have a fair amount of
leeway. Your comments should focus on issues of gender and sexuality, and you
might choose to analyze a specific scene in detail or to situate the film in
the context of class readings. Your entries should demonstrate that you have
watched the film actively and analytically, and that you are keeping abreast
of course readings and discussions. Obviously, if we view a film in class, you
will not be able to write about it in advance of that class.

**If the syllabus specifies "reviews" for that week** :

Several times throughout the semester, you are assigned to find reviews or
articles about the film that were published at the time the film was released.
You must copy these and insert them in your film journal, and your response
paper for that week should address these reviews. How do they help you imagine
how differently or similarly people at that time saw this text? Do the
authors/reviewers address questions of gender and sexuality? What do they tell
you about the historical context within which the film was originally seen?
How do they mesh with your interpretations or the issues and themes that stand
out in your viewing?

**How to find reviews:**

The _Reader's Guide to Periodical Literature_ , which is in the reference
section of the library, has listings by year of virtually all the articles
published in popular magazines. There are also newspaper indices, and the
reference librarians can help you locate them. For recent films, computer
search engines will turn up more possibilities, and I will arrange an optional
session with library reference staff to learn about them if students wish.

Assume you want to find a review of _Rebel Without a Cause_. Find the volume
of _Reader's Guide_ that covers 1955, the year the movie was produced. You may
find an entry under the film's title, but likely not. Look under "Moving
Picture Plays" and there will be a list of films and citations for reviews.
(The category changes to "Motion Pictures" in the 1960s.) Zimmerman does not
have all the magazines listed, but there are a fair number of them downstairs
in periodicals (some are microfilm only). Write down the citations for the
reviews you are interested in and locate the articles. Try to find reviews in
different sorts of magazines. You may need to look at more than two to find
ones that you want to use for your journal. Feature articles on the films are
definitely acceptable as well. Your options will be most constrained on older
films, but for more recent films you'll have more possibilities.

While you are locating the reviews or articles, pay attention to what is
around them. What other films were released that year? What are the major
stories in the magazines/newspapers that people would have seen when they read
the review/article? What sorts of advertisements? How are gender issues
handled in them? How is sexuality portrayed? You do not have to do content
analysis of the entire magazine, but flip through the pages and see what
catches your eye. If something seems useful to you, you may copy it and
include it in your journal. _NEVER TEAR ANYTHING OUT OF LIBRARY MATERIALS!!!!_

You should locate and copy these reviews before the class meeting for which
they are assigned, because we will discuss them in class. Be prepared to talk
about what you found.

For efficiency's sake, you may decide to chase down all the reviews/articles
at once, in advance. _If you have any difficulty completing this assignment,
let me know as soon as possible._ Not everyone is familiar with this sort of
library work, and I can give more specific instructions if students need them.

**PROJECT**

Class periods for Nov. 21 and 28 are devoted to group project presentations.
Each group (we'll form the groups early in the semester) will present scenes
from a Disney animated film, discussing the film and its representations of
sex/sexuality and gender. Bell and Haas's _The Mouse and the Mermaid_ (ordered
thru the UNM Bookstore) will be useful in your preparation. I will pass out
more specific instructions early in the semester when we form groups and
choose films. This presentation will count as part of your participation
grade.

