### History 560  
THE WESTWARD MOVEMENT IN AMERICAN HISTORY

(Professor Mansel Blackford)



We shall examine the history of the Trans-Mississippi West from the late-1700s
to the present. We shall begin by investigating the exploration of the region
and the social and economic evolution of its fur trapping, mining, cattle, and
farming frontiers in the nineteenth century. We shall look at what these
developments meant for Native Americans, especially those living on the
Northern Great Plains. We shall then turn to an examination of the twentieth-
century development of the West, focusing on natural resource usage and
urbanization. As we examine these topics, we shall pay special attention to
the interactions between varied groups--Euro-Americans, African Americans,
Native Americans, and others--in the development of the West.

The objectives of the course are several. First, students shall gain a basic
understanding of how and why the Trans-Mississippi West, and its major
subregions, developed the way they did. The course will stress how various
types of interactions between different groups of people influenced social and
economic developments. Second, students will improve their communications
skills by giving short verbal reports and writing essay exams and papers.

Grading will be based upon a mid-term exam (30%), a paper (30%), and a final
exam (40%). Exams and papers will be based on the required readings and the
lectures, with some additional work in the library or on the internet needed
for the papers. Papers received late will be penalized one full letter grade
for each class day they are late. All students must be enrolled by the end of
the second week; no students will be enrolled after that time.



**Required Readings:**

  1. Milo Quaife, ed., _Kit Carson's Autobiography_
  2. John Neihardt, ea., _Black Elk Speaks_
  3. Nannie Alderson, _A Bride Goes West_
  4. John Ise, _Sod and Stubble_
  5. Nathaniel West, _Day of the Locust_ 



**Highly Recommended Readings:** As a spin-off from its funding of the
8-episode PBS special directed by Ken Burns on the History of the American
West in the fall of 1996, General Motors is funding for 3 years an internet
website on the History of the American West. The site is:
http://www.gm.com/thewest. The site contains a great deal of information about
the West: maps, images, an interactive timeline, and the texts of all of the
PBS episodes. There is no charge for using this site; everything on it may be
copied or downloaded free of charge.

Of most importance for this class, the site includes an archives of primary
sources. These sources are arranged by episode and include both written and
visual documents. I strongly encourage you to read or look at them. I have
listed some of the most valuable of the written documents as recommended
readings in the next part of the syllabus. The number in parenthesis after the
title refers to the archival episode in which that document may be found.
Please note, too, that it is possible to research your paper for the course
from sources on this website.



**TENTATIVE TOPICS AND ASSIGNMENTS (IN TWO-HOUR TIME BLOCKS)**

    
    
    
    
    	 Block	Topics and Assignments
    
    
    
    
    	1.	Introduction to the Class
    
    
    
    
    		The Geography of the West
    
    
    
    
    	2.	The West Before Lewis and Clark
    
    
    
    
    		The Leap into the Unknown: Lewis and Clark
    
    
    
    
    		Recommended reading: "Journals of Lewis and Clark," October-
    
    
    
    
    		December, 1805, linked to maps and images (1)
    
    
    
    
    	3.	The Business of the Beaver Trade
    
    
    
    
    		The Mountain Man: Myth and Reality
    
    
    
    
    	4.	The Later Fur Trade: the Destruction of the Buffalo
    
    
    
    
    		Required reading: _Kit Carson's Autobiography_. all
    
    
    
    
    	 5.	Plains Indian Culture
    
    
    
    
    		Indian and White Concepts of Life and War
    
    
    
    
    	6	Plains Indian Wars: The Sioux
    
    
    
    
    		The Reservation Experience: An Attack on Indian Culture
    
    
    
    
    		Recommended readings: "The Fort Laramie Treaty of 1868"
    
    
    
    
    		(4); "Documents of the Sand Creek Massacre of 1864-65"
    
    
    
    
    		(4); and "Chief Red Horse's Account of Little Big Horn" (6)
    
    
    
    
    	7	The Ghost Dance and Wounded Knee
    
    
    
    
    		Required reading: _Black Elk Speaks_ , all
    
    
    
    
    	8.	MID-TERM EXAM
    
    
    
    
    
    	9.	The California Gold Rush
    
    
    
    
    		Nevada's Comstock Lode: Bonanza in Silver
    
    
    
    
    		Recommended reading: "George Swain's letters of 1849-50" (3), and
    
    
    
    
    		Luzena Wilson, "Reminiscences of a 49ner" (3)
    
    
    
    
    	10	The Life of the Miner
    
    
    
    
    		Video: "Comstock Lode"
    
    
    
    
    	11	The Open Range Cattle Industry
    
    
    
    
    		Life on the Open Range: The Real American Cowboy?
    
    
    
    
    		Recommended readings: "Songs of the Plains: Cowboy Folk Songs"
    
    
    
    
    		(5), and Theodore Roosevelt, "Ranch Life and the Hunting Trail 1888"(7)
    
     
    
    
    	12	The Emergence of the Modern Cattle Industry
    
    
    
    
    		Video: "Lonesome Dove"
    
    
    
    
    		Required reading: _A Bride Goes West,_ all
    
    
    
    
    	 13	Crossing the Oregon Trail
    
    
    
    
    		Video: "The Oregon Trail"
    
    
    
    
    		Recommended readings: "Letters and Journals of Narcissa Whitman" (2), Catherine Sager, "Across the Plains in 1844" (2), and "Testimony of Benjamin Singleton before Congress Regarding the African American Migration from the Southern States to Kansas 1880" (7)
    
    
    
    
    	14.	The Plight of the Western Farmer
    
    
    
    
    		Attempted Solutions to the Problems of the Farmer
    
    
    
    
    	15	Western Cities: Instant Cities?
    
    
    
    
    		Required reading: _Sod and Stubble_ , all
    
    
    
    
    
    	16	San Francisco and Hiroshima: Contrasts in Planning
    
    
    
    
    		Emperor Norton of San Francisco
    
    
    
    
    		PAPER DUE
    
    
    
    
    
    	17	Los Angeles: Boom Town
    
    
    
    
    		Los Angeles: Anti-City
    
    
    
    
    
    	18	The Modern West: The Alaskan King Crab Frontier
    
    
    
    
    		Required reading: _Day of the Locust_ all
    
    
    
    
    	19	The Meaning of the West: The American West Today
    
    
    
    
    	20.	Review for Final Exam
    
    
    

