**The United States since 1945**  
**History 207.01**  
![](auline3.gif)  
[![](3003.gif)](USsince45SylFall2001.htm)**[Return to
Syllabus](USsince45SylFall2001.htm)**

  **THE   ASSIGNMENTS**

**Click on:** **Assignment One** | **Assignment Two** | **Assignment Three** |
**Assignment Four** | **Assignment Five**  
---|---|---|---|---  
**Assignment Six** | **Assignment Seven** | **Assignment Eight** |
**Assignment Nine** | **Assignment Ten**  
  
**About the Assignments:** Much of this course is organized around ten written
assignments. These assignments are designed not only to help you increase your
understanding of critical issues in recent U.S. history, but to increase your
ability to interpret the documentary record on which that understanding is
based. Moreover, the assignments are collaborative.  For each assignment you
will be asked to a) "post" an **essay** to be read by the other members of
your group; and b) post a **comment** on each of the essays prepared by the
other members of your group.

1.  Each assignment is keyed to the lectures, discussions and assigned readings for the course.

2.  A typical assignment requires that you first carefully read a chapter (sometimes two) in each of the two textbooks: Paul Boyer, _Promises to Keep: The United States Since World War II_ ; and Robert Griffith & Paula Baker, _Major Problems in American History Since 1945_.   There are suggestions for additional readings in both textbooks, as well as a link to a list of recently published studies.  You should also visit the web sites listed in **[A Guide to Web Resources for The Study of the History of the United States since 1945](Guide1945.htm)**.

3\. You are then asked to prepare a **_brief essay_ (500-600 words) ** based
on the **** assigned readings.  For details on each assignment, see below.

4.  In preparing your essay, be sure to cite the sources from which you are drawing.  For our purposes, you may use parentheses, with a brief, informal citation.  For example,  cite Paul Boyer, _Promises to Keep_ as (Boyer, p. 36).   When citing a **_document_** from _Major Problems_ , cite a shortened version of its title as it appears in the book, along with the page citation. e.g., (Truman's Advisors Discuss the Atomic Bomb, _Major Problems_ , p.51.)  In citing an **_article_** from _Major Problems_ , cite the _author's name_ and the page number.  e.g., (Feis, _Major Problems_ , p. 68.)  _Do not cite the editors' names (Griffith & Baker), unless you are drawing on introductory materials of which he is the author_.  Remember, when you use language that is not your own you must use quotation marks and cite the source from which you have drawn.  Failure to do so is plagiarism, one of the most serious violation's of the University's **[Academic Integrity Code](http://www.american.edu/american/registrar/aic.htm)**.

5.  Submitting your Analysis: Your analysis **must be posted to your Team's Lotus Discussion Database**.    For information about the Lotus Discussion Groups and how to use them, click on **[Using the Lotus Notes Discussion Databases.](Lotus.htm)**

6.   It is absolutely critical that you post your analysis by the scheduled deadline, which in most cases will be **5:00 p.m. on Wednesday (occasionally Sunday)** , the day before the scheduled discussion. This is to provide time for your team mates to read and submit comments on what you have posted _before_ the class meets. _Papers posted after the deadline will not receive full credit_.

7.  Finally, each of you will be expected to **review and comment upon the essays** posted by all the members of   your team **before the scheduled class discussion**.   Your comments need not be long, _but should be substantive_.   Like the essays, they should be based on the relevant readings (both documents and articles).  And as in the essays, you should cite your sources.

8.  You will be graded on **both your analysis and comments**.   Each assignment will count toward 5% of your grade for the course.  For details, see **[Assessment](Assessment.htm)**.
![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**

THE ASSIGNMENTS

**Assignment One:   The Atomic Bombing of  Japan.  **Carefully read chapter
two in Griffith and Baker, _Major Problem_ s, and chapter one in Boyer,
_Promises to Keep_.   Then prepare a brief (c.500 word.) analysis of  _one of
the documents_ contained in the assigned reading from Griffith, _Major
Problems_.   Consult with the other members of your team in order to avoid
picking the same document.  In preparing your essay, it would be well to keep
in mind the important differences between **primary documents** and the
**"secondary accounts"(e.g., the articles)** that follow **.   **_In writing
your essay, be sure to cite the sources (books, articles and documents) from
which you have drawn information and/or interpretations._

Your analysis should include the following:

> > * Drawing _Promises to Keep_ and _Major Problems,_ briefly sketch the
**background or context** for understanding the document.

>> * Briefly **describe the document** :  who wrote it, when & why, what, if
anything, is special or unique about it?

>> * What does it tell us about the issues under examination?

>> * How does it **compare or contrast** with other documents in the chapter?
Does it embody a different point of view? Offer a different kind of evidence?
Address a different issue?

>> * How does the document **relate to the secondary articles** in _Major
Problems_?   Does it strengthen or weaken the case made in a particular
article?

>>  
>  
>> * For **EXTRA CREDIT( 1 pt)** :  Locate (either in the Library or on the
web), copy, identify and briefly describe _an additional document_ relating to
the atomic bombing of Hiroshima. If possible, post the document (or a link to
it) on the Entire Class Lotus Notes Database.  If not, turn it in to the
instructor as a hard copy.

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**

**Assignment Two: The Origins of the Cold War. ** Carefully read chapter three
in _Major Problem_ s, as well as chapter two in _Promises to Keep_. Then
prepare a brief essay on the origins of the Cold War from the perspective of
one of the following individuals:   Harry S. Truman, Joseph Stalin, Clark
Clifford, Henry Wallace. Consult with the other members of your team in order
to avoid duplication.

>   * First,  identify the individual. Include a brief (1-2 sentence)
biography including the person's background, politics & personality, etc. You
will find some information on these individuals in the two texts, but you may
need to supplement it with additional information drawn from the library.

>   * Carefully analyze the primary document (from _Major Problems_ ) by the
individual in question.  Place it in context: When was it written?  What was
happening at the time?

>   * How do the views expressed by the individual you have selected differ
from that of others?  Be specific.

>   * In preparing your essay, be sure to draw on _both_ the primary documents
and the secondary works (the articles by historians in   _Major Problems_ ,
and _Promises to Keep_.   _Cite the specific pages from which you have drawn
information_.

>  
>  
>   * For **EXTRA CREDIT (1 pt)** :  Locate (either in the Library or on the
web), copy, identify and briefly describe _an additional document_ relating to
the origins of the Cold War.  If possible, post the document (or a link to it)
on the Entire Class Lotus Notes Database.  If not, turn it in to the
instructor as a hard copy.

>

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**

**Assignment Three: Politics and Culture in Cold War America. ** Carefully
read chapter four in _Major Problems (_ especially  the essays by Beth Bailey
and Roland Marchand) as well as chapters three, four and five in Boyer,
_Promises to Keep_.   Prepare an essay on one of the following topics.
Consult with the other members of your team in order to minimize duplication.
I _n writing your essay, be sure to cite the sources (books, articles and
documents) from which you have drawn information and/or interpretations._

> > * Drawing on the chapters listed above, as well as on **[Documents on
PostWar Politics](PostWarPoliticsDocuments.htm)** , prepare an essay on
postwar politics.  Evaluate both 1) the continuing impact of the New Deal and
2) the impact of the Cold War in shaping postwar politics.

>> * Drawing on the chapters listed above, as well as on the data from the
chapters on Population and The Family in **_The First Measured Century_** , at
**[athttp://www.pbs.org/fmc/book/1population1.htm](http://www.pbs.org/fmc/book/1population1.htm),
** and at **<http://www.pbs.org/fmc/book/4family1.htm>** ,  prepare an essay
on the impact of the Baby Boom on postwar American society.

>> * Drawing on the chapters listed above, as well as _Life_ Magazine's
article on the teenage market ( _Major Problems_ , 122-3),  and the excerpt
from Michael Harrington's _The Other America_   ( _Major Problems_ , 216-219),
prepare an essay on the emergence of a postwar "culture of consumption."

>> * Drawing on the chapters listed above, as well as on the poem "I'm
Waiting" by beat poet Lawrence Ferlinghetti, prepare an essay exploring the
shortcomings of postwar American politics and culture. Ferlinghetti's 1958
poem is widely available on the web, including a copy at:
**<http://www.worldofpoetry.org/usop/dream5.htm>.**

>>  
>  
>> * For **EXTRA CREDIT (1 pt)** :  Locate (either in the Library or on the
web), copy, identify and briefly describe _an additional artifact_
(advertisement, movie, song, book or magazine article) that illustrates points
made in the readings on postwar American culture.  If possible, post the
document or a link to it in the Entire Class Lotus Notes Database.  If not,
turn it in to the instructor as a hard copy.

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  


**Assignment Four: Kennedy, Cuba and the Cuban Missile Crisis. ** Carefully
read chapter five in _Major Problem_ s , as well as chapter six in _Promises
to Keep_. You should also survey the materials available on the world wide web
(see[ **Guide to Resources**](Guide1945.htm)).  Then prepare a brief essay
describing the background and motivation of one of the key participants:
Kennedy, Khrushchev or Castro; or, prepare an essay evaluating the relative
importance of the Cold War and the history of U.S. relations with Cuba in
creating the Missile Crisis.   Again, check with your team mates to minimize
duplication.  In your essay you should on be sure to draw on the readings from
both textbooks, as well as relevant documents in _Major Problems_. Cite your
sources, whether from primary documents, articles by historians (Paterson, May
& Zelikow) or from _Promises to Keep_.  


> > For **EXTRA CREDIT (1 pt)** :  Locate (either in the Library or on the
web), copy, identify and briefly describe _an additional document_ relating to
the origins of the Cold War.  If possible, post the document (or a link to it)
on the Entire Class Lotus Notes Database.  If not, turn it in to the
instructor as a hard copy.

  
![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**

**Assignment Five: The Struggle for African-American Equality   **Carefully
read chapter seven in _Major Problem_ s, as well as chapter eight in Boyer,
_Promises to Keep_. Then prepare a brief essay on one of the following topics,
_using both documents and citations from the readings to support your
arguments_.   Be sure to check with your team mates to avoid duplication. I _n
writing your essay, be sure to cite the sources (books, articles and
documents) from which you have drawn information and/or interpretations._

> > * The role of government and politics in generating and/or retarding the
struggle for African-American equality.

>> * The role of broad economic and social factors (industrialization,
urbanization, "the great migration," the "nationalization" of American
culture, etc. in generating and/or retarding the struggle for African-American
equality.

>> * Prepare an essay comparing and contrasting the contributions of
organizations and leaders in creating the civil rights movement, with those of
local communities and ordinary people.

>> * Prepare an essay discussing the "history" of the civil rights movement in
the 1980s and 1990s. Is there a link between how Martin Luther King is
depicted (as described by Vincent Harding) and the gritty urban history of
Detroit described by Tom Sugrue.  (You should also read ahead for this essay,
especially in Boyer, pp. 409, 474-477.)

>>  
>  
>> * For **EXTRA CREDIT (1 pt)** :  Locate (either in the Library or on the
web), copy, identify and briefly describe _an additional document_ that
illustrates an important point in your essay.   If possible, post the document
(or a link to it) on the Entire Class Lotus Notes Database.  If not, turn it
in to the instructor as a hard copy.

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  


**Assignment Six: The United States and Vietnam. ** Carefully read chapter
eight in _Major Problem_ s, as well as chapter ten in _Promises to Keep_ and
Christian Appy's "The Muffling of Public Memory in Post-Vietnam America."
Read also, Boyer, pp. 54-61, 113-116, 179-184 and 313-320. Then prepare a
brief essay on one of the topics listed below. As before, check with your team
mates to minimize duplication.  I _n writing your essay, be sure to cite the
sources (books, articles and documents) from which you have drawn information
and/or interpretations._

>   * Briefly descibe the history of Vietnam before 1954.  How did this
history shape events in Vietnam in the years that followed?

>   * How did the Cold War affect the perceptions and actions of U.S. policy
makers in Vietnam?  Were their perceptions accurate or distorted?

>   * How and why was the U.S. committment expanded in 1964-65?  What role did
actions by previous administrations play? What was the influence of the Cold
War?  What was the influence of domestic politics?

>   * How have Americans (and their leaders) continued to grapple with the
memory and meaning of  Vietnam.  (For this assignment, see especially the
essay by Christian Appy, "The Muffling of Public Memory in Post-Vietnam
America." )

>

  
![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  


**Assignment Seven: The New Feminism. ** First **,  ** read chapter ten in
_Major Problem_ s, and pp. 346-351 & 478-483 in _Promises to Keep_. Then
interview a women who is _at least 50 years old or older_.   Ask her to
reflect _on her own life experiences_ as well as on the changes in women's
lives that she has observed.   Based on your readings, your interview _and
your reflections on your own life and/or the lives of women whom you know_ ,
prepare a brief essay comparing and contrasting the life of the person whom
you interviewed with those of both an earlier generation (women who came of
age during the 1950s or before) and the lives of women in your own generation.
What has changed?  What has not?  How does the individual "story" told by the
person you interviewed compare with the larger "story" found in your
textbooks.

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  


**Assignment Eight: The Politics of the 1980s.   **Carefully read chapter
**_twelve_**   in  _Major Problem_ s, as well as chapter fourteen  in
_Promises to Keep_. Then prepare a brief essay on the one of the following
issues listed below.   As before, be sure to communicate with your team mates
in order to avoid duplication.  And be sure to identify the sources of your
information and interpretations.  ![](New.gif) **You have until Sunday
evening, November 4 to revise Assignment Eight.**  
**Just post your revised essay as a "response" to your original essay.   If
you do NOT submit a revised essay, I will read and grade the one that you
originally posted.**

> 1.  The role of race (and racial politics) in the political realignment that
took place in the 1970s and 1980s. (You should also re-read the essay by
Thomas Sugrue in Major Problems, pp. 272-278.)

>

> 2.  The role of economic problems and the politics of big business in
shaping the politics of the 1980s.

>

> 3.  The role of the "religious right" and other social conservatives in
shaping the politics of the 1980s;

>

> 4.  The role of lobbyists, campaign consultants and the media in
transforming American politics.

>

> EVERYONE:  Did the Clinton Presidency mark a break with the politics
examined in your essay or a continuity?

  
![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  


**Assignment Nine: New Economy?** Carefully read the assigned readings.  Then
prepare a brief essay on the "New Economy" in which you explore the following
themes.  Change: how is the new economy different from the old economy?  How
is the new economy similar to the old economy?  What are the positive aspects
of economic and technical changes over the past two decades?  What are the
negative aspects?  As always, be sure to identify the sources of your
information and interpretations.  


**Assignment Ten:   From the Cold War to the New World Order.   ** Carefully
read the assigned readings, including **_chapters Thirteen and Fourteen_** in
_Major Problems_. Prepare a brief essay _comparing and contrasting_ the Cold
War years with the "New Global Era."    In writing your essay, please explore
_all of the themes listed below._   As always, be sure to identify the sources
of your information and interpretations.

> 1\. How has the end of the Cold War and the emergence of  "globalization"
changed America's relation to the world?

>

> 2\. How has globalization altered the relationships between national
governments (including the United States) and international markets?

>

> 3.  Is the world is safer and/or more prosperous following the Cold War?

>

> 4.  What are the implications for American foreign and military policy?
Under what (if any) circumstances should the U.S. use military force?  
>  
>  
> 5.  ![](New.gif)   I wrote the above questions _before_ September 11, 2001.
Feel free to include your thoughts regarding recent events in your essay.
However, _please be sure_ to place those thoughts in the context of the
readings for the assignment.

* * *

  
![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  
[![](3003.gif)](US45syllabusS2001.htm)**[Return to Top of Syllabus for History
207](USsince45SylFall2001.htm)**  
    
    
  

**  Page last modified on August 26, 2001**

