**The United States since 1945**  
**History 207.01**  
![](auline3.gif)  
[![](3003.gif)](USsince45SylFall2001.htm)**[Return to
Syllabus](USsince45SylFall2001.htm)**

**  THE  ASSIGNMENTS**

**Click on:** **About the Assignments** | **Assignment One** | **Assignment
Two** | **Assignment Three** | **Assignment Four** | **Assignment Five** |
**Assignment Six**  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
**Assignment Seven** | **Assignment Eight** | **Assignment Nine** |
**Assignment Ten** | **Assignment Eleven** | **Assignment Twelve** |
**Assignment Thirteen**  
  
**About the Assignments: Much of this course is organized around a series of
written assignments. These assignments are designed not only to help you
increase your understanding of critical issues in recent U.S. history, but to
increase your ability to interpret the documentary record on which that
understanding is based. Moreover, the assignments are collaborative.  For each
assignment you will be asked to a) "post" an essay to be read by the other
members of your group; and b) post a comment on each of the essays prepared by
the other members of your group.**

**1.   Each assignment is keyed to the lectures, discussions and assigned
readings for the course.**

**2.   A typical assignment requires that you first carefully read a chapter
(sometimes two) in each of the two textbooks: Paul Boyer, _Promises to Keep:
The United States Since World War II_ ; and Robert Griffith & Paula Baker,
_Major Problems in American History Since 1945_.   There are suggestions for
additional readings in both textbooks, as well as a link to a list of recently
published studies.  You should also visit the web sites listed in [A Guide to
Web Resources for The Study of the History of the United States since
1945](Guide1945.htm).**

**3\. You are then asked to prepare a _brief essay_ (usually about 600 words)
based on the assigned readings.   For details on each assignment, see below.**

**4.   In preparing your essay, be sure to cite the sources from which you are
drawing.  For our purposes, you may use parentheses, with a brief, informal
citation.  For example,  cite Paul Boyer, _Promises to Keep_ as (Boyer, p.
36).   When citing a _document_ from _Major Problems_ , cite a shortened
version of its title as it appears in the book, along with the page citation.
e.g., (Truman's Advisors Discuss the Atomic Bomb, _Major Problems_ , p.51.)
In citing an _article_ from _Major Problems_ , cite the _author's name_ and
the page number.  e.g., (Feis, _Major Problems_ , p. 68.)  _Do not cite the
editors' names (Griffith & Baker), unless you are drawing on introductory
materials which they wrote_.  Remember, when you use language that is not your
own you must use quotation marks and cite the source from which you have
drawn.  Failure to do so is plagiarism, one of the most serious violation's of
the University's [Academic Integrity
Code](http://www.american.edu/american/registrar/aic.htm).**

**5.   Submitting your Analysis: Your analysis must be posted to your Team's
Lotus Discussion Database.**

**6.    It is absolutely critical that you post your analysis by the scheduled
deadline, which in most cases will be 5:00 p.m. on Wednesday (occasionally
Sunday), the day before the scheduled discussion. This is to provide time for
your team mates to read and submit comments on what you have posted _before_
the class meets. _Papers posted after the deadline will not receive full
credit_.**

**7.   Finally, each of you will be expected to review and comment upon the
essays posted by all the members of  your team before the scheduled class
discussion.  Your comments need not be long, _but should be substantive_.
Like the essays, they should be based on the relevant readings (both documents
and articles).  And as in the essays, you should cite your sources.**

**8.   You will be graded on both your analysis and comments.  Each assignment
will count toward 5% of your grade for the course.  For details, see
[Assessment](Assessment.htm).**

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**

* * *

**THE ASSIGNMENTS**

**Assignment One:   The Atomic Bombing of  Japan.  Carefully read chapter two
in Griffith and Baker, _Major Problem_ s, and chapter one in Boyer, _Promises
to Keep_.   Then complete the following, _two part_ assignment:**

> **1.   First, prepare a brief (c.300 word.) analysis of  _one of the
documents_ contained in the assigned reading from Griffith, _Major Problems_.
Consult with the other members of your team in order to avoid picking the same
document. In preparing your essay, it would be well to keep in mind the
important differences between "primary" documents and the "secondary" accounts
(e.g., the articles) that follow.  _In writing your essay, be sure to cite the
sources (books, articles and documents) from which you have drawn information
and/or interpretations._**

> > **Your analysis should include the following:**

> > >   * **Drawing _Promises to Keep_ and _Major Problems,_ briefly sketch
the background or context for understanding the document.**

>>>   * **Briefly describe the document:   who wrote it, when & why.**

>>>   * **What does it tell us about the issues under examination?**

>>>   * **How does it compare or contrast with other primary documents in the
chapter?   Does it embody a different point of view? Offer a different kind of
evidence?  Address a different issue?**

>>>   * **How does the document relate to the two "secondary" accounts in
_Major Problems_?   Does it strengthen or weaken the case made in a particular
article?**

>>>   * **For EXTRA CREDIT( up to 1 pt):  Locate (either in the Library or on
the web), copy, identify and briefly describe _an additional document_
relating to the atomic bombing of Hiroshima. Be sure to evaluate the
credibility of the source. If possible, post the document (or a link to it) on
your Team's Lotus Notes Database.  If not, turn it in to the instructor as a
hard copy.**

>>>

>

> **2.   Second, carefully read the two "secondary" accounts by Maddox. and
Alperovitz.  Write a brief (c.300 word) essay  comparing and contrasting the
arguments offered by the two authors.  Be sure to _cite the specific pages
from which you have drawn information_.**

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  

* * *

  
**Assignment Two: The Origins of the Cold War. Carefully read chapter three in
_Major Problem_ s, as well as chapter two in _Promises to Keep_. Then
prepare a brief (c.600 word) essay on one of the following individuals: Harry
S. Truman, Joseph Stalin, Clark Clifford, Henry Wallace. Consult with the
other members of your team in order to avoid duplication.**

>   * **First,   identify the individual. Include a brief (2-3 sentence)
biography, including the person's background, politics, position, etc. You
will find some information on these individuals in the two texts, but you may
need to supplement it with additional information drawn from the library or
the web.**

>   * **Carefully analyze all of the "primary" document(s) from _Major
Problems_ that relate to the individual in question. _Note:_ the document may
be written by the individual himself, may reflect his views as presented by a
subordinate, or may reflect the perception of an individual by one of his
adversaries.   What do the documents reveal about the individual in question
and the role he played in the origins of the Cold War?**

>   * **Compare and contrast the views expressed by the individual you have
selected with those of the others?   Were there alternatives to the directions
in which each of them led or tried to lead their respective countries?**

>   * **Finally, and most importantly, indicate how the individual and/or his
views, role, etc. are treated in the two "secondary" accounts by historians
Paterson and Gaddis.**

>   * **In all cases, _cite the specific pages from which you have drawn
information_.**

>  
>  
>   * **For EXTRA CREDIT (up to 1 pt):  Locate (either in the Library or on
the web), copy, identify and briefly describe _an additional document_
relating to the origins of the Cold War.  Indicate how it relates to the other
readings included in _Major Problems_. Be sure to evaluate the credibility of
the source.   If possible, post the document (or a link to it) on your team's
database.  If not, turn it in to the instructor as a hard copy.**

>

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  

* * *

  
**Assignment Three: Politics and Culture in Cold War America. Carefully read
chapter four in _Major Problems (_ especially  the essays by Beth Bailey and
Roland Marchand) as well as chapters three, four and five in Boyer, _Promises
to Keep_.   Prepare an essay (600 words) on one of the following topics.
Consult with the other members of your team in order to minimize duplication.
I _n writing your essay, be sure to cite the sources (books, articles and
documents) from which you have drawn information and/or interpretations._**

> > * **Drawing on the chapters listed above, as well as on[Documents on
PostWar Politics](PostWarPoliticsDocuments.htm).  See especially the excerpts
from Clark Clifford's memo on the election of 1948, Joe McCarthy's speech
attacking the Truman Administration, and Dwight D. Eisenhower's farewell
speech on the dangers of  "the military industrial complex."  Then prepare an
essay on the impact of the Cold War in shaping postwar politics.**

>>  
>  
>> * **Drawing on the chapters listed above, as well as on the data from the
chapters on Population and The Family in _The First Measured Century_ , at
[athttp://www.pbs.org/fmc/book/1population1.htm](http://www.pbs.org/fmc/book/1population1.htm),
and at <http://www.pbs.org/fmc/book/4family1.htm>,  prepare an essay on the
impact of the Baby Boom on postwar American society.**

>>  
>  
>> * **Drawing on the chapters listed above, as well as _Life_ Magazine's
article on the teenage market ( _Major Problems_ , 122-3),  and the excerpt
from Michael Harrington's _The Other America_   ( _Major Problems_ , 216-219),
prepare an essay on the emergence of a postwar "culture of consumption."**

>>  
>  
>> * **Drawing on the chapters listed above, as well as on the poem "I'm
Waiting" by beat poet Lawrence Ferlinghetti, prepare an essay exploring the
shortcomings of postwar American politics and culture. Ferlinghetti's 1958
poem is widely available on the web, including a copy at:
<http://www.worldofpoetry.org/usop/dream5.htm>.**

>>  
>  
>> * **For EXTRA CREDIT (up to 1 pt):  Locate (either in the Library or on the
web), copy, identify and briefly describe _an additional artifact_
(advertisement, movie, song, book or magazine article) that illustrates points
made in the readings on postwar American politics and culture.  If possible,
post the document or a link to on your team's Lotus Notes Database.  If not,
turn it in to the instructor as a hard copy.**

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  

* * *

  
**Assignment Four: Kennedy, Cuba and the Cuban Missile Crisis. Carefully read
chapter five in _Major Problem_ s, as well as chapter six in _Promises to
Keep_. You should also survey the materials available on the world wide web
(see[ Guide to Resources](Guide1945.htm#Missiles)).  Then prepare a brief
essay describing _the background and motivation_ of one of the key
participants: Kennedy, Khrushchev or Castro; or, prepare an essay evaluating
the relative importance of the Cold War and the history of U.S. relations with
Cuba in creating the Missile Crisis.    Again, check with your team mates to
minimize duplication.  In your essay you should on be sure to draw on both the
documents contained in _Major Problems_ , as well as the two essays by
historians Paterson and May and Zelikow.  _Be sure to cite your sources,
whether from primary documents, from the articles by Paterson and, May &
Zelikow, or from _Promises to Keep__.**  


> > **For EXTRA CREDIT (up to 1 pt):  Locate (either in the Library or on the
web), copy, identify and briefly describe _an additional document_ relating to
the origins of the Cold War. Be sure to describe its relationship to the other
readings for the assignment.  If possible, post the document (or a link to it)
on your team's Lotus Notes Database.  If not, turn it in to the instructor as
a hard copy.**

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  

* * *

  
**Assignment Five: Lyndon Johnson, the Great Society and Postwar Liberalism.
Carefully read chapter seven in Boyer, _Promises to Keep_ , as well as pages
237-243 from chapter 8.  Read chapter six Griffith & Baker, _Major Problems_.
Pay special attention to the two essays by Katznelson and Davies.  Read the
defense of the Great Society by Joseph Califano in _The Washington Monthly_.
To prepare the second part of this week's essay, you will probably need to do
some additional reading in _Promises to Keep_ as well as other books and
articles on specific Great Society legislation.**

**Then prepare an essay _in two parts_.**

> **First , briefly summarize (300-400 words) the two very different
criticisms of  The Great Society offered by Katznelson and Davies. How do
these differ from the traditional liberal defense of the Great Society as
expressed by Califano?  From the standard conservative critique offered by
Ronald Reagan? (see _Major Problems_ , pp.221-222).**

>

> **Then, describe in some detail (200-300 words) one of the major reforms
introduced during the Great Society such as civil rights, the war on poverty,
conservation, health care (especially medicare and medicaid), consumer
protection, education, etc. (Be sure to check with your team mates to avoid
duplication.) Your essay should include: a brief discussion of the history and
context for the reform. For example, had there been earlier efforts to address
problems in this area.   What circumstances led to its passage. What happened
subsequently?  In what ways did this reform illustrate the strengths or
weaknesses of American liberalism?  Finally, and most importantly, how does
the legislation or program you have chosen to describe relate to the arguments
you have summarized in the first part of your essay: does it support the
traditional liberal defense (Califano)?  the standard conservative critique
offered by Reagan?  The radical critique by Katznelson?  Davies' effort to
distinguish between what he believes are two different impulses within the
Great Society?**

  
![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  

* * *

  
**Assignment Six: The Struggle for African American Equality.   _First,
carefully_ read chapter seven in _Major Problem_ s, as well as chapter eight
(and, from chapter 9, pp. 254-263) in Boyer, _Promises to Keep_.  Then, select
_one_ of the primary documents from _Major Problems_ (including the police and
fire department logs for the Milwaukee riot of 1967)..  Be sure to check with
your team mates to avoid duplication.  Then prepare a brief (600 word essay)
placing that document in broad historical context.  Draw as many connections
as you can between the document you have selected and the other documents from
_Major Problems_ ; the essays by Vincent Harding and Tom Sugrue, and the
relevant portions of Boyer, _Promises to Keep_.   I _n writing your essay, be
sure to cite the sources (books, articles and documents) from which you have
drawn information and/or interpretations._**

>   * **For EXTRA CREDIT ( up to 1 pt):  Locate (either in the Library or on
the web), copy, identify and briefly describe _an additional document_ that
illustrates an important point in your essay.   You must draw connections
between this document and the document you have discovered.  If possible, post
the document (or a link to it) on your group's Lotus Notes Database.  If not,
turn it in to the instructor as a hard copy.**

>

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  

* * *

  
**Assignment Seven: The United States and Vietnam. Carefully read chapter
eight in _Major Problem_ s, as well as chapter ten and eleven in _Promises to
Keep_ and Christian Appy's "The Muffling of Public Memory in Post-Vietnam
America."  Read also, Boyer, pp. 54-61, 113-116, 179-184 and 313-320. Be sure
to also read the report by the student at Kent State and visit the BBC site on
the MyLai Massacre.  Then prepare a brief essay on one of the topics listed
below. As before, check with your team mates to minimize duplication.  I _n
writing your essay, be sure to cite the sources (books, articles and
documents) from which you have drawn information and/or interpretations._**

>   * **Briefly describe the history of Vietnam before 1954.   How did this
history shape events in Vietnam in the years that followed?  To what extent
did this history contrast with the Cold War assumptions of U.S. policy makers
in Vietnam? Were their perceptions accurate or distorted?**

>   * **How and why was the U.S. commitment expanded in 1964-65?   What role
did actions by previous administrations play? What was the influence of the
Cold War?  What was the influence of domestic politics?**

>   * **How and why did public opinion shift against the war?   With what
consequences?**

>   * **How have Americans (and their leaders) continued to grapple with the
memory and meaning of   Vietnam.  (For this assignment, see especially the
essays by Herring in _Major Problems_ and   by Christian Appy, "The Muffling
of Public Memory in Post-Vietnam America." )**

>

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  

* * *

  
**Assignment Eight: The "Many Sixties."   The nineteen sixties were marked by
many dramatic developments, including (among other things) the continued
emergence of the civil rights movement (Assignment Six), the beginnings of the
new feminism (Assignment Nine), growing opposition to the war in Vietnam
(Assignment Seven) and by a growing youth movement that found expression in
both radical politics and cultural rebellion.  Of course, not everyone (even
among the young) favored civil rights, opposed the war, smoked dope or showed
up at Woodstock in 1969.  Some were sympathetic to such movements, others
repelled by them.  This assignment requires that you try to draw connections
between how the sixties are represented in your textbooks and how they are
remembered by those who lived through the decade.**

**First, read carefully the assigned readings.   Then interview someone who
was relatively young (late teens to early thirties) during the 1960s.
Finally, prepare an essay (600 words) on how his or her observations connect
(or fail to connect) with the sixties as reflected in a) the contemporary
documents in _Major Problems_ , the very different recollections of former
student leftists Hayden and Collier & Horowitz, and the retrospective
historical commentaries by Isserman and Kazin and Perlstein. Be sure to ask
about cultural change (style, attitudes toward authority, dress, music, etc.)
as well as politics (war, civil rights, etc.).  _Be sure to cite the sources
from which you have drawn information and/or interpretations_.**  


![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  

* * *

  
**Assignment Nine: The New Feminism. First,   read chapter ten in _Major
Problem_ s, and pp. 346-351 & 478-483 in _Promises to Keep_. Then interview a
women who is _at least 50 years old or older_.   Ask her to reflection _her
own life experiences_ as well as on the changes in women's lives that she has
observed.   Based on your readings, your interview _and your reflections on
your own life and/or the lives of women whom you know_ , prepare a brief (600
word) essay comparing and contrasting the life of the person whom you
interviewed with those of both an earlier generation (women who came of age
during the 1950s or before) and the lives of women in your own generation.
What has changed?  What has not?  How does the individual "story" told by the
person you interviewed compare with the larger "story" found in your
textbooks.**

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  

* * *

**Assignment Ten: The Politics of the 1980s.   Carefully read chapter twelve
in  _Major Problem_ s, as well as chapter fourteen  in _Promises to Keep_.
Then prepare a brief essay on one of the following issues listed below.   In
addition, everyone should address the last two questions.  As before, be sure
to communicate with your team mates in order to avoid duplication.  _And be
sure to identify the sources of your information and interpretations_.**

> **1.   The role of race (and racial politics) in the political realignment
that took place in the 1970s and 1980s. (You should also re-read the essay by
Thomas Sugrue in Major Problems, pp. 272-278.)**

>

> **2.   The role of economic problems and the politics of big business in
shaping the politics of the 1980s.**

>

> **3.   The role of the "religious right" and other social conservatives in
shaping the politics of the 1980s;**

>

> **4.   The role of lobbyists, campaign consultants and the media in
transforming American politics.**

>

> **EVERYONE:   Did the Clinton Presidency mark a break with the politics
examined in your essay or a continuity?**

>

> **EVERYONE:   Do the 1980s and 1990s mark the emergence of a "new" or even
"Postmodern" politics that is sharply different from the politics of the
modern (New Deal/PostWar) era?**

![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  

* * *

  
**Assignment Eleven: New Economy? Carefully read the assigned readings.  Then
prepare a brief essay on the "New Economy" in which you explore the following
themes:**

> **1.   Change: how is the new economy different from the old economy?  How
is the new economy similar to the old economy?**

>

> **2.   Plus and/or Minus: What are the positive aspects of economic and
technical changes over the past two decades?  What are the negative aspects?**

>

> **3.    What are the connections between the "new economy" and U.S.
politics?  Social change?  Culture?  What are the connections between the "new
economy" and international affairs (in particular, globalization)?**

>

> **_As always, be sure to identify the sources of your information and
interpretations._**

  
![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  

* * *

  
**Assignment Twelve: The past twenty years have been marked by the emergence
(or perhaps reemergence) of a highly diverse America.  On the one hand,
African Americans, Latinos and other groups have continued and expanded the
struggles for equality and recognition begun during the 1960s and 1970s.  On
the other hand, new immigrants have arrived in the United States in numbers
not experienced since the early 20th century.  These developments have
occurred, moreover, during a period of rapidly expanding internationalism.
These three phenomena have been merged (not always smoothly) into the concepts
of "multi-culturalism" and "diversity."  Prepare an essay (600 words)
discussing the emergence (or is it reemergence?) of a more highly diverse
America and the debates this set off during the 1980s and 1990s.  What do you
believe will be the likely outcome of these developments over the next quarter
century?**

**As always, cite the sources for your information and interpretations.**  


![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  

* * *

  
**Assignment Thirteen:   From the Cold War to the New World Order.
Carefully read the assigned readings. Then prepare a brief essay _comparing
and contrasting_ the Cold War years with the "New Global Era."    In writing
your essay, please explore _all of the themes listed below._   As always, be
sure to identify the sources of your information and interpretations.**

> **1\. How has the end of the Cold War and the emergence of   "globalization"
changed America's relation to the world?**

>

> **2\. How has globalization altered the relationships between national
governments (including the United States) and international markets?**

>

> **3.   Is the world is safer and/or more prosperous following the Cold
War?**

>

> **4.   What are the implications for American foreign and military policy?
Under what (if any) circumstances should the U.S. use military force?**

>

> **5.    In what ways have the events of September 11, 2001 grown out of the
Cold War?  Globalization?**

>

> **6.    What affects do you believe September 11 will have on the future of
the United States, both at home and abroad?**

* * *

  
![](3003.gif)**Return to Top of Page**  
[![](3003.gif)](US45syllabusS2001.htm)**[Return to Top of Syllabus for History
207](http://american.edu/bgriff/h207Sp2002web/USsince45sylSp2002.html)**  
    
    
  

**  Page last modified on March 29, 2002**

