

**

Current Topics in Collection Development

LIS 450CD2 - Fall 2001

Instructor: Carole Palmer

**

palmer@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu

![](Green and Black Stripe.gif)

**

Syllabus



Course Description:

**

Explores current topics and problems related to the development and management
of library collections. Addresses changes in scholarly communication and the
production and distribution of information resources that impact planning and
policy for building, budgeting, and providing access to collections. Examines
issues related to developing libraries that blend traditional and digital
materials, including economic challenges, cooperative strategies, and specific
selection and evaluation practices. Provides an overview of current digital
library projects and products.

The class will be conducted as a seminar and will revolve around discussion of
readings and case material collected by students. Class sessions will cover
contemporary problems and trends in the field. Students will help guide the
direction of the course by selecting themes to be addressed from the weekly
readings and presenting highlights from their projects. The assignments will
complement the readings by allowing students to learn about collection
practices and problems of interest and familiarizing students with new
developments and initiatives that affect the content and function of
collections.



**

Objectives:

**

1\. Provide a general overview of the internal and external factors that
impact collection development and collection management decisions.

2\. Examine contemporary collection building trends and practices as they
relate to changes in scholarly communication, new document formats and
configurations, and enhanced access capabilities.

3\. Explore the collection problems professionals are currently facing in the
field and the concurrent digital library developments. **

Texts:

**

A course packet will be available at the University bookstore online through
the UIUC Library Gateway. Copies will also be on reserve in the Library and
Information Science Library.

**

Requirements:

**

Regular attendance, completion of readings, and class discussion are required.
Students will also submit themes for discussion and complete three assignments
throughout the course of the semester.

Written work will be evaluated on evidence that

    * the relevant literature and sources have been consulted, 
    * key concepts and issues are understood, and 
    * substantive thought and analysis has been given to the problem. 

Organization and articulation of content will also be assessed.

Late assignments will not be accepted without prior approval, and incomplete
assignments will receive partial credit.



**

1. General Participation.

**

Students are expected to complete syllabus readings and participate in weekly
class discussions.

**

15 points.

**



**

2. Weekly Discussion Themes

__

Email due before noon the Sunday before class, beginning September 9

Select 5 weeks

**__

Beginning in the third week of the course, students will

    * suggest discussion themes derived from the readings for the week. 

Each student should submit weekly discussion themes _for at least five units_
during the semester. The day before class, send me a paragraph elaborating on
a key topic or a selected "quote of the week" that you would like the class to
discuss. It may not be possible to cover all the items submitted for a given
week, but I will compile the suggestions and keep a running agenda as a guide
to class discussion. Be prepared to introduce your chosen topics in class. You
may select an area for discussion for any number of reasons. For example you
might select a topic that seems especially important or neglected, because you
strongly agree or disagree with it, or because you are curious about how your
classmates view the matter.

**

10 points total.



3. Collection Assessment and Evaluation Plan

__

Papers due on 10/8

**__

Select a collection at a local library for assessment and evaluation, and
determine the objectives to be achieved through the process. For instance, you
may want to examine the business reference section at your local public
library in terms of providing service to local small businesses. Or you could
choose a specific subject area within the university collection to consider in
terms of curriculum or research support. Perform a preliminary assessment of
the collection, and then develop a comprehensive evaluation plan. The paper
should include a write-up of the assessment and a detailed plan for further
evaluation.

The assessment should describe the subjects and formats contained in the
collection, as well as the size, scope, depth, recency, and significance of
the collection. Consider circulation activity and condition of physical
materials, and _be sure to account for access to electronic materials provided
by the library_.

Propose an evaluation plan that fits the collection and its objectives.
Discuss the methods to be used and why they are the most suitable for the
task. Outline basic procedures, staffing, and timeline for the project.

_

Papers should be about 5 pages or 1200 words.

_**

20 points.

**

Related resources:

Collection Assessment / Collection Development Training for Arizona Public
Libraries. <http://www.dlapr.lib.az.us/cdt/collass.htm>

Collection Assessment / University of Wyoming Libraries. ****<http://www-
lib.uwyo.edu/cdo/collass.htm>

[A Guide to the Collection Assessment
Process](http://www.nla.gov.au/libraries/help/guide.html). Australian
Collection Assessment Manual: a collection assessment guide, compiled by
Margaret Henty, National Library of Australia, 1992.

**



4. Digital Library Report

__

Papers due on 10/29

Demos 10/29 and 11/5

**__

Identify a completed or ongoing digital library project to study and evaluate.
Read the material available on the project, going beyond the web sites
provided, when possible. Write a report _directed to an audience of collection
developers_.

    * Provide background on the project, a description of the content or test-bed collection(s), enhancements and functions provided, and planned developments. 
    * Consider the target user group for the material and how they might utilize the resource. 
    * Evaluate it as a collection option. Make suggestions about how it might add to, duplicate, or complicate existing collections and services in a suitable library. Consider what contribution the project is making to library development overall. 

We will be looking at your digital library sites in class. Be prepared to talk
about the features of the site and why collection developers should or should
not be interested in the content and developments of the project.

_

Papers should be about 5 pages or 1200 words.

_**

20 points.**



**

5. Case Studies

__

Overview presentations on 9/17 and 9/24

Papers due on 11/26

Panel presentations 11/26 and 12/3

**__

Choose a library or information center to examine as a collection development
case. It does not need to be a local site. In fact, it would be ideal if, as a
whole, the class developed cases for multiple types of libraries in various
locations.

    * Collect a range of information related to the library and its collections, using a combination of sources. 

You may consult the library literature, statistical resources, and web pages
for existing information and data. For example, basic statistics can be found
in the _American Library Directory_ , and those compiled by the Association of
Research Libraries can be accessed at
[http://fisher.lib.virginia.edu/newarl/](http://fisher.lib.virginia.edu/newarl/).
Some libraries also make their annual reports available on the web, and
librarians often publish reports on practices and new initiatives undertaken
in their libraries. Some sources may allow you to track certain factors over
time.

You may also wish to compile your own data through observation at the site or
by establishing contact with a librarian or staff member who can provide you
with details about internal operations and experiences related to collections.
These techniques may allow you to assess changes, challenges, and problems
faced by the library.

Students will give a brief overview of their case study progress on Weeks 4
and 5.

The final case study report should provide a descriptive profile of the
library that synthesizes the information you collected and an analysis of
strengths and weaknesses of the operations.

    * Discuss what you found out about the user communities served, the size and scope of the collection, collection policies, staff and resources devoted to collection activities, access mechanisms and services, etc. Provide as much information as possible about the acquisition and provision of electronic resources, budgeting, and staffing issues. Highlight innovations and problem areas.

After students have selected their case study sites, we will look at the range
of libraries chosen and assemble groups that will make useful comparisons.

_

    * Work with your group to compare and contrast the results of your case studies_. Groups will be scheduled to present their observations and analysis to the entire class at the end of the semester.

_

Papers should be about 8 pages or 2000 words_ ; _panel presentations should
run about 30 minutes.

_**

35 points (total for paper and presentations).

**





**

Class Schedule and Reading Assignments

**



**

Week 1 - _ _Wednesday__ , August 22

_

Course Introduction

**_



**

Week 2 - August 27

_

The Contemporary Environment

**_

Cline, Nancy M. "Virtual Continuity: The Challenge for Research Libraries
Today." [EDUCAUSE Review (May/June
2000)](http://www.educause.edu/pub/er/erm00/erm003.html).

Shreeves, Edward. "The Acquisitions Culture Wars." _Library Trends_ 48, no. 4
(Spring 2000): 877-890. **** [[WilsonWeb, Library Literature and Information
Science Full Text](http://hwwilsonweb.com/)]



**

No class - September 3 Labor Day

**



**

Week 3 - September 10

_

Hybrid Libraries

**_

Atkinson, Ross. "Managing Traditional Materials in an Online Environment: Some
Definitions and Distinctions for a Future Collection Management." _Library
Resources and Technical Services_ 42, no. 1 (1998): 7-20. [Course packet]

Manoff, Marlene. "Hybridity, Mutability, Multiplicity: Theorizing Electronic
Library Collections." _Library Trends_ 48, no. 4 (Spring 2000): 857-876.
[[WilsonWeb, Library Literature and Information Science Full
Text](http://hwwilsonweb.com/)]

Montgomery, Carol Hansen, and JoAnne L. Sparks. "The Transition to an
Electronic Journal Collection: Managing the Organizational Changes." Serials
Review 26, no. 3 (2000):4-18. [Access from [LIS electronic journals
page](http://www.library.uiuc.edu/lsx/ejournals.asp) at UIUC Library Gateway]



**

Week 4 - September 17

_

Case study overviews

__

Practices

**_

Arlen, Shelley, Ann Lindel, Razia Nanji, and Colleen Seale. "Web Tools for
Collection Managers." [Collection Building 17, no. 2](http://clorinda.emerald-
library.com/vl=515029/cl=31/nw=1/rpsv/cw/www/mcb/01604953/v17n2/contp1-1.htm)
(1998): pp. 65-70.

Demas, Samuel, Peter McDonald, and Gregory Lawrence. "The Internet and
Collection Development: Mainstreaming Selection of Internet Resources."
_Library Resources and Technical Services_ 39 (1995): 275-290. [Course packet]

Faulkner, Lila A., and Karla L. Hahn. "Selecting Electronic Publications: The
Development of a Genre Statement." [Issues in Science and Technology
Librarianship, no. 30](http://www.library.ucsb.edu/istl/01-spring/) (Spring
2001).

[AcqWeb](http://acqweb.library.vanderbilt.edu/)

**



Week 5 - September 24

_

Case study overviews, continued

__

Evaluation

**_

Dobson, Cynthia, Jeffrey D. Kushkowski, and Kristin H. Gerhard. "Collection
Evaluation for Interdisciplinary Fields: A Comprehensive Approach." _Journal
of Academic Librarianship_ 22 (1996): 279-284. **** [[WilsonWeb, Library
Literature and Information Science Full Text](http://hwwilsonweb.com/)]

Gyeszly, Suzanne D. "Electronic or Paper Journals? Budgetary, Collection
Development, and User Satisfaction Questions." [Collection Building 20,
no.1](http://clorinda.emerald-
library.com/vl=515029/cl=31/nw=1/rpsv/cw/www/mcb/01604953/v20n1/contp1-1.htm)
(2000): 5-10.

Mercer, Linda S. "Measuring the Use and Value of Electronic Journals and
Books." [Issues in Science and Technology Librarianship, no.
25](http://www.library.ucsb.edu/istl/00-winter/index.html) (Winter 2000).

Sylvia, Margaret F. "Citation Analysis as an Unobtrusive Method for Journal
Collection Evaluation Using Psychology Student Research Bibliographies."
[Collection Building 17, no. 1](http://clorinda.emerald-
library.com/vl=515029/cl=31/nw=1/rpsv/cw/www/mcb/01604953/v17n1/contp1-1.htm)
(1998): 20-28.

**



Week 6 - October 1

_

Collection Landscapes

**_

Marinko, Rita A., and Kristin H. Gerhard. "Representations of the Alternative
Press in Academic Library Collections." _College and Research Libraries_ 59,
no. 4 (July 1998): 363-377. **** [Course packet]

Perrault, Anna H. "The Changing Print Resource Base of Academic Libraries in
the United States." _Journal of Education for Library and Information Science_
36, no. 4 (1995): 295-308. [Course packet]

Hollerman, Curt. "The Study of Subject Strengths, Overlap, and National
Collecting Patterns: The Uses of the OCLC/AMIGOS Collection Analysis CD and
Alternatives to It." _Collection Managment_ 22, no. 1/2 (1997): 57-69. [Course
packet]

Serebnick, Judith and Frank Quinn. "Measuring Diversity of Opinion in Public
Library Collections." _Library Quarterly_ 65, no. 1 (1995): 1-38. [Course
packet]

**



Week 7 - October 8

_

Assessment and evaluation plans due

__

What to Digitize?

**_

Grahm, Peter S. "New Roles for Special Collections on the Network." _College
and Research Libraries_ 59, no. 3, (1998): 232-239. [Course packet]

Hazen, Dan, Jeffrey Horrell, Jan Merrill-Oldham. [Selecting Research
Collections for Digitization](http://www.clir.org/pubs/abstract/pub74.html).
Washington, D.C.: Council on Library and Information Resources, 1998.

Pritcher, Lynn. "Ad*Access: Seeking Copyright Permissions for a Digital Age."
[D-Lib Magazine 6, no. 2](http://www.dlib.org/dlib/february00/02contents.html)
(February 2000).

Tennant, Roy. "So Much to Digitize, So Little Time (and Money)." _Library
Journal_ 123, no. 13 (August 1998), pp. 36-37. **** [[WilsonWeb, Library
Literature and Information Science Full Text](http://hwwilsonweb.com/)]

**



Week 8 - October 15

_

Scholarly Communication and Publishing Trends

**_

Atkinson, Ross. "Library Functions, Scholarly Communication, and the
Foundation of the Digital Library: Laying Claim to the Control Zone." _Library
Quarterly_ 66, no. 3, (1996): 239-265. [Course packet]

Atkinson, Ross. "A Rationale for the Redesign of Scholarly Information
Exchange." _Library Resources and Technical Services_ 44, no. 2 (2000): 59-69.
**** [[WilsonWeb, Library Literature and Information Science Full
Text](http://hwwilsonweb.com/)]

Harnad, Stevan. "Free at Last: The Future of Peer-Reviewed Journals." [D-Lib
Magazine (December
1999).](http://www.dlib.org/dlib/december99/12contents.html)

"To Publish and Perish." [Policy Perspectives 7, no.
4](http://www.irhe.upenn.edu/cgi-bin/pp-cat.pl) (March 1998).

[SPARC](http://www.arl.org/sparc/home/index.asp?page=0). The Scholarly
Publishing and Resource Coalition.

**



Week 9 - October 22

_

E-Journals

**_

Anderson, Kent, John Sack, Lisa Krauss, and Lori O'Keefe. "Publishing Online-
Only Peer-Reviewed Biomedical Literature: Three Years of Citation, Author
Perception, and Usage Experience." [Journal Of Electronic Publishing 6, no.
3](http://www.press.umich.edu/jep/06-03/index.html) (March 2001).

Fosmire, Michael, and Song Yu. "Free Scholarly Electronic Journals: How Good
Are They?" [Issues in Science and Technology Librarianship, no.
27](http://www.library.ucsb.edu/istl/00-summer/index.html) (Summer 2000).

Shum, Simon Buckingham, and Tamara Sumner. "JIME: An Interactive Journal for
Interactive Media." [First Monday 6, no.
2](http://www.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue6_2/) (February 2001).

[NewJour](http://gort.ucsd.edu/newjour/)



**

Week 10 - October 29

_

Digital library reports due; demos begin

__

E-Books

**_

Hawkins, Donald T. "E-Books: A Major Publishing Revolution. Part 1: General
Considerations and Issues." _Online_ (July/ August 2000). [[WilsonWeb, Library
Literature and Information Science Full Text](http://hwwilsonweb.com/)]

Hughes, Carol Ann. "The Myth of 'Obsolescence': The Monograph in the Digital
Library." [Portal: Libraries and the Academy 1, no.
2](http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/portal_libraries_and_the_academy/toc/pla1.2.html)
(2001): 113-119.

Summerfield, Mary, Carol Mandel, and Paul Kantor. "The Potential for Scholarly
Online Books: Views from the Columbia University Online Books Evaluation
Project." _Publishing Research Quarterly_ (Fall 2000): 39-52. [Course packet]

**



Week 11 - November 5

_

Digital library reports due; demos continued

_



_

Economics

**_

Frazier, Kenneth. "The Librarian's Dilemma: Contemplating the Costs of the
'Big Deal.'" [D-Lib Magazine 7, no.
3](http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march01/03contents.html) (March 2001).

Okerson, Ann S. "The LIBLICENSE Project and How it Grows." [D-Lib Magazine 5,
no. 9](http://www.dlib.org/dlib/september99/09contents.html) (1999 September).

Odlyzko, Andrew. "The Economics of Electronic Journals." [First Monday 2, no.
8](http://www.firstmonday.dk/issues/issue2_8/index.html) (1997).

[Licensing Issues](http://www.arl.org/scomm/licensing/). Washington, D.C.
Association for Research Libraries.

[Licencingmodels.com](http://www.licensingmodels.com/).



**

Week 12 - November 12

_

Cooperative Strategies**_  

Allen, Barbara McFadden. "Hanging Together to Avoid Hanging Separately:
Opportunities of Academic Libraries and Consortia." _Information Technology
and Libraries_ 17, no. 1 (1998): 36-44. [[WilsonWeb, Library Literature and
Information Science Full Text](http://hwwilsonweb.com/)]  
Also, review [CIC web pages](http://www.cic.uiuc.edu/), especially programs
and activities for libraries.

Alexander, Adrian W. "Wither Fair Use? A Library Consortium Viewpoint."
[Portal: Libraries and the Academy 1, no.
2](http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/portal_libraries_and_the_academy/toc/pla1.2.html)
(2001): 197-202.

Landesman, Margaret, and Johann Van Reenen. "Consortia vs. Reform: Creating
Congruence." [Journal of Electronic
Publishing](http://www.press.umich.edu/jep/06-02/index.html) 6, no. 2
(December 2000).

[Libraries on the Web. USA Consortia](http://sunsite.berkeley.edu/Libweb/usa-
consortia.html).

**_



No Class - Thanksgiving Break

**_



**

Week 13 - November 26

_

Case study reports due, panel discussions begin

__

Outsourcing

**_

Knuth, Rebecca, and Donna G. Bair-Mundy. "Revolt over Outsourcing: Hawaii's
Librarians Speak Out about Contracted Selection." _Collection Management_ 23,
no. 1-2 (1998): 81-112. [Course packet]

Martin, Robert S., et al. "[The Impact of Outsourcing and Privatization of
Library Services and Management](http://www.ala.org/alaorg/ors/outsourcing/)."
American Library Association, June 2000.

Older, Norman. "Outsourcing, Model or Mistake: The Collection Development
Controversy in Hawaii." Library Journal (15 March 1997): 28-31. [Course
packet]

**



Week 14 - December 3

_

Case study panel discussions, continued

__

Course Review

**_

