Constitutional Interpretation  [**Student Course
Guide**](http://www.princeton.edu/scg/) ![->](/~scg/pics/arrow.gif) [ Fall
2000](/~scg/html/departments.f00.shtml) ![->](/~scg/pics/arrow.gif)
[Politics](../f00.shtml) ![->](/~scg/pics/arrow.gif)
[315](/~scg/search/searchcourse.pl?q=POL+315) ![->](/~scg/pics/arrow.gif)
Student Review  
---  
  
### Constitutional Interpretation (SA)  
[RP George](/~scg/search/searchprof.pl?last=George&init=RP)  

###  |

[(add to
scheduler)](javascript:openWindow\('http://campuscgi.princeton.edu/~scg/scheduler/bottom.scg.pl?Submit=Add&Selection=POL+315:+Lecture+1.0:++'\))  
---|---  
  
[Fall 1999 Statistics](../315/stats.f99.shtml) (taught by RP George )  
Lectures:|  5.0 | Seminars:|  4.5 | Precepts/Classes:|  4.8 | Readings:|  4.8
| Papers/Exams:|  4.5 | Overall:|  4.9 | Enrollment:|  53

This course is nothing short of truly legendary. Historically, professors who
have taught this course have been among Princeton's most famous, both on- and
off-campus. Alumni, especially in political fields, are likely to ask about
it. Unlike so many other courses in Princeton, especially in the liberal arts
where I am, an "A" in this course is a badge of honor that can be worn with
pride.

The first lecture of this class saw the auditorium packed to capacity. By the
second class, it was half empty. It's that tough. You think you're the man?
You think you got what it takes? You're gonna need it - this class is to the
Politics Department what "Death Mechanics" is to Physics.

This course is truly a tour de force of the United States Constitution. As I
was taking the course, I seriously questioned the choice of some of the
topics. Only now, working in a constitutionally-intensive field of law, do I
realize how crucial each of these topics truly were, and how essential this
class was to my understanding of them. I find myself constantly referring back
to my briefs of the cases we read in this class.

This is NOT your standard class. Normally, you read a textbook and are told
the important concepts. Here, you read CASES and are expected to determine for
yourself the relevant principles. Not an easy task, especially given many of
the cases are both internally inconsistent as well as inconsitent with each
other. Nonetheless, anyone who hopes to speak even vaguely intelligibly about
whether a law is constitutional or unconstitutional needs to take this course.

This course covers several important topics. The interstate commerce clause -
to resolve issues of federalism. The Contracts clause - to determine what
restrictions government can put on the economy. The Due Process Clause - to
discuss restrictions on state power, as well as the ever-popular "right of
privacy," from which stems many of our reproductive rights. The First
Amendment - resolving issues of free speech and free exercise of religion; if
your religion requires you to smoke illegal drugs, is the government
preventing your free exercise by prosecuting you for it? As well as general
issues about the nature of a constitution, federal-state relations, and
separation-of-power issues.

One of the most talked-about features of the course is the moot court that
serves as the midterm. One student from each precept acts as the petitioner,
and the other acts as the respondant. They then argue a case drawn up by the
professor before the rest of the students, who act as Supreme Court justices.
Each of the student attorneys must prepare legal briefs complete with legal
citations, each of the student justices are required to write an opinion
(sorry, no Per Curiums allowed). During the moot court itself, the attorneys
present oral arguments, and then are assaulted by the justices with a barrage
of questions. if one of the attorneys is underprepared or incompetant, the
session can be painful. On the other hand, with a well-prepared attorney, it
can be very fun.

Professor Whittington is ALWAYS more than willing to explain complex concepts
to you. He is ALWAYS in his office, ready to help out students. In all
honesty, his lectures tend to be slow and boring - he's not necessarily the
most exciting person in the world to be presenting such great material.
However, he definitely covers all the bases, and during both precept and
office horus, as well as pretty much whenever else you find him, he's always
willing to help.

Undoubtedly, the one thing you've heard about this course is the grading. It's
curved around a B-. You very well may get a C-. It's worth it.

As far as the reading, Professor Whittington assigned required reading, and
then a list of 30 books each week as optional reading. Anyone who does the
optional reading should be spanked severely on general principle. However,
this syllabus acts as an invaluable resource later (keep it and treasure it)
should you ever need to do a research paper on a constitutional topic or
provision. In all honesty, I've gone to some precepts without having done the
reading and have been able to follow the conversation.

You HAVE to learn how to brief and read cases. The first 2 weeks' assignments
are pretty much dedicated to this. You have to take a final exam that is easy
if you've done the reading. Over Christmas Break you have to read John Ely
Hart's Democracy and Distrust. This is regarded as one fo the greatest works
on Constitutional Interpretation of the second half of the 20th century, but
again Prof. Whittington never stressed this fact to us. it was only later, in
writing my final paper for another course in legal language, that I discovered
this. MAKE SURE YOU READ IT - not only will it utterly change the way you look
at the Constitution (it's simply brilliant) but there's a najor essay question
on the final dedicated to it.

My biggest criticism is that Prof. Whittington is a dry lecturer and does not
tell us why what we're studying is important - that is, how a specific topic
relates to interesting problems we'll eventually wonder about or have to deal
with in the real world. However, this year the course will be taught by Prof.
George, and this criticism might not be applicable. Prof. George will probably
add different things to the class.

If you're interested in the law, some people recommend AGAINST taking this
course because they say you'll learn it all in law school. This may be true.
Nonetheless it's good to go in with a basic understanding of several key cases
as well as the general topography of the Constitution. It's good to have
experience in legal reasoning, and the type of logic (or sometimes lack
thereof) found in these cases. Furthermore, you NEED to know a lot of this
stuff NOW (if you like to work with or discuss the law in other classes), not
3 years from now in law school.

In short, take this class. It'll be a major challenge. The precepts feature
great debates. The cases can sometimes make fun reading. And the simple fact
remains, any lawyer from Princeton will always remember it.

Even for those not interested in the law, I'd of course recommend it. That's
because I think this stuff is really interesting. But then again, remember
that EEB majors for instance recommend EEB courses even to non-majors...

_Reviewer's Major: Woodrow Wilson School

_

* * *

comments: [(Add your comments)](comments.shtml)

* * *

Forget the comments on Whittington, all you really need to know is that George
is one of the best lecturers (actually, it's hardly a "lecture") and one of
the brightest professors in the politics department (that's why he now holds
an endowed position as McCormick Professor of Jurisprudence). If you can
accept the likely prospect of not getting a grade above a B (believe me, it's
worth it) this course is a great Princeton experience you shouldn't miss.

Semester Taken: Fall '99  
Professor: George  
User's major: Politics

_Sun Apr 16 02:01:00 EDT 2000_

* * *

For Pre-Law types: If you're concerned about "needing" this course to get into
Law School on the one hand, and the severe grade deflation on the other, rest
assured (from the experience of several Princeton alums) that you do NOT
"need" to take this course to get into some great law schools. If you feel the
need to signal your interest in law to admissions readers, you might consider
Law and Economics, Discrimination and the Law, or English Constitutional
History, for example. On the other hand, if you want a taste of law school,
this course might give you a good dose thereof.

Semester Taken:  
Professor:  
User's major: WWS

_Mon May 14 01:00:04 EDT 2001_

* * *

Okay, it's a known fact among anyone who has ever taken this course that Prof.
George is one of the best professors at Princeton. Only an hour and half every
week just isn't enough - I found myself wishing he would just keep talking
even though class was over. What people tend to overlook is that the material
in this course would be worth the grade deflation even if it were taught by
Bozo the Clown. I found myself reading ahead in this class instead of reading
to catch up in other classes. Precepts are awesome. Even the papers were fun
to write, and I spent far more time on my 2000 word court opinions than I have
on 30-page term papers. But I loved every minute of it - seriously. I had
never wanted to be a lawyer until I took this course. My only regret is that I
took it already so I don't have it to look forward to in my schedule next
year.

Semester Taken: Fall 2000  
Professor: The Incredible Robert George  
User's major: WWS

_Wed Apr 24 13:14:20 EDT 2002_

* * *

![](../../../pics/eyes.count?dept/pol/315/f00) 1582 Visitors

