_" The life of the law has not been logic, it has been experience" \--Oliver
Wendell Holmes, Jr. _

    
    
    **HISTORY 3690-G: THE UNITED STATES CONSTITUTION
    AND THE NATION (Honors)** 

* * *
    
    
     Instructor: Dr. Lynne Curry					 Office: 216J Coleman Hall
    Office Hours: TR 1:00-2:00 pm; 				 Phone: 581-7988/3310 
    W 9:00-11:00 am; and by appointment 			 email: [cflc2@eiu.edu](mailto:cflc2@eiu.edu) 

* * *

**Content:** This course surveys the intellectual, social, and political
evolution of the Constitution in American history, with a special emphasis on
developing students' skills in analytical reading, critical thinking, and
expository writing.

**Course texts** : We have two texts. (1) Benedict, The Blessings of Liberty
(2) Waldrep and Curry, History 3600 Documents Reader. Readings assignments are
on the class schedule. To aid your understanding and enhance our class
discussions, complete the week's reading assignment __before__ coming to class
each Tuesday.

**Attendance** : Regular attendance and active participation are mandatory.
You are responsible for information and material covered in your absence.

**Examinations** : We will have three essay examinations, two mid-terms and a
final. The final is not comprehensive. I will give out the essay questions in
advance.

**Research project** : See the syllabus for information on this requirement.
The paper wil l be done in small groups in several stages throughout the
semester, including a presentation in class.

**Academic integrity** : I observe the standards for academic integrity
established by this university. Students unfamiliar with the penalties for
academic dishonesty are urged to consult me prior to taking their first
examination.

**Note** : If you have a documented disability and wish to receive academic
accommodations, please contact the Office of Disability Services.

**Grading** : In assigning a final grade for this course, I will evaluate your
entire performance, including attendance, active participation, and all
written work.

    
    
    Mid-term examination I		 20%
    Mid-term examination II 		 20%
    Research project (all stages)	 40 % 
    Final examination 			 20%

Course Schedule and Reading Assignments

    
    
    _Week_ 	    _Topics and Reading Assignments_
    
    
     1 			What is the Constitution? Origins, terms, definitions. 
    			READ: Benedict Chapter 1 
    			Documents pp. 3-17 *
    			*Always read introductions to each chapter in documents reader.
    
    
    
    2 			Colonial developments.
    			READ: Benedict Chapter 2 
    			 Documents p. 31 and pp.41-42
    
    
    3			Road to revolution
    			READ: Benedict Chapter 3
        		    Documents pp. 47-61 
    
    
    4      		The Constitution and the Bill of Rights
     			READ: Benedict Chapter 4
    	                Documents pp. 69-79; 89-99
    			Mid-term examination I Thursday, February 1st
    
    
    5			Early controversies and the Marshall Court
    		        READ: Benedict chapters 5 and 6
    			Documents pp. 131-134; 151-152; 159-166
    
    
    6			Jacksonian Democracy
    			READ: Benedict chapter 7
    			Documents pp. 171-182; 187-189
    
    
    7			Slavery and sectionalism
    			READ: Benedict chapter 8
    			Documents pp. 199-208; 221-222
    
    
    8 			The Civil War
    			READ: Benedict chapter 9
    			Documents pp. 263-268; 279-281
    			Stage 1 of research project due in class Thursday, March 1st
    
    
    9			Reconstructing the nation
    			READ: Benedict chapter 10
    			Documents pp. 293; 299-302; 309; 315-316
    			Mid-term Examination II Thursday, March 8th
    
    
    10			Spring Break
    
    
    11			Industrializing America
    			READ: Benedict chapters 11 and 12
    			Documents pp. 355-360; 363-365; 373-374; 383-392
    			Stage 2 of research project due in class Tuesday, March 20th
    
    
    12			Depression, War, and Cold War
    			READ: Benedict chapters 13, 14, 15
    			Documents pp. 403-408; 411-416; 435-438; 453-454
    
    
    13			Civil rights/equal rights
    			READ: Benedict chapter 16
    			Documents pp. 455-456; 459-470
    
    
    14			Presidential powers
    			READ: Benedict chapter 17
    			Documents pp. 475-488
    
    
    15			Conservative constitutionalism
    			READ: Benedict chapter 18
    			Documents pp. 493-495; 497-498
    
    
    16			Stage 4 (class participationss)
    			Stage 3 (paper) due in class Thursday, April 26th
    
    			Final exam: Wednesday, May 2, 2:45 to 4:45 pm

_Research Project_

**Stage 1** (5 points): Form a group numbering from 5 to 8 members to work on
the research project. (I strongly suggest you also meet as a study group
during the semester, especially before examinations.) Report the names of your
group members to me. When all groups have rep orted to me, I will assign each
group a Supreme Court decision to research. Due date: Names are due in writing
no later than _Thursday, February 1st._

**Stage 2** (20 points): First, locate the full text of the Supreme Court
decision I have assigned your grou p on the Lexis-Nexus website (accessible
through the Booth Library home page). Or, find it on microfilm in Booth
Library. Each group member should print out a copy for reference throughout
the semester. Next, develop a bibliography of secondary works (w r itten by
scholars) that discuss this decision. This may include books, parts of books,
or scholarly journal articles. Your sources should include a mix of history
and law scholarship. Secondary sources you find on the web may be used but
check with me before including them (not all are reliable). Encyclopedia or
CD-ROM entries may _not_ be used as secondary sources. **Due date** :Your
bibliography (one copy per group) is due _Thursday, March 1st._

**Stage 3** (50 points): After reading your sources carefully it's up to you
to divide them among the group members) write a paper in which you answer the
following questions (it's up to you to divide up the writing for each
section):

1\. What were the facts of this case (who, what, where, when)? Who were the
main actors on each side? What was the original conflict that precipitated
this case?

2\. What was the central constitutional issue raised in this case? Be very
specific, i.e., exactly what part of the Constitution did this case address
(cite the article, section, or phrase within the text itself).

3\. What was the Court's decision in this case? How, exactly, did the Court
apply the Constitution? How did the Court interpret the language of the
Constitution? Be very specific.

4\. What is the broader historical significance of this case? How did the
Court\rquote s decision change the direction of constitutional history? Why is
this decision important

**Grading criteria for your paper** :{ (1) Substance: Thoroughness of your res
earch, careful reading of your sources, complete and thoughtful answers to all
of the questions listed below. (2) Style: Spelling, punctuation, grammar, etc.
Your paper must include a final bibliography and citations to your references
(footnotes or end notes) where appropriate. Your paper must look like a
polished, final product, not a rough draft. **Due date: Tuesday, April 17th.**

**Stage 4** (25 points): Each group will present a fifteen-minute overview of
the Supreme Court cases they have researched. Presentations must address the
four sets of questions listed above. Your grade for this stage will be based
on your ability to answer these questions clearly and succinctly. Be prepared
to answer questions from your audience (including me).

