| [![Northwestern
University](/shared/images/common/seal_two.gif)](http://www.northwestern.edu/)
|  |   | Search |  
---|---|---  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |  |  |  |
[Northwestern](http://www.northwestern.edu/)  
---|---|---  
[Search Help](http://www.northwestern.edu/search/help/) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |  |  | [Center for Legal
Studies](http://www.northwestern.edu/legalstudies/)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | CENTER FOR LEGAL STUDIES |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |  [Northwestern
University](http://www.law.northwestern.edu/) > [Center for Legal
Studies](http://www.northwestern.edu/legalstudies/) > Undergraduates -- Course
Requirements | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |  |  | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)
| ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
---|---|---|---  
  | ![](/shared/images/blue/bullet_blue.gif) |
[Undergraduates](/legalstudies/undergraduate/) |  
  |   | Legal Studies Adjunct Major/Minor for Undergraduate Students |  
  | ![](/shared/images/blue/bullet_blue.gif) | [Certificate in Law and Social
Science](http://www.northwestern.edu/lss) |  
  |   | One-year program concentrating on law, for graduate students in the
social sciences |  
  | ![](/shared/images/blue/bullet_blue.gif) | [JD/PhD Joint Degree
Program](http://www.northwestern.edu/graduate/academic/jdphd.html) |  
  |   | Integrated joint-degree program for graduate and law students |  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |  |
![](/shared/images/blue/bar_blue_left.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |  Course Requirements for the Legal
Studies Major | ![](/shared/images/blue/bar_blue_right.gif)  
---|---|---|---  
  |   | Last updated 04/30/2002 | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
  |   |

|

Proposal for an Adjunct Major and Minor in Legal Studies  
Approved by the Curricular Policies Committee, February 20, 2002  
  
Approved By Weinberg College Faculty, First Reading March 7, 2002;  
Second Reading, April 17, 2002  
  

The Center for Legal Studies offers an undergraduate major and an
undergraduate minor, in addition to graduate instruction.  The Legal Studies
major is an adjunct major, which means that it does not replace any other
major or major requirements; it complements other majors, and may be taken
only in conjunction with a department major.  The major and minor are not
situated in any one school, but are open to students in all schools.   Because
demand for the required Advanced Research Seminar may exceed the enrollment
limits, admission to the major is competitive.

The Legal Studies adjunct major is designed for students who seek to employ
various academic perspectives and methodologies to study legal issues, and to
use the conceptual framework of the law to illuminate empirical and
theoretical concerns in the social sciences and humanities.  It is not a "pre-
law" program.  This major conceives of law broadly to include the study of
legal institutions, legal actors, and legal processes.  Law, broadly
conceived, is a social institution that provides an excellent lens through
which students may learn about and critically examine a variety of themes
central to other disciplines, shedding light on both the understanding of law
as well as debates central to those disciplines.  Legal Studies emphasizes the
reciprocal relationships between law and society to examine the social
environment which law often is employed to alter and in which law operates.

Adjunct Major in Legal Studies

Eleven quarter-courses are required for the major.  Students are required to
have taken two "law related" courses (one of which could be "in progress)
before they apply for admission to the Advanced Research Seminar and the
major.  (Among the courses that meet this requirement are Political Science
220, American Government, Political Science 230, Law in the Political Arena;
Sociology 206, Law & Society, and Sociology 202, Norms and Deviance.  The
Director of the Center for Legal Studies may approve other courses as law
related.)   Three of the courses are a year long core sequence that is
typically taken in the junior year; admission to this sequence is by
application only. Six required courses are electives, chosen from a list of
approved courses that is posted on the web.  Students are required to take one
course from each of five categories of electives: 1) Theory/Philosophy
(Jurisprudence), 2) Global/Comparative Perspectives, 3)
Institutions/Organizations/Economics; 4) Law and Inequality, and 5) Legal
Argument/Communications. (The courses that fall in these five areas are listed
below. Each quarter the  Center will post on the web what courses will meet
area requirements.) Two of the 11 courses not drawn from the core courses of
the major may be double counted toward another major.  (Additional courses may
be counted as "related courses" as required in some majors).  The Director may
approve a course offered in a particular year as a substitution for an
elective course when the syllabus demonstrates a legal studies emphasis.  In
certain cases, students who are combining a major in Legal Studies with a
major in another field that also requires a senior research seminar may
arrange to fulfill their Advanced Research Seminar requirement in a combined,
but expanded, project.

Students who achieve a grade point average of 3.5 in Legal Studies courses and
write a research seminar thesis of distinction will be accorded Honors.

Students interested in the adjunct major in Legal Studies should consult with
a program advisor in the Center for Legal Studies. Information is available in
the Weinberg College Office of Studies and the Center for Legal Studies
office.

Application Process

In spring quarter, students will apply for admission to the Advanced Research
Seminar for the following academic year.  The application will consist of a
one-page statement of interest, a university transcript, a listing of law-
related courses completed or in process, and the name of a faculty member who
can serve as a reference (to be used only as necessary).  Students will be
notified of their admission to the Seminar (and the major) prior to pre-
registration for Fall Quarter.

Course Requirements  (11 Courses)  
  
I. Prerequisites (2 Law-Related courses, one of which may be in progress at
time of application)  
Law-related courses include the following, as well as those approved by
Director:

  * Pol. Sci. 202 - American Government
  * Pol. Sci. 203 - Law in the Political Arena
  * Soc. 206 - Law & Society
  * Soc. 202 - Norms and Deviance

II. Core Courses (3 required)

  * Advanced Research Seminar I:   Researching Law and Society*
  * Advanced Research Seminar II:  Research Seminar on Law and Society (K grade given)*
  * Advanced Research Seminar III: Research Seminar on Law and Society*

III. Approved Electives (6 required)  
Other law-related courses may be approved by Director.  
African American Studies

  * 220 The Civil Rights Movement and Beyond
  * 330 Black Women in 20th-Century United States
  * 320 Social Meaning of Race
  * 332 Black Feminist Theories

Anthropology

  * 347  Political Anthropology: origins of the state; comparative political organization
  * 378   Law and Culture

Economics

  * 213  Economics of Gender
  * 250  Business and Government
  * 312 African American Economic History
  * 339  Labor Economics
  * 350  Monopoly, Competition, and Public Policy
  * 351  Law and Economics

Gender Studies

  * 210 Gender, Power, and Culture in America
  * 390 Topics in Gender Studies (often law related)
  * 397 Gender Theory

History

  * 318 1 & 2: Legal and Constitutional History of the United States
  * 301-1,2 Survey of African American History
  * 306-1,2 History of the American South

Legal Studies

  * 390 Topics in Legal Studies*
  * 394 Linkage Seminars in Legal Studies*
  * 396 Internship in Legal Studies *
  * 399 Independent Study in Legal Studies*

Linguistics

  * 324   Language and Law 

Philosophy

  * 265   Introduction to the Philosophy of Law
  * 150 Elementary Logic - I
  * 250 Elementary Logic - II
  * 260 Ethics
  * 263 Social and Political Philosophy
  * 360 Ethical Theory
  * 364 Principles of Political Philosophy

Political Science

  * 202   American Government 
  * 230   Introduction to Law in the Political Arena
  * 330   Politics of Local Justice
  * 331   Appellate Processes
  * 332   Constitutional Law I (judicial process; federalism; separation of powers)
  * 333   Constitutional Law II (civil and political rights)
  * 325   Legislative Process
  * 395   Jr/Sr Research Seminars (1-2 each year on law topics)
  * 201-1,2 History of Political Thought
  * 301 Moral Dilemmas and Political Theory

Psychology

  * 386 Stereotyping and Prejudice

Sociology

  * 202   Social Problems: Norms and Deviance
  * 206   Law and Society
  * 308   Sociology of Deviance and Crime
  * 318   Sociology of Law
  * 330   Law, Norms and Power
  * 215   Economy and Society
  * 302   Sociology of Organizations
  * 316   Economic Sociology

SESP

  * SOC POL 305   Law and Social Policy
  * SOC POL 310   Legal Aspects of Education

Medill

  * EDIT 370   Law and Ethics of Journalism

Speech

  * COMM ST 205 Theories of Persuasion
  * COMM ST 214 Legal Argumentation
  * COMM ST 215 Principles of Rhetorical Criticism
  * COMM ST 220 Theories of Argumentation
  * COMM ST 271 Race, Gender, and the Mass Media
  * COMM ST 321 Public Argumentation
  * COMM ST 330 1 & 2   Contemporary Problems in Freedom of Speech
  * COMM ST 362 Professional-Client Communication
  * RTV 331   Regulation of Broadcasting

International Studies

  * 202 International Ethics

* Denotes courses in Legal Studies that must be approved as new courses 

List of course numbers by area: (some courses listed in two areas)

  1. Theory/Philosophy: AF AM 332, GNDR 397, HIST 323, PHIL 265, PHIL 260, PHIL 263, PHIL 263, PHIL 360, PHIL 364, POL SCI 201-1,2, POL SCI 301
  2. Global/Comparative Perspectives: ANTHRO 347, ANTHRO 378, INTERNAT 202
  3. Institutions/Organizations/Economics: ECON 250, ECON 339, ECON 350, ECON 351, HIST 318-1,2; LEG ST 396, LING 324, POL SCI 230, POL SCI 330, POL SCI 331, POL SCI 332, POL SCI 333, POL SCI 325, SOC 202, SOC 206, SOC 308, SOC 318, SOC 330, SOC 215, SOC 302, SOC 316, SOC POL 305, SOC POL 310, EDIT 370 
  4. Law and Inequality: AF AM 220, AF AM 330, AF AM 320, AF AM 332, ECON 213, ECON 312, GNDR 210, GNDR 390, GNDR 397, HIST 301-1,2; HIST 306-1,2; PSYCH 386; COMM ST 271, SOC 206, SOC 202, SOC 308, SOC 330 
  5. Legal Argument/Communications: PHIL 150, PHIL 250, EDIT 370, COMM ST 205, COMM ST 214, COMM ST 215, COMM ST 220, COMM ST 271, COMM ST 321, COMM ST 330-1,2, COMM ST 362, RTV 331 

  
Minor in Legal Studies

The minor in Legal Studies exposes students to a range of course offerings in
Legal Studies, but does not require admission into or participation in the
Advanced Research Seminar.  Students qualify for the minor by satisfactorily
completing eight courses from the approved list of electives or requirements
for the major in Legal Studies posted on the web.  Additional law-related
courses approved in advance by the Director may be counted toward the eight
required courses.  Students are required to take one course from each of five
categories of electives: 1) Theory/Philosophy, 2) Global/Comparative
Perspectives, 3) Institutions/Organizations/Economics; 4) Law and Inequality,
and 5) Legal Argument/Communications.  The courses that fall in these five
areas are listed below. At least four courses must be at the 300 level.  Each
quarter the Center will post on the web what courses will meet area
requirements.  Students interested in a minor in Legal Studies should consult
with a program advisor in the Center for Legal Studies. Information is
available in the Weinberg College Office of Studies and the Center for Legal
Studies.  


**List of course numbers by area:** (some courses listed in two areas)

  1. Theory/Philosophy: AF AM 332, GNDR 397, HIST 323, PHIL 265, PHIL 260, PHIL 263, PHIL 263, PHIL 360, PHIL 364, POL SCI 201-1,2, POL SCI 301
  2. Global/Comparative Perspectives: ANTHRO 347, ANTHRO 378, INTERNAT 202
  3. Institutions/Organizations/Economics: ECON 250, ECON 339, ECON 350, ECON 351, HIST 318-1,2; LEG ST 396, LING 324, POL SCI 230, POL SCI 330, POL SCI 331, POL SCI 332, POL SCI 333, POL SCI 325, SOC 202, SOC 206, SOC 308, SOC 318, SOC 330, SOC 215, SOC 302, SOC 316, SOC POL 305, SOC POL 310, EDIT 370 
  4. Law and Inequality: AF AM 220, AF AM 330, AF AM 320, AF AM 332, ECON 213, ECON 312, GNDR 210, GNDR 390, GNDR 397, HIST 301-1,2; HIST 306-1,2; PSYCH 386; COMM ST 271, SOC 206, SOC 202, SOC 308, SOC 330 
  5. Legal Argument/Communications: PHIL 150, PHIL 250, EDIT 370, COMM ST 205, COMM ST 214, COMM ST 215, COMM ST 220, COMM ST 271, COMM ST 321, COMM ST 330-1,2, COMM ST 362, RTV 331 

  
---  
  
  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |  
  
[Undergraduates](/legalstudies/undergraduate) | [Certificate in Law and Social
Science](http://www.northwestern.edu/lss) | [JD/PhD Joint Degree
Program](http://www.northwestern.edu/graduate/academic/jdphd.html)  
[Northwestern Home](http://www.northwestern.edu/) | [Calendar: Plan-It
Purple](http://planitpurple.northwestern.edu) | [Sites
A-Z](http://www.northwestern.edu/webindex/) |
[Search](http://www.northwestern.edu/search/)  
1810 Chicago Avenue, Room 219  Evanston, IL 60208  
Phone: 847-467-2207  E-mail:
[dik192@northwestern.edu](mailto:dik192@northwestern.edu)  
Last updated 04/30/2002  [World Wide Web
Disclaimer](http://www.northwestern.edu/disclaimer.html) and [University
Policy Statements](http://www.northwestern.edu/policy.html)  (C) 2002
Northwestern University  
  
  
  | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)  
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) | ![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif) |
![](/shared/images/common/bit.gif)

