Constitutional Interpretation  [**Student Course
Guide**](http://www.princeton.edu/scg/) ![->](/~scg/pics/arrow.gif) [ Fall
1999](/~scg/html/departments.f99.shtml) ![->](/~scg/pics/arrow.gif)
[Politics](../f99.shtml) ![->](/~scg/pics/arrow.gif)
[315](/~scg/search/searchcourse.pl?q=POL+315) ![->](/~scg/pics/arrow.gif)
Student Review  
---  
  
_**This is an old review from Fall 1999. Information here may not be
accurate._**

### Constitutional Interpretation (SA)  
[RP George](/~scg/search/searchprof.pl?last=George&init=RP)  

[Fall 1999 Statistics](../315/stats.f99.shtml) (taught by RP George )  
Lectures:|  5.0 | Seminars:|  4.5 | Precepts/Classes:|  4.8 | Readings:|  4.8
| Papers/Exams:|  4.5 | Overall:|  4.9 | Enrollment:|  53

POL 315 - Constitutional Interpretation - is rumored to be the hardest A.B.
course at Princeton. That rumor could very well be true. However, for certain
students, Con. Interp. can be a rewarding challenge. The readings are fairly
demanding. The volume is not too much more than most 300-level politics
courses (about 300 pages per week). However, it is very dense, consisting
mostly of legal theory and Supreme Court opinions. The lectures are an hour
and a half long, and the precepts are two hours, but both only meet once a
week. Students must write a short paper (5 pages) and a longer moot court
opinion (10 pages). There is no midterm, but there is a final exam.

The course requirements are substantial but not overwhelming. The hard part of
this course is not keeping up with readings or understanding the concepts
diccussed; the grading is simply much more demanding than other courses. There
just are not many, if any, A's or A-'s given out, despite the high level of
effort and intelligence of most students. In fact, very few B+'s are awarded
either. Prof. Whittington might deny this, but the work required to earn a B
in Con. Interp. would get you an A in just about any other course at
Princeton. In short, if you cannot risk having a less than stellar grade on
your transcript, Con. Interp may not be for you. But taking risks is a crucial
part of a well-rounded education. If you have any interest in law, the
Constitution or the American legal system, Con. Interp. is a risk you must
take. I can honestly say that I have not taken any other course at Princeton
that I was more fascinated by or tried harder to excel in. Consequently, I
learned more in Con. Interp. than I did in any other course before or since.
If you've ever wondered if capital punishment constitutes "cruel and unusual
punishment" or how the Supreme Court created a "right to privacy" from the
Constitution, you need to take this course. Con. Interp. is critical to
understanding the rights and responsibilities mandated by American law.

Last fall Con. Interp. was taught by professor Whittington. His unassuming
personality contrasted nicely with the advanced material covered in lectures.
Precepts always seem to develop into lively discussions and debates. This
course has many juniors and seniors, but some brave sophomores did very well
also. Many students are pre-law, but that is certainly not necessary. An
interest in the Constitution is the only pre-requisite. Preceptors are easily
accessible after precept and during office hours.

Con. Interp. is a challenge. That is clear from day one. However, for anyone
who cares about the meaning of the Constitution and how that meaning has
changed over the last 200 years, missing this course would be a crime.

_Here is another view of this course submitted by a different reviewer:_

Politics 315 is an absolute must for anyone interested in law or
constitutional issues, regardless of whether you're planning to go to law
school. (For whatever it's worth, I was the only person in my precept not to
raise my hand on the first day when my preceptor asked who was thinking about
law school, and I'm now deciding when to take the LSAT.)

The course examines a different issue each week, covering everything from
"What is the constitution?" to the constitutional right to privacy. During
reading period there is the additional assignment of reading John Hart Ely's
book _Democracy and Distrust_, which has become a minor classic in its field
and is a great read.

This course was previously taught by Professor Whittington, who I found to be
a bit dry at times, but will be taken over next semester by Professor George
(Robbie to those who know and love him), who has taught 315 in the past and is
currently the professor for Civil Liberties. He said he will be using the same
casebook as last year, and the only major change in the syllabus is his plan
to spend a bit of time highlighting the issue of impeachment, in light of
recent events. And yes, Prof. George reassured me he would "maintain the
course's tradition of grading to a rigorous standard" and that students would
have to do "distinguished" work to merit a good grade. (Read: don't hold your
breath for an A. The rumors, unfortunately, are all true. They do give some
A's, but they are few and far between.)

Professor George is an excellent, engaging professor and definitely knows his
stuff, to put it mildly. If you hear anyone complaining about boring lectures,
this is sure to be remedied next semester. And don't be intimidated by
Princeton's reigning conservative if you happen to be a bleeding-heart
liberal; Professor George's main concern is not your political leanings but
rather how rigorously you are able to defend them. He is a bit hard to get a
hold of if you have questions outside of class, especially since he doesn't
check his e-mail, so be prepared to be persistent if you really want to take
something up with him.

I think 300 pages a week is a bit of a high estimate for the reading load; I
seem to remember it being more along the lines of maybe 150, 200 tops. For
those of you with some experience in the politics department, it's more
reading than a political theory course, but less than, say, a course in
international relations. The reading is a bit dense, and if you're reading
Supreme Court cases for the first time, it'll probably be slow going at the
beginning. Don't let this discourage you; you'll get the hang of it in a
couple weeks.

Class attendance really is a must, both in lecture and precept. Lecture
provides a good overview of the Court's position on various issues over time,
and highlights the important cases, including some which are not in the
reading. Precepts are almost always lively and go by quickly, despite their
abnormal (2 hour) length. I don't know who Professor George will have
precepting for him next year; I had Eric Mitnick and thought he was definitely
one of the better preceptors I've had in my time at Princeton.

The grading was based on a short (3-5 page) paper (5%), a moot court exercise
(30%), the final exam (50%), and precept participation (15%). The short paper
is due around midterm week and is really just supposed to give you an idea of
how you stand. Grades on the first paper were abominably low (I think the
average was a C or a C-), but don't let this scare you, as the grades on the
moot court are not quite so bad and the grading of the final exams was
considerably more generous.

One piece of general advice: your preceptor will probably tell you to brief
all the cases you read each week (basically just writing a summary of the
issues, the rulings, the dissents, etc.). Please learn from my mistake and DO
IT, rather than waiting until reading period to brief a zillion cases. It will
help you immensely in studying for the final, which is, after all, half your
grade.

To sum up, I highly recommend 315 to anyone who might be interested in
constitutional law. Yes, it's true that grades in this course are consistently
lower than in other politics courses, but please don't let this scare you
away. If you can stick it out, you will have spent 12 weeks covering some of
the most fascinating material the department has to offer. Plus it'll build
your character. _

* * *

comments: [(Add your comments)](comments.shtml)

* * *

Forget the comments on Whittington, all you really need to know is that George
is one of the best lecturers (actually, it's hardly a "lecture") and one of
the brightest professors in the politics department (that's why he now holds
an endowed position as McCormick Professor of Jurisprudence). If you can
accept the likely prospect of not getting a grade above a B (believe me, it's
worth it) this course is a great Princeton experience you shouldn't miss.

Semester Taken: Fall '99  
Professor: George  
User's major: Politics

_Sun Apr 16 02:01:00 EDT 2000_

* * *

For Pre-Law types: If you're concerned about "needing" this course to get into
Law School on the one hand, and the severe grade deflation on the other, rest
assured (from the experience of several Princeton alums) that you do NOT
"need" to take this course to get into some great law schools. If you feel the
need to signal your interest in law to admissions readers, you might consider
Law and Economics, Discrimination and the Law, or English Constitutional
History, for example. On the other hand, if you want a taste of law school,
this course might give you a good dose thereof.

Semester Taken:  
Professor:  
User's major: WWS

_Mon May 14 01:00:04 EDT 2001_

* * *

Okay, it's a known fact among anyone who has ever taken this course that Prof.
George is one of the best professors at Princeton. Only an hour and half every
week just isn't enough - I found myself wishing he would just keep talking
even though class was over. What people tend to overlook is that the material
in this course would be worth the grade deflation even if it were taught by
Bozo the Clown. I found myself reading ahead in this class instead of reading
to catch up in other classes. Precepts are awesome. Even the papers were fun
to write, and I spent far more time on my 2000 word court opinions than I have
on 30-page term papers. But I loved every minute of it - seriously. I had
never wanted to be a lawyer until I took this course. My only regret is that I
took it already so I don't have it to look forward to in my schedule next
year.

Semester Taken: Fall 2000  
Professor: The Incredible Robert George  
User's major: WWS

_Wed Apr 24 13:14:20 EDT 2002_

* * *

![](../../../pics/eyes.count?dept/pol/315/f99) 1590 Visitors

