    
**PLSC 151**

**Introduction to Comparative Politics**

Comparative Politics has a long and very distinguished history . . . One could
say that the study of Comparative Politics goes all the way back to
humankind's first recorded history - even to prehistory (Howard Wiarda. 1993\.
_Introduction to Comparative Politics: Concepts and Processes_ , p. 29).  


Contemporary politics presents a demanding agenda for the student of
comparative politics. In order to appreciate the complexity of politics and
political transitions in countries around the world, we must look beyond our
own immediate experiences (Mark Kesselman et al. 1996. _Comparative Politics
at the Crossroads_ , p. 3).  


The unleashed power of the atom has changed everything save our modes of
thinking, as we thus drift towards unparalleled catastrophe (Albert Einstein,
in Charles Hauss. 2000. _Comparative Politics: Domestic Responses to Global
Challenges_ , p. 515).

MWF 9:00 to 9:50

Fall 2000

Burnham 301

Instructor Elizabeth Paddock

Office Burnham 322

Phone Number 873-7308*

email [epaddock@lib.drury.edu](mailto:epaddock@lib.drury.edu)

Office Hours M 10-12; 2-4

T 3-4

W 10-11

T 3-4

And by appointment - please note that no appointments will be scheduled for
Fridays.  


*I have voice mail. If I am not in my office, please leave a message and I will return your call as soon as possible. Please do not 

call me at home.  


_INTRODUCTION_  


This course is designed as an introduction to the careful examination of the
political structures and political cultures of several countries. We will look
specifically at the constitutions, political cultures, and executive and
legislative branches of the United States, Canada, Mexico, the United Kingdom,
France, Japan, and China. We also will consider these countries' memberships
in regional political-economic organizations - NAFTA, the European Union, and
APEC.  
    
    


OBJECTIVES

The objectives of this course are

    * to introduce students to the study of comparative politics and its different meanings;

2\. to give students a grasp of basic knowledge about the political systems of
a number of countries;

  * to assist students with basic skills in reading, interpretation, and communication.

These objectives are part of a broader goal of the instructor: to encourage
students to a life-long interest in the politics of the United States and
other countries of the world.  


THE DRURY MISSION

These course objectives correspond with the mission and educational goals of
Drury University. In this class, we seek to "cultivate spiritual sensibilities
and imaginative faculties as well as ethical insight and critical thought" by
encouraging careful analysis of several different political models and the
specific countries which correspond with those models. We seek to "foster the
integration of theoretical and practical knowledge" by applying specific
theories to political institutions, structures, behaviors, and cultures of
different political systems. We also encourage students to seek an integration
between political systems, economic systems, ideological systems, and other
systems that define a culture. Finally, we seek to "liberate persons to
participate responsibly in and contribute to life in a global community" by
introducing the student to the varied components of citizenship and culture
within the context of different models of nationhood and international
interdependence.  
    
    


AMBIGUITY

In this class, we probably will raise more questions than answers. One of the
premises that students of political science must acknowledge is that politics
is ambiguous. The questions raised in this class are meant to initiate and
engage critical thought and discussion. We are not seeking to identify a/the
"Truth," but rather, we want to examine questions that may lead students to
better understand the truths of our societies - and that may help resolve some
of the conflicts that exist in today's world.  
    
    


_READINGS_

Students should complete the assigned readings before class, as these will
serve as the foundation for class discussion.  


Several texts are required for this class:  


Hacker, Diana. 2000. _A Pocket Style Manual_. Boston: Bedford

Books.

Kesselman, Mark, Joel Krieger, and William A. Joseph (Eds.).  


2000\. _Introduction to Comparative Politics_ (Second  


Edition). Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.

Soe, Christian. 2000. _Annual Editions: Comparative Politics_  


_00/01_. Guilford, CT: Dushkin/McGraw-Hill.  


These texts can be found in the student bookstore.  


In addition, each student must subscribe to _The Christian Science Monitor_.
The best way of keeping up with major issues and events is through the
subscription of a good national/international newspaper. Subscriptions are
available from the instructor. Payment will be made directly to _The Christian
Science Monitor._ This will be discussed in more detail in class.  


Students also will be required to read some materials that have been put
together in a packet. These packets are available from the instructor. The
syllabus, assignments, and other relevant materials can be found at the
instructor's web page. The address is "www2.drury.edu/epaddock/epaddock.html"
(do not use the quotation marks when typing in the address).  


_ASSIGNMENTS, EXAMS, AND GRADES_  


A student's grade will be determined on the basis of three in-class exams
(total 45 percent); a written assignment (25 percent); quizzes based on _The
Christian Science Monitor_ (15 percent); and attendance and participation (15
percent).  


Exam I October 2 | |

Exam II November 1 | 45% |

Exam III December 8 | |

Written Assignment November 29 25%

_Christian Science_

_Monitor_ quizzes Same dates as

regular exams 15%

Attendance/

Participation Daily 15%

*Seniors will take their third exams at the same time scheduled for other students. All students must attend the class scheduled for the final \- December 13 at 8:00 a.m. - for presentation of the written assignment.   


_Exams_ (45%). Students will be required to complete three in-class exams in
the semester. These exams will test students' knowledge and comprehension of
class materials, plus students' abilities to synthesize these materials. Tests
will cover readings, lectures, discussions, and contemporary issues. Exams
will include a few objective questions (i.e., multiple choice), and one or two
essay questions. Students should bring their notes and books with them on
those days when in-class exams are scheduled, as students may use these
materials in completing their exams.  


Multiple choice questions require students to choose the best response from
four (occasionally five) possible answers. Only one answer is correct. While
students are allowed to use their books and notes during the exam, students
are _strongly encouraged_ to study for the multiple choice part of the exam
beforehand. Essay questions require students to synthesize several ideas or
issues into a coherent composition. Responses to essay questions will be
graded according to the following criteria: accuracy, comprehension of
materials, organization of materials, and correct grammatical structure.  


The three exams will account for 45 percent of the total grade. The strongest
test score will count for 20 percent, the weakest score for 10 percent, and
the remaining score for 15 percent. If all three scores are identical, or
nearly identical, all three will count for 15 percent each.  


Students must take exams at the scheduled times. Students who miss an exam
must contact the instructor within 24 hours by email
([epaddock@lib.drury.edu)](mailto:\(epaddock@lib.drury.edu\)) or by telephone
(873-7308). Verification (e.g., a doctor's note) is necessary. All make-up
exams will consist of short essay questions. Dates of make-up exams will be
negotiated by the students who miss the original exam, and the instructor. All
students who miss an original exam must take the make-up at the same time.  


_Christian Science Monitor quizzes_ (15%). Students will subscribe to _The
Christian Science Monitor_. Specific articles will be chosen by the instructor
and/or the class and discussed regularly. Weekly assignments will be
distributed through email. Questions from the _Monitor_ readings will be
included in the regular exams, but will count separately from the exam grades.
Normally, there will be five multiple choice questions based on the _Monitor_
readings included in each quiz.  


_Written Assignment_ (25%). The written assignment will be part of a larger
class project that students will present at the time scheduled for the final
(Wednesday, December 13 at 8:00 a.m.) The first week of class, students and
the instructor will decide on two countries to be studied. Each student will
be assigned a particular subject relevant to one of the two countries, and
will be responsible for research on that one subject. For example, if the
class chooses to examine Peru as one of the two countries, one student will be
assigned to research the presidency of Peru, another the legislature of Peru,
a third would consider Peruvian political culture, another the Peruvian
economy, and so on. Each student is required to submit a 7-10 page paper that
examines the subject he or she has been assigned. Assignments will be made by
the instructor in consultation with each student.  


An outline is due Wednesday November 6. Students who wish may submit rough
drafts, but no later than Monday November 13 (to ensure that the paper is
returned to the student in sufficient time for corrections and rewrites). The
paper is due no later than Wednesday, November 29 at 9:00 a.m. Any papers
submitted after November 29 at 9:00 a.m. will be deducted five points for each
day late (i.e., November 29, 9:01 a.m. to November 30, 9:00 a.m.: 5 points;
November 30, 9:01 a.m. to December 1, 9:00 a.m.: 10 points, etc.). Absolutely
no papers will be accepted after 9:00 a.m. December 6. Papers found under the
instructor's door after class Monday November 29 will be counted as late. Any
student who anticipates _any_ conflict with this schedule should see the
instructor _IMMEDIATELY_. Students cannot submit final papers via email.  


The final paper must be 7-10 pages, typed (double-spaced) and must be
accompanied by citations and a bibliography of at least seven sources. Papers
will be graded according to the following criteria: completion of each
component of the assignment; appropriate research and sources; critical
analysis (i.e., has the student thought about the questions involved? Has he
or she considered some of the related issues?); organization of materials; and
correct grammar.  


Papers that are inconsistent with the assignment will receive a 0. PLEASE BE
SURE YOU UNDERSTAND THIS ASSIGNMENT. IF YOU DO NOT, PLEASE ASK.  


** _NOTE ON BIBLIOGRAPHY_ ** A student must use a minimum of seven different
sources in his or her paper. The instructor will place on reserve relevant
books held by the Olin Library. In looking for additional academic sources,
students should begin with "FirstSearch" and "EBSCOhost" (two online data
bases). The online guide of the Social Science Index also is an important
place to look. Students also might consider the CIA World Factbook
([www.odci.gov/cia/publications/factbook/](http://www.odci.gov/cia/publications/factbook/)
) for some background information. Students should _not_ use individuals' web
sites as sources; these almost always are biased, unobjective, and are not
academic. A student should not include more than three Internet sources in his
or her bibliography; the rest of the bibliography must include books and
articles from academic journals and publications. Such publications as
encyclopedia, _Time_ , _Newsweek_ , _People_ , _The National Enquirer_ and
other popular magazines are not academic sources and should not be included in
an academic paper. Students must use the APA style of documentation and
bibliographic citation (this will be discussed in class, but students can find
the appropriate style in Hacker's _A Pocket Style Manual_ ). Papers whose
bibliographies are presented in any other style will be deducted ten points.  


Students will present and discuss their papers in an informal class discussion
Wednesday December 13, 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m. Each student should plan on
five to seven minutes each in presenting his or her research. Students are not
required to use visual aids in their presentations, but they may do so if they
wish. Presentations will comprise 20 percent of the paper grade.  


_Attendance and participation_ (15%) _._ Students are required to attend class
regularly. Each student will receive one point per day for attendance.
Students also will receive one point per day for appropriate participation and
contribution to discussions. Students who miss a class \- for whatever reason
- will lose the one point for attendance and the one point for participation,
but may make up other assignments (e.g., in-class exams) after consulting with
the instructor and providing a doctor's note or other documentation. A student
who leaves class early for a doctor's appointment, a job interview, and so on,
will lose the one point for attendance, though he or she may obtain the one
point for participation depending on that person's contributions up to the
time he or she leaves class. Students are reminded to schedule doctors'
appointments, job interviews, and so on at times other than this class.  


_Final Grades._ Final grades will be based on the accumulation of scores at
the end of the semester. No letter grades will be assigned until the end of
the semester. Students who fall on the borderline of grades and who have shown
a "good faith" effort in class will be given the benefit of the doubt and the
higher grade. The following scale will be used in the assignment of letter
grades:  
    
    


97 - 100 A+ 77 - 79 C+

93 - 96 A 73 - 76 C

90 - 92 A- 70 - 72 C-

87 - 89 B+ 67 - 69 D+

83 - 86 B 63 - 66 D

80 - 82 B- 60 - 62 D-

59 and below F

70 - 100 Satisfactory

Below 74 Unsatisfactory  


60 or above Drop-pass after the first six weeks of class

Below 60 Drop-fail after the first six weeks of class  


A grade of C represents a satisfactory level of performance which can be
expected of any Drury student who gives a reasonable amount of time, effort,
and attention to the work of the course. Such satisfactory performance should
include familiarity with the concept of the course as shown by an acceptable
mastery of the information, concepts of skills involved, and regular
participation in the work of the class.  


A grade of B indicates a higher level of performance than the satisfactory
standard defined for a grade of C. It involves excellence in some aspect of
the work, such as completeness, accuracy, detail of knowledge, or effective
independent work.  


A grade of A involves a level of performance that is conspicuously excellent
in the factors indicated in the definition of B.  


A grade of D indicates below standard performance; it is acceptable toward
graduation only if offset by superior work in other courses.  


A grade of F . . . indicates an unacceptable level of performance (Drury
College 1999-2000 Academic Catalog, p. 26).  


Students may be offered occasional extra credit points for attending
convocation or other scheduled events.  


_Statement of Student Responsibility_  


Each student is responsible for his or her own behavior and work in this
class. Students who miss class and class assignments are responsible for
contacting the instructor. Make-up assignments are allowed only when students
provide sufficient justification (e.g., illness) and documentation (e.g., a
doctor's note). Students must turn in their own work for each assignment of
this class. While group discussions are encouraged, there are no group tests
or group papers in this class. Each student must turn in his or her own work.
Students who cheat on examinations or plagiarize written materials will
receive an automatic "0" for the assignment. Cheating includes (but is not
limited to) the following: the use of inappropriate or unacceptable materials
in the course of an examination (e.g., a textbook when not allowed); the
copying of answers off of a "cheat sheet" (e.g., a sheet of paper, one's hand
or shirt sleeve, a desk, etc.); the exchange and/or copying of answers between
two or more students; and consultations with other students during an
examination. Plagiarism includes (but is not limited to) the following: the
use of someone else's words as one's own in a paper or on an examination or
assignment; the failure to give credit to someone else's words or ideas in a
paper, on an examination, or in an assignment; and the copying of words,
numbers, ideas, etc., from a textbook, a novel, a newspaper, a monograph,
another student's paper, a radio or television broadcast, a letter, etc., and
the use of those words as one's own. Students are urged to review the
university's policies on academic honesty and integrity.  
    
    


_COURSE OUTLINE_  


This course will combine discussion and lecture. Most class periods will be
oriented around discussion of the day's reading. On occasion, the instructor
will lecture to provide students some background information for appropriate
discussion.  


The following course outline is an approximate schedule for the semester.
Every effort will be made to follow it as closely as possible. Any changes
will be announced in class.  


Key: KKJ = Kesselman, Krieger, and Joseph

Soe = Annual Editions: Comparative Politics

August 23 Introduction: What is Politics?  


August 25 Understanding Comparative Politics:

How did it start?

What does it entail?

At what will we look?

KKJ: Chapter 1  
    
    


August 28 The United States as Foundation:

Representative Democracy

Soe: #25: "What Democracy Is . . ."  
    
    
    
    


August 30 The United States: Constitutional History and Structures

KKJ: Chapter 7, pp. 287-300  


September 1 Political Culture

KKJ: Chapter 7, pp. 287-300  


September 4 LABOR DAY NO CLASSES  


September 6 Executive and Legislative Branches

KKJ: Chapter 7, pp. 301-308

Soe: #26: "Congress and the House of

Commons . . ."  


September 8 Elections and Political Parties

KKJ: Chapter 7, pp. 308-319

September 11 NAFTA

Packet: Preamble, Chapter 1 and Chapter 2  


September 13 Canada: The Constitution and Federalism

Packet: Brooks "Canada's Constitution"

"Ideological and Institutional Roots"

September 15 Canada: Political Culture

Packet: Brooks "The Social and Economic

Setting"  


September 18 Canada: Government Structures

Packet: Brooks "The Machinery of Government"  


September 20 Canada: Political Parties and Elections

Packet: Brooks "Parties and Elections"  


September 22 Mexico: Political Culture, History, and

the Revolution

KKJ: Chapter 9, pp. 377-402

Soe: #43 "Mexico is Changing . . ."  


September 25 Mexico: The Constitution and Structures of

Government

KKJ: Chapter 9, pp. 402-408  
    
    


September 27 Mexico: Political Parties and Elections

KKJ: Chapter 9, pp. 408-423  


September 29 Conclusions on NAFTA and its member countries  


October 2 FIRST EXAM

October 4 The European Union: Origins and Development

Packet: Hauss "The European Union"

Soe: #30 "The Untied States of Europe"  


October 6 The European Union: Institutions

Soe: #31 "A Survey of Europe"  


October 9 The United Kingdom: Constitutional Structures

KKJ: Chapter 2, pp. 27-50

Soe: #2 "Unwritten Rules"

#5 "The New Politics"  


October 11 The United Kingdom: Political Culture

Soe: #3 "There Will Always Be an England"  


October 13 FALL BREAK NO CLASSES

October 16 The United Kingdom: Government Structures

Question Time

KKJ: Chapter 2, pp. 50-62

October 18 The United Kingdom: Political Parties and

Elections

KKJ: Chapter 2, pp. 63-77  


October 20 France: The Revolution and the Constitution

KKJ: Chapter 3, pp. 79-92

Soe: #11 "The Odd Couple"  


October 23 France: The Revolution and Political Culture

KKJ: Chapter 3, pp. 92-104

Soe: #10 "A Survey of France"  


October 25 France: Government Structures

KKJ: Chapter 3, pp. 104-118

October 27 France: Political Parties and Elections

KKJ: Chapter 3, pp. 118-132  


October 30 Conclusions on the European Union and its

Member Countries  


November 1 SECOND EXAM  


November 3 APEC

Packet: "APEC - Introduction"

"APEC - Organization"  


November 6 Outlines due  


November 6 Japan: Political Culture, History, and the Constitution

KKJ: Chapter 5, pp. 187-210

Soe: #18 "Empty Isles . . ."  


November 8 Japan: Government Structures

KKJ: Chapter 5, pp. 211-224

Soe: #17 "Japan's Search for a New Path"  


November 10 Japan: Political Parties and Elections

KKJ: Chapter 5, pp. 224-239  


November 15 Authoritarian Government  


November 17-20 Marxism and Marxism-Maoism  


November 22-24 THANKSGIVING BREAK NO CLASSES  


November 27 China: Political Culture and the Constitution

KKJ: Chapter 11, pp. 485-512  


November 29 Written Assignments due  


November 29- China: The Communist Party and Party

December 1 Government

KKJ: Chapter 11, pp. 512-543  


December 4 Discussion of presentations  


December 6 Conclusions  


December 8 THIRD EXAM  


December 13

8:00 - 10:00 a.m. Presentations and Discussion  
    
    
  

Expository Writing in Political Science

  
  
  
  

The following points are offered as suggestions for clear writing in political
science and other fields. Keep in mind that the goal of expository writing is
to transmit clear and unambiguous meaning to the reader. Ambiguity has no
place in expository writing. Write as clearly and as simply as possible.  


  * Does the opening paragraph present a focused, organized introduction to the topic and the argument? Does it present a clearly defined and specific thesis?
  


  * Does the style reflect a thinking personality? Are ideas fully developed and explained?
  


  * Can the paragraphs be moved around at will (you should not be able to do this), or does each paragraph need to be exactly where it is? Does each successive paragraph build on its predecessors?
  


  * Are generalizations supported by examples? Are assertions supported by data or evidence?
  


  * Are the transitions between paragraphs and sentences clear and well defined?
  


  * Does each sentence and each paragraph pass the "so what" rule? Does the essay pass the "so what" rule?
  


  * Have descriptive words and phrases been chosen carefully? Do these words and phrases clarify a point, or do they "muddy the waters"?
  


  * Have the sentences been structured to emphasize the most important words and ideas?
  


  * Does the conclusion help the reader to recognize the value of having read this essay?
  


  * Is the essay free of punctuation problems, spelling mistakes, and grammatical errors?

