**HIST 300: HISTORIOGRAPHY  
SYLLABUS, Spring, 1998**

Carol Loats
Office Hours:  
Office: Psych 117                                                   MW 11-12,
W 3-4,T-Th 2-3 549-2348
and by appointment



**_Course Description_** :  
This course is an introduction to two intersecting and overlapping aspects of
the historian's craft. One aspect is historiography, which is the study of how
history has been written and is being written today; the other aspect is
historical methods, the methods used to do historical research and writing.

**_Course Objectives :  
_** 1) The course will provide opportunities to practice and become more aware
of the skills of history, through frequent writing assignments.

2) The course will help students learn how to read history written by others,
to understand the historiographical approaches and historical methods being
used by the authors, and to understand the assumptions and arguments of the
authors.

3) The course will promote student development of a critical historian's eye
to apply to historical works, analyzing their strengths, weaknesses,
arguments, and assumptions.

4) The course will provide opportunities to share insights and questions, and
provide and receive feedback, in small groups.

5) The course will provide opportunities to learn efficient research
techniques, i.e. to learn where and how to find information on a historical
topic.

6) The course will require students to complete a research project using
secondary sources, through which they practice interpretation of a single
historical event or problem from a variety of angles, and learn to evaluate
conflicting or competing analyses.



**_Readings_**

1) Conal Furay and Michael J. Salevouris, The Methods and Skills of History: A
Practical Guide, 1988, required. Below, this abbreviated as "F/S."

2) Mark T. Gilderhus, History and Historians: A Historiographical
Introduction, 3rd edition, 1996, required.

3) Anthony Brundage, Going to the Sources: A Guide to Historical Research and
Writing, 2nd edition, 1997, required.

4) Beverley Southgate, History: What and Why, 1996, listed as optional, but
most chapters will be required readings; available in the bookstore, and Xerox
copies (of portions) on reserve until then.

5) Jules R. Benjamin, A Student's Guide to History, 6th edition, 1994,
available in the bookstore and on reserve, is a useful general guide, and is
optional. Could help you with any history course.

6) After the Fact: The Art of Historical Detection, by Davidson and Lytle, 3rd
edition, 1992, is available for purchase. Each of you will be assigned one or
two chapters in this book, and those of you interested in US history may want
to purchase it. Purchase is optional, and a copy is also on reserve.

7) The styles used by historians are described in Turabian's A Manual for
Writers (6th edition, 1996), also available in the bookstore and on reserve.
Although you are required to follow this manual in your writing, purchase is
optional.

8) Other required readings will be on reserve in the library or handed out in
class.

**Note** : All reading and written assignments are to be completed _by the
date listed on the syllabus_ ; class discussions will often revolve around
them. Be aware that when syllabus indicates "as assigned," different students
may have different assignments. Further information about readings and written
assignments will be presented in class, in advance of due dates.

**_Daily schedule and Assignments_**

Unit I **INTRODUCTION**

January 14   Introduction; to the course

January 21   History: What, Why, arid What's Historiography?  
                    Read:    1) Furay/Salevouris, Ch, 1, 2, and 12 (for all assigned                                  chapters in this book work through all the exercises in your                                   head, and be prepared to defend your responses)   
                                  2) Gilderhus, Ch. 1  
                                  3) Southgate, Ch. 3  
                                  4) Brundage, Ch. 1 and 4

                   Write: F/S Ch. 2, Exercise A3 or B3, to hand in (You are to write a                     brief, well developed (2 to 4 paragraphs) historical essay in which                           you explain why events turned out as they did for either the fur                           trade, the first skirmish of the American Revolution, or Rent State,                           based entirely on material presented in the book.)



Unit II            **METHODS: Doing History**

January 28     a) Primary/Original Sources  
                     Read:      1) F/S, Ch. 8  
                                   2) primary source (handouts assigned)  
                                   3) Gilderhus, Ch. 6, as assigned  
                                   4) Brundage, Ch. 2, pp. 16-20  
                                   5) project instructions handout   
                      Write:    1) F/S Ch. 8, Exercise A3, to hand in  
                                   2) for your primary source, worksheets  

                       b) Traditional and Computer Resources

                       Read:   1) F/S, Ch. 3  
                                  2) Brundage, Ch. 2, pp., 20-28 and Ch. 3

                       Write: 1) for HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY, tentative, topic                                   choices due today, 6 PM; see separate handouts

February 4      Reading  History  
                       Read:     1) F/S, Ch. 4, 5, 6, 7, and 9  
                                     2) Brundage, Ch. 5, pp. 65-72

                       Write:    1) Ch. 9, Exercises Al and B1, to turn in  
                                    2) library worksheets

February 11                  From Research to Writing, and Unit Recap

                       Read:    1) F/S, Ch. 10  
                                    2) Gilderhus, Ch. 6, as assigned  
                                    3) Brundage, Ch. 5, pp. 72-82

                       Write:    1) for HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY: preliminary                                      bibliography due today, 6 PM (see separate handout)

                        Note: expect a unit quiz from this point on

Unit III **            HISTORIOGRAPHY: Understanding How History Has **
**Been and Is Being Written; Applying That As you Read**

February 18     Introduction to Historiography; Historical Writing in the
Distant                              Past  
                        Review: F/S, Ch. 12, Brundage, Ch. 1 & 4  
                        Read:       1) Southgate, Ch. 1, and Ch. 2, pp. 12-20  
                                       2) Gilderhus, Ch. 2  
                                        3) individual readings as assigned                    

                     Write:      1) worksheets on history-writing  
                                    2) worksheets on your assignment

February 25   Historical Writing through the 19th Century  
                      Read:     1) Gilderhus, Ch. 3  
                                    2) Brundage, Ch. 2, pp. 20-27  
                                    3) individual readings as assigned  
                                    4) Brundage, Ch. 4

                       Write:     1) worksheets on history-writing  
                                      2) worksheets on your assignment  
                                      3) for HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY: report on                                                book reviews and historiographical essays due today, 6                                                PM (see separate instructions)

March 4           Philosophies of History  
                        Read:  Gilderhus, Ch. 4 and 5, as assigned  
                        Write: for HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY: annotated                          bibliography due today for home teams, and due  
                         Friday to me, by 4 (see separate handout), for  
                         10% of your grade

March 11          Understanding and Categorizing Approaches  
                         Read:  1) Southgate,  
                                    2) review F/S, Ch. 7  
                                    3) Gilderhus, Ch. 7, as assigned  
                                    4) individual readings in _After the Fact_ as assigned

                           Write: 1) worksheets for your assignment  
                                     2) for HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY: book review                                       due today for home teams, and final version due                                                 Friday,4 PM, to me (10% of grade) 

                              NOTE: Be sure to sign up for your oral report date

March 18              Understanding and Categorizing Approaches (cont. )  
                             Read: review Brundage, Ch. 1  
                             2) Southgate, Ch. 4 and 5

                                    Write: for HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY: prospectus                                      (paper proposal) due today to home teams; due Friday, 4                                       PM, to me (5% of grade)

SPRING BREAK

April 1                         Approaches (cont.) and Historiography Unit
Recap  
                                      Do: 1) bring to class one of the books, or all your notes on                                                    one of the books, that you are going to use for your                                                    historiographical essay; this should probably not be                                                    the book you are using for your book review  
                                              2) Come to class prepared to work on your description                                                     of the historiography of your topic, and your thesis,                                                      in your home team

                                       Write: worksheets/report on the primary source you have                                                      selected for your topic  
                                        NOTE: Expect a unit quiz at any point from here on

Unit IV                           **BRINGING TOGETHER METHODS AND**
**HISTORIOGRAPHY**

April 8                            Writing

                                          Read : 1) F/S, Ch. 11  
                                                       2) review Benjamin, Gilderhus, etc. on writing  
                                          Write: 1) F/S, Ch. 11, Ex. A5 and B5, to turn in  
                                                       2) for HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY:                                                             description of historiography of your topic and                                                              your proposed thesis due today at 6 PM (5% of                                                              grade)

April 15                            Oral Reports  
                                           Drafts due and oral reports scheduled - stay tuned

April 22                            Unit Conclusions and Course Conclusions  
                                            Final Peer Review of Drafts

                                            Do: bring a nearly final version of your  
                                            HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY for use in home teams

April 24                             2 copies of final version of
HISTORIOGRAPHICAL                                             ESSAY due, 4 PM
(Note that this is not a class meeting )

April 29                             Final exam, 6 PM

**_Important Information_**

1) Your grade in this course will be based on the following components:

             10 % quizzes (there will be at least two unit quizzes)  
             10 % exercises, worksheets, preliminary bib, drafts for home teams, etc.  
             10 % 5 % each for thesis statement and prospectus for                                                       HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY  
             10 % final exam  
             20 % written HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY  
                5 % oral presentation of HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY  
             20 % 10% each for annotated bibliography and book review for                                     HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY  
              _15 %_ discussions (preparing, attending, contributing, reporting on your                          individual readings)  
             100 %

2) **Attendance is _EXPECTED_**. Attendance is absolutely MANDATORY for oral
presentations. You are expected to come on time and prepared to contribute to
intelligent and thoughtful discussions, and with drafts of written work for
your home team peer review. You are responsible (in quizzes, final exam, and
written work) for all material presented or discussed in class and covered in
the syllabus. Absences will affect your grade both directly and indirectly. If
circumstances arise which cause you to miss a class, notify me and come see
me. It is your responsibility to know about changes, sign-up sheets that have
circulated, and other things you may have missed.

3) Your **final paper/project** for this class will be a HISTORIOGRAPHICAL
ESSAY. It will be based on careful reading and critique of several (probably
five) books and a scholarly article about your topic. You will be asked to
present your insights orally, and also to prepare a polished written version.
Together these oral and written presentations count 25% (5 for oral, 20 for
written) of the final grade. Notice that several other steps toward completion
of the HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY are also graded, see "HISTORIOGRAPHICAL ESSAY"
in the schedule above, and watch for handouts on the various assignments.
Drafts of the final paper and various intermediate steps are due as indicated
above for review by your home teams, and your presence for this process counts
as part of your discussion grade. Presentation of drafts to your home team
counts as part of your exercises grade. It is important that you are present
to give and receive peer review in your home team.

4) I use checklists as I grade essay assignments. My checklists are available
to you ahead of time if you wish to see them before you complete your work.

5) Reminder: For this (and any) university-level course, you can expect to
work about 2 hours out of class for each hour in class. For a class meeting
only once a week, the big challenge is to work throughout the week, rather
than trying to cram 6 hours of work into the day of class.

6) **Plagiarism** is the act of using someone else's exact words, or
extensively paraphrasing someone else's ideas, as if they were yours (that is,
without giving credit to the author, book, or person you are "stealing" from).
Plagiarism is not allowed, and results in an F an assignment. You risk failing
the course as well.

7) **If you need assistance** in understanding anything on this syllabus, or
in fulfilling any of the requirements for the course, please see me. I hope to
see each of you regularly in my office as we explore history together. Any
student eligible for and needing academic adjustments or accommodations
because of a specific physical, psychiatric, or learning disability is
requested to speak with me about it _no later than the end of the second week
of classes_.

