[![TAMU-
CC](tamuhome.gif)](http://www.tamucc.edu)[![Syllabus](syl5302.gif)](http://www.tamucc.edu/~whatley/padm5302.htm)

![](redrule.gif)

## Policy Making and Public Administration  
PADM 5302  
  
Syllabus

##### Last Update: December 2, 1998

![](redrule.gif)

**INSTRUCTOR:** [Hugh Carter Whatley](http://www.tamucc.edu/~whatley/).

  * Office: Center for Instruction, Room 352. 
  * Telephone: 994-5997. 
  * FAX: 994-6098. 
  * E-mail: [whatley@falcon.tamucc.edu](mailto:whatley@falcon.tamucc.edu). 
**

OFFICE HOURS:** Monday-Wednesday-Friday, 9 to 10 AM; Monday-Wednesday, 11-12
AM; or by appointment.

**CLASS MEETINGS:**

  * Center for Instruction (CI), Room 102, Thursday, 7 to 9:30 PM, Fall Semester, 1998. 

**REQUIRED TEXTS:**

> Theodoulou, Stella Z. and Matthew A. Cahn. (1995). _Public policy: the
essential readings_. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

>

> Wilson, James Q. (1989). _Bureaucracy: what government agencies do and why
they do it_. New York: Basic Books.

**

OPTIONAL TEXTS:**

> Scott, Gregory M., & Garrison, Stephen M. (1995). _The political science
student writer's manual_. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

>

> Clark, Carol Lea. (1997). _Working the web: a student's guide_. Fort Worth,
TX: Harcourt Brace.

**OBJECTIVE:** The objective of this course is to show you different views of
how public policy is made in the United States so that in your future careers
you will be able to understand and influence the policy process.

**COURSE DESCRIPTION:** This course will study the relationship between
politics and administration. Special attention will be given to the influence
of administration and bureaucracy, legislative bodies, parties, political
leadership, interest groups and other forces in the formation and execution of
public policy in various levels of American government.

**E-MAIL:** Many of you will find it convenient to use E-mail to communicate
with me or with your classmates. You can also submit assignments by using
E-mail. You can [establish an
account](http://www.tamucc.edu/~labweb/helps/newuser.html) through the
university, or if you prefer, make arrangements with a commercial Internet
provider. Once you have done that, please send me an E-mail so that I will
have a record or your address. You also may want to review some of the
informal rules of "[Netiquette](http://www.fau.edu/rinaldi/net/index.htm)."

**

[LISTSERV](PADM5302/listserv.htm):** A listserv has been established for the
course. If you subscribe to the listserv, you can receive information of
general interest to all students via your E-mail. Information on how to
subscribe is posted on the Listserv Web page.

**EXAMS:** You will have a [mid-term examination](PADM5302/midterm.htm) due on
October 23, 1998 and a [final examination](PADM5302/final.htm) due on December
18, 1998. Both will be take-home exams.

**GRADING CRITERIA:** An average of 90 or above will earn an A; 80 to 89 a B;
70 to 79 a C; 60 to 69 a D; and below 60 an F. Grades will be rounded off to
the nearest whole number. The table below shows the weights of graded portions
of the course.

[Mid-term Exam](PADM5302/midterm.htm) |  20%  
---|---  
[Final Exam](PADM5302/final.htm) | 25%  
[Group Project](PADM5302/web5302.htm) | 15%  
Group Participation | 10%  
[Article Reviews](PADM5302/read5302.htm) | 10%  
Oral Reports | 10%  
Class Participation | 10%  
  
**WRITTEN WORK:** You have five formal written assignments for this course: a
[mid-term](PADM5302/midterm.htm), a [final](PADM5302/final.htm), a [group
project](PADM5302/web5302.htm) and two [article
reviews](PADM5302/read5302.htm). Your formal written work will be graded both
for form and substance. You must clearly express your ideas and show critical
thinking in your work. Use the recommendations in _The Political Science
Student Writer's Manual_ or a similar style manual for formats, punctuation,
etc. Expect a lower grade if you make grammatical errors or do not follow
instructions. You may have someone proof read your work before it is
submitted, or better, take it to the writing center for a critique. Remember,
your work must be your own, but there is nothing wrong with having someone
help you with it as long as you do not violate the university's plagiarism
policy.

[GROUP PROJECT](PADM5302/web5302.htm) **:** You will form groups of three to
six students to study a local issue. The intent of this assignment is to
provide a community service by educating the public on the issue. It will
require you to determine what is important and then to decide how to
communicate that to the public using the World Wide Web. Instructions on how
to design the Web page will be given in class. This project is due by 3 PM on
November 12, 1998.

**GROUP PARTICIPATION:** Your group participation grade will be given to you
by your fellow students. You will be divided into teams for the group project.
Each team member will give a class participation grade to each of the other
students in the team. This grade can be any score from 0 to 100. Your
individual grade will be the average of the grades assigned to you by your
classmates.

[ARTICLE REVIEWS and ORAL REPORTS:](PADM5302/read5302.htm) **** You are
required to write two essays analyzing articles assigned from the Theodoulou
and Cahn reader. You will also give an oral report in class over each of the
two articles. The essays must be turned in on a computer disk or sent by
E-mail in DOS text format one week prior to your oral presentation. They will
then be posted on the World Wide Web and linked to the reference to the
article in this syllabus. Article reviews by students in previous sections are
posted in the course [archives](PADM5302/archive.htm).

**CLASS PARTICIPATION:** Your class participation grade requires you to send
an E-mail to the class with a substantive comment on each of two article
reviews. The comments should be one or two paragraphs suggesting how the
article reviewed relates to other course materials. The intent of the
assignment is for you to provide you classmates with ideas they can
incorporate into their article reviews. These comments must be made prior to
December 11, 1998.

**GROUP EFFORTS:** Group study sessions are one of the best ways to master the
ideas in this course; however, group efforts are forbidden while you are
writing your exams. As stated above, your written work must be your own.

![](redrule.gif)

### CLASS SCHEDULE:

**Week 1:** September 3, 1998

  * There are no readings for this week. 

**Week 2:** September 10, 1998

  * Wilson: Chapter 1, "Armies, Prisons, Schools." and Chapter 2, "Organization Matters." 

**Week 3:** September 17, 1998

  * Wilson: Chapter 3. "Circumstances." 
  * Wilson: Chapter 4, "Beliefs." 
  * Wilson: Chapter 5, "Interests." 
  * Wilson: Chapter 6, "Culture." 

**Week 4:** September 24, 1998

  * Wilson: Chapter 7, "Constraints." 
  * Wilson: Chapter 8, "People." 
  * Wilson: Chapter. 9, "Compliance." 

**Week 5:** October 1, 1998

  * Wilson: Chapter 10, "Turf." 
  * Wilson: Chapter 11, "Strategies." 
  * Wilson: Chapter 12, "Innovation." 
  * Theodoulou: [Theodoulou, "The Contemporary Language of Public Policy."](PADM5302/theo01e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Sabatier. "Political Science and Public Policy."](PADM5302/theo02e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Lowi. "Distribution, Regulation, Redistribution: The Functions of Government."](PADM5302/theo03e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Edelman. "Symbols and Political Quiescence."](PADM5302/theo04e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Salisbury, "The Analysis of Public Policy."](PADM5302/theo05e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Dahl. "With the Consent of All."](PADM5302/theo06e.htm) 

**Week 6:** October 8, 1998

  * Wilson: Chapter 13, "Congress." 
  * Wilson: Chapter 14, "Presidents." 
  * Wilson: Chapter 15, "Courts." 
  * Wilson: Chapter 16, "National Differences." 
  * Theodoulou: [Heclo. "Issue Networks and the Executive Establishment."](PADM5302/theo07e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: Miliband. "Imperfect Competition." 

**Week 7:** October 15, 1998

  * Wilson: Chapter 17, "Problems." 
  * Wilson: Chapter 18, "Rules." 
  * Wilson: Chapter 19, "Markets." 
  * Wilson: Chapter 20, "Bureaucracy and the Public Interest." 
  * Theodoulou: [Truman. "Group Politics and Representative Democracy."](PADM5302/theo09e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Mills. "The Power Elite."](PADM5302/theo10e.htm) 

**Week 8:** October 22, 1998

  * Class will not meet. 
  * Your take-home [mid-term examination](PADM5302/midterm.htm) is due by 3 PM on Friday, October 23, 1998. 

**Week 9:** October 29, 1998

  * Wilson: None. 
  * Theodoulou: [Theodoulou, "How Public Policy is Made."](PADM5302/theo11e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Cobb and Elder. "Issues and Agendas."](PADM5302/theo12e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Kingdon. "Agenda Setting."](PADM5302/theo13e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Lindblom. "The Science of Muddling Through."](PADM5302/theo14e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Schulman. "Nonincremental Policy Making."](PADM5302/theo15e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Bardach. "The Implementation Game."](PADM5302/theo16e.htm) 

**Week 10:** November 5, 1998

  * Wilson: None. 
  * Theodoulou: [Majone and Wildavsky. "Implementation as Evolution."](PADM5302/theo17e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Sabatier and Mazmanian. "A Conceptual Framework of the Implementation Process."](PADM5302/theo18e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: Nachmias. "The Role of Evaluation in Public Policy."
  * Theodoulou: [Nagel. "Trends in Policy Analysis."](PADM5302/theo20e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Rubin. "The Politics of Public Budgets."](PADM5302/theo21e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Cahn. "The Players: Institutional and Noninstitutional Actors in the Policy Process."](PADM5302/theo22e.htm) 

**Week 11:** November 11, 1998

  * Your Group Project is due by 3 PM on Friday, November 12, 1998. 
  * Wilson: None. 
  * Theodoulou: [Fiorina. "Congress: Keystone of the Washington Establishment. "](PADM5302/theo23e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Mayhew. "Congress: The Electoral Connection."](PADM5302/theo24e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Light. "The Presidential Policy Stream."](PADM5302/theo25e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Wildavsky. "The Two Presidencies."](PADM5302/theo26e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Wilson. "The Rise of the Bureaucratic State."](PADM5302/theo27e.htm) 

**Week 12:** November 18, 1998

  * Wilson: None. 
  * Theodoulou: [Weber. "Bureaucracy."](PADM5302/theo28e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Meier. "Regulation: Politics, Bureaucracy, and Economics."](PADM5302/theo29e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Baum. "Appellate Courts as Policy Makers."](PADM5302/theo30e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: Glazer. "Towards an Imperial Judiciary?"
  * Theodoulou: [Iyengar and Kinder. "News that Matters."](PADM5302/theo32e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Graber. "Processing the News: How People Tame the Information Tide."](PADM5302/theo33e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: Eldersveld. "Parties, the Government, and the Policy Process." 

**Week 13:** November 25, 1998

  * Class will not meet. 

**Week 14:** December 3, 1998

  * Wilson: None. 
  * Theodoulou: [Berry. "The Advocacy Explosion."](PADM5302/theo35e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Sabato. "The Consultant Corps."](PADM5302/theo36e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Cahn. "Playing the Policy Game."](PADM5302/theo37e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Rogin. "Political Repression in the United States."](PADM5302/theo40e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Neustadt. "Presidential Power."](PADM5302/theo43e.htm)
  * Theodoulou: [Edelman. "Constructing the Political Spectacle."](PADM5302/theo44e.htm) 

**Week 15:** December 10, 1998

  * Wilson: None. 
  * Theodoulou: Dahl. "A Preface to Economic Democracy."
  * Theodoulou: Domhoff. "Who Rules America Now?" 

**Finals Week:** December 14-18, 1998

  * Your [final examination](PADM5302/final.htm) will be due by 3 PM on Friday, December 18, 1998. 

![](redrule.gif)

![](/cgi-bin/Count.cgi?md=5&dd=D&df=padm5302.data&ft=0)

