|  |  |  
---|---|---|---  
|

[Home](../index.html) | [Twenty-First Century
Landscape](http://www.siu.edu/~jadams) | [Site Map](sitemap.html)  
[Anthropology Dept.](http://www.siuc.edu) | [SIU ](http://www.siuc.edu)

|  |  
---|---|---  
|  |  
  
![](../images/logo3.gif) |  |  |  
  
Jane Adams, Faner 3539  
Office hours: 11:00-11:50 MWF and by appointment  

Phone 453-5019  
email: jadams@siu.edu  
  

**ANTH. 310G/ 470G PEOPLES AND CULTURES OF NORTH AMERICA  
**

**SPRING 2002  
**

**1:00-1:50 MWF, FANER 351** 5  
  

This course deals with peoples living in North America in the twentieth
century. As with any region as large as this, it is impossible to do full
justice to all its many peoples. Somewhat arbitrarily, the course is divided
into 4 units: Immigration/Frontiers, American Indians, African-Americans, and
Rural America.  
  

In each unit, we will read several important ethnographies. We will read these
works on a number of levels:  
  

* for the descriptions and information they contain   

* for their theoretical and stylistic preoccupations, and   

* for the historic period in which they were written.   
  

That is, we will read them both as sources of information about life in North
America, and as documents that can help us understand the history of
anthropological thought.  
  

In order to keep the reading to a manageable amount, each student will read
and write a critical summary of one ethnography in each unit. These summary
essays will include a search for and summary of reviews and other commentaries
that have been written of the assigned ethnography. Papers will be shared with
other members of the class, and presented for class discussion.  
  

**REQUIREMENTS:**  
  

**1\. Attendance:** The content of this course is based on student
participation. Attendance is therefore critical. Students are required to
attend all classes. You are allowed three (3) absences without penalty. **YOU
WILL LOSE 1/3 (ONE-THIRD) LETTER GRADE FOR EACH CLASS YOU MISS IN EXCESS OF
THREE ABSENCES.**  

  

2\. Writing. You will read four ethnographies, do a thorough search for
reviews and commentaries that have written about these ethnographies, and
write a 5-10 page (1250-2500 word) critical review of each ethnography.
Reviews are due on the date assigned. **YOU WILL LOSE ONE LETTER GRADE FROM
YOUR REVIEW FOR EACH DAY (MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY) THE PAPER IS LATE**.  

**3\. Grading** :  

  * 4 critical reviews (with associated research) @ 20% each . .80%  

  * Oral discussion of the review, 4 @ 5% each . . . . . . . . . . 20%  

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . .100%  
  
**Instructions for critical review**.  
  
1\. Select book to be read and reviewed, as approved by instructor  

2\. Search relevant indexes (digital and hard copy) for reviews, critical
commentaries, and background on the author.  

3\. Order items that are not in Morris Library's holdings. Do this early as it
often takes several weeks to receive materials through interlibrary loan or
fax services.  

4\. Read and take notes on the book and reviews, etc.  

5\. Use "face sheet" and "Instructions for Critical Reviews" as a study and
writing guide.  

6\. Write your review as clearly and concisely as possible.  

7\. Turn in two copies of a double-spaced version of the paper, along with
copies of all reviews and your notes on the assigned date (see Class Schedule)  

8\. email a copy of your paper to all students in the class.  

9\. Students should read the reviews mailed to them for discussion.  

10\. Orally present your review on date assigned.  

11\. Participate in discussions of classmate's reviews.  
  
**Schedule**  

Week 1, Jan. 14. Introduction, including "how to do research"  

Select books for first unit, "Immigration"  

Week 2, Jan. 23, 25. Overview of peoples and cultures inhabiting North
America.  

Week 3, Jan. 28. Begin discussion of Immigration  

Week 4, Feb 4. Begin discussion of Immigration.  

First critical reviews due Feb. 6, Feb. 8, as assigned.  

Week 5, Feb. 11. All remaining critical reviews due Feb. 11.  

Week 6, Feb. 18. Finish Immigration unit.  

Week 7, Feb. 25. American Indian Unit begins. Critical reviews due March 2.  

Week 8, March 4., American Indian  

Week 9, March 11.. Spring Break  

Week 10. March 18. Finish American Indian  

Week 11. March 25. African American Unit begin. Critical reviews due March 30.  

Week 12. April 1. African American  

Week 13. April 8. African American  

Week 14. April 15. Rural America Unit begin. Critical reviews due April 20.  

Week 15. April 22. Rural America.  

Week 16. May 29. Rural America and wrap up.  

|  
  
|

[Back to 310G Syllabus  
  
](anth310g.html)[Instructions for Critical Reviews](anth310g_instr.html)  
  
[Book Assignments- Immigration](310g_immigration.html)  
  
[Book Assignments - American Indians](310g_indians.html)  
  
[Book Assignments - African Americans](310g_blacks.html)  
  
[Book Assignments - Rura](310g_rural.html)l  
  
[Schedule of Reports  
](310g_reprt_sch.html)  
[Back to course page](coursespage.html)

|  
---|---  
|  
  
|  |  |  |  |

