[English 570.001](http://www.tamu-commerce.edu/coas/litlang/bolin/Eng570.html)
Strategies in Composition, Summer I 1997  
[Bill Bolin  
](mailto:Bill_Bolin@tamu-commerce.edu)Office & Hours: HL 314, Mondays and
Tuesdays 3:00-5:00 and by appointment.  
Telephone: 886-5272 (office) or 886-3604 (home)

Course Description / Course Objectives / Assignments / Evaluation / Attendance
/ Plagiarism / Calendar

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

This course will give you the opportunity to explore the boundaries of
composition studies, possibly redefine those boundaries, and certainly
discover and develop new strategies to work within those boundaries when
writing or teaching writing. You'll have the opportunity to review current
literature on composition studies and to provide your own written and oral
insights. Two textbooks are required:

  * Gradin, Sherrie L. _Romancing Rhetorics: Social Expressivist Perspectives on the Teaching of Writing_. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook Heinemann, 1995.
  * Heilker, Paul. _The Essay: Theory and Pedagogy for an Active Form_. Urbana, IL: NCTE, 1996.

These books are on reserve at the circulation desk:

  * Berlin, James A. _Rhetoric and Reality: Writing Instruction in American Colleges, 1900-1985_. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1987.
  * Helmers, Marguerite H. _Writing Students: Composition Testimonials and Representations of Students_. New York: State U of New York P, 1994.
  * Owens, Derek. _Resisting Writings (and the Boundaries of Composition)_. Dallas: Southern Methodist UP, 1994.
  * Petraglia, Joseph, ed. _Reconceiving Writing, Rethinking Writing Instruction_. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 1995.
  * Phelps, Louise Wetherbee, and Janet Emig, eds. _Feminine Principles and Women's Experiences in American Composition and Rhetoric_. Pittsburgh: U of Pittsburgh P, 1995.

Moreover, this class requires you to realize boundaries of that discipline
called composition studies. These boundaries are formed, to a great extent, by
the published material in the field, and you will explore those publications
in both print and electronic versions. Thus, you will secure an e-mail address
(provided free by the university if you don't already have one), and we will
meet in the Communications Skills Center regularly to access the Internet.

back to the top

**COURSE OBJECTIVES**

*to get a sense of the histories and the possible disciplinarity of composition studies  
*to ponder the possible purposes and contents of a writing course  
*to recognize diverse writing styles and rhetorical situations  
*to develop strategies for writing and teaching writing 

**ASSIGNMENTS**

**Reviews:** You'll review two journal articles per week, addressing the topic
of that week. When you've found a fairly recent article or document that fits
the topic and your interest, review that article or document on a 4X6 card. On
one side of the card, put your name, the bib info (MLA style), and a summary
of the article or document. On the other side of the card, write evaluative
comments about the article or document. Address its usefulness to you and its
general strengths and weaknesses. These reviews will be the basis for class
discussion when they are due, generally on Thursdays.

**Response papers:** You'll turn in 2-3 pages (typed, double-spaced)
describing your reactions to some part of the reading for that Monday. This is
not a check to see if you've done the reading. It is, rather, an opportunity
for you to use the reading as a starting place to (re)consider your
perceptions of the boundaries of composition and strategies that recognize
those boundaries. It is up to you to decide what part(s) of the assigned
reading you will write about.

**Journal:** You won't turn this in, but you should log questions and comments
on paper as you do the reading for this class (assigned or otherwise). Then
you'll have some material to refer to during class discussions. You'll also
have a partial record of your thoughts to refer to later on.

**Seminar paper:** This will be a 5-10 page (typed, doubled-spaced) somewhat
sophisticated draft exploring some aspect(s) of writing theory and/or
pedagogy. You'll use external data to foreground your argument and your
reasoning. You will each have an opportunity to tell the rest of us about your
paper on the last class day.

Use [MLA guidelines](http://155.43.225.30/mla.htm) on all the writing that you
turn in. Also, as a rule I do not accept late assignments.

back to the top

**EVALUATION**

Although I will write comments on your papers and reviews, these comments will
not include a grade. During the third and fifth weeks, you'll receive written
reports from me on the quality of your work up to that point. If I feel before
those times that your work is not satisfactory, I will alert you so that we
can determine appropriate action to improve your work. Feel free to see me
during office hours or to make an appointment if you'd like to talk about your
progress.

You will, of course, receive a letter grade at the end of the term.

**ATTENDANCE**

I don't anticipate any attendance problems. If you must miss a class session,
call me at one of the above numbers and make satisfactory arrangements for
turning in any work due that day. Your final grade will drop one letter for
each absence after two.

**PLAGIARISM/ACADEMIC DISHONESTY STATEMENT**

Plagiarism is a serious offense that involves misrepresenting one's written
work in a deceitful fashion. Academic dishonesty applies to any situation in
which the student attempts to take credit where such credit has not been
earned according to the criteria of the assignment. These terms will come up
as we discuss theories of writing and pedagogy. Any student involved in
plagiarism or academic dishonesty must resubmit an honest version of the
assignment in question, subject to my approval, to avoid receiving a grade of
F for the course.

back to the top

**CALENDAR**

**JUNE**

**2 M** intro to class

**3 T** introductions to Berlin and Owens

**4 W** introductions to Gradin and Heilker

**5 R** two article reviews on schools of thought within composition/rhetoric
due for class discussion

**9 M** Gradin, chap. 1  & 2; response paper due

**10 T** Helmers, chap. 1

**11 W** Petraglia, chap. 1 (Connors)  & 2 (Goggin)

**12 R** two article reviews on history of composition/rhetoric due for class
discussion

**16 M** Gradin, chap. 3  & 4; response paper due

**17 T** Gradin, chap. 5

**18 W** Owens, chap. 5

**19 R** two article reviews on expressivism due for class discussion

**23 M** Gradin, chap. 6  & 7; response paper due

**24 T** Phelps  & Emig, chap. 1 (Ashton-Jones) & 3 (Bridwell-Bowles)

**25 W** Heilker, preface  & chap. 1--3

**26 R** two article reviews on feminist discourse due for class discussion

**30 M** optional conferences for seminar paper

**JULY**

**1 T** Heilker, chap. 4

**2 W** Heilker, chap. 6  & afterword

**3 R** seminar papers due

back to the top

