![](banner_h.gif)

* * *

**Gregory J. W. Urwin**

![](gurwin.jpg)  
    


**GREGORY J. W. URWIN** (Ph.D., University of Notre Dame),   Professor of
History, Graduate Chair.
[gurwin@unix.temple.edu](mailto:gurwin@unix.temple.edu)

**Research and Teaching Interests:**   U.S. Military History, War of
Independence, Civil War, Indian Wars, World War II, U.S. Marine Corps  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


![](ColUrwin.jpg)**Personal Statement:  ** I am a military historian with an
interest in the armed forces of the United States and Great Britain.  My
research has emphasized the American Revolution, American Civil War, America's
Indian Wars, and World War II in the Pacific.  My earlier work consisted of
traditional "drum and bugle" military history -- battles, campaigns, and
military biography.  Since the late 1980s, however, I have taken more of an
interest in the "New Military History," which focuses on the political,
sociological, institutional, and cultural aspects of war.  This has led me to
look more closely at the experiences of  ordinary soldiers and the history of
African Americans in uniform.  I am currently working on a book about the
defenders of Wake Island as prisoners of war during World War II.  The Wake
Islanders enjoyed one of the highest survival rates of any group of Caucasian
troops taken by the Japanese, and I will try to identify and explain the
reasons for their good fortune.  After that, I plan to go back in time and
tackle research projects relating to the American Civil War and War of
Independence.

**(Left) Professor Urwin commanding the 1st Battalion, Frontier Brigade, at
the Battle of Shiloh Reenactment, near the original Shiloh battlefield in
western Tennessee, April 1997.   (Photo courtesy James Neel)  (Below) Urwin on
the set of _Glory._ (Photo courtesy Ronnie A. Nichols)**

![](civil_nichols.jpg)  
    
    
    
    
    
    


![](pages.gif)**Representative Publications:**

"The Army of the Constitution:  The Historical Context," in Max G. Manwaring,
ed., _". . . To Insure Domestic Tranquilty, Provide for the Common Defense . .
.":   Papers from the Conference on Homeland Protection_ (2000).

Co-Editor (with Cathy Kunzinger Urwin), _History of the 33d Iowa Infantry
Volunteer Regiment, 1863-6,_ by A. F. Sperry (1999).

_Facing Fearful Odds:   The Siege of Wake Island_ (1997).

"'We Cannot Treat Negroes . . . as Prisoners of War':  Racial Atrocities and
Reprisals in Civil War Arkansas," _Civil War_ _History_ (1996).

_Wake Island in World War II:   An Annotated Bibliography_ (1996).![](cv.jpg)

"'The Lord Has Not Forsaken Me and I Won't Forsake Him':  Religion in
Frederick Steele's Union Army," _Arkansas Historical Quarterly_ (1993).

"Custer:  The Civil War Years," in  Paul A. Hutton, ed., _The Custer Reader_
(1992).

"The Defenders of Wake Island and Their Two Wars, 1941-1945," _Prologue:
Quarterly of the National Archives_ (1991).

_The United States Infantry:   An Illustrated History, 1775-1918_ (1988).

Editor, _Custer and His Times:   Book Three_ (1987).

_The United States Cavalry:   An Illustrated History_ (1983).

_Custer Victorious:   The Civil War Battles of General George Armstrong
Custer_ (1983).  


![](FFO.jpg)  


Professor Urwin received the 1998 General Wallace M. Greene, Jr., Award from
the Marine Corps Heritage Foundation for _Facing Fearful Odds:   The Siege of
Wake Island_, as well as the 1997 Harold L. Peterson Award from Eastern
National for "'We Cannot Treat Negroes . . . . as Prisoners of War':  Racial
Atrocities and Reprisals in Civil War Arkansas."  He is also the recent
recipient of a Marine Corps Heritage Foundation Research Grant.  He has been a
Fellow of the Company of Military Historians since 1992.  Professor Urwin
serves as the general editor of a new book series, "Campaigns and Commanders,"
published by University of Oklahoma Press.  "Campaigns and Commanders" will
blend traditional operational history and military biography with the "New
Military History." A long-time devotee of living history, Professor Urwin
helped make the Oscar-winning Civil War epic, _Glory_ , and recently retired
as a field officer in the Frontier Brigade, the largest Union Civil War
reenactment unit west of the Mississippi River.  
    
    
  

![](usinfantry.jpg)          ![](sperry_iowa.gif)

* * *

**DR. URWIN'S PERSONAL PAGES**

[Facing Fearful Odds:  The Siege of Wake Island](ffo.htm)

[History of the 33d Iowa Infantry Volunteer Regiment, 1863-6](sperry.htm)  


* * *

**DR. URWIN'S CLASS PAGES (FALL 2002)**

**HIST. 0107   WORLD WAR II**  
![](gu_hrh.jpg)  
[Course Syllabus](WW2Syb.html)

[Book Review Choices](WW2Bib.html)

[Textbook Terms and Essay Questions](WW2Essays.html)

[Table of Organization, U.S. Infantry Division, July 15, 1943](tousinf.htm)

[Table of Organization, German One-Tank Regiment Panzer
Division](panzerto.htm)

[Red Army Organizational Tables](redarmytos.htm)

[How to Write a Book Review](BookReview.htm)  


**W386.   WRITING SEMINAR IN AMERICAN HISTORY**

[Syllabus](W386Syb2002.htm)

**HIST. 0976   DISSERTATION COLLOQUIUM** ****

[Syllabus](DissCollSyb02)

* * *

( **Above)   Dr. Urwin (at left) with His Royal Highness, Charles, Prince of
Wales, when they**  
**were both young and single in 1977.   (Photo courtesy Claudette Tischler)**

* * *

  
![](gregosh1.jpg)

**Dr. Urwin lectures on Confederate war crimes against black Union troops and
runaway slaves**  
**during the Poison Spring Seminar at the Old State House Museum in Little
Rock, Arkansas,**  
**January 2002.    (Courtesy Old State House Museum)**  

* * *

  
Return to the [faculty](http://www.temple.edu/history/faculty.html) list.  
Return to the [Temple History Web Page.](http://www.temple.edu/history)

  
  

