WWW Autonomous Robotics Hints and Kinks

### Helpful Hints for Senior Design Experience

#### John C. Gallagher  
  
---  
![](../../../common_graphics/bar_green_l.gif)

#### Introduction

This document is a collection of hopefully useful information for people
taking CEG 498 (Design Experience) at Wright State University. It is not meant
to replace common sense or stifle your own creativity. Neither is it intended
to be an exhaustive survey of project management techniques. It is, rather,
intended to provide practical hints as well as reasonable warnings about
problems you may encounter. Both hints and warnings are drawn from
observations of the successes and failures of various project design
experience project groups.

Topics are presented roughly in the order they will become important in the
class and are posed in the form of answer/question pairs. You are encouraged
to read the whole document from beginning to end. You are advised to read the
class syllabus before digging into this document. Some of the advice won't
make much sense unless you understand class policies. So, without further
ado.... the questions....

#### What is CEG 498 and what do I need to do to earn a good grade?

Knowing what you're up against is a good first step in deciding how to
proceed. This is as true for academic course work as it is for anything else.
CEG498 is an engineering practicum for which we accept the following
definition:

> A practicum is a setting designed for the task of learning a practice. In a
context that approximates a practice world, students learn by doing, although
their doing usually falls short of real-world work. They learn by undertaking
projects that simulate and simplify practice; or they take on real-world
projects under close supervision. The practicum is a virtual world, relatively
free of the pressures, distractions, and risks of the real one, to which,
nevertheless, it refers. It stands in an intermediate space between the
practice world, the "lay" world of ordinary life, and the esoteric world of
the academy.

>

> \- Donald Schon in _Educating the Reflective Practitioner : Toward a New
Design for Teaching and Learning in the Professions_

So, what does this definition mean for you? Basically, it means that CEG 498
is a "learn by doing" experience. There will be no formal lectures that tell
you what you need to know to solve your problems. By now, you should have
sufficient technical skill to address meaningful engineering problems --
especially since in this endeavor you're choosing the problem to be solved.
The point of this class is to apply those skills to the solution of a problem
that approximates what you might be faced with in the real world. You will
have to formulate your problem, decide what skills and resources you have at
your disposal, and plan an approach that enables your group to deliver an
effective product on a tight schedule. The instructor will NOT manage your
project for you. The point is for you to discover how to manage yourselves.

The key to a "good grade" in this class is a proactive attitude toward your
work. It will simply not be possible to sit back and passively wait for an
instructor to tell you what to do. Though your work will be formally evaluated
(see the class syllabus) -- no one will follow you around giving approval or
disapproval for every decision you need to make. It is your job to critically
evaluate your own decisions and efforts. It is your job to find out what you
need to know and to secure that knowledge. It is your job to ensure that your
work is progressing in a timely manner. It is your job to record your efforts
so that you, the instructor, and other students that come after you can
benefit from your experience.

From the above it may seem you can expect nothing from the instructor. That
really isn't true. You can request and get advice (maybe too much advice),
help in locating and securing materials and physical resources, contacts with
domain experts to answer questions, lab space, meeting space, and pots of
coffee. The key is that you have to request the help. The project is your
responsibility. For purposes of the class, it might be good to view the
instructor as a "benevolent member of upper management" who has an active
interest in your success -- but not the inclination to directly interfere with
your efforts. You can expect that any reasonable resources will be made
available. On the other hand, you can expect to be called to the carpet at
some point to demonstrate that you accomplished something.

#### How do I get started?

Ok, so you're signed up and been primed with the talk of a proactive stance
and personal responsibility. You will no doubt look at a calendar and realize
that time is short. You will be tempted to begin work as quickly as possible.
Avoid this temptation. It is far better to start smart than it is to start
fast. The consequences of early choices are difficult to shake off later --
especially since your time is short.

Sometime in the first week of the quarter, the whole class will meet and be
divided into three-person project groups. The first and perhaps most critical
task your group will face is to select a project that is appropriate for the
skills you collectively possess. The importance of this decision can not be
stressed enough. It will be difficult enough as it is to bring a significant
project in on a tight schedule without your choosing a task that requires you
to develop new technical expertise. During the first week, meet with your
group and have a frank discussion about everyone's talents and skills. Discuss
what classes or other relevant experiences you each have. Determine your
strengths (I.E. Windows or Unix development, software or hardware design,
engineering math, database design, etc.) and choose a project that plays into
those strengths. The instructor maintains a list of suggested projects for
your convenience. You may select from that list or you may design your own
project. Don't be afraid to propose your own idea. The instructor will be
happy to work with you to formulate a custom project for your group. Proceed
on project selection quickly -- but not so quickly that you forgo matching the
project to your talents.

Once you have a project in mind, you should begin on writing a project
proposal. The point of the proposal is not to lay out everything you will do
over the course of your project. There is no way you can know all that at the
beginning. The purpose of the proposal is to demonstrate that you have
identified a significant problem to solve, that you can solve it with the
people and resources available to you, and that you have a plan in place to
deliver your solution in a timely manner. At a minimum, your proposal document
should answer the following sets of questions:

  * What specifically is the problem you are trying to solve? Why is your problem significant? What benefits will accrue from your efforts? How will solving this problem positively impact people?   
  

  * What is your proposed solution to the problem? Specifically, how does your solution address the problem you defined earlier? What features of your solution will address what aspects of the target problem? Is your solution a brand new innovation or an evolutionary advance to existing practice? Why is your solution better than what may already be out there? Does it perform better? Is it cheaper? Is it safer?   
  

  * Why should anyone believe your group can deliver the promised solution? What special skills and knowledge does your team possess that will insure success? Have you ever worked on a similar problem? If so, were you successful?  
  

  * Why should anyone believe you your group can deliver the promised solution in a timely manner? Who will work on what (I.E. How will you apply your special skills and knowledge). What are your deadlines? Are they realistic considering the material and human resources available?   
  

The specific format of the proposal document is up to your group. If you need
it, you can find guidance in any number of engineering texts and proposal
writing guides. Whatever format you choose -- be it your own or one you borrow
from elsewhere -- your reader must be convinced that you addressed all four of
the above classes of questions. When evaluating your proposal, assume the
reader is a reasonably skilled computer engineer who is not familiar with the
problem you are trying to solve. If your proposal explains the problem and its
significance, explains your solution and how it address the problem, and
further convinces the reader that you have the juice to deliver that solution
on time -- then you've done your job. Feel free to talk to consult the
instructor often while preparing your proposal. You may also want to look at
examples of "successful" proposals from the instructors archive of student
work. Don't stress over this too much -- the key is to formalize discussions
you should be having in your group anyway. If you do that initial planning
step correctly -- the proposal should be a snap.

#### Our proposal is approved, now what?

At this point, your proposal is in and approved. What this means is that you
have chosen a problem, made an assessment of your resources, and sketched out
your final goal. In effect, you have defined your starting and stopping
conditions, and are now faced with the long dark tea time of the soul where
you have to actually produce something. Have no doubt -- there are pitfalls
aplenty here. There's perhaps thousands of books on project management out
there that purport to warn you about those pitfalls and how to avoid them. As
mentioned in the introduction, we will not attempt a survey of these ideas.
Rather, in the spirit of a practical guide, we will list common pitfalls we've
observed in CEG 498, offer some principles that might help you avoid them,
then give you a sample management plan that embodies the given principles. You
are, of course, free to accept or reject any of the advice given.

First, here's some common pitfalls that have plagued a number of CEG 498
groups:

_The Sliding Deadlines Syndrome_      This one is very common. Most students
in CEG498 are taking this class concurrently with other classes. In addition,
many students have jobs and/or lead active lives outside of school. Other
classes, jobs, even normal family life impose deadlines and restrictions over
which one has little control. Your CEG498 project, however, is self-managed.
Except for the final reckoning at the end of the class -- you have a great
deal of freedom to play with deadlines. There will be a real temptation to put
CEG498 work aside in favor of activities that serve externally imposed
deadlines. Falling into this trap is deadly -- and it will catch up with you.  
  
_The Idle Hands Drain_      Your project will be big enough that no one person
can complete it satisfactorily in the allowed time. If you're going to deliver
a quality product, you can not afford idle hands. Every member of the group
should be actively engaged at all times. Poor planning can lead to periods of
time where group members are effectively idle. If this happens, you will lose
time that you will never regain. The end of the quarter is a hard deadline and
you will be called to the carpet. Extensions will not be available simply
because you're "not ready".  
  
_The Project Overlord_      This occurs when one team member concludes that it
is easier to do all the work him/herself than it is to go through the trouble
of coordinating the efforts of several people. This won't fly -- as the
projects are supposed to be too large for any one person. A particularly
talented person might pull this off, but usually by neglecting other areas of
his/her life. The existence of a project overlord will be obvious to the
instructor and will result in low grades for all group members.  
  
_The Whipping Boy(s)_      This often occurs in concert with the existence of
a project overlord, but can occur by itself. This pitfall is characterized by
one or more group members taking a passive role in group decisions and being
assigned undesirable tasks that no one else wants to do. The group is damaged
because the whipping boys are generally out of the loop and are not
particularly interested in completing their jobs well. This will show in your
group's final product and will result in poor grades all around.  
  
_The Linchpin_      This occurs when one group member becomes so critical to
the overall success of the project that no progress can occur without his/her
active attention. This pitfall is distinct from the project overlord, as the
linchpin may not purposefully put him/herself in that position. A linchpin can
be created via poor planning. For example, if project tasks are decomposed in
such a way all tasks depend on the participation of a particular group member.
A linchpin can also be created via poor communication among group members. For
example, a member that runs off to do his/her bit and never shares his
thoughts or materials with the rest of the group will become a linchpin
because no one but that person has a clue about that aspect of the project. As
long as the linchpin remains active in the project -- there is no problem. If
the linchpin leaves or otherwise fails to deliver, however, the whole project
will be in severe jeopardy.  
  
_Shortchanging the Documentation_      You will be required to produce a
number of documents that describe and explain your products. Sometimes groups
become so focused on earlier stages of the project that they do not leave
enough time to produce quality documentation. What might otherwise be an
excellent project can be ruined by poor documentation. What good is all your
work if there's no documentation that it happened?  
  
_Shortchanging the Testing_      Sometimes groups become so wrapped up in
design and implementation that they totally neglect testing their products.
Embarrassment ensues when the demo demons appear to exploit bugs and crash
systems during the public presentation at the end of the course.  
  
_Creeping Featureism_      This occurs when one or more group members start to
drift from their primary mandates and begin adding features that they find
interesting -- but are not required to solve the problem. This can happen both
at the individual and group levels.

The above are certainly not the only pitfalls one can imagine. They do
represent the ones we've actually observed in this class, however. Perhaps
more important than identifying the pitfalls, though, is cooking up specific
strategies to avoid them. Following are several principles the instructor has
found useful in avoiding these same pitfalls in his own work. You can adopt
any or all of them as you see fit.

_If your virtue is not strong enough to keep you on task, employ your vices_
No one starts a project expecting to fall prey to one of the above pitfalls.
The beginning stages of any of these pitfalls seem innocuous enough. You'll
slide a deadline "just this once", or, you'll take autocratic control of the
project "just to get things back on schedule". Some people can avoid these
temptations through force of will. To those virtuous souls -- congratulations.
Many of us (including the author) aren't so strong willed and will fall prey
to every one of the above pitfalls given even the slightest opportunity. If
your virtues won't do -- design systems that enforce your compliance by appeal
to your vices. For example, everyone has at least a small core of vanity and
nobody wants to "look bad" to their peers and associates. Requiring every
member to give a personal progress report in the group's weekly meeting will
help everyone resist the temptation to slide deadlines -- as no one will want
to be the guy with nothing to say.  
  
_Every group member keeps detailed personal jounrals -- no excpetions_
The syllabus states that all students are required to keep project journals.
They will have a role in assigning student grades -- but they also have a role
in helping you to avoid some of the above pitfalls. Keeping of detailed
individual journals counteracts the forces that might otherwise create
linchpins. Assuming the journals are of sufficient quality and detail -- then
anyone might consult them to find out what a particular group member was doing
and/or thinking at a particular time. Though a journal is not a substitute for
access to the person, a good journal could prevent total disaster if a person
has to leave the project for a period.  
  
_Decompose the project into tasks that can be completed in parallel_      This
one is easy to state, but not necessarily easy to implement. Naturally, you
should divide the total design and implementation effort into subtasks that
can be assigned to individual group members. Strive to dole out the tasks in
portions that can be completed in parallel with each other. Avoid problem
decompositions that have one or more group members waiting on the work of
other group members (idle hands drain). Sometimes, of course, there will be
tasks that by nature are dependent on previous results. If this happens, make
sure otherwise idle group members are kept busy with "wildcard tasks" that can
be completed at nearly any stage of the project. Developing test plans to
exercise your code, writing user's manuals, and preparing some presentation
slides and material are all examples of tasks that can occur at any point of
the project.  
  
_Have a written project plan -- assess your progress weekly_      You should
have a detailed timeline of tasks to be completed. This timeline should have
been included in your proposal. Some groups never look at the timeline again.
This is a mistake. At least weekly, meet as a group. Discuss everyone's
progress with respect to the timeline. If you find you are falling behind,
make adjustments as necessary to put yourselves back on schedule. You need not
be slaves to the timeline. The discipline of checking your progress against a
timeline, however, does force you to assess progress on a regular basis much
like the exercise of balancing your checkbook forces you to assess your
finances. Checking your progress with respect to a written plan helps to
prevent creeping featureism as well as shortchanging of testing and
documentation.  
  
_Prepare for meetings_      You will have meetings at least once a week.
Prepare for them. There is nothing worse than a project meeting where everyone
sits around looking at each other and saying nothing. Meetings like that waste
everyone's time. Have a written agenda and make sure you prepare yourself to
contribute according to the agenda. You need not have a special, unique agenda
for every meeting. A simple generic form will do. More important is that you
have a plan for your meeting and everyone knows what will be expected of him
or her.  
  
So far, we've identified pitfalls to avoid and some principles to assist in
the avoidance. What follows is sample weekly meeting agenda that attempts to
embody the above principles. Again, you are free to use this sample meeting
agenda as is or modify to suit your own tastes.

|  **Sample Meeting Agenda**

I) Old Business  

A) Review of this week's milestones     One group member reads the goals that
were to have been met by today's date B) Individual Progress Reports     Each
group member gives a brief report of his/her activities over the previous
week. Special attention is given to discussing how specific group goals were
served by those activities. C) Group Assessment     As a group, discuss how
well this week's goals were met. Make a list of any goals that have not been
met or might need more work.  II) New Business  

A) Review milestone list / task assignments     Discuss as a group if
adjustments need to be made to milestone dates and/or assignment of people to
tasks. Be honest. If someone is not making progress and needs to be moved to a
different task -- do so. If changes are made to the project timelines or work
assignments, make sure all group members get copies. B) Individual Plans
Each group member discusses what he/she will do in the upcoming week to meet
his/her obligations to the project. C) Open discussion     Each group member
is given an opportunity to toss any project related issue to the group for
discussion  III) Product Demonstrations     Have a working prototype?
Demonstrate it.  
---  
  
#### Individual Journals / Design Notebooks

In industry, design notebooks are commonly used both to document work and as
supporting evidence for filing patent applications. In addition to their use
as assessment tools and as legal documents, notebooks also help individual
engineers organize their thoughts and work for personal reference. In this
class, you'll be asked to maintain your own personal notebook. Though your
notebook need not be as formal as the professional variety, it will be used in
much the same way. The instructor will use your notebook to assess your
contributions to your group. The notebook will also serve to organize your
thoughts and work, enabling easier completion of other tasks related to the
class.

What is a design notebook? Simply put -- it is a running record of what you
did and when you did it. The one and only secret to keeping a good notebook is
that you make entries while you are working and as developments are occuring.
If you don't find yourself jotting something in the notebook at least once
every fifteen minutes while working -- you are quite likely not making
sufficiently detailed entries. The worst thing you can do is work for several
hours or days and try to make notebook entries after the fact. Trust us -- you
won't remember all the details....

Your notebook must meet the following specs:

  1. The notebook must be perminantly bound (sewn or glued binding). Spiral or ring bindings are not acceptable. Why? Remember, notebooks may be used as evidence in legal proceedings -- it should not be easy to either lose or insert pages.   
  

  2. The notebook must be clearly and perminantly labeled with your name, the names of all the other people on your project team, and the name of the project.  
  

  3. Everything should be written in **ink**. Erroreous text should be stricken with a single line through the offending words. Erroneous images can be stricken with crossed lines. Avoid scribbling things out -- even the errors should be legible. It might be useful to have several colored pens -- perhaps reserving one color (red) for striking errors.   
  

  4. Items you paste into the notebook (photographs, printouts, photocopies, etc.) should be _perminantly_ attached to the page. Glue or tape is acceptable. Paper clips, staples, or just tucking the attachments between pages is not acceptable. Again, this increases your credibility by decreasing the chance the attachments were added after the fact. It also helps prevent attachments from being accidentally lost.  
  

  5. Every page must be connsecutively numbered. This also helps prove that pages were not added after the fact.   
  

  6. Start a new page each day you work. Write the date at the top of the page. Take notes about the work you do **as you are doing it**. If you draw sketches, do calculations, record data, or take notes in a meeting, do it **in the notebook**. At the end of every work period, take fifteen minutes or so to write a summary of what was accomplished and what tasks you intend to accomplish in the next work period.   
  

  7. The following types of information are all appropriate for inclusion in your notebook: 

    1. Results of library research. References to useful books or articles. Useful or interesting quotes from published works. 
    2. Design ideas, problem descriptions, possible algorithms. 
    3. Commented source code 
    4. Notes taken during group meetings 
    5. Testing results, bug reports,  
By far the most important advice that can be given is that you should make
entries as you go along. It is much more difficult to make up the entries
after the fact. The instructor has several examples of good notebooks that you
may examine by request. Consult these notebooks if you have any questions.

#### Online/Computer Generated Engineering Notebooks

Periodically, someone wants to maintain an engineering notebook using computer
tools (desktop publishing tools, word processors, image editors, HTML editors,
etc.). This is acceptable, but keep in mind that the use of such tools can
make it more difficult to make entries _while_ you are working. The loss of
spontenaity in making entries can make it more difficult to make entries as
you go along. You may use computer tools -- but you will be held to the same
standards as those keeping traditional paper notebooks.

#### Group Documents

Your group will have to produce a number of communal documents as detailed in
the class syllabus. Realize that prepairation of the group documents is
_group_ work. Don't fall into any of the common pitfalls mentioned elsewhere
in this document. Be sure to explicitily schedule time to work on the
documents and be sure that everyone is involved. It's fine to have one person
taking the lead on producing the documents -- just be sure that person isn't
the only one working on them.

#### Group Presentations

You've made it to the end and now it's time to make your public presentation.
Public speaking is another of those topics where you can find thousands of how
to guilds and perhaps as many opinions on how to do it well. As with other
topics discussed in this document, we will not attempt a full summary of
thoughts on how to deliver a good presentation. Rather, we'll just give some
guidelines and friendly advice.

First, never forget that giving a good engineering presentation is like
telling a good story. There should be identifiable antagonists (your problem),
a hero (your solution), an interesting plot (discussion of how your solution
solves the problem), and a hook for a sequel (discussion of possible future
extensions to you work). Though your presentation will and should contain a
significant amount of technical detail, it is important to not let those
details dominate the plot, so to speak. Avoid allowing your presentation to
degenerate into a boring brain dump of intricate details. You'll turn off even
the most technically savvy audience that way. Second, remember to practice
your presentation before you give it. It's easy to blow this off, especially
since you'll be giving the presentation during finals week. Still -- the only
way to know if your timings are correct and if your slides and other
presentation media are up to snuff is to do a dry run. Don't skimp on the
rehearsal.  
  
![](../../../common_graphics/bar_green_l.gif) [ ![left
arrow](../../../common_graphics/arrow_green_l.gif) Back to Design Experience
Resources Page](./resources.html) |  This document last updated on 8/22/01  
---|---

