**![Comm 3210 Syllabus](_derived/3210syll.htm_cmp_sandston110_bnr.gif)**  
[![Home](_derived/home_cmp_sandston110_hbtn.gif)](Home.html)
[![Up](_derived/up_cmp_sandston110_hbtn.gif)](Comm3210.html)
[![Courses](_derived/courses.htm_cmp_sandston110_hbtn.gif)](courses.htm)
[![Research](_derived/research.htm_cmp_sandston110_hbtn.gif)](research.htm)

  
  
---  
**

Human Communication Theory

Communication 3210, Spring 1999 (3 s.h.)

University of Colorado at Boulder

**_

"There is nothing so practical as a good theory." --Kurt Lewin

"Of all things communication is the most wonderful." --John Dewey

_**

Index to Online Syllabus (** last updated: December 30, 1998 **):

**| ![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Course and Instructor Information  
---|---  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Overview and Objectives  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Required_Texts  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Grading_Policy  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Exams  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Application_Paper  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Miscellaneous Assignments, Quizes,
Participation  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Extra_Credit  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Course_Expectations  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Unit_I - General_Themes  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Unit II - Messages  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Unit III - Relationships  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Unit IV - Social Influence, Media, and
Culture  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Final Examination  
**

Links:

**![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| [Comm 3210: Human Communication
Theory](Comm3210.html) (public website for course materials)  
---|---  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)|  WebCT (secure course website for checking
your grade, online discussions, etc.)  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| [Communication Theory
Resources](http://www.colorado.edu/communication/meta-discourses/index.htm)
(internet resources for communication theory students)  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| [Application
Papers](http://www.colorado.edu/communication/meta-discourses/index.htm)
(application papers on various theories, written by previous Comm 3210
students)  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| [Bob Craig's Home
Page](http://spot.colorado.edu/~craigr)  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| [Communication Department Home
Page](http://www.colorado.edu/Communication/)  
  
![](_themes/sandston/astonrul.gif)

**

Lecture:** (010) 9:00pm-9:50pm MW, Duane G125

**

Recitations:

**

(011) 2:00-2:50pm F, MUEN D144

(012) 3:00-3:50pm F, RAMY N183

(013) 4:00-4:50pm F, RAMY N183

**

Course Professor - Lecture Instructor: Robert Craig

** Office: Hellems 86 Office hours: Mon. 11:00-11:50am & 1:00-1:50pm, Wed.
2:00-2:50pm, or by appointment Phone/Voice mail: (303) 492-6498 Email:
[Robert.Craig@Colorado.EDU](mailto:/Robert.Craig@Colorado.EDU) Fax
(Communication Dept.): (303) 492-8411 Home Page:
[http://spot.colorado.edu/~craigr/Home.html](file:///C:/My%20Documents/My%20Webs/CU_home/Home.html)
**

Teaching Assistant - Recitation Instructor: Elenie Opffer

** Office: Hellems 65 Office hours: Mon. 10:00-10:50am, Wed. 11:00-11:50am,
Fri. 1:00-1:50pm, or by appointment Phone/Voice mail: (303) 492-7309 Email:
opffer@ucsu.Colorado.EDU Fax (Communication Dept.): (393) 492-8411 **

Overview& Objectives:** "There is nothing so practical as a good theory,"
wrote Kurt Lewin, one of the founders of modern communication studies. In this
course we take a close, critical look at some of the most important
contemporary theories of human communication, emphasizing their practical
implications for society and our everyday lives. The course begins with
general issues concerning the nature of theory and communication, the relation
between theory and practice, and the influence of gender. These general themes
will help us to take a critical perspective on the theories we study
throughout the course. The remainder of the course takes up a series of
theories through which we explore how the communication process produces
information and meaning, selfhood, interpersonal relationships, social
influence, and culture. Recitation activities focus on review, further
exploration, and practical application of theories presented in lecture.
Graded assignments include exams (three hourly tests and a final), an
application paper, several short written assignments, and "pop" quizzes.

Because the Communication Department believes that any person claiming to be
educated in communication should have some knowledge of the theoretical
foundations of the field, communication majors are required to take either
Communication 3210: Human Communication Theory, which emphasizes the social
scientific tradition of communication theory, or Communication 3300:
Rhetorical Foundations of Communication, which emphasizes the humanistic
tradition of the field.

Specific objectives of Communication 3210 include:

**_

(1) To become better informed about current theories of human
communication.**_ By the end of the course you should be able to identify,
explain, and illustrate key concepts and principles of theories covered in the
course.

**_

(2) To increase your ability to make use of theories in reflecting on
practical problems and situations.**_ By the end of the course you should be
able to analyze practical communication problems and situations, making
appropriate use of theories covered in the course.

**_

(3) To become a more discerning critic of communication theories - maybe even
a creative theorist.**_ By the end of the course you should be able to explain
and illustrate standards for evaluating theory and apply those criteria to
defend your critical judgments about theories covered in the course. To some
extent, you should also be able to compare and contrast different theories. At
best, you might be able to formulate and argue for your own perspective on
communication theories, experience profound insights, or develop new
theoretical ideas. Such creative theorizing is not actually required in order
to pass the course, but we try not to discourage it!!

**

Required texts:** The following books are required and should be available at
the UMC and Colorado bookstores:

![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| [_A First Look At Communication Theory
(Third Edition)_ by Em Griffin (McGraw-Hill,
1997).](http://www.afirstlook.com/)  
---|---  
_![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Communication and Community: Implications
of Martin Buber's Dialogue_ by Ronald C. Arnett (Southern Illinois University
Press, 1986).  
_![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Communication as Culture: Essays on Media
and Society_ by James W. Carey (Unwin Hyman, 1989).  
**

Study Questions:** Study questions will be provided for each unit. These
questions are designed to assist you in preparing for lectures, recitations,
assignments, and exams. Essay questions on exams will be taken directly from
the study questions.

**

Internet Materials:** Course materials including syllabus, study questions,
assignments, announcements, notes, and supplementary resources, will be posted
on our course home page on the World Wide Web, located at
[http://spot.colorado.edu/~craigr/Comm3210.html](file:///C:/My%20Documents/My%20Webs/CU_Home/Comm3210.html).

To check your grades or participate in online discussions, go to our WebCT
website. Only registered students can access this secure website. If you are
registered for this course you will automatically be registered to log on with
your user name and password. You can log on at any time to check your current
grades or participate in discussions on our course bulletin board.

You can access our WebCT site from hot links either here or on our [course
home page](file:///C:/My%20Documents/My%20Webs/CU_Home/Comm3210.html). You can
also get there from the main WebCT home page at
http://mordred.colorado.edu:8900.

Your user name for logging on to WebCT will be the same one you use to access
your CU email account. Your initial WebCT password will be your social
security number, but you can change your password at any time after logging
on. If you experience any problems logging on or using WebCT, please contact
one of the instructors. We will be glad to help.

**

Grading Policy:** Grading will be on a point system. Graded assignments are
worth a total of 350 points. Cut-off points for final letter grades are:
325(93%)=A, 315(90%)=A-, 305(87%)=B+, 290(83%)=B, 280(80%)=B-, 270(77%)=C+,
255(73%)=C, 245(70%)=C-, 235(67%)=D+, 220(63%)=D, 210(60%)=D-, less than
210=F.

**

Grading "Rules & Regs":** A missed assignment will receive 0 points. A failed
assignment (except for short papers, quizzes, and extra credit projects) will
receive no less than 40% of the maximum points for the assignment. All out-of-
class writing assignments must be typed, double-spaced. Style and mechanics of
writing will affect the grade. Late assignments may be accepted at the
discretion of the instructors but will be penalized. Students are required to
keep backup hard copies of all papers (in case of disk crashes, lost papers,
etc.). Optional assignments can be done for a maximum of 25 extra credit
points (see below).

**

Exams:** Exams will include essay and short answer questions (please bring a
blue book to each exam). Exams will cover lectures and assigned readings, and
will be based on the _study questions_ for each unit (see above). The final
exam will be based on material after Test #3 plus a _selective_ review of
earlier material. Maximum points are:

![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)|  Test #1 (Feb 3): 50 points  
---|---  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Test #2 (Mar 1): 50 points  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Test #3 (Mar 31): 50 points  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Final Exam (May 10): 100 points  
**

Application Paper** (Due: April 16, 50 points): The purpose of the application
paper is to develop and demonstrate your ability to apply communication
theories to practical problems. In no more than 10 typewritten pages (double-
spaced), an application paper does three things: (1) In no more than 2 pages,
explains one of the theories covered in this course, defining and illustrating
the main points _in your own words_ ; (2) applies the theory to a real
communication problem or situation, showing how the theory can be used to
understand what's going on and/or decide what to do about it; and (3)
evaluates the usefulness of the theory (optionally, this may include original
suggestions for revising or enhancing the theory).

Although this is not primarily a library research paper, you should use at
least one published source beyond the textbook to obtain additional
information and a different perspective on your chosen theory. Additional
readings are listed at the end of each textbook chapter and links to Internet
resources are posted on the Communication Theory Resources web page. Materials
consulted in writing the paper should be cited in the text and in a reference
list in APA style. If this style is not familiar from previous courses, we can
provide you with a handout explaining it. There are also several websites with
basic information on APA style (browse from the Communication Theory Resources
web page).

You are welcome, if you can and wish to do so, to submit your application
paper (or other papers, including extra credit assignments) electronically as
an HTML document. One advantage of doing this is that you can include "live"
hyperlinks, graphics, or audio-visual materials right in the paper. If you
want to do this, talk with us about how to format and submit the paper. Word
processor files (Word or WordPerfect) may also be ok, but please check with us
beforehand to make sure we have compatible systems and software.

Model application papers from previous semesters will be posted on the course
website at http://spot.colorado.edu/~craigr/applications.html. The students
who wrote these papers have kindly permitted us to publish them on our
website. They are not "perfect" papers, but they are all good-to-excellent
papers and illustrate different approaches to the assignment. In addition to
using them as examples for this assignment, you can also use them as resources
for understanding particular theories and practical applications. If you write
a really good application paper this semester, especially if you write it on a
theory for which we have no model papers, we will invite you to publish your
paper on the website for use by future students. Fame (though not fortune)
awaits you - just imagine!

Of course, it goes without saying that any paper you turn in must represent
your own work. The model papers are just examples, not templates! Closely
paraphrasing a model paper or a chapter from the textbook with a different
example is _not_ an acceptable way to do this paper! For your protection, we
keep files of papers from past semesters and make every effort to detect
instances of plagiarism. Evidence of plagiarism will result in a failing grade
and may be reported to the Dean's office for disciplinary action.

**

Miscellaneous assignments, quizzes, and participation** (50 points): Brief
essays, quizzes, or oral presentations may be assigned for specific recitation
meetings. "Pop" quizzes on the assigned reading will be given at the beginning
of several lectures. Recitation attendance and class participation, _including
participation in lectures, recitations, and online discussions on our WebCT
class bulletin board,_ will be assessed at the end of each unit.

You are not specifically required to participate in discussions on our class
bulletin board on WebCT but are strongly encouraged to do so. Contributions to
the bulletin board will be included along with other forms of participation
(such as attendance and participation in recitations) in determining the
participation component of your grade. You can contribute to the bulletin
board by posting substantive, course related messages such as:

![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Course-related questions  
---|---  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Answers to questions posted by the
instructors or other students  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Examples, applications, or criticisms of
particular theories  
![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Suggestions or comments on resources such
as articles, books, websites, etc.  
  
If you have questions or need help using the bulletin board, please contact
one of the instructors.

**

Optional extra credit projects:** Extra credit projects must be clearly
related to the course objectives, proposed by the student, and _approved in
advance by the instructors_. Possible projects include, but are not limited
to: an additional application paper, a library research paper (e.g. based on
recommended readings at the end of a chapter in Griffin), a critical book
review, preparing and teaching part of a class, creating materials for the
course website, etc. The maximum points for a particular extra credit project
must be negotiated in advance and will depend on the nature of the project
(e.g. a ten page library research paper might earn up to 25 points; a five
page application paper might earn up to 12 points). Projects involving oral
presentations in class depend on the availability of class time and should be
arranged as early as possible in the semester. A maximum total of 25 points
extra credit may be earned in the course. Extra credit projects will _not_ be
accepted after the last day of classes.

**

Course Expectations - Preparation for Class:

![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)|  Before each lecture:** Carefully read
assigned chapter(s) and review the study questions. Be ready for a quiz on key
terms.  
---|---  
**![](_themes/sandston/astonbu1.gif)| Before each recitation:** Review lecture
notes and readings for that week and be ready to answer all study questions.
Bring books and lecture notes to class.  
**

Students with Disabilities:** We encourage students with documented
disabilities, including invisible disabilities such as chronic diseases,
learning disabilities, head injury and attention deficit/hyperactive disorder,
to discuss with us, after class or during office hours, appropriate
accommodations that might be helpful to them.

**

Schedule of Classes and Assignments:

**[**Unit I - General Themes:**](ques1.htm)

M Jan 11: Introduction & Overview.

W Jan 13: Scientific & Humanistic Perspectives on Theory.

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 1.

**Recommended additional reading:** Griffin Chapter 2.

F Jan 15: Recitation: Perspectives on Theory.

(Martin Luther King holiday)

W Jan 20: What Makes a Good Theory?: Scientific & Humanistic Standards.

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 3.

F Jan 22: Recitation: Evaluating Theories.

M Jan 25: Transmission & Ritual Perspectives on Communication.

** Due today:** Carey Chapter 1, pp. 13-23.

W Jan 27: Reflexivity of Theory and Practice.

** Due today:** Carey Chapter 1, pp. 23-35.

F Jan 29: Recitation: Models of Communication and Reflexivity.

M Feb 1: Gender: Muted Group Theory (Kramarae).

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 35 and pp. 471-472.

W Feb 3: **TEST #1.

** F Feb 5: Recitation: Feedback on Test #1 & More on Gender.

[**Unit II - Messages:**](ques2.htm)

M Feb 8: Information Theory (Shannon & Weaver).

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 4.

W Feb 10: Cybernetics (Wiener).

** Due today:** "Feedback" by J. de Rosnay. This is an electronic document.
You can read it on the World Wide Web at
<http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/FEEDBACK.html>. Also please review Griffin, p. 53
(short section on "Learning Through Feedback").

F Feb 12: Recitation: Information Theory & Cybernetics.

M Feb 15: The Meaning of Meaning (Richards).

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 5.

W Feb 17: Self-Concept and Symbolic Interactionism (Mead).

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 7.

F Feb 19: Recitation: Meaning, Self, & Symbolic Interactionism.

M Feb 22: CMM: Coordinated Management of Meaning (Pearce & Cronen).

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 6.

W Feb 24: Application and Critique of CMM Theory.

** Due today:** "Dialogic Communication" by W. B. Pearce & K. Pearce. This is
a short electronic document. You can read it on the World Wide Web at
http://www.pearcewalters.com. In addition to reading "Dialogic Communication,"
we recommend that you browse the rest of the web site (it's not big) to learn
more about applications of CMM theory.

F Feb 26: Recitation: CMM Theory and Unit II Review.

M Mar. 1: **TEST #2.

**

[**Unit III - Relationships:**](ques3.htm)

W Mar 3: Relational Development (Rogers, Altman & Taylor, Thibaut & Kelley).

** Due today:** Griffin pp. 140-152.

F Mar 5: Recitation: Feedback on Test #2 & Relational Development.

M Mar 8: The Interactional View (Watzlawick).

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 13.

W Mar 10: Dialectical Theory (Baxter & Montgomery).

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 14.

F Mar 12: Recitation: The Interactional View & Dialectical Theory.

M Mar 15: Dialogue & Monologue (Buber).

** Due today:** Arnett pp. 1-43.

W Mar 17: Perspectives on Dialogue (Buber & Rogers).

** Due today:** Arnett pp. 47-78; and Griffin pp. 140 & 227-228.

F Mar 19: Recitation: Dialogue

(Spring Break)

M Mar 29: Dialogue & "Community of Otherness" in Organizations.

** Due today:** Arnett pp. 79-91.

**Recommended additional reading:** Arnett pp. 95-110.

W Mar 31: **TEST #3.

** F Apr 2: Recitation: Feedback on Test #3 and more on Dialogue.

[**Unit IV - Social Influence, Media, and Culture**](ques4.htm) **:

**

M Apr 5: Cognitive Dissonance (Festinger).

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 16.

W Apr 7: Dramatism (Burke).

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 24.

F Apr 9: Recitation: Cognitive Dissonance Theory & Dramatism

M Apr 12: Technological Determinism (McLuhan).

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 26.

W Apr 14: Media, Technology, & "The Future" (Carey).

** Due today:** Carey Chapter 7.

F Apr 16: Recitation: McLuhan & Carey.

** Due today: Application paper.

**M Apr 19: Technology & Ideology: Case of the Telegraph (Carey).

** Due today:** Carey Chapter 8.

Wed Apr 21: Cultivation Theory (Gerbner).

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 27.

F Apr 23: Recitation: Carey & Gerbner

M Apr 26: Cultural Studies (S. Hall).

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 28.

W Apr 28: Face Negotiation Theory (Ting-Toomey).

** Due today:** Griffin Chapter 32.

F Apr 30: Recitation: Hall & Ting-Toomey.

M May 3: Wrap-up & [Review for Final Examination](ques5.htm).

** Last day to turn in extra credit projects.**

**

Final Examination:** Monday, May 10, 7:30 a.m. - 10:30 a.m.

![](_themes/sandston/astonrul.gif)

Return to top of page  
  
---|---  
  
[![University of
Colorado](_borders/university.gif)](http://www.colorado.edu)[![Department of
Communication](_borders/department.gif)](http://www.colorado.edu/communication/)[![<meta>discourses
| theory <for>
communication](_borders/metadis1.gif)](http://www.colorado.edu/communication/meta-
discourses/)[![E-mail Bob
Craig](_borders/email_bob.gif)](mailto:Robert.Craig@Colorado.EDU)  
---

