**Martha A. Myers Web Page**

**Department of Sociology**

**The University of Georgia**

![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrrul.gif)

**Deviance & Social Control**

**Fall 2002  **

![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrrul.gif)

**[![Home](_derived/home_cmp_copy-of-bold-stripes-1-110_hbtn.gif)](home.htm)
[![Up](_derived/up_cmp_copy-of-bold-stripes-1-110_hbtn.gif)](2470hme.htm)
![Syllabus](_derived/F02-2470syl.htm_cmp_copy-of-bold-
stripes-1-110_hbtn_p.gif) [![Study Guide](_derived/F02-2470sg.htm_cmp_copy-of-
bold-stripes-1-110_hbtn.gif)](F02-2470sg.htm)
[![Attendance](_derived/F02-2470rl.htm_cmp_copy-of-bold-
stripes-1-110_hbtn.gif)](F02-2470rl.htm) **

![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrrul.gif)

**Professor.    ** Dr. Martha A. Myers

> Baldwin Hall 213C

>

> 542-3252 or [mamyers@arches.uga.edu](mailto:mamyers@arches.uga.edu)

>

> Office Hours: T & Th. 12:30 - 1:30 and W 1 - 2

**Teaching Assistant.     **Beth Harvey
[[eharvey@arches.uga.edu](eharvey@arches.uga.edu)]

> Baldwin Hall 213C  
>

> Office Hours:  9:00 a.m. - 11:00 a.m. & by appointment.

**Class Hour.**     Tuesday & Thursday 2:00 p.m. - 3:15 p.m., Park Hall 265  

**Course Overview.**     This course is based on the premise that deviance is
a socially-constructed phenomenon. By this, sociologists mean that the
conditions and behaviors that bear the label "deviant" vary over time and
across social space. Also varying over time and space are our reactions to
conditions and behaviors bearing the label deviant. The general outline of the
course expands on this premise. Students will be introduced to the most recent
research on a wide range of deviance including obesity, mental disorders,
suicide, substance abuse, cult membership, homosexuality, and violence.
Readings emphasize what we currently know about these behaviors. They also
explore the ways in which our response to these behaviors has been fluid,
changing over time and across space.

**Texts.  **Patricia A. Adler and Peter Adler [ **A** ]. 2002/3.
_Constructions of Deviance: Social Power, Context and Interaction_ 4th
Edition.

> Tewksbury, Richard, and Patricia Gagne [ **T** ]. 2000. _Deviance and
Deviants: An Anthology_. Los Angeles: Calif.: Roxbury.

>

> Readings on electronic reserve [ ** _password = myersa_** ], designated by
the author followed by **[ER]**. Also available for sale at Bell-Jean
Copyprint as a packet.

**Study Guide.** Review questions for all readings can be found at [
www.arches.uga.edu/~mamyers](http://www.arches.uga.edu/~mamyers).

**Course Requirements.**    Grades for the course depend on class attendance
and four (4) multiple choice examinations, each worth 100 points.  **A missed
examination is NOT counted as an absence, and requires no excuse.** With the
exception of Examination #4, missed examinations can be taken immediately
after Examination #4.  They will consist of short answers and essays. All
examinations must be completed within the time allotted for the final
examination.

**Attendance Policy.   **This course has a stringent attendance policy, which
will be strictly enforced. Students who, for whatever reason, cannot make a
firm commitment to attend every class are encouraged to drop the course.
Attendance will be taken each class period by signing a roll. ** _Students who
fail to sign the roll both on August 20 AND on August 22 will be withdrawn
administratively so that other students may add the course._**
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)|  There are NO excused
absences, so do NOT bring excuses from family, doctors, and coaches.  
---|---  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| Students with 0 - 1 absence
will have 5% [20 points] added to their course grade.  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| Students with 2 - 3
absences will have 3% [12 points] added to their course grade.  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| Students with four [4]
absences before October 15, the Midpoint Withdrawal Deadline, will be
administratively withdrawn from the course for excessive absences.  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| Students with four [4] or
more absences after October 15 will have 10% [40 points] deducted from their
final grade.  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| Students are responsible
for locating and signing the roll.  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| Students who arrive 10 or
more minutes late, who leave 10 or more minutes early, or who leave
immediately after signing the roll forfeit their attendance.  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| **In compliance with
university policies, any student who is administratively withdrawn after the
midpoint of the semester, October 15, will receive a WF.**  
  
**Grading Policy**.     Grades will be assigned on the following basis.

**_Points_** | **_Percentage_** | **_Grade_**  
---|---|---  
360 \- 400 | 90% + |

A  
  
320 \- 359.9 | 80% \- 89.99% |

B  
  
280 \- 319.9 | 70% \- 79.99% |

C  
  
240 \- 279.9 | 60% \- 69.99% |

D  
  
Less than 240 | Less than 60% |

F  
  
**Class Etiquette.**     This class is large, so you may feel anonymous and
invisible. You are not. You may also confuse me with a television set. Please
do not. This class will work if we all follow one guiding principle: **_Treat
your fellow students, the professor, and the teaching assistant with
respect._** This is what respect means to me. ![](_themes/copy-of-bold-
stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| **Arrive on or before 2:00 p.m.** Students who
arrive late disrupt the students they climb over and distract me. They also
run the risk of forfeiting attendance and of having the professor or teaching
assistant draw attention to their discourteous behavior.  
---|---  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| **Turn off your cell
phone.** Need I say more?  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| **Listen and take notes.**
You will do better on exams if you devote your complete attention to the
course. Please do not read newspapers, work crossword puzzles, or fall asleep
during class. Also, please refrain from discussing world events with your
neighbor. All these behaviors show disrespect to the professor and other
students, and are likely to elicit public comment from the professor and/or
teaching assistant.  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| **Leave class at 3:15 not
before.** Class ends at 3:15, not 3:05 or 3:10.   Students who leave early
disrupt the class, risk losing their attendance credit, and are likely to have
the professor or teaching assistant draw attention to their disrespectful
behavior.  
**

Course Topics and Readings.** With the exception of examination dates, the
course outline presented below may undergo slight revision during the
semester. Any changes will be announced in class and on the web page.   **A**
= Adler  & Adler; **T** = Tewksbury; **ER** = electronic reserve or Bell-Jean
CopyPrint; **ER ONLY** = Electronic reserve only.

**Part 1: Deviance**  
  
---  
  
Aug 20

|

Overview: Defining Deviance

|

Curra,  Ch. 1[ **ER** ]; A4, A1, A7  
  
---|---|---  
  
Aug 22

|

Studying & Measuring Deviance

|

Curra, Ch. 2 **[ER]** ; A2; Best, Ch. 2 [ **ER** ]; A12 & A13  
  
Aug 27, 29

|

Creating Deviance

|

A14, A16, A15, A9  
  
Sept 3, 5

|

Reacting to Deviance

|

A17, A18, T15  
  
****September 1**** ** **0 [Tuesday]****

|

****Examination #1****

|



|

**Part 2: Deviant Identities and Careers**  
  
---  
  
Sept 12, 17

|

Managing Deviance

|

A23, T11, A26, A24, T27, A25, A19  
  
---|---|---  
  
Sept 19, 24

|

Developing a Deviant Identity

|

T10, A21, A22, A37, A39  
  
Sept 26

|

Deviant Organizations #1

|

A28, T31, T32, A29  
  
Oct 1

|

Deviant Organizations #2

|

A30, A31, T33, A27, T14  
  
****October**** ** **3 [Thursday]****

|

****Examination #2****

|

  
  
**Part 3: Individual Deviance**  
  
---  
  
Oct 8, 10

|

Mental Disorders

|

Conrad & Sneider [ **ER** ]; McCaghy [ **ER ONLY** ], Ch. 9; Herman [ **ER]**  
  
---|---|---  
  
Oct 15, 17

|

Suicide

|

Thio [ **ER],** Ch. 7; Canetto [ **ER]**  
  
Oct 22

|

Deviant Drug Use

|

McCaghy [ **ER** ], Ch. 8  
  
Oct 24

|

Problem Drinking

|

Jackson [ **ER** ]  
  
Oct 29, Nov 5

|

Illicit Drug Use

|

T1-T3; McIntosh **[ER]** ; A40  
  
****November 7 [Thursday]****

|

****Examination #3****

|

  
  
**Part 4: Group Deviance**  
  
---  
  
Nov 12, 14

|

Deviant Religions

|

Saliba [ **ER** ];Tumminia **[ER]**  
  
---|---|---  
  
Nov 19, 21, 26

|

Sexual Deviance

|

Thio [ **ER** ], Ch.10; T9, T26  
  
December 3, 5

|

Interpersonal Violence

|

T8, T20, T24, T16, Jones & Finkelhor [ **ER** ]; T19  
  
****December  13 [F], 3:30-6:30 p.m.****

|

****Examination #4****

|

  
  
****Disabilities.**** If you have a documented disability and would like to
request classroom accommodations, please see the instructor after class or
make an appointment during office hours.

****Academic Honesty Policy****.  All students are expected to maintain the
highest standards of honesty in this class. All students are assumed to know
what constitutes cheating and pertinent University regulations and policy.
Cheating or assisting another student who cheats are serious violations of
regulations, and penalties are severe. Ignorance is not an acceptable excuse.
For more information, consult _A Culture of Honesty: Policies and Procedures
on Academic Honesty_ , available from your academic advisor.

**Human Rights Statement.** All students should know that the Department of
Sociology has a Human Rights Committee for the resolution of student
grievances. Any student registered for a sociology course at the University of
Georgia who feels that he or she has not been treated in a fair or
professional manner by an instructor is advised to follow these procedures:
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| The student should discuss
his or her problems with the instructor of the course, unless extenuating
circumstances prohibit this.  
---|---  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| If that discussion does not
resolve the grievance, the student should then discuss the problem with the
Head of the Sociology Department.  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)| If that discussion does not
resolve the grievance to the student's satisfaction, the student may request
the activation of the Human Rights Committee by submitting a letter to the
Chair of the Human Rights Committee, Department of Sociology, University of
Georgia.  
  
The Human Rights Committee will have the responsibility of investigating all
charges in accordance with procedures on file at the Sociology offices, copies
of which are available to students. The Committee will also have the
responsibility of making recommendations in writing to the Head, copies of
which will be made available to the student complainant and the instructor
involved. The Department Head will review the recommendations, and make a
decision, in writing, with copies to the student complainant and the
instructor involved. Any appeal of that decision must be to the Dean of the
College of Arts and Sciences.

**Thinking of a sociology major or minor?** The requirements for a sociology
major are as follows: ![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)|

Prerequisite: Introductory Sociology [SOCI 1101]  
---|---  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)|

Required:  Logic and Practice of Sociological Research [SOCI 3600] OR
Qualitative Methods of Social Research [SOCI 3590]  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)|

Required: Development of Sociological Theory [SOCI 3220]  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)|

Electives: 6 courses, 5 of which must be 3000-level or higher.  
The requirements for a sociology minor are as follows: ![](_themes/copy-of-
bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)|

Prerequisite: Introductory Sociology [SOCI 1101]  
---|---  
![](_themes/copy-of-bold-stripes-1-/abstrbu1.gif)|

Electives: 4-5 courses, 9 of which must be 3000-level or higher.

