Spring 1998 / SOCIOLOGY 302 / UNIQUE No. 40305



  |  _

Professor_ |  _

Teaching Assistant_  
---|---|---  
  
Name: |

Dr. Kelly Raley |

 Edie Elwood  
  
Office: |

366 Burdine |

230-A Burdine  
  
Office Hours |

MW 10-10:45, W 1-2:30, & by appt. |

Monday 10-1  
  
Email |

[kraley@prc.utexas.edu](mailto:kraley@prc.utexas.edu) |

 [edie@prc.utexas.edu](mailto:edie@prc.utexas.edu)  
  
Phone number |

471-1122 |

471-1122  
  
 Sociology comprises an interesting combination of scientific techniques and
philosophical approaches. As the professor of this class, my goal is to help
you learn what sociology is about. That is, I plan to enable you to know some
of the kinds of questions sociologists address and to know the types of
answers sociologists provide to these questions.



**_

REQUIREMENTS FOR THE CLASS:**_ Read the assigned readings prior to the class
period during which we will discuss the material. Doing so will not only
facilitate discussion, but also allow you to ask questions about the readings
during class. Final grades are determined by a weighted average of homework
and exams. A=90-100; B=80-89; C=70-79; D=60-69; F  < 60.



**

Take Home Assignments (and Pop Quizzes if necessary)** (20% of grade): There
will be about one assignment per week. Assignments are due at the beginning of
the class period and all assignments should be type written or computer
processed. Assignments will receive one of three grades, "A"=100 points,
"Pass"=75 points or "Fail"=0 points. To receive a "pass" you must show that
you have read and basically understand the material. "A"s will be given to
thoughtful responses. I will drop your lowest assignment grade. If you miss an
assignment for any reason, you may use that assignment as your one dropped
grade. If class participation is weak I may decide to give a pop quiz. If
there is a pop quiz, it will be averaged in with your homework grades. _No
assignments/quizzes will be accepted late.

_



**

Exams** (80% of grade): Exams will be a combination of multiple choice, short
answer, and essay questions. (Bring in 3 blue books of at least 8 pages each
by March 9th. Write your name on the inside of the cover.)



15% First Exam **Feb. 9 th /** 20% Second Exam  **March 13th

**

20% Third Exam **April 13th** / 25% Final Exam  **May 16 th 9:00-12:00

**



There will be **_no make up exams**_ except in extreme circumstances. If you
do need to make up an exam, contact me as soon as possible. _All make-ups are
100% essay exams_.



**_

Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty**_ : Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from The University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of
The University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
For more information on University policies check the web page:
[www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs](http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs).
**Unauthorized collaboration on homework is considered scholastic
dishonesty.**

**_

TEXTS, READER, AND COURSE PACKET (all are required)**_ :

Newman, David. 1997. _Sociology: Exploring the Architecture of Everyday Life_.
2nd  Edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.

Newman, David. 1997. _Sociology: Exploring the Architecture of Everyday Life,
Readings_. 2nd Edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.

 Paradigm Pack (get a Paradigm 24th St., 1/2 block off Guadalupe)



**_

COURSE OUTLINE and CALENDAR:

**

Date_ _Topic and reading assignment

_**

I. An Overview of Sociology

**

1/21 **Introduction to the class

**

1/23 ** What is the Sociological Imagination?

**

Text: Chapter 1 (pages 1-15)

Reader: Chambliss "The Mundanity of Excellence" (pp. 4-15)

_

(Last day to drop without approval of chair and academic dean.)

_

1/26 **What are Social Institutions?

**

Text: Chapter 2, pp. 17-37.

1/28  **Fundamental Sociological Theories

**

Chapter 2, pp. 38-40

1/30  **How can institutions affect behavior?

**

Reader: Ritzer "The Credit Card" (pp. 29-40)

2/2 **How do sociologists research social processes?

**

Text: Chapter 3 (the second half; pp. 74-88)

Reader: Adler, "Researching Dealers and Smugglers" (pp. 53-61)

2/3 **Quantitative Data Sources

**_

2/4 last day to drop with possible refund.

_

2/5 **Ethical issues in the research process/Review

**

2/9 **First Exam** (15% of grade)

_

last day a student may submit notice of planned absences in the spring
semester for the observance of religious holy days.

_**

II. The basic elements of society

**

2/11 **How do sociologists decide what to research?

**

Text: Chapter 3 (first half, pp. 53-73)

2/13 ** Waxing Philosophical: What is knowledge; what is truth?

**

Reader: Lowney and Best, "Stalking Strangers and Lovers" (pp. 44-52)

2/16 **Why do people in other countries do such crazy things?**.

Paradigm Pack: Harris, Marvin. "Mother Cow" pp 7-17

_

last day to drop without possible academic penalty

_

2/18 **Another example of seemingly irrational behavior caused by culture.

**

Reader: Miner, "Body Ritual Among the Nacirema" (pp. 63-66)

2/20 ** What are the elements of "Culture"?

**

Text: Chapter 4 (pp. 89-118)

2/23 **How do you learn norms?

**

Text: Chapter 5 (pp. 119-154)

2/24 ** Who do you think you are? Why**?

Reader: Adler and Adler, "The Glorified Self" (pp. 86-92)

2/26 **How is behavior affected by socially constructed identities?

**

Smith and Kleinman, "Medical Students' Contacts with the Living and the Dead"
(pp. 93-101)

Thorne, "Boys and Girls Together ... But Mostly Apart." (pp. 102-113)

3/2 **Not Normal -- Not Right: Why are some activities defined as "bad"?

**

Text: Chapter 7 (pp. 187-221)

3/4 **How class affects social perceptions of and reactions to harmful
behavior.

**

Reader: Chambliss, The Roughnecks and the Saints (pp. 135-144)

Reiman, "A Crime by Any Other Name" (pp. 145-160)

3/6 **What's Happening to the American Family?

**

Text: Chapter 8 (pp. 231-276)

3/8 **Why do we care about these changes in the family?

**

Paradigm Pack: Popenoe, "American Family Decline" pp 18-33

_

Three blue books of at least 20 pages each are due. Write your name on the
inside cover

_

3/11 **Summary and Review of the basic elements of society

**

3/13 **Exam 2 (20% of grade)

**

Spring Break

**

  3. Social Structures and Institutions

**

 3/23 **Social institutions shape, but do not determine, individual's lives

**

Text: Chapter 9 (pp. 279-315)

 3/25 **I'm not just a number: why do bureaucracies exist?

**

Reader: Chambliss "The Routinization of Disaster (pp. 213-222)

3/27 **What do sociologists mean whey they refer to "Class"?

**

Text: Chapter 10 (pp. 316-356)

3/30 **Class is socially constructed, but still important.

**

Reader: Lamont, "Money, Morals, and Manners" (pp.223-240)

4/1 **Does the American Middle Class have and real power?

**

Domhoff, "The Bohemian Grove" (pp. 241-248)

4/3 **Class relations in other countries

**

Ehrenreich and Fuentes, "Life on the Global Assembly Line" (pp. 249-257)

4/6 **Why are some people poor?

**

Text: Chapter 11 (pp. 357-407)

4/8 **What are the consequences of poverty?

**

Reader: Kozol, "Savage Inequalities in America's Schools" (pp. 258-267)

4/10 **Are there any solutions to the poverty problem?

**

Snow and Anderson, "The Subculture of Street Life" (pp. 268-280)

 4/13  **Exam 3 (20 % of grade)

**

 4/15 **Does Race Matter?

**

Text: Chapter 12 (pp. 409-448)

4/17 **Does prejudice and discrimination really still exist outside of rural
Arkansas?

**

Reader: Graham, "Invisible Man" (pp. 283-294)

4/20 **Institutional Racism

**

Paradigm Pack: Farley et al "Stereotypes and Segregation", pp. 34-64.

(This one is a little longer than usual. Start reading early)

4/22 **Gender and Inequality: You've come a long way, baby**

Text: Chapter 13, (pp. 449-493)

Paradigm Pack: Grauerholz, . "Sexual Harassment of Women Professors by
Students" pp 65-71.

4/24 **Why do men get paid more than women?

**

Williams, "Still a Man's World" (pp. 323-332)

4/27 **Race and Class differences in the experience of gender inequality

**

Wrigley, "Other People's Children" (pp. 340-350)

4/29 **How did the World's Population get to be so big?

**

Text: Chapter 14, (pp. 495-536)

5/1 **Can the world afford to have so many people?

**

Paradigm Pack **:** Berreby, David. 1990. "The Global Population Crisis", pp
72-77

5/4 **Recent Demographic Change in the United States**

5/6 **If such large, powerful forces are at work, who can change anything?

**

Text: Chapter 15, (pp. 537-570)

Reader: Kingsolver, "Holding the Line" (pp. 352-367)

5/8 **Last Class Day!

**

