![](images/marblerule.gif)

# General Science 320: Earth Sciences

![](images/marblerule.gif)

## **![](images/GLOBE17.GIF)GNSC 320 website**

  1. On this page: 
    * Course Information and Description
    * Required Readings and Supplies
    * Course Requirements and Assessment
  2. **[Course Schedule](sch.htm)**
  3. [Geological Column](geolcolumn/index.htm)
  4. [Email Participants](email.htm)
  5. Journal ideas 
    * [Earth Reflections](earth.htm)
    * [Meteorology Observations](weather.htm)
  6. [Rock and Mineral Collection](collections/index.htm) guidelines 
    * [List of Minerals](collections/list.htm) (with descriptions) 
    * [Mineral description](collections/mineral.htm) template 
    * [Sedimentary description](collections/sedimentary.htm) template 
    * [Igneous description](collections/igneous.htm) template 
    * [Metamorphic description](collections/metamorphic.htm) template 
  7. Planetary Scavenger Hunt 
  8. [Project Ideas](projects.htm)
  9. [Lyell Focus Questions](lyell/index.htm)
  10. [Hallam Focus Questions](hallam/index.htm)
  11. Web Links 
    * [Geology Links](geolinks.htm)
    * [Meteorology Links](weatherlinks.htm)
    * [Solar System Links](../planet/links/solar.htm) 

(Links will be added to the above list when the pages become available.)

![](images/marblerule.gif)

## **![](images/GLOBE17.GIF)**Course Information and Description

###### | Top |

**Kerry Magruder** |

**Office** |

**Planetarium**  
---|---|---  
  
GNSC 320  
Earth Sciences |

Wood Science, Rm. 202 (cubicle in northwest corner) |

Wood Science Rm. 108  
  
MWF  
8 and 9 a.m. |

Office Phone:  
878-2166 |

Planetarium phone:  
878-2090  
  
Room 214: Lab days  
Room 108: Class days |

Office Hours:  
Mon & Wed, 11-noon  
and before or after class, by chance or by appointment. |

[Planetarium Home Page](../planet/index.htm)  
  
Home phone:  
273-3989 (before 10 pm) |

Virtual Office Hours by email, anytime!
[KVMagruder@aol.com](mailto:KVMagruder@aol.com) |

[The Mars Show](../planet/shows/mars.htm):  
Friday evenings, 8 pm  
  
## **Course Description**

GNSC 320 "Earth Sciences" is a junior level liberal arts course in which
students explore the phenomena associated with rocks, minerals, fossils, and
the Earth's present stratigraphical characteristics, and examine the
inferences that can be made from these about the Earth's past. Meteorological
phenomena, including weather patterns, storms and clouds, and optical
phenomena of the atmosphere are surveyed. The Earth is placed in a planetary
science context with an overview of the features of the solar system. Emphasis
throughout this liberal arts course is given to foundations of knowledge and
methods of reasoning in the geosciences.

## **General** Course Topics

See the [Course schedule](sch.htm) for details.

  * **GEOLOGY**
    * Rocks and Minerals 
    * Present-day geological processes: Aqueous 
    * Present-day geological processes: Igneous 
    * Historical geology 
    * Geological Column 
    * Ice Ages 
    * Plate Tectonics 
    * Mass extinctions 

** **

  * **METEOROLOGY**
    * Clouds and the Atmosphere 
    * Storms and Weather Prediction 
    * Optical Phenomena of the Atmosphere 

** **

  * **ASTRONOMY**
    * Planetary Science: 
      * Various features of solar system objects are noted whenever they are analogous to processes or phenomena on the Earth (e.g., solar system volcanos are discussed along with vulcanism on Earth). 
      * Students will complete a Planetary Scavenger Hunt web worksheet. 
    * Other astronomy topics are covered in [US 311](../us/311/index.htm): 
      * Constellations 
      * Sky and Planetary Motions 
      * Star types 
      * Nebulae, Clusters, and other Deep Sky objects 
      * Cosmic Dimensions 
      * Cosmology, Big Bang 
      * Consider taking GNSC 250 [Planetarium Operations](../planet/planops/index.htm) for constellation skylore!  

![](images/marblerule.gif)

## **![](images/GLOBE17.GIF)Required Readings and Supplies**

###### | Top |

### Required Texts



  * John McPhee. _The Control of Nature_. New York: Noonday Press; Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1989. ISBN: 0-374-52259-6 (pbk.). 
    * McPhee has more books (4) in the list of geologists' 20 favorite books than any other writer. This one will captivate you and show you why geologists love geology. McPhee tells three stories that masterfully illustrate the human significance of present processes of geological change, and of human attempts to control these processes. The first part deals with the Louisiana contest between the Atchafalaya and the Mississippi Rivers. Iceland's rugged volcanoes and the people who live there are the focus of the second part. Finally, Los Angeles' situation beneath the San Gabriel Mountains is explored in the last part of the book. 



  * Stan Chernicoff, _Essentials of Geology_. Worth, 1997. ISBN: 1-57259-109-9 (pbk). 
    * This beautifully-illustrated text provides an accessible overview of geology. I think you'll be surprised: it is a textbook you will actually enjoy reading. 



  * Ellen K. Peters, _No Stone Unturned: Reasoning about Rocks and Fossils._ New York: W. H. Freeman and Company, 1996. ISBN: 0-7167-2953-9. 
    * Ms. Peters provides a refreshing emphasis on reasoning methods and methodological problems in geology which complements the factual orientation of the main text. 



  * Audubon Society _Field Guide to Weather_. Knopf, 1991. ISBN: 0-679-40851-7. 
    * "This is the ultimate weather reference book. It's a stunning collection of more than 200 pages that feature nearly 400 color plates.... You can match the sky to a color plate in the book, look at the reference page, and learn all about the cloud formation, including its significance in predicting weather. If you buy but one weather book, let this be the one." Ronald L. Wagner and Bill Adler, Jr., _The Weather Sourcebook_ , pp. 180-181. (If you buy a second weather book, try _The Weather Sourcebook_!) 
    * Along with the rock and mineral collection, this field guide provides the basis for the "lab" portion of the course. Since there are no scheduled labs, watching the weather and organizing a rock collection are essential outside of class activities. 

** **

  * **There's a lot to do for this class! And there's a lot of reading! Why is this so?**
    * This is a junior level course for liberal arts majors, so expect the same workload and time commitment as you might experience with other junior level courses. 
    * However, unlike many science classes, we do not have scheduled laboratory periods--and geological _fieldwork_ can't be done in a _laboratory_ anyway. To some extent you will compensate for this lack vicariously, by reading of other people's experiences. The detailed experiences reported by McPhee, Peters, and Chernicoff are critical to the course, so make time for them before the class periods for which they are assigned. 
    * You will soon see that geology has a unique character as a **historical science** focussing upon particular geographical places, and a host of specific experiences in a variety of singular localities. More than a testable abstract knowledge of general principles, to understand geology you will need a large repertoire of memories in the field. In our case, this field experience must be gained vicariously from the books, web assignments, class slides and other visuals, videos, journal assignments, rock collecting, etc.  

### **Required Supplies**

  * Protractor with pivot arm (a **goniometer** for measuring crystal angles). This is the same protractor used as a [skywatching "quadrant"](../planet/bcp/instruments/quadrant/index.htm) in [US 311 Nat Sci](../us/311/index.htm). 
  * An Email address and regular access to the World Wide Web. 
  * Earth Sciences Field Pack. A lab fee will be charged to your university account for the following materials, to be distributed in class: 
    * 48 rock and mineral specimens, unlabelled 
    * Magnifying glass 
    * Ceramic streak plate 
    * HCl test bottle 
    * Hardness testing materials: iron nail, glass plate, copper strip. 
    * Magnet 
    * Note:  
We are reluctant to assess a lab fee for students who already must buy
expensive geology and meteorology textbooks. One might even ask, "Since there
is no lab section for this course why should there be a lab fee?" However,
given the absence of a laboratory section, field experience with the
characteristics of rocks and minerals becomes even more essential for a
junior-level science course. The lab fee is necessary to reimburse the
Division for the expenses incurred by ordering specimens and supplies. Unlike
other lab courses for which there are lab fees, these supplies become your own
property. They will enable you to become familiar with the properties of
various rocks and minerals, performing simple tests upon their specimens as
would a geologist in the field. These supplies are non-consumable, and should
be useful in your future classroom, if you are one of the education students
enrolled in the course, once they are organized into a permanent collection in
conjunction with course activities. ([Guidelines for mineral and rock
collections](collections/index.htm).)

** **

### **Recommended Supplementary Resources**

  * Ronald Wagner and Bill Adler, Jr. _The Weather Sourcebook_. Old Saybrook, Connecticut: The Globe Pequot Press; Adler and Robin Books, Inc., 1994. ISBN: 1-56440-384-X (pbk.) $18.95. 
  * _Aviation Weather_. Prepared for pilots by the US government, this is an inexpensive, comprehensive, and first-rate survey of practical meteorology. 
  * **Geological map of Oklahoma** (available from the OU Geosciences Center in Norman). 
  * **Field Guide to Rocks and Minerals** (any). 
  * **Field Guide to Fossils** (any). 
  * **World Atlas** with physical maps of all continents and countries (any) 
  * Texts used for this course in previous years: 
    * Anthony Hallam. _Great Geological Controversies_ , 2d ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989. ISBN: 0-19-858219-6 (pbk.). See [focus questions](hallam/index.htm) for each chapter in Hallam. 
    * Charles Lyell. _Principles of Geology._ Vol. 1. 1830; rpt. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1990. ISBN: 0-226-49794-1 (pbk.). See [outline](lyell/index.htm) of Lyell for focus questions. 

Note: Lyell's book ranks 1st and Hallam's 9th in a recent survey of
geologists' favorite books by D. M. Triplehorn and J. H. Triplehorn, as
reported in the _Journal of Geological Education_ (1993, 41: 260-261).
Incredibly, John McPhee had four books in the top ten, including _The Control
of Nature_.  

![](images/marblerule.gif)

## **![](images/GLOBE17.GIF)**Course Requirements

###### | Top |

#### Grading Summary

Completion of all requirements is necessary for a passing grade. Grades will
be calculated on a percentage basis (no curve), as follows:

  * Quizzes and Reading Reflections, 35% 
  * Journals and Homework, 35% 
  * Rock Collection, 20% 
  * Final examination, 10% 

#### Click on each of the above for an explanation.

  * **Quizzes, Reading Reflections** , 35% 
    * The first and most important requirement is to come to as many class periods as possible. 
      * We cover a lot of "ground" (pardon the pun) so commit yourself never to skip. Come even if you are not prepared! 
      * If you must be absent, arrange for a student partner to collect any handouts and relay notes to you prior to the next class. Making up missed material is your own responsibility. 
    * The second requirement is to prepare for class periods by reading the assigned texts and completing homework assignments. 
      * Brief **quizzes** will be given at the beginning of almost every class. Alternatively, short study questions -- " **Reading Reflections** " -- will be collected. 
      * Reading Reflections and other homework assignments will be distributed in advance, either at the previous class period or via "daily web guides." 
      * Quizzes and Reading Reflections may not be made up if you are late or absent, nor if you were absent for the previous class period. 
      * The semester's lowest quiz grade (e.g., a zero from a day when you were absent) automatically will be dropped. 
      * Required **Daily Web Guides** will be posted for each class period. These guides will include updated reading assignments, reading reflections, quiz suggestions, and other matter important for the next class. If web access is painfully inconvenient for you, organize a small group of fellow students and rotate responsibility for obtaining these guides. Web guides will be available from the [course schedule](sch.htm); click on the link for any particular day.  

For class on this day... |

Daily web guide will be posted no later than....  
---|---  
  
Mondays |

Saturday noon  
  
Wednesdays |

Tuesday 9 a.m.  
  
Fridays |

Thursday 9 a.m.  
      * Homework assignments other than Reading Reflections will be collected with journals. 

** **

  * **Journals and Homework, 35%**  
    * You will learn to keep a geological and meteorological journal. 
      * Keep your journal in a three-ring binder so that the pages for each week may be taken out every Friday to turn in, and then be returned to their proper place in the notebook the following Monday. 
      * Staple journal pages securely and make sure every page has your name on it. 
      * Journals are due at my office (Rm 202 cubicle) by 4:59 p.m. every other Friday (see [Course Schedule](sch.htm)). Beware: building doors are usually locked at 5 p.m. Put journals in a special tray provided. If not turned in at this time or before, that Friday's journal may not be made up. 
      * Bring your journal notebook to each class period. 
      * The entire notebook will be turned in the last week of class (to be returned before the final examination). 

** **

    * **Homework**
      * Each journal will include homework assigned during that time period (other than Reading Reflections collected in class as quizzes). 
      * A paper on John McPhee's _The Control of Nature_ counts equal to one journal and will be graded separately. 
      * A "Planetary Scavenger Hunt," due the last week of class, counts equal to one journal and will be graded separately. 
      * Attendance at one of the weekly Friday night Planetarium presentations of the [Mars Show](../planet/shows/mars.htm) counts as one journal and will be graded separately. Complete the [Mars focus and discussion questions](../planet/shows/marsQ.htm) worksheet and turn it in the week after viewing the show. Write the date you attended the Mars Show on your worksheet, and staple the worksheet to your ticket. 
      * One semester project may be completed outside of class time to substitute for one journal. 
        * An ideal project is a weekend field trip to areas of geological interest in the state (Robbers' Cave; Alabaster Caverns; Sand Dunes state park; etc.). 
        * **Each project must be individually approved by me in advance**. Projects submitted with unapproved topics will not be graded. 
        * [Project suggestions](projects.htm)

** **

    * **Meteorological Observations**
      * Guidelines for [Journal Weather Observations](weather.htm)

** **

    * **Geology Reflections**
      * One geological reflection is required with each journal. 
      * "Reflections" should be a minimum of one carefully handwritten page. 
      * Reflections may focus on observed phenomena, or constitute mini-essays on relevant themes. These might include prose entries on such topics as: noticable signs of urban geology; geologically-significant aspects of agriculture; experiences at museums or on nature hikes; cultural or philosophical discussions of books or films, etc. 
      * [Suggestions for writing geology reflections](earth.htm)

** **

  * **Rock Collection, 20%**  
48 unlabelled rock and mineral specimens will be provided to each student to
organize into a permanent student collection. Each collection provides a
nucleus for a lifetime of rock collecting, and should be useful in the future
classrooms of education majors. Collections will be inspected and graded in
two stages during the semester (see [Course Schedule](sch.htm)).

    * Organizing your [Rock Collection](collections/index.htm)

** **

  * **Final examination, 10%**  
The final examination is required of all students. It will consist primarily
of selected quiz questions plus brief essay questions pertaining to the
semester activities and course readings. Study questions for the essays will
be distributed in advance.

![](images/marblerule.gif)

  

![](images/greenpt.gif)Oklahoma Baptist University is committed to providing
equal access to University programs and services for all students. Under
University policy and federal and state laws, students with documented
disabilities are entitled to reasonable accommodations to ensure the student
has an equal opportunity to perform in class. If any member of the class has
such a disability and needs special accommodations, please report to Mr. Bobby
Canty in the **Student Services Center, GC 101** , as soon as possible to
discuss possible accommodations. Reasonable accommodations may be arranged
after verification of your situation. Do not hesitate to contact me if any
assistance is needed in this process.

  

###### | Top |

##
![](images/marblerule.gif)![](images/backarrow.gif)![](images/bison.gif)**Related
Web pages**

  * [Earth Sciences](index.htm)
  * [Basic Celestial Phenomena](../planet/bcp/index.htm)
  * [Constellations](../planet/bcp/aster/constellations/index.htm) Index Page 
  * [OBU Planetarium](../planet/index.htm)
  * [Cosmology and Cultures](../planet/cc/index.htm)
  * [Unified Studies Natural Science](../us/index.htm)
  * [Division of Natural Sciences and Mathematics](../index.htm)
  * [Mabee Learning Center](http://www.okbu.edu/library/index.html)
  * [Oklahoma Baptist University](http://www.okbu.edu/) 

![](images/marblerule.gif)

[![](images/macmade.gif)](http://the-tech.mit.edu/Macmade/) Page made with
[HyperNote](http://www.hypernote.com/) and [Claris Home
Page](http://www.claris.com/) Kerry Magruder, Planetarium Director, [Home
page](http://www.hypernote.com/~magruder) or
[Email](mailto:KVMagruder@aol.com)



