Rev. 01/24/01

**HISTORY 2111: UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1865**

PREREQUISITES: READ 0099 and ENGL 0099

3 CREDIT HOURS

FALL SEMESTER 2001

**

PROFESSOR: DR. PETER B. MAKAYA, J.D.,Ph.D.**

OFFICE: LB 219

OFFICE HOURS:  8:30-8:50 AM (MWF)

: 8:30-9:20AM(TR)

: 1:00-3:30pm(MWF)

: 2:00-3:30 PM (TR)

TELEPHONE # :478/274-7807

**

E-MAIL: pmakaya@warrior.mgc.peachnet.edu**

_**

TEXTBOOK**_: GEORGE BROWN TINDALL AND DAVID Emory SHI, **_AMERICA: A NARRATIVE
HISTORY_ , A BRIEF FIFTH EDITION (NEW YORK, N.Y.: W.W. NORTON AND COMPANY,
INC., 2000).

_

COURSE GOALS_**:

As a result of taking this course, a student should be able to:

1\. Demonstrate an understanding of the development of American social and
political life.

2\. Identify and evaluate the major political, social, economic, and cultural
trends in United States and Georgia history from the early colonial period to
the Civil War.

3\. Interpret and discuss historical data from the text, lectures, class
discussions and other sources.

4\. Exhibit a comprehension of the historical processes of continuity and
change so as to develop a better appreciation of the nation's past and present
circumstances.

5\. Understand the role of individuals in shaping American society and
political life

6\. Better understand how history relates to his or her own life.

**

_COURSE DESCRIPTION_ :  **History 2111:United States History to 1865 is a
survey of U.S. History to the post-Civil War period (from the Age of discovery
through the Civil War). Emphasis will be on Georgia and the South in the
making of the nation.

History 2111 gives exemption from the U.S. and Georgia history examinations as
required by the Georgia General Assembly.

_**

COURSE EVALUATION**_: Evaluation of this course will be based on the following
criteria:

1\. _**Completion of Five Tests**_. All the five tests, including the Final
Exam, **MUST** be taken. Make-up tests will ONLY be given in cases of genuine
emergencies or participation in a recognized College function. Proof may be
required of all excused absences. All make-up exams _**MUST**_ be completed
before the next scheduled exam. Students will be given five (5) essays for the
make-up test. All regular class exams will include multiple-choice questions,
identifications, and essay questions.

The five exams to be given during the semester will constitute 90% of the
total grade. The remainder will come from your critical book review.

2\. _**Class Participation**_ : Class participation is highly encouraged.

3\. _**A CRITICAL BOOK REVIEW ASSIGNMENT**_ : A critical book review is
required during the semester. It should be typed, doubled spaced and should be
three to four pages long. Font size should be 12.

Your book review, which is NOT a book report, should start by giving full
information

about the author, title, place of publication, and the number of pages.
_**EXAMPLE**_ : Norman Brown, _Life Against Death: The Psychoanalytic Meaning
of History_ (New York: Vintage Books,1959),pp. (This information should appear
on the cover sheet)

In your critical review, you should discuss the author's purpose for writing
the book and the extent to which, in your opinion, the author accomplished or
failed to accomplish his/her aims. You may pick out several themes or
arguments that strike you as important and discuss them critically. Give
specific examples or illustrations of the book's theme, thesis, or arguments
that the author has developed and then a general evaluation of the book. Show
the value of the book, and the book's strengths and weaknesses. Show how
effectively or logically the book's theme or argument was presented. Determine
whether or not the interpretation, or the conclusion convinced you. State
whether or not you can recommend the book to someone else and state your
reasons clearly. **REMEMBER!** the main part of your critical review is your
own opinion of how well the author did his job. You must state clearly whether
the author had a definite point of view or not. **You must use the third
person pronoun, and also the past tense.**

**

ATTENDANCE POLICY**: Attendance is expected at all scheduled class meetings
unless circumstances warrant an absence. If a student amasses a total of six
class meetings, he/she will be withdrawn from the class. A probation notice
will be sent to the student after four class absences and no further notice
will be given thereafter. If the withdrawal occurs prior to or on midterm
date, the student will receive the grade of _W_. If the withdrawal occurs
after the midterm date, the student will receive a _WF_.

**

WITHDRAWAL FROM COURSES:  **A student may withdraw from a course with the
grade of _W_ providing that the student has correctly followed the drop-add
procedure. After the midpoint of the grading period, designated as the mid-
term date in the College calendar, students who officially withdraw or are
administratively withdrawn from a course will receive from their instructor
the grade of WF except in cases of hardship as determined by the Vice
President for Academic Affairs.

**COURSE OUTLINE**

Brief definition of history

Chapter 1: Discovery and Settlement

**Test 1**

Chapter 2: Colonial Ways of Life

Chapter 3: The Imperial Perspective

Chapter 4: From Empire to Independence

**Test 2**

Chapter 5: The American Revolution

Chapter 6: Shaping A Federal Union

Chapter 7: The Federalists: Washington and Adams

**Test 3**

Chapter 8: Republicanism: Jefferson and Madison

Chapter 9: Nationalism and Sectionalism

Chapter 10: The Jacksonian Impulse

**Test 4**

Chapter 11: The Dynamics of Growth

Chapter 12 Romanticism, Religion, and Reform

Chapter 13 Manifest Destiny

Chapter 14 The Old South: An American Tragedy

Chapter 15: The Crisis of the Union

Chapter 16: The War of the Union

**Final Exam  **

























