# Medieval Europe (HIST 423) Syllabus

Winter Quarter, 2002

Section 01 17:00-19:00 TTh

Teacher: Marianne Delaporte

### A. OFFICE HOURS

|

Monday |

Tuesday |

Wednesday |

Thursday |

Friday  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
8:00 |   |

|   |

|  
  
9:00 |

  |

  |

  |

Chapel |

  
  
10:00 |

Office |

  |

Office |

Office |

Office  
  
11:00 |

Office |   |

Office |

Office | Office  
  
12:00 |

|

  |

|

|  
  
1:00 |

Office |

  |

Office |

Office |  
  
2:00 |

|

  |

|

|

  
  
3:00 |

|

  |

|

Meetings |

  
  
4:00 |

|   |

|

Meeting |

  
  
5:00 |

|   |

|

|

  
  
Office Address: Irwin Hall 209B

Telephone: (707) 965-6302

E-mail Address:
[marianne.delaporte@ptsem.edu](mailto:marianne.delaporte@ptsem.edu)



### B. COURSE OBJECTIVES

  
1\. To gain a sound grasp of the major developments of the Medieval period in
Europe.

2\. To gain an understanding of the 'genius' of medieval culture.

3\. To become familiar with the major points of debate in Medieval
historiography.

4\. To develop the following skills:

  * a. The ability to gather information efficiently and critically; 
  * b. The ability to think critically about what is heard or read; 
  * c. The ability to form judgments which are consistent with the evidence; 
  * d. The ability to communicate those judgments clearly and cogently.

### C. METHODS

1\. Classes four time a week: the first three classes of the week will be
lectures, the last class a discussion, debate, or presentation.

2\. Supervised reading of various texts from or about the Medieval period.

3\. Reading: Lectures are a guide to, rather than an exhaustive analysis of, a
topic. Wide and intelligent reading is necessary if students are to be well-
informed.

4\. Discussions, research paper and examination: to enable students to
determine how near they are to reaching the objectives of the course.

### D. REQUIREMENTS

1\. Reading: You should aim to spend at least six hours each week reading,
making notes, preparing the essay and preparing for the discussions.

2\. Discussions: there will be a discussion or presentation with a question
and answer session every week in which each student will be expected to
participate. In a chosen week a student will either lead out in a discussino
or make a presentation to the rest of the class based on a monograph on the
Medieval period; at least two days before the discussion, the student will
provide the rest of the class with a list of questions or points to be covered
and a bibliography. (Students who miss these discussions without valid excuse
will have their final grade reduced by at least one letter.)

3\. Research Paper: 15-20 pages (typed) - due on March 8

4\. Final examination: Wednesday, March 20, 12.30-14.30

###  Textbooks

Chr¨¦tien de Troyes, _Ywain: The Knight of the Lion_ , Waveland Press

Michael Goodich, _Other Middle Ages: Witnesses at the Margins of Medieval
Society_ , University of Pennsylvania Press

C. Warren Hollister, _Medieval Europe: A Short History_ 8th ed., McGraw-Hill

### F. GRADING

Students who have participated in all the discussions may choose to have their
grade calculated in either of the following ways:

1\. Based solely on the research paper.

2\. Based on the discussion, research paper, and final examination (30, 40,
30%)



2\. Solely on the basis of the final examination.

|

A |

91-100 |

B- |

70-75 |

D+ |

50-55  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
|

A- |

85-91 |

C+ |

65-70 |

D |

45-50  
  
|

B+ |

80-85 |

C |

60-65 |

D- |

40-45  
  
|

B |

75-80 |

C- |

55-60 |

F |

Under 40  
  
###  G. Research Paper Question

On any aspect of the Middle Ages chosen by the student which has been approved
by the teacher.

###  H. Monographs on the Medieval Period

Bloch, Marc L. B. _Feudal Society_ , translated by L. A. Manyon. New York:
Routledge, 1989 (original translation published by University of Chicago Press
in 1961).

Emmerson, Richard K. _Antichrist in the Middle Ages_ : _A Study of Medieval
Apocalypticism, Art, and Literature_. Seattle: University of Washington Press,
1981.

Hanawalt, Barbara A. _Growing Up in Medieval London_ : _The Experience of
Childhood in History_. New York: Oxford University Press, 1993.

Herlihy, David. _Opera Muliebria_ : _Women and Work in Medieval Europe_. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1990.

Knowles, David. _The Evolution of Medieval Thought_ , 2nd edition. New York:
Longman, 1988.

Reeves, Compton. _Pleasures and Pastimes in Medieval England_. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1998.

Richards, Jeffrey. _Sex, Dissidence and Damnation_ : _Minority Groups in the
Middle Ages_. New York: Routledge, 1990.

Rubin, Miri. _Corpus Christi_ : _The Eucharist in Late Medieval Culture_. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1991.

###  I. Topics to be Covered

1\. Dark Ages or Middle Ages? (A historiographical approach)

2\. A survey of Medieval Europe's history

3\. Medieval religion

4\. Medieval philosophy

5\. The impact of Medieval literature

6\. Medieval society

7\. Medieval politics ans statecraft

8\. Medieval Europe and the rest of the world

9\. Reflecting on the Middle Ages . . . towards the Renaissance . . . .

### **Readings**

_Medieval Religion_

_Medieval Europe_ , ch. 4, 9 & 11; _Other Middle Ages_ , Section V

_Medieval Philosophy_

_Medieval Europe_ , ch. 6 & 16

_Medieval Literature_

_Medieval Europe_ , ch. 13

_Medieval Society_

_Medieval Europe_. ch. 8  & 14; _Other Middle Ages_ , Sections I-IV, VI

_Medieval Politics and Statecraft_

_Medieval Europe_ , ch. 7, 12 & 15

_Medieval Europe and the Rest of the World_

_Medieval Europe_ , ch. 5 & 10

_Reflecting on the Middle Ages_

_The Middle Ages_ , vol.1: ch. 16, 28, 29, 35; _The Middle Ages_ , vol. 2: ch.
17, 36-39



* * *

[Back to: Index of Links for HIST 423
Page](http://www.puc.edu/Faculty/Keith_Francis/Hist_101/wwwkf.html)

