![Loukia K. Sarroub](../images/topbar/topbar2.gif) |

  
  
---|---  
  
![Leaf](../images/topbar/leaf.gif)[![Home](../images/topbar/home.gif)](../index.html)[![Courses](../images/topbar/courses.gif)](index.html)[![Publications](../images/topbar/publications.gif)](../publications/index.html)[![Research](../images/topbar/research.gif)](../research/index.html)[![Links](../images/topbar/links.gif)](../links/index.html)  
  
  
  
---  
|

![Leaf](../images/leaves/leaf4.gif)

|

# Syllabus

Ethnographic Methods in C&I; 725

Tuesday, 4:35-7:15p

438 Teacher Education Bldg.

Spring 2001

Loukia K. Sarroub

Office Hours: by appointment

Office: 444-C Teacher Education Bldg.

Telephone: 263-465, E-mail: lsarroub@education.wisc.edu



|

![Leaf](../images/leaves/leaf1.gif)  
  
---|---|---  
Ethnography is a research approach developed in anthropology and sociology and
directed at obtaining in-depth information about the "lived experience" of
groups of people in naturally occurring settings. Ethnographic method has
generally been defined as extended contact with a given community with an
emphasis given to description of local particularities, including individuals¨ª
perspectives and interpretations of their world. In this course we will learn
how "to do" ethnography by considering various examples of book and article-
length ethnographies and by proposing and implementing a small research
project. Discussion and readings will focus on the place of ethnographic
research in education, theoretical foundations of ethnography, methods of
ethnographic research, analysis of ethnographic data, the writing of an
ethnographic report, and the utilization of findings. We will also explore the
use of video, audio, and print representations in data collection and in the
dissemination of ethnographic research.

The readings chosen for the course reflect a range of "problematiques" with
which researchers and educators grapple in the field of education. Hence, we
will consider among other issues, relationships among schools, parents,
students, social and economic class, achievement, ethnicity, culture,
nationality, age, race, gender, religion, language use, identity politics,
etc. In learning how to do ethnography we will examine how other ethnographers
have theorized about the "nitty-gritty" of everyday life in various places and
times, and how they represent their ethnographic data and their roles as
researchers. We will examine salient notions of reflexivity and representation
as we engage in fieldwork and course readings.

Throughout the course we will emphasize the connection between ethnography as
method and ethnography as a theoretical space or site. As such, we will
evaluate both our work and the work of others as being historically,
politically, socially, and linguistically situate

**Course Requirements**

I invite you to be active participants in this course. Please read the
assignments before class and be ready to participate in the discussions. At a
minimum, you should be ready to help others understand concepts and arguments
in materials¨®by asking about those points you don't understand or by thinking
about how to paraphrase sections that you understand but find difficult. The
quality of discussion depends on your contributions. In case of an unavoidable
absence, please leave a message for me in my office before class.

Participation in class discussion will include a written critical reaction
(3-4 pages) to one of the books and related readings. I will give you a set of
guidelines for writing the critical reaction papers. A pair of students will
choose one book and any related readings and present them to the class. You
will each hand in your own critical reaction, but you will be expected to
collaborate on your in-class commentary. For class discussion, be prepared to
situate the book in the course, explain the author¨ªs role as a
researcher/ethnographer, suggest what you think worked for the author or what
might work better, and pose 2-3 questions for discussion.

As novice ethnographers, you will learn best by doing fieldwork. Because the
semester imposes time constraints that are not compatible with ethnographic
research methods, we will make adjustments to get the most of the fieldwork
experience. You will have the option to work on a project by yourself, in
pairs, or in groups of three-to-four members. If you decide to work with
others, you are expected to share the design, data generation, analysis, and
the ethnographic report. Because we are on such a short time schedule, the
amount of data that you are asked to collect is small and related to the grade
for which you are working. Whether you work alone or as part of a group, you
will form a research group (2-3 members) within which you can share your
efforts and debrief. These groups will remain the same throughout the
semester.

At each phase of the project you will receive a detailed response from me and
your research group. You should use these responses to improve fieldwork
techniques. All work turned in on time will be returned in one week with my
comments; if materials are late there are no guarantees about a prompt
response or the level of feedback you will receive. The final project will be
a portfolio of your work with a dual purpose. On the one hand it should show
what you have learned about ethnographic methods; on the other hand, it
involves the construction of a theoretical site that presents what you've
learned about the research question you've studied. Final projects are due May
8. Late portfolios will not be accepted.

**Written Assignements**

> Critical reaction paper (3-4 typed pages and double-spaced)  
>  A short (2-3 page) project proposal including a problem statement, research
questions, and methods of data collection and analysis  
>  One set of field notes  
>  One interview transcription  
>  One ethnographic analysis including a domain analysis, vignette, and
analytic memos  
>  An outline of the ethnographic case (text to guide my reading of your
analysis)  
>  A final project report

I encourage you to talk with me outside of class as the semester progresses
about the course or any other interest you may have related to education and
research. Office hours are scheduled by appointment. Please make arrangements
in class, by phone at 263-4655, or by email at lsarroub@education.wisc.edu.

**Course Readings**

Books are available at the University Bookstore and are on Reserve at the
CIMC. A course packet is available on reserve and on-line at the CIMC. You may
also purchase the course packet at AMS Print (262-6216) in the Memorial Union
on campus.

**Required Books:**

Duneier, M. 1992. _Slim¨ªs Table: Race, respectability, and masculinity._
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

El-Or, T. 1994. _Educated and ignorant: Ultraorthodox Jewish women and their
world._ Boulder: Lynne Rienner Publishers, Inc.

Emerson, R. M., Fretz, R. I., Shaw, L. L. 1995. _Writing ethnographic
fieldnotes._ Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hammersley, M. and Atkinson, P. 1995. _Ethnography: Principles in practice._
London: Routledge.

Jackson, P. W. 1990. _Life in the classrooms._ New York: Teachers College
Press.

Lareau, A. 1993. _Home advantage: Social class and parental intervention in
elementary education._ NY: Falmer Press.

Peshkin, A. 1986. _God¨ªs Choice: The total world of a fundamentalist Christian
school._ Chicago: University of Chicago Press

Rabinow, P. 1977. _Reflections on fieldwork in Morocco_. Berkeley: University
of California Press.

Raissiguier, C. 1994. Becoming women, becoming workers: Identity formation in
a French vocational school. Albany: SUNY Press.

Spradley, James P. 1979. _The ethnographic interview._ NY: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich College Publishers.

Wolcott, H. F. 1990. _Writing Up Qualitative Research_. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.

Wolf, M. _The thrice told tale: Feminism, postmodernism, & ethnographic
responsibility._ Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.

**Recommended Books:**

Erickson, F. and Wilson, J. 1982. _Sights and sounds of life in schools: A
resource guide to film and videotape for research and education, Research
Series No. 125._ East Lansing: Institute for Research on Teaching of the
College of Education at Michigan State University.

Hammersley, M. 1995. _What¨ªs wrong with ethnography_? London: Routledge.

Lareau, A., Shultz, J. 1996. _Journeys through ethnography: Realistic accounts
of fieldwork._ Boulder, CO: Westview.

**Course Packet:**

Adler, P. and Adler, P. 1998. Observational techniques. In Norman K. Denzin &
Yvonna S. Lincoln (Eds.), _Collecting and interpreting qualitative materials._
London: Sage. Pp. 79-109.

Fontana, A. and Frey, J. Interviewing: The art of science. In Norman K. Denzin
& Yvonna S. Lincoln (Eds.), _Collecting and interpreting qualitative
materials_. London: Sage. Pp. 47-78.

Geertz, C. 1973. "Thick description: Toward an interpretive theory of
culture." _In The Interpretation of Cultures._ NY: Basic Books. Pp. 3-30.

Geertz, C. 1988. Being there: Anthropology and the scene of being there. _In
Works and lives: The anthropologist as author._ Stanford: Stanford University
Press. Pp. 1-24.

Lareau, A. 1987. "Social class differences in family-school relationships: The
importance of cultural capital." _Sociology of education_ 60, pp. 73-85.

Macleod, J. 1996. On the making of Ain¨ªt no makin¨ª it. In Annette Lareau and
Jeffrey Shultz (Eds.), _Journeys through ethnography: Realistic accounts of
fieldwork._ Boulder: Westview.

Miles, M. and Huberman, A. M. 1994. "Codes and Coding." In Qualitative data
analysis, second edition. London: .Sage. Pp. 55-72

Page, R., Samson, Y., & Crockett, M. Reporting ethnography to informants.
_Harvard educational review_ 68 (3), pp. 333.

Reinharz, S. 1984. Reclaiming self-awareness as a source of insight. _In On
becoming a social scientist_. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers. Pp.
240-263.

Richardson, L. 1998. Writing: A method of inquiry. In Norman K. Denzin &
Yvonna S. Lincoln (Eds.), _Collecting and interpreting qualitative materials._
London: Sage. Pp. 345-371.

Sarroub, L. K. (In press). The sojourner experience of Yemeni American high
school students: An ethnographic portrait. _Harvard Education Review_ (Fall
2001).

Theophano, J. and Curtis. 1996. Reflections on a tale told twice. In Annette
Lareau and Jeffrey Shultz (Eds.), _Journeys through ethnography: Realistic
accounts of fieldwork_. Boulder: Westview.

Van Maanen, J. 1988. Confessional tales. In _Tales of the field: On writing
ethnography._ Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Pp. 73-81.

Van Maanen, J. 1988. Realist tales. In _Tales of the field: On writing
ethnography._ Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Pp. 45-54.

Wacquant, L. In press. Whores, slaves, and stallions: Languages of
exploitation and accommodation among prizefighers. _Body and Society_ 6 (3).

Williams, R. 1981. "Towards a sociology of culture." In _The sociology of
culture_. NY: Schocken Books. Pp. 1-32.

Willis, P. and Trondman, M. 2000. Manifesto for Ethnography. _Ethnography 1_
(1), pp. 1-16.

**Grading Policy**

Grading in this course is based on the amount of work you are willing to do
and the quality of work you will present. I am assuming that assignments will
be completed on time and that they will reflect good effort, theory, and
method. I also expect that you will be active participants both in writing and
in discussion. Attendance is required and I reserve the right to return work
that is not up to an acceptable standard for either reworking or changing the
nature of the grade you have agreed to pursue. Late portfolios will not be
accepted.

A thoughtful and high quality portfolio should include the following:

  * Critical reaction paper (3-4 pages)
  * 4 sets of field notes
  * 2 interviews (one transcribed and one whose contents are catalogued) 
  * Analysis of the data collected: domain analysis, memos, vignettes 
  * Final project rep



![Leaf](../images/leaves/leaf5.gif)  
  
  
  
[Home](../index.html) | [Courses](index.html) |
[Publications](../publications/index.html) |
[Research](../research/index.html) | [Links](../links/index.html)  
  


