**![SYLLABUS](_derived/syllabus.htm_cmp_wrldfnc010_bnr.gif)**  
[![Up](_derived/up_cmp_wrldfnc010_hbtn.gif)](comm312.htm)
![SYLLABUS](_derived/syllabus.htm_cmp_wrldfnc010_hbtn_p.gif)
[![PROJECTS](_derived/projects.htm_cmp_wrldfnc010_hbtn.gif)](projects.htm)
[![READINGS](_derived/readings.htm_cmp_wrldfnc010_hbtn.gif)](readings.htm)

  
  
---  
| |

**ORAL COMMUNICATION IN BUSINESS   **

**99 F - 00 S**

![](_themes/wrldfnc/worhorsa.gif)



_

**TEXTBOOK/READINGS:**_

Adler and Elmhorst: _COMMUNICATING AT WORK, 6th ed._

Handbook/Assignments Packet

Videotape: 2-6 hour VHS format

Reserve Readings on COMM 312 Website

_

**COURSE DESCRIPTION:**_

COMM 312 is an introduction to the study of communication for non-majors. As
Adler & Elmhorst state, "Virtually everyone communicates at work...research
validates the importance of communication-related skills, including working on
teams, teaching others, serving customers, leading, negotiating, working with
cultural diversity, interviewing, listening, conducting meetings, and
resolving conflict."  Therefore, this introductory course includes 1) an
analysis of the types and principles of **all** communication inherent in the
business and professional setting and 2) an emphasis on understanding and
improving **all** basic communication skills from communication theories to
message aspects, from developing relationships to resolving conflicts, and
from analyzing audiences to questioning, interviewing, researching,
supporting, organizing, and delivering information within **all** contexts.
This is **NOT** a public speaking course, but it is an opportunity to
understand the theories and to improve the skills of face-to-face
communication in today's high-tech world.



_

**COURSE ACTIVITIES:**_

4 in-class presentations: 3 individual and 1 group

Written reports of research: overview of group presentation

Written audience analyses and outlines for public presentations

Three **50 minute** examinations: questions written  & selected by all COMM
312             instructors

_

**ATTENDANCE POLICY:**_

Because of the limited number of hours allowed for each of the discussion
areas as well as the group work and films, daily attendance is expected.  On
the days you are to present a project or to take an exam, you will NOT be
excused from class unless:

l.  you have been officially excused  _PRIOR TO_ the class meeting (See p.22
Policies), or

2. you have a  _substantiated_   illness ( _DOCTOR'S_ _WRITTEN CONFIRMATION_ as the Health Center can  _NOT_ confirm type nor extent of illness)   or  _verified_ family emergency.    _**Excuses must be presented the day of your return to class for makeup work to be scheduled.**_

Any unexcused absence will mean an automatic "0" on the assignment to be
performed or turned in or on an examination.  Papers will be accepted for
grading ONLY DURING THE CLASS PERIOD DUE!  Late papers will be read for
comments only, but NO letter grade will be given.  See syllabus for assigned
due dates.  All makeup exams will be essay question format. If you have any
questions, please see me BEFORE the problem arises.

_

** **_

_**GRADING POLICY:**_

The Department of Communication adheres to the following grading policy:

Many students seem to believe that they start with an "A" in a class and then
work their way down when they "do something wrong."  Actually, the reverse is
true.  Students begin with a zero and work their way up if they "do something
right."

Grades on individual projects, exams, or performances in the "D" range suggest
that the work was done but is of poor quality.  Grades in the "C" range
suggest that the work fulfills the basic requirements of the syllabus and is
of average quality.  Grades in the "B" range suggest that the work fulfills
the basic requirements and is of high quality.  Grades in the "A" range
suggest that the work is exceptional.  Thus, good grades are earned, not an
inherent right.  Just as "F's" are not automatically given in every class,
neither are "A's."

Grades will be computed based on points earned for each assignment. The packet
describes the requirements and grading criteria for each of the major
assignments. ALL written assignments are to be typed in proper form with
correct spelling and punctuation and are due on the day of presentation.
**Late assignments will NOT receive points.**    Points will be assigned
accordingly; the total number of points at the end of the semester will be
used to determine course grades. A Bell curve is NOT applied in the grading of
this course. **Plus and minus grades** may be applied to   _point totals_ on
either side of the dividing lines.

_**160 points**_ :     **Projects:** **  Proj. 1** \- 20 Oral Resume

                                                    \- 10 RO w/Written Resume

                                        **Proj. 2** \- 10 Speaker Introduction

                                                    \- 24 Intro.Outline / Interview questions/Audience                                                              Analysis/  BO / RO & References

                                                    \- 40 Information presentation

                                        **Proj. 3** \- 20 Group presentation

                                                    \- 20 Individual presentations

                                                    \- 10 Group Overview, Individual Outline &                                                                  References

                                                    -   6 Group & Peer evaluation

**_240_ points** : 3 hourly exams

**400 points possible**

**NOTE:   5 POINTS WILL BE DEDUCTED FOR EACH MANDATORY DAY OF ATTENDANCE YOU
MISS!**

**EXTRA CREDIT WORK DOES NOT EXIST!   Class attendance and participation are
considered to be requirements of the class, not something that earns you
"bonus" credits.**

_**

TEST SCORES WILL BE POSTED BY E-MAIL ONLY!**_

To encourage all students to become computer and E-mail literate, the scores
for all exams will be posted only by E-mail. Revisions of assignments and
additional information and materials will be sent via E-mail.

**_

DROP/ADD POLICY_: **

All Drop/ Adds will be handled through the University Phone Drop/ Add system.

_**

REGISTRATION STATUS:**_ **

**

Because of the performance orientation of this course,  **this class may _NOT_
be taken as Listener / Audit status**. In addition, **this course may _NOT_ to
be taken if you have** **previously taken COMM 255 Fundamentals of
Communication.**

![](_themes/wrldfnc/worhorsa.gif)  
  
---|---|---

