**UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN-RIVER FALLS  
SOCIOLOGY 445  
POWER AND INEQUALITY  
**  
I

INSTRUCTOR: Dr. Timothy E. Nissen  
  
OFFICE: 319 KFA  
  
TELEPHONE: 3992  
  
E-MAIL: [tim.e.nissen@uwrf.edu](mailto:tim.e.nissen@uwrf.edu)  
  
  
  

All communities divide themselves into the few and the many.  The first are
the rich and well-borne, the other the mass of the people....  The people are
turbulent and changing; they seldom judge or determine right....  Give,
therefore, to the first class a distinct, permanent share in the government.
They will check the unsteadiness of the second, and as they cannot receive any
advantage by a change, they therefore will ever maintain good government.



                                Alexander Hamilton (1780)

  **WELCOME**

Inequality is everywhere on the agenda.  It lights the fire of political
conflict anytime people experience a disparity between their condition and the
condition of others and wish that the disparity- inequality- changed.  It is
these very same disparities which serve as the subject of electoral contests,
interest group competition, and political protest.  The disparity may exist
between classes, between women and men, or among racial and ethnic groups.
The very role that our modern welfare state plays in allocating benefits puts
the issue of inequality at the very center of political life.



This is not new however.  Ever since the beginning of Western philosophy for
instance, people have recognized the role of social classes.  It was
recognized that some individuals and families had more money, more influence,
more prestige than their neighbors.  It was also recognized that the
differences were more than personal or familial.  What they recognized was
that the patterns of inequalities resulted in strata of families or
individuals who shared very similar positions within the societies.  Society
was  divided into a hierarchy where each level had its own interests and
goals.  Interests and goals which all persons within the level or strata
shared in common, but which differed from those found in the strata below
and/or above them.  This is the observation Hamilton made.  A society where
the rich sought social stability to preserve their advantages, but the poor
worked for social change that would bring them a more equal share of these
societal resources.

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**  
  
  

**Overview of the content and purpose of the course** : It is this issue of
inequality, of social stratification, of the power inherent in this, to which
this  
course addresses itself. It seeks to examine the same questions which were
historically the first questions posed by sociology. Questions such as  
those identified by Dahrendorf: "Why is there inequality among men [women]?
Where do its causes lie? Can it be reduced or even abolished  
altogether?   Or do we have to accept it as a necessary element in the
structure of human society?" (Ralf Dahrendorf, The Logic of Social
Hierarchies, 1970) Beware however, that as you consider these questions and
engage in sociology, whether in the mode of science or in the idiom of action,
you must acknowledge the moral setting surrounding your sociological analyses
and social stratification. For instance, this can be most clearly seen in the
consideration of whether inequality can be abolished. If one answers yes, does
this mean you want to blot out human beauty or stifle the impulse to
accomplish great deeds? Does it mean a society depicted in Vonnegut's
"Harrison Bergeron," where those who can think must wear headphones blaring
ear-splitting noises to interrupt their train of thought, or those who are
physically gifted must walk under the weight of bags of buckshot attached to
their limbs? (Kurt Vonnegut, Welcome to the Monkey House, 1970) In other
words, what, if anything, is owed to those who will not or cannot be judged by
their achievements? This question is really a part of a much larger moral
question which we must all explore: who belongs to the human community, and to
what minimum of protections or benefits does their membership entitle them?  
  
In order to assist you in this exploration, this course will help you see that
challenges in society to methods of distributing chances for personal
fulfillment often imply conflicts over what sorts of people human beings
aspire to be, as well as, what forms of social organization fit those
aspirations. Keep in mind that neither sociology nor this class can tell you
what type of society you ought to prefer. What this class does attempt to do
however, is remind you that one sign of having been educated is the capacity
to identify a moral choice when one is posed, and to understand that its
resolution almost always requires courage and candor, as much as it does
information. At the very least you should come away from this course better
able to make sense of a complicated world. If, on top of that, you are also
prepared to make the world work well and maybe even to make it good, then we
will all benefit.  
  
**For whom the course is intended** : This course is designed for students who
are interested in the questions posed above and are prepared to scrutinize
their social worlds.  
  
**Prerequisites of the course and its place within the curriculum** : This
course is an advanced course within the sociology curriculum and is a required
course for non-Sociology major, Criminal Justice minors.  

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND POLICIES**

**Attendance** : Students are expected to attend class regularly and to
participate in class discussion. In case of absence from class, the student is
responsible for material covered, announcements made concerning any changes in
course outline, etc.  
  
Attendance is part of the class work component of your grade and will be one
of the major deciding factors in all borderline situations.  
  
**Deadlines** : All deadlines are indicated in the syllabus or will be
assigned in class at least one week in advance. Deadlines will be extended in
only the most extenuating circumstances or when appropriate for the whole
class. Late submissions--1.0 percent of the assignment value will be deducted
per day the assignment is late. For this reason, make sure you discuss your
situation with me before an assignment is due, not after.  
  
**Ethical Standards** : Demonstration of ethical behavior is expected in all
aspects of academic performance. Employers must be able to depend upon high
ethical standards of behavior from the professionals they hire. Consequently,
particular attention is paid to honesty in preparing for and taking exams,
doing written and oral assignments. Examples of dishonest behavior would
include cheating on an exam by copying another student's work or bringing any
disallowed information into the exam site. Plagiarizing in an assignment is
another example of dishonest behavior. (Information about proper citation of
sources is attached to the syllabus.) The above examples would result in a
failing grade for the exam/ assignment and notation of the infraction in the
student's file.  
  
**Texts** : You will have two texts for this class. The first is _Social
Stratification in the U.S.: The American Profile Poster_ by Stephen J. Rose.
The second is _Social Inequality: Patterns & Processes _ by Martin N. Marger.  
  
**General Responsibilities** : First, you are expected to keep up with the
appropriate sections in your textbooks/assigned readings and to be thoroughly
familiar with material to be covered in class. The instructor will not lecture
from the texts, but will expect you to be able to discuss and/or write about
the material assigned in class. This is part of your class participation
grade.  
  
Second, you are expected to keep abreast of current issues as presented
through the media and to be able to relate these issues to class discussion.  
  
Finally, you are expected to contribute to class discussion. Since such
participation should exemplify a scientific perspective, you are encouraged to
be objective and open minded. Most importantly, you are encouraged to develop
an awareness of your own biases and to develop a willingness to alter your
thinking in view of new knowledge.  
  
**Office hours** : Always remember that I am here for your benefit. Use me as
you need and don't be afraid to ask for help or assistance. If the hours
listed at the beginning of the syllabus are inconvenient, please see me after
class or call me to set up an appointment for another time. Do not wait until
it is too late!  
  
**Course Requirements** : There are two basic requirements for this course:
participation and tests in addition to optional assignments.  
  
**Methods of evaluating your understanding** : The two requirements mentioned
above form the basis by which your dreaded GRADE will be determined.  
  
_PARTICIPATION_ :  
Attendance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50  
Participation. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . 25  
Group research project . . . . . _100_  
TOTAL..................................175  
  
_TESTS_ :  
Midterm. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100  
Final ... _100_  
TOTAL...............................200  
  
_OPTIONAL_ :  
Cultural Artifacts .. .25  
Scrapbook/Journal .... 50  
Term Paper .. .75  
Essays .. .30  
  
Your grade will be determined on a 375 point scale, based upon points
accumulated as follows:  
  
A = 368+  
B = 330-367  
C = 292-329  
D = 255-291

**COURSE OUTLINE AND CLASS SCHEDULE**

**PART ONE: INTRODUCTION**  
  
I. Case Biographies and Profile Poster  
  
II. Questions Raised  
    A. Basic Question  
    B. Most Basic Question  
  
III. How Did We Get There From Here?  
  
  
**PART TWO: ANSWERING THE BASIC QUESTION--@Who gets what, and why?**  
  
_Section One: Formulation of Knowledge  
_  
I. Basic Concepts  & Definitions  
    A. Social Differentiation  
    B. Social inequality  
    C. Social stratification/structured inequality  
    D. Class  
        Reading: Chapter 1  
  
II. Varieties of Human Stratification Systems--Historical Review  
    A. Primitive Communal  
    B. Slave  
    C. Caste  
    D. Estate  
    E. Class  
        Reading: Chapter 6, p. 136-147  
  
**Section Two: Who Gets What?**  
  
I. Variables Defining State and Class Systems  
    A. Economic Dimension  
        1\. Occupation  
        2\. Income  
        3\. Wealth  
            Reading: Chapter 2, 5, p. 110-119  
  
    B. Social Dimension  
        1\. Prestige  
        2\. Socialization  
        3\. Association  
    C. Political  
        1\. Power  
            Reading: Chapter 5, p. 120-135  
     
**Section Three: Why Does Who Get What  
**  
I. Legitimating Inequalities  
            Reading: Chapter 9  
  
II. Theoretical Understandings of Stratification  
    A. Dominant paradigms: functional and conflict  
    B. Paradigm typology  
        1\. Critical order  
        2\. Uncritical order  
        3\. Critical-conflict  
        4\. Uncritical-conflict  
            Reading: Chapter 8  
  
**Section Four: Change in Stratification Systems  
   ** A. Mobility  
    B. Succession  
            Reading: Chapter 6, p. 148-163  
  
**PART THREE: GLOBAL STRATIFICATION SYSTEM**  
  
**PART FOUR: DISADVANTAGED GROUPS**  
I. Gender  
II. Race  & Ethnicity  
III. Disabilities  
IV. Sexual Orientation  
            Reading: Chapters 3,4,10-13

**ASSIGNMENT DETAILS**

**Class Work** : Your participation grade is composed of three components. The
first two are your class attendance (50 points) and your willingness to
voluntarily contribute to class discussion and activities (25 points).  
  
The third component involves a group research project (100 points). The
purpose of this project is to help you understand how you are affected by
class, race, and gender in your everyday lives. You will research and present
to the class one of the projects found at the end of the syllabus. Once the
project is assigned you will be given some class time to develop your
approach. In general you should follow the following research process 1)
define the problem; 2) review the literature; 3) formulate the hypothesis; 4)
choose a research method; 5) collect data (survey, secondary analysis,
documents, participants observation, unobtrusive measures); 6) analyze the
results; 7) share the results. You will be required to discuss with me how you
will process before beginning your research. You will be graded as follows:  
1)Each group receives a grade for the actual in-class presentation which
comprises 50% of your total project grade. 2) Each student will write a 3 page
paper describing the steps the group took in researching and preparing their
presentation and specifying the roles that they and other group members took
in carrying out the project. This paper makes up 25% of the project grade.
Finally each student will assign a number grade for each group member
including themselves. The average of these grades makes up the last 25%. The
group presentation is evaluated on the following criteria: adequacy of the
literature review used as a foundation for the project; the research method
chosen and implication of the method; the presentation of the data; the flow
of the presentation; and the division of labor and coordination of the
presentation.  
  
Research projects: 1. _Comparing stratification at UWRF with stratification in
the United States_ :  
You will use Stephen Rose's book, _Social Stratification in the United States_
, to present what stratification looks like in this country. This book and the
accompanying poster show the kinds of families at different income levels, and
the kinds of  
occupations of these families. You must simplify the material from this book
and poster to clearly illustrate stratification in our country. You should
also create a survey and collect the same general information from members of
the class and university: family structure (married couple, single parent,
etc.), occupations of earners, and income level of the family as well as other
information you believe will be informative. You may also want to collect
other information about the backgrounds of students in the class and
university (educational background of parents, type of high school attended,
etc.) and present this information to the class. Constructing a poster similar
to the one in Rose=s book may help clarify your comparisons between UWRF
students and the general population.  
  
2\. _Comparisons of academic majors by gender_ :  
You will be exploring the ways in which gender may or may not determine the
fields in which people choose to major. Begin by reading research that has
shown that women and men become Atracked@ into different fields, despite the
fact that no clear differences exist between women=s and men=s intellectual
abilities in these different fields (Gaskell, 1984; Jacobs 1995). You will be
researching whether this trend is apparent at UWRF. You must find a way to
collect information about the number of men and women majoring in different
departments (around 10). You may choose to contact the Registrar=s office,
Department offices, etc. You can also enhance your presentation by
interviewing at length, students from majors dominated by men or women.  
  
3\. _Chilly climate_ :  
You will be examining the classroom climate at UWRF for signs that it is
Achilly@ for women or minorities. You will begin with some articles that
specify the ways in which the university setting can seem inhospitable to
students (Hall and Sandler 1982; Hall and Sandler 1984; Jacques 1980; Muir
1991). You need to find a way to explore whether the classroom is Achilly@ for
members of a group compared to others women, minorities, the disabled,
nontraditional students, etc.). You may want to interview members of different
ability/age/gender/racial groups to determine their sense of the environment,
and compare their experiences.  
  
4\. _Job opportunities and stratification_ :  
You will be exploring the ways the jobs that students plan to pursue after
graduation tend to be stratified by gender and race.  Much research suggests
that careers tend to be stratified by race and gender, and that salaries vary
by racial/gender groups (Almquist 1987; Groat, Chilson, and Neal 1982; King
1992; Reskin and Padavic 1994). First, you will need to determine the career
paths of most UWRF undergraduates. Then you will research some of the most
common fields and show whether those careers reflect any kind of
stratification by gender or race, in terms of subfields (for example, many
studies show that women doctors tend to be present in less prestigious fields
such as pediatric medicine) or in terms of wages and salaries (i.e., studies
show that male students directly out of M.B.A. programs receive higher
salaries than women directly out of the same programs).  Examine the four or
five most common fields at UWRF. Look for data on both members of the
occupation and salary differences for workers under 25 or 30.  
  
5\. _Social groupings and race_ :  
You will be exploring the ways in which race may determine how people
socialize at UWRF. Studies have shown that even in the relatively Aopen@
college environment, racial and ethnic backgrounds play a large role in
determining the kinds of friendships and social relationships people pursue
(DePalma 1991; Hallinan and Williams 1989; Magner 1990). You will
systematically research whether this seems true at UWRF. You will want to find
a way to determine how students tend to socialize. For example, engage in
unobtrusive observation in several popular meeting places on campus and
examine how often people of different ethnicities sit together and talk
together. Use a coding form to eliminate confusion and consider interviews
with students of different backgrounds.  
  
6\. _Socializing and gender_ :  
You will be exploring the impact of traditional gender roles on the behavior
of students in social settings. Begin by reading articles discussing gender
role socialization and characteristics (Alder, Kless, and Alder 1992;
Blumenfeld 1992). Then observe men and women interacting at parties, bars,
restaurants, or meeting places around campus. Before observing, develop a
detailed coding form so that no confusion with coding rules occurs. Code both
men and women engaging in traditional or nontraditional gender role behavior.
You may also decide to compare settings: for example, the behavior of women
and men at a bar and in the student center, or the behavior of men and women
in gay and straight bars.  
  
Resources  
Adler, Patricia, Steven Kless, and Peter Adler. 1992. "Socialization to Gender
Roles: Popularity among Elementary School Boys and Girls." Sociology of
Education 65:169-87.  
  
Almquist, Elizabeth M. 1997. "Labor Market Gendered Inequality in Minority
Groups." Gender and Society 1:400-14.  
  
Blumenfield, Warren J. 1992. "Squeezed into Gender Envelopes." Pp. 23-28 in
Homophobia: How We All Pay the Price, edited by Warren J. Blumenfeld. Boston,
MA: Beacon Press.  
  
DePalma, Anthony. "Separate Ethnic Worlds Grow on Campus." The New York Times,
18  
May 1991, p.1.  
  
Gaskell, Jane. 1984. "Gender and Course Choice: The Orientation of Male and
Female Students." Journal of Education  
166:89-102.  
  
Groat, H. Theodore, David W. Chilson, and Arthur G. Neal. 1982. "Sex
Stratification Among Three Cohorts of Recent University Graduates." Sociology
and Social Research 66:269-88.  
  
Hall, Roberta M. and Bernice R. Sandler. 1982. "The Classroom Climate: A
Chilly One for Women?" Washington, DC: Project on the Status and Education of
Women, Association of American Colleges.  
  
Hallinan, Maureen T. and Richard A. Williams. 1989. "Interracial Friendship
Choices in Secondary Schools." American Sociological Review 54:64-78.  
  
Jacobs, Jerry A. 1995. "Gender and Academic Specialties: Trends Among
Recipients of College Degrees in the 1980s." Sociology of Education 68:81-98.  
  
Jacques, Jeffrey M. 1980. "The Split Labor Market and Ethnic Antagonism: A
Case Study in Higher Education." Sociology of Education 53:225-36.  
  
King, Mary C. 1992. "Occupational Segregation by Race and Sex, 1940-1988."
Monthly Labor Review 115:30-36.  
  
Magner, Denise K. 1990. "Amid the Diversity, Racial Isolation Remains at
Berkeley." The Chronicle of Higher Education. November 14; 37:A37.  
  
Muir, Donal E. 1991. "White Fraternity and Sorority Attitudes Toward "Blacks"
on a Deep South Campus." Sociological Spectrum 11:93-103.  
  
Reskin, Barbara and Irene Padavic. 1994. "Sex Segregation in the Workplace."
Pp. 45-79 in Women's Work, Men's Work: Sex Segregation in the Workplace.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.  

**Tests** : The first component of the tests category is the midterm exam. It
will be a combination of multiple choice; short answer &/or essay questions
worth 100 points. Blue books may be required.  
  
The second component of the tests category is the final. The format of the
final will be similar to the midterm and blue books may be required.

[![](Back-AwayT.gif)](cour.htm)



[![](Digihome.gif)](welcome.htm)



Tuesday, 14-May-2002 11:18:22 CDT

