Department of African-American Studies  
  
---  
  
  

| [Home](../index.htm) | [|](../Default.htm) | [Newsletter](../newsletter.htm)
| | | [Programs](../programs.htm) | | | [Courses](../courses.htm) | | |
[Faculty](../faculty.htm) | | | [Contact Us](../contact_us.htm) | | | [Site
Map](../site_map.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
* * *  
  
**[Back to Courses](../courses.htm#AAS 4120)**  
---  
  
Course Syllabus

**

AFRICAN-AMERICAN STUDIES 4120

POLITICAL SCIENCE 4170

**

African-American Political Thought

Instructor: Dr. Charles E. Jones Phone: (404) 651-2157

Office: 962, 1 Park Place South Office Hours: Tues. & Thurs. 2:00 - 3:00

Spring 2001 or by appointment

**

Purpose of the Course

**

This course is designed to introduce students to African-American political
and social ideas. Through critical examination of the major expressions of
that discourse, we hope to arrive at some understanding of the principles,
goals, and strategies developed by African-American women and men. The course
will focus on major philosophical, theoretical, and ideological formulations
put forward during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. In light of the
historic and contemporary problems associated with race, class, and gender
oppression, we will also probe carefully the manner in which these structures
of domination and exploitation have differentially and similarly impacted the
lives of black women and men.

**

Course Objectives

**

> 1\. To introduce students to the development and character of African-
American political and social discourse.

>

> 2\. To introduce students to the role that political and social ideas play
in the lives of African-Americans.

>

> 3\. To introduce students to black feminist criticism as a dimension of
African-American thought.

>

> 4\. To help and encourage students to read, think, discuss, and write
intelligently, analytically, and critically about African-American social and
political discourse, in particular, and the larger American social and
political dynamic, in general.

>

> **

Required Textbooks

**

> James, Joy. _Transcending the Talented Tenth: Black Leaders and American
Intellectuals_. (New York: Routledge, 1997.)

>

> McCartney, John T. _Black Power Ideologies: An Essay in African-American
Political Thought_ , Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1992.

>

> Meyer, Michael. ed. _Frederick Douglass: The Narrative and Selected
Writings_. New York: The Modern Library, 1984.)

>

> Moses, Wilson J. ed. _Classical Black Nationalism_ : From the American
Revolution to Marcus Garvey. (New York: New York University Press, 1996).

>

> Van Deburg, William L., ed. _Modern Black Nationalism: From Marcus Garvey to
Louis Farrakhan_. New York: New York University Press, 1997.

>

> **

Additional Required Readings

**

> Throughout the semester the instructor will assign additional readings which
will be placed on reserve in the Department of African-American Studies, Suite
962 1 Park Place South.

>

> **

Class Activities:

_

Class Dialogue

_**

Each student will lead the class in discussion of a minimum of two class
readings which will also include the submission of a summary of the assigned
readings. Each student=s participation in group assignments will be included
in the final class participation grade.

**_Comment Paper_**  

The purpose of this paper is to assist the student in mastering the week=s
required readings. The paper will answer at least three questions and provide
a critique of the week=s readings and provide a critique of the week=s
readings. The paper should be 2-3 double-spaced pages and is due at the
beginning of class.

**_

Analytical Essays_:** Each students will write two essays on topics selected
by the instructor. Each paper will be approximately 5-8 pages.

**_

Course Requirements and Evaluation

> _**

>

> Class Participation 100 Points

>

> Comment Papers (5) 100 Points

>

> Mid-Term Examination 100 Points

>

> Analytical Essays (2) 100 Points

>

> _

>

> Final Examination_ _100 Points_

>

> A=450-500  
>  B=400-449  
>  C=350-359  
>  D=300-349  
>  F=299 and below

**

Total 500 Points

**Late assignments will be penalized **five points per day**. Throughout the
semester students will have opportunities to complete extra credit assignments
(two points). _Make-ups for extra credit assignments are not permitted_.



**

Week 1:** January 8-12.

> A. Course Introduction

>

> 1\. General Overview: Educational Philosophy and Class Expectations.

>

> 2\. Analytical Frameworks.

>

> B. The Ideological Spectrum of African-American Thought

>

> McCartney: Chapter 1.

>

> Van DeBurg: pp. 1-15.

>

> **

Week 2:** January 15-19.

> A. Ideological Spectrum of African-American Thought Continued ...

>

> Mack Jones Framework: Class handout.

>

> B. Responses to Chattel Slavery

>

> 1\. The Abolitionist Movement.

>

> Meyer: pp. ix-xxx.; pp. 3-120.

>

> **

Week 3:** January 22-26.

> A. Responses to Chattel Slavery

>

> 1\. The Abolitionist Movement Continued ...

>

> Meyer: pp. 231-299.

>

> McCartney: Chapter 3.

>

> 2\. **_Comment Paper #1 is due.

>

> _**

>

> Meyer: pp. 349-391.

>

> Moses: pp. 135-142.

>

> **

Week 4:** January 29- February 2.

> A. Responses to Chattel Slavery

>

> 1\. Black Nationalist Solutions.

>

> McCartney: Chapter 2.

>

> Moses: pp. 1-35; 48-53.; 68-100.

>

> **

Week 5:** February 5-9.

> A. Responses to Chattel Slavery

>

> 1\. Emigrationist ventures.

>

> Moses: pp. 101-124; pp. 131-134; pp. 145-208.

>

> 2\. **_Comment paper # 2 is due_**.

>

> **

>

> ** B. 1st Analytical Essay is Due (Feb. 9).

**

Week 6:** February 12-16.

> A. Politics of Accommodation:

>

> McCartney: Chapter 4.

>

> Atlanta Exposition Speech; class handout.

>

> **

>

> Week 7:** February 19-23.

>

> A. Resistance to White Resistance: Moses: pp. 228-240.

>

> B. African-American Race Women Respond:

>

> James: 1-81.

>

> **

Week 8:** February 26 - March 2.

> A. Challenges to De Jure Segregation:

>

> B. **_Mid-Term Examination

>

> _** **

Week 9:** March 5-9.

> A. **Have a Nice Spring Break!!!!

>

> ** **

Week 10:** March 12-16.

> A. Resurgence of Black Nationalism:

>

> 1\. The Garvey Movement:

>

> McCartney: Chapter 5.

>

> Moses: pp. 241-250.

>

> Van Deburg: pp. 34-63; 78-92, and Chapter 37.

>

> 2\. **_Comment Paper #3 is Due.

>

> _** **

Week 11**: March 19-23.

> A. Leadership at the Modern Civil Rights Movement:

>

> McCartney: Chapters 6 and 9.

>

> James: 83-100.

>

> Selections by Martin Luther King; Class handout.

>

> **

Week 12:** March 26-30

> A. Black Nationalism Revisited

>

> McCartney: Chapters 7 and 11.

>

> Van Deburg: Chapters 12, 22, 30, 32, and 34.

>

> 1\. **_Comment Paper # 4 is Due.

>

> _** **

Week 13:** April 2-6.

> A. Revolutionary Black Nationalism

>

> Van Deburg: Chapters 21, 26 and 27.

>

> McCartney: Chapter 8.

>

> 1\. **_Second Analytical Essay is Due.

>

> _** **

Week 14:** April 9-13.

> A. Pan Africanism:

>

> Van Deburg: Chapters 23 and 25.

>

> B. Black Neoconservatism:

>

> *Mack Jones. "The Political Thought of New Black Conservatives." In
_Readings and Issues in American Politics_ , edited by Franklin Jones and
Michael O. Adams et al., eds. Class Handout.

>

> **

Week 15**: April 16-20.

> A. Contemporary Manifestations of African-American Political Thought

>

> 1\. Kawaida Theory:

>

> Van Deburg: Chapter 28.

>

> 2\. Afrocentrism:

>

> Van Deburg: Chapter 29.

>

> 3\. **_Comment Paper #5 is Due.

>

> _** **

Week 16:** April 23-27.

> A. The Role of the Black Intellectual

>

> James: Chapters 7 and 8.

>

> James: pp. 183-192.

>

> **On Reserve** **in Pullen Library:**

>

> 1\. Anderson, Jervis. "The Public Intellectual," _The New Yorker_. January
17, 1994., pp. 39-46.

>

> 2\. Boynton, Robert S. "The New Intellectuals" _Atlantic Monthly_. March
1995, 53-69.

>

> 3\. Reed, Adolph. "What Are the Drums Saying, Booker? The Current Crisis of
the Black Intellectual," _Village Voice_. April 11, 1995.

>

>  
>

> **

I. Influential Historical and Contemporary Political Activists/Thinkers

19th Century

**

Anna J. Cooper

Martin Delany

Frederick Douglass

Henry Highland Garnett

Maria Stewart

Sojourner Truth

David Walker

**

Turn of the Century/Early 20th Century

**

African Blood Brotherhood/Cyrill Brigss

CPUSA leaders (1919 - 1945)

W.E.B. Du Bois

Amy Jacques Garvey

Marcus Garvey

Harry Haywood

A. Phillip Randolph

Booker T. Washington

Ida B. Wells

Black Women's Organizations Leaders

**

1930s-1950s

**

Ralph Bunche

Claudia Jones

The Honorable Elijah Muhammed

Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.

Paul Robeson

**

Civil Rights Movement

**

Ella Baker

Martin Luther King, Jr.

Baynard Rustin

Roy Wilkins

**

Modern 60s + Era Black Radicals

**

James Boggs

Eldridge Cleaver

Kathleen Cleaver

Angela Davis

James Foreman

George Jackson

DRUM Leaders

Dr. Huey P. Newton

Henry Winston

**

Modern 60s +Era Black Nationalists

**

Harold Cruse

Malauna Karenga

Kwame Toure

Malcolm X

**

The Contemporary Period

**

Molefi Asante

Amiri Baraka

Louis Farahkann

Patricia Hill-Collins

Bell Hooks

Jesse Jackson

Thomas Sowell

Cornell West



|  |  
**[Back to Courses](../courses.htm#AAS 4120)**

