**History 1311**

Dr. Anson
Summer, 2000

Office: Stabler Hall 606C

Hours: 8:30-9 a.m., MTWRF, and by appointment (call 569-3235;

e-mail: _emanson@ualr.edu;_ web: )  


History 1311 is a survey course of World Civilization from the dawn of
civilization through the Protestant Reformation.

_Required Reading_ :

        The following is the text required for this course. It is available in the bookstore. 

        Anson, Miller, Bilsky, Hanson. _A Brief History of Civilization_ (2 nd edition) 

**         Optional**: _A Civilization Primer_ (4th edition) (for individuals
with limited background in the social sciences)

        _Hammond's Historical Atlas_

**_Examinations_ :**

1\. **Brief Papers:** Each student should submit 7 one-page (target length,
but can be longer, but not too much) papers, typed (or equivalent length in
clear long hand), answering _one_ of the questions that follow the reading
selections in the text. Answers to the questions **_must_** be based on the
material in the reading, not on the introduction to the reading, nor the
textbook narrative, nor on outside sources. Moreover, all statements of fact
based on the reading (not just quotations) need to be referenced in the paper.
This can be done simply by listing a page reference (i. e. p. 107) or the
source =s own internal numbering system (i. e. Ham. 208; Gen 8:15) after the
statement in question. No formal footnotes are needed. Students are expected
to do their own papers; no group efforts. Papers must be handed in either
before or on their due date; no late papers will be accepted. Papers, however,
may be mailed in (postmark date must be on or before the due date), or
e-mailed to me on or before the due date (not faxed).

2\. **Midterm and Final** : There will be a midterm and a final examination.
The midterm and the final will consist of a first section devoted to
identifications about which the student will write a brief paragraph. There
will be some choice among these identifications. The second portion of the
exam will be devoted to one or more essay questions. A group of potential
essay questions for the midterm is attached to this syllabus; the essay
questions for the midterm will be drawn from these. Students are encouraged to
think about these questions as soon as the material relating to specific
questions has been covered. Students may turn in practice essays, thesis
statements, outlines of possible answers to essays, in advance of the exam.
These will be handed back to the students with written comments; no grade will
be recorded. Final exam questions will also be distributed in advance. The
final will be cumulative.

**_Class Attendance_ :** **_Class attendance is required_** ; the student is
held responsible for all reading assignments, handouts, and for all material
covered and announcements made in class. Everyone is expected to be present at
the time class starts and remain until it is dismissed. If for great and good
cause you are either late or have to leave early, please enter or leave
quietly and as inconspicuously as possible, i.e. do not walk across the front
of the room.

**_Make-up Exams_** : There will be no make-up midterms or papers. Each
student's two lowest paper grades will be dropped before the final computation
of grades; a missed paper will be recorded as a zero. If the midterm exam is
missed, the midterm component of your final grade will be added to that of the
final (the final will then be worth 50% of the final grade). No incompletes
will be given unless approved by me _prior to_ August 14, 2000. Moreover,
incompletes will only be given when circumstances beyond the control of the
student prevent the student from completing _part_ of the course requirements.
Incompletes cannot be given for the entire semester's work. Moreover, all
completed work counts; an incomplete is not a substitute for a failing grade.
Finally, History 1311 cannot be taken on a credit/no credit basis, or
pass/fail basis.

_General Regulation_ : Final grades will be computed on the following basis:

50% for brief papers (two lowest paper grades will be dropped)

20% for the midterm (will be dropped if student scores higher on final; 20%
then added to weight of final)

30% (or 50% if midterm dropped or missed) for the final

All testing and final grade computations on the basis of:

90 - 100% = A                             60 - 69% = D

80 - 89% = B                                 0 - 59% = F

70 - 79% = C                                 (Grades will not be curved)

**_DISABILITY SUPPORT SERVICES_** \- It is the policy of UALR to accommodate
students with disabilities, pursuant to federal law, state law, and the
University's commitment to equal educational opportunities. Any student with a
disability who needs accommodation, for example in seating placement or in
arrangements for examinations, should inform the instructor at the beginning
of the course. The Chair of the Department offering this course is also
available to assist with accommodations. Students with disabilities are also
encouraged to contact the Office of Disability Support Services, which is
located in the Donaghey Student Union, Room 105, telephone 569-3143.

**_CHEATING_** \- No student may gain undue advantage over his/her classmates
by deceptive or dishonest means (as defined in "Cheating", Student Handbook,
p. 30). Anyone who engages in such activity will receive an "F" in the course
and will be turned over to the Academic Integrity and Grievance Committee for
University disciplinary action.

**_GRADING QUESTIONS AND COMPLAINTS_** \- Students with questions or
complaints about the grading of their papers or exams should write out what
the problem is and hand it in after class. This is the forum in which such
matters are to be handled, not during class, nor during office hours.

**SYLLABUS**

(writing exercises and exams in **bold** type)  
  WEEK | DATE | TOPIC | ASSIGNMENT (due on date across from)  
---|---|---|---  
1 | 7/10 | Introduction |  
  | 7/11 | Mesopotamia | pp. vii-3  
  | 7/12 | Mesopotamia | pp. 3-4, **Hammurabi, pp. 7-20**  
  | 7/13 | Egypt |  
  | 7/14 | Pre-exilic Judaism |  
  |   |   |  
2 | 7/17 | Pre-exilic Judaism | p. 4, **Old Testament, pp. 31-49**  
  | 7/18 | Post exilic Judaism |  
  | 7/19 | Greece | pp. 61-62, 65-101  
  | 7/20 | Classical/Hellenistic | pp. 62-64  
  | 7/21 | Greek Thought | **Phaedo, pp. 103-140**  
  |   |   |  
3 | 7/24 | Roman Republic | pp. 215-217, 221-226  
  | 7/25 | Rep/Empire | pp. 217-218  
  | 7/26 | Christianity | pp.218-219, **Matthew/Romans, pp. 227-240 (answer
one of the questions on page 240)**  
  | 7/27 | Christianity |  
  | 7/28 | India/China | pp. 141-152, **Buddha, pp. 153-170**  
  |   |   |  
4 | 7/31 | **MIDTERM** |  
  | 8/1 | Early Middle Ages | pp. 249-250, 254-256  
  | 8/2 | Early Middle Ages |  
  | 8/3 | Islam | pp. 250-252, **Koran, pp. 261-277**  
  | 8/4 | Later Middle Ages | pp. 252-260, pp. 279-303  
  |   |   |  
5 | 8/7 | Renaissance | pp. 319-320  
  | 8/8 | Reformation | pp. 320-323  
  | 8/9 | Reformation | p. 324, **Henry VIII, pp. 325-372**  
  | 8/10 | No Class |  
  | 8/11 | **FINAL** |  
  
**MIDTERM**

**QUESTIONS**  
    


  1. > How does Post Exilic Judaism differ from Pre-exilic Judaism?

  2. > Compare the _Old Testament_ readings with the _Phaedo_. How do they differ?

  3. > Compare Mesopotamian and Egyptian civilization. What are the differences? The similarities? How might you account for both?

  4. > Compare _Phaedo_ and Paul =s _Letter to the Romans_. What differences do you note between the teachings of Plato and those of Paul? What similarities?

  5. > Compare the poleis of the Athenians and the Spartans. How are they alike? Different?

  6. > Compare the values found in the _Iliad_ and those in the _Book of Matthew_. How are they alike? Different?

  7. > Compare the fall of the Roman Republic and the fall of the Roman Empire. What are the similarities? The differences?

  8. > Compare Republican Rome at its height and Athens prior to the Peloponnesian War. How are they alike? Different?

  9. > Why is Christianity so successful in converting the Roman Empire?

**History 1311**

**Final Exam Questions**  


  
  

Part I

1.     Why is there a Protestant Reformation? Why does it occur in the 16th century?   
2.     Many historians have claimed that the Protestant Reformation was caused as much by political concerns as by   
        religious ones. Is there any evidence to support this position? Are these historians correct?   
3.     What changes take place in Europe in the 11th and 12th centuries? Why are they important?   
4.     Compare the teachings of Buddha and those of Mohammed. How do they differ, agree? 

Part II

1.     How does Islam differ from Christianity? As set forth in the _Books of Matthew_   and _Romans_ and the _Koran?_ As practiced   
        during the Middle Ages?   
2.     Compare the teaching of Christianity as set forth in Matthew and Romans with the teachings of Buddha. What are the   
        similarities? The differences?   
3.     How does the early Middle Ages differ from the Roman Empire at its height?   
4.     How does Reformation Europe differ from the Roman Empire at its height? 

