**Spring 2000 History 1160** | **An Introduction to American History,
1607-1865** | **MWF 12:00-12:50 Denny 220**  
---|---|---  
  
SYLLABUS

Prof. Dan Dupre  
Garinger 103  
Office Hours: MWF 10-11 and by appointment  
[ddupre@email.uncc.edu](mailto:ddupre@email.uncc.edu)



_Course Description_

This is a general survey of American history from European settlement in the
early 17th century to the Civil War.  The course is structured around a
chronological narrative of events but includes extensive coverage of the broad
themes of economic, political, social and cultural changes that shaped
American society.

_Course Objectives_

In this course, students should learn how to listen and read carefully and
critically, paying particular attention to the cause and effect of historical
forces in the shaping of American society.   Students also will learn how to
read and interpret primary documents.  Through their on-line discussions and
exams, students will learn how to write analytically and make arguments using
evidence.

This course is approved for Goal VI/C (Understanding the Individual, Society,
and Culture) of the[ general education
requirements](http://www.uncc.edu/catalog/yr9799/bacregs.html#goals) for
undergraduates at UNC-Charlotte.

_Course Requirements_

The required reading for the course is John Mack Faragher, et al., _Out of
Many_ , 3rd ed., Vol. I and the companion Document Set.  There will be three
exams, each covering roughly a third of the semester.  The exams will be based
on the lectures, the text book and the documents and will be short-answer and
essay questions.  You are allowed to bring to each exam one notebook-size
sheet of paper with handwritten notes.   The final exam will be on Monday, May
8th from 12 to 3.  In addition to the exams, there will be five quizzes on the
textbook, each consisting of five multiple-choice questions.  I will count the
four best quiz grades and drop the lowest.  There will be no make-up quizzes.
Missed exams, without prior arrangement with me, will receive zero credit.

There will be some in-class discussion but most of the "discussion" will occur
on-line.  Students will be divided into groups of approximately ten to
participate in nine [on-line discussions](online_discussion.htm) during the
semester.  Each discussion will involve reading an assignment, making an
initial contribution (listed as "C" in the syllabus) based on questions, then
reading your group members' contributions and writing a follow-up response
(listed as "R" in the syllabus).  Both your contribution and your response
should be a paragraph or two in length.  These discussions are mandatory and
will help you sort through the documents in preparation for the exams.  You
will receive one of three marks for each of the nine discussion sessions:
exemplary, satisfactory, or unsatisfactory.  Exemplary contributions to
discussion will involve thoughtful answers to questions and use of documentary
evidence in support of arguments.   Unsatisfactory contributions will show
little evidence of reading the assigned documents or giving any thought to the
posed questions.  _Your final grade will drop two points for every
unsatisfactory discussion grade you receive after the first session, which
will serve as a trial run._   On the other hand, if you receive exemplary
discussion grades on five out of the nine sessions you will receive full
credit (30% of exam grade) without having to answer the essay question based
on the documents on the final exam.  Keeping up with the reading and working
hard on the discussions will pay off at the end of the semester.

The first exam will be worth 20% of your grade, and the second and third will
be worth 30% each.  The four quizzes will count 5% each, for a total of 20%.

_Attendance Policy_

Much of the exam will be based on the lectures, so attendance is important.
Since I will not be able to call roll in a class this size, I will create a
seating chart at the beginning of the second week of class.  You will sit in
the seats you have chosen for the rest of the semester so that the teaching
assistant can take attendance.  You may miss up to 4 classes in the semester.
If you miss 5-7 classes, your final grade will drop 5 points.  If you miss
8-10 classes, your final grade will drop 10 points,a nd if you miss more than
10 classes, you will fail the class.  Please do not come into class late; it
is disruptive to the other students and myself.  If you arrive after
attendance is taken, you will be counted absent.

_Final Note_

Your success in this class will depend largely upon the initiative you take in
doing the reading, paying attention to the lectures and taking complete notes,
participating in discussions, asking questions and studying hard for exams.
The use of the web and on-line discussions is new to me and probably something
you are not very familiar with as well.  Feel free to seek out help from
either the teaching assistant or myself if you have any technical problems or
if you are confused about an assignment or don't understand the lectures or
reading.  You are always welcome to see me after class or to call or email me
or to stop by my office.  Work hard and keep in touch and you'll do fine.

_Weekly Assignments and Lectures_

The following is an outline of the lecture topics and the reading assignments
in the Faragher textbook.  _Note: the reading assignments for the on-line
discussions are not included in this section of the syllabus but can be found
in the[on-line discussion page.](online_discussion.htm)_   Some pages in the
document book are included here and will be discussed in class.  Also, please
note that the dates for the quizzes and the exams listed here are also listed
on the [written assignment page.](written_assignments.htm)

Jan. 12    Introduction

Jan. 14    Europeans and Native Americans--Faragher, Ch. 2; Doc. 3-3, pp.
28-29  
no class on Monday, Jan. 17

Jan. 19    Early Jamestown--Faragher, Ch. 3 to p. 58; ON-LINE DISCUSSION 1 (C)

Jan. 21    Tobacco Boom--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 1 (R)

Jan. 24    From Servants to Slaves--Faragher, rest of Ch. 3 (1st Quiz on this
part of Ch. 3)

Jan. 26    The Settlement of New England--Doc. 3-5, pp. 32-33

Jan. 28    Puritan Belief and Society

Jan. 31    Culture and Environment in 17th-Century America--Faragher, Ch. 4
(2nd Quiz)

Feb. 2    Best Poor Man's Country?--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 2 (C)

Feb. 4    18th-Century Slavery--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 2 (R)

Feb. 7    The Great Awakening--Faragher, Ch. 5

Feb. 9    The Enlightenment

Feb. 11  _FIRST EXAM_

Feb. 14  The Imperial Crisis--Faragher, Ch. 6

Feb. 16  The Coming of the Revolution--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 3 (C)

Feb. 18  Independence--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 3 (R)

Feb. 21  Revolutionary War--Faragher, Ch. 7

Feb. 23  Confederation--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 4 (C)

Feb. 25  The Limits of Revolutionary Ideology--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 4 (R)

Feb. 28  The Constitution--Faragher, Ch. 8 ( 3rd Quiz)

March 1  The First Party System--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 5 (C)

March 3  Jefferson's Empire of Liberty--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 5 (R)

Spring Break!!!

March 13  Westward Expansion and the Agricultural Revolution--Faragher, Ch. 9

March 15  The War of 1812--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 6 (C)

March 17  Nationalism and Sectionalism--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 6 (R)

March 20  Transportation and the Market Revolution--Faragher, pp. 271-79 and
Ch. 12

March 22  The Industrial Revolution

March 24  _SECOND EXAM_

March 27  The Cotton Kingdom--Faragher, Ch. 11

March 29  Antebellum Slavery--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 7 (C)

March 31  Andrew Jackson and Indian Removal--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 7 (R)

April 3  Nullification--Faragher, Ch. 10 (4th Quiz on all but pp. 271-79)

April 5  Jackson's Battle against the Bank of the United States

April 7  The Second American Party System

April 10  Urban America--Faragher, Ch. 13

April 12  Social Reform--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 8 (C)

April 14  Abolitionism and Feminism--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 8 (R)

April 17  The Mexican-American War--Faragher, Ch. 14 (5th Quiz)

April 19  Sectional Conflict  
no class April 21

April 24  Fire-Eaters and Free-Soilers--Faragher, Ch. 15

April 26  Secession--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 9 (C)

April 28  Prospects of War--ON-LINE DISCUSSION 9 (R)

May 1  Battlefield and Homefront

May 3  Review

_FINAL EXAM_ \--Monday, May 8, 12-3

* * *



[Course Homepage](Default.htm) | [Department of History
Homepage](http://www.uncc.edu/colleges/arts_and_sciences/history) | [UNC
Charlotte Homepage](http://www.uncc.edu)  
---|---|---  
  
Created by: Dan Dupre with help from John Smail and Kelly Hatley  

Last updated: January 11, 2000



