
    ![
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
    HHHHHHHHHHH HH H EEEE TTTTT     Humanities
    HHHHHH    H  H H E      T       OnLine
    HHHHHH    H H  H EEE    T       Web Site
    HHHHHH    H HH H E      T       
    HHHHHH    H HH H EEEE   T       H-TEACH](/graphics/Logo.H-NetBare.GIF)

## Integrity & Standards

From: Joanne M Ross
<[rossjoan@STUDENT.MSU.EDU](mailto:rossjoan@STUDENT.MSU.EDU)> Date: Wed, 17
Aug 1994 09:54:57 -0400 (EDT)

I would like to shift our focus a tiny bit. I have encountered a distressing
situation and hope some of you will offer advice or comfort. What does one do
with students who refuse to do the WORK and then complain that you, the
instructor, are too hard, too mean, insensitive, expect too much - whatever? I
love working with students in almost any setting yet I often feel bloodied
around the gills because I insist on certain behaviors and set rigorous
standards.

I am teaching a summer course, off campus, an American survey to be exact. On
the first night and the second I EMPHASIZED that attendance was mandatory (as
participation represents 25% of the grade) in addition, I said I expected
folks to be on time --- well you would think I promised to drown their first
born. Unreasonable, after all they had summer vacations, job interviews,
whatever. Several students indicated they would need to miss in excess of 3
class meetings (13 total) -- I suggested that they consider dropping the
class. When a couple of students wandered in on the third class meeting I
suggested they might be in a very deep hole. (One woman listen and
acknowledged the uphill battle, dug in and has done very well . Another threw
the syllabus on my desk and stormed out of the class.) Several dropped, one
complaining to the department chair. I was a little nervous but held my
ground. The class has come together well, we are a community and a great deal
of learning has occurred.

Last week with three class meetings remaining I posted anonymous grades on the
board - urging the students to get their assignments completed. One young
woman has repeatedly reported to class with one excuse after another regarding
her failure to complete her work. She approached me 25 minutes before class,
while one other student was in and out of the room, with yet another excuse. I
said I was not interested in excuses that at this particular point in the
class she was failing. She had turned in approximately 1/10 of the required
work. She stood her ground and said she would have it all in by the end of
class (I do not mark down for late assignments) - I pointed out that by doing
so she deprived herself of my comments and would undoubtedly suffer for such a
decision. She continued to demand that I understand her "problems" - I was
less than sympathetic and told her to get her work done or suffer the
consequences. (This particular student has not been doing the work - she does
not participate in discussions, there are only 11 students in the class, so
her silence is felt.) Now she is complaining that I am unfair, cruel, I
humiliated her - etc. Intellectually I know I am doing the "right" thing but
darn this kind of stuff wears a person down. I have several peers who have
given up

  * they grade to a 2.8 regardless and call it good enough. It is not worth the trouble to hold to standards - the students complain and the instructor is left to defend his/herself. I document any and all encounters - but still fell very vulnerable. Anybody have any strategies? Sorry if this sounds like a giant whine - but I need to find a way to survive the battering. And if that means rethinking classroom expectations I am all ears. (Really in this environment EYES.) 

As a side note my daughter graduated from a liberal arts college 15 months ago
and she is amazed at the behavior of the students I encounter. She said
attendance was expected and when one failed to do the work there was nobody to
"blame." Her advice is to go with the flow - she thinks I worry too much. I
should hand out a syllabus on day one and let the students "hang" themselves.
What do you folks out in Netland do? Is there a happy middle ground -
someplace between benign neglect and paternal/maternalism?

Thanks,

Jody Ross  
[rossjoan@student.msu.edu](mailto:rossjoan@student.msu.edu)  
Michigan State University

* * *

Date: Wed, 17 Aug 1994 16:30:04 -0400 (EDT) From: Peter C. Holloran
<[pch@WORLD.STD.COM](mailto:pch@WORLD.STD.COM)>

That message by Jody Ross refocused my attention from summer vacation (i.e.,
reading books in my field, library research, some writing) to the rapidly
approaching Fall semester. I sympathize with her. If you have tenure, well-
enrolled courses, supportive colleagues, department chairs and deans, perhaps
you can dismiss her problems. The rest of us know exactly what she means. Too
many ill-prepared, unqualified high school graduates enter our college
classes, their shock at (reasonably) high and strict standards produces anger,
whining, denial, tears and complaints. Some rise to the new academic
standards, many do not. This is a universal problem, one we cannot hope to
solve in this net, but one we should all discuss frankly. I wish I knew what
to say. Low enrollments at many colleges prompts many of us to lower standards
or lose our untenured, part-time jobs. It is a miserable situation!

Peter Holloran

* * *

Date: Wed, 17 Aug 94 15:03:59 CDT  
From: [jmw1@midway.uchicago.edu](mailto:jmw1@midway.uchicago.edu)

In response to: Joanne M Ross's message of Wed, 17 Aug 1994 09:54:57

On the occasions where I have had to deal with students who operate like Jody
Ross' students, I tell them that the standards of the class and the standards
of holding a job are essentially the same. If you can't get the job done,
everyone suffers. I and two others teach a large (150+) course in which it is
crucial that the weekly writing get done and turned in on time. We simply say
up front there are three rules: no late papers, no late papers, no late
papers.

I know of other teachers who circulate what is in effect a contract between
teacher and students. It lays out the conditions of the class ahead of time.
Certainly, there are situations where we have to make exceptions, just as
there are on a job. But just as on a job, when week after week someone asks
for the exception, they can't expect to hold the job very long.

I've been teaching for, gasp, 30 years now, and I have been appalled at the
way secondary education infantilizes students and then that infantilization
continues in college. I am not talking about draconian rules applied
inflexibly and mindlessly, but about treating one another as grownups.

Joe Williams  
Department of English  
University of Chicago

* * *

Date: Wed, 17 Aug 94 16:05:42 EST  
From: [AWIEMERS@UCS.INDIANA.EDU](mailto:AWIEMERS@UCS.INDIANA.EDU)

Jody Ross, I too encourage you to hold to your standards as your head and gut
are telling you to do. It might help to keep in mind that the difficult
students, though they stand out, are in the minority and if you can develop a
tough enough skin they, you, and the rest of the students will be better off.
I have found students appreciate my holding the line against complainers and
excuses (both in high school and college).

My school has a policy that a student who misses more than 30% of class
meetings is automatically withdrawn. Students are notified when they hit 20%,
30%, and then dropped at the next absence. The policy is clear- cut and as far
as I know, there is little complaint. Obviously such a policy helps the
instructor. Insturctors are also free to withdraw any student who misses three
consecutive classes. We are free to use whatever policy we like regarding late
work. After initially accepting late work, with no penalty, and having several
students dig themselves into holes (and I ended up nerve-wracked trying to
keep track and nudge them into action), I now will not accept any work over a
week late. (I would probably grant an occasional exception. . .) Clear
guidelines and standards at the beginning, with a few reminders along the way,
seem to help a lot. Also, offering individual help by phone or individual
meetings goes a long way toward indicating that you really aren't an ogre and
you really are interested in helping them learn. (I know class size might
limit your availability and willingness. I teach part-time and have very small
classes.)

It might also help to keep in mind that even though you see others giving up
on integrity and standards, there are plenty who do not. I, for one,
appreciated hearing your concerns.

Amy Wiemers  
Bedford College Ctr.  
Bedford, IN  
[awiemers@indiana.edu](mailto:awiemers@indiana.edu)

* * *

Date: Wed, 17 Aug 1994 15:11:04 -0500 (CDT) From:
[KJEFFREY@CARLETON.EDU](mailto:KJEFFREY@CARLETON.EDU)

I am a department chair, and I would back you up all the way. Setting clear
and reasonable expectations and holding students to them could not possibly be
construed as cruelty. When these students get jobs (assuming anyone will hire
them), they are going to be held to expectations like yours every day. You are
doing them a favor in preparing them for adulthood.

If a student came in promptly to report a problem or to request special
permission to miss a class, to turn a paper in late, etc., that is something
else. I might not accede to the request, but I would certainly consider it
carefully. But when a student routinely misses class, misses deadlines, etc.,
and then requests some special dispensation after the fact, we are not really
helping them by allowing them to get away with this.

Kirk Jeffrey  
Carleton College  
kjeffrey@carleton

* * *

From: "A. Pappas" <[pappas@SCF.USC.EDU](mailto:pappas@SCF.USC.EDU)>  
Date: Thu, 18 Aug 1994 08:56:16 -0700 (PDT)

Hold your ground!

Our school (private art college) has a 3 absences = fail the class policy, 3
tardies = an absence. Instructors are free to make these tighter for their
classes, and I do: here are mine: 2 unexcused absences = fail, 2 tardies (not
in a desk when attendance is taken) = an absence. Make up exams given only
with doctor's note on clinic letterhead or bail bond receipt. (same needed for
an excused absence). Late papers are docked one full grade per day. Attendance
and discussion count (usually) 10-15%.

I have had students complain about workload, grading policy, difficulty of
assignments etc. I tell them "you are in college now--and the standards get
higher every year." I also remind them about getting to work on time in the
real world. I try to remember that it is *not* my job to be their friend. I go
over the syllabus carefully at the beginning of class and explain deadlines,
etc. When students have a lame excuse for a late paper I tell them to get it
in as soon as possible, but that they will be penalized as outlined in the
syllabus--students are graded on their performance on tests and papers, and
part of a test or assignment is getting it done in the time alotted. I have
had better results when I strictly enforce deadlines--people know they can't
put if off, and if I take the assignment seriously, they are more likely to,
too. My late penalty policy lets them know I take their work, and mine,
seriously.

Result: the deadbeats hate me, the middling students think I'm a fair grader
and don't complain about my policies, and the bright, high achievers love me.
*Don't* lower your standards. The deadbeats will promptly fail to meet the
new, lower requirements anyway! There will always be some kids who only want a
C in the course, but I see no reason why they shouldn't earn it--when I jack
up the minimum threshold for a C, they usually rise to meet it...(strange that
they won't do that much work if the reward is a B).

In the long run it is better to have students flunk out than drop out. Not
every student belongs in college, and the sooner they find out, the better. It
doesn't bother me to fail students for a substandard performance-- what
bothers me is seeing bright, motivated students drop out because they are
afraid of their rapidly rising student loan debt.

My two cents.

Andrea Pappas  
Art History  
[pappas@scf.usc.edu](mailto:pappas@scf.usc.edu)

* * *

Date: Thu, 18 Aug 1994 10:01:06 -0500  
From: [Gail.Bederman.1@ND.EDU](mailto:Gail.Bederman.1@ND.EDU)(Gail Bederman)

Re: late assignments. I, too, grade down for late work--I take off one letter
grade for every 24-hour period that a paper is late (so, an A paper which was
due on Monday at 9:00, but which is turned in on Tuesday at 5: 30, becomes a
B+.)

However, any student who wishes an extension on any paper can have one, for
any reason (I don't ask), but s/he MUST request this extension during the
first week of classes-- i.e. by the wednesday after the first wednesday we
meet.

I announce this in the first class, and remind them of it on the deadline day
for requesting extenions. When students ask me for extensions, that first
week, they need to inform me when they plan to get the paper in, and that
becomes the date after which I will grade down for lateness. All due dates are
clearly written on the syllabus, so students can plan ahead and guage what
conflicts might arise from other exams, weddings, intramural sports events,
etc.

I find students appreciate the opportunity to plan their schedules like this,
and it helps me avoid the situation where a good student turns in a bad paper
because she had 3 other exams the same day. Also, I can be inflexible about
lateness later in the term without looking unreasonable or "mean"--after all,
I point out to students begging for extensions, you had the opportunity to ask
for an extension earlier.

[Gail.Bederman.1@nd.edu](mailto:Gail.Bederman.1@nd.edu)  
History Department (219)631-7789 University of Notre Dame  
Notre Dame, IN 46556

* * *

Date: Thu, 18 Aug 1994 10:32:52 -0500 (CDT) From:
[SIMSG@BELMONT.EDU](mailto:SIMSG@BELMONT.EDU)

In the immediate situation Jody described, I too would support her in her
efforts to maintain appropriate standards.

However, I am not sure that the issue of standards and integrity helps us
understand the situation completely. I was struck by the fact that Jody was
describing a situation in a community college while several respondents made a
comparison to student behavior at liberal arts colleges. These comparisons
make me wonder if we are dealing with issues of class and socialization, in
addition to dealing with the need for appropriate standards and discipline.
The kind of attendance, punctuality, and diligence we expect from students may
be habits that our middle-class students accept easily while our students from
working-class backgrounds or from poor households find to be foreign.

My thoughts are really unformed on this--perhaps I should have waited before
writing. Nevertheless, I am wondering if the situation Jody described is an
example of the problem of socializing students to the assumptions of academic
life. And if so, do you think we have a responsibility to make our college
classrooms assessible to students whose previous experience (not their
knowledge and intellectual capacity) makes the college class- room a foreign
place.

\--George Sims  
[simsg@belmont.edu](mailto:simsg@belmont.edu)  
Belmont Univ.

* * *

From: [KenBie@AOL.COM](mailto:KenBie@AOL.COM)  
Date: Thu, 18 Aug 94 02:25:54 EDT

We have all been there, Joanne Ross. For those who do not have the protection
of tenure, I have complete sympathy. It is indeed a deplorable situation. In
nearly three decades of college teaching, I have tried every policy
conceivable to deal with the kind of problems you describe-- even a policy of
not having a policy! Nothing works perfectly. I now have a fairly brief and
straightforward set of "rules" that are included in my syllabus handed out the
first day of class. I read it to the little darlin's word for word, with
emphasis where appropriate. I highly recommend that whatever policy you adopt,
it be as unambiguous as you can make it, and that you make sure every student
gets a copy when they join the class. My "rules" follow:

All Students Please Note:

Make-Up Exams and Deadlines: No "make-up" exams will be given. If an emergency
forces you to miss an exam, see or call the instructor as soon as possible.
Your Final Exam score will substitute for one missed exam score.  
You may arrange to take an exam early. However, all deadlines for written
assignments are absolute NO EXCEPTIONS.

Absences: Three consecutive or four total absences will result in your
dismissal from the course with a grade of "W" or "WF" depending on the
instructor's determination of your grade at the time of dismissal.

Each class begins when the instructor convenes it and ends when the instructor
dismisses it. Failure to attend any part of a class session will in most cases
be counted as a complete absence. No distinction is made between an "excused
and "unexcused" absence. You are responsible for knowing your attendance
status and for requesting adjustments to your attendance record.

Withdrawals: Inattention, nonperformance, or disruptive behavior in class are
not permitted and will also be grounds for dismissal from the course. If you
decide not to continue coming to class, you must initiate a drop at the
Registrar's office. If you do not, and the instructor does not drop you, you
will automatically receive an "F" for the course.

Building Policy: Smoking is NOT allowed in the building. Drinks and food are
NOT allowed in the classroom. This policy is enforced.

That's it!

I have, and I enforce, a strict attendance policy because I use Cooperative
Learning groups and I will not have "part time" students creating havoc with
the work their group is trying to get done. The truth is, since I have been
using CL, the regularity of my students attendance has improved dramatically.  
For one, most students find CL both helpful and fun, and two, they are under a
lot of peer pressure to show up, show up prepared, and participate. My classes
meet just twice a week (MW and TT) for 80 minutes each time, so four absences
equal two weeks of class.

I truly do not give ANY make-up exams. If a real emergency occurs, the
affected student simply gets a no-grade that can be replaced by his/her Final
Exam score. This works wonderfully well! The Final Exam is comprehensive, so
the student will have to study the material tested on the exam he/she missed
in order to prepare well for the Final. I haven't given any make-up exams in
years, and I have had no grievances posted. You can the lives of untol numbers
of aunts and grandmothers this way :-)

The NO EXCEPTIONS statement for written assignments sounds a bit more severe
than it actually is. Written assignments are peer edited by two classmates
before they are due to me, and when due, they are graded as A-full credit as
is; AR- 85% credit or rewrite for full credit; or Rrequired rewrite.  
Students with rewrites have another week to hand in their revised paper. So,
if a student runs out of time, they hand in what they know will be an R, but
they buy a weeks time to get their act together. The rewrite deadlines are
absolute, NO EXCEPTIONS.

The second paragraph under Absences conveys the simple message that students
are not welcome to come late or to leave early, and here they are told what
happens if they make a habit of it-- they accumulate absences and will be
dropped.

Throughout, the student is charged with the responsibility of behaving in a
mature manner. This is an appropriate standard for establishing class rules.
If we do not clearly convey the message that our students are welcome, needed,
and expected to come to class and do the work, how will they get that message?
I hope this is of some help to you.

Ken Weatherbie  
Del Mar College

* * *

Date: Thu, 18 Aug 1994 09:33:46 -0400 (EDT) From: Martin Ryle
<[RYLE@URVAX.URICH.EDU](mailto:RYLE@URVAX.URICH.EDU)>

Jody raises problems most of us face. I have developed an attack that seems to
work. When the student comes to me seeking special consideration, I first try
to ascertain whether the request is based upon a genuine problem. If it does
not, I point out to the student that she/he (or parents) is paying a lot of
money to take advantage of my judgment about the subject; further, presence in
the class implies that the student is paying me to tell him/her how to meet my
standards of competence and excellence and to judge whether those standards
are being met. If the request is for special treatment--too hard, too harsh,
or whatever--I ask if the student is requesting that he/she be given less than
full value for the money paid. If the issue is a grade change, I ask if the
request is that I lie. Sometimes the student drops the course--that's fine
with me. More often, the student shuts up and gets to work.

Martin Ryle  
University of Richmond, VA  
[ryle@urvax.urich.edu](mailto:ryle@urvax.urich.edu)

* * *

Date: Thu, 18 Aug 1994 11:05:25 -0700 (PDT) From:
<[crjackson@UCDAVIS.EDU](mailto:crjackson@UCDAVIS.EDU)>

Bill Cecil-Fronsman raises an interesting question about the nature of the
students who take classes in summer school (and other non-traditional venues).
Do they expect to take it easier? I taught identical courses at UC Berkeley in
the fall and in the summer, and the students (with a coule of notable
exceptions) were simply not as good. I think attitude has soemthing to do with
it, but there are a couple of other factors that contribute to the lower
quality:

  1. Very often, they are taking summer school because they *have to*--they failed a course during the regular semester and have to make it up. 
  2. Often they are not regular students at the university; summer school is run differently, and is far more accepting of students who wouldn't normally be admitted to the regular semester. Harvard is a good example: pay your money, get to say that you "went to Harvard." 
  3. The summer session is always shorter; there simply isn't time, even if the student is motivated and smart. 
  4. Perhaps the most important factor is work: most of the students I had in the summer session were working at part-time (or even full-time) jobs. 

Christopher R. Jackson, UC Davis

* * *

Date: Thu, 18 Aug 1994 14:41:25 -0500 (EST) From:
[00aoedmonds@BSUVC.BSU.EDU](mailto:00aoedmonds@BSUVC.BSU.EDU)

A thought or two on the standards/integrity discussion. Absolutely, we must
have high standards in our expectations of our students. When class discussion
and cooperative/collaborative learning are part of the requirements,
attendance should be made mandatory. When we have hundreds of papers and exams
to grade, late paper/make-up exam policy should be stringent. Above all, we
should have the compassion and flexibility to VIOLATE these standards when
appropriate! Showing our students that we are human will help them learn more
than all the stern, "you lazy barbarian ingrate" lectures in the book. I used
to have no attendance policy at all. "You're adults," I'd say. "If you're too
stupid to come to class, so be it. If you pass my tests without showing up,
that's my problem." Seldom had a lot of absensces. This past year I revised
the policy a little. Gave bonus points for perfect attendance! Even a few for
those who only missed thrice. (I can hear the virtual gasps now!) Maximum of
20 points (out of 1200). Almost perfect attendance in a class of 80. BTW, no-
one got a higher letter grade because of the bonus points. BUT even fewer
missed class. This semester I'm giving bonus points (a few, mind you) for
EARLY PAPERS!! Watch the late ones disappear Carrots, folks, not sticks, at
least in my view. Gee, after 30 years of teaching, I thought *I* was a hard-
nosed old f**t :)

    
    
                                              Tony Edmonds
                                              History
                                              Ball State Univ.
    

* * *

Date: Thu, 18 Aug 1994 16:43:58 -0500 (CDT) From:
[SIMSG@BELMONT.EDU](mailto:SIMSG@BELMONT.EDU)

Gee, y'all. Most of our responses to Joanne's question about standards and
integrity sound defensive. Does it demean our students if on openingday we
read the riot act to them?

In a class of 35 or 40, I'll always have a couple of students who need to test
the limits with regard to tardiness, absences, late papers, and missed exams.
And it is absolutely necessary that I do not equivocate about the rules and
expectations that were clearly stated in the course syllabus.

But that means I also have 33 to 38 students who make a good faith effort to
observe the standards I've set for the course. For those students, aggressiv e
open-day warnings to "the little darlings" are insulting. And if I begin the
course with that kind of tone, I will have even greater problems than usual in
convincint them that their participation in collaborative learning exercises
is valued.

\--George Sims  
Belmont Univ.  
[simsg@belmont.edu](mailto:simsg@belmont.edu)

* * *

Date: Thu, 18 Aug 1994 20:27:35 -0400 (EDT) From: peter c holloran
<[pch@WORLD.STD.COM](mailto:pch@WORLD.STD.COM)>

The posting by Jody Ross has produced several well-intentioned responses
urging her to be firm and set high standards. This is easy for tenured faculty
to say. But what about untenured, part-time faculty who may not be rehired if
too many students complain about them to the chair or dean, or in student
evaluations? What if low enrollments are seen as the fault of the faculty
member and he or she is not rehired next semester? Let's get real, colleagues.
The problem is the admissions office sends too many unprepared students into
our classrooms. Too many parents send under-prepared or incompetant kids to
college for social reasons. We are supposed to teach them without ruffling any
feathers? An impossible job.

Peter Holloran

* * *

Date: Fri, 19 Aug 1994 9:12:03 -0400 (EDT) From:
[HSIUNG@JUNCOL.JUNIATA.EDU](mailto:HSIUNG@JUNCOL.JUNIATA.EDU)

I would like to second Tony Edmonds's distinction between history majors and
those non-majors taking our survey courses. I think of my intro surveys as
courses where I have a chance to win over some students from the sciences or
other divisions. I hope the students leave my course wanting to take another
history course (not just from me), resisting the urge to sell back the course
readings, and PERHAPS considering majoring in history. And so I assign
readings that may have a better chance of connecting with the students, and
largely keep the monographs to the upper-level courses. To repeat Tony
Edmonds's final words, high expectations, yea; unreasonable ones, absolutely
not. I look forward to your thoughts on what might constitute "un- reasonable
expectations" at your particular institutions.

  * Dave Hsiung, History Dept., Juniata College, Huntingdon, PA 16652 

[hsiung@juncol.juniata.edu](mailto:hsiung@juncol.juniata.edu)

* * *

From: [twdavis@WHALE.ST.USM.EDU](mailto:twdavis@WHALE.ST.USM.EDU)(Theron W.
Davis III) Date: Fri, 19 Aug 1994 10:45:16 -0500 (CDT)

As a Ph.D. student I still exist in that in-between place where the instructor
is still receiving formal instruction; and this perspective has opened my eyes
about a few things.  
First, as teachers we unnecessarily alienate ourselves from the kids in our
classes when we go into a classroom *expecting* resistance or indifference.
That knowledge influences---no, dampens---our enthusiasm for what we're doing.
He or she would be a rare bird indeed who could deal with that knowledge and
still approach a class with zest. Yet I think it too often leads us to think
of the experience as one that we and the class just have to wade through as
best we can. Second, for non-majors I agree that the expectations should be
different. Not lower, just different. Know your audience! Here I'm speaking
primarily of survey courses. I've heard a several different ideas about how
World History surveys should be approached, for instance. One professor
insists they learn the rudiments of Western and non-Western cultures---their
own heritage and others'. Another claims the survey should introduce them to
the rigors of college-level work *and* teach them their heritage and others'.
Still another suggests that we need to show them through these surveys what it
is that historians do---model for students how the discipline works. And
finally, one professor just recently told me that the freshman survey is the
only chance we have to grab them and interest them in history, so we should
keep that idea at the top of the long list of goals we all have for our
classes. All these approaches are valid ones, but the last two make the most
sense for classes geared more toward non-majors, *particularly* the freshman
survey. The classroom is just the forum we need to win back the popular
audience that we so often lament we've lost. I'm not sure how all that
translates into your classroom; I'm still working out how it applies to my
own. I think it boils down to this---know your audience.  
All this begs a question that I'd like to throw out for discussion: Should we
have two sets of requirements for majors and non-majors in the same class? We
do this when a class has graduate students and non-graduate students. Would it
be unreasonable to implement this idea with regard to majors and non-majors?
It doesn't necessarily mean a lower standard for non-majors, but more likely a
lighter work load. I'm not so sure that kids object to the standard so much as
the work load. I'd really like to know what you all think about this. I admit
to having a lot to learn about teaching and am eager to learn.

Theron W. Davis  
U. of Southern Miss.

* * *

From: [twdavis@WHALE.ST.USM.EDU](mailto:twdavis@WHALE.ST.USM.EDU)(Theron W.
Davis III) Date: Fri, 19 Aug 1994 10:45:16 -0500 (CDT)

As a Ph.D. student I still exist in that in-between place where the instructor
is still receiving formal instruction; and this perspective has opened my eyes
about a few things.  
First, as teachers we unnecessarily alienate ourselves from the kids in our
classes when we go into a classroom *expecting* resistance or indifference.
That knowledge influences---no, dampens---our enthusiasm for what we're doing.
He or she would be a rare bird indeed who could deal with that knowledge and
still approach a class with zest. Yet I think it too often leads us to think
of the experience as one that we and the class just have to wade through as
best we can. Second, for non-majors I agree that the expectations should be
different. Not lower, just different. Know your audience! Here I'm speaking
primarily of survey courses. I've heard a several different ideas about how
World History surveys should be approached, for instance. One professor
insists they learn the rudiments of Western and non-Western cultures---their
own heritage and others'. Another claims the survey should introduce them to
the rigors of college-level work *and* teach them their heritage and others'.
Still another suggests that we need to show them through these surveys what it
is that historians do---model for students how the discipline works. And
finally, one professor just recently told me that the freshman survey is the
only chance we have to grab them and interest them in history, so we should
keep that idea at the top of the long list of goals we all have for our
classes. All these approaches are valid ones, but the last two make the most
sense for classes geared more toward non-majors, *particularly* the freshman
survey. The classroom is just the forum we need to win back the popular
audience that we so often lament we've lost. I'm not sure how all that
translates into your classroom; I'm still working out how it applies to my
own. I think it boils down to this---know your audience.  
All this begs a question that I'd like to throw out for discussion: Should we
have two sets of requirements for majors and non-majors in the same class? We
do this when a class has graduate students and non-graduate students. Would it
be unreasonable to implement this idea with regard to majors and non-majors?
It doesn't necessarily mean a lower standard for non-majors, but more likely a
lighter work load. I'm not so sure that kids object to the standard so much as
the work load. I'd really like to know what you all think about this. I admit
to having a lot to learn about teaching and am eager to learn.

Theron W. Davis  
U. of Southern Miss.

* * *

Date: Fri, 19 Aug 1994 15:52:01 -0500 (EST) From:
[00aoedmonds@BSUVC.BSU.EDU](mailto:00aoedmonds@BSUVC.BSU.EDU)

Theron Davis asks about different requirements for history majors and
nonmajors in survey classes. I agree with Peter Halloran: there aren't usually
many history majors in survey classes (at least they don't know it yet!) When
I teach the survey, I find out who the few majors are, then find a time when
we can all meet, maybe for an extra hour every week or two, to talk about
"history major stuff" that arises in the course, i.e., historiog- raphy,
document interpretation, additional reading (perhaps an article or two). We do
this for the "fun" of it--I get no extra pay, obviously, and the students get
no extra points (although I might consider that next time). We all enjoy the
additional learning.

    
    
                            Tony Edmonds
                            Ball State University
    

PS: Please give my regards to Neil McMillen and inform him that I am still a
better tennis player than he.

* * *

Date: Sun, 21 Aug 1994 23:51:06 -0400 (EDT) From: Susan J Mulley
<[smulley@uoguelph.ca](mailto:smulley@uoguelph.ca)>

At the risk of being a sole dissenting voice on this topic, I would like to
interject another opinion. The reality of post-secondary education has changed
drastically for most students in the past few years. As professors, I think we
must recognize this changing dynamic. (Perhaps this change is unique to
Canada, but that seems unlikely) Two factors seem to me to be the major
components of this change.

  1. More students work. In fact, when I surveyed a class composed of mostly third and fourth year students all but 2 in a class of 45 had jobs which required 20 hours a week or more. It is fine for us to say that students need to make a choice between their jobs and their university requirements - but what are we really saying if we believe that? These students could not afford to attend university without their jobs. They are not making frivolous decisions here - they are making the best choices they can, based on a very difficult situation. If we give them NO leeway we are telling them they should not be at university unless their parents can afford to send them and to pay the whole cost. 
  2. There are many more non-traditional students returning to university or attending for the first time. What do we tell a student who needs to write a make-up exam because her kid got the chicken-pox in the middle of exams, or the student who can't write his exam at 8:30 a.m. because his shift doesn't end until 9:30 and he supports a family of five and can't afford to risk his job? For that matter, I have had single parents with 3 exams in 24 hours ask for a different exam time - would it be reasonable to say no? Think of the added stress that schedule imposes on the family! What about the single parent on family benefits who doesn't want to write on Saturday because the day-care is closed and if she pays for a sitter the money has to come out of her limited food budget for that week? Let's try to have some empathy with our students. Many of them face barriers we cannot even imagine, and probably would not cope with as well as they do! 

I think too often we are out of touch with the reality of these students
lives. Many of us went through the system at a time when it was MUCH more
accessible financially than it is at present. Of course there are always some
students who will attempt to scam us - but why tar the entire class with the
same brush when many students are just trying to do the best they can in a
difficult situation.

Why is flexibility such a bad thing? I am very uncomfortable with the idea of
ABSOLUTE rules for a class. Perhaps I have not taught long enough to become
jaded with the excuses, but I think that I would rather err on the side of
empathy. Maybe I will miss some "chancers", but at least the students who need
the encouragement will get it. I haven't found that being flexible means a
decrease in student respect - I don't take late papers unless students speak
to me first, but I am willing to listen to the fact that LIFE sometimes gets
in the way of school. Perhaps because of this attitude I NEVER get the 'my
aunt died' excuse, students just say 'I screwed up and didn't start this in
time - here's a note from my boss saying I have to work'.

As far as class attendance goes, I agree with poster who said that non-
attendance is a student's own funeral. I tell students "I expect you to come
to class. If you do not come to class you will not get the information I am
teaching. Some of the background material is covered in the text, but I am not
following the text verbatim. You will be examined on everything that is taught
in this course: text, lectures and seminars." Then I leave the choice up to
the students. I chose to spend 6 extra years getting a doctorate not a high-
school qualification because I didn't want to have to take attendance or to
deal with parents. ( Well, not just because of that, but it was part of the
decision :) ) Students need to be treated as adults - if they choose not to
come to class, they need to accept the consequences. If they can ace my course
without attending class - well, good for them! As adults (or proto-adults
perhaps for first year students) we also need to recognize that they have
lives that may sometimes impinge on how they treat our course.

If we treat students with the RESPECT and EMPATHY they deserve, we can not go
far wrong.

Susan J. Mulley  
University of Guelph  
[smulley@uoguelph.ca](mailto:smulley@uoguelph.ca)

[Return](/~teach/) to H-TEACH Home Page.  

  
[![H-Net Humanities & Social Sciences
OnLine](/footers/graphics/logosmall.gif)](/)  
[Contact Us](/contact/)  
Copyright (C) 1995-2002, H-Net, Humanities & Social Sciences OnLine  
Click Here for an [Internet Citation Guide](/about/citation).  
---

