![](spacer1.gif) |  ![Course Syllabus](syllbann.gif)

**History 53  
United States: 1865 to the Present**

| **Required Books** | **Nature of the Course**  
---|---  
**Office Hours** | **Course Grades**  
**Attendance Policy** | **Quizzes**  
**Examinations** | **Exam and Quiz  
Procedures**  
**Examination Dates** | **Absences from Exams**  
**Final Examination** | **Fairness**  
  
** REQUIRED BOOKS

* Blum, _The Progressive Presidents_ (PP)

* Brinkley, _American History: A Survey, 9th ed., II._ (AH)

* Maddox, ed., _American History: Annual Editions, 14th ed., II_ (AE)

* Primus documents (PD)

* * *

NATURE of the COURSE

History 53 is an introductory course in the history of the U.S. from the end
of the Civil War to the present. Lectures will be mainly interpretive and will
assume a command of the basic facts by students. Please consult the syllabus
and read the assigned material prior to attending each lecture. I like you to
get your money's worth from your textbook purchases, so be warned that I do
require a good deal of reading and do test on that reading.

* * *

OFFICE HOURS

Office hours are as follows:

Hammersmith (220B WDB)  
MWF; 11:30-1:00 and by appointment

Wilhelm (210A WDB)  
MW 9:30-10:30/ T 3:00-4:00/ F 10:30-11:30 and 1:30-2:30

Park (G13 WDB)  
M 9:40-11:40/ W 9:40-11:40/ F 11:00-12:00

Please bring your notes and any graded material with you; we can be more
helpful if we can be specific in our comments.

* * *

COURSE GRADES

Grades are calculated as follows: quizzes (25%); hour exams (25% each); final
examination (25%). The grading scale is as follows: A: 90-100; B: 80-89; C:
70-79; D: 60-69; F: 0-59.

* * *

ATTENDANCE POLICY

Attendance, though not required, is highly recommended and will be rewarded in
three ways: (1) by more insights than you can get from someone else's notes or
by simply completing the reading assignments; (2) by the dazzling impression
you can make with your thoughtful questions and insightful answers; (3) by
being able to double-count your highest quiz score, if you have no more than
three absences all semester. While we will not subtract points from your
course grade for absences, we will consider attendance as a factor for those
on a grade borderline at the end of the semester. Remember that lecture
material, classroom videos, and other visual materials go beyond the text and
required readings, so it is highly unlikely you will do well in the course
without regular attendance. Except for the special cases noted (see absences
from examinations), students must be present for all exams.

* * *

QUIZZES

There will be three quizzes. I will confirm the dates, indicated on the
syllabus, at least one class period in advance. They will normally concentrate
on the reading material and will be brief. _There will be no make-ups_. In
computing course grades, the highest two scores will be used. If students do
well on the third quiz, we will factor this into the calculation of course
grades. Based on past student performances, doing well on the third quiz will
boost course marks to the next highest letter grade for approximately 10% of
the class. Another way to improve grades is to attend class regularly. For
those with three or fewer misses (whether excused or unexcused), we will
double-count your highest quiz grade. In this instance, only your highest two
quiz grades will count; the other two are potential "extra credit boosts".

* * *

EXAMINATIONS

There will be two hour exams and a final exam. They will combine multiple
choice, short answer, and essays. We will provide more details about each exam
prior to the test date. Old exams are on file in Colson and will be [posted on
this Web site](exams.html).

* * *

EXAM and QUIZ PROCEDURES

You will answer quiz questions on the paper provided. Unless we indicate
otherwise, please bring a bluebook, purchased at a bookstore carrying texts or
at other locations in Morgantown, to answer exam questions. If any pages are
missing in your bluebook, inform your instructor before the exam. _We will not
accept bluebooks with pages missing_. You may do the questions in any order
and may write on both sides of the paper. "A" and strong "B" essays ordinarily
take three to five pages (one side); a good short answer or a good ID usually
involves a solid paragraph (at least four or five sentences). In this regard,
keep in mind the journalistic "w's": who or what, when, where, and why.

For purposes of anonymity, write your name on the back of the bluebook rather
than on the front. Please indicate on the front which major essay you have
answered. We also request that you use pen rather than pencil. Neatness does
not count; visibility does, and smuggy pencil often proves quite difficult to
decipher.

* * *

EXAMINATION DATES

Tentative exam dates are September 26 and October 24. I will confirm or change
those dates at least two class periods before the intended examination. The
final exam will be in the regular classroom, Thursday, December 11, from
11:00-1:00. Given WVU's grade report line (293-WVUI), we will not post grades.

* * *

ABSENCES FROM EXAMS

Students will be excused from an examination only by furnishing proof of
illness or discussing an unavoidable absence prior to the examination. Please
contact your quiz section leader in the office at Woodburn Hall. The number
for History is 293-2421 (Hammersmith ext. 5235). As a backup, you may leave
your telephone number on Professor Hammersmith's voice mail- using the above
number and extension. At our discretion, a student excused from an examination
may be asked to write an essay and/or take an oral examination. A student who
misses a test for reasons other than the above will receive a zero for the
exercise.

* * *

FINAL EXAMINATION

Since the second most-asked question about the course (after "May we have more
assigned reading?") always concerns the final exam, let me indicate that the
final exam will be partly comprehensive. About two weeks before the end of the
semester, we will distribute three comprehensive questions. You may study for
these questions in any way you choose, including asking for guidance, but you
may not bring notes into the final exam. I will select _one_ of the three for
the final exam; all students must answer this question. It will count
approximately one-third of the final exam grade. The rest of the final will
test material only from the second hour exam to the end of the semester.

* * *

FAIRNESS

WVU is committed to social justice. We concur with the University's commitment
and will strive to maintain a positive learning environment based on open
communication, mutual respect, and non-discrimination. WVU does not
discriminate on the basis of race, sex, age, disability, veteran status,
religion, sexual orientation, color, or national origin. We will appreciate
and consider suggestions on extending and enhancing such an environment. If
you have a disability and anticipate needing any type of accomodation to
participate fully in this class, please let us know and make appropriate
arrangements with [Disability
Services](http://www.wvu.edu/~socjust/dassist.html) (293-6700). It would be
best to discuss this matter during the first week of class with your section
leader. **

* * *

[**Back to the Main Menu**](index.html#menu)

**

