Williams History Department Courses

Introductory Survey Courses (202-299)

* * *

These courses are open to all students and are intended to provide a basic
understanding of the history of peoples, countries, and geographic regions
over relatively long time-spans. Most of all, they will provide students with
the background necessary for more advanced study in history at the 300 and 400
level. They are offered in either small or large formats, depending on the
individual course.

_*Denotes courses that meet the college Peoples & Cultures requirement._

**Introductory Survey Courses: Africa and the Middle East (202-211):**

**HIST 202 Early African History Through the Era of the Slave Trade**
(formerly HIST 270) (Not offered 2000-2001)*

> This course introduces students to the early history of the peoples of
Africa, with an emphasis on sub-Saharan Africa. The course begins with the
origins of late stone-age African civilizations (ca. 25,000 B.C.E.) and runs
through the late-eighteenth-century years of the most intensive exports of
slaves. It concentrates on people and civilizations indigenous to Africa. It
therefore notices Asian and European visitors mostly as Africans influenced
them, and takes up foreigners and outside ideas only as Africans made use of
them. Such extraneous (though related) topics as the origins of Islam, the
Atlantic slave trade, European wars that touched African shores, the African
Diaspora in the New World, and European explorers and missionaries receive
only passing attention. The emphasis in this course on the African sides of
these, and other aspects of world history provide a valuable alternative
perspective on apparently familiar events elsewhere around the globe.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, an hour
exam, and a final exam.

>

> [_Groups C and D_](mrequire.html#group)

[MUTONGI](faculty/kmutongi.html)

**HIST 203 Sub-Saharan Africa since 1800** (formerly HIST 269)*

> This survey of sub-Saharan African history takes up the continuing saga of
African political, social and economic developments from the aftermath of the
trans-Atlantic slave trade to the present. It is divided into three sections.
The first section of the course focuses on the consequences of the slave trade
on African societies and on theAfricans' interaction with European merchants,
explorers, and missionaries in the decades preceding colonial conquest. The
human consequences of the trade lingered long after the abolition of the slave
trade across the Atlantic Ocean. Many African societies were weakened, thus
setting the stage for colonial conquest. During the second half of the
nineteenth century, however, competition among Europeans for control of raw
materials for the nascent industries led to colonization, and in some cases,
to white settlement in Africa.

>

> The second section of the course investigates the process of colonial
conquest and the dynamics of colonial rule in Africa. It looks especially at
the ways in which colonialism affected various groups of Africans, and at the
ways, both subtle and overt, in which Africans resisted or collaborated with
colonial rule in order to achieve their goals. The colonial period, brief in
time, yet profoundly significant in its impact, was ushered out partly by the
rising tide of African nationalism.

>

> The last section of the course, then, examines the rise of new nation-
states, their colonial legacies, post-colonial economies, and systems of
justice, education, and governance.

>

> Format: discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, one
exam, and two papers.

>

> No enrollment limit (expected: 30). Open to all.

>

> [_Group C_](mrequire.html#group)

[MUTONGI](faculty/kmutongi.html)

**HIST 209 The Origins of Islam: God, Empire, and the Apocalypse** (formerly
HIST 275; also Religion 231)(Not offered 2001-2)*

> The rise of Islam in the seventh century C.E. is usually seen, by both
Muslim and non-Muslim historians, as a total break with the past. This course
will challenge that assumption by placing the rise of Islam in the context of
the history of late antiquity (c. 300-700 C.E.). The first half of the course
will examine the impact of Judeo-Christian monotheism in the ancient world,
the rise of confessional empires, articulation of new ideas about holiness and
its relation to sexuality and the transformations undergone by Judaism,
Christianity, Zoroastrianism and Manichaeism. We shall examine the
conversation of these traditions with classical paganism and philosophy, the
internal struggle within traditions to define rules of interpretation, the
impact of ascetic, iconoclastic and apocalyptic ideas and, finally, polemics
among the traditions. Special attention will be given to borderlands (Armenia,
Syria, and Arabia) where the problems of regionalism and religious diversity
were prominent. We will then examine the career of Muhammad (PBUH) in the
context of Arabia, the spread of the Islamic empire into Christian and Iranian
worlds, the impact of apocalyptic expectations, the fixation of religious
decision making within the tradition and the question of conversion and
religious diversity within the commonwealth of Islam. The course will end with
the flourishing of the Abbasid empire in the ninth century.

>

> Requirements: two five-page papers and a final research project. Each class
will use a case study approach focusing on one textual, artistic, or
architectural artifact.

>

> _Open to all classes without prerequisite._ [_Groups C and
D_](mrequire.html#group)

>

>> > > > > > > > > > > > DARROW

>

> **HIST 211: The Greater Game? Central Asia and Its Neighbors Yesterday,
Today and Tomorrow** (Same as African and Middle Eastern Studies 201 and
Religion 236)

>

> See under Religion for full description

**Introductory Survey Courses: Asia (212-221):**

**HIST 212 Barbarians in the Middle Kingdom: China to 1850** (formerly HIST
283) (Not offered 2001-2002)*

> This course will explore the history of early Imperial China through an
investigation of so-called barbarian incursions into China proper. Among other
topics, we will study Buddhism's penetration of China during the fourth
through ninth centuries and beyond; the arrival of the Mongol Hordes, led by
Ghengis and then Khubilai Khan; attitudes toward overseas exploration and
migration in the early- and late-Ming and early-Qing dynasties; and finally
the arrival of the "foreign devis" (Europeans) in China. The course will offer
an overview of early-Imperial China, as well as an investigation of what it
meant to be "Chinese" during that era.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, three short papers and a
self-scheduled final exam.

>

> [_Groups C and D_](mrequire.html#group)

[REEVES](faculty/creeves.html)

**HIST 213 Modern China, 1800-Present: Continuity and Change** (formerly HIST
284)*

> This course is designed to introduce students to some of the major events
and issues in China's dynamic transformation from the world's oldest and
largest bureaucracy to a revolutionary state-and its subsequent evolution to
the contemporary political and economic phenomenon we know today. Tracing
premodern legacies that have helped shape China, the course covers the decline
and fall of the Qing dynasty through the creation of Communist China and the
unfolding of the post-Mao era. The class uses primary and secondary sources
(including literature and films) to examine the origins and impact of major
social and ideological trends such as foreign imperialism, nationalism,
racism/culturalism, feminism, communism, Maoism, and capitalism in China. The
course considers the relationship between political thought and practice and
how these "-isms" affected the daily life of the individual in China.

>

> Classes center on group discussion.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, a short paper (3-5 pages),
quizzes and a self-scheduled final exam.

>

> [_Group C_](mrequire.html#group)

[REEVES](faculty/creeves.html)



**Introductory Survey Courses: Europe and Russia (222-241):**

**HIST 222 Greek History** (formerly HIST 216; same as Classics 216) (Not
offered 2001-2)

> Ancient Greece has been thought to embody the origins of Western
civilization in its institutions, values, and thought; it has been seen as the
infancy of modern society, with the attributes of innocence, purity, and the
infant's staggering capacity for exploration and learning; it has been
interpreted as an essentially primitive, violent culture with a thin veneer of
rationality; and it has been celebrated as the rational culture par
excellence. The study of ancient Greece indeed requires an interpretive
framework, yet Greek culture and history have defied most attempts to
articulate one. We will make our attempt in this course by investigating
ancient Greece as a set of cultures surprisingly foreign to us, as it so often
was to its own intellectual elite. But we will also come to appreciate the
rich and very real connections between ancient Greek and modern Western
civilization. The course will begin with Bronze Age-Greece and the earliest
developments in Greek culture, and will conclude with the spread of Greek
influence into Asia through the conquests of Alexander the Great. We will
explore topics such as the aristocratic heritage of the city-state, the
effects of pervasive war on Greek society, the competitive spirit in political
and religious life, the confrontations with the East, the relationship of
intellectual culture to Greek culture as a whole, Greek dependence on slavery,
and the diversity of political and social forms in the Greek world. The
readings will concentrate on original sources, including historical writings,
philosophy, poetry, and oratory. The class will meet once a week for a
lecture, and will divide into two discussion sections for the second meeting
of the week.

>

> Evaluation will be based on contributions to class discussions, a midterm, a
final exam, and a medium-length paper.

>

> _Open to first-year students._ [_Group D_](mrequire.html#group)

CHRISTENSEN

**HIST 223 Roman History** (formerly HIST 218; same as Classics 218)

> The study of Roman history involves questions central to the development of
Western institutions, religion, and modes of thought. Scholars have looked to
Rome both for actual antecedents of European cultural development and for
paradigmatic scenes illustrating what they felt were cultural universals. Yet
Roman history also encompasses the most far-reaching experience of diverse
cultures, beliefs, and practices known in the Western tradition until perhaps
contemporary times. A close analysis of Roman history on its own terms shows
the complex and fascinating results of an ambitious, self-confident nation's
encounter both with unexpected events and crises at home, and with other
peoples. As this course addresses the history of Rome from its mythologized
beginnings through the reign of the emperor Constantine, it will place special
emphasis on the impressive Roman ability to turn the unexpected into a rich
source of cultural development, as well as the complex tendency later to
interpret such ad hoc responses as predestined and inevitable. The Romans also
provide a vivid portrait of the relationship between power and self-confidence
on the one hand, and violence and ultimate disregard for dissent and
difference on the other. Readings for this course will concentrate on a wide
variety of original sources, and there will be a strong emphasis on the
problems of historical interpretation.

>

> Classes will involve both lecture and discussion.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class preparation and participation, two short
papers, and a final exam.

>

> _Open to first-year students._ [_Group D_](mrequire.html#group)

CHRISTENSEN

**HIST 225: The MiddleAges (Same as Religion 216)**

This course exploares the development of European and Mediterranean
civilizations during the thousand-year period known as the "Middle Ages." At
the beginning of this period the Romans ruled a massive empire that stretched
from Britain to north Africa and from Spain to Iraq. A millennium later, this
classical and pagan world had broken apart into three successor civilizations:
medieval Europe, the Byzantine empire, and the Islamic world. This course
investigates how this momentous transformation occurred. We will examine such
topics as relations between Romans and "barbarians," the speard of
Christainity and Islam, the development of kingdoms and empires, the Vikings
and crusades, saints and religous reformers, art and architecture, cities and
trade, the persecution of Jews and heretics, as well as the Black Death and
Italian Renaissance.

Format: seminar with short lectures and audio-visual presentations.

> Evaluation will be based on several papers, an exam, and class
participation.

>

> No prerequisites. Enrollment will range from 10 to 30 students.

>

> [_Groups B and D_](mrequire.html#group)

[GOLDBERG](faculty/egoldberg.html)

**HIST 226 Europe from Reformation to Revolution: 1500-1815** (formerly HIST
205)

> This course introduces students to the major historical developments in
Western Europe during the early modern period -- such pan-European phenomena
as the Reformation, the Witch Craze, the Military Revolution, the rise of
absolutist states, the seventeenth-century crisis in government and society,
the Enlightenment, the French Revolution and Napoleon, and the establishment
of European influence around the world.

>

> Evaluation will be based on two short papers, a midterm and a final exam.

>

> [_Group B and D_](mrequire.html#group)

[WOOD](faculty/jwood.html)

**HIST 227 : Europe's Long Nineteenth Century**

> This course introduces students to the era of the European domination of the
world, a time of revolutionary excitement and fervor, of war and travesty, and
of great intellectual ferment. Topics include the French Revolution, the
Revolutions of 1830 and 1848, the Industrial Revolution, German and Italian
Unification, the Scramble for Africa, the Russian Revolution, and the origins
of World War I. With an eye toward exploring the origins of today's complex
attitudes toward race, ethnicity, and gender, the course will investigate
racial thought, anti-semitism, and feminism in the nineteenth century.

>

> Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation,
a midterm exam, and interpretive essay,and a final exam.

>

> No prerequisites. Enrollment unlimited (expected: 35).

>

> [_Group B_](mrequire.html#group)

LATCHAM

**HIST 228 Europe in the Twentieth Century** (formerly HIST 209) (Not offered
2001-2)

> This course offers an introduction to some of the more important issues in
twentieth-century European history, focusing on the major ideologies,
institutions, and cultural practices that have shaped the course of European
history in this tumultuous century. Organized topically and thematically, the
course will consider European society on the eve of World War I, the impact of
the War on that society, the Russian Revolution and its aftermath, economic
and political reconstruction in the 1920s, the Depression, the rise of Fascism
and Nazism, World War II and the Holocaust, the establishment of postwar
social democratic welfare states in western Europe, the "economic miracle" of
the 1950s, the social unrest of the 1960s, the origins and development of the
European Union, the 1989 revolutions in Eastern Europe, and the rebirth of
nationalism at the close of the century. Following several introductory
lectures, the course will be taught via discussion.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, a mid-term exam, several
quizzes, and a final take-home essay exam.

>

> [_Group B_](mrequire.html#group)

LATCHAM

**HIST 229 European Imperialism: The Conquest and Division of the World**
(formerly HIST 222)* (Not offered 2000-2001)

> A survey of European imperialism in the nineteenth and early-twentieth
centuries, paying special attention to important case studies-British India,
South and Latin America after independence, China and the Opium Wars, and the
Scramble for Africa-and the onset of anti-colonial struggles in these areas.
The rich historiographical debate concerning both the reasons for and the
nature of imperialism, commencing with the Hobson-Lenin thesis, will be
examined. Issues to be explored include imperialism and Christianity,
imperialism and gender, imperialism and racism, and imperialism and
technology. The course will include a number of important films on these
subjects.

>

> Evaluation will be based on a midterm, a final exam, one 10-page research
paper, two map quizzes, and class participation.

>

> [_Group B_](mrequire.html#group)

SINGHAM

> **HIST 230: Modern European Jewish History,1789-1948**

>

> What does itmean to be a Jew? The vexed question of Jewish identity emerged
at the end of the eighteenth century in Europe and has dominated Jewish
history throughout the modern period. Although Jewish emancipation and
citizenship followed different paths in France and the German states, in both
cases jews were confronted by unprecedented opportunities for integration into
non-Jewish society and unprecedented challenges to Jewish communal life.
Focusing primarily on France and Germany, this course will introduce students
to the major social, cultural, religious and political transformations that
shaped the lifes of Europe's Jews from the outbreak of the French Revolution
to the aftermath of World War II. We will explore such topics as emancipation,
Jewish diversity, the rise of religious denominations within Judaism,
competing political ideologies, Jewish-gentile relations, the role of Jewish
women, Jewish responses to Nazism, and the situation of Jews in the immediate
postwar period. In addition to broad historical treatments, course materials
will incude memoirs and novels.

>

> Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation,
two papers, and a final exam.

>

> No prerequisites. No enrollment limit

>

>> Group B

>>

>> GARBARINI





**HIST 234 Britain, 1688-1848** (formerly HIST 230) (Not offered 2001-2002)

> This course offers a survey of British history between 1688 and 1848,
introducing the student to major aspects of the nation's development in the
"long eighteenth century." Several themes will be addressed in the course:
British society before the industrial revolution; the political and
ideological structure of the British state in the wake of the Glorious
Revolution of 1688 and the Hanoverian succession of 1714; social conflict in
pre-industrial Britain; the domestic consequences of Britain's foreign wars
and imperial ventures; the advent of a "modern" consumer economy; the causes
and consequences of the industrial revolution; the impact of the French
Revolution on British society; and, finally, the reform of British political
institutions in the first half of the nineteenth century. Overall, the course
is designed to explore the creation of "Great Britain" via the Act of Union
between England and Scotland in 1707 and then to trace the emergence of
Britain as a modern industrial democracy and world power. While the instructor
will deliver four introductory lectures, emphasis in the course will be placed
on class discussion of the readings.

>

> Along with History 235, "Britain Since 1848," this course is conceived as
part of a two-semester survey of modern British history.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, two interpretive essays
(8-10 pages each), and a self-scheduled final exam.

>

> [_Groups B and D_](mrequire.html#group)

[WATERS](faculty/cwaters.html)

**HIST 235 Britain Since 1848** (formerly HIST 231)

> This course will survey British history from 1848 to the present day,
charting how Great Britain - the most powerful nation and empire of the
nineteenth-century world - evolved into "Little England" \- a small country on
the margins of Europe - in little over 100 years. The first half of the course
will investigate Victorian Britain and its remarkable political stability;
some of the later challenges mounted to the liberal parliamentary system by
workers and feminists; British industrial expansion and its profoundly
transformative effects on urban life and social structure; the ideology of
"Victorianism" and its implications for gender roles and family life; and
finally, the expansion of the British Empire and its impact on domestic life.
The second half of the course will chart Britain's troubled development in the
twentieth century, from "the strange death of liberal England" before 1914, to
the outbreak and trauma of World War I, the anxious interwar period punctuated
by the Great Depression and Appeasement, and the experience of yet another
"total war" against the Germans between 1939 and 1945. We will examine how the
British struggled to invent a new post-imperial identity for themselves after
1945, when they confronted not only their nation's economic decline but
decolonization, the loss of their Great Power status, an increasing dependence
on the United States, and a conflicted relationship with the rest of Europe
which continues to this day. The instructor will deliver several introductory
lectures, but the bulk of the course will be devoted to class discussion of
the readings, which, in addition to secondary sources, will include
contemporary political documents, social surveys, reportage, novels and films.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, several short papers, and a
final exam.

>

> Open to all.

>

> [_Group B_](mrequire.html#group)

WATERS

**HIST 238 Germany in the Twentieth Century** (Not offered 2000-2001)

> Written documents, literature, film, and the writings of historians will be
used in surveying the history of Germany since 1890. Topics to be considered
include: Wilhelmian Germany and the role played by domestic and foreign policy
in the decision of the imperial government to opt for war in 1914; the impact
of war and defeat on German society; the relation of the cultural flowering
that occurred in Germany during the 1920s to the political and social
instability of the Weimar Republic; Hitler and the collapse of democratic
Germany; the Third Reich; World War II and the Holocaust; the reconstruction
of Germany after 1945; Germany in the context of the Cold War (the Federal
Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic); and united-Germany
after the wall. A central theme of the course will be the attempt of Germans
during the twentieth century to decide what Germany is and how it fits into
the rest of Europe, and to determine the nature of their state and society.

>

> Requirements include: three short papers and a number of pop quizzes.

>

> [_Group B_](mrequire.html#group)

[KOHUT](faculty/tkohut.html)

**HIST 240 Muscovy and the Russian Empire** (formerly HIST 232)

> Between the fourteenth and the seventeenth centuries the princes and
political elite of Muscovy created a vast multi-national empire in Eastern
Europe and Asia. Over the next 150 years their imperial heirs transformed and
extended this empire, to the point that on the eve of the Crimean War
(1853-1855) many believed it to be the most powerful state in Europe. But
defeat in the war exposed the weakness of the imperial regime and helped to
provoke a process of state-led reform that failed to avert, and may well have
contributed to, the collapse of the regime in the February Revolution of 1917.
Using a combination of primary and secondary sources, this course will explore
the character of the Muscovite and the Russian empires and the forces,
processes, and personalities that shaped their formation, expansion, and, in
the latter case, decline. Discussion/lecture course.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, a map quiz, several short
essays based on class readings, and a final self-scheduled exam.
[Syllabus](HIST232.html)

>

> [_Groups B and D_](mrequire.html#group)

[WAGNER](faculty/wwagner.html)

**HIST 241 The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Union** (formerly HIST 233)

> The October Revolution of 1917 brought to power in the debris of the Russian
empire a political party committed to the socialist transformation of society,
culture, the economy, and individual human consciousness. Less than seventy-
five years later, the experiment appeared to end in failure, with the stunning
collapse of the Soviet Union in December 1991. Using a combination of primary
and secondary sources, this course will explore the nature and historical
significance of the Soviet experiment, the controversies to which it has given
rise, and the forces, processes, and personalities that shaped the formation,
transformation, and ultimate collapse of the Soviet Union.

>

> Discussion/lecture course.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, a map quiz, several short
papers based on class readings, and a final self-scheduled exam.

>

> [_Group B_](mrequire.html#group)

[WAGNER](faculty/wwagner.html)

**Introductory Survey Courses: Latin America and the Caribbean (242-251):**

**HIST 242 Latin America from Conquest to Independence** (formerly HIST 287)
(Not offered 2001-2002)*

> This course examines the construction of distinctively Latin-American
societies from the age of conquest to the independence movements of the early-
nineteenth century. The central theme will be the ways in which social
conflicts between and among Europeans, Amerindians, and Africans shaped
colonial Latin America and the subsequent creation of independent nations in
the region. While discussing the interplay of race, class, and gender in these
New World societies, the course will analyze the transformation of political
and economic structures during the period of Spanish and Portuguese rule in
the Americas.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers (3-5
pages), and a take-home final exam.

>

> [_Groups C and D_](mrequire.html#group)

[KITTLESON](faculty/rkittleson.html)

**HIST 243** **Modern Latin America, 1822 to the Present**

This course will examine salient issues in the history of the independent
nations of Latin America. The first section of the course will focus on the
turbulent formatio of nation-states over the course of the nineteenth century.
In this regard the course will analyze the social and economicchanges of the
period up to World War I and the possibilities they offered for both political
order and disorder. Key topics addressed will include caudillismo, the role of
the Church in politics, economic dependency and development, and the place of
indigenous and African Latin-American peoples in new nations. The second
section will move us to qustions in twentieth-century Latin-American history,
including industrialization and urbanization; the emergence of workers' and
women's movements and the rise of mass politics; militarism, democracy, and
authoritarian governments; the influence of the U.S. in the region; and the
construction of cultural modernism in these "Third World" societies. Here and
throughout the course we will strive for an understanding of how social
conflicts shaped and were shaped by economic and political forces.

Format: lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation,
two short papers (3-5 pages), and a take-home final exam.

No prerequisites. Enrollment unlimited (expected 35-45).

> [_Group C_](mrequire.html#group)

[KITTLESON](faculty/rkittleson.html)

**HIST 249 The Caribbean From Slavery to Independence** (formerly HIST 225)*
(Not offered 2001-2)

> This course explores the history of the Caribbean from the eighteenth to the
twentieth centuries, focusing on a comparative approach to British, French,
and Spanish rule in the region. It will concentrate on the history of Jamaica,
Haiti, Cuba and Puerto Rico. Topics to be covered include: comparative slave
systems; plantation economies; revolution, rebellion and resistance;
abolitionism; missionary activity; the apprenticeship system; voodoo and slave
religions; indentured labor and intra-Caribbean migration; free persons of
color, mulattoes, and West Indian color hierarchies; class and color; trade
unionism; communism; the independence movements; women in the contemporary
Caribbean; and the legacies of slavery and colonialism.

>

> Evaluation will be based on a midterm, a final exam, one 10-page research
paper, and class participation.

>

> [_Group C_](mrequire.html#group)

[SINGHAM](faculty/ssingham.html)

**Introductory Survey Courses: United States (252-291):**

**HIST 252A: British Colonial America and the United States to 1877**

This survey course covers Anglo-American history from the period of colonial
settlement to the immediate aftermath of the CivilWar. Major social,
political, economic and cultural developments will be examined. Readings
emphasize three themes of major importance in order to better understand the
period surveyed: gender, slavery, and Indian America. The objective of this
course is to provide students with a general knowledge and understanding of
Anglo-Amercan history to 1877, as well as to introduce them to some important
historiographical debates and historical methodologies. Format:
lecture/discussion. Evaluation will be based on class participation, a series
of short analytical papers, and a final exam.

No enrollmentlimit.

Groups A and D

AUBERT

**HIST 252B America from San Gabriel to Gettysburg, 1492-1865** (formerly HIST
243)

> A topical analysis of the history of what became the United States of
America, beginning with the early years of European conquest and ending with
the crisis of the Civil War. Particular attention will be paid to the
relationship between major political events and changing patterns of economic,
social, and cultural life that shaped them. Readings will include contemporary
sources, historical studies, and biographies.

>

> Requirements: Students will write a series of short analytical papers and
will have a choice of either writing a longer, final essay or taking a final
exam.

>

> [_Groups A and D_](mrequire.html#group)

[DALZELL](faculty/rdalzell.html)

**HIST 253 The United States from Appomattox to AOL, 1865-Present** (formerly
HIST 244)

> This course will survey the history of the United States from the time the
nation struggled to heal from the wounds of fratricidal war, to the closing of
the frontier, to the struggle to come to terms with its place in the world
community, and finally, to the modern period as the United States continues to
wrestle with and define its global mission. Against this larger bacdrop we
will explore the history of the women and men who struggled daily with the
circumstances unique to their color and class, while trying to create better
lives for themselves. Readings will include selected primary sources,
contemporary historical scholarship, novels, and memoirs.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers (5-7
pages), and a final exam.

>

> [_Group A_](mrequire.html#group)

[HICKS, KUNZEL](faculty/chicks.html)

**HIST 270 American Politics from the Populists to the Present**

> Although William Jennings Bryan and the populists went down to defeat in
1896, they helped launch an extended period of governmental and social reform.
Beginning with the Populists and the Progressives, this survey will examine
the course of twentieth-century American politics, aiming to understand the
elaboration of liberal reform during this period, as well as conservative
resistance to and eventual triumph over it. We will focus in particular on the
transformation of the Democratic and Republican parties; the changes in the
American presidency; the expanding parameters of governmental power; and the
debates over America's role abroad.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, quizzes, a midterm, and a
final exam.

>

> [_Group A_](mrequire.html#group)

MERRILL

**HIST 281 African-American History Through Emancipation** (formerly HIST
261)*

> This course introduces students to the events, figures, and institutions
that have shaped African-American history. Beginning with the struggles to
dominate the African coast and the emergence of the modern slave trade, the
course traces the experiences of Africans in North America through the fall of
the Western slave societies. While our goal is to see American history from
the perspective of people of African descent in the United States, we will
also compare their experiences with those of African descent in the Caribbean,
South America, and other parts of North America. The final objective is to
increase students' familiarity with the historiography and intellectual
debates in "Afro-Am."

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, and a
final exam.

>

> [_Group A_](mrequire.html#group)

WILDER

**HIST 282 African-American History From Reconstruction to the Present**
(formerly HIST 262)*

> This course introduces students to the significant themes and events that
have shaped the African American political experience from Reconstruction to
the present. We will examine the social, political, and economic meaning of
freedom for men and women of African descent as well as explore the political
nature and development of African American historiography. The course will
give particular attention to such topics as the rise of Jim Crow, migration,
urbanization, the Civil Rights Movement, as well as the legacy of the post-
Civil Rights Movement era.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, and a
final exam.

>

> [_Group A_](mrequire.html#group)

HICKS

**HIST 286 Latino/a History from 1846 to the Present** *

> This course examines the formation of Latino/a communities in the United
States from 1846 to the present. These communities were formed through
conquest, immigration, and migration. In examining the causes of migration, we
will consider economic and political conditions in the countries of origin,
U.S. foreign policies, and the connections between the United States and the
countries of origin. We will epxlore the ways in which migration processes are
mediated through labor recruitment, immigration and refugee policies, and
social networks. We will analyze how Latinos and Latinas have been
incorporated into the economies of the regions of the United States where they
settled. Focusing on the historical experiences of Mexicans, Puerto Ricans,
Cubans, and Dominicans, this course will also address more recent immigration
from Central and South American countries.

>

> Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short essays, and a
final exam.

>

> [_Group A_](mrequire.html#group)

WHALEN

**Introductory Survey Courses: Transnational/Comparative (292-299):**

**HIST 292(F) Technology and Culture** (Same as History of Science 305) (Not
offered 2001-2)

> (See under History of Science for full description.)

**HIST 293(S) History of Medicine (Same as History of Science 320)** (Not
offered 2001-2)

> (See under History of Science for full description.)



* * *

[Courses](course.html) | [History homepage](index.html) | [Williams
homepage](../index.html)  
  
---  


