Ellen Stroud
telephone: 775-8530

303 Rice Hall
e-mail: ellen.stroud@oberlin.edu

History Department
office hours: Tuesdays, 12-2 pm and by apt.



# History 252: American Environmental History



Fall 2001

Tuesdays and Thursdays, 9:35 - 10:50 am

King Hall Room 101



This course explores the major themes of U.S. Environmental History, examining
changes in the American landscape, the development of ideas about nature in
the United States, and the history of U.S. environmental activism.  Throughout
the course, we will be exploring definitions of nature, environment, and
environmental history.



Course Requirements:



_Reading:_



The following books are available at the Oberlin College Bookstore, and are on
reserve at Mudd Library:



William Cronon,  _Changes in the Land_ (1983)



Charles Rosenberg, _The Cholera Years_ (1962)



William Cronon, _Nature 's Metropolis_ (1991)



Mark Spence, _Dispossessing the Wilderness_ (1999)



Donald Worster, _Dust Bowl:   The Southern Plains in the 1930s_ (1979)



Rachel Carson, _Silent Spring_ (1962)



Andrew Hurley, _Environmental Inequalities_ (1995)



In addition, a number of shorter readings are available both on reserve at the
library and on electronic reserve (ERES): http://eres.cc.oberlin.edu



_Class Discussion and Participation:_



Despite the fact that this is a large class, course attendance and
participation are crucial components.  Each student is expected to have
mastered that week's readings before class on Thursday, and be prepared to
engage in intelligent discussion of that reading. Class attendance and
participation will account for 20 percent of the grade.

_  
_

_Writing:_



Students will complete two three- to four-page scholarly book reviews of their
choice of the books assigned for the course.  Due dates for the various books
are indicated in the syllabus.  At least one review must be turned in before
fall break.  Guidelines for the reviews will be distributed during the second
week of class.  Each review will be worth 15 percent of the final course
grade.

  
In addition, each student will write an eight-page paper on the environmental
history of a landscape of her or his choosing, using the methods and ideas
learned throughout the semester.  Guidelines for this paper will be
distributed during the second week of class.  A one-page paper proposal, worth
5 percent of the final course grade, is due on Thursday, October 4th, at the
beginning of class.  Rough drafts, though not required, will be accepted for
comments until the beginning of class on Tuesday, December 4th.   Final drafts
are due at 5 pm on the last day of reading period, Monday, December 17th.  The
final draft will be worth 25 percent of the final course grade.



Papers should be submitted in hard copy, and should be double-spaced, with
one-inch margins, and in a twelve-point font.  All writing assignments are due
at the beginning of class on the due date.



Due dates should be taken seriously.  Papers will lose one-third of  a letter
grade for every 24-hour period they are late.  That means, for example, that a
paper that normally would have received a B+ would receive a B if it were
turned in the morning after it was due.



Students must complete and turn in all written work in order to pass the
course.  That means, for example, that a student who has received an A on
every assignment but one, but neglects to turn in that one, will fail the
entire course.



## Quizzes



There will be two scheduled quizzes, each worth 10 percent of the final grade.
Quizzes cannot be made up except in absolutely extraordinary circumstances.



_Grading:_



To summarize, the course will be graded as follows:



Class attendance and discussion:         20 %

First book review:                               15 %

Second book review:                           15 %

First quiz:                                            10 %

Second quiz:                                        10 %

Landscape paper proposal:                    5 %

Landscape paper:                                 25 %

###  

### Schedule of Classes and Assignments



#### Week One                      Pre-Contact Landscapes



Tuesday, September 4             Introductions and Definitions



Thursday, September 6           Pre-contact landscapes



Reading:

Cronon, "Kennecott Journey" (ERES)

Stewart, "Environmental History" (ERES)





#### Week Two                     Contact and Conquest



Tuesday, September 11           Colliding worlds



Thursday, September 13         Domesticating the landscape



                                                            Reading:

Cronon, _Changes in the Land_ , entire (pages 1-170)



           

#### Week Three                   Labor and Landscape



Tuesday, September 18           Settlement patterns

                                                *( _Changes in the Land_ book review due)*



Thursday, September 20         Labor and the landscape



                                                            Reading:         

                                                            Jefferson, "Notes on the State of Virginia (ERES)

                                                            Murrin, "Beneficiaries of Catastrophe"

                                                            (Begin reading _The Cholera Years_ for next week)

                       



#### Week Four                     Urbanization



Tuesday, September 25           Environmental challenges in the cities

                                                *( _The Cholera Years_ book review due)*



Reading:

Rosenberg, _The Cholera Years_ , entire (pages 1-234)



Thursday, September 27         Yom Kippur (No Class)



                                                           

#### Week Five                     Transportation



Tuesday, October 2                 Ports, rivers and canals  



Thursday, October 4               Railroads, time and trees

                                                *(One-page proposal for landscape paper due)*



Reading:

Cronon, _Nature 's Metropolis_ (pages 1-147)





#### Week Six                       Commodification



Tuesday, October 9                 Taking nature to market



Thursday, October 11             Industrial landscapes

                                                *( _Nature 's Metropolis_ review due)*



Reading:

Cronon, _Nature 's Metropolis_ (pages 148-385)





#### Week Seven                   Conservation and Preservation



Tuesday, October 16               Imagined landscapes

                                                *(First quiz, at the beginning of class)*



Thursday, October 18             Film:  "The Wilderness Idea"



Reading:

Karl Jacoby, "Class and Environmental History" (ERES)

                                                            (Begin reading _Dispossessing the Wilderness_ )



                                   

#### Week Eight                    Fall Break



Tuesday, October 23               Fall Break (No Class)

Thursday, October 25             Fall Break (No Class)

  



#### Week Nine                     The Creation of Wilderness



Tuesday, October 30               Conserving forests



Thursday, November 1           Preserving ideals

                                                *( _Dispossessing the Wilderness_ review due)*



                                                            Reading:

                                                            Spence, _Dispossessing the Wilderness_ (entire)

                                                            (Begin reading _Dust Bowl_ )

                                               



#### Week Ten                      Expertise, Modernity, and the Land



Tuesday, November 6             Managing the landscape



Thursday, November 8           "Nature" strikes back

                                                *( _Dust Bowl_ review due)*



                                                            Reading:

                                                            Worster, _Dust Bowl_ , entire (pages 3-243)

                                                           



#### Week Eleven                           World War II



Tuesday, November 13           Nuclear nature



Thursday, November 15         Film:  "Silent Spring"

*(Silent _Spring Review_ due)*



                                                            Reading:

Rachel Carson, _Silent Spring_ , entire (1-297)





#### Week Twelve                          The Environmental Movement



Tuesday, November 20           Earth Day and beyond



                                                            Reading:

                                                            Aldo Leopold, "The Land Ethic" (ERES)

                                                            Ed Abbey, _The Monkey Wrench Gang_ , 1-7  (ERES)

                                                            (Begin reading _Environmental Inequalities_ )



  

Thursday, November 22         Thanksgiving (No Class)





#### Week Thirteen                The Environmental Movement Gets Complex



Tuesday, November 27           Urban environments



Thursday, November 29         Environmental justice

                                                *( _Environmental Inequalities_ review due)*



                                                            Reading:

Hurley, _Environmental Inequalities_ , entire (1-182)

Davis, "Fortress L.A." (ERES)





#### Week Fourteen               The Trouble with Wilderness



Tuesday, December 4              Toxic landscapes

                                                *(Last day to submit rough drafts of landscape paper)*



Thursday, December 6            Is there trouble with wilderness?



                                                            Reading:

                                                            Cronon, "The Trouble with Wilderness"  (ERES)

                                                            Foreman, "All Kinds of Wilderness Foes" (ERES)

                                                            Snyder, "Nature as Seen from Kitkitdizze" (ERES)

                                                            Sessions, "Reinventing Nature?" (ERES)

                                                            Willers, "The Trouble with Cronon" (ERES)

                                                                                                                                                           



#### Week Fifteen                          Concluding Thoughts



Tuesday, December 11            Conclusions, evaluations



Thursday, December 13          Second quiz, final thoughts



Monday, December 17            Landscape paper due at 5 pm, in my office

