_**E NG 6018-901 (Ref 0854) & ENG 6018-777 (Ref 6587)  
Spring 1996** _  
**Professor[Phillip Sipiora](mailto:sipiora@chuma.cas.usf.edu) (with [David
Erben](mailto:erben@chuma.cas.usf.edu))**  

    
    
    Internet:        sipiora@chuma.cas.usf.edu & erben@chuma.cas.usf.edu
    
    Voice Mail:      813-974-9473          Secretary:       813-974-9458
    Department:      813-974-2421          fax:             813-974-2270
    Class Web Page:  http://www.cas.usf.edu/~sipiora/metaphor.html
    Class Listserv:  metaphor-l@nosferatu.cas.usf.edu
    Pre-Lectures:    http://www.cas.usf.edu/~sipiora/lectures/lecture1.html
    

  
**Theories of Metaphor and Contemporary Latin American Fiction **

* * *

[Class Home Page](indexm.html)

* * *
    
    
    Tuesday 6-9pm                                                 CPR 202
    

**S yllabus**

* * *

Electronic Activities  
Required Texts  
Topics and Readings  
Class Requirements  

* * *

**Description**  
The first half of this course will examine contemporary theories of metaphor,
ranging from semiotic approaches to historical explanations to
"deconstructive" strategies of reading. The second half of the course will
apply these theories to the works of Borges, Fuentes, Garcia Marquez, and Paz.
Each week a truncated version of the week's lecture will appear on the Web
page for the course. All students, on-site and distant, are encouraged to
review the weekly outline prior to the class meeting. Transcripts of each
week's electronic discssion will be posted to the class Web page.

**Electronic Activities**  
Extensive computer is not necessary for participation in this course. For
students physically in attendance, each class meeting in CPR 202 will involve
an introductory lecture/oral discussion (approximately 75 minutes) of the
week's reading, followed by an electronic MUD discussion of the reading(s)
(approximately 60 minutes), which will involve both remote and on-site
students. Distant students should make arrangements to use terminals at remote
compus sites (Sarasota, Ft. Myers, Lakeland, and St. Petersburg) in order to
log in to weekly discussion sessions. It is very difficult, if not impossible,
to access the MUD ( _Seulemonde_ ) through telephone lines at this time of the
evening (Tuesdays, 7:45-8:50), so no one should rely on home access for on-
line discussions  
There will be an open listserv (metaphor@nosferatu.cas.usf.edu), which will
offer a vehicle for the ongoing discussion of issues raised in class. Please
subscribe as soon as you can by sending the following message to the listserv
address (listserv@nosferatu.cas.usf.edu):

subscribe metaphor-l your first and last names

Each member of the class will be expected to offer one substantive reply
(100-300 words) each week to a question posed to everyone in the class - a
"question of the week." (These responses may also be writeen graphically and
sent by fax, campus mail, or snail mail.) If anyone has any questions about
any aspect of the course, please write directly to Phillip Sipiora or David
Erben (addresses above). Mr. Erben should be contacted for information
regarding any technical and/or electronic issues, including difficulties in
listserv subscriptions, accessing web page postings, posting listserv
comments, and so forth.

**Required Texts** :

Theoretical Readings:

Selections from Walter Benjamin, Paul de Man, Jacques Derrida, Umberto Eco,
Friedrich Nietzsche, Ramon Saldivar and Hayden White.

Literary Readings:

  1. Luis Jorge Borges _Ficciones_
  2. Anne Friedberg, _The Old Gringo, The Death of Artemio Cruz_
  3. Gabriel Garcia Marquez _Love in the Time of Cholera, One Hundread Years of Solitude_
  4. Octavio Paz _A Draft of Shadows_

* * *

**Weekly Topics and Readings** :

**Week 1**

  * Introduction 
  * Umberto Eco, "Metaphor," ( _Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language_. Bloomington: U of Indiana P, 1986: 87-129.) 

**Week 2**

  * Hayden White, "The Historical Text as Literary Artifact" ( _Tropics of Discourse: Essays in Cultural History_. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1978: 81-100.) 
  * \---. "The Tropics of History" ( _Tropics _: 197-217)

**Week 3**

  * Friedrich Nietzsche, "Nietzsche's Lecture Notes on Classical Rhetoric." (Trans. and Ed. Carole Blair. _Philosophy and Rhetoric_ 16(1983): 94-129.) 
  * Paul de Man, "The Epistemology of Metaphor" (In _On Metaphor_. Ed. Sheldon Sacks. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1978: 11-28.) 
  * Selections from _Allegories of Reading_. (New Haven: Yale UP, 1979.) 

**Week 4**

  * Selections from _Allegories of Reading_ 

**Week 5**

  * Jacques Derrida, "White Mythology: Metaphor in the Text of Philosophy." ( _New Literary History_ 6(1974): 11-74.) 
  * \---. "Retrait of Metaphor" ( _Enclitic_ 2(1978): 6-33.) 

**Week 6**

  * \---. "Retrait of Metaphor" 

**Week 7**

  * Walter Benjamin, "The Task of the Translator," ( _Illuminations_ [Ed. Hannah Arendt]. NY: Schocken Books, 1968:69-82.) 
  * Paul de Man, "Conclusions," ( _The Resistance to Theory_. Paul de Man. U of Minnesota P, 1986: 73-105.) 
  * Jacques Derrida, "Des Tours de Babel," ( _Difference in Translation_. Ed. Joseph F. Graham. Cornell UP, 1985: 165-207.) 

**Week 8**

  * Luis Jorge Borges, _Ficciones_ 

**Week 9**

  * Carlos Fuentes, _The Old Gringo_ 
**Week 10**

  * Carlos Fuentes, _The Death of Artemio Cruz_ 
**Week 11**

  * Gabriel Garcia Marquez, _Love in the Time of Cholera_ 
**Week 12**

  * Gabriel Garcia Marquez, _One Hundred Years of Solitude_ 
**Week 13**

  * Gabriel Garcia Marquez, _One Hundred Years of Solitude_ 
**Week 14**

  * Octavio Paz, _A Draft of Shadows_ 
**Week 15**

  * Octavio Paz, _A Draft of Shadows_ 
**Week 16**

  * Final Examination 

* * *

**Class Requirements** :

    
  1. Essay (12-15 pages)     
  2. Final Examination     
  3. Class Participation     
  4. E-Mail Account     
  5. Web Access 

