> English 288 (section 100)  
>  Nature in Literature  
>  Steven Jones  
>  GREEN ROMANTICISM

>

> In this course we'll read mostly literature from the British Romantic
period, 1789-1832, which was also--and not coincidentally--the period of the
(first) Industrial Revolution in Europe. Romantic authors are frequently
thought of as "nature poets" because they seem obsessed with the problem of
how humanity interacts with the natural world. In fact, however, they were
writing at a time of profound ecological crisis and many of their works
grapple with radical re-definitions of "nature" itself. The _idea_ of Nature
is so important in Romanticism precisely because the natural world seemed at
the time so threatened by catastrophic industrial change. We'll read important
British Romantic poets plus, for purposes of historical comparison, American
Romantic, Walt Whitman, and Beat Poet, Gary Snyder--both of whom owe a great
deal to British Romanticism. Three short papers will be required, as well as
class participation (see below). All readings are found on the Web (links
below) except for Kerouac, Snyder, and _Frankenstein_.

>

>  
>

> Books to buy: Jack Kerouac, _The Dharma Bums_ ; Mary Shelley, _Frankenstein_
; Gary Snyder, _No Nature_.

>

> **Schedule of readings (subject to change):**

>

> **_Week of_**

>

> **Jan. 15: Barbauld,["To a
Lady..."](http://www.rc.umd.edu/editions/contemps/barbauld/poems1773/painted_flowers.html);
Wordsworth, ["Lines Written in Early
Spring"](http://www.bartleby.com/145/ww130.html); Clare, ["The
Mores"](http://orion.it.luc.edu/~sjones1/mores.htm); [Godwin vs.
Malthus](http://www.rc.umd.edu/editions/mws/lastman/frames.htm); ["General
Ludd's Triumph"](http://orion.it.luc.edu/~sjones1/triumph.htm)**

>

> **Jan. 22: (no class 1/22 for M.L. King event) Blake, selected _Songs_
([Blake Archive](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/blake/): copy C, plates
4, 9, 11, 12, 13, 20, 21, 30, 35, 37, 42-44, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52)

>

> **Jan. 29: Robert Burns,[selected
works](http://www.library.utoronto.ca/utel/rp/authors/burns.html) ("Afton
Water," "To a Mouse," "Ye Flowery banks [Bonny Doon]"); John Clare, [selected
works](http://human.ntu.ac.uk/clare/clare.html)("The Mores," "Insects," "[VM4]
Ballad: A weedling...,""[VM5]Langley Bush,""[VM8] Helpstone Green")

>

> **Feb. 5: William Wordsworth,[selected
works](http://www.bartleby.com/145/wordchrono.html) ("We Are Seven," "Goody
Blake and Harry Gill," "A Whirlblast...,""Expostulation and Reply," "The
Tables Turned," "Nutting," "There was a boy,""A slumber did my spirit seal,"
"The World is too much with us,""On the projected Kendal and Windermere
Railway," "Steamboats, viaducts, and railways")

>

>  **Feb. 12: Wordsworth, cont'd. and["Michael: A Pastoral
Poem"](http://www.bartleby.com/145/ww162.html)

>

> **Feb. 19: Coleridge,[selected
works](http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/stc/Coleridge/poems/poems_links.html)
("The Eolian Harp," "Frost at Midnight," "Fears in Solitude," "Rime of the
Ancient Mariner")

>

> **Feb. 26: Various["last man"
works](http://www.rc.umd.edu/editions/mws/lastman/lms.htm); P. B. Shelley,
["The Cloud"](http://www.library.utoronto.ca/utel/rp/poems/shelley6b.html);
[notes to _Queen Mab_](http://www.english.upenn.edu/~curran/250/mabnotes.html)
(on vegetarianism and Prometheus); other [selected
works](http://www.bartleby.com/people/ShelleyP.html) ("Ode to the West Wind,"
"Stanzas Writen in Dejection near Naples, [CPW:]"Prometheus Unbound IV
[excerpts]")

>

> **Mar. 5: (spr. brk. 3/5-3/11)

>

> Mar. 12: M. W. Shelley, _Frankenstein_

>

> **Mar. 19: Keats,[ selected works](http://www.bartleby.com/people/Keats-
Jo.html) ("To one who has been long in city pent," "Keen, fitful gusts," "On
the Grasshopper and the Cricket," "Ode to a Nightngale," "Ode on a Grecian
Urn," "Robin Hood," "To Autumn")

>

> **Mar. 26: Walt Whitman,[selected works](http://www.bartleby.com/142/)
("Walt Whitman," "This Compost," "The World Below the Brine," "Elemental
Drifts")

>

> **Apr. 2: Jack Kerouac, _The Dharma Bums_

>

> **Apr. 9: First international[Earth Day
Proclamation](http://www.wowzone.com/proclamn.htm), 1970; page on [Deep
Ecology](http://www.heureka.clara.net/gaia/deep-eco.htm); Gary Snyder,
selections from _No Nature_

>

> **Apr. 16: (Easter brk. 4/12 pm-4/16 pm) TBA**

>

> **Apr. 23: Snyder, selections from _No Nature_** ; [Viridian
Design](http://www.viridiandesign.org/):  
>  
>

>

>> "'Nature' is over," says [Bruce] Sterling. "The twentieth century did it
in. There's not a liter of seawater anywhere without its share of PCB and DDT.
An altered climate will reshuffle the ecological deck for every creature that
breathes. You can't escape industrialism and hide from the sky. It's over.
From now on, 'Nature' is under surveillance and on life-support. Face up to
it."

>

> * * *

>

>  
>

>

> ## ENGLISH 288 WRITING ASSIGNMENTS

>

> All essays must be typed, double-spaced. Any secondary sources cited or
consulted must be documented properly--but it is not _necessary_ to use
secondary sources at all. Literary works must be cited by line or page number
and quoted accurately. Essays must be turned in on time unless there is a
legitimate medical or other excuse. _Late papers will not be accepted without
such an excuse._ These essays will count for **85%** of your grade for this
course. Class participation, a combination of attendance and willingness to
answer questions or discuss the readings, will count for the remaining
**15%**. I encourage you to talk to me at any time during the semester about
any aspect of these assignments.  
>  
>  **DUE 3/2  
>  3-5 pages**  
>  Write an essay pointing out the science-fictional elements in/of selected
romantic-period works. These may include imaginary representations of the
future, of technological change, of "alien" species, or of environmental
change. When it seems helpful to do so, compare these features to works of
science fiction from our own time--books, films, video games, or whatever.  
>  
>  **DUE 4/2  
>  3-5 pages**  
>  Write an expository essay comparing the linguistic style and self-
representation (the fictional persona) of a specific passage (or two) from
Walt Whitman's poetry with a specific passage (or two) from Jack Kerouac's
prose. In what ways are the two authors' styles and personae alike?  
>  
>  **DUE 4/27  
>  3-5 pages**  
>  Write an expository essay citing any of the works we have read this term to
show the various ways "nature" is represented in romantic-period literature as
unreal, as something other than an observable fact. Begin your essay with the
following sentence: "In a number of romantic-period works, nature is
represented as unreal, as something other than an observable fact"--then take
it from there.  
>  
>

