HIST 103-2&3: WORLD CIVILIZATIONS, 1800 TO THE PRESENT

Syllabus, Fall 1997

Carol Loats Office Hours:

Office: Psych 117 MWF 11-12, MW 4:30-5, F 2-3

549-2348 and by appointment

Important: This syllabus spells out explicitly what you can expect from this
class, and what will be expected of you. Read everything on these pages
carefully, refer back to these pages frequently, and complete all assignments
which are listed here, unless otherwise instructed. If there is anything which
you do not understand, be sure to ask for clarification. If you miss class,
you are responsible for finding out about any additional assignments or any
changes in the syllabus.

Course Description:

"Nothing capable of being memorized is history."

R.G. Collingwood

Covering the time period from the late 1700s to the present, this course
selectively examines places and events which reveal the complexity of the
recent past and its relevance to the present. The course is not about
memorizing dates, events, or people's names. The course is about understanding
the past by seeing connections and relationships between events, and by
understanding the experiences of people who lived in different times and
places, and had different perspectives. The structure and content of the
course require you to learn by reading and listening, discussing and writing.
Written assignments and exams will ask you to think, to organize your
thoughts, and to write careful analyses; the focus will be on making
connections, and understanding and expressing the complexity of the past.. In
essays written outside of class you will be asked to show your comprehension
of some part of the past by responding to an assigned topic with your own
words.

Exams will cover both readings and lecture material through short

and longer essays.

Readings:

1\. McKay, Hill, and Buckler, A History of World Societies, vol. C, From the
French Revolution to the Present, 4th edition, 1996. Below, this is referred
to as "McKay."

2\. Andrea and Overfield, The Human Record: Sources of Global History, vol. 2,
Since 1500, 2nd edition, 1994. Below, this is referred to as
"Andrea/Overfield."

3\. Levi, Survival in Auschwitz, 1961.

4\. Other required readings, handed out or on reserve, may be assigned during
the semester. Stay tuned.

A study guide, recommended but not required, is also available, as well as A
Student's Guide to History by Benjamin. The Student's Guide is useful for
success in any history course, and the study guide is specifically geared
toward this course and the McKay text .

Lecture Schedule and Reading Assignments

**READINGS ARE TO BE FINISHED BY THE DATE THEY ARE LISTED**

All written assignments, and any changes to the syllabus, will be described,
ahead of time, in class and through handouts.

Aug. 25 Introduction

UNIT I, BACKGROUND: The World in the Late Eighteenth Century

Aug. 27 Background

Read: Andrea/Overfield, "How to Read the Evidence,"

pp. P-1 through P-16

letter of introduction due

Aug. 29 Background (cont.)

Read: .Andrea/Overfield, pp. 191-206.

Sept. 1 Background (cont.)

Read: Andrea/Overfield, pp. 216-217, 221-225.

Sept. 3 Background (cont.)

Read: Andrea/Overfield, pp. 226-246.

Sept. 5 Discussion 12 The World in the Late Eighteenth Century

Read: Andrea/Overfield pp. 257-258

Discussion #1 handout.

written work due - follow instructions on handout

UNIT II, EUROPE'S LONG NINETEENTH CENTURY

Sept. 8 The French Revolution and Its Effects

Read: McKay, Ch. 23.

Andrea/Overfield, pp. 176-178; 184-185.

handouts .

Sept. 10 French Revolution (cont.)

Sept. 12 Industrial Revolution in Europe

Read: McKay, Ch. 24.

Sept. 15 Industrial Revolution (cont.); Europe 1815-1850

Sept. 17 Discussion 22 Effects of the Industrial Revolution

Read: Andrea/Overfield, pp. 259-277.

written work due - see handout

Sept. 19 Europe, 1850-1914: Flexible Conservatism

written work due - see handout

Sept. 22 Europe, 1815-1850 (cont.)

Read: McKay, Ch. 25.

Sept. 24 Europe, 1850-1914 (cont.)

Read: McKay, Ch. 26, pp. 866-881.

Sept. 26 Europe, 1850-1914 (cont.)

Sept. 29 First MIDTERM EXAM

Oct. 1 European Society and Ideology

Read: McKay, Ch. 26 , pp. 842-866.

Oct. 3 Discussion 31 Middle Class Hegemony and Challengers

Read: Andrea/Overfield, pp. 277-293.

written work due - see handout

Oct. 6 New Wave of Western Imperialism

Read: McKay Ch. 27.

Oct. 8 Imperialism (cont.)

Oct. 10 Imperialism (cont.)

Read: McKay, Ch. 28; focus on pp. 914-927.

Oct. 13 Discussion 4: Imperialism

4, 329

Read: Andrea/Overfield, pp. 301-306, 311-31

334, 339-344, 362-365, 370-374.

written work due - see handout

Oct. 15 Film: "The Lumiere Years"

UNIT IV THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

Oct. 17 Film: "The Lumiere Years"

Read: McKay, Ch. 29.

Oct. 20 World War I and Revolution in Russia (cont.)

worksheet due

Oct. 22 World War I and Revolution in Russia (cont.)

written work due

Oct. 24 World War I and Revolution in Russia (cont.)

essay due - see handout

Oct. 27 Asia, 1914-1939

Read: McKay, Ch. 30

Oct. 29 Asia (cont.)

Oct. 31 Asia (cont.

Nov 3

Europe Between the Wars

Read: McKay, Ch. 31, focus on pp. 1040-1053;

Andrea/Overfield, pp. 387-389.

Nov. 5

Europe Between the Wars (cont.)

Read: McKay, Ch. 32, pp. 1054-1068

Nov. 7

Discussion 5: Nazis, Agenda and Implementation

Read: Andrea/Overfield, pp. 298-301, 400-405.

written work due - see handout

Nov. 10

Nov. 12

Nov. 14

World War II

Second MIDTERM EXAMINATION

World War II

Read: McKay, Ch. 32, pp. 1074-1089

Nov 17

Discussion 6: Work and Death Camps

Read: Survival in Auschwitz

written work due - see handout

Nov. 19

Cold War and the World

Read: McKay, Ch. 33; focus on pp. 1090-1095 and 1108

1117

essay due

Nov. 21

Asia and Africa Since World War II

Read: McKay, Ch. 34.

Discussion 1: Colonialism's Legacies

Read: Andrea/Overfield, pp. 441-447, 456-464, 480

490\.

written work due - see handout

Dec

Asia, Africa, and Latin America Since World War II

Read: McKay, Ch. 35 (optional).

Dec. 5

Conclusions

Read: McKay, Ch. 36 (optional)

Dec. 9

FINAL EXAM, 8 am

for 9 o'clock class

s

Dec. 11

FINAL EXAM, 8 am for 10 o'clock class

Course Objectives:

1\. The course will promote a basic familiarity with the history of six
regions of the world between the late 1700s and the present .

2\. The course will provide students with an experience of the process of
history through the study of primary sources.

3\. The course will encourage students to learn to read and think more
critically about the past, to develop skills of synthesis and analysis, to
make connections and see relationships between events of the past, and to
compare various societies, identifying key similarities and differences.

4\. The course will promote student consideration of issues of causation, both
long and short term, and engage students in an explicit analysis of change and
continuity as simultaneous

features of human history.

5\. The course will guide students to speak and write more effectively.

Additional Important information:

1) Your grade in the course will be calculated as follows:

10% discussions and related written work

10% worksheets

20% two essays, 10% each

10% quizzes and other miscellaneous work

30% 15% each Midterm

20% Final

100%

2) Discussions: Students will lead small groups in scheduled discussions to
analyze and evaluate selected topics based partly on primary sources. Everyone
will be a leader at least once, and a participant in each of the other
discussions.

Students will be responsible for advance preparation for discussions. For each
discussion scheduled, whether you are a leader or a participant, you are
required to attend the discussions, and to bring with you written work which
you have prepared. Be sure that you get handouts on the readings packets and
discussion process early in the semester.

3) Attendance and Promptness: After assessing the success ration of students
in previous history classes, it is apparent

that those students who come to class on a regular basis and do their reading
assignments in a timely fashion consistently get good grades. Only through
regular attendance will you be on top of the material and be able to fulfill
the objectives of the class. Therefore, I expect regular class attendance.
Attendance will be taken periodically during the semester, and attendance is
required for the scheduled discussions.

The most important moments of each class session are usually the first and
last few moments, when upcoming assignments are mentioned and the day's
material is introduced or summarized. For your own benefit, and as a courtesy
to the instructor and to the rest of the class, you are expected to be present
promptly at the

beginning of the period and to stay throughout the period.

4) Plagiarism is the act of using someone else's exact words, or extensively
paraphrasing someone else's ideas, as if they were your (that is, without
giving credit to the author, book, or person you are "stealing" from).
Plagiarism is not allowed, and results in an F on an essay assignment. Your
essays should reflect your understanding of the material, and should be
written from your own head, after consulting with your notes and texts for
content (i.e., write with the book closed).

5) Reminder: For this and (and any) course at the university level, you can
expect to work about 2 hours out of class for each hour in class.

6) If you need assistance in understanding anything on this syllabus, or in
fulfilling any of the requirements for the course, please see me. Any student
eligible for and needing academic adjustments or accommodations because of a
specific physical, psychiatric, or learning disability is requested to speak
with me about it no later than the end of the second week of classes. I hope
to see all of you regularly in my office as we explore history together.

7) Pleas note that, if you live off-campus and your home phone has caller ID
and does not accept unblocked calls, you cannot be called from a campus phone,
including my office phone. If you leave me a message to call you, I will not
be able to do so. Phones on the campus system cannot be unblocked.

