**HISTORY 270**

**IMPERIALISM, NATIONALISM, AND COMMUNISM IN THE BALKANS**

_Josh Sanborn_

Office hours: MWF 8-9, M 1:30-3, or by appt.

Office location: Fretz House, rm 30

Office phone: x5177

Email: sanbornj@lafayette.edu

Web page:
[http://www.lafayette.edu/~sanbornj/](http://www.lafayette.edu/~sanbornj)

**COURSE OUTLINE**

This course addresses the ways that political ideologies have helped to shape
the social and cultural landscape of Eastern Europe and focuses on the Balkans
as the case study of this interaction. We will examine the imperial ideologies
of the Habsburg and Ottoman empires, nationalism in the 19th and 20th
centuries, and post-WWII communism. The course concludes with a discussion of
the ways that these ideologies affected the most recent period of turbulence
in Yugoslavia. Throughout the course, we will be concerned with the
relationship between ideas and behaviors and the way that ideology mediates
that relationship. We will survey the basic ideologies of rule in the Balkans
in the modern period and see how they have shaped (and in some cases failed to
shape) politics, society, and culture in the region.

**EXPECTATIONS**

My main expectation is this: that you are attending Lafayette and taking this
course in order to get a college education, not just a college degree. I am a
firm believer in the ideals of a liberal arts education. Women and men with a
college education should be marked by an ability to understand themselves and
the world that they inhabit. They should be able to think clearly, read
intelligently, and communicate their ideas orally and in writing.

This personal transformation is hard work, and you need to devote sufficient
time for work for this class. The full load here is 4 courses, and being a
full-time student is a full-time job. So you should expect to spend about 10
hours a week on each of your courses. You'll spend 3 of those in class. I
devised this syllabus expecting that you will be spending 7 hours a week
working outside of class.

**CLASS ACTIVITIES AND GRADING**

We will have a wide variety of activities over the course of the semester.
Some of these will be graded individually and some will be incorporated into
the participation grade.

Every week you will write an approximately one-page (250 wds) response to the
readings. For the most part, you can choose any aspect of the readings to
write about that you like, though on occasion I will ask you to respond to a
more direct question. You will post this response on the website by Monday at
9 AM by creating a new "discussion thread." Between Monday and Wednesday, you
should read all the responses of your classmates and post a response to at
least one of them by Wednesday at 10 AM. On most weeks, we will have a class
discussion on Friday that takes these responses as its starting point. Be sure
to be prepared on Friday to discuss your postings and those of others. These
written responses and oral presentations will be part of your participation
grade.

There will be one midterm exam and one final exam, which will mix objective
short-answer questions with longer interpretive ones. Each of the exams will
cover _all_ of the materials we have covered (lectures, films, discussions,
readings). The final exam will cover all the material for the entire course.

On two occasions, you will be asked to find a scholarly article relating to
the topic of the week, to make it available to the class, and to make a
presentation on it to the class (including leading discussion after your
presentation concludes). Presentations will start on the week of February 19,
and they will be graded.

We will also sponsor a film series open to the entire Lafayette community this
semester. You are expected to attend all of these films. In addition, you will
be responsible for advertising, introducing, and leading a discussion of one
of these films. This will take some research and preparation, so you are
encouraged to screen the film well before we see it as a group and then to do
research on the film, the directors, and/or the leading actors so that your
introduction, discussion, and promotion of the film will be effective.

Finally, you will be expected to write a term paper on the relationship
between ideology and practice in the history of the Balkans. You should choose
a specific topic in consultation with me prior to the midterm exam. The paper
should be 12-15 pages long.

**SCHEDULE OF LECTURE TOPICS, READINGS, AND ASSIGNMENTS**



  * **Week of Jan. 22 Introduction: Geography and Cultural Geography of the Balkans**
    * Assigned readings: Mazower xxv-xliii, 1-36 (handout - read by Friday)
  * **Week of Jan. 29: The theoretical bases of imperialism**
    * Assigned readings: Doyle, 11-47, 104-138, 232-256
  * **Week of Feb. 5 The theoretical bases of nationalism**
    * Assigned readings: Eley and Suny, 3-55, 60-78, 106-131, 243-259, 456-480
  * **Week of Feb. 12 The theoretical bases of communism**
    * Assigned readings: Marx and Engels, viii-91
  * **Week of Feb. 19 Old Regimes and New Upstarts in the Balkans**
    * Assigned readings: Glenny, 1-134
  * **Week of Feb. 26 The Eastern Question and the Ottoman Empire**
    * Assigned readings: Glenny, 135-248
  * **Week of Mar. 5 The Eastern Question and the Habsburg Empire**
    * Assigned readings: Glenny, 249-306
    * **_MIDTERM EXAM, FRI. MAR. 9_**
  * **Week of Mar. 12 _Spring Break_**
  * **Week of Mar. 19 The Long Great War**
    * Assigned readings: Glenny, 307-392
  * **Week of Mar. 26 National Dictatorships**
    * Assigned readings: Glenny, 393-477
    * **_FILM ON MONDAY MARCH 26 7PM - CHARUGA_**
  * **Week of Apr. 2 World War II in the Balkans**
    * Assigned readings: Glenny, 478-544
  * **Week of Apr. 9 - National Communism**
    * Assigned readings: Glenny, 545-633
    * **_FILM ON MONDAY APRIL 9 7PM - HEY BABU RIBA_**
  * **Week of Apr. 16 The Balkanization of the Balkans, 1980-1990**
    * Assigned readings: Ramet, 3-76
  * **Week of Apr. 23 Secessionitis and War in Yugoslavia**
    * Assigned readings: Ramet, 151-251
    * **_FILM ON MONDAY APRIL 23 7 PM - PRETTY VILLAGE, PRETTY FLAME_**
  * **Week of Apr. 30 A Battered Land**
    * Assigned readings: Ramet, 253-342
    * **_TERM PAPER DUE, FRI. MAY 4_** 

**BOOK LIST**

Misha Glenny, _The Balkans: Nationalism, War and the Great Powers_

> Penguin, ISBN 0670853380

Michael Doyle, _Empires_ Cornell UP, 080149334X

Geoff Eley and Ronald Grigor Suny eds., _Becoming National: A Reader_

> Oxford UP, 0195096614

Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, _The Communist Manifesto_ (intro. by Martin
Malia)

> Signet, 0451527100

Sabrina Petra Ramet, _Balkan Babel: The Disintegration of Yugoslavia from the
Death of Tito_

> _to the War for Kosovo_ 3rd. ed. Westview, 0813390346

