
    ![
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
    HHHHHHHHHHH HH H EEEE TTTTT     Humanities
    HHHHHH    H  H H E      T       OnLine
    HHHHHH    H H  H EEE    T       Web Site
    HHHHHH    H HH H E      T       
    HHHHHH    H HH H EEEE   T       H-OIEAHC](/graphics/Logo.H-NetBare.GIF)

## Colonial America

    
    
    History 343                                     Charles L. Cohen                
    Fall, 1994                                      4115 Humanities                 
    TuTh 9:30-10:45, 5322 Social Science            Tel: 263-1956, -1800 (Dept.)    
    Sections: 301 - Th 1:20-2:10, 2121 Humanities   Office hours: Tu 8:15-9:15,     
              302 - Th 2:25-3:15, 2261 Humanities     Th 11:00-12:00, and by appt.  
    Class email: [hist-343@facstaff.wisc.edu](mailto:hist-343@facstaff.wisc.edu)         Email: [clcohen@macc.wisc.edu](mailto:clcohen@macc.wisc.edu)    
                                                           [clcohen@wiscmacc.bitnet](mailto:clcohen@wiscmacc.bitnet)  
    

The following books are required reading, but they can be fun too.

    
    
         Lois Green Carr, et al., Robert Cole's World                               
         Robert Ritchie, Captain Kidd and the War Against the Pirates               
         Ian K. Steele, Betrayals                                                   
         Alden Vaughan, American Genesis                                            
    

A packet of required materials entitled:

Common Histories: A Reader for History 343

is available at the Humanities Copy Center, 1650 Humanities Building. All
additional assignments come from this packet.

The College Library has placed the books and packet on three-hour reserve.

Writing-Intensive Course

History 343 is a writing-intensive course aiming to promote your compositional
skill as well as enhance your knowledge of colonial America. You will pen
something almost every week, although most assignments will be quite brief.

Written Assignments

The major written assignments consist of two 5-page papers and a final
examination. Papers must be typed and double-spaced; they are due at the
beginning of class on the Tuesdays indicated. Please note that you have two
options for each paper, due on different dates; you may choose your option but
may not turn in two options for one paper. Minor assignments are due in the
Thursday sections; they too must be typed, double-spaced. Pages 4-5 below list
the paper topics, minor assignments, and due dates.

Rewrite Policy

You may rewrite any written assignment except the final exam. To begin, you
must first talk with me about such details as the new due date and the kinds
of changes to be made. You must inform me of your decision to rewrite by the
end of the next class session after I return the original version. You will
ordinarily receive one week to rewrite, but I am flexible about negotiating
extensions for good cause. The old draft (plus any separate sheet of comments)
must accompany the new version. Rewriting cannot lower your grade (nor can
changing your mind about handing in a revised paper), but it does not by
itself guarantee a higher one; you must substantially rework the essay,
following my comments and initiating your own improvements too.

Grading

Simplicity itself. The two major papers, the final exam, and class participa-
tion count 25% of the final grade. Class participation will be evaluated on a
combination of attendance and quality of discussion (which is not identical to
quantity). The minor assignments will be ungraded, but failure to turn them in
will lower your class participation grade.

Date Lecture Program and Assignments

Sept. 1 The American Environment

6 The Amerindians of the Eastern Woodlands

8 Two Latin Empires

    
    
                        Reading: William Cronon, Changes in the Land, 54-81;        
                                 Roger Williams, Key into the Language of America,  
                                 94-102, 122-45, 159-67, 182-91; "Two Land Deeds"   
                        Minor assignment: #1                                        
                                                                                    
          13      England on the Eve of Colonization                                
                                                                                    
          15      Yom Kippur - no lecture or sections; UW schedule adjustment       
                                                                                    
          20      Planting Virginia                                                 
                                                                                    
          22      Rachel and Leah                                                   
                                                                                    
                        Reading: Alden Vaughan, American Genesis; William           
                                 Strachey, comp., "The Lawes Divine, Morall and     
                                 Martiall"                                          
                        Minor assignment: #2                                        
                                                                                    
          27      The City on a Hill                                                
                                                                                    
                        First Paper Due - Option 1                                  
                                                                                    
          29      The Expansion of New England                                      
                                                                                    
                        Reading: Philip Gura, A Glimpse of Sions Glory, 237-75;     
                                 "The Examination of Mrs. Ann Hutchinson at the     
                                 court at Newtown"                                  
                        Minor assignment: #3                                        
                                                                                    
    Oct.   4      New Netherland                                                    
                                                                                    
                        First Paper Due - Option 2                                  
                                                                                    
           6      The Beginnings of the English Empire                              
                                                                                    
                        Reading: Oliver Rink, Holland on the Hudson, 214-63;        
                                 Arnold J.F. Van Laer, Council Minutes, 186-281     
                        Minor assignment: #4                                        
                                                                                    
      Date                     Lecture Program and Assignments                      
                                                                                    
    Oct.  11      Two Proprietaries                                                 
                                                                                    
          13      The English West Indies                                           
                                                                                    
                        Reading: Robert Ritchie, Captain Kidd, 27-238; Alexander    
                                 Exquemelin, The Buccaneers of America, 77-113;     
                                 [Daniel Defoe], A General History ... of the Most  
                                 Notorious Pirates, 130-41                          
                                                                                    
          18      Tobacco Roads                                                     
                                                                                    
          20      Times of Trouble                                                  
                                                                                    
                        Reading: Carr et al., Robert Cole's World, 1-182            
                        Minor assignment: #5                                        
                                                                                    
          25      The Society of the Godly                                          
                                                                                    
          27      Coven and Covenant in New England                                 
                                                                                    
                        Reading: David Hall, Worlds of Wonder, 71-116; S[amuel]     
                                 D[anforth], New-England Almanack for ... 1686;     
                                 [Dorothy Cotton], "The Nature and Disposition of   
                                 the Moon, in the Birth of Children"                
                        Minor assignment: #6                                        
                                                                                    
    Nov.   1      The African Element                                               
                                                                                    
           3      War in the Woodlands                                              
                                                                                    
                        Reading: Ira Berlin and Philip D. Morgan, "Labor and the    
                                 Shaping of Slave Life in the Americas"; Jack P.    
                                 Greene, Diary of Colonel Landon Carter, 285-330;   
                                 Olaudah Equiano, The Life of Olaudah Equiano, or   
                                 Gustavus Vassa, the African, 65-110                
                        Minor assignment: #7                                        
                                                                                    
           8      The Glorious Revolution                                           
                                                                                    
                        Second Paper Due - Option 1                                 
                                                                                    
          10      The Revolutionary Settlement                                      
                                                                                    
                        Reading: Thomas Barrow Trade & Empire, 39-59; Robert        
                                 Toppan and Alfred Goodrick, eds., Edward           
                                 Randolph, III, 78-91; VII, 373-84, 507-517; Leo    
                                 F. Stock, ed., Proceedings ... of the British      
                                 Parliaments ..., II: 1689-1702, 177-211            
                                                                                    
          15      Smoke and Oaks, Loaves and Fishes                                 
                                                                                    
                        Second Paper Due - Option 2                                 
                                                                                    
      Date                     Lecture Program and Assignments                      
                                                                                    
          17      Money and Migrants in Eighteenth-Century Society                  
                                                                                    
                        Reading: Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, A Midwife's Tale, 72-      
                                 101; Edward Papenfuse, In Pursuit of Profit, 35-   
                                 75; Jacob M. Price, ed., Joshua Johnson's          
                                 Letterbook, 1771-1774, 1-31, 161-62                
                                                                                    
          22      Material Culture                                                  
                                                                                    
              24  Thanksgiving Vacation - Thank a Semi-Separatist                   
                                                                                    
          29      God's Kingdom in Eighteenth-Century America                       
                                                                                    
     Dec.   1     Reason and Revelation                                             
                                                                                    
                        Reading: Michael J. Crawford, Seasons of Grace, 180-95;     
                                 Patricia Bonomi, Under the Cope of Heaven, 131-    
                                 61; Jonathan Edwards, "Sinners in the Hands of an  
                                 Angry God"; J.M. Bumsted, ed., "Emotion in         
                                 Colonial America: Some Relations of Conversion     
                                 Experience in Freetown, Massachusetts, 1749-1770"  
                        Minor Assignment: #8                                        
                                                                                    
    Dec.   6      Rule Britannia                                                    
                                                                                    
           8      Colonial Politics                                                 
                                                                                    
                        Reading: Edmund S. Morgan, Inventing the People, 174-208;   
                                 Robert Munford, "The Candidates; or, the Humours   
                                 of a Virginia Election"                            
                        Minor Assignment: #9                                        
                                                                                    
          13      The Imperial Wars                                                 
                                                                                    
          15      Ends and Beginnings                                               
                                                                                    
                        Reading: Ian K. Steele, Betrayals; "Journal of Stephen      
                                 Cross of Newburyport," 334-57, 12-21               
                                                                                    
          22      Final Examination (12:25 P.M.)                                    
    

Paper Topics

In writing these essays, you should draw on the lectures, discussions and
class readings, making specific statements firmly rooted in the evidence,
using quotations whenever applicable, and evaluating the arguments of all
"authorities" (including me!). You may of course draw on materials from
outside the course but are not required to. You may choose another topic if
the suggested ones bore, fatigue or disorient you, but you must consult with
me before so proceeding.

**PAPER 1:**

    
    
          Option 1 - Due Sept. 27. Taking into account Amerindian and Anglo-        
                American notions of "property" and "possession," explain how        
                contests over land and landholding affected the early settlement    
                of Virginia and Massachusetts.                                      
                                                                                    
          Option 2 - Due Oct. 4. Define what constitutes an "orderly society" and   
                discuss the difficulties early settlers of both Virginia and        
                Massachusetts experienced in creating one.                          
    

**PAPER 2:**

    
    
          Option 1 - Due Nov. 8. Explain how slavery operated as a labor system in  
                colonial British America by analyzing the tasks slaves performed,   
                the way in which slaves carried out their duties, the goals         
                masters wanted slaves to achieve, and the methods masters used to   
                control their work force.                                           
                                                                                    
          Option 2 - Due Nov. 15. Discuss England's North American colonial policy  
                during the period 1660-1715.                                        
    

Final Examination

The final examination will consist of an essay written during the exam period.
You will receive the question at least one week before the exam, and may use a
single page of notes during the exam.

Minor Assignments

#1-3: Summarizing an Argument - #1, due Sept. 8: In one sentence NOT EXCEEDING

    
    
          50 words (the 51st word and its successors face a terrible fate),         
          summarize as fully as possible Cronon's primary argument. #2: due Sept.   
          22: In like manner, summarize Vaughan's primary argument. Make two        
          copies of your summary, one with your name (for me) and the other         
          without (for another student). #3: due Sept. 29: Put your name on the     
          anonymous summary you received and in the margins evaluate both its       
          writing and content.                                                      
    

SET 2: Analyzing a Source - #4, due Oct. 6: In one or two sentences NOT

    
    
          EXCEEDING 50 words total (see above for implied threat), explain what     
          the court records reveal about women's lives in New Amsterdam during the  
          mid-1640s. #5, due Oct. 20: In like manner, analyze agricultural          
          production on Robert Cole's farm based solely on the information in his   
          inventory (pp. 176-82). Make two copies of your summary as previously.    
          #6, due Oct. 27: Put your name on the anonymous analysis you received     
          and in the margins evaluate both its writing and content.                 
    

SET 3: Devising a Definition - #7, due Nov. 3: In one sentence NOT EXCEEDING

    
    
          50 words (or else ...), define "slavery." #8, due Dec. 1: In like         
          manner, define "revival." Make two copies of your summary as previously.  
          #9, due Dec. 8: Put your name on the anonymous definition you received    
          and in the margins evaluate both its writing and content. A PROCLAMATION  
    

Regarding Late Papers

Whereas it may come to pass that one or more individuals, whether through
dilatoriness, dereliction, irresponsibility, or chutzpah, may seek respite and
surcease from escritorial demands through procrastination, delay, and
downright evasion;

And whereas this unhappy happenstance contributes mightily to malfeasance on
the part of parties of the second part (i.e., students, the instructed, you)
and irascibility on the part of us (i.e., me);

Be it therefore known, understood, apprehended, and comprehended:

That all assignments must reach us, or be tendered to the Department
Receptionist, on or by the exact hour announced in class, and that failure to
comply with this wholesome and most generous regulation shall result in the
assignment forfeiting one half letter grade for each day for which it is tardy
(i.e., an "A" shall become an "AB"), "one day" being defined as a 24-hour
period commencing at the announced hour on which the assignment is due; and
that the aforementioned reduction in grade shall continue for each succeeding
day of delay until either the assignment shall be remitted or its value shrunk
unto nothingness. And let all acknowledge that the responsibility for our
receiving papers deposited surreptitio (i.e., in my mailbox or under my door),
whether timely or belated, resides with the aforementioned second-part parties
(i.e., you again), hence onus for the miscarriage of such items falls upon the
writer's head (i.e., until I clutch your scribbles to my breast, I assume you
have not turned them in, all protestations to the contrary notwithstanding).

Be it nevertheless affirmed:

That the greater part of justice residing in mercy, it may behoove us, acting
entirely through our gracious prerogative, to award an extension in
meritorious cases, such sufferances being granted only upon consultation with
us, in which case a negotiated due date shall be proclaimed; it being
perfectly well understood that failure to observe this new deadline shall
result in the immediate and irreversible failure of the assignment (i.e., an
"F"), its value being accounted as a null set and less than that of a vile
mote. And be it further noted that routine disruptions to routine (i.e., lack
of sleep occasioned by pink badgers dancing on the ceiling) do not conduce to
mercy, but that severe dislocations brought on by Acts of God (exceedingly
traumatic events to the body and/or soul, such as having the earth swallow one
up on the way to delivering the assignment) perpetrated either on oneself or
on one's loving kindred, do.

And we wish to trumpet forth:

That our purpose in declaiming said proclamation, is not essentially to
terminate the wanton flouting of didactic intentions, but to encourage our
beloved students to consult with us, and apprehend us of their difficulties
aforehand (i.e., talk to me, baby), so that the cruel axe of the executioner
fall not upon their Grade Point Average and smite it with a vengeance.

To which proclamation, we do affix our seal:

Information provider:  
Unit: H-Net program at UIC History Department Email:
[H-Net@uicvm.uic.edu](mailto:H-Net@uicvm.uic.edu)  
Posted: 8 Jul 1994

* * *

  
[![H-Net Humanities & Social Sciences
OnLine](/footers/graphics/logosmall.gif)](/)  
[Contact Us](/contact/)  
Copyright  (C) 1995-2002, H-Net, Humanities & Social Sciences OnLine  
Click Here for an [Internet Citation Guide](/about/citation).  
---

