![Summer On-Line](../graphics/flag2.jpg)

  
  

Dr. James Fonseca  * Ohio University, Zanesville Campus  * 164 Elson Hall  *
Zanesville, OH 43701  * (740) 588-1435  * E-mail:
[fonseca@ohiou.edu](mailto:fonseca@oak.cats.ohiou.edu)  

#  GEOG 234--Geography of the United States and Canada (4 credit hours)

Summer Quarter: June 12-August 18, 2000  
Register from April 3-June 12, 2000

  
Hello and welcome to this web course on the Geography of the United States and
Canada at Ohio University! My name is Jim Fonseca. I am a Professor of
Geography and I am also the Dean of Ohio University - Zanesville, one of the
five regional campuses of Ohio University. You can learn more about me and see
my picture by clicking on

[**www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/dean.htm**](http://www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/dean.htm)

  

### **How to contact me**

The easiest and quickest way to reach me is via e-mail. You can also call me.
My fax number is 740-588-1436. As I am the campus dean, I am generally on
campus from 8:00 to 5:00 everyday, unless I am out of town. I will always try
to respond to e-mails and phone calls as soon as possible. If you have a
concern that requires a meeting, or if you simply want to come by to say
hello, I will also be happy to meet with you by appointment at any time that
is mutually convenient. If you do want to meet in person, please call Gail
Porter, my assistant, at 740-588-1434 to set up a time for us to meet.

  

### **Course Decription**

In this course you will learn about the human and physical geography of the
United States and Canada. Physical geography refers to the natural or
environmental earth systems such as climate, weather, topography, vegetation,
soils, etc. Human geography means human-created systems such as transportation
networks, cities and settlements, agriculture, land use patterns, population
distribution and migration, industrial location, etc. When you have completed
the course, you will also have learned quite a bit about what modern geography
is about -- it's a lot more than memorizing state capitals and learning major
exports as you may have done years ago in a grade school geography class! You
will also learn about geographic concepts and geographic tools and analytical
techniques such as GIS (Geographical Information Systems).

  

### **Course Calendar**

The following is a brief outline of the content of the course. A full outline
with study questions will be available on-line (at the class web site).

Generally the course is divided into 18 units. Most require some reading in an
on-line "textbook:" _The Geography of the United States_ by Stephen S.
Birdsall and John Florin.

WEEK 1--JUNE 12 |  Introduction to the course. How to use the CD-ROM. How to
use the WWW. How to use email and the list-serv. Introduction to human
geography. Read Chapter 1 (THEMES AND REGIONS) and Chapter 3 (FOUNDATIONS OF
HUMAN ACTIVITY) in the on-line text. | WEEK 2--JUNE 19 |  Introduction to
physical geography. Read Chapter 2 (THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT) and Chapter 4
(MEGALOPOLIS). FIRST EXAM |  WEEK 3--JUNE 26 |  Physical geography continued.
Read Chapter 5 (THE MANUFACTURING CORE), and Chapter 7 (APPALACHIA AND THE
OZARKS) |  WEEK 4--JULY 3 |  Upper and Lower South. Zelinski's cultural
regions of the United States; application to Ohio. Read Chapter 8 (THE DEEP
SOUTH) and Chapter 9 (THE SOUTHERN COASTLANDS) |  WEEK 5--JULY 10 |
Agriculture. Read Chapter 10 (THE AGRICULTURAL CORE) |  WEEK 6--JULY 17 |
Models of city structure. Borchert's model of the evolution of the US urban
hierarchy. Read Chapter 11 (THE GREAT PLAINS AND PRAIRIES). SECOND EXAM |
WEEK 7--JULY 24 |  Forestry, energy and mining. Read Chapter 12 (THE "EMPTY"
INTERIOR), Chapter 6 (THE BY-PASSED EAST) AND Chapter 17 THE NORTHLANDS |
WEEK 8--JULY 31 |  Residential perception exercise Read Chapter 13 (THE
SOUTHWEST BORDER AREA) and Chapter 14 (CALIFORNIA) |  WEEK 9--AUGUST 7 |  Read
Chapter 15 (THE NORTH PACIFIC COAST) and Chapter 16 (HAWAII) |  WEEK 10--
AUGUST 14 |  Canada; overview of the geography of Canada; State of the States.
Read assigned readings and web sites on Canada. FINAL EXAM

The course calendar above will help you pace your lesson submission so that
you can complete the course within the 10-week schedule. You are expected to
submit your assignments according to the calendar. You may submit an
assignment early in the week in which it is due, but not before that week. If
you are unable to meet the deadline for a particular week, you must notify
your instructor by e-mail _in advance._ Under normal circumstances, you must
submit all assignments prior to an examination before you take that
examination.  

All course requirements must be completed by Friday, August 18, 2000. The
instructor will permit an extension only under extreme circumstances.

  

### **Required Materials**

You only have to purchase one item for this course: a CD-ROM that costs about
$25.00. It is called "The ARGUS CD-ROM." It is an interactive CD ROM with very
little text but many pictures of landscapes, cities, and economic geography
activities. It also includes many maps, and some animations and interactive
exercises. It is available for purchase through the on-line Ohio University
bookstore and at the OUZ/MATC bookstore in the Campus Center at the Ohio
University - Zanesville Campus. ARGUS stands for _Activities and Readings in
the Geography of the United States_. To help you understand what I feel is
important for you to learn, I have developed a fairly extensive STUDY GUIDE as
part of the class syllabus.

**Note:** Books for the course are in stock at Specialty Books, (740)
594-4002. [**Click here**](http://www.specialty-books.com/cgi-bin/ohiou) for
online ordering.

Before you take the course, you should have (1) access to a computer and (2)
know how to use the CD-ROM drive. You will also need (3) access to a to the
Internet and (4) access to e-mail. If you do not have access to a computer at
your home or office, you can use a computer on campus at Ohio University in
Athens or at any of the five regional campuses. For example, at the Ohio
University - Zanesville Campus, a computer lab is available to students in the
LAC (Leaning Advancement Center). As an enrolled Ohio University student, a
campus email account is provided free of charge to you.

As part of the course, you will learn how to use several geographic utilities
(tools) on the WWW such as Map Quest and various search utilities. Two of the
assignments will require you to send short e-mails on a geographic term or a
region you researched and to incorporate web sites as links within the e-mail.
If you do not already know how to do this, it is a simple process that will be
explained to you during the course.

Other required reading for the course includes a short on-line text, _The
Geography of the United States_ by Stephen S. Birdsall and John Florin. You
can preview this on-line text at this web site:

[**odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/GEO/index.htm**](http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/GEO/index.htm)

You will also have to read some newspaper and magazine articles about the
geography of the US and Canada on-line.

I may also mail you some pamphlets and other materials (course "hand-outs").
So I will ask you for a postal address right after we start up discussion on
the email list-serv. Be sure to give me your **summer address** where things
can get to you during the ten weeks of the course.

  

### **Grading Policy & Standards**

Your grade for the course will be based on three exams (25% each) and another
component worth 25% composed of class participation in email discussion and
various exercises and short research projects. These exercises making up 25%
of your grade are listed below.

Exams will have to be taken at proctored sites as explained on the On-Line
Course Homepage. Generally, exams will consist of multiple choice and matching
questions with some brief essay or definition types of questions. The first
exam will be given just two weeks into the course so you can see pretty
quickly what types of exams I give, and how well you are studying and learning
the material.

**Warning:** On-line courses can be hazardous to your academic health! Here is
what I mean by this: without any requirement for class attendance or in-person
participation, you are on your own to keep up with the material. It is very
easy to keep putting things off until the end of the class. To help you keep
pace, I am giving three exams evenly spaced throughout the course and I will
be requiring you to turn in (electronically) various exercises and short
research projects on a regular schedule throughout the course. This will
require you keep up and, hopefully, prevent you from falling behind in the
course. Your first test of how well you are doing will be the first exam which
I will give just two weeks into the course. If you do very poorly on that
first exam you might want to consider dropping the course while you can still
do so without receiving a failing grade.

Here is a partial list of exercises and other things that make up the
remaining 25% of your grade not covered by the three exams. (This is 90% of
it, but I may add a couple of things as I continue to revise and hopefully
improve the course.) Some of these exercises will only take a few minutes to
complete; others are a bit longer. Some requirements, such as class discussion
on the list-serv, will obviously continue until the course is finished.

1) Participate in a meaningful way in discussion on the list-serv.  
2) Complete a brief exercise that involves using a trip-planner program such
as Map Quest where you plan a trip, estimate mileage and driving time, print
out a street map of your hypothetical destination, etc. (Specific instructions
for this exercise and other brief exercises will be given to you when they are
due.)  
3) Use a web program to locate and describe air photos of a site of your
choosing  
4) Locate some data on the web about rivers, weather and climate  
5) Select a geographic term from a list I will give you. Research the term on
the web and write a 2-3 paragraph explanation of it referencing the web sites
you used  
6) Select one of the 16 regions of the USA and Canada we will study. Write a
few paragraphs description of an important geographical issue in the region
using web sites for that region that are listed in class web materials. (For
example, you might choose strip mining in Appalachia.)  
7) Learn the names of the 50 US states. If you don't already know them, there
is an interactive web site that quizzes you on their names and locations that
is actually fun.  
8) Learn the names and locations of the 50 largest cities in the US. As with
number 7 above, there is an interactive web site in the form of a fun quiz.  
9) Write a brief summary of a slide show I have developed on the web about
ethnic communities in the US. This example focuses on the Portuguese American
Community of Southern New England. You can preview the slides at this site

[**www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/geoslides/Default.htm**](http://www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/geoslides/Default.htm)

On the ARGUS CD-ROM, material is indexed under one of the categories listed
below. Note that activities in the Activities category are listed
alphabetically; all other units on the disk are accessed by a clickable map:  

     REGIONS     MAPS     TOURS     BIG JOBS (Economic Geography)     CASES     DIARIES     WEATHER     LANDFORMS     ACTIVITIES A - L     ACTIVITIES M - Z 

  

### **Optional Class Meeting**

This is a web-based class that does not require any class attendance or in-
person participation. However, because I would like a chance to get to meet
you, and to give you a chance to meet me, I will schedule an OPTIONAL meeting.
The meeting will be about midway through the course, most likely on a
Saturday. This meeting is OPTIONAL and whether or not you attend will not
affect your grade. I will announce the meeting date and location on e-mail at
least two weeks ahead of time. Most likely the meeting will be in Zanesville,
Ohio.

  
**Attention Ohio Learning Networkers:** Always check with your home campus
advisor to make certain that a course from another school will fulfill your
degree requirements.

  
  
  
![](../graphics/bottom_nav_map.jpg)  
  
  
Please e-mail comments or suggestions to:
[**summer.sessions@ohiou.edu**](mailto: summer.sessions@ohiou.edu)

