![](UCphysics.gif)  

# Dr. Randy Johnson

![](princeton.gif) |

## A.B., Princeton University, 1969

## Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley, 1975

|  ![](berkeley_logo.gif)  
---|---|---  
  
## Area of Interest: Experimental High Energy Physics

* * *

![](P001364.3.jpg)

* * *

Revised - January, 2000

Email Address: [ Randy.Johnson@uc.edu ](mailto:Randy.Johnson@uc.edu)  

Telephone: 513-556-0528  
Fax: 513-556-3425  

Mailing address (also UPS address):  

> Physics Department, ML 11  
>  Room 417, Geology/Physics Building  
>  University of Cincinnati  
>  Cincinnati, OH 45221  
>

###  Index

  * Research 
    * NuTeV (Neutrino Deep Inelastic Scattering at the Tevatron) 
    * BooNE (Booster Neutrino Experiment) 
  * Recent Publications
  * Teaching - 1999-2000 Academic Year 
    * Modern Physics for Engineers (Fall '99) 
    * Particle Physics (Winter/Spring '00) 
  * Previous Courses 
    * Graduate Electrodynamics
    * Statistics for Physics
  * Personal History 

###  ![](nutev.gif)Research - NuTeV

NuTeV is a high energy neutrino experiment designed to make very precise
determinations of two parameters, "rho" and "sin^2 theta_W", of the standard
model of electroweak interactions. These parameters are simply related to the
ratios of the quark and the anti-quark weak cross sections and to the ratio of
charged current to neutral current cross sections. These parameters, if they
continue to be consistent with the standard limits on the Higgs mass. If they
are not consistent, they will indicate new physics beyond the standard model.
In addition to this fundamental measurement, NuTeV will also be able to
measure the quark composition of nucleons and will be able to look for exotic
events such as those coming from neutral heavy leptons or from neutrino
oscillations. From the detection of dilepton events, we will be able to
measure the dynamical charm quark mass.  More information about the NuTeV
experiment can be found on the [ NuTeV home page.](http://www-e815.fnal.gov)

A Cincinnati graduate student, Masoud Vakili, collaborated in setting up and
running NuTeV. He wrote his thesis on data obtained on the earlier CCFR
experiment. That thesis explored the possibility that neutrinos can scatter
collectively off groups of nucleons and not just from single nucleons or
quarks. A second graduate student, Narumon Suwonjandee, is analyzing the
charged current events in the NuTeV data to determine the structure of the
proton.

###  ![](boone_tank.jpg)Research - BooNE

BooNE is a new neutrino experiment designed to verify or disprove the recent
Los Alamos result that found evidence for neutrino oscillations. LSND (the Los
Alamos experiment) found an excess of electron type neutrinos in their
detector. An explanation of this result is that the muon neutrinos, which were
the predominate type of neutrinos produced, "oscillated" into electron
neutrinos. Such a result necessarily imples that the neutrinos have mass.

The BooNE experiment is designed to definitely prove or disprove the LSND
result. If LSND is correct we should see an excess of hundreds of electron
neutrinos. If LSND is wrong, we will disprove it at the 5 sigma level.

BooNE uses protons from the 8 GeV Booster at Fermilab. We will interact those
protons in a beryllium target and produce pions. these pions will decay to
muons and muon neutrinos is a 50 m decay pipe. 500 m of dirt will absorb all
other particles except the penetrating neutrinos. We will detect a small
fraction of the neutrinos in a 12 m diameter sphere of mineral oil. The type
of resulting particles from the interaction will be determined by the pattern
of Cerenkov light detected on the wall of the sphere.

Cincinnati has two main responsibilities in this project: 1) doing radiation
calculations to assure the laboratory that we are safely handling the incoming
proton beam; and 2) specifying and testing the mineral oil that will be used
in the detector. Narumon Suwonjandee has been doing the radiation calculations
with me in addition to her NuTeV analysis work and a UC undergraduate, Steve
Tomassettii has been helping with the mineral oil specification.

Boone is presently under construction and is on schedule to take data in
December, 2001. More information can be found on the BooNE home pages at
[Fermilab](http://www-boone.fnal.gov) or [Los
Alamos](http://www.neutrino.lanl.gov/BooNE).

###  Recent Publications

[ Evidence for Diffractive Charm Production in nu_mu Fe and nubar_mu Fe
Scattering at the Tevatron](http://xxx.lanl.gov/ps/hep-ex/9909041), T Adams,
_et al._ (to be published in Phys. Rev. D (2000))

[ Search for a 33.9 MeV/c^2 Neutral Particle in Pion
Decay](http://xxx.lanl.gov/ps/hep-ex/9912062), J.A. Formaggio, _et al._ ,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4943 (1999).

[ Nuclear Structure Functions in the Large x Large Q^2 Kinematic Region in
Neutrino Deep Inelastic Scattering](http://xxx.lanl.gov/ps/hep-ex/9905052), M.
Vakili, _et al._ , to be published in Phys. Rev. D (2000).

[ A Limit on Muon-Neutrino (Anti-Muon Neutrino)-->Tau Neutrino (Anit-Tau
Neutrino) Oscillations from a Precision Measurement of Neutrino- Nucleon
Neutral Current Interactions](http://xxx.lanl.gov/ps/hep-ex/9506007), K.S.
McFarland, D. Naples, _et al._ , Phys. Rev. Letts. 75, 3993 (1995).

###  Teaching

####  Modern Physics for Engineers

Relativity, an introduction to quantum mechanics, and a survey of modern
physics topics. [Course web page](Modern.Physics/Index.html) includes links to
syllabus, problem sets, study aids, and previous exams.

####  Particle Physics

Particle Physics is a two quarter graduate course that serves as an
introduction to high energy physics. [Course web page](HEP/Index.html)
includes syllabus, Mathematica examples, and problem sets.

####  Graduate Electrodynamics

This three quarter graduate course covers the topics in Jackson plus conformal
mappings and finite element solutions to Laplace's equation. Mathematica is
used for problem solutions and examples. [Course web page](EM/Index.html)
includes links to the syllabus, Mathematica examples, and problem sets.

####  Statistics for Experimental Physicists

I have recently also taught a course in statistical analysis for physicist. [
Course web page](probability/Index.html) can also be found on the web.

###  Personal History

I came to neutrino experiments by a round-about route. I did my Ph.D. thesis
on hadronic interactions, an experiment performed at Fermilab just after it
opened, and continued those studies when I worked at Brookhaven National
Laboratory. I came to Cincinnati in 1984 and began working on the SLD
experiment at SLAC. The group at Cincinnati built and installed the drift
volumes for the endcap Cerenkov Ring Imaging Detectors in that experiment.
After installation, I joined the NuTeV collaboration.

