![Winter Online](../../winteronline/graphics/flag.gif)

  
  

* * *

Geography of the United States and Canada  
GEOG 234--Four Quarter Hours

Dr. James Fonseca  
Ohio University  
164 Elson Hall  
Zanesville, OH 43701  
(740) 588-1435  
E-mail: [fonseca@ohiou.edu](mailto:fonseca@oak.cats.ohiou.edu)  
|  ![](../../winteronline/graphics/planetearth.gif)

  
  

* * *

  
Hello and welcome to this web course on the Geography of the United States and
Canada at Ohio University! My name is Jim Fonseca. I am a Professor of
Geography and I am also the Dean of Ohio University - Zanesville, one of the
five regional campuses of Ohio University. You can learn more about me and see
my picture by clicking on

[**www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/administration/fonseca/**](http://www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/administration/fonseca/)

  

* * *

|

###  Course Decription

| In this course you will learn about the human and physical geography of the
United States and Canada. Physical geography refers to the natural or
environmental earth systems such as climate, weather, topography, vegetation,
soils, etc. Human geography means human-created systems such as transportation
networks, cities and settlements, agriculture, land use patterns, population
distribution and migration, industrial location, etc. When you have completed
the course, you will also have learned quite a bit about what modern geography
is about -- it's a lot more than memorizing state capitals and learning major
exports as you may have done years ago in a grade school geography class! You
will also learn about geographic concepts and geographic tools and analytical
techniques such as GIS (Geographical Information Systems).

* * *

| **Methods of Course Instruction** |  All course content is presented on the
World Wide Web; e-mail is used for submission of assignments, as well as for
the instructor's evaluation and comments.

* * *

|

### Materials

|  | **Required** |  You only have to purchase one item for this course: a CD-
ROM that costs about $25.00. It is called "The ARGUS CD-ROM." It is an
interactive CD ROM with very little text but many pictures of landscapes,
cities, and economic geography activities. It also includes many maps, and
some animations and interactive exercises. It is available for purchase
through the on-line Ohio University bookstore and at the OUZ/MATC bookstore in
the Campus Center at the Ohio University - Zanesville Campus. ARGUS stands for
_Activities and Readings in the Geography of the United States._ To help you
understand what I feel is important for you to learn, I have developed a
fairly extensive STUDY GUIDE as part of the class syllabus.

**Note:** The book for the course are in stock at Specialty Books, (740)
594-4002. [**Click here**](http://www.specialtybookstore.com) for online
ordering.

Before you take the course, you should have (1) access to a computer and (2)
know how to use the CD-ROM drive. You will also need (3) access to a to the
Internet and (4) access to email. If you do not have access to a computer at
your home or office, you can use a computer on campus at Ohio University in
Athens or at any of the five regional campuses. For example, at the Ohio
University - Zanesville Campus, a computer lab is available to students in the
LAC (Leaning Advancement Center).

You can access the course and do all your work through your home computer,
with an Internet connection, if you have these. However, to be honest, since
you have to download a lot of graphics such as maps and access web sites,
**you will find that accessing these materials through a lab computer will be
at least ten times faster. Something that you download in the lab in two
seconds might take you a minute at home over your phone line.** So consider
doing a much work as possible in a campus or library computer lab.

As an enrolled Ohio University student, a campus email account is provided
free of charge to you. Blackboard uses your official Ohio University email. It
is your responsibility to access your account and enter your password to get
access to the course. **If you want to use another email system such as
Hotmail, that is fine, but it is your responsibility to forward your OU email
account to your Hotmail account and to change the forwarding each time you
change your email address.**

We will use a program called Blackboard to conduct the class. This is my first
time using this system to teach a course, so please bear with me. I'm certain
there will be some problems and occasional confusion as I get to learn the
system.

If you do not already know a lot about computers, from this course you will
learn more about how to use a CD ROM, how to use the Internet (also know as
WWW -- the World Wide Web) and how to use electronic mail and Blackboard. A
basic introduction to the use of some of these tools is covered on the home
page of the Online Course web site for OU. You can see that information at
this web site:
[**www.ohiou.edu/independent/tutorial/intro.htm**](http://www.ohiou.edu/independent/tutorial/intro.htm)

As part of the course, you will learn how to use several geographic utilities
(tools) on the WWW such as Map Quest and various search utilities. Some of the
assignments will require you to post short emails on a geographic term or a
region you researched and to incorporate web sites as links within the email.
If you do not already know how to do this, it is a simple process that will be
explained to you during the course.

Other required reading for the course includes a short on-line text, _The
Geography of the United States_ by Stephen S. Birdsall and John Florin. You
can preview this on-line text at this web site:

[**www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/geography/canadaus.homepage.htm**](http://www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/geography/canadaus.homepage.htm)

You will also have to read some newspaper and magazine articles about the
geography of the US and Canada on-line.

  

* * *

|

### **Course Calendar**

|  The following is a brief outline of the content of the course. A full
outline with study questions will be available on Blackboard and online (at
the class web site).

Generally the course is divided into 18 units (different regions) within ten
weeks, so that is about two units per week. Most units require some reading in
an online "textbook:" _The Geography of the United States_ by Stephen S.
Birdsall and John Florin.



| WEEK 1--JUNE 17 |  Introduction to the course. How to use the CD-ROM. How to
use the WWW. How to use email and the list-serv. Introduction to human
geography. Read Chapter 1 (THEMES AND REGIONS) and Chapter 3 (FOUNDATIONS OF
HUMAN ACTIVITY) in the online text.  | WEEK 2--JUNE 24 |  Introduction to
physical geography. Read Chapter 2 (THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT) and Chapter 4
(MEGALOPOLIS).  |  WEEK 3--JULY 1 |  Physical geography continued. Read
Chapter 5 (THE MANUFACTURING CORE), and Chapter 7 (APPALACHIA AND THE OZARKS)
|  WEEK 4--JULY 8 |  Upper and Lower South. Zelinski's cultural regions of the
United States; application to Ohio Work. Read Chapter 8 (THE DEEP SOUTH) and
Chapter 9 (THE SOUTHERN COASTLANDS)  |  WEEK 5--JULY 15 |  Agriculture. Read
Chapter 10 (THE AGRICULTURAL CORE)  |  WEEK 6--JULY 22 |  Models of city
structure. Borchert's model of the evolution of the US urban hierarchy. Read
Chapter 11 (THE GREAT PLAINS AND PRAIRIES).  |  WEEK 7--JULY 29 |  Forestry,
energy and mining. Read Chapter 12 (THE "EMPTY" INTERIOR), Chapter 6 (THE BY-
PASSED EAST) AND Chapter 17 (THE NORTHLANDS)  |  WEEK 8--AUGUST 5 |
Residential perception exercise Read Chapter 13 (THE SOUTHWEST BORDER AREA)
and Chapter 14 (CALIFORNIA)  |  WEEK 9--AUGUST 12 |  Read Chapter 15 (THE
NORTH PACIFIC COAST) and Chapter 16 (HAWAII)  |  WEEK 10--AUGUST 19 |  Canada;
overview of the geography of Canada; State of the States. Read assigned
readings and web sites on Canada. ONLINE FINAL EXAM. DATE TO BE OFFICIALLY
ANNOUNCED BUT YOU WILL PROBABLY BE ABLE TO TAKE IT AT A TIME OF YOUR CHOICE
SOME TIME AROUND AUGUST 21-26.



The course calendar above will help you pace your lesson submission so that
you can complete the course within the 10-week schedule. You are expected to
submit your assignments according to the calendar. You may submit an
assignment early in the week in which it is due, but not before that week. If
you are unable to meet the deadline for a particular week, you must notify
your instructor by email _in advance._ Under normal circumstances, you must
submit all assignments prior to an examination before you take that
examination.

  

All course requirements must be completed by Friday, August 23, 2000. The
instructor will permit an extension only under extreme circumstances.

  

* * *

| **Grading Policy & Standards** |  I am using a contract grading system in
this course. Everyone must do a certain amount of work and pass the final exam
to earn a "C" and pass the course. There will only be one exam (the final
exam) that everyone must pass. But you determine what grade you want to earn.
The higher the grade you want, the more work you have to do in terms of class
exercises.

The final exam will consist of multiple-choice and matching questions with
some brief essay or definition types of questions. I'll give you sample
multiple choice questions as we go along that tie in with the ARGUS CD ROM,
the web text, and the online "lecture" material. Test yourself as you go along
to see how ell you are reading and studying the material. **All the sample
questions given as examples will be included in the final exam. So there is no
reason to get any of these wrong!!!** The sample questions will let you see
pretty quickly what types of questions I will ask on the final exam and it
will let you see how well you are studying and learning the material.

**Warning:** Online courses can be hazardous to your academic health! Here is
what I mean by this: without any requirement for class attendance or in-person
participation, you are on your own to keep up with the material. It is very
easy to keep putting things off until the end of the class. To help you keep
pace, I will be requiring you to turn in (electronically or by mail or fax)
various exercises and short research projects on a regular schedule throughout
the course. This will require you keep up and, hopefully, prevent you from
falling behind in the course. **If you find that you are missing a lot of the
sample multiple-choice questions, you need to read the material more
carefully, or read the material twice, or to print it out and use a
highlighter and then study your highlighted sections.**

Due dates for these will be given in the syllabus. Some requirements, such as
class discussion on the list-serv, will obviously continue until the course is
finished.

**REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL STUDENTS TO PASS THE COURSE WITH AT LEAST A GRADE OF
"C:"**

  1. Complete all sections of the ARGUS CD ROM. Follow the study guide and answer questions along the way. It is best to write out your answers and keep them in a notebook, but you do not have to turn these answers in. Do the sample multiple choice questions at the end of various sections. 

  2. Read the online text by Birdsall and Florin. 

[**www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/geography/canadaus/homepage.htm**](http://www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/geography/canadaus/homepage.htm)

Answer sample multiple choice questions. (You do not have to turn these in.)

  3. Read the posted "Lecture" material. Answer sample multiple choice and other questions. (You do not have to turn these in.) 

  4. Participate in online class discussion (How much depends on the grade you want to earn; see below.) 

  5. Complete and turn in (by the posted deadlines) various class exercises. These exercises may take you anywhere from five to 30 minutes. Some longer exercises will count as two. You are free to choose any combination of exercises you wish. How many depends on the grade you want to earn; see below. You may turn these in by email; fax; postal mail; or put them in my campus mail box. 

  6. Pass (with a score of at least 60) the Final Exam at the end of the course. 

In addition to 1-6 above, to earn an "A" you must also

    Participate in a meaningful way in discussion on the list-serv. On average, you should participate at least once or twice a week; that is, about fifteen times during the course.     Complete any 30 class exercises. 

In addition to 1-6 above, to earn an "B" you must also

    Participate in a meaningful way in discussion on the list-serv. On average, you should participate at least once a week; that is, about ten times during the course.     Complete any 20 class exercises. 

In addition to 1-6 above, to earn an "C" you must also

    Participate in a meaningful way in discussion on the list-serv. On average, you should participate at least five times during the course.     Complete any 10 class exercises. 

You cannot aim to earn a "D." Set your sights higher than that! It may be
possible that a "D" is assigned to someone who tried for a "C" and didn't make
it; or an "F" or a "D" is assigned to someone who bombs the final, but let's
not aim to get a "D".

If you are wondering what the exercises are like, here are a few examples.
THESE ARE NOT THE ACTUAL EXERCISES AS I HAVEN'T GIVEN YOU THE WEB SITES YET,
BUT THIS WILL GIVE YOU AN IDEA:

      1. Complete a brief exercise that involves using a trip-planner program such as Map Quest where you plan a trip, estimate mileage and driving time, print out a street map of your hypothetical destination, etc. (Specific instructions for this exercise and other brief exercises will be given to you when they are due.) 
      2. Use a web program to locate and describe air photos of a site of your choosing. 
      3. Locate some data on the web about rivers, weather and climate   

      4. Select a geographic term from a list I will give you. Research the term on the web and write a 2-3 paragraph explanation of it referencing the web sites you used. 
      5. Select one of the 16 regions of the USA and Canada we will study. Write a few paragraphs description of an important geographical issue in the region using web sites for that region. (For example, you might choose strip mining in Appalachia.) 
      6. Learn the names of the 50 US states. If you don't already know them, there is an interactive web site that quizzes you on their names and locations that is actually fun. 
      7. Learn the names and locations of the 50 largest cities in the US. As with number 6 above, there is an interactive web site in the form of a fun quiz. 
      8. Write a brief summary of a slide show I have developed on the web about ethnic communities in the US. This example focuses on the Portuguese American Community of Southern New England. You can preview the slides at this site 

[**www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/geoslides/Default.htm**](http://www.zanesville.ohiou.edu/geoslides/Default.htm)

On the ARGUS CD-ROM, material is indexed under one of the categories listed
below. Note that activities in the Activities category are listed
alphabetically; all other units on the disk are accessed by a clickable map:  

     REGIONS     MAPS     TOURS     BIG JOBS (Economic Geography)     CASES     DIARIES     WEATHER     LANDFORMS     ACTIVITIES A - L     ACTIVITIES M - Z  

  

* * *

| **Optional Class Meeting** |  This is a web-based class that does not
require any class attendance or in-person participation. However, because I
would like a chance to get to meet you, and to give you a chance to meet me, I
will schedule an OPTIONAL meeting. The meeting will be about midway through
the course, most likely on a Saturday. This meeting is OPTIONAL. Whether or
not you attend will not affect your grade. I will announce the meeting date
and location on email at least two weeks ahead of time. Most likely the
meeting will be in Zanesville, Ohio.

  

* * *

| **How to contact me** |  The easiest and quickest way to reach me is via
email at [fonseca@ohio.edu](mailto:fonseca@ohio.edu). You can also call me at
740-588-1434. My fax number is 740-588-1436. As I am the campus dean, I am
generally on campus from 8:00 to 5:00 everyday, unless I am out of town. I
will always try to respond to emails and phone calls as soon as possible. If
you have a concern that requires a meeting, or if you simply want to come by
to say hello, I will also be happy to meet with you by appointment at any time
that is mutually convenient. If you do want to meet in person, please call
Gail Porter, my assistant, at 740-588-1434 to set up a time for us to meet.

  

* * *

| **Technical  
Requirements** | **Hardware**  
Windows PC (486 or better processor, minimum 8MB RAM, DOS 5.0 or higher,
Windows 3.x or Windows 95/98)

Macintosh (68030 or better processor, minimum 8 MB real RAM, system 6.07 or
higher)

SLIPP/PPP Internet connection (if using modem connection, at least 14,400
kbps); connection must not have firewalls preventing access.

**Software**  
Graphical browser (level of Netscape 3.1 or higher)

Standard email communication software

* * *

| **Enrollment  
Information** | **Active Terms:** Term-based; 10 week quarter system

**Registration Dates:** April 1-June 2, 2002

Call the [**Ohio University Online
Staff**](file:///harddrive/Web%20Pages/HTML/old%20web%20pages/ouonline/index.html)
at 1-888-551-6446 if you have questions about this course or the enrollment
process.

Call the education counselors in the Division of Lifelong Learning at (740)
593-2150 if you have questions about Ohio University Degree Opportunities.

