![<course#> Oregon State University Distance & Continuing
Education](images/ensc_479_title_banner_3.jpg)  
| [Syllabus](index.htm) | [Contact](contact.htm) | [Theme](theme.htm) |
[Submissions](submissions.htm) | [Writing Resources](writing_resources.htm) |
[Weeks](weeks/index.htm) | [1](weeks/one/index.htm) | [2](weeks/two/index.htm)
| [3](weeks/three/index.htm) | [4](weeks/four/index.htm) |
[5](weeks/five/index.htm) | [6](weeks/six/index.htm) |
[7](weeks/seven/index.htm) | [8](weeks/eight/index.htm) |
[9](weeks/nine/index.htm) | [10](weeks/ten/index.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
#  Theme

## Restoring Salmon Runs in the Columbia River

Introduction  
Paper #1: Evaluation of Resources  
Paper 2: Analysis of an Environmental Risk  
Paper #3 Priorities

###  Introduction

This quarter, the Environmental Sciences Case Studies Course will focus on the
issue of restoring salmon runs in the Columbia River. Concern for the fate of
Columbia River salmon has generated enormous concern and led to drastic
cutback in all types of fishing, resulted in changes in managing the flow of
water though dams thereby affecting irrigation and electrical power
generation, and profoundly affected the sociology of native Americans and
others living in the Pacific Northwest.

This course will help students better understand the size of the effort needed
to determine the causes of declining salmon runs in the Columbia River, and
the issues involved in making decisions necessary to restore runs.

This theme was chosen because as an issue, it has components of life,
physical, and social sciences. Life science issues may center around the
biology of the fish, their life histories, and their resource needs, but may
also include other ecological factors. Physical science issues might include
water quality issues in the Columbia River basin, oceanography, and features
of global warming. Social science issues might include the history of salmon
harvests, the role of salmon in the culture of those in the Pacific Northwest,
and the interest groups concerned with the future of salmon populations. Since
most environmental issues recognized today are interdisciplinary in nature,
lessons learned from this course can be applied elsewhere. The choice for the
course of risk analysis of Columbia River salmon was made for you. Although
the course may appear arbitrary,the topic of risks to salmon is of universal
interest among students and is rich with data, information, and diverse
perspectives.

Many facts seemingly speak to the risks to Columbia River salmon. Some of the
potential risks to Columbia River salmon include downstream migration through
dams, the impact of livestock in tributaries, upstream migration through fish
ladders, genetic changes due to hatcheries, salmon diseases, overfishing in
freshwater, overfishing at sea, impacts of feeding by marine mammals,
insufficient offshore food supplies, and fingerling predation by squawfish.
Although these and other risks are known to exist, there is disagreement about
their relative importance or the costs and benefits associated with reducing
the risk from each factor.

Federal agencies, such as the Bonneville Power Administration, the US Forest
Service, the US Marine Fisheries Board, and the US Department of Fish and
Wildlife have studied salmon in the Columbia River for many years. State
agencies in Oregon, Washington, Idaho, and Montana have focused on Columbia
River salmon as a vital resource and gathered data relevant to understanding
population trends. Finally, the Confederated Tribes, commercial fishermen,
sports fishermen, the timber industry, and those who graze cattle in the
Columbia River watershed have all gathered information for themselves to try
and explain how salmon populations have changed over the past decades. Even
with the intense interest of numerous groups in the public and private sector,
there is still no agreement on the major risks faced by salmon, and there is
no strategy that prioritizes action to minimize risks to Columbia River
salmon.

The students in this class will evaluate information and data available from
agencies in the public and private sector and will produce a strategic plan
for reducing risks to Columbia River. Efforts from you and your classmates
will demonstrate the power of environmental case study analysis, and the long-
term potential for such efforts that are sustained. In addition, work from the
class will illustrate why such case studies are difficult, why we have so much
data and yet need so much more, and why a diverse group of people can look at
the same data and draw different, valid conclusions. Nonetheless, it is not
reasonable to expect that a class of students, however bright and industrious,
could produce a comprehensive plan to reduce risks for Columbia River salmon.

The instructors and students must keep in mind that a group of interested and
well-intended people, willing to commit genuine effort over a finite amount of
time, can develop an overview and a basic plan that serves as a logical
starting point for further discussions, but that this work will by nature be
flawed and incomplete. Thus a final lesson will be to recognize and
acknowledge the difficult task facing those experts who spend more time and
resources than available for this class, and who are working over the course
of years to provide the insight necessary for resource management.

### Paper #1: Evaluation of Resources

The Columbia River watershed includes Oregon, Washington, Idaho, Montana, and
Canada. In addition, Columbia River salmon grow in the Pacific Ocean. Many
agencies in the federal governments in the US and Canada have explored factors
to help describe the status of salmon runs, and the factors contributing to
the decline of populations. During the first 3 weeks of this course, students
will assess the quantity and quality of data related to Columbia River salmon
populations that is available on the World Wide Web. During weeks 1-5 of this
course students will choose 1 source of information and write a paper
**assessing the quality and quantity of information available from the
source** on the topic of risks to Columbia River salmon.

#### Possible sources of information include:

  1. Data available from State Agencies in Oregon 
  2. Data available from State Agencies in Washington 
  3. Data available from State Agencies in Idaho 
  4. Data available from State Agencies in Montana 
  5. Data available from US National Fisheries Marine Board 
  6. Data available from Bonneville Power Administration 
  7. Data available from the Confederated Tribes 
  8. Data available from British Columbia Provincial Government 
  9. Data available from the Canadian Federal Government 
  10. Data available from non-governmental organizations 

[Return to Week 1.](weeks/one/activity.htm)

### Paper 2: Analysis of an Environmental Risk

The many possible causes of declining salmon runs in the Columbia River
include:

  * Offshore factors such as El Nino events
  * Overfishing at sea
  * Predation by marine mammals
  * Dams in the Columbia River watershed
  * Fish ladder designs
  * Hatchery management
  * Logging and other human activities in tributaries. 

During the second 3 weeks of the course, students will use information
gathered primarily from the web to **assess the impacts of these and other
factors contributing to decline of Columbia River salmon stocks.** Student
papers written during the Phase I part of the course that assess the quality
and quantity of data/information on risks to Columbia River salmon are in the
Project area and should be used to guide students to information needed for
**assessing the magnitude of a specific risk**.

#### During weeks 4-9 of this course students will choose one of the topics:

  1. Assessing effects of El Nino 
  2. Assessing effects of fishing in the Pacific Ocean 
  3. Assessing effects of predation by marine mammals 
  4. Assessing effects of dams on downstream smolt migration 
  5. Assessing effects of fishladders on upstream adult migration 
  6. Assessing effects of hatcheries 
  7. Assessing effects of squawfish predation 
  8. Assessing effects of logging near tributaries 
  9. Assessing effects of livestock grazing near tributaries 
  10. Assessing effects of other factors? 

The assessment of each of these potential factors affecting Columbia River
salmon will include information that determines the certainty of a cause-
effect relationship between a factor and its effects on salmon numbers, and
attempts to quantify the change in salmon populations that can be ascribed to
a specific factor. Assessments should be highly focused. For example, it may
be too difficult to assess the effects of predation by all marine mammals, but
manageable to focus on one marine mammal such as sea lions.

Similar focus can be made on other topics by choosing one type of marine
fishing, considering only one dam, one hatchery, one tributary where either
logging or grazing take place, or by assessing only one type, species, or run
of salmon. [Return to Week 4.](weeks/four/begin_paper_2.htm)

### Paper 3: Prioitizing Risks

Rationales for prioitizing risks:

  * The greatest increase in adult salmon per dollar spent
  * Choosing to solve the risks that are the most simple to fix, regardless of whether the projected increase in adult salmon is large or small. 
  * Focus on efforts to save the most endangered salmon run
  * Improving down stream migration of juveniles
  * Any other rationale that you can justify. 

Once the rationale is in place, prioritize the risks evaluated by students and
thereby outline a strategy for salmon recovery. [Return to Week
10.](weeks/ten/index.htm)

  
  
| [Syllabus](index.htm) | [Contact](contact.htm) | [Theme](theme.htm) |
[Submissions](submissions.htm) | [Writing Resources](writing_resources.htm) |
[Weeks](weeks/index.htm) | [1](weeks/one/index.htm) | [2](weeks/two/index.htm)
| [3](weeks/three/index.htm) | [4](weeks/four/index.htm) |
[5](weeks/five/index.htm) | [6](weeks/six/index.htm) |
[7](weeks/seven/index.htm) | [8](weeks/eight/index.htm) |
[9](weeks/nine/index.htm) | [10](weeks/ten/index.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  


Oregon State University | Distance & Continuing Education | [Environmental
Sciences](http://osu.orst.edu/dept/ES/)  
4943 The Valley Library, Corvallis, OR 97331-4504  
[](javascript:footerpopup\(\)) 800-667-1465 Advising Center | Admissions &
Registration 541-737-2527  
Local 541-737-2676 | [ostateu@orst.edu](mailto:ostateu@orst.edu) | Fax
541-737-2734

[](javascript:footerpopup\(\))OSU Services for Students with Disabilities |
[](javascript:footerpopup\(\))OSU Disclaimer  
Copyright (C) 2001, Oregon State University  
[![Oregon State University Distance & Continuing Education home
page](images/statewide_globe2000.jpg)](http://statewide.orst.edu)[![Oregon
State University home page](images/osu_logo.gif)](http://oregonstate.edu)

