[Home](../index.html) \- [Syllabus](../syllabus.html) \- [Tutorial
Section](http://www.ldeo.columbia.edu/%7Ekatz/U4735section.html)

U4735x Environmental Science for Decision Makers

Lectures 20 and 21: Origin of Hydrocarbons.

Walter Pitman

* * *

### List of Projections:

  * [Diagrammatic representation of the energy budget of the earth](../projections/pitman/13.1.ebudget.gif).
  * [Photosynthesis and respiration](../projections/pitman/photoresp.html).
  * [Four main settings for anoxic environments favorable for preservation of organic matter in sediments](../projections/pitman/5.6.anoxic.jpg).
  * [Products of the maturation of organic matter](../projections/pitman/29.maturation1.jpg).
  * [Petroleum fractions](../projections/pitman/pet.fractions.html).
  * [Temperature of the maturation stages and relative amounts of crude oil, wet gas and dry gas produced](../projections/pitman/30.maturation2.jpg).
  * [Correlation between hydrocarbon generation, temperature, and some paleothermometers](../projections/pitman/5.14.correlation.jpg).
  * [Model showing possible relationship between time after burial of source rocks and the temperature for oil and gas formation](../projections/pitman/32.time.temp.jpg).
  * [Burial curve for the Central Graben of the North Sea](../projections/pitman/5.13.burialcurve.jpg).
  * [Primary migration of petroleum out of source rocks, followed by secondary migration into reservoir rocks](../projections/pitman/34.pri.mig.pet.jpg).
  * [Common geologic structures that trap oil and gas in the subsurface](../projections/pitman/8-6.traps.jpg).
  * [Migration of oil and gas into and out of an anticlinal trap](../projections/pitman/37.trap.mig.jpg).
  * [Sketch of seismic lines across Goshute Valley, northeast Nevada](../projections/pitman/33.goshute.jpg).
  * [Sketch showing illustration strike-slip faulting, listric normal faulting, and crustal attenuation](../projections/pitman/34.strike.slip.jpg).
  * [Baltimore Canyon](../projections/pitman/baltimore.canyon.jpg).
  * [Western Canada Basin](../projections/pitman/21.w.canada.jpg).
  * [Cross section across Central Appalachian Basin](../projections/pitman/22.c.appal.jpg).
  * [Tertiary Tectonics - Western Cordillera](../projections/pitman/31.w.cordillera.jpg).
  * [Basin types of the world](../projections/pitman/2.basin.types.jpg).
  * [Features of the Mississippi Delta](../projections/pitman/8.miss.delta.gif).
  * [Cyclic sequence in a Coal Measures deposit](../projections/pitman/7.cyclic.sequence.gif).
  * [Fomation of coal from peat](../projections/pitman/peat.gif).
  * [Conversion of kerogen to oil, gas, and coal as a function of temperature](../projections/pitman/13.3.conversion.gif).
  * [Plot of temperature vs heating time](../projections/pitman/temp.v.time.gif).
  * [Proportions of constituents in various grades of coal](../projections/pitman/8.25.coal.grades.gif).
  * [World map showing the distribution of known coal deposits](../projections/pitman/12.coal.deposits.gif).

####  

#### _Decomposition of Organic Matter in the Oceans._

[Diagrammatic representation of the energy budget of the
earth](../projections/pitman/13.1.ebudget.gif).

[Photosynthesis and respiration](../projections/pitman/photoresp.html).

Over 90% of the organic matter produced as and by living organisms is broken
down by oxidation (respiration).

CH2O \+ O2 \--> CO2 \+ H2O + energy

NH3 \+ 2O2 \--> H+ \+ NO3- \+ H2O

Organic matter may be oxidized as it sinks through the water.

On the bottom, sulphate reducing and denitrifying bacteria maybe decompose the
organic matter without oxygen.

_Phytoplankton_ are the base of the food chain in the ocean. They are
photosynthetic and live in the photic zone using sunlight, water, CO 2 and raw
nutrients which have been ultimately derived from the land.

_Phytoplanktonic algae_ are the most important of the organic matter which
gives rise to petroleum:

  1. diatoms.
  2. dinoflagellates.

_Zooplankton_ feed on the phytoplankton (and on each other). They provide the
(lipid rich) material from which petroleum is derived:

  1. radiolaria.
  2. foraminifera.
  3. pteropods.

[Four main settings for anoxic environments favorable for preservation of
organic matter in sediments](../projections/pitman/5.6.anoxic.jpg).

Preservation is enhanced by:

  1. reduction in bioturbation.
  2. reduction in oxygen content of the water.
  3. increased sedimentation rate. (A very high sedimentation rate will dilute the organic content.)

Microbial breakdown is due to:

  1. bacteria.
  2. fungi.
  3. protozoa.

Oxygen may penetrate into the sediment to depths of 5-20 cm.

#### _Formation of Hydrocarbons and Hydrocarbon Reservoirs/Traps._

  1. _Diagenesis_.

Biogenic decomposition produces _biogenic methane_. At slightly higher
temperatures and pressures the organic matter is converted to _kerogen_ \- an
amorphous material of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.

  2. _Catagenesis_.

At higher temperatures and pressures kerogen is altered and the majority of
_crude oil_ is formed. During this phase and the next, the larger molecules
break down into simpler molecules (a process called _cracking_ ).

  3. _Metagenesis_.

In the final stage of alteration (at higher temperatures and pressures) of
kerogen and crude oil, _natural gas_ (mostly _methane_ ) is produced and
residual carbon is left in the source rock.

[Products of the maturation of organic
matter](../projections/pitman/29.maturation1.jpg).

[Petroleum fractions](../projections/pitman/pet.fractions.html).

[Temperature of the maturation stages and relative amounts of crude oil, wet
gas and dry gas produced](../projections/pitman/30.maturation2.jpg).

[Correlation between hydrocarbon generation, temperature, and some
paleothermometers](../projections/pitman/5.14.correlation.jpg).

[Model showing possible relationship between time after burial of source rocks
and the temperature for oil and gas
formation](../projections/pitman/32.time.temp.jpg).

[Burial curve for the Central Graben of the North
Sea](../projections/pitman/5.13.burialcurve.jpg).

_Some Definitions:_

> _Source rocks_ are mainly organic rich shales.

>

> _Primary migration_ \- within and out of the source rock.

>

> _Secondary migration_ \- to and within the rock where the oil and gas
accumulate - called a reservoir rock.

Oil and gas must flow from the source rock (often assisted by pressure)
through some permeable conduit or pathway to a reservoir which must consist of
relatively porous and permeable rock.

The reservoir must be covered or sealed by a caprock, which is a rock layer of
_very low permeability_ , which prevents the oil and/or gas from migrating
further upward and escaping.

Good caprocks:

  1. evaporites (salt).
  2. well compacted shale with perhaps carbonate cement.

[Primary migration of petroleum out of source rocks, followed by secondary
migration into reservoir rocks](../projections/pitman/34.pri.mig.pet.jpg).

_Summary of Requirements for Trap Formation:_

  1. Suitable source rock must have been subjected to the maturation process.
  2. Primary migration possible.
  3. Suitable reservoir rock must exist.
  4. Secondary migration from source rocks into reservoir rocks possible.
  5. Large enough potential accumulation.
  6. Reservoir sealed.

[Common geologic structures that trap oil and gas in the
subsurface](../projections/pitman/8-6.traps.jpg).

[Migration of oil and gas into and out of an anticlinal
trap](../projections/pitman/37.trap.mig.jpg).

[Sketch of seismic lines across Goshute Valley, northeast
Nevada](../projections/pitman/33.goshute.jpg).

[Sketch showing illustration strike-slip faulting, listric normal faulting,
and crustal attenuation](../projections/pitman/34.strike.slip.jpg).

[Baltimore Canyon](../projections/pitman/baltimore.canyon.jpg).

[Western Canada Basin](../projections/pitman/21.w.canada.jpg).

[Cross section across Central Appalachian
Basin](../projections/pitman/22.c.appal.jpg).

[Tertiary Tectonics - Western
Cordillera](../projections/pitman/31.w.cordillera.jpg).

[Basin types of the world](../projections/pitman/2.basin.types.jpg).

#### _Coal._

[Diagrammatic representation of the energy budget of the
earth](../projections/pitman/13.1.ebudget.gif).

  1. Land plants first appeared 400my ago in Devonian.
  2. First rapid development of flora - 345 my ago.
  3. Gave rise to the first vast deposits of coal in the carboniferous.

Coal is fossil plant matter (mostly land plants)

It does not migrate as oil and gas do. Under a microscope it is often seen to
consist of altered vegetative matter: wood, bark, leaves, roots, etc.

The place of accumulation is almost always swamps, because in swamps the dead
plant matter may be submerged under water in a non-oxidizing environment.

In coastal swamps, lagoons, deltas, etc. there is massive production of
organic matter in the form of plants and trees.

The residue of these forms of _peat_ which, when more deeply buried, may be
transformed to _lignite_ and _bituminous coal_. A small fraction may form oil
and gas.

[Features of the Mississippi Delta](../projections/pitman/8.miss.delta.gif).

#### _Coal Formation._

  1. Growth of plant matter in a swamp.

  2. Submersion of this dead plant matter underwater without oxygen.

  3. Partial decomposition by anaerobic bacteria giving off hydrogen and oxygen in the combined form of various gases. The carbon becomes increasingly concentrated.

  4. The decomposition is terminated when the anaerobic bacteria are poisoned by the very acid compounds they liberate.

  5. As the _peat_ is progressively buried to deeper levels and compressed and heated, volatile compounds continue to escape and the carbon concentration increases.

  6. The peat is converted successively, ie.

> _lignite_ \-- > _sub-bituminous coal_ \-- > _bituminous coal_.

[Cyclic sequence in a Coal Measures
deposit](../projections/pitman/7.cyclic.sequence.gif).

[Fomation of coal from peat](../projections/pitman/peat.gif).

Sub-bituminous coal and bituminous coal are sedimentary rocks. The next phase
- _anthricite_ \- is a metaphoric rock created from the above by the pressure
and heat of tectonic processes.

Anthricite is hard to ignite but burns without smoke.

The other coals - bituminous, sub-bituminous, lignite, and peat - are
increasingly easy to light but increasingly _smoky_.

[Conversion of kerogen to oil, gas, and coal as a function of
temperature](../projections/pitman/13.3.conversion.gif).

#### _Definitions:_

_Metamorphic rocks:_

> Any rock derived from pre-existing rocks by mineralogical, chemical, and
structural changes, essentially in the solid state, in response to marked
changes in temperature, pressure, shearing, stress and chemical environment at
depth in the earth's crust, ie below the zones of weathering and cementation.

_Metamorphism:_

> The mineralized and structural adjustment of solid rocks to physical and
chemical conditions which have been imposed at depth below the surface zones
of weatheringand cementation which differ from conditions under which the
rocks originated.

[Plot of temperature vs heating time](../projections/pitman/temp.v.time.gif).

[Proportions of constituents in various grades of
coal](../projections/pitman/8.25.coal.grades.gif).

[World map showing the distribution of known coal
deposits](../projections/pitman/12.coal.deposits.gif).

* * *

