[![](/images/wulogo.gif)](http://www.wustl.edu)  
---  
![](/images/L2_face/news_face.gif) |
[![](/images/gwbhead.gif)](http://gwbweb.wustl.edu)  
---|---  
[![](/images/L2_buttons/shortMSW.gif)](/academic/msw/msw_overview.html) |
[![](/images/L2_buttons/shortPhDprog.gif)](/academic/phd/phd_overview.html) |
[![](/images/L2_buttons/shortGWBcommun.gif)](/people/people.html) |
[![](/images/L2_buttons/shortcnt.&proj.gif)](/centers/centers.html) |
[![](/images/L2_buttons/shortnews&events.gif)](../news.html) |
[![](/images/L2_buttons/shortjobsonline.gif)](/jobs/index.html) |
[![](/images/L2_buttons/shortsitesearch.gif)](/sitemap.html) |
[![](/images/L2_buttons/shortcontact.gif)](/contacts.html)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
> ###  GWB Graduates first Open Society Institute Fellows

>

> Seven emerging democracies will soon have the benefit of professionally
trained social workers as the first class of Open Society Institute (OSI)
Fellows graduate from the George Warren Brown School of Social Work and return
to their homelands.

>

> The OSI Fellowship program, part of the Soros foundations network, provides
training in social work to students from Azerbaijan, Georgia, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, Tajikstan and Uzbekistan. OSI is a private operating and
grant-making foundation that seeks to promote development and maintenance of
open societies around the world through educational, social and legal reform.
The goal of the fellowship program is to help these students implement reform,
create policy and foster the development of social work in their home
countries.

>

> "As the school with the largest number of international students, the George
Warren Brown School of Social Work is proud to train this first group of
outstanding social work students," Shanti K. Khinduka, Ph.D., dean and the
George Warren Brown University Professor said. "They are destined to play key
leadership roles in creating social development institutions in their native
countries, and the GWB faculty looks forward to continued communication and
interaction with them."

>

> The OSI Fellows from Washington University have a wide variety of plans
after they return to their homelands.

>

> Gulnara Ismankulova hopes to be a pioneer in her country. "When I return
home I will be the first U.S. trained social worker for the 17 million people
of Kazakhstan," she said. "This is a situation of both honor and
responsibility. I see my mission as introducing social work knowledge to the
people of my country."

>

> Ismankulova hopes to utilize her skills as a medical doctor and a social
worker as she works in social and community development. Specifically, she
would like to establish community health centers in underserved and
impoverished communities in Kazakhstan.

>

> Fariz Ismailzade of Azerbaijan looks to spread his knowledge in the country
through teaching. "I am planning to teach a course that I developed, 'Social
and Economic Development Policy,' at the Western University in Baku."

>

> The syllabus for the course is based on a similar course at School of Social
Work. Ismailzade also plans to work in a non-profit organization.

>

> Khoumar Housseynova, also from Azerbaijan, plans to work with international
Non-Governmental Organizations or other United Nations agencies to help them
develop foundations in social work. She would also like to continue research
in social work.

>

> Chimeg Tserendorj will be joining Center for Social Development in Mongolia
after she graduates. Her work at the center will include developing a Master
Plan for Social Sector Development for the country.

>

> The remaining OSI fellows, Natela Phartskaladze of Georgia and Victoria
Izmailova of Kyrgyzstan plan to conduct groundbreaking work in their countries
based on their areas of study at GWB. Andrey Adilov from Uzbekistan will
graduate in August.

>

> The Fellows note that their time at Washington University has been
invaluable in their preparation for the future.

>

> "Two years of study at GWB introduced me to the profession of social work, a
profession about which prior to coming to here I knew nothing about,"
Ismankulova said. "I have learned a great deal about issues of social justice,
social welfare policies, human diversity and human behavior. I became
acquainted with the specific skills of social work assessment and intervention
on individual, group, and community levels. I am leaving GWB with a feeling of
accomplishment in learning a profession that will help me to be a better
advocate for social changes in my country."

>

> Beyond learning the practical tools needed for social work practice, the
Fellows said that their time at the University helped them develop leadership
skills and expand their perspectives.

>

> "It has been a wonderful learning experience to study at GWB and to live in
St. Louis during these two years," Ismankulova said. "It has broadened my
worldview immensely and gave me an opportunity to explore my own strengths and
capabilities. I think that GWB really encourages and welcomes diversity among
student body, and I am proud that for two years I was a part of this world."

>

> Housseynova also credits the University with giving her a well-rounded
experience in the U.S. "The faculty was very considerate and helpful," she
said. "I also loved working with the students, most of whom were concerned
about the further improvement of the GWB community and the people at my
practicum site, the psychology department at the medical school, who made a
wonderful study team and who valued diversity and social skills. I gained
friends at GWB, and I strongly believe that I gained them for life."

>

> Gautam Yadama, Ph.D., associate professor of social work and coordinator of
the social and economic development concentration, is excited about the
current and future outcomes of the OSI program. "In the short run, we have a
great group of students that we have trained in a way that even they did not
envision because they did not know about social work. I think the students
really benefited from the classwork and internships in the field," he said.

>

> "In the long run, the success of this program is predicated on these
students impacting their countries in the areas of social development and the
creation of social policy infrastructure, both critical for countries
undergoing social and economic transition."  
>  

