[![back to Academic Information](../../academic_title.gif)](../../index.html)

> # 2002-2003 Course Descriptions \- SL

>

> SL 200S - Introduction to Service Learning in Multicultural Communities - 4
credits

>

> Seeks to foster the development of self-reflective, culturally aware, and
responsive community participants. Students gain hands-on experience,
knowledge, and skills about local communities and community organizations.
Students learn how to work with communities sensitively, and to participate in
multicultural community service settings. Requires a minimum of 30 hours of
community service work, in addition to class time, during the semester. Each
section has a specific service theme. See current course schedule for details.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

>

> SL 201S - Introduction to Service Learning in Multicultural Communities--
After-School Recreation - 4 credits

>

> Fosters the development of self-reflective, culturally aware, and responsive
community participants. Students gain hands-on experience, knowledge, and
skills about after-school programs and local communities. Students learn how
to work with communities sensitively and to participate in multicultural
after-school service settings. The focus of the service is recreation
activities.

>

> Corequisite(s): SL 201LS

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

>

> SL 201LS - After-School Programs Service Learning Lab: Recreation - 0
credits

>

> Required lab for SL 201S. Students participate in after-school recreation
programs for a minimum of 30 hours.

>

> Corequisite(s): SL 201S

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

>

> SL 202S - Introduction to Service Learning in Multicultural Communities--
After School The Arts - 4 credits

>

> Fosters the development of self-reflective, culturally aware, and responsive
community participants. Students gain hands-on experience, knowledge, and
skills about after-school programs and local communities. Students learn how
to work with communities sensitively, and to participate in multicultural
after-school service settings. The focus of the service is music, art, and
drama activities.

>

> Corequisite(s): SL 202LS

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

>

> SL 202LS - After-School Programs Service Learning Lab: The Arts - 0 credits

>

> Required lab for SL 201S. Students will participate in after-school music,
art, and drama programs for a minimum of 30 hours.

>

> Corequisite(s): SL 202S

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

>

> SL 203S - Introduction to Service Learning in Multicultural Communities--
After-School Science/Math - 4 credits

>

> Fosters the development of self-reflective, culturally aware, and responsive
community participants. Students gain hands-on experience, knowledge, and
skills about after-school programs and local communities. Students learn how
to work with communities sensitively, and to participate in multicultural
after-school service settings. The focus of the service is math and science
activities.

>

> Corequisite(s): SL 203LS

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

>

> SL 203LS - After-School Programs Service Learning Lab: Science/Math - 0
credits

>

> Required lab for SL 203S. Students will participate in after school math and
science programs for a minimum of 30 hours.

>

> Corequisite(s): SL 203S

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

>

> SL 295S - Service Learning Special Topics: Staff America Reads - 2 credits

>

> Provides a structured opportunity for CSUMB staff and faculty to tutor
elementary school children in reading as part of the America Reads Challenge.
All participants are involved in direct one-on-one tutoring at local
elementary schools and participate in a weekly class meeting to reflect on
their experiences as tutors with regard to issues of diversity, justice,
compassion, and social responsibility.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

>

> SL 300S - Service Learning Leadership Development - 4 credits

>

> Develops students' leadership capacities as community builders and effective
service learning practitioners by deepening their understanding of themselves,
the surrounding community, and service learning pedagogy. Requires completion
of a service learning action project and commitment to serve as a University
Service Advocate for at least one semester.

>

> Prerequisite(s): successful completion of at least one service learning
experience, and instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

>

> SL 390S - Effective Tutoring Service Learning - 2 credits

>

> Prepares students to tutor and mentor middle and high school youth in local
schools. Students receive instruction on effective tutoring techniques to
assist them in providing math and writing support on a one-on-one basis.
Involves students in classroom observation and after-school tutoring. Course
requires 3-5 hours of community service each week.

>

> Prerequisite(s): participation in the Precollegiate Academic Development
(PAD) Program, or PAD coordinator consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

>

> SL 394S - Service Learning Pedagogy & Partnership Support - 1-4 credits

>

> Provides hands-on experience in practicing skills developed in SL 300S (or
Summer of Service Leadership Academy). Students work closely with service
learning faculty members, community partners, other students, and staff to
develop and facilitate meaningful service learning experiences. Students meet
weekly to receive support, training, and development opportunities regarding
best practices in service learning. Course requires a community service
placement or project.

>

> Prerequisite(s): successful completion of the Summer of Service Leadership
Academy or SL 300, and instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

>

> SL 491S - Advanced Topics in Service Learning and Civic Engagement - 4
credits

>

> Students examine issues of justice, diversity, compassion, and social
responsibility in the context of community service. Requires 3-5 hours of
community service each week.

>

> Prerequisite(s): instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

>

> SL 492S - Community Research Service Learning - 4 credits

>

> Students work on research projects that are responsive to community needs in
collaboration with community organizations. Requires 3-5 hours of community
service each week.

>

> Prerequisite(s): instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

>

> SL 497S - Service Learning Independent Study - 1-4 credits

>

> Student and faculty member select topic of study and number of credits.
Course requires 3-5 hours of community service each week.

>

> Prerequisite(s): instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#SL) (if available)

#####  

#####

#### [CSUMB Catalog](../../catalog) . [Course Descriptions](../courses) .
[Schedule of Classes](../../schedule) . [Academic Calendar](../../calendar)

#### Questions about Course Descriptions: [Campus Service Center](/cgi-
bin/campus_email?a=Campus+Service+Center&b=onestop@csumb.edu)

#####  

##### Last updated 12 APR 2002 by: [webfolk ](http://csumb.edu/cgi-
bin/campus_email?a=Web+Page+questions&b=webfolk@csumb.edu)

##### http://csumb.edu/academic/catalog/courses/

[![CSU Monterey Bay](../../../main.images/footer.jpg)](http://csumb.edu/)

