##  

| ![](teachlogo.GIF)  
---|---  
  
[Top Page](index.html)

* * *

[Senior Block  
Syllabus](block.html)

[ED 40 Syllabus Assessment](ed40.html)

[ED 41 Syllabus Diversity](ed41.html)

[ED 42 Syllabus Integration and Technology](ed42.html)

* * *

[Directory](direct.html)

[Calendar](calendar.html)

[Portfolio](portfolio.html)

![](new_tiny.gif)[Unit](unit.html)

[Resources](resource.html)

[Photos  
](photo.html)[Course ](requirements.html)![](new_tiny.gif)[  
Requirements](requirements.html)

* * *

[Anderson One  
School District](http://www.anderson1.k12.sc.us/)

[Furman University Department of Education](http://www.furman.edu/)

* * *

|

**ED 41: DIVERSE SCHOOL CULTURES: Teaching, Learning, and Management**

**Spring Term 2000**

* * *

**Lead Instructor**  
Dr. Lesley Ann Quast, Professor of Education  
294-3389  
[lesley.quast@furman.edu](mailto:lesley.quast@furman.edu)  
Furman Hall 123B

**Texts**  
Jones, V. F.,  & Jones, L. S. (1997). Comprehensive classroom management:
Creating communities of support and solving problems (5th ed.). Boston: Allyn
and Bacon.

Tomlinson, C. A. (1999). The differentiated classroom. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.

**Course Description**  
This course is designed to deepen understanding of diversity in elementary and
middle school cultures. Influences on the development of personal attitudes
toward diversity are examined. Learner characteristics are addressed through
multiple intelligences, cognitive styles, and experiences brought to the
classroom. Classroom and school communities that embrace diversity are studied
through analysis of attributes and practices of successful educators.
Instructional and management strategies that encourage learning, sensitivity,
and socialization are developed through heavily integrated clinical and field
experiences. Inherent in the  "deepening of understanding" is the development
of reflective thinking and writing practices at moral and ethical levels. A
model of reflective practice is infused throughout the course and experiences.

**Course Objectives**  
As a result of active participation in the seminars, readings, and field and
clinical experiences in this course, teacher candidates will have the
opportunity to know and be able to:

  * Apply a schema for learning about any culture. 
  * Describe models of personal stages of development from ethnocentrism to globalism. 
  * Demonstrate understanding of the role of print and non-print media in constructing knowledge of the world and various social, cultural, economic, and political attitudes and positions within it. 
  * Identify models of multicultural curriculum infusion. 
  * Demonstrate understanding of the impact of diversity on classroom and school cultures. 
  * Describe profiles of cultural learning styles for African American, Hispanic American, Native American, Asian American, and other cultural groups. 
  * Demonstrate skills to use cultural learning-style profiles wisely. 
  * Describe the effects of: ability grouping and curriculum tracking, discipline policy and practice, teacher expectations and teacher-student interactions, and standardized testing on minority students. 
  * Apply principles of culturally responsive pedagogy and curriculum development. 
  * Apply research on: effective teaching, schools, cooperative learning, craft wisdom, resilient child, and parental involvement. 
  * Design, teach, and assess varied instructional strategies based on research and validated experiences on multiple intelligences and learning styles 
  * Create a safe, non-threatening and anti-bias environment for learning and teaching. 
  * Assess, design, teach, and analyze theoretically-based management styles and strategies to encourage learning, cultural sensitivity, and socialization. 
  * Identify effective strategies for constructively addressing behaviors that interfere with the teaching/learning process or that inhibit socialization. 
  * Construct an effective communication pathway to encourage family involvement in the schooling process and to support student learning. 
  * Apply reflective thinking and writing practices at moral and ethical levels to dilemmas and situations in seminar, school, and classroom experiences. 

**Content by Topic  
** A Model for Reflective Thinking and Practice

Essential Elements of Cultures

Principles of Culturally Responsive Teaching

Successful Attributes and Practices with Diverse Learners

Effective Instructional Strategies for Teaching Diverse Learners

Effective Management Strategies with Diverse Learners

Family Involvement and Partnerships



**Methodologies/Strategies of Instruction to be Used in This Course**

Diverse School Cultures is one of three courses offered as part of the "senior
block". It will be team-taught by university professors and practitioners from
rural and urban school settings. The following statements appear as part of
the beliefs delineated in the conceptual framework of the Teacher Education
Program and are pertinent to the methodologies/strategies of instruction to be
used in this course:

  * Successful educators model effective pedagogy 
  * Engaged teaching and learning require reflective and creative thought, critical analysis, and strategic action 
  * The preparation of educators in a climate of respect counters prejudice and heightens understanding 
  * Civil discourse and free speech depend on respect for different viewpoints 
  * Developing effective, dynamic leaders is necessary for an ethical and democratic society 

Particular instructional strategies to be used include, but are not limited
to: cooperative learning, one-on-one mentoring, mini-lectures, group
discussions, use of case studies and vignettes for in-class applications,
guided practice in reflective thinking and writing, role-playing, and
demonstration lessons.

**The South Carolina System for Assisting, Developing, and Evaluating
Professional Teaching (ADEPT)**  
The specific performance dimensions that are developed in this course are: PDs
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

**Course Requirements (details to be distributed)**

  * Completion of assigned readings in texts and articles given in class. 
  * Successful completion of a data collection project (in conjunction with ED 40 requirement) 
  * Classroom Management /Discipline Plan (in conjunction with integrated unit). 
  * Reading of two books on diversity and active participation in "bag lunch" conversations and completion of related reflection entries. 

**Evaluation Methods to be Used**  
In keeping with the conceptual framework of the Teacher Education Program,
multiple measures are to be used to determine the candidate's knowledge and
performance levels throughout the course. Evaluation methods are intended to
model research-based and experience-validated approaches to gaining
information and using it constructively in the development of the
professional. Candidates are challenged to reflect, reconsider, apply
knowledge to new contexts, and construct new meanings. Individual as well as
collaborative approaches to fulfilling course requirements will be provided.
Self-evaluation is a component of each course requirement, and will be guided
by rubrics along with open-ended opportunities to respond.



**Sources for Additional Assigned Readings**  
Alvermann, D. E., Moon, J. S.,  & Hagood, M. C. (1999). Popular culture in the
classroom: Teaching and researching critical media literacy. Newark, DE: IRA.

Banks, J. A. (1999). An introduction to multicultural education. Needham
Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.

Bigelow, B., et. al. (1994). Creating classrooms for equity and social
justice. In Bigelow, et al. (Eds.). Rethinking our classrooms (pp. 4-).
Milwaukee, WI: Rethinking Schools, Ltd.

Bondy, E. (unpublished). The caring of strangers: Insights from a field
experience in a culturally unfamiliar community. Unpublished paper.

Chamerlin, J. G. (1999). Upon whom we depend:The American poverty system. New
York: Peter Lang.

Cornelius, C. (1999). Iroquois corn: In a culture-based curriculum. Albany:
State University of New York Press.

Cole, R. W. (1995). Educating everybody's children: Diverse teaching
strategies for diverse learners. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.

Elrich, M. (1994). The stereotype within. Educational Leadership, 51, 12-15.

Finders, M., & Lewis, C. (1994). Why some parents don't come to school.
Educational Leadership, 51, 50-54.

Ford, B. Al., Obiakor, F. E., & Patton, J. M. (1995). Effective education of
african american exceptional learners. Austin, TX: PRO-ED.

Froyen, L. A., & Ivesons, A. M. (1999). Schoolwide and classroom management:
The reflective educational leader. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Hollins, E. R. (1996). Culture in school learning: Revealing the deep meaning.
Mahwah, NJ: Earlbaum Associates.

Horgan, D. D. (1995). Achieving gender equity: Strategies for the classroom.
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.

Howard, G. R. (1999). We can't teach what we don't know. New York: Teachers
College Press.

Howe, C. K. (1994). Improving the achievement of Hispanic students.
Educational Leadership, 51, 42-44.

Jarchow, E., Midkiff, R., & Picker, S. (Eds.). (1998). Practical lessons to
promote a global perspective in elementary education.. Washington, DC: AACTE.

Johnson, L. R. & Johnson, C. E. (1999). Teaching students to regulate their
own behavior. Teaching Exceptional Children, 31 (4), 6-11.

Jones, L. & Newman, L. (1997). Our america. New York: Washington Square Press.

Ladson-Billings, G. (1994). The dreamkeepers: Successful teachers of African
American children.. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Lipman, P. (1998). Race, class, and power in school restructuring. Albany:
State University of New York Press.

McIntyre, A. (1997). Making meaning of whiteness. Albany: State University of
New York Press.

McNamara, R. P. (1997). Beating the odds: Crime, poverty, and life in the
inner city. Child Welfare League.

Mercer, C. D., & Mercer, A. R. (1998). Teaching students with learning
problems (5th ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Michie, G. (1999). Holler if you hear me: The education of a teacher and his
students. New York: Teachers College Press.

Nieto,S. ((1999). The light in their eyes: Creating multicultural learning
communities. New York: Teachers College Press.

Sapon-Shevin, M. (1996). Celebrating diversity, creating community. In W.
Stainback & S. Stainback (Eds.). Inclusion: A guide for educators.. Baltimore:
Paul H. Brookes.

Shulman, J., Lotan, R. A., & Whitcomb, J. A. (1998). Groupwork in diverse
classrooms. New York: Teachers College Press.

Stephan, W. (1999). Reducing prejudice and stereotyping in schools. New York:
Teachers College Press.

van Manen, M. (1986). The tone of teaching. Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada:
Scholastic Canada, Ltd.

**Course References Available in the Library or Dr. Quast's Office**

_Current Books:_  
Adams, M, Bell, L. A.,  & Griffin, P. (1997). Teaching for diversity and
social justice. New York: Routledge.

Armstrong, T. (1994). Multiple Intelligences in the classroom. Alexandria, VA:
ASCD.

Caine, R. N., & Caine, G. (1997). Education on the edge of possibility.
Alexandria, VA: ASCD.

Cohen, J. (Ed.). (1999). Educating minds and hearts. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.

Dilworth, M. E. (1998). Being responsive to cultural differences. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.

Elias, M. J., et. al. (1997). Promoting social and emotional learning.
Alexandria, VA: ASCD.

Henderson, G. (1999). Our souls to keep. Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press.

Irvine, J. J. (1997). Critical knowledge for diverse teachers & learners.
Washington, DC: AACTE.

Jensen, E. (1998). Teaching with the brain in mind. Alexandria, VA: ASCD.

Schmidt, M. W. & Harriman, N. E. Teaching strategies for inclusive classrooms.
Orlando: Harcourt Brace.

Smith, G. P. ( 1998). Common sense about uncommon knowledge: The knowledge
bases for diversity. Washington, DC: AACTE.

McLaughlin, M., & Vogt, M. E. (1996). Portfolios in teacher education. Newark,
DE: International Reading Association.

Wiseman, D. L., Cooner, D. D., & Knight, S. L. (1999). Becoming a teacher in a
field-based setting. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.

Wood, J. W. (1998). Adapting instruction to accommodate students in inclusive
settings. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill.

_Journals:_  
Educational Leadership, 55 (4), [December 1997/January/1998]

Educational Leadership, 55 (8), [May 1998]

Educational Leadership, 56 (7), [April 1999]

Kappa Delta Pi Record, 35 (4), [Summer 1999]

Teaching Exceptional Children, 31 (6), [July/August 1999]

The Educational Forum, 63 (4), [Summer 1999]

_Audiotapes:_  
Confronting the Future - Race, gender, and class in America. (1998). Kappa
Delta Pi Lecture, AACTE.

2000: A Race Odyssey, Julian Bond (2000). Opening Night Lecture, AACTE.

Engineering Social Reform: The Women of Hull House and Their Work, William
Ayers (2000). Women's Breakfast Address, AACTE.  
  
 [Michael Svec](mailto:michael.svec@furman.edu), Department of Education,
[Furman University](http://www.furman.edu/)  
Copyrighted 2000

