**ANTHROPOLOGY 490** **THE AMHERST COMMUNITY** **A Community Service Learning
Course** **(Spring 1997)**



Professor Art Keene Office: 207 Machmer Phone: 545-0214 Email:
Keene@anthro.umass.edu Office Hours: T, 10:45-12:00, WED 2:30-3:30 and by
appointment



_Praxis: the dialectic in which action and reflection feed on each other._
_PauloFreire_ _ _ _In community you must do the work of learning who other
people are and how they see things differently and honoring that so you in
turn will have your views honored._ _Laird Sandhill_ _ _ _Community evokes in
the individual the feeling that "here is where I belong, these are my people,
I care for them, they care for me, I am part of them. I know what they expect
from me and I from them, they share my concerns. I know this place, I am on
familiar ground, I am at home". (Daniel Yankelovitch, New Rules.)_ _ _
_Community exits when people who are interdependent struggle with the
traditions that bind them and the interests that separate them in order to
realize a future that is an improvement upon the present. (Carl Moore)_ _ _
_The more a community's culture supports individual destiny and creativity the
more likely it is to be able to hold a healthy tension between its collective
mission and personal freedom and therefore the more likely it is to actually
enable the individual's work for social change._ _Paige Cousineau_ __
_INTRODUCTION:_

There is a good deal of social commentary being generated these days about the
state of community. Pundits from both the left and the right (and everywhere
in between) lament the erosion of community in the contemporary USA and
elsewhere. Conservatives often speak of the erosion of community values and
community standards. This lament often marks the frustration of the cultural
majority over (perceived and real) concessions and compromises that have been
made to non-dominant (or subaltern) interests. For these conservative thinkers
as well as for many moderate "new communitarians" successful community is
threatened by heterogeneity - by many voices expressing diverse interests and
needs. These conservative voices often nostalgically long for the "good old
days" when things were less conflictual and when people were united around
community institutions such as church and school and civic holidays.
Progressive observers on the other hand see community as purposeful
association based on connection, commitment and mutual responsibility. That
is, meaningful community is seen as collection of people who recognize their
common cause and who contribute in some way to the common well being.
Progressive commentators have lamented that the emergence of a culture of
selfishness during the era of Reagan/Thatcher, now hegemonic in the 90's, has
undermined the ability of people to see their common interests and their
willingness to work together.

This course endeavors to follow up on theoretical issues raised in the course
Anthropology 397b - Community (which was offered in the Fall of 1996) by
exploring them on the ground in a real, complex community. Because there is
such an aggressive celebration of greed and competition about, combined with a
cynicism that ridicules idealism, altruism, and movements for social justice
(most notably evident in the gloating triumphalism over the collapse of
socialism around the world) we began that course with a most basic question:

**_Is it possible for people to live together?_**

The emergence in the West of a hegemonic discourse centered on individualism
and a culture of selfishness would suggest that the answer is no, that the
ideas of tolerance, cooperation, mutual understanding, mutual assistance and
social justice are anachronistic idealisms that must inevitably give way,
indeed have already given way, to the forces of individualism, materialism and
competition. The eruption of myriad ethnic conflicts around the world in
concert with the energetic pursuit of capitalism in the formerly socialist
world would seem to support the aforementioned conclusion. We undertook an
investigation of the fate of different kinds of communities around the globe
in order to ascertain what is required to build meaningful and effective
communities to meet the challenges that current global events are throwing at
us.

Since membership in any community necessitates mediation of the needs and
desires of individuals with those of a larger group the issue of cooperation
was central to our inquiry. This raises a number of theoretical and practical
questions. For example: when and why do we cooperate with others? Why do we
chose to pool our efforts and under what circumstances do we prefer to go it
alone? If I help a friend write a paper, am I hurting myself by taking
potential time away from endeavors that would have enhanced my own well being?
Does the advancement of the well being of others, necessarily diminish mine?
Why is the University reluctant to accept co-written dissertations, co-written
papers, or collectively graded projects? When does it pay to cheat? Do I (as a
member of a western capitalist society) calculate the costs and benefits of
cooperation? Do members of other societies also calculate costs and benefits
and if so, do they do it in the same way? If I can count on others to assist
me, does this diminish my own motivation to work hard? Are motivations the
same (or equally effective) in cooperative and individualistic environments?
Does the compromise necessary to cooperate with others stifle my
individuality? If I wish to engage in collective endeavors but I also wish to
preserve my freedom of action and creativity as an individual, how can I do
this?

Back to Amherst:

Many of the above issues arise either explicitly or implicitly within Amherst
as its residents struggle with issues like funding for schools, ethnic
diversity, declining standards of civility , conflict over resources among the
University, the colleges and the town, and the democratic character of town
government (to name just of few sites of contestation). Amherst has often
defined itself as a special place which if not utopian is at least somewhat
isolated from the vicissitudes that affect other communities. Amherst is
sometimes referred to (both affectionately and disparagingly depending on the
politics of the speaker) as the center of the Happy Valley, the capital of
"PC", or as not being part of the "real world". Many long-time Amherst
residents boast of Amherst being a solid community in which people care about
each other and where racial, cultural and class harmony predominate. This is
certainly part of the ideology of Amherst. However, if we understand ideology
to be those ideas that mask social contradictions, then understanding the
nature of community in Amherst necessitates breaking down the ideology of
Amherst. So, we want to ask, what is it that makes Amherst a community? Are
the trends of intolerance and incivility that are apparent throughout the USA,
evident in Amherst as well? What forces bind this community together and what
forces tear it apart? How can we use this information to confront some of the
real problems that face Amherst and other communities?

This seminar will explore these questions through the construction and
execution of ethnographic research projects in the town of Amherst. Students
will learn about basic anthropological field methods and then apply them in
conducting weekly data collection exercises. In the first fe weeks we will
attempt to develop a basic profile of the town and its citizens. Based on this
information students will design and carry out a major research project which
will be presented to the seminar and to the anthropology department at the end
of the term.

COURSE FORMAT: There are two components to this course - the seminar component
which covers preparation for the field and the writing-up of research and the
service component which involves doing meaningful work within the Amherst
community. The seminar operates for the firs 7 weeks plus the final week. Each
meeting during that component will focus on a set of readings and/or a data
collection assignment. Members of the seminar are expected to vigorously
prepare for and attend each class meeting and to actively participate in
discussions. Seminars are team efforts and the quality of the course depends
on the thoughtful participation of EVERY member. If you come to class
unprepared, you shortchange not just yourself but every other member of the
seminar. You will be undertaking modest, but hopefully significant research
projects that have the potential to impact on the lives of the citizens in
Amherst as well as the future of community based research in Amherst. Hence
you will be held to the same professional and ethical standards as practicing
anthropologists. In service learning courses a substantial portion of your
education comes from doing service to the community. While service comes in
different shapes, sizes and flavors you can expect to spend a minimum of 3-5
hours/week engaged in service at your field site. Your will undertake your
service/research in teams of 3-5 and you will be responsible for preparing a
substantial written report on your efforts. You will also prepare an oral
report to be presented to the Anthropology department and/or representatives
from the town of Amherst at the end of the term.

GRADES:

Grades will be based according to the following breakdown.

25% attendance and participation, homework and field journal,

25% oral presentation of class project

50% final project (Note: every member of project team will receive the same
grade regardless of individual contributions.)



REQUIRED TEXTS:

1) Madeline Blaise In these girls hope is a muscle. 1995. Available at Food
For Thought Books, Amherst.

2) Elizabeth Chiseri-Strater and Bonnie Stone Sunstein. Field working: reading
and writing research.. 1997 . Available at Food For Thought Books.

2) The Amherst Bulletin : available at Hastings (on the common), The Amherst
Bulletin Office (next to Cutty's on University Drive) and at many other
outlets downtown. The Bulletin usually appears on newsstands late Thursday and
is free.

3) short readings to be handed out during the term including:

Arthur Keene, The retreat from Community and the Language of Disengagement.
Paper presented at the 1995 Conference of the International Communal Studies
Association.

Selections from James Spradley, The ethnographic interview. Holt. 1979



WEEKLY ASSIGNMENTS

1) Data collection exercise (First 5 weeks only) usually handed out on
Thursday and due the following Thursday. In addition each seminar participant
has the following weekly responsibilities:

a) read the Amherst Bulletin noting issues relevant to the course

b) weekly readings as assigned

c) make weekly, if not daily, entries in your personal journals. You will use
your journal in a different way than you have in previous anthropology
courses. Later in the term this journal will become your field journal in
which you will record all of the data necessary to do your project. In order
to do this project you must develop a basic understanding of the town of
Amherst. In the early weeks you will use the journal to record observations
and impressions about the town and about the key issues affecting it. You can
think of it as a conceptual sketch book for your major study. Your entries can
take any form you want, but I expect your journal to show a continuous
engagement with the course subject matter. I will ask to see your journals
several times during the semester so please keep them up to date and bring
them with you to each class.



LATE HOMEWORK POLICY: If you must miss class for any reason, it is your
responsibility to make sure that your homework still arrives on time. Just as
professional researchers working on a research contract are expected to
deliver reports on time - regardless of their other responsibilities - so too
are you expected to fulfill the responsibilities of the seminar in a timely
manner. Since most of the assignments contribute to our composite picture of
Amherst, a late assignment, which arrives after our discussion, does little to
help our research group. MAKE SURE YOUR HOMEWORK GETS TO CLASS ON TIME! LATE
ASSIGNMENTS WILL BE SIGNIFICANTLY DOWNGRADED.

SCHEDULE OF EVENTS

NOTE: all assigned readings for the weeks below are to be completed by our
Tuesday meeting unless otherwise noted.

Week 1

Jan 28 Introduction - Review of available projects for Spring 1997.

Jan 30 What is a community? Issues in the construction of community.

Read: Keene (1995) plus handouts



Week 2 Feb 4 Where is the Amherst community and what makes it so special?

READ: Blais - ALL

[FW] Chapter 3

Feb 6 Discussion and selection of research topics/service project



Week 3

Feb 11-13 Doing ethnography. Thinking about methods and community studies.

Entering the Field and the Ethnographic Interview.

Read: [FW] Chapter 1 and 5

Week 4 Feb 25-27 Ethics of Field Work

Group Discussion of Research Design

Making Contacts

Read [FW] Chapter 2

Week 5 Mar 4-6 EVERYONE SHOULD BE IN THE FIELD BY THIS DATE

Field Notes - review Chapter 2



Week 6 Mar 11 Participant Observation and Problem solving

BEGINNING WITH WEEK 6 (MAR 11) WE WILL MEET FORMALLY ONLY ONCE /WEEK (ON
TUESDAYS) TO REPORT ON OUR PROGRESS, TO SOLVE PROBLEMS THAT MAY COME UP AND TO
BE GENERALLY HELPFUL AND SUPPORTIVE TO EACH OTHER. TEAMS WILL BE REQUIRED TO
FILE WRITTEN BI-WEEKLY PROGRESS REPORTS WITH PROFESSOR KEENE. KEENE WILL BE
AVAILABLE FOR CONSULTATIONS IN HIS OFFICE ON THURSDAYS DURING OUR REGULARLY
SCHEDULED CLASS TIME AS WELL AS DURING OFFICE HOURS. EACH GROUP SHOULD MAKE
ARRANGEMENTS TO HAVE KEENE VISIT THEM AT THEIR FIELD SITE AT LEAST ONCE DURING
THE PROJECT. IT IS THE RESPONSIBILITY OF EACH GROUP TO ARRANGE THIS SITE
VISIT.

Week 7 Mar 18 Writing Research

READ [FW] CHAPTER 6

Week 8-13 Ongoing Research and problem solving.

Week 14 May 6 Executive summary and draft of public presentation due.

EXAM PERIOD: Public Presentations



[return to Arhtur Keene's Home Page](../index.html)

