**HS126 01 American Visions**

[**(home)**](index.htm)

MWF 9-10am  
Jordan Hall 387

Andrew Denson



adenson@butler.edu  
www.butler.edu/~adenson  
940-9681 (office)  

Office Hours: MWF 1-2pm  
Jordan Hall 349E



**Introduction**



Welcome to "American Visions," a history course designed to fulfill Butler's
humanities requirement. The course is an introduction to the cultural history
of the United States. The primary goal is for students to learn about the ways
in which a variety of individuals and groups of people have experienced life
in America over the past four centuries. As the name "American Visions"
implies, our pursuit of that goal will include an ongoing discussion of how
different people have perceived and defined America: their "visions" of the
nation and its inhabitants. Along the way, the course offers an introduction
to cultural history as a field of study and an opportunity for students to
practice and improve their skills at critical thinking and writing.



**Books**



David Freeman Hawke, _Everyday Life in Early America_.

John Kasson, _Rudeness and Civility_.

Larry May, _Screening Out the Past_.

Karal Ann Marling, _As See on TV_.



**Schedule**



Aug. 23  
Course Introduction

Start reading Hawke.



EARLY AMERICAN CULTURE



Aug. 25  
Beginnings

Hawke, 1-15.



Aug. 28, 30, Sept. 1  
Colonial America I

Hawke, 16-71.



**No class Sept. 4**



Sept. 6, 8  
Colonial America II

Hawke, 72-177.

**Essay one due, Sept 6**



Sept. 11, 13  
Revolution.



Sept. 15  
**Exam on Hawke.**



ANTEBELLUM CULTURE



Sept. 18, 20, 22  
Market Revolution

Start reading Kasson.



Sept. 25, 27, 29  
Nineteenth-century City I

Kasson, 3-146.

**essay two due Sept. 29**



Oct. 2, 4  
Nineteenth-century City II

Kasson, 147-260.



Oct. 6, 9  
Other Visions of Antebellum America



Oct. 11  
**Exam on Kasson.**



**No class Oct. 13**



MODERN AMERICAN CULTURE



Oct. 16, 18, 20  
Industry, Urbanization, and American Culture

Start reading May.



Oct. 23, 25, 27  
Modern America at the Movies I

May, 3-95.



Oct. 30, Nov. 1, 3  
Modern America at the Movies II

May, 96-241.

**essay three due**



Nov. 6, 8  
Other Visions of Modern America.



Nov. 10  
**Exam on May.**



POSTWAR AMERICAN CULTURE



Nov. 13, 15, 17  
Postwar America

Start reading Marling.



**Thanksgiving Holiday**



Nov. 27, 29, Dec. 1  
Postwar Culture, As Seen on TV

Marling.



Dec. 4, 6, 8  
Other Visions of Postwar America

**Essay four due Dec. 6**



Dec. 11  
**Exam on Marling**.





**Attendance**



You are required to attend every class meeting. If you miss a meeting you must
have it excused to avoid damaging your course grade. When possible, you should
inform me ahead of time when you are going to miss a meeting. When that is not
possible, you must contact me within twenty-four hours of missing a meeting to
have the absence excused. Once you have two unexcused absences, I will take 2%
off of your final course grade for each additional unexcused absence (so three
unexcused absences equal 2% off, four equal 4% off, and so on).



**Late Papers**



Except in cases involving some kind of extreme emergency, turning in writing
assignments late will result in the loss of one grade per day. If you know you
will not be present on the day an assignment is due, you must contact me ahead
of time. In most cases I will require you to turn in the assignment early.



**Participation**



Your active participation during class time is essential and will be graded.
You must demonstrate that you have done the assigned reading and that you
understand it. In addition to holding discussion most class periods, I will
occasionally have you perform brief in-class or overnight writing assignments.
These will not receive formal grades, but I will examine them to see if you
are keeping up and thinking about the material. For each class period I will
write notes on the nature and degree of each student's participation.



**Assignments**



You will take four exams, write four short essays, and lead (with a partner)
one class discussion. The exams will cover the books, one test for each book.
You will receive a list of questions about a week before the exam. We will
come up with some of those questions in class discussion; I will add a few of
my own. I will select three questions from that list for the exam. You will
answer two of the three.



The writing assignments will require you to use outside materials (in most
cases via the World Wide Web) and to integrate it with the material in the
assigned readings, lectures, and discussions. The idea of these assignments is
to use the WWW to move beyond the usual sources used in history classes and to
explore ways in which different kinds of sources tell us different things
about the past. These will be short essays: just two pages in the case of the
first one, around four pages for the others. The grades will take into account
organization and clarity. I will be handing out specific information about the
assignments as they come up. Writing advice and guidelines, along with an
explanation of the criteria I will use in grading, are available on my web
site: www.butler.edu/~adenson.



Finally, you and a partner will lead one class discussion sometime during the
semester. The class periods during which you may fulfill this requirement are
underlined in the schedule above. You get to choose your partner and class
period. Advice on leading discussion is posted on my web site.



**Breakdown of Final Grade**



Exams: 10 percent each.

Essay one: 5 percent

Essays two, three, four: 10 percent each.

Participation: 20 percent.

Discussion leadership: 5 percent.



**If Things Go Badly**



If you feel that you are having trouble keeping up with the class or that your
performance is not what you would like it to be, talk with me and do so as
early as possible. Many times, students delay seeking help until it is too
late to do much about their final grade.



**Academic Dishonesty**



Definitions of and rules regarding cheating, plagiarism, and other forms of
academic dishonesty are described in the Butler student handbook. Students
should familiarize themselves with these university policies. Penalties for
academic dishonesty can range from the lowering of an assignment grade to
failure of the course.



**Student Disability Services**



The Office of Student Disability Services asks that faculty pass along the
following statement: "It is the policy and practice of Butler University to
make reasonable accommodations for students with properly documented
disabilities. Written notification from Student Disability Services is
required. If you are eligible to receive an accommodation and would like to
request it for this course, please discuss it with me and allow two weeks
notice. Otherwise, it is not guaranteed that the accommodation can be received
on a timely basis. If you have questions about Student Disability Services,
you may wish to contact Michele Atterson, JH 136, ext. 9308."

