![](../media/L_Menu_02.gif) |  | ![](../media/CEP_logo_03.gif) | ** |
Location: Governance > Policy Summary  
---  
On this page:  | Attendance | Governance | Study Abroad | Diversity Statement
| Diversity Course Requirement | Friday Structure | Narrative Transcripts |
Admission to the Major | Admission to Core Courses for Non-Majors | Early
Advancement |  
**

# POLICY SUMMARY  
  
![](../media/Top_01.gif)

### _Attendance_

Attendance at class and governance is required. A student absent more than
twice in a quarter will not receive credit unless the faculty evaluation of
the student's work for that quarter explains why credit is due despite the
absences.

![](../media/Top_01.gif)

### _Governance_

Steering manages communication and decision making. Hearthstone organizes
recurring events, Headlights takes on emerging issues, SSC promotes social
justice. Everyone gets a chance to participate in every decision and
development.

![](../media/Top_01.gif)

### _Study Abroad_

Any CEP member may take up to two quarters of study outside the CEP core
seminars for the purpose of participating in foreign study or other program
that earns UW credit. The time away from CEP must be consented to by the
affected cohort, including provisions for bringing the experience back to the
cohort.

### _Diversity Statement_

The Community and Environmental Planning Program (CEP) is working to build a
diverse learning community of students and faculty through recruitment,
diversity training, open and ongoing dialogue, and multi-cultural curriculum.

We particularly encourage and support the presence, participation, and
leadership of persons whose race, sex, national origin, age, religion, marital
status, sexual orientation, veteran status, physical disability, cultural
heritage, status as a parent, and socioeconomic status will contribute to the
diversity of our program.

![](../media/Top_01.gif)

### _Diversity Course Requirement_

Each CEP member will graduate having taken at least five method creits that
center on cultural diversity and oppression studies, from a different
perspective or telling a different story than dominant and oppressive
cultures. It is recommended that the Diversity Course Requirement be fulfilled
in fall quarter of the Junior year of CEP.

![](../media/Top_01.gif)

### _Friday Structure_

CEP meets Friday mornings to deal with business and make decisions. Six Joint
and four Class meetings per quarter alternate in the 8:30-9:20 hour.
Headlights, Hearthstone, and Students for Social Change meet simultaneously
every week 9:30-10:20. Steering meets 10:30-11:20 weekly. This schedule is
flexible whenever we agree to alter it, and is revisted at the final Joint
meeting of every quarter to assess if it meets our needs.

![](../media/Top_01.gif)

### _Narrative Transcripts_

The first week of each core class, students and faculty consent to the
syllabus and a brief paragraph describing the work required to receive credit.
At the end of the quarter, faculty write evaluations of each student's work,
and each student writes a self-evaluation. Both evaluations include the
paragraph on course expectations, followed by an assessment of the student's
work for the quarter. If the student does not complete the work agreed to in
the intitial paragraph, no credit can be given without explanation by faculty
as to why the student deserves credit. These quarterly evaluations together
form the student's narrative transcript. Each transcript also includes a two-
page cover sheet with: a half-page CEP statement to be developed by Steering
that goes out with every Narrative Transcript (this statement has never been
written to implement this policy); a half-page cohort statement that goes out
with all NT's from that cohort; and a one-page student self-description of
their own two-year experience in CEP.

![](../media/Top_01.gif)

### _Admission to the Major_

The only path into the major is through the regular admission process,
including a full application, interviews, and acceptance.

![](../media/Top_01.gif)

### _Admission to Core Courses for Non-Majors_

CEP 301 is closed to non-majors. If a non-major seeks entry into any other
core class, the Director will inform the class. Without meeting the person,
the class will decide if they want to admit a non-major into the quarter's
seminar.

![](../media/Top_01.gif)

### _Early Advancement_

A newly-admitted CEP major who has completed both 302 and 303 as a non-major
can apply to the Director for early advancement to Senior status. Application
will include a completed ISP.

![](../media/Top_01.gif)

![](../media/H_line_01.gif)

![](../media/CEP_logo_01.gif) |  The Community and Environmental Planning
Program  
[College of Architecture and Urban Planning](http://www.caup.washington.edu)  
[University of Washington](http://www.washington.edu), Seattle, WA, 98195

Updated: Thursday, June 08, 2000  
---|---  
  
![](../media/H_line_01.gif)  
[HOME](../index.html) | [Information](../info/info.html) |
[Admissions](../admissions/admission.html) | [Governance](governance.html) |
[Students](../students/students.html) | [Events](../events/events.html)

