[![back to Academic Information](../../academic_title.gif)](../../index.html)

> # 2002-2003 Course Descriptions \- MAE

>

> MAE 600 - ProSeminar in Multicultural Bilingual Education \- 4 credits

>

> During this required introductory seminar the cultural and political context
of learning are critically examined--especially with regard to providing
effective educational experiences for diverse populations. Utilizing the lens
of various research traditions, participants work to contrast differing
perspectives and ways of knowing. In addition to building library research
skills, students actively contribute to change or the existing knowledge base
by engaging in action research.

>

> Prerequisite(s): admission to Master of Arts in Education program.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 619 - Kaleidoscope of Latino Cultures - 4 credits

>

> The focus of this course is predicated on the assumption that given the
linguistically and culturally diverse student population of the region and
state, effective teachers must align what and how they teach with the lived
experiences of their students. Thus, to deepen understanding of Latino
cultures and societies, participants explore significant historical periods
and events in Latino cultures, with an emphasis on Mexico. This course
contributes toward the BCLAD certificate.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 621 - Qualitative and Quantitative Research Methods in Education - 4
credits

>

> Students examine frameworks, processes, and compositional approaches to
designing qualitative and quantitative research studies in the field of
education. Also, building upon ProSeminar experiences, participants gain a
more complex understanding of the purposes and processes of action research.
This understanding serves as the basis for the completion of their action
thesis proposals.

>

> Prerequisite(s): admission to Master of Arts in Education program, and MAE
600.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 622 - Ethnographic Research Methods for Multicultural Education - 4
credits

>

> Gives students a conceptual overview of traditional qualitative research
using ethnographic methods, with an emphasis on helping students understand
and describe the points of view of individuals living and working in
multicultural settings. Moreover, as the basis for facilitating beneficial
change in their classrooms, schools, or communities, participants use
ethnographic and/or historical research skills to design their action thesis
projects and complete their proposals.  
>  Prerequisite(s): admission to Master of Arts in Education program, and MAE
600.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 625 - Professional Literature Review Seminar - 4 credits

>

> In a supportive and collaborative setting, participants engage in in-depth
and critical analysis of professional literature as they further define and
frame their interests or contextualize their action thesis projects. Students
use online resources to identify important theoretical and empirical
contributions that connect their research to existing professional literature.
Emphasis is placed on learning the conventions of academic writing using the
APA guide, as well as bringing out one's voice in the writing process.

>

> Prerequisite(s): admission to Master of Arts in Education program, and MAE
600.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 630 - Emergent Literacy - 4 credits

>

> Utilizing a psycholinguistic perspective, students gain an advanced
understanding of emergent literacy across the lifespan. Emphasis is also be
placed on developing an advanced understanding of language and language cueing
systems, philosophies of reading and writing, assessment tools, current
research into emergent literacy, and evaluation of appropriate learning
materials and activities. Participants who are classroom teachers are
encouraged to use their own class for the required fieldwork.

>

> Prerequisite(s): completion of a multiple subject credential program, or
instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 631 - Applied Linguistics and Language Acquisition \- 4 credits

>

> Focuses on examining the nature and structure of languages, with an emphasis
on mainstream American English. Participants survey recent theories and
research on first language acquisition and bilingualism, especially in
relation to the process of second language learning, in a social context.
Students also examine how second language acquisition theories are applied in
K-12 classrooms, through observing and practicing lessons in ELD and ESL
settings. This course contributes toward CLAD certification.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 632 - Arts as Culturally Responsive Curriculum - 4 credits

>

> Explores the integration of the visual and performing arts into the
curriculum using an interdisciplinary approach. More specifically, students
identify and apply the unique elements of each of the arts (dance, drama,
music, and visual arts) to various curricular areas, in pursuit of an
understanding of the arts as a way of knowing. This work is deepened through
examination of the Visual and Performing Arts Framework, readings, and in-
depth study of culturally responsive material.

>

> Prerequisite(s): admission to Master of Arts in Education program, or
instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 633 - Multicultural Literature for a Partnership World - 4 credits

>

> Challenges and provokes critical insight into how children, in partnership
with their teachers, become literate beings. Analytic reading, substantive
discussion, reflective writing, visual representation, and dramatic enactment
are used to demonstrate how the written word can be used to inform and
transform worlds. A persistent theme is how to use this wonderful collection
of literature as a political tool for promoting social justice, encouraging
empowerment, and combating ethnocentrism

>

> Prerequisite(s): admission to Master of Arts in Education program, or
instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 634 - Literacy for Linguistically Diverse Learners \- 4 credits

>

> Using a sociocultural and politically conscious framework, participants
examine theories of teaching and learning, trends in literacy instruction,
instructional strategies, and literacy assessment for linguistically diverse
classrooms. Students also assess the literacy skills of first- and second-
language learners, develop applications for literacy based on culturally
relevant pedagogical frameworks, and apply strategies for English language
development and SDAIE instruction. This course contributes toward CLAD
certification.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 635 - Biliteracy for Spanish/English Learners - 4 credits

>

> Designed for teachers in designated Spanish/English bilingual classrooms.
Participants learn the processes and effective strategies for teaching reading
and writing to bilingual students as well as assessment of literacy. This
class is taught in Spanish.

>

> Prerequisite(s): admission to Master of Arts in Education program, or
instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 636 - Culture, Cognition, and Development - 4 credits

>

> Explores the relationships between culture, child development, cognition,
and experiential learning. More specifically, participants examine the
learning process through the perspective of culturally different communities
and families and apply theoretical principles of psychosocioemotional
development to their teaching. Students also develop expertise in constructing
and using culturally congruent instructional strategies. This course
contributes toward CLAD certification.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 637 - Multicultural Curriculum Design - 4 credits

>

> Students critically analyze curriculum frameworks and materials that are
recommended for multicultural teaching. Furthermore, participants use
different models of curriculum construction to design instructional activities
and analyze the impact of their teaching on students. Finally, a collection of
exemplary multicultural and bilingual teaching resources, as well as networks
for finding additional resources, are developed.

>

> Prerequisite(s): admission to Master of Arts in Education program, or
instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 638 - Technology as a Tool for Creativity in Multicultural Classrooms -
4 credits

>

> Participants explore current technologies and coming trends. "Technology" in
this course is more than computers and digital media. Participants also
explore the issues created by these technologies. They look at tools that will
help them use the potential of technology to support teaching and learning,
and to develop thoughtful and powerful implementations of technologies in
whatever educational setting they work. This course meets the Level 2
credentialing requirements of the California Commission on Teacher
Credentialing.

>

> Prerequisite(s): admission to Master of Arts in Education program, or
instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 639 - Reflective Teaching Practicum - 4 credits

>

> Students analyze classroom practice and the underlying theories in the
context of principles of constructivist, multicultural, and critical pedagogy
and classroom reform. Critical inquiry is undertaken to examine the role of
standards, assessment, and environments in an effective and emancipatory
classroom. This practicum entails analysis of one's teaching and it also
offers opportunities for candidates seeking National Board Certification to
further develop their NBTS portfolio.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 640 - Pluralism, Politics, and School Practices - 4 credits

>

> Builds an understanding of how life in a classroom is a reflection of
efforts to maintain power and privilege at the global, national, and local
levels. That is, the politics surrounding educational policies and
instructional practices are explored to uncover how they perpetuate the status
quo, especially with respect to our (in)ability to address inequities based on
cultural, linguistic, or gender diversity. Emphasis is placed on developing
strategies for advocating for change in a politically astute manner.

>

> Prerequisite(s): admission to Master of Arts in Education program, or
instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 641 - Paradigms in Assessment - 4 credits

>

> Situates the development and use of various forms of assessment in a
historic, social, and political context. A questioning stance is assumed with
regard to mandated assessments to achieve a more complex understanding. That
is, the connections between how we assess and how students from diverse
backgrounds come to understand learning, their world, and their place in this
world are explored. Participants consider alternative paradigms for student
assessment.

>

> Prerequisite(s): admission to Master of Arts in Education program, or
instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 642 - Multicultural Community Partnerships - 4 credits

>

> Students explore relationships between schools and multicultural
communities. In addition to building an understanding of the importance of
such relationships for the lives of students, teachers, families, communities,
and society, an emphasis is placed on determining ways of building stronger
and more effective partnerships.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 643 - Math plus Equity equals Radical Equations - 4 credits

>

> Participants explore the teaching and learning of mathematics as a critical
social justice issue. This focus requires participants to expand their
pedagogical repertoires to include instructional strategies that promote high
mathematics achievement among historically underserved populations.
Furthermore, work is done to expand pedagogical imaginations to include a
deeper understanding of how mathematical ability and skills can be used to
work toward achieving more widespread social justice.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 644 - Critical Social Foundations of Education - 4 credits

>

> Ideal for experienced teachers who are ready to move beyond traditional
conceptions of teaching and learning. Participants consider alternative
conceptions of education, such as progressive and emancipatory traditions.
Emphasis is placed on understanding how engaging in the practices and
perspectives advocated by the major architects of alternative
conceptualizations impact the living and growing of students, the material
conditions that contextualize the work of teachers, and the nature of society.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 651 - National Board Portfolio 1 - 4 credits

>

> Designed for teachers **currently working** on their portfolio for the
National Board for Professional Teaching Standards. In a structured and
supportive environment, participants complete two sections of their portfolio.

>

> Prerequisite(s): instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 652 - National Board Portfolio 2 - 4 credits

>

> Designed for teachers **completing** their National Board for Professional
Teaching Standards portfolio. In a structured and supportive environment,
participants complete the last two sections of their portfolio.

>

> Prerequisite(s): MAE 651 or instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 670 - Capstone Seminar - 4 credits

>

> This is the culminating learning experience for the Master of Arts in
Education. By the time students have begun this seminar they should have
submitted their proposal and refined their problem statement as well as
formulated the beginning of a literature review. Students share both their
developing projects and development as researchers with their peers. All work
is publicly presented during the MAE Capstone Festival.

>

> Prerequisite(s): MAE 620, MAE 622, and approved MA action thesis proposal.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 690 - Action Thesis Advising - 1 credit

>

> Students should register for one credit of this course every semester
between completion of research methods and Capstone.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 695 - Special Topics - 1-4 credits

>

> Courses that are offered on a trial basis, or courses that may only appear
once, are offered as special topics. Anytime a special topics course is
offered, it will have a title clarifying its general focus.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

>

> MAE 697 - Independent Study - 1-6 credits

>

> Student and faculty member select topic of study and number of credits.

>

> Prerequisite(s): admission to Master of Arts in Education program, or
instructor consent.

>

> [Course syllabus](http://classes.csumb.edu/courses.html#MAE) (if available)

#####  

#####

#### [CSUMB Catalog](../../catalog) . [Course Descriptions](../courses) .
[Schedule of Classes](../../schedule) . [Academic Calendar](../../calendar)

#### Questions about Course Descriptions: [Campus Service Center](/cgi-
bin/campus_email?a=Campus+Service+Center&b=onestop@csumb.edu)

#####  

##### Last updated 12 APR 2002 by: [webfolk ](http://csumb.edu/cgi-
bin/campus_email?a=Web+Page+questions&b=webfolk@csumb.edu)

##### http://csumb.edu/academic/catalog/courses/

[![CSU Monterey Bay](../../../main.images/footer.jpg)](http://csumb.edu/)

