# Biology 251

# Principles of Evolution

# Syllabus 2001

**

Instructor

** | **

Office hours

**  
---|---  
  
**Dr. Keith Garbutt**

214 Brooks Hall/248 Stalnaker Hall

Phone: 293-2100

e-mail: kgarbutt@wvu.edu

web: http://www.as.wvu.edu/~kgarbutt

|

Office Hours will be held in the

Honors office **248 Stalnaker**

**Hall**

9:00 - 10:00 AM Tuesday

8:30 - 9:30 AM Thursday  
  
**Teaching Assistant**

|  
  
**Ms. Kelly Pagano**

325 Brooks Hall

Phone: 293-5201 x 2540

e-mail: kpagano@wvu.edu

|

1:30-2:30 PM Thursday  
  
**Book (required):**

  * Evolutionary Biology (1998) by Douglas J. Futuyma (Third Edition)

**Other materials required:**

  * Calculator, one that can calculate natural logarithms and exponentials with the press of a button

  * Blue Books for Midterms and Final

  * Zip Disk (if you have your own computer, with a zip drive, format it for that computer)

**

NOTE: POLICY FOR DISABLED STUDENTS AND SOCIAL JUSTICE PHILOSOPHY.

**  
---  
  
  
If you are learning, sensory, or physically disabled, and feel you need
special assistance in lecture, reading assignments, lecture testing or labs,
please contact me during regular office hours or by appointment and make
appropriate arrangements with Disability Services (293-6700).  The first week
of the semester is the best time for these discussions, and all matters will
be held in strictest confidence as the need determines.  
  
  
  
West Virginia University is committed to social justice. The instructor of
this course concurs with West Virginia University's commitment and expects to
maintain a positive learning environment based upon open communication mutual
respect, and non-discrimination.  Our University does not discriminate on the
basis of race, sex, age, disability, veteran status, religion, sexual
orientation, color or national origin.  Any suggestions as to how to further
such an environment will be appreciated and given serious consideration.  
  
  

**Attendance Policy**

Attendance at the class is required.  With the exception of the first week of
classes (Jan. 9th) and weeks when there is a mid-term there will be a short
quiz. Failure to take a quiz will result in a zero for that quiz. You will be
allowed to drop one quiz grade.

### Important Dates

  * Last day to drop a class without penalty                     January 12th

  * First Mid-term                                                           February 7th

  * First Draft of Paper due                                             March 6th

  * Second Mid-term                                                           March 14th

  * Spring Recess                                                                March 24th - April 1st

  * Final Paper Due                                                             April 3rd

  * Final Web Page Due                                                      April 17th

  * Final Examination                                                          April 24th

## Examinations, Quizzes, and Assignments

**

Exam

** | **

Schedule

** | **

% of total grade

**  
---|---|---  
  
First - Mid Term

|

Tuesday February 7th

|

10  
  
Second Mid-Term

|

Tuesday March 14th

|

10  
  
Final

|

Tuesday April 24th

|

25  
  
Weekly Quizzes

|

Every week.

|

20  
  
Group Project

|

TBA

|

15  
  
Term Paper

|

Due Tuesday April 3rd

|

20  
  
Total

|   |

100  
  
_Please note that the final for this class is in the last week of classes NOT
exam week - this is in accord with University policy which states " Final
examinations for classes scheduled during the evening hours will be given
during the week preceding examination week."_

**Grading** : The course grade will be based upon performance in the weekly
quizzes, term paper, Group Project, two semester examinations and the final.
All questions on the tests will be either problems, or essay questions. The
grade scale will be absolute and as follows.

                                                A                                             100 - 87

                                                B                                             87- 75

                                                C                                             75 - 65

                                                D                                             65 - 55 

**Quiz:** The weekly quiz will be based, in the main, on the readings set for
that week.

**Group Project:** Working in groups of three you will build a web page (or
group of pages) that give an introduction to a major topic in evolutionary
biology. The page(s) should have both text and graphic elements and should
contain links to sites, which complement the topic being presented.

**Term Paper:** This should be a literature review of one of the four topics
below. It should be between 10 and 15 pages in length and rely heavily on
primary literature.

Topics: Natural Selection; Sexual Selection; Co-evolution; Speciation.

Following are Journals that may be of use in writing papers - this is **NOT**
an exhaustive list.

  

  * Advances in Genetics

  * Advances in Human Genetics

  * American Journal of Botany

  * American Journal of Genetics

  * American Journal of Zoology

  * American Naturalist

  * Annals of Human Genetics

  * Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics

  * Annual Review of Genetics

  * Behavior Genetics

  * Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Genetics

  * Crop Science

  * Drosophila Information Service

  * Ecology

  * Evolution

  * Evolutionary Biology

  * Evolutionary Theory

  * Genetics

  * Genetical Research

  * Hereditas

  * Heredity

  * Journal of Genetics

  * Journal of Heredity

  * Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London (Series B)

  * Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

  * Proceedings of the Royal Society of London (Series B)

  * Theoretical and Applied Genetics

  * Theoretical Biology

  * TREE

**  
**

####  Grading of Term Papers

**" A" work**

(1)    Responds fully to the assignment set;

(2)    Discusses clearly the topic under study in terms of its biological and
where appropriate historical context;

(3)    Shows the current state of research in this area and discusses and
comments on areas of controversy;

(4)    Is written at a level appropriate for a biologically literate audience;

(5)    Begins and end effectively;

(6)    Provides adequate supporting arguments, evidence, examples and details;

(7)    Is well organized and unified;

(8)    Correctly acknowledges and documents sources;

(9)    Is free of errors in grammar, punctuation, word choice, spelling, and
format; and

(10)  Maintains a level of excellence and creativity in realizing (1) through
(7).

**" B" work**

Realizes (1) through (9) fully and completely - and demonstrates overall
excellence - but shows little or no originality or creativity.

**" C" work**

Realizes (1) through (9) adequately \- and demonstrates overall competence -
but contains a few, relatively minor errors or flaws. A "C" paper may show
great creativity and originality but those qualities do not make up for poor
or careless writing and research.  A "C" paper usually looks like a next-to-
final draft.

**" D" work**

Fails to realize some elements of (1) through (9) adequately - and contains
several serious errors or flaws, poor research or many minor flaws.  A "D"
paper often reads like a first or second draft.

**" F" work**

Fails to realize several elements of (1) through (9) adequately and contains
many serious errors and omissions.

**Course Outline**

The following course outline is tentative and does not constitute a contract.
The instructor reserves the right to change the content of the course as they
feel is appropriate.

**Date**

|

**Subject**

|

**Reading (To be Done BEFORE class)**  
  
---|---|---  
  
January 9

|

Historical Development of Evolutionary Ideas

|

Chapters 1 and 2  
  
January 16

|

History and Diversity of Life I

|

Chapters 5 and 6  
  
January 23

|

History and Diversity of Life II

|

Chapters 7 and 8  
  
January 30

|

Variation

|

Chapter 9  
  
February 6

|

Exam 1 - Mutation

|

Chapter 10  
  
February 13

|

Population Structure and Drift

|

Chapter 11  
  
February 20

|

Natural Selection

|

Chapter 12 and 13  
  
February 27

|

Quantitative Traits

|

Chapter 14  
  
March 6

|

Species and Speciation

|

Chapter 15 and 16  
  
March 13

|

Exam 2 Genotype and Environment

|

Chapter 17  
  
March 20

|

Coevolution

|

Chapter 18  
  
March 27

|

NO CLASS

|  
  
April 3

|

Life History Evolution I

|

Chapters 19 and 20  
  
April 10

|

Life History Evolution II

|

Chapters 20 and 21  
  
April 17

|

Human Evolution

|

Chapter 26  
  
April 24

|

Final Exam

|  

