

**HS 126 01 American Visions  
TR 11-12:15  
Jordan Hall 336B**

**(**[ **home**](index.htm) **)**

**Andrew Denson**

**940-9681  
adenson@butler.edu  
blue.butler.edu/adenson**



**Office hours:**

**TR 1-2 (or by appointment)  
JH 349E**



****READ THIS DOCUMENT IN ITS ENTIRETY. YOU WILL BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE FOR ALL
OF THE INFORMATION IT CONTAINS****



**Introduction**



**Welcome to "American Visions," a history course designed to fulfill Butler's
humanities requirement. The course is an introduction to the cultural history
of the United States. The primary goal is for students to learn about the ways
in which a variety of individuals and groups of people have experienced life
in America over the past four centuries. As the name "American Visions"
implies, our pursuit of that goal will include an ongoing discussion of how
different people have perceived and defined America: their "visions" of the
nation and its inhabitants. Along the way, the course offers an introduction
to cultural history as a field of study and an opportunity for students to
practice and improve their skills at critical thinking and writing.**





**Books**



**Benjamin Rader, _American Ways: A Brief History of American Cultures_.**

**Paul Johnson and Sean Wilentz, _The Kingdom of Matthias_.**

**Karen Halttunen, _Confidence Men and Painted Women_.**

**John Kasson, _Amusing the Million_.**

**LeRoi Jones (Amiri Baraka), _Blues People_.**





**Course Schedule**



**Aug 23 - Introduction**



**Aug 28 - Colonial Cultures, Northern -- Rader, 1-30.**

**Aug 30 - Colonial Cultures, Southern -- Rader, 31-55. **Quiz****



**Culture of the New Republic**



**Sep 4 - Revolution -- Rader, 57-85.**

**Sep 6 - Equality and Gain -- Rader, 87-109. **Essay One due****



**Sep 11 - Religious Revival -- Rader, 111-31. **Quiz****

**Sep 13 - Market, Church, and Family -- Johnson and Wilentz, 1-90.**

****



**Sep 18 - The Kingdom of Matthias \-- Johnson and Wilentz, 91-179.**

**Sep 20**



**Sep 25 - EXAM**



**Victorian Culture**



**Sep 27 - The City and the Middle Class -- Rader, 135-157. **Quiz****

**Start reading Halttunen.**



**Oct 2 - Sentimental Culture - Halttunen, 1-55.**

**Oct 4 - No class**



**Oct 9 - Clothing and Etiquette - Halttunen, 56-123.**

**Oct 11 - Death and the Parlor - Halttunen, 124-97.**



**Oct 16 - Outside Victorian Culture \-- Rader, 159-82. **Essay Two Due****

**Oct 18 - No class**



**Modern Culture**



**Oct 23 - Unraveling the Victorian World -- Rader, 185-207. **Quiz****

**Oct 25**



**Oct 30 - Coney Island and Popular Culture - Kasson, 1-112.**

**Nov 1**



**Nov 6 - EXAM**

**Nov 8 - Modernity -- Rader, 209-236. **Quiz****



**Nov 13 - Slavery, Freedom, and the Blues -- Baraka, 1-94.**

**Nov 15 - The Great Migration and Jazz -- Baraka, 95-121.**



**Nov 20 - Thanksgiving**

**Nov 22**



**Nov 27 - From Big Bands to Modern Jazz -- Baraka, 122-236.**

**Nov 29 - **Essay Three Due****



**Dec 4**

**Dec 6 - Rader, 237-64.**



**Dec 12 - Final Exam  
(10:15am)**





**Attendance**



**You are required to attend every class meeting. If you miss a meeting you
must have it excused to avoid damaging your course grade. When possible, you
should inform me ahead of time when you are going to miss a meeting. When that
is not possible, you must contact me within twenty-four hours of missing a
meeting to have the absence excused. Once you have two unexcused absences, I
will take 2% off of your final course grade for each additional unexcused
absence (so three unexcused absences equal 2% off, four equal 4% off, and so
on).**



**Reading**



**Reading assignments must be completed before the class period for which they
are assigned. Some weeks have heavier assignments than others, so be sure to
look ahead and leave yourself enough time.**



**Participation**



**Your active participation during class time is essential and will be graded.
You must demonstrate that you have done the assigned reading and that you
understand it. In addition to holding discussion most class periods, I will
occasionally have you perform brief in-class or overnight writing assignments.
These will not receive formal grades, but I will examine them to see if you
are keeping up and thinking about the material. For each class period I will
write notes on the nature and degree of each student's participation.**



**Assignments**



**You will take five quizzes, sit three exams, and write three short essays.
The quizzes will cover the reading in Rader, American Ways. They will consist
of several short answer questions, more factual than interpretive. The idea
here is to make sure you are keeping up with the reading.**



**The exams will cover the books, lectures, and discussion. You will receive a
list of essay questions about a week before the exam. We will come up with
some of those questions in class discussion; I will add a few of my own. For
the first two exams, I will select three or four questions from the list, and
you will answer two. For the final, which is cumulative, I will select four or
five questions, and you will answer three.**



**The writing assignments will require you to use outside materials (via the
World Wide Web) and to integrate them with the material in the assigned
readings, lectures, and discussions. The idea of these assignments is to use
the WWW to move beyond the usual sources used in history classes and to
explore ways in which different kinds of sources tell us different things
about the past. These will be short essays: around three pages each. The
grades will take into account organization and clarity. I will be handing out
specific information about the assignments as they come up.**



**Writing advice and guidelines, along with an explanation of the criteria I
will use in grading, are available on my web site. Be sure to read through
these guidelines before writing the essays.**



**Late Papers**



**Except in cases involving some kind of extreme emergency, turning in writing
assignments late will result in the loss of one grade per day. If you know you
will not be present on the day an assignment is due, you must contact me ahead
of time. In most cases I will require you to turn in the assignment early.**



**Breakdown of Final Grade**



**Two hour exams - 10% each**

**Final Exam - 20%**

**Quizzes - 10% total**

**Participation - 20%**

**Essays - 10% each**





**If Things Go Badly**



**If you feel that you are having trouble keeping up with the class or that
your performance is not what you would like it to be, talk with me and do so
as early as possible. Many times, students delay seeking help until it is too
late to do much about their final grade.**



**Academic Dishonesty**



**Definitions of and rules regarding cheating, plagiarism, and other forms of
academic dishonesty are described in the Butler student handbook. Students
should familiarize themselves with these university policies. Penalties for
academic dishonesty can range from the lowering of an assignment grade to
failure of the course.**



**Student Disability Services**



**The Office of Student Disability Services asks that faculty pass along the
following statement: "It is the policy and practice of Butler University to
make reasonable accommodations for students with properly documented
disabilities. Written notification from Student Disability Services is
required. If you are eligible to receive an accommodation and would like to
request it for this course, please discuss it with me and allow two weeks
notice. Otherwise, it is not guaranteed that the accommodation can be received
on a timely basis. If you have questions about Student Disability Services,
you may wish to contact Michele Atterson, JH 136, ext. 9308."**







