_[Syllabus](E280syl.html)_

_Environmental History: People on the Land_ **Is humankind a parasite or a
progressive agent of change on this planet? This class is an inquiry into the
extent and influence of[ecological revolutions](Mermod.html) in our nation's
history. We examine a body of written, visual, and architectural evidence to
answer better how humans adapt to [climatic changes](Climaweb.html) that alter
vegetation and landscape. This documentary analysis emphasizes how humans
substantially transformed [North America's diverse geography](USmap.html). As
an oral interpretation course you are expected to read your writing aloud in
class.**   **The[writers that we read](EHreadin.html) contribute their
evidence to the discussion of how well we know past threats to our
[ecological](Ecology.html) life support system, its biological diversity and
the [Earth's](3earths.html) fragile human freight. Together each of you must
answer how [landscapes](landskip.html) and [resources](ecomodel.html) are
threatened. At the end of the class each student orally and in writing
presents their argument for how technology and society depend on [preserving
the land](Protect.html).**

**Critical readings on line.**

**

* * *

**

[**Required Reading**](EHreadin.html) **|[Calendar](280Calen.htm) |
[Assgnments](280Assig.htm)| [Dateline](ehtimlin.html) | [Directory of
class](EHIndex.html)**  
  
  
**~~~**

[**What must you do to do well in this course?**](EHGrades.html)

**  
Etiquette: Class time is spent on comparing oral & written interpretations of
the readings.  
A typical class day includes these activities:  
**

[**Free Writing**](WRITER.html) **means to write down on paper quickly and
informally express your thoughts for the rest of the class in 6 minutes!.  
**

[**Discussion**](EHGrades.html) **, responding to comments or leading the
class in a recitation of the highlights in the reading.  
**

**Lecture, A 10 to 20 minute synopsis of the terms and ideas in the study
guide.  
Actions, informal role play, fact findings, board work, or sketches, and more
structured formats,including, group exercises, problem solving, or summarizing
the previous meeting's material are daily class participation.  
Thes are done to increase other participant's understanding of your expression
, your questions or your reading comprehension.**

**_return to top of page_**

**_

* * *

_**

**Critical readings on this site:**

> [**Wilderness in the American Imagination**](wilder.html)

>

> [**LEARNING** about **_How nature and people alter one
another_**](mermod.html)

>

> [**Hydrological cycle as it relates to you**](hydrocyc.html)

>

> [**Conflict and consensus in Marc Reisner's _Cadillac
Desert_**](Cadydes.html)

>

> [**Knowing what the experts are saying:about land and water as a necessary
matrix**](category.html)

>

> [**Is reclamation**](reclamat.html) **[conservation](conserv.html) or
[preservation](Protect.html)?**

>

> [**Max Horkheimer's Revolt of Nature is a critique of modern
values**](revolnat.html)

>

>> > **_return to top of page_**

* * *

**[My Intentions](EHgoals.html) * when teaching and learning in this class are
ten in all.  
* Goals of this course, relating to the D and T general education requirements**

> > > 1\. To articulate verbally and reveal repeatedly in your writing the
words, ideas, values and beliefs of the authors about the historical process
that you are reading. [Three essays to rewrite.]

>>>

>>> 2\. To express verbally a description of cases and events based on the
assigned readings.

>>>

>>> 3\. To read critically and record regularly in your notes the facts and
opinions that form the basis of discussions in the class with frequent
references to documentary evidence from the texts.

>>>

>>> 4\. To demonstrate how you resolve differences between facts and opinions
in terms of tone, rhetoric, degrees of error and false witness, by orally
presenting your written ideas.

>>>

>>> 5\. To display how you organize your thoughts in a recognizably
chronological pattern when describing the significance of documents, persons,
places, events or evidence of historic interest.

>>>

>>> **_return to top of page_**

>>>

>>> 6\. To orally interpret your readings in light of carefully listening to
others and contrasting their notes with your notes to more fully comprehend
the readings and discussion material.

>>>

>>> 7\. To analyze definitions of key concepts in writing thereby
demonstrating both very obvious and more subtle contrasts between competing
visions and among the cornerstone ideas of the class.

>>>

>>> 8\. To practice verbally and demonstrate frequently in writing a synthesis
of opposing or competing viewpoints as derived from primary and secondary
works in the assigned readings.

>>>

>>> 9\. To argue orally based on written evidence from reading, research and
listening for the importance of protecting the earth's life support systems,
human security and biological diversity.

>>>

>>> 10\. To find, examine, express verbally and reconsider in writing the
persistent challenges facing our social institutions, ethical ideals and means
of subsistence given the recent decline of wildlife resources, the increase in
population and the historically crushing impact of consumption.

>>>

>>> **_return to top of page_**

>

> * * *

>

> **[Course Index](ehalfdex.html)**

>

> **[course direction](enhistCD.html)** |

>

> **[calendar](Enhistca.html)** |

>

> **[syllabus](E280syl.html)** |

>

> **[assignments](Enhistas.html)** |

>

> **[first day](EH1stDay.html)**  
> ---|---|---|---|---

