**

AMERICAN ART 289/689: 1750-1945

**

Professor Rebecca Butterfield Fall 2000  
rebecb@sas.upenn.edu T/R 10:30a-12:00n  
Room 204 Jaffe Building  
Office Hours: Thursdays, 1-2:45pm

**_

Course Description_ :

**

This course examines major themes and issues in two centuries of American
painting, sculpture, and, to a lesser extent, works on paper. Among the topics
to be considered are: the development and promotion of various genres (such as
history painting, portraiture, landscape, still life, and figure painting);
the interrelation of American art and European traditions; the relationship
between art and identity; the links between the production and reception of
art works; and the achievements of such well-known artists as Benjamin West,
Thomas Eakins, Winslow Homer, Cecilia Beaux, Henry Ossawa Tanner, and Georgia
O'Keeffe. We will approach this material through assessments of style and
form, historical context, and iconography, all of which will be amplified by
assigned readings.

Classes will combine lecture and discussion, for which students will prepare
with careful critical reading. Written assignments consist of three short
response papers, one longer paper, a mid-term exam, and a final exam. Students
will be evaluated on class contributions as well as on their written work,
with discussion weighted equally with the papers and exams.

**_

Texts:

**_

The following books are available for purchase at Penn Book Center, 130 S.
34th St.

Matthew Baigell, _A Concise History of American Painting and Sculpture

_

Sylvan Barnet, _A Short Guide to Writing About Art

_

A bulk pack of required readings (BP) is available at Campus Copy Center, 3907
Walnut St. **(BP)**.

Additional readings are on reserve at the Fine Arts Library **(R)**.

**_

Requirements_ :

**_

Response Papers_. These three papers are designed to help you think critically
and creatively about the reading assignments. They will serve as the basis for
in-class discussions as well as prepare you for the exams. Some questions to
consider in your writing (and in all your readings for this course) include:

1) What are the author's main points?

2) How does s/he support these points?

3) What kind of sources does the author use (published or unpublished writings
contemporary with the making of the art, such as correspondence or records of
the artist, critical reviews in periodicals or newspapers, diaries or
correspondence of those who saw the work; other visual images; recent art-
historical or cultural-historical scholarship about the era of the artist)?

4) What are the author's underlying assumptions about art history?

5) What alternative analyses would you suggest?

6) How would you develop these ideas?

7) How does the piece compare to others you have read for the course?

_

Research Paper_. A seven-page paper (typed or printed, one-inch margins on all
sides, double-spaced, 10 or 12 point font) on one work of art in the
Pennsylvania Academy of Fine Arts or the Philadelphia Museum of Art. The paper
consists of three parts: 1) a formal analysis of the work itself; 2) a study
of the contexts in which the work was produced; and 3) a discussion of how the
historical contexts of the work contribute to its meanings.

**_

Course Schedule_ :

**

Sept. 7 _ Introduction and Overview

_

Sept. 12 _ Colonial Portraiture

_**

Readings:** Baigell, Ch.1: Colonial Art

Lovell, "Reading 18th Century American Family Portraits" **(BP)

**

Sept. 14 _ The Grand Manner Tradition_ (Benjamin West, Gilbert Stuart, Charles
Wilson Peale)

**

Readings:** Baigell, Ch.2: The New Nation

Abrams, "Benjamin West's Documentation of Colonial History: _Penn's Treaty
with the Indians_ " _Art Bulletin_ 1982 **(BP)

**

Sept. 19 _ Early History Painting_ (Trumbull, Allston, Vanderlyn, Morse)

**

Readings:** Strazdes, "Washington Allston: Great Painting as Mute Poetry"
_Redefining American History Painting_ **R

**

Sept. 21 _ Landscape

_**

Readings:** Baigell, Ch. 3: Self-Discovery, pp. 66-92.

Wallach, "Thomas Cole and the Aristocracy," **(BP)

**

Myers, _The Catskills_ , pp. 17-20, 65-87 **R

**

Recommended reading: Wallach in _Thomas Cole: Landscape into History_ **R

**

Sept. 26 _ Landscape_

**

Readings:** Wilson, "The Landscape of Democracy: Church's _West Rock, New
Haven_ " _AmArtJo_ 1986 **(BP)

**

Sept. 28 _ Genre Painting_ (William Sydney Mount, George Caleb Bingham)

**

Readings:** Baigell, Ch. 3: Self-Discovery, pp. 92-110

Elizabeth Johns, _American Genre Painting_ , chs. 1,2,3 **R

**

Oct. 3 _ Mid-Century Sculpture

_**

Readings:** Baigell, Ch. 3, pp. 112-121

Kasson, "The Greek Slave" from _Marble Queens and Captives_ **R

**

Fryd, "Two Sculptures from the Capitol" _AmArtJo_ **(BP)

DUE: First response paper on the readings for Oct. 3

**

Oct. 5 _ The Frontier Experience: The Land

_**

Readings:** Truettner, "The Art of History: American Exploration and Discovery
Scenes, 1840-1860" _AmArtJo_ 1982 **(BP)

**

Wallach, "The Battle over the West as America" _Art Apart_ **(BP)

**

Recommended: Baigell, "Territory, Race, Religion: Images of Manifest Destiny"
_Smithsonian Studies in American Art_ Summer/Fall 1990 **(BP)

**

Oct. 10 _ The Frontier Experience: Native Americans

_**

Readings:** Viola, "The American Indian Genre Paintings of Catlin, Stanley,
Wimar, Eastman, and Miller" in _American Frontier Life: Early Western
Paintings and Prints_ **R

**

Essays by Richard Slotkin and Vine Deloria, Jr. in _Buffalo Bill and the Wild
West_ **R

**

O'Connor, "The Hoop of History: Native American Murals and the Historical
Present" _Redefining American History Painting_ **(BP)

DUE: Second response paper on the readings for Oct. 10

**

Oct. 12 _ Meet at Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts 10:45am

_

Oct. 17 ** MID-TERM EXAM** (short essays on specific works of art)

Oct. 19 _ Winslow Homer: Civil War and Early Career

_**

Readings:** Cikovsky, "Homer's _Prisoners from the Front_ " _Metropolitan
Museum Bulletin_ 1978 **(BP)

**

Geise, "Harvesting the Civil War: Art in Wartime New York" _Redefining
American History Painting_ 1995 **R

**

Oct. 24 _ Winslow Homer: Later Career

_**

Readings:** Burns, "Revitalizing the `Painted-Out' North: Winslow Homer, Manly
Health, and New England Regionalism in Turn-of-the-Century America" **(BP)

**

Weinberg, "Thomas B. Clarke, Collector" _AmArtJo_ 1976 **(BP)

**

Adams, "Mortal Themes" _AiA_ 71/2 1983 **(BP)

**

Oct. 26 _ Thomas Eakins

_**

Readings:** Elizabeth Johns, _Thomas Eakins: The Heroism of Modern Life_ ,
chs. 1,2,3 **R

**

Oct. 31 _ Eakins and Mary Cassatt

_**

Readings:** Sharp, "How Mary Cassatt Became an American Artist" _Mary Cassatt:
Modern Woman_ **R

**

Nov. 2 _ Impressionism_ (Chase, Sargent, Beaux)

**

Readings:** Baigell, Ch. 4 "At Home and Abroad," pp. 122-179

Burns, "`The Earnest, Untiring Worker' and the Magician of the Brush: Gender
Politics in the Criticism of Cecilia Beaux and John Singer Sargent" _Oxford
Art Jo_ 1992 **(BP)

**

Cikovsky, "Chase's Tenth Street Studio" _Archives American Art Jo_ 1976 **(BP)

DUE: THIRD RESPONSE PAPER ON READINGS FOR NOV. 2

**

Nov. 7 _ Aestheticism and Symbolism_ (Whistler and Tanner)

**

Readings:** Burns, "Old Maverick to Old Master: Whistler in the Public Eye in
Turn-of-the-Century America" _AmArtJo_ 1990 **(BP)

**

Harper, "The Early Religious Paintings of Henry Ossawa Tanner" _AmerArt_ Fall
1992 **(BP)

**

Nov. 9 _ Late 19th Century Sculpture and Still Life_ (Harnett, Peto, St.
Gaudens, Remington)

**

Readings:** Baigell, Ch. 4, pp. 179-191

Staiti, "Illusionism, Trompe L'Oeil, and the Perils of Viewership" _William M.
Harnett_ **R

**

Nov. 14 _ Late 19th Century Genre_ (Hovenden, Ryder)

**

Readings:** Burns, "The Country Boy Goes to the City: Thomas Hovenden's
_Breaking Home Ties_ " _AmArtJo_ 1988 **(BP)

**

Nov. 16 _ Early Modernism: The Eight

_**

Readings:** Baigell, Ch. 5: Early Modernism

Milroy, "Modernist Ritual and the Politics of Display" _Painters of a New
Century_ **R

**

Haywood, "George Bellows's _Stag at Sharkey's_ : Boxing, Violence, and Male
Identity" _Smithsonian Studies in AmArt_ Spring 1988 **(BP)

**

Nov. 21 _ Early Modernism: The Stieglitz Group & the Armory Show

_**

Readings:** Chave, "O'Keeffe and the Masculine Gaze" _AiA_ Jan. 90 **(BP)

**

Schapiro, "The Introduction of Modern Art in America: The Armory Show" 1952 in
_Modern Art: 19th and 20th Centuries_ , pp. 135-78 **R

DUE: Research Paper

**

Nov. 23 _ THANKSGIVING

_

Nov. 28 _ Geometric Abstraction: Precisionism & Stuart Davis

_**

Readings:** Baigell, Ch. 6

Zabel, "Stuart Davis's Appropriation of Advertising: The _Tobacco_ Series,
1921-24" _AmArt_ Fall 1991 **(BP)

**

Nov. 30 _ Urban Realism

_**

Readings:** Todd, "Isabel Bishop: The Question of Difference" _AmArt_ Fall
1989 **(BP)

**

Hills, "Jacob Lawrence as Pictorial Griot: The Harriet Tubman Series" _AmArt_
Winter 1993 **(BP)

**

Dec. 5 _ Regionalism_ (Thomas Hart Benton, Grant Wood, John Steuart Curry)

Dec. 7 _ Early Abstract Expressionism

_**

Readings:** Baigell, Ch. 7, pp. 297-319

Guilbaut, "The New Adventures of the Avant-Garde in America" _October_ 15 1980
**(BP)

**

Dec. XX _ Final Exam_ Bring SASE (8 x 10) for the return of exams/papers

