
    **American Art: 1750-1945
    ARTH 289
    
    Sylvia Yount						Spring 1997
    927-7600 ext.4213					TR 3-4:30
    email: pafa4@pond.com					Penn. Academy
    office hours: by appointment				118 No. Broad St.**										
    
    
    Course Description:
    
    This course examines major themes and issues in over two centuries of 
    American painting, sculpture, and, to a lesser extent, works on paper.  
    Among the topics to be considered are: the development and promotion of 
    various genres (such as history painting, portraiture, landscape, still 
    life, and figure painting); the interrelation of American art and 
    European traditions; the emergence of regional art markets; the 
    relationship between art and identity; and the achievements of such 
    well-known artists as Benjamin West, Thomas Eakins, Winslow Homer, 
    Cecilia Beaux, Robert Henri, and Georgia O'Keeffe.
    
    Using the collection of the Museum of American Art of the Pennsylvania 
    Academy of the Fine Arts--America's oldest art museum and school of fine 
    arts--as a case study, the course will also explore issues of curatorial 
    practice and museum theory.  Classes will combine slide lecture and 
    gallery discussion, in which each student will be expected to 
    participate.  Written assignments consist of two short response papers, 
    one longer paper, a midterm exam, and a final exam.  Students will be 
    evaluated on class contribution as well as written work.
    
    **Texts:**
    
    The following books are available for purchase at the Penn Book Center 
    (3726 Walnut Street):
    
    Baigell, Matthew. A Concise History of American Painting and Sculpture.
    Berger, John.  Ways of Seeing.
    Taylor, Joshua.  Learning to Look: A Handbook for the Visual Arts.
    
    A bullk pack of required reading (BP) is available at Wharton 
    Reprographics, 3620 Locust Walk.
    Additional reading will be placed on reserve (R) at the Fine Arts Library.
    
    
    **Requirements:
    
    Response Papers.**  These two papers are designed to help you think 
    critically and creatively about the reading assignments.  They will serve 
    as the basis for in-class discussions as well as prepare you for the 
    exams.  Some questions to consider in your writing include: 1) what are 
    the author's main points? 2)how does the author support these points? 
    3)what kind of sources does the author use (primary or secondary)? 4)what 
    are the author's underlying assumptions about art history (i.e., 
    methodology)? 5)what alternative analyses would you suggest? 6)how would 
    you develop these ideas? 7)how does the piece compare to others you have 
    read for the course?
    
    **Research Paper.** A seven-page paper on one work of art in the 
    Museum of 
    American Art's collection will be due in early April.  The paper consists 
    of three aspects: 1) a formal analysis of the work itself; 2) a study of 
    the contexts in which the work was produced; 3)an analysis of how the 
    installation fo the work contributes to its meaning.  Students will 
    present oral synopses of their papers during the last tow weeks of class.
    
    Calendar
    
    January 14	Course overview and introduction to the Pennsylvania 
    		Academy of the Fine Arts
    
    January 16	America Forges Its Identity: Colonial and Federal Potraiture 
    Readings:	Berger, chpt. 1
    		Baigell, chpt. 1
    		Lovell, "Reading Eighteenth-Century American Family 
    		Portraits" (BP)
    
    January 21	The Grand Manner Tradition
    Readings:	Berger, chpts. 2-3
    		Baigell, chpt. 2
    		Abrams, "Benjamin West's Documentation of Colonial 
    		History: Penn's Treaty 		with the Indians" (BP)
    
    January 23	A New Democracy: Culture and Commerce
    Readings:	Berger, chpts. 4-6
    		Baigell, chpt. 3
    		Johns, American Genre Painting, chpts. 1-2 (R)
    
    January 28	Mid-Century Sculpture
    Readings:	Kasson, Marble Queens and Captives, chpts. 1-2 (BP)
    
    
    
    
    January 30	Claiming "National" Subjects: Land, War, History
    Readings:	Wallach, "Thomas Cole and the Artistocracy" (BP)
    		Myers, The Catskills, pp. 17-20, 65-87 (R)
    		Chambers, "Painting the Civil War as History," in
    		Picturing History (R)
    
    **First Response Paper Due (2 double-spaced printed pages on this week's 
    readings)**
    
    February 4	The Role of the Museum
    Readings:	Berger, chpt. 7
    		Baxandall, "Exhibiting Intentions" (BP)
    		Wallach, "The Battle over The West as America, 1991" (BP)
    
    February 6	Schooldays: Artistic Training at Home and Abroad
    Readings:	Baigell, chpt. 4
    		Bolger, "The Education of the American Artist" (BP)
    
    February 11	European and American Exchange: Patronage and Study
    Readings:	Troyen, "Innocents Abroad: American Painters at the 1867 
    		Exposition Universelle, Paris" (BP)
    		Weinberg, "The Lure of Paris: Late Nineteenth-Century
    		American Painters and Their French Training," in A New 
    World (R)
    		Visit storage vaults
    
    February 13	NO CLASS: Unsupervised visit to American Art collection of
    		 Philadelphia Museum of Art.
    
    February 18	Thomas Eakins: Method
    Readings:	Foster, Writing About Eakins (BP)
    		Johns, "An Avowal of Artistic Community," in Eakins and 
    		the Photograph (R)	
    
    February 20	Thomas Eakins: Practice
    Readings:	Johns, Thomas Eakins: The Heroism of Modern Life,
    		chpts. 1  & 3 (R)
    		Smith, "The Agnew Clinic: `Not Cheerful for Ladies to 
    		Look At' " (BP)
    		Visit Jefferson Medical College
    
    February 25	Exhibition Study: "The Sartain Family and Their 
    		Philadelphia Circle"
    
    **Second Response Paper Due (2 double-spaced printed pages on any February 
    readings)**
    
    
    February 27	Collecting as Cultural Practice
    Readings: 	Cikovsky, "William Merritt Chase's Tenth Street Studio" (BP)
    		Weinberg, "Thomas B. Clarke: Foremost Patron of American
    		Art, 1872-1899" (BP)
    		Truettner, "William T. Evans, Collector of American Paintings"
    		(BP)
    
    March 4		**MIDTERM EXAMINATION**
    
    March 6		Still Life and the Illusionist Tradition
    Readings:	Staiti, "Illusionism, Trompe l'Oeil, and the Perils of
    		Viewership," in William Michael Harnett (R)
    
    March 11  & 13  	**SPRING BREAK**
    
    March 18	A Look at Regional Art Worlds: Philadelphia in the 1890s
    Readings:	Becker, "Art Worlds and Collective Activity," in Art 
    		Worlds (R)
    **Choose topic for research paper by this date, in consultation with 
    instructor**
    
    March 20	Representing Winslow Homer
    Readings:	Prown, "Winslow Homer in His Art" (BP)
    		Burns, "Revitalizing the Painted-Out' North: Winslow Homer,
    		Manly Health, and New england Regionalism in 
    		Turn-of-the-Century America" (BP)
    
    March 25       	Impressionism
    Readings:	Weinberg, "American Impressionism in a Cosmopolitan 
    		Context" (BP)
    		Danly, "American Impressionism and the Pennsylvania 
    		Academy" (BP)
    		Fairbrother, "Painting in Boston, 1870-1930," in The 
    		Bostonians (R)
    
    March 27	Aestheticism and Symbolism
    Readings:	Burns, "From Maverick to Old Master: Whistler in the Public
    		Eye in Turn-of-the-Century America" (BP)
    		Harper, "The Early Religious Paintings of Henry Ossawa 
    		Tanner" (BP)
    
    April 1		Late Nineteenth-Century Sculpture
    Readings:	Bogart, Public Sculpture and the Civic Ideal in New York City,
    		1890-1930, chpt. 9 (R)
    		Becker, "Aesthetics, Aestheticians, and Critics," in Art 
    		Worlds (R)
    		Walking Tour of Benjamin Franklin Parkway
    
    
    
    **Research Paper Due (7 double-spaced printed pages on single work of art in
    			Museum's collection)**
    
    April 3		The Ashcan Group and the Eight
    Readings:       Baigell, chpt. 5
                    Zurier, "The Making of Six New York Artists," in
    		Metropolitan Lives (R)
    		Milroy, "Modernist Ritual and the Politics of Display," in
    		Painters of a New Century (R)
    
    April 8		Early Modernism: The Steiglitz Circle and Beyond
    Readings:  	Homer et. al., Avant-Garde Painting and Sculpture in America,
    		1910-25, pp. 9-28 (R)
    		Chave, "O'Keeffe and the Masculine Gaze" (BP)
    
    April 10	Urban Realism, Regionalism, and Abstraction
    Readings:	Baigell, chpt. 6
    		Todd, "Isabel Bishop: The Question of Difference" (BP)
    
    April 15	Student Reports
    
    April 17	Student Reports
    
    April 22	Student Reports
    
    May 9		**FINAL EXAM (8:30-10:30 AM)**
    
    
    
    

