Click here to return to the list of [ Syllabuses](syllabuses.html).  
Click here to return to [ P. Thomas Carroll's Contents
Page](http://www.rpi.edu/~carroll/contents.html).  

##

* * *

Course Syllabus

* * *

History of American Technology  
Fall 1996

Click here to jump to Schedule.  
  
**Number:** 51.4650-01  
**Location:** Sage 4101  
**Hours:**

  * Class: 
    * Tuesdays 11:00 a.m to 12:20 p.m. 
    * plus roughly one extra hour per week TBA 
  * Office: 
    * Tuesdays and Thursdays 12:30-1:00 p.m. 
    * Thursdays 2:00-4:00 p.m. 
    * and by appointment  

* * *

**Instructor:**  
  
P. Thomas Carroll (carroll@rpi.edu)  
Sage 5112, phone 276-8508  
http://www.rpi.edu/~carroll/  

* * *

**Prerequisites:**

  * One course in American history 
  * or 51.212 (History of Science and Technology) [now 51.250] 
  * or AP standing in American history 
  * or permission of instructor 

* * *

N.B. This course carries social science credit only (4 credit hours).  
This course also qualifies for credit as an advanced-placement (AP) American
history course.

* * *

To track down Carroll, or for grades and other course information, contact
Patti Mugrace (mugrap@rpi.edu), Sage 5116, 276-6444.

* * *

Advanced technology is today a hallmark of American culture. Most Americans
know this, but few realize that the United States has been famous for its
distinctive technology for at least a century and a half. By surveying some of
the major American technological developments, and by reading what some
leading scholars of the history of American technology have written about
them, this course will explore the interactions between technology and culture
in the American setting. We will concentrate on ideas and forces at work in
American history rather than on names, places, and dates. Some part of each
class may deal with the nuts-and-bolts aspect of particular mechanical
inventions, but the main thrust of the course and the central purpose of class
discussions will be the wider context of technology, not how things work. How
has technology evolved? Why has it changed? With what consequences? What
meanings do we ascribe to the material aspects of our culture? Can we control
the evolution of technology at all? Should we? If so, when and how and by
whom? The course will give each student an opportunity to develop proficiency
in oral expression and expository prose, and to conduct limited original
research.

* * *

**Course texts** (available in Rensselaer Bookstore; each will be used
extensively):

Edward H. Carr, _What Is History?_ (New York: Random House, Vintage Paperback
V391, 1967).

Brooke Hindle and Steven Lubar, _Engines of Change: The American Industrial
Revolution, 1790-1860_ (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press,
1986).

Thomas P. Hughes, _American Genesis: A Century of Invention and Technological
Enthusiasm, 1870-1970_ (New York: Penguin Books, 1989).

Carroll W. Pursell, _The Machine in America: A Social History of Technology_
(Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1995). Referred to as
"Pursell textbook" in schedule below.

Carroll W. Pursell, Jr., ed., _Technology in America: A History of Individuals
and Ideas_ (Cambridge, Mass., and London: MIT Press, 1981). Referred to as
"Pursell anthology" in schedule below.

Randall E. Stross, ed., _Technology and Society in Twentieth Century America:
An Anthology_ (Chicago: Dorsey Press, 1989).

William Strunk, Jr., and E. B. White, _The Elements of Style_ , 3rd ed., with
index (New York: Macmillan, 1986).

* * *

**Assignments and grade.** The grade in this course will derive from seven
different indicators of your performance: two short surprise quizzes on the
readings; a four-page typed essay; a simple research project; a midterm; a
final; and class participation (which will include special preparation for one
discussion class, performance as an editor of a classmate's draft essay and
draft research report, and weekly ungraded written reflections).

Unless the class as a whole is not at all average, grading will be adjusted to
a normal curve with a mean of Bminus. Collaboration with classmates is
downright encouraged except where explicitly prohibited; there is to be no
collaboration in the taking of quizzes or in the drafting of essays, research
reports, exams, and weekly reflections. Essays  "recycled" from-or jointly
submitted to-other courses are not acceptable for the essay assignment, even
if they are your own work, without the advance permission of the instructor,
and your research project must be your own work only, conducted solely for
this course. Cheating on _any_ part of the course will constitute grounds for
failure of the whole course. In particular, to avoid the charge of plagiarism,
place all phrasing not your own, however trivial, within quotation marks, and
cite a source for all passages or ideas not your own; failure to do so
constitutes one form of cheating. Consult the _Rensselaer Handbook_ for
further information about academic dishonesty. Weighting of the various
components of the grade will be as follows:  

> 05% Quiz (higher score)  
>  10% Quiz (lower score)  
>  20% Four-page essay  
>  10% Research project  
>  15% Midterm examination  
>  20% Final examination  
>  20% Class participation  
>

The quizzes will be given in class on unannounced dates. They will be simple
tests of your diligence in keeping up with and comprehending the assigned
reading. The essay, a four-page typed, double-spaced (ca. 1,000 words)
discussion of a topic assigned by the instructor, will serve as an exercise in
analytical prose and critical historical interpretation. One of three possible
due dates will be assigned to you randomly. The research project will be a
simple, structured exercise in finding and interpreting primary historical
materials; full instructions will be handed out early in the semester, and the
research reports are due in not later than 03 December. The midterm and final
will be tests of your ability to integrate the materials of the course into
your own critical historical interpretation. They will be in-class, open-
notes, closed-book exams. (If a majority of the class wishes it, the final
will be handed out in advance, and a take-home option may be added for it.) At
the instructor's option, students with exemplary scores near the end of the
semester may be exempted from the final examination. The best preparation for
the exams is full and responsible participation in class discussions, which
provides an opportunity to subject your ideas to public scrutiny. This is such
an important element of history that class participation is factored
materially into the grade. Indeed, the success of the course depends
critically upon each student attending class religiously, completing the
readings _before_ class, and participating actively in the discussions. I do
not _require_ class attendance, but if you choose to skip class without cause,
you risk missing a quiz and you lessen the cumulative total of your
opportunities to earn a good class participation grade.

Students are required to submit a page of reflections on the current week's
readings at the beginning of weeks 1 through 12 (see Schedule below), and they
are encouraged to write an anonymous one-paragraph evaluation of the week's
work at the end of each Thursday class. A handout of pointers about how to
write a weekly reflection will be distributed shortly after the semester
begins. The number of one-page reflections submitted will be factored into the
class participation grade, but their content will not be graded; they provide
writing practice for the student, encourage the taking of notes that will be
useful for the exams, and allow the instructor to monitor progress in the
course. As time permits, the instructor will write comments on the submitted
reflections each week.

The instructor will be the discussion leader of last resort, but once during
the semester, each student will help the instructor direct the weekly
discussion by being a _discussion assistant_. In most weeks, during the
Thursday class, the instructor will launch the discussion period with brief
opening remarks, will interject provocative questions, will provide
supplementary explanation now and then, will occasionally attempt to draw out
analysis from others, and will summarize at the end of the session. The
student assistants will take the most active role, however, both as discussion
leaders and as _agents provocateurs_ , asking the bulk of the questions,
correcting classmates, and challenging the interpretations of the readings, of
the students, and even of the instructor. A handout of pointers about how to
be an effective discussion assistant will be distributed shortly after the
semester begins. You will pick your week for this assignment on 29 August.

Essays and research reports will not go straight from student to instructor.
Instead, each student will be paired with a classmate who will serve as her or
his editor, and the editor will get the submission first. It will be the
editor's job to supply the student with constructive marginal comments
concerning the style and the content of the submission. This procedure both
gives students experience at editorial criticism and makes it possible for the
instructor to make this course more writing-intensive. Editors may also review
other submissions, though this is optional. Guidance will be provided to
editors in class, there will be a handout of relevant writing tips, and the
assigned text by Strunk and White gives pithy, timely advice, for which you
will be held responsible in your written work. A sign-up sheet for editorial
pairings will be available on 03 September. Write your name at the end of each
draft you edit for your partner, and staple the edited draft of your own work
to the back of your polished essay, or research report, when you submit it for
grading.

If you are unhappy about your grade on any component of this course, please
let the instructor know so that mistakes and misunderstandings can be
minimized. The _Rensselaer Handbook_ explains grade appeals that go beyond
negotiations between the instructor and the student.

* * *

**Schedule.**

We will add roughly one additional hour of class per week, though these hours
may be bunched into multi-week chunks rather than spread out evenly over the
semester.

Readings from sources other than the texts will be on reserve in Folsom
Library.

**0\. August 27 and 29--Definitions and objectives; truth versus good
judgment.**

Reading:  

  * "Prologue: The Strange Death of Silas Deane," in James West Davidson and Mark Hamilton Lytle, _After the Fact: The Art of Historical Detection_ , 2nd ed. (New York: Knopf, 1986), xv-xxxv. 
  * Carr, chapters 1 and 4. 
**1\. September 3 and 5--[Technology in the American
"Wilderness"**](hoatlec1.html) (JPEG file, 59594 bytes).

Reading:

  * Pursell anthology, chapter 2 (Hindle on the wooden age). 
  * Pursell textbook, preface and introduction. 
  * Hindle and Lubar, chapters 1 and 2. 
**2\. September 10 and 12--[Early engineers, "improvements", and technology
transfer**](hoatlec2.html) (JPEG file, 67477 bytes).

Reading:

  * Pursell anthology, chapter 3 (Meier on Jefferson). 
  * Pursell anthology, chapter 4 (Stapleton on Latrobe). 
  * Pursell textbook, chapters 1, 2, and 3. 
  * Hindle and Lubar, chapters 3, 4, 5, and 6. 
**3\. September 17 and 19--[Industrialization and the American System of
Manufacturing**](hoatlec3.html) (JPEG file, 66135 bytes).

Reading:

  * Pursell anthology, chapter 5 (Smith on Whitney). 
  * Pursell textbook, chapter 4. 
  * Hindle and Lubar, chapter 13. 
  * David A. Hounshell, _From the American System to Mass Production, 1800-1932_ (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984), introduction and chapter 1. 
**4\. September 24 and 26--[Republican technology and the factory
town**](hoatlec4.html) (JPEG file, 66630 bytes).

Reading:

  * John F. Kasson, _Civilizing the Machine: Technology and Republican Values in America, 1776-1900_ (New York: Penguin Books, 1977), chapter 1. Read chapter 2 also if you have the time. 
  * Hindle and Lubar, chapters 11, 12, and 14. 
**5\. October 1 and 3--[Machines to sew, machines to reap: the diffusion of
"machinofacture"**](hoatlec5.html) (JPEG file, 67266 bytes).

Reading:

  * Nathan Rosenberg, _Technology and American Economic Growth_ (New York: Harper  & Row, 1972; reprinted White Plains, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe, Inc., 1977), chapter 4. 
  * Hindle and Lubar, chapter 15. 
  * Robert L. Heilbroner, "Do Machines Make History?" _Technology and Culture_ 8 (1967) 335345. 
  * Pursell textbook, chapters 5, 7, and 8. 
**6\. October 8 and 10--[Improvements revisited: the new urban
technology**](hoatlec6.html) (JPEG file, 68422 bytes).

Reading:

  * P. Thomas Carroll, "American Science Transformed," _American Scientist_ 74 (1986) 466-485. 
  * Pursell textbook, chapter 6. 
  * Sam B. Warner, Jr., _Streetcar Suburbs: The Process of Growth in Boston, 18701900_ (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press and MIT Press, 1962; reprinted New York: Athenaeum, 1973), chapter 2. 
  * Carl W. Condit, _American Building_ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968), chapters 9 and 10. 
  * Stross, chapter 1 (Boorstin on consumer palaces, etc.). 
October 15--No class. How did technology factor into Columbus's life?

October 17--Midterm examination (in class, open notes, closed book).

October 19--Optional tour of historical sites in Troy and environs. Details to
be announced in class.

**7\. October 22 and 24--[Invention, research, inventor-entrepreneurs: the age
of heroic invention**](hoatlec7.html) (JPEG file, 74890 bytes).

Reading:

  * Hughes, introduction, plus chapters 1 and 2. 

NOTE: Group 1 essays go to editors.

**8\. October 29 and 31--[The corporation as inventor**](hoatlec8.html) (JPEG
file, 68937 bytes).

Reading:

  * Hughes, chapter 4. 
  * Pursell anthology, chapter 12 (Jenkins on Eastman). 
  * Stross, chapter 4 (Noble on patents, corporation as inventor). 

NOTE: Revised Group 1 essays due. Coin tosses for Group 1: TH

NOTE: Group 2 essays go to editors.

**9\. November 5 and 7--[War, technological momentum, systems, giantism, and
progress**](hoatlec9.html) (JPEG file, 67969 bytes).

Reading:

  * Hughes, chapters 3 and 5. 
  * Pursell textbook, chapter 9. 
  * Pursell anthology, chapter 14 (Hays on Pinchot). 
  * Pursell anthology, chapter 15 (Cooper on Taylor). 
  * Pursell anthology, chapter 16 (Flink on Ford). 
NOTE: Revised Group 2 essays due. Coin tosses for Group 2: HT

NOTE: Group 3 essays go to editors.

**10\. November 12 and 14--[Modern workers at work, at home, on the road. I:
Gender and consumerism**](hoatlec10.html) (JPEG file, 62312 bytes).

Reading:

  * Pursell textbook, chapters 10 and 11. 
  * Stross, chapter 13 (Cowan on more work for mother). 
  * Stross, chapter 8 (Flink on the car culture). 
  * Stross, chapter 9 (Jackson on the crabgrass frontier). 
  * Stross, chapter 14 (Postman on TV and _U.S.A. Today_ ). 
NOTE: Revised Group 3 essays due. Coin tosses for Group 3: HH

**11\. November 19 and 21--[Modern workers at work, at home, on the road. II:
The Second World War and the postwar prosperity**](hoatlec11.html) (JPEG file,
80012 bytes).

Reading:

  * Pursell textbook, chapter 12. 
  * Stross, chapter 3 (Braverman on labor and monopoly capital). 
  * Stross, chapter 10 (Rhodes on the making of the atom bomb). 
  * Stross, chapter 11 (Boyer on atomic culture). 
  * Stross, chapter 12 (McDougall on the space age). 

November 26 and 28: Thanksgiving week. No classes. Observe the cultural
significance of the technologies of cooking and eating used at the
Thanksgiving dinner.

**12\. December 3 and 5--[Technological alternatives and the control of
technology**](hoatlec12.html) (JPEG file, 82549 bytes).

Reading:

  * Hughes, chapter 9. 
  * Pursell textbook, chapter 13. 

December 17--Final examination (in class, open notes, closed book), 2:00-5:00
p.m., Sage 4101.  

* * *

Click here to return to the list of [ Syllabuses](syllabuses.html).  
Click here to return to [ P. Thomas Carroll's Contents
Page](http://www.rpi.edu/~carroll/contents.html).  

* * *

