[![home](../../images/interior/logo.gif)](../../index.html) | [![University of
Illinois at Urbana Champaign](../../images/interior/banner-
uiuc.gif)](http://www.uiuc.edu/)  
[![Department of Urban & Regional Planning](../../images/interior/banner-
durp.gif)](../../index.html)  
---|---  
  |  | ![Course Title](../../images/course-titles/up494s.jpg)  
---  
|

  
Syllabus

**Schedule of Readings | Written Assignments  
**

  
Schedule of Readings

  
**% Denotes general background information that may be helpful**  
**    if read first**  
**# Denotes case study or comparative research**

**Module 1 Introduction to Regional Planning in the United States**

**%** John Friedmann and Robin Bloch, "American Exceptionalism in Regional
Planning, 1933-2000," _International Journal of Urban and Regional Research_
14 (December 1990): 576-601  

> The authors attempt to answer the questions: What policies have been
implemented to address regional and/or spatial development in the U.S. since
1933 and what has been the politics associated with them?

**#** Urlan Wannop, "United States, But Enduring Regionalism," Chapter 7 in
_The Regional Imperative: Regional Planning and Governance in Britain, Europe,
and the United States_

> Regional planning in the U.S. ranges from systematic to fragmented, as
illustrated by case studies from Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN and the San
Francisco Bay Area, CA.

  
Joel Garreau, _The Nine Nations of North America_ , "The Nine Nations," "The
Foundry," "Dixie," "Ecotopia," and "The Breadbasket" (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1981)

> By conceptually dividing the North American continent into regions and by
defining the characteristics of each region, readers can more easily
understand the issues faced by the regions.

  
**Module 2 Evolution of Regional Planning in the United States**

**%** John Friedmann and Clyde Weaver _, Territory and Function: The Evolution
of Regional Planning_ (London: Edward Arnold, 1979), pp. 1-86

> Discusses the origins of regional planning doctrine in the United States.

Edward Spann, _Designing Modern America: The Regional Planning Association of
America and Its Members_ , Chapter XI, "Regionalism: Mumford, MacKaye, et.
al." (Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 1996.

> Mumford and MacKaye both stressed the importance of regionalism during the
1920s and 1930s, especially in planning.

  
Robert Fishman, "The Regional Plan and the Transformation of the Industrial
Metropolis,"

> The Regional Plan of New York and its Environs (1929-1931) remains the most
thorough and ambitious planning project in the U.S.  However, the idea of
continued dominance by a centralized industrial city assumed by the plan was
obsolete soon after the plan was adopted.

  
**#** Donald Rothblatt, "North American Metropolitan Planning," _Journal of
the American Planning Association_ 60 (1994): 501-520  

> Through case studies of urban regions in both countries, the author finds
Canadian metropolian areas to have more highly developed regional governance
and planning systems than their counterparts in the U.S., despite the U.S.'s
history of promoting regional planning.

  
**Module 3 Spatial and Environmental Implications of Regional Planning in the
United States**

**Demographics:**

A.C. Nelson and T.W. Sanchez, "Debunking the Exurban Myth: A Comparison of
Suburban Households," _Housing Policy Debate_ 10 (1999: 3): 689-709

> Compares households to conclude that those living on the metropolitan fringe
are not any different from those living in closer-in suburbs.  Exurbanization
is simply the latest step in continued suburbanization.

**#** R.D. Abla and K. Trent, "Population Loss and Change in the North: An
Examination of New York's Migration to the Sunbelt," _Social Science
Quarterly_ 67 (1986), 690-706

> Examines migration from New York to the Sunbelt between 1975 and 1980,
focussing on the individual characteristics of the migrants.

**%** Benjamin Chinitz and R. Dusansky, "The Patterns of Urbanization with
Regions of the United States," _Urban Studies_ 9 (1972):

C.F. Longino, "From Sunbelt to Sunspots," _American Demographics_ 16 (November
1994), 22-25

> Historically, states in the Sunbelt have attracted retirees, but recent data
show that while some traditional retirement areas still receive floods of
older migrants, some others are on the decline.

William Alonso, "Population and Regional Development," in B. Higgins and D.J.
Savoie, _Regional Economic Development_ (Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1988), Chapter
6, p. 131-168  

> Regional development and the policies affecting it often ignore the
population factor.  The non-homogeneity of populations, the nature of
migration, and the quality of populations all influence regional development
and therefore ought to be incorporated into regional development models.

  
**Growth Management:**

**#** Dennis E. Gale, "Eight State-Sponsored Growth Management Programs: A
Comparative Analysis," _Journal of the American Planning Association_ 58
(Autumn 1992): 425-439

> Comprehensive land use planning has been advanced by the enactment of
programs to foster statewide local or local-regional growth management.  A
comparison of these programs reveals diverse features and provisions at the
same time as the emergence of four distinct paradigms.

Paul Niebanck, "Dilemmas in Growth Management," _Journal of the American
Planning Association_ 50 (1984): 403-405

> A new vision of growth management has emerged, seeking population diversity,
self-restraint in consumption and resource use, and ecological fit.

  
H. L. Diamond and P.F. Noonan, "Making More Efficient Use of Land" and "New
Interests Awaken, New Strategies Emerge, New Problems Arise," _Land Use in
America_ , Chapters 2 & 3 (Washington: Island Press, 1996), p. 13-84

> Protecting natural systems often requires regulations that reach beyond one
political jurisdiction, resulting in conflicts over regional land use among
local governments.  Since the 1970s, innovation, cooperation, and
participation has increased in regional development, allowing encouragement
for the future.

  
**%** Arthur C. Nelson and James B. Duncan, _Growth Management Principles and
Practices_ , Chapters 1 & 2, "The Purposes of Growth Management" and "State
and Regional Growth Management Approaches" (Washington: American Planning
Association, 1995), p. 1-36

> Growth management policies aim to improve the quality of life through good
planning.  Effective policies address issues that cross local government
boundaries, thereby producing tensions among state, regional, and local
interests.

  
**#** Gerrit Knaap, "State Land Use Planning and Inclusionary Zoning: Evidence
from Oregon," _Journal of Planning Education and Research_ 10 (1990): 39-46

Anthony Downs, _New Visions for Metropolitan America_ , Chapter 3 "Local
Growth Management Policies," Chapter 4, "Links Between Central Cities and
Suburbs," (Washington: Brookings Institute, 1994), p. 31-59

> Chapter 3: Analyzes the effects of growth management policies adopted by
local governments that often benefit local residents while disregarding the
larger metropolitan area.  
>  Chapter 4:  Examines the functions of city and suburb and the weakening
links between them.

**Coastal Zone Management:**

**#** Paul A. Sabatier and Barbara J. Klosterman, "A Comparative Analysis of
Policy Implementation under Different Statutory Regimes: The San Francisco Bay
Conservation and Development Commission, 1965-1972," in Daniel A. Mazmanian
and Paul A. Sabatier, eds., _Effective Policy Implementation_. Lexington, MA:
D.C. Heath and Company, 1981), p. 169-206  

> The McAteer-Petris Act of 1965 recognized that a regional approach was
necessary to control the filling of the San Francisco Bay.  The act created
the San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission (BCDC),
considered a successful regional regulatory agency.

**Transportation:**

**#** Genevieve Giuliano, "Transporting Los Angeles," in Michael J. Dear, H.
Eric Schockman and Greg Hise, eds., _Rethinking Los Angeles_ (Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications, 1996), __ p. 231-247

> The extensive highway system in Los Angeles has allowed the region to grow
at a phenomenal rate, but the region's dependence on the automobile has had
costs:  environmental, economic, and social.

**Enivironmental and Rural Policy:  **

**#** Arthur C. Nelson, "Preserving Prime Farmland in the Face of
Urbanization: Lessons from Oregon," _Journal of the American Planning
Association_ 58 (Autumn 1992): 467-488  

> Oregon has been sucessful in preserving farmland through implementation of a
variety of statewide policies.  The author concludes that other states can
learn from Oregon's success.

Paul A. Sabatier and Hank C. Jenkins-Smith, eds., _Policy Change and Learning:
An Advocacy Coalition Approach_ (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 199 ), p.
177-208  

**Module 4 Economic Planning Issues in Cities, Suburbs and Regions in the
United States**

**%** Niles Hansen, Benjamin Higgins, and Donald J. Savoie, _Regional Policy
in a Changing World_ , Chapter 5 "Regional Economic Development Policies and
Programs in the United States:  A Critical Overview and Implications for the
Future" (New York:  Plenum Press, 1990), p. 119-157

> Reviews the history of federal regional development policies and what has
been learned from them.

**%** William R. Barnes and Larry C. Ledebur, _The New Regional Economies:
The U.S. Common Market and the Global Economy_, Chapter 3 "The Economic
Region" (Thousand Oaks, CA:  SAGE Publications, 1998), p. 19-38

> Describes region classification systems, then focuses on the variations of
economic performance of metropolitan-centered economic regions.

M. Ellis, R. Barff, and B. Renard, "Migration Regions and Interstate Labor
Flows by Occupation in the United States," _Growth and Change_ 24:   166-90

> Discusses the geography of labor flows for different occupational groups,
concluding that differences in migration regions reflect job information flows
and regional employment structure for various classes of labor.

**#** Michael I. Luger and Harvey A. Goldstein, _Technology in the Garden:
Research Parks ad Regional Economic Development_, Chapter 5 "The Research
Triangle Park" (Chapel Hill:  The University of North Carolina Press, 1991) p.
76-99

> The Research Triangle Park in North Carolina serves as a model of dramatic
regional economic restructuring and  provides optimism for other regions.

**#** Martin J. Schiesl, "Designing the Model Community: Irvine Company and
Suburban Development,  1950-1988" in Kling, Spencer, and Poster, eds.,
_Postsuburban California: The Transformation of Orange County since World War
II_ (Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1991), p. 55-91

> Orange County, CA is unlike the structure of many other older metropolitan
regions that are based on a dominant central city surrounded by residential
and industrial areas.  Instead, Orange County consists of several independent
and highly specialized centers, in large part a result of the early policies
of the Irvine Company.

**#** Gary A Dymski and John M. Veitch, "Financing the Future in Los Angeles:
From Depression to 21st Century," in Michael J. Dear, H. Eric Schockman and
Greg Hise, eds., _Rethinking Los Angeles_ (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications, 1996), __ p. 35-55

> The authors examine the financial aspects of L.A. growth and whether the
city's economic and social environment can support future expansion.

**%** Hugh O. Nourse, _Regional Economics: A Study in the Economic Structure,
Stability, and Growth of Regions_ (New York: McGraw Hill, 1968), Chapter 9,
"The Impact of Growth on Regional Economic Structure," p. 209-224  

> The author alters land use models to investigate impact of changes in
population, income, and technology on regional structure.

**#** Richard Child Hill, "Crisis in the Motor City: The Politics of Economic
Development in Detroit," in Susan Fainstein, et. al., _Restructuring the City:
The Political Economy of Urban Redevelopment_ (New York: Longman, 1983), p.
80-125  

> For most of the 20th century, Detroit exemplified the dynamic and
contradictory forces of U.S. industrial capitalism.  Faced with decline in its
primary industry of automobile manufacturing, Detroit will act as a model for
other industrial cities undergoing similiar  economic restructuring.

**#** Allen J. Scott, "From Silicon Valley to Hollywood: Growth and
Development of the Multimedia Industry in California," in H.J. Braczyk, P.
Cooke and M. Heidenreich, eds., _Regional Innovation Systems: The Role of
Governance in a Globalized World_ (Bristol, PA: UCL Press, 1998), p. 136-163  

> One sector of the California economy that has demonstrated significant
growth in recent years is the consumer-oriented, cultural products sector,
including the multimedia industry.  This industry is dependent on the
resources and capabilities of both Silicon Valley and Hollywood.

**#** Andrew Isserman and Terrence Rephann, "The Economic Effects of the
Appalachian Regional Commission: An Empirical Assessment of 26 Years of
Regional Development Planning," _Journal of the American Planning Association_
61 (1995): 345-64

> The authors present an empirical study on the extent to which the ARC
stimulated the depressed economy of the Appalachian region.

**#** Edward J. Feser and Stuart H. Sweeney, _Out-migration, Population
Decline, and Regional Economic Distress_ , Chapter 2 "Out-migration,
Population Decline, and Regional Fortunes," and Chapter 3 "Population Loss and
Economic Adjustment in Four Communities" (Washington:  Economic Development
Administration, January 1999) p. 3-40

> The economic health of communities is often measured by unemployment and
income, but these measures are limited.  Other measures, such as out-
migration, population decline, and regional fortunes, should be included to
draw a more accurate picture.  Chapter 3 provides a case study of four U.S.
regions that have suffered economic and population decline.

**Module 5** **Community Life in Urban and Non-Urban Region**

**#** Kenneth M. Reardon, "Enhancing the Capacity of Community-Based
Organization in East St. Louis," _Journal of Planning Education and Research_
17 (1998): 323-333  

> An examination of the empowerment planning approach, as implemented in East
St. Louis, IL by students and faculty of the University of Illinois.

**%** Avis C. Vidal, "Can Community Development Re-Invent Itself? The
Challenges of Strengthening Neighborhoods in the 21st Century," _Journal of
the American Planning Association_ 63 (1997): 429-438  

**#** Susan S. Fainstein and Clifford Hirst, "Neighborhood Organizations and
Community Planning:  The Minneapolis Neighborhood Revitalization Program," in
W. Dennis Keating, Normal Krumholz, and Philip Star, eds., _Revitalizing Urban
Neighborhoods_ (Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1996), p. 96-111

> Examines and assesses the neighborhood planning program in Minneapolis,
Minnesota.

**#** Jacqueline Leavitt, "Los Angeles Neighborhoods Respond to Civil Unrest:
Is Planning an Adequate Tool?" in W. Dennis Keating, Normal Krumholz, and
Philip Star, eds., _Revitalizing Urban Neighborhoods_ (Lawrence, KS:
University Press of Kansas, 1996), p. 112-130

> Discusses community planning and public sector abandonment of poor
neighborhoods in Los Angeles during the 1990s.

Dennis Keating and Norman Krumholz, "Downtown Plans of the 1980s:  The Case
for More Equity in the 1990s," _Journal of the American Planning Association_
57 (1991):

**Module 6** **Politics, Institutions and the Management of Urbanized Regions
in the United States**

**#** B.E. Holzinger, "Rethinking American Public Policy, The Environment,
Federalism, States, and Supernational Influences," _Policy Studies Journal_ 26
(Fall 1998): 499-511

> Power relationships between levels of government in the United States are
changing: issues now fall under different jurisdictions than they did in the
past.  Draws upon case studies of public corporations and the environmental
impact statement process.

**%** S.F. Schram and C.S. Weissert, "The State of American Federalism,
1996-1997," _Publius_ 27 (Spring 1997): 1-31

> Despite examples of limits on federal power and increases in state power
during 1996-1997, the federal government still holds much of the power it has
known since the 1930s.  The federal system is complex and reform is difficult.

**#** H. Eric Schockman, "Is Los Angeles Governable? Revisiting the City
Charter," in Michael J. Dear, H. Eric Schockman and Greg Hise, eds.,
_Rethinking Los Angeles_ (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 1996):   p.
57-75

> Describes the legal basis for governance of Los Angeles: the city charter.
The author advocates reform of the charter as the first step to achieving
broader political representation.

**#** Daniel A. Mazmanian, Michael Stanley-Jones and Miriam J. Green,
"Breaking Political Gridlock: California's Experiment in Public-Private
Cooperation for Hazardous Waste Policy," _Environmental Studies Series B_
(Claremont, CA: California Institute of Public Affairs, 1988): p. 5-43  

> The Southern California Hazardous Waste Management Project (SCHWMP) brought
together a variety of parties concerned with hazardous waste, illustrating
that cooperation is possible between the public and private sectors.

**#** J.R. Ferrell, "Water in the Missouri Valley: The Inter-Agency River
Committee Concept," _Journal of the West_ 7 (1968): 96-

R. C. Kearney and J.J. Stucker, "Interstate Compacts and the Management of
Low-Level Radioactive Wastes," _Public Administration Review_ 45 (January-
February 1985): 210-220  

Anthony Downs, _New Visions for Metropolitan America_ , Chapter 9 "Offsetting
Fragmented Land Use Powers," Chapter 10 "The Politics of Choosing Among
Visions," (Washington: Brookings Institute, 1994):  p. 169-205

> In theory, regionwide government structures, or metropolitan governments,
are necessary to address growth-related problems, but they rarely exist in
practice.  Other means are therefore necessary to regulate on a regional
level. Futhermore, citizens of these regions must strengthen their social
solidarity in order to choose the best growth strategy.

  
Assignment Descriptions

  
**NAFTA Assignment Descriptions**  
Profs. E.M. Bergman and C. Silver

There will be four written assignments with the course that are tied to the
readings in the modules. Each of these will be roughly 1000 word essays that
can be done using the course  readings. The use of outside materials (drawn
perhaps from the course bibliography or materials that you find on your own)
are also appropriate. The essays will be prepared and transmitted
electronically. The initial submission will be read and commented on within
several days of submission. A revised essay will be required in most cases. It
is very important that you stay within the word limit for the essay.  Final
revised essays will be posted to the "list serve" so that all students can
have access to the collective insights of the participants
([UP494List@urban.uiuc.edu](mailto: UP494List@urban.uiuc.edu)).  Reading
assignments may be changed slightly to reflect class interests.  We will
schedule seminar discussion to fit our common scheduling requirements, after
all permanent class members are known here and in Berlin and Groningen.

**Assignment #1 Characteristics of Regionalism in the United States**

In a nation of 50 states, and thousands of fiercely independent and relatively
powerful local government units, regionalism has been a difficult fit into the
mix of U.S. social/political institutions. Over the course of the twentieth
century, there have been periods when regionalism has flourished as an
intellectual construct, as a reform strategy, as an alternative to fragmented
government, and as a way to guide urban and economic development. Based upon
the readings in Modules 1 and 2, compose a 1000 word essay on the topic,
"Critical Junctures in the Emergence of Regionalism in 20th Century America."
You should draw directly from the readings, but be sure to indicate your
sources. The following example shows you to note sources within your essay -
(Freeman and Bloch, 1990, p. 581). While you use the readings for basic ideas,
it is important to use your own words to synthesize the readings.  Due 20
April

**Assignment #2 Growth management strategies in the United States  **

Undoubtedly the most widespread set of initiatives to influence the spatial
development of regions in the United States are those that fit under the
rubric of "growth management." The power to regulate land use is derived from
state governments and in those states where growth management legislation has
been enacted, the spatial development of regions tends to be based on explicit
planning objectives. But the success of growth management strategies, and
their effects, is not always what the proponents claim. Using the literature
in Module 3, prepare a 1000 word essay that critically assesses the approaches
and impacts of growth management initiatives on regional and urban development
in the United States.  Due 4 May

**Assignment #3 Changing Social and Economic Structure of US Regions**

The transformation of major urban areas in the United States since World War
II has been characterized by the dismemberment of the traditional core city,
including the central business district and the adjacent residential and
industrial zones, and a rapid spread of the areas of new growth deeply into
the periphery. This has not been without a certain degree of rebuilding in the
core area, as evidenced in some city (e.g. Boston, San Francisco, New York and
Chicago) but overall urban analyst point to the pervasive problem of poverty,
decay and decline in the inner city. Based upon the literature in Modules 4
and 5, present your own view on the changing social and economic structure of
urbanized regions. Your essay should not exceed 1000 words. Also, you may want
to select one or two urbanized regions as the focus for discussion.  Due 8
June

**Assignment #4 Institutional Arrangements to Strengthen Regional Planning
(OPTION A or B)**

**A.  ** As pointed out in assignment #1, regional approaches to development
challenges in the United States have had to contend with a strong tradition of
local autonomy. But as the readings in Module 6 suggest, there have been
successful effort to cooperate, plan and implement without necessarily
creating strong regional bodies. Select one or more of the cases from this
section of readings and discuss the approaches, problems, and accomplishments
of regional cooperative endeavors. Be sure to keep your essay within 1000
words. You may, of course, refer back to earlier readings in other modules to
help complete this assignment. Due 22 June

**Or**

**B.  ** Write your own essay assignment in one paragraph, laying out what
precise factors and issues ought to be answered, and then write your 1000 word
essay.  You may use a mixture of readings and points from any of the assigned
readings and you are especially encouraged to reference new readings that you
have found to develop your essay.  All readings must be from recognized
journals and published books.  Ideas for this optional essay can draw upon
previous course materials, but also consider a review of recent issues
contained in current or archive issues of PLANetizen
([www.planetizen.com](http://www.planetizen.com)), which reviews major issues
now facing US urban and regional development.  Due 22 June  
    
    
  
---  
  
![](../../images/interior/bottom_line.gif)

**UIUC Department of Urban and Regional Planning**

[Student Resource Center](../../student/index.html) | [Alumni
Network](../../alumni/index.html) | [Admissions Info
Center](../../admissions/index.html)  
[Home](../../index.html) | [ Site Guide](../../guide/index.html) | [Calendar
of Events](http://www.urban.uiuc.edu/calendar/) |[ Contact
Us](../../contact/index.html)  
  
---  
  


