![](Ksusbar.gif)  


**Syllabus**

  

**Course Objective**

The objective of this course is to assist the student in gaining an
understanding of the development of technology as we understand it in our
contemporary setting, and to develop some awareness of the interrelationship
between technology and society. In addition, the course will explore the
relationships between culture and technology in regard to ideas, politics,
institutions, our government, business, and the environment.

* * *

**General Course Plan**

The course will begin as a lecture course in which the instructor will present
an overview of the history of technology and general orientation to the course
format. Next, students will engage in a collaborative effort to review
selected areas of technology. This will be done by independent study, research
and group discussions. Finally, students will develop a group or individual
portfolio project as a final class project.

* * *

**Texts**

![](cover.gif)

_Technology and American Society_ , by [Gary
Cross](http://www.engr.psu.edu/sts/faculty/c/cross.html) and Rich Szostak,
Prentice Hall.  
_Imagining Tomorrow_ , Edited by Joseph Corn, MIT press (ON RESERVE IN
LIBRARY)

  

* * *

**Supplementary Materials**

_Readings will be assigned from these selected sources._  
_Invention and Technology_ , American Heritage of; Forbes, Inc. Forbes
Building, 60 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10011  
_Technology and Culture_ , University of Chicago Press, Box 37005, Chicago
Ill, 69637  
_Engines of Change_ , Brooke Hindle and Steven Lubar. Smithsonian Institution
Press.  
_American Genesis_ , Thomas P. Hughes. Penguin Books  
_History of Science Technology_ , Facts on File by Edgardo Marorini  
_Technology in America_ , By Alan I. Marcus, Howard P. Segal. Harcourt Brace
and Jovanovich  
_The Visible Hand_ , Alfred D.Chandler, Jr. Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press.  
_Connections_ , By James Burke, Time-Life Multimedia, Inc.

* * *

**Mode of Instruction**

Lecture and class discussion from the text and individual readings from
magazines, handouts and other selected history textbooks will comprise part of
our in-class time. In addition, we'll take local tours,  watch videotapes and
you'll be expected to go  online for history research. Finally, I expect you
to become a source by sharing with all of us some of the material and
information  you have read or found.  This will be done during class and for
the final  portfolio project.

* * *

**Evaluation**

Your course grade will derive from five sources: a midterm (15%), a portfolio
project (35%); class participation (10%); and periodic class assignments
(40%). The final grade will be determined based on a scale which will be 90%
and above="A", 80% - 90%="B", 70% - 80%="C", 60% - 70% ="D, and below 60% -
"F"."

* * *

**Specific Policies**

1\. I do not accept late assignments. There will also be no make-up exams.

2\. Food and drinks are not allowed in class.

3\. Any students with a physical or mental disability who needs an
accomodation or other assistance in this course should make an appointment to
speak with me within two weeks.

4\. On all assignments, examinations, or other course work undertaken by
undergraduate students, the following pledge is implied, whether or not it is
stated: "On my honor, as a student, I have neither given nor received
unauthorized aid on this academic work." It is expected in all academic work
in this class that all work be done individually by you, unless specifically
approved by your instructor.

* * *

**Portfolio Project**

  * Everyone will participate in an individual or group portfolio project. The project will be selected by students with my approval. The project will serve as a partial homework assignment. In addition,  I am weighing the portfolio as 35% of the final grade. In fact, you'll note that the portfolio serves as the final EXAM assignment, so you'll want to start early with your portfolio project and you'll want to do your best quality work. This project will give you the opportunity for a hands on experience in understanding history and technology.

**_Example Portfolio Projects_**

  *   **[Central Kansas Flywheels Museum](http://www.tri.net/flywheel/) -** Students may volunteer to work on a small project for the Central Kansas Flywheels Museum. This could include cataloging museum items, or helping establish a database program of the donated museum items, or other project mutually agreed on by museum directors.

  * **[Smokey Hill Museum](http://www.salinakansas.org/attractions/MUSEUM.html) -** Students may volunteer to work on a small project for the Smokey Hill Museum. This could include helping develop displays for children, or other projects as mutually agreed on by the museum volunteer director.

  * **[Internet History research and development project](portfolio.htm) \- ** Students may research Internet sites for information about Technology subjects. The final outcome could be used for the clas  Internet Home Page.  (for students knowledgeable about developing home pages), or a written portfolio of selected museum sites.

  * **[Community Access student video history project](http://www.salnet.org/) \- ** (for those students qualified to produce Community Access TV programs, or have an interest in media technology). Students may develop and produce a short videotape about some history of technology subject. The final tape will be shown as a short program on local Community Access TV.

  * **Hometown History Project-** Students may volunteer for a project in their hometown museum. This range of projects available are only limited by imagination. these projects need to be approved by the instructor prior to start date.

  * **[Salina Fox Theatre](http://www.thefoxtheatre.org) -** The Fox theatre may offer opportunities for students who are interested in volunteering for a project that might involve research, or simple fix-up work.. Consult with the Instructor prior to volunteering on this project.

![](Ksusbar1.gif)  
Top of Page  
[Main Menu](http://www.sal.ksu.edu/faculty/gregs/hist231/default.htm)  
**[College of Technology and Aviation](http://www.sal.ksu.edu/menu.htm)**  
**[Kansas State University](http://www.k-state.edu)**

