## COURSE SYLLABUS  
Environmental Perspectives On Communication Arts  

* * *

Texts  
Attendance  
Deadlines  
Grading  
  
  
  
**Instructor:**

Lea J. Parker  
Assist. Prof., Environmental Communication, School of Communication  
Box 5619  
Northern Arizona University  
Flagstaff, Arizona 86011  
**Office:** Bldg. 16, Room 205 D  
**Phone:** (520) 523-4661;  
**FAX:** (520) 523-1505 **E-Mail:**
[Lea.Parker@nau.edu](mailto:Lea.Parker@nau.edu)

  
  
  

**COURSE DESCRIPTION, PURPOSE AND JUSTIFICATION:**  

Environmental themes have recurred in the communication arts since the
beginning of the human experience. In the 20th Century, communication arts
have played a vital role in public perception and government policy concerning
environmental issues.This course offers an analytical exploration and
interpretation of oral (and aural), visual and written artistic and
communication works that have reflected and influenced contemporary
environmental thought.



**COURSE OBJECTIVES:**  

At the conclusion of this course the student will have acquired the following
knowledge and skills:

(1) an understanding of how environmental issues have influenced oral (and
aural), visual and written communication

(2) an understanding of how oral (and aural), visual and written communication
has influenced public perception

(3) an understanding of how oral (and aural), visual and written communication
has influenced public policy

(4) develop effective research skills for analysis of oral (and aural), visual
and written environmental communication

(5) develop effective writing skills for the interpretation of oral (and
aural), visual and written environmental communication

(6) develop an appreciation for how oral (and aural), visual and written
communication can portray the environment

  
  
**COURSE PROCEDURE:**

This semester - long course will be divided into essentially three components:
the oral (and aural) component will primarily examine music; the visual
component will primarily examine artworks; the written component will
primarily examine written works (creative, persuasive and legal).

  
  
**TEXTS:**

There is no text for this course. Selected readings will be supplied to the
student at the instructor's descriptions. Readings may include but are not
limited to: musical lyrics, critical analysis of music, descriptions of
artworks, critical analysis of artworks, creative and artistic writings of
environmental writers, public policy documents dealing with environmental
issues, Supreme Court environmental rulings and, environmental articles for
the purpose of comparing oral, visual and written communication with primary
environmental theories.



**ASSIGNMENTS AND TESTS:**

Assignments will be given in class. It is the responsibility of students with
excused absences to contact the instructor about make up work. In addition to
in class exercises which are worth participation points, students will write
three major papers, one for each component of the course: oral (aural),
visual, and written. Tests will consist of a midterm and a final.



**GRADES:**

Completion of in - class work assignments and tests will be used to attain
cumulative points. It should be noted that completion of the assignment does
not insure maximum point value; therefore, students wishing to achieve a high
grade should strive to attain the most points possible for all assignments.
Written assignments are subject to the School of Communication Policies and
Standards (see attached copy). Note: there is no "make-up" for missed in-
class work. Students are expected to keep copies of all graded returned work
in a class notebook and will be asked to exhibit these in case of grade
dispute. Individual grades will be discussed by appointment only.



**GRADE SCALE:**

Grades will be distributed according to the following scale: 92 percent and
above = A: 83- 91 percent = B; 74-82 percent = C; 65-73 percent = D; below 65
percent = F.

Note: Students are expected to complete every assignment by established
deadline. There is no alternate make up work for this class.



**GRADE WORKS:**



* Analysis Paper No. 1: Impact of a Musician or Musical Selection on Environmental Perception and/or Policy - 100 points

* Analysis Paper No. 2: Impact of an Artist or Artwork on Environmental Perception and/or Policy - 100 points

* Analysis Paper No. 3: Impact of a Writer or a Written Work on Environmental Perception and/or Policy - 100 points

* Midterm Test - 100 points

* Final Test - 100 points

* In Class Participation points - 10 to 20 points

TOTAL POINTS POSSIBLE = Approximately 510-520



**DEADLINES:**

Deadlines are absolute! No work will be accepted after the scheduled deadline,
resulting in a grade of ZERO (O) for the assignment not turned in by deadline.



**ATTENDANCE:**

Students missing one or more classes Jeopardize their grades. The material for
this course is taken from a variety of sources in addition to assigned
readings. Lectures will not be repeated. Excused absences are given for the
following reasons only: (a) illness documented by written doctor's medical
statement or copy of prescription: (b) family emergencies documented by
appropriate evidence, (c) institutional reasons documented by official
institutional excuse form.



**ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:**

All work submitted for this course must be original and must be completed
during the semester in which the class is taken. No duplicate work (work
completed for other classes) will be accepted and will be considered cheating.
Any act of cheating or plagiarism will result in a grade of ZERO (O) for the
assignment or test in question and may result in the lowering of the final
grade by one or more letter grades, subject to instructor discretion.



**SAMPLES OF COURSE CONTENT:**

**Oral (Aural) Component: Music**

**Classical:** "The Planets" by Gustav Holst; "The Four Seasons" by Vivaldi;
"Grand Canyon Suite" by Ferde Grofe; "Pastoral" by Beethoven; "Mysterious
Mountain" and "And God Created Great Whales" by Alan Hovhaness; "Night
Watchers" by Dan Welcher

**Contemporary:** "Red Rain" by Peter Gabriel; "If a Tree Falls" and "Radium
Rain" by Bruce Cockburn; "She'll Take You Back" by Pink Floyd; "Yosemite" by
David Arkenstone; "Fragile Mystery" by Eric Tingstad and Nancy Rumbel; "Madre
De La Tierra" by David Lanz; "Lament for Hetch Hetchy" by Alasdair Fraser; the
album "Civilized Evil" by Jean A Luc Ponty; the album "The Eleventh Hour" by
Mars Lasar; the album "Dolphin Smilesn" by Steve Kindler and Teja Bell; the
albums "Canyon, Callings," and "Missa Gaia" by Paul Winter

**Visual Component: Artworks**

**Classical** : Impressionistic Nature and Pastoral Art of: Claude Monet, such
as "Water Lilies;" Vincent Van Gogh, such as "Starry Night" and "Crows over a
Wheat Field," Henri Rousseau, such as "In the Forest," "Jungle Scenery with
Setting Sun," "The Snake Charmer," and "The Waterfall." The Italian art of
Botticelli, Giorgione, Leonardo Da Vinci, and Lorenzetti

**Contemporary:** Studies of art portraying environmental concepts, such as
"Balance" by Robert Lewis Arnold; the work of Jay Burch, Susan Seddon Boulet,
Scott Thom and other modern artists; Photos that have influenced national park
policy, such as those of Ansel Adams; Studies of architecture that promotes
environmental sustainability, such as Paolo Soleri's Arcosanti.

**Written Component: Rhetoric**

Classical to Contemporary:

From the poetic works of Erasmus Darwin to the classic by his son, Charles
Darwin, _Origin of the Species_ , to the classic _Silent Spring_ of Rachel
Carson, to the creative works of Robinson Jeffers, Loren Eiseley, and Edward
Abbey. Other writings include works by Annie Dillard, Aldo Leopold, David
Leveson, Jim Nollman, Rene Dubos, David Attenborough, Jacques Cousteau. Also:
Legal writings such as Supreme Court environmental decisions.









Back to the top of the page  
[Go to the Environmental Communication Research
Center](http://www.nau.edu/soc/ecrc/)  
[Go to the N.A.U. Homepage](http://www.nau.edu/)

