History of Science 211b Spring 1998



Ancient Inventions



The dramatic pace of technological change in the twentieth century obscures
the surprising fact that most of the discoveries and inventions on which
modern societies have been constructed were made in prehistoric times. Ancient
inventions tell detailed stories of complex knowledge for which no written
records exist. In the first part of this course, we will survey what is known
about the technology of daily life in several very ancient societies. In the
second part, we will study one important technology, the production of
textiles, in detail. During the third part of the course students will work on
group projects in the Science Center machine shop, reconstructing an ancient
invention of their choice.



Tentative Syllabus



PART I: OUR AMAZING ANCESTORS [SR, part 1]



Jan 27 Introduction

Jan 29 The stone age I: spinning fibers into threads [WW, chapters 1,2]



Feb 3 Machine shop workshop, led by Greg Young: making handspindles [3-5 OR
7-9]

Feb 5 Discussion; planning for oral presentations [AI, general browsing]



Feb 10 The stone age II: primitive technologies (lecture/demonstration by
Robert Leverett)

[http://www.flintknappers.com]

Feb 12 pottery, glassmaking, copper and iron working (lecture byDavid Dempsey,
at the Museum)



Feb 17 oral presentations: ancient inventions in the Americas

Feb 19 oral presentations: ancient inventions in Asia



Feb 24 oral presentations: ancient inventions in the Mediterranean

Feb 26 Discussion; preparation for NY trip



Saturday February 28: bus trip to New York City [Liberty Street Gallery in WFC
(Leonardo exhibition) and the Metropolitan Museum of Art]



8:30 a.m. Bus will meet students at J.M. Greene Hall8:30 a.m. Bus will meet
students at J.M. Greene Hall

12:00 noon Arrive at World Financial Center

4:00 p.m. Arrive at the Metropolitan Museum of Art

8:00 p.m. Depart the Met

11:30 p.m. Arrive back at J.M. Greene Hall





PART II: VERY ANCIENT TEXTILES [SR, part 2; WW, chapters 3-11]



Mar 3 Fiber lab [at the Lyman Plant House]

Mar 5 Handspinning workshop: spinning wool on your spindle



Mar 10 The story of silk; guest presentation by students working on the
Northampton Silk Project

Mar 12 papyrus, bark "paper", parchment and Chinese paper (lecture by David
Dempsey, at the

Museum)



SPRING BREAK





Mar 24 Discussion: textiles in antiquity [FINAL DEADLINE FOR CHOOSING YOUR
FINAL PROJECT]

Mar 26 Textiles and industrial revolutions



Mar 31 Textile project presentations

Apr 2 Textile project presentations



APRIL 4 SYMPOSIUM: FROM COTTAGE TO FACTORY



PART III: ANCIENT INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTIONS [SR, part 3; AI; WW, chapter 12]



Apr 7 Discussion of the symposium

Apr 9 "Revolutions" in science, technology, and industry



Apr 14 What did they know and how do we know it? Issues and arguments in
prehistoric technology

Apr 16 Natural Knowledge in preclassical antiquity [NN, chapters 3 and 5]



Apr 21 Class Presentations: work in progress

Apr 23 Class Presentations: work in progress



Apr 28 Class Presentations: work in progress

Apr 30 Review of the course





SYMPOSIUM: FROM COTTAGE TO FACTORY (tentative schedule)



9:00 Christopher Clark, Warwick University, "Early Industry in Rural New
England"

10:00 coffee break

10:15 Daryl Hafter '55, Eastern Michigan University, "The Paradox of Women's
Work Before and After

Industrialization"

11:00 Leonard Rosenband, Utah State University, "From Rags to Reams: Work and
Culture in Old Regime

Papermaking"

12:00 lunch for the students in HSC 211b and HST 256b with the speakers and
the History of Science

Committe, place TBA





Books: R = required, O = optional



AI: Ancient Inventions, by Peter James and Nick Thorpe (Grecourt Bookshop) R

WW: Women's Work: the first 20,000 years, by Elizabeth Barber (Grecourt
Bookshop) R

SR: Supplementary Readings (Copy Cat Copy Shop, Pleasant Street) R

NK: Natural Knowledge in Pre-classical Antiquity , by Mott Greene (Grecourt
Bookshop) O



Other Resourses:



The World Wide Web. The Ancient World Web is linked to the Smith History of
Science Home Page. From there you can visit many places related to this
course. Our Home Page is also linked to such useful sites as

http://www.flintknappers.com



Books on reserve: in Nielson Library, the Art Library, and the Science Library

Journals: there are many, including

Scientific American

British Journal for the History of Science

History of Technology

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science

Science in Context

ISIS





Assignments



1\. This course is an unusual mix of reading, writing, talking, and doing;
integrating this material will be your task as well as mine. To this end, you
will write brief (2-3 pages double-spaced typed) bi-weekly reports in which
you integrate the readings, workshops, and discussions. (February 10, 24,
March 10, 31, April 14)



2\. Class presentations: amazing inventions of ancient Asia, the Americas, or
the countries of the Mediterrranean. (Feburary 17, 19, 24). You must prepare a
handout and brief bibliography for your presentation. The bibliography must
include at least one book or article that does not appear either on the class
reading list or on the Web.

3\. Lucretius thought that the pinnacle of civilization had been reached in
his time (about 95-55 BCE); since then, many other people, in many times and
places, have lived with that illusion. You live somewhere, sometime BCE. Write
a 2 or 3 page letter to a friend about the amazing inventions you have seen in
your lifetime. (March 3).



4\. Textile Project (details TBA). Class presentations: March 31, April 2; Due
in final form April 3.



5\. (a) Class presentations: work in progress -- reproducing ancient
inventions (April 21, 23 and 28)



(b) Complete your reproduction of an ancient invention, AND write a brief
paper about it. The paper should

have two parts: (i) a description of the invention (and its technological,
scientific and cultural

background) and how it works; (b) how you made it. See the Virtual Museum for
examples. Due last

day of exam period.

Instructor: Marjorie Senechal -- Office Hours: T 1:30 - 2:30, Th 9-10, and by
appointment

Burton 311, x3862, senechal@minkowski.smith.edu

