STS001 Home Page

# STS001

# The History of Technology in America

###  *** IMPORTANT NOTE ***

###  The following web page pertains to the 1998 offering of STS001. All new
STS001 students should refer to the current course syllabus, as all of this
information is out of date.

  
  

* * *

* * *

* * *

  
  

# Spring, 1998

### Professor Deborah Fitzgerald

### Teaching Assistant Rob Martello

  
![](rocket.gif) ![](15modelt.gif) ![](att.gif)  
  
  
Welcome to the home page of what is "widely acclaimed" to be one of the best
classes at MIT -- _The History of Technology in America._

     EDITOR'S NOTE: "widely acclaimed" is used loosely in the preceding sentence.

This web page provides a brief overview of the course, a syllabus, weekly
updated discussion questions, a section for TA announcements, and resources to
assist the development of the www class projects.

For more information on related topics, we encourage you to visit the home
page for the [Science, Technology, and Society
Department](http://web.mit.edu/sts) at the [Massachusetts Institute of
Technology](http://web.mit.edu/).

* * *

### Course Overview

  
This course will consider the ways in which technology -- very broadly defined
-- contributed to the shaping and building of American society in the 19th and
20th centuries. We will explore how technology has been a central player in
the larger political, cultural, and economic trends of this period.

The subject matter of this course is highly relevant to MIT's educational
mission and to MIT students' career paths. This course will encourage students
to ask critical questions of both technology and the broader culture of
American society, and will endeavor to train students to be neither blind
critics of new technologies nor blind advocates of technologies in general,
but thoughtful and educated participants in the democratic process.

Professor Fitzgerald received her B.A. from Iowa State University (History of
English) and her Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania (History and
Sociology of Science). Prior to joining the MIT faculty in 1988, she was
Assistant Professor in the Department of the History of Science at Harvard
University. Her research focuses on the industrialization of agriculture,
particularly in 20th century America. She is the author of _The Business of
Breeding: Hybrid Corn in Illinois, 1890-1920_ (1990).

Rob Martello was born in New York City at a very young age. He received a BS
from MIT in Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Science, and an MS from MIT in
Environmental Engineering. He is now a PhD student in the STS department,
attempting to combine Environmental History, the History of Technology, and
Paul Revere into a coherent thesis.

  

* * *

### TA Announcements

  

  * Hi! I'm Rob, your TA. Please, feel free to check out my profound [HOMEPAGE](http://mit.edu/rmartell/www) or email me at _rmartell@mit.edu_ any time.

  * **IMPORTANT NOTE:** Rob's office hours have CHANGED! You can now meet me **after class, from 4:00 to 5:00 PM, every Tuesday and Thursday!** Either walk up to me after class and tell me you want to chat, or stop by E51-070 at this time.

  * Random thought question: Science fiction is a good way to think about the History of Technology. What are the goals of sci-fi? What constitutes good sci-fi, or to put it another way, which Sci-fi authors do you like, and why? Which books would you consider the classics? (Student feedback thus far: Dune, Ender's Game, Snowcrash, Hyperion, Orion, Foundation.)

  

* * *

### Syllabus and Reading List

  
    This link invokes the [STS001 syllabus and reading list.](syllabus.html) It duplicates and expands upon the information     contained in the course syllabus distributed on the first day of class.

  

* * *

### Discussion Questions

    You asked for it. You got it. Discussion questions will now be added to this web page     before each class.

*** [February 5](disc2.5.html) *** [February 10](disc2.10.html) *** [February
12](disc2.12.html) *** [February 19](disc2.19.html) *** [February
24](disc2.24.html) *** [March 5](disc3.5.html) *** [March 12](disc3.12.html)
*** [March 17](disc3.17.html) *** [March 19](disc3.19.html) *** [March
31](disc3.31.html) *** [April 2](disc4.2.html) *** [April 7](disc4.7.html) ***
[April 14](disc4.14.html) *** [April 16](disc4.16.html) *** [April
28](disc4.28.html) *** [April 30](disc4.30.html) *** [May 7](disc5.7.html) ***

[LAST QUESTIONS!!! May 7](disc5.7.html) (Thus ends an era.)

  

* * *

### CLASS PAPERS AND PROJECTS

  

  * **Paper one** was due on February 10. [Click here](paper1.html) if you want to reread the assignment for old time's sake.

  * **Paper two** was due on March 19. If you are one of the numerous students who feel a void in your life now that this paper is behind you, you can always [click here to reread the assignment for paper two.](paper2.html)

  * **Paper three** is the film review project. It is mobile, tactile, and fragile. It is hip and cool. It is on line and feelin' fine. Best of all, it is due at any time you like, but **no later than May 1!** To hand it in, please give it to Rob Martello in class, or drop it in the envelope outside of Rob's office door (room E51-070). [Click here to read the assignment for paper three!](paper3.html)

    ***** FINAL PROJECT *****

     The final project is team-based (3 people per team) and involves the creation of a     series of linked www pages on a History of Technology subject. All deadlines for     this project are on the [syllabus.](syllabus.html)

Assume that your team is an html educational consulting firm specializing in
the history of technology. You have been hired by a local high school to
produce a series of www (world wide web) hypertext pages intended for a
twelfth grade audience. This audience will span the entire intellectual,
philosophical, and emotional spectrum of American teenagers. Some will be
knowledgeable on the subject, and will demand a high degree of sophistication.
Some will know nothing about your subject and will expect to be educated from
first principles. Some will be pro-technology, some will hate it, and others
will be ambivalent. Many will be fans of the TV show "Buffy the Vampire
Slayer." If you alienate any of these constituencies, your company will not
receive a glowing referral letter.

Teams will consist of three students. Each team is responsible for a coherent
set of at least six different www pages. In addition to creating these pages,
you must make a fifteen minute class presentation in which you explain your
strategy and answer questions. Every student will also be assigned a different
team's www pages for critique.

**This is foremost a historical project.** Your biggest responsibility is to
figure out how to explain technological change in the context of larger themes
and patterns of change; for example, how does your technology reflect
contemporary social issues, or economic tensions, or ethical crises? How does
this change as time passes; for example, many times a technology seems not to
fit with the times; why is that? What made the time of your technology
special? All projects must be multidimensional. Part of your report must be
Technical, Ethical, Cultural, Political, Environmental, and Economic. Projects
in which one dimension overwhelms the others will not be well received.

Projects that include humans are much more interesting and grounded in reality
than those without earthlings. Who are the characters in your story? Who
carries and receives the action? Beware of superficial or unanchored stories.

These www pages must be both interesting and informative. Be creative, and
feel free to make use of graphics, sound clips, movies, or any other clever
web tricks. However, **the lion's share of your grade will be derived from
your written text.** Think of this project as a group report written on the
web. As in any historical report, you are expected to footnote all of your
sources (for text, images, sounds, and anything else you use - copyright and
plagiarism laws do apply to the web). Think carefully about the use of
hypertext links to allow the reader to move through your project in a non-
linear manner that suits their own interests.

Your project should contain at least the equivalent of ten pages of
singlespaced text (not counting images).

**PROJECT TEAM ASSIGNMENTS**

  * [TOPIC ONE: **Energy** (Solar and Electric Car)](topic1.html)

    * **TEAM ONE** : Steve Belin, Damon Bramble, Stephen Zoepf

  * [TOPIC TWO: **Biology** (Genetic Engineering)](topic2.html)

    * **TEAM TWO** : Jaime Sarabia, Duane Stevens, Buddy Webb

    * **TEAM THREE** : Laura Kwinn, Benjamin D. Martens, Poonam Modha

    * **TEAM FOUR** : Philip Kim, Andrew Ahn, Sara Garon

  * [TOPIC THREE: **Computers** (Artificial Intelligence)](topic3.html)

    * **TEAM FIVE** : Jacob Strauss, Samuel Wong, Matt Hanna

    * **TEAM SIX** : Travis Furrer, David DiFranco, Michael T. Kenworthy

    * **TEAM "LUCKY NUMBER" SEVEN** : Crystal Harris, Edu Morales, Jay Texeira

    * **TEAM EIGHT** : Matt Kixmoeller, Roland Desroches, Eric Nicholson

    * **TEAM NINE** : Jervis Lui, Kenneth Ng, Xuxia Kuang

  * [TOPIC FOUR: **Robotics** (History of Robots in Industry)](topic4.html)

    * **TEAM TEN** : John McBean, Aaron Mazzeo, Todd Dumond

    * **TEAM ELEVEN** : Hernan Mercado-Corujo, Xixi D'Moon, Tim Chiodo

    * **TEAM TWELVE** : Leila Hasan, Sauparna Das, Adrian L. Morgan

  * [TOPIC FIVE: **Astronautics** (Human factor in space missions)](topic5.html)

    * **TEAM THIRTEEN** : Jeff Daniels, Ashok Eastman, Kartik Mani

    * **TEAM FOURTEEN** : Baris Erkmen, Ray Louie, Jeremy Lin

    * **TEAM FIFTEEN** : Jon Heiner, Aaron Adler, Andrew Montgomery

  * [TOPIC SIX: **Hydropower** (Rivers and Dams)](topic6.html)

    * **TEAM SIXTEEN** : Richard Moy, Vinod Natarajan, Justin Kuo

    * **TEAM SEVENTEEN** : Jon Plaue, Todd Rosenfield, Ore Adeyemi

  
    [Click here to view each team's first www page.](allpage.html)

  
    Next Deadline: **GULP!!!** by **MAY 5** , ALL WWW PAGES ARE DUE!

  

* * *

### HELPFUL LINKS

  

  * Assistance in web page design:

    * Here is the very useful [NCSA (at UIUC) Beginner's Guide to HTML](http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/General/Internet/WWW/HTMLPrimer.html) that will teach you all you need to know about designing creative and exciting www pages.

    * Look! This is the [ Mayfield Handbook of Technical & Scientific Writing](http://tute.mit.edu/afs/athena/course/21/21.guide/www/home.htm). For those of you in the snoozer club, yes, this is the same document we discussed in class. This is your one stop shopping to issues such as quotations, footnotes, and Wing-It side orders.

    * And here is the [SIPB WWW Frequently Asked Questions List](http://www.boutell.com/faq/oldfaq/index.html). Lots of information about web pages, hypertext, and the html language.

    * Many of you have asked me about copyrighting on the web. Admittedly, this is a complex and new field, and we are not legal beagles. See me with any questions, or check out the [Franklin Pierce Law Center guide to "Copyright on the Internet"](http://www.FPLC.edu/tfield/copyNet.htm). You can also consult the [Copyright website](http://www.benedict.com/), or the [United States Copyright Office](http://lcweb.loc.gov/copyright/) for those of you who like to go to the source.

    * Look! Here is the [Alta Vista Search Engine](http://altavista.digital.com/). It will help you find all sorts of cool information anywhere on the web. Please remember what we said about copyright information and plagiarism -- if you can find something on the web, so can we...

    * Finally, here is a [Hypertext Guide to American History](http://grid.let.rug.nl/~welling/usa/usa.html) that is based in the Netherlands University of Groningen. It does not use graphics, but illustrates the full power of a thorough outline and nonlinear hypertext links. Take a look and judge for yourself. What do you see as the "voice" behind these pages? Do you agree with their perspective? Is this "biased" in any way? How can it be improved (as I like to say, there is always room for improvement...)

  * History of Technology sites:

    * The [Technology History](http://www.tectrix.com/links/tech_hist.html) www page contains a lot of commercial site information (good source of images if you cite properly).

    * The [Society for the History of Technology (SHOT)](http://hfm.umd.umich.edu/tc/SHOT) www page is an example of an academic approach to technology history.

    * And of course, the [MIT STS Home page](http://web.mit.edu/sts/www/) provides more information about a great MIT department \-- in fact, you should consider minoring in STS! There's always room for one more!

  

* * *

  
This page has been accessed at least
[![several](http://www.mit.edu/cgi/counter/sts001www)](http://www.mit.edu/doc/counter-
howto.html) times since the counter was last reset on January 15.

This web page is maintained by Rob Martello _(rmartell@mit.edu)_

