> **University Scholars 203** **Technology and American Frontiers: an
exploration of resources** ...each technology is an extension of human lives:
someone makes it, someone owns it, some oppose it, many use it, and all
interpret it. (David E. Nye, **Electrifying America** preface)

 Look here for the text of the
[syllabus](http://home.wlu.edu/~blackmerh/technol/syllabus.html) as handed
out.

 [Cook barbed wire site at U.
Va.](http://xroads.virginia.edu/~CLASS/am484_98/cook/wire.htm)  check it out
as an example of a project!!

Links to  [readings on
Frontiers](http://home.wlu.edu/~blackburnj/technol/frontiereadings.htm) for 22
Jan meeting, and to the [online
forum](http://liberty.uc.wlu.edu/wcb/schools/2/lib/jblackbu/2/forums/forum2/wwwboard.html)

Some thoughts on web pages as  [hypertext commonplace
books](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/commonplace.html) and comments on
[evaluation](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/eval.html)

Some Archy and Mehitabel
[links](http://home.wlu.edu/~blackmerh/technol/archy.html)

An excursion on [agricultural
history](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/turner.html) prompted by reading
Turner, and another on (well, starting from...) [Hannibal
MO](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/missouri.html) which then leads on to
ruminations on  [Americans and
Technology](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/wec.html) and several texts
on  [Luddites](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/limit/ludd.html). Are we
at a  [new point](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/newpoint.html)? See
what  [Jerry Mander](http://home.wlu.edu/~blackmerh/technol/mander.html) has
to say, and compare with  [David
Nye](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/nye.html) .

A weblet more or less centered on
[utopia](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/utopia.html) and following
various weekend thoughts.  And  [Buckminster
Fuller](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/bucky.html) as an exemplary
utopian. Another example is  [Scott
Nearing](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/nearing.html) , and in some
respects the daddy of it all is Edward Bellamy's  [Looking Backward
2000-1887](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/bellamy.html) . Another vision
is  [Gandhi's](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/gandhi.html)

The **stuff** I'm working on is
[silicon](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/silicon.html)

Some materials on [ manufacturing, enterprises and
industries](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/factory.html) . Read  [3
short texts](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/3text.html) ...and oh by the
way the journal  [Technology and
Culture](http://www.press.jhu.edu/journals/technology_and_culture/) is now
available in full text (though only the most recent issues).

Looking ahead a bit: we'll consider
[steam](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/steam.html) ,
[electricity](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/electr.html) ,
[Fordism](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/fordism.html) and [20th century
industry](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/indust.html) in the first week
of March, probably work on computers next, and then explore some technology-
and-labor issues after that.

Computers: here's my  [summary
weblet](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/computer.html) and links to
historically important articles by  [Vannevar Bush
](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/vbush.html)and  [J.C.R.
Licklider](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/licklider.pdf) .  Another
interesting source is  [Bowker's review
article](http://www.press.jhu.edu/journals/technology_and_culture/v039/39.3er_bowker.html)
on some recent literature of cyberspace. (Please read AT LEAST parts 6-8 of
Bush, and the first Licklider source) and if your taste runs to Stephen King,
check out the short story (fable/parable)  [The Machine
Stops](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/limit/forster.PDF) , by EM Forster
(1928 --but absolutely up to date in some respects).  

* * *

  
Web pages of participants:  
[Jordan Ginsberg](http://home.wlu.edu/~ginsbergj/technol/)   [Tarah
Grant](http://home.wlu.edu/~tgrant/technol/)   [Aaron
McCullough](http://home.wlu.edu/~amccullo/technol/)  
[Christine Metzger](http://home.wlu.edu/~metzgerc/technol/)   [Selanga
Ranawaka](http://home.wlu.edu/~ranawakas/technol/)   [Julieann
Ulin](http://home.wlu.edu/~ulinj/technol/)  
 [John Blackburn](http://home.wlu.edu/~blackburnj/technol/) and my own weblet
on  [Technologies of Memory](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/memory/)  

* * *

> These links provide background to the genesis of this course:

>

> [running log](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/log.html) of ruminations
and links  
> [course proposal](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/pro2.html) for
Technology and American Frontiers: an exploration of resources  
> [overall scheme](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/scheme.html) (August
summary), and a [December
addendum](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/technol/scheme2.html)  
> materials for a presentation to the [Virginia Collegiate Honors
Council](http://www.wlu.edu/~hblackme/vchc) (September 19)

