**L &S 121 - SYLLABUS**

_A more detailed syllabus is also available in[PDF format](FinalSyll.pdf)_

**Required texts:**

Flink, James J. _The Automobile Age_. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990.
(available in paperback).

Dunn, J. A., Jr. _Driving Forces: The Automobile, Its Enemies, and the
Politics of Mobility_. Washington, DC, Brookings Institute, 1998\. (available
in paperback).

**_There is a Course Reader .. from Copy Central on Bancroft_**

**Recommended texts:**

Bijker, Weibe, Thomas P. Hughes, and Trevor Pinch, (Eds.). _The Social
Construction of Technological Systems: New Directions in the Sociology and
History of Technology_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987.

Goddard, S.B. _Getting There: The epic struggle between road and rail iln the
American century._ Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.  
    
  **Week** |  **Theme** |  **Lecture Topic** |  **Required Readings**  
---|---|---|---  
  
1

Aug. 28-30 |  Introduction |

1\. _Course overview_

**"** Automobility" = the automobile "system" as cultural expression and
social artifact

2\. _The car as metal and (e) motion:_ What is the  "STS" approach and how
does it apply to the study of the automobile in US society? |

  
    
    


Flink Ch 1, The Automotive Idea

Dunn Ch. 1, The Automobile and Its Enemies  
  
2

Sept. 4-6 |  Technology |

3\. _WhoUs Driving, or, the engine that could:_ Technological determinism,
SCOT, and the internal combustion engine. Could it have been different?

4\. _Anatomy of a/the car:_ All about the whole car: suspension, tires,
steering, transmission, brakes, etc. . Complexi-fication of the modern car.
Fuel consumption vs. size/weight/power. |

Volti, A century of automobility (R)

Heilbroner, "Do Machines Make History?" (R)

Arthur, "Competing Technologies (R)

Volti, "Why Internal Combustion?" (R)

  
  
3

Sept. 11-13 |

Technology /

Infrastructure |

5\. _Where the rubber hits the road._ Technologies are more than artifacts.
Networks of production, distribution, and support. Infrastructure (roads,
signs, regulations, traffic signals). Large technical systems and normal
accidents.

6\. _The powers behind the throne._ The emergence of the technical complex;
institutions from industries (e.g. LOF) to corporations (cars) to public
agencies (roads), including supporting industrial complexes (oil, steel). |

Flink Ch 2, The Emerging Industry

Flink Ch. 3, A Car for the Great Multitude.  
    
    
    


Graham and Marvin, "Urban Infrastructure" (R)

Margaret Crawford, "The Fifth Ecology," from _The Car and the City._ (R)  
---|---|---|---  
  
4

Sept. 18-20 |  Infrastructure |

_7\. Three men, three ideas:_ Taylor, Ford and Sloan. Modes of production and
their impact on accessibility. Dissemination to other sectors.

_8\. Divided highways._ External networks of roads, highways; paving and the
interstate system. Opening up of AmericaUs South and West. |

Flink Ch. 4, Fordism

Flink Ch. 5, Rise of the Giants

Flink Ch. 12, Sloanism  


Dunn Ch. 2, Promoting Highways  
  
5

Sept. 25-27 |  Infrastructure |

_9\. Oil makes the wheels go Tround. T_ he growth of the oil companies.
Producing, refining, and marketing petroleum.

_10\. Derailed: the demise of rapid transit sytems._ Case studies of LA and
SF. Conspiracy and co-optation. Legends of the fall. |

Yergin, "Hydorcarbon Man" (R)  
Gordon, from _Steering a New Course_ (R)  
Brown et. al., from _Running on Empty_ (R)

Flink Ch. 19, Triumph of the Auto.  
Dunn Ch. 2, Promoting Highways  
  
6

Oct. 2-4 |

MIDTERM

Societal / cultural impact |

**_11\. In-class written midterm_**

_12\. The auto as liberation technology._ From rural farmers to urban
computers .. escaping the farm, the home, the job, and the train. |  Flink Ch.
7, Modern Times  
Flink Ch. 8, Diffusion  
Dunn Ch. 6, Rationalizing Sprawl  
Weber, _The Joys of Automobility_ (R)  
  
7

Oct. 9-11 |  Societal / cultural impact |

_13\. The New American Dream. T_ he rise of mass advertising and consumption.
Planned obsolescence. Post WWII suburbanization.

_14\. The car as centrifuge._ Suburbanization, modernity, mobility, and
structural discrimination. |

Flink Ch. 9, The Family Car

Flink Ch. 10, On the Road

Weber, _Joys_ (redux)

Dunn, Ch. 7, Towards a Politics of Mobility  
  
8

Oct. 16-18 |  Societal / cultural impact |

_15\. Trapped behind the wheel_. Growing reliance on the automobile, the oil
crisis, the inability of Detroit to adapt. Energy consumption, and traffic
density

_16_. _Networks, Flows, and the Built Landscape_   **Guest Lecturer - Jonathan
Mason,** |

Flink Ch. 20, Decline and Resurgence Kunstler, _Geography of Nowhere,_ Ch.11
"Three Cities" **(*R2)** Ruth Schwartz Cowan, _A Social History of Technology_
, pp. 236-248 **(*R2)**   C. Lee, "Transportation 2025," unpublished **(*R2)**
J.B. Jackson, "Roads Belong in the Landscape" and "Truck City;" **(*R2)**  
---|---|---|---  
  
9

Oct. 23-25 |  Status, Symbolism, and Sex |

_17\. Cultural icons and rites of passage._ Advertising; machismo and the
gendered car; drag racing, drive-ins, road trips, RVs and camping trips, SUVs
and off-road destruction.

_18\. Paradise by the dashboard lights._ The car as sex subject, object, and
facilitator. |

Flink Ch. 15, Insolent Chariots Zuckermann, "The Auto and the Ego" from _End
of the Road_ (R)  McShane, Ch. 8, "Gender Wars", from _Down the Asphalt Path_
(R)  Virginia Scharff, _Taking the Wheel_ , excerpts **(*R2)**  
  
10

Oct 30 Nov 1 |  Energy & Environment |

_19\. Burn baby, burn: fuels and additives_. Gasoline! Catalytic converters,
lead, ethanol, MTBE. Alternative fuels. **Guest lecturer Pamela Franklin**
_20\. Blowing smoke._ Local and global air quality impacts. Tailpipe and
evaporative emissions and the basic science of photochemical ozone formation.
The LA story and the emergence of emission control systems. **Guest lecturer
Prof. Catherine Koshland.** |

Combined readings for both lectures:  
P. Franklin, C. Koshland et. al., "Clearing the Air." **(*R2)** Calvert et.
al., "Achieving Acceptable Air Quality," **(*R2)** Utell et. al., "Public
Health Risks from Vehicle Emissions," **(*R2)** J. Carbajo, "Regulations and
economic incentives," **(*R2)**   _**(SEE PDF file for recommended additional
reading by Marc Ross)**_  
  
11

Nov. 6-8 |  Energy & Environment |

_21\. Where do they go to die?_ Tires, batteries, auto bodies, and other
secondary messes. Front and rear-end environmental and resource costs



_22\. Foul play._ Traffic patterns and trends. Distributional justice -
relative access to cars, roads, schools, and jobs. |

Socolow and Thomas, "The Industrial Ecology of Lead and EVs" **(*R2)** Lave
et. al. Reply to the above **(*R2)** Weaver, "Scrap Tires," **(*R2)**   More
from Scharff excerpts **(*R2)** Gilroy, "Driving While Black" **(*R2)** B. H.
Wright, "New Orleans Neighbor-hoods under Siege," Ch. 10, and E. Mann,
"Confronting Transit Racism in Los Angeles," Ch. 6, both from R. Bullard, ed.,
_Just Transportation:_ **(*R2)**  
  
12

Nov. 13-15 |  Regulation |

_23\. Which side are you on?_ Regulation as a necessary part of the operation
of a socio-technical system. Safety impacts and highway safety. Evolution of
NHTSA.    _24\. Thou shalt (or shalt not)._ Modes and styles of regulation.
Smog check, fuel efficiency, etc. The auto-industry vs. the EPA ... **Guest:
Louise Wells Bedsworth** |

Bijker and Pinch recap. Mitnick, _The Political Economy of Regulation, " pp.
1-20._ **(*R2)** Dunn Ch. 3, Regulating the Industry. **(*R2)**     Paul
Portney, "EPA and the Evolution of Federal Regulation," from Portney, _Public
Politics for Environmental Protection ", Ch. 2_ **(*R2)** Flink Ch. 20 (recap)  
  
13

Nov. 20

(Only) |  Regulation |

_25\. Safety and the Regulatory State._ Why do we accept these risks and avoid
others? How regulation infiltrates our lives through taxes, traffic,
insurance, etc.

**_26\. Actual (literal) Turkey Day_** |

Guest Lecturer(s) from the UCB Traffic Safety Center  




The Joy of Cooking.  
  
14

Nov. 27-29 |  Futures |

_27\. Future Car! Alternative technologies: EVs, hybrids, fuel cells_

_28\. Moving away from cars?_ Smart highways or soft paths? Bicycles, buses,
networking and other means and modes of interaction .. serious alternatives or
mere co-optation? |

Flink, Epilogue. Mark Brown on the EV program **(*R2)**  
  Recap on Webber, Dunn, and others on the AutoPlus. Anthony Downs, _Stuck in
Traffic_ , excerpts **(*R2)**  
  
15

Dec. 4-6 |  Wrap-up |

_29\. Where are we now? _ Road rage, disempowerment, centralization, and other
social pathologies.

_30. **Are you ready for the final exam, Thelma?**_ |

No _required_ readings for the last week. See the PDF file and (*R2) for two
recommended readings on road rage...  
  
    


[Home](../index.htm)

