![](../images/UFLOGO.jpg) AOM 5045

Appropriate Technology for Agricultural Mechanization

* * *

**Agricultural and Biological Engineering Department**

**University of Florida**

**AOM 5045 Section 0166X Fall, 1997**



**Appropriate Technology for Mechanized Agriculture. Semester Credits: 3,
Instructor: Dr. Richard C. Fluck, P.E. Prerequisite: Advanced undergraduate
standing in agriculture or equivalent. Offered Fall Semester of odd-numbered
years.**

**Selection, evaluation and transfer of appropriate mechanization technology
for agricultural development. Agricultural power sources; field, processing,
transportation, water pumping and other farmstead equipment; and structures.**

**Objectives:**

> > **1\. Examine the precepts, characteristics, experiences and methodologies
of appropriate technology.**

>>

>> **2\. Define and give a basic understanding of appropriate technology for
mechanized agriculture.**

>>

>> **3\. Examine competing technologies within the realm of agricultural
engineering and their selection, transfer and impacts as appropriate
technologies, with an emphasis on underdeveloped agriculture.**

>>

>> **4\. Identify and emphasize the unifying concepts of appropriate
technologies for mechanized agriculture, including power and energy,
economics, cultural factors, and environmental factors.**

**There is no text for AOM 5045. Lecture notes will be supplied for most
classes; these will include references for optional additional reading.**

****

**The lecture plan is as follows:**

**I. Appropriate Technology (AT)**

> **A. Definitions and related ideas**

>

> **B. History of AT**

>

> **C. Case studies**

>

> **D. Sources and transfer of technology**

**II. Appropriate Technology in Agriculture**

> **A. Farming systems of the world**

>

> **B. Goals for AT in mechanized agriculture**

>

> **C. Farming systems research and extension (FSR &E):**

>

> **D. History of technology development in agriculture**

> > **1\. Developed countries**

>>

>> **2\. Underdeveloped countries**

> **E. Case studies**

>

> **F. Mechanized agriculture development in LDC's**

**III. Appropriate Technology in Mechanized Agriculture**

> **A. Energy and power requirements for mechanization**

>

> **B. Humans as mechanical energy sources**

>

>> **1\. Manual tools and equipment for field operations**

>

>> **2\. Manually-operated pumps and water lifting devices**

>

>> **3\. Human-powered transportation equipment**

>

> **C. Draft animal force, power and energy**

>

>> **1\. Draft animals and associated implements**

>

>> **2\. Draft-animal-operated pumps and water lifting devices**

>

>> **3\. Animals for transportation**

>

> **D. Internal combustion engine**

>

>> **1\. Single axle tractors**

>>

>> **2\. Riding tractors**

>>

>> **3\. Tractor implements**

>

>> **4\. Engine-powered transportation equipment, mobile and stationary**

>

> **E. Electric motors and associated equipment**

>

> **F. Solar energy**

>

>> **1\. Solar thermal energy processes and equipment**

>>

>> **2\. Solar photovoltaic energy**

>

> **G. Wind power**

>

>> **1\. Applications for pumping and lifting water**

>

>> **2\. Applications for electricity, heating and other uses.**

>

> **H. Hydropower**

>

>> **1\. Small-scale hydroelectric power**

>>

>> **2\. Water-powered water lifting and pumping devices**

>

> **I. Biomass energy**

>

>> **1\. Anaerobic methane generation**

>>

>> **2\. Gasification and combustion of biomass**

>

> **J. Processing equipment: threshers, shellers, cleaners, grinders, mills,
etc.**

>

> **K. Principles & technology for crop preservation & storage**

>

>> **1\. Dryers for grain and other agricultural commodities**

>

> **M. Support services, institutions and circumstances affecting
mechanization**

>

> **N. Future trends**

>

>  

**AOM 5045 meets 2nd period (8:30-9:20 A.M.) MWF in Room 21, Frazier Rogers
Hall (the Agricultural Engineering Building). AOM 5045 has no laboratory
period.**

**Attendance at lectures, though not required, is strongly encouraged. It is
impossible to recapture through distributed class notes, and the notes taken
by others, the total content of lectures, particularly those that are
discussion-oriented. If you have to miss class, check with the instructor to
obtain class notes and assignments for the period(s) you will miss or have
missed. Classes will begin promptly at 8:30. Tardiness is discouraged.**

**Grading will be based on the following assignment of weights:**

    **Homework 10%**
    **Class participation 10%**
    **Tests (2) 30%**
    **Term Paper 20%**
    **Final Exam 30%**

**Tests will be comprehensive over the material covered since the previous
test. Testing techniques will vary, including multiple choice, true-false,
fill-in-the-blank, problem solving and essay.**

**As a result of completing the registration form at the University of
Florida, every student has signed the following statement: "I understand that
the University of Florida expects its students to be honest in all their
academic work. I agree to adhere to this commitment to academic honesty and
understand that my failure to comply with this commitment may result in
disciplinary action up to and including expulsion from the University."**

**Homework will normally be graded on the basis of 10 points maximum credit.
Homework assignments will have specific due dates. Late homework will be
reduced one point for each class period the homework is late; no homework will
be accepted for credit after the last class period.**

**Dr. C. Direlle Baird, 17 Frazier Rogers Hall, 392-2522, is the department
chairman for Agricultural and Biological Engineering and as such is the person
you should see if you have concerns about this course or instructor that are
appropriately directed to someone other than the course instructor.**

**Resources are available on-campus for students having personal problems or
lacking clear career and academic goals which interfere with their academic
performance. These resources include:**

> > **1.** ** _University Counseling Center_** **, 301 Peabody Hall, 392-1575,
personal and career counseling;**

>>

>> **2.** ** _Student Mental Health_** **, Student Health Care Center,
392-1171, personal counseling;**

>>

>> **3.** ** _Sexual Assault Recovery Services (SARS)_** **, Student Health
Care Center, 392-1161, sexual assault counseling; and**

>>

>> **4.** ** _Career Resource Center_** **, Reitz Union, 392-1601, career
development assistance and counseling.**

**The final exam is scheduled for Wednesday, December 17 from 7:30 until 9:30
A.M. It will be comprehensive over the entire course.**

* * *

| [University of Florida](http://www.ufl.edu/) | [Ag and Bio Eng
Dept](http://www.agen.ufl.edu/) | [AOM Courses
Home](http://www.aom.ufl.edu/aomcourses/index.htm) | [AOM 5045 Home
](index.htm)|

* * *

Last Modified 04/20/99 02:59 PM

* * *

