**Course Description  Course Policies   Assignments   Syllabus   Reference
List

**

**[ Discussion
Forum](http://instruct.unc.edu:6080/wcb/schools/5/3701/dsonnenw/INL20102991/forums/forum1/wwwboard.html)
[Student Pictures](inls201-pics.htm)     [Student Presentations](stud-
talks.htm)  

**[Online APA Style Guide
Materials](http://www.english.uiuc.edu/cws/wworkshop/apamenu.htm)     [UNC-CH
Human Subjects Review Board (AA IRB)
Manual](http://research.unc.edu/ors/irb/index.html)

**

**![](apes.JPG)**

"I don't care if she is taking notes. Where were you last night?"

  
  

**INLS 201-02: Research Methods** ****

**Fall 1999**

**Thursday, 12:30-3:00pm, 307 Manning Hall** ****

  
  

**Dr. Diane H. Sonnenwald**

**Office: SILS 206**

**Phone: 962-8065**

**Email:[ dhs@ils.unc.edu](mailto:dhs@ils.unc.edu)**

**Office Hours: Thursday, 9:00-11:00, or by appointment.**

  
  

**Course Description**

This course is an introduction to research methods used in library and
information science. It includes writing a research proposal. The course
prerequisite is the completion of 12 semester hours in the SILS master's
program.

  
  

**Relationship to the Master's Curriculum**

This course is required of all SILS master students. It builds on students'
basic understanding of library and information science by strengthening their
skills in designing and conducting research. During the seminar, students are
expected to: (1) learn basic principles of research methods; (2) identify
research questions of interest to them and relevant to their area(s) of
concentration in their master's program and their career goals; (3) review
literature related to their topic; and (4) propose a method(s) for addressing
their question. This is an opportunity to lay the foundation for the master's
paper (that is required of all SILS master students.) _Link to the SILS
master's paper requirements:_ [ Link to Master's paper requirements
](http://dbserv.ils.unc.edu/projects/masters/mspaper.html) ****

  
  

******Course Text**

****Robson, Colin. (1994). _Real World Research_. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Estimated cost of textbook is $31.95. Used textbooks are often available, and
a copy of the textbook is on reserve in the SILS library. ****

  
  

**Reading Assignments** ****

****Most assigned readings will come from the text. Copies of assigned
readings from journal articles and other books can be found in the INLS 201-02
PAM box in the SILS library. Three copies of each have been made available at
the start of the semester. ****

  
  

**Course Policies**

1\. The University Honor Code must be followed.

> "The principles of academic honesty, integrity, and responsible citizenship
govern the performance of all academic work and student conduct at the
University as they have during the long life of this institution. Your
acceptance of enrollment in the University presupposes a commitment to the
principles embodied in the Code of Student Conduct and a respect for this most
significant Carolina tradition. Your reward is in the practice of these
principles.

>

> Your participation in this course comes with the expectation that your work
will be completed in full observance of the Honor Code. Academic dishonesty in
any form is unacceptable, because any breach in academic integrity, however
small, strikes destructively at the University's life and work." (from the
8/1/92 letter to the faculty, signed by Paul Hardin, Chancellor, and John
Moody, Student Body President.)

2\. Assignments (including exams) are due on the date specified in the
syllabus. Those received late will be penalized two points for each day of
lateness. No exceptions.

3\. Evaluation Criteria:

> Homework assignments: 25% (2 assignments; each worth 12.5%)

>

> Individual presentation: 10%

>

> Research proposal: 45%

>

> Class participation: 20%

The assignments, proposal, presentations, and class participation will be
graded on the following scale:

> H 95-100%

>

> P+ 90-94%

>

> P 85-89%

>

> P- 80-84%

>

> L 70-79%

>

> F 69% and below.

4\. If you miss a class, for whatever reason, it is your responsibility to get
notes from classmates. The instructor will be happy to discuss what was
covered, but does not guarantee completeness, nor does she keep class notes
for student use.

Home

* * *

**Assignments (Each worth 12.5% for a total of 25%)** ****

  
  

******Research Questions** **-** Due Sep. 16 - Estimated length: 2-3 pages
****

> For this assignment, you are to hand in a list of _two research questions_ ,
each one of which you think would be a good topic for research (e.g., for your
masters paper). Write each question on a sheet of paper. _Under each question,
write a paragraph or two elaborating on the question, explaining exactly what
you're asking and why the question is important_.

>

> Where do you get ideas? Start from where you are! Draw on your own
interests, experiences, and knowledge. Then talk with faculty, colleagues you
work with, other professionals, and friends. Review old class notes, look at
completed masters papers (on the first and fourth floor of the SILS library.)
Look at the questions people ask on the electronic lists to which you
subscribe. Try browsing in annual reviews of the literature, such as the
_Annual Review of Information Science_ _and Technology (ARIST)_ (SILS REF
Z699.1 .A1 A65) and _Advances in Librarianship_ (SILS REF Z674.A4). Do
literature searches in your areas of interest and read papers in current
journals.

>

> There is no one definition of what makes a research question "important."
Use data, examples, and opinions of academic and professional experts to
justify or explain the importance of your questions.

>

> You won't be held to any of the ideas in future assignments for this course,
though you're encouraged to continue to develop them if you wish.

>

> The criteria by which this assignment will be judged are: ****

>

> ********EVALUATION CRITERIA ****

>

> An **H** will be given for a set of two questions showing original thought,
each of which deals with a distinctly different important issue, and which are
well developed and clearly presented.

>

> A **P** will be given for a set of two questions where only one question
shows original thought, is well developed and clearly presented. The second
question may be closely related to the first, may be less original, less well
developed, or less clearly presented than is necessary for an H.

>

> An **L** will be given for a set of two questions that are closely related,
and/or may deal with trivial issues and/or may be poorly developed and
presented.

>

> An **F** will be given for a set of questions that numbers less than two, or
are so vague that it is difficult to understand the questions and their
importance.

  
  

**Literature Review** \- Due Oct. 21 - Estimated length: 5-7 pages ****

> For this assignment, critique research papers or books related to a research
question (or topic) you have selected for your research proposal (and,
ideally, your master's paper.) You may define "related" as broadly as you
wish. _You must review a minimum of 6 papers or books._ _Justify your
selection and evaluate the papers_.

>

> When evaluating the papers, synthesize their results and pay particular
attention to their use of methods. How are the papers related? How do the
results contribute to our knowledge and understanding of your research
question/topic? What don't they address? Are the data analyzed and the source
from which it was collected appropriate? Are the interpretations/results
offered convincing? Do the papers make genuine contributions to knowledge? Can
you see ways in which they could be improved, or areas in which more or
different material or a different approach is needed for a convincing
argument?

>

> In writing up this assignment, compare the research methods and
contributions made by the papers. Were any of the approaches particularly
fruitful? Did the nature of the topic make some approaches to research or
sources of material for analysis more effective than others? What did you
learn from the papers? Summarize both positive and negative aspects of each
paper, and discuss the implications for your research.

>

> In this assignment, you should demonstrate a familiarity with a body (or
bodies) of knowledge relevant to your research question, integrate and
summarize what is known relative to your research question, and show how your
question is linked to prior research. You should also demonstrate an in-depth
understanding of the research methods used in the literature, and the
appropriateness of various research methods to your question.

>

> The criteria by which this assignment will be evaluated are:

>

>  
>

>

> EVALUATION CRITERIA ****

>

> ****An **H** will be given for a discussion that has something important and
original to say in discussing each paper that leads to specific implications
for your research. Both positive and negative points should be made about each
paper. The papers should be synthesized, illustrating topical and
methodological relationships with each other and your research. The
conclusions must be presented in general terms and include implications for
the design of your research project. The discussion must be well balanced
between the papers, well developed, and clearly presented.

>

> A **P** will be given for a discussion that has both positive and negative
things to say about each paper, though points may be less fully developed,
less original, or less clearly explained than is necessary for an H, or the
discussion may be less well balanced between the papers.

>

> An **L** will be given for a discussion that fails to find both positive and
negative things to say about the different papers, or develops or illustrates
points poorly, or consists only of a description of the papers' contents
rather than a critique.

>

> An **F** will be given for a discussion that fails to deal with six papers,
or makes points clearly not supported by what was found, or otherwise fails to
fulfill the assignment.

  
  

********

**Research Proposal (45%)**

_Draft due: Dec. 02_

_Final due: Dec. 14_

> ____Each student must develop a research proposal. The proposal may build on
the research questions and the methods literature review assignments completed
in earlier, or may be focus on an entirely new question/topic area. Ideally,
the proposal can serve as the first chapters of your masters paper (or Ph.D.
paper/research project.) __

>

> __Each proposal should contain the following sections:

>

>   * Introduction: Problem Statement (1 - 3 pages)

>

> The problem statement should state the research question and describe the
nature and importance/significance of the research question on which you will
work.

>

>

>   * Relevant Literature (5 - 7 pages)

>

> In this assignment, you should demonstrate a familiarity with a body (or
bodies) of research literature relevant to your research question, integrate
and summarize what is known relative to your research question, and show how
your question is linked to prior research. You should also demonstrate an in-
depth understanding of the research methods used in the literature relevant to
your question, and the appropriateness of those methods to your question.

>

>

>   * Research Methodology (4 - 6 pages)

>

> In this section, you should describe your research design, including why
your design is appropriate for your research question. Each data collection
and data analysis technique you plan to use should be fully described and
explained. The description should cover: (a) the research site, study
participants, and/or other data sources you have chosen (and why); (b) how you
will gain access to the data sources and/or cooperation of study participants;
(c) the type and quantity of data to be collected and why these data are
appropriate and feasible; (d) the way data will be analyzed (and why); (e) and
any other aspects of your research plans that are relevant, including problems
you would expect to encounter and how you will resolve them; (f) copies of all
data collection instruments you plan to use. If you are planning to use
previously collected data or historical data (e.g., documents, books) examples
of these data should be included. The _strengths_ _and limitations_ of your
approach should also be discussed. If you plan to use human study participants
in your research, the appropriate completed IRB forms should be included in an
appendix. (Note, you do not have to have the IRB forms reviewed and approved
before you turn in your proposal, but they must be completed and included in
your proposal.)

>

>

>   * Research Schedule (1 page)

>

> The research schedule should provide both (1) expected completion dates, and
(2) worst-case completion dates for all major stages of your research project.

>

>

>   * Summary (.5 - 1 page)

>

> The summary paragraph(s) should summarize your research question, the
importance of the question, its relationship to the literature, the methods
you will use to investigate the question, expected completion timeframe, and
the expected outcomes/benefits of your research.

>

>

  
>  
>

>

> Additional, basic requirements for the paper:

>

> 1\. Should be _double-spaced_ , typed, with wide margins and numbered pages.
_A font size 12 or larger should be used._

>

> 2\. Provide the reader with a well organized, structured and formatted
writing.

>

> 3\. Provide the reader with an assignment free of spelling errors,
typographic errors, and grammatical errors. Avoid using passive voice when
possible.

>

> 4\. Be sure to fully note and cite direct quotations and other's ideas and
concepts.

>

> 5\. _Follow the APA style guide_ for citation and reference formats-
Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (4th Edition).
(1994). Lancaster, PA: Lancaster Press. A copy of the Publication Manual is
available in the reference section of the SILS Library Reference Work Room.

>

> See the textbook, and course bibliography for references to help you write
your research proposal.

>

> CRITERIA FOR EVALUATION

>

> ****An **H** paper includes a problem statement that provides strong reasons
for considering the problem important; a well-developed literature review, and
a methods section with clear descriptions of research site and/or data sources
and/or research subjects and of the data to be collected, along with a plan
for analyzing the data and a full discussion of any methodological problems
that could reasonably be expected, with suggested solutions. The connection
between the research question, the site/sources/subjects, and the plans for
data collection and analysis should be fully explained.

>

> A **P** paper is a good solid piece of work that may be less effective in
explaining why the project is needed or in connecting it to central issues in
the field; or it may lack references to relevant literature; or it may lack an
obvious connection between the research question and the methods to be used;
or it may not describe question or the methodology in full detail; or it may
overlook some minor methodological problems that might reasonably be
anticipated or fail to discuss or resolve them satisfactorily.

>

> An **L** paper may fail to explain the need for the research or it may fail
to connect the research question to the methods to be used, or the different
aspects of methods to each other. Major methodological problems may have been
overlooked.

>

> An **F** paper is entirely lacking a required element (problem statement,
relevant literature, research site and/or sources and/or subjects, data
collection and analysis). Any plagiarism or other violation of the Honor Code
will also result in an F and the likelihood of further action.

  
  

**Individual Presentation (10%)**

**Sept. 16, Oct. 21 or Dec. 02**

> You are required to make one individual presentation during the semester.
The purpose of the presentation is to present your research questions,
literature review, or research proposal to the class. You will have the
opportunity to select which topic you wish to cover in your presentation; if
you do not volunteer for a topic or if too many students have also selected
the same topic, a topic will be assigned to you. Each presentations should be
10 minutes in length. Research question presentations are to be given
September 16; literature review presentations are to be given October 21;
proposal presentations are to be given December 2. This presentation is worth
10% of your total grade.

>

> Following are 12 criteria that will be used to evaluate your presentation.

>

> _1\. Content of presentation_

>

> The presentation covers all aspects of the assignment in a clear and concise
way.

>

> _2\. Professional Appearance and Demeanor_

>

> Appearance and demeanor is important to convey to your audience that you
take your work seriously (and hence they should it seriously as well), and you
respect and value their time and feedback.

>

> _3\. Good Posture_

>

> Presenter stands upright rather than leaning on the podium or shifting from
one leg to another. Shifting position to make eye contact around the room is
fine and encouraged. Movement is natural, flowing and purposeful rather than
distracting. Good posture helps keep the audience interested in your
presentation.

>

> _4\. Effective Use of Gestures:_

>

> Gestures complement and enhance the content rather than distracting from it.

>

> _5\. Consistent Eye Contact_

>

> Presenter scans audience throughout the presentation making eye contact with
everyone in the room. Presenter avoids looking down at the floor, backward
towards the screen for lengthy periods of time, up above the level of the
audience eyes, or frequently at notes. Eye contact is not just a rapid seep of
the room, but a steady progression from one side of the room to the other and
back. The purpose of eye contact is to receive continuous feedback on whether
or not the audience seems to be following the presentation and to determine
their continuing interest level.

>

> _6\. Voice Inflection and Voice Projection_

>

> The presenter broadcasts their voice so that everyone in the room can
readily hear it. Enunciation is clear so that everyone can clearly understand
the words that are spoken. The presenter avoids speaking in a monotone but
also avoids letting the end of sentences trail off so they can barely be heard
and understood. The presenter is effective at varying the speed and tone of
their voices. Voice inflection and projection is needed to keep the audience
mentally involved and to help them recognize key points in your presentation.

>

> _7\. Enthusiasm for Topic_

>

> The presenter gives the audience a sense that they have a sincere interest
in the topic and are excited to have the opportunity to share that interest
with you. Many people are initially excited about a project when they begin
it, but the ability to stay interested in a project as you delve into it and
hit stumbling blocks is an important skill to cultivate.

>

> _8\. Effective Use of Overheads/Media_

>

> All presenters are expected to use at least one nonverbal communication
medium other than gestures. Was the media effective? Did it help convey the
main points or distract from the presentation? Did the presenter(s) appear
comfortable with the media? If unexpected problems arose, did they adapt to
the problems and subsequent changes quickly, and thereby minimize the
disruptive potential of the problems? When turning to the medium (or media) to
emphasize its meaning or content, the presenter should not remain fixed on it
for excessive periods of time but only long enough for the audience to grasp
its meaning and/or importance.

>

> _9\. Minimal Reliance on Notes and Notes Kept Discrete_

>

> Notes should be kept as hidden from view as possible so they do not distract
from the presentation. This can be done by using 3x5 cards that are discretely
placed nearby or by writing comments on a sheet of paper kept in between
viewgraphs. These notes should be used only to jog the memory concerning key
points or for help with an occasional numerical analysis or quote. Where notes
must be held, presenter should cradle the 3x5 cards in one hand (covering them
from the audience as much as possible) and should occasionally shift the cards
discretely from one hand to the other so that all gestures are not being made
with the same hand during the presentation. Presenter should not focus for
long periods of time on notes, should not allow notes to distract from
consistent eye contact, and should never read for extended periods from notes
(reading should only be for short quotes, for verifying specific numbers or
dates, or for confirming that nothing has been left off of a list that is
being presented).

>

> _10\. Comfortable with Prepared Material_

>

> Did the presenter appear to know what he/she wanted to say and the
underlying meaning of the material meant that was being presented? Did you
sense that he/she could answer a basic question concerning the interpretation
of such content during the time they were making their prepared comments? Did
it sound like the individual was given a prepared script from someone else
that he/she did not personally understand?

>

> _11\. Duration of presentation._

>

> _The duration of each presentation should be 10 minutes (not including the
question and answer period.) If the presentation is shorter, it indicates the
presenter did not give much thought to the assignment and/or presentation. If
the presentation is longer, it indicates the presenter did not appropriately
select and summarize the key points for the audience._

>

> _12\. Knowledge Shown in Question and Answer (Q &A) Period _

>

> Did the presenter actively participate in the Q&A process, even in areas
that were not directly related to the part of the content that they presented?
Was the person willing to listen to and consider new points made by the
audience that he/she had not thought of before? Was the presenter effective at
thinking quickly on her/his feet showing the ability to analyze and then
incorporate or logically reject new perspectives based upon a pattern of known
facts? ****

>

> **__**_In addition, presenters will also receive feedback from classmates.
Each student in our class will be asked to list two things that you did very
well in your presentation, and two things that could be improved._ **__**

  
  

**Class Participation (20%)**

>  
>  
>

>

> Students are required to constructively ask questions and discuss ideas with
others to increase everyone's understanding and appreciation of research and
issues in our field throughout the semester. In addition, there will be class
participation assignments due periodically throughout the semester. These
assignments are informal learning opportunities and will help prepare students
to be successful with the larger, graded assignments. (10%)

>

> In addition, students are required to interact with colleagues taking
similar research method courses at the University of Oulu in Finland and
National Taiwan University in Taipei. Taiwan. Students will have opportunities
to interact with these colleagues in audio-video conferences, an electronic
discussion forum, by posting their presentations on the web and sharing the
url's with their colleagues (i.e., posting the url on the discussion form),
and possibly using other collaboration software such as NetMeeting to discuss
research and research methods. (10%) ****

Home

  
  

* * *



**Course Syllabus ( _tentative_ )**

  

**Links to course dates:  8/19  8/26  9/02  9/09  9/16  9/23  9/30  10/07
(10/14 No Class; Spring break)  10/21  10/28  11/04  11/11  11/18  (11/25 No
Class; Thanksgiving Holiday) 12/02  12/14**

  
  

**Aug. 19: Introduction**

_**_**

> **_The discussion this week will be a general introduction to the course and
the instructor. We will cover the course objectives, expectations with respect
to the course, and mechanics of the course. Students will have the opportunity
to introduce themselves._**

>

> **_Because we only met as a class once a week, and we lose two weeks due to
holidays (fall break and Thanksgiving), we will begin covering course material
this class. In particular, we will discuss what is research? What are the
different theoretical approaches to research? Theoretical paradigms, research
questions, and methods are intrinsically linked together, each influences the
other. Students will learn about different research paradigms, and how they
relate to research in information and library science (ILS). What paradigm do
you prefer? Why? How does this influence your research interests, including
your proposal topic, master's paper, etc.?_**

>

> **Required Reading :**

>

> Textbook, chapter 1, pp. 2-17 **

>

> ** Optional, Recommended Reading :**

>

> Neuman, W. Lawrence. (1994). _Social Research Methods (2 nd edition).
_Boston: Allyn and Bacon.**

>

>       Chapter 3: Theory and Research, pp. 34-54**

>

>       Chapter 4: The Meanings of Methodology, pp. 55-77

**

  
  

**Aug. 26: Designing research studies: To bravely go where none have gone
before**

> **_Each master's and Ph.D. student at SILS must develop a research topic and
write a research proposal. What makes a good research topic? What are the
elements of a research proposal? What are the general approaches or strategies
to designing a research study? What are the advantages and disadvantages to
the approaches? These questions will be explored in this class. This is
important to consider when developing a research question._**

>

> **__****Required Reading :**

>

> Textbook, chapter 2, pp. 18-35.**

>

> Textbook, chapter 3, pp. 38-76.**

>

> Jones, S. (1999). Studying the net: Intricacies and issues. In S. Jones
(Ed.), _Doing Internet Research_ (pp. 1-27). London: Sage.**

>

>         This chapter discusses some possible important research questions
and approaches to studying the Internet.

>

> ** Optional, Recommended Reading:**

>

> Burke, M., Chang, M., Davis, C., Hernon, P., Marchionini, G., Nicholls, P.,
Schwartz, C., Shaw, D., Smith, A., Wiberley, S., & Wolpert, A. (1997).
Editorial: A research agenda beyond 2000. _Library & Information Science
Research, 19_(3), 209-216.**

>

> Stuck on coming up with a research question? These researchers in ILS
describe topics they believe are important research topics in our field. Do
you agree?

>

> ******Class Participation Assignment :**

>

> In preparation for class discussion (and for the assignment due later), each
student must draft 2 possible research questions and 2-3 reasons why each
question is important.

  
  

**Sept. 02: Reviewing Related Research, or, the Literature Review: Help or
hindrance?**

> **_A literature review is required in most (if not all) research proposals,
including the SILS master's paper. We will examine the purpose of literature
reviews and attributes of good and not so good literature reviews._**

>

> **Required Reading:**

>

> Katzer, Jeffrey, Cook, Kenneth H., & Crouch, Wayne W. (1991). _Evaluating
Information_. New York: McGraw Hill. **

>

>        Chapter 8: Subject Matter: What is being studied, pp. 79-97**

>

> Neuman, W. Lawrence. (1994). _Social Research Methods (2 nd edition).
_Boston: Allyn and Bacon.**

>

>        Chapter 5: Reading other people's research, pp. 79-95.**

>

> Onwuegbuzie, Anthony J. (1997). Writing a research proposal: The role of
library anxiety, statistics, and composition anxiety. **_Library & Information
Science Research, 19_(1), 5-33.**

>

> **Class Participation Assignment:**

>

> In preparation for the literature review written assignment due Oct. 21,
practice critiquing the paper by Onwuegbuzie. How do the results contribute to
our knowledge and understanding about the topic? What doesn't the paper
address? Are the data analyzed and the source from which it was collected
appropriate? Are the interpretations/results offered convincing? Does the
paper make a genuine contribution to knowledge? Can you see ways in which the
paper could be improved, or areas in which more or different material or a
different approach is needed for a convincing argument?

  
  

**Sept. 9: Designing Experiments: Taming the dragon**

> **_Experiments are a popular method of research in information and library
science. For example, Saracevic, Marchionini, Wildemuth, and Shaw use
experimental research designs in their work. Students will learn the
fundamentals, advantages and disadvantages of this approach. We will also
discuss what resources are available at SILS to support this type of research
design._**

>

> **Required Reading:**

>

> Text book, Chapter 4, pp. 77-120**

>

> Schacter, J., Chung, G., & Dorr, A. (1998). Children's Internet searching on
complex problems: Performance and process analyses. _JASIS, 49_ (9),
840-849.**

  
  

**Sept. 16: First assignment due**

> **Presentations**

>

> RESEARCH QUESTION ASSIGNMENT DUE TODAY.**

>

> _PRESENTATIONS ON RESEARCH QUESTIONS GIVEN TODAY._**

>

> _All students are expected to give feedback to the presenters._**

  
  

**Sept. 23: Designing Surveys and Case Studies: Knowing the dragon**

> **_Surveys and case studies are also commonly used in ILS. Fundamentals of
these approaches, and the advantages and disadvantages to each will be
discussed. Students will learn when these methods are appropriate to use._**

>

> **Required Reading:**

>

> Textbook, Chapter 5, pp. 121-145. **

>

> Textbook, Chapter 6, pp. 146-169.**

>

> Garton, L., Haythornthwaite, C., Wellman, B. (1999). Studying on-line social
networks. In S. Jones (Ed.), _Doing Internet Research_ (pp. 75-106). London:
Sage.**

  
  

**Sept. 30: Ethics and Research Design; Collecting data using observational
methods**

> **_Ethics in research is an important issue that touches every aspect of the
research process, and is embedded in every class session. However, during the
first part of this class we will take time to explicitly discuss ethics in
research. What are your ethical responsibilities as a researcher? Do these
differ from your legal responsibilities? Does your ethical perspective
influence your research design? If so, in what ways?_**

>

> **_During the second part of this class, we will discuss collecting data
using observational methods. The fundamentals, advantages, and disadvantages
of observation will be covered. Will you use observation as a data collection
method in your research? Why, or why not?_**

>

> **Required Reading:**

>

> Sharf, Barbara F. (1999). Beyond netiquette: The ethics of doing
naturalistic discourse research on the Internet. In S. Jones (Ed.), _Doing
Internet Research_ (pp. 243-256). London: Sage.**

>

> Burke, M., Chang, M., Davis, C., Hernon, P., Nicholls, P. Schwartz, C.,
Shaw, D., Smith, A., Wiberley, S. (1996). Editorial: Fraud and misconduct in
library and information science research. _LISR 18_ , 199-206.**

>

> Textbook, Chapter 8, pp. 190-225**

  
  

**Oct. 07: Interviews and Questionnaires**

> **_Interviews and questionnaires have many uses in our field. Different
types of interviews and interview practices will be discussed. Questionnaire
development will also be discussed._**

>

> **Required Reading:**

>

> Textbook, Chapter 9, pp. 227-268**

>

> Witmer, Diane F., Colman, Robert W., Katzman, Sandra L. (1999). From paper-
and-pencil to screen-and keyboard: Toward a methodology for survey research on
the Internet. In S. Jones (Ed.), _Doing Internet Research_ (pp. 145-161).
London: Sage.**

>

> **Class Participation Assignment:**

>

> Each student must meet individually or in a small group with a SILS faculty
member who might be a possible masters paper advisor. Students can meet
anytime during the semester with SILS faculty to discuss their research ideas
(and are encouraged to do so). However, each student must meet with a faculty
member no later than Oct. 07.**

  
  

**_Oct. 14: Fall Break: No Class_**

  
  

**Oct. 21: Literature Review Assignment Due; Presentations; Unobstrusive Data
Collection**

> _LITERATURE REVIEW ASSIGNMENT DUE TODAY._**

>

> _PRESENTATIONS ON RESEARCH QUESTIONS GIVEN TODAY._****

>

> **__****__****_Unobtrusive methods include document/documentary analysis,
use of data archives (including computer transaction logs), and bibliometrics.
These methods will be highlighted in this class session._**

>

> **Required Reading:**

>

> Text book, Chapter 10, pp. 269-293**

  
  

**Oct. 28: Data Analysis: Quantitative Data**

> **_After you collected data, then what do you do? This session will focus on
techniques to analysis quantitative data. Part of the class session will be
held in the SILS computer lab._**

>

> **Required Reading:**

>

> Textbook, "Arranging the Practicalities" and "Dealing with the Data", pp.
294-307**

>

> Textbook, Chapter 13, pp. 309-369**

  
  

**Nov. 04: Data Analysis: Quantitative Data**

> **_More on quantitative data analysis Part of the class session will be held
in the SILS computer lab._**

>

> **Required Reading:**

>

> Losee, Robert M. & Worley, Karen A. (1993). _Research and Evaluation for
Information Professionals_. New York: Academic Press.**  
>      Chapter 8: Statistical Analysis, pp. 165-203.**

  
  

**Nov. 11: Data Analysis: Qualitative Data**

> **_If you conducted interviews or observed study participants or collected
documents, what do you do with these data? How do you analyze them? This class
session will focus on using qualitative methods to analyze data._**

>

> **Required Reading:**

>

> Textbook, Chapter 12, pp. 370-408**

  
  

**Nov. 18: More on Analyzing Qualitative Data; Planning the Research Process**

> **_More on qualitative data analysis, and a discussion on planning and
completing the research process, including developing a schedule for
completing the research project, and reporting the outcomes of the research
project._**

>

> **Required Reading:**

>

> Textbook, Chapter 13, pp. 410-429**

>

> Patton, M. (1990). _Qualitative evaluation and research methods._ London:
Sage.**

>

>       Chapter 8: Qualitative analysis and interpretation, pp. 371-436.**

>

> **Optional, Recommended Reading:**

>

> Patton, M. (1990). _Qualitative evaluation and research methods._ London:
Sage.**

>

>       Appendix 8.3: Excerpts from an illustrative interview analysis, pp.
449-459.**

>

>       Appendix 9.1: A documenter's perspective, pp. 495-506.**

  
  

**_Nov. 25: Thanksgiving Day Holiday: No Class_**

  
  

**Dec. 02: Draft proposals due!**

> **Proposal presentations today!**

>

> **_Two (2) copies of your draft proposal are due. The copies will be
distributed among students in our class. That is, two students will each
receive a copy of your draft and they will provide you with feedback on your
draft proposal no later than Dec. 7. Likewise, you will receive two draft
proposals and must give feedback to the authors no later than Dec. 7._**

>

> **_Students will also present their proposals today. Students are expected
to give feedback to the students presenting today in class._**

>

> **Required Reading:**

>

> Hernon, P. & Schwartz, C. (1998). Editorial: Writing the scholarly research
paper - some advice. _LISR 20_ (2), 111-113.**

  
  

**Dec. 14: NOON - 3:00pm**

> **_FINAL PROPOSALS ARE DUE!_**

Home

  
  

* * *

**References**

Adler, P. A. & Adler, P. (1987). _Membership roles in research_. Newbury Park,
CA: SAGE Publications. **

Bailey, K.D. (1994). _Methods of Social Research_. New York: The Free Press.**

Chatman, E. (1992). _The information world of retired women_. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press.**

Curtis, B., Krasner, H., & Iscoe, N. (1988). A field study of the software
design process for large systems. _Communications of the ACM_ , _31_ ,
1268-1287.

Ericsson, K.A., & Simon, H.A. (1992). _Protocol Analysis: Verbal Reports as
Data._ Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.**

D'Andrade, R. (1986). Three scientific world views and the covering law model.
In D. Fiske, & R. Schweder, (Eds.), _Metatheory in social science_ (pp.
19-42). Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. **

Dervin, B. (1992). From the mind's eye of the user: The sense-making
qualitative-quantitative methodology. In J.D. Glazer & R.R. Powell (Eds.),
_Qualitative Research in Information Management_ (pp. 6-84). Englewood, CO:
Libraries Unlimited.**

Fidel, R. (1993). Qualitative methods in information retrieval research.
_Library and Information Science Research_ , 15, 219-247.**

Flanagan, J. C. (1954). The critical incidence technique. _Psychological
Bulletin, 51_ , 1-22. **

Frohmann, B. (1994). Discourse analysis as a research method in library and
information science. _Library and Information Science Research, 16_ ,
119-138.**

Haricombe, L.J. (1993). Combining qualitative and quantitative methodologies
to study the effects of an academic boycott on academics in South Africa.
_Library Quarterly, 63_ (4), 508-527..**

Haythornthwaite, C. (1996). Social network analysis: An approach and technique
for the study of information exchange. _Library and Information Science
Research, 18_ (4), 323-342.**

Hernon, P. & Schwartz, C. (1994). Editorial: The need for more methodological
and research design studies in library and information science. _Library and
Information Science Research, 16_ , 85-86.**

Kajberg, L. (1996). A citation analysis of LIS serial literature published in
Denmark 1957-1986. **_Journal of Documentation, 52_ (1), 69-85.**

Iivonen, M. (1996). Completion of quantitative and qualitative methods:
Example from a consistency study. In P. Ingwersen & N. O. Pors (Eds.), _COLIS:
Second International Conference on Conceptions of Library and Information
Science: Integration in Perspective_ (pp.149-160). Copenhagen: The Royal
School of Librarianship.**

Iivonen, M., & Sonnenwald, D.H. (1998). From translation to navigation of
different discourses: A model of search term selection during the pre-online
stage of the search process. **_JASIS, 49_ (4), 312-326.**

Kirk, J., & Miller, M. (1986). _Reliability and validity in qualitative
research_. London: Sage.**

Kraut, R. E., & Streeter, L. A. (1995). Coordination in software development.
_Communications of the ACM_ , 38 (3), 69-81. **

**An example of the survey method in info systems.**

Leonard-Barton, D. (1987). The case for integrative innovation: an expert
system at Digital. _Sloan Management Review, Fall_ , 7-19. **

**a nice example of a case study in info systems**

Lofland, J. & Lofland, L. H. (1984). _Analyzing social settings_ (2nd ed.).
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Company. **

**I have used this a lot to guide my own work.**

McCracken, G. (1988). _The Long Interview_. Newbury Park: Sage Publications.**

Nielsen, J.M. (Ed.) (1990). _Feminist Research Methods_. London: Westview
Press.**

**A book I enjoyed reading!**

Solomon, P. (1997). Conversation in information-seeking contexts: A test of an
analytical framework. _Library and Information Science Research, 19_ (3),
217-248.**

Wellman, B., & Berkowitz, E. (Eds.) (1988). _Social Structures: A Network
Approach_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.**

Wildemuth, B.M. (1993). Post-positivistic research: Two examples of
methodological pluralism. _Library Quarterly, 63_ (4), 450-468.**

Yin, R.K. (1989). _Case Study Research_. Newbury Park: Sage Publications.**

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Home

**![](201ne0{newimage0}.gif)**

