**

CRP 395/CRP679.20

**

**_LATIN AMERICAN CITIES

**_

Fall 1999

Instructor:  Barbara Lynch ( _bdl5@cornell.edu)

_

Time: Thursdays, 2:30-4:25 p.m.

Working group meetings to be arranged

Place: Room 115 West Sibley



**

Course Description

**

This course offers advanced undergraduates and graduate students an
opportunity to explore the dynamics of urbanization in a rapidly changing
region of the world. We will ask how economic and social processes associated
with colonialism, post-colonial state building, and recent patterns of
globalization have shaped Latin American urban landscapes and patterns of
every day life. The first part of this course will treat social, political and
spatial phenomena, including rural-urban flows, the construction of urban
spaces, and the implications of economic globalization for urban economies and
environments. The second half of the course focuses on urban responses to
these massive changes: violence and repression, social movements, and
transmigration. This course is a prerequisite to a joint workshop on urban
water issues in Guadalajara, Mexico. The 5-day workshop, offered in
collaboration with Pratt Institute, York University, and the University of
Guadalajara will take place in January 2000.

**



Requirements

**

Students will be responsible for the required reading and active participation
in weekly seminar discussions and working group meetings.

Written requirements are

  * 8 one-page written reviews and oral presentations on assigned readings. Assignments will be made each week, and must be completed during the week in which the reading is assigned. Reviews submitted after that date will not count toward the total. Those who have prepared reviews on a reading will be expected to lead the discussion on that reading.

  * A 10-15 item annotated bibliography and 15-page report on a topic related to one of the themes listed below:

I. Urban watershed management: technology, policy, and implementation.
(Required for participants in Guadalajara workshop)

II. The urbanization of injustice: housing and human settlement policies in
Latin America

III. Participation in urban management. What works? What doesn=t?

IV Resisting or opting out? Popular culture in Urban Latin America\

Class members will join one of four working groups, each focused on one theme
listed above. Starting during the third week of the course, the working groups
will meet weekly to develop a common set of readings the chosen theme, to
share information, and to develop a set of complementary sub-themes which will
become report topics. Each group will report out to the class once after Fall
Break and once at the end of the semester on key findings, conclusions, and
policy recommendations.

**

Required Readings

**

The following texts are required and should be purchased at the Campus Store.

Gilbert, Alan. _The Latin American City,_ rev. ed.

Roberts, Bryan. _The Making of Citizens: Cities of Peasants Revisited

_

Bennett, Vivienne. _The Politics of Water: Urban Protest, Gender and Power in
Monterrey, Mexico

_

Stokes, Susan. _Cultures in Conflict: Social Movements and the State in Peru

_

Prieto, Norma Iglesias. _Beautiful Flowers of the Maquiladora_ :

Pezzoli, Keith. _Human Settlements and Planning for Ecological Sustainability:
The Case of Mexico City.

_

Additional required readings will be placed on reserve in the Sibley Fine Arts
Library.

**



SYLLABUS

** **

A. URBANIZATION IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

**

Archaeological evidence and sixteenth-century Spanish accounts attest to the
existence of a rich urban tradition in Latin America before the European
encounter. Colonial efforts to supplant this tradition and its landscapes with
an Iberian model better suited to resource extraction and post-Independence
emphases on a new kind of urbanism based on bourgeois notions of progress,
order, and discipline produced a new kinds of cities. In this introductory
unit, we will talk about some of these urban initiatives and their
implications for landscape change and the social organization of urban space.

**

Week 1: Introduction to the Latin American City (August 26)

Week 2: Origins of Modern Latin American Cities: Order, Discipline and
Progress (September 2)

**

Roberts, Chapters 1,2

Deans-Smith, Susan. The working poor and the eighteenth-century colonial
state: gender, order and public discipline. In William H. Beezley et al.,
_Rituals of Rule, Rituals of Resistance._ Chap 3. Pp.47-75.

Samper, Miguel. Bogota in the Nineteenth Century. In G.M. Joseph and M.D.
Szuchman, eds., _I Saw a City Invincible: Urban Portraits of Latin America._
Chapter 6.

Martinez-Vergne, Teresita. 1999. _Shaping the Discourse on Space._ Chapter 1

Holloway, Thomas. _Policing Rio de Janeiro._ Chapter 6.

Needall, Jeffrey. 1996. The _Revolta Contra Vacina_ of 1904. In S. M. Arrom
and S. Ortoll, eds., _Riots in the Cities: Popular Politics and the Urban Poor
in Latin America, 1765-1910._ Chap 6, pp. 155-194

**



Week 3: Evolution of Latin American Cities: Fear and Modernity (September 9)

**

Rosenthal, Anton. Fear in the street: trolleys and the reorganization of
public space in Montevideo, Uruguay,  1906-1922.

Tenorio Trillo, Mauricio. 1996. 1910 Mexico City: space and nation in the city
of the ACentenario.@ _Journal of Latin American Studies 28 71-104.

_

Owensby, Brian. 1998. Domesticating modernity: markets, home, and morality in
the middle class in Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo, 1930s and 1940s. _Journal of
Urban History 24_ (no.3): 337-363.

Roberts, Chapter 4

Gilbert, Chapters 2,3

Gordon, Gary Isaac. 1997. Mexico City=s AWar of the Sidewalks.@ Latin American
Studies Association. April 17-19, Guadalajara.

Recommended :

Davis, Diane E. 1998. The social construction of Mexico City: Political
conflict and urban development, 1950-1966. _Journal of Urban History 24_ (No.
3): 364-415.

Tenenbaum, Barbara. 1994. Streetwise history: the Paseo de la Reforma and the
Porfirian State, 1876-1910. In William H. Beezley et al., _Rituals of Rule,
Rituals of Resistance._ Chapter 7. Pp. 127-50.

Johns, _The City of Mexico in the Age of Diaz._ Chapter 1,2,3

Derby, Lauren. The City Rises

**



B. THE URBAN ECONOMY AND HOUSEHOLD SURVIVAL

**

Much has been written about the impacts of globalization, neoliberal trade
policies, and IMF structural adjustment programs on the economies of Latin
American cities. In the section that follows, we will talk about the
implications of these macroeconomic phenomena for the lives and livelihoods of
the vast majority of Latin American urban dwellers. Our objective in this part
of the course will be to better understand the implications of employment in
the formal and informal sectors of urban economies for female and male workers
and their households.

**

Week 4: Formal Sector and Informal Sector in a Neoliberal Age (September 16)

**

Gilbert, Chapter 4

Roberts, Chapter 3,5

Cross, John. 1998. Cooptation, competition, and resistance: State and street
vendors in Mexico City. _Latin American Perspectives 25 (issue 99, no 2,
March): 41-61.

_

Itzigsohn, John. 1998. The socioeconomic organization of informal production.
Unpublished ms.

Pino, Julio Cesar. 1998. Labor in the favelas of Rio de Janeiro, 1940-1969.
_Latin American Perspectives 25_ (Issue 99): 18-40.



Recommended:

Castells, Manuel and Alejandro Portes. 1989. World underneath: the origins,
dynamics and effects of the informal economy. In A. Portes et al., eds., _The
Informal Economy: Studies in Advanced and Less Developed Countries._

Tardanico, Richard and Rafael Menjivar Larin. 1997. _Global Restructuring,
Employment, and Social Inequality in Urban Latin America.

_

Hellman, Judith Adler. _Mexican Lives._ Chapters 1-4.

**

Week 5: Women and Work (September 23)

**

*Lawson, Victoria. 1995. Beyond the firm: restructuring gender divisions of labor in Quito's garment industry under austerity. _Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 13:_ 415-44.

Alvarez, Julia. 1995. Audition. In _The Other Side/El Otro Lado.

_**

** Iglesias, Prieto, Norma. 1997. _Beautiful Flowers of the Maquiladora.

_

Seligmann, Linda J. 1998. Survival politics and the movements of market women
in Peru in the age of neoliberalism. In Lynne Phillips, ed., _Third Wave of
Modernization._ Chapter 4.



Recommended:

_

Beneria, Lourdes. 1992. Accounting for women's work: the progress of two
decades. World Development 20: 1547-1559.

_

Safa, Helen. 1995. _The Myth of the Male Breadwinner.

_

Espinal, Rosario, and Sherri Grasmuck. 1997. Gender, households and informal
entrepreneurship in the Dominican Republic. _Journal of Comparative Family
Studies 28_ (No. 1): 104-128.





**

C. THE SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF URBAN SPACE

**

Since mid-century, patterns of urban growth in Latin America have changed
dramatically. In part, these changes can be attributed to the spontaneous
movement of rural peoples in search of employment and such urban amenities as
health care and education. In part they are the result of deliberate planning
policy, which in turn may reflect the preferences industrialists, real estate
developers, and construction firms. Our task in this section will be to ask
how current urban landscapes have been produced, with what ends, and with what
implications for middle-class, working-class, and poor urban residents.



**

Week 6: New Patterns of Urban Growth: Primate Cities, Second Cities and Urban
Sprawl (September 30)

**

Holston, James. 1989. _The Modernist City._ Chapters 4,5

Pezzoli, Chapters 4-7

Browder, John and Brian Godfrey. 1997. _Rainforest Cities._ Chaps 3,4,5.

**



Week 7: Segregation and Articulation: Planning and Transport Policy (October
7)

**

Gilbert, Chapters 1, 5.

Ward, Peter. 1990. _Mexico City: The Production and Reproduction of an Urban
Environment._ Chaps. 2,4

Vasconcellos, E.A. 1997. The making of the middle-class city: transportation
policy in Sao Paulo. _Environment and Planning 29_ : 293-310.

Rabinovitch, Jonas. 1996. Innovative land use and public transport policy.
_Land Use Policy 13_ (1): 51-67.

Caldeira, Teresa P.R. 1999. Fortified enclaves: the new urban segregation. In
James Holston, ed., _Cities and Citizenship._ Pp. 114-138.

**



Week 8: The Illegal City (October 14)

**

[ii Working Group II to report to class]

Varley, Ann. 1998. The political uses of illegality: evidence from urban
Mexico. In E. Fernandes and A. Varley eds., _Illegal Cities: Law and Urban
Change in Developing Countries._ Chapter 10.

Kowarick, Lucio and Clara Ant. 1994. One hundred years of overcrowding: slum
tenements in the city. In L. Kowarick, ed., Social Struggles and the City: the
Case of Sao Paulo. Chap. 2. Pp. 60-76.

Fernandes, Edisio. 1997. Access to Urban Land and Housing in Brazil: AThree
Degrees of Illegality.@

Schneier, Graciela. 1990. Latin America: a tale of cities. International
Social Science Journal No.125: 337-353.

Roberts, 6

****

Recommended:

****

Chamoiseau, Patrick. 1997 [1992]. _Texaco

_

Castells, Manuel. 1983. The social basis of urban populism: squatters and the
state in Latin America. In _The City and the Grassroots_ , Part 4.

**



Week 9: Can Urban Landscapes be Sustainable: Pollution and Urban Services
(October 22)

**

[iiWorking Group I to report]

_

_

Mello Lemos, Maria Carmen de. The politics of pollution control in Brazil:
state actors and social movements cleaning up Cubatao. _World Development 26
(1): 75-87.

_

Bennett, Vivienne. _The Politics of Water.

_

Gilbert, Chapter 6.

_



_

Recommended:

Hardoy, J,. D. Mitlin and D. Satterthwaite, eds. _Environmental Problems in
Third World Cities.

_

Pezzoli, Keith. 1998. _Human Settlements and Planning for Ecological
Sustainability: The Case of Mexico City._ Chapters 3, 7-9.

Sklair, Leslie. 1994. Global system, local problems: environmental impacts of
transnational corporations along Mexico=s northern border. In H. Main and S.W.
Williams, _Environment and Housing in Third World Cities._ Chapter 5.

**



D. Governance, Citizenship in Contemporary Latin American Cities: Prospects
for Democracy and Social Justice

**

In this section of the course we look first at the kinds of governmental
institutions that have emerged in the late twentieth century. We will ask how
do different forms of urban governance expand or contract the polis and what
kinds of concepts of citizenship they imply. We will then ask how urban
dwellers respond to the opportunities, hardships, and sometimes physical
threats that they face on a daily basis. State violence is used liberally to
support the status quo, very little popular violence is counterhegemonic.
Coping strategies are the rule: playing by the rules of the political system
in place and creating safe outlets for social expression--from voluntary
associations, religious movements and participation in carnival. When does
popular culture reinforce hegemony, and when does it become form of
resistance? When do coping strategies become social movements? Finally, for
many Latin Americans, exit is an expression of political choice. Our final
area of inquiry will be the effects of the diaspora on urbanization in Latin
America and on the construction of new Latin American cities beyond regional
boundaries.

**



Week 10: Governing the City (October 29)

**

[iiWorking Group III to report]

Lomnitz, Larissa and Rodrigo Diaz. 1993. Cultural grammar and bureaucratic
rationalization in Latin Amiercan Cities. In R. Morse and J. Hardoy, eds.
_Rethinking the Latin American City._ Chapter 12.

Gay, Robert. 1998. The Broker and the Thief. Paper presented at the XXI Intl
Congress of the Latin American Studies Assn., Chicago IL.

Vainer, Carlos. 1998. Participation, poverty and environment in the Strategic
Plan for the City of Rio de Janeiro. Paper prepared for Conference on Space,
Place and Nation. Center for Latin American, Caribbean, and Latino Studies,
University of Massachussetts, Amherst.

Schild, Veronica. 1998. Neoliberalism=s new gendered market citizen: the
Acivilizing@ dimension of social programmes in Chile. Paper prepared for
Conference on Space, Place and Nation. Center for Latin American, Caribbean,
and Latino Studies, U.Mass, Amherst.

Roberts, Chapter 8

**



Week 11. Building urban communities from the bottom up. (November 4)

**

[ii Working group IV to report]

** **

Friedmann, John. 1993. The Right to the City. In R. Morse and J. Hardoy, ed.s,
_Rethinking the Latin American City._ Chap. 6, pp. 98-109.

Pezzoli, Chapters 9-11

Coyula, Mario. 1996. The neighborhood as workshop. _Latin American
Perspectives 23 (No.4): 90-103._

Abers, Rebecca. 1996. From ideas to practice: the partido de trabalhadores and
participatory governance in Brazil. _Latin American Perspectives 23 (No.4):
35-53._

**





Week 12. Violence and Repression (November 11)

**

Chevigny, Paul. 1995. _Edge of the Knife: Police Violence in the Americas._
Chap. 5.

Roldan, Mary. 1997. Citizenship, class and violence in historical perspective:
the Colombian case.

Moser, Caroline and Jeremy Holland. _Urban Poverty and Violence in Jamaica

_

Scheper-Hughes, Nancy and Daniel Hoffman. 1996-97. Street kids. Worldview 10:
15-28.

** **

Lemembel, Pedro. 1998. Soccer and devotion in the barrios of Santiago. _NACLA
Report on the Americas 32_ : 36-43.

Linger, Daniel Touro. _Dangerous Encounters: Meanings of Violence in a
Brazilian City._ Chaps. 3,4.

****

Recommended:

_

Corradi, Juan E. et al. 1992. Fear at the Edge: State Terror and Resistance in
Latin America. University of California Press.

_

Human Rights Watch. 1997. _Police Brutality in Urban Brazil

_**



Week 13: Landscapes of Resistance: Social Movements** **(November 18)

**

Bouvard, Marguerite Guzman. 1994. _Revolutionizing Motherhood._ Chap. 9

Gilbert, Chapter 7

Hellman, Judith Adler. 1997. Anniversary essay on social movements:
revolution, reform and reaction. _NACLA Report on the Americas 30_ (No.6):
13-18.

Stokes, Susan. All



Recommended:

Castells, Manuel. 1983. The City and the Grassroots. Part 6: A cross-cultural
theory of urban social change.

**



Week 14: Cities on the Edge

**

Rouse, Roger. 1991. Mexican migration and the social space of postmodernism.
_Diaspora_ : 3-23

Garcia Canclini, Nestor. 1995. _Hybrid Cultures._ Chapter 7.

Portes, Alejandro and Alex Stepick. 1993. _City on the Edge, Chap 1-5.

_

Sorensen, Ninna Nyberg. 1995. _I Want a Bite of the Big Apple_.

Espada, Martin. 1990. Justo the Painter has Just Conquered Lawrence, Bully,
_Rebellion is the Circle of a Lover's Hands_.; 1987. Tony Went to the Bodega
but He Didn't Buy Anything; Tiburon; The Moon Shatters on Alabama Avenue,
_Trumpets from the Islands of their Eviction_ ; 1993. Tires Stacked in the
Hallways of Civilization, _City of Coughing and Dead Radiators.

_

Cruz, Victor Hernandez. Snaps of Immigration; New/Aguas Buenas/Jersey; in _Red
Beans_ (1991).

**_



Recommended:

**_

Anzaldua, Gloria. 1987. The Homeland, Aztlan: El Otro Mexico. In
_Borderlands/La Frontera_. Chapter 1.

_

Basch, Linda, Nina Glick Schiller and Cristina Szanton Blanc. 1994. Nations
Unbound.





















**



**















_

