
    ##### 
    University of South Alabama                Dr. Michael L. Monheit
    History Department                   Office: 376 Humanities Bldg. 
                                             
         OFFICE HOURS: Tuesday and Thursday 4 PM to 5 PM,
         Tuesday 7:40 PM to 8:30 PM OR BY APPOINTMENT - I am
         happy to arrange a time to meet that is convenient to
         you.  PLEASE NOTE THAT I OFTEN KEEP MY DOOR CLOSED
         DURING OFFICE HOURS.  PLEASE KNOCK!! 
    
    Telephone: 460-6868 or 460-6210
    Mailbox/messages: History Dept., 344 Humanities Bldg.
    E-mail: mmonheit@jaguar1.usouthal.edu
    

##### REFORMATION EUROPE, 1517-1648 HISTORY 353, FALL 1996  
SYLLABUS

THEMES OF THE COURSE:

This course is intended to provide you with an overview of the  
major events of the period 1517-1648. I will emphasize the  
monumental religious changes of the sixteenth century: the  
varieties of religious reform which have come to be known  
collectively as the Reformation and Counter-Reformation. We will  
look closely at the lives of the Protestant reformers Martin  
Luther, John Calvin and of the Catholic reformer Teresa of Avila.  
The course will also consider the appeal of the variety of  
religious doctrines to different groups of people, and the  
relationship between political and religious change.

COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

Midterm, Thursday, Oct. 24 IN CLASS, 20% of grade.

In-class paper critique, Thursday, Nov. 14, 5% of grade

Paper due, Tuesday, December 3 (last day of this class) 25% of grade

Final, Friday, December 6, 6 PM to 8 PM 35% of grade.

In-Class Quizzes, announced and surprise, 15% of grade

Paper - 25% of grade plus 5% for your in-class critique of  
another student's paper. The paper will be 6-10 pages. You will  
be asked to write a paper on a topic of your choice to be worked  
out in consultation with me, depending upon your interests. You  
may review several books or study a theme in actual writings from  
the Reformation translated into English. The project will  
involve library research, including the locating and gathering of  
books and articles appropriate to your interests. You are  
required to write a rough draft, which will be critiqued in class  
by a fellow student but will not be graded, and a final draft due  
on the last day of class for which you will receive a grade.

Optional Paper - If you are a history major or minor and have a  
particularly strong interest in some aspect of this subject,  
please see me about writing a longer research paper, which will  
count for a larger part of your grade and take the place of the  
above paper. In the longer paper (at least 15 pages), you will  
make use of original writings by people who lived in the  
sixteenth century (translated into English) to explore an issue  
of interest to you. Your paper will also make use of books and  
articles by historians who have written on the topic you have  
chosen to study. You will be asked to write a rough and final  
draft, and other writings related to your paper. In this case,  
the paper will count for 45% of your grade, and the Mid-term,  
Final and Quizzes will play a proportionally smaller role in your  
grade. YOU MUST CONSULT ME AND OBTAIN APPROVAL BEFORE  
UNDERTAKING SUCH A PROJECT. I EXPECT YOU TO CONSULT WITH ME  
FREQUENTLY AS YOU WORK ON THE PAPER. PLEASE SEE ME FOR FURTHER  
INFORMATION.

Class Participation - You will receive extra credit for  
participating in class discussion. Frequent participation can  
earn you an extra half-grade credit, and could make the differ-  
ence between an A or a B, a B or a C, etc. In exceptional cases,  
you can improve by a whole letter grade. You will have regular  
opportunities to discuss the assigned and optional readings for  
this course. I will frequently give you questions to think about  
for the next day's readings.

If you actively participate in class discussion, you will come  
out of the course with a much more sophisticated understanding  
than if you simply listen to lectures and discussions. Moreover,  
since your class-mates also benefit from lively class discussion,  
your participation helps your fellow students as well. You are  
expected to prepare the readings carefully in time for the class  
hour in which they are to be discussed. Please bring the day's  
readings to class with you. In addition to regular class  
participation, you may choose to present one or more of the  
readings. Such presentations can only help your credit for class  
participation.

Please don't be afraid of making mistakes or of "looking  
foolish." No athlete ever became a superstar who didn't start  
out playing his sport awkwardly or clumsily, and the same  
principle applies to history -- although you may be more adept at  
"playing" history than you think! The more chances you take, the  
more you will improve. In my evaluation of class participation,  
you will do better by speaking up than by keeping silent, even if  
what you say shows that you had some difficulties in understand-  
ing the reading.

GRADING: 90 and above = A  
80 to 89 = B  
70 to 79 = C  
60 to 69 = D  
59 and below = F

I welcome students to come by during my office hours to discuss  
the course material, and enjoy talking to you. SEE MAP TO MY  
OFFICE AT END OF SYLLABUS. You need not be having a problem to  
come by. Of course, if at any time you are having difficulties  
understanding the material, working on your paper, or with any  
other aspect of the course, I want you to come talk to me about  
the problem. It is quite common even for seniors to run into  
difficulties in their studies. If you cannot come during my  
office hours (listed at beginning of syllabus), please speak to  
me after class or leave a message in the History Department with  
the best times to reach you and I will be happy to arrange an  
appointment.

REQUIRED READINGS:

Available in Student Bookstores:

De Lamar Jensen, Reformation Europe: Age of Reform and  
Revolution, Second Edition, D.C, Heath and Co. 1992 (paper  
edition)  
Hans J. Hillerbrand, editor, The Protestant Reformation, 1968,  
Harper Collins (paper edition).  
Barbara Diefendorf, Beneath the Cross: Catholics and  
Huguenots in Sixteenth-Century Paris, Oxford, 1991, paper  
edition.

De Lamar Jensen, Reformation Europe, is a basic text which  
provides an overview of the period. In addition to reading the  
pages assigned in this book, use it as a basic reference manual.  
It provides a Chronology of Important Events (Appendix I), a list  
of Rulers of European States (Appendix II) and Genealogical  
Charts showing the relationships among leading royal families of  
Europe. If, in the course of your reading, you come across a  
name, event, or region that is not adequately described, look it  
up in this book in the index, in the table of contents, or in the  
Chronology.

Hillerbrand, The Protestant Reformation and hand-outs distributed  
in class provide many primary documents -- writings by people who  
lived "back then." They are intended to give you a sense of how  
people lived and thought, and also to let you see some of the  
source from which historians like Jensen and Diefendorf have  
derived their knowledge. Much of class discussion will involve  
interpretation of these documents, so that you will begin to  
actually "do" history, not simply absorb historical knowledge.  
Much of this course involves learning to improve your reading and  
writing skills. Try to adjust your reading speed according to  
the difficulty of the material. You may sometimes find that it  
takes an hour to grasp five pages of reading, at others that  
twenty minutes suffices for ten or fifteen pages. It is important  
to look up difficult words in a good dictionary. This is normal,  
and is nothing to be ashamed of. If you are having difficulty  
with studying, please see me. Tutoring is available in the  
History Department and at the Writing Laboratory on campus.

    
    
                        
    
    ### TENTATIVE SCHEDULE OF ASSIGNMENTS
    
    
    
    
    ##### 
    
    INTRODUCTION TO COURSE
    
         READING: Jensen pp. 1-9; Start readings for next
                  assignment 
    
    EUROPEAN SOCIAL AND POLITICAL ORGANIZATION
    
         READING: Jensen, pp. 9-29, 32-5, 36-40
                  Diefendorf, pp. 9-27 (Paris)
    
    RELIGION ON THE EVE OF THE REFORMATION: CHURCH CORRUPTION AND
    POPULAR SPIRITUALITY
    
         READING:  Jensen, pp. 44-7, 191-200.
                   Diefendorf, Chapter 2, pp. 28-48.
                   Handout: Selections from Thomas A Kempis,
                   including The Imitation of Christ.)  
    
    RENAISSANCE HUMANISM AND CHRISTIANITY
    
         READING:  Jensen, pp. 40-44, 397-400
                   Handout: Erasmus, Praise of Folly
    
    LUTHER'S LIFE
    
         READINGS: Jensen, pp. 53-66
                   Luther, Preface to Complete ed. of Luther's Latin
                   Writings, Hillerbrand pp. 1-3
    
    LUTHER'S TEACHINGS
    
         READING:  Jensen, pp. 71-3
                   Luther, The Freedom of a Christian Man, in         
                   Hillerbrand, pp. 3-28
    
    WOMEN AND THE SPREAD OF RELIGIOUS REFORM
    
         READING: Jensen, pp. 80-2
    
    HUMANISM VS. SCHOLASTICISM I: FREEDOM OF THE WILL
    
         READING:  Jensen, pp. 66-8 top to end of first paragraph    
                   Handout: Erasmus, Freedom of the Will
                   pp. 74-5.  Luther, Bondage of the Will, pp. 263-5
    
    HUMANISM VS. SCHOLASTICISM II: PROBLEM OF BIBLICAL INTERPRETATION
    
         READINGS: Luther, Preface to the German Translation of the
                   New Testament, Hillerbrand pp. 37-42 
    
    RADICAL REFORMERS I: THE GERMAN PEASANTS 
    
         READINGS: Jensen, pp. 68 top (start with Revolt of
                   Imperial Knights) to 71; Review pp. 72-3
                   Twelve Articles of the Peasants  in
                   Hillerbrand, pp. 63-66
                   Luther, Friendly Admonition to Peace
                   concerning the Twelve Articles, in
                   Hillerbrand, pp.67-86
         OPTIONAL: Luther, On Governmental Authority, in            
                   Hillerbrand, pp. 43-62
    
    THE EARLY EXPANSION OF THE REFORMATION
    
         READINGS: Jensen, pp. 73-88
    
    RADICAL REFORMERS II: THE ANABAPTISTS
    
         READINGS: Jensen, 107-118
                   The Schleitheim Confession of Faith, in
                   Hillerbrand, pp. 129-36
                   Peter Riedemann, Account of Our Religion,
                   in Hillerbrand, pp. 143-146
                   Elizabeth, a Dutch Anabaptist Martyr, A
                   Letter, in Hillerbrand, pp. 146-152
    
    CALVINISM I: CALVIN'S ROAD TO REFORM
    
         READINGS: Jensen, pp. 129-34
                   Handout from Calvin
    
    CALVINISM II; CALVIN AT GENEVA AND HIS TEACHINGS       
         READINGS: Jensen, pp. 135-42, Calvin's Geneva
                   Jensen, pp. 142-9, Calvin's Theology
                   Calvin, Reply to Sadoleto , in Hillerbrand,        
                   pp. 153-172.
                   Handout, Calvin on Images, and Institutes, "Of
                   Civil Government"
    
    CATHOLIC REFORMATION I: POPULAR CATHOLICISM AND LOYOLA
    
         READINGS: Jensen, pp. 200-20
                   Handout, Loyola, selections from Spiritual
                   Exercises, pp. 59, 71
         REVIEW:   Diefendorf Chapter II, "The Most
                   Catholic Capital" 
    
    CATHOLIC REFORMATION II: ST. TERESA'S LIFE, REFORMS AND
    TEACHINGS
    
         READINGS: Handout, from Teresa of Avila, Life of Saint
                   Teresa 
    
    WITCHCRAFT
    
         READINGS: Jensen, pp. 389-93
                   Handout, selection from a witch trial
    
    THE FRENCH WARS OF RELIGION I: PRELUDE TO ST. BARTHOLOMEW'S DAY   
              READINGS: Jensen, pp. 149-51, 229-244
                        Diefendorf, Introduction (pp. 3-8), Chs 3-10,
                        Conclusion, pp. 49-180
                        REVIEW Handout, Calvin, Institutes, "Of Civil
                        Government"
    
    THE FRENCH WARS OF RELIGION II: PROTESTANTS, LEAGUERS AND
    POLITIQUES 
              READINGS: Jensen, pp. 244-57
                        Philip Mornay, "A Defense of Liberty
                        Against Tyrants," pp. 222-239, in
                        Hillerbrand.
     
    CONCLUSION AND OVERVIEW OF THE COURSE
    
              READINGS: Jensen, pp. 224-5, 476-8
    
    
    IMPORTANT DATES                      
    
    MID-TERM EXAM (IN CLASS) Thurs. Oct. 24 IN CLASS
    
    LAST DAY TO DROP A FALL CLASS  Wednesday, Oct. 30
    
    IN-CLASS CRITIQUE OF ROUGH DRAFT OF PAPER, Thurs., Nov. 14
    
    FINAL DRAFT OF PAPER DUE Tuesday, Dec. 3 (last day of this        
                            class) 
    
    FINAL EXAM Fri., December 6, 6 PM to 8 PM, in Classroom     
    
    
    
                                 **MAP TO MY OFFICE
            __________________ _________ __________ _________ _ _______
           |     ___________| |         |          |         |E|  |
           |    |  ______   | |  364    |   362    |   360   |L|  |
           |----| |______|  |_|_________|__________|_________|E|  |
       MY  | X  / |      |                                    V STAIRS
     OFFICE>>X  \ |  390 |          Third Floor Humanities
       376 |----| |      |             (South Wing)                   
           |    | |      |   ____________________  __________ ___  _____
           |    | |______|  |         |       344\/          |   \/     |    
           |    |___________|         |History Dept Office   |   342    |
           |__________________________|______________________|CLASS ROOM|**
                                                               
    

