![Monogram](mc.gif)  [ **Maurice Crouse's home page**](home.html "Maurice
Crouse's home page")  ![->](arrowtny.gif) [**  Fall  2002
courses**](fall02.html "Fall 2002 courses")  ![->](arrowtny.gif)  Current page  
---  
  
# History 2020

## Guidelines for Reading and Writing Exercises

The [syllabus for this course](2602_02f.html) requires that you submit two
essays as responses to the "reading and writing" questions, one such essay to
be written for each of the two units into which the course is divided. Each
essay must consist of at least 600 words and is to be based on 250-300 pages
of appropriate reading. Each essay is due several days before the examination
for the unit with which it is associated (consult the [course
syllabus](2602_02f.html) for the exact date). Late reports will be marked down
10 points for each day that they are overdue (NOTE: this is each **_day_** ,
not each class meeting).

![Serious study](studying.gif)

Well before the due date, choose your topic from those which are listed below.
Then determine what reading you will do to gain the background you need to
write an essay on that topic. Perhaps the simplest way to start is to examine
the suggestions for reading that are at the end of each chapter in the
textbook. Many more sources can be found in the _Harvard Guide to American
History_ , the Library of Congress' _Guide to the Study of the United States
of America_ , and the numerous volumes in the Goldentree Bibliographies in
American History series, all of which may be found in the Reference Room of
the Library. If you cannot locate suitable titles on your own, arrange for a
conference with your instructor.

You may read all 250-300 pages from a single book, or you may read portions of
more than one book for a total of 250-300 pages. Choose your sources, and the
pages within those sources, so that they really contribute toward an
understanding of your topic. Most of the sources should be available at the
Libraries of The University of Memphis or at the Memphis Public Library and
Information Center. (Some students buy paperbound copies of books for their
personal libraries.)

![More serious study](studying2.gif)

Do your reading carefully, taking notes as you read so that you can later
refer to your notes in the writing of the essay. Write your essay in draft
form. Revise it carefully. Then rewrite it in polished form. The essay need
not be typewritten, but if you write by hand, write neatly and legibly.

As a heading to your essay, attach a photocopy or photocopies of the title
page(s) of the book(s) on which you are reporting. Each photocopy must include
the author's name, the name of the book, place of publication, publisher's
name, and date of publication. If any of the information does not appear on
the photocopy, add it manually. Please add manually the exact pages which you
read in each book--you must show in this way that you have read at least the
required number of pages.

The body of the essay should be a coherent, organized, literate composition on
the theme of your chosen topic. It is not a term paper or a research paper and
need not have footnotes, quotations, or other things normally found in such
papers. It should be a simple, straightforward setting forth of what you
learned from the reading.

The essay must be your own work, in your own words. It must reflect the
content of the book or books which you have chosen. Do not use textbooks,
encyclopedias, or Internet materials. Copying or paraphrasing something from a
textbook, an encyclopedia, or an Internet document, and claiming that it is a
summary of what you have read is plagiarism. Plagiarism will not be tolerated.
If you have any doubt as to what constitutes plagiarism, read the documents
under the heading of [The problem of
plagiarism](http://www.people.memphis.edu/~history/lit.html#plagiarism) at the
Department of History's Web site on Writing and Literature Resources.

###  

### READING AND WRITING TOPICS FOR THE FIRST UNIT:

  * The "Compromise of 1877"
  * Civil rights and the Supreme Court, 1877-1898
  * Southern states' restrictions on black voters
  * Booker T. Washington as a political leader
  * The New South -- dream or reality?
  * Manufacturing and railroads in the South, 1877-1915
  * U.S. policy toward Indians in the 19th century
  * Mining in the "Wild West"
  * Cattle raising in the "Wild West"
  * Farming in the "Wild West"
  * American public land policy after the Civil War
  * The significance of the frontier in American history
  * Transcontinental railroads
  * J. P. Morgan and the American economy
  * John D. Rockefeller and the American economy
  * Andrew Carnegie and the American economy
  * Industrial combinations, from pools to interlocking directorates
  * The Interstate Commerce Act
  * The Sherman Anti-Trust Act
  * The Gospel of Wealth
  * The Social Gospel
  * The condition of laborers, 1880s-1910s
  * Labor organizations
  * The urbanization of America, late 19th century
  * Urban living conditions in the late 19th century
  * Political machines and political bosses
  * Urban reform movements
  * Education in the Gilded Age
  * American art and architecture in the Gilded Age
  * American literature in the Gilded Age
  * The spoils system and civil-service reform
  * The tariff in American politics, late 19th century
  * The Granger movement
  * The Populist movement
  * The controversy over free silver
  * The Omaha Platform of the Populist Party
  * The new Manifest Destiny -- American expansion in the late 19th century
  * The Spanish-American War
  * The debate over the Philippines
  * The Panama Canal
  * Origins of the Progressive movement
  * The Industrial Workers of the World and other radical critics
  * Robert LaFollette as a reform leader
  * Theodore Roosevelt as a progressive president
  * The controversy over conservation under Roosevelt
  * The Roosevelt Corollary in diplomacy
  * The "insurgents" and William Howard Taft
  * The Bull Moose Party in 1912
  * The election of 1912
  * Woodrow Wilson as a progressive president

### READING AND WRITING TOPICS FOR THE SECOND UNIT:

  * American neutrality, 1914-1917
  * The submarine issue in the First World War
  * American military involvement in the First World War
  * The home front during the First World War
  * Woodrow Wilson's "Fourteen Points"
  * Negotiating the Treaty of Versailles
  * The League of Nations
  * The Senate's consideration of the peace settlement
  * Warren G. Harding as a political leader
  * Prohibition -- the "Great Experiment"
  * The Scopes trial
  * The Ku Klux Klan and other nativist organizations
  * The "Jazz Age" \-- the social history of the 1920s
  * Progressivism in the 1920s
  * Causes of the Great Depression
  * Herbert Hoover's policies for the Great Depression
  * Franklin D. Roosevelt's rise to the presidency
  * The "Hundred Days" of the New Deal
  * The New Deal and agriculture
  * The New Deal and industry
  * The New Deal and labor
  * The "second" New Deal
  * The historical significance of the New Deal
  * The Good Neighbor Policy
  * U.S. neutrality legislation in the 1930s
  * U.S. in the European theatre of the Second World War
  * U.S. in the Pacific theatre of the Second World War
  * Wartime diplomacy, from Casablanca to Yalta
  * The home front during the Second World War
  * The United Nations
  * The "Cold War"
  * Harry S. Truman as a political leader
  * The Truman Doctrine
  * The Marshall Plan
  * The election of 1948
  * U.S. policy toward China, 1945-1950
  * The Korean "police action"
  * McCarthyism
  * Dwight D. Eisenhower as a political leader
  * Massive retaliation as a defensive strategy
  * NATO and other defensive alliances
  * School desegregation
  * John F. Kennedy as a political leader
  * The Cuban missile crisis
  * The Peace Corps
  * The race to the moon in the 1960s
  * The Berlin Wall
  * The election of 1964
  * Lyndon B. Johnson as a political leader
  * American involvement in Vietnam
  * The "hawks" and the "doves" \-- American opinion about Vietnam
  * The civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s
  * The Black Power movement
  * Martin Luther King as a civil rights leader
  * Stokely Carmichael as a civil rights leader
  * The Feminist movement
  * Richard M. Nixon as a political leader
  * Nixon's foreign policy
  * Watergate
  * The rise of the Republican Party in the recent South

  
![Valid XHTML 1.0!](valid-xhtml10.gif)

