# Sociology 335 - Urban Sociology  
Summer Workshop, May 6-16, 2002

  
Class meets - Monday through Thursday, 12:00 - 5:00, Peck 2405 (except on days
when other locations are designated.)

Instructor - Professor John E. Farley  
Office - Peck 0232  
Office Hours: Tuesday, Thursday 10:00-11:00 a.m., Monday through Thursday
5:00-5:30 p.m. (will be extended if student demand warrants)  
email (the best way to reach me): [jfarley@siue.edu](mailto:jfarley@siue.edu)  
phone: 650-2680 (If I am not available you can leave voice mail)

**

NOTE: The schedule in this syllabus is tentative. Changes may occur as the
class unfolds.**

## Course Objectives and Content

  
Using a largely experiential approach, this class will examine the process of
urbanization, the impacts of living in cites, the relationship of various
urban groups to one another and to the city, and problems of today's urban
areas. You will also learn about some basic materials, methods, and resources
for studying cities and urbanization.

## Textbook

  
The textbook for the course, available through textbook rental service, is
The Sociology of Cities, by John J. Macionis and Vincent N. Parillo (Prentice
Hall, 1998). The reading assignments below pertain to that book, unless
otherwise noted. All reading assignments should be completed by the day for
which they are assigned. This is especially important for a course meeting in
a two-week, workshop format.

## Assignments and Tests

  
There will be six short (two-page) "think papers" and two multiple-choice
tests. Each "think paper" will count equally and the think papers combined
will count for 50% of your grade. Each of the two tests will be worth 20% of
your grade. Attendance and participation, including grades on any pop quizzes
that may be given, will count 20% This yields a total of 110%; the lowest 10%
of your grade will be dropped. However, you MUST turn in all 6 think papers
and take both tests in order to receive a grade for this course! Regular
attendance is expected and that absences will be penalized. (See below)



## Attendance and Participation

  
**_Attendance is extremely important in a class that meets for only two
weeks.**_ Each absence means that you miss one-eighth of the class. I expect
that you be present at every session, and remain for the entire class session.
To assure good attendance, I may take attendance from time to time and at any
time during the class. I may also give pop quizzes. _Remember, attendance and
participation, including grades on any pop quizzes, count 20% of your final
grade._ In addition, more than one unexcused absence may, at the discretion of
the instructor, result in a substantial grade penalty. Because the quality of
experiential exercises for everyone in the class depends on good student
participation, an unexcused absence from the Cahokia Mounds tour, the St.
Louis neighborhood tour, the Urban Dynamics simulation, or any computer lab
activity **will** result in a lowering of your attendance and participation
grade by at least one full grade (e.g. from a B- to a C-). **_Please be aware
that we are completing an entire semester's worth of coursework (normally 16
weeks) - and receiving credit for such - in just 8 class days. This means that
you must make this class your top priority - indeed virtually your_ only
_priority - for these two short weeks. If this is not possible, you should
consider dropping the class now.**_ The think papers are short - you are not
asked to write major tomes or "term papers" - but you do need to keep up
because of the fast-paced nature of this class.



## Plagiarism Policy

  
Plagiarism means representing the work of others as your work. This includes
unacknowledged copying from any book, journal article, the Internet, or any
paper written by someone else. If you use anyone else's direct words, it must
not only be cited and referenced but also placed in quotes. Any such use
(including close paraphrases) that is not in quotation marks constitutes
plagiarism and is a serious violation of academic honesty. Any instance of
plagiarism will result in an automatic failing grade for the assignment or
test in which it occurred. Repeat violations will be referred to the
appropriate University office for disciplinary action. University policy
provides that plagiarism be punished by failure for the course and possible
suspension from the University. As a general rule, all of your work must be
your own and written in your own words. Short, acknowledged quotations are
permissible, but that is all.



## Course Schedule

  
**Monday, May 6. Urbanization, the Urban Transformation, and the pre-
industrial city**

The origin of cities and the "newness" of city living, modernization and
urbanization (take a look at Table 2.2!), where and why cities grow (Mexico
City and Teotihuacan, Cahokia mounds, St. Louis), modern vs. pre-industrial
cities, "primate cities" vs. "urban heirarchy."

Powerpoint demo: Teotihuacan and Mexico City

**

Experience 1: Field trip to Cahokia Mounds. Class will break a little after
3:00 and reconvene at 3:45 at the Cahokia Mounds visitor center for a tour of
the site of the largest prehistoric city in North America.**

Readings: Chapters 1, 2, 11.

  
**Think paper 1.** \- What did you learn from our visit to Cahokia Mounds?
Based on what you learned about Cahokia Mounds and Teotihuacan, identify two
key ways in which pre-historic cities are geographically or sociologically
similar to modern industrial cities, and two key ways in which they are
different. Due: Wednesday, May 8.

**

Tuesday, May 7. Part 1. The Urban Transformation in America**

Stages of U.S. urbanization (a tale of three cities; comparing the "second
cities")

Microcase computer demonstration: Urban growth and change in the United
States.  
Films: "Chicago: Growth and Change" and "Los Angeles: The Making of a City."

The emergence of the suburban majority.

**

Part 2. Getting Data on the City, or How to Study the City Quantitatively**

Sources of existing data. The census as a source of urban data; census
geography and data. Can data be used to rate cities?

Case study A: The Sociology 335 "places rated" index.  
Case study B: Functional specialization and systems of cities; central place
theory

Readings: Chapter 3, pages 161-165 in Chapter 6, pages 192-194 in Chapter 7,
pages 224-227 in Chapter 8.



**

Experience 2: Using the American Fact Finder**

Class will re-convene in Computer Lab (Science Building, Room 1225). Using
Microsoft Internet Explorer, open the [American Fact
Finder](http://factfinder.census.gov/servlet/DatasetMainPageServlet?_lang=en)
on the World Wide Web, we will get data for the St. Louis MSA and one
community within it (Edwardsville) from the 1990 and 2000 Censuses. We will
examine trends between 1990 and 2000, and ways in which Edwardsville is
different from the larger metropolitan area of which it is a part. You will
learn how to download census data from the American Fact Finder, how to put it
in an Excel spreadsheet, and how to computer percentages from that data. You
will receive additional instructions on how to do the first think paper based
on this exercise. Then, if time allows, you will have the opportunity to find
census data on own hometown.

[**Think Paper 2**](http://www.siue.edu/~jfarley/s335a102.htm) \- Brief
writeup on how and why you expected Edwardsville to differ from the MSA as a
whole, and whether it did or not. Include your data. Assignment due Thursday,
May 9.

  
**Wednesday, May 8. The Internal Structure of Metropolitan Areas**

In-class discussion of Think Paper 1.

How are populations distributed within cities? Classical theories (concentric
zones, sectors, multiple nuclei). Social Area Analysis and Factorial Ecology.
The Factorial Ecology of St. Louis. Background info for tomorrow's
neighborhood tour.

**

Experience 2: The Analyzed City**

A. Using the Concentric Zones, Radial, and Multiple-Nuclei Theories of
Population Distribution.

Class presentations with diagrams of the theories, and Microcase analysis of
the St. Louis area (pre selected variables and your choice of variables).
Compare and contrast the geographic structure of St. Louis with those of
Chicago and Los Angeles.

B. Understanding the metropolitan area with the factorial ecology method -
Case Study, St. Louis 1980

Using material from the my own Factorial Ecology study of the St. Louis area
in 1980, we'll examine the distribution of different factors and illustrate
them with different neighborhoods. We'll also hand out materials on the
neighborhoods we'll see in tomorrow's tour.

Qualitative analysis of the city Participant and unobtrusive observation
(Tally's Corner, The Urban Villagers, and Slim's Table). Readings: Chapter 6

  
**Thursday, May 9. Experience 3: Experiencing the City - Metrolink Tour of
Area Neighborhoods**

Half-day [Metrolink](http://www.cmt-stl.org/metro/metro.html) tour of East St.
Louis, St. Louis, and northwest St. Louis County. We'll meet promptly at 12:00
Noon at the Fifth and Missouri Metrolink station in East St. Louis, adjacent
to the SIUE East St. Louis Center. Carpooling may be arranged if necessary.
Get an all-day pass and wear your walking shoes! (Note: Metrolink and this
tour are accessible to people with disabilities, but the tour does involve
some walking. If you feel that you may need any special arrangements, please
notify the instructor by Tuesday, May 8.)

We'll tie this in to the Social Ecology presentation held in Wednesday's
class, and to Metrolink historical material. Examples of what will be seen on
tour:

Industrial Abandonment/Deindustrialization - E. St. Louis (but we'll also
illustrate impact of Metrolink, gambling boat). It's not just the inner city -
we'll also see more abandonment later in inner NW St. Louis County.

Transit-Oriented Development - Emerson Park Service/entertainment sector
growth - Laclede's Landing, Convention Center, Stadium area. Revitalization of
city but what are economic consequences of shift from manufacturing to
service/entertainment? Show also residential impact - Columbus Square. Whither
downtown retail? The dilemma of St. Louis Centre.

Upscale diverse cosmopolites: Central West End. Concentration of single,
married childless, retired, gay/ lesbian, somewhat racially diverse, and all
upscale.

Urban Renewal, '80s style: Debalaviere Place. Similar population
characteristics to CWE. Discuss displacement issue.

If time allows:

Crossing the segregation line: Debalaviere Place to Delmar. Urban
redevelopment: The "East Loop" and The Pageant

Urban problems in the Suburbs: inner northwest St. Louis county. Another side
of the service economy: the airport expansion controversy.

Optional post-tour social - LaClede's Landing, on the way home.

**

Think Paper 3** : Write 2-page paper about what was learned about area
neighborhoods on the tour, and/or how light rail is changing the St. Louis
area. Relate your ideas to at least one concept from the textbook or from
classroom materials. Additional information on this assignment may be found on
the tour handout. This paper will be due Tuesday, May 14. (I strongly
encourage you to write down at least preliminary impressions during and within
one day after the tour, but since there's a test on Monday, you can have until
Tuesday to turn this in.)

  
**Monday, May 13. Social and Cultural Consequences of Urbanization.**

What difference does it make to live in cities? The "loss of community"
debate. Is modern communications technology ending rural-urban differences?

**

Experience 4. The envisioned city** \- Brainstorming session on how living in
urban areas makes life different (or doesn't). Are people in cities and
suburbs different from people in rural areas? Are people who live in cities
and suburbs different from one another?

**

Experience 5. The Wired City** \- Session in computer lab: Surf the St.Louis
Web sites

Again we will reconvene in the computer lab, Science Building, Room 1225.
We'll surf the [St. Louis Web sites](http://stlouis.missouri.org/) , beginning
from the St. Louis home page. Be sure to look at neighborhood links, including
demographics and other information. (If the St. Louis site is busy or if you
prefer, you can surf the [Chicago Web sites](http://www.ci.chi.il.us/). If you
go to this site, be sure to also explore
<http://www.chgocitytours.com/comcntr/index.htm>. We'll do some unobtrusive
observation using the World Wide Web to learn more about urban life. More
detail will be provided on this activity on the day of the visit to the
computer lab.

Reading: Chapters 4, 5, pages 214-224 and 229-237 in Chapter 8.

[**Think Paper 4**](http://www.siue.edu/~jfarley/s335a402.htm): Write up what
you learned about St. Louis or the St. Louis area (or Chicago or the Chicago
area) that you didn't know before. What might you hypothesize about large
metropolitan areas as a result of what you learned? Relate your hypothesis to
at least one concept or theory discussed in Chapter 4, 5, or 8 (pp. 229-237).
More detailed instructions will be provided on Monday. This 2-page assignment
due Wednesday, May 15.

**

Test 1 ("Midterm" exam)** \- Final hour of class, Monday, May 13. Test will
cover all readings, classes, and class activities through Thursday, May 9.

  
**Tuesday, May 14 - Urban Problems 1: Racial and Economic Inequality and
Segregation.**

Poverty and racial inequality in American cities. Is economic inequality
increasing in our urban areas? The problem of concentrated poverty. The
measurement, causes, and consequences of racial housing segregation.

**

Powerpoint demonstration:** A new study of segregation in the St. Louis area,
based on the 2000 Census.

**

Experience 6 - Doing Something About Discrimination and Segregation.**

Guest presentation by the staff of the Metropolitan St. Louis Equal Housing
Opportunity Council (EHOC). They will talk about housing discrimination in the
St. Louis/Metro-East area and what EHOC is doing about it.

Discussion of the RegionWise citizen-action project on Spatial Mismatch - An
analysis of an urban problem in St. Louis. How can citizen action effectively
address issues like those raised in the RegionWise materials? NOTE: You MUST
have read the entire RegionWise booklet by this time. You will be assigned to
groups to begin working on Think Paper 5. This will be the ONLY time you get
in class to work on this group project, and to use it effectively, you MUST
have read all of the RegionWise booklet by this time.

[**Think Paper 5**](http://www.siue.edu/~jfarley/s335a502.htm) \- This will be
a group assignment. Based on what you've heard from the EHOC people and read
in the RegionWise booklet and in Chapter 14, do the following:

Choose one of the four possible approaches to the spatial mismatch problem in
the St. Louis area (the four approaches are outlined in the RegionWise
booklet) that you think overall is the most effective approach. Why do you
think this general approach is the best way to address the Spatial Mismatch
problem in this area?

Recommend one _concrete and specific action_ that could be taken by St. Louis
area planners, businesses, and/or government agencies that will help in
addressing this problem and moving the area in the direction suggested by
whichever general approach you chose. What would be the purpose of your
proposed action (i.e. what outcome would you want it to achieve),and why do
you think the action you propose would make a difference in attaining your
desired outcome? The more you can back up your ideas with material from the
class and/or with sociological data or literature, the better. This will be a
group project, tied to group brainstorming activity to be held in class.
Detailed instructions for Think Paper 5 can be found
[here](http://www.siue.edu/~jfarley/s335a502.htm)

Due: Thursday, May 16. (Your group should be prepared to discuss your
recommendation in a class presentation. Time to plan your group presentation
will be provided during class today. You will probably also need to meet once
outside class.) Readings: Chapters 10, 14.

  
**Wednesday, May 15. Experience 7 - The Simulated City : Urban Dynamics**

1\. Play the Urban Dynamics simulation game.

2\. **Think Paper 6** : In what ways was the simulation like a real city? In
what ways was it not? Did you create the same history that has been created in
real cities, or a different history? Explain. What do you think caused things
to come out the way they did? This paper may be turned in to the Sociology
Department Office no later than Monday, May 20.

  
**Thursday, May 16. Urban Problems 2 - Theories about Power, Conflict, and
Inequality in the City.**

Who has power in cities, and why? The Growth Machine model, and the "New Urban
Sociology."

Class presentations and discussion of Think Paper 5 - Proposed policy changes
to improve the quality of life in the St. Louis area.

Urban - suburban inequality: Economics and Politics. **Experience 8 - Poletown
Lives (film)**

Reading: pages 198-212 in Chapter 7

**

Final Examination** (multiple choice) - Covers readings assigned for this
week, and this week's classes.

[Return to John Farley's Home Page](http://www.siue.edu/~jfarley/)

[Return to SIUE Sociology Home
Page](http://www.siue.edu/SOCIOLOGY/sociology.htm)

