**THE "NATURE" OF URBAN SPRAWL**

**IPE 1013          INTRO TO IPE**

**Tuesdays and Thursdays 12.00 to 1.15 p.m.**

**Instructors Contact Information:**

Gavin Bridge - ph. 5-5325 - gbridge@ou.edu - SEC 670 - Hours: Tuesday 1:15 -
2:00 (or by appt.)

Ari Kelman - ph. 5-2594 - kelman@ou.edu - Couch 2 - Hours: Thursday 1:15 -
2:00 (or by appt.)

Bob Nairn - ph. 5-3354 - nairn@ou.edu - CEC 327D - Hours: Thursday 10:30 -
11:30 (or by appt.)

**  Course Description:**

This course will introduce students to some of the questions surrounding one
of the most controversial environmental issues facing the nation: urban
sprawl. The course will be taught in an interdisciplinary fashion, drawing on
the humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences; course materials will
be interdisciplinary as will assignments. Students are not expected to have
any prior experience dealing either with issues of sprawl specifically or the
built environment more generally.

**Course Requirements:**

Attendance and participation are mandatory and together will count for 10% of
your grade. You must always be in class unless you have received permission to
be absent prior to the class meeting in question. You may have one unexcused
absence over the course of the semester without penalty. 45% of your grade
will be based on your performance on 3 mini-assignments (15% per mini-
assignment). These assignments will be spread out over the course of the
semester and will include a mapping exercise, a writing exercise, and a
calculation exercise. There will also be weekly quizzes that will make up 25%
of your grade. These quizzes will be based on the weekly readings. Any student
that has a 100% average on all of the quizzes will be allowed to drop the
lowest of their mini-assignment grades. Finally, a group project will make up
the remaining 20% of your grade.

**Some Additional Ground Rules:**

We expect all written assignments to be double-spaced, in a 12-point font, and
with normal (i.e. approx. 1 inch) margins. Please stay within prescribed page
limits.

There will be no extensions given on any assignments, except in the case of a
personal or family emergency (e.g. serious illness or accident). If you turn
in an assignment late without an extension the grade will be reduced by 10
points (on a 100 point scale) per day.

Any student in this course who has a disability that may prevent him or her
from fully demonstrating his or her abilities should contact any of the
instructors as soon as possible so we can discuss accommodations necessary to
ensure full participation and facilitate your educational opportunities.

Honesty is fundamental in all academic activities, and those privileged to be
members of a university community have a special obligation to observe the
highest standards of honesty and a right to expect the same standards of all
others. Academic misconduct in any form is inimical to the purposes and
functions of the University and therefore is unacceptable and rigorously
proscribed. Academic misconduct includes (a) cheating (using unauthorized
materials, information, or study aids in any academic exercise), plagiarism,
falsification of records, unauthorized possession of examinations,
intimidation, and any and all other actions that may improperly affect the
evaluation of a student's academic performance or achievement; (b) assisting
others in any such act; or (c) attempting to engage in such acts.



  



**Course Schedule:**

24th August                           Introduction to course

Reading                                 Cronon, _Nature 's Metropolis_

26th August                           Historical siting of cities

Reading                                 Spirn, _Granite Garden_

31st August                            Nature in the city

3rd September                        Nature in the city

Reading                                 Vitousek, _Human Domination of Earth
's Ecosystems_

                                Costanza, _The Value of the World 's Ecosystem Services¡­_

7th September                        Changing land use and changing problems

9th September                        Changing land use and changing problems

Reading                                 _Major Problems_ , Travelers' Accounts

                                                Jackson, _Crabgrass Frontier_

14th September                      From walking cities to streetcar suburbs

16th September                      From walking cities to streetcar suburbs

Reading                                 _Major Problems_ , City Planner,
Developer, and Mumford

Assignment                          Writing Mini-Assignment - Due September
23rd

21st September                       Automobility and suburbanization

23rd September                      Automobility and suburbanization

Reading                                 Mathias, _Atmospheric Pollution_

28th September                      Sprawling air quality problems

30th September                      Sprawling air quality problems

Reading                                 Miller, _Searching for Common Ground
¡­_

                                                _The Economist_ , Sprawl Article

                                                Bruegmann, _Paradoxes of Anti-Sprawl Reform_

5th October                             Sprawling Norman

7th October                             Sprawling Norman

Reading                                 Davis, _Ecology of Fear_

Assignment                          Mapping Mini-Assignment - Due October 14th

12th October                           Sprawl between the wars

14th October                         Sprawl between the wars

Reading                                 McPhee, _The Control of Nature_

19th October                           Destination Norman: half day field trip
__

21st October                         Destination Norman: half day field trip

Reading                                 web page to be assigned

                                                Perry and Vander Klein, _Special Issue: Cultural Eutrophication_

26th October                           Urban Water Quality

28th October                           Urban Water Quality

Readings                               Davis, _Ecology of Fear_

Assignment                          Calculation Mini Assignment - Due November
4th

2nd November                        The post-war suburban boom

4th November                         The post-war suburban boom

Reading                                 Molotch, _The City as a Growth
Machine_

9th November                         Why Sprawl Happens

11th November                       Why Sprawl Happens

Reading                                 Garreau, _Edge City_

16th November                       Edge City and the New Urbanism

Reading                                 Kunstler, _Home from Nowhere_

                               

18th November                       Group Project Assignment - Due December
9th

23rd November                      THANKSGIVING

25th November                       THANKSGIVING

Reading                                 Jackson, _Ecological Restoration_

                                                Mcdonald, _A Combination in Behalf of Restoration_

                                                Miller, _Population Distribution_

30th November                      Urban Ecological Restoration

2nd December                         Urban Ecological Restoration

Reading                                 Walljasper, _Portland 's Green Peace_

                                                Campbell, _Green Cities, Growing Cities, Just Cities_

7th December                         Sustainable Cities

9th December                         Sustainable Cities



**Evaluation will be based on the following:**

Attendance and Participation
10%

Class Quizzes, based on Readings* (1 per week)                            25%

Mini-Projects a) writing assignment
15%  

         b) calculation-based assignment                              15%

                         c) map-based assignment                                          15%

Group Project
20%

TOTAL
100%



     [ [Home](http://www.ou.edu/cas/ipe/) | [Faculty](http://www.ou.edu/cas/ipe/GeneralInfo/whoisipe.html) | [Resource Center](http://www.ou.edu/cas/ipe/GeneralInfo/ipersctr.html) | [Curriculum](http://www.ou.edu/cas/ipe/Curriculum/General/ipeclass.html) | [More Info](http://www.ou.edu/cas/ipe/Forms/infoform.html) | [Sign Up](http://www.ou.edu/cas/ipe/Forms/stdntfrm.html) | [Advisor](http://www.ou.edu/cas/ipe/Advisor/Interview/advisor.html) | [Links](http://www.ou.edu/cas/ipe/Links/envlinks.html) ]

