**![](graphics/DTP!banner.gif)**

**(C) 2002 by Rick Sheridan**

|

Class Syllabus |

Practical Project  
---|---  
  
Advanced Research Sites |

DTP Links  
  
Recommended Reading |

Free Training Resources  
  
Internet and DTP Terms |

Rick's Other Computer Classes  
  
**Copy of the Syllabus:**

    
    
     BUTTE COLLEGE  SPRING SEMESTER 2002 SYLLABUSCOURSE: Desktop Publishing (BCIS 47)Instructor: Rick Sheridan



COURSE DESCRIPTION

This is a fun course that will focus on mastering desktop publishing skills on
Microsoft Publisher, FrontPage or Adobe PageMaker. By the end of this
semester, students will be able to create brochures, newsletters, menus and
basic Web pages. By mastering these software programs, you will have a solid
understanding of desktop publishing and be able to operate a variety of other
graphics-related software. This class will also cover the basics of good
design and how to combine the use of computers with traditional design
techniques. We will review several of the other well known desktop publishing
software, such as PowerPoint, QuarkXPress, Photoshop and Illustrator. Several
students have found desktop publishing jobs as a result of this class. Most of
the class will be working in Publisher/FrontPage while part of the class will
be in PageMaker.



COURSE OBJECTIVES

After completing this course, you will be able to:

* Compose, edit and print documents.

* Save and retrieve documents.

* Set margins and tabs.

* Insert headers, footers and automatic page numbering.

* Moving and resizing graphics & clipart.

* Create master pages and style sheets.

* Work with multiple documents.

* Design and work with columns.

* Link text boxes.

* Master the basics of color use.

* Understand the basic principals of visual communications.

* Create a variety of brochures, newsletters, logos, etc.

* Be able to duplicate and improve an existing design.

*Learn how to create basic Internet home pages.



MATERIALS NEEDED

TEXTBOOK- Please purchase the required textbook as soon as possible: Microsoft
Publisher 2000 by Elizabeth Eisner Reding and Microsoft FrontPage 2000 by Ann
Barron If you are in the PageMaker section, the required book is: Adobe
PageMaker 6.5 by Kevin Proot. All of these books are available at the Butte
College Bookstore.

DISCS- will need at least three 3 1/2" high density disc (available in the
Butte College Bookstore or computer stores in this area). Please bring all
three discs to class each day. Also- please label them with your name. #1 & #2
are to make a backup of the unfinished exercises, #3 is for current work.

NOTEBOOK- you will need an inexpensive two-pocket folder to keep all notes and
class exercises. All of the Exercises from the textbook need to be saved on
one of your discs until you have received the graded printout. Save all of the
graded printouts in your notebook to be turned in on last day.

Please remember to bring this syllabus, the textbook and your discs to class
every time!



COURSE REQUIREMENTS

BOOK EXERCISES- One of the most important parts of this class will be to do
all of the "Exercises" and the "Check Your Understanding" from the book's
chapters as assigned below. Save everything on your discs and put any graded
printouts in your notebook as described below.

PRACTICAL PROJECTS- During the semester, students will do two practical
desktop publishing projects. These will consist of working with a local non-
profit organization, sports team and/or business to help them design a
newsletter, brochure, logo, etc. Please let me know what you plan to do before
you begin. I have contacted several non-profit groups in Chico and can supply
you with names and addresses of groups that need volunteer desktop publishers.
I also have examples from last semester to give you a better idea of what I
want. (Please do at least one of the projects for a local non-profit
organization).

NOTEBOOKS- Students are required to keep a basic notebook which will include
all class notes, exercises and practical projects. The notebook is due on the
last day of class and will be returned before the Final.

CLASS PARTICIPATION/ATTENDANCE- Regular attendance in the classroom is
expected. Students having more than five unexcused absences will have their
grade lowered. Students are encouraged to utilize the lab hours available to
them. Playing computer games or surfing the Internet during class is highly
discouraged. Be sure to communicate with me if do not understand anything on
this syllabus.

TESTS- There will be two tests, on Thursday October 4 and Thursday November
15. Tests will probably be a "hands-on" practical exercise based on material
in the textbook and class lecture. The emphasis on these tests will be for you
to complete a design based on a model or set of instructions.



GRADE EVALUATION

Exercises and Practical Projects: 50%

Tests and Final Exam: 40%

Notebooks: 10%

OTHER INFORMATION

GENERAL WARNINGS: Last semester we found several mistakes in the book. I have
tried to skip those exercises this semester. To minimize any problems- 1.
Restart your computer at the beginning of class. 2. Read the entire chapter
before starting the project. 3. Microsoft Publisher does not always perform
exactly like it is supposed to (regardless of your skill level). If this ever
happens, just make a note of it and go on to the next step. Copying someone
else's project or cheating on the tests will result in a "F" grade for the
course.

SKILL LEVEL: Please remember that the students in this course range from
absolute beginners to experienced computer users. If you are an experienced
computer user and finish the classroom assignment early, simply move on to the
Practical Project, read ahead in your book or spend the time practicing more
advanced computer skills.

PRINTING: You will need to make a printout for each chapter that you complete.
Please try to limit the number of copies that you print (by proofing them
onscreen and printing more than one Exercise per page if possible). It is
difficult to keep our printers from breaking down or constantly running out of
toner.

MISCELLANEOUS: It is a good idea to look at the completed design (usually at
the end of the chapter) and use it as a guide so that you are not totally
dependent on the instructions. By the middle of the semester you should be
able to complete the exercises just by looking at the finished design.
Substitute any fonts or graphics that are not available on our computers. This
is a "hands-on" course, students will work independently and at their own pace
on a variety of interesting and useful graphics projects. Most of the learning
will come from workbook tutorials. You will also receive several handouts with
projects listed on them. I will be available throughout class to help you
individually. It is important to use the book's index and table of contents to
look up common questions rather than simply raising your hand every time you
get stuck. I will also provide occasional lectures to help explain the
concepts in the textbook. I'm your instructor, Rick Sheridan. My background is
in graphic arts and journalism. I've worked as the art director for two
publications and have had articles published by several daily newspapers
throughout the United States since completing a Master's of Arts in 1988. I've
taught at Butte College since 1996 and at Chico State since 1997.

Below is a basic outline of how this course will be organized along with the
student's work requirements. You may work at your own pace but please try to
not get too far ahead or behind with the schedule listed below. I will have a
seperate handout for those students in the PageMaker section.

Week 1: January 22-January 26  
We will go over the syllabus and learn the fundamentals of good design. I will
provide an overview of Microsoft Publisher and the PC operating system. We
will all practice the basics of computer operations. Please begin reading from
your textbook as soon as possible and bring the three discs to class each
time.  

Week 2: January 28-February 1  
Readings: Unit A from the Publisher book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps, Concepts Review.  

Week 3: February 4-8  
Readings: Unit B from the Publisher book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  

Week 4: February 11-15  
Readings: Unit C from the Publisher book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  

Week 5: February 18-22  
Readings: Unit D from the Publisher book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  

Week 6: February 25-March 1  
Readings: Unit E from the Publisher book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  

Week 7: March 4-8 (Test #1, March 7)  
Readings: Unit F from the Publisher book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  

Week 8: March 11-15  
Readings: Unit G & H from the Publisher book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  

Week 9: March 18-22  
Readings: Unit A from the FrontPage book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  
Important Note: Please don't print any of the chapter's Steps. I will grade
your entire Web page when you get to the end of the book. Please print the
Concept Reviews and turn them in, stapled together as one group.  

Week 10: Spring Break- March 25-29  

Week 11: April 1-5  
Readings: Unit B from the FrontPage book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  

Week 12: April 8-12  
Readings: Unit C from the FrontPage book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  

Week 13: April 15-19 (Test #2, April 18)  
Readings: Unit D from the FrontPage book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  

Week 14: April 22-26  
Readings: Unit E from the FrontPage book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  

Week 15: April 29-May 3  
Readings: Unit F from the FrontPage book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  

Week 16: May 6-10  
Readings: Unit G from the FrontPage book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  

Week 17: May 13-17  
Readings: Unit H from the FrontPage book.  
Please read the entire chapter and do the: Steps and Concepts Reviews.  

Week 18: May 21-24, Finals week, details to be announced later.  

Practical Project- remember that the Practical Project is very valuable to
your final grade and that you can go "all out" by either doing an extra
project or expanding your existing project to make it look as professional as
possible.

(Back to the top)

**Practical Projects**

Spring, 2002

Now is a good time to start thinking about the required Practical Projects. As
mentioned in the syllabus, two different practical projects are required this
semester and they provide an excellent opportunity to put your desktop
publishing skills to actual use. These practical projects are a great way to
start developing a portfolio and can include a newsletter, brochure, Web page,
etc. Do at least one of these projects for a non-profit community
organization, such as the Boys & Girls Club, Humane Society, Sierra Club, etc.
The other project can be a sports team you belong to, a local business (no
family businesses!) etc. Please follow these guidelines below for best
results:

1\. Meet with the organization at least once before beginning the project and
show them your "letter of intro." You should work with at least two people
from the organization to gather ideas about what they need and what you are
able to offer them. Create at least three sketches or "thumbnails" and show
them to the people you meet with to get feedback, and tentative approval of
one of the designs. This can either be during the first meeting or you can
fax, mail or drop off the ideas later.

2\. Create the next stage "rough" design on your computer and give your client
a copy. You can fax, mail or drop off the copy to get more feedback and the
final approval of the project from them.

3\. Complete the project and provide the client with a printed copy and a disc
copy of your work. Be adaptable and provide the client with a high-quality
product that they will be proud to use.

4\. Type at least one page for each project describing why you picked that
organization, who you met with, the dates, what their needs were and how you
negotiated the final design.

5\. If you need any help finding an organization to work with, look at the
attached list or see me. I have spoken with several non-profit organizations
in Chico who are interested in having volunteers from our class. Don't
hesitate to ask if you have any questions!

6\. This project will be graded on the "curve." You need to do an detailed job
that shows off as many desktop publishing skills as possible. Simple one-page
flyers or brochures will end up at the bottom of the curve. During the last
three years we had several excellent projects, including a 4-page newsletter
for the Butte Environmental Council, a 8-page "Preschool Handbook" for a
Hamilton City elementary school, a 5-page brochure for a Japanese baseball
team, a well-developed Internet site for a local Whittmeyer Auto along with
other creative projects.

7\. Your job is to work as the designer, tying together the various elements
such as text, graphics and photos in a visually appealing and user-friendly
format. Feel free to ask the organization that you are working with to assign
one of their members to do the basic wordprocessing so that you are not
overwhelmed with "busy work."

8\. Have fun with this project! Don't hesitate to ask if you have any
questions.

* * *

**Recommended Resources:**

Poor Richard's Building Online Communities, by Margaret Levine Young. ISBN:
0-9661032-9-7. Top Floor Publishing, 8790 West Colfax. Suite 107, Lakewood CO
80215, Ph# 303-205-9861, www.topfloor.com

Poor Richard's Internet Marketing & Promotions, by Peter Kent ISBN:
0-9661032-5-4. Top Floor Publishing, 8790 West Colfax. Suite 107, Lakewood CO
80215, Ph# 303-205-9861, www.topfloor.com

Robin Williams Design Workshop, by Robin Williams and John Tollett. ISBN:
0-201-70088-3. Peachpit Press, 1249 Eighth Street, Berkeley, CA 94710. (800)
283-9444. www.peachpit.com

Microsoft PowerPoint, Expert Certification, by Elizabeth Flynn. ISBN:
0-7638-0338-3. ECM Paradigm, St.Paul, MN, 2001. (800) 645-7151. www.emcp.com

Graphic Design Cookbook, Mix & Match Recipes for Faster, Better Layouts, by
Leonard Koren and R. Whippo Meckler. Chronicle Books, San Francisco, CA, 1989.
ISBN: 0-87701-569-4

Accelerated Learning for the 21st Century by Colin Rose. Dell, NY. ISBN:
0-440-50779-0

Aunt Ellen Learning Systems- they offer a Personal Coach CD that helps anyone
learn basic computer literacy, web skills, word processing and more.
www.auntellen.com

(Back to the top)

****

**Desktop Publishing Links:**

    
    
    [Quick access to graphics and clip art](http://www.fg-a.com/)[Lots of copyright-free photos](http://RoyaltyFreePhotos.com/)[Links to free Web page hosting](http://www.free-webmaster-resources.net/hosting.html)[Additional free Web page hosting](http://freewebspace.net/)[Adobe banner generator](http://webservices.adobe.com/banner/main.html)[Advanced Web design resources](http://www.adeveloper.com/resource.html%20)[Web page background design archive ](http://www.backgroundsarchive.com/)[Web design techniques](http://www.tips-tricks.com/)[Picture search engines links](http://www.cornado.com/products/pp/)[Beginners' Central- teach yourself Internet skills](http://www.northernwebs.com/bc/)[Learn the Net- more learning resources](http://www.learnthenet.com)[Howstuffworks.com- general tutorials on computers](http://www.howstuffworks.com)[The Complete Internet Guide and Web Tutorial ](http://www.microsoft.com/insider/internet/default.htm)[Becoming WebWise- free Internet training](http://www.bbc.co.uk/webwise/learn/)[The Newbie Club- learn more about your PC](http://www.newbieclub.com/tutorials/?worldwidelearn)[Teach yourself DTP skills with this site](http://desktoppub.about.com/library/diamonds/bldust_biz.htm?iam=dpile&terms=%2Btips-+%2Bbuying+%2Ba+%2Bcomputer)[List of all Web robobs (bots)](http://www.botspot.com/search/index.html)[Cool catalog of graphics & postcards](http://www.stellamarrs.com/w_catalog.pl) [Computer how-to articles!](http://www.computeruser.com/articles/howto/index.html)[Windows Knowledge Base (computer repair)](http://search.support.microsoft.com/kb/c.asp)[Excellent computer tutorial site](http://www.wiredguide.com/)[Do-it-yourself Web design site](http://homestead.com/)[Desktop Publishing tutorials](http://ehow.com/)[Articles & advice on technology](http://www.advisor.com/)[General art search engine](http://www.artcyclopedia.com/)[Collection of Web design tutorials](http://webreference.com/)[Scanning guide tutorial](http://www.sci.sdsu.edu/multimedia/epson/)[Alta Vista Photo Finder (picture search engine)](http://image.altavista.com)[Image Finder](http://sunsite.berkeley.edu/ImageFinder/)[Image Surfer](http://ipix.yahoo.com)[Clip art search engine](http://www.webplaces.com/search)[Large clip art collection](http://visualparadox.com/)[Cite your Internet research & images](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/cup/cgos/idx_basic.html)[Large Javascript collection](http://wsabstract.com/)[Typograhpy resources](http://www.will-harris.com/)[A good general DTP site- lots of resources](http://www.desktoppublishing.com)[Practical Project ideas and links #1](http://Idealist.org)[Practical Project ideas and links #2](http://VolunteerMatch.com)[Windows Knowlege Base (many resources!)](http://search.support.microsoft.com/kb/c.asp)[Zee's Favorite Places for creating a Web Page](http://www.en.com/users/zee/htmlstz.htm)

(Back to the top)

**Citing your research from the Web:**

As you may know, plagerism is still considered to be a very serious offense.
Many students copy materials from the Internet without ever citing it (this
includes copyrighted images and photographs). The sites below provide
inofrmation and examples of how to cite Internet information and graphics,
both in the MLA and the APA styles.

<http://www.columbia.edu/cu/cup/cgos/idx_basic.html>

**Advanced Internet Research Sites** -

**Standard Searches:**

To perform a basic Internet search, simply click on the Net Search button on
the top of your screen, you will get one of the five major search engines
(Yahoo, Infoseek, Lycos, Excite, Netscape). Simply type in the term you are
looking for.

**Boolean searches:**

You can focus many of your searches by using Boolean search logic. The easiest
way to use the power of Boolean searches is to use quotes if your search uses
more than "two words." This forces the search engine to find only those sites
where both terms are together on the same paragraph. Otherwise you will get a
lot of sites that are not closely related to what you are looking for. Some of
the other common Boolean symbols are: & for And, | for Or, ~ for Not, etc. For
example, if you needed information about childhood diabetes, you could perform
a search for childhood & diabetes which would be much more effective than
simply searching for both terms separately. You could also use other
combination search terms such as childhood & diatetes & nutrition. Several
search engines support Boolean searching, including Alta Vista (use their
Advanced Search) and Yahoo.

**Multi-purpose Research Sites:**

Here are several links for multiple search engines along with a brief
explanation of how to use them. The way that I search is to ocasionally try
the individual search engines that are available by clicking the Search button
at the top of the screen (such as Yahoo, Excite, Lycos, etc), but to usually
rely on the multiple search engines. These multiple search engines search all
(or most) of the individual Web search engine sites and gather the results
together. These multiple search sites provide an excellent way to quickly
examine the results from several search engines. These multi-threaded search
sites can be slower to return search results than subject-and-keyword search
sites and will sometimes show duplicate results. Below is a review of several
of these services.

**Profusion:** This is a multiple search engine that uses artificial
intelligence to categorize incoming queries from up to nine search engines.
You can select the "Best Three," "Fastest Three" or all nine search engines.
The "check links" option has ProFusion verify that all results page links were
accessible before displaying them to the user. This is my favorite multiple
search engine because of it's easy-to-use features, duplicate link reduction
and fast processing speed. <http://www.profusion.com/>

**Dogpile:** Another multiple search engine that takes a single query and
processes it so that you will get results from major search engines such as
AltaVista, Lycos, Yahoo, etc. Another nice feature is Dogpile's ability to
also search newsgroups, online yellow pages, weather information, shareware
archives, news headline searches and lots more. <http://www.dogpile.com/>

**MetaCrawler:** Yet another multiple search engine. MetaCrawler collates
results, eliminates duplication, scores the results and provides the user with
a comprehensive list of relevant sites. MetaCrawler also offers a low-
bandwidth version (slow modem access), power-search options, and other
features. <http://www.metacrawler.com/>

**PureSearch:** This resource gives you access to 70 well know search sites,
including meta search engines and databases. PureSearch will show you how
improve your searches by using some of the many search modifiers available on
each site and will point you to hundreds of other specialty information sites
related to your topic. Simply select a search engine from the list boxes and
click on the "Tips" button for instant online pointers. Unfortunately
PureSearch only lets you select one search engine at a time so it is not
really as effective as several of the other multiple search engines above. [
http://www.puresearch.com/](http://www.puresearch.com/)

**Direct Hit:** Here is a "popularity engine" that works by monitoring which
Web sites typical Internet searchers select from their search results list,
how much time the searchers spend at these sites and the position of a site
relative to other sites. This information is then used in the ranking to
further refine the search results. Basically, the sites that are regularly
selected by searchers are boosted in their ranking, while the sites that are
consistently ignored by searchers are penalized in their rankings. This
popularity method monitors what millions of daily Internet searchers are doing
to provide search results based on the number of total visitors.
<http://directhit.com>

**WebRing:** These member Web sites have banded together to form their sites
into linked circles (rings). This unique structure allows the creation and
evolution of thousands of different "Web communities." Each ring was started
and is maintained by an individual website owner. Through navigation links at
the bottom of member pages, visitors can travel to all or any of the sites in
a ring. You can move through a ring in different directions and survey all the
sites that make up the ring. You can select a category of rings and then
refine your search by searching within those rings. If you can't find a Ring
that suits your needs, Webring encourages you to start your own.
<http://www.webring.org/>

**Ask Jeeves!:** With this natural language processing technology, you type a
question for Jeeves just the way you'd phrase it if you were asking a friend.
Jeeves has already researched thousands of questions, and has catalogued the
answers to them so that you often get your answer quickly. Jeeves will also
navigate through millions of Web sites to find questions not already in the
archive. Jeeves attempts to answer questions of all types, serious or offbeat,
business or personal. Jeeves determines both the meaning of the words in the
question (semantic processing) as well as the meaning in the grammar of the
question (syntactic processing). The Ask Jeeves knowledgebase contains links
to more than 7 million sources of answers, which contain information about the
most frequently asked questions on the Internet. <http://www.askjeeves.com/>

**General Search Tips:**

Here are some general tips for obtaining the best search results. These tips
are are based on my own and other's experiences in making a Web search as fast
and efficient as possible. Persistance and common sense are probably the two
most valuable characteristics in consistently finding high quality search
results.

  * Concentrate on key words and phrases that best describe your search term.
  * Keep trying all of the related terms and concepts. Sometimes just making a word plural (or not plural) will change the search results dramatically.
  * Eliminate unnecessary words (the, a, an, etc.) from the search string. 
  * Always check for misspelled words and typing errors.
  * Try synonyms and variations of words.
  * Follow any instructions that the search site suggests for constructing a good search.
  * Test your search string on several different search sites (or through a multiple search engine). Search results from different sites can vary greatly.
  * Visit some of the sites that appear on your initial search and locate terms that might help you refine your search string. 
  * Keep tossing those terms at the search engine! 

** **

**Internet and software training resources:**

Here are several "do-it-yourself" training resources where you can teach
yourself various software & Internet skills along with learning how to do
basic repairs to your computer.

<http://www.learnthenet.com>

<http://lcweb.loc.gov/global/internet/training.html>

<http://help-site.com/>

<http://www.zdnet.com/windows/98/tips.html>

<http://www.cmpnet.com/win98>

<http://www.microsoft.com/support/>

<http://www.annoyances.org/win95/>

<http://www.cmpcmm.com/cc/companies.html>

****

(Back to the top)

**Common Image File Types (extensions):**

.avi A video file that opens in Windows Media Player.

.doc A text document from Microsoft Word.

.rtf Rich Text Format that allows many different word processing programs to
open this file.

.exe An executable file or self-executing zip file, usually a program or
installation file.

.gif; .jpeg Image file types. Open in any browser and in most image editing
programs such as Adobe Photoshop.

.htm; .html A document formatted in HyperText Markup Language. Opens in all
Web browsers.

.mp3 A near CD-quality, compressed audio file. Popular mp3 players include
Sonique, WinAmp, and Windows Media Player.

.mpeg A video file that opens in Windows Media Player

.mov; .qt An Apple Quick Time movie file.

.pdf Opens with Adobe software, such as Adobe Acrobat Reader; a standard for
government publications.

.ra; .rm Real Media audio and video files.

.sit A file compressed using StuffIt for Macintosh.

.txt A plain text file that opens in any word processing program.

.wav A Microsoft Windows audio file

.zip A compressed (zipped) file that can be extracted using WinZip or PKZip.

** **

**Internet Terms:**

Browsers: A program that you install on your computer to access the Web The
browser reads Web pages and interprets the commands they include to produce a
visually appealing page on your screen. Netscape is the most popular of the
graphic browser programs. The two main Web browsers are Netscape Navigator and
Microsoft Internet Explorer. Both are currently available for free.

E-mail: Short for electronic mail. A way to correspond with someone else on
the Internet who also has an e-mail connection. You can communicate locally,
within the United States or throughout the world, all without paying for
stamps or a telephone bill. Netscape Navigator and Microsoft Internet Explorer
have a built-in e-mail program or you can use commercial programs such as
Eudora or Pine.

FAQ (frequently asked questions): There are many FAQ files available for
almost every subject that you might find on the Internet. Going to the site's
FAQ files is the best place to start to find answers to your questions.

FTP (file transfer protocol): A fast way of uploading or downloading files on
the Internet. Web browsers can perform basic FTP downloads, but dedicated FTP
programs do it better.

Home pages: A location (or page) on the Web that contains information and/or
links that take you to other related sites. The home page tells you what is
available at that Web site. A well designed home page gives you attractive
graphics and easy-to-read information about their project while often
supplying you with links to other interesting sites on the Internet.

HTML (HyperText Markup Language): The programming language or code in which
every page on the Internet is written. Originally, home pages had to be
created by programmers who knew how to use HTML. Now easy-to-use software
programs, such as Claris HomePage and Microsoft FrontPage, help users design
Internet Web sites and automatically create the HTML tags for the sites.

Internet: A global network of computer networks that contains a huge
collection of information from various universities, governments, businesses,
libraries, museums, private individuals, etc. All of these sites are linked
together by an international network of computers that speak the same language
(HTML), and are able to communicate with each other. When you connect to the
Internet, your computer becomes part of this world-wide network of computers.
On the Internet, you can exchange electronic mail, access and participate in
discussion forums, search databases, purchase the latest gadget, share
information about your hobby, and so forth. No one owns the Internet and no
one controls it. The backbone of the Internet connects supercomputers in major
cities all around the world.

ISP (Internet service provider): The company, university or institution that
sells or provides you with access to their server so that your computer can
access the Internet. ISP's connect to this backbone through their own lines,
and provide your computer with a connection through the telephone line.

Java: A powerful Web page programming language that allows programmers to add
basic animation and other automated tasks. Java can run on any platform (Mac
or PC).

Links (hypertext links): the colored (usually blue) or underlined words or
images or graphics that automatically connects you to another Web page when
you click on it with your mouse. Links can be made from either text or
graphics.

Mailing lists: Subject-based forums where you can communicate with others with
a similar interest by e-mail. You send your e-mail to a central point and then
you receive all the messages that have been sent to that list.

Modem (modulator/demodulator): the hardware that allows your computer to
communicate with another computer through the telephone lines.

Newsgroups: Public discussion groups where people can read messages posted by
others and contribute their own. There are thousands of newsgroups on the
Internet, covering many different subjects.

Plug-in: Software that enhances the capabilities of your Web browser to enable
it to do things like play animations, video clips and/or sound.

Public domain: If something on the Internet is in the public domain, you
should be able to use it withoug infringing on the copyright.

Search engines: Tools to search the World Wide Web to find specific
information that is needed. Search engines scan the Web, based on keywords
that are entered, and provide users with direct hyperlinks to the sites
discovered. Some of the more popular search engines are Yahoo, Excite, Lycos
and Infoseek. They can be activated by using the Net Search button while in
Netscape or the Search button in Microsoft's Internet Explorer.

Server: A central computer which provides information to other computers. Web
sites are stored on Web servers.

Shareware/Freeware: Many software programs are available on the Internet as
shareware (try before you buy), or freeware (free use by anyone).

Subject trees: An alphabetically-organized list of Web resources, categorized
under major headings such as Arts, Business, Government, etc. They provide a
Web version of a library subject card catalog. You can click several
categories of subject trees until you find the desired sites.

Upload: To transfer data from your computer to another computer.

URL (uniform resource locator): This is the generic term for the addresses on
the World Wide Web or Internet. All Web site addresses start with http:// The
rest of the URL will include the DNS or Domain Name System which is the unique
identification of that site.

Web space: The space on a Web server that is allocated for hosting a Web site.

World Wide Web (WWW or "The Web"): The Web is an easy-to-use-program that runs
on top of the Internet, making many of the sites accessible through hyperlinks
and other tools. Many of the sites on the Internet are organized so that they
can be easily found on the Web by the search engines mentioned below.



[Click Here](http://www.csuchico.edu/~csu/celt/to.html) to see a list of other
classes that I am teaching this semester, including: Basic & Advanced Web
Design, Microsoft Excel & Windows, etc.

  
---  
  
![](graphics/shovlban_gif)

**(Keep digging)**

(Back to the top)

