| ![](../images/header.gif) |  | [![](../images/home.gif)](../../index.html) |
[![](../images/overview.gif)](../overview/from_the_head.html) |
[![](../images/admission.gif)](../admission/applying.html) |
[![](../images/acedemics.gif)](middle_school.html) |
[![](../images/student_life.gif)](../student_life/day.html)  
---|---|---|---|---  
[![](../images/community.gif)](../community/directory.html) |
[![](../images/make_a_gift.gif)](../gift/annual_fund.html) |
[![](../images/alumnae.gif)](../alumnae/welcome_alumnae.html) |
[![](../images/calendarnav.gif)](../calendar/calendar.html) |
[![](../images/summer.gif)](../summer/summer_day_camp.html) |
[![](../images/site_map.gif)](../map/map.html)  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
| ![](images/history_photo.jpg)  
---  
| ![](../images/dummy.gif)  
![](images/course_descriptions_title.gif)  
![](../images/dummy.gif)  
---  
| ![](../images/dummy.gif) |

[![](images/english_nav.gif)](../academics/english.html)[![](images/math_nav.gif)](../academics/math.html)[![](images/science_nav.gif)](../academics/science.html)[![](images/language_nav.gif)](../academics/languages.html)  
[![](images/middle_school_nav.gif)](../academics/middle_school_arts.html)[![](images/upper_school_nav.gif)](../academics/upper_school_arts.html)
[![](images/history_nav.gif)](../academics/history.html)  
[![](images/human_dev_nav.gif)](../academics/human_development.html)[![](images/pe_nav.gif)](../academics/physical_education.html)

**  
History Course Descriptions**  
![](images/gold_line.gif)

**Ancient Civilizations 6**  
Sixth Grade Ancient History explores the origins of civilization in the
ancient world. Students study the development of civilizations from the
earliest evidence of humans, to the discovery of agriculture, the
establishment of towns and cities, and the emergence of complex civilizations.
First semester concentrates on the dawn of civilization in Africa and
Mesopotamia and the cultural achievements of the ancient Egyptians. Parallels
are studied in the ancient civilizations of the Indus River Valley as well as
ancient China and ancient Israel. Second semester focuses on the development
of the Greek and Roman civilizations. Students follow the role of geography,
government, economics, religion, and cultural developments through each
civilization studied. Organizational and study skills are emphasized; group
projects involve a variety of activities. Students utilize informational
technologies for research and presentations.

**World History 7**  
World History is a continuation of the study of civilizations begun in the
sixth grade. The course begins with the fall of the Roman Empire and moves
chronologically to the exploration of the Americas. Through text readings,
projects, discussion, group activities, and oral reports, students learn about
Western and non-Western people and cultures from the period 500 A.D. up
through modern times. Seventh grade students learn how to outline, take notes,
and develop their skills in written and oral expression. They also study
geography and current events. Students' understanding is further enhanced
through field trips, outside speakers, videos, and assignments that integrate
history and technology.

**American History 8**  
American History is an introductory survey beginning with the first Americans
and the Colombian exchange. The course ends with the events of the 1970's and
1980's. A variety of methods helps students learn the important facts and
trends as well as the values which have influenced the development of this
nation. Students learn the chronology of American history, develop research
and presentation skills by completing a semester project, and strengthen oral
skills by participating in group presentations and debate. Analysis of primary
sources, map studies, videos and computer projects, and units on the structure
of American government and immigration enrich this course and help students in
their understanding of American history. This course includes preparation for
the eighth grade trip to Washington, D.C. and a decades project.

**Cultures and Civilizations**  
Cultures and Civilizations is a required two-semester course for freshmen that
concentrates on the political, economic, social, intellectual, and diplomatic
history of the Western and non-Western worlds from the 16th to the 20th
centuries. Units on China, Japan, the world of Islam, Africa, and Europe
examine the cultures and societies of these areas and their interaction with
one another. C &C; emphasizes a solid grasp of factual material, chronology,
and geography; it fosters an understanding of historical themes and causation.
It continues to help students develop competence in analytical and expository
writing. Works of literature, such as _A Tale of Two Cities, Germinal, All
Quiet on the Western Front, Night, Nectar in a Sieve, A Story Like the Wind_ ,
and _Spring Moon_ are among the outside reading selections that enrich the
course content.

**The Individual and Society**  
This required one-semester course examines the relationship between the
individual and society in historical and theoretical settings. Topics in the
course include discussions of _1984_ , _Brave New World_ , the origins of
civilization, the Greek polis, the major world religions, Plato's _Republic_ ,
and totalitarianism. A major component of the class is the construction of
Web-based versions of research projects that are mounted on the Castilleja
website. In the first quarter as a collaborative project, students research a
religion and examine key elements to evaluate how the religion binds the
individual to society. As a final project, each student conducts an
independent study and analysis of a modern, post World War II authoritarian or
totalitarian regime. The project's goal is to analyze how the regime attempts
to balance the needs of the individual with those of the society or state.
These projects are based on research in electronic and print resources and
reinforce students' knowledge in documenting sources and incorporating links
to related sites on the World Wide Web.

**The American Political System: The Struggle to Provide Liberty and Justice
for All**  
This course introduces the origins, development, and structure of the American
political system. Students critically evaluate significant events and
controversies that have shaped America's democracy from its foundation to the
present and focus on the central theme: How does the American system provide
the Constitutional goals of "liberty and justice for all"? The course places
strong emphasis on issues such as: civil liberties, federal budget management,
governmental reform, the role of media in politics, how leadership affects
democratic politics and the impact of social movements on the political
process. The class conducts ten formal debates during the semester on
controversial issues. Each student participates on two debate teams per
quarter and acts as debate moderator once during the semester. Students
facilitate weekly roundtable discussions to discuss and evaluate current
political developments using _The Washington Post National Weekly_ as text.

**United States History Honors**  
Open to eleventh and twelfth graders, United States History is a two-semester
course which introduces students to the critical issues of this nation's past.
The chronological narrative provides a perspective on both historical
causation and contemporary events. While the course represents the traditional
topical approach to American History, the syllabus emphasizes the exciting
diversity of America's cultural heritage. A special emphasis is placed on the
experiences of African Americans, Mexican Americans, Native Americans, Asian
Americans and women (across ethnicity and class). The curriculum encourages
students to refine their skills in critical analysis, effective oral
communication, discussion, and expository writing.

**United States History AP**  
United States History Advanced Placement is a college-level two-semester
course open to eleventh and twelfth grade students. The course requires
extensive reading, research, and analytical writing. Students examine varying
interpretations of American History and methods of historiography. The class
includes a period per week devoted exclusively to a seminar discussion in
which the students assume the responsibility for preparation and leadership.
In the second semester, students identify and research a topic of historical
significance for a query paper. Students take the U. S. History AP exam in
May. _Prerequisites: Department recommendation. Either United States History
Honors or United States History AP is required._

**Electives (Open to 11th and 12th Grade Students)**

**African Studies**  
African Studies is a one-semester history elective open to juniors and seniors
that focuses on the development of sub-Sahara Africa from the emergence of
indigenous cultures to the challenges of the 21st century. Students examine
the elements of Africa's heritage through reading primary sources, oral
histories, and recent African fiction; they evaluate the aftermath of
decolonization and the impact of technology on traditional societies; they
master Africa's physical and political geography; they develop competence in
exploring print and electronic sources of information; they continue to
develop their fluency in written and oral expression. Outside reading includes
_Things Fall Apart, Cry, the Beloved Country_ , and selections from Nadine
Gordimer and Buchi Emecheta.

**Civil Liberties and Civil Rights**  
This one semester history elective is open to juniors and seniors and posits a
series of questions. Does free speech mean that you can shout  "Fire" in a
crowded theater? Does equal protection allow special preferences for
disadvantaged groups? Is there a constitutional right to die? These questions
represent the type this course investigates. It introduces the student to the
range of individual rights and freedoms set forth in our Constitution and
examines how the interpretation of those rights and freedoms has changed
through American history. Students refine their skills in speaking, writing,
and analysis by writing and arguing their own decisions. Students also present
topical current events to the class, participate in frequent mock trials and
arguments, and write one major research paper.

**East Asian Studies**  
East Asian Studies concentrates on the economic, political, diplomatic,
social, and cultural developments and histories of China and Japan. After a
rapid chronological survey of the traditional eras and the  "ways" of East
Asia, students concentrate on the period in the modern era of world wars and
revolutionary movements as they relate to East and West. Required outside
reading is selected from contemporary literature such as _Wild Swans, The
Death of Woman Wang,_ and _Patriotism_.

**Economics**  
Economics is an elective with the primary goal of giving students an
understanding of the way in which individuals, households, firms, industries,
and governments decide to employ their given talents and material resources to
best meet their individual and societal needs and wants. Students learn the
foundation of economic thought, the nature and function of product and factor
markets, the role of the government in promoting greater efficiency and equity
in the economy, the role of money and financial institutions, how to measure
overall economic productivity and stability, and the increasing role of global
markets. Theory is practiced in case applications and simulations, by
participating in class discussions, by listening to expert guest speakers and
through current events reading. Two projects are required, one each quarter;
these projects include a descriptive paper on the stock market and investing,
and a business plan.

**History of Art (See Fine Arts)**

**International Relations**  
International Relations is a one semester elective for juniors and seniors who
seek an intellectually rigorous course in contemporary international affairs.
This course concentrates on both the G-7 nations of the world and emerging
nations. Readings and discussion examine fundamental political and economic
dynamics in international relations, world trade, and the international
monetary system. This course takes advantage of community resources available
to area high school students such as the World Affairs Council and SPICE.
Guest speakers introduce diverse topics of global concern such as the
biodiversity of Africa and ecology of global development. This class follows a
seminar format with a high degree of student participation. One class per week
will require student reporting on contemporary world affairs. Sources include
_The Economist, Current History: A Journal of Contemporary World Affairs,
Global Decision Making,_ and _Foreign Affairs._ _Prerequisite: Department
recommendation is required._

**European History AP**  
This year long course open to juniors and seniors offers a rigorous, in-depth
study of European history, spanning the period from 1450 to the present. In
addition to providing preparation for the AP exam in the subject, the class
focuses on such major intellectual movements as the Renaissance, the
Enlightenment, the Scientific Revolution, and Marxism. The course covers major
economic changes such as the Industrial Revolution and major political events
such as the Atlantic Slave Trade and World War II. The former are just a few
examples of events or ideas that were born in Europe but reverberated
throughout the world. The class encourages students to perform thoughtful
written and oral analysis of rich primary source materials encompassing
philosophy, scientific investigation, literature, religion and political
thought. Students participate in trials and philosophical arguments, write
frequently, and prepare for the AP exam. _Prerequisites: Completion of C &C;,
APS/I&S; and commitment to a challenging workload. _

**Macroeconomics AP**  
Macroeconomics Advanced Placement is a semester college-level elective
designed to provide a thorough understanding of the principles of economics
that apply to an economic system as a whole. Students review fundamental
economic concepts, then focus exclusively on macroeconomic issues: the
measurement of economic performance (GNP, GDP and national income),
unemployment, inflation, aggregate supply and demand, money and banking,
fiscal-monetary policy, international economics, globalization, and the
tradeoffs between the various economic elements/theories. The course requires
extensive reading and preparation time outside of class. _Prerequisites:
Completion of economics or departmental recommendation._

**Music History (See Fine Arts)**

**Russian History**  
Beginning with the founding of the first Russian state at Kiev, this course
provides a rapid chronological survey of Russian History from the medieval
period through the fall of the Soviet Union with a particular emphasis on
leadership traditions from Ivan IV through Stalin. Much of the content focuses
on the themes of continuity and change, reform and revolution, authority and
dissent. Films, videos, and documentaries enrich the course content, as do
readings from the great Russian novels and short stories of the 19th century
and more recent fictional and non-fictional evaluations of Stalin and the
Stalin era. Among these works are _One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich_ ,
and _The Overcoat._

Return to top

| ![](../images/dummy.gif)  
---|---|---  
| ![](images/academics_header.gif)  
[![](images/middle_school.gif)](../academics/middle_school.html)  
[![](images/upper_school.gif)](../academics/upper_school.html)  
[![](images/student_projects.gif)](../academics/student_projects.html)  
[![](images/technology.gif)](../academics/technology.html)  
[![](images/library.gif)](../academics/library.html)  
  
  
  
  
---  
![](../images/dummy.gif)  
| ![](../images/dummy.gif)  
[home](../../index.html) ![](../images/line.gif)
[overview](../overview/from_the_head.html) ![](../images/line.gif)
[admission](../admission/applying.html) ![](../images/line.gif)
[academics](middle_school.html) ![](../images/line.gif) [student
life](../student_life/day.html) ![](../images/line.gif)
[community](../community/directory.html) ![](../images/line.gif) [make a
gift](../gift/annual_fund.html) ![](../images/line.gif)
[alumnae](../alumnae/welcome_alumnae.html) ![](../images/line.gif)
[calendar](../calendar/calendar.html) ![](../images/line.gif)
[summer](../summer/summer_day_camp.html) ![](../images/line.gif)
[map](../map/map.html)  
contact [dawna_houston@castilleja.org](mailto:dawna_houston@castilleja.org)
with questions & comments  | ![](../images/logo.gif)  
![](../images/dummy.gif)  
---|---

