  ![](images/rotary_earth.gif) | The Authority of the Word: Books, Culture and
Society in Europe and the United States  
---|---  
  

* * *

  **AMST 532** | **[Prof. Robert Gross](mailto:ragros@facstaff.wm.edu)**  
---|---  
**HIST 715-03** | **College Apts.**  
**SPRING 1998** | **Office hours:**  
| **Weds., 1 - 3:00 p.m.**  
| **Thurs., 3:30 - 5:00 p.m.**  
| **Office phone: 221-1266**  
  | **Index:**  

** **  
    * **Statement of Purpose **
    * **Required Readings **
    * **Course Requirements **
    * **Electronic Resources **
    * **Schedule of Readings **

  
---|---  


* * *

**Statement of Purpose**

[![](images/gute.jpg)](http://www.digitalcentury.com/encyclo/update/print.html)
| This course will examine the social history of ideas and of intellectuals in
the West from the early modern era to the present from a new perspective: that
of the the new history of the book. Beginning with the invention of the
printing press in Germany around 1450, we will explore the impact of what has
been called "print culture" upon learning, communications, and systems of
authority in both Europe and the United States. Topics will include: the
history of literacy and of popular reading; the role of printers as an artisan
class and the industrialization of their trade; censorship, state power, and
the control of knowledge; democratization and the expansion of the literary
marketplace; the rise of authorship and mass publishing; the interplay of
popular culture and high culture; the changing status of intellectual elites;
gender and reading; and the future of books in an electronic age. Readings
draw on sources from both sides of the Atlantic.  
---|---  


**Required Readings**

  [![](images/lion2.gif)](http://swem.wm.edu) | The following books are
available for purchase at the College Bookstore. Copies have also been placed
on reserve at Swem Library.  

1\. Brown, Richard D. _Knowledge Is Power: The Diffusion of Information in
Early America, 1700-1865._ New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1989.  

2\. Chartier, Roger. _Order of Books; Readers, Authors & Libraries in Europe
Between the 14th & 18th Centuries._ Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1994.  

3\. Cummins, Eric. _The Rise and Fall of California's Radical Prison
Movement._ Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1993.  

4\. Darnton, Robert. _The Great Cat Massacre and Other Episodes in French
Cultural History._ New York: Vintage Books, 1984.  

5\. Eisenstein, Elizabeth L. _The Printing Revolution in Early Modern Europe._
Cambridge, Eng. and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983.  
---|---  
[![](images/SILV.jpg)](http://www.nypl.org/research/chss/grd/resguides/bookhist.html)
| 6.  Garvey, Ellen. _The Adman in the Parlor: Magazines and the Gendering of
Consumer Culture, 1880s to 1910s._   New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1996.

7\. Ginzburg, Carlo. _The Cheese and The Worms: The Cosmos of a Sixteenth-
Century Miller._ Trans. John and Anne Tedeschi. New York: Penguin Books, 1982.  

8\. Hall, David D. _Cultures of Print: Essays in the History of the Book._
Amherst, Mass.: Univ. of Massachusetts Press, 1996.  

9\. Radway, Janice. _Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy, and Popular
Literature._ 2nd ed. Chapel Hill, N.C.: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 1991.  

10\. Shields, David S. _Civil Tongues & Polite Letters in British North
America. _Chapel Hill: Univ. of North Carolina Press for Institute of Early
American History and Culture, 1997.

11\. Zboray, Ronald J. A Fictive People: Antebellum Economic Development and
the American Reading Public. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1993.

A packet of supplementary readings is available in the American Studies
reading room [the porch off the American Studies reception area in College
Apartments] and in the History Department Library. These assignments are
designated as "R" on the detailed schedule that follows.  
---|---  


**Course Requirements**

  | Students are expected to do the weekly reading, participate actively in
discussions, carry out short, bibliographic assignments, both independently
and in collaboration with others, and write a major research paper.  

 The bibliographic assignments are designed to introduce you to major
reference sources and to techniques of analysis in the history of the book.
For the most part, these assignments are brief, requiring three hours a week,
at most; the point is to familiarize you with significant aids to research.
The assignments will be distributed on a separate sheet.

The major paper for the course can explore any theme in the history of books
and print culture, for which you can find original sources and some secondary
scholarship. Students are expected to select their topics, in consultation
with me, and to submit a statement of their project (no later than) February
27. Final papers should be 20-25 pages in length (no more); each paper must be
accompanied by a bibliographic essay of 5-7 pages, covering the literature on
your topic and evaluating the leading issues and the most useful sources.  
  
---|---  
**Electronic Resources**
[![](images/SHARP2.jpg)](http://www.indiana.edu/~sharp/) | Students in this
course are expected to take advantage of the electronic resources for
scholarship in the history of the book. The best place to start in the webpage
of SHARP, the Society for the History of Authorship, Reading, and Publishing,
which is the largest membership organization for individuals interested in
this field. The SHARP webpage provides access to a wide variety of materials,
including publishers' records, bibliographical projects (e.g., the
Williamsburg Imprints Program and the Virginia Newspaper Project), academic
programs and scholarly societies (such as the American Antiquarian Society's
Program for the History of the Book in American Culture), on-line exhibits,
bibliographies and course syllabi, and notices and calls for papers. Browsing
the SHARP webpage is a quick way to get a sense of current activity in the
field, both in the U.S. and abroad. To reach the SHARP website, enter the
following URL:  <http://www.indiana.edu/~sharp/>

Once on the SHARP website, follow its directions to move among the options.  
  
---|---  
  [![](images/VN.jpg)](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/cataloging/vnp/home.html) |
SHARP maintains an electronic bulletin board, known as SHARP-L, through which
people interested in book history carry on a regular exchange of information
and ideas. It is a good way to find out who is doing what, to learn of
upcoming conferences and publications, to follow current debates, and to post
inquiries of your own. Members of the list are remarkably forthcoming with
suggestions for books, articles, and sources in the field. To subscribe to
SHARP-L, you can follow the instructions on the SHARP web page or use your
e-mail program. If you choose the latter route, send your message to the
following address:    listserv@iubvm.ucs.indiana.edu

Leave the subject line blank, then record the following message:

 sub SHARP-L your name  
---|---  
  [![](images/PRESS.jpg)](http://www.desbib.org)  
  | The American Antiquarian Society, a national research library of U.S.
history based in Worcester, Massachusetts, has played a major role in
fostering the history of the book as a scholarly field in the U.S. Starting in
1983, it launched a formal Program in the History of the Book in American
Culture, which has sponsored conferences and summer seminars, produced
important publications, issued a periodic newsletter The Book, and undertaken
a five-volume collaborative History of the Book in America, now in progress
under a grant from the [National Endowment for the
Humanities](http://www.neh.fed.us/). I have placed in the American Studies
library a complete run of The Book down to the most recent issue, the
prospectus and volume outlines for HBA, and a guide to bibliographic sources
in the field compiled by Joanne Chaison, Head of Readers' Services at the AAS.
The Proceedings of the American Antiquarian Society regularly carries essays
in bibliography and the history of the book.  
---|---  
  [![](images/SCOL.jpg)](http://www.acls.org:80/acls/aantiqs.htm) | The
American Antiquarian Society, a national research library of U.S. history
based in Worcester, Massachusetts, has played a major role in fostering the
history of the book as a scholarly field in the U.S. Starting in 1983, it
launched a formal Program in the History of the Book in American Culture,
which has sponsored conferences and summer seminars, produced important
publications, issued a periodic newsletter The Book, and undertaken a five-
volume collaborative History of the Book in America, now in progress under a
grant from the  I have placed in the American Studies library a complete run
of The Book down to the most recent issue, the prospectus and volume outlines
for HBA, and a guide to bibliographic sources in the field compiled by Joanne
Chaison, Head of Readers' Services at the AAS. The Proceedings of the American
Antiquarian Society regularly carries essays in bibliography and the history
of the book.  
---|---  


**Schedule of Readings**

    
  | 1/22/98  
  | Introduction to the Course  
  
---|---|---  
| 1/26/98  | I. Literacy, Books, and the Politics of Culture

Robert Darnton, "What Is the History of Books?" in  _The Kiss of Lamourette,_
107-35 (R);

David D. Hall, "On Native Ground: From the History of Printing to the History
of the Book," _Cultures of Print_ , 15- 35;

Chartier, _Order of Books_ (all);  

Robert A. Gross, "Communications Revolutions: Writing a History of the Book
for an Electronic Age," _The Book_ Nos. 42  & 43 (July-Nov. 1997):7-12 (R).  
  
| 2/2/98 | II. Print Culture and the Problem of Modernity

Elizabeth Eisenstein, _The Printing Revolution in Early Modern Europe_ (all);  

Jack Goody and Ian Watt, "The Consequences of Literacy," _Comparative Studies
in Society and History_ , V (1963): 304-45 (R);

Johannes Fabian, "Keep Listening: Ethnography and Reading," in Jonathan
Boyarin, ed., _The Ethnography of Reading,_ 80-97 (R).  
  
| 2/16/98 | IV. Authority and Tradition in British North America

Keith Thomas, "The Meaning of Literacy in Early Modern England," in Bauman,
ed., _The Written Word_ , 97-132 (R);

Hall, _Cultures of Print_ , 36-150;

Brown, _Knowledge Is Power,_ 3-64;  

Darnton, "A Police Inspector Sorts His Files: The Anatomy of the Republic of
Letters," in _Great Cat Massacre,_ 145-90.  
  
| 2/23/98 | V. American Revolution and Print Culture

David Shields, _Civil Tongues and Polite Letters in British North America,_ to
be assigned;

Brown, _Knowledge Is Power,_ 65-131  
    
Michael D. Warner, _Letters of the Republic,_ 34-72 (R);  

Darnton, "Readers Respond to Rousseau: The Fabrication of Romantic
Sensitivity," in _Great Cat Massacre,_ 215-56.  
  
| 3/2/98 | VI. The Reading Revolution of the Nineteenth Century

Brown, _Knowledge Is Power,_ 132-59, 197-244, 268-96;  

Zboray, _A Fictive Republic._  
  
| March 7-15, 1998  
  | Spring break  
  
| 3/16/98 | VII. Gender, Popular Culture, and Reading

Cathy Davidson, "Ideology and Genre: The Rise of the Novel in America," _AAS
Proceedings_ 96 (1987):295-321 (R);  

Brown, _Knowledge Is Power,_ 160-96;  

Mary Kelley, "Reading Women/Women Reading: The Making of Learned Women in
Antebellum America," J _ournal of American History_ 83 (September 1996):140-60
(R);  
    
Barbara Sicherman, "Reading and Ambition: M. Carey Thomas and Female Heroism,"
_American Quarterly_ 45 (March 1993):73- 103 (R);

Helen Lefkowitz Horowitz, "'Nous Autres': Reading, Passion, and the Creation
of M. Carey Thomas," _Journal of American History_ 79 (June 1992):68-95 (R);

Robert A. Gross, "Reading Culture, Reading Books," _Proceedings of the
American Antiquarian Society_ 106 (October 1996):59-78 (R).  
  
| 3/23/98 | VIII. Mass Magazines and Consumer Culture

 Joshua Brown, "Reconstructing Representation: Social Types, Readers, and the
Pictorial Press, 1865-1877," _Radical History Review_ 66 (Fall 1996):5-38 (R);

Garvey, _Adman in the Parlor_ ;

Robert A. Gross, "Markets, Magazines, and Mores: Periodicals and Print
Culture," _The Book_ 41 (March 1997):1-6 (R).  
  
| 3/30/98 | IX. Conformity and Resistance: Reading in Prison

Cummins, _Rise and Fall of California's Radical Prison Movement._  
  
| 4/6/98 | X. Patriarchy, Mass Culture, and Female Reading

Radway, _Reading the Romance_.  
  
| 4/13/98 | Seminar: Research Reports  
  
| 4/20/98 | Seminar: Research Reports  
  
| 4/27/98 | Seminar: Research Reports

FINAL PAPER DUE ON MAY 10, 1998  


[![](images/home.jpg)](http://www.wm.edu/CAS/ASP/index.html) _Return to
American Studies Program Index  

* * *

This syllabus was formatted for the web by [Charles B.
Green](mailto:cbgree@mail.wm.edu). Please contact him if you experience any
problems with external links or if you have any suggestions or comments._

