![](images/rotary_earth.gif)|  The Authority of the Word:  
Books, Culture and Society in Europe and the United States  
---|---  
  
* * *

**AMST 532|  **[Prof. Robert Gross](mailto:ragros@facstaff.wm.edu)**  
---|---  
**HIST 616**|  **College Apts.  
**FALL 1996|  **Office hours:  
| **Tues., 2 -3:30 p.m.  
| **Thurs., 11 a.m. - 12:30 p.m.  
| **Office phone: 221-1266**  
  
| **Index:

    * Statement of Purpose
    * Required Readings
    * Course Requirements
    * Electronic Resources
    * Schedule of Readings
    * Schedule of Workshops 
**  
---|---  
  
* * *

**Statement of Purpose **

[![](images/gute.jpg) |  This course will examine the social history of ideas
and of intellectuals in the West from the early modern era to the present from
a new perspective: that of the new history of the book. Beginning with the
invention of the printing press in Germany around 1450, we will explore the
impact of what has been called "print culture" upon learning, communications,
and systems of authority in both Europe and the United States. Topics will
include: the history of literacy and of popular reading; the role of printers
as an artisan class and the industrialization of their trade; censorship,
state power, and the control of knowledge; democratization and the expansion
of the literary marketplace; the rise of authorship and mass publishing; the
interplay of popular culture and high culture; the changing status of
intellectual elites; gender and reading; and the future of books in an
electronic age. Readings include both primary and secondary sources from both
sides of the Atlantic.  
---|---  
  
**Required Readings**

[![](images/lion2.gif)](http://swem.wm.edu)

|  The following books are available for purchase at the College Bookstore.
Copies have also been placed on reserve at Swem Library.

1\. Brodhead, Richard H. _Cultures of Letters: Scenes of Reading and Writing
in Nineteenth- Century America._ Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1993.

2\. Brown, Richard D. _Knowledge Is Power: The Diffusion of Information in
Early America, 1700-1865._ New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1989.

3\. Chartier, Roger. _Order of Books; Readers, Authors & Libraries in Europe
Between the 14th & 18th Centuries._ Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1994.

4\. Darnton, Robert. _The Great Cat Massacre and Other Episodes in French
Cultural History._ New York: Vintage Books, 1984.

5\. Davidson, Cathy N. _Revolution and the Word: The Rise of the Novel in
America._ New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.  
---|---  
[![](images/SILV.jpg)](http://www.nypl.org/research/chss/grd/resguides/bookhist.html)

|

6\. Eisenstein, Elizabeth L. _The Printing Revolution in Early Modern Europe._
Cambridge, Eng. and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983.

7\. Ginzburg, Carlo. _The Cheese and The Worms: The Cosmos of a Sixteenth-
Century Miller._ Trans. John and Anne Tedeschi. New York: Penguin Books, 1982.

8\. Hall, David D. _Cultures of Print: Essays in the History of the Book._
Amherst, Mass.: Univ. of Massachusetts Press, 1996.

9\. Kelley, Mary. _Private Woman, Public Stage; Literary Domesticity in
Nineteenth Century America._ New York: Oxford University Press, 1985.

10\. Radway, Janice. _Reading the Romance: Women, Patriarchy, and Popular
Literature._ 2nd ed. Chapel Hill, N.C.: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 1991.

11\. Warner, Michael D. _Letters of the Republic._ Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1991.

A packet of supplementary readings is available in the American Studies
reading room [the porch off the American Studies reception area in College
Apartments] and in the History Department Library. These assignments are
designated as "R" on the detailed schedule that follows.  
---|---  
**

**Course Requirements**

** |  ** Students are expected to do the weekly reading, participate actively
in discussions, carry out short, bibliographic assignments, both independently
and in collaboration with others, and write a major research paper.

The bibliographic assignments are designed to introduce you to major reference
sources and to techniques of analysis in the history of the book. For the most
part, these assignments are brief, requiring three hours a week, at most; the
point is to familiarize you with significant aids to research. The assignments
will be distributed on a separate sheet.

The major paper for the course can explore any theme in the history of books
and print culture, for which you can find original sources and some secondary
scholarship. Students are expected to select their topics, in consultation
with me, and to submit a statement of their project (no later than October 4).
Final papers should be 20-25 pages in length (no more); each paper must be
accompanied by a bibliographic essay of 5-7 pages, covering the literature on
your topic and evaluating the leading issues and the most useful sources.  
---|---  

**Electronic Resources**

**

[![](images/SHARP2.jpg)](http://www.indiana.edu/~sharp/)|  The history of the
book has taken shape as a scholarly field at the very moment the electronic
revolution of our time is dramatically altering the media for disseminating
and representing the written word. In the view of Roger Chartier, the shift
from page to screen is as radical as the movement from scroll to codex in the
second century A.D. Yet, the computer can facilitate traditional scholarship,
even as it alters the conditions for communication in the academic world.
Through the Internet and the Worldwide Web, we are gaining access to a global
array of resources on virtually any subject one can imagine. That is as true
for the history of the book as for every other field.  
---|---  
[ ![](images/VN.jpg)](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/cataloging/vnp/home.html)|
Students in this course are expected to take advantage of the electronic
resources for scholarship in the history of the book. The best place to start
is the webpage of [**SHARP**](http://www.indiana.edu/~sharp), the Society for
the History of Authorship, Reading, and Publishing, which is the largest
membership organization for individuals interested in this field. The SHARP
webpage provides access to a wide variety of materials, including publishers'
records, bibliographical projects (e.g., the [Williamsburg Imprints
Program](http://www.desbib.org/cgibin/ssis/home.html) and the [Virginia
Newspaper Project](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/cataloging/vnp/home.html)),
academic programs and scholarly societies (such as the [American Antiquarian
Society's Program](http://www.acls.org:80/acls/aantiqs.htm) for the History of
the Book in American Culture), on-line exhibits, bibliographies and course
syllabi, and notices and calls for papers. Browsing the SHARP webpage is a
quick way to get a sense of current activity in the field, both in the U.S.
and abroad. To reach the SHARP website, just access the following website URL:  
---|---  
[ ![](images/PRESS.jpg)|

<http://www.indiana.edu/~sharp/>

Once on the SHARP website, follow its directions to move among the options.

SHARP maintains an electronic bulletin board, known as
[**SHARP-L](http://www.indiana.edu/~sharp/sharp-l.html)** , through which
people interested in book history carry on a regular exchange of information
and ideas. It is a good way to find out who is doing what, to learn of
upcoming conferences and publications, to follow current debates, and to post
inquiries of your own. Members of the list are remarkably forthcoming with
suggestions for books, articles, and sources in the field. To subscribe to
SHARP-L, you can follow the instructions on the SHARP web page or use your
e-mail program. If you choose the latter route, send your message to the
following address:

[ listserv@iubvm.ucs.indiana.edu](http://www.indiana.edu/~sharp/sharp-l.html)

Leave the subject line blank, then record the following message:

sub SHARP-L your name  |
[![](images/SCOL.jpg)](http://www.acls.org:80/acls/aantiqs.htm)|  The American
Antiquarian Society, a national research library of U.S. history based in
Worcester, Massachusetts, has played a major role in fostering the history of
the book as a scholarly field in the U.S. Starting in 1983, it launched a
formal Program in the History of the Book in American Culture, which has
sponsored conferences and summer seminars, produced important publications,
issued a periodic newsletter The Book, and undertaken a five-volume
collaborative History of the Book in America, now in progress under a grant
from the [National Endowment for the Humanities](http://www.neh.fed.us/). I
have placed in the American Studies library a complete run of The Book down to
the most recent issue, the prospectus and volume outlines for HBA, and a guide
to bibliographic sources in the field compiled by Joanne Chaison, Head of
Readers' Services at the AAS. The Proceedings of the American Antiquarian
Society regularly carries essays in bibliography and the history of the book.  
---|---  
  
**Schedule of Readings **

[![](images/DARNTON.jpg)](http://www.columbia.edu:8080/cu/record/record2008.32.html)|
8/28/96

Introduction to the Course

9/2/96

I. Literacy, Books, and the Politics of Culture

Robert Darnton, "What Is the History of Books?" in Darnton, _The Kiss of
Lamourette,_ 107-35 (R);

David D. Hall, "On Native Ground: From the History of Printing to the History
of the Book," _Cultures of Print,_ 15-35;

Roger Chartier, _Order of Books_ (all).

  
  
---|---  
[![](images/LIZ.jpg)](http://www.oberlin.edu/~library/perspectives13_1.html) |
9/9/96

II. Print Culture and the Problem of Modernity

Elizabeth Eisenstein, _The Printing Revolution in Early Modern Europe_ (all);

Jack Goody and Ian Watt, "The Consequences of Literacy," _Comparative Studies
in Society and History,_ V (1963): 304-45 (R);

Harold Love, "The Ambiguous Triumph of Print," in Love, _Scribal Publication
in Seventeenth-Century England_ (1993), 284-310 (R).

  
---|---  
[![](images/GINZ.jpg)](http://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/history/ginzburg/index.html)|
9/16/96

III. Popular Reading in the Pre-Industrial World

Robert Darnton, "First Steps Toward a History of Reading," in Darnton, _The
Kiss of Lamourette,_ 154-90 (R);

Carlo Ginzburg, _The Cheese and the Worms_ (all);

Robert Darnton, "Peasants Tell Tales: The Meaning of Mother Goose," in
Darnton, _The Great Cat Massacre,_ 9-74.

9/23/96

IV. Authority and Tradition in Early America

David D. Hall, _Cultures of Letters,_ 36-150;

[Richard D. Brown](http://www.ucc.uconn.edu/~wwwhist/Brown.html), _Knowledge
Is Power,_ 3-109.

  
  
---|---  
  
[![](images/BEN.jpg)](http://www.upenn.edu:80/AR/men/bf.html)|  9/30/96

V. The World of Benjamin Franklin, Printer

Benjamin Franklin, _Autobiography_ ;

Stephen Botein, "`Mere Mechanics' and an Open Press: The Business and
Political Strategies of the Colonial American Printer," _Perspectives in
American History,_ 9 (1975): 127-228 (R);

Warner, _Letters of the Republic,_ 1-96.

  
  
---|---  
**
[![](images/PAINE.JPG)](http://www.dpipc.com:80/cdadesign/paine/archive.html)|
10/7/96

VI. Republicanism and Print Culture

Gordon S. Wood, "The Democratization of Mind in the American Revolution," in
_Leadership in the American Revolution,_ 63-88 (R);

Brown, _Knowledge Is Power,_ 110-217;

Warner, _Letters of the Republic,_ 97-150.

Recommended reading: Thomas Paine, _Common Sense_ (1776).

10/14/96

 **Fall break**

****** 10/21/96

VII. Gender, Popular Culture and the Novel

Cathy Davidson, _Revolution and the Word,_ 3-150, 254-62;

Robert Darnton, "Readers Respond to Rousseau: The Fabrication of Romantic
Sensibility," in Darnton, _The Great Cat Massacre,_ 215-56;

Michael D. Warner, _Letters of the Republic,_ 118-76.

10/28/96

VIII. The Publishing Revolution of the Nineteenth Century

Robert A. Gross, "Printing, Politics and the People," _Proceedings of the
American Antiquarian Society,_ 99 (Oct. 1989): 375-97 (R);

David Paul Nord, "Systematic Benevolence: Religious Publishing and the
Marketplace in Early Nineteenth-Century America," in Leonard I. Sweet, ed.,
_Communication and Change in American Religious History_ (1993), 239-69 (R);

Brown, _Knowledge Is Power,_ 218-96;

Mary Kelley, _Private Woman, Public Stage,_ 3-107.

11/4/96

** IX. The Profession of Authorship in a Commercial Age

Kelley, _Private Woman, Public Stage,_ 111-214, 285-315;

Richard Brodhead, _Cultures of Letters_ (all).

11/11/96

Guest speaker: Stephen Whitfield, "Banned and Beloved: Salinger's Catcher in
the Rye"

Daniel M. Stashower, "On First Looking into Chapman's Holden: Speculations on
a Murder," _American Scholar_ 52 (1983): 373-77 (R).

11/18/96

X. Gender and Reading

Hall, _Cultures of Print,_ 169-87;

Mary Kelley, "Reading Women/Women Reading: The Making of Learned Women in
Antebellum America," _Journal of American History_ 83 (September 1996): 140-60
(R);

Barbara Sicherman, "Reading Little Women: The Many Lives of a Text," in Linda
K. Kerber, Alice Kessler-Harris, and Kathryn Kish Sklar, eds., _U.S. History
as Women's History: New Feminist Essays_ (Chapel Hill and London, 1995),
245-66 (R);

Robert A. Gross, "Reading Culture, Reading Books," _Proceedings of the
American Antiquarian Society_ 106 (October 1996) (R);

Janet Cornelius, "'We Slipped and Learned to Read': Slave Accounts of the
Literacy Process, 1830-1860," Phylon XLIV (September 1983): 171-86 (R).

11/25/96

XI. Mass Culture and the Politics of Female Reading

Janice Radway, _Reading the Romance_ (all).

Beginning of Research Reports.

12/2/96

Research Reports

**FINAL PAPER DUE ON DEC. 20, 1996**

**

Schedule of Workshops **

9/4/96

Introduction to Library Resources - Margaret Cook, Swem

9/11/96

The Book as Artifact - John Haskell, Swem

9/18/96

Studying the Physical Book - Terry Belanger, Charlottesville

9/25/96

Printing and Bookbinding in the Eighteenth Century -Colonial Williamsburg

10/2/96

The Printed Archive of Anglo-America: Evans's Bibliography and the Eighteenth-
Century Short-Title Catalog

10/9/96

Needs and Opportunities in the History of the Book: Outlines of HBA

10/16/96

The Printed Archive of the Nineteenth Century: Shaw and Shoemaker's American
Bibliography, National Union Catalog

10/30/96

The Rise of Mass Media: Newspapers, Magazines, and Dime Novels - Virginia
Historical Society

11/6/96

Personal Documents and the History of Reading

11/13/96

Printing in an Electronic Age

11/20/96

Beginning of Research Reports

12/4/96

Research Reports  
  
---|---  
  
****** **[![](images/home.jpg)](../../index.html) _Return to American Studies
Program Index

* * *

**** _This syllabus was formatted for the web by[Charles B.
Green](mailto:cbgree@mail.wm.edu). Please contact him if you experience any
problems with external links or if you have any suggestions or comments.

