



**Social Studies [American Studies] IIIA Regular and College Prep levels**

This is a required course and fulfills the one year requirement for graduation
in American History. It is intended primarily for juniors.

The first two weeks we will examine the social change which has taken place in
American society in recent years and concentrate on the difference between
history and journalism.

The next 8-10 weeks will be a brief review of discovery, exploration,
colonization, creation of our government, problems faced by expansion, the
Civil War through the Reconstruction Period, and social problems caused by
reconstruction.

The rest of the semester semester will concentrate on late nineteenth and
early twentieth century America. Covered will be the industrial revolution,
American emergence as a world power.

**Text** \- United States History Since 1861 by Boorstin or USA: The Unfolding
Story of America by Groisser and Levine  



U.S. History Semester I

UNITS OF STUDY

[TWO TO THREE WEEKS ARE SPENT ON EACH UNIT AND UNITS WILL VARY IN LENGTH AND
ORDER DEPENDING ON AVAILABILITY OF CURRICULAR MATERIALS AND EDUCATIONAL
EQUIPMENT]

**High School Social Studies MEAP Core Values Goals**

Core democratic values are the fundamental beliefs and constitutional
principles of American society which unite all Americans. These values are
expressed in the Declaration of Independence, the United States Constitution
and other significant documents, speeches, and writings of the nation. (see
Core Values page)  



Introduction to the Study of History

A. What is history and why study it?

B. How to study history?

Recent Events

A. Nixon - Ford (exit Agnew) -"Southern Strategy"

1\. China relations

2.Cambodian incursion

3\. Paris Peaces Accords

4\. Watergate

5\. S.A.L.T

B. Carter

1\. Camp,David Accords

2\. Human Rights

3\. Inflation Oil Boycott

4\. Iran

C. Reagan

1\. Supply-Side economics

2."Star wars" weapons

3\. Entitlements

4\. Reagan and the Supreme Court

D. Bush

> 1\. Soviet colapse

>

> 2\. Dessert Storm/Taxes/New Right

E. Clinton

1\. Health Care

* * *

Colonial Period

British colonial policy

American Revolution

a. Philosophical background

b. Events leading to the Declaration of Independence

c. Articles of Confederation

d. Effects of the War

Rise to Nationalism

a. The Weaknesses in the Articles of Confederation

b. The Constitution

c. Amendments

d. Political philosophies: 1790s

e. New government in action/ N.W. Ordinance

f. Marshall's court

g. The Westward expansion

h. The War of 1812

i. Era of good feelings-Monroe Doctrine

Sectionalism

a. Missouri Compromise

b. Jacksonian Democracy

c. Jacksonian Indian policy

d. Reform movements

e. Manifest Destiny: Texas, Oregon

f. Mexican War

Impending Crisis

a. Expansion of slavery 1848-1850

b. Economic sectionalism (Compromise of 1850)

c. Kansas-Nebraska Act

d. Dred Scott

e. Election of Lincoln

Crisis



a.Differing views of slavery

b. Fort Sumter

The Civil War

a. A new kind of war

b. The first year

c. Emancipation Proclamation

d. Gettysburg to Apppomattox

Reconstruction

a. Lincoln vs. the Radicals

b. Assassination

c. Johnson's impeachment Trial

d. Reconstruction

e. election of 1876

The Westward Movement

a. Indian policy

b. Cattle

c. Mining

d. Plains farmer

e. Railroad

f. End of the frontier

Industrialization andLaissez Faire Capitalism

a. Captains of industry

L Invention

c. Social costs of industrialization

d. Social Darwinism vs. Social reform

l.Jane Adams-Hull House,Muckrakers

2.Governmental reform

3.Du Bois/ Washington controversy regarding education

4\. Frances Willard W.C T.U.

City Growth and immigrant background

a. Schools for cultural assimilation.

b. Why immigrants came to U.S.



Politics in the Gilded Age

a. Garfield/ Arthur civil service reform

b. The dirty campaign Cleveland us. Blaine

c. Congressional Government

d. Populists/Farmers Alliances

e. Free Silver William Jennings Bryan

f. Coxey's Army

g. Mc Kinley's front porch campaign

American Imperialism

a. Seward's folly

b. Maximilian Mexico

c.Spanish American War

d. Hawaii

Progressives and the Progressive Era

a. Theodore Roosevelt and the Square Deal

b. Conservation

c. Big Stick Policy/ Panama Canal

d. Taft failure to live up to Progressive ideals

e. Bull Moose Platforms split of Republican party.

Wilson's New Freedom and Prelude to W.W.I

a. Wilson's domestic policies

b. Foreign affairs

**CLASSROOM TEACHING METHODS**

1\. Lecture by instructor (note taking by students).

2\. Guest lectures

3\. Oral reading in class.

4\. Classroom discussion.

5\. Student participation and homework.

6\. Written and oral Projects

7\. Periodic quizzes and Tests.

**STUDENT PARTICIPATION ACTIVITIES**

1\. Simulation Games

2\. Role-playing activities

3\. Classroom discussion of current activities  

* * *

**Social Studies [American Studies] IIIB Regular and College Prep levels**

This semester will concentrate on twentieth century America. Covered will be
WWI, the Roaring Twenties and the depression of the thirties, WWII and its
effect on the present day world situation, Korean War and Vietnam Conflict and
the lessons learned, through the space age and present day.

****

**Text** \- United States History Since 1861 by Boorstin or USA: The Unfolding
Story of America by Groisser and Levine

UNITS OF STUDY

[TWO TO THREE WEEKS ARE SPENT ON EACH UNIT AND UNITS WILL VARY IN LENGTH AND
ORDER DEPENDING ON AVAILABILITY OF CURRICULAR MATERIALS AND EDUCATIONAL
EQUIPMENT]

**High School Social Studies MEAP Core Values Goals**

Core democratic values are the fundamental beliefs and constitutional
principles of American society which unite all Americans. These values are
expressed in the Declaration of Independence, the United States Constitution
and other significant documents, speeches, and writings of the nation. (see
Core Values page)  

U.S. History Semester II

World War I and its aftermath

A. American involvement

B. Submarine warfare, Zimmerman note

C. Major engagements of the war

D. Aftermath collapse of Czarist Russia in Russian revolution

E. Failure of League and Wilson's 14 points as prelude for W.W.II

Return to Normalcy and Bigotry

A. Harding and Scandal

B.Palmer raids

C.The 'new'' Klan

D.Sacco and Vanzetti

E. Prohibition

F. Hoover and the Crash

G. "Lost Generation.

The Great Depression

A. N.R.A.

B. New Deal Reforms

C. court packing

E. Storm clouds of war and appeasement

World War II and aftermath

A. Hitler, Mussolini, Tojo , totalitarianism unchecked

B. Blitzkrieg

C. Battle of Britain

D. Lend Lease

E. Pearl Harbor

F. North Africa

G. Normandy

H. Pacific Campaigns

I. Wartime conference repercussions,

Post World War II

A.Truman Admin,

> l.Berlin Airlift

>

> 2.Marshall Plan

>

> 3\. Truman Doctrine

>

> 4, Korean War

>

> 5\. Civil Rights-Dixiecrats

B. Eisenhower

> 1\. Brinkmanship

>

> 2\. Desegregation

>

> 3.Sputnik

>

> 4\. U-2

C. Kennedy

> l. New Frontier

>

> 2\. Cuban missile Crisis

>

> 3\. Bay of Pigs

>

> 4\. Vietnam

>

> 5\. Test Ban

>

> 6\. Civil Rights

D. Johnson

> 1\. Great Society-War on Poverty

>

> 2\. Gulf of Tonkin - escalation

>

> 3\. Widespread Social changes -drugs, sex, protests of Blacks and women

E. Nixon - Ford (exit Agnew)

> 1\. China relations

>

> 2.Cambodian incursion

>

> 3\. Paris Peaces Accords

>

> 4\. Watergate

>

> 5\. S.A.L.T

F. Carter

> 1\. Camp,David Accords

>

> 2\. Human Rights

>

> 3\. Inflation Oil Boycott

>

> 4\. Iran

G. Reagan

> 1\. Supply-Side economics

>

> 2."Star wars" weapons

>

> 3\. Entitlements

>

> 4\. Reagan and the Supreme Court

H. Bush

I. Clinton

* * *

**CLASSROOM TEACHING METHODS**

1\. Lecture by instructor (note taking by students).

2\. Guest lectures

3\. Oral reading in class.

4\. Classroom discussion.

5\. Student participation and homework.

6\. Written and oral Projects

7\. Periodic quizzes and Tests.

**STUDENT PARTICIPATION ACTIVITIES**

1\. Simulation Games

2\. Role-playing activities

3\. Classroom discussion of current activities  

* * *

  
[Return to Mr. Gibson's Page](gibsonhs.html)  
  
Other Links  
  
[Social Studies Department Page](hssocst.html)  
  
[Return to Dowagiac Schools Home Page  
  
](index.html)[REMC XI](http://www.remc11.k12.mi.us/bcisd)

