Williams History Department

Previously Offered Courses

* * *

**HIST 111 Topics in Asian-American History** (Same as American Studies 111)*

This course will introduce four major topics in the study of Asian-American
history: (1) the early Chinese immigrant experience, (2) the incarceration of
Japanese Americans during World War II, (3) post-1965 Asian immigration and
adaptation as seen among Korean and Southeast-Asian Americans, and (4)
contemporary issues in Asian-American society. Readings will include some of
the major works in the field, novels, and recent journalist accounts of the
Asian-American experience.

Students will be evaluated on class discussion, three short papers, and an
oral presentation.

_Enrollment limited. Preference to first-year students._

[Professor Wong](faculty/kwong)



**HIST 201(S) From Cold War to New World Order**

A mere three years after the end of World War II, the United States government
identified that it was in a "struggle for power, or 'cold war'" with the
Soviet Union--a struggle "from which we cannot withdraw short of eventual
national suicide." The Cold War developed with remarkable rapidity, and we
will focus our initial efforts in this course to understand how and why the
United States established all the structures of the national security state by
1950, examining as well the counterparts to these structures in the Soviet
Union. From this foundation we will then explore the myriad ways that the Cold
War shaped domestic and international politics in the succeeding decades,
particularly in the Third World, and the forces that led to the Cold War's
end. When the Berlin Wall came tumbling down in 1989, expectations ran high on
both sides of the "iron curtain" that democracy and a free market might well
flourish in the former Eastern bloc and eventually in the Soviet Union. But
while there have been some successes on both of these fronts, the end of the
Cold War has also produced a profound reshuffling of international politics.
This instability has forced many reassessments of the Cold War era, with which
we will conclude the course.

Evaluation will be based on class participation, short response papers, one
essay (5-7 pages), and a final exam.

_Group A_

[Professor Merrill](faculty/kmerrill.html)



**HIST 203(F) The Early Middle Ages** (Same as Religion 217)

An introduction to the history of Western Europe from the "fall" of Rome (ca.
300) through the First Crusade (ca. 1100). We will explore such subjects as
the survival of Roman culture and institutions; the growth and consolidation
of the Christian Church; the conversion of Europe; the tensions between church
and state; the nature and function of feudalism; the rise of towns; and the
relationship between Europe, Byzantium, and Islam.

Classes will consist of a short lecture/reading and discussion format.

Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, and a final
essay exam.  [Syllabus](http://www.williams.edu/history/courses/Hist203/)

_Groups B and D_

[Professor Klepper](faculty/dklepper.html)



**HIST 204(S) The Later Middle Ages** (Same as Religion 218)

An introduction to the history of Western Europe from the beginning of the
twelfth century through the fifteenth century. Subjects covered will include
the social order; the rise of urban economy and culture; the rise of
universities; the development of centralized secular and papal monarchies;
critique and reform of the Church, the evolution of Christian and national
identities and the definition and persecution of marginal groups; and,
finally, the widespread social and economic upheaval that marked "the autumn
of the Middle Ages" and the transition to early modern Europe.

Classes will consist of short lectures/readings and discussion.

Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, and a final
essay exam.  [Syllabus](http://www.williams.edu/history/courses/Hist204/)

_Groups B and D_

[Professor Klepper](faculty/dklepper.html)



**HIST 213(F) The European Enlightenment in the Eighteenth Century**

The eighteenth-century Enlightenment was a broad movement of ideas, both
critical and constructive, aimed at reforming the prevailing order of European
life in a direction of greater tolerance, individual freedom and improvement
in the material conditions of human life. The Enlightenment transformed the
way governments governed and the way their subjects expected to be treated,
leaving a legacy of political principles and social expectations that has
profoundly affected modern history. The movement was spearheaded by two
generations of thinkers who came to be known as "philosophes," writers who
thought of themselves more as social critics and reformers than disinterested
seekers of truth, and who believed they were in a position to apply lessons
distilled from two millennia of recorded history to the problems of
contemporary life. Although this movement dominated much of the intellectual
life of the eighteenth century, it was opposed by formidable forces, not the
least of them rival intellectuals with more favorable views of authority and
traditional religion. This course will explore the Enlightenment movement and
its critics in the context of eighteenth-century life through readings of
exemplary texts by such authors as Voltaire, Montesquieu, Diderot, Rousseau,
Burke, Mandeville, Beccaria and Condorcet. We will focus on new conceptions of
liberty, ideas of natural sociability, the critique of Christianity and the
Church, theories of progress, reform of criminal justice system, and other
themes.

Evaluation will be based on two short papers, a midterm exam and a final exam.

_Group B_

[Professor Beilin](faculty/lbeilin.html)



**HIST 214(S) The Rise of American Conservatism**

In our own time it may be hard to imagine the American political landscape
without conservatism, and yet like its counterpart--liberalism--conservatism
is a creature of history. In the forms that we recognize today, conservatism
had its origins in reactions to the New Deal; from the 1950s, when Dwight D.
Eisenhower called for a "dynamic conservatism," it went through momentous
transformations in the late 1960s and 1970s. And while the Reagan presidency
was indeed experienced as a political "revolution," it remains unclear what
legacy of conservative principles his administration established. This course
will chart that trajectory, using primary documents, secondary analyses, and
political biographies, and will explore in particular what issues
conservatives have embraced in different periods; what issues have created
conflict among conservative ranks; and how they have mobilized political power
at different historical junctures.

Evaluation will be based on class participation, two essays (5-7 pages), and a
final paper (15-20 pages) that involves original research and analysis.

_Group A_

[Professor Merrill](faculty/kmerrill.html)



**HIST 215(F) Introduction to the History of the Modern Middle East,
1798-1998** *

Starting with Napoleon Bonaparte's brief occupation of Egypt, this course
follows the radical transformation of the Middle East during the last two
hundred years. Incorporating films, novels, memoirs, primary material and
secondary texts, the class will attempt to understand how the Middle East
changed from a region dominated by two large empires to one divided into more
than a dozen nation-states. The course will trace the growing power of
Europeans and European ideas like nationalism and feminism in the area, as
well as the impact of oil, the creation of the State of Israel, the Cold War
and the collapse of the Soviet Union. We will conclude with a close look at
the Iranian Revolution, radical Islam, the Gulf Wars, and the Palestinian-
Israeli Peace Process.

Evaluation will be based on two book/film reviews, in-class midterm exam, and
a take-home final exam.

_Group C_

Professor Watenpaugh



**HIST 217(S) Jews and Christians in Medieval Europe** (Same as Religion 214)*

The relationship between Jews and Christians in medieval Europe was extremely
complex and marked by many contradictions. Though they comprised distinct
communities with distinct cultures, to a great extent Jews and Christians
lived side-by-side in relative harmony through the twelfth century. After that
point, conditions for Jews deteriorated; restrictions on Jewish economic
activities and social interaction, ritual murder charges, the trial and
burning of the Talmud, and forced sermons and disputations culminated in the
expulsion of Jews from much of Western Europe in the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries. But even during that precarious time, the two communities continued
to influence each other. This class will explore positive as well as negative
encounters between Jews and Christians in the Middle Ages and wrestle with the
difficult question of why Latin Christendom ceased to tolerate the Jewish
community in its midst. Subjects will include social relations, economic ties,
intellectual and cultural exchanges and influences, the Crusades, the
influence of converts/apostates, the attack on the Talmud, changing images of
The Other, Christian missionizing, and the expulsion from Western lands.

Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers, a midterm
and a final exam.
[Syllabus](http://www.williams.edu/history/courses/Hist217/)

_Groups B and D_

[Professor Klepper](faculty/dklepper.html)



**HIST 301E(S) The Rise of the West in the Early-Modern Period**

The purpose of history is to recreate in the mind of the historian the full
range of individual and collective human experience in the past. Historians
employ a number of different approaches in the process of recreation. But
their overall goal is to understand people in the past in a manner which,
while comprehensible to the present, remains as faithful as possible to the
past. This course examines the history of Europe and Europeans during the
Early-Modern Period. We will explore the different ways people in that period
made their present and the different ways historians have attempted to
recreate their past and ours. This course pays special attention to one of the
central preoccupations of early-modern European scholarship, namely what were
the causes for the expansion of Europe, the conquest of the Americas, and the
triumph of modernism in the early modern era. Topics include the Protestant
Reformation, the rise of individualism, the military and agrarian revolutions
and the English Revolution.

Evaluation will be based upon a midterm, a final exam, one or two short
papers, and class participation.

_Restricted to junior History majors._

[Professor Singham](faculty/ssingham.html)



**HIST 301F(F) Faith and Reason: Critical Explorations in American Religious
History**

This Junior Seminar will explore the complicated relationship between proof
and persuasion, and history and belief, through a focused exploration of the
rise of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons) during the
Second Great Awakening. A close study of Mormonism's complicated past will
allow us to explore larger questions about epistemology and ontology,
questions that cut to the heart of what historians do. How, for example, can
students of the past discern the reliability of historical documents? Who
decides what is credible historical evidence? What place is there in the study
of history for faith claims about divine causation? Indeed, how much of the
study of history is itself a leap of faith and how much is grounded in
empirical certainty, if such a thing even exists?

Evaluation will be based on active class participation, an oral report on
supplementary readings, two 8- to 10-page position papers, and one final paper
of 18-20 pages.  [Syllabus](courses/HIST301F.html)

_Restricted to junior History majors._

[Professor Pagan](faculty/epagan.html)



**HIST 326 Rise and Fall of the Mexican Revolution** *

The first great revolution in the twentieth-century world, the Mexican
Revolution was as epic a struggle as later episodes in Russia, China, and
Cuba. This course will examine the social, economic, and political forces that
exploded in more than a decade of violence and produced the peculiar,
relatively stable "institutional revolutionary" government that continues to
rule in Mexico. Themes will include the construction of capitalism in the
late-nineteenth century; the creation of an authoritarian Liberal political
tradition; and the legacy of revolutionary culture, art, and politics that
emerged from the violent phase. By taking up such phenomena and their effects
on peasants, workers, women, middle-class professionals, and the wealthy, we
will try to assess the extent to which this was a social revolution and to
what extent merely a reshuffling of those who had been ruling the country.
Toward the end of the course we will analyze recent events such as the
outbreak of a peasant revolt in Chiapas and the series of scandals and
assassinations that have bloodied the corridors of political power in the
1990s. Students will then debate a final topic: Is the Mexican Revolution
dead, or is its promise just now to be fulfilled?

[Professor Kittleson](faculty/rkittleson)



**HIST 330 Orthodoxy, State and Society in Modern Russia** (Same as Religion
220)

It has often been claimed that Russia's distinctiveness, however defined and
evaluated, owes much to the imprint of Orthodoxy and the Orthodox Church. Yet,
curiously, both are largely absent from the historiography of modern Russia,
except to be caricatured as either the handmaiden or the victim of a
repressive state. This course seeks to reach a fuller understanding of the
impact of Orthodoxy and the Orthodox Church on the history and culture of
modern Russia, and of the ability of the Church in turn to adapt to conditions
of modernity, by examining the responses of the Church to a series of profound
challenges that have confronted it since the early-eighteenth century. Topics
to be explored include the relationship of the Orthodox Church to both the
Imperial Russian and the Soviet state; the response of the Church to internal
dissent and demands for reform; the relationship between the Church and other
religions; and the response of the Church to secularizing critics, popular
religious movements, the feminization of monasticism, social and economic
change, and revolutionary upheaval. The uses of Orthodoxy by artists,
intellectuals, and political movements also will be examined.

Discussion course.

Evaluation will be based on class participation, several short essays based on
class readings, and a final self-scheduled exam. An alternative set of
readings will be available for students with a reading knowledge of Russian.

_Group B_

[Professor Wagner](faculty/wwagner.html)



**HIST 336(S) Magic and Science in the Middle Ages** (Same as History of
Science 336)

This course will examine the ways magic was viewed and practiced in medieval
Europe, particularly in regards to its relationship to science. While in our
twentieth-century-American world magic and science are largely viewed as
opposing systems, in the medieval world they were intimately connected.
Subjects will include the reception and transformation of Greek and Arabic
knowledge, astrology and astral magic, alchemy, medicine and healing, the use
of magical objects, and the cult of secrecy and books on secrets.

Evaluation will be based on class participation, two short papers and a
research paper.  [Syllabus](http://www.williams.edu/history/courses/Hist336/)

_Groups B and D_

[Professor Klepper](faculty/dklepper.html)



**HIST 337(F) Medieval European Mysticism** (Same as Religion 215)

A rich mystical tradition flourished in medieval Europe in both the Christian
and Jewish realms. Most of the mystical texts created in this period can be
characterized by one or more of the following three approaches to mystical
union with God: disciplined attention to the divine through contemplation,
theological speculation about the relationship between the soul and God, and
the use of erotic imagery to experience the mystical relationship as a
spiritual love affair. In this course we will examine some of the classic
mystical texts of the period--both Orthodox and heretical in the case of
Christian texts--following a topical organization. In addition to decoding the
difficult language of this writing and placing it in its secular and religious
historical context, we will consider particularly the role of gender in the
mystical experience and the very different circumstances under which Christian
and Jewish mystics operated. Class format: reading and discussion.

Evaluation will be based on class participation, three short analytical
papers, and a final exam.
[Syllabus](http://www.williams.edu/history/courses/Hist337/)

_Groups B and D_

[Professor Klepper](faculty/dklepper.html)



**HIST 339(F) Nations and Nationalism: The Middle East and the Balkans** *

No idea has had a greater impact on the modern Middle East and the Balkans
than nationalism. This seminar will examine the origins and spread of
nationalism by using these two regions as case studies. We will follow the
introduction of this Western ideology to the area during the nineteenth
century, examine the debates about the origins of various "isms" like Arabism,
Zionism, and Pan-Slavism, and compare and contrast liberal nationalism with
its more populist cousins. Special attention will be paid to the creation of
various cults of personality: Ataturk in Turkey, Reza Shah in Iran, Nasser in
Egypt, Assad in Syria and Saddam in Iraq.

Evaluation will be based on a mini-project, create your own nation, a major
project, and an 18- to 25-page paper on a topic chosen in consultation with
the instructor.

_Group C_

Professor Watenpaugh



**HIST 354T The Anglo-American World in the Eighteenth Century: War, Society,
and Politics, 1700-1775** +

This tutorial will focus on the complex and constantly changing relationship
between Great Britain and its North-American colonies in the decades
culminating in the American Revolution. Central to that relationship was a
series of global wars, which in the New World manifested itself as an
increasingly successful attempt by the British to expand the boundaries of
their North-American empire. With the Seven Years War, that effort brought all
of French Canada into Britain's orbit, much to the delight of Americans
throughout the thirteen colonies. Yet within a dozen years of the end of the
war those same colonies were on the verge of declaring their independence.
Among the subjects to be considered will be: the nature and structure of
society and government on both sides of the Atlantic in the era of the
imperial wars; the differing ways in which the British and Americans mobilized
for, fought, and experienced warfare in the New World; and the various
consequences of the wars in the mother country and the colonies, including the
growing rift between them that followed the coming of peace in 1763. In
exploring these subjects we will cover topics as diverse as the role of Native
Americans in the imperial wars, the life of the common colonial soldier, the
rise of George Washington, the military career of Colonel Ephraim Williams,
and the Tory sympathies of the large and powerful clan of which he was a
member.

Each student will write and present orally an essay of approximately 7 pages
every other week on the assigned readings for that week. Students not
presenting an essay will be responsible for offering a critique of the work of
their colleague. Evaluation will be based on students' written work, on their
analyses of their colleague's work, and on a final written exercise.

_Groups A, B, and D. Enrollment limited._

[Professor Dalzell](faculty/rdalzell)



**HIST 367(F) Natural Disaster in Modern History: Ideas and Responses**

The regular course of human life is interrupted all too often by natural
calamities: earthquakes, floods, famines and epidemic disease sometimes take
the lives of many thousands of persons in a short period, leaving others
bewildered and in search of explanations and consolations. In premodern times,
Western people viewed nature as an enchanted realm filled with signs of divine
pleasure and wrath; calamitous or unusual events were often interpreted as
lessons or punishments for human behavior. Since the rise of modern science,
however, a perspective on nature has emerged which refutes this
"superstitious" approach and emphasizes the capacity of humankind to predict
and prepare for natural disasters. Indeed, extraordinary progress has been
made in the prevention of damage caused by these events. But nature has not
lost any of its power to terrify and to destroy, often surpassing the ability
of individuals and societies to cope. This course will examine the many faces
of the human response to natural disaster. We will begin with a consideration
of the medieval conception of apocalypse and millenarian expectation in the
early-modern world. We will then consider the attack on superstition which
occurred during the period of the scientific revolution and the Enlightenment,
pausing to consider the birth of such progressive techniques for disaster
preparedness as casualty insurance. The course will then turn to a synoptic
examination of several modern disasters such as the outbreak of plague in
1722, the Lisbon earthquake of 1755, and the Irish Famine of 1845-49. We will
examine several facets of response to these calamities: political, economic,
social and cultural; and the consequences of the events in national history.

Students will do an independent research project on a disaster not studied in
class, write a paper on it, and present a summary of their findings to the
seminar.

Evaluation will be based on participation in class discussions, the oral
presentation, and the research paper.

_Enrollment limited._

_Groups B and D._

[Professor Beilin](faculty/lbeilin.html)



**HIST 385T Inventing Gender: America 1600-1850+**

This tutorial will use American history as a case study of the Euro-American
development, between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries, of the modern
concept of gender, the set of personality traits and behaviors expected to
differentiate males and females. Until the sixteenth century in Western
culture, scant attention was paid to theorizing the characteristics of
masculinity and femininity; in early modern society, and increasingly with the
development of capitalism and liberal political theory, appropriate qualities
of adulthood and citizenship came to be articulated to a bipolar concept of
sexuality and its associated character. We shall read a series of
works&endash;&endash;modern monographs and articles and selected primary
source documents&endash;&endash;which represent or analyze this development
from different perspectives and with very different conclusions. Students will
engage with this material on two levels of the historian's craft: one,
developing their own arguments about the significance of evolving ideologies
of gender and the way that they fit with economic, political, and religious
changes in American society (with periodic attention to parallel European
developments); and two, enhancing their understanding of the way that changes
in the historiography about gender illustrate both an evolving sense of what
is worth knowing-indeed, what even can be known-about " private" life in the
past and the larger-scale shifts in scholars' sense of what is meaningful
about the past.

Each student will be paired with another for weekly one-hour meetings; at each
session, one student will present orally a written essay of 7-10 pages, on
assigned reading, and the other will offer a critique. Students will be
evaluated on their written work, oral presentations, ability to answer
questions about their interpretations and to frame insightful critiques of
their partner's work, and a final written essay that will address the themes
developed through the semester.

_Enrollment limited. Groups A and D_

[Professor Tracy](faculty/ptracy.html)

* * *

[ Courses](course.html) | [History homepage](index.html) | [Williams
homepage](../index.html)  
---

