> > > > **HISTORY 328 RISE OF RUSSIA FALL 2001**

Dr. Ronald Jensen

Robinson B 357a, 993-1257. e-mail: rjense1.

Office hours: MW2:30-3:30 pm, F 9:30-10 am and by appt.



The course will examine the rise of Russia from its tribal origins in the 9th
century to the status of world power in the 19th century. Russia's location on
the fringe of Europe gave it a unique history shaped by influences as varied
as the Vikings, Byzantine Greeks and Mongols. We will explore the impact of
these external forces on the Russian people and on Russia's most distinctive
institutions, autocracy and serfdom. In addition, we will evaluate the role of
some of Russia's dramatic personalities -- Ivan the Terrible, Peter the Great
and Catherine the Great especially -- on this society. Most importantly, we
will gain insight into the lives and experiences of the Russian people
themselves. Classes will combine lecture with discussion, supplimented by
slides and film. Some assignments will use the world wide web (*).



Required Readings

> Walter G. Moss, A History of Russia

>

> Paul Avrich, Russian Rebels 1600-1800

>

> M. S. Anderson, Peter the Great

>

> Alexander Pushkin,The Captain's Daughter

>

> Reader Hist 328 (Course Material Sales, 117 Johnson Center)

>

> *WEB Readings. These will require use of the internet. The online syllabus
for the course is in the GMU History and New Media website at
http://chnm.gmu.edu/courses/jensen/hist328/hist328-99.html and direct links to
web readings are underlined. Consult online syllabus for updates or
corrections in schedule or websites.



Requirements:

There will be a quiz, mid-term and a final exam and two short papers based on
Anderson and Pushkin. Further instruction will be given in class.

Optional term paper: Students who find a subject they would like to explore
apart from the assigned readings may submit a research paper (10 pages)
instead of the two short papers. A suitable topic must be chosen in
consultation with the instructor by October 15. The paper must include
footnotes and a bibliography. Guidelines to follow. Due November 16.

Grading: quiz 10%, mid-term 20%, papers 15% each, class participation 15%,
final 25%. (Optional term paper 30%)

 Class participation will include 3-4 one page response papers on readings
during the term and they will be announced a few days before they are due.

Regular attendance is important. If you must miss class, get the notes from
another student, because you will be responsible for that material or any
handouts or schedule changes made in class. Make-up exams require a doctor's
certificate or the equivalent and no late papers without prior permission.



 Course Schedule:

  KIEVAN RUSSIA. Aug 29

A. [Land](http://www.grida.no/db/maps/prod/level3/id_1278.htm) and
[People](http://metalab.unc.edu/sergei/exs/his/his.html)*

B. Vikings in Russia;

C. Byzantium and Christianity;

Readings: Moss, chapters 1-4;*
[Vikings;](http://www.dur.ac.uk/~dml0www/variagi.html) [Oleg's
campaign](http://www.dur.ac.uk/~dml0www/olegcamp.html),
[Christianization](http://www.dur.ac.uk/~dml0www/christin.html).



MONGOLS and MOSCOW. Sept 14

A. Mongol Empire

B. Orthodox Church and Culture

C. Rise of Moscow.

Readings: Moss, 5-7; *[Mongol
Empire](http://www.geocities.com/athens/forum/2532) (Genghis Khan & In Depth
History); *[Russian Orthodox
Church](http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~mes/russia/moscow/history.html)[
](http://www.cstoronto.edu/~mes/russia/moscow/history.html), [Monastery of
Holy Trinity](http://parallel.park.org/guests/russia/moscow/sergiev/main.html)
(see Icons and Other Images),[ Andrei
Rublev;](http://parallel.park.org/guests/russia/moscow/sergiev/rublev.html)
*[Life of Sergei of Radonezh](http://www.dur.ac.uk/~dml0www/sergrado.html).



MUSCOVITE RUSSIA. Oct 1

A. Ivan the Terrible

B. Time of Troubles

C. Romanov Dynasty.

Readings: Moss, 8-10; Avrich, 1 (Bolotnikov); * [St.
Basil's](http://www.geocities.com/vienna/1470/) Cathedral*[Correspondence Ivan
IV](http://www.dur.ac.uk/~dml0www/ivankurb.html) and Prince Kurbskii.



 MID-TERM EXAMINATION. Oct 15



SOCIETY IN CRISIS. Oct 17

A. Serfdom: Laws and Landlords

B. Rebellion and Russian Society

C. Women and Society

Readings: Moss 11-12; Avrich 2 (Razin); Reader: Kollmann and Hughes.
*[Domostroi ](http://www.dur.ac.uk/~dml0www/domstroi.html)and
[Ulozhenie](http://www.dur.ac.uk/~dml0www/1649code.html) of 1649.



PETER THE GREAT. Oct 24

A. Peter, His Life and Times

B. Russia and the West

C. Legacy.

Readings: Moss 13; Anderson, Peter the Great.

Paper on Anderson.



CATHERINE'S RUSSIA. Nov 5

A. Woman and Ruler

B. Enlightenment and Rebellion

C. Poland and the Jews

Readings: Moss 14-17; Avrich 4-5 Pugachev; Pushkin, Captain's Daughter

Reader: Alexander Radishchev; *[Great Catherine
Palace](http://www.alexanderpalace.org/catherinepalace/history.html) tour.

Paper on Pushkin



RUSSIA AND EUROPE. Nov. 21

A. War and Peace

B. The Decembrists

C. Despotism and the New Age

Readings: Moss 18-21; *[Napoleon in
Russia](http://www.napoleon.org/us/us_cd/bib/articles/textes/aubin/mab9802.html);
Reader: Decembrists.

 Final examination: see schedule of classes for your section.

Web Sources on Russian History

Bucknell University Russian Studies. Rich, well organized site. Chronology
sections on Kievan and Imperial Periods includes links to important documents,
descriptions and illustrations for us.
<http://www.departments.bucknell.edu/russian/history.html>

University of Durham (UK) Department of Slavic Studies contains key primary
documents. <http://www.dur.ac.uk/~dml0www/rushist2.htm>



