Syllabus Columbia ME 4312 and NJIT Physics 462  Spring 2001

Scheduled Meeting Time: Friday 1 to 3.30

Instructors: Prof. Vijay Modi and Prof. K. R. Farmer

    
Prof. K. R. Farmer, II

Adjunct Associate Professor, Columbia University

also, Department of Physics, NJITMicroelectronics Research Center

Tel. (973) 596-5714, email: [farmer@njit.edu](mailto:farmer@njit.edu)

<http://www.njit.edu/Directory/Centers/MRC/index.htm>  
[](http://www.njit.edu/Directory/Centers/MRC/index.htm)

Prof. Vijay Modi, Professor  
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Columbia University  
220 Mudd Building, Phone: 212 854 2956 email:
[modi@columbia.edu](mailto:modi@columbia.edu)  
<http://www.columbia.edu/~modi>

TA:Jiang Zhe and Jonathan Schulz, NJIT MRC

Sample Student Report on the Acclerometer Experiment (submitted by Dean
Madroukas)  
[Click here to download PDF
File](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/madroukas.pdf)

Processing Lab Report Questions  
[Click here to download PDF
File](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/processlab.pdf)  
    


HOMEWORK:  
  [HW1 ](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/HW1.htm) |
[SolutionHW1](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/SolutionHW1.pdf)
| [FigureforHW1](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/Fig_HW1.jpg)  
---|---|---  
[HW2 ](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/hw2.htm) |
[SolutionHW2](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/HW2.jpg) |  
[HW3](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/HW3.pdf) |
[SolutionHW3](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/SolutionHW3.jpg)
|  
[HW4](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/HW4.pdf) |
[HW4_1](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/SolutionHW4_1.jpg)[HW4_2](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/SolutionHW4_2.jpg)
| [HW4_3 ](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/SolutionHW4_3.jpg)  
[HW5.pdf](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/HW5.pdf) |
[HW5_1](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/SolutionHW5_1.jpg)[HW5_2](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/SolutionHW5_2.jpg)
|  
HW6 |
[HW6_1](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/SolutionHW6_2.pdf)[HW6_2](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/SolutionHW6_3.pdf)
|  
[Lab_Manual](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/mechanical/modi/MEMS/lab_manual.pdf) |
|  
  
**Course Materials:**

_Silicon Sensors and Microstructures (SSM)_ , Lucas NovaSensor, 1990.

Microsystem Design (MD) by Stephen Senturia, Kluwer, 2001see
[Errata](http://web.mit.edu/microsystem-design/www/errata.html) to Senturia
book as well

_MRC Laboratory Safety Manual (LSM)_

Handouts

**Course Description:** This course will combine lecture and laboratory work
to provide students with a practical, hands-on introduction to
microelectronics and especially micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS).About
half of the class time will be devoted to the lecture portion of the course,
and will cover mainly the material found in the _Silicon Sensors and
Microstructures_ book, with supplementation where necessary from other
sources.The goals of the lectures are to provide an introduction and overview
of 1) MEMS markets and applications, 2) MEMS materials and fabrication
methods, with emphasis on silicon micromachining, 3) basic MEMS device
concepts including pressure, acceleration, rotation and flow sensors, as well
as more advanced devices, systems and applications, 4) MEMS device design and
simulation tools, 5) MEMS device measurement and characterization principles
and techniques, and 6) MEMS packaging concepts.The other half of the class
time will be devoted to the laboratory portion of the course, and will
comprise 1) an introduction to cleanroom safety and protocol, 2) hands-on
fabrication of MEMS device structures including pressure sensors,
accelerometers, gyros and flow sensors, and 3) packaging and testing the
student-fabricated devices.

**Assignments:** For the lecture portion of the course, each student will be
responsible for all of the material found in the _Silicon Sensors and
Microstructures_ book and in the _MRC Laboratory Safety Manual_.A mid-term
quiz will be given to test this knowledge.For the laboratory portion of the
course, each group of students (~ 4) will choose a specific problem to solve
using a specific MEMS device and measurement technique.After researching their
problem in the literature, they will fabricate MEMS devices tailored to the
needs of their problem, and test their devices, comparing them with commercial
devices.The laboratory component of the course will be evaluated on the basis
of individual laboratory notebooks, a group written report and a group oral
presentation.

**Grading:** Student grades will be determined from quiz, notebook, written
report and oral presentation scores as follows:quiz--33%, notebook--17%,
written report--25%, oral presentation--25%.An overall average of less than
50% generally will be considered failing.Class participation records will be
used to help determine borderline grades.

  
  
  **Week** |

##  Lecture Topic

|  **Laboratory Activity**  
---|---|---  
1 |

MEMS Markets and Applications ( _SSM_ , Chapter 2)

|  
  
2 |

MEMS materials and fabrication methods, with emphasis on silicon
micromachining ( _SSM_ , Chapter 3); Basic MEMS device concepts including
pressure, acceleration, rotation and flow sensors ( _SSM_ , Chapter 4)

|  
  
3 |

Advanced MEMS devices, systems and applications ( _SSM_ , Chapters 5, 6)

|

Cleanroom Protocol and Safety ( _LSM_ )  
  
4 |

MEMS device design and simulation tools ( _SSM_ , Chapter 7)

|

Introduction to Design tools  
  
5 |

MEMS device measurement and characterization principles and techniques ( _SSM_
, Chapter 8)

|

Research specific problem and MEMS device and measurement technique solution  
  
6 |

MEMS packaging concepts ( _SSM_ , Chapters 9,10)

|

Select specific problem and MEMS device and measurement technique solution  
  
7 |

Midterm quiz (takehome)

|

Cleanroom---Day 1  
  
8 |

|

Cleanroom---Day 2  
  
9 |

|

Cleanroom---Day 3  
  
10 |

|

Package and Test---Day 1  
  
11 |

|

Test---Day 2  
  
12 |

|

Test---Day 3  
  
13 |

|

Test---Day 4  
  
14 |

|

Laboratory notebook and written report due; Oral presentations in class

