For other resources see: [PEM Index
Page](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/pemindex.htm)

For Pam Mack's Home Page see: [Pamela E.
Mack](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/)

**Syllabus**

**Calhoun Honors Seminar H202**

**The Space Age**

Fall 1997, Section 2

Instructor: Pamela E. Mack

  * 203 Hardin Hall, phone: 656-5356 
  * e-mail: [Pammack@clemson.edu](mailto:pammack@clemson.edu)
  * class meetings: MWF 12:20-1:10, Hardin 202
  * this syllabus is on line at: <http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/syl202.htm>
  * listserv address: [9708C_H_SH202002-L@clemson.edu](mailto:9708C_H_SH202002-L@clemson.edu)

**Office Hours:** MWF 8:30-9 am, 10:15-11 am, Tuesday 8:30-11:30, Wed. 2-4 pm.
I am often in at other times (except Thursday afternoons) but make an
appointment or call to check that I am in if you want to be sure of catching
me.

**Objectives:** This course covers the history of the development of space
travel, with a focus on the U.S. space program from 1958 to the present. The
central focus of the course is: What did the space program mean to the
American people and to the world? To answer that question we will examine the
history of space policy, literature about the space program, and many original
documents.

ABET Classification: CHS H202 is classified as "social science" under Clemson
University's General Education requirement. To satisfy requirements for
curricular depth, as established by the College of Engineering and Science
pursuant to guidelines of the Accreditation Board for Engineering and
Technology, Engineering majors may take this course in conjunction with a
three-credit course in history or political science.

**Requirements: **

  * hour exam 1/6 
  * term paper 1/3 
  * listserv 1/6 
  * final exam 1/3 

The reading for this course will take thought because it presents a variety of
opinions in their original form, rather than the conclusions of historians.
Analyzing and drawing conclusions from the reading will be central to the
course, so it is essential that you do the reading and come prepared to
discuss it in class.

No one book provides an overview for this course; you will quickly find
yourself lost if you do not attend class. Class is dismissed if the instructor
or a substitute has not arrived within 10 minutes of the scheduled starting
time of the class.

The attendance policy for this course is as follows. Instead of taking
attendence I will show that attendence is expected by asking students to
explain all absences (either send me a "sorry I missed class" e-mail or speak
to me after class when you return). The professor reserves the right to
penalize students with excessive absences (which I would define as missing
more than 6 classes). If the professor or a substitute does not arrive within
10 minutes of the scheduled starting time of the class students may leave.

A listserv has been created for this course to automatically send e-mail to
all enrolled students (if you prefer to use an off-campus e-mail address
please speak to the instructor about having that address added to the list).

The listserv assignments are a required part of the course, rather like the
journals some other courses assign. If you need help learning how to use a
listserv or using Eudora features (like mailboxes and sort) to manage the mail
you receive from the list the professor would be happy to help you (or we can
set up a training session if there are a significant number of people who need
help). It is recommended that you create a separate mailbox for the class
listserv and save all significant messages that you get from this listserv for
the entire term; you will find the discussion that took place on the listserv
useful when studying for exams.

The goal of the discussion listserv is to allow more thorough and more
informal discussion of the reading and the lectures than is possible in class.
You can read comments left by other members of your group and add your own for
everyone to read. The professor will place a new discussion topic on the
system each week.

Your participation in this system will be graded primarily on the basis on
quantity so that you can feel free to say whatever is on your mind that is
relevant to the course material under discussion. Contributions to the
computer conference should be thoughtful comments on the reading and/or the
material presented in class and/or the comments of other students and/or
current events or personal experiences relevant to the issues raised by this
course, usually one or two paragraphs long (not less than 8 lines or more than
two screens). Grammar and spelling do not matter so long as your point is
clear, and controversy is encouraged. You will be graded on the number of
notes you write: for an A you must write at least 20 notes, for a B write 15,
for a C write 10, and for a D write 5. Students whose notes are not of
adequate quality will receive a warning via e-mail that those notes will not
be counted.

One hour exam will be administered Oct. 10 and will be open book. The final
exam will be a takehome due at the scheduled exam time on Dec. 5.

The term paper should be 8-10 typed pages and should be documented with
footnotes or endnotes. I am looking for papers based on primary source
research that deal with attitudes towards the space program and the culture of
the space age, not just with the technical development of a project. Papers
must be analytical; that is, they must ask a question or state a thesis and
then develop an argument using specific evidence to prove a point. Papers will
be evaluated primarily on the basis of your ability to use evidence and
argument to effectively prove your point. For more information see [Paper
Assignment](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/paper202.htm) .

**Required Reading:  **Reading should be done before the class day for which
an assignment is listed.

  * Three books are at the bookstore: 
    * Roger D. Launius, _NASA:  A History of the U.S. Civil Space Program _(Malabar FL: Krieger Publishing Company, 1994). Readings are described as follows: Launius I: 3 would be part I chapter 3, Launius II: 7 would be part II chapter 7.
    * Arthur C. Clark, _2001: A Space Odyssey_
    * Tom Wolf, _The Right Stuff_

  * The other reading is on the World Wide Web. Assignments are listed below. If you are using this syllabus on line there is a link to each reading assignment--all you need to do is click on the highlighted text to get to the assigned reading. If the link leads you to a text, you should read all the text on that page, unless otherwise specified. If the link leads you to a web page composed mostly of further links you should explore that page and its links enough to get a sense of the issues involved.

Class Schedule: August:

  * 20 Introduction.
  * 22 The future is upon us. _2001:  A Space Odyssey_ sections I-III. See also [2001: A Space Odyssey](491-2001.htm)
  * 25 _2001_ sections IV-Epilogue
  * 27 Rockets for Hitler. [A Brief History of Rocketry](http://www.ksc.nasa.gov/history/rocket-history.txt). Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander, _This New Ocean_ [ch. 1-3](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4201/ch1-3.htm) . "[The Disney-Von Braun Collaboration and Its Influence on Space Exploration" by Mike Wright](http://history.msfc.nasa.gov/history/sf/disney.html)
  * 29 Early research in the U.S. Launius II: 1 & 2\. Bilstein, _Orders of Magnitude_ [ch. 4](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4406/chap4.html)

September:

  * 1 Sputnik. Launius I: 2. Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander, _This New Ocean_ [ch. 1-6](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4201/ch1-6.htm) . [Russian Exhibit on Sputnik](http://www.ccas.ru/~chernov/vsm/h_sput.htm)
  * 3 Impact of Sputnik. Launius II: 3\. [1957 Time Line](http://home.earthlink.net/~gillers/Gillers.1957.html). [Sputnik](http://www.csd.uu.se/~larsmats/blipp/Lyrics/English/sputnik.html) (lyrics by the Swedish synthetic pop group Blipp!). Class will meet in the Library Instruction Lab on Level 2 of the Library.
  * 5 Founding of NASA. Launius I: 3 and II: 4 & 6\. [National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 (As Amended)](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/amendact.html). _The Right Stuff_ ch. 1-3.
  * 7 (Sunday) The film _2001: A Space Odyssey_ will be shown at 6 pm in Hardin 200.
  * 8 Goals of the Space Program. Launius II: 5. [The Space Race](http://www.nasm.edu/GALLERIES/GAL114/)
  * 10 Project Mercury. Launius II: 8. _The Right Stuff_ ch. 5-8
  * 12 _The Right Stuff_ ch. 9-11. Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander, _This New Ocean_ [Epilogue](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4201/epilog.htm) . **Paper Topic Due.**
  * 15 The decision to go to the moon. Launius I: 5, II: 9-11 (or see [Key Documents from the Apollo Space Program](http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/hqpao/apollo_11/key_documents.html) ). [The Kennedy Perspective on Space](http://www.nasa.gov/hqpao/apollo_11/retrospective_pg2.html). [Wiesner Committee,"Report to the President-Elect of the Ad Hoc Committee on Space," January 10, 1961](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/report61.html). 
  * 17 _The Right Stuff_ ch. 12-Epilogue.
  * 19 [The Apollo mode decision](apmode.htm). 
  * 22 Apollo management. Launius I: 6, II: 12, 15. Brooks, Grimwood, and Swenson, _Chariots for Apollo: A History of Manned Lunar Spacecraft_ [Epilogue](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4205/epilog.html) . [The Soviet Manned Lunar Program](http://www.interaxs.net/pub/spacey/sovspac1.htm) .
  * 24 Apollo success. Launius I: 7, II: 16\. [The Saturn V Home Page](http://www.calweb.com/~ccorway/saturn-v/saturn-v.htm) . [The Apollo Program](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/apollo.html) .
  * 26 Reactions to Apollo. Compton, _Where No Man Has Gone Before_ , [ch. 1-4](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4214/ch1-4.html) , [14-5](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4214/ch14-5.html) , [14-6](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4214/ch14-6.html) (including linked pages), and [14.7](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4214/ch14-7.html)
  * 29 What next? Launius I: 8, II: 13. [Report of the Space Task Group, 1969](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/taskgrp.html), Launius II: 18.

October

  * 1 Beginnings of space science. Launius I: 4, II: 7, 14, 20. [Space Art](http://www.secapl.com/bonestell/Top.html)
  * 3 Planetary exploration [Planetary Science Spacecraft](http://isr.co.jp/tnp/spacecraft.html) . **Paper bibliography due.**
  * 6 The Hubble Space Telescope. [Hubble Space Telescope](http://www.stsci.edu/hst/) .
  * 8 Review
  * 10 **Hour Exam**
  * 13 Weather satellites and Mission to Planet Earth. [Sentinels in the Sky: Weather Satellites By Robert Haynes](http://solar.rtd.utk.edu/~jgreen/weather.html). [Earth Observations From Space: History, Promise, and Reality](http://www.nas.edu/ssb/cesexsum.html) . [NASA's Observatorium](http://observe.ivv.nasa.gov/nasa/core.shtml)
  * 15 Communication Satellites [Communications Satellites: Making the Global Village Possible by David J. Whalen](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/satcomhistory.html)
  * 17 Space Commercialization. [At the Frontier of Space Commercialization](http://SEDS.LPL.Arizona.EDU:80/spaceviews/9611/index.html)
  * 20 Fall Break
  * 22 The Shuttle Decision. Launius I: 9, II: 19, 21, 22
  * 24 Shuttle technology. [Space Shuttle Program](http://www.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/technology/sts-newsref/sts_overview.html#sts_program) .
  * 27 Shuttle Operations
  * 29 The Shuttle accident. Launius II: 24\. [FAS Challenger Accident Page](http://www.fas.org/spp/51L.html). [Spacecraft Calamities: Ask the Experts](http://eagle.online.discovery.com/cgi-bin/forums_view/dir845408323/Fresh%20Science/Spacecraft%20Calamities) . **Paper Rough Draft Due.**
  * 31 The future of the Shuttle. Launius I: 10.

November

  * 3 Space programs in Europe and Japan. [European Space Agency Overview](http://www.esrin.esa.it/esa/descrip/descrip.htm) , [What ESA Does](http://www.esrin.esa.it/esa/descrip/esa1.htm) , and [The Fair Return Rule](http://www.esrin.esa.it/esa/descrip/esa2.htm) . [Japan Space Net](http://www.spacer.com/index.html) , [UN Space Treaties](http://www.un.or.at/OOSA_Kiosk/treat/treat.html) .
  * 5 The Soviet Space Program [Tovarich](http://www.airspacemag.com/ASM/Mag/Index/1995/DJ/tova.html) . Ezell and Ezell, The Partnership [ch. 1 pt. 4](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4209/ch1-4.htm) and [Epilogue ](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4209/epilog.htm)
  * 7 No class meeting. Instead explore the links about MIR at: [Space Stations](mir.htm) and write about the subject on the listserv. [Space Station Mir and The Russian Space Program](http://www.reston.com/astro/space.station/mir.html). [Mir Space Station--History](http://maximov.com/Mir/mirhistory1.html).
  * 10 The military in space: reconnaissance. [NRO History](http://www.fas.org/irp/nro/nrohist.htm) . [Corona Program Profile](http://www.lmsc.lockheed.com/newsbureau/pressreleases/1995/9554.html) .
  * 12 Space as the new high ground [FAS Military Space Programs](http://www.fas.org/spp/military/program/index.html)
  * 14 The Strategic Defense Initiative. AIAA Policy Paper on [Ballistic Missile Defense](http://www.aiaa.org/policy/papers/ball-miss-def.html) . [Ballistic Missile Defense Programs](http://www.acq.osd.mil/bmdo/bmdolink/html/programs.html) . Heritage Foundation, [Defending America](http://www.townhall.com/heritage/library/categories/natsec/bg1074.html) . **Paper Due.**
  * **Sunday Nov. 16, 6-9 pm, "The Right Stuff" film, Hardin 200**
  * 17 Historical background to a space station. [Skylab Operations](http://www.ksc.nasa.gov/history/skylab/skylab-operations.txt) .
  * 19 The space station decision(s). Launius II: 23\. [NAS Letter Report on Space Station](http://www.nas.edu/cets/aseb/station4.html) .
  * 21 Current status of Space Station. [Science in the Sky](http://www.sciam.com/0696issue/0696trends.html) . [International Space Station](http://station.nasa.gov/) .[Recommendations Regarding NASA](http://www.cato.org/testimony/ct-hu-1.html) .
  * 24 Smaller, Quicker, Cheaper. [Mr. Goldin Goes to Washington](http://www.airspacemag.com/ASM/Mag/Index/1995/AM/mggw.html) . [Statement by Administrator Daniel S. Goldin March 19, 1996](http://spacelink.msfc.nasa.gov/NASA.Overview/NASA.Budget.Request.FY.1997/Administrators.FY97.Budget.Statement). [The New Millenium](http://www.airspacemag.com/ASM/Mag/Index/1996/AS/nmlm.html) .
  * 26 Mars? [Project Mars Home Page](http://personalwebs.myriad.net/tgunn/) . [The Whole Mars Catalog](http://www.reston.com/astro/mars/catalog.html) .
  * 28 THANKSGIVING BREAK

December:

  * 1 Does NASA have a future? Launius II: 25\. [1996 NASA Strategic Plan](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/nsp/) . [The X-33 History Home Page](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/x-33/home.htm) . [New Opportunities, Concerns for Cheap Access to Space](http://SEDS.LPL.Arizona.EDU:80/spaceviews/9705/articles.html#1)
  * 3 Review: **LAST  DAY TO POST TO DISCUSSION LISTSERV**
  * 5 Takehome Final due 11 am.

Send me e-mail at: [Pammack@clemson.edu](mailto: pammack@clemson.edu)

Main page for [History 491](hist491.htm) (with links to special topics pages)

For other resources see:  [PEM Index
Page](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/pemindex.htm)

* * *

This page last updated Aug. 19, 1997  
  

