**Latina/Latino Studies **

**Spring 2002 Courses Offered**  

**LLS 100 Introduction to Latina/Latino Studies**

Interdisciplinary introduction to the basis for a Latina/Latino ethnicity in
the United States. Topics include immigration and acculturation experiences
and their commonalities and differences, comparison of Latina/Latino
experiences to those of other racial, ethnic and immigrant groups, and the
potential for a pan-ethnic identity. 3 hours --  _Gen Ed: U.S. Minority
Cultures_

_[Syllabus](http://www.lls.uiuc.edu/LLS100SP02.htm)_

Call #    04824    LECD A    2-3:20      MW         119 MSEB
Cruz, A.

**LLS 200 Introduction to 19 th Century U.S. Latina/Latino Literature**

Focuses on the fiction (historical novels and poetry) as well as the critical
essays of the 1848 Mexican-American War and the 1898 Spanish-American War, the
two key 19th century events that determined the status of the people of
Caribbean and Mexican descent in the United States. 3 hours. (Credit is not
given for both LLS 200 and LLS 201) -- _Gen Ed: Historical and Philosophical
Perspectives; Non-Western Cultures; U.S. Minority Cultures_

_[Syllabus](http://www.lls.uiuc.edu/LLS200SP02.htm)_

Call #    04825    LECD A    1-2:20       TUTH     106B8 Engr Hall
Aleman, J.

**LLS 227 Latino/Latinas in Contemporary United States Society**

Examines the incorporation of the major Latino/Latino subgroups into United
States society, surveys the major theoretical approaches that have been used
in the social sciences to explain majority-Latino relations, and provides an
empirical overview of how major social institutions affect the daily lives of
Latinas and Latinos. **Prerequisite** : LLS 100, SOC 100 or consent of
instructor. 3 hours -- _Gen Ed: US Minority Culture_

Call #    04826    LECD RD   3:30-4:50      TUTH     304 Lincoln
DeAnda, R.

**LLS 230 Introduction to U.S. Racial and Ethnic Politics**

Efforts by racial and ethnic communities to organize to make political
demands, and by society as a whole to allocate resources based on race or
ethnicity will be examined. Topical focus will include African Americans,
Latinos, Asian Americans, Native Americans, and white ethnics. The primary
goals of the course will be to develop a more comprehensive understanding of
racial and ethnic politics by identifying commonalities and differences among
these groups and their relationship to the state. 3 hours -- _Gen Ed: U.S.
Minority Cultures; Social Sciences_

_[Syllabus](http://www.lls.uiuc.edu/LLS230SP02.htm)_

Call #    04827    DISC M1     10                 F               222 DKH

                           LECT M       9                  TUTH        101 Armory        Shaw, T.

Call #    04828    DISC M2     9                  F               300 Lincoln

                           LECT M      9                   TUTH        101 Armory        Shaw, T. 

Call #    04829    DISC M3    11                 F               126 Wohlers

                           LECT M      9                   TUTH        101 Armory        Shaw, T. 

Call #    04830    DISC M4    11                 F                170 Wohlers

                           LECT M      9                   TUTH        101 Armory       Shaw, T. 

Call #    04831    DISC M5    9                   F                374 Lincoln

                           LECT M     9                   TUTH        101 Armory        Shaw, T. 

Call #    04832    DISC M6   10                 F                336 Davenport

                           LECT M    9                   TUTH        101 Armory        Shaw, T. 

**LLS 242 Topics in U.S. Latina/Latino Literature**

Topics in the cultural of people of Mexican, Puerto Rican, and Cuban descent
in the United States. Taught in English. 3 hours. Topic: Women's History,
Literature, and Iconography. \-- _Gen Ed: U.S. Minority Cultures; Literature
and the Arts_

_[Syllabus](http://www.sip.uiuc.edu/rromero/latinalit/)_

Call # 04833    LECD X1    12                 W                205 Greg Hall
Harris, A.

                        LECD X1    12-1:50        M                160 English         Harris, A.

Call # 04834    LECD X2    12                W                215 Greg Hall
Romero, R.

                        LECD X2    12-1:50        M                160 English         Romero, R. 

**LLS 251 Mexican Americans: Ethnicity, Culture, and Identity in the United
States**

Examination of the history of Mexican Americans living within the United
States from the Spanish Conquest to the twentieth century. Explores the
process of migration, settlement, assimilation, and discrimination with
emphasis on continuity and change in Mexican cultural development. 3 hours --
_Gen Ed: U.S. Minority Cultures; Historical and Philosophical Perspectives_

_[Syllabus](http://www.lls.uiuc.edu/LLS251SP02.htm)_

Call # 04835    LECD A    3-4:20          TUTH          196 Lincoln
Burgos, A.

**LLS 269 Latinas and Latinos Challenging the Anthropological and Literary
Landscape**

Theoretical and methodological perspectives on the construction of
Latina/Latino identities in contemporary American society. 3 hours. -- _Gen
Ed: U.S. Minority Cultures_

_[Syllabus](http://www.lls.uiuc.edu/LLS269SP02.htm)_

Call # 04836    DISC A    1                    F                113 Davenport

                        LECT 1    1                    MW            319 Greg Hall    Torres, A.

Call # 04837    DISC B    2                    F                113 Davenport

                        LECT 1    1                    MW           319 Greg Hall    Torres, A.

**LLS 290 Independent Study**

Special topics not treated in regularly scheduled courses; designed especially
for advanced undergraduates. **Prerequisite** : One course in Latina/Latino
Studies and consent of instructor. 0 to 3 hours. May be repeated in the same
or subsequent semesters as topics vary to a maximum of 6 hours.

                     CONF    ARR                Ind Study 

**LLS 296 Topics in Latina/Latino Studies**

Topic: Latinas in film, TV, and Music. 3 hours. May be repeated for a total of
6 hours.

Call # 08246    LECD R    1-2:20        TUTH            123 Greg Hall
Valdivia, A.

(Advanced Hours)

**LLS 325 Latina/Latino Politics**

Examines the role of Latino electorates in shaping state and national
politics. Review of histories of Latino national origin groups, examination of
public policy issues of concern to Latinos, successes and failures of Latino
empowerment strategies, and the electoral impact of Latino votes. Focus will
be primarily on Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans, and Cuban Americans and an
assessment of the degree to which their political agendas are likely to merge
over the coming years. **Prerequisite** : Six hours of Political Science
credit or consent of the instructor. 3 hours or 1 unit.

[Syllabus](http://www.lls.uiuc.edu/LLS325SP02.htm)

Call # 04838    LECD A    10-11:20    TUTH           138 Wohlers    DeSipio,
L.

  
****** Students interested in LLS courses for advanced hours during the Spring
2001 semester may make arrangements with professors teaching 200-level classes
to do added work and petition LAS for advanced hours or take LLS 325. For more
information, please contact the Latina/Latino Studies Program.

