Dr. Nancy Fitch

Summer 2002

Section 2, Schedule # 10589

TWTh 3:30-5:50.

H 509

Office: Humanities 810K

Office Phone: 714-278-2964

Office Hours: TWTh 1:30-3:00 and by appointment

E-mail: [nfitch@fullerton.edu](mailto:nfitch@fullerton.edu)

Class Web Site: http://faculty.fullerton.edu/nfitch/history110b/Default.htm

  
  

**HISTORY 110B**

**WORLD CIVILIZATIONS SINCE 1500**

  
  

Many students ask the question, "why do I have to take a world history
course"? This is a good question. There are many answers. The most important
is that in order to understand the world we live in today, one must understand
how developments from the very distant past have profoundly shaped our present
world. The world history course is also designed to provide you with a common
intellectual experience by broadening your understanding of ideas and values
drawn from different strands of our own culture and to increase your
understanding and appreciation of cultural diversity and the process of
cultural interaction.

  
  

********Other students often ask the question, "what is world history?" This
is another good question. When we study world history we want to look at the
history of humanity--human experience. We do this by examining specific events
and processes, but not necessarily all civilizations. Successful world
histories will provide a big picture and include ideas of comparison,
syncretism, looking at alternative worldviews using primary sources as well as
themes that demonstrate common and divergent experiences.

  
  

********In other words, I do not believe that history is simply the
memorization of facts about the past. For this reason, I do not give multiple-
choice examinations. I want you to develop the ability to see the big picture,
to think about causation, and to understand that history is not about "facts"
because historians often disagree over what the "facts" are. To be a good
historian, you need to use geographic skills, write analytical historical
essays, employ problem solving, identify problems, and challenge history (that
includes challenging the text and me). Historical knowledge, like other kinds
of knowledge, is not a fixed, finite body of information but something that is
in flux. As historians (and students) ask new questions about the past, new
insights are gained.

****To help you better understand what skills and knowledge you should have by
the end of the course, we have developed learning goals for all General
Education Courses.

  
  

**LEARNING GOALS FOR ALL SECTIONS OF HISTORY 110B:**

  
  

**1\. To understand holistically the origins and historical development of
world civilizations within a global context.**

**2\. To describe and analyze critically the reciprocal influence of Western
and non-Western institutions, values, and ideas.**

**3\. To recognize the forces that contributed to the particular development
of diverse societies and shaped our present world.**

**4\. To recognize and understand the contributions of ethnic and gender
groups to past and present societies in contexts of accommodation and
resistance.**

**5\. To understand and describe critically major political, economic,
intellectual, and cultural themes recurring throughout the history of the
world.**

  
  

**ADDITIONAL LEARNING GOALS FOR THIS SECTION OF HISTORY 110B:**

  
  

**1\. To understand the historical origins and impact of ideas of human rights
and popular sovereignty.**

**2\. To understand the impact of modern science and technology on world
civilizations.**

**3\. To understand how historians make arguments from historical evidence.**

  
  

**REQUIRED READING:** Howard Spodek, _The World's History_ , Second Edition,
Vol. II (Prentice-Hall, Inc, 2001). Available at the Little Professor
Bookstore. A map to the store will be provided.

  
  

There will be one mid-term and one-final exam. The mid-term will cover the
first part of the class; the final will cover the last part of the class. The
exams will consist of broad questions designed to get you to bring the course
material together. They will also contain a map component. I will give you
study questions in advance so that you can structure your studying around
them.

  
  

Because it is so difficult to discuss things in a large class, additionally,
you will be required to post at least two **MEANINGFUL** entries on the class
**Bulletin Board** or **(preferably)** to respond to two of the entries of
other students. I will not count routine questions about class format, but
will count anything related to course content. To make these posts useful for
you, it will be helpful to ask for clarification of main points that you don't
understand or to help other students understand something better that you
know, but they do not. In a class as large as this one, everyone comes to
class with different backgrounds. Some of you know more about some countries
or cultures than others. Some of you may know more about the country you are
from than I do. All of you bring different disciplinary backgrounds to the
class, so don't be afraid to ask questions or offer information. The point of
this exercise is to help you help each other learn the material. Note that you
should identify yourselves in the posts, so that I can count them, but
anonymous posts are okay. This activity will be worth 10% of your grade.
[Note: 1 post is worth a D, the 2 posts will be worth a C, 3 posts will get
you a B, and 4 posts will get you an A.]

  
  

**Summary:**

  
  

Mid-Term: 40%

  
  

Bulletin Board Discussion: 10%

  
  

Final: 50%

  
  

Total: 100%

  
  
  
  

**WEEK ONE**

Tuesday, June 4

**1\. Introduction**

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "Global Population Growth and Shift," pp. 453-456

  
  

******2\. Transoceanic Connections and Global Encounters**

A. Winds, Currents, and the Technologies of Early Trade

B. Xheng He and the Ming Treasure Ships

C. Arab and African Traders

D. Did Africans Discover the Americas?

E. Europe on the Periphery of the World Economy

F. The Ecological and Medical Impact of Global Encounters

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, Sections on World Trade, 379-394

Spodek, "Atlantic Exploration," 406-407

Spodek, "Capitalism and the Expansion of Europe," 409-415

  
  

**WEEK TWO**

Wednesday, June 5

**1\. Americans and Europeans on the Eve of Encounters**

A. Pre-Colonial Mexican Civilizations

(1) The Maya

(2) The Toltecs

(3) The Aztecs

B. The Incas of Peru

C. The Mind of the Conquerors

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "World Trade Patterns, 1100-1500: What Do We Know?" pp. 376-

379

Spodek, "Religious Beliefs and Capitalist Practice: What Difference Does It

Make?" pp. 419-423

Spodek, "Capitalism," pp. 427-432

Spodek, "What Difference Does It Make?" pp. 439-440

  
  

**4.** **The Conquest of the Americas**

A. The Conquest of Mexico

B. The Conquest of Peru

C. Controlling the Conquered

  
  

Required Reading

[http://faculty.fullerton.edu/nfitch/nehaha/index.htm](http://faculty.fullerton.edu/nfitch/nehaha/index.htm)

Spodek, "The Columbian Exchanges of Plants, Animals, and Disease," p. 457

****

**WEEK THREE**

Thursday, June 6

**5.The Rise of Islamic Empires in the Middle East, Europe, and India**

A. State and Society in the Ottoman Empire (Based in Modern Turkey)

B. The Making of the Balkans and the Origins of Kossovo

C. State and Society in the Safavid Empire (Persia/Iran)

D. State and Society in India

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "Ottomans and Mughals," pp, 434-436

Spodek, "Asian Migrations, 1300-1750," pp. 445-456

Spodek, "Cities and Demographics," pp. 470-474

Spodek, "The Joint Stock Companies in Asia," pp. 424-425

  
  

**6\. Pyramid Shaped Societies in China and Europe**

A. State and Society in Ming and Qing China

B. Absolutism, Religion, and Gender in Western Europe

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "China: The Ming and Manchu Dynasties, 1368-1750," p. 453

Spodek, "France: Consolidating the Nation," pp. 423-426

  
  

**WEEK FOUR**

Tuesday, June 11

**7\. Religion and the Scientific Revolution**

A. The Scientific Revolution in Western Europe from Copernicus to Newton

B. Resistance to the New Learning in the Western and Non-Western Worlds

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "Intellectual Revolutions in Science and Philosophy," pp. 484-489

  
  

**8\. Science and Technology in Europe and China**

  
  

Required Reading

****[**http://faculty.fullerton.edu/nfitch/history110b/scitech.html](http://faculty.fullerton.edu/nfitch/history110b/scitech.html)**

  
  

**WEEK FIVE**

Wednesday, June 12

**9\. The Rise of Capitalism and Slavery**

A A. The Mali and Songhai Empires and the Trans-Sahara Trade

B B. The Swahilli Trading States

C C. Central African Kingdoms

D D. The Impact of Slavery in Africa

E

Required Reading

Spodek, "Sub-Saharan Africa," pp. 379-382

Spodek, "South Africa, 1652-1902"

  
  

**10\. Slavery and the Formation of an Atlantic World**

A. The Impact of Slavery in Saint Domingue (Haiti)

B. The Impact of Slavery in Brazil

C. The Impact of Slavery in the United States

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "Slavery: Enforced Migration, 1500-1750," pp. 463-470

  
  

**WEEK SIX**

Thursday, June 13

**10\. The European Intellectual Revolution: "The Enlightenment"**

A. The Chinese Influence on the Enlightenment

B. Enlightenment and Politics

C. Enlightenment and Economics

D. Enlightenment and Slavery

E. Enlightenment and "The Woman Question"

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "The _Philosophes_ and the Enlightenment in the Eighteenth Century,"

pp. 489-491

  
  

**11\. The Enlightenment and the American Revolution**

A. The Emergence of Democratic and Republican Ideas in the 13 Colonies

B. The U.S. Constitution and Its Influence

(1) The Idea of Representation and Protecting Interests

(2) The Idea of a "Bill of Rights" Protecting Individuals

L. Who Gained? Who Lost?

(1) Traditional Elites, the Middle Class, Urban Workers, and Farmers

(2) Native Americans; African-Americans, free and slaves

(3) Women

Required Reading

Spodek, "Revolution in North America, 1776," pp. 491-495

  
  

**WEEK SEVEN**

Tuesday, June 18

**12\. The French Revolution and Its Impact**

  
  

A. The Ideas of the French Revolution

B. The Terror

C. Napoleonic Reforms

D. Who Gained? Who Lost?

(1) The Aristocracy and Traditional Elites, The Middle Class

(2) Urban Workers

(3) Peasants

(4) Slaves, Jews, Protestants, and Actors

(5) Women

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "The French Revolution and Napoleon, 1789-1812," pp. 495-506

  
  

**13\. Latin American Independence Movements**

A. The Haitian Revolution

B. Simon Bolivar Strikes from The North

C. Jose San Martin Strikes from The South

D. The Mexican Independence Movement

E. Latin American Independence Movements: Reform or Revolution?

F. Who Gained? Who Lost?

(1) _Creoles_ and _Peninsulares_

(2) The Middle Class __

(3) _Mestizos_

(4) Amerindians; Black Latin Americans, Free and Slave __

(5) Women __

  
  

Required Reading

**** Spodek, "Haiti: Slave Revolution and Response," pp. 506-509

Spodek, "The End of Colonialism in Latin America: Independence and

Disillusionment, 1810-30," pp. 509-515

  
  

**WEEK EIGHT**

Wednesday, June 19

**15\. The Industrial Revolution in England**

A. Bottlenecks and Technological Change

B. The Logic of Capitalist Production and Profit-Making

C. New Organizations of Production

  
  

Required Reading

**** Spodek, "The Industrial Revolution: What Was IT? What Was Its

Significance?" pp. 517-532

  
  

**16.** **The Industrial Revolution and Its Impact**

A. The Transformation of Agricultural and Mining Production

In Egypt and Latin America

B. The Impact of the Industrial Revolution in India and China

C. The Rise of the Industrial City

D. Liberalism, Socialism, and Trade Unionism

E. Internal and International Migration

F. Nations and Nationalism

G. The Industrial Revolution: Who Gained? Who Lost?

(1) Industrialized Societies Versus Commodity Producers

(2) The Traditional Nobility, the Middle Class

(3) Urban Workers

(4) Peasants

(5) Racial and Ethnic Minorities

(6) Immigrants to Industrial Countries

(7) Women in Western and Non-Western Cultures

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "Political Reaction in Britain and Europe, 1800-1914,"

pp. 532-537

  
  

**WEEK NINE**

Thursday, June 20

**17\. Darwinism, Social Darwinism, and Neo-Colonialism**

A. Charles Darwin's Theory of Evolution

B. Racism and Darwinian Ideas in Europe and the United States

C. Japanese Social Darwinism

D. Imperialism and Neo-Colonialism in Asia, Africa, and Latin America

E. Imperialism and Neo-Colonialism: Who Gained? Who Lost?

(1) The Traditional Elites in Western and Non-Western Societies

(2) The Bourgeoisie, Peasants, and Urban Workers

(3) "Peoples of Color"

(4) Women in Western and Non-Western Cultures

(5) Western and Non-Western Values and Cultures

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "Competition among Industrial Powers: The Quest for Empire,"

pp. 537-544

Spodek, "Africa, 1652-1912," pp. 549-555

  
  

**18\. The Chinese and Japanese Responses to Western Imperialism**

A. Chinese Resistance to Western Ideas

B. Western Companies Gain Control of Chinese Industry

C. British India, Opium, and the Opium Wars

D. Japanese Transformation and Industrialization

E. Japan Becomes an Imperialist Power in Korea, Taiwan, and China

  
  

****Required Reading

**** Spodek, "China, 1800-1914," pp. 544-549

Spodek, "Japan: From Isolation to Equality, 1867-1914," pp. 582-590

Spodek, "Japan: Fragile Superpower," pp. 659-661

  
  

**WEEK TEN**

Tuesday, June 25

  
  

***MID-TERM EXAMINATION***

  
  

**19\. The Collapse of the Ottoman Empire and the Origins of World War I**

A. The Collapse of the Ottoman Empire

B. The Bosnian Crisis

C. European Alliance Systems

D. The Growth of "Yellow Journalism"

E. The Rise of the Military-Industrial Complex

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "The Ottoman Empire: The 'Sick Man of Europe,' 1829-76,"

pp. 541-542

Spodek, "Urbanization, Gender Relations, and Nationalism East and West,"

pp. 557-582

**WEEK ELEVEN**

Wednesday, June 26

**20\. How Technology Changed the Face of War**

A. Technology, Industry, and Warfare

B. Wartime Technology and the Rise of Interventionist States

C. Women's Rights Movements and the War

D. The Versailles Treaty

(1) Creating a Hostile Germany

(2) The Making of Modern Eastern Europe

(3) The Making of the Modern Middle East

  
  

Required Reading

**** Spodek, pp. 594-606

  
  

**21\. Early Twentieth Century Revolutions: The Russian Revolution**

A. Russian Backwardness

B. The Failures of the Czarist Regime

C. The Russian Revolution

D. The Formation of the Soviet Union

E. Lenin's Plans for Russia's Future

F. The Stalin Era

(1) The Great Famine

(2) The Great Terror

N. Who Gained? Who Lost?

(1) The Traditional Ruling Class

(2) The Middle Class and the "New Class" (Communist Party Elite)

(3) Urban Workers

(4) Peasants

(5) Ethnic Minorities in the former Russian Empire

(6) Women

(7) The Revolutionary Ethos

N. The Commonwealth of Independent States (Russia) Today

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "Playing Technological Catch-Up With the West,"

pp. 640-658

  
  

**WEEK TWELVE**

Thursday, June 27

14\. **Early Twentieth Century Revolutions: The Mexican Revolution**

A. Mexico in the 19th Century

B. The Mexican Revolution of 1910

C. Agrarian Reforms of Zapata and Villa

D. The Mexican Constitution of 1917

E. Nationalization of Oil and Agrarian Reform in the 1930s and 1940s

F. Revolutionary Artists and the New Mexican Identity

G. The Mexican Revolution: Who Gained? Who Lost?

(1) The Traditional Ruling Class

(2) The Middle Class

(3) Foreign Business Interests

(4) Urban Workers and Peasants

(5) Ethnic Minorities and "People of Color"

(6) Women

(7) The Revolutionary Ethos

N. What the Mexican Revolution Did and Did Not Accomplish:

Mexico Today

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "Latin America," 1870-2000"

  
  

23. **The Age of Uncertainty and Anxiety**

A. Psychoanalysis

B. 20th Century Physics

C. Modern Art

D. 20th Century Music

E. Cinema, Radio, and the Rise of Mass Culture

F. The Great Depression

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "The Paris Peace Settlement of 1919," pp. 605-606

Spodek, "Between the Wars, 1920-39: Economic Depression and

The Expansion of the Welfare State," pp. 606-608

Spodek, "The Image of Humanity," pp. 614-621

  
  

**WEEK THIRTEEN**

Tuesday, July 2

**24**. **Hitler and the Rise of Nazi Germany**

A. Eugenics, Degeneration, and the Construction of a Race-Based

State

B. Why Men and Women Found Fascism Fascinating

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "World War II, 1939-45," pp. 608-614

  
  

25\. **Nazi and Japanese Expansion and the Outbreak of World War II**

A. Hitler's War Aims

B. The Munich Crisis and Appeasement

C. The Nazi-Soviet Pact

D. The Japanese Occupation of China

E. Hitler Conquers Much of Europe

F. Japanese Designs on Southeast Asia and the Philippines

G. The Betrayal of "Friends": Hitler Invades the U.S.S.R.

H. Japan Moves into Southeast Asia

I. Japan Bombs Pearl Harbor

J. The U.S. Enters the War

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "Social Consequences of War-Time Industrial Growth,"

pp. 661-668

  
  

******WEEK FOURTEEN**

Wednesday, July 3

26. **The Holocaust**

A. Science and Technology Used to Mass Murder

B. Jewish and Non-Jewish Resistance

C. Who Knew?

D. Why Does It Matter?

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "Horrors of the War," pp. 612-614

  
  

**26\. Consequences of the War in Europe and Asia**

A. How the End of the War Created the "Cold" War

B. The Development of Nuclear Weapons and the Arms Race

C. How the Cold War Transformed International Revolutions

(1) The Chinese Revolution

(2) The Korean Revolution

(3) The Vietnamese Revolution

(4) The Making of Modern India and Pakistan

(5) Independence Movements in the Middle East and Africa

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "China and India, 1914-2000," pp. 677-711

Spodek, "The Middle East and North Africa, 1880-2000,"

pp. 713-740

Spodek, "Sub-Saharan Africa, 1914-2000," pp. 741-772

  
  

**WEEK FIFTEEN**

July 4--- **HOLIDAY**

  
  

**WEEKS SIXTEEN AND SEVENTEEN**

Tuesday, July 9, Wednesday, July 10

  
  

******28.** **Historical Perspectives on the Contemporary World**

A. The Question of Human Rights

B. Why Are Some Countries Rich and Others Poor?

C. The Pacific Rim and the Global Economy of the Twenty-First Century

D. Where Are We Heading in the New Millenium?

  
  

Required Reading

Spodek, "The Leviathan State and the United Nations,"

pp. 621-638 ****

  
  

**WEEK EIGHTEEN**

Thursday, July 11

**FINAL EXAMINATION**

**ASSESSMENT**

  
  

The general goal of this course is to help you become historically literate.
In order to achieve such literacy, you should be able to:

¡§ Demonstrate knowledge of historical facts, themes, and ideas

¡§ Demonstrate the ability to reason through analysis, evaluation, and
synthesis of historical evidence

¡§ Demonstrate the ability to effectively communicate historical knowledge and
reasoning through discussion, debate, and writing

  
  

**ASSESSMENT CRITERIA**

  
  

**_A=Exceptional_** __

Reflects unusually thorough and comprehensive understanding of the issues in
question

Analyzes, evaluates, and synthesizes evidence very effectively

Thoroughly identifies, defines, and describes all key
themes/concepts/issues/ideas

Presents a clearly articulated thesis and highly persuasive argument that is
probing, creative, and nuanced

Reaches highly informed conclusions based on the evidence

Includes all of the most relevant and significant supporting evidence

Contains no factual inaccuracies

Is very well focused and organized

Is very well written and proofread with few to no errors in spelling,
punctuation, grammar, syntax

Is very well documented with no errors or omissions in citation

  
  

**_B=Commendable_**

Reflects clear understanding of the issues in question

Analyzes, evaluates, and synthesizes evidence effectively

Identifies, defines, and describes some key themes/concepts/issues/ideas

Presents a clearly identifiable thesis and defensible argument

Reaches informed conclusions based on the evidence

Includes relevant and significant supporting evidence

Contains only minor factual inaccuracies

Is well focused and organized

Is well written and proofread with few errors in spelling, punctuation,
grammar, syntax

Is well documented with few to no errors or omissions in citation

  
  

**_C=Competent_**

Reflects adequate understanding of the issues in question

Analyzes, evaluates, and synthesizes evidence somewhat effectively

Identifies, defines, and describes a few key themes/concepts/issues/ideas

Presents a thesis and argument that are reasonable but unpersuasive,
simplistic, superficial, or logically flawed

Conclusions are reasonably well founded

Includes some supporting evidence but not all of it is relevant

May have a major factual inaccuracy but most information is correct

Demonstrates adequate focus and organization

Is adequately written and proofread with some errors in spelling, punctuation,
grammar, syntax)

Is adequately documented but may contain minor errors or omissions in citation

  
  

**_D=Limited Evidence of Achievement_**

Reflects poor understanding of the issues in question

Ineffectively analyzes, evaluates, and synthesizes evidence

Identifies, defines, and describes few key themes/concepts/issues/ideas

Thesis and argument are unclear and/or very superficial

Reaches incomplete or inaccurate conclusions based on the evidence

Omits most of the relevant evidence

Information is largely inaccurate or irrelevant

Demonstrates inadequate focus and organization

Is poorly written and proofread with many and/or serious errors in spelling,
punctuation, grammar, syntax

Is poorly documented with many and/or serious errors and omissions in citation

  
  

**__****_F=Minimal Evidence of Achievement_**

Work that does not adequately meet ANY of the standards set for above or which
is exceptionally inadequate in its thesis, ideas, evidence, writing, or
documentation

  
  
  
  

**__**Ideally, you should do all required reading assignments before class
sessions because, in general, I will cover more in class than is in the
reading, so it will be clearer if you have a general idea about the material
first. You are also responsible for all material covered in class, even when
it is not included in the reading. If for some reason, you must miss a class,
try to borrow lecture notes from someone else. I also expect you to watch the
films shown in class. You will need information from them to answer questions
that could be on the examinations. It is almost impossible to arrange for you
to see the films at another time.

  
  

It will be difficult to do well if you do not come to class; therefore,
attendance is required. Except in extremely unusual circumstances, it will not
be possible to take a make-up examination.

  
  

Cheating will not be tolerated and campus policies on cheating will be
enforced.

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

