![Bowdoin](/africana_studies/images/africana_studies_masthead.jpg)

[![About](/includes/global/images_new/about.gif)](http://www.bowdoin.edu/about/)
|
[![Academics](/includes/global/images_new/academics.gif)](http://academic.bowdoin.edu/index.shtml)
|
[![Admissions](/includes/global/images_new/admissions.gif)](http://www.bowdoin.edu/admissions/)
| [![Campus
Resources](/includes/global/images_new/campus.gif)](http://www.bowdoin.edu/campusresources)
| [![Student
Life](/includes/global/images_new/student.gif)](http://www.bowdoin.edu/studentlife/)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
|

**[...](/courses/f01 "fall 2001")** / [africana studies
264](/courses/f01/afrs264) /
[disseminate/islam](/courses/f01/afrs264/disseminate)

| ![](/includes/global/images/onePX404040.gif) |
[![search](/includes/global/images/search.gif)](http://www.bowdoin.edu/search)  
---|---|---|---  
  
![](/includes/global/images/clear.gif)|
![](/includes/global/images/clear.gif)| ![](/includes/global/images/clear.gif)  
---|---|---  
  
[Introduction](/africana_studies/index.shtml)

[Courses](/africana_studies/courses/index.shtml)

[Faculty](/africana_studies/faculty/index.shtml)

[Calendar](/africana_studies/calendar/index.shtml)

[Program Requirements](/africana_studies/require/index.shtml)

[Independent Study & Research](/africana_studies/research/index.shtml)

[Resources](/africana_studies/resources/index.shtml)

[Affiliated Departments](/africana_studies/depts/index.shtml)

[Featured Alumni](/africana_studies/alumni/index.shtml)

[Russwurm Center](/russwurm_center/index.shtml)

| ![](/includes/global/images/clear.gif) |



# Africana Studies/History 264 Fall 2001

Prof. Randolph Stakeman

Ext. 3646 E-mail: rstakema@bowdoin.edu

Office Russwurm Center

Office Hours Mon-Thurs 2:30pm -4:00 p.m. and by appointment





## Islamic Societies in Africa

##  

Islam has been and continues to be an important force in the history of
Africa. Islam has maintained its traditions and vitality while at the same
time adapting to vastly different cultures. This course is not a comprehensive
survey of Islam, but a course on the social organization of several African
societies in which Islamic religious beliefs dominate. The course will combine
a political and social history of the spread of Islam in Africa with three
case studies: the Hausa (Nigeria), Morocco and Sudan. In each society we will
focus on women, gender roles and the relationships between men, women and
power. I hope that this course will lead to an understanding of how religion,
ideology, and patriarchy underlie social relationships in Muslim societies as
well as our own.

Our class meetings will be organized as conferences, that is, although I may
lecture for part of the time, classes also will provide an opportunity for us
to develop our understanding of Africa through discussion. It is very
important that each student come to class fully prepared to participate. This
is your class; the quality, excitement and intellectual depth of each class
depends upon you. At each class our discussion will begin with the questions
on the syllabus and any questions about the reading. This course does not
require a previous background in African history, but it does require a
commitment to undertake a serious and open-minded study of a substantial body
of material, much of which will be radically foreign to your own experience.
At times the reading may become very detailed and contain words, names and
places unfamiliar to you. This is regrettable, yet inevitable when studying
cultures different from your own. Do not get hung up on the details; we are
more concerned with the general patterns and processes than with the names.

There are two kinds of writing assignments in the course. First, you will keep
a journal about each reading in the course. These journals are to be written
on some removable paper, so that you can hand in a section of the journal and
still maintain a section to write in. Loose leaf paper works well for this. In
these journals you are to a) Answer the questions posed in the syllabus and b)
Add such comments as you want to about the reading, the course, and the ideas
presented. Portions of this journal will be submitted periodically. You will
be graded only pass/no credit for your journal entries. If you miss more than
two journal entries without an excuse, it may be considered grounds for no
credit in this assignment.

There will be two short paper assignments during the course. These 5-7 page
essays will provide an opportunity for you to develop, expand and experiment
with ideas that the reading and discussions generate. These papers are not to
be research papers, that is, they are not to be summaries of information. You
do not need to do extra reading for them although you are free to do so if you
prefer. Your essays can take several forms and should present your own
analyses and arguments. These papers may criticize ideas presented in the
readings, expand upon important points not fully treated in the discussions or
readings, apply techniques or ideas from other disciplines or classes, or take
various other approaches. The key to these essays is the choice of a topic
important enough to be interesting, yet narrow enough to be developed in a
short essay. The choice of the topic is up to you because it should reflect
your ideas, skills, experiences and the way you think about the world. These
essays should be succinct, well thought out papers that reflect your ability
to think in specific terms about the problems addressed in that segment of the
course. They will be evaluated primarily upon the sophistication of the ideas
expressed, the strength of the argument and your ability to support your
arguments with examples. Please be sure to check with me about the suitability
of the topic for such short essays. The papers will be due October 10 and
November 19. Finally, there will be a research project at the end of the
course.

The project can be in the form of a research paper, a web page, or take other
forms e.g. a play, work of fiction, art work etc. You will present a draft of
the project and make a class presentation of the project before submitting the
finished work. Most of the reading in the course will be in the books ordered
through the bookstore, but from time to time there will be reading assignments
available only on reserve at the library. All reading not in the books for the
course, will be available both on electronic reserve and on hard copy reserve
at the library.

The following books are available at the campus bookstore:

**Fatima Mernissi, The Veil and the Male Elite**

**Barbara Callaway, The Heritage of Islam**

**Cheikh Hamadou Kane, Ambiguous Adventure**

**Sondra Hale, Gender Politics in Sudan**

**Brett** **Fentress, The Berbers**

## I. History and Theory

### September 3

_**Introduction to the Course/Religion as a Cultural System**_

Reading: Geertz, "Religion as a Cultural System"(copies distributed in class)

Question: What role does religion play in a society?

### September 5

_**Islamic Practice and Belief**_

Reading: Carolyn Fluehr-Lobban, Islamic Society in Practice,Chapters 2 and 3.

Question: What aspects of daily life does Islam regulate?

### September 10

_**The Messenger and the Message**_

Reading: Esposito, Islam: The Straight Path, Chapter One (copies on reserve)

Question: How did the Prophet reflect and fulfill the needs of his society?

### September 12

_**The Battle for the History of the Prophet**_

Reading: Mernissi, The Veil and the Male Elite, Chaps 1 and 2.

Question: How does Mernissi's account differ from Esposito's.

### September 17

_**Women in Islamic Society**_

Reading: Mernissi, The Veil and the Male Elite, Chaps 3 and 4

Question: Does Islam provide an ideological basis for the subordination of
women?

### September 19

_**Women in the Koran and in the Life of the Prophet**_

Reading: Mernissi, The Veil and the Male Elite, Chaps 6-8

Questions: How do women help shape the Prophet's life? Does the Koran improve
or restrict women's lives?

### September 24

_**Mernissi's Sexual Theory of Patriarchy**_

Reading: Mernissi, The Veil and the Male Elite, Chaps 5, 10, Conclusion

Question: What are Mernissi's theories for patriarchy. Does either theory
provide a sufficient explanation of Islamic patriarchy?

II. Islam in North Africa

### September 26

_**The spread of Islam: Conquest and Revivalism in North Africa**_

Reading: Brett and Fentress, The Berbers, Chapter 3

Question: Does conquest spread a religion?

### October 1

_**The Arabization of North Africa**_

Reading: Brett and Fentress, The Berbers, Chapter 4

### October 3

_**Political development in North Africa**_

Reading: Margali Morsy, North Africa 1800-1900, Chaps 1 and 2 (copies on
reserve)

### October 8

_**International Politics and North Africa**_

Reading: Margali Morsy, North Africa 1800-1900, pp. 75-105 (copies on reserve)

###  October 10

_**The Political World of the Berbers**_

Reading: Brett and Fentress, The Berbers, Chapter 5

### October 15

_**The Social World of Berber Society**_

Reading: Brett and Fentress, The Berbers, Chapter 7

### October 17

#### _Contemporary Islamic Movements in North Africa_

Reading: Sondra Hale, Gender Politics in Sudan, Chap 3

### October 24

**_Women in Contemporary Sudan_**

Reading: Sondra Hale, Gender Politics in Sudan, Chap 4

III. Islam in West Africa

### October 29

**_Islamic Nationalism and the Ideology of Gender_**

Reading: Sondra Hale, Gender Politics in Sudan, Chap 6

### October 31

**_The Spread of Islam in West Africa_**

Reading: Hiskett, The Development of Islam in West Africa, Chapter 18 (copies
on reserve)

### November 5

**_Islam and Traditional Education_**

Reading: Ambiguous Adventure - I

### November 7

**_The West and Islam_**

Reading: Ambiguous Adventure - II

### November 12

**_The Spirit and the Flesh_**

Reading: Ambiguous Adventure -III

### November 14

**_Education and the Social position of West African Women_**

Reading: Callaway, The Heritage of Islam: Women, Religion, and Politics in
West, Chaps 2 and 3

### November 19

**_Women in the Economy_**

Reading: Callaway, The Heritage of Islam: Women, Religion, and Politics in
West, Chap 4

### November 26

**_Women and Politics in West Africa_**

Reading: Callaway, The Heritage of Islam: Women, Religion, and Politics in
West, Chap 5

### November 28

**_Student Presentations_**

### December 3

**_Student Presentations_**

### December 5

**_Student Presentations_**



