![Bowdoin](/africana_studies/images/africana_studies_masthead.jpg)

[![About](/includes/global/images_new/about.gif)](http://www.bowdoin.edu/about/)
|
[![Academics](/includes/global/images_new/academics.gif)](http://academic.bowdoin.edu/index.shtml)
|
[![Admissions](/includes/global/images_new/admissions.gif)](http://www.bowdoin.edu/admissions/)
| [![Campus
Resources](/includes/global/images_new/campus.gif)](http://www.bowdoin.edu/campusresources)
| [![Student
Life](/includes/global/images_new/student.gif)](http://www.bowdoin.edu/studentlife/)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
|

**[...](/africana_studies "africana studies")** / [courses](/courses) / [fall
2001](/courses/f01) / [africana studies 266](/courses/f01/afrs266)

| ![](/includes/global/images/onePX404040.gif) |
[![search](/includes/global/images/search.gif)](http://www.bowdoin.edu/search)  
---|---|---|---  
  
![](/includes/global/images/clear.gif)|
![](/includes/global/images/clear.gif)| ![](/includes/global/images/clear.gif)  
---|---|---  
  
[Introduction](/africana_studies/index.shtml)

[Courses](/africana_studies/courses/index.shtml)

[Faculty](/africana_studies/faculty/index.shtml)

[Calendar](/africana_studies/calendar/index.shtml)

[Program Requirements](/africana_studies/require/index.shtml)

[Independent Study & Research](/africana_studies/research/index.shtml)

[Resources](/africana_studies/resources/index.shtml)

[Affiliated Departments](/africana_studies/depts/index.shtml)

[Featured Alumni](/africana_studies/alumni/index.shtml)

[Russwurm Center](/russwurm_center/index.shtml)

| ![](/includes/global/images/clear.gif) |

# Africana Studies/History 266 Fall 2001

### Prof. Randolph Stakeman

### Ext. 3646 E-mail: rstakema@bowdoin.edu Office Russwurm Center

### Office Hours Mon-Thurs 2:30pm - 4:00 p.m. and by appointment

## Africa to 1850

Our class meetings will be organized as conferences, that is, although I may
lecture for part of the time, classes also will provide an opportunity for us
to develop our understanding of Africa through discussion. It is very
important that each student come to class fully prepared to participate. This
is your class; the quality, excitement and intellectual depth of each class
depends upon you. At each class our discussion will begin with the questions
on the syllabus and any questions about the reading. This course does not
require a previous background in African history, but it does require a
commitment to undertake a serious and open-minded study of a substantial body
of material, much of which will be radically foreign to your own experience.
At times the reading may become very detailed and contain words, names and
places unfamiliar to you. This is regrettable, yet inevitable when studying
cultures different from your own. Do not get hung up on the details; we are
more concerned with the general patterns and processes than with the names.

There will be three short paper assignments during the course. These 5-7 page
essays will provide an opportunity for you to develop, expand and experiment
with ideas that the reading and discussions generate. These papers are not to
be research papers, that is, they are not to be summaries of information. You
do not need to do extra reading for them although you are free to do so if you
prefer. Your essays can take several forms and should present your own
analyses and arguments. These papers may criticize ideas presented in the
readings, expand upon important points not fully treated in the discussions or
readings, apply techniques or ideas from other disciplines or classes, or take
various other approaches. The key to these essays is the choice of a topic
important enough to be interesting, yet narrow enough to be developed in a
short essay. The choice of the topic is up to you because it should reflect
your ideas, skills, experiences and the way you think about the world. These
essays should be succinct, well thought out papers that reflect your ability
to think in specific terms about the problems addressed in that segment of the
course. They will be evaluated primarily upon the sophistication of the ideas
expressed, the strength of the argument and your ability to support your
arguments with examples. Please be sure to check with me about the suitability
of the topic for such short essays. The papers will be due September 25,
October 23 and November 20.

Some of the reading in the course will be in the books ordered through the
bookstore, but from time to time there will be reading assignments available
only on reserve at the library. All reading not in the books for the course,
will be available both on electronic reserve and on hard copy reserve at the
library . The following books are available at the campus bookstore:

John Iliffe, _Africans: The History of a Continent_

Toyin Falola, _Africa: African Cultures and Societies before 1885_

Schoenbrun, _A Green Place, A Good Place_

Chinua Achebe, _Things Fall Apart_

Walter Rodney, _How Europe Underdeveloped Africa_

Amos Tutuola, _The Palm Wine Drinkard and My Life in the Bush of Ghosts_

Keegan, _Colonial South Africa and the Origins of the Racial Order_

**_August 30_**

Introduction - Environment and History

Reading: Iliffe, pp. 1-5

Why should we learn pre-colonial history? How has Africa's environment
influenced its history?



**_September 4_**

The Study of Culture

Reading: Falola, pp. xix to 17, 35-58

Falola states large debates in numbered pithy statements. Where do you stand
on each one?



_**September 6**_

Development and History

Rodney, How Europe ...,Chap 1

What is development in Rodney's eyes? What explains the difference between
Western and African development? What is wrong with capitalism in Rodney's
view?



**_September 11_**

Central Africa - The Ancient World

Schoenbrun, A Green Place, A Good Place, Chap 1

You are a detective about Africa's past and can be an archaeologist or a
linguist. Depending on who you are what can archaeology (or linguistics) tell
you about the Great Lakes region?



**_September 13_**

Food Producing

Schoenbrun, A Green Place, A Good Place Chap 2 How did food production, iron,
cattle and bananas change the lives of those who lived around the Great Lakes?

**_September 18_**

The Interlake Communities

Schoenbrun, A Green Place, A Good Place Chaps 3 and 4

How did social organization e.g. families and political leadership reflect the
changes in production? How did the environment affect gender roles and
relations?



**_September 20_**

East and southern Africa

Reading: Iliffe, Chap 6 pp 97-123

What are the courses of migration, in other words, why did people migrate?
What did each group of immigrants bring that was new?



**_September 25_**

PAPER DUE

Islam in Africa

Reading, Falola, Chap 7 107 - 128

Why did people convert to Islam? How does the way it was spread affect who
converted to Islam in Africa?



**_September 27_**

Kingdoms in West Africa

Falola, Chaps 9 and 10

Compare and contrast a centralized society and a decentralized one. Is
centralization/decentralization the best way to classify societies?



**_October 2_**

Indigenous Religion

Falola, Chap 5 pp.73-94, Chap 16 pp 285-302

How did religion order the relationship between young and old? The living and
the dead? Men and women? According top African beliefs why did evil exist,
what were its manifestations, what did one do about it?



**_October 4_**

West African Society

Iliffe, Chap 5. pp. 62-96

What are the strengths and weaknesses of West African political organization?
How has environment affected settlement patterns in West Africa? Social
institutions?



**_October 11_**

My Life in the Bush of Ghosts

Start Reading Tutuola, My Life in the Bush of Ghosts



**_October 16_**

My Life in the Bush of Ghosts

Finish Reading Tutuola, My Life in the Bush of Ghosts

Select a story. What does it tell you about the society that created it?



**_October 18_**

Africa on the World Stage

Rodney, Chap 4

How was Africa "underdeveloped" by contact with Europe. Were West Africa, the
intralacustrine states, and South Africa underdeveloped?



**_October 23_**

PAPER DUE

Slave Trade in Africa

Lovejoy, Transformation of Slavery, Chap 1 (on reserve)

Manning, Slavery and African Life, Chap 1 (on reserve)

What are the questions people have asked about slavery and the slave trade?
What "transformation" of slavery does Lovejoy see and how does it change
society?



**_October 25_**

The Slave Trade - Internal Relations

Lovejoy, Transformation of Slavery, Chap 6 (on reserve)

What was the effect of slavery on kinship groups?



**_October 30_**

The Slave trade - Trade and non kingly societies

Manning, Slavery and African Life, Chap 7 (on reserve)

What is Manning's thesis and how does he go about proving it? Where could he
be wrong?



**_November 1_**

Things Fall Apart

Start book



**_November 6_**

Things Fall Apart

Finish book



**_November 8_**

East African Coast

Michael N. Pearson, Port Cities and Intruders, Chap 2 (on reserve)

Randall Pouwels, Horn and Crescent, Chap 2 (on reserve)

Who would Pearson include in his study and what were their lives like?



**_November 13_**

East Africa

Randall Pouwels, Horn and Crescent, Chap 3 (on reserve)

Jonathon Glassman, Feasts and Riot, Chap 1 (on reserve)



**_November 15_**

19th Century in East Africa

Jonathon Glassman, Feasts and Riot Chap 2 (on reserve)



**_November 20_**

PAPER DUE

South Africa before 1600

Thompson, History of South Africa, Chap 1 (on reserve)

Keegan, Colonial South Africa..., Chap 1 (on reserve)



**_November 27_**

Whites in South Africa

Keegan, Colonial South Africa..., Chap 2 (on reserve)



**_November 29_**

The Mfecane and the Great Trek

Keegan, Colonial South Africa..., Chap 6 (on reserve)



**_December 4_**

South Africa in the 19th Century

Keegan, Colonial South Africa Chap 9 (on reserve)



**_December 6_**

Round Table Discussion - How does Africa's past help us understand its
present?



