**English 2214: Introduction to Literature (Fiction)  
Rethinking the American Experience Through Fiction:  
Revisionist Historical Novels of  
the Central Appalachian Coal Mining Wars**

**Syllabus**

 ![](../artwork/motgrnrule.gif)

**Instructor: Stephen D. Mooney**

|

**Office Phone: 1-8449**  
  
---|---  
  
**Office: 110A Williams**

|

**Home Phone (no calls after 9 p.m.): 552-1936**  
  
**Office Hours: M-F 9-10**

|

**email: pinemtn@vt.edu**  
  
  **TEXTS**

  * _Storming Heaven_ , Denise Giardina
  * _River of Earth_ , James Still
  * _Hardcastle_ , John Yount
  * _The Unquiet Earth_ , Denise Giardina

In addition to the novels listed above, course materials may include films and
documentaries such as _Matewan_ , _HarlanCounty, U.S.A_., _Roving Pickets_ ,
_Justice in the Coalfields_ , and _Beyond Measure_. Materials may also include
songs by artists such as Sarah Ogan Gunning, Florence Reece, Jim Garland, Jean
Ritchie, Merle Travis, Hazel Dickens, Billy Edd Wheeler, and Dwight Yoakam,
among others.

**COURSE DESCRIPTION (see 2214 Home Page)**

**INTRODUCTORY REMARKS  
(INCLUDING COURSE GOALS)**

In Virginia Tech's _University Core Curriculum: A Guide for Students_ ,
college administrators try to define the kinds of work they see as crucial for
students' intellectual development. Addressing this issue, the administrators
write:

> [In your courses here at Virginia Tech] you will often find it necessary to
re-examine strongly held beliefs or opinions in the light of new evidence, or
to understand complex issues that may not have clear solutions. You may well
find that learning how to ask questions is sometimes as important as having
the answers. And you will need to communicate effectively with others--in a
society in which there are many "others" whose experience and perspectives are
likely to be different from your own. Thus you will have ample opportunity to
confirm for yourself that one form of knowledge is not enough.

These are precisely the kinds of work we are are trying to do in the section
of English 2214 entitled _Rethinking the American Experience Through Fiction:
Revisionist Historical Novels of the Central Appalachia Coal Mining Wars_. As
the course title implies, we will be "rethinking" or "re-examining" some
commonly held American historical assumptions or interpretations about, among
other things, "progress" and the triumph of industrial-technological
modernity. Our reexamination, though, will not involve an attempt to simply
replace one set of assumptions or interpretations with another. Instead, our
reexamination should demonstrate for us the essential validity of some of the
remarks made above by university administrators. Significantly, our
reexamination will occur primarily from the perspective of one of the societal
"others" mentioned by them.

**Perspective is Everything**

Before we proceed further, let's consider some remarks by filmmaker John
Sayles ( _Matewan_ ), from his introduction to Lon Savage's book _Thunder in
the Mountains: the West Virginia Mine War, 1920-21_. Writes Sayles:

> History is a picture filtered through the lenses of time, language, and
point of view. The history of the moment, of the daily headline, has immediacy
and heat but can often lack the depth and accumulation of detail a later look
can provide. Language can alter the perception of an incident without altering
the "facts," can turn "striking workers" into "unemployed rioters" and back
again with a brushstroke. As for point of view, accounts of an event vary not
only with the witnesses' physical perception of the instant but also their
political and philosophic perception of the world and of human nature itself.
History is a tricky story that depends on who is telling it and where they're
coming from.

>

> I first heard stories of the coal wars of the twenties . . . by word of
mouth from coal miners and their relatives as I hitchhiked through West
Virginia. Some years later I wrote a screenplay for a movie called _Matewan_
based on what I'd heard and what little I could find that was written about
it. Most of this came from people on one side or the other of the union
struggle, people who were there in the thick of the fight and chose their
words as weapons in a battle still raging. But as history usually belongs to
the winners, and the story of the coal wars is largely that of a people who
lost and continue to lose, it was a story more often told in ballads and
folktales than in the pages of library books.

>

> As we began shooting the movie, we discovered Lon Savage's _Thunder in the
Mountains_. What is important about Savage's book is that he recognizes if
history is a mirror it is a broken one, not one perception of the truth but
hundreds of them, oddly shaped fragments of memory that must all be examined
to form some kind of coherent story. The story Lon Savage tells is
unfortunately a largely unheard one but it is a dramatic and important one, as
much a part of our American heritage as that of the Alamo or Gettysburg or the
winning of the West. . . . As Savage understands, if people's deeds last
beyond their lives to become part of history, it is partly through the stories
we tell about them. With Thunder in the Mountains, Lon Savage helps give shape
to those lives, to those times, and brings us a story too long untold.

**The Unheard Story**

As Sayles' comments might suggest, this is a course in the historical-cultural
development of one group of American "losers" (or "others"): the residents of
the coal-producing regions of central Appalachia. As Sayles' comments also
make clear, the history of this group of American "others" is largely an
unheard one, as their voices and viewpoints were largely ignored or
marginalized in the historical accounts written by the "winners," those busy
chronicling the triumph of the American Experiment during the heyday of the
Industrial Age.

In fact, these standard histories generally fail to discuss or even to mention
seminal events or episodes in the coal mining wars of central Appalachia. For
example, in your high school history classes--or in your American History
courses here at Virginia Tech--did you encounter references to

  * The Coal Creek Wars?
  * The Bull Moose Special?
  * The Matewan Massacre?
  * To the Three Days War?
  * The March on Logan?
  * The Battle of Blair Mountain?
  * The National Miners' Union?
  * The Battle of Evarts?
  * To Florence Reece or Granny Hagar or Sarah Gunning or Aunt Molly Jackson?
  * To Sid Hatfield or Harry Simms or Barney Graham?
  * To the Roving Pickets?
  * To Buffalo Creek, West Virginia?
  * Or to the AT Massey or Pittston strikes?

Probably not.

But in this course, you will become familiar with these and other episodes
that are part of the "unheard history" of central Appalachians, one of
America's primary "loser" or "other" groups. In fact, this course operates
from the premise that some familiarity with this "people's history" (as well
as that of Native Americans, or African Americans, or Hispanics, or Gays, for
example) is crucial for the intellectual development of all American citizens.
Like Savage's book, then, or Sayles' movie, or the novels of Giardina, Yount
and Still, this course seeks to participate in the telling of this "unheard
history."

**Lots of Questions--No Sure Answers**

In the remarks that begin this section of the syllabus for English 2214,
university administrators are quoted as saying that contemporary college
students have to be willing to recognize the existence of multiple "complex
issues that may not have clear solutions."

As you move toward the close of this course, you will find that "sure" or
"easy" or "definite" answers simply aren't possible to many of the questions
debated in regard to the coal mining industrialization of central Appalachia.
You also will find that there exist multiple perspectives and points of view
in relation to these questions. Some of them include:

  * What was the nature of "pre-industrial" central Appalachia?
  * Was it a region comprised of small family farms where people worked hard and sacrificed much, but enjoyed the independence and freedom that resulted from their participation in a self-sufficient culture? Or was it a place where generations of people lived through a merciless and unending cycle of spirit-breaking toil on ever-shrinking and increasingly infertile hill farms?
  * What was the long-term effect of coal mining industrialization on the region? Did it imprison the bulk of the population in an exploitative and oppressive extractive industrial system that sucked out the region's resources and shipped off the attendant wealth to absentee capitalists in Boston, New York, and Philadelphia? Or did it liberate that same population from its reliance on a clearly failing agrarian lifestyle and offer them an appealing alternative life in a cash-paying economic system that enabled the region's people to participate in the material culture of modern America?
  * Were the hundreds of coal towns that sprang up in the region repressive and grimy places to live where workers,to paraphrase songwriter Merle Travis, soon owed their souls to the company store? Or were the coal towns pleasant places to live where an atmosphere of community and solidarity was pervasive and spirit-enriching?
  * To what degree was the coming of the unions welcomed and initiated by the region's coal miners, who sought better laboring conditions and a better quality of life through collective action? Or to what degree was the coming of the unions viewed with disdain and distrust by the region's workers, who had no desire to see their traditional independence diminished by a mass-participation system ultimately controlled by outside interests with an obvious larger agenda of their own?
  * Why were the union wars that followed in central Appalachia so persistent and so violent? Who is to blame for the property destruction and loss of life that occurred? The callous "operators" with their collective eyes firmly on profit margins and bottom lines? Or the radical union "agitators" who poured into the region to help organize its coal miners?
  * What was life like there for the thousands of southern blacks and European immigrants who came into central Appalachia to mine its coal? Were they welcomed as "laboring brothers" by the natives of the region or were they received with hostility, prejudice, and discrimination?
  * What was the quality of life for women in central Appalachian coal mining culture? What were their roles in this culture? What were their freedoms and limitations?

One of our primary goals in this course is simply to acquaint ourselves with
these questions (and others), to the multiple perspectives and points of view
that swirl around them, and to the complex realities they represent. Ideally,
by the end of the course, each of us--through an individual process of careful
analysis and consideration--will come to some understanding of them and to
some conclusions, however tentative, about them.

**Why a Course Devoted to the Novels of the Central Appalachian Coal Mining
Wars?**

Why a course devoted to the "unheard history" of some American subcultural
group? Isn't such a course limited? Doesn't such a course ignore the
"universals" that characterize human life in whatever time or place? In an
attempt to speak to these questions, I will provide some admittedly simplistic
historical analysis.

Since our beginnings in America, we have experienced two major economic-
cultural shifts that have profoundly influenced our ways of life and thought:

  * the first from the widespread rural agrarianism of Jefferson's vision (1750-1850) to the full-blown urban industrialism of the Machine Age (1850-1950);
  * the second from the heavy industry of the Machine Age to the high technology of the computer-driven Information Age that charaterizes post-modern America and the current Global Community (1950-).

At first glance, although central Appalachian coal mining novels might seem
utterly disconnected from all this "national level" history, they are in fact
a crucial part of it. Perhaps more accurately, they provide a key
"representational window" into it, especially the shift (and perhaps more
importantly, the human response to it) from the rural agrarianism of America's
first hundred or so years to the urban industrialism of its second. After all,
at least until the 1930s, the America of the age of heavy industry was powered
almost exclusively by coal, and central Appalachian coal miners as well as
others were the Vulcans fanning the flames of America's might.

In truth, when one considers American literature in its entirety, one
recognizes that these central Appalachian coal mining novels--of which there
are nearly 50--represent the fullest and most substantial literary response we
have to this basic American shift into the Machine Age--as well as to the
human and cultural dilemmas that resulted from it. After reflection, then, we
see that a course devoted to central Appalachian coal mining novels and
culture is not a "regional" or "provincial" course at all.

Instead, it provides valuable insight into major shifts in American cultural
history and it also opens a window for the examination of more universal
themes, ones having to do with the ongoing world-wide human struggle with the
often bewildering forces of industrial-technological modernity.

Finally, the four central Appalachian coal mining novels we will read speak to
almost all of the most basic and most "universal" human questions and
dilemmas:

  * What is the meaning of life? From what do we derive it?
  * Why is the world so unfair? Why do we have to endure such suffering? Why do bad things happen to good people?
  * Why do some people (or countries or regions) have so much when others have so little?
  * Why do certain historical moments happen when they do? Why are we born into the world when we are?
  * When we grow older, will we fall in love? Will we be loved in return?
  * Why are men the way they are? Women?
  * How does the individual "self" maintain its integrity and dignity in the context of a closely-knit network of family, community, region, and even nation?
  * What responsibilities or abilities does the individual human have to affect the course of his or her life?
  * How do we react in the face of debilitating pressures and forces that are simply beyond our control and seem to place us in a squarely deterministic universe?
  * What is the significance of place to humans? What is the proper relationship between man and nature? How does living among mountains (or in a city or along the sea) shape humans?
  * How does the past inform the present? Do we ever learn from the past or are we doomed to repeat its mistakes?
  * How do we gain forgiveness for the sins we commit? Is redemption possible?
  * What is the nature of Divinity? Is it possible for us to know?



**COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND GRADE CALCULATION**

Two 5-p. papers/One 10-p. paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50%

15-30 min. class presentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

Final Exam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. 20

Participation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . 10  

**GRADING SCALE**

** **A 100-95** |  **C 76-74**  
---|---  
**A- 94-90** |  **C- 73-70**  
**B+ 89-87** |  **D+ 69-67**  
**B 86-84** |  **D 66-64**  
**B- 83-80** |  **D- 63-70**  
**C+ 79-77** |  **F 59-0**  
**



**ESSAY EVALUATION CRITERIA**

(For additional information on the essay, its requirements and conventions,
and the method of manuscript preparation utilized in this course (MLA) see the
10-page handout provided in the classroom

  * audience/purpose
  * context/background
  * controllingidea/thesis
  * content/development
  * organization/structure
  * grammar/mechanics
  * style/clarity
  * format/physical design
  * documentation/bibliography

**A FEW WORDS ON THE ORAL PRESENTATIONS**

Each student in the course will provide, generally at the beginning of a class
period, a 15-30 minute presentation on some aspect of the course or the
assigned readings. The instructor will discuss each individual presentation
with the person giving it, making sure the student is aware of what the
presentation's goals are and content should/might be. If possible or relevant,
at the end of presentations, presenters should pose three or four questions
that might serve as a jumping off point for further class discussion of the
subject/topic. Hand outs and visual aids (overheads, video clips, etc.) are
welcome but not required.

Generally speaking, students should be aware that a good oral report is marked
by the same qualities as a good essay: a clear sense of purpose, a clear
controlling idea, a body of relevant and logically organized content, a clear
proficiency in delivery of that content, and finally, a clear sense of
closure, of finishing the assigned task within the given time limit. In short,
a clear sense of purpose and a report that accomplishes that purpose within
15-30 minutes while providing a clear sense of beginning, middle, and end.

**THE WRITING CENTER**

English 2214 students should be aware of the Writing Center, located in
Williams 205. The Writing Center provides a free tutorial and consultation
service for Virginia Tech students, faculty, and staff. Assistance is
available on a one-time, occasional, or regular basis and those interested
should call 231-5436 to schedule an appointment. I encourage students to take
advantage of this fine, professional, and free service.

**POLICIES AND PROCEDURES**

**Attendance**

While there is no formal attendance policy in this course, consistent
attendance and participation are required if the student is to successfully
complete it. In fact, failure to attend regularly can result in a significant
lowering of the student's final grade. Why? Since we'll spend much of the
semester discussing ideas, techniques, or history that, as experience as
proven many times over, students are unlikely to pick up on their own, you
should bear in mind that unnecessary and/or excessive absences will
undoubtedly have an adverse effect on your understanding of course materials,
and thereby on essay, exam, participation, and final grades.

**Late Submission of Essays**

All essays are due at the beginning of class on the specified day. Late essays
not accompanied by verifiable documentation of some considerable difficulty
will be penalized one full letter grade for each day they are late. Please
note that computer or printer problems are not acceptable reasons for the late
submission of essays. Neither are tests, papers, or projects due the same day
in other courses. Also, when composing on a word processor or personal
computer, students should always save frequently and should also print out a
second copy of their assignment when it is done. This copy can then be
provided to the instructor if the first is somehow lost.

**Making Up Missed In-Class Work**

Missed in-class work cannot be made up unless the student's absence is
excused. Please realize, though, that there is some required in-class work
that cannot be made up, that cannot be recreated outside of class for those
who have missed.

**Responsibility for Course Content**

Students are responsible for the content of each class period, whether present
or absent. The instructor will not provide a second lecture--or attempt to
recreate the activities of the class period--for those absent on any given
day. Finally, absence on a prior day is not sufficient reason for lack of
preparation on the day or return, or for failure to provide due assignments in
a timely manner.

**Honor Code/Plagiarism**

TheVirginia Tech Honor Code applies to every aspect of this course. Of
particular concern in a course with substantive writing assignments is
plagiarism. Plagiarism means presenting someone else's work, words, or ideas
as if they were your own (for example, having someone else write course papers
for you, turning in someone else's old paper as your own, or copying verbatim
or paraphrasing too closely passages from secondary or criticial sources
without properly acknowledging them). Plagiarism is cheating, it is academic
(and personal) dishonesty, and it will be treated as such.

Students caught plagiarizing will receive a failing grade for the course and
will be reported to the appropriate departmental and university officials.
However, acts of plagiarism should not occur in this course because students
will be provided with (in the first week) a lengthy handout on manuscript
preparation in the MLA style, which includes considerations of documentation
and bibliography.

[![](../artwork/pgnarrl.gif)](../2214hp.html)

![](../artwork/motgrnrule.gif)



