**MUSIC 2116: SURVEY OF MUSIC FROM c. 1750 TO c. 1990** **  
** Index #13719--Spring Semester 2002--Prof. John R. Howell

* * *

[2116 Home](2116Documents.html) \- [Instructor](../howell.html) \-
[Calendar](2116Calendar.html) \- [Syllbaus](2116Syll.html) \- [Concert
Schedule](2116Concerts.html) \- [Recording Index](2116Index.html) \-
[Writing](2116Writing.html)

* * *

**COURSE SYLLABUS**

This page has been updated for Spring 2002.



**![](../images/personnageinred.gif)**

**Contents:**

  * **Quick Facts**
  * **Course Objectives**
  * **Course Specifics**
  * **Evaluation and Grading**
    * Extra Credit Opportunities
    * Grade Percentage Scale
  * **Course Materials**
  * **Core Curriculum Goals**
    * Area 2 Goals
    * Area 6 Goals

** **

**

* * *

****Quick Facts** **  
****Time and Place** : 1:25-2:15 MWF, Squires Recital Salon  
**Instructor** : Prof. John R. Howell  
**Office** : 160 Squires (Ground Floor, Music Wing)  
**Office Hours** : E-mail 24 hours a day: John.Howell@vt.edu. In person by
appointment. Emaiil for appointment.  
**Telephone** : Office 231-8411; Department 231-5685; Home 953-1928.

> (Please do not call at home unless it is _really_ necessary.)

**

* * *

****Course Objectives** **  
** Students successfully completing Music 2116 will understand the historical
processes through which musical styles begin, grow, mature, and decline; will
be able to recognize and identify the elements that define specific styles of
Western Art Music and Popular Music in the 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries;
will understand and be able to use the terminology associated with each style
period; and will be familiar with the contributions of important individuals
active in specific styles and style periods.

([To Top](2116Syll.html))

**

* * *

****Course Specifics** **  
** 1\. This is a history course, the subject matter of which is the art music
("classical" music) of Europe and later America from the mid-18th century to
the present day, plus the development of American popular music, jazz, and
musical theater. (The companion course, MUS 2115, covers the art music of
Europe from Classical Greece to about 1750.) The two courses may be taken in
either order. The ability to read music, while helpful, is not a prerequisite
for this course.

2\. This course satisfies Core Curriculum requirements in Area 2 and Area 6,
but not if it is audited or taken Pass/Fail. It does not satisfy graduation
requirements in Music History for Music Majors, but may satisfy other Core
Curriculum requirements. It is a required course for Music Minors.

3\. This course is taught under the tradition and procedures of the
[University Honor Code](http://www.vt.edu/honorsystem/UgradHonor.html). ( Find
it at <http://www.vt.edu/honorsystem/UgradHonor.html>.) Cheating and
plagiarism are unacceptable at this university and in this course, and
suspected or proven instances will be turned over to the Student Honor Court
for investigation and resolution.Turning in written work or opscan answer
sheets is deemed to be acceptance of the Honor Pledge.

4\. There will be both reading and listening assignments to prepare for almost
every class, depending on which Option the student contracts for (see
Evaluation and Grading). In addition, all students are expected to attend and
submit a written review of one concert of art music.

5\. Regular class attendance is expected. Announcements made in class apply to
all students. Missed assignments and quizzes may not be made up unless absence
is excused by the instructor in advance, or unless serious illness or family
emergency is documented by a doctor's note or similar document. Tours by Music
Department ensembles are excused if arrangements are made in advance. Travel
by varsity or club sports teams are excused if arrangements are made in
advance and a memo from the coach is received by the Instructor. Absences for
specific religious holidays are excused if arrangements are made in advance.
Contact the instructor in advance either in person, by e-mail, or by
voicemail.

6\. Students are required to have an e-mail account and to provide the
instructor with an e-mail address no later than Monday, January 21 if the
account is not active at the beginning of the semester. Quiz grades, class
announcements, comments, and changes in assignments or due dates will be
distributed on the class e-mail list, and questions or comments may be sent to
the instructor at any time and will be answered as quickly as possible. Always
put 2116 and nothing else as the "subject" line so the instructor can identify
class posts and deal with them immediately. Always include a signature with
your own full name. **DO NOT SEND EMAIL AS HTML CODE!!** Plain Text is the
only universal standard for email.

7\. Students are also required to have Internet access. The instructor's
homepage can be found at <http://www.music.vt.edu/faculty/howell/howell.html>.
The course Homepage can be found at
<http://www.music.vt.edu/faculty/howell/2116/2116Documents.html>. This
Syllabus, the Course Calendar giving all assignments and Quiz dates, details
on the Writing Assignments, Index of Recordings, Chapter Outlines, links to
concert schedules at Virginia Tech and Radford University, and other study
aids for this course will only be available at this Website. They will not be
handed out on paper.

8\. Some assignments may be turned in electronically as an attachment to
e-mail, in an e-mail message itself, or to the instructor's DropBox.
Assignments submitted electronically are on time if they are sent by 11:59:59
p.m. on the date due. (Electronic submission is not a requirement, and is
offered simply for the student's convenience. Hard copy may always be turned
in in class.) For email attachments use a standard word processing file like
Microsoft Word or WordPerfect. Some file formats cannot be opened, and may
even crash the instructor's machine. Because of the prevalence of viruses, no
file that does not show a standard word processing icon will be opened and
will not be read or graded. In case of doubt, save your file in RTF format
before sending. **ALWAYS include your last name as part of the filename** ,
and always include a heading in the body of the paper itself.

9\. There is no midterm exam. There will be brief short-answer Quizzes on
terms and listening assignments for each chapter, depending on the Grading
Option contracted by the student. There will be an Introductory Unit Quiz and
five additional Unit Quizzes covering one or two chapters each, including the
identification of listening examples, with multiple-choice questions. There
will be a comprehensive final exam covering listening identifications
(multiple choice; required of everyone), and your choice of term
identifications (multiple choice), or essay questions (which will be provided
ahead of time). An alternate final exam time is freely available without
hassles or paperwork. Expect to turn in an assignment and/or take a quiz at
almost every class meeting, depending on the Grading Option you choose.

10\. Any students who need special consideration because of disabilities
should email the instructor with this information and furnish the instructor
with a copy of the university form. The instructor will do whatever is
necessary and possible to accomodate such students.

([To Top](2116Syll.html))

**

* * *

****Evaluation and Grading** :

**1.** The way a student's work is evaluated **** depends on which of the
options below the student chooses. These are designed to allow students to
choose the learning activities they find most effective and to choose the
degree of class preparation and participation they are willing to put in. Each
student is required to email the instructor with a choice of options by the
second Monday of the semester. There will be one, and only one, opportunity to
change options, again by email, during the week following the posting of the
scores for Unit Quiz 1. The student's choice is a contract between the student
and the instructor. Class attendance will increase the student's ability to
score well on Quizzes and the Final Exam, but is not required under Option 1.
Class attendance and preparation for Chapter Terms and Listening Quizzes is
expected under Option 2 and Option 3, and can be expected to increase the
student's learning and exam scores. Any student who does not make a choice
will automatically be assigned a contract under Option 1.



**Option 1: Evaluation Primarily by Quiz and Exam Scores**

**

Six Unit Quizzes

|

60% of Final Grade  
  
---|---  
  
Final Exam

|

30% of Final Grade  
  
Preliminary Unit Quiz (Monday, Jan 21)

|

5% of Final Grade  
  
Concert Review

|

5% of Final Grade  
  
**Total** : |

100%  
  
**



**Option 2: Evaluation by Quiz and Exam Scores plus Homework Quizzes**

**

Six Unit Quizzes

|

55% of Final Grade  
  
---|---  
  
Final Exam

|

25% of Final Grade  
  
Homework (based on Chapter Quizzes)

|

10% of Final Grade  
  
Preliminary Unit Quiz (Monday, Jan 21)

|

5% of Final Grade  
  
Concert Review

|

5% of Final Grade  
  
**Total:** |

100%  
  
**



**Option 3: Evaluation by Quiz and Exam Scores plus Homework and Written
Work**

**

Six Unit Quizzes

|

50% of Final Grade  
  
---|---  
  
Final Exam

|

20% of Final Grade  
  
Homework (based on Chapter Quizzes)

|

10% of Final Grade  
  
2 Written Assignments (Reviews or Papers)

|

10% of Final Grade  
  
Preliminary Unit Quiz (Monday, Jan 21)

|

5% of Final Grade  
  
Concert Review

|

5% of Final Grade  
  
**Total:** |

100%  
  
**

**2. _Grade Percentage Scale:_**

Please note that some items treated as opportunities for Extra Credit in past
years have now been incorporated into the three available Options. To offset
the lack of extra credit opportunities, the Grade Percentages below have been
adjusted downward. Grades are earned, not assigned. They are never curved and
they are never "rounded up." Decide what grade you want and work for it from
the first week of class.

A+ |

97 - 100%

|  B+ |

86- 88.99%

|  C+ |

74 - 77.99%

|  D+ |

62 - 65.99%

|  F |

0.00 - 53.99%  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
A |

93 - 96.99%

|  B |

82 - 85.99%

|  C |

70 - 73.99%

|  D |

58 - 61.59%

|

|  
  
A- |

89 - 92.99%

|  B- |

78 - 81.99%

|  C- |

66 - 69.99%

|  D- |

54 - 57.99%

|

|  
  
(Note: The grade A+ will be awarded if earned, but the Registrar will not
record it. Go figure!)

Most problems can be solved. **Questions? _Ask!_**  

([To Top](2116Syll.html))

**

* * *

****Course Materials**

Required Text: Stolba, K Marie. The Development of Western Music: A History.
3rd edition. McGraw-Hill, 1998. (The "blue" book, hard cover, used for both
2115 & 2116\. Previous editions are out of date.)

Required Recordings: (Both CD and cassette versions should be available.)  
Recorded Examples to Accompany The Development of Western Music: An Anthology,
Volume II (Pre-Classic through the 20th Century), 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, 1998.
(Previous editions are out of date.)

Anthology of Musical Scores to accompany the recordings, required for music
minors, optional for others:  
Stolba, K Marie (ed). The Development of Western Music: An Anthology. 3rd ed.
Volume II (Pre-Classic through 20th Century). McGraw-Hill, 1998. (Previous
editions are out of date.)

Reference Materials:  
Grun, Bernard. The Timetables of History: A Horizontal Linkage of People and
Events. New, updated ed. New York: A Touchstone Book published by Simon and
Schuster, 1979. (Library Reference Room)

Hacker, Diana. A Writer's Reference. 2nd ed. Boston: Bedford Books of St.
Martin's Press, 1992. (Used in Tech English Courses.)

New Grove Dictionary of Music and The New Harvard Dictionary of Music (Library
Reference Room)

([To Top](2116Syll.html))

**

* * *

****Core Curriculum Goals** **  
** This course addresses selected goals in Area 2 and Area 6 of the University
Core Curriculum in the following manner.

Area 2 Goals  
Goal #1: Examine some of the formative ideas and cultural traditions that have
shaped Western experience. The importance of musical ideas and traditions in
illuminating the formative ideas and cultural traditions of each historical
period will be examined.

Goal #2: Study classic and contemporary texts that have influenced or
exemplified currents in Western thought and imagination. "Texts" will be
studied in two different senses, both the musical texts that transmit to us
the musical works which influenced currents in Western society and the
literary texts about music which help us interpret those influences.

Goal #3: Gain an understanding of some aspects of human achievement and
experience that have been persistently overlooked in mainstream Western
culture, including those of women, minorities, and non-Western peoples. The
contributions of women and minorities to musical achievement have long been
overlooked, and will be addressed both through selection of a text which
includes those achievements and through emphasis on those achievements in
lectures. Non-Western music is not covered in this course.

Goal #4: Analyze creative works of various mediums both in the arts and
technology from the viewpoints of cultural meanings and influence. Intrinsic
to the art of music are the instruments used to produce or accompany that
music. The changes in musical instruments, in the technologies of designing
and making them, and in the way they were used as part of the creative process
of performance in different historical periods will be examined.

Goal #5: Gain acquaintance with historical traditions and with humanistic
methods of studying and interpreting them. The development and change in
historical traditions in music is a core concept in this course, and the
contrast among the humanistic attitudes of the Renaissance, the influences of
the Enlightenment on Baroque and Classical musical traditions, and the
influences of the Romantic movement will be discussed, and students have the
option of writing papers covering these subjects.

Goal #6: Consider the contributions of philosophical, ethical, or religious
systems to human life. A very large proportion of the music that has survived
into modern times was conceived and intended for use in religious contexts.
The philosophy of Nationalism in the 19th century had profound effects on
music well into the 20th. Both will be discussed.

Goal #7: Recognize how the interaction of tradition and innovation nourishes
both individuality and community. Two thousand years of musical development
and change is the direct result of constant interaction between traditional
concepts and musical forms and innovative concepts and musical forms, and
examination of both the musical communities that defined historical style
periods and the individuals whose innovations led to changes in style is a
core concept for this course.

Goal #8: Gain critical and appreciative perspective upon one's own culture by
studying other historical periods and other cultural traditions. Listening to
and studying music totally unlike what one is familiar with will lead to
discussion of how to critique and appreciate unfamiliar musics and place them
in historical and cultural perspective as precursors to the music of today.

Goal #9: Study the life, thought, and creative activity of men and women of
achievement in various fields of human endeavor. The life, thought, and
creativity of men and women of achievement and influence in the field of music
in each historical period is a core concept for this course.

([To Top](2116Syll.html))

Area 6 Goals  
Goal #1: Participate in cultural events and activities on campus, in both
popular and classical arts. Attendance at a minimum of one on-campus concert
and writing of a carefully considered review of that concert is required. This
concert must contain classical music, but may also include popular music.
Attendance at additional concerts, either classical or popular, is encouraged,
and students have the option of writing additional Concert Reviews.

Goal #2: Understand how the artists or designers who produce these events and
works have shaped their ideas. The social, political, economic and religious
influences on the composers of each historical period will be examined in
detail.

Goal #3: Examine intuitive and metaphorical thought processes and their
relationship to the human imagination and other intellectual abilities. The
way in which our intuition causes us to interpret the music of the past in new
ways will be considered, and the extent to which composers of various
historical periods used musical metaphor in the form of text painting or tone
painting will be examined.

Goal #4: Explore the interaction of art and society, including the
contributions of diverse groups to cultural life, such as women and members of
minority groups. The interaction of music and society and the interaction of
music with other arts in each historical period are core concepts in this
course, and the contributions of women, minorities, and members of different
national and linguistic groups will be examined.

Goal #5: Study selected classic works of fine and applied arts. Selected
classic musical works will be studied through listening and discussion with
regard to their structure and function as well as their esthetic goals and
effects.

* * *

[2116 Home](2116Documents.html) \- [Instructor](../howell.html) \-
[Calendar](2116Calendar.html) \- [Syllbaus](2116Syll.html) \- [Concert
Schedule](2116Concerts.html) \- [Recording Index](2116Index.html) \-
[Writing](2116Writing.html)

* * *



