
    EUROPEAN PAINTING 1760-1860
    
    Professor Susan Sidlauskas
    Graduate Teaching Assistant and WATU Fellow: Mr. Jon Seydl
    Art History 284/684
    Fall 1995
    Prof. Sidlauskas' Office: Jaffe History of Art Building/208
    Office Hours: Tuesday 2:00-4:00
    Make appointments at the History of Art Office
    Tel: 898-1878/8327
    e-mail: sidlausk[at]mail.sas.upenn.edu
    Mr. Seydl's hours to be announced
    e-mail: jseydl[at]mail.sas.upenn.edu)
    
    COURSE SYNOPSIS
    
    The death of the revolutionary hero, the search for spiritualmeaning, the 
    "rape" of the countryside by industrialism, theanxious masculinity of 
    romanticism, and the emergence ofsuch conceptions as "orientalism" and 
    nationalism are only someof the themes that will be addressed through the 
    art of thisearly modern period.  We will focus on painters from 
    France,England and Germany, with an emphasis on the first, and thesocial 
    and political contexts in which their work was produced,exhibited, and 
    understood.  We will study the career ofJacques-Louis David, for 
    instance.  First the painter of the 1789revolutionary "martyrs," he 
    became a promoter of the EmperorNapoleon.  We shall consider the 
    sometimes sadistic romanticismof Eugene Delacroix; the perverse 
    "femininity" of Jean-DominiqueIngres' nudes; Theodore Gericault's 
    unprecedented portraits ofthe insane; the nationalist landscapes of 
    Caspar David Friedrichand John Constable; the fantastic visions of J.M.W. 
    Turner,William Blake, and Francesco Goya, and the radical 
    landscapepainting of the mid-century that foreshadowed Impressionism.
    
    Whenever possible, we will consider a relatively small number of {key} 
    works by each artist, rather than attempt to master anexhaustive survey.  
    Even within this lecture format, discussionis expected and encouraged.  
    The required readings representdiverse views within the field of art 
    history.  They range from a general, critical history of the period 
    Nineteenth-CenturyArt by Stephen Eisenman, a required text 
    available at the PennBook Center) to more topical, and controversial 
    essays (kept in folders at the Fine Arts Library Reserve Desk) that 
    address themes such as gender and sexuality, patronage, and 
    political censorship.  The original sources for all the readings are 
    listed at the end of your syllabus.  If you get frustrated with 
    the mediocre quality of the xeroxed pictures in your articles, you can 
    consult the original in the library.
    
    There will be two exams, a mid-term and a final, and two papers,one 4-5 
    pages, the other 8-10.  For the first paper, you will compare two 
    paintings at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, chosen by you from a group of 
    at least five pairs.  For the final paper,you will choose a topic from a 
    list of approximately ten possibilities, and combine visual analysis with 
    some research. In addition, a one page topic summary identifying the 
    theme of your final paper and plan for research will be required.  
    Dates for all assignments are listed below (but are subject to change). 
    Students who wish to affiliate themselves with WATU will be required to do 
    two drafts of these papers, as well as a third writing assignment--a 
    critical analysis of an assigned article or excerpt from your Eisenman 
    text. (This WATU assignment is referred to below as the "extra paper.")
    
    There are six section meetings during the course of the semester,led by 
    Jon Seydl, the Teaching Assistant for this class, and two review sessions 
    prior to each exam, also led by Mr. Seydl.  After the first two weeks of 
    class, these meetings will generally take place every other week and will 
    replace a scheduled Tuesday lecture.  Times for sections will be scheduled 
    as close to the start of classes as possible.  Participation in 
    section discussions is required, and factored into your final grade. Most 
    section meetings will revolve around a key work of art and a critical 
    article or chapter from your book. Students are asked to bring three 
    questions or points of discussion about the readings to each section.  Two 
    of these meetings will be held at the galleries of the Philadelphia Museum 
    of Art.  We hope to be able to provide transportation.
    
    Some cautionary words: Attendance is mandatory at both lectures and 
    sections.  If you attend both, you should have have no significant problem 
    with the exams or assignments.  There will be {NO MAKE-UPS} for either 
    exam, unless there is a dire medical emergency or a death in the family; 
    proof will be required. Papers will be graded down half a grade for every 
    day they are late.  Plagiarism will result in a failing grade. 
    
    Some reassuring words: Although memorization seems to be a necessary evil 
    of introductory art history courses, be assured that the identifications 
    you will be presented with at exam time are quite easily recognizable if 
    you have attended classes and sections faithfully.
     
    NOTE FOR GRADUATE STUDENTS: Additional assignments and meetings with Prof. 
    Sidlauskas will be required.  Please see me to arrange your schedule.
    
    @Center(TENTATIVE CLASS SCHEDULE)
    
    (Sept. 5:) SS--Introduction and Overview. Section Assignments. 
    {Reading for next class:} Carol Duncan's "Fallen Fathers: Images of 
    Authority in Pre-Revolutionary French Art"(Fine Arts Reserve).  Also read 
    in Eisenman, pp 7-50.
    
    (Sept. 10:) SS--Jean-Baptise Greuze and the New 
    Public.  {Reading for next class:} Continue with Eisenman. 
    
    (Sept. 12:) SS--Jacques-Louis David. Early Works. {Reading for 
    next class:} Michael Maarinen, "Images and Ideas of Charlotte Corday" 
    (Fine Arts Reserve).
    
    (Sept. 17:) JS--David and the Revolution. {Readings for next 
    class:} Review Eisenman pp 14-34.
    
    (Sept. 19:) SS--The Late David. {Reading for nextclass:} 
    Abigail Solomon-Godeau, "Male Trouble: A Crisis in Representation" (Fine 
    Arts Reserve). 
    
    (Sept. 24:) JS--New Canons of Masculinity.  WATU students: First 
    draft for Paper #1 due in section.  {Readings for next class:} Review 
    Eisenman, pp 34-50.
    
    (Sept. 26:) SS--The Post-Revolutionary Years: Gros and Girodet. 
    {Reading for next class:} Eisenman, Review pp 23-50 and read pp 51-60, 
    and read David Fraser, "Joseph Wright of Derby and the Lunar Society" 
    (Fine Arts Reserve). 
    
    (Oct. 1:) SS--Joseph Wright of Derby and the Age 
    ofIndustrialization. {Reading for next class:} in Eisenman, 
    Brian Lukacher, "Visionary History Painting: Blake and his Contemporaries," 
    pp 98-114. FIRST PAPER DUE IN CLASS.
    
    (Oct. 3:) SS--William Blake. {Reading for nextclass:} 
    Eisenman, continue as above, and add pp. 78-97. 
    
    (Oct. 8:) JS--Visionaries: Blake, Goya and Fuseli.  {Reading 
    for next class:} Continue as above, and read excerpt from Janis Tomlinson, 
    pp 115-127 in {Goya in the Twilight of Enlightenment} (Fine Arts Reserve).
    
    (Oct. 10:) SS--Francisco Goya.   {Reading for afterfall break:} 
    Joseph Koerner, pp 5-21 in {Caspar DavidFriedrich and the Subject of 
    Landscape} (Fine Arts Reserve)
    (Oct. 15:) FALL BREAK
    
    (Oct. 17:) SS--Caspar David Friedrich and the 
    Romantic Landscape.  Prepare for Mid-term exam. JS--REVIEW SESSION 
    FOREXAM. TIME AND PLACE TO BE ANNOUNCED.
     
    (Oct. 22:) MID-TERM EXAMINATION IN CLASS.  {Readingfor next 
    class:} Review Eisenman, pp 47-50, and read pp 73-74.
    
    (Oct. 24:) SS--Jean-Dominique Ingres. {Reading fornext 
    class:} Carol Ockman, "Two Large Eyebrows a l'Orientale:Ethnic 
    Stereotyping in Ingres'  {Baronne de Rothschild}" (Fine Arts Reserve)
    
    (Oct. 29:) JS--The Portraiture of Ingres and his Contemporaries. 
    Philadelphia Museum of Art. {Reading for next class:} Eisenman, pp 60-68 
    and Linda Nochlin, "Gericault, or the Absence of Women" (Fine Arts 
    Reserve).  WATU students: Draft for extra paper due in section.
    
    (Oct. 31) SS--Theodore Gericault. {Reading for next class:} 
    Nina Athanassoglou-Kallmyer, "Gericault's Severed Headsand Limbs: The 
    Politics and Aesthetics of the Scaffold" (Fine Arts Reserve), and 
    Eisenman, pp 68-77.
    
    (Nov. 5:) SS--Gericault and the young Eugene 
    Delacroix.  {Reading for next class:} Eisenman, pp 68-77.
    
    (Nov. 7:) SS--Eugene Delacroix. {Reading for next class:} 
    Marcia Pointon, "Liberty on the Barricades: Women,Politics, Sexuality" 
    (Fine Arts Reserve). WATU students: Final draft of extra paper due in 
    class. 
    
    (Nov. 12:) JS--Delacroix's Exoticism. (If possible,section is 
    to be held at the Philadelphia Museum of Art).  {Reading for next class:} 
    Elizabeth Helsinger, "Constable. The Making of a National Painter" (Fine 
    Arts Reserve) and in Eisenman: Brian Lukacher, "Nature Historicized: 
    Constable, Turner and Romantic Landscape Painting."  ALL STUDENTS: SUBMIT 
    1 PAGE SUMMARY OF FINAL PAPER IN CLASS.
    
    (Nov. 14:) SS--John Constable. {Reading for next class:} John 
    McCoubrey, "Parliament on Fire, Turner's Burnings"(Fine Arts Reserve).
    
    (Nov. 19:) SS--J. M. W. Turner. Before next class,review Turner 
    and Constable readings.
    
    (Nov. 21:) JS--Turner and Constable. Philadelphia Museum of Art. 
    {Reading for next class:}  Eisenman, pp 206-212 and Linda Nochlin, "Lost 
    and Found. Once More the Fallen Woman"(Fine Arts Reserve). ALL STUDENTS: 
    First draft of final paper due in sections.
    
    (Nov. 26:) SS--The Pre-Raphaelites.  {Reading for next class:} 
    Eisenman, pp 188-196 and review above, and Elizabeth Childs, "Big Trouble, 
    Daumier, Gargantua and the Censorship of Political Caricature" (Fine Arts 
    Reserve).
    
    (Nov. 28:) THANKSGIVING
    
    (Dec. 3:) SS: Honore Daumier. {Reading for next class:} Review 
    Eisenman, pp 206-212 and Robert Herbert, "City vs.Country, The Rural 
    Image in French painting from Millet to Gauguin" (Fine Arts Reserve) 
    JS--EXAM REVIEW SESSION (time and place to be announced).
    
    (Dec. 5:) SS--Millet and the Barbizon School of Landscape 
    Painting. FINAL PAPER DUE IN CLASS.  PREPARE FOR FINAL EXAM.
    
    
    
    (READINGS ON RESERVE)
    
    
    Athanassoglou-Kallmyer, Nina, "Gericault's Severed Heads and
    Limbs," {Art Bulletin}, vol. 74, Dec. 92, pp 599-618.
    
    Berger, John, {Ways of Seeing}, Penguin, 1972.
    
    Bindman, David, {Blake as an Artist}, 1977.
    
    Boime, Albert, "Caspar David Friedrich's {Monk by the Sea},
    {Arts Magazine}, vol. 16, Nov. 1986, pp 54-63.
    
    Bryson, Norman. {Tradition and Desire}, Cambridge, 1984,
    
    Childs, Elizabeth, "Big Trouble, Daumier, Gargantua and the
    Censorship of Political Caricature," Art Journal, Spring 1992,
    vol 51, #1, 26-37
    
    Clark, T.J., {The Absolute Bourgeois}, Princeton, 1973
    
    Crow, Thomas, {Emulation.  Making Artists for RevolutionaryFrance}, 
    New Haven, 1995.
    
    Crow, Thomas, {Painters and Public Life in 18th century
    Paris}, New Haven and London, 1985.
    
    Crow, Thomas, "Revolutionary Activism and the Cult of Male Beauty
    in the Studio of David," from B. Fort. ed., {Fictions of the
    French Revolution}, Northwestern University Press, 1991, 55-84
    
    Condon, Patricia, {Ingres: In Pursuit of Perfection}, exh.
    cat., J.B. Speed Museum, 1983.
    
    Connolly, John, "Ingres and the Erotic Intellect," from Thomas
    Hess and Linda Nochlin, eds., {Woman as Sex Object. Studies in
    Erotic Art} 1730-1970}, New York, 1972.
    
    Duncan, Carol, "Fallen Fathers: Images of Authority in
    Pre-Revolutionary French Art," {Art History}, vol. 4. no. 2,
    June 1981, 186-202
    
    Eisenman, Stephen, {Nineteenth-Century Art: A Critical
    History}, London, 1994.
    
    Fraser, David, "Joseph Wright of Derby and the Lunar Society," in
    {Joseph Wright of Derby}, exh. cat., Metropolitan Museum of
    Art, New York, 1990 
    
    Helsinger, Elizabeth, "Constable: The Making of a National
    Painter," {Critical Inquiry}, Winter 1989, vol 15., #2,
    253-279
    
    Herbert, Robert, "City vs. Country, The Rural Image in French
    Painting from Millet to Gauguin," {Artforum}, February 1970,
    44-55
    
    Herbert, Robert, {David, Voltaire and the French Revolution},
    New Haven, 1973.
    
    Honour, Hugh, {Neo-Classicism}, London and New York, 1968.
    
    Johnson, Dorothy, "Desire Mythologized, David's {L'Amour
    Quittant Psyche}," {Art History}, vol 9, no. 4, December 1986,
    450-470.
    
    Johnson, Dorothy, {Jacques-Louis David. Art in Metamorphosis},
    Princeton, 1993.
    
    Koerner, Joseph Leo, {Caspar David Friedrich and the Subject
    of Landscape}, 1990. 
    
    Lajer-Burcharth, Eva, "David's {Sabine Women}," {Art
    History}, vol. 14, #3, Sept. 1991, 397-430.
    
    Larkin, Oliver, {Daumier. Man of his Time}, 1967.
    
    Leeks, Wendy, "Ingres Other-Wise," {Oxford Art Journal}, vol.
    9, no. 1, 1986, 29-37.
    
    Maarinan, Michael, "Images and Ideas of Charlotte Corday: Texts
    and Contexts of an Assassination," {Arts Magazine}, 54, April
    1980, 158-176.
    
    McCoubrey, John, "Parliament on Fire, Turner's Burnings," {Art
    in America}, December, 1984, 112-25.
    
    Munhall, Edgar, {Ingres and the Comtesse d'Haussonville}, exh.
    cat., New York, 1985.
    
    Nochlin, Linda, "Gericault, or the Absence of Women,"
    {October} 68, Spring 1994, 45-59
    
    Nochlin, Linda, "Lost and Found: Once More the Fallen Woman,"
    {Art Bulletin}, March 1978, vol. LX, #1, 140-153
    
    Nochlin, Linda, {Realism}, Penguin Books, 1971.
    
    Ockman, Carol, {Ingres}, New Haven, 1995.
    
    Ockman, Carol, "Two Large Eyebrows a l'Orientale: Ethnic
    Stereotyping in Ingres' {Baronne de Rothschild}," {Art
    History}, vol. 14, Dec. 1991, 521-539
    
    Pointon, Marcia, "Liberty at the Barricades," in {Naked
    Authority}, Cambridge, 1990, 59-82
    
    Pollock, Griselda, "Woman as Sign: Psychoanalytic readings," in
    {Vision and Difference: Femininity, Feminism, and Histories of
    Art}, Routledge, 1988
    
    Rosen, Charles and Henri Zerner, {Romanticism and Realism},
    New York, 1984. 
    
    Rosenblum, Robert, {Ingres}, 1967.
    
    Rosenblum, Robert, {Nineteenth-Century Art}, 1984.
    
    Rosenthal, Michael, {Constable: The Painter and his
    Landscape}, 1983.
    
    Shanes, Eric, ux{Turner's Human Landscape}, 1990.
    
    Simon, Robert, "David's Martyr-Portrait of Le Pelletier de Saint
    Fargeau," {Art History}, vol. 14, no. 4, Dec. 1991, 459-487.
    
    Solomon-Godeau, Abigail, "Male Trouble: A Crisis in
    Representation," {Art History}, vol. 16, No. 2, June 1993,
    286-312.
    
    Trapp, Frank, {The Attainment of Delacroix},
    1970.
     

