 St. Lawrence University  
 Department of Government

  ** _Government 363: International Organization_**

 Professor Karl K. Schonberg  
 Spring 2001

Office Hours: 208 Hepburn.  Wednesday and Thursday, 10:30-12:40 and by
appointment.  
Phone: office: 229-5434  
E-mail: [kschonberg@mail.stlawu.edu](mailto:kschonberg@mail.stlawu.edu)

**Overview:**   In the last century, the number of organizations bringing
together different states to pursue their common interests has increased
dramatically, as has the impact of these organizations on international
politics.  The range of activities and practical influence of these bodies are
vastly greater now than they ever have been before.  Some have seen in this
trend a movement toward the eventual end of the sovereign nation state; others
say these organizations simply represent the forum in which these sovereign
states pursue their interests in an increasingly complex world, but there is
no doubt that the functioning of the modern international system cannot be
understood without considering the influence of international organizations.
This class will address these issues, and will leave students with a better
understanding of the history, roles, potential, and limitations of these
bodies.  It will help students to comprehend the incentives which compel
individuals and nations come together across territorial boundaries to pursue
their common goals, and the means by which they have done so in the past and
are likely to do so in the future.

**Requirements:** Five **short papers (10% each)** will be completed by
students.   These should be typed essays of roughly three to four pages in
length.  The first of these must be submitted on or before Monday February 12.
Note that only one paper may be submitted per week, and that they must be
handed in at the beginning of class that week.  These papers should present
the author's reactions to class readings assigned for the day they are
submitted.  Most importantly, these papers must present a thoughtful and
opinionated commentary on the issues being examined.  A **research paper
(30%)** of roughly 20 pages will be submitted on or before Thursday, May 10.
A preliminary **thesis statement, outline, and list of sources (5)%** for this
research paper will be submitted on April 9.   **Class participation (15%)**
is expected to be informed, thoughtful, and frequent.   At a minimum, I expect
you to be in class, having completed and carefully considered the assigned
reading, and prepared to engage in discussion.

**Texts:**   The following required texts are available for purchase at the
bookstore:

  * David Armstrong, Lorna Lloyd, and John Redmond.  _From Versailles to Maastricht:   International Organization in the Twentieth Century_.  St. Martin's, 1996.
  * Kelly-Kate Pease.  _International Organizations: Perspectives on Governance in the Twenty-First Century_.   Prentice Hall, 2000.
  * Lawrence Ziring, Robert Riggs, and Jack Plano.  _The United Nations: International Organization and World Politics_ , Third Edition.  Harcourt, 2000.

 Students will also be expected to read a major newspaper daily; the _New York
Times_ is available at the bookstore, though you are encouraged to read the
national daily newspaper of your choice, in print or online.

    All additional articles listed below are on reserve in the Chilson Reading Room (on the second floor of Hepburn Hall) and available online via Article First, which can be accessed from any computer terminal on campus through ODY's electronic database web page. 

* * *

  


January 22: _Introduction_

January 29: _History of International Organization and Theoretical
Perspectives_  
    Ziring, 1-19, 485-496.   
    Pease, 1-36.   
    Armstrong, 1-112.   
    
    

**_The United Nations System_**

February 5:  _Organization of the U.N._  
    Ziring, 27-141, 497-524.   
    Armstron, 113-137.   
    "Bewitched, Bothered, and Bewildered," Butler, Richard, _Foreign Affairs_. 78, no. 5, (1999).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html). 

February 12: _International Security and Peacekeeping_  
    Ziring, 142-209.   
    Pease, 99-122.   
    "The United Nations at 50: Managing Ethnic Crises \- Past and Present" Carment, David, and others, _Journal of Peace Research_. 35, no. 1, (1998).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "Inventing East Timor," James Traub Source, _Foreign Affairs_. 79, no. 4, (2000).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "Sidelined in Kosovo?"  Franck, Thomas M, and others, _Foreign Affairs_. 78, no. 4, (1999).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html). 

    **First short paper due on or before February 12**

February 19:  _Arms Control and Disarmament_  
    Ziring, 257-300.   
    "A Farewell to Arms Inspections ," Byman, Daniel, _Foreign affairs_. 79, no. 1, (2000).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "The UN Gears Up" Wurst, Jim, _Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists_. 55, no. 1, (1999).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html). 

February 26:  _Trade and Development_  
    Ziring, 384-470.   
    Pease, 141-182. 

March 5: _Human Rights, Social Policy, and the Environment_  
    Ziring, 321-383, 525-531.   
    Pease, 183-225.   
    "The United Nations International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights: Does It Make A Difference In Human Rights Behavior?" Keith, Linda Camp, _Journal of Peace Research_. 36, no. 1, (1999).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html). 

    **Second short paper due on or before March 5**

**March 10-18:   Spring Break**

March 19:  _International Courts and Dispute Resolution_  
    Ziring, 210-256.   
    "Saving the War Crimes Tribunal," Thornberry, Cedric, _Foreign Policy_. no. 104, (1996).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "The Yugoslav War Crimes Tribunal: Part Two,"May, Radmila, _The Contemporary Review_. 275, no. 1605, (1999).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "Waiting for Justice: The United States and the International Criminal Court," Neier, Aryeh, _World Policy Journal_. 15, no. 3, (1998).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "A Century of Arbitration: The International Court of Justice," Nash, Michael L., _The Contemporary Review_. 274, no. 1600, (1999).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "Revisiting the European Court of Justice," Mattli, Walter, and others, _International Organization_. 52, no. 1, (1998).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    
    

**_International Organization Beyond the U.N. System_**

March 26: _History of the European Union_  
    Armstrong, 138-187.   
    "The Makers of Europe, Inc.," Murphy, Cait, _Fortune_ , v. 140 no10 (Nov. 22 1999).  On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "Sovereignty: An Introduction and Brief History," Philpott, Daniel, _Journal of International Affairs_ , v. 48 (Winter 1995).  On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html). 

April 2: _Contemporary Roles and Future Prospects for the E.U._  
    Armstrong, 188-218.   
    "Prospects for European Union and Implications for the United States," Gordon, Philip H.,  _SAIS Review_ , 17, no. 2, (Summer 1997).  On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "Anglo-Saxon Attitude," O'Sullivan, John," _National Review_. 50, no. 17, (September 14, 1998).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "The Euro and the New Face of the European Union," Weidenfeld, Werner, _The Washington Quarterly_. 22, no. 1, (1999).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    Martin Walker, "Europe: Superstate or Superpower?" _World Policy Journal_ , vol. 17, #4   
(Winter 2000-2001).  On reserve and available online through [Article
First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).  
    Zbigniew Brzezinski, "Living with a New Europe," _National Interest_ , #60 (Summer 2000). On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html). 

    **Third short paper due on or before April 2**

Aprl 9: _Military Alliances_  
    Pease, 123-140.   
    "Unfinished Business," Pryce-Jones, David, _National Review_. 51, no. 9, (May 17, 1999).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "Kosovo Seething," Rohde, David, Foreign Affairs. 79, no. 3, (2000).  On reserve and available online through [ArticleFirst](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "Turn of the Century Identity Crisis: Correcting the Course of NATO," Haig Jr, Alexander M., _Orbis_. 43, no. 3, (1999).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "How to Wreck NATO ," Muravchik, Joshua, _Commentary_. 107, no. 4, (1999).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "Courting Disaster: An Expanded NATO vs Russia and China," Russett, Bruce, and others, _Political Science Quarterly_. 113, no. 3, (1998).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html). 

    **April 9:   Research paper preliminary thesis statement, outline, and list of sources due**

April 16: _Regional Organization Beyond Europe_  
    Armstrong, 219-249.   
    "Transforming ASEAN," Eng, Peter, _Washington Quarterly_ , v. 22 no1 (Winter 1999).  On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).  
    "Will Soldiers Follow? Economic Integration and Regional Security in the Southern Cone," Pion-Berlin, David, _Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs_ , v. 42 no1 (Spring 2000).  On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "The Crisis in Africa: Local War and Regional Peace," Talbott, Strobe, _World Policy Journal_ , v. 17 no2 (Summer 2000).  On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "NAFTA at 5," Wallach, Lori, and Sforza, Michelle, _Nation_ , v. 268 no3 (Jan. 25 1999).  On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html).   
    "The NAFTA Effect," _New Perspectives Quarterly_ , v. 17 no. 2 (Spring 2000).  On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html). 

April 23:  _Future Prospects: Toward Global Governance?_  
    Ziring, 471-484.   
    Pease, 226-240.   
    Give War a Chance, Luttwak, Edward,  _Foreign Affairs_. 78, no. 4, (1999).   On reserve and available online through [Article First](http://web.stlawu.edu/library/menualp.html). 

    **Fourth short paper due on or before April 23**

April 30:  Model U.N. Security Council.

    **Fifth short paper due April 30, in conjunction with Model UNSC**

**Thursday, May 10, 4:30 p.m.:   Final Research Paper Due**  


* * *

  
    
    

**Short Paper Guidelines**

 Papers for this course will be expected to present a coherent, well-informed,
and forceful argument about some aspect of the subject being examined in class
on four days of your choice.  The fifth short paper will be submitted on April
30, in conjunction with model U.N Security Council which we will conduct in
our last class meeting.  The first first of these papers must be handed in no
later than February 12; the second no later than March 5; the third no later
than April 2; and the fourth no later than April 23.

 Please note, however, that you may hand in any of these papers earlier, which
means the topics and due dates are largely up to you.  While the first paper
must examine some aspect of international organization examined in the first
four weeks of class, for instance, the choice of subjects within that period
is yours--though if you wish to write about the history of the U.N.
Secretariat, you must hand the paper in by February 5, since that is the
Monday on which we will discuss history and organization of the U.N.

 Beyond these requirements, you are encouraged to think and argue creatively
about any aspect of an assigned subject which interests you.  If you wish to
write about the European single currency, for example, you must submit your
paper on March 26--since that is the week in which we'll discuss that issue--
but you are free to write about reasons for the currency's declining value,
implications for the United States, the reasons for Britain's choice not to
join, or any other aspect of the issue that interests you.

 Consult with me early and often as you consider possible topics and begin to
write.  I can't tell you what to write about, but I will give you my opinion
of ideas you may have, and possibly suggest other approaches.  I'll be happy
to meet with you during my office hours or by appointment for this purpose,
but please feel free to call me at home as well if you have a question or idea
you'd like to discuss.  One very useful approach to this assignment will be to
ask yourself, after completing the assigned readings, "how can the
institutions described here work better?," and arguing in support of an answer
to that question in a paper of 3-4 pages.

 These are not research papers, and no additional sources beyond the assigned
texts are expected, though you are strongly encouraged to consult such sources
if you wish to.  Reading periodicals like the
_[Economist](http://www.economist.com)_ , _[Foreign
Affairs](http://www.foreignaffairs.org)_ or _[Foreign
Policy](http://www.foreignpolicy.com)_ for discussion of current events
relating to your topic, or consulting additional texts for background
information, will almost always make your argument stronger--and it is
primarily on the strength of your argument that you grade is based.

 As you begin to write, your first and foremost concern should therefore be,
"what is my argument?"  Do not start to type until you know what your paper is
about and you have a clearly formulated thesis statement.  This should be one
sentence, stating concisely,  specifically, and in detail the point your paper
will be trying to prove.  This statement should appear early in your paper--
ideally in the first paragraph--and every sentence that follows should be
intended to prove it.  Outline your argument carefully and in detail before
you begin writing, and after letting the reader know what you intend to prove,
let them know how you intend to prove it in a few sentences.  Do not spend
time on general introductory or concluding paragraphs which are only loosely
related to your thesis.

 Proofread your essay carefully before you submit it, or better still, have
someone else read it and critique it.  No matter how well you write, any paper
will benefit from a trip to the writing center.  Note that proofreading and
spell-checking are not the same thing, and both are required.  You will not be
graded primarily on style, but a disjointed, muddled presentation can very
definitely make your argument unclear and ineffective, for which you will lose
points.  A trip to the writing center in ODY will improve the quality of your
work no matter how strong it is to begin with.

 Provide citations if you directly quote a source, paraphrase an argument
found elsewhere, or refer to factual information which is not common
knowledge.  Citations may be parenthetical in the paper's text, footnotes, or
endnotes.  Form is your choice; I have no preference as long as it is
consistent throughout the paper.  Citations should include (or refer to a
bibliographical reference which includes) the author's full name, title of the
work, publisher and date of publication, and page number.  Citations from the
Internet should provide, in a footnote or endnote, the long site name listed
in the location box of your browser.

 Your paper will be graded on the coherence of your argument and the
effectiveness with which it is asserted and proven.  It will not be graded on
the amount material you include.  These papers are expected to be roughly
three to four pages in length, but this is only a guideline, not a
requirement.  If you feel you have made your case concisely and effectively in
three pages, do not feel compelled to write more, make the fonts or margins
bigger, or otherwise change your paper to get onto page four.  Use 12 point
type, and one inch margins on the top, bottom, and both sides of the page.
Number your pages, and start counting with the first page of text.

 Papers written for a given week must be handed in at the beginning of class
on Monday of that week.  Papers submitted after the beginning of class will be
considered late.  Extensions will be given only in cases of very serious
illness or family emergency; computer problems are not an acceptable excuse.
No extensions will be given on the day a paper is due under any circumstances.
Late papers will be penalized one half grade (.5 on the four-point scale) per
day late.  Papers more than three days late will not be accepted and will
receive a grade of zero.

