Department of History

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

History 68/(Peace, War, and Defense 76)

WAR AND AMERICAN SOCIETY TO 1903

Fall 1997, Peabody 104

Richard H. Kohn

Monday, Wednesday, Friday 2-2:50

COURSE DESCRIPTION/OBJECTIVES

History 68 surveys the American military experience from the settlement of the
colonies in the early 17th century through the creation of the modern military
system of the early 20th century.

The purpose of the course is to introduce students to the military history and
experience of the American people:

The nature of war and how warfare changed from the introduction of gunpowder
to the early 20th century

The military challenges and threats, internal and foreign, that Americans
faced during these three centuries, how they changed, and how Americans viewed
them

The military policies and institutions Americans developed to achieve their
military goals and defend their society and nation, and how those evolved over
time

How Americans waged and experienced war--on the battlefield, in the highest
councils of government, and on the homefront in American communities.

By the end of this course, students should be able to understand:

War and military service as experienced by those who lived them

The nature and functioning of military institutions

How and why Americans became involved in wars, why those wars were fought the
war they were, why they turned out the way they did, and how they affected
individuals, groups, local communities, and the nation as a whole

How to analyze, synthesize, and interpret historical process and events

FORMAT/ASSIGNMENTS

Classes are designed to connect students directly with the experiences of
Americans in war, military service, and national security. Lectures cover
broad military, political, social, and economic subjects, providing overviews
and interpretations of developments in peace and war over time. Discussion
sections focus on the readings; students discuss and debate various aspects of
American military experience, and question the interpretations advanced in
lectures and readings. Films depict the experience of war at the individual
level, the nature of behavior in battle, and the character and functioning of
military institutions in war and peace.

Students should fill out an identification sheet their first day of class
indicating the times when they are available, besides Monday 2-2:50, to meet
in discussion sections. A roster of discussion classes, including location and
time, will be posted outside the classroom and Mr. Kohn's office. Each day at
lecture a roster will circulate for initialing to indicate attendance.

The following books should be purchased at local area bookstores; they have
been ordered at the UNC Student Stores:

Allan R. Millett and Peter Maslowski, For the Common Defense: A Military
History of the United States of America (1994 revised edition);

Walter Millis, Arms and Men: A Study in American Military History;

John Shy, A People Numerous and Armed: Refections on the Military Struggle for
American Independence;

Michael Shaara, The Killer Angels;

Edward M. Coffman, The Old Army: A Portrait of the American Army in Peacetime,
1784-1898;

Colin G. Calloway, ed., Our Hearts Fell to the Ground: Plains Indian Views of
How the West Was Lost;

Elting E. Morison, Men, Machines, and Modern Times.

In addition, students should purchase at least three blue books for the
examinations.

Students will be responsible for all material covered in the lectures,
readings, discussion sections, and films, and for the locations of major
events discussed in the course (that is, there will be at least one map
question on each examination). Students who cannot because of schedule
conflicts attend the films shown in the evenings (mostly Wednesday) can view
the films after the class showing in the non-print department of House
undergraduate library.

There will be one in-class examination and a final examination, each
consisting of identification short questions, a map identification question,
and essays. For each of the eight discussion sections, there will be a five-
page essay assignment given out beforehand to be handed in at the beginning of
section; students are required to write the first (due September 8) paper
assignment, one of the next three assignments, and four in toto for the
semester. Students may do five papers if they wish, and count the four highest
for grading purposes. However for those discussion sections in which they
choose not to write the essay, participation in class discussion sufficient to
indicate that they have done the reading in preparation for class is required.

Students should do the reading daily in preparation for lecture so each block
can be completed before section meets.

EVALUATION/GRADING/HONOR CODE/DEADLINES

The final grade will be computed as follows: mid-term examination, 12 per
cent; four discussion section essays, 40 per cent; final examination, 38 per
cent; and class participation, evaluated on the basis of the quality and
frequency of contribution to the discussion sections, 10 per cent. The
standards for grading will be those described in the University Registrar's
Procedures No. 8: "A - Mastery of course content at the highest level of
attainment . . . the student has shown such outstanding promise . . . [;] B -
Strong performance demonstrating a high level of attainment . . . student has
shown solid promise in the aspect of the discipline under study [;] C - A
totally acceptable performance demonstrating an adequate level of attainment .
. . not yet showing unusual promise . . . [;] D - A marginal performance . . .
demonstrating a minimal passing level . . . [;] F - an unacceptable
performance . . . performance has revealed almost no understanding of the
course content. . . ."

All academic work must be accomplished within the letter and spirit of the
Carolina Honor Code. Students are not to consult or collaborate on the essays
due in discussion sections and must write out the honor pledge on the first
assignment, "On my honor, I have neither given nor received unauthorized aid
on this assignment." After that, on all essays and exams, simply writing
"Pledge" and signing your name will suffice. All exams are to be taken without
the assistance of books, notes, or other people, but you may study with
classmates and forming study groups is an effective way to prepare for the
mid-term and final. On the papers, you need not do research beyond the
assigned reading, but cite all ideas and facts to the author and page in
parentheses or footnotes at the appropriate place, and note other works used
but not assigned as reading at the appropriate places with full bibliographic
citations. Remember to quote all material taken literally from elsewhere, and
to cite your paraphrasing of other works or ideas not your own in the essays.

Attendance at the examinations is mandatory and unexcused absences will result
in an F for that portion of the work. Because discussion sections will focus
mostly on the questions in the essays assigned, the essays must be turned in
at the beginning of class. Late papers will not be accepted.

HOW TO SUCCEED IN THIS COURSE

Students will best achieve their objectives in the course if they 1/ read the
assignments before each class meeting, in the order assigned 2/ come to
lecture and take notes, using the outlines provided at the beginning of class,
3/ prepare the papers well ahead of the deadline, in the light of the
critiques they received on previous papers, and 4/ come to discussion sections
prepared to discuss the questions and other issues that occur to them in the
course of reading, viewing the films, and listening to lectures. All of the
assignments, lectures, discussions, and films should be considered in the
light of the themes outlined on this syllabus, and actively connected back to
those themes. Students should be sensitive to change over time, that is, how
war, institutions, policies, and practices changed over the course of time,
and also, what remained constant or relatively stable.

The Millett and Maslowski book functions as a text for the course, providing a
chronological narrative of the evolution of military policy and institutions,
and the course of American wars and military actions. Students can use it to
provide background for the class meetings, provide themselves with a sense of
comprehensiveness in the understanding the developments over time, and ground
themselves solidly in the facts of what happened and why. The lectures
sometimes seem to cover the same ground, but select out certain topics and
provide a connected set of arguments and interpretations on how war evolved,
how and why institutions formed and developed, and why wars and campaigns
turned out as they did--all interpretations for your consideration,
discussion, debate, and perhaps disagreement. Millis's book is much more an
interpretation and a synthesis focused on the rise of modern, total war, and
should be read more broadly for its argument about how war changed and how the
United States's experience fit with those changes--political, economic,
social, intellectual, and technological--in warfare. Shy's volume is a set of
essays meant to illuminate the inner character of the American War for
Independence, largely on the American side: what it was like, why it was that
way, and its impact both on the people involved and the outcome of the
struggle. Read it to understand the inner dynamics of the war, of revolution,
and of revolutionary warfare. Coffman's book describes what the peacetime
regular army, between 1784 and 1861, was like--not only the officers and
soldiers, but the women and children involved with them. Read it as a
descriptive picture, but compare it to citizen soldiers' experience, and
relate what was happening inside the army to the broader military policy and
experience of the nation. Ask yourself, too, if this is a "typical" military
institution. Shaara's novel should be read to experience what battle and
combat in the Civil War was like, for the officers and the men, and as a study
in leadership, command, decision-making, discipline, strategy, tactics, and
character. How had war changed, on the basis of this reading? Does Millis have
it right? Calloway's volume provides a view of the plains Indians from their
perspective: how and why they lost their land, their freedom, and to some
extent their culture in the 19th century; try to get inside their world and
understand the experience from their perspective, and use the book as an
antidote to the images Hollywood and popular culture has given you previously
about them, and what happened on the plains in the half-century before Wounded
Knee. Finally, Morison's little book raises some fascinating questions about
bureaucracies and technological change that have great relevance for us today:
how and why some organizations resist innovation and others adopt it, or adapt
to it, and the role of the human agent and leadership in this process. Apply
his wise thinking to the army and navy in the last two decades of the 19th
century and consider all the factors that affected those institutions as they
struggled with modernity.

Students should be aware that the reading assignments for each class meeting
vary in length (from as little as 20 pages to as much as 100), so that the
reading corresponds to the class subject.

INSTRUCTORS

Mr. Kohn's office is Hamilton 402, telephone 962-3093, and office hours are
Mondays 3-4 and Fridays 1-2. Mr. Hamner's office is Hamilton 411 and his
office hours are Mondays 3-4 and Wednesdays 1-2. Both of us will meet by
appointment if these hours do not fit student schedules.

CLASS SCHEDULE

**

August

**

20 Introduction: Military History as War, People, and Institutions

22 The Four Phases of America's Military Past: An Overview (Shy, 265-294)

25 The European Naval and Military Background (Millett, xi-xiv, 1-50)

27 The Invasion of America: Virginia and Massachusetts (Millis, 5-25; Shy,
29-41)

29 Colonial Warfare and Military Institutions (Millis, 25-37)

**

September

**

3 European Warfare and Military Institutions

3 Film: "The Last of the Mahicans" (Time and Room To be Announced)

5 Film in Class: Battle of Culloden

8 Section Meeting: War in Colonial America (Review course materials through
9/5)

10 The War for Independence: Britain on the Offensive (Millett, 51-87; Shy,
1-27, 81-115)

12 The War for Independence: Britain Defeated (Shy, 117-162, 181-212)

15 The War for Independence: American Victory (Shy, 163-179, 213-244)

15 Film: "Mary Silliman's War" (Time and Room To be Announced)

17 Confederation and Constitutional Reform (Shy, 246-263; Millett, 88-100)

19 Federalists: Creating the Military Establishment (Millett, 100-106 Millis,
37-71)

22 Section Meeting: The War for Independence (Review course materials through
9/15)

24 Jeffersonians: Completing the National Establishment (Coffman, 3-41)

24 Film: "Waterloo" (Time and Room To be Announced)

26 The War of 1812 (Millett, 106-122)

29 Section Meeting: Early National Period (Review course materials through
9/26)

29 Film: "Billy Budd" (Time and Room To be Announced)

**

October

**

1 MID-TERM EXAMINATION

3 19th-Century National Security Policy (Millett, 123-144; Millis, 72-118)

6 The 19th Century Army and Navy (Coffman, 42-136)

8 The Wars against the Whites (Coffman, 137-211)

10 The Mexican-American War (Millett, 144-161)

13 Section Meeting: 19th Century Constabulary (Review course materials through
10/10)

15 Civil War: Opening Moves (Millett, 162-202)

20 Civil War: Southern Failure (Millis, 118-130; begin reading Shaara)

22 Civil War: The Northern War Effort (Millett, 203-247; continue reading
Shaara)

24 Civil War: Presidential War Leadership (continue reading Shaara)

27 Section Meeting: The Civil War (Review course materials through 10/24
except Shaara)

29 Combat in the Civil War Civil War (continue reading Shaara)

29 Film: "Glory" (Time and Room To be Announced)

31 The African-American Experience (finish Shaara)

**

November

**

3 Section Meeting: Combat in the Civil War (Review course materials through
10/30)

5 The Army and Reconstruction (Millett, 248-264)

7 The Frontier Constabulary (Calloway, to page 70)

10 The Native American Effort to Avoid Destruction (Calloway, 71-149)

12 The New Steel and Steam Navy (Millett, 265-283; Millis, 131-167; Morison,
vii-16, 98-122)

12 Film: "The West: Part VI" (Time and Room To be Announced)

14 The Martial Spirit in the United States in the Late 19th Century (Finish
Calloway)

17 Section Meeting: Defeat in the West (Review Calloway, other materials on
Indian Wars)

19 The Spanish-American War (Millett, 284-300; Millis, 167-181)

21 The Philippine-American War (Millett, 300-315, Morison, 17-44)

24 The Reformation of the Military Establishment (Millis, 181-210,
Morison,45-66, 206-226)

**

December

**

1 Section Meeting: Modernizing the Military (Review course materials through
11/24)

3 The New Military Establishment (I) (Millett, 316-338)

5 The New Military Establishment (II) (Review of course materials)

8 Review and Recapitulation (Review of course materials)

15 **FINAL EXAMINATION

**

