[![](grbut.jpg)](index.html)  
[![](grbutstudents.jpg)](students.html)  
  
[![](grbutcatalog.jpg)](catalog.html)  
  
[![](grbutcenter.jpg)](center.html)  
  
[![](grbutUCM.jpg)](about.html)  
  
[![](grbutcontact.jpg)](contact.html)  
| ![](bannercenter.jpg)  
---|---  
  
| **Registration**

 **Student Fee**  
A $25 student fee is due from all students by the first of September. If
students are late to pay this fee there will be a $50 fine in addition to the
student fee. If this fee is not paid the student becomes inactive. Inactive
students may not take courses, order courses, submit course work for grading,
receive credits, or receive certificates or degrees. If a student reactivates,
her program requirements may be updated to match current program requirements,
even if that includes additional credits or courses to graduate.  
  
**Tuition**  
Tuition for the 2001-2002 school year is $95 per credit, including clinical
credits.  
  
**Registration**  
The Enrollment Agreement must be signed by the student before registering.
Tuition and fees must be paid in full at the time of registration. There are
no time payment options. However, students have the option of registering
individually for courses. Students are encouraged to register for the entire
semester or five days before an individual course begins. When students
register early, they will receive their syllabus and have additional time to
start their reading. Classes are accelerated and students must have read their
syllabus and texts and be preapred for each class. Students may call their
instructors if they have any questions as to what they need to prepare for the
first day of class.  
If the student registers for a course on the first day of class or after,
there is an additional $20 late fee. Registration can be taken care of at the
office or can easily be done by phone with a VISA or MasterCard. An additional
3% secretarial fee is added to payments made by VISA or MasterCard.  
Registration can also be done by mail with the student writing down the
courses and sending the money with it to the office. Remember to add the cost
of appropriate lab fees and shipping costs to the credit cost. Registration
cannot be given to the instructor. Registration must arrive in the office
before the first day of class in order to avoid a late fee. Call the office if
you have any questions.  
  
**Assisted Studies Discounts**  
Assisted Studies students will receive a 15% discount when they order an
entire area of study--general education, core midwifery, or advanced. There is
no discount for the clinical area of study.  
  
**Help with NARM Certification Expenses**  
Students who have paid and completed the clinical area of study and are ready
to take the NARM exam will get a gift of 1/2 the amount they paid for clinical
credits to help defray the costs of the testing. Students must send a copy of
their NARM application to the office to verify when they are taking the test,
and a check will be written out to NARM for you to attach to your application.
Be sure to allow adequate time before time limits for test dates. If the
student does not apply for NARM certification by the end of their last
semester, they will not receive the gift from UCM to help with the cost.  
  
**Refund Policy**  
In-Residence Refunds: A full refund of tuition will be paid if the student
withdraws no later than midnight on the fifth day (excluding Sundays and
holidays) after making the payment. An adidtional $20 fee will be withheld
from the refund for each course that the syllabus is not returned in good
condition. After the five days the withdrawn or dismissed resident student
shall be refunded the following percentage of all tuition paid over and above
a non-refundable service fee of $20 per course: 90% of the balance through the
completion of 10% of the course, 75% of the balance through the completion of
20% of the course, 60% of the balance through the completion of 30% of the
course, 45% of the balance through the completion of 40% of the course, 30% of
the balance through the completion of 50% of the course, and nothing
thereafter. 'Completion' of the course means the percent of class sessions
that have occurred, regardless of whether the student attended. There are no
refunds on books.  
  
**Assisted Studies Refunds:** The student must withdraw from a course by
notifying the office by telephone within ten days after receiving the course
syllabus or other materials, in order to receive a refund of full tuition.
After the ten days the withdrawn or dismissed student shall be refunded the
following percentage of all tuition paid over and above a non-refundable
service fee of $20 per course: Within 18 days, 75% of the balance; within 27
days, 60% of the balance; within 36 days, 45% of the balance; within 45 days,
30% of the balance; and nothing thereafter. An additional $20 fee will be
withheld from the refund for each course that the syllabus is not returned in
good condition. A written refund request must follow the phone request.
Refunds will be sent within thirty days of receipt of the written request.  
  
**Auditing Classes**  
Students desiring to audit courses must register for courses and pay the
regular fee per credit. A student may not petition for credit for classes
taken without credit (as an auditor) after the first two class sessions. A
grade of AU is recorded on the transcript.  
  
**Textbooks**  
Students are resopnsible for getting the textbooks before the course begins.
You may request a textbook list from the office. Books required for each
course are also listed at the beginning of the syllabus for each course.  
  
**UCM Catalog**  
The UCM catalog can be ordered from the office.  
  
**Loans and Scholarships**  
The Utah College of Midwifery does not offer loans. Personal loans can be
applied for at local banks and credit unions. The UCM does not regularly give
scholarships. The fees per credit hour are kept as low as possible so that all
interested students can attend. UCM will accept scholarship donations.  
  
**Semesters**  
Classes for resident students run from September through May. The main part of
the school years is divided into two semesters. The fall semester starts the
first week in September and the winter semester starts the first week in
January. Courses are scheduled in block form so there are only one or two
courses per area of study being taught at one time.  
  
**Graduation**  
Certificates are mailed to Assisted Studies Students when their degree or
certification applications are accepted. Graduation for resident students is
held in August. Applications for degrees and certifications must be sent to
the Registrar by the 1st of July. All requirements for the degree or
certificate must be complete at the time of the application.  
  
**Class Schedule**  
Class schedules are available from the UCM office. The schedule for the coming
school year will be mailed out during the summer to currently enrolled
resident students.  
  
**Class size varies from 5 to 20 students.** There is a good ratio of
instructors to students. Course labs, many of which concentrate on verifying
NARM skills, are closely supervised by faculty members. Students are required
to bring to the lab their Practical Skills Guide for Midwifery so a certified
midwife can sign off the skills as they are properly demonstrated.  
  
---  
  
**Utah College of Midwifery**  
282 North State Street  
Orem, Utah 84057  
1-888-489-1238  
1-801-764-9068  
[registrar@midwifery.edu](mailto:registrar@midwifery.edu)  

