

Music, Gender, and Culture

Course Syllabus, Fall 1998

Professor Elizabeth L. Keathley





_Required Texts_ :

  * Bowers & Tick, eds., _Women Making Music_ [BT]
  * Neuls-Bates, ed., _Women in Music: An Anthology of Source Readings_ [NB]
  * Koskoff, ed., _Women and Music in Cross-Cultural Perspective_ [KOS]
  * McClary, _Feminine Endings: Music, Gender, and Sexuality_ [MC]

_Reserve readings_ : See the list at the end of the syllabus [RES]

_Listening_ : Required listening may be found on tape under number A-467.1 -
A-467.n.

Scores, texts, and translations, where available, have been placed on reserve.



_Course Objectives_ :

  * to acquire knowledge and understanding of the roles of women in Western art music
  * to develop insight into the significance of gender in music across several cultures
  * to become acquainted with issues of gender and difference in recent music scholarship
  * to apply research, critical thinking, and expository writing skills to music in relation to gender



_Approach and philosophy._

This course assumes that you have developed significant knowledge of the
history of musical style, as well as skill in music analysis. The emphasis
here, then, will be cultural, historiographical, critical, and interpretive,
rather than positivistic. A number of the readings will be controversial. You
will be expected to engage all readings (whether or not you agree with their
viewpoints) with a critical eye, attending not only to the overt arguments,
but to the assumptions on which the arguments rest, the language used, and the
type of evidence brought to bear on the arguments. You are entitled to your
own opinions; there is no penalty for having a viewpoint different from that
of the author of the reading, the rest of the class, or the professor.
However, you will be expected to apply to your own opinions the same scrutiny
you apply to others'. You will also be expected to show respect to others in
the class at all times.

The material for the course falls into three units: I. Women and Western art
music; II. Music and gender in cross-cultural perspective; and III. Feminist
music criticism and other challenges to musicology. Where possible I have
supplied recordings and scores for music appropriate to the readings. In
instances where that has not been possible, expect to do some singing in
class! Since the quality of the recordings (and sometimes the performances) is
not always what we might wish, listen creatively.

At the end of each unit, you will be asked to write a unit critique: what did
you learn that is of value to you? Why is it valuable? What were the major
issues of the unit? Which readings were most significant and why? What parts
did you have difficulty with and why? What readings, listening, or strategies
could improve the unit? Unit critiques are intended both to inform me about
ways to improve the course and to help you assess what you have learned from
it. Unit critiques will not be graded, but they are required. Please take them
seriously and execute them thoughtfully.

Since we will be encountering ways of thinking about music which may be new to
many of you, take this opportunity to do some intellectual risk-taking: feel
free to test your theories in class discussion, even if they are "unpopular"
or if you wind up modifying or discarding your theory later. Construe
disagreement as a challenge to your argument (rather than a personal attack),
and treat it as an opportunity to verify, refine, and rethink your argument.
Finally, I do not regard this as a class in which you have all the questions
and I have all the answers: although I have read and re-read some of this
material many times, I continue to discover new nuances--frequently pointed
out by students!--which allow me to reconsider what I already "know." My
interpretations are subject to change, as are any of yours, so do take them
for what they are: informed, thoughtful _interpretations_ , not "the right
answer" nor "the truth."



_Course requirements_. Successful students will:

Attend class; prepare all listening, reading, and writing assignments as
directed; participate meaningfully in class discussions and projects; keep a
portfolio of your written work, including a journal of assigned listening;
perform well on 3 exams; research and write a term paper on a topic that you
clear with me first; make a class presentation based on that research; submit
a thoughtful critique at the end of each unit; evaluate your own work and that
of your classmates. Required tasks are discussed more fully after the course
calendar.



_Evaluation:_ Your course grade will be based on the following:

  * Attendance (percentage-based) 10%
  * Participation (presumes preparation) 10%
  * Portfolio: short papers, projects, journal 20%
  * Three Exams / quizzes 30%
  * Research paper & presentation 30%

COURSE CALENDAR

(Assignments and due dates are subject to change with sufficient notice.)

Week 1

August 31

  * Introduction: Music, gender and culture: mapping the terrain

September 2

  * Women & the Western Art Tradition: Outlines

Read: BT "Introduction," 3-14; RES, Citron, "Gender, Professionalism, and the
Musical Canon," 1-8; NB "The Woman Composer Question" (#34-39), 206-227

Listen: Fanny Mendelssohn-Hensel, Overture; Cecile Chaminade, _Concertstuck_ ,
tape A-467.1, side A

Write: Two versions of a review of _one_ of the assigned pieces, both with the
same basic evaluation, one version using "sexual aesthetics," and one without.



September 4

  * Hildegard and Friends

Read: BT "'Ful weel she soong the service dyvyne'...," 15-38; NB "Middle Ages"
(#1-4), 3-20.

Listen: Hymns and sequences from the Las Huelgas codex and Hildegard von
Bingen, Tape A-467.1, side B

Write: Journal entries, one piece from each group. Think about _address_ and
what that may (or may not) imply about authorship.



Week 2

September 7 **Labor Day -- No Classes**

September 9

  * Secular Music in the Middle Ages

Read: BT " _Jougleresses_ and _Trobairitz,_ " 39-61; NB "Middle Ages" (#5 &
6), 21-33. Be sure to study pictures.

Suggested reading: Monter, "The Pedestal and the Stake: Courtly Love and
Witchcraft" in _Becoming Visible_

Practice: "A chantar m'er de so" by Comtessa de Dia (BT, 49) plus one other
song of your choice (BT 52-54)

Write: One paragraph: what does iconographic evidence tell us about women's
participation in music?



September 11

  * Women singers and vocal virtuosity Early Modern Italy

Read: BT "Women Singers and Women's Songs..." 62-89; "Courtesans, Muses, or
Musicians?" 90-115; NB "Renaissance" (#7-9), 37-50; RES, Austern, "'Sing
Againe Syren'..."

Suggested reading: Kelly-Gadol, "Did Women Have a Renaissance?" in _Becoming
Visible_

Listen: Maddalena Casulana, "Morte-che voi?...," Tape A-467.2A

Practice: Casulana madrigal TBA



Week 3

September 14

  * Italian baroque women composers

Read: BT "The Emergence of Women Composers in Italy" 116-167; NB "Baroque"
(#10 & 12), 55-61 & 65-69; RES, Cusick, "Of Women, Music, and Power..."

Listen: Vocal works by Bianca Maria Meda, Isabella Leonarda; Francesca
Caccini; Francesca Campana; Settimia Caccini, & Barbara Strozzi, Tape A-467.2,
side A



September 16

  * Barbara Strozzi

Read: BT "The Voice of Barbara Strozzi," 168-190

Suggested Reading: Garrard, _Artemesia Gentileschi: The Image of the Female
Hero in Italian Baroque Art_

Listen: Strozzi, cantata: _L'Astratto: Voglio si, v o cantar_, Tape A-467.2
side B



September 18

  * Musicians of the French baroque

Read: BT " _Musiciennes_ of the Ancien Regime," 191-223; NB #11 "Elisabeth-
Claude Jacquet de La Guerre" 62-64.

Listen: Jacquet de La Guerre, cantata: _Judith_ , Tape A-467.2 B

**Preliminary paper topic due (one paragraph in writing)**

**Sign up for individual conferences**



Week 4

September 21

  * Women musicians in the "Classical" period

Read: BT "Women and the Lied," 224-247; NB "Classic Period" (#13-16), 73-88

Suggested Reading: Kleinbaum, "Women in the Age of Light" in _Becoming
Visible_

Listen: Mary Barthelemon, "Se pieta da voi..."; Marianne Martines, Sinfonia in
C; Lieder by Louise Reichardt, Fanny Mendelssohn-Hensel, & Clara Wieck
Schumann, Tape A-467.3, side A

September 23

  * Clara Wieck Schumann

Read: BT "Clara Schumann," 249-281; NB #17, 18, 22, 23 (Clara Schumann, Amy
Fay, Fanny Mendelssohn), 91-121 & 143-155; RES, Fishman, "German Romantic
Criticism"

Suggested reading: Schopenhauer, "On Genius" "On Women"

Listen: Wieck Schumann, Trio in G minor, op. 17, Tape A-467.3, side B; Piano
Concerto in A min. op. 7, I;Allegro maestoso; Drei gemischte Chore (1848),
tape A-467.4 side A



September 25

  * **Exam I**



Week 5

September 28

  * Other Romantics: Farrenc & Le Beau

Read: BT "Luise Adolpha Le Beau," 282-303; RES, Friedland, "Louise Farrenc";
NB #25, 26 (Le Beau & Cosima Wagner), 167-178.

Suggested Reading: Ortner, "Is Female to Male as Nature Is to Culture?" in
_Women, Culture & Society_; McDougall, "Working-Class Women During the
Industrial Revolution" in _Becoming Visible_

Listen: Le Beau & Ferrence (see attached listening list)



September 30

  * Ethel Smyth

Read: BT "'Shout, Shout, Up with Your Song!'...," 304-324; NB "The Woman
Composer Question Revisited" (#46, 47) 278-302,& Ethel Smyth (#24), 156-166;
RES, Siepmann, "Who Was Ethel Smyth?"

Listen: Smyth



October 2

  * The Boulangers and the _Prix de Rome_

Read: RES, Fauser, " _La Guerre en Dentelles_ : Women and the _Prix de
Rome_..."; NB, Nadia Boulanger (#41), 239-246

Listen: Nadia and Lilli Boulanger



Week 6

October 5

  * Women and American Musical Life at the Turn of the Century

Read: BT "Passed Away is the Piano Girl," 325-348; NB "Women as amateurs,
teachers, and patrons" (#27-29),179-191, & Elizabeth Sprague Coolidge (#40),
231-238; RES, Locke & Barr, "Introduction" and "Patronage--and Women...";
Loesser, "The Piano as a female accomplishment" & "Anti-accomplishment"

Listen: Piano music by women composers



October 7

  * Women and the Orchestra

Read: BT "Women's Orchestras in the U.S."; RES "The Women's Symphony...and
Florence Price..."; Short articles on women conductors; AMS Posting re: Vienna
Philharmonic; Rockwell, "A Percussionist...," and "Evelyn Glennie"; NB "Women
as Orchestral Musicians" (#30-33), 192-205 and "Women in the Orchestral
Field..." (#42-44), 247-272

Listen: Beach, Price, Kolb, Women's Phil



October 9

  * Women and the Opera

Read: RES, Clement, "Prelude" from _Opera, or the Undoing of_ _Women_ ; RES,
"Dignity's Voice Stilled"; NB (#19-21 & 45), 122-142 & 273-277; MC "Excess &
Frame," 80-111

Suggested Reading: Mordden, _Demented_ ; McClary, _Carmen_ ; Koestenbaum, _The
Queen's Throat_ ; other chapters in Clement; Lawrence Kramer, _After the
lovedeath: sexual_ _violence and the making of culture_ ; John Berger, _Ways
of_ _Seeing_ ; Bram Dijkstra, _Idols of Perversity_

Listen: Opera examples; Diamanda Galas

**Portfolios due. Include prospectus for research paper and preliminary
bibliography**



Week 7

  * October 12 Twentieth-Century Composers I: The Avant-garde

Read: BT "Ruth Crawford Seeger"; NB (#48, 49), 303-322

Listen: Crawford, String Quartet; Newlin Trio; Maconchy String Quartet

Write: "Meta-Analysis" paper: Analysis of one movement of Crawford's String
Quartet from two perspectives (details to follow)



October 14

  * Twentieth-Century Composers II: Experiments & New Paradigms

Read: RES, Oliveros, "On Sonic Meditation," Grigsby, "Women Composers of
Electronic Music," Lochhead, "Joan Tower's _Wings_..." (S); NB #50, 323-332

Listen: Annea Lockwood, Joan Tower, Nancy Van de Vate, Libby Larsen



October 16

  * Introduction to Ethnomusicology

Read: KOS "Introduction to Women, Music, and Culture," 1- 23; KOS "Power and
Gender in the Musical Experiences of Women," 225-244; RES, Robertson, "The
Ethnomusicologist as Midwife"

Listen: no new assignment



Week 8

October 19

  * Women's Songs/Wedding Songs: Balkans to Sephardic Diaspora

Read: RES, Sugarman, "The Nightingale and the Partridge.."; KOS "Balkan Women
as Preservers of Traditional Music and Culture," 45-53; KOS "'Yo Salio de la
Mar': Judeo-Spanish Wedding Songs...," 55-67

Listen: Wedding Songs of Prespa Albanians & Sephardic Jews; Flory Jagoda



October 21

  * Women's Songs/Lamenting

Read: KOS "From Singing to Lamenting: Women's Musical Role in a Greek
Village," 25-43; RES, Tolbert, "Magico-Religious Power and Gender in the
Karelian Lament"; RES, Bourke, "More in Anger than in Sorrow: Irish Women's
Lament Poetry"

Listen:



October 23 **Exam II**



Week 9

October 26

  * Women Musicians in India

Read: KOS "Professional Women in Indian Music..."; RES, Manuel, "Courtesans in
Hindustani Music"; Srinivasan, "Reform and Revival: The Devadasi and her
Dance"

Listen: Lakshmi Shankar, Sheila Chandra, Aruna Narayan



October 28

  * Women Musicians in the Islamic World

Read: KOS "A Sociohistorical Perspective on Tunisian Women as Professional
Musicians"; RES, Sawa, "The Role of Women in Musical Life: The Medieval Arabo-
Islamic Courts"; KOS "Hazara Women in Afghanistan"

Listen: Tunisian folk songs; Umm Kulthum



October 30

  * Japan

Read: KOS "Female _Tayu_ in the _Gidayu_ Narrative Tradition of Japan"

Listen: Music of _Kabuki_ and _Bunraku_ ; Edo period Koto music



Week 10

  * November 2 Java

Read: KOS "Identity and Individuality in an Ensemble Tradition: The Female
Vocalist in Java"

Listen: Javanese gamelan music



November 4

  * U.S. Hymnody/Gospel Music

Read: KOS "The Joyful Sound: Women in the Nineteenth-Century U.S. Hymnody
Tradition," 177-194

Practice: Hymns on pp. 186 & 188

Listen: Gospel selections; Mahalia Jackson; Sweet Honey in the Rock



November 6

  * Women & the Blues

Read: RES, Yurchenco, "Mean Mama Blues"; Carby, "It jus bes dat way
sometime..."; Bowers, "'I Can Stand More Trouble Than Any Little Woman My
Size..."; Forman, "Aretha on Record..."

Listen: Bessie Smith; Mama Yancey; Koko Taylor; Aretha Franklin

**Portfolios due.**



Week 11

November 9

  * Rock & Reaction: Women-Identified Music

Read: KOS "An Investigation into Women-Identified Music...," 203-212; RES,
Meade, "Rock is a Four-Letter Word..."; "Punk rock feminism" fanzine excerpts

Listen: Jonatha Brooke; Bikini Kill



November 11

  * Rap

Read: RES, Cleage, "When the Music Doesn't Play..."; Short articles on rap
music; Berry, "Masculine or Feminine?..."; Keyes, "'We're More than a Novelty,
Boys'..."

Listen: Queen Latifah; Salt-n-Pepa; MC Lyte; other rappers



November 13

  * Feminist Musicology and Other Challenges...

Read: MC "Introduction: A Material Girl in Bluebeard's Castle" and RES,
McClary, "Reshaping a Discipline: Musicology and Feminism in the 1990's"

Suggested reading: Pieter Van den Toorn, _Music, Politics, and_ _the Academy_

Listen: no new assignment

**Research papers due.**



Week 12

November 16

  * Questions of Gender and Musical Form

Read: MC, "Sexual Politics in Classical Music" & "Getting Down off the
Beanstalk," 53-79; 112-131

Suggested reading: Rieger, "Do Women Compose Differently?"; Ecker,
"Introduction" and Bovenschen, "Is There a Feminine Aesthetic?" in Ecker,
_Feminist_ _Aesthetics_

Listen:



November 18

  * "Queer Theory"

Read: RES, Holsinger, "The Flesh of the Voice..." & Mockus, "Queer Thoughts on
Country Music and k.d. lang"

Listen: Hildegard and k.d. lang



November 20

  * Beyond baroque

Read: MC "Constructions of Gender in Monteverdi's Dramatic Music," 35-52;
Peraino, "I am an Opera: Identifying with ... _Dido and Aeneas_ "

Listen: TBA



Week 13

November 23 ****

  * Feminist perspectives on modernism

Read: RES Tick, "Charles Ives and Gender Ideology"; Smith, "'A Distinguishing
Virility': Feminism and Modernism in American Art Music"

Suggested reading: McClary, "Terminal Prestige," _Critical_ _Inquiry_

Listen:



November 25

  * Patriarchy and the "other"

Read: RES, Cook, "'Cursed Was She': Gender and Power in American Balladry";
Hisama, "Postcolonialism on the make: the music of John Mellencamp, David
Bowie and John Zorn

Listen:



November 27 **Thanksgiving Holiday -- No classes**



Week 14

November 30

  * Laurie Anderson & Madonna

Read: MC "This is Not a Story My People Tell: Musical Time and Space According
to Laurie Anderson," and "Living to Tell: Madonna's Resurrection of the
Fleshly"

Listen: Laurie Anderson & Madonna



December 2 Student presentations/discussion



December 4 Student presentations/discussion



Week 15

December 7 Student presentations/discussion

December 9 Student presentations/discussion

**Portfolios due.**

**Exam III** will take place during **your designated final exam time,
Tuesday, December 15,** **12:00 noon to 2:00 pm.**



[Link to list of Reserve Readings for Music, Gender, and
Culture](gender_reserve.html)

[Link to Listening list for Music, Gender, and Culture](gender_listening.html)

[Return to Elizabeth Keathley's Homepage](index.html)

