_

Working Women and the Law_

Summer Session 1

Tuesdays, Thursdays 6:15-9:45

May 28- July 2

Professor: Mia Cahill

Email: [Miacahill@yahoo.com](mailto:Miacahill@yahoo.com)

Phone: 609-452-8411

This course critically examines the implementation of several laws relating to
women working outside of the home. The substantive issues we explore, such as
sex discrimination, pregnancy discrimination, sexual harassment, family leave,
pay equity, child custody, alimony and alternative dispute resolution will
contribute to our understanding of the process through which law is
implemented and the extent to which different institutions are more or less
successful in achieving equality goals. In addition to federal law, there will
be a special focus on New Jersey law. Guests will be invited to participate in
some classes.

Requirements:

    1. Class Participation:

It is important that you read the assigned material, attend class and
participate in class discussions.

    2. Opinion Papers

Undergraduate students are required to submit two opinion papers based on
course readings and the topic areas of the course. Graduate students are
required to submit four Opinion Papers. The Opinion Papers are designed to
stimulate class discussion, and should be short- approximately three pages
long (typed, double-spaced). The opinion papers must relate to the readings
(your reflections on one or more of the readings, your evaluation of the
strengths and weaknesses of the readings) but they must also include your
opinion about the issues raised. Please- no summaries of the readings! For
credit, opinion papers must be submitted via E-mail to the class listserv by
8:00 the night before the class to which the paper relates.

    3. Final Exam

The final exam will be on July 3 in class. The exam will be open book.



Evaluation

Undergraduate student grades will be based on class participation (25%), two
opinion papers (25%) and an open book in-class exam (50%). Graduate student
grades will be based on class participation (25%), four opinion papers (35%)
and an open book in-class exam (40%).



Materials

Class participation depends on everyone having read the materials. In reading
the materials, reflect on the author's central claims, the strengths and
weaknesses of the arguments, and make your own informed opinion about the
issues raised in the readings.

Assigned materials are available at the bookstore

Photocopy Packet

_

Gender & Family Issues in the Workplace_ (Edited by Francine Blau and Ronald
Ehrenberg) (Russell Sage Foundation: March 2000)

  1. Introduction, week 1, may 28

Overview of Working Women and the Law

    * Plan of the Course



  1. Overview of Discrimination Laws and Operation of the Legal System, May 30

    * Description of the U.S. Legal System
    * Overview of Laws Affecting Working Women

Readings:  Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964

Pregnancy Discrimination Act of 1978

New Jersey Law Against Discrimination

Family Medical Leave Act

Pay Equity Act

William L.F. Felstiner, Richard L. Abel and Austin Sarat, "The Emergence and
Transformation of Disputes: Naming, Blaming, Claiming ," 15 _Law & Society
Review_ 631-654 (1980-81).

  1. Sex Discrimination in Employment, June 4

    * Social and Legal Issues 
    * Direct and Indirect Evidence

Readings: _Gender and Family Issues in the Workplace_ 20-64.

Kimberle Crenshaw, "A Black Feminist Critique of Antidiscrimination Law and
Politics," in _The Politics of Law_ 3 rd ed., David Kairys Editor. (New York:
Basic Books) (1998)



  1. Bringing Claims and Using Law, June 6, 

    * Movie, _A Civil Action

_

Readings: _Gender and Family Issues in the Workplace_ 92-132.

  1. The Social Transformation of Disputes, Discussion, June 11

    * The Social Transformation of Disputes
    * Group Claims versus Individual Claims
    * Do the 'Haves Always Come Out Ahead?
    * The Model of Legal Protection and Its Critics

Readings:

Phoebe Morgan, "Risking Relationships: Understanding the Litigation Choices of
Sexually Harassed Women," 33 _Law & Society Review_ 67 (1999).

Edelman, Lauren, Howard Erlanger and John Lande, "Internal Dispute Resolution:
The Transformation of Rights in the Workplace." 27 _Law & Society Review_
647-671 (1997).

  1. The Division of Civil Rights in New Jersey, June 13

    * The Operation of the Division
    * New Jersey Law
    * Bringing Claims

Readings:  On-line Materials from the Division of Civil Rights

On-line Materials from the EEOC



  1. Law and Social Change, June 18

    * Can law create social change?
    * Which comes first, social change or law?
    * Limits of legal reform
    * Symbolic role of law

Readings:

Michael McCann. "How Does Law Matter for Social Movements?" from _How Does Law
Matter_ , Northwestern University Press, 1998.

Cornel West, "The Role of Law in Progressive Politics," in The Politics of Law
3rd ed., David Kairys Editor. (New York: Basic Books) (1998).

  1. Sexual Harassment, June 20

    * Quid Pro Quo Harassment
    * Hostile Environment Sexual Harassment
    * The Role of Culture in Sexual Harassment and Sex Discrimination

Readings:

Vicki Schultz, "Reconceptualizing Sexual Harassment," 107 _The Yale Law
Journal_ 1683-1805 (1998).

  1. Family Law, June 25

    * No Fault Divorce
    * Types of Child Custody and Presumptions
    * The Loss of Women's Traditional Prerogatives in Child Custody
    * Tender Years Doctrine
    * Effect of Wage Income on Alimony

Readings: On-line New Jersey Child Support Guidelines

On-line Alimony Materials

Penelope Bryan. "Killing Us Softly: Divorce Mediation and the Politics of
Power" Buffalo Law Review 40: 441 (1992).

  1. Family Leave and Final Issues, June 27

    * Legal Issues
    * Implementation
    * Policy Considerations
    * Review, Questions

Readings:  _Gender and Family Issues in the Workplace_ 265-284.

  1. Exam, July 3

    * Final Exam

