**UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA**

**AHS 125G 11616: ARTS OF ASIA: ANTIQUITY TO 1300**

**Instructor:** |  Dr. Nalini Rao  
---|---  
**Room No:** |  101 HAR  
**Office:** |  GFS 128  
**Office hrs:** |

T 10.00 -11.00 A.M.

Th 10.00- 11.00 A.M. or by appointment  
**Tel:** |

(213) 740-4552

Messages may be left in my mailbox at the Art History Dept. (Watt Hall 104).  
**E-mail:** | [nalini_rao@yahoo.com](mailto:nalini_rao@yahoo.com)  
  


**COURSE OBJECTIVES**

The class is an introduction to the arts of India, China and Japan. It will
concentrate on the religious traditions of Asia, with special emphasis on
Buddhism, Hinduism, Confucianism and indigenous beliefs and their translation
into aesthetic criteria in the arts. The purpose of the course is to introduce
the student to the arts of Asia by analyzing the visual characteristics of the
works of art and placing them in their historical and cultural context. It
seeks to understand how art changed over time and with variations in place
using a wide variety of disciplines. Emphasis will be placed on art history
methodology as well as on visual and verbal skills essential to the
description and analysis of visual forms.

**REQUIRED TEXT**

Plante, John D. La. _Asian Art_. 3rd edition. Boston: McGraw-Hill. 1992.

Course Reader

The books are on sale at the USC bookstore. In addition, there will be a set
of recommended readings which will be kept on reserve in the Leavey library.



**COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND ASSIGNMENTS**

_Assignment_ |

_Date_ |

_Points_ |

_% of Grade_  
---|---|---|---  
Short paper |

9/21 |

25 |

5%  
Midterm I (India) |

10/12 |

100 |

20%  
Midterm II (China) |

11/9 |

100 |

20%  
Final Paper |

12/2 |

100 |

20%  
Final Exam (Japan,India,China) |

12/16 |

150 |

30%

  
Section participation |   |

25 |

5%  
****

**ATTENDANCE**

It is important to attend every lecture and discussion section. Handouts will
include a list of important monuments and artworks, terms, study questions and
suggested readings. Sections will discuss issues that complement and reinforce
the material and ideas presented in class. Attendance and active participation
are an important part of your grade. Assigned readings are crucial to class
participation.

**EXAMS**

Exams will consist of maps, slide identification questions, comparison and
contrast, short and long essay questions.

****

**FINAL PAPER**

All students are required to write a paper (8-10 pages long) on any work of
art exhibited in the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA), based on an
independent field trip to the museum.

**Museum location:** 5905 Wilshire Boulevard, Los Angeles, CA 90036

**Museum hrs:** Monday, Tuesday and Thursday: Noon - 8p.m.; Friday: noon-9p.m.
Saturday and Sunday:11am. - 8p.m. Closed on Wednesday.

Second Tuesdays are free. Bring student I.D. for discount.

**Galleries to Visit:** Indian and Southeast Asian (third level); Chinese
(lower level); Pavilion for Japanese Art.  

You may choose any piece (in consultation with your TA) on display at the
museum. Make a sketch of the piece which will help you to remember the
details. You will not be judged on your artistic talent. Then address the
visual aspects of your piece. In addition, consider the object in terms of its
display in the museum. Write a formal analysis of the piece in 3-4 pages,
indicating the features that allow you to identify the subject matter or
iconography of the piece.

The second section of the paper involves placing the work within its
respective historical tradition and context. It will be necessary to do
research and look for images to compare and contrast with your selected work.
Remember to cite your source(s). This portion of the paper should be between
4-6 pages. Questions to consider include:

    * How does this work fit within the Indian, Japanese or Chinese tradition? Is it similar to anything we have seen in class in terms of style, type or date? 
    * In what type of setting do you thing the work you have chosen would have been placed originally? What is the function, role and use of the work in its cultural context? Are there aspects of patronage, power and iconography that need analysis? Explain your reasoning. You might support your argument with references to your sources.  

This Museum Project must be presented in a term paper format and should by
typed or computer generated and include title page, 8-10 pages of text,
footnotes or endnotes, sketch, copies of images used for comparison and
contrast, and bibliography.

Use a manual of style for the proper form of footnote/ endnote and
bibliography. Remember that it is important to acknowledge your sources, not
only for words but also for ideas. Plagiarism is a serious academic offense.

**Makeup and Late Policy:**

Short papers must be handed in on time. Late assignments will not be accepted,
except in documented cases of sudden illness or family emergency. In that
case, you have only one week after the deadline to hand in the short papers,
and the grade will be lowered one full unit (a B+ becomes a B-).

There will be no makeup for the exams. Missing an exam will result in a F. If
you miss an exam due to illness or family emergency you must contact your TA.
as soon as possible.

The Museum Project must be turned in by the deadline. No late work will be
accepted.



**GRADING:** Grading is based on the following scale.

A= Above 90 (450) | B+ =85-88 (above 425) | C+ =70-74 (above 350) | D+= 55-59
(above 275)  
---|---|---|---  
B+= 85-88 (above 425) | B =80-84 (above 400) | C= 65-69 (above 325) | D= 50-54
(above 250)  
A-= 88-89 (above 440) | B- =75-79 (above 375) | C- =60-64 (above 30) | F=
below 45% (225)  
  


****

****

****

****

****

****

****

**TENTATIVE SCHEDULE OF LECTURES AND READINGS**

**INDIA**  
---  
  
**Date** |

**Lectures/ Topics** |

**Readings**  
  
8/31 |

Introduction. Slide overview, course goals and requirements |  
  
9/2 |

The Indus Valley Civilization |

Plante, 4-8 * S. R Rao, Dawn and Devolution of the Indus Civilization . 1-34
and 324-337  
  |

Background of Hinduism Vedic Period |

( R )B. Rowland, "The Epic Period" Ch. 4, 24-34  
  
9/9 |

Buddhism. Life of Bduddha Mauryan Period..Asoka |

(R) S. Huntington, Mauryan art , 41-48  
  
9/14 |

Early Buddhist Art, Sanchi |

Plante, 14-17 * S. Huntington,. 90 - 100

( R )John Irwin, The Axial

Symbolism of the Buddhist Stupa.  
  
9/16 |

The Buddha Image . Mathura and Gandhara |

Plante, 19-24 (R) B. Rowland,The Hellenistic Tradition in Northwestern India"
(R ) Coomaraswamy, "The Origin of the Buddha image"  
  
9/21 |

The Buddhist Cave Temples at Ajanta |

* Ghosh, Ajanta Murals,*S. Huntington, 239-260 ( R ) Suzuki, Mahayana Buddhism. 22-35  
  
9/23 |

Gupta Art, Sarnath Pala period |

(R )Pal, The Ideal Image :The Gupta Sculptural Tradition and its
Influence,1-46  
  
9/28 |

Hindu Temple Art and Architecture |

(R ) G. Michell, The Hindu Temple,Ch 4, 61-76. * Ch. 2, 20-48  
  
9/31 |

Elephanta Cave Temples |

Plante 44-45 ( R) Stella Kramrisch, The Image of Mahadeva in the Cave-Temple
on Elephanta Island  
  
10/5 |

Rock Cut Temples , Mamallapuram and Ellora |

Plante, 45-50  
  
10/7 |

Structural temples, Chalukyan period |

* S. Huntington, 322-337  
  
10/12 |

Hindu gods and worship |

*D. Eck, Darsan: Seeing the Divine Image in India  
  
10/14 |

Erotic Art of India |

Plante, 50-53 * Devangana Desai

The Erotic Sculpture of India, Ch 4  
  
10 /19 |

Midterm Exam I  
  






**TENTATIVE SCHEDULE OF LECTURES AND READINGS**

**CHINA**  
---  
  
**Date** |

**Lectures/ Topics** |

**Readings**  
  
10/21 |

Introduction, Bronze Age | Plante. 84-105 *Lee, 23-26, 29-59 * Max Loehr, "The
Bronze Styles of the Anyang Period." ( R )Wen Fong,ed.,The Great Bronze Age of
China,20-34  
  
10/26 |

Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism | *De Bary, Sources of Chinese History  
  
10/28 |

Qin dynasty |

Plante , 107-110 *Lee 57-60

*Maxwell Hearn, "The Terracotta Army of the First Emperor of Qin   
  
11/2 |

Han Dynasty: funerary art | Plante, 110-120 *Lee 60-72 ( R )W. Watson,
Iconography under the Western Han , 89-95. (R ) Craig Clunas, " Art in the
Tomb," * Wu Hung, "Art in Ritual Context: Rethinking Mawangdui."  
  
11/4 |

Northern and Southern Dynasties: Buddhist art |

Plante, 122-134. Lee 156-162

(R) Craig Clunas, "Art in the Temple."

( R) J. Caswell, "The Thousand-Buddha Pattern in Caves XIX and XVI at Yun-
Kang," 35-51  
  
11/9 |

Northern and Southern Dynasties painting |

Lee 286-296 * Yang Xin, " Approaches to Chinese Painting," and J. Cahill,
"Approaches to Chinese painting."

( R) J. Cahill, Chinese Painting,11-23  
  
11/11 | Tang dynasty: court and funerary art Song dynasty sculpture |

Plante, 136-145 Lee 171=173 and 296-313

Plante148-151  
  
11/16 |

_Midterm II: China_  
  


****



**TENTATIVE SCHEDULE OF LECTURES AND READINGS**

****

**JAPAN**  
---  
  
**Date** |

**Lectures/ Topics** |

**Readings**  
  
11/18 | Introduction. Jomon , Yayao and Kofun periods |

Plante 196-206  
  
11/ 23 | Introduction Shintoism, Buddhism Asuka-Hakuho period: Asukadera and
Horyuji |

Plante, 208-213 *Lee 165-171

(R ) P. Mason, "Encounter with china and Buddhism,"pp 38-64  
  
11/25 |

Holiday  
  
11/30 | Nara period: State Buddhism,Todaiji and the Great Buddha |

Plante, 215-218Lee 173-185 ( R ) P.Mason,"Encounter with China and

Buddhism,"pp. 62-80  
  
12/2 | Early Heian period: Mountain temple:Muroji | Plante 220-222 * Lee
314-323 ( R) P. Mason,"New Beginnings and the Formulation of Court
Culture,"pp. 97-113  
  
12/7 | Late Heian Period: Byodoin and Pure Land Buddhism. | Plante, 222-226
Lee 324-357 ( R ) P. Mason, "New Beginnings and the Formulation of Court
Culture,"pp. 120-121 and 137-144 ( R ) Murasaki Shikibu, "A PictureContest,"ch
19 of the Tale of Genji  
  
12/9 |

Review  
  
12/14 |

**_Final Exam_**  
  


(R) Readings in the Course Reader

* Readings on Reserve in the library

