  
  
  
  
  
  

**Law and Political Theory -- Fall 1999: **

****

**Emerging Trends in Criminal Law Policy Analysis: **

**Interpretive Theories and Methods of Proof In Contemporary Legal Scholarship
**

  
  

**Bernard E. Harcourt **

  
  
  
  

**_Abstract_ **

  
  

This semester, in Law and Political Theory, we will explore the relationship
between legal theory and the social sciences (especially political science,
economics, and sociology) in the contemporary debate over criminal law policy
analysis. We will take as our starting point the recent, heated debate
generated by the provocative writings of social norm theorists in the criminal
law. These norm-focused scholars offer an explanation why certain criminal law
and policing strategies -- such as anti-gang loitering ordinances, youth
curfews, reverse stings, and order-maintenance policing \-- are purportedly
effective. Specifically, they assert that these policies work because they
operate on social meanings (for instance, youth curfews reduce gang activity
in part because they change the perception, among juveniles, that their peers
value gang membership).

  
  

The writings of norm-focused scholars (such as Dan Kahan and Lawrence Lessig)
raise an important question that goes to the heart of contemporary
interdisciplinary approaches to law: how do you properly integrate social
scientific methods and research in criminal law policy analysis? or, more
generally, how do you formulate social scientific research projects in the
legal context? During the course of the semester, I will suggest one important
rule of thumb: pay special attention to the social theoretic assumptions. I
will suggest that it is only by being specially attentive to the interpretive
nature of social theoretic assumptions and to the implications for methods of
proof that we can formulate a proper legal/social scientific research project;
and I will present, as an illustration for discussion purposes, one proposed
approach to research and several related research projects.

  
  

The course readings and discussion will be divided into three parts. During
the first part, we will explore the recent debate over norm-focused
scholarship with an eye to formulating the central question of the course,
namely how to design social scientific research projects in the legal context.
In this first part, we will read works by Lessig and Kahan, as well as works
by their critics. These readings raise important questions about the
possibility of objectivity in the social sciences after the interpretive or
linguistic turn, and it is to these questions that we will turn in the second
part of the course. In the second part, we will go back to earlier debates in
the philosophy of social science over positivism and critiques of positivism.
In the third part, we will then explore one alternative approach to legal and
social scientific inquiry and study its social theoretic underpinnings.

  
  

During the semester, we will be reading works primarily in legal theory,
political theory, and philosophy of social sciences. Three books are available
at the bookstore. These are: Auguste Comte's _Introduction to Positive
Philosophy_ , Thomas Kuhn's _The Structure of Scientific Revolutions_ , and
Michel Foucault's _The Order of Things_. The other readings listed on this
syllabus are available on reserve at the Law Library.

  
  

The course will meet on Wednesdays from 2:00 to 3:50 in Room 138. The class
format will be a 45-minute lecture followed by class discussion. Each student
is expected to have read each and every reading assignment and to be prepared
to discuss the materials. Attendance in class is mandatory. Students will be
required to write three two-page reaction papers on any of the assigned
readings, to be submitted before the class in which those readings are
discussed. The final exam in this course will be a take home exam, distributed
on the first day of the exam period and due on or before the last day of the
exam period, Friday, December 17 th, 1999 before 4:30 p.m.

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**_Reading List_ **

  
  

August Comte, Introduction to positive philosophy (Indianapolis: Hackett
Publishing Company, Inc. 1988) (1830)

  
  

Michel Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archeology of the Human Sciences (New
York: Vintage Books 1994) (1966)

  
  

Jurgen Habermas, "Technology and Science as 'Ideology'" in Critical Theory:
The Essential Readings 117-145 (David Ingram and Julia Simon-Ingram eds.) (New
York: Paragon House, 1992) (1968)

  
  

Bernard E. Harcourt, _From Chicago to Tucson: On Social Meanings and Subject
Creation_ , __ Law & Society Review ___ (forthcoming 1999) (work in progress).

  
  

Sandra Harding, The Science Question in Feminism (excerpts) (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1986)

  
  

Max Horkheimer, "The Latest Attack on Metaphysics," in Critical Theory:
Selected Essays 132-187 (New York: Continuum1992) (1937 circa)

  
  

Max Horkheimer, "Traditional and Critical Theory," in Critical Theory: The
Essential Readings 239-255 (David Ingram and Julia Simon-Ingram eds.) (New
York: Paragon House, 1992) (1937 circa)

  
  

Robert Klee, Introduction to the Philosophy of Science, Chapter 2: "The
Positivist Model of Scientific Theories," 28 - 39 (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1997)

  
  

Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (3rd edition)
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996) (1962)

  
  

Lawrence Lessig, _The New Chicago School_ , 27 Journal of Legal Studies 661
(June 1998).

  
  

Tracey L. Meares and Dan M. Kahan, _Law and (Norms of) Order in the Inner
City_ , 32 Law & Society Review 805 (1998)

  
  

Max Weber, "Science as a Vocation," in From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology
129-156 (H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, eds.) (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1958) (1918)

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

******_Syllabus_**

  
  
  
  

PART I: Framing the Question: The Current Debate Over Social Norm Theory in
Criminal Law

  
  
  
  

A. "The New Chicago School":

  
  

_August 18_ : Lawrence Lessig, _The New Chicago School_ , 27 Journal of Legal
Studies 661 (June 1998).

  
  
  
  

B. Norm-focused Scholarship in Criminal Law Policy Analysis:

  
  

_August 25_ : Tracey Meares and Dan Kahan, _Law and (Norms of) Order in the
Inner City_ , 32 Law & Society Review 805 (1998).

  
  
  
  

C. A Critique of Norm-focused Scholarship:

  
  

_September 1_ : Bernard E. Harcourt, _From Chicago to Tucson: On Social
Meanings and Subject Creation_ , __ Law & Society Review ___ (forthcoming
1999) (work in progress).

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

PART II: The Debate Over Positivism in the Philosophy of Social Science

  
  
  
  

A. Early Positivism:

  
  

_September 8_ : August Comte, Introduction to positive philosophy
(Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. 1988) (1830)

  
  
  
  

Optional reading: Max Weber, "Science as a Vocation," in From Max Weber:
Essays in Sociology 129-156 (H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, eds.) (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1958) (1918)

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

B. The Positivist Model of Science:

  
  

_September 15_ Robert Klee, Introduction to the Philosophy of Science, Chapter
2: "The Positivist Model of Scientific Theories," 28 - 39 (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1997)

  
  
  
  

C. A Historicist Critique:

  
  

_September 22_ : Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (3rd
edition) (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996) (1962)

  
  
  
  

D. A Feminist Critique:

  
  

_September 29_ : Sandra Harding, The Science Question in Feminism (excerpts)
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1986)

  
  
  
  
  
  

PART III: Towards an Alternative Model of Legal and Social Scientific Inquiry:

  
  
  
  

A. The Importance of Social Theory:

  
  

_October 6_ : Max Horkheimer, "The Latest Attack on Metaphysics," in Critical
Theory: Selected Essays 132-187 (New York: Continuum1992) (1937 circa)

  
  

Optional reading:

  
  

Max Horkheimer, "Traditional and Critical Theory," in Critical Theory: The
Essential Readings 239-255 (David Ingram and Julia Simon-Ingram eds.) (New
York: Paragon House, 1992) (1937 circa)

  
  

Jurgen Habermas, "Technology and Science as 'Ideology'" in Critical Theory:
The Essential Readings 117-145 (David Ingram and Julia Simon-Ingram eds.) (New
York: Paragon House, 1992) (1968)

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

B. Subject Creation Theory:

  
  

_October 13 and 20_ : Michel Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archeology of
the Human Sciences (New York: Vintage Books 1994) (1966)

  
  
  
  
  
  

****PART IV: Rethinking Social Meaning Today

  
  

_October 27_ : Babcock, Barbara (1993) "Feminisms/Pretexts: Fragments,
Questions, and Reflections" 66:2 _Anthropological Quarterly_ 59 - 66.

  
  

Pierre Bourdieu (1990) "Landmarks" in _In Other Words: Essays Towards a
Reflexive Sociology_ 34 - 55. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

  
  
  
  

_November 3_ : Taylor, Charles (1993) "To Follow a Rule. . ." in _Bourdieu:
Critical Perspectives_ (eds. Craig Calhoun, Edward LiPuma and Moishe Postone).
Cambridge: Polity Press.

  
  

Bohman, James (1999) "Practical Reason and Cultural Constraint: Agency in
Bourdieu's Theory of Practice," in _Bourdieu: A Critical Reader_ (ed. Richard
Shusterman). Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

  
  
  
  

_November 10_ : Butler, Judith (1999) "Performativity's Social Magic," in
_Bourdieu: A Critical Reader_ (ed. Richard Shusterman). Oxford: Blackwell
Publishers.

  
  

Dreyfus, Hubert and Paul Rabinow (1993) "Can there be a Science of Existential
Structure and Social Meaning?" in _Bourdieu: Critical Perspectives_ (eds.
Craig Calhoun, Edward LiPuma and Moishe Postone). Cambridge: Polity Press.

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

CONCLUSION: __

  
  

_November 17_ : Bernard Harcourt, _On the Possibility of Objectivity in the
Social Sciences_ (work-in-progress)

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

