# **HIST 356 U. S. History 1877-1917 - Fall, 1999**

**Instructor: _Dr. Kevin Kragenbrink_

Office Hours: 8:00 - 10:00 AM M-TH or by Appointment

Office #: JB 281

Phone 880-5708  FAX 880-7609

[E-Mail: kkragenb@csusb.edu](mailto:kkragenb@csusb.edu)

**[[Personal Information](vita.htm)] [[Other History Sites](other.htm)]
[[History 146](HIS146.htm)] [[History 200](hist200.htm)]

[[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return to Hist. Dept. Main
Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)]

**

* * *

** [Course Description] [Assigned Readings] [Course Requirement] [Grading]

[Schedule of Lectures] [Mid-Term Exam] [Term Paper]

* * *

**CourseDescription** :

This course will examine the transformation of the United States during the
period from the end of Reconstruction to the nation's involvement in WWI. In
the process we shall explore the transition from a nation that was largely
agricultural and rural and also relatively ethnically homogeneous to one that
was industrial, urban, and ethnically diverse. uring the quarter, we shall
look at the various forces of change (industrialization, urbanization, and
immigration) and at class, ethnicity (including race), and gender. We shall
also examine the impact of social and economic change on the political system
and on cultural expression.

[return to top of page] [[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return
to Hist. Dept. Main Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)]

**

* * *

Assigned Readings**:

**Texts:**

Cashman, Sean Dennis, _America in the Gilded Age: From the Death of Lincoln to
the Rise of Theodore Roosevelt_ , 3rd ed., (New York: New York University
Press, 1993)

Cooper, John Milton, Jr., _Pivotal Decades: The Unites States, 1900-1920_ ,
(New York: W. W. Norton, 1990)

Fink, Leon, ed., _Major Problems in the Gilded Age and the Progressive Era:
Documents and Essays_ , (Lexington, Mass: D. C. Heath & Co., 1993)

**HIST356 e-mail Discussion List**

Without question, the most important developing resources for students of
history is the internet.  Since this is true, I am committed to doing all that
I can to help you become proficient in using the net.  To facilitate this, I
have set up an e-mail discussion list for our class to use.  The purpose of
the list serve is to communicate information about the course, to promote
active discussion of the issues we are addressing in the course, and to
encourage you to ask questions and get personally involved in the study of
history.  **You MUST sign on to the Discussion List** as a part of the
requirements for this course.   To sign on to the list follow these
instructions:  First, you must have access to the internet and an e-mail
address.  If you don't already have an address at home or through work you can
get one for free through the university.  Go to the computer lab on the first
floor of the new library building and they will help you out.   Once you have
your e-mail set up you need to "subscribe" to the discussion list.  To
subscribe, send a message to "majordomo@csusb.edu" with "subscribe hist356" in
the body of the message.  **Please Note:   You will have ONE WEEK to complete
this task.  Failure to do so will affect the participation portion of your
course grade.**

**Other Resources:**

I may, from time to time during the course, ask you to read additional
material related to the topics we are discussing.  Additional material will be
available either on the internet or on reserve in the library.

[return to top of page] [[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return
to Hist. Dept. Main Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)]

* * *

**Course Requirements**:

1\. _**Assigned Readings**_ : The assigned readings must be completed before
each class session. A complete schedule of readings is provided in this
syllabus. History is a reading intensive subject. I assure you that reading
faithfully will help you do well in this course as it will in any historical
research. Conversely, failing to keep up with the readings will undoubtedly
make it more difficult for you to do well.

2\. _**Weekly Quizzes**_ : Each week, on either Wednesday or Friday (see the
course schedule for actual dates), at the beginning of the class you will be
given a quiz covering that week's assigned reading in Fink, _Major Problems in
the Gilded Age and Progressive Era_. The quizzes will be made up of from 5 to
10 multiple choice questions. The quizzes will be graded immediately in class
and will be followed by a discussion of the issues and concerns raised in the
readings covered.

3\. _**Examinations**_ : There will be two exams in this course. A Mid-Term
and a Final exam. Each of these exams will be made up of a combination of
short answer and essay type questions. The short answer section of the exam
will consist of 10 events, issues, people, etc. . . for each of which I will
expect you to be able to write a paragraph describing what is being identified
and why it is important in U. S. history. For the essay section you will be
provided with four possible essay questions, from which you will be required
to answer two. Samples of both short answer topics and essay questions are
provided for you in the Exams section of this syllabus. Make-up exams will be
given at _my_ discretion and only if you make arrangements _before_ the exam
or if you provide documentary proof of the emergencey which prevented you from
taking the exam at the scheduled time. Make-up exams will be all essay in form
and are generally more difficult than the regularly scheduled exams.

4\. _**Term Paper**_ : A term paper is required for all students in this
course. It should be about 3,500-4,000 words in length, or about 15 full pages
(double-spaced, one inch margins), exclusive of notes and bibliography. It
should include footnotes and a bibliography. The topic of the paper must be
agreed upon between the student and the instructor. Two types are possible: an
historiographical essay or an original research paper. Each is described in
some detail on the Term Paper page on my web site. Speak to me early if any of
these requirements pose a problem for you. In developing either type of paper,
follow this timetable:

> Sept. 24-Oct. 15: meet with instructor to discuss possible topics

> Oct. 18: submit a one-page (or less) definition of your topic

> Nov. 1: 1st Progress Report: submit a list of secondary works and, if
appropriate, likely primary sources

> Nov. 19: 2nd Progress Report: submit a one-page outline of the paper

> Dec. 3: submit completed paper

You will be graded only on the final paper, not on the interim papers.
However, I shall respond to the interim papers, to assist you in developing
the final paper. The point of these papers is for me to provide you with
specific suggestions for your paper. Since the first three papers will not be
graded, obviously there will be no penalty if you do not submit them on time,
or even if you do not submit them at all. However, I shall not accept your
final paper unless you tell me (in writing) your topic and major sources at
least four weeks before the paper is due (i.e., Nov. 4). The grade will be
based on my evaluation of the quality of your research (approximately 1/3),
analysis (approximately 1/3), and writing (approximately 1/3).

[return to top of page] [[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return
to Hist. Dept. Main Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)]

* * *

**Grading**:

There is no "curve" for this course and I do not offer extra credit. Grades
are assigned on a simple 10% scale. The assignments and exams are weighted as
listed below. **NOTE: YOU MUST TURN IN _ALL_ ASSIGNED WORK TO PASS THIS
CLASS**

  
---  
  
**Weighted Course Requirements** |

**Grade Distributions**  
Weekly Quizzes: 10% | 92-100% = A | 73-77% = C  
Research Paper: 30% | 90-91% = A- | 70-72% = C-  
Mid-Term Exam: 25% | 88-89% = B+ | 68-69% = D +  
Final exam: 30% | 83-87% = B | 63-67% = D  
(Final Exam: Wednesday, December 8 at 2:00 p.m.) | 80-82% = B- | 60-62% = D-  
Class Participation: 5% | 78-79% = C+ | Below 60% = F  
  
[return to top of page] [[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return
to Hist. Dept. Main Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)]

* * *

**Lecture & Reading Schedule: **

September 24: _Introduction to the Course_

September 27: _Life in Rural/Agricultural America_

September 29: _Developing an Industrial Economy_

October 1: _The Rise of Big Business and The Consequences of
Industrialization_.

(Fink - Chapter 1)

October 4, 6: _Creating an Urban Society_

October 8: _City and Suburb In American Social Development_. (Fink - Chapter
5)

October 11: _Responding to Industrialism and Urbanization: The Emergence of
Organized Labor_

October 13: _The New Immigration_

October 15: _The New Face of America_. (Fink -Chapter 2)

October 18: _The Changing Character of Race Relations: The American South_

October 20: _The Changing Character of Race Relations: Native Americans_

October 22: _The Effort To Create A Homogeneous America_ (Fink - Chapter 7, 8)

October 25: _Changing Gender Roles in America at the Turn of the 20 th
Century_

October 27: _Women in the Public Sphere_ (Fink - Chapter 11)

October 29: _Mid-Term Exam_

November 1: _American Politics in the Gilded Age_

November 3: _The "Agrarian Revolt" and the Appearance of Populism_

November 5: _People and Power at the Turn of the Century_ (Fink Chapter 6)

November 8: _Intellectual Trends In America at the Dawn of the 20 th Century_

November 10: _The Origins of Progressivism_

November 12: _The Reforming Impulse_ (Fink - Chapter 9, 12)

November 15: _Progressive Politics, I_

November 17: _Progressive Politics, II_

November 19: _The Rise of an Activist State_ (Fink - Chapter 10)

November 22: _Progressive Politics, III_

November 24: _Progressivism in Retrospect_

November 29: _American Imperialism_

December 1: _An American Empire_ (Fink - Chapter 14)

December 3

December 8: Final Exam - 2:00 p.m.

[return to top of page] [[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return
to Hist. Dept. Main Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)]

**

* * *

Mid-term Exam**

The mid-term exam will be on October 29. Bring one or more blue books and a
black or blue pen. (different colored inks and pencil will not be allowed).
The examination will be divided into two parts, each of which will be worth
half of the exam grade.

_**1\. Short Identification**_. You will be asked to select five items from a
list of ten. For each, you will identify it and indicate its significance for
understanding life in the United States in the late 19th century and early
20th century. You should be able to accomplish this in about half a page (8
1/2 x 11 page) per item. Each will be worth 10% of the exam grade. Examples of
items (some of which may be on the exam):

"island communities"; life in a rural, agricultural society

Protestant perfectionism; American nationalism

Andrew Carnegie; John D. Rockefeller

characteristics of the industrial corporation

J. P. Morgan; finance capitalism

urban expansion; urban transportation; urban housing

the central business district

the city "machine" and "boss"; Tammany Hall

the functional autonomy of the craftsman; craft or trade unions

Knights of Labor; the "producing classes"

the American Railway Union; industrial unions

American Federation of Labor

National Civic Federation

IWW

Socialist Party of America

general patterns of European immigration; ethnic enclaves; acculturation and
assimilation

nativism; the American Protective Association; immigration restriction

share-cropping and the crop lien; debt peonage

disfranchisement and segregation

Booker T. Washington; the Tuskegee Institute; W.E.B. Du Bois; NAACP

immigration from Asia; Chinese Exclusion Act

federal Indian policy; Indian schools; Dawes Severalty Act

"domesticity" and "separate spheres"

women's colleges; women's clubs; WCTU

settlement houses and social work

women and politics before suffrage; prohibition

_**2\. Essay**_. You will be asked to select two subjects from a list of four
possible essays, and use each as the basis for an essay that deals with the
history of the United States during the years 1877 to 1916. These essays will
be worth 50% of the exam grade. Following are some examples of topics.
**NOTE** : these are sample questions only. The questions you will receive may
or may not cover these subjects. You must be prepared to answer questions
covering any of the topics discussed in the first half of this course.

Compare life in a rural area in 1880 with life in an urban, industrial area in
1910. How were people's situations and experiences similar? How were they
different? What caused the major changes?

Consider the following statement: "More than any other single factor,
industrialization was responsible for the most profound changes in American
life in the late 19th and early 20th centuries." Criticize this thesis.
Summarize evidence pro and con. Draw a conclusion as to the validity of the
statement. (Consider what other factors were responsible for changes in
American life.)

Consider the following statement: "More than any other single factor,
ethnicity and race were the most divisive factors in American life in the late
19th and early 20th centuries." Criticize this thesis. Summarize evidence pro
and con. Draw a conclusion as to the validity of the statement. (Consider what
other factors were responsible for divisiveness.)

Trace the changing patterns of organization among American wage-earners during
the period from the mid-1870s to World War I. How do you explain the survival
of some organizations and the failure of others?

For the period from the mid-1870s to the early 20th century, compare federal
policies regarding African Americans, immigrants from Asia, American Indians,
Latinos, and immigrants from Europe. What are the assumptions about race that
underlay the various policies?

Compare the experiences of several of the following groups during the period
1877-1916: American Indians, African Americans, immigrants from eastern Asia,
people of Mexican descent living in the southwest, immigrants from
northwestern Europe, immigrants from southern or eastern Europe. How were they
similar? How were they different?

Explain the concepts of domesticity and separate spheres. What factors in
women's lives challenged these concepts? What are the most important changes
in women's social and economic roles between 1877 and 1916? How do you explain
these changes?

[return to top of page] [[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return
to Hist. Dept. Main Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)]

* * *

**Term Paper**

Some notes about the types of term papers acceptable for this course and how
to prepare them.

**_Historiographical essay_**. Write an extended essay in which you explore
the contributions of various historians to the understanding of a topic. An
historiographical essay typically answers the question,  "What have historians
said about this topic and how have different historians treated the topic
differently?" (For examples, see the essays by Ridge or Rodgers in the
recommended readings.)

Examples of topics:

Development of the steel industry, 1877-1916

Development of U.S. labor unions, 1877-1916

Gender and American society, 1877-1916

The settlement house movement

Experience of an immigrant group (e.g., Germans, Italians), 1877-1916

Patterns of nativism, 1877-1916

The prohibition movement, 1877-1916

Federal Indian policy, 1877-1916

Race relations, 1877-1916

U.S. policy toward a particular country or region, 1877-1916

The tariff as a political issue, 1877-1916

Agriculture and politics, 1877-1916

American socialism before World War I

In choosing a topic, try to pick one that spans most of the time period of
this course (1877-1916). Plan to use at least five books (or a combination of
books and articles equivalent to at least a thousand printed pages) _in
addition to_ the required reading in order to develop this essay. (Textbooks
and encyclopedia articles are not appropriate.) Many of the required and
recommended readings are good places to begin, and you should include any of
them that are relevant in your essay so long as you use other works as well.
Be sure to include in your essay a treatment of the contributions of the
authors of the books you use. (If you've not done an essay of this sort
before, consult with the instructor before selecting a topic and beginning to
work.) Begin your essay by indicating your topic and what you hope to learn by
exploring it. You may want to conclude with a set of questions for further
research.

**_Original research paper_.** Select a topic that you can explore using
primary sources (whether archival or published). Set up your research problem
by referring to one or more secondary works in the general area of your topic,
either drawn from the required readings or from other works. Define a thesis
question, explore it using primary sources, and draw a conclusion. Topics must
be centered on the time period 1877-1916.

[return to top of page] [[return to Dr. K's Main Page](index.html)] [[Return
to Hist. Dept. Main Page](http://ssbs.csusb.edu/history/)]

