* * *

**College of Arts and Sciences**

**Governors State University**

**Division of Liberal Arts**

**Course Syllabus**

**Index Number: ART 500**

![](Cgr191e.JPG)**Course Title: Topics in Art: Images of the Masculine in Art
and Culture**

Credit Hours: 3.0

Trimester: Spring/Summer, 2002

Time: 7:30 - 10:20 p.m. Tuesday and Thursday

* * *

DESCRIPTION:

This course focuses on male and female masculine images in the visual arts and
popular culture.  Images and film will be used to gain insight into collective
attitudes, feelings, politics, tensions, contradictions, and the ambivalence
of masculinity.

EXPECTED STUDENT OUTCOME:

Upon completion of the course the student has acquired:

1\. A knowledge of the principal imagery in western culture that calls
attention to masculinity.

2\. A familiarity with the symbolic content and range of meaning attributed to
such imagery.

3\. An awareness of the background and setting in which the imagery was
created and utilized.

4\. The ability to analyze a number of examples from the standpoint of major
themes presented in lecture and discussions.

* * *

COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

1\. Attendance at lectures and participation in discussions are mandatory.

2\. Required research paper on an approved topic in an acceptable format
(Undergraduates: 6-8 typewritten pages. Graduates: 8-10 typewritten pages with
extensive bibliography.)

3\. Oral report on an assigned topic presented to the class--utilizing the
necessary visual materials.

* * *

TEXTS:

Craig, Steve _Men, Masculinity, and the Media_.

Goldstein, Laurence, ed. _The Male Body: Features, Destinies, Exposures._

Halberstam, Judith _Female Masculinity._

Horrocks, Roger _Male Myths and Icons, Masculinity in Popular Culture_.

Moore, Robert and Douglas Gillette _King, Warrior, Magician, Lover;
Discovering the Archetypes of the Mature Masculine._

* * *

LECTURES/DISCUSSIONS/ASSIGNED READINGS:

1\. Introduction to masculinity, a contemporary understanding in psychological
theory, social psychology of the male sex role, and the social sciences. Read:
"Introduction" and "Approaches to Gender" in Robert Horrocks _Myths and Icons_
, 1-21.

2\. Masculinity, an historical perspective: The Epic Male. Read:
"Introduction" by Laurence Goldstein and "Alien Territory" by Margaret Atwood
in _The Male Body_ , viii- 7.  "Introduction to Female Masculinity," by Judith
Halberstam in _Female Masculinity_.

3\. The Hero: Heracles in Image and Idea through the ages. Read:
"Introduction" in Moore-Gillette's _King, Warrior, Magician, Lover_ , xv-xix
and "The Crisis in Masculine Ritual Process," 3-7; "Masculine Potentials"
9-11, "Boy Psychology and Man Psychology" 13-45 in Goldstein _The Male Body_.

4\. Theseus and Perseus. Read: Lance Strate "Beer Commercials," in Craig _Men,
Masculinity, and the Media_ 78-92

5\. The Spiritual and Chivalric Male. Read: Michael Kimmel "Consuming
Manhood," in Goldstein _The Male Body_ , 12-41, "Superman/Superboys/Supermen"
in Craig _Men_.., 61-77; "King" and "Warrior" in Moore and Gillette, _King_
49-95.

6\. The Renaissance and Middle-Class Male. Read: Sam Fussell "Bodybuilder
Americanus," 43-60 in Goldstein _The Male Body_ and Ralph Donald's
"Masculinity and Machismo" in Craig's _Men_. 124-136.

7\. The Era of 'Strenuous Life.' Read: Fred Pfeil "Rock Incorporated," in
Goldstein _The Male Body_ , 67-101; and "Male Images in Rock and Pop Music" in
Horrocks' _Male Myths_ 126-146; and "Metal Men and Glamour Boys," in Craig
_Men_ 41-60.

8\. Initiations to Masculinity. Read: Brad Sewell "If It was you instead of
me," in Goldstein _The Male Body,_ and "The Magician," "The Lover" in Moore  &
Gillette's _King_.

9\. Masculinity around the Globe. Read: Charles Johnson "A Phenomenology of
the Black Body in Goldstein _The Male Body_ , 121-136, and "Good Times to
Cosby Show" in Craig _Men_ 94-111.

10\. Student Presentations and discussion. Read: A. Campbell and N. Griffith,
"The Male Body and Contemporary Art," in Goldstein _The Male Body_ , 153-176.

11\. Student Presentations and discussion. Read: Susan Bordo, "Reading the
Male Body," in Goldstein _The Male Body_ 265-306; "Ponography" in Horrocks'
_Male Myths_ , 101-125.

12\. Student Presentations and discussion. Read: "Male Sport" in Horrocks'
_Male Myths_ 147-169, "Image of Men in Sport Media," 169-184, and "Gaze Out of
Bounds," in Craig _Men_. 186-199.

* * *

STUDENT RESEARCH:

Individual oral presentations and suggested term paper topics will be devoted
to one or more of the following and their representation in art and popular
culture (including literature, film, and advertising):

The Strongman/Superman/Superwoman

The Pioneer/Explorer/Inventor/Artist

The Lawman/Lawperson

The Spiritual Man/Woman

The Noble Savage/The Hunter

The Warrior

The Leader

Athletic Male/Female

The Lover

The Companion/Friend

The Parent

The Teacher

The Healer

The Colleague/Client

The Consoler

The Rational One

The Buffoon

The Wild Man/Woman

The Violent One

The Gay Male/Butch

The Androgynous One

The Addicted One

The Discouraged One

The Jubilant/Ecstatic Male/Female

The Lawbreaker/Gangster

The Miser

The Weakling

The Dreamer

The Coward

The Aging One

The Male Victim/Martyr

RESEARCH PAPER:

A research paper is required of all students who are taking this course for
academic credit. The topic should be selected in consultation with the
instructor.

Research papers must be typed (double-spaced). The bibliography should include
complete information on the author, publisher, edition, and the date of
publication of the sources utilized. It should be carefully proofread. Sylvan
Barnet A Short Guide to Writing about Art is recommended as a guide. Sample
papers are available for consultation upon request.

A research paper is intended as an introduction to the methods and approaches
used in the study of visual imagery. Whatever your topic, you will be expected
to seek out the latest sources on the subject, including current periodical
literature. For information on bibliographies, guides to research and
periodicals, consult the reference librarian. If the Governors State Library
lacks necessary sources, you are expected to obtain them from other libraries
or utilized inter-library loan, allowing sufficient time for delivery. You are
expected to exhaust standard library procedures before applying for assistance
elsewhere.

Note: You must footnote/endnote any material you use in your paper that
derives from other printed sources that cannot be considered as common
knowledge. Plagiarizing is the taking of ideas, writings, etc., from another
and passing them off as one's own.

* * *

Links:

[Masculinity and
Representation](http://www.newcastle.edu.au/department/so/kibby.htm)

[MensBiblioMenu](http://online.anu.edu.au/~e900392/mensbiblio/mensbibliomenu.html)

[Male Spirit](http://www.govst.edu/users/gbourge/malespir/male.htm)

Other GSU Courses in Art History

[ART527 African Art and Cultures: West
Africa](http://www.govst.edu/users/gbourge/syllabus/WestAf.htm)

[ART527 African Art and Cultures: Central
Africa](http://www.govst.edu/users/gbourge/syllabus/ART527.htm)

[ART523 Pre-Columbian Art: Mexico-
Guatemala](http://www.govst.edu/users/gbourge/syllabus/PreColum.htm)

[ART360 Art Seminar: Concepts and
Methods](http://www.govst.edu/users/gbourge/syllabus/ART360.htm)

[ART505 Worlds of Art](http://www.govst.edu/users/gbourge/syllabus/WORLDS.HTM)

* * *

* * *

This page last updated on March 5, 2000

  

* * *  
  
---  
---  
  


