**College of Arts and Sciences Department of History**

**Northern Arizona University Spring 2002** ** __**

**__**

**_Instructor: Dr. Sanjam Ahluwalia_**

**_Office: LA 232_**

**_Phone # : 3-8709_**

**_Office Hours: MW 12.45-2.00, and by appointment_**

**_E-mail:[Sanjam.Ahluwalia@nau.edu](mailto:Sanjam.Ahluwalia@NAU.EDU)_**

**_Class Meetings_** **:** ** _LA: 200; MWF: 11.30-12.20_** ****

**_Teaching Assistant: Ellen Cheeseman-Meyer_**

**_Course Prerequisites: None_ **

****

**HIS 102: The Making of the Modern World **

****

  
  

**_IMPORTANT : Please look at the "Northern Arizona University Policy
Statements" and the "Classroom Management Statement" at the back of this
document_** ******_before reading the syllabus._** ****

  
  

**COURSE DESCRIPTION** : This course traces the evolution of the world from a
constellation of relatively isolated regions in 1500 to global interdependence
of the present-day. The lectures, reading materials, primary documents, films,
and assignments, while delineating the role of western Europe, will focus on
the contributions of the non-western regions to the forging of the modern age.
The emphasis in the course will be on the interdependence of the world regions
--an interaction that was stimulated by the European invasions and
colonizations. In analyzing and understanding global histories as inter-
connected we will pay close attention to the social, cultural, political,
economic, demographic and ecological implications of this history. Class
lectures and readings will stress upon issues of diversity, power imbalances,
and the interactive workings of race, ethnicity, class, gender, and national
variables.  Though primarily a course in global history, it will draw upon
materials and pedagogical approaches from other disciplines, such as feminist
studies, anthropology, literature, political science, and art. ****

  
  

**THEMATIC FOCI** : The readings and class lectures will emphasize the
importance of valuing diversity of human experiences. Students will be urged
to pay close attention to how variables of gender, race, ethnicity, class,
religion, community, and nation shaped historical understandings in different
parts of the globe. We will pay close attention to technological developments
and their varied impact in history, again our focus will be to map how
technology impacted different social groups and societies in the past. Looking
at global interactions across time and space, this course will also examine
how environmental consciousness shaped human interactions with their natural
world.

  
  

**DISTRIBUTION BLOCK** : Cultural Understanding.

  
  

**ESSENTIAL SKILLS** : Critical Reading and Thinking, Ethical Reasoning,
Effective Writing, and Oral Communication.

**COURSE OBJECTIVES** : The course will promote understanding of different
cultures as they have developed in global, political, social, cultural,
economic, and environmental contexts. It will provide the opportunity for
students to study the historical development of local and regional societies,
and to cross disciplinary and geographical boundaries to appreciate an
increasingly interdependent and multi-cultural world. This pedagogical
approach will emphasize the interconnectedness and uniqueness of all peoples.
It will elucidate the contributions of culturally diverse groups to the
formation of the modern world, while highlighting their achievements. The
course's potential is exemplary for instilling the skills and values of world
citizenship and for relating to people different from oneself.

  
  

**COURSE STRUCTURE** : This is the second course in a two semester sequence on
World History at NAU. These courses intended to be large surveys that break
down into smaller discussion sections through the strategic use of teaching
assistants. Both courses also build upon common themes of (1) the
globalization process; and (2) cultural change . The general format of the
course will be: interactive lectures, audio-visual materials, intensive
reading and writing, and small group discussions.

  
  

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

You are expected to engage with weekly readings carefully and critically and
participate actively in class discussions, 15% of your course grade will
depend upon class discussion of various films and readings. This class will
also require use of internet resources.

Informal Writing: You will be expected to write short critical responses to
works of fiction, primary documents, and films.

Map Quiz: There will be 2 map quizzes in class, you will be asked to identify
specific places on an outline map from a list of places handed out in class
ahead of time.

Mid-Term Exam: There will be an in-class mid-term exam. The format of which
will be discussed in class.

Final Exam: In-class final exam will consist of essay questions drawn from a
list handed out in class two weeks prior to the exam.

  
  

**COURSE GRADES**

Grades for the course will be calculated in the following way:

Class Discussion 15%; Informal writing 25%; Map Quiz 15%; Mid-term Exam 20%;
and Final Exam 25%.

  
  

TOTAL FOR COURSE 100%

The grading scale for the course will be as follows:

90%+ = **A** ; 80 - 89%= **B** ; 70-79%= **C** ; 60-69%= **D** ; below 60%=
**F**.

  
  

******ASSIGNED** **TEXTS** :

Howard Spodek, The World's History: Volume II-Since 1100. **(REQUIRED)**

  
  

Raymond Hylton, Documents Set: The World History: Volume II. **(REQUIRED)**

  
  

Virginia Woolf, Three Guineas. **(REQUIRED)**

  
  

A set of REQUIRED and RECOMMENDED readings available on the World Wide Web
(WWW).

  
  

If necessary I may put REQUIRED or other RECOMMENDED readings on reserve at
the Cline

library.

  
  

**COURSE POLICIES**

ALL WRITTEN ASSIGNMENTS ARE DUE IN CLASS.

  
  

******PLEASE NOTE** : I do not give extensions, incompletes, or make-up exams,
except in cases allowed for by University Policy.

  
  

Plagiarism or other forms of academic dishonesty will not be tolerated in any
of the assignments, and will result in failing the course. Please consult the
section on "Academic Integrity" in the _NAU Policy Statements_ appended to
this syllabus for further details. IT IS THE STUDENTS' RESPONSIBILITY TO
FAMILIARIZE HERSELF/HIMSELF WITH THESE MATTERS AS DEFINED BY THE UNIVERSITY.

  
  

******ATTENDANCE AND PUNCTUALITY**

**** While I will not take regular roll, frequent and repeated absence and/or
lack of punctuality could effect your grade. As pointed out above 15% of your
class grade will depend on participation in the various class discussions
assigned in the syllabus. Whatever your reasons for arriving late or missing a
class, it is **YOUR RESPONSIBILITY** to arrange to meet or call a classmate
and find out what happened in that class.  ****

  
  

**COURSE SCHEDULE: SUBJECT TO MODIFICATION**

  
  

January 14: **_Introduction._** __

  
  

January 16: **_Why World History? Dominant themes to be covered in the
course._** __

Reading: Spodek, "Introduction," PP: 1-16.

  
  

January 18-25 **_Changing World in 1500: Trade, Politics, and Society_** __.

January 18: Class Lecture.

  
  

**_January 21: Martin Luther King's Birthday-NO CLASS !!_**

  
  

January 23: Class lecture.

January 25: Class discussion of primary documents.

  
  

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 12: Channels of Communication," PP: 372-408 and
"Chapter 13: The Unification of World Trade," PP: 409-443; Documents Set,
"Chapter 12," PP: 205-218.

  
  

January 28 & February 1: **_Demography and Migration-1500-1770s._** __

January 28: Class Lecture.

January 30: Class Discussion of Primary documents and Chapter. **_First In
class Map Quiz._** __

Feburary 1: Film **_Faces of Slavery_**

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 14: Demography and Migration," PP: 444-474.

Documents Set, PP 244-246; 250-254.

  
  

February 4: ** _MID-TERM EXAM!! PLEASE REMEMBER TO BRING BLUE BOOKS!!_** __

  
  

February 6-18: **_Political Revolutions in Europe and the Americas:
1688-1850_** __.

February 6: Revolution and ideas

February 8: English Revolution--1688.

February 11:American Revolution-- 1775-1783.

February 13: French Revolution-- 1789-1799.

February 15: Revolt in Haiti-- 1791.

February 18: **_Comparative analysis and importance of the revolutions-Class
Discussion._** __

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 15: Western Revolutions and their Export," PP:
478-507.

Documents Set, PP 255-264.

  
  

**__**February:20-22 ** _End of Colonialism in Latin America_** __

Readings, Spodek, "Chapter 15," PP: 509-516.

Documents Set, PP. 264-268

  
  

February 25- March 1: **_Industrial Revolution-1740-1914._** __

February 25: Britain and Europe.

February 27: Impact on the world outside Europe: India, China and Africa.

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 16: The Industrial Revolution," PP: 517-556.

Documents Set, PP: 278-286.

Marx, Communist Manifesto. **Available on line.**

**Please make a print out from the following site:**
_http://csf.colorado.edu/psn/marx/Archive/1848-CM/_

  
  

March 1- **_Class discussion of_** ** _Communist Manifesto._** __

  
  

March 4-8: **_Social Revolutions- 1830-1914_** __

March 4: Gender Politics.

March 6-8: Film Doll House.

Readings, Spodek, "Chapter 17: Social Revolutions," PP: 557-575.

Documents Set, Chapter 17, PP 288-291, 306-311. **__**

  
  

**_March 11-15: SPRING BREAK!!_** __**__**

  
  

**_March 18: PAPER DUE ON_** **_Communist Manifesto. Class discussion of
_****_Doll House , Second Map Quiz._**

  
  

March 20: ** _Politics of Nationalisms- 1830-1914._**

Readings: Spodek, "Chapter 17: Social Revolutions," PP: 575-593.

  
  

March 22-27: **_Technologies of Destruction: 1914-2000_** __.

March 22: World War I.

March 25: World War II.

March 27: **_Class discussion of_** **_Virginia Woolf_**

Readings, Spodek, "Chapter 18: Technologies of Mass Production and
Destruction," PP: 594-639; Documents Set, PP: 312-325, Virginia Woolf, Three
Guineas.

  
  

March 29- April 5 ** _Russia and Japan 1914-2000_** __.

March 29-April 1: Russia.

April 3-5: Japan.

Readings, Spodek, Chapter 19: Soviet Union and Japan," PP 640-676.

Documents Set, PP: 339-349; 354-362.

  
  

April 8-17: **_India and China 1914-2000._** __

April 8-10: India.

April 12-15: China.

April 17: Class Discussion-Gandhi and Mao.

Readings, Spodek "Chapter 20: China and India," PP 677-712.

Documents Set, PP: 363-386.

M. K. Gandhi, Hind Swaraj. **Available on Line.**

**Please make a print out from the following site:**

_http://www.swaraj.org/mkgandhiswaraj.htm_

  
  

April 19-22: **_Latin America 1870s-2000._** __

April 19 & 22: Latin America.

Readings, Spodek, "Chapter 23: Latin America," PP: 774-804.

Documents Set, 432-435; 437-458.

  
  

**_April 19: PAPER DUE ON_** ** _Three Guineas._** __

  
  

April 24-29: ** _Arab World and Africa 1870s-2000._** __

Readings, Spodek, "Chapter 21: The Middle East and North Africa," PP: 713-15;
720-721; 727-740; Spodek," Chapter 22: Sub-Saharan Africa," PP: 741-773.

Documents Set, PP: 387-392; 401-410; 423-431.

  
  

**_May 1: FINAL EXAM REVIEW!_** __

**_May 8: 10.00- 12.00 PM. FINAL EXAM-PLEASE REMEMBER TO BRING BLUE
BOOKS!!!_** __

