241 Chinese Literature in Translation I: Prose and Poetry  
  
---  
  
[Current Schedule](index.htm)

|

[Semester Schedule](schedule.htm)

|

[Syllabus](syllabus.htm)

|

[Links](links.htm)  
  
---|---|---|---  
  

Assignments

  

**Week 7**  
**M 10/29  
****Essay 2:** War, death, and separation were common experiences in ancient
China. Look for poems on this theme in the Book of Poetry, The Songs of the
South, music bureau poetry, and The Nineteen Old Poems. Make sure that you
include poems which provide different aspects of this theme. For example,
include poems written from the perspective of someone who goes/went to war and
of someone who stays/stayed behind; poems which celebrate the war and poems
which show a critical attitude toward war. Cite specific poems and compare
them with each other so as to give a sense of their individual character. Your
paper should be between 4 and 5 pages long.  

**Week 10**  
**M 11/28**  
**Essay 3:** Compare two poets of the Tang dynasty (618-906) with each other.
You may choose the work of one poet we have discussed in class; however, you
have to choose the second one by yourself and justify your choice. Identify
the characteristic features of each poet in regard to choice of topics,
preference for a particular poetic form, use of language and imagery, self-
representation, etc. The main emphasis of this assignment is on the difference
between these two poets. You may quote as many as 2 short poems (i.e.,
quatrains or briefer) per poet in their entirety; you may quote many more
lines, phrases, and words by the two poets to make your argument. Your paper
should be between 4 and 5 pages long. The paper is due on Wednesday November
28. Tang poets we have discussed in class are: Wang Wei, Li Bai, Du Fu, and Bo
Juyi. Additional Tang poets among which you can choose include: Meng Haoran;
Han Shan; Meng Jiao; Han Yu; Li He; Du Mu; Yu Xuanji (a female poet); Li
Shangyin. All of these poets are represented in Owen's anthology. Besides
these poets, you may choose any other Tang poet(s) you fancy.  

**Week 13  
M 12/10  
****Essay 4:** Write an answer to the question the editors of the Women
Writers of Traditional China raise in the introduction to their anthology:
"What are the hallmarks of women's verse? Is there any definition of women's
poetry but the tautological 'women's poetry' is verse written by women?" (p.
6) Is poetry gender-specific? Can men write only male poetry and females
female poetry? Is there such a thing like a specific male or female
sensibility? Can there be a poetry which is gender-neutral, and what would it
look like? Cite specific poems to support your argument. Your paper should be
between 4 and 5 pages long.  



**To make up the class from 10/3, please do one of the following
assignments:**  
1\. Attend one of the films of the Intercultural Film Club and write a one to
one and half page summary and response paper on it. For the schedule of the
Intercultural Film Club go to:
[http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/~aacc/](http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/%7Eaacc/)  
2\. Attend the second Thursday morning session of the Rutgers Hermeneutics
Conference on October 4, 2001, between 11:00 and 12:10. This session is on the
_Book of Songs._ Report on how the two scholars approached the _Book of
Songs._ For the location and program of this conference, go to the following
URL:
[http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/~easian/hermeneutics/program.html](http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/%7Eeasian/hermeneutics/program.html)  
3\. Attend one of the teach-ins related to the September events. These teach-
ins are organized by the Religion Department of Rutgers University. Report on
what the teach-in was about and whether you found it helpful. For more
information see the following URL: <http://religion.rutgers.edu/events.html>[  
](http://religion.rutgers.edu/events.html)4\. Visit the exhibition entitled
"Taiwan Today: Contemporary Photography & Cinematography" on display in
Alexander Library between September 20 and November 21, 2001. Answer the
following question: How does Taiwan present itself in this exhibit? What is
shown? What is not shown? What image does Taiwan project in this exhibit? If
you had to represent the US in Taiwan with a similar exhibit, what would you
show and why? What image of the US would you like to project? For more
information on the Taiwan exhibit, go to the following URL:
http:[//www.rci.rutgers.edu/~easian/lang-
culture/announcements/index.html](http://www.rci.rutgers.edu/%7Eeasian/lang-
culture/announcements/index.html)  
Your assignment is due before the end of the semester. This assignment is
mandatory and does not count as extra-credit asignment.  

> > > > > > > > ####  
>  
>  Past Assignments

**Week 2  
M 9/10 Texts and Contexts**  
**Exercise 1:** What can we learn about Chinese poetry from this excerpt of
the mid-18th century novel The Story of the Stone? Who wrote poetry? On what
occasions? What kowledge was required? What are some of the criteria for
judging poetry? Make a list of at least 5 observations.  

**Week 3  
W 9/17**  
**Exercise 2:** Look at the biographies and poems of these three women
writers. What is their social background? How/ from whom did they learn to
write poetry? Why did they write poetry? What subjects did they write about?
How wide or narrow is the range of the subjects on which they write? Is their
poetry gendered, i.e., could be written only by a woman writer?  
  
  
**Week 4  
W 9/24**  
**Exercise 3:** Look at these poems (all of them are on the subject of spring)
and make a list of titles, words, phrases, allusions, situations, different
kinds of mood, structure, etc. which they have in common. How could you use
this list to write a poem on the subject of spring in imitation of these
poems?  

**Week 5**  
**M 10/1**  
**Essay 1:** Choose 10 poems on the subject of autumn, make a list of common
elements, and use your analysis of these poems to write about how autumn is
described and used in traditional Chinese poetry. You may quote up to 3 poems
to support your argument. Your essay should be between 4 and 5 pages long.

Back to Top



Last modified on: October 12, 2001.  
  

