English 204/03, Survey of American Literature  
Tuesdays/Thursdays 8:10 am to 9:25 pm, Spring 2001  
Shepherd College, Shepherdstown, West Virginia  
Updated 2/16/01

Syllabus

Thu Jan 11 - Introduction to Course. Information Sheets. Practice Quiz.

Homework: Read "Literature to 1620," pp. 1-10, "The Iroquois Creation Story"
and "The Pima Creation Story," pp. 22-31.

Tue Jan 16 - Native American Creation Myths: Iroquois and Pima

Homework: Read the two Columbus Letters: "Letter to Luis de Santangel
Regarding the First Voyage, 1493" and "Letter to Ferdinand and Isabella
Regarding the Fourth Voyage, 1503," pp. 11-14. Also read John Smith's "From
the _General History of Virginia_. . . . " pp. 37-49.

(Wednesday, January 17 is the last day to Add/Drop via RAIL)

Thu Jan 18 - Explorers: Columbus and Smith

Homework: Read Anne Bradstreets poems "The Prologue," "To Her Father with Some
Verses," "The Author to Her Book," "A Letter to Her Husband Absent upon Public
Employment," within pp. 127-142. Also, Read Edward Taylor's poem, "Huswifery,"
pp.173.Finally, read Mary Rowlandson's "A Narrative of the Captivity and
Restoration of Mrs. Mary Rowlandson," pp.147-164.

Tue Jan 23 - Puritans: Bradstreet, Taylor and Rowlandson

Read from Franklin's Autobiography, Part Two, pp. 269-285, Paine's "Common
Sense," 308-321, and Jefferson's "The Declaration of Independence" 324-329

Thu Jan 25 - Colonialists: Franklin, Pain and Jefferson

Homework: Review for the Little Exam in part by Reading the Introduction to
Early American Literature 1620-1820 on pp. 77-87.

Tue Jan 30 - Little Exam (100 points)

Homework: Read The introduction to American Literature 1820-1865 on pp.
409-425 and Irving's "Rip Van Winkle" and Cooper's "The Slaughter of the
Pigeons" from The Pioneers, pp. 426-448.

Thu Feb 01 - The First Short Stories and Novels: Irving and Cooper

Read part of Equiano's "Narrative of the Life," pp. 349-353, Apess' "An
Indian's Looking-Glass for the White Man," pp. 477-483, part of Jacobs'
_Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl_ called  "The Lover," pp. 831-835, and
chapters VI and VII of Douglass' _Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass_
, pp. 973-978.

Tue Feb 06 - Conquered Peoples: Equiano, Apess, Jacobs, and Douglass

Homework: Read Hawthorne's "May-Pole of Merry Mount," pp. 623-629 and Poe's
"Sonnet--To Science," "The Raven" and "The Tell-Tale Heart," within pp.
700-746.

Thu Feb 08 - Hawthorne and Poe. Paper 1 Due in Class ONLY. No late papers
accepted.

Homework: Read Emerson's "The American Scholar," pp. 525-537, Thoreau's "Where
I Lived, and What I Lived For," pp. 910-919 and Whitman's "Letter to Ralph
Waldo Emerson," pp. 1019-1025.

Tue Feb 13 - Transcendentalists: Emerson, Thoreau, Whitman

Homework: "When I Heard the Learn'd Astronomer," p. 1044, "A Noiseless Patient
Spider," p. 1056, and Stanzas1, 2, 6, 11, 13, 17, 24, 32, 48, 49, 52 from
"Song of Myself," pp. 1057-1100.

Thu Feb 15 - Walt Whitman's Poetry

Read "These are the days when Birds come back--""I taste a liquor never
brewed--" "There's a certain Slant of Light," "Much Madness is divinest
Sense," "I heard a Fly buzz--when I died--" "This World is not Conclusion,"
"The Brain--is wider than the Sky--" "Apparently with no surprise"

Tue Feb 20 - Emily Dickinson's Poetry

Homework: Gilman's "The Yellow Wall-paper," pp. 1656-1668

Thu Feb 22 - An Early Feminist - Gilman

Homework: Review for Exam I

Tue Feb 27 - Exam I (150 points)

Homework: Crane's "Open Boat," pp. 1702-1719

Thu Mar 01 - Naturalism: Crane

Homework: James' "Daisy Miller: A Study," pp. 1491-1532

Tue Mar 06 - Realism: James

Homework: Read Frost's "Mending Wall," "The Road Not Taken," "Fire and Ice,"
"Nothing Gold Can Stay," "Stopping by the Woods on a Snowy Evening,"
"Departmental," and "Design"within pp. 1857-1869

Thu Mar 08 - Modern Poetry I: Frost

Read Sandburg's "Chicago," pp. 1886-7; Stevens' "The Emperor of Ice-cream" and
"A High-Toned Old Christian Woman," within pp. 1888-1901; Millay's "I Think I
Should Have Loved You Presently" and "In the Grave No Flower" within pp.
2104-2107; Cummings' "anyone lived in a pretty how town," and Hughes' "Mother
to Son," "I, Too," "Note on Commercial Theatre," "Democracy" within pp.
2224-2231.

(Midterm Grades Distributed by Advisors March 12th through March 16th)

Tue Mar 13 - Modern Poetry II: Sandburg, Stevens, Millay, Cummings and Hughes

Read Faulkner's "Barn Burning" pp. 2175-2187 and Hurston's "Chapter 2" from
_Their Eyes Were Watching God_.

Thu Mar 15 - Modern Fiction: Faulkner and Hurston. Paper II Due in Class. No
Late Papers Accepted.

Homework: Read the first half of Williams' _Streetcar Named Desire_ pp.
2282-2325.

S P R I N G * B R E A K (March 17th through March 25th)

Tue Mar 27 - American Drama: Williams - Video and Discussion

Homework: Read the second half of Williams' _Streetcar Named Desire_ pp.
2325-2348.

Thu Mar 29 - American Drama: Williams - Video and Discussion

Homework: Read Kingston's "No Name Woman" pp. and Li-Young Lee's poems
"Persimmons," and "This Room and Everything in It" within pp. 2813-2817.

(Friday March 30th is the last day to Withdraw. See Advisor before noon.)

Tue Apr 03 - Chinese-Americans: Kingston and Li-Young

Homework: Read Cha'vez' "The Last of the Menu Girls" pp. 2549-2566

Thu Apr 05 - Latino-Americans: Cha'vez

Homework: Read Brooks' poems "kitchenette building," "The Bean Eaters," "To
the Diaspora," "The Coora Flower" within pp. 2660-2665 and Hayden's "Middle
Passage" and "Those Wintry Sundays" within pp. 2624-2632.

Tue Apr 10 - African Americans: Brooks and Hayden

Read: Bishop's Read Bishop's "One Art," "In the Waiting Room" and "The Moose"
within pp. 2618 - 2624.

Thu Apr 12 - Contemporary Poetry: Bishop - Poems

Homework: Review for Exam II

Tue Apr 17 - Exam II (150 Points)

Start Reading Louise Erdrich's novel _Love Medicine_ , Chapters 1-3: "The
World's Greatest Fi

