## **Public Affairs U8500**

## **Seminar on the Politics of Identity and Difference: Perspectives on
Gender, Sexual Identity, and Race in the Workplace**

Spring 1998 ****  
  
---  
  
  

### **Professor Robin Ely**

Office: ****| ****1308 IAB ****| ****Office Hours: Tuesdays, 3:00 - 5:00 pm
****  
---|---|---  
****Phone: ****| ****854-4309 ****|
****E-mail:[rje8@columbia.edu](mailto:rje8@columbia.edu) ****  
****| ****| ****  
****Lecture: ****| ****Mondays, 2:10 - 4:00 pm ****| ****Room: 1401 IAB ****  
****| ****| ****  
  
  

**Course Description**  
  

The purpose of this course is to expose students to critical perspectives on
identity, focusing in particular on gender, race, and sexual identity, and to
explore the implications of these perspectives for how we understand and think
about creating workplaces that are both more equitable and more productive.
The course begins with a discussion of the meaning of identity and introduces
the notion of power as a central feature in the socially constructed meaning
of different identities. We then take a brief foray into a series of narrative
writings by people reflecting on the ways in which their identities as women,
people of color, gays, lesbians, and/or bisexuals have shaped their
experiences in the world. The purpose of these writings in the course is to
provide a grounding, based in people's lived experiences as members of
oppressed groups, for the theories introduced in the course.  
  

The next segment of the course covers a range of theoretical perspectives on
gender, sexual identity, and race. This part of the course draws heavily from
modern and postmodern feminist perspectives and, to a lesser extent, critical
race theory. In addition, there is a special emphasis on exploring how the
dominant--and therefore typically invisible--experiences of masculinity and
whiteness shape gender and race relations, respectively.  
  

The final segment of the course applies the theories we've discussed to
situations people encounter at work. First, we discuss the nature and quality
of interpersonal relationships at work as a particularly poignant--and
consequential--site for the expression of power asymmetries in gender, race,
and sexual relations. We also explore different perspectives on and
manifestations of inequities and inequalities in the workplace. Next, again
applying the concepts of the course, we consider different positions on
Affirmative Action as a potential remedy. Finally, we end with some thoughts
on how, at the level of both theory and individual action, one might think
about intervening to create organizations that are both more equitable and
more effective.  
  
  
  

**Course Requirements**  
  

1\. It is absolutely essential that students attend each class, having
completed all assigned readings.  
  

2\. Students will hand in weekly discussion questions, based on the assigned
readings. These will be due [the day or morning before the class meets].  
  

3\. Students will write a 20-page (maximum) final paper.  
  
  
  

**Course Grades**  
  

Course grades will be based on:  
  

1\. Weekly discussion questions (35 %)  
  

Each week prior to class, each student will prepare 2 to 3 questions designed
to stimulate class discussion. The questions should be related to topics and
ideas raised in the readings. They will be graded on a three-point scale
(excellent, good, unacceptable) based on the degree to which they are a)
provocative, creative, and insightful, b) relevant to the topics of the
week/course as a whole, and c) integrative.  
  

2\. The final paper (65 %)  
  

Each student will write a final paper on a topic of her/his choosing. In the
paper, students can explore further issues raised in the course; explore
issues that are related to or suggested by the course, but not directly
addressed; or apply learnings from the course to a particular organizational
or public policy problem. Other possibilities for paper topics also exist, and
students are encouraged to think creatively about how they would like to use
this opportunity.  
  
  
  

**Readings**  
  

[Required texts to be determined, depending on SIPA system for producing
"course packets," etc.]  
  
  
  

**Course Outline and Assigned Readings**  
  

**Part I. Identity and Power**  
  

**Class 1 Introduction**

**Jan. 26**  
  

The first class will be an introduction to the course, its purposes and its
logic.  
  

**Class 2 Identity**

**Feb. 2**  
  

Gergen, Kenneth. _The saturated self_. [selected chapters to be determined for
final draft of syllabus]  
  

Scott, Joan. 1992. "Experience." In J. Butler and J. Scott (eds), _Feminists
theorize the political_. London: Routledge, 22-40.  
  

Scott, Joan. 1995. Multiculturalism and the politics of identity. In J.
Rajchman (ed), _The identity in question_. London: Routledge, 3-12.  
  

**Class 3 Power**

**Feb. 9**  
  

Fiske, S. T. 1993. Controlling other people: The impact of power on
stereotyping. _American Psychologist_ , _48_ (6), 621-628.  
  

Lips, H. 1991. Power: Its many faces. Chapter 1 in _Women, men and power_.
Mountain View, CA: Mayfield Publishing Company, ??.  
  

Lips, H. 1991. Dominance: The structure of power. Chapter 6 in _Women, men and
power_. Mountain View, CA: Mayfield Publishing Company, ??.  
  

Kanter, Rosabeth Moss. 1977. Industrial Supply Corporation: The setting.
Chapter 2 in _Men and women of the corporation_. Basic Books, 29-43.  
  

Kanter, Rosabeth Moss. 1977. Power. Chapter 7 in _Men and women of the
corporation_. Basic Books, 164-205.  
  

hooks, bell. 1984. Changing perspectives on power. Chapter 6 in _Feminist
theory: From margin to center_. Boston, MA: South End Press, 83-93.  
  

Kennedy, Duncan. 1993. Sexual abuse, sexy dressing, and the eroticization of
domination. Chapter 4 in _Sexy Dressing: Essays on the power and politics of
cultural identity_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 126-213.  
  

**Class 4 The Experience of Oppression**

**Feb 16**  
  

Mura, D. 1988. Strangers in the village. In R. Simonson and S. Walker (eds),
_Multicultural literacy_. Saint Paul, MN: Graywolf Press, 135-153.  
  

The readings in the list below preceded by an asterisk are REQUIRED and [are
contained in your reading packet]. The other readings listed are on reserve. I
STRONGLY RECOMMEND that you read those as well.  
  

A. _Experiences of Asian American Women_ :  
  

*Mazumdar, S. 1989. General introduction: A woman-centered perspective on Asian American history. In Asian Women United of California (Ed.), _Making waves: An anthology of writings by and about Asian women_. Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1-22.   
  

Woo, D. 1989. The gap between striving and achieving: The case of Asian
American women. In Asian Women United of California (Ed.), _Making waves: An
anthology of writings by and about Asian women_. Boston, MA: Beacon Press,
185-194.  
  

Noda, K. E. 1989. Growing up Asian in America. In Asian Women United of
California (Ed.), _Making waves: An anthology of writings by and about Asian
women_. Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 243-251.  
  

Yamada, M. 1983. Invisibility is an unnatural disaster: Reflections of an
Asian American woman. In C. Moraga and G. Anzaldua (Eds.), _This bridge called
my back: Writings by radical women of color_. New York: Kitchen Table: Women
of Color Press, 35-40.  
  

Yamada, M. 1983. Asian Pacific American women and feminism. In C. Moraga and
G. Anzaldua (Eds.), _This bridge called my back: Writings by radical women of
color_. New York: Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press, 71-75.  
  

B. _Experiences of Latinas_ :  
  

*Moraga, C. 1983. La guera. In C. Moraga and G. Anzaldua (Eds.), _This bridge called my back: Writings by radical women of color_. New York: Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press, 27-34.   
  

Moraga, C. 1983. We fight back with our families. Chapter in C. Moraga.
_Loving in the war years_. Boston, MA: South End Press, 105-111.  
  

Neumaier, D. 1990. (From an interview with the Chicana muralist Judy Baca)
Judy Baca: Our people are the internal exiles. In G. Anzaldua (Ed.), _Making
face, making soul: Haciendo Caras_. San Francisco: Aunt Lute Foundation Books,
256-270.  
  

C. _Experiences of Native American Women_ :  
  

*Shanley, K. 1988. Thoughts on Indian feminism. In B. Brant (Ed.), _A gathering of spirit: A collection by North American Indian women_. Ithaca, NY: Firebrand Books, 213-215.   
  

Cameron, B. 1983. "Gee, you don't seem like an Indian from the reservation."
In C. Moraga and G. Anzaldua (Eds.), _This bridge called my back: Writings by
radical women of color_. New York: Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press, 46-52.  
  

Sanchez, C. L. 1988. Sex, class and race intersections: Visions of women of
color. In B. Brant (Ed.), _A gathering of spirit: A collection by North
American Indian women_. Ithaca, NY: Firebrand Books, 163-167.  
  

Moschkovich, J. 1983. "--But I know you, American woman." In C. Moraga and G.
Anzaldua (Eds.), _This bridge called my back: Writings by radical women of
color_. New York: Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press, 79-84.  
  

D. _Experiences of African American Women_ :  
  

*Wallace, M. 1988. Invisibility blues. In R. Simonson and S. Walker (eds), _Multicultural literacy_. Saint Paul, MN: Graywolf Press, 161-172.   
  

Lorde, A. 1983. The master's tools will never dismantle the master's house. In
C. Moraga and G. Anzaldua (Eds.), _This bridge called my back: Writings by
radical women of color_. New York: Kitchen Table: Women of Color Press,
98-101.  
  

Canaan, A. 1983. Brownness. In C. Moraga and G. Anzaldua (Eds.), _This bridge
called my back: Writings by radical women of color_. New York: Kitchen Table:
Women of Color Press, 232-237.  
  

The Combahee River Collective. 1982. A Black feminist statement. In G. T.
Hull, P. B. Scott, and B. Smith (Eds.), _All the women are White, all the
Blacks are men, but some of us are brave_. New York: The Feminist Press,
13-22.  
  

E. _Experiences of African American Men_ :  
  

*Baldwin, J. 1963. My dungeon shook: Letter to my nephew on the one hundredth anniversary of the emancipation. In _The fire next time_. New York: The Dial Press, 13-22.   
  

Baldwin, J. 1985. The black boy meets the white boy. From _The price of a
ticket_. New York: St. Martin's, 289-303.  
  

Gwaltney, J. L. 1981. _Drylongso_. New York: Vintage Books. Chapters:  
  

Howard Roundtree, 59-63.

Porter Millington, 102-104.

Sims Patrick, 109-113.  
  

F. _Experiences of White Jewish Women_ :  
  

* *Bulkin, E. 1988. Hard ground: Jewish identity, racism, and anti-semitism. In E. Bulkin, M. B. Pratt, and B. Smith (Eds.), _Yours in struggle_. Ithaca, NY: Firebrand Books. Any or all of Parts I - IX. (I recommend I, II, III, IV, VII, and/or IX.)   
  

G. _Experiences of Gay, Lesbian, and Bi-sexual People_ :  
  

*Schuster, R. 1992. Bisexuality and the quest for principled loving. In E. R. Weise (Ed.), _Closer to home: Bisexuality and feminism_. Seattle, WA: The Seal Press, 147-154.   
  

*Woods, J. D. 1993. Dimensions of the closet. Chapter 1 in _The corporate closet: The professional lives of gay men in America_. New York: Free Press, 1-30.   
  

Clark, D. 1987. The pleasures of being gay. In _Loving someone gay_. Berkeley:
Celestial Arts, 104-109.  
  

Grahn, J. 1987. Flaming without burning: Some of the roles of gay people in
society. In M. Thompson (Ed.), _Gay spirit: Myth and meaning_. New York: St.
Martin's Press, 3-27.  
  

Blasingame, B. M. 1992. The roots of biphobia: Racism and internalized
heterosexism. In E. R. Weise (Ed.), _Closer to home: Bisexuality and
feminism_. Seattle, WA: The Seal Press, 47-53.  
  

Almaguer, T. Chicano men: A cartography of homosexual identity and behavior.
In H. Abelove, M. A. Barale, D. M. Halperin (Eds.), _The lesbian and gay
studies reader_. New York: Routledge, 1993, 255-273.  
  

[NOTE: There may be some replacements above with more recent material, as well
as some additions.]  
  

**Part II. Theories of Gender, Sexual Identity, and Race**  
  

**Class 5 Modern Feminist Perspectives on Sex and Gender**

**Feb. 23**  
  

Gies, F. L. 1993. Self-fulfilling prophecies: A social-psychological view of
gender. In A. Beall and R. Sternberg (eds.), The psychology of gender. New
York: Guilford Press, 9-54. [Include??]  
  

Epstein, Cynthia Fuchs. 1988. _Deceptive distinctions: Sex, gender, and the
social order_. New York City: Russell Sage Foundation. [Selected chapters to
be determined in final draft of syllabus.]  
  

Gilligan, Carol. 1982. Images of relationship. Chapter 2 in _In a different
voice_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 24-63.  
  

Bem, Sandra L. 1993. The construction of gender identity. Chapter 5 in _The
lenses of gender_. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 133-175.  
  

Hartsock, Nancy. 1983. _Money, sex, and power_. Boston: Northeastern
University Press. [Selected chapters to be determined in final draft of
syllabus.]  
  

Dinnerstein, Dorothy. 1976. The ruling of the world. Chapter 8 in _The mermaid
and the minotaur_. New York: Harper and Row, Publishers, 160-197.  
  

**Class 6 Postmodern Perspectives on Sex and Gender**

**March 2**  
  

Flax, Jane. 1990. Feminisms: Stories of gender. Chapter 5 in _Thinking
fragments: Psychoanalysis, feminism, and postmodernism in the contemporary
west_. Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press, 135-183.  
  

Fraser, Nancy and Nicholson, Linda F. 1990. Social criticism without
philosophy: An encounter between feminism and postmodernism. In L. Nicholson
(ed), _Feminism/postmodernism_. London: Routledge, 19-38.  
  

Flax, Jane. 1990. Postmodernism and gender relations in feminist theory. In L.
Nicholson (ed), _Feminism/postmodernism_. London: Routledge, 39-62.  
  

Di Stefano, Christine. 1990. Dilemmas of difference. In L. Nicholson (ed),
_Feminism/postmodernism_. London: Routledge, 63-82.  
  

Bordo, Susan. 1990. Feminism, postmodernism, and gender skepticism. In L.
Nicholson (ed), _Feminism/postmodernism_. London: Routledge, 133-156.  
  

**Class 7 On Masculinity**

**March 9**  
  

Astrachan, Anthony. 1988. Why this book. Chapter 1 in _How men feel_. New
York: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 3-13.  
  

Astrachan, Anthony. 1988. A framework of ideas. Chapter 2 in _How men feel_.
New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 14-35.  
  

Stoltenberg, John. 1989. How men have (a) sex. In _Refusing to be a man:
Essays on sex and justice_. Portland, OR: Breitenbush Books, Inc., 25-39.  
  

Stoltenberg, John. 1989. Sexual objectification and male supremacy. In
_Refusing to be a man: Essays on sex and justice_. Portland, OR: Breitenbush
Books, Inc., 41-56.  
  

Herek, Gregory M. On heterosexual masculinity: Some psychical consequences of
the social construction of gender and sexuality. In M. Kimmel (ed), _Changing
men_. Sage Publications, 68-82.  
  

[NOTE: I may add or update here with readings from some newer research and
more recently edited volumes.]  
  

**Spring Break March 16-March 20**  
  

**Class 8 The Social Construction of Sexual Identity**

**March 23**  
  

Rich, Adrienne. 1980. Compulsory heterosexuality and lesbian existence.
_Signs: A Journal of Women in Culture and Society_ , _5_ (4), 631-660.  
  

Chodorow, Nancy. _Masculinities, Femininities, Sexualities_. [Get full cite]  
  

**Class 9 Race and Race Relations**

**March 30**  
  

Essed, Philomena. 1990. Racism in today's societies. Chapter 1 in _Everyday
racism_. Sage Publications, 7-37.  
  

West, Cornel. 1992. Black leadership and the pitfalls of racial reasoning. In
T. Morrison (Ed.), _Race-ing justice, en-gendering power: Essays on Anita
Hill, Clarence Thomas, and the construction of social reality_. New York:
Pantheon Books, 390-401.  
  

Steele, S. 1990. I'm Black, you're White, who's innocent. Chapter 1 in _The
content of our character_. New York: St. Martin Press, 1-20.  
  

Lawrence, Charles. 1987. The id, the ego, and equal protection: Reckoning with
unconscious racism, _Stanford Law Review_ , 317-324.  
  

[NOTE: There will be several additional readings here on the social
construction of race and racial identity.]  
  

**Class 10 On Being White**

**April 6**  
  

McIntosh, P. 1990. White privilege: Unpacking the invisible knapsack.
_Independent School_ , Winter, 31-34.  
  

Steele, S. 1990. White guilt. Chapter 5 in _The content of our character_. New
York: St. Martin Press, 77-92.  
  

Pratt, M. B. 1988. Identity: Skin, blood, heart. In E. Bulkin, M. B. Pratt,
and B. Smith (Eds.), _Yours in struggle_. Ithaca, NY: Firebrand Books, 11-57.  
  

Frankenberg, R. 1993. _White women, race matters: The social construction of
whiteness_. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. [Selected chapters
to be determined in final draft of syllabus.]  
  

**Part III. Applications to the Workplace**  
  

**Class 11 Relationships at the Intersections of Sex, Gender, and/or Race**

**April 13**  
  

Hurtado, Aida. 1989. Relating to privilege: Seduction and rejection in the
subordination of white women and women of color. _Signs_ , _14_ , 833-855.  
  

Thomas, David A. 1989. Mentoring and irrationality: The role of racial taboos.
_Human Resource Management_ , _28_ (2), 279-290.  
  

Ely, Robin J. 1994. Effects of organizational demographics and social identity
on relationships among profession women. _Administrative Science Quarterly_ ,
39, 203-238.  
  

Richter, J. 1990. Crossing boundaries between professional and personal life.
In H. Y. Grossman and N. L. Chester (eds.), _The experience and meaning of
work in women's lives_. Hillsdale, NY: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 143-164.  
  

Kolb, Deborah. Peace-making in organizations [Get full cite.]  
  

Fletcher, Joyce. [Get full cite.]  
  

**Class 12 Inequality/Inequity**

**April 20**  
  

Acker, Joan. 1992. Gendering organization theory. In A. J. Mills and P.
Tancred (eds.), _Gendering organizational analysis_. Newbury Park, CA: Sage
Publishers, 248-261.  
  

Kanter, Rosabeth Moss. 1977. Numbers: Minorities and majorities. Chapter 8 in
_Men and women of the corporation_. Basic Books, 206-242.  
  

Schultz, Vicki. 1992. Women "before" the law: Judicial stories about women,
work, and sex segregation on the job. In J. Butler and J. Scott (eds),
_Feminists theorize the political_. London: Routledge, 297-338.  
  

McKinnon, Catherine. 1979. _Sexual harassment of working women_. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press. [Selected chapters to be determined in final draft
of syllabus.]  
  

Freeman, Alan. 1988. Racism, rights, and the quest for equality of
opportunity: A critical legal essay. _Harvard Law Review_ , 23.  
  

**Class 13 Making Change I**

**April 27**  
  

Fish, Stanley. 1994. You can only fight discrimination with discrimination.
Chapter 5 in _There's no such thing as free speech_. New York: Oxford
University Press, 70-79.  
  

Kennedy, Randall. 1989. Racial critiques of legal academia. _Harvard Law
Review_.  
  

Kennedy, Duncan. 1993. A cultural pluralist case for affirmative action in
legal academia. Chapter 2 in _Sexy Dressing: Essays on the power and politics
of cultural identity_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 34-82.  
  

**Class 14 Making Change II**

**May 4**  
  

Thomas, David A. and Ely, Robin J. 1996. Making differences matter: A new
paradigm for managing diversity. _Harvard Business Review_ , September-
October.  
  

Meyerson, Debra and Scully, Maureen. 1996. Tempered radicalism and the
politics of ambivalence: Personal alignment and change. _Organization
Science_. [Need to get exact cite.]  
  

Flax, Jane. No conclusions: Gender, knowledge, self, and power in transition.
Chapter 7 in _Thinking fragments: Psychoanalysis, feminism, and postmodernism
in the contemporary west_. Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of
California Press, 222-236.  
  

Van Nostrom, Katherine Herr. Readings from Gender-responsible leadership [Get
full cite.]  
  

Martin, Patricia Yancy. Feminist management techniques. In E. Fagenson (ed.),
_Women and work_ [Get full cite.]

* * *

[Return to the SIPA Course
Index](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/sipa/COURSES/97_98/sipacoursesIndex.html)

[**SIPA Directory**
![](syllabus.ely_files/back.gif)](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/sipa/index.html)

* * *

[_Columbia University Home Page_](http://www.columbia.edu/)  
[SIPA Web manager](mailto:hm3@columbia.edu)

