

















[![Home](_derived/home_cmp_nature000_vbtn.gif)](./)  
[![Syllabus](_derived/syllabus.htm_cmp_nature000_vbtn.gif)](syllabus.htm)  
[![Assignments](_derived/assignments.htm_cmp_nature000_vbtn.gif)](assignments.htm)  
[![Grades](_derived/grades1.htm_cmp_nature000_vbtn.gif)](grades1.htm)



| |

![](_themes/nature/narule.gif)

  
GRCC Online Spring 2002

Sociology 220 - Sex and Gender  
  
Instructor: Sheila Farr

![](_themes/nature/narule.gif)



Welcome to Sociology 220, Sex and Gender.  My name is Sheila Farr. I received
my graduate degree from the University of Washington, and have been teaching
at GRCC for ten years. I am enjoying teaching on the internet, and look
forward to meeting you all through e-mail contact. However, I am available to
speak with you by phone or in-person at my office on campus.  My e-mail
address is [sfarr@grcc.ctc.edu](mailto:sfarr@grcc.ctc.edu).  My phone number
is (253)833-9111 x4707. My office is in room SS23. I check my e-mail several
times a day, so e-mail is the best way to reach me on a regular basis.  If you
have any questions on anything you see when you first look at this website,
please contact me immediately - so that we are all starting out together  with
a mutual understanding of the course requirements.  The HOME page has general
information about the course. The SYLLABUS page contains the outline of the
course on a week by week schedule. The GRADING page is just that -- grade
calculations.  The ASSIGNMENTS page lists the assignment due dates, and the
content of the weekly assignments. Each week, one assignment is due. It will
be posted on the ASSIGNMENT page the first Monday of each week, and will be
due the following Monday by midnight.  All assignments should be sent to my
e-mail account [sfarr@grcc.ctc.edu](mailto:sfarr@grcc.ctc.edu).  Exams will be
sent out on Fridays to your e-mail accounts, and are due back to me on
Tuesdays, by midnight.  Exam dates can be found on the syllabus. All exams and
assignments should be sent as attachments to my e-mail account.

  _Course Objective:_

The goal of this class is to learn about the similarities and differences
between women and men.  We will be looking at these distinctions from a
sociological perspective, which is essentially saying that we will look at
these distinctions as complex ones. The understanding will be that the
distinctions between masculinity and femininity are open to analysis and
change.

 The sociological perspective allows us to step outside of ourselves and to
take a critical view of the world.  Understanding our own constraints and
opportunities contributes to greater empathy and communication both in the
personal and the public sphere.

  _Course Description:_

From culture to culture, the male-female distinction has been assigned
meanings and significance that have implications for virtually all aspects of
life.  In this course, we will study the differences and similarities between
women and men, both personally and politically.  In studying sex and gender
from a sociological perspective, we will question the meaning that cultures
have placed on femininity and masculinity. We will look critically at the
theories and the research on a range of diverse topics.

  _Classroom Policies:_

Academic honesty is expected in this class. If it is suspected that cheating
has occurred, there will be an investigation.  It is possible that you will
receive a 0 for that assignment or a 0 for the course.  In this class, you
will be expected to keep current on the readings as posted in the syllabus. It
is to your benefit to have read each chapter prior to starting the week that
the chapter is due.  You are expected to turn in assignments by their due
dates.

Late assignments are not accepted.  


_Campus Wide Outcomes_

1\. Responsibility - encompasses those behaviors and dispositions necessary
for students to be effective members of a community.

2.  Critical Thinking - the ability to think through various topics in a complex way.  In other words, for the purpose of this class, you will be expected to step outside of yourself and pay close attention to the constraints and opportunities available to different groups of people under various circumstances.

3.  Examining Diversity - the recognition and examination of the similarities and differences within and among groups of people.

_Special Needs_

I realize that students may have special needs that may impact your ability to
be successful in this course.  If there is something that I can do to help you
with the course, please notify me as soon as possible.

_Students Subject to Provisions of Americans with Disabilities Act_

If you believe you qualify for course adaptations or special accommodations
under the Americans With Disabilities Act, it is your responsibility to
contact the Disabled Students Services Coordinator in the LSC and provide the
appropriate documentation.  Please notify me as soon as possible if you need
any kind of special accommodations.  


![](_themes/nature/narule.gif)

  
  
---|---|---

