  
**Major Topics in East Asian Civilization**  
---  
  
![](../buttonbar2.gif)  
  
|

# Questions on the Reading  
  
---  
  
### Week 4

|

[return to Syllabus](../course_syllabus.html)  
  
[![](../images/time1.gif)](javascript:MM_openBrWindow\('../timelines/timeline.html','850','scrollbars=yes,resizable=yes,width=400,height=550'\))
|    |
[![](../maps/thumbs/buddhism_map.jpg)](javascript:openWindow\('imgview.html','buddhism_map','scrollbars=yes,resizable=yes,
width=700,height=550'\);) |  [ ![](../maps/thumbs/3kingdoms_new.gif)
](javascript:openWindow\('simpleimgview.html','3kingdoms','scrollbars=yes,resizable=yes,
width=550,height=550'\);) |  [![](../maps/thumbs/n_s_dynasties_new.gif)
](javascript:openWindow\('simpleimgview.html','n_s_dynasties','scrollbars=yes,resizable=yes,
width=550,height=550'\);)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
**Questions on the Reading for week 4**  
|  Tuesday:  | Sources of Chinese Tradition, pp. 415-481, *Ebrey, 97-104.  
---|---  
  |  
Thursday:  | Sources of Chinese Tradition, pp. 481-504, 522-536.  
  
  
**Introduction** to  "Early Buddhist China."

When the Chinese first learned of Buddhism, its teachings were often evaluated
in Daoist and Confucian terms. Yet the apparent differences between the
social, philosophical, and literary traditions of India and China proved less
than insurmountable. Buddhism became a fundamental element of Chinese
civilization, and it became the means by which Chinese civilization spread
throughout East Asia.

The readings for this week include selections from early Chinese Buddhist
apologetic texts; Chinese translations of Indian and Central Asian Mah_y_na
sutras; commentaries on those sutras by Chinese monks; a defense of the Pure
Land School that was to rank among the most popular forms of East Asian
Buddhism; and a central text of the Meditation (Chan) School, a form of
Buddhism that developed in China and later spread to Korea (Son) and Japan
(Zen).  
  
|   |  
---|---  
[![](images/thumbs/pagoda.jpg)](javascript:openWindow\('imgview.html','pagoda','scrollbars=yes,resizable=yes,width=650,height=550'\);)
|

The Famen pagoda prior to excavation ( _left_ ); Excavation photograph of the
first chamber of the Famen Monastery crypt ( _right_ ). Lintong, Shaanxi
Province.

The discovery of the reliquary deposit beneath the ruins of a brick pagoda at
Fufeng is a rare instance of a perfect match between the archaeological data
and historical events. The Tang scholar Han Yu's diatribe of 819 protesting
the emperor's receiving the relics of the Buddha in his own palace and
imploring His Majesty to cast out such filthy remains so that the people might
never again be misled by them, is one of the great pieces of Chinese prose
writing (see deBary). It was also an important milestone in the events leading
to the great Buddhist persecutions Of 842 - 845 CE, in which thousands of
Buddhist monasteries were razed and hundreds of thousands of monks and nuns
forced to return to lay life. The relics of which Han Yu complained came from
the Chongzhensi, renamed the Famensi, or Monastery of the Gate of the Law, in
1003 under the Song dynasty (960 \- 1279 CE). Founded in 555 under the Western
Wei dynasty (535 \- 557 C E), the Famen Monastery rose to extraordinary
prominence under the Tang dynasty (61S - 907 CE); it was closely associated
with no fewer than seven Tang emperors, including the notorious Empress Wu
Zetian (r. 684 - 705).

In August 1981, after a period of heavy rainfall, the octagonal, brick pagoda
of thirteen stories, which had endured for 372 years since its construction in
1609, collapsed in ruins. After the remains had been made safe, the provincial
government decided to build a replacement, and an archaeological team was
constituted to proceed with an excavation prior to rebuilding. Clearing of the
foundations revealed not only the circular trench in which the brick pagoda
had stood but also the larger, square foundations of an earlier wooden pagoda
and steps leading down to a level corridor and three successive stone
chambers, the innermost of which lay beneath the core of the foundations of
both pagodas.

As the focus of worship in early Buddhist monasteries, every pagoda had its
"foundation deposit," sealed within a stone casket or small chamber in the
foundations, where it usually lay undisturbed until it became necessary to
rebuild the pagoda after its destruction by fire or lightning, the ravages of
war or religious persecution. Under such circumstances, the contents could be
recovered and incorporated in a new deposit beneath the restored or rebuilt
pagoda. In this deposit, the relic, described by Han Yu as the Buddha's
"decayed and rotten bones," was supposed to be a fingerbone. It is a hollow
cylinder as thick as a finger and about an inch and a half long, with the
seven principal stars of the Great Bear, or Big Dipper, engraved inside it.
Three facsimiles were also discovered in the crypt.  
  
[![](images/thumbs/manu.jpg)](javascript:openWindow\('imgview.html','manu','width=380,height=550'\);)[![](images/thumbs/pen_monk.jpg)](javascript:openWindow\('imgview.html','pen_monk','width=420,height=550'\);)[![](images/thumbs/buddha_preaching.jpg)](javascript:openWindow\('imgview.html','buddha_preaching','width=420,height=550'\);)[![](images/thumbs/hui_neng.jpg)](javascript:openWindow\('imgview.html','hui_neng','width=480,height=550'\);)[![](images/thumbs/lotus_sutra.jpg)](javascript:openWindow\('imgview.html','lotus_sutra','width=650,height=550'\);)[![](images/thumbs/parsel.jpg)](javascript:openWindow\('imgview.html','parsel','width=600,height=550'\);)[![](images/thumbs/sakyamuni.jpg)](javascript:openWindow\('imgview.html','sakyamuni','width=425,height=550'\);)[![](images/thumbs/sakyamuni2.jpg)](javascript:openWindow\('imgview.html','sakyamuni2','width=400,height=550'\);)[![](images/thumbs/sutra.jpg)](javascript:openWindow\('imgview.html','sutra','width=425,height=550'\);)  
**Questions**  
  
  1. Buddhism presented certain intellectual and cultural challenges to Chinese traditions. What were the main points of conflict between Buddhist and traditional Chinese beliefs and practices? What were the differing views of self and society, the body, the family, the state, death, and the afterlife? How did Chinese Buddhist texts attempt to defend Buddhism from contemporary critique? 

  2. How do the philosophical and psychological concepts of Mah_y_na Buddhism found in the Three Treatise, Consciousness Only, Lotus, and Flower Garland schools relate to those of pre-Buddhist Chinese thought? Where can you identify points of similarity or difference? 

  3. How does the Lotus Sutra distinguish its message from previous Buddhist teachings? What, according to the sutra, is the meaning and function of "expedient means"? What does the sutra have to say about the nature and value of language, narrative, and its own textual status? What forms of religious practice are advocated by the sutra and to what do they lead? 

  4. What were the principal challenges to Pure Land claims raised in Daochuo's Compendium on the Happy Land and how were they rebutted? How does the cosmology of the Pure Land texts compare to that of the Lotus Sutra? 

  5. How is self-cultivation understood in the Platform Sutra? What similarities and differences do you see between the Chan texts and those of the pre-Buddhist Chinese tradition? 
  


