

**_

RTVF 4900.711: ETHNICITY AND AMERICAN FILM

_

SPRING, 1998

_

_

PROFESSOR DIANE NEGRA

SPEECH/DRAMA BLDG., ROOM 217

TEL: 565-2591 - INTERNET: NEGRA@UNT.EDU

OFFICE HOURS 2:00-4:30 T/TH AND BY APPOINTMENT





_

Prerequisites:

**_

Consent of Instructor.

Because the course requires broad familiarity with film history, students
should have taken at least one introductory film class and hold basic
knowledge of contemporary American social history.

**_

Course Content and Goals:

**_

This course has both a historical and a critical focus. It is designed to
raise questions concerning the representation of a variety of ethnicities in
American film from the silent cinema to the classical period and New
Hollywood. Entering into current debates about the nature and function of
"whiteness," this course invites students to reflect on what it means to be
white in American culture, and to consider the category of whiteness as
hierarchical, contested, and unstable. We will consider the valuing and
devaluing of ethnicities over time as we examine mainstream American films
from the 1910s to the 1990s and their depictions of Irish, Italian, Hispanic,
Asian, Arab and Jewish identity. Through analysis of Hollywood
representations, we will engage broader questions of the way in which
ethnicity structures white experience in the U.S. We will consider the complex
relationship between American popular culture and immigration and assimilation
issues and investigate the ways that ethnicity intersects with issues of
genre, stardom, nationalism, tourism and nostalgia. We will pose cultural
questions about the ideological function of ethnicity in the Hollywood system,
and consider the ways in which ethnicity has been celebrated or demonized and
its relationship to social history.

The course will have a particular (but not exclusive) focus on the
intersections of ethnicity and gender.

**_

Film Screenings:

**_

Required screenings for our course will be held once weekly. Because the films
that we view drive the course, it is essential that you attend these
screenings in order to make sense of the reading material and to be able to
participate in class. If it is absolutely unavoidable that you will miss a
particular screening, all the films for the course will be available on video
at the Media Library. You cannot check out these videotapes, but you can watch
them at the library when you present your student ID. The films are also at
your disposal to re-view in preparation for essays and exams.



**_

Reading Material:

**_

There are two required texts for this course: _Unspeakable Images: Ethnicity
and the American Cinema_ , ed. Lester D. Friedman, and _White_ , Richard Dyer.
In addition, there will be a coursepak available at the GAB Copy Center.
Should you be unable to purchase these readings, I will place one copy each of
the Friedman and Dyer texts and the coursepak on reserve in the library.

You may find it useful to do some supplemental reading in Allen L. Woll &
Randall M. Miller's _Ethnic and Racial Images in American Film and Television_
, in which the authors provide overviews of the history of representation of
various racial and ethnic groups. The book is available in the reference
section of the library.

The amount of reading is disproportionately heavy near the start of the
semester, lighter near the end to allow you to devote more time to the
preparation of your term paper. The reading material for this course is
demanding, and may in some cases, require re-reading and extensive note-
taking. It is my hope that we will be able to engage with some of the most
important and advanced theorizations of ethnicity, gender, genre, and stardom,
and I keep the reading level high to challenge, not to frustrate you. We will
devote a good deal of class time to discussion of the reading, and I invite
you to raise questions both during class time and during office hours.

**_

Graded Course Activities

**_

3-5 page Essay. . . . . . . . . . 25%

Mid-Term Exam. . . . . . . . . .25%

10-15 page Term Paper. . . . .50%

Your final grade in the course is derived from three major assignments: a
short essay of 3-5 pages, an essay format midterm exam, and a full-length term
paper. Deadlines for these assignments may be found in the Course Syllabus
below. In general, the class will heavily emphasize your ability to make
reasoned arguments about ethnicity and film, and will stress your ability to
work with textual evidence. This course is designed to give you an opportunity
to polish your oral and written expressive skills.

The Mid-Term Exam will ask you to synthesize the major concepts of the first
half of the course. It will be an essay-based take-home exam given to you
before the Spring Break.

Your 3-5 page essay will respond to a specific assignment, while your term
paper can be more open. I will ask you to propose a topic and discuss your
intended methodology in a 1 page abstract due approximately one month before
the paper itself. I will be very happy to brainstorm and discuss ideas with
you, and to read and critique drafts of your paper as it evolves. When I can,
I will also try to order copies of films which you may want to use in your
research (if they are not already part of the Media Library collection). Bear
in mind that this will require a month or more's notice. For a complete
directory of American films with ethnic and racial content before 1960, I
recommend the American Film Institute's _Within Our Gates: Ethnicity in
American Feature Films 1911-1960_ available in the reference section at the
library.

Because our course will be heavily discussion-oriented, I also leave room in
the final grade for some assessment of your participation in class. While I do
not penalize students for weak class participation, I do raise borderline
grades at the end of term for students who have participated frequently and
intelligently.



**

COURSE SYLLABUS



_Date_ _Topic_ _Readings

**_

January 26 Introduction to the Course

Theorizing Ethnicity Friedman, anthol.

February 2 The Problem of Whiteness Dyer, excerpts from

Screening: _The Sheik_ _White_ (pgs 1-144)

(George Melford, 1921) Studlar, "Optic

Intoxication:' Rudolph

Valentino and Dance

Madness"

February 9 Ethnicity and Assimilation Dyer, excerpt from

Screening: _Young Romance_ _White_ , (pgs. 145

(George Melford, 1915) 223)

Musser, anthol.

February 16 Ethnicity and Otherness Higashi, anthol.

Screening: _The Cheat_ Kirihara, "The

(Cecil B. DeMille, 1915) Accepted Idea

Displaced: Stereotype  and Sessue

Hayakawa"

Browne, "Orientalism

as an Ideological  Form"

February 23 Ethnicity and Disguise Winokur, _American

_

Screening: _Manhattan Melodrama_ _Laughter: Immigrants,

_

(Alan Crosland, 1934) _Ethnicity and 1930s

_

_Hollywood Film

_

_Comedy_ , pgs. 179-

238.

Shohat, anthol.

**

SHORT ESSAY DUE

**

March 2 Ethnicity and Censorship Lee, _Pending_

Screening: _Duel In the Sun_ _Catholicization: The

_

(King Vidor, 1946)  _Legion of Decency,

_

_Duel in the Sun and

_

_The Threat of Censor-

_

_ship_ , pps. 42-68.

Dyer, "The Colour of  Virtue: Lillian Gish,  Whiteness and

Femininity"

March 9 Ethnicity and Pastoral Fantasy Sweeney, "A Good

Screening: _The Quiet Man_ Stick to Beat the

(John Ford, 1952) Lovely Lady:'

Violence and Equality  in John Ford's _The

_

_Quiet Man_."

Giles, anthol.

**

SPRING BREAK

**

March 23 Ethnicity, Stardom and Genre Dyer, "Introduction"

Screening: _Touch of Evil_ McLean, "'I'm A

(Orson Welles, 1948) Cansino:' Trans-

formation, Ethnicity,

and Authenticity in the Construction of Rita Hayworth, American

Love Goddess."

Lott, "The Whiteness

of Film Noir"

**

MID-TERM EXAM DUE

**

March 30 Ethnicity and Tribalism Dyer, "Entertainment

Screening: _West Side Story_ and Utopia"

(Robert Wise, 1961) Chinen-Biesen, "West

Side Story: Kennedy's

'Camelot' and  American National  Identity in 1961"

Roberts, "'The Lady in the Tutti-Frutti Hat:' Carmen Miranda, A Spectacle of
Ethnicity"

April 8* Ethnicity, Performance and Urban  Yanc, "'More Than A

(re-scheduled Culture  Woman:' Music,

class) Screening: _Saturday Night Fever_ Masculinity, and

(John Badham, 1977) Male Spectacle in _Saturday

_

_Night Fever_ and

_Staying Alive_ "

Neale, "Masculinity as Spectacle"

April 13 Ethnicity and Transformation Sobchak, anthol.

Screening: _Zelig_ Desser and Fried-

(Woody Allen, 1984) man, _American-

_

_Jewish Filmmakers:

_

_Traditions and Trends

_

pps. 36-68.

**

TERM PAPER ABSTRACT DUE

**



April 20 Ethnicity and Postmodernism Marchetti, anthol.

Screening: _Year of the Dragon_

(Michael Cimino, 1985)

April 27 New Modes of Ethnic Romanticism  Rowe, _The Unruly

_

Screening: _Moonstruck_ _Woman: Gender and

_

(Norman Jewison, 1987) _the Genres of

Laughter_. pps. 191-212.

Woll & Miller,

_Ethnic and Racial

_

_Images in American

_

_Film and Television_.

pps. 275-307.

May 4 Ethnicity, Nostalgia and Negra, "Marisa Tomei

Tourism and the Fantasy of

Screening: _Only You_ Ethnicity"

(Norman Jewison, 1994)

Course Conclusions/Final Wrap-Up



**

TERM PAPERS DUE MAY 8 AT 5:00 PM.

**











**

SELECTED READINGS

RTVF 4900: ETHNICITY AND AMERICAN FILM

SPRING, 1998

**

1. Studlar, Gaylyn. "'Optic Intoxication:' Rudolph Valentino and Dance Madness." in _This Mad Masquerade: Stardom and Masculinity in the Jazz Age_. New York: Columbia U P, 1996, 150-198.

**

**

2. Browne, Nick. "Orientalism as an Ideological Form: American Film Theory in the Silent Period." _Wide Angle_ 11(4) (1989) 23-31.

****

3. Kirihara, Donald. "The Accepted Idea Displaced: Stereotype and Sessue Hayakawa." in _The Birth of Whiteness: Race and the Emergence of U.S. Cinema_. Ed. Daniel Bernardi. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers U P, 1996 81-99.

4. Winokur, Mark. "Unlikely Ethnic Heroes: William Powell, Myrna Loy, and the Fantasy of Assimilation." in _American Laughter: Immigrants, Ethnicity, and 1930s Hollywood Film Comedy_. New York: St. Martin's P, 1996, 179-238.

5. Dyer, Richard. "The Colour of Virtue: Lillian Gish, Whiteness and Femininity." in _Women and Film: A Sight and Sound Reader_. Eds. Pam Cook  & Philip Dodd, London: BFI, 1993, 1-9.

6. Sweeney, Gael. "'A Good Stick To Beat the Lovely Lady:' Violence and Equality in John Ford's _The Quiet Man_." (Unpublished Essay, Author's Permission).

7. Dyer, Richard. "Introduction." in _Heavenly Bodies: Film Stars and Society_. New York: St. Martin's P, 1986, 1-18.

8. McLean, Adrienne L. "'I'm A Cansino:' Transformation, Ethnicity and Authenticity in the Construction of Rita Hayworth, American Love Goddess." _Journal of Film and Video_ 44(3-4) (Fall-Winter 1992-1993) 8-26.

9. Lott, Eric. "The Whiteness of Film Noir." in _Whiteness: A Critical Reader_. Ed. Mike Hill, New York: New York U P, 1997, 81-101.

10. Dyer, Richard. "Entertainment and Utopia." _Movie_ 24 (Spring, 1977) 2-13.

11. Roberts, Shari. "'The Lady in the Tutti-Frutti Hat:' Carmen Miranda, a Spectacle of Ethnicity." _Cinema Journal_ 32(3) (Spring, 1993) 3-23.

12. Neale, Steve. "Masculinity as Spectacle." in _Screen_ 24(6) November/December 1983 2-16.

13. Yanc, Jeff. "'More Than A Woman:' Music, Masculinity, and Male Spectacle in _Saturday Night Fever_ and _Staying Alive_." _The Velvet Light Trap_ 38 (Fall, 1996) 39-50.

14. Desser, David & Lester D. Friedman. "Woody Allen: The Schlemiel as Modern Philosopher." in _American-Jewish Filmmakers: Traditions and Trends_. Urbana: U of Illinois P, 1993, 36-68,

15. Rowe, Kathleen. "Masculinity and Melodrama in Postclassical Romantic Comedy." in _The Unruly Woman: Gender and the Genres of Laughter_. Austin: U of Texas P, 1995, 191-212.

16. Woll, Allen L. & Miller, Randall M. "Italians." in _Ethnic and Racial Images in American Film and Television_. New York: Garland, 1987, 275-307.

