**Syllabus**  
**Hist 418: American Military History**  
**(TR 2:30-3:45 in DA 303)**

**Prof. Wayne Lee
103a Gottschalk**  
**wlee@louisville.edu
852-6817 (dept. phone)**

**Texts:** All the books for this class will be available at the University
Bookstore.

Chambers, John W. and G. Kurt Piehler, eds. _Major Problems in American
Military History_. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1999. (ISBN: 066933538X)

Hagan, Kenneth J. and William R. Roberts, eds. _Against All Enemies,
Interpretations of American Military History from Colonial Times to the
Present_. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Publishing Group, 1986. (ISBN:
0313252807)

Howard, Michael C. _War in European History_. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1976. (ISBN: 0192890956)

Karsten, Peter, ed. _The Military in America, From the Colonial Era to the
Present_. 2nd ed. New York: The Free Press, 1986. (ISBN: 0029191904)

In addition there will be several readings on online course reserve through
the library catalog. They are listed here with links to their location on the
Library web site (remember password!) and highlighted below. Make sure you
arrange to get those readings before the last minute!

You will need Adobe Acrobat Reader to read or print these reserve articles.
You can download it here:  [Adobe Acrobat
Reader](http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep2.html)

 [Starkey, Armstrong. The Indian Way of
War](http://vhost.louisville.edu/library/ereserve/history/Lee/lee_s3.pdf) in
_European and Native American Warfare, 1675-1815_. Norman: University of
Oklahoma Press, 1998, pp. 17-36, 173-77.

 [Shy, John. American Strategy: Charles Lee and the Radical
Alternative](http://vhost.louisville.edu/library/ereserve/history/Lee/lee_s2.pdf)
in _A People Numerous and Armed_. Rev'd ed. Ann Arbor: The University of
Michigan Press, 1990, pp. 133-162, 318-323.

 [Royster, Charles. 1775: Rage
Militaire](http://vhost.louisville.edu/library/ereserve/history/Lee/lee_s1.pdf)
in _A Revolutionary People at War_. New York: W.W. Norton and Co., 1979. pp.
25-53, 383-388.

 [MacDonald, Charles B. Chapters 1-3 in The Mighty
Endeavor.](http://php.louisville.edu/library/ereserve/history/Lee/lee_s4.pdf)
New York: William Morrow, 1986. pp. 13-51, 589-591.

 [Keegan, John. Chapters 12-16, 32 in The Second World
War](http://vhost.louisville.edu/library/ereserve/history/Lee/lee_s7.pdf) .
New York: Penguin, 1989. pp. 240-307, 574-85

 [Brodie, Bernard. Recapitulation and
Conclusion](http://php.louisville.edu/library/ereserve/history/Lee/lee_s5.pdf)
in _Strategy in the Missile Age_. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1959.
pp. 390-410.

____________________________________  
I recommend having on hand a decent college-level textbook of American
history. If you find the reading confusing you may find it helpful to refer to
a brief outline of the history of the period. This is purely optional.

Don't forget, there may be some days when it doesn't seem like we're talking
about the reading. That **does not** mean that we won't, or that you don't
need to know it, only that some readings are long enough that they have to be
split up over several days.

**Exams:** There will be two 15-minute short-answer quizzes. The first on
**February 15** , and the second on **April 5.** The two quizzes are designed
to check your awareness of some basic facts and that you have kept up on the
reading. There will also be a midterm on **March 8** and a final exam during
the exam period ( **Wed. Apr 25, 11:30-2:00** ). Both exams will consists of
short essay questions. We will discuss them in more detail in class.

**Other Assignments:** Participation is a major component of this class (30%
of your grade) As a general rule Thursdays will be used for discussions, and
the readings for those days are designed to facilitate debate. On each
Thursday every student will be required to bring to class an "admit slip" on a
3x5 card (failure to use a 3x5 card after the first week will have an adverse
impact on your grade). On the admit slip you will write at least one question
for discussion, or a _significant_ observation on the nature of the reading
for that week. They will be handed in at the beginning of class. Each will be
graded with either a zero, a check minus, a check, or a check plus. These will
form a major component of your participation grade. Active participation in
discussion and various in-class exercises will also be noted, as will
attendance.

**Grades:** Each quiz will be worth 10% of your grade. The midterm and final
are each worth 25%. Class participation counts for 30%.

**Plagiarism:** Plagiarism is defined as the unacknowledged use of the words
or ideas of another person. The most obvious case of plagiarism is the use of
another's words in a word-for-word manner in your own work, without citing the
original author. It also includes, however, borrowing the framework of ideas
from another author (or another student), again, unless you acknowledge that
borrowing in your work. If you ever have any doubts then ask.  You are
responsible for understanding the university policy on plagiarism. If you have
doubts then ask. If I discover that you have plagiarized your work or cheated
on your exams you will receive a failing grade for the course and be subject
to University disciplinary action.

**Missed deadlines or exams:** If you know you will miss a test, inform me
before hand. If you legitimately miss a test, you may take a makeup. It is
your responsibility to contact me within six days, make an appointment for a
makeup, and keep that appointment. Makeup tests may have a different format,
at my option. Keep all returned tests until the end of the semester. As a
matter of uniformity, any missed assignment or test must be justified with
some kind of documentation. You are adults. You are obviously free to choose
when you need to miss class. That freedom does not extend to quiz days or days
when assignments are due. For that you need an excuse.

**Finding me:** I will be in my office on a regular basis 1:00-2:15 on Tuesday
and Thursday. I am in my office _much_ more than that, and will also be
available after class for specific questions. If my office hours conflict with
your class schedule, please let me know and we can make an alternate
appointment.  

* * *

  
**Week 1 (Jan 8-12) Introduction**  
**Tues** : Introduction and syllabus

**Thurs** : essays in Piehler 1-34

**Week 2 (Jan 15-19) Europeans and Native Americans**  
**Tues** : Howard 38-74

**Thurs** : **(reserve)** Starkey 17-36

**Week 3 (Jan 22-26) Early Indian Conflicts and the Imperial Wars**  
**Tues** : Shy in Hagan, 3-20; Anderson in Karsten, 36-52

**Thurs** : Documents in Karsten, 53-61; Documents in Piehler, 37-47; Hirsch
in Piehler, 54-60; Jennings in Piehler, 48-54

**Week 4 (Jan 29-Feb 2) The American War for Independence**  
**Tues** : Gruber in Hagan, 21-48; **( _reserve_ )** Royster 25-53

**Thurs** : Lender, Royster and Knouff in Piehler, 75-93; Documents in
Piehler, 67-74; **( _reserve_ )** Shy 133-162

**Week 5 (Feb 5-9) The Early Republic**  
**Tues** : Cress in Hagan, 49-70; Coles in Hagan, 71-90

**Thurs** : Skelton in Hagan, 91-112; Documents in Piehler 99-108, 120-21,
124-26; Shy and Stuart in Piehler, 109-116

**Week 6 (Feb12-16) The Civil War (pt. one)**  
**Tues** : Howard 75-93; Gow in hagan, 133-54

**Thurs** : **_Quiz_** Symonds in Hagan, 155-72

**Week 7 (Feb 19-23) The Civil War (pt. two)**  
**Tues** : essays in Karsten, 145-76

**Thurs** : documents in Piehler, 154-68; essays in Piehler, 169-184

**Week 8 (Feb 26-Mar 2) The Frontier Army**  
**Tues** : Cooper in Hagan, 173-96; Cooper in Karsten, 209-225

**Thurs** : Documents in Piehler, 189-203; Custer essays in Piehler, 204-218

**Week 9 (Mar 5-9) The Managerial Revolution and WWI**  
**Tues** : Karsten in Karsten, 239-274; Documents in Piehler, 223-31; Essays
in Piehler, 236-245; Millett in Hagan 235-256

**Thurs** : **_Mid-Term_**

MARCH 12-18 SPRING BREAK

**Week 10 (Mar 19-23) World War II (Europe)**  
**Tues** : **( _reserve_ )** MacDonald 13-51; Stokesbury in Hagan, 279-304

**Thurs** : Essays in Karsten, 335-49; Documents in Piehler, 315-26

**Week 11 (Mar 26-30) World War II (Pacific)**  
**Tues** : **( _reserve_ )** Keegan 240-307, 574-85

**Thurs** : Documents in Piehler, 339-351; essays in Piehler, 352-71

**Week 12 (Apr 2-6) The Cold War, Nuclear Strategy and the Defense
Establishment**  
**Tues** : Ambrose in Hagan, 305-20; Van EE in Hagan, 321-40

**Thurs** : **_Quiz_ ; **Documents in Piehler, 382-390; Essays in Piehler,
391-406; **( _reserve_ )** Brodie, 390-410

**Week 13 (Apr 9-13) The Vietnam War**  
**Tues** : Cooling in Hagan, 341-60; Summers in Hagan, 361-74

**Thurs** : Essays and Documents in Karsten, 397-438

**Week 14 (Apr 16-20) The Present**  
**Tues** : Documents in Piehler, 447-474; essays in Piehler, 475-486

**Thurs** : NO CLASS

**Final Exam** : Wed. April 25, 11:30-2:00

