**Syllabus**  
**HIST 522.01: The American Revolution and Confederation Era**  
**(TR 11:00-12:15 in NS 108)**

**Prof. Wayne Lee
103a Gottschalk**  
**wlee@louisville.edu
852-6817 (dept. phone)**  
**Texts:** All the books for this class will be available at the University
Bookstore. The Coursepack will be available at Gray's.

Norman K. Risjord, _Jefferson's America, 1760-1815_ (Madison, WI: Madison
House Publishers, 1991).

James Kirby Martin, ed., _Ordinary Courage:The Revolutionary War Adventures of
Joseph Plumb Martin,_ 2nd ed. (New York: Brandywine Press, 1999). (
_abbreviated **Martin's Narrative**_ )

James K. Martin and Mark E. Lender, _A Respectable Army: The Military Origins
of the Republic, 1763-1789_ (Arlington Heights, Ill. Harlan Davidson, 1982).

Richard D. Brown, ed., _Major Problems in the Era of the American Revolution,
1760-1791_ (New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2000). _(abbreviated **MP** )_

Robert Calhoon, _Dominion and Liberty: Ideology in the Anglo-American World,
1660-1801_  
(Arlington Heights, Ill: Harlan Davidson, 1982).

A course pack of articles available at Gray's _(abbreviated **CP** )_. (If you
feel like you can round up the separate readings contained in this reader
cheaper than Gray's is providing them for, let me know and I can provide you
with a list of the articles.)  
**_________________________________**

I recommend having on hand a decent college-level textbook of American
history. The first two chapters of most American history textbooks can provide
a helpful summary of people and events. This is purely optional.

Don't forget, there may be some days when it doesn't seem like we're talking
about the reading. That **does not** mean that we won't, or that you don't
need to know it, only that some readings are long enough that they have to be
split up over several days.

**Exams:** There will be two 15-minute short-answer quizzes. The first on
**February 8** , and the second on **March 29.** The two quizzes are designed
to check your awareness of some basic facts and that you have kept up on the
reading. The final exam will be a single in-class essay question. We will
discuss it in more detail in class.

**Papers and other Assignments:**  
_1\. Annotated Bibliography_. During the semester you will be reading a
variety of historians' works. When you finish each (whether a book or
article), you should prepare an annotated bibliographic entry for that work.
Note that this _does not include_ Risjord or Martin's Narrative or any of the
documents. Each entry should provide a full bibliographic citation, and
100-150 words describing the work. We will discuss the way to write such an
annotation in class. This assignment will be graded at the end of the semester
(due on **April 17** ) . You should turn in your first few annotations,
however, on **January 25**. That will allow me to see if you are making
mistakes.

_2\. Two Essays_. You will be required to write two 4-5 page interpretive
essays (typed, double spaced). The subjects will be announced later. These are
not research papers, but rather reactions to some of the documents and
articles/books that you will be reading. The first essay will be due on
**February 15** , the second on **March 22**.

**Grades:** Each quiz will be worth 10% of your grade. The final is worth 20%.
Class participation counts for 20%. Your annotated bibliography is worth 20%.
The 5-7 page essay is also worth 20%.

Graduate students will have an additional assignment. It will count 20% of
their grade, and in turn, the essay will count only 10%, and the ann.
bibliography of in class readings only 10%.

Participation is a major component of this class. Questions and comments are
always welcome and encouraged, but certain days will be marked out in the
syllabus (or by announcement in class) as particularly suitable for
discussion. Insure that you are prepared to do so. Attendance counts toward
participation.

**Plagiarism:** Plagiarism is defined as the unacknowledged use of the words
or ideas of another person. The most obvious case of plagiarism is the use of
another's words in a word-for-word manner in your own work, without citing the
original author. It also includes, however, borrowing the framework of ideas
from another author (or another student), again, unless you acknowledge that
borrowing in your work. If you ever have any doubts then ask.  You are
responsible for understanding the university policy on plagiarism. If you have
doubts then ask. If I discover that you have plagiarized your work or cheated
on your exams you will receive a failing grade for the course and be subject
to University disciplinary action.

**Late policy:** All assignments are due at the beginning of class on the day
specified in the syllabus (unless other arrangements have been made). Do not
come late or skip class to finish an assignment. It will be counted late. More
specifically, any work turned in late, but on the same day, will be docked 1/3
of a letter grade. For each succeeding 12 hour period that it is not turned in
it will lose a full letter grade.

**Missed deadlines or exams:** If you know you will miss a test, inform me
before hand. If you legitimately miss a test, you may take a makeup. It is
your responsibility to contact me within six days, make an appointment for a
makeup, and keep that appointment. Makeup tests may have a different format,
at my option. Keep all returned tests until the end of the semester. As a
matter of uniformity, any missed assignment or test must be justified with
some kind of documentation. You are adults. You are obviously free to choose
when you need to miss class. That freedom does not extend to quiz days or days
when assignments are due. For that you need an excuse.

**Finding me:** I will be in my office on a regular basis 1:00-2:15 on Tuesday
and Thursday. I am in my office _much_ more than that, and will also be
available after class for specific questions. If my office hours conflict with
your class schedule, please let me know and we can make an alternate
appointment.  


  

**Schedule**

Week 1 (Jan 8-12) **Introduction**  
Tues: **Introduction and Syllabus**

Thurs: **Historians and the Revolution**  
*Reading (26pp) : Smith and Wood in MP, 4-13; Calhoon 1-17 

Week 2 (Jan 15-19) **Colonial North America to 1765**  
Tues: **Peoples and Places**  
*Reading (26 pp): Risjord 1-26 

Thurs: **Politics and Economics**  
* Reading (44 pp): Risjord 27-55; Documents in MP, 28-46 

Week 3 (Jan 22-26) **The Seven Years' War and the End of the Imperial Era**  
Tues: **The War**  
* Reading (17 pp): Documents in MP, 71-78; Anderson in MP, 79-87 

Thurs: **The Consequences**. **__Annotations due__**  
* Reading (9 pp): Marshall in MP 88-97 

Week 4 (Jan 29-Feb 2) **Background to Resistance**  
Tues: **Philosophies of Order and Liberty**  
*Reading (37 pp): Calhoon 19-56

Thurs: **_Discussions_**  
* Reading (29 pp): J.K. Martin 1-29

Week 5 (Feb 5-9) **The Growth of Resistance**  
Tues: **Structures of Authority and Imperial and Popular friction**  
* Reading (21 pp): Greene in MP, 47-58; Beeman in MP 59-69 

Thurs: **The Stamp Act. _ _Quiz__**  
*Reading (31 pp): Risjord 59-69; Documents in MP, 99-112; Morgan in MP, 119-127. 

Week 6 (Feb12-16) **Resistance Organized**  
Tues: **Townshend Acts to....**  
*Reading (15 pp): Maier in MP, 128-137; Documents in MP, 113-118 

Thurs: **the Tea Party. _ _Essay due__**  
*Reading (18pp): Risjord 70-87; Documents in MP, 140 

Week 7 (Feb 19-23) **Declaring a Revolution**  
Tues: **Intolerables to Lexington and Concord**  
*Reading (68 pp): Risjord 88-94; Documents in MP 140-172; Fischer in CP, xiii-29 

Thurs: **Motivations: _Discussions_**  
*Reading (45 pp): Doerflinger in MP, 173-179; Maier in MP 180-188; Calhoon 59-77; Fischer in CP 30-43. 

Week 8 (Feb 26-Mar 2) **Raising an Army / Fighting a War**  
Tues: **Boston to Saratoga**  
*Reading (76 pp): Shy in MP, 205-211; Documents in MP, 191-197; Martin's Narrative, 1-64 <reads very quickly> 

Thurs: **Boston to Saratoga, cont.**  
* Reading (113 pp): Resch, 1-46; J.K. Martin 30-97 

Week 9 (Mar 5-9) **Losing and then Winning a War**  
Tues: **Southern Campaigns**  
*Reading (62 pp): Martin's Narrative, 65-102; J.K. Martin 99-134 

Thurs: **Yorktown.**  
*Reading (114 pp) Martin's Narrative, 103-145; J.K. Martin 136-208 

MARCH 12-18 SPRING BREAK

Week 10 (Mar 19-23) **Other Perspectives on the War**  
Tues: **Battles and Raids and Plundering**  
* Reading (111 pp): Martin's Narrative 147-168; Calhoon 79-84; Calhoon in MP 247-255; Higginbotham in MP 212-223; Documents in MP 229-237 

Thurs: **The War abroad and against the Indians**. **__Essay due__**  
*Reading (13 pp): Documents in MP 225-228; Dowd in MP 238-246; Calhoon 84-85 

Week 11 (Mar 26-30) **Who Should Rule at Home?**  
Tues: **The Populist Challenge**  
*Reading (46 pp): Isaac in CP 345-368; Calhoon 88-101; Documents in MP, 257-260, 288-295 

Thurs: **Women and Slaves and the Revolution. _ _Quiz__**  
*Reading (72 pp): Kerber in CP 349-378; Berlin in MP, 275-286; Frey in MP 262-274 

Week 12 (Apr 2-6) **The Confederation**  
Tues: **Discontent**  
*Reading (49 pp): Calhoon 103-115; Risjord 132-140; Brooke in MP, 374-388; Documents in MP, 343-348, 353-363 

Thurs: **The West**  
*Reading (20 pp): Risjord 141-158; Documents in MP 349-352 

Week 13 (Apr 9-13) **The Constitution**  
Tues: **Debates**  
*Reading (44 pp): Calhoon 115-126; Risjord 158-173; Rakove in MP, 428-438; Banning in MP, 419-427 

Thurs: **Consequences**  
*Reading (60pp): Risjord 208-240; Zagarri and Young in MP, 483-511 

Week 14 (Apr 16-20) **A Vision?**  
Tues: **(Discussions!!) _ _Final annotated bibliography due__**  
*Reading (62pp): Young in CP, 561-623 

Final Exams: April 25- May 1  
    
    
    
    


