**Introduction to Sociology 204-03** ****

**Course Director** : Professor Dwaine Plaza

**Teaching Team:** Lisa Hasko, Rachel Lewis-Porter  & Ken Simonton

**Office** : 302 Fairbanks Hall **Office Phone** : 737-5369

**Course Directors Office Hours** : Tuesday/Thursday 12:30-14:00 p.m. (or by
appointment)

**Email:** [dplaza@orst.edu](mailto:dplaza@orst.edu)

**Email:**[lisahasko@hotmail.com  rpvanwa@aol.com
schollarballer35@yahoo.dk](rpvanwa@aol.com)

**Course Web Page Address** :
<http://osu.orst.edu/instruct/soc204/plazad/index.htm>

**Class Meetings**

**Lecture :** Tuesday/ Thursday 11:00-12:20 KIDD 350

The primary objective of this course is to provide students with an overview
of what constitutes the discipline of sociology. The course begins by
introducing sociology as a mode of inquiry and a way of approaching the world.
This includes its historical background, key concepts, various methods of
inquiry, and selected areas within the discipline. The subject matter
includes: socialization, society, social interaction, deviance, global
stratification, gender, race and ethnic relations. By the end of the course,
students will have the conceptual tools which will allow them to become
critical thinkers. They will also have a strong foundation from which they can
continue upper level courses in sociology.

**Required Course Text** :

Anderson, Margaret (2000) _Sociology: Understanding a Diverse Society_ ,
Belmont California: Wadsworth Publishing Company (2nd Edition).

**Course Requirements** :  
Each student will be responsible for completing one peer review research
assignment. This assignment will form the basis for group discussions,
together with assigned readings. The format for class will be a lecture on
Tuesday and part of Thursday. Also on Thursday, a sociologically relevant
video will be used as a supplement each chapter covered in the text book.
During the class students will also participate in a number of writing to
learn exercises. Both a mid-term and final exam will be written consisting of
multiple choice questions.

**Summary of Final Grade Calculation**

Peer Review Assignment 25 percent

Writing to Learn Exercises 20 percent

Mid-term Exam 25 percent

Final Exam 30 percent

**Extra Credit**  
Throughout the next ten weeks of the course you are encouraged to attend
special events on campus or off campus which have a sociological content
(guest speakers, colloquia, theatrical plays, special lectures, gallery
openings, movies etc..). After attending the event you will need to write up a
one page commentary. In the write up you need to indicate the time, place and
the title of the event. You will need to provide a brief synopsis of what took
place at the event. You will need to apply your "sociological imagination" to
theorize/ analyze the event and link it to the content of the Margaret
Anderson text book: _Sociology: Understanding a Diverse Society_ . Finally, in
the write up, you need to tell us what you learned from having attended this
event and how it changed your consciousness vis-a-vis sociology. It is
possible to get a maximum of **5** percent in extra credit for attending
special events outside of class. Each event attended and written up will be
worth **one percent**. All write ups for extra credit need to be submitted to
the course director.

**Important Notes:**  
All assignments must be submitted in **TYPED** form.

During the course there may be some unforseen circumstances which arise that
alter the schedule below. In this case it will be **YOUR** responsibility to
be in class to find out what those adjustments might be.

**Services For Students with Disabilities**  
Students with documented disabilities who may need accommodations, who have
any emergency medical information the instructor should know of, or who need
special arrangements in the event of evacuation, should make an appointment
with myself as early as possible, no later than the first week of the term.

**The Writing Center**  
The Writing Center provides students with a **FREE** consulting service for
their writing assignments. The Center is located at **123 Waldo Hall**. The
service operates from **Monday to Thursday 9-7 pm, and Friday 9-4 pm.** You
can make an appointment to discuss your writing with a peer writing assistant
( **737-5640** ). Another option available through the Center is to use email
to get online answers to brief writing questions ( **writingQ@mail.orst.edu**
).

If you are experiencing problems with this course, its content, the readings,
my teaching style. I want to strongly encourage you to raise your concerns at
the earliest possible moment. You can do this by visiting me during my office
hour.

**Course Content**  
The course begins by introducing sociology as a mode of inquiry. This includes
its historical background, key concepts, various methods of research, and
selected areas within the discipline. The subject matter then becomes more
varied and includes issues like: socialization, society, social interaction,
deviance, global stratification, gender, race and ethnic relations. Some
videos will be shown to supplement materials covered in the text book.

April 2/4 Understanding Sociology pp. 2-31

April 9/11 Sociological Research pp 32-57

April 16/18 Culture pp 59-87.

April 23/25 Socialization. pp 89-115. **Peer Review Paper Due in Class April
23**

May 30/2 Society and Social Interaction pp. 117-167.

**Mid-term Exam written in Class May 2.**

May 7/8 Class Stratification pp.225-253.

May 14/16 Deviance and Social Control. pp. 196-223. **Submit to Instructor
Final Version of Peer Review Assignment May 16**

May 21/23 Global Stratification. pp. 255-278.

May 28/30 Gender Stratification pp. 311-341.

June 4/6 Race and Ethnicity. pp. 278-309.

June 12 **Final Exam scheduled for Wednesday 12:00 pm.**

**Peer Review Paper Assignment Choices** The purpose of the peer review paper
assignment is to give students experience in conducting sociological research
and then practice in academic writing. In this process you will be called upon
to be both author and peer reviewer. After your paper is reviewed by a
colleague you will then have two weeks in which to incorporate changes and
make general improvements to your paper. The final paper ( **revised version**
) and the earlier ( **draft** ) peer reviewed version will be handed in to the
instructor for grading. By participating in this excise it is hoped that you
will be able to learn more about your own writing style while at the same time
help others to improve their academic writing style. From the assignments
below choose only **one** research setting to investigate and report on.

**Content Analysis Paper (With Peer Review** )  
Virtually everywhere you turn in The United States you are bombarded by
advertisement images of new products or life styles that can only be obtained
through the purchase of some new "transforming" product or service.
Advertisements tell a story and the story has to be relatively congruent with
our larger belief system, otherwise we're likely to be turned off by the
advertisement. Ads typically mirror predominant social roles (expected
behaviors) of men and women. Since each advertisement tells a story and must
do so in a very limited format, they rely heavily on symbols. Your job will be
to analyze in detail the various symbols, text or clues that go towards
constructing a message about American gender **(I don't mean subliminal here,
and would in fact, urge you to stay away from trying to pick those out since
they can be overly subjective)**. You need to pick 8-10 ads from magazines
that you read which provide a description and commentary of what you see
related to gender roles and expectations in American society (for women or
men). You must also provide a conclusion that sums up your general
observations and calls attention to any patterns you detect. The central
question I would like you to answer is, do the advertisements challenge or
reinforce (or both) the traditional norms of masculinity and femininity in
American society. The final write up should be 3-4 pages plus one table.
Include copies of the advertisements you analyzed in the final package you
submit for grading.

**Observation Paper (With Peer Review)**  
Visit a physical recreation center on or off campus -- observe and record
systematically for two separate one hour periods: (a) What the unwritten rules
of dress are? (b) What the unwritten codes of conduct are with regards to use
of the equipment? (c) What the gender differences between men and women are in
terms of use of the facilities; (d) Which gender is most likely to initiate
conversation in this environment? (e) What is the length of time that women
and men speak in conversations in this environment? When writing up the final
paper you will need to adhere to the following steps. First, summarize your
observations; second explain the patterns that you observed; third explain how
these patterns relate to gender relations, societal expectations, norms and
values for each gender. I suggest that you include in your final submission a
separate table of the criteria which were used to record and count the
occurrences of events/ dress codes at the gym. Your paper should be 3-4 pages.

**Observation Paper (With Peer Review)**  
Television programs are important in the socialization and development of
adolescents in the United States. Watch several televison shows from different
decades that portray the family (at least one from each decade). For example
"Leave it to Beaver", "The Honeymooners", "I love Lucy", "Happy Days", "The
Brady Bunch", "Family Ties", "The Flintstones", "Whose the Boss", "Married
with Children", "The Cosby Show", "Family Matters". Describe the role of women
and men in each of the three programs (leadership roles, hierarchy, class,
gender, race, ethnicity issues). What are the hidden socialization messages
that are conveyed to viewers about the "ideal" family in America? Comment on
the changes in the "ideal" family which can be seen from your observation of
the three decades of television. Your paper should be 3-4 pages.

**Observation Paper (With Peer Review)**  
Wresting has become a global form of "sports" entertainment for both men and
women. For this reason I would like you to take a sociological look at this
phenomenon. To complete this assignment I would like you to begin by watching
three separate World Wrestling Federation programs. Once you have done this I
would then like you to select three issues from the following choices to write
your paper. (a) How is masculinity and femininity within the match portrayed
for the television audience? (b) What are some of the latent American cultural
values that are inherent in the wrestling match (e.g. individualism, violence
being naturalized, hero worship, winners are the most important)? (c) What are
some of the masculine, "race" and ethnic stereotypes apparent in the wrestlers
persona, the character names the wrestlers choose, the costumes the wrestlers
wear, the announcers descriptions of the wrestlers or how the wrestling match
is staged? (d) Use your sociological imagination to explain why some wrestlers
are loved while others are hated. (e) What impact might this pseudo "sports"
entertainment be having on the socialization of young men and women in
American society? Provide specific examples from the matches you observe to
back up your generalizations. Your paper should be 3-4 pages.

**Observation Paper (With Peer Review)**  
Video games were first introduced in the 1970s; since that time they have
become one of the most preferred childhood leisure activities. For this reason
I would like you to take a sociological look at this activity. To do this
assignment I would like you to play three video games from (e.g. Nintendo,
Sega, Dreamcast, Playstation, or PC, ). Make sure that the three games have a
similar theme (action/adventure, role playing, or sports) so that you can
become familiar with the objectives, characters in the game, rewards and
visual images unfolding while the game is being played. Once you have done
this I would then like you to answer the following questions within your
paper. (a) What are the male and female character roles in each game? Are
these roles in any way "gendered"? (b) What are some of the latent American
cultural values that are in the video game (e.g. individualism, violence being
naturalized, hero worship, good verses evil, winners are the most important,
gun play or aggressive behavior being rewarded)? (c) Use your sociological
imagination to explain why some games are loved while others are not as
popular (reflect here on the content/theme of the games and how these fit into
the larger American cultural ethos). (d) What impact might this seemingly
harmless form of entertainment be having on the socialization of young men and
women in American society? For the final paper, please make sure to provide a
brief one paragraph description of each game reviewed and use specific
examples from each game to back up the generalizations you make. Your paper
should be 3-4 pages.

**Observation Paper (With Peer Review)**  
Media love refers to the way love is portrayed on television, radio, magazines
and newspapers. To study this subject you will need to watch television soap
operas to see how they socialize us about what love is suppose to be. Your
task is to be a non-participant observer and to record every clue that soap
operas provide us with what American style love is. Try to be thoughtful and
perceptive by noticing things perhaps that other observers might not. For
example is love socially constructed? Are there certain "acceptable"/
"appropriate" rules for men / women to show their love in American society? Do
you find these values influencing some of your own ideas about current or
future love relationships? For this assignment you are required to watch 3
soap operas. The programs that you might choose from include: "General
Hospital", "As the World Turns", "Melrose Place", "One Life To Live", "Bold
and the Beautiful", "All My Children", "Young and the Restless", "Four
Corners", "Days of Our Lives", "Port Charles", "Beverly Hills 90210".Your
paper should be 3-4 pages.

**Writing to Learn In Class Exercises**  
Throughout the quarter you will be asked to spend a few minutes of in class
time or out of class time to participate in short writing to learn activities.
The purpose of these exercises is to help you learn more about the course
content through written reflection on the materials covered in class. These
exercises may include: write and pass, micro-themes, reading response
questions, media/film reflections, or end of class observations. These writing
to learn exercises require no more than a few paragraphs of written response.
Your written work will be submitted to the instructor to receive either a
check mark or a very short comment. **NO LETTER OR NUMBER GRADES** will be
used. There will be ten writing assignments throughout the quarter. Each
assignment is worth 2 percent.

**Peer Review Paper Assessment Sheet**

The following assessment sheet is designed for you to use in revising your own
paper before you submit it and also for checking a colleagues work that you
are required to review. Answer the following questions as you proceed.  
1\. **Read the essay** one time through without making any marks or comments.

2\. **Is there a clear thesis**? Does it have a position or attitude? If it
does, put a check by the thesis statement.

3\. **Is the topic too broad**? If so can you suggest a way to narrow it?
Write this next to thesis in the margin. If it is fine, then put a check by
it.

4\. **Is the introduction sufficient**? Does it start too broad? Is there
justification and/ or back ground information provided in the introduction?
Suggest ways they might improve the introduction in the margin. Does the
conclusion bring up new points not raised in the body of the paper, if so,
indicate with a "?". Has the paper ended well?

5\. **Overall meaning** :  
(a) Does the argument make sense overall? Is it convincing? Write a
description of the good and bad points of the essay on the back page.

(b) **UNI-FICATION** : Are the paragraphs unified to the thesis? If not, write
"uni" in the margin next to that paragraph.

(c) **CONTENT** : is there something they are leaving out that might damage
their argument? If so, what?

(d) **LOGIC** : Are there any logic problems in the essay? Note them in the
margin.

(e) **ORDER:** Is it clear why the paragraphs are ordered the way they are?
Are transitions between paragraphs needed?

**Read the following questions then read the essay again**.

6\. **Body Paragraphs**

(a) **CHECK** : Does every paragraph have a topic sentence. Put a check by
each .

(b) **UNI-FICATION:** Are the sentences unified to the topic sentence? If not,
write "uni" in the margin next to that sentence.

(c) **CIRCLES** : Is each example properly developed and connected back to the
thesis? Put a small circle in the margin for detail that is not fully
explained.

(d) **SUPPORT** : Is the evidence sufficient? Write "support" in the margin
next to sections that need more evidence, examples or details.

(e) **COHERENCE** : Do the different supporting examples in each paragraph
relate logically and clearly? Are transitions needed? Mark "coh" in problem
places.

7\. **Words and Sentences** :

(a) **VARIETY** : Is there enough sentence variety? Write "var" by problem
spots. Suggest where s/he could combine sentences using "coord" or "subord".

(b) **DICTION** : Are the verbs vivid, do the nouns strike you? Where could
s/he use better language for their tone and meaning?

(c) **EMPTIES** : put an "x" through any use of "it is", "there are" or "there
is" in the paper.

(d) **STYLE** : At the end of the paper, characterize the writing style
(boring, overly emotional, cliche, engrossing, etc.) Does the writer use any
figures of speech? Are they overdone or under-used?

**At the end of the essay, sign your name and give any general suggestions or
comments that you would feel helpful in making this person a better writer.**

