###  

### Religion and Gender in Premodern Japanese Literature

###  
Syllabus

  
Course Description:

            In this seminar we will examine the intersection of religion and gender in Japanese literature from the 8th to the 16th centuries.  The course assumes no prior academic experience in gender, literature, religion, or Japanese culture.  It does require openness, curiosity, and a willingness to talk and listen.  Please come to class having read the assignments and be ready to discuss them.

The course includes a large number of primary texts in translation.  Reading
assignments have been kept relatively short to allow for careful consideration
of these fascinating documents that allow men and women of another time and
place to speak to us across the centuries.  Literature provides an excellent
window into the gender system of any culture; in the case of ancient Japan we
are fortunate to have a wealth of female-authored texts.  Too often, however,
"gender" is equated with the study of women.  This course also includes
religious constructions of masculinity in literature.  What were the religious
meanings given to the biological categories of male and female?  How about
sexuality, "orientation," and sexual transgression?  What was particular to
women's religion?  To men's?  No course of this length could hope to exhaust
these questions, but beginning to answer them is guaranteed to be interesting.

Course Requirements:

1)    Class attendance and participation. (approx. 40%)  Regular class
attendance is required.  Please notify the instructor by email if you plan to
be absent.  All reading assignments are to be completed by the date they are
listed in the syllabus.  Each and every student is expected to take an active
role in seminar discussions.  This includes regular postings to the class
bulletin board, which will be up and running by the third week of class.
Also, each student must give one in-class presentation.

2) Written assignments. (approx. 60%)  This course requires 20 pages of
writing per student.  See the course website for an explanation of
expectations surrounding these assignments.

a) Two five-page essays (15% each).  Due Feb. 20th and Mar. 20th.  These
essays are based on the course assignments.

b) One final paper of ten pages (35%).  This paper must include both materials
from the course and outside primary or secondary materials and should focus on
women"s literature of the Heian and Kamakura periods.  Students must present
the instructor with a topic for approval by April 3.  A proposed bibliography
is due by April 10.  A draft of the paper will be circulated among the class
members April 24 and discussed on April 26.  The final paper is due by the
last day of the exam period.

Course Texts:

Margaret Childs, _Rethinking Sorrow: Revelatory Tales of Late Medieval Japan_
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Center for Japanese Studies, 1991)

Karen Brazell, _The Confessions of Lady Nij o _(Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1973)

Doris Bargen, _A Woman's Weapon: Spirit Possession in _The Tale of Genji__
(Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1997)

Texts are available at the Haverford College Bookstore.  Other readings are
available on eRes.  These are marked with an asterisk.

Class Schedule:

# Snakes and Transformations

Jan. 23 W                                Class Introduction

Jan. 25 F                                 *Dojoji (two versions), *Bynum

Jan. 30 W                                *Klein, *Waters

Feb. 1 F                                   *Eguchi, *Terasaki [instructor
absent for meeting]

Feb. 6 W                                 *Lotus (Devadatta), *Kamens

Feb. 8 F                                   *Konjaku ("Times Now Past"),
*Tonomura, *Kelsey

Feb. 13 W                               Seven Nuns in Childs

## Masculinities

Feb. 15 F                                 Koya , Three Monks in Childs

Feb. 20 W (paper due)            *Heike,*Yoshitsune

Feb. 22 F                                 *Heike, *Atsumori

Feb. 27 W                             *Tyler, "Japan Means Trouble!" and
"Bring Back That Ferry!";*Narukami

Mar. 1 F                                  *Hagakure, *Thornton

Mar. 6 W                                *Page Boy Kannon; Gemmu in Childs;
*Childs, Chigo

Mar. 8 F                                  *Mirror of Male Love, *Boyarin

SPRING BREAK

# Mothers and Others

Mar. 20 W                              *Mokuren

Mar. 22 F                                *Marra, *Strong

# Life at Court, Possession, Childbirth

Mar. 27 W                              *Pandey ("Wild Words"), Nijo

Mar. 29 F  (paper due)            Nijo

Apr. 3 W                                 Nijo into Genji, *Shirane  

Apr. 5  F                                  (No Class " Instructor at Academic
Meeting)

Apr. 10 W                               *Murasaki diary

Apr.12 F                                  *Flowering Fortunes

Apr.17 W                                Bargen xi-31

see:[ http://www.meijigakuin.ac.jp/~pmjs/resources/genji-
chart.html](http://www.meijigakuin.ac.jp/%7Epmjs/resources/genji-chart.html)
for a chart of Genji characters

read introduction to the Tale of Genji at:[
http://www.penguinputnam.com/static/packages/us/taleofgenji/introduction.html](http://www.penguinputnam.com/static/packages/us/taleofgenji/introduction.html)

Apr.19 F                                  *Genji, "Evening Faces"/ Bargen,
Chapter 2

Apr.24 W                                *Genji, "Heartvine"/ Bargen, Chapter 3

Apr.26 F                                  *Genji, "Lavender"/ Bargen, Chapter
4

May 1 W                                 *Genji, "Oak Tree"/ Bargen, Chapter 5

May 3 F                                  *Genji, "Floating"/ Bargen, Chapter
6/ Conclusion

[home](index.html)  
  
---  
  


