---  
| |

**HISTORY 110A, SPRING, 2002 SECTION 13304**

**INSTRUCTOR: PROFESSOR BRUNELLE**

**Class Time and Location: MW, 1-2:15 p.m., H 121**

**Office: H 710E
[Home](Default.htm)**

**Tel.: (714)278-7045
[World History Study Questions](worldhisques.htm)**

**Fax: (714)278-2101
[World History Style Sheet](worldhisstylesheet.htm)**

**email:[gbrunelle@fullerton.edu](mailto:gbrunelle@fullerton.edu)**

**Web Site:<http://fpwebs.fullerton.edu/gbrunelle>**

**Office Hours: M, 10:30-11:30, 6-7 p.m.: W, 3-4 p.m.**

**Final Exam Date and Time: Wednesday, May 29, 2:30-4:20 p.m.**

**Required Reading:**

**Jerry H. Bentley, Herbert F. Ziegler, Traditions and Encounters, v. I, (New
York: McGraw Hill, 1999)**

**Wiesner, et. al., Discovering the Global Past: A Look at the Evidence, v. I,
(New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1997)**

**Description**

**History 110A is a general survey of World Civilizations from antiquity to
the 16 th century, which marks the beginning of what historians call the Early
Modern Era. Because this is a survey class, the emphasis will be on the
acquisition of a general knowledge of broad sweeps of historical development.
The course will be organized around certain broad themes, such as the role of
religion in society, political organization of societies, gender, and contacts
between the West and the rest of the world.**

**_Learning Goals_**

**The goal of this course is to provide students with an integrative, holistic
introductory survey of the historical development of civilization within a
global context. Specifically, it will explore the impact of both Western
institutions and ideas upon non-Western societies and cultures and of the
influence of non-Western cultures and peoples upon Western societies and
cultures. It is designed to provide students with a common intellectual
experience by broadening their understanding of ideas and values drawn from
different strands of our own culture and to increase their understanding and
appreciation of cultural diversity and the process of cultural interaction.**

**_Requirements and Assessment_**

**Survey courses, by their very nature, move quickly through large amounts of
material. This class will combine lecture with small group and whole class
discussions of the readings. If students are not prepared to discuss the
readings in class, they will also be unprepared to discuss them on the exams.
The readings will appear on the exams! Moreover, is a student falls behind in
reading the textbook, he or she will be likely to feel confused in class, as
lectures will build from and presume a prior reading of, rather than
reiterate, the background material found in the textbook. Readings are
assigned on a weekly basis and should be completed by the beginning of the
week in which they are to be discussed in class.**

**Students in this course will be expected to read a textbook, Bentley, and
primary sources found in a source book, Wiesner, et al.. The single most
important requirement of this course is that students must keep up with the
reading, which you can expect to average about thirty to fifty pages a week.
Finally, students will also have three essay exams. The fourth essay exam will
be held during the final exam period listed above. The exams will be drawn
from study questions handed out in class and available on the course web
page.**

**_Grades:_ there will be three essay exams offered during the course of the
semester. I will drop the lowest grade. This  includes any exam a student
might miss for illness or other reasons. Your grade, therefore, will be based
on your best two midterms. If you find that you are going to have to miss more
than one midterm, you may want to consider withdrawing from the class. There
will also be a cumulative final exam.**

**Although I do not give points for class participation, or take off points
for non-attendance (in body or mind), I do pay attention to which students
participate in discussions regularly. Frequent participation in discussion can
boost the grades of students who are borderline between grades (2.9 to 3.0,
for example).**

**_Makeup Exam Policy_ : There will be no make up exams. Instead, I will drop
the lowest of the three midterm exams. There will be no extra credit.**

**Exams will have two components: a map section, based on maps found in the
textbook (worth ten points) and two or three essay questions based on texts
and readings and worth 30 or 45 points each. I will provide a list of study
questions upon which the exam questions will be based. These questions will be
posed, along with the syllabus, on my web site, as well as handed out in
class. Students who do poorly on the first midterm are strongly advised to
meet with me for some suggestions as to how to study for the exams.**

**_Honor Policy_**

**Students may work together to discuss the readings and prepare for exams.
All work performed for a grade in the class should be the student's own,
however. University Honor Policy will be observed.**

**_Topics and Reading Assignments_**

**Week 1: Feb, 2, 4 Traditions and Encounters, ch. 2, "Before History."
Wiesner, ch. 2, "The Need for Water in Ancient Societies"**

**Week 2: Feb. 11, 13, Traditions and Encounters, ch. 3, "Early Society in
South Asia and the Indo-European Migrations." Wiesner, ch. 2, "The Need for
Water in Ancient Societies"**

**Week 3: No class Monday, Feb. 18. Feb. 20, Traditions and Encounters, ch. 4,
"Early Society in East Asia," and ch. 5, "Early Societies in the Americas and
Oceania"**

**Week 4: Feb. 25, Wiesner, ch. 3, "Writing and Power, Defining World Views."
First Midterm, Weds., Feb. 27.**

**Week 5: March 4, 6, Traditions and Encounters, ch. 6, "The Empires of
Persia" and ch. 7, "The Unification of China"**

**Week 6: March 11, 13, Traditions and Encounters, ch. 8, "State, Society, and
the Quest for Salvation in India". Also, Wiesner, ch. 5, "The Equine
Revolution (3700 C.E. - 100 C.E.)**

**Week 7: March18, 20, Traditions and Encounters, ch. 9, "Mediterranean
Society, the Greek Phase" Also, Wiesner, ch. 4, "Representing the Human
Form.**

**Week 8: March 25, Traditions and Encounters, ch. 10, "Mediterranean Society:
The Roman Phase." Also, Wiesner, ch. 6, "Han and Rome: Asserting Imperial
Authority." Second Midterm Weds., March 27!**

**Please Note! Spring Break is the week of April 1-5. No class!**

**Week 9: April 8, 10, : Traditions and Encounters, ch. 11, "Cross-Cultural
Exchanges on the Silk Roads." also, ch. 12, "A Survivor Soceity: Byzantium"
and Wiesner, ch. 8, Regional Metropolises: Constantinople and Tenochtitlan"**

**Week 10: April 15, 17,: Traditions and Encounters, ch. 20, "Worlds Apart:
the Americas and Oceania" and ch. 13, "A New Society: The Realm of Islam" and
Wiesner, ch. 7, "International Religious Communities.".**

**Week 11: April 22, 24, Traditions and Encounters, ch. 14, "The Resurgence of
Empire in East Asia," and ch. 15, "India and the Indian Ocean Basin"**

**Week 12: April 29, Traditions and Encounters, ch. 16, "The Foundations of
Christian Society in Western Europe" and ch. 17, "Nomadic Empires and Eurasian
Integration."**

**Week 13: May 6, 8: Traditions and Encounters, ch. 18, "States and Societies
of Sub-Saharan Africa" and Wiesner, ch. 11, "Medicine and Reproduction in the
Middle Ages."**

**Week 14: May 13, 15, Traditions and Encounters, ch. 19, "Western Europe
during the High Middle Ages," and Wiesner, ch. 9, "The Two Faces of 'Holy
War': Christian and Muslim 'Jihads'" Wiesner, ch. 11, "Medicine and
Reproduction in the Middle Ages." Wednesday, May 15, Third Midterm!**

**Week 15: May 20, 22: Traditions and Encounters, and ch. 21, "Reaching Out:
Cross-Cultural Interactions." Also, Wiesner, ch. 12, "Trans-Asian Contacts:
The Basis of a World System." Review for final exam.**

**Week 16, Wednesday, May 29, 2:30-4:20 p.m., Final Exam.**

**Top of Page**  
---|---|---

