[back to home page](../index.html) ****

**WOMEN'S STUDIES PROGRAM**

**ARIZONA STATE UNIVERSITY**  
    


**WST 191-- All About Feminism**

**SPRING 2000**

Instructor: Ann Hibner Koblitz

Office: Engineering A, 205

Phone: 480-965-8483

E-mail: koblitz@asu.edu

Office Hours: Monday 12:30-1:30 and 4:30-6PM; Tuesday 2-4PM; and by
appointment (NOTE: I tend to spend a lot of time in my office. If the door is
open, feel free to come in.)  


**Required Text Available in Bookstore:**

Barbara Findlen, ed. _Listen Up! Voices from the Next Feminist Generation_  


**Course Goals:**

This course is designed to give first year students a broad overview of
feminism and women's studies. We shall discuss such questions as: How is our
society gendered? What is feminism? What do people in Women's Studies do? What
is it about the term "feminist" that raises so many hackles? Why are so many
people so quick to label feminists as "man haters"? How has "backlash"
affected feminist movements? What does being a feminist mean in contemporary
society? Can a man call himself a feminist? Are there feminists in all
societies? How does feminism differ across cultural contexts?  


**Format and Ground Rules:**

This class is a seminar, and questions, debate, and discussion are at the
heart of the course. You will take a field trip to the mall, listen to some
mini-lectures by guest speakers, and see some fascinating videos as we explore
the meaning of gender in our daily lives.

Small classes can in some ways be more difficult than large ones: it is
difficult to melt into the crowd, your peers immediately notice your absence
or failure to do the readings, etc. A small class can be immensely satisfying,
however, provided that: 1) we all do the readings; 2) we all participate in
class; 3) we come to class promptly and attend regularly; 4) we are all
courteous and respectful to one another, even in cases of disagreement; 5) we
keep our sense of humor.  


NOTE: _Please refrain from coming late, leaving early, and wandering in and
out of the classroom at will. Also, please switch off all cell phones, pagers,
and alarm watches while in class._  


COURSE DOCUMENTS, INCLUDING THE SYLLABUS AND A 5-PAGE WRITING HANDOUT, WILL
SOON BE AVAILABLE ON-LINE AT ASU'S BLACKBOARD SITE: http://
blackboard.is.asu.edu/ You need to enroll in the site BEFORE you access
courses by clicking on "create account."  


**Course Requirements:**  


\-- **ATTENDANCE IS REQUIRED.**  


\-- **COMPLETED ASSIGNMENTS ARE REQUIRED.** The assignments will only be
graded credit/no credit, but they **MUST** be completed, and **they must be
handed in on time**.  
    
    


**CALENDAR AND SCHEDULE OF ASSIGNMENTS**  


**Please note that the reading and videos contain some explicit sexual and
violent content.**  
  **24 January** |  introductions | outlines of the course will be discussed,
ground rules will be set, and you will have some chance to give input on
videos and possible speakers  
---|---|---  
**31 January** |  sex role socialization and definitions of gender | how do we
become male and female?  
**7 February** |  feminism in the United States | Video: "The American
Parade-- We the Women"  
**14 February** |  global feminisms | read _Listen Up_ to p. 137; be ready to
discuss it in class  
**21 February** |  gender, race, and class | finish _Listen Up_ ; be ready to
discuss it in class

**assignment due in class:** choose one of the women from the book and tell
why she interests you, What are your similarities and differences? (1-2 pp.)  
**28 February** |  images of gender and myths of beauty | Video: "Still
Killing Us Softly"  
**6 March** |  sexuality and the media | Video: "Dreamworlds II"

**assignment due in class:** bring in three ads from popular magazines (or
videotaped from TV) featuring women or men in sexualized roles  
**13 March** | **Spring Break-- NO CLASS** |  Enjoy yourselves!!  
**20 March** |  the mall exercise (field trip-- no regular class) | Arrange a
time to go to Fiesta Mall or Scottsdale Fashion Square and assess the
experience from the point of view of this class.  
**27 March** |  discussion of the mall field trip | **assignment due in
class:** mall field trip sheet  
**3 April** |  guest speaker TBA | "gender bender" assignment: think about
your own gender norms-- what is it about yourself that you consider
particularly emblematic of "femininity" or "masculinity" as defined in our
culture? Create a subversion of those gender norms and perform the subversion
in public. Consider the reasons why your action transgresses norms, and note
how people respond to it. Why do you think your action draws the responses it
does? Write up your thoughts in 1-2 pp.  
**10 April** |  discussion of gender bender | **gender bender write-up due in
class** ; come prepared to discuss your performance  
**17 April** |  do feminists have a sense of humor? | Video: "Cannibal Women
in the Avocado Jungle of Death"  
**24 April** |  class party and evaluation  | This will be our last day of
class and should be a grand celebration! You will evaluate us, as well as eat
lots of stuff.  
[back to home page](../index.html)

