Stanford University



**Communication 001/211**

** **

**Media Technologies, People, and Society**

** **

Fall, 2000-2001



Monday and Wednesday, 11:00 A.M. - 12:15 P.M.



Section TBA



Location: Building 420, Room 040



Professor Clifford Nass (Instructor)

300D McClatchy Hall

Telephone: 723-5499

E-Mail: nass@stanford.edu

Appointments: Kathy Lung ([klung@stanford.edu](mailto:klung@stanford.edu);
650-725-9472)



Kwan Min Lee (Head TA): kmlee@stanford.edu



Francis Lee (TA): square@stanford.edu

  
Martin Leese (TA): mleese@stanford.edu



Caroline Simard (TA): csimard@stanford.edu

  
Michelle Cabalu (Experiment and Web Manager): mcabalu@earthlink.net



Web site: [www.stanford.edu/class/comm1](http://www.stanford.edu/class/comm1)

  

# Overview

** **

Old and new media technologies are converging. A new digital world combines
traditional print, television, and film with computers, telephones, and
communication networks to form a collection of products and services that
significantly influence all aspects of personal and community life.
Communication 001/211 will look at the technologies and industries that make
up the new world of "digital convergence." We will examine their effects on
psychological life, on industry, and on communities local and global through
demonstrations and critiques of a wide range of communication products and
services.

** **

**Requirements**

** **

1\. Signing up for the class email list

2\. Web-based (not Axess) sign-up for the class, section, and experiments

3\. In-class midterm (cannot be taken early)

4\. In-class final (cannot be taken early)

5\. Section attendance and participation

6a. Comm. 1: Research paper and paper proposal

6b. Comm. 211: Work as a research assistant _or_ a research paper

7a. Comm. 1: A maximum of eight experiments as an experimental participant

7b. Comm. 211: Eight hours as a research assistant _or_ as an experimental
participant

8\. Lecture attendance is not required, but it is essential for passing the
course: The lectures introduce a great deal of material that is not covered in
the readings.

** **

# Details of Requirements

** **

## Sections

Sections will meet weekly at various times. They will begin the third week of
classes. Section sign-up will be web-based and will be performed at the start
of the second week of classes. Students will be graded on the basis of
attendance, performance on section-based assignments, and quality of
participation.



## Research Paper (Undergraduates)

Undergraduates will write a five-page paper on a class topic. A one-paragraph
proposal of the topic is required and must be approved by your section leader.
Details of the paper will be circulated during the third week of the class.



## Research Assistant

Graduate students will work as a research assistant on an experiment, and will
write a brief summary (2-3 pages) of what they learned from the experience.
Students who have objections to serving as an experimental assistant will be
permitted to write an eight-page paper on a topic (approved by the Head TA)
relevant to the course. More details about the nature of this requirement will
be given during the second or third week of class. Graduate students are _not_
required to complete the five-page paper.



## Experiment Participation

All students will be required to be participants In experiments conducted in
the Communication Department. Each student will be assigned to be a
participant in up to eight experiments. The exact number will be determined by
fate; thus, the number will likely vary, sometimes considerably, from student
to student. Students who do not wish to participate as subjects in experiments
have the option of either working as a research assistant on an experiment (if
available) or writing a paper (in addition to the required paper).

  

**Grading for Comm. 1**



_ Aspect of Course  Weight _



Midterm 30%



**** Paper  20%



Sections 10%



Final Exam 40%



###  Total 100%



**Grading for Comm. 211**



_ Aspect of Course  Weight _



Midterm 30%



**** Research Assistant  15%



Sections 10%



Final Exam 45%



** Total 100%**



**Required Books**

_ _

Nass, C. (2000). _Media technologies, people, and society: Reading packet_.



Negroponte, N. (1995). _Being digital_. Knopf: New York.



Reeves, B. & Nass, C. (1996). _The media equation: How people treat computers,
television, and new media like real people and places_. New York: Cambridge
University Press.



**Key Dates (Tentative)**

** **

Wednesday, September 27 First day of class

Wednesday, October 9 Class cancelled for Yom Kippur

Wednesday, November 1 Midterm examination

Monday, November 6 Comm 001 paper proposals due

Monday, December 4 Comm 001 papers due

Monday, December 11 (8:30-11:30 AM) Final examination



**NOTE** : Students may **NOT** move the date of the examination to facilitate
their departure from Stanford. Having plane tickets will **NOT** be an excuse
for changing the date of the examination.

  

**Detailed Readings and Lectures**

** **

_1\. Introduction to the Course (Wednesday, September 27)_

** **

No Readings

** **

_2\. What is Communication? (Monday, October 2)_



Required Readings



Watzlawick, P. (1976). _How Real Is Real?_ New York: Vintage. Pp. 3-14; 24-26;
30-40; 48-51; 63-64.

Schelling, T. C. (1978). _Micromotives and macrobehavior_. New York: W. W.
Norton  & Co. Pp. 11-17, 36-41, 110-112.



_3\. Overview of Digital Life (Wednesday, October 4)_

** **

Required Readings



Negroponte, N. 1995. _Being Digital_. Knopf: New York.

** **

_4._ ** _No Class_** _(Monday, October 9)_

** **

No Required Readings

** **

_5\. What are Media - Basics (Wednesday, October 11)_

** **

Required Readings



Nass, C.I., & Mason, L. (1990). On the study of technology and task: A
variable-based approach. In J. Fulk & C. Steinfeld (Eds _.), Organizations and
communication technology_ (pp. 46-67). Newbury Park: Sage.

McLuhan, M. (1964). _Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man_
(Introduction, Chapter 1: 3-21). New York: McGraw-Hill (Signet Books).

Norman, D. A. (1988). <i style='m

