![](Topper1.jpg)  
---  
**_

    

[Prehistoric and Bronze Age Images of Women](goddess.html)

[Women in ancient Mesopotamia](mesowom.html)  
    

[](file:///D%7C/medieval/eastmon.html)[Women in ancient Egypt](egwom.html)

**_**_[Women of the ancient Hebrews](hebwom.html)_**_**

_****_

    

[Women in ancient and medieval India, Hinduism and Buddhism](indiawom.html)  
    

[](file:///D%7C/medieval/irimon.html)[Women in ancient and medieval
China](chinawom.html)

[Women in medieval Japan](japwom.html)

[Women in ancient Greece](greecewom.html)

[Women in the Roman Empire](romewom.html)

**_**_[Women in Byzantium](byzwom.html)_** _**

_****_

    

**_[Women in early Christianity](christwom.html) _** _****__**

> **_**_[Women in the Medieval Islamic World](islamwom.html)_**_**

**_

    

**_[Women in the Medieval African Kingdoms](afwom.html) _** _****_

    

[Women in Medieval Europe](medwom.html)

**_[Was there a Renaissance for Women?](renwom.html)_**

**_[Women in the Protestant Reformation](reforwom.html)_**

_****_

    

[General Resources](gensource.html)

[Syllabus](womsyll.html)

[Women in the Ancient and Medieval Worlds Main Page](women.shtml)

**_[Contact the author](mailto:dvess@mail.gcsu.edu) _**

_****_

    

[Georgia College & State University](http://www.gcsu.edu) _** |

> **Women in Ancient Egypt**

>

> [Class outline on female pharaohs](egwomout.html)

>

> [Class outline on marriage, family, and daily customs](egcus.html)

>

> [Images of women in ancient art](http://www.arthistory.sbc.edu/imageswomen/)
a simply fabulous site with a chapter on Egyptian women

>

> [The Turin
Canon](http://www.geocities.com/%7Eamenhotep/glossary/tc/main.html) an
extremely important source of information on the Egytpian dynasties my
Manetho. Lists Sobeknofru and other important women who ruled as kings.

>

> [Herodotus on
Nitocris](http://www.reshafim.org.il/ad/egypt/herodotus/nitocris.htm) will the
real Nitocris please stand up? Here is Herodotus's version of her revenge on
those who killed her brother-husband and her death. This page has quite a few
links to other sites related to the study of ancient Egypt. From [an
introduction to the history and culture of pharaonic
Egypt](http://nefertiti.iwebland.com/index.html)

>

> [The Curse of Nitocris - Extracts from the Journal of Damien, Lord Mortlake
](http://www.wolfram.demon.co.uk/nit_ch00.htm)Did she haunt the third pyramid,
which Manetho mistakenly thought she completed and in which he thought she was
buried?

>

> [Marriage as a tool of foreign politics during the New
Kingdom](http://nefertiti.iwebland.com/political_marriages.htm) from [an
introduction to the history and culture of pharaonic
Egypt](http://nefertiti.iwebland.com/index.html)

>

> [Queen Hatshepsut's expedition to the Land of Punt: The first oceanographic
cruise?](http://www-ocean.tamu.edu/Quarterdeck/QD3.1/Elsayed/elsayed-
hatshepsut.html)

>

> [Hatsheptsut: female pharaoh of
Egypt](http://touregypt.net/historicalessays/hatshepsut.htm) also at
[http://www.thekeep.org/~kunoichi/kunoichi/themestream/hatshepsut.html](http://www.thekeep.org/%7Ekunoichi/kunoichi/themestream/hatshepsut.html)

>

> [Hatshepsut: Woman King](http://members.tripod.com/%7Eib205/hatshepsut.html)

>

> [Hatshepsut: The Queen who would be
King](http://www.bediz.com/hatshep/index.html) an excellent site with many
graphics and very good textual resources.

>

> [Hatshepsut: The Queen who would be
King](http://www.crystalinks.com/egypthatshepsut.html)

>

> [Queens of Egypt](http://www.touregypt.net/magazine/mag02012001/magf1.htm)
Part I and [Part II](http://www.touregypt.net/magazine/mag03012001/magf6.htm)
(part II focuses on Hatshepsut's morturary temple)

>

> [Pharaoh Maatkare Hatsheptsut](http://www.maatkare.com/) the falling ankhs
on the opening screen are cool, but gee, they take forever to load.

>

> [Hatsheptsut: Queen of
Egypt](http://campus.northpark.edu/history/WebChron/Africa/Hatshepsut.html)

>

> [Mortuary Temple of
Hatshepsut](http://members.tripod.com/%7Eib205/hatshepsut_temple.html)

>

> [Text of Hatshepsut's Obelisk at
Karnak](http://www.rostau.demon.co.uk/Hatshepsut/)

>

> [Hatsheptsut, The Queen of Sheba, and Immanuel
Velikovsky](http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Academy/1326/hatshepsut.html)

>

> [Hatsheptsut](http://www.civilization.ca/civil/egypt/eghats1e.html) site has
a script for a play about Hatshepsut

>

> [Hatshepsut's Temple Great Buildings
Online](http://www.greatbuildings.com/buildings/Hatshepsuts_Temple.html)

>

> [The Theban Mapping Project](http://www.kv5.com/) tour Deir-el-Bahri and
other Theban sites

>

> [Women monarchs and heads of state a lesson plan for grade school children
on Hatshepsut](http://school.discovery.com/lessonplans/programs/hatshepsut/)

>

> [Women and Gender in Ancient Egypt: From Prehistory to Late
Antiquity](http://www.umich.edu/%7Ekelseydb/Exhibits/WomenandGender/title.html)
An exihibtion at the Kelsey museum. many nice images and some good textual
introduction to the problem of interpreting women's lives in ancient Egypt. A
good many of the images come from the Roman period, however, when life for
women was quite different than it was during the dynastic period.

>

> [Women in ancient Egypt: a course syllabus from
Diotoma](http://www.uky.edu/ArtsSciences/Classics/jjwaesyll.html) the syllabus
links to some very good primary source texts, including texts relating to
[religious
literature](http://www.uky.edu/ArtsSciences/Classics/jjtexts_III1.html),
[biographical
inscriptions](http://www.uky.edu/ArtsSciences/Classics/jjtexts_IV1.html),
[women and political
power](http://www.uky.edu/ArtsSciences/Classics/jjtexts_V1.html), [legal
status of women](http://www.uky.edu/ArtsSciences/Classics/jjtexts_VII1.html),
and [family law.
](http://www.uky.edu/ArtsSciences/Classics/jjtexts_VII2.html)There is also an
[extensive
bibliography](http://www.uky.edu/ArtsSciences/Classics/biblio/ane.html).

>

> [Papyri about women and
children](http://scriptorium.lib.duke.edu/papyrus/texts/women.html) from the
[Duke Papyrus
Archive](http://scriptorium.lib.duke.edu/papyrus/texts/homepage.html)

>

> [Women in ancient Egypt](http://www.virtual-
egypt.com/newhtml/special/women/) from [Virtual Egypt](http://www.virtual-
egypt.com/)

>

> [Female Pharaohs](http://womenshistory.about.com/cs/ancientegypt/) from
[Women's History](womenshistory.about.com)

>

> [Discovery Online: The Search for Cleopatra's
Palace](http://www.discovery.com/news/features/cleopatra/cleopatra.html)

>

> [Discovery Online: Cleopatra: As the Nile
Turns](http://www.discovery.com/stories/history/cleopatra/cleopatra.html)

>

> [Women in Ancient
Egypt](http://www.egyptrevealed.com/052201-womeinegypt.htm)

>

> [Cleopatra, the last
pharaoh](http://ce.eng.usf.edu/pharos/Alexandria/History/cleo.html)

>

> [EGYPTIAN WOMEN IN PTOLEMAIC AND ROMAN EGYPT](http://www-
oi.uchicago.edu/OI/DEPT/RA/OBRIEN_DISSPROP_TEXT.HTML) a dissertation proposal

>

> [The Egyptian Economy and Non-royal Women: Their Status in Public
Life](http://www.stoa.org/diotima/essays/wardlect.shtml)

>

> [The Nefertiti Page](http://www.duke.edu/%7Emcd3/)

>

> [Nefertiti](http://www.akhet.co.uk/nefertit.htm)

>

> [The Tel-el-Amarna collection](http://www.amarna.com/) explore the artifacts
from the capitol city of Akhenaton and Nefertiti

>

> [The Amarna Site](http://www.amarna.co.uk/) super site with virtual
explorations of many locations related to Nefertiti, Akhenaton and other women
associated with them.

>

> [Pharaohs of the Sun](http://www.mfa.org/egypt/amarna/) an exhibition

>

> [Do we have the mummy of
Nefertiti?](http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Crete/3102/do_we_have_.htm)

>

> [Another article on the possible mummy of Nefertiti from Teh London Times
](http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/0,,61-2001191217,00.html); [another
article from the Discovery
Channel](http://dsc.discovery.com/news/briefs/20010618/nefertiti.html)

>

> [Nefertiti: the Queen in her Chariot](http://www.nilemuse.com/nefertiti/)
discussion of some of the art from the Nefertiti's time. Black and white
drawings.

>

> [Nefertari's tomb](http://www.touregypt.net/historicalessays/nefertari.htm)

>

> [Temple of Hathor/Temple of
Nefertari](http://www.bluffton.edu/%7Esullivanm/egypt/abusimbel/nefertari/nefertari.html)

>

> [House and Garden in Ancient
Egypt](http://nefertiti.iwebland.com/timelines/topics/housing.htm)

>

> [Man and Woman in Ancient
Egypt](http://nefertiti.iwebland.com/people/couples.htm)

>

> [Personal Hygiene and Cosmetics in Ancient
Egypt](http://nefertiti.iwebland.com/timelines/topics/cosmetics.htm)

>

> [Medicine in Ancient Egypt: explore the Edwin Smith
Papyrus](http://nefertiti.iwebland.com/timelines/topics/medicine.htm) from
medical papyri we can learn much about women's health and also to what extent
the Egyptians understood the female anatomy. This page has an excellent set of
links as well as very good textual material.

>

> [Medicine in Ancient
Egypt](http://viator.ucs.indiana.edu/%7Eancmed/egypt.HTM)

>

> [Tatoos in Ancient Egypt](http://www.egyptmonth.com/mag11012000/mag4.htm)
some women had tatoos on their thighs that were symbolic of fertility

>

> [Childbirth and Children in Ancient
Egypt](http://www.touregypt.net/featurestories/mothers.htm)

>

> [Slavery in Ancient
Egypt](http://nefertiti.iwebland.com/timelines/topics/slavery.htm)

>

> [The goddess Sekhmet](http://showcase.netins.net/web/ankh/sekhmet1.html)

>

> [The Goddesses of Ancient Egypt](http://www.shira.net/egypt-goddess.htm)

>

> [Seshat, goddess of writing](http://www.crystalinks.com/seshat.html)

>

> [Sesaht, female
scribe](http://www.thekeep.org/%7Ekunoichi/kunoichi/themestream/seshat.html)

>

> [www.kemet.org](http://www.kemet.org/) learn about the modern practice of
kemet, the ancient Egyptian word for their spiritual practices.

>

> [Music in Ancient
Egypt](http://www.umich.edu/%7Ekelseydb/Exhibits/MIRE/Introduction/AncientEgypt/AncientEgypt.html)

|  **

Above: Bust of Nefertiti from the Berlin Museum

Below: Bust of Cleopatra  **  
---  
![](Bottom1.jpg)

