Culture Wars Syllabus

# English 1.303  
American Literature and Culture Wars

# Spring 1996

[Jonna Mackin](http://www.english.upenn.edu/~jmackin/) Home ph: 476-2543

A4 Bennett Hall

Office ph: 898-5146

Office Hours: Tues, Thurs 1:30-2:30

[jmackin@dept.english](mailto:jmackin@english.upenn.edu) mackin1@dept.english

(class listserv)

## Course description:

This course explores a body of nineteenth-century American fiction that
portrayed controversial topics. The media present our current "culture wars"
as a recent phenomenon, but debates about sexuality, gender, national politics
and ethnic identity have a long history. We will analyze these short works in
order to explore the rich powers of language that express feeling and
imagination. The reading and writing assignments are designed to sharpen your
ability to think critically and to write lucid, powerful prose.

## Course schedule:

#### Jan. 16

Introduction

#### Jan. 18

Autobiography of Ben Franklin - handout in-class drafting exercise

#### Jan. 23

Melville, "Benito Cereno"

#### Jan. 25

Melville, "Benito Cereno"

#### Jan. 30

Douglass, _Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass*_ *1-page paper due

#### Feb. 1

Douglass, _Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass

_

#### Feb. 6

Davis, _Life in the Iron Mills_ * *2-page close reading

#### Feb. 8

Davis, _Life in the Iron Mills_ paper

#### Feb. 13

Wilson, _Our Nig_

#### Feb. 15

Wilson, _Our Nig_ *

#### Feb. 20

Peer Review *4-5 page draft due

#### Feb. 22

Writing Workshop _volunteers needed_

#### Feb. 27

Zitkala Sa, _American Indian Stories_ draft returned

#### Feb. 29

Zitkala Sa, _American Indian Stories_

#### Mar. 5

Gilman, "The Yellow Wallpaper" *4-5 page revised paper due

#### Mar. 7

Gilman, "The Yellow Wallpaper"

#### Mar 9-17

Spring Break

#### Mar. 19

Chesnutt, selected stories

#### Mar 21

Chesnutt, selected stories

#### Mar. 26

Cahan, _Yekl*_ *2-3page paper due

#### Mar. 28

writing workshop _volunteers needed_

#### Apr. 2

Cahan, _Yekl_

#### Apr. 4

Screening: _Hester Street

_

#### Apr. 9

Chopin, "The Awakening"

#### Apr. 11

Chopin, "The Awakening"

#### Apr. 16

peer review* *5-6 page draft due

#### Apr. 18

Chopin, selected stories

#### Apr. 23

Chopin, selected stories* revised draft due _

#### Apr. 25

Conclusion

## Texts:

  * Phinney, Thomas. _A Short Handbook_
  * Cahan, Abraham. _Yekl; and The Imported Bridegroom and other Stories_
  * Chesnutt, Charles. _The Collected Stories of Charles W. Chesnutt_
  * Chopin, Kate. _The Awakening_
  * Davis, Rebecca Harding. _Life in the Iron Mills_
  * Douglass, Frederick _Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass_
  * Gilman, Charlotte Perkins. _The Yellow Wallpaper and Other Stories_
  * Melville, Herman. _Billy Budd, Sailor, and Other Stories_
  * Wilson, Harriet. _Our Nig; or, Sketches in the Life of a Free Black_
  * Zitkala-Sa. _American Indian Stories_ 

* * *

# Course requirements and policies

## Essays

Throughout the term you will be responsible for **4 short papers, as well as
several in-class exercises and 2 peer reviews, one long and one short**. In
addition, you will write **two longer papers** that will be submitted once,
and then revised and submitted again. These papers are meant to contain more
formal analyses of the works we have read, and I will ask you to submit them
with an outline, so as to urge you to pay close attention to organization. I
will provide some sample topics for these papers but will be happy to accept
your own paper topics, **provided you discuss them with me ahead of time**.
You will receive a tentative grade on your first draft, and when your revision
is graded, you receive a final grade. You need to put effort into the revision
process. Changing a few words or a sentence around is not considered a
thoughtful revision and will not improve your grade. In addition to the
scheduled revisions, you may revise any paper and turn it in no more than two
weeks after it was returned to you. Be sure to turn in originals with
revisions.

## Sparking

Each student will be responsible for sparking one class discussion, and the
calendar is set up so that at least 2 students lead the discussion each day.

You are expected to conduct the class on the text you select, either by
exploring questions raised by the text under discussion or by providing
information on an outside source you might have consulted. You should try to
raise some questions about the text, either offering an interpretation of a
critical element, or by suggesting some of the ideas that have been important
to you in your reading. Class members are expected to support their peers
leading discussion by reading the materials and by actively participating in
the discussion. When it's your turn you'll appreciate the help from your
classmates who _talk_!

## Participation

Class participation is essential to your learning experience. Those who teach
learn, and those who engage in discussion are also teaching. There are several
ways that you can fulfill the participation requirement. Obviously, active
engagement with the texts that shows up in class discussion is one way. Your
responses in listserv postings are another kind of participation. You'll also
have an opportunity to communicate with your peers through peer review,
sparking exercises and class workshops.

## Attendance

Because class discussion is such an essential part of our learning experience,
it is important that you be present to participate. When sparking exercises
begin, you will see how much you need your fellow classmates to engage in
conversation with you. The professor feels the same way. Without wanting to
seem excessively punitive, I am including the following guidelines for those
lagging at the lunch table: you will need a dean's excuse after your 2nd
unexcused absence, and any unexcused absence after your third will lead to a
drop in your grade, and further absences will lower the grade again.
Department policy sanctions a grade of "F" for those students who miss class
more than 2x the number of days per week that class meets -- for our purposes
that number is 4.

## Late papers

If you have a problem with a deadline and discuss it with me at least 1 week
in advance, we can negotiate. Otherwise, papers are due as listed in the
syllabus.

## Grading

A rough formula I will use:

65% papers  
25% class participation  
10% listserv postings

## Listserv

**You must have an e-mail account to participate in this class.** Your
listserv responses are your reading journal and part of your participation
that you share with the class. Your responses should be approximately a
paragraph of thoughts and/or questions that have been stimulated by your
reading assignment for that day. If you decide to respond to another class
member's post, all the better, for the one of the main goals for the listserv
postiings is to stimulate discussion. It also gives you an opportunity to
begin putting your thoughts about the text into written form. You should post
your responses on the evenings prior to class so people have time to read
them.

## Conferences

Some conferences have been scheduled on the syllabus. I would urge you to feel
free to meet with me whenever you need help. In addition to my posted office
hours,you can make an appointment to see me, or we can communicate by e-mail.

## Academic Integrity

While the work in this class will be collaborative in the sense that we will
work with each other to improve our writing, all of the material you submit
should be your own work, representing your own engagements with the texts.
Where you wish to refer to another's ideas, you must properly cite that
source. Consult a manual of style or speak to me if you have questions about
proper attribution. I've attached a copy of the University's official Code of
Academic Integrity. See pages 15-19 of the Pennbook for information on the
Student Disciplinary System.

## Workshops

We will target specific skills in periodic workshops throughout the semester.
In some workshops, volunteers will provide their papers to be critiqued by the
entire class. Though some find it hard to expose themselves to this kind of
review, volunteers benefit greatly from the experience and are always glad
they participated.

* * *

## USING SOURCES PROPERLY  
OR  
HOW TO AVOID PLAGIARISM

Plagiarism is the conscious appropriation of passages, either word for word or
in idea, from the writing of another person, and the incorporation of those
passages as one's own in written work submitted for credit.

Plagiarism includes the copying of lab reports and homework, or the unchanged
use of the essential ideas or conclusions of such work.

It is always assumed that written work for credit is the student's own unless
proper acknowledgment is given to the original author by the use of quotation
marks and footnotes or parenthetical citations and a bibliography.

Students can free themselves from uncertainties in the matter of plagiarism by
following the following rules:

  1. Direct quotation: When you use the exact words of a consulted authority, you must place every quoted word in quotation marks, and attach a footnote or parenthetical reference to each quoted passage. Every footnote or parenthetical reference must identify the source used and give the page number on which the borrowed material can be found. 
  2. Indirect quotation: When paraphrasing the words of a consulted authority, give an exact footnote or parenthetical reference to each summarized passage. Summaries can be introduced by phrases such as "According to..." or " As ... suggests." 
  3. General acknowledgement: When you make general use of the thoughts, ideas or information found in another person's work, attach a footnote. 
  4. Bibliography: Append a complete list of all authorities that you have consulted (books, periodicals, lectures, television shows, films, interviews, websites, etc.) to each piece of written work submitted. The authorities should be cited even if you do not make specific reference to them in the paper itself. 

