# English 6.303  
Tricksters and Transformations  
in Modern American Literature  
Spring 1997

![](monkey.gif)

## [Jonna Mackin](http://www.english.upenn.edu/~jmackin/)

Home Ph. 476-2543

A4 Bennett Hall

Office Ph. 898-5146

Office Hours Wed 11-12:00 and by appointment

[jmackin@dept.english](mailto:jmackin@english.upenn.edu)

mackin6@english (class listserv)

### Course description:

In this course we will attempt to broaden our understanding of humor and how
it works by looking at tricksters and clowns in 19th and 20th century American
texts. How do we recognize when something is meant to be funny? or when a
trick is being played on someone in the text, or on us as readers? What skills
do we bring to our reading that will help us to recognize something that is
meant to be funny? Sometimes we need to expand our understanding of how comedy
works before we can broaden our sense of humor. We also need to become
thoughtful and critical readers in order to recognize the comic spirit at work
in a text. We will assess how the texts we read reproduce the visual aspects
of clowning by watching some famous examples like Charlie Chaplin, Bugs Bunny
and Seinfeld's Kramer. We will consider various theoretical writings about
comedy to help us understand what makes us laugh and why. We will also learn
to see what a broad range there is to the comic spirit; not everything that is
humorous makes us laugh out loud. Sometimes humor can also be quite serious;
it can have an important and profound effect on what the text conveys. The
reading and writing assignments are designed to sharpen your ability to think
critically and to write lucid, powerful prose. There will be no final.

### Texts: _(Available at House of Our Own Bookstore on Spruce at 39th)_

  * Chesnutt, Charles, _The Collected Stories of Charles W. Chesnutt_
  * Ellison, Ralph, _Invisible Man_
  * Freud, Sigmund, _Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious_
  * Kingston, Maxine Hong, _Tripmaster Monkey_
  * Pynchon, Thomas, _The Crying of Lot 49_
  * Twain, Mark, _The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn_ 
_Bulkpack:_ Available at Penn Reprographics. NOTE: Jan 13- 21 English
bulkpacks will be sold in room 215 of the Nursing Building; after that time at
the regular location in Steinberg- Dietrich Hall

_Selected Handouts will be provided_

### Course schedule:

#### Jan 13

Introduction to Tricksters and Clowns* *in-class drafting exercise

#### Jan 15

_Huck Finn_ pp.49-61; 105-111; 151-208

post responses to the listserv

#### Jan 20

_Huck Finn_ pp. 267-277; 295-374; post listserv responses

#### Jan 22

theory: Henri Bergson (bulkpack) and Seinfeld's Kramer* *1-page paper due

post responses to the listserv

#### Jan 27, 28, 29

Conferences (sign up)

#### Jan. 27

Charles Chesnutt stories and thesis exercise; post listserv responses

#### Jan. 29

Chesnutt and Bugs Bunny*

* 2-page paper due

#### Feb. 3

Theory: Bakhtin (bulkpack), Carnival and The Simpsons; listserv posts

#### Feb. 5

Beth Brant, Anna Lee Walters,Debra Earling, Sherman Alexie stories(bulkpack);

1-page mini-peer review; _* (bring 1 extra copy of paper)_ *3-page paper due _

_ post listserv responses

#### Feb. 10

selection from _Trickster of Liberty_

(bulkpack); post listserv responses

#### Feb. 12

Theory, Freud: _Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious_ , Charlie Chaplin

post listserv responses

#### Feb. 17

Freud; post listserv responses

#### Feb. 19

evidence paragraph exercise and debate

#### Feb 24

Midterm (40 minutes), _Invisible Man;_ post listserv responses

#### Feb. 26

_Invisible Man;_ post listserv responses

#### Mar. 3

_Invisible Man;_ post listserv responses* *short library research project due

#### Mar. 5

_Invisible Man ;_ post listserv responses

#### Mar 10

SPRING BREAK

#### Mar 12

#### Mar. 17

Donald Barthelme stories; post listserv responses

Begin sparking reports

#### Mar. 19

Gish Jen, Roxana Robinson, Sherman Alexie stories (bulkpack)* *3-4 page draft
of paper due (3 copies)

post listserv responses

#### Mar. 24

workshop and peer review ; 3 page peer review form due

#### Mar. 26

_Tripmaster Monkey;_ listserv posts

Draft returned

#### Mar. 31

_Tripmaster Monkey*_ ; listserv posts __ *Re-writes due

#### Apr. 2

_Tripmaster Monkey ;_ listserv posts

#### Apr. 7

_The Crying of Lot 49;_ listserv posts

#### Apr. 9

_The Crying of Lot 49;_ listserv posts

#### Apr. 14

writing workshop (volunteers needed)* __ *4-5 page draft due

#### Apr. 16

exercise on style; bulkpack reading: "Concision" and "Elegance"

#### Apr. 21

_The Crying of Lot 49_

#### Apr. 23

_Sweeney Agonistes_ (bulkpack) * *final rewrites due

* * *

# Course requirements and policies

## Essays

Throughout the term you will be responsible for **4 short papers, as well as
several in-class exercises and 2 peer reviews, one long and one short**. In
addition, you will write **two longer papers** that will be submitted once,
and then revised and submitted again. These papers are meant to contain more
formal analyses of the works we have read, and I will ask you to submit them
with an outline, so as to urge you to pay close attention to organization. I
will provide some sample topics for these papers but will be happy to accept
your own paper topics, **provided you discuss them with me ahead of time**.
You will receive a tentative grade on your first draft, and when your revision
is graded, you receive a final grade. You need to put effort into the revision
process. Changing a few words or a sentence around is not considered a
thoughtful revision and will not improve your grade. In addition to the
scheduled revisions, you may revise any paper and turn it in no more than two
weeks after it was returned to you. Be sure to turn in originals with
revisions.

## Sparking

Each student will be responsible for sparking one class discussion, and the
calendar is set up so that at least 2 students lead the discussion each day.

You are expected to conduct the class on the text you select, either by
exploring questions raised by the text under discussion or by providing
information on an outside source you might have consulted. You should try to
raise some questions about the text, either offering an interpretation of a
critical element, or by suggesting some of the ideas that have been important
to you in your reading. Class members are expected to support their peers
leading discussion by reading the materials and by actively participating in
the discussion. When it's your turn you'll appreciate the help from your
classmates who _talk_!

## Participation

Class participation is essential to your learning experience. Those who teach
learn, and those who engage in discussion are also teaching. There are several
ways that you can fulfill the participation requirement. Obviously, active
engagement with the texts that shows up in class discussion is one way. Your
responses in listserv postings are another kind of participation. You'll also
have an opportunity to communicate with your peers through peer review,
sparking exercises and class workshops.

## Attendance

Because class discussion is such an essential part of our learning experience,
it is important that you be present to participate. When sparking exercises
begin, you will see how much you need your fellow classmates to engage in
conversation with you. The professor feels the same way. Without wanting to
seem excessively punitive, I am including the following guidelines for those
lagging at the lunch table: you will need a dean's excuse after your 2nd
unexcused absence, and any unexcused absence after your third will lead to a
drop in your grade, and further absences will lower the grade again.
Department policy sanctions a grade of "F" for those students who miss class
more than 2x the number of days per week that class meets -- for our purposes
that number is 4.

## Late papers

If you have a problem with a deadline and discuss it with me at least 1 week
in advance, we can negotiate. Otherwise, papers are due as listed in the
syllabus.

## Grading

A rough formula I will use:

65% papers  
25% class participation  
10% listserv postings

## Listserv

**You must have an e-mail account to participate in this class.** Your
listserv responses are your reading journal and part of your participation
that you share with the class. Your responses should be approximately a
paragraph of thoughts and/or questions that have been stimulated by your
reading assignment for that day. If you decide to respond to another class
member's post, all the better, for the one of the main goals for the listserv
postiings is to stimulate discussion. It also gives you an opportunity to
begin putting your thoughts about the text into written form. You should post
your responses on the evenings prior to class so people have time to read
them.

## Conferences

Some conferences have been scheduled on the syllabus. I would urge you to feel
free to meet with me whenever you need help. In addition to my posted office
hours,you can make an appointment to see me, or we can communicate by e-mail.

## Academic Integrity

While the work in this class will be collaborative in the sense that we will
work with each other to improve our writing, all of the material you submit
should be your own work, representing your own engagements with the texts.
Where you wish to refer to another's ideas, you must properly cite that
source. Consult a manual of style or speak to me if you have questions about
proper attribution. I've attached a copy of the University's official Code of
Academic Integrity. See pages 15-19 of the Pennbook for information on the
Student Disciplinary System.

## Workshops

We will target specific skills in periodic workshops throughout the semester.
In some workshops, volunteers will provide their papers to be critiqued by the
entire class. Though some find it hard to expose themselves to this kind of
review, volunteers benefit greatly from the experience and are always glad
they participated.

* * *

## USING SOURCES PROPERLY  
OR  
HOW TO AVOID PLAGIARISM

Plagiarism is the conscious appropriation of passages, either word for word or
in idea, from the writing of another person, and the incorporation of those
passages as one's own in written work submitted for credit.

Plagiarism includes the copying of lab reports and homework, or the unchanged
use of the essential ideas or conclusions of such work.

It is always assumed that written work for credit is the student's own unless
proper acknowledgment is given to the original author by the use of quotation
marks and footnotes or parenthetical citations and a bibliography.

Students can free themselves from uncertainties in the matter of plagiarism by
following the following rules:

  1. Direct quotation: When you use the exact words of a consulted authority, you must place every quoted word in quotation marks, and attach a footnote or parenthetical reference to each quoted passage. Every footnote or parenthetical reference must identify the source used and give the page number on which the borrowed material can be found. 
  2. Indirect quotation: When paraphrasing the words of a consulted authority, give an exact footnote or parenthetical reference to each summarized passage. Summaries can be introduced by phrases such as "According to..." or " As ... suggests." 
  3. General acknowledgement: When you make general use of the thoughts, ideas or information found in another person's work, attach a footnote. 
  4. Bibliography: Append a complete list of all authorities that you have consulted (books, periodicals, lectures, television shows, films, interviews, websites, etc.) to each piece of written work submitted. The authorities should be cited even if you do not make specific reference to them in the paper itself. 

