###  ARTH 284/684: EUROPEAN PAINTING 1760-1860

Professor Susan Sidlauskas  
Graduate Teaching Assistant and WATU Fellow: TBA  
Art History 284/684  
Fall 1998  
Prof. Sidlauskas' Office: Jaffe History of Art Building/208  
Office Hours: Tuesday 2:00-4:00  
Make appointments at the History of Art Office  
Tel: 898-1878/8327  
e-mail: sidlausk@mail.sas.upenn.edu  
Ms. Taube's hours to be announced  
e-mail: itaube@mail.sas.upenn.edu

**COURSE SYNOPSIS**

The death of the revolutionary hero, the search for spiritualmeaning, the
"rape" of the countryside by industrialism, theanxious masculinity of
romanticism, and the emergence ofsuch conceptions as "orientalism" and
nationalism are only someof the themes that will be addressed through the art
of thisearly modern period.  We will focus on painters from France,England and
Germany, with an emphasis on the first, and thesocial and political contexts
in which their work was produced,exhibited, and understood.  We will study the
career ofJacques-Louis David, for instance.  First the painter of the
1789revolutionary "martyrs," he became a promoter of the EmperorNapoleon.  We
shall consider the sometimes sadistic romanticismof Eugene Delacroix; the
perverse "femininity" of Jean-DominiqueIngres' nudes; Theodore Gericault's
unprecedented portraits ofthe insane; the nationalist landscapes of Caspar
David Friedrichand John Constable; the fantastic visions of J.M.W.
Turner,William Blake, and Francesco Goya, and the radical landscapepainting of
the mid-century that foreshadowed Impressionism.

Whenever possible, we will consider a relatively small number of  works by
each artist, rather than attempt to master anexhaustive survey.  Even within
this lecture format, discussionis expected and encouraged.  The required
readings representdiverse views within the field of art history.  They range
from a general, critical history of the period (Nineteenth-CenturyArt by
Stephen Eisenman, a required text available at the PennBook Center) to more
topical, and controversial essays (kept infolders at the Fine Arts Library
Reserve Desk) that address themes such as gender and sexuality, patronage, and
politicalcensorship.  The original sources for all the readings are listed at
the end of your syllabus.  If you get frustrated with the mediocre quality of
the xeroxed pictures in your articles, you can consult the original in the
library.

There will be two exams, a mid-term and a final, and two papers,one 4-5 pages,
the other 8-10.  For the first paper, you willcompare two paintings at the
Philadelphia Museum of Art, chosenby you from a group of at least five pairs.
For the final paper,you will choose a topic from a list of approximately
tenpossibilities, and combine visual analysis with some research. In addition,
a one page topic summary identifying the theme ofyour final paper and plan for
research will be required.  Datesfor all assignments are listed below (but are
subject to change). Students who wish to affiliate themselves with WATU will
berequired to do two drafts of these papers, as well as a thirdwriting
assignment--a critical analysis of an assigned article orexcerpt from your
Eisenman text. (This WATU assignment isreferred to below as the "extra
paper.")

There are six section meetings during the course of the semester,led by
......, the Teaching Assistant for this class, and tworeview sessions prior to
each exam, also led by .....  After the first two weeks of class, these
meetings will generally takeplace every other week and will replace a
scheduled Tuesdaylecture.  Times for sections will be scheduled as close to
thestart of classes as possible.  Participation in sectiondiscussions is
required, and factored into your final grade. Most section meetings will
revolve around a key work of art and acritical article or chapter from your
book. Students are asked tobring three questions or points of discussion about
the readingsto each section.  Two of these meetings will be held at
thegalleries of the Philadelphia Museum of Art.  We hope to be ableto provide
transportation.

Instead of using slide viewers to keep track of the images youare required to
know, you will be able to view the images on theWeb, which can be accessed
either through the home page for ourcourse, or through the slide library.
Check your listserv forthe relevant addresses.

Some cautionary words: Attendance is mandatory at both lecturesand sections.
If you attend both, you should have have nosignificant problem with the exams
or assignments.  There will be **NO MAKE-UPS** for either exam, unless there
is a dire medical emergency or a death in the family; proof will be required.
Papers will be graded down half a grade for every day they arelate.
Plagiarism will result in a failing grade.

Some reassuring words: Although memorization seems to be anecessary evil of
introductory art history courses, be assuredthat the identifications you will
be presented with at exam timeare quite easily recognizable if you have
attended classes andsections faithfully.  
    
**NOTE FOR GRADUATE STUDENTS** : Additional assignments and meetingswith Prof.
Sidlauskas will be required.  Please see me to arrangeyour schedule.

**TENTATIVE CLASS SCHEDULE**

(Sept. 10:) SS--Introduction and Overview. SectionAssignments. B{Reading for
next class:} Carol Duncan's "FallenFathers: Images of Authority in Pre-
Revolutionary French Art"(Fine Arts Reserve).  Also read in Eisenman, pp 7-50.

(Sept. 15:) SS--Jean-Baptise Greuze and the New Public.B{Reading for next
class:} Continue with Eisenman.

(Sept. 17:) SS--Jacques-Louis David. Early Works.B{Reading for next class:}
Michael Maarinen, "Images and Ideasof Charlotte Corday" (Fine Arts Reserve),
or reading on David's _Marat_ to be announced.

(Sept. 22:) TA--David and the Revolution. B{Readingsfor next class:} Review
Eisenman pp 14-34.

(Sept. 24:) SS--The Late David. B{Reading for nextclass:} Abigail Solomon-
Godeau, "Male Trouble: A Crisis inRepresentation" (Fine Arts Reserve).

(Sept. 29:) TA--New Canons of Masculinity.  WATUstudents: First draft for
Paper #1 due in section. B{Readingsfor next class:} Review Eisenman, pp 34-50.

(Oct. 1:) SS--The Post-Revolutionary Years: Gros andGirodet. B{Reading for
next class:} Eisenman, Review pp 23-50and read pp 51-60, and read David
Fraser, "Joseph Wright of Derbyand the Lunar Society" (Fine Arts Reserve).

(Oct. 6:) SS--Joseph Wright of Derby and the Age ofIndustrialization.
B{Reading for next class:} in Eisenman, BrianLukacher, "Visionary History
Painting: Blake and hisContemporaries," pp 98-114. **FIRST PAPER DUE IN
CLASS.**

(Oct. 8:) SS--William Blake. B{Reading for nextclass:} Eisenman, continue as
above, and add pp. 78-97.

(Oct. 13:) TA--Visionaries: Blake, Goya and Fuseli.B{Reading for next class:}
Continue as above, and read excerptfrom Janis Tomlinson, pp 115-127 in {Goya
in the Twilight ofEnlightenment} (Fine Arts Reserve).

(Oct. 15:) SS--Francisco Goya. B{Reading for nextclass:} Joseph Koerner, pp
5-21 in Ux{Caspar David Friedrich andthe Subject of Landscape} (Fine Arts
Reserve)

(Oct. 20:) SS--Caspar David Friedrich and the RomanticLandscape.  Prepare for
Mid-term exam. TA--REVIEW SESSION FOREXAM. TIME AND PLACE TO BE ANNOUNCED.  
    
(Oct. 22:) **MID-TERM EXAMINATION IN CLASS.**   B{Readingfor next class:}
Review Eisenman, pp 47-50, and read pp 73-74.

(Oct. 27:) SS--Jean-Dominique Ingres. B{Reading fornext class:} Carol Ockman,
"Two Large Eyebrows a l'Orientale:Ethnic Stereotyping in Ingres' _Baronne de
Rothschild_ " (FineArts Reserve)

(Oct. 29:) SS--The Portraiture of Ingres. B{Readingfor next class:} Eisenman,
pp 60-68, and reading to be announced.

(Nov. 3:) TA--Classicism and Romanticism. B{Readingfor next class}: Linda
Nochlin, "Gericault, or the Absence ofWomen" (Fine Arts Reserve).  WATU
students: Draft for extra paperdue in section.

(Nov. 5) SS--Theodore Gericault. B{Reading for nextclass:} Nina Athanassoglou-
Kallmyer, "Gericault's Severed Headsand Limbs: The Politics and Aesthetics of
the Scaffold" (FineArts Reserve), and Eisenman, pp 68-77...

(Nov. 10:) SS--Gericault and the young EugeneDelacroix. B{Reading for next
class:} Eisenman, pp 68-77.

(Nov. 12:) SS:--Delacroix. B{Reading for next class:}Marcia Pointon, "Liberty
on the Barricades: Women, Politics,Sexuality" (Fine Arts Reserve). WATU
students: Final draft ofextra paper due in class.

(Nov. 17:)  TA--The Late Delacroix. (If possible,section is to be held at the
Delacroix exhibition at thePhiladelphia Museum of Art). B{Reading for next
class:}Elizabeth Helsinger, "Constable. The Making of a NationalPainter" (Fine
Arts Reserve) and in Eisenman: Brian Lukacher,"Nature Historicized: Constable,
Turner and Romantic LandscapePainting."  **ALL STUDENTS: SUBMIT 1 PAGE SUMMARY
OF FINAL PAPER INCLASS.**

(Nov. 19:) SS--John Constable. B{Reading for nextclass:} John McCoubrey,
"Parliament on Fire, Turner's Burnings"(Fine Arts Reserve).

(Nov. 24:)  SS--J. M. W. Turner. Before next class,review Turner and Constable
readings.

(Nov. 26:) THANKSGIVING

(Dec. 1:) TA--Turner and Constable. To be heldat the Philadelphia Museum of
Art. B{Reading for next class:} Eisenman, pp 206-212 and Linda Nochlin, "Lost
and Found. OnceMore the Fallen Woman" (Fine Arts Reserve). WATU STUDENTS:
Firstdraft of final paper due in sections.

(Dec. 3:) SS--The Pre-Raphaelites. B{Reading for nextclass:} Eisenman, pp
188-196 and review above, and ElizabethChilds, "Big Trouble, Daumier,
Gargantua and the Censorship ofPolitical Caricature" (Fine Arts Reserve).

(Dec. 8:) SS--Honore Daumier. B{Reading for nextclass:} Review Eisenman, pp
206-212 and Robert Herbert, "City vs.Country, The Rural Image in French
painting from Millet toGauguin" (Fine Arts Reserve) TA--EXAM REVIEW SESSION
(time andplace to be announced).

(Dec. 10:) SS--Millet and the Barbizon School ofLandscape Painting. **FINAL
PAPER DUE IN CLASS.**   PREPARE FOR FINALEXAM.

**READINGS ON RESERVE**

Begin(Verbatim)  
Athanassoglou-Kallmyer, Nina, "Gericault's Severed Heads and  
Limbs," ux{Art Bulletin}, vol. 74, Dec. 92, pp 599-618.

Berger, John, ux{Ways of Seeing}, Penguin, 1972.

Bindman, David, ux{Blake as an Artist}, 1977.

Boime, Albert, "Caspar David Friedrich's Monk by the Sea,  
Arts Magazine, vol. 16, Nov. 1986, pp 54-63.

Bryson, Norman. Tradition and Desire, Cambridge, 1984,

Childs, Elizabeth, "Big Trouble, Daumier, Gargantua and the  
Censorship of Political Caricature," Art Journal, Spring 1992,  
vol 51, #1, 26-37

Clark, T.J., The Absolute Bourgeois, Princeton, 1973

Crow, Thomas, Emulation.  Making Artists for RevolutionaryFrance, New Haven,
1995.

Crow, Thomas, Painters and Public Life in 18th century  
Paris, New Haven and London, 1985.

Crow, Thomas, "Revolutionary Activism and the Cult of Male Beauty  
in the Studio of David," from B. Fort. ed., Fictions of the  
French Revolution, Northwestern University Press, 1991, 55-84

Condon, Patricia,Ingres: In Pursuit of Perfection, exh.  
cat., J.B. Speed Museum, 1983.

Connolly, John, "Ingres and the Erotic Intellect," from Thomas  
Hess and Linda Nochlin, eds., Woman as Sex Object. Studies in  
Erotic Art 1730-1970}, New York, 1972.

Duncan, Carol, "Fallen Fathers: Images of Authority in  
Pre-Revolutionary French Art," Art History, vol. 4. no. 2,  
June 1981, 186-202

Eisenman, Stephen, Nineteenth-Century Art: A Critical  
History, London, 1994.

Fraser, David, "Joseph Wright of Derby and the Lunar Society," in  
Joseph Wright of Derby, exh. cat., Metropolitan Museum of  
Art, New York, 1990

Helsinger, Elizabeth, "Constable: The Making of a National  
Painter," Critical Inquiry, Winter 1989, vol 15., #2,  
253-279

Herbert, Robert, "City vs. Country, The Rural Image in French  
Painting from Millet to Gauguin," Artforum, February 1970,  
44-55

Herbert, Robert, David, Voltaire and the French Revolution,  
New Haven, 1973.

Honour, Hugh, Neo-Classicism, London and New York, 1968.

Johnson, Dorothy, "Desire Mythologized, David's ux{L'Amour  
Quittant Psyche}," Ux{Art History}, vol 9, no. 4, December 1986,  
450-470.

Johnson, Dorothy, ux{Jacques-Louis David. Art in Metamorphosis},  
Princeton, 1993.

Koerner, Joseph Leo, Ux{Caspar David Friedrich and the Subject  
of Landscape}, 1990.

Lajer-Burcharth, Eva, "David's Ux{Sabine Women}," ux{Art  
History}, vol. 14, #3, Sept. 1991, 397-430.

Larkin, Oliver, Ux{Daumier. Man of his Time}, 1967.

Leeks, Wendy, "Ingres Other-Wise," Ux{Oxford Art Journal}, vol.  
9, no. 1, 1986, 29-37.

Maarinan, Michael, "Images and Ideas of Charlotte Corday: Texts  
and Contexts of an Assassination," Ux{Arts Magazine}, 54, April  
1980, 158-176.

McCoubrey, John, "Parliament on Fire, Turner's Burnings," ux{Art  
in America}, December, 1984, 112-25.

Munhall, Edgar, ux{Ingres and the Comtesse d'Haussonville}, exh.  
cat., New York, 1985.

Nochlin, Linda, "Gericault, or the Absence of Women,"  
Ux{October} 68, Spring 1994, 45-59

Nochlin, Linda, "Lost and Found: Once More the Fallen Woman,"  
Ux{Art Bulletin}, March 1978, vol. LX, #1, 140-153

Nochlin, Linda, Ux{Realism}, Penguin Books, 1971.

Ockman, Carol, ux{Ingres}, New Haven, 1995.

Ockman, Carol, "Two Large Eyebrows a l'Orientale: Ethnic  
Stereotyping in Ingres' Ux{Baronne de Rothschild}," Ux{Art  
History}, vol. 14, Dec. 1991, 521-539

Pointon, Marcia, "Liberty at the Barricades," in Ux{Naked  
Authority}, Cambridge, 1990, 59-82

Pollock, Griselda, "Woman as Sign: Psychoanalytic readings," in  
ux{Vision and Difference: Femininity, Feminism, and Histories of  
Art}, Routledge, 1988

Rosen, Charles and Henri Zerner, Ux{Romanticism and Realism},  
New York, 1984.

Rosenblum, Robert, ux{Ingres}, 1967.

Rosenblum, Robert, Ux{Nineteenth-Century Art}, 1984.

Rosenthal, Michael, Ux{Constable: The Painter and his  
Landscape}, 1983.

Shanes, Eric, ux{Turner's Human Landscape}, 1990.

Simon, Robert, "David's Martyr-Portrait of Le Pelletier de Saint  
Fargeau," Ux{Art History}, vol. 14, no. 4, Dec. 1991, 459-487.

Solomon-Godeau, Abigail, "Male Trouble: A Crisis in  
Representation," Ux{Art History}, vol. 16, No. 2, June 1993,  
286-312.

Trapp, Frank, Ux{The Attainment of Delacroix},  
1970\.  
    
[BACK TO ARTH
284/684](http://www.arthistory.upenn.edu/fall98/284/index98.html)

