**

History 111X  
Religious Studies 191: Religion and Culture in the U.S. South  
Fall 2000, Th 6:00 p.m  
112 Armstrong Hall  
Dr Briane Turley  
Course Web Site: <http://are.as.wvu.edu/111.htm>_  
Journal of Southern Religion_ : <http://jsr.as.wvu.edu>

**Historically, southern U.S. culture has been at the center of much heated
commentary. In the 1920s, literary critic H. L. Mencken opined that
"Fundamentalism, KuKluxry, Revivals, lynchings, hog wallow politics . . . are
the things that always occur to a northerner when he thinks about the South. .
. . It seems to him that civilization is completely dead down there."
(Mencken, _Bathtub Hoax_ , 249). On the other hand, songwriter and country
music star, Hank Williams, expressed more upbeat convictions toward the region
when he sang, "If heaven ain't a lot like Dixie, I don't want to go. As these
quotations suggest, pundits of southern history and culture almost inevitably
refer to the region's religious heritage when expressing their views.

Indeed religion, whether sectarian, domestic, folk, or civil has had
tremendous influence in shaping the history and culture of the American South.
And, as this course will argue, southern religious history and culture
continues to have a formative influence on broader American culture. Using a
variety of conceptual perspectives and methodological approaches, this course
will investigate the development of the major religious groups in the region
and will explore the meaning and function of religion as a cultural phenomenon
in southern life. Special attention will be given to religion and culture in
Appalachia.

You may contact me via:

Office: G-14 Woodburn; Office hours arranged by appointment

E-mail: _[bkt9@wvu.edu](mailto:bkt9@wvu.edu)

_

Phone: 293-2421; Home: 864-1074

**_

Required Texts_**: The following required texts are available at the WVU Book
Store.

Albert J. Raboteau, _Slave Religion: The Invisible Institution in the
Antebellum South

_

Christine Heyrman, _Southern Cross: The Beginnings of the Bible Belt

_

Samuel S. Hill, _One Name but Several Faces

_

Eugene D. Genovese, _A Consuming Fire: The Fall of the Confederacy in the Mind
of the White Christian South

_

Bill Leonard, ed., _Christianity in Appalachia: Profiles in Regional Pluralism

_

Donald G. Mathews, "The Southern Rite of Human Sacrifice" _Journal of Southern
Religion,_ August 2000, <http://jsr.as.wvu.edu/mathews.htm>

**_

Course Requirements:_** The following will comprise the criteria used in
grading:

_

1\. CLASS PARTICIPATION_. Most meetings of this course will involve some
discussion of the assigned readings; therefore it is imperative that you
attend class regularly and come prepared fully to participate. Student
participation will count toward 25% of the final grade according to the
following components:

a) Attendance. The instructor will take regular attendance, and _more than
one_ unexcused absence will affect the student's participation grade by 5% per
absence. If a student must miss class for a valid reason he or she must
contact me _before_ the missed class to receive an excused absence. Excused
absences normally involve documented medical emergencies, death in the
immediate family, unavoidable government obligation such as military service
or jury duty, and a university-sponsored activity that requires the student's
participation in an athletic event.

b) Active participation. Class participation and the demonstrated ability to
critique the assigned readings and relate the written material to information
gleaned during recitation. Students must do more than simply recite data but
must show an ability to discuss the implications of the authors' works.
Moreover, the instructor will introduce other significant works in the field
and expects students to compile a comprehensive bibliography that will serve
them should they decide to do additional research. Finally, students will also
be required to read Donald Mathews article on the "Southern Rite of Human
Sacrifice" and make presentations and lead class discussions on the topic
during the evening of November 16. _The instructor will make specific
assignments at midterm.

2\. BOOK REVIEWS_. Students will write four three-page reviews (750 words) of
the required books. Since there are five required books, students may select
one book that they need not review. However, all students must review the
_Christianity in Appalachia_ text. Reviews will be graded for content as well
as grammar and style. When grading book reviews, the instructor will pay
particular attention to the topical content of the paper along with the
conventions of grammar, spelling, punctuation, and the rhetorical devices of
style and logic. Assessment of the student's writing is based on the _Chicago
Manual of Style_ , and grading will follow the criteria established by the
University's English 1 program. Reviews should be typed, double-spaced in a
regular 12 point font (similar to the Times Roman font used in this syllabus)
with one-inch margins. Your name should be at the top of the first page.
Staple your papers; do not place in binders or folders and _do not_ use cover
sheets. Late papers will be penalized 10% per day for every day they are late.
(40%)

_

3\. FINAL EXAM_. The final examination comprises short answer and major essay
responses and will be given on Thursday, Dec 9 at 6:00 p.m. Students will
receive a set of study questions at least two weeks in advance of the final.
The short answer section will be derived entirely from the word list that we
generate during the semester. The major essays should reflect the student's
familiarity with bibliographic material examined during class meetings. (35%)

**_

Disability Issues

_**

Please see the instructor immediately if you have a disability that may
interfere with your enjoyment or performance in this course. The instructor
welcomes individuals with disabilities in his classes and will respond quickly
to accommodation issues whenever possible.

**_

Academic Misconduct

_**

Students should be familiar with the WVU statement on Academic
Integrity/Dishonesty published in the undergraduate catalog. In keeping with
University policy, Plagiarism, cheating on exams, submitting another person's
work as your own and all other behaviors defined as academic dishonesty will
be referred to the Dean of Arts and Sciences office and to the Dean of the
college in which the student is enrolled. If a student is found to be guilty
of misconduct, the penalty involves the assignment of an unforgivable F for
this course and could, at the Dean's discretion, include even more severe
penalties.

**

                    Course Schedule:

**

> > **

>>

>> 08/24 **Course overview.

                    Religion and Regionalism: Methodological Considerations in Time and Space.

> > **

>>

>> 08/31 **Outside the Bible Belt: **** Sixteenth-Century **** Spanish
Missions and Native American Culture

                    The Colonial South and Transformation to Bible Religion (Heyrman, intro-ch 3)

> > **

>>

>> 09/07 **Appalachian Women: The Role of Gender at Home and in the Pulpit.
(Heyrman, ch3-end)

>>

>> **

>>

>> 09/14 **African-American Religions in the Old South: Continuities and
Divergences with White Religions. (Raboteau, chs 1-3)

                    African-American Spirituals and the Case for Liberation.

> > **

>>

>> 09/21 **The Origins of Southern Evangelicalism.(Raboteau, chs 4-6)

                    A **** Crucible for Civil Rights: **** African-American Religions and the New South.

> > **

>>

>> 09/28** We are (are not!) of this World: Protestant reactions to the
Progressive Era ( _Southern Cross_ review due).

                    Southern Religion in Art and Landscape.

> > **

>>

>> 10/05 **Southern Judaism **.** _Jews in Appalachia_

                    Catholicism in the South **** ( _Slave Religion_ review due).

> > **

>>

>> 10/12 **Honor, Southern Religions, and the Civil War. (Genovese, chs 1-4;
Epilogue)

                    Religion and Emotion in Appalachian Cultures.

> > **

>>

>> 10/19 **Politics and the Pulpit: Race, Religion, and the Rise of Jim Crow
_(A Consuming Fire_ **** review due).

>>

>> **

>>

>> 10/26 **Southern Religion and Literature: The Christ-Haunted South of
Flannery O'Conner.

                    Southern Civil Religion. **

> > 11/2 **Religion and Popular Culture in the South.

                    The Strange Case of Elvis Presley ( _Christianity in Appalachia_ review due). **

> > 11/09 **Southern Culture and the **** Emergence of Non-Traditional
Religions.

                    Southern Religion in Film: _The Apostle

> > _**

>>

>> 11/16 **Lynching as a Form of Human Sacrifice

>>

>> **

>>

>> 11/23** Fall Recess

>>

>> **

>>

>> 11/30 **Religion as Liberation: Martin Luther King and the Long, Hard Road
to Civil Rights. The Future of Southern Religions ****_(One Name but Several
Faces_ **** review due).

>>

>> **

>>

>> 12/07** Final Examination.

