**

**Scandinavian S-178 (=Literature and Arts A78)**

|

**http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~laa78/**  
  
---|---  
  
**THE VIKINGS AND THE NORDIC HEROIC TRADITION**

|

**Instructor: Stephen Mitchell (samitch@fas.harvard.edu; 5-3513)**  
  
**Tu Th 1:00-3:30, plus 2-hour weekly section meetings**

|

**Teaching Fellow: Lena Norrman (norrman@fas.harvard.edu)**  
  
**

**summer 2002**

**DESCRIPTION:** Examines the heroic legacy resulting from the historical
events in northern Europe A.D. 800 to A.D. 1100, concentrating on the medieval
Icelandic sagas. The course focuses on how these texts present their heroes as
warriors, kings, poets, outlaws and adventurers-- as well as, to quote one
19th-century scholar, "farmers at fisticuffs." The course considers several
specific heroic traditions, such as the "Bear's Son Tale" and the "Dragon-
Slayer," over time, and reviews how the viking image is received and shaped in
later periods (e.g., the poetry of 19th-century Denmark, the art of Victorian
England, the scholarship and pseudo-scholarship of our contemporary world).
The elusive question of the North American colony of "Vinland" as a meaningful
component of this legacy is examined in both its scientific and imaginative
contexts.

**OBJECTIVES:** The period 800-1100 is often characterized in Northern
European history as the Age of the Vikings, a title to which ethnic
(=Scandinavian) and professional (=pirates, adventurers, explorers)
implications have been attached over the centuries; at the same time, we often
refer to all Scandinavians of this period as "vikings." The tasks before us
can be separated into several parts:

> 1) to examine the social, literary, and religious worlds of Scandinavia in
the period 800-1100;

>

> 2) to understand the character of "viking" activities, and the place of "the
heroic" in that world, by examining native and foreign texts, as well as
historical and archaeological materials; and,

>

> 3) our main concern, to explore the ongoing reinterpretation of this era in
the literary works of later periods: How, for example, is this epoch treated
in the saga literature of 13th-century Iceland? What purposes does it serve in
Renaissance Scandinavia? How is it received and reshaped in 19th-century and
20th-century Scandinavia, England, Germany, and America, and what roles did
(and does) it play in nationalist movements, and within ethnic groups?

The aim of the course, in addition to acquainting participants with many great
works of medieval literature, is to provide students with conceptual tools for
understanding the value placed on heroic literature and tradition in societies
of various periods.

**COURSE RESPONSIBILITIES:** In addition to regular section preparation and
participation (20%), course grades will be based on a mid-term on (10%) and 2
five-page essays (10% each), as well as a final exam (50%).

**READINGS:** ALL TEXTS ARE AVAILABLE FOR PURCHASE AT THE COOP AND ELSEWHERE.

**PRIMARY:**

> 1) Edda. Snorri Sturluson, transl. Anthony Faulkes, Everyman ISBN:
0460876163\.

>

> 2) The Poetic Edda, transl. Lee M. Hollander. University of Texas Press.
ISBN: 0292764995\.

>

> 3) King Harald's Saga, transl. Magnus Magnusson and Hermann Palsson. Viking
Pr. ISBN: 0140441832.

>

> 4) Seven Viking Romances, transl. Hermann Palsson and Paul Edwards. Penguin.
ISBN: 0140444742.

>

> 5) The Vinland Sagas. The Norse Discovery of America. Graenlendinga Saga and
Eirik's Saga, transl. Magnus Magnusson and Hermann Palsson. Penguin. ISBN:
0140441549.

>

> 6) Egil's Saga, transl. Hermann Palsson and Paul Edwards. Penguin. ISBN:
0140443215.

>

> 7) Laxdaela Saga, transl. Magnus Magnusson and Hermann Palsson. Penguin.
ISBN: 0140442189.

>

> 8) Njal's Saga, transl. Magnus Magnusson and Hermann Palsson. Viking Pr.
ISBN: 0140441034.

>

> 9) The Saga of Gisli the Outlaw, transl. George Johnston. Univ. of Toronto
Press. ISBN: 0802062199\.

>

> 10) Grettir's Saga, transl. Denton Fox and Hermann Palsson. University of
Toronto Press. ISBN: 0802061656.



**SECONDARY:**

> 11) H.R. Ellis Davidson, Gods and Myths of Northern Europe. Viking Penguin.
ISBN: 0140136274.

>

> 12) Else Roesdahl, The Vikings, transl. Susan M. Margeson and Kirsten
Williams. Penguin. ISBN: 0140252827.

>

> 13) Mitchell, Heroic Sagas and Ballads (handout)

>

>  

**WEBSITES:**

A number of specific websites are listed at the course website; you are sure
to find many others. But be wary of overly enthusiastic sites; a topic like
'vikings' attracts all kinds, and just because you read something on the web,
doesn't necessarily make it so.



**COURSE OUTLINE:**

Tu 6/25 ORGANIZATIONAL and INFORMATIONAL MEETING [Hour 1]

Tu 6/25 THE HISTORICAL SETTING [Hour 2]

> o Roesdahl, 3-22



Th 6/27 THE HISTORICAL SETTING (cont'd) [Hour 1]

Th 6/27 OLD NORSE MYTHOLOGY [Hour 2]

> o Poetic edda, 1-13, 120-28

>

> o Roesdahl, 25-45; 52-63

>

> o Davidson, 9-47



Tu 7/2 OLD NORSE MYTHOLOGY (cont'd) [Hour 1]

> o Edda. Snorri Sturluson, 59-72

>

> o Poetic edda, 14-64, 74-82, 104-116

>

> o Davidson, 48-91

>

> o Carlyle, "The Hero as Divinity. Odin. Scandinavian Mythology" (1840) LINK

Tu 7/2 OLD NORSE MYTHOLOGY (cont'd) [Hour 2]

> o Edda. Snorri Sturluson, 1-58

>

> o Poetic edda, 117-119

>

> o Davidson, 92-127, 190-223

>

> o Roesdahl, 147-67



**Th 7/4 INDEPENDENCE DAY -- NO CLASS**



Tu 7/9 HEROIC POETRY and THE DRAGON SLAYER (cont'd) [Hour 1]

> o Poetic edda, 205-321

>

> o Roesdahl, 168-84

Tu 7/9 THE HERO AS KING: King Harald's Saga [Hour 2]

> o The Anglo-Saxon Chronicle for 1066 LINK

>

> o "The Battle of Maldon" LINK

>

> o Hale, "The Viking Longship," LINK



**Th 7/11 **MIDTERM [Hour 1]****

Th 7/11 THE HERO AS POET: Egil's Saga [Hour 2]



Tu 7/16 THE HERO AS POET: Egil's Saga (cont'd) [Hour 1]

****ESSAY # 1 DUE****

Tu 7/16 THE HERO AS EXPLORER: The Vinland Sagas [Hour 2]

> o Roesdahl, 262-76



Th 7/18 THE HERO AS EXPLORER: The Vinland Sagas (cont'd) [Hour 1]

> o E-SOURCEBOOK: Items in the Greenland folder

Th 7/18 THE HERO AS LAWYER: Njal's Saga [Hour 2]



Tu 7/23 THE HERO AS LAWYER: Njal's Saga (cont'd) [Hour 1]

Tu 7/23 THE HERO AS OUTLAW: The Saga of Gisli the Outlaw [Hour 2]



Th 7/25 THE HERO AS HEROINE: Laxdaela Saga [Hour 1]

Th 7/25 FILM: Vikings (NOVA) Part I [Hour 2]



Tu 7/30 THE HERO AS MONSTER: Grettir's Saga [Hour 1]

Tu 7/30 THE HERO AS BEWITCHED WANDERER: Arrow-Odd's saga (Seven Viking
Romances) [Hour 2]

> o SOURCEBOOK: Mitchell, 8-32, 44-90



Th 8/1 THE HERO AS AN 'ASHLAD': Gautrek's saga (in Seven Viking Romances)
[Hour 1]

> o SOURCEBOOK: Mitchell, 91-136

Th 8/1 FILM: Vikings (NOVA) Part II [Hour 2]



Tu 8/6 THE HERO AND THE BALLAD TRADITION [Hours 1 and 2]

> o SOURCEBOOK: Mitchell, 137-77

>

> o E-SOURCEBOOK: "Regin the Smith"

****ESSAY # 2 DUE****



Th 8/8 VINLAND, VIKINGS AND THE IMAGINATION [Hour 1]

> o SOURCEBOOK: Mitchell, 32-43

>

> o Websites:

>

>> Alfred, Lord Tennyson, "The Battle of Brunanburh" (selections) LINK

>>

>> Morris, "The Story of Sigurd the Volsung" (selections) LINK

>>

>> Longfellow, "The Skeleton in the Armor" (selections) LINK

>>

>> Wagner, "The Ring of the Nibelung" (selections) LINK

Th 8/8 VINLAND, VIKINGS AND THE IMAGINATION [Hour 2]

> o E-SOURCEBOOK: Items in the Vinland Folder

>

> o Websites:

>

>> Dighton Rock LINK

>>

>> Norumbega LINK

>>

>> Kensington LINKS

>>

>> The Vinland Map LINK



**READING PERIOD ASSIGNMENT:**

The remaining sagas in Seven Viking Romances, pp. 171-281



**Tu 8/13 Final exam (2:15 pm ) -- See the study guide in the Handouts
Folder**





