**

English 151 The Nineteenth Century Novel

**

Several distinct goals will guide the reading assignments, lectures, sections,
worksheets, short papers and take home exam within this course.

**

First,** to give a detailed critical reading of a representative set of
classic British and European novels written between 1774 and 1896, the period
when the novel reached its peak as a form and dominated European literature.
The course will explore the fact that the novel was a European and American
form of great interconnectedness and that it was the major art form, along
with classical music and easel painting, that defined and reflected a middle
class, economic and secular civilization that included many cultures but
shared a set of major works of art.

**

Second** , to define a basic set of technical narrative terms such as motif,
symmetry, sequence, character, plot, narrator, time, setting and objects.
Course worksheets, distributed in class, will address each narrative term
within a specific novel. Because the basic narrative technology in our own
time is visual-- a film, a television series, a video--some attention will be
given to the contrast between visual story telling and what we could call, by
way of contrast, de-visualized narration. Both oral story telling and the
reading of novels could be called de-visualized means for transmitting
stories.

**

Third,** to inventory and examine the major forms taken by the novel in its
classic period. Including

  * The Realistic Novel
  * Romance or Fantasy Novel
  * The Historical Novel, invented by Scott, brought to perfection in such works as _Middlemarch, War and Peace, Absalom, Absalom.
_

  * The Serial Novel--published first in weekly or monthly episodes in newspapers or journals. Closely connected to Television's idea of the series where the same characters return week after week. 
  * Victorian Multi-Plot Novels: a novel made up of two, three or four interwoven plots, each with its own assembly of characters and outcomes. The multi-plot novel is similar to the musical symphonic form as we find it from Beethoven to Mahler in the nineteenth century. 
_

  * Bildungsroman_ (The Novel of a youth's Formation and Education)
  * Novel of Consciousness and inner life: reflection, attention, subjectivity
  * Novel of Manners. A comic, satiric, or ironic form centered on behavior,  conduct, character and, above all, on language and verdicts.
  * Social Novel. Representations of society, communities or families instead  of the biography of one or of several individuals.
  * Biographic Form. The Fictional life History of one central character from childhood to stable adult location in society, i. e. marriage.
  * The Detective Novel, especially its intellectual form.

**

Fourth,** to connect the novels into the wider questions of nineteenth century
culture: Romanticism and its domestication into Victorian culture; the
problems posed by economics and science (i.e. Darwin's ideas of nature,
competition, survival and their consequences for nineteenth century ideas of
society); philosophical pessimism and the fin de siecle mood; social mobility
and the decline of social knowledge; the changing nature of social classes and
the English novel's primary relation to a society divided into classes; the
changing ideas of family, intimacy and marriage; the role of women and the
British Novel's domination by women writers; the relation of brief and long
duration within temporal experience to the writing of fiction; the nineteenth
century's awareness of history, change, revolution, reform and the variety of
equally possible cultures; the new psychology of self construction (the "self-
made" woman or man) within a society of Individualism with its romantic
recognition of irrational, accidental, and unconscious aspects of behavior.

**



************************************************************



Requirements**: Course requirements include regular attendance at lectures,
full participation in weekly section meetings, lengthy reading assignments,
worksheets, and

(1) a 5-6 page paper due **October 3

**

(2) a 5-7 page paper due **November 14

**

(3) a 7 page paper due **December 12

**

(4) a take home exam at the start of reading period (date to be set, but
**Wednesday January 4 is the likely date

**





**

*************************************************************

_

List of Novels

**_

Austen, _Sense and Sensibility

_

Bronte, _Wuthering Heights

_

Eliot, _Middlemarch

_

Flaubert, _Madame Bovary

_

Bronte, _Jane Eyre

_

Conrad, _Lord Jim

_

Dickens, _Great Expectations

_

Dostoevsky, _Notes from the Underground

_

Zola, _L'Assommoir

_

Hardy, _Jude the Obscure

_

Mann, _Buddenbrooks

_

Books have been ordered at the COOP in convenient and inexpensive editions.

**

*************************************************************

_

Lecture Schedule English 151

_

Part I: The Novel of Society

**

We will begin with the **novel of society** and its most challenging variation
the **Novel of adultery**. We will use Austen's _Sense and Sensibility,_
Eliot's _Middlemarch_ and Flaubert's _Madame Bovary_ to define the features of
literary Realism

September 12  Introduction--Reading culture and Economic society

September 17, 19 _Sense and Sensibility,_ Jane Austen

October 24, 26 _Madame Bovary,_ Gustave Flaubert

October 1, 3 _Middlemarch,_ George Eliot (Mary Ann Evans)

**

Wednesday October 3 ** **5-7 page Paper Due in class.

**

October 8 Columbus Day. No classes held. _

_

October 10 _Middlemarch

_

October 15, 17 _Middlemarch

_**

*************************************************************

**__**

Part II: Romanticism and Biographic Form.

**

The novel and individual life; the biographic form; life history and romance;
character and knowledge. The alternatives to realism: dream, nightmare,
fantasy, romance, and self-division.

October 22, 24 _Jane Eyre_ , Charlotte Bronte

October 29, 31 _Great Expectations,_ Charles Dickens

November 5, 7 _Wuthering Heights,_ Emily Bronte

November 12, 14 _Lord Jim_ , Joseph Conrad

**

Wednesday November 14: 5-7 page short paper due in class.**

**

*************************************************************

Part III: The City Novel as a synthesis: persons, things, parts and doubles

**

November 19, 21 _L'Assommoir_ , Emile Zola __

November 26, 28 _Jude the Obscure,_ Thomas Hardy _

_

December 3, 5  _Notes from the Underground_ , Fyodor Dostoevsky

December 10, 12 _Buddenbrooks,_ Thomas Mann _

_**

December 12 : 6-7 page paper due in class

Take Home Final Exam tentatively scheduled for Wednesday January 4

*************************************************************

For those interested in further exploration the following are suggested as
secondary readings. Key, starting point texts for narrative are marked with a
double star (**) Some of the best recent work is marked with a double
ampersand (&&)

**

  * Armstrong, Nancy, _Desire and Domestic Fiction._ ( **& &)
**

  * Auerbach, Eric, _Mimesis._ Chapters 16-19. **(**) Classic work on Realism
**

  * Bakhtin, Mikhail, "Discourse in Dostoevsky" in _The Poetics of Dostoevsky._ **(**)
**

  * Bakhtin, Mikhail, _The Dialogic Imagination.
_

  * Barthes, Roland, _S/Z.
_

  * Barthes, "Introduction To the Structural Analysis of Narratives," in _A Barthes Reader.
_

  * Beer, Gillian, _Darwin"s Plots.
_

  * Booth, Wayne, _The Rhetoric of Fiction._ **(**) Still the best starting point.
**

  * Brooks, Peter, _Reading for the Plot.
_

  * Butler, Marilyn, _Jane Austen and the War of Ideas.
_

  * Chatman, Seymour, _Story and Plot.
_

  * Cohen, William, _Sex Scandal_ **( &&)**Chapters on George Eliot and Dickens
  * Forster, E. M., _Aspects of Fiction._ **(**) Short, simple, useful.
**

  * Garrett, Peter, _The Victorian Double-Plot Novel.
_

  * Geertz, Clifford, "Thick Description: Toward an Interpretive Theory of Culture," in  Geertz, _The Interpretation of Culture_ . **(**) Realism, Anthropology.
**

  * Genette, Gerard, _Narrative Discourse._ **(**) narrative theory
**

  * Gilbert, Sandra and Gubar, Susan, _The Madwoman in the Attic._
  * Girard, Rene, _Desire, Deceit, and the Novel.
_

  * Holloway, John, _The Victorian Sage.
_

  * Kincaid, James, _Child Loving: The Erotic Child and Victorian Life._ **( &&)
**

  * Lawrence, D. H., "Study of Thomas Hardy": in _Phoenix:
_

  * Leavis, F. R., _The Great Tradition.
_

  * Levine, George, _The Realistic Imagination.
_

  * Lodge David, _The Art of Fiction_ **Fifty Brief Technical chapters on narration.
**

  * Marcus, Steven, _Representations (esp. 183-213)._ (History and _Midlemarch)
_

  * Marsh, Joss, _Word Crimes_ **( &&)**Blasphemy, esp. Chapter on _Jude the Obscure
_

  * Miller, D. A., _Narrative and Its Discontents.
_

  * Miller, D. A. _The Novel and the Police._ **( &&) **esp.Chapter on _Bleak House
_

  * Miller, J. Hillis, _Thomas Hardy: Distance and Desire.
_

  * Nochlin, Linda, _Realism.
_

  * Poovy, Mary, _The Proper Lady and the Woman Writer.
_

  * Scarry, Elaine, "Work and the Body in Hardy" in _Resisting Representation_ **( &&)
**

  * Schorer, Mark, "Fiction and the Analogical Matrix" **(**)** Classic essay on _MIddlemarch.
_

  * Sedgwick, Eve, _Between Men: English Literature and Male Homosocial Desire._ **( &&)
**

  * Sedgwick, Eve, **( &&) **_Epistemology of the Closet
_

  * Tanner, Tony, _Adultery and the Novel.
_

  * Van Ghent, Dorothy, _The English Novel.
_

  * Welsh, Alexander, _Circumstantial Evidence._ **( &&)
**

  * Williams, Raymond, _The Country and the City.
_

  * Williams, Raymand, _The English Novel from Dickens to Lawrence.
_

  * Yeazell, Ruth, _Fictions of Modesty: Women and Courtship in the English Novel._ **( &&)

Historical Works

**

  * Hobsbawm, Eric, _The Age of Revolution, The Age of Industry, The Age of Empire.
_

  * Houghton, Walter, _The Victorian Frame of Mind.
_

  * Young, G. H. _Victorian England, Portrait of an Age._ The best short starting point.



