## Philosophy 103: History of Western Philosophy  
_The Nineteenth Century_

####  
Fall 2001/TuTh 1:15/Mr. Beckman

![](brown.jpg)

Just as skepticism and the rise of science were issues that stimulated
philosophical controversy throughout the modern period (1600-1800) the
continuing success, indeed apparent certainty, of science was a determinant of
the philosophical debates of the Nineteenth Century. It is possible to read
the philosophical history of this century as a continuation of issues in
epistemology and metaphysics, all growing out of questions concerning
scientific knowledge and the status of the material world.

There is quite another side to the Nineteenth Century, however. From the point
of view of social history it was a deeply troubled time. The French Revolution
left the idealism of the Age of Enlightenment behind and suffered the
Napoleonic Wars in its place. The developments of industrial machinery and the
capitalistic system of manufacture and marketing became the Industrial
Revolution and ushered in the development of urban centers and, consequently,
urban problems. And far-reaching revolutions in other sciences --- chemistry,
geology, biology, and psychology --- threatened the age-old separation between
the inorganic and organic worlds.

Reading the philosophy of the Nineteenth Century, we find a strong divergence
of issues and concerns. There are those who continue to contemplate the old
problems of epistemology and metaphysics; but there are also those who are
strongly drawn to the enormous political and social problems of their day. In
addition, the century marks the beginning of Existentialist despair, the death
of gods and the illusion of sacredness in human life.

It is appropriate to begin this course with two philosophers of the 18th
Century, Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Immanuel Kant. Rousseau gives us the origin
of social and political debates as they stormed into the 19th Century; Kant
suggested a resolution of the empiricist-rationalist debate over science,
creating a remarkable new way of understanding science and, at the same time,
extending his ideas into moral philosophy. Next to Kant in stature and
following out one line of Kantian thinking, G. W. F. Hegel created a form of
idealism that dominated much of the century. In England, however, the "worldly
philosophy" of Adam Smith and others had lead to John Stuart Mill's brilliant
and practical statements about the social and political spheres of life. It
was Mill's own England, however, that produced such terrible social conditions
among the urbanized, industrialized workers, that Friedrich Engels' studies
inspired a life-long working relationship with Karl Marx. Marx's social
history inverted the causal order of Hegel and optimistically predicted the
revolutionary recovery of the working classes. Looking at the state of human
existence from quite a different point of view, Friedrich Nietzsche accepted
"the death of god" and sought for a revaluation of all values. In America, no
person better exemplifies the struggle between science and faith than William
James. Starting in chemistry and medicine, James moved into psychology and,
then, philosophy in his lifelong attempt to understand.

**Personal Information**

My office is Parsons 1249. My office phone number is 607-3148. My HomePage is
at http://www2.hmc.edu/~TBeckman/. The easiest way to contact me and get a
quick reply is through e-mail via Tad_Beckman@HMC.EDU.

**Assignments and Expectations**

All course materials are available on the Web. The course HomePage is at
http://www4.hmc.edu/humanities/phil103/. You should visit these Web pages
frequently throughout the semester since all changes and updates will be made
at that location. There are extensive course notes on the course Web site;
also, be sure to look at the links to related Web resources.

Attendance and participation in class discussions are expected. Since the bulk
of class time will be devoted to discussion of the texts, it is essential that
everyone finish the assigned reading before class and be prepared to talk
about it and ask questions.

A discussion site for this course has been constructed on the WebXing software
at http://www4.hmc.edu:8001/webx. Access this site directly or from the course
HomePage and follow directions. Your participation in this will be graded.

Papers are assigned on a separate page and the due dates are indicated on the
schedule.

Grading will be based on the following approximate distribution of emphasis:

Class participation..........20%  
Discussion Web Site.......30%  
Papers (4)........................50%  
[P#1,2,&3 10% each and P#4 20%]

**Required Texts**

  * Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, _On the Social Contract_
  * Kant, Immanuel, _Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics_
  * Kant, Immanuel, _Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals_
  * Mill, John Stuart, _Utilitarianism_
  * Mill, John Stuart, _On Liberty_
  * Hegel, Georg W., _Introduction to the Philosophy of History_
  * Marx, Karl and Friedrich Engels, _German Ideology_
  * Nietzsche, Friedrich, _Beyond Good and Evil_
  * James, William, _Essays in Pragmatism_

In addition to these books, which are available at Huntley Bookstore, I highly
recommend reference to Jones, W. T. _A History of Western Philosophy: Vol. IV,
Kant and the Nineteenth Century, Second Edition_ (New York: Harcourt, Brace,
and Jovanovich, 1975).

![](brown.jpg)

Back to [Course Home Page](index.htm)

![](brown.jpg)

