ES 546 Geomorphology syllabus

# ES 546 Field Geomorphology

Study of landforms and landscape development in the field. Techniques for
description, surveying, mapping, and interpretation of landforms in a natural
setting. Practical application of geomorphology to terrain analysis. Two
credit hours.

**http://academic.emporia.edu/aberjame/geomorph/syllabus.htm**

![](../images/colorbar.gif)

  * **Instructor:** [James S. Aber](http://www.emporia.edu/earthsci/aberjame.htm)

![](../images/phone.gif) 316-341-5981, Fax: 316-341-5997, **E-mail:**
[aberjame@emporia.edu](mailto:aberjame@emporia.edu)

  * **Prerequisite:** ES 110 Introduction to Earth Science, or equivalent.

**![](../images/whitebal.gif)Course Information**

**Course requirements | **Summary of 2001 project | **Introduction to
geomorphology | **Geomorphology weblinks

![](../images/yellowba.gif) Weekly [announcements](announc.htm).

## Course availability

This course will be taught in fall semester, 2001. Regular (on-campus)
students should enroll through normal procedures. The course is also available
for distance learning from Emporia State University. Off-campus students
should enroll through [lifelong
learning](http://www.emporia.edu/lifelong/home.htm). In order to receive
university credit, students must be officially enrolled and must be in contact
with the instructor for course materials and directions.

![](../images/redball.gif) Return to top of page.

## ES 546 requirements

  1. **Participation:** Each student is expected to attend and participate in all class meetings and **field trips**. Notes, maps, photographs, samples, and measurements that are made on field trips will form the basis for preparing final reports.

  2. **Report:** Typewritten report of findings based on field trips and on published or unpublished information relevant to the project. Report should include pertinent observations, data, calculations, maps and illustrations to support your interpretation of the geomorphic problem. Report must follow standard scientific style and include a bibliography of all references cited.

  3. **Grading:** The grading scheme for ES 546 follows: participation = 20%, report = 80%. Final grades are given in letters (A-F) with +/- designations, according to current university policy. The ESU student [academic dishonesty policy](../plagiarism.htm) is observed in this course.

## Semester schedule

One-day **field trips** will take place on Saturdays during the months of
September and October. Field trip dates are scheduled tentatively for Sept.
29, Oct. 13 and 20. Students should be available for 2-3 field trips depending
on weather conditions and other factors.

![](../images/redball.gif) Return to top of page.

## ![](../images/world.gif) Summary of field project for 2001

Different topics or methods are covered each time this course is offered. The
subject for fall 2001 is **geoarcheology** , which is the application of
geomorphology to archeology. Archeology is concerned with the remains or
traces of past human activity, which may be at the surface or hidden beneath
the modern landscape. Such remains include: city ruins, old roads and trails,
graves, hidden treasure, garbage dumps, sunken ships, abandoned mines and
quarries, campsites and campfires, ceramic pots and bricks, and tools--stone,
bronze, iron, bone, ivory, etc. The remains of objects created by ancient
humans are called **artifacts**. Artifacts vary from spectacular structures,
such as Stonehenge, to common waste products of routine activities, like stone
flakes and ceramic shards.

_What is the connection between geomorphology and archeology?

_ Human activities generally take place at the land surface. The surface is
modified in many ways--pits are dug, walls and roads are built, the soil is
disturbed, new materials are introduced, drainage is altered, crops are grown,
animals are killed and cooked, garbage and waste are generated, the dead are
buried, and finally the site is abandoned. In some cases, sites of human
activity are later covered over by sedimentary or biological processes.
Archeologic sites may be preserved under wind-blown sand and silt, river
deposited mud, and coastal sediments of lakes or seas. Rapid vegetation
growth, as in peat bogs, may also cover up archeologic sites.

The **goals of geoarcheology** are to interpret as much information as
possible about the original land surface on which the human activity took
place and to determine the history of later site burial and alteration. Dating
of landscape surfaces and determination of paleoenvironments are key aspects
for geoarcheology. These goals involve elements of geology, biology, and
climatology in the reconstruction of archeologic site conditions.

The field project will focus on the old **race track** located in the Missouri
bottomland in vicinity of the present airfield at Fort Leavenworth. The exact
position of the race track is now uncertain. This race track was the site
where Nez Perc e Indians were imprisoned following their defeat by the U.S.
Army in the late 19th century.

  * Kite aerial photos from [Ft. Leavenworth](http://www.emporia.edu/kite/leaven/leaven.htm).  

  * [Historical maps](http://www.emporia.edu/nasa/lewis_cl/leaven/leaven.htm#history) of Ft. Leavenworth.  

  * [Nez Perce Indians](http://www.lewis-clarkvalley.com/indian.html) of today.  

  * [Nez Perce War](http://content.lib.washington.edu/aipnw/walker/walker.html#eahc) of 1877. 

Another, nearby archeologic site is a long-lost French fort in vicinity of
modern Fort Leavenworth, Kansas. **Fort de Cavagnial** was established in 1744
and occupied for 20 years near the Missouri River in what is now northeastern
Kansas. The history of the fort is well documented, and its remains were
observed by Lewis and Clark in 1804. Its whereabouts were subsequently lost,
however, and no traces of the fort have been found in spite of much recent
efforts.

![](../images/go_to.gif) History of [Fort de Cavagnial](cavagnial.htm).

| ![](ks-phys_lv.gif) | **Physiographic map of Kansas obtained from the Kansas
Geological Survey. The study site at Fort Leavenworth (red dot) is located
next to the Missouri River in the glaciated region.

Our field project is to build a detailed **maps of geomorphic features** in
the vicinity of the former Fort de Cavagnial and/or the race track at Fort
Leavenworth. The maps may serve as a means to determine the possible location
and fate of the fort or race track. Many people have searched for traces of
the fort, but without success, so it is unlikely that we will actually
identify the fort itself. It is possible we may recognize the race track,
however. To compile these maps, we will utilize a variety of ground-based and
aerial techniques for collecting observations on geomorphic features--
landforms, soils, topography, vegetation cover, land use, drainage, etc.

![](../images/go_to.gif) Field methods for [geoarcheology](methods.htm).

![](../images/redball.gif) Return to top of page.

## ![](../images/globe.gif) Introduction to geomorphology

Geomorphology is the study of the Earth's surface landforms both on land and
on the sea floor. This study is both descriptive and quantitative; it deals
with morphology, processes, and origins of landforms. The ultimate goals of
geomorphology are to understand the way in which landforms are created and to
document the evolution of landforms through time. The geomorphology of any
region or site is the result of interplay involving three factors.

  1. **Structure:** refers to the nature of solid material that forms the surface, its composition, texture, fabric, architecture, mechanical strength, and other physical attributes.

  2. **Process:** refers to the physical, chemical, biological or human processes that shape the surface into landforms. Broadly speaking, processes are either depositional (constructive) or erosional (destructive).

  3. **Time:** refers both to the rate at which a process modifies the surface and to the length of time or duration that a process has operated at a site.

All Earth surfaces are subject to diverse processes that operate at greatly
varying rates. Static landscapes do not exist; all landscapes undergo constant
modification. The active processes also change through time, so that every
landscape is subject to continual evolution.

The processes that shape landforms can be categorized as endogenetic or
exogenetic. **Endogenetic** processes are related to plate tectonics and to
the surface effects of plate movements, both horizontally and vertically, as
well as to other processes originating from the Earth's interior.
**Exogenetic** processes develop at or above the surface in the atmosphere,
hydrosphere, cryosphere, or biosphere. They involve wind, water, ice, mass
movements, or living organisms that modify landforms. Impact and accumulation
of extra-terrestrial material (meteorites, comets, _etc._ ) are also
exogenetic processes.

Endogenetic and exogenetic processes combine with structure and time to
produce the observed landforms at the Earth's surface. Most landforms involve
a considerable mass of material, and so are slow to adapt when environmental
changes take place. The geomorphology of a region, therefore, represents a
long-term integration of environmental conditions and trends. A region's
geomorphology is, thus, a reflection of both past and present environments.

![](../images/redball.gif) Return to top of page.

## ![](../images/connec.gif) Useful geomorphology websites

  * [Geoarcheology](http://www.uiowa.edu/~osa/geo/geo.htm) in Iowa.  

  * [Geomorphology from space](http://daac.gsfc.nasa.gov/DAAC_DOCS/geomorphology/GEO_HOME_PAGE.html), web version of NASA Special Publication 486.  

  * [Web resources for geomorphologists](http://tgl.geology.muohio.edu/gbook/gresources.html) from the Geomorphology Lab, Miami University, Ohio.  

  * [Introduction to quantitative geomorphology](http://tgl.geology.muohio.edu/gbook/IQG.html), an on-line exercise manual by Larry Mayer &copy.;  

  * [Association of Polish Geomorphologists](http://hum.amu.edu.pl/~sgp/wel.htm), at Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland.  

  * [Virtual Geomorphology](http://hum.amu.edu.pl/~sgp/gw/gw1.htm), from Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland.  

  * [Tropical geomorphology newsletter](http://zikzak.zikzak.net/tgn/).  

  * [Images](http://geogweb.berkeley.edu/GeoImages/Wells/wells.html) illustrating principles of geomorphology.  

![](../images/colorbar.gif)

This course is presented by the [Earth
Science](http://www.emporia.edu/earthsci/) department for the express use and
benefit of students enrolled at [Emporia State
University](http://www.emporia.edu/). Anyone else may view and enjoy the
information here. All course curriculum (C) by the author (2001).

Please send your comments to the course instructor, **J.S. Aber** , e-mail:
[aberjame@emporia.edu](mailto:aberjame@emporia.edu).

Return to top of page.  
Last update: 21 Aug. 2001.

