**[University of Baltimore](http://www.ubalt.edu)[Division of Applied
Psychology and Quantitative Methods](http://www.ubalt.edu/www/dapqm)**  
**Syllabus: Ethical, Historical & Social Foundations APPL 614.18**

Fall  2000

**                                    Instructor:**  **_Tom Mitchell,
Ph.D._**AC 209 D

                                    Phone 410 837-5348 Fax 410 837-4089   
                                 E-mail [TMITCHELL@ubmail.ubalt.edu](mailto:tmitchell@ubmail.ubalt.edu)[![](mail.gif)](mailto:tmitchell@ubmail.ubalt.edu)

                                    URL: **[homepage](http://home.ubalt.edu/tmitch)** http://home.ubalt.edu/tmitch

                                   URL: **Course Syllabus** site: http://home.ubalt.edu/tmitch/614/

**                                    Office Hours**: Wed 12-1:30 PM, 4-5:15
PM; Thur 12 - 1:30 PM;

**                                    Class:  Wednesdays** 8:15 to 10:45 PM

**                                    Classroom**: Academic Center 215

updated 09/04/00  
![](eyes.gif)

**_DESCRIPTION OF COURSE_** :

Objectives: This course is designed to familiarize students with the ethical,
historical and social foundations of the field of psychology. The course will
focus on the origins of applied psychology, particularly the historical roots
of counseling/clinical and industrial/organizational, and how some of the
principal theories have helped to shape the currents status of these fields.
It will also focus on the role of social psychology in applied psychology.
Ethical implications will be explored for issues relating to the testing of
human subjects, and  those of concern to practitioners in the fields of
counseling and industrial/organizational psychology.  

* * *

**_TEXTS/MATERIALS REQUIRED:_**

(1) Lesko, W. F. (1997). **_Readings in Social Psychology_.** 3 rd Edition.
Allyn & Bacon, Pub.

(2) Bolles,. R. C.  (1993). **_The Story of Psychology: A Thematic History._**
Brooks/Cole Pub _._

(3) **_Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct_** (1992).
American Psychological Association ( Note: this will be distributed in class).

(4) **_APA Publication Manual_.** (1994). American Psychological Association.
4th Edition.

(5) Additional readings will be distributed in class or placed on reserve in
Langsdale Library.

* * *

**Web sources:**      [Bolles Note       ](bolles.htm)[Lesko Notes from
class](leskonot.htm)

  * [E. HILGARD text NOTES ](hilgard.htm) on file
  * [Today in Psychology (from APA) ...interesting events for each day of the year](http://www.cwu.edu/~warren/today.html)
  * [_Psychology: Themes and Variations_ \- ](http://www.unb.ca/web/courses/fields/module/textbook/index.html)3rd Edition  by  Wayne Weiten at Santa Clara University
  * (evolution of psychology) Chapter one    **(thanks to Christy Sherard for this site)**
  * [Psychology Journals ](http://www.wiso.uni-augsburg.de/sozio/hartmann/psycho/journals.html) ...on line
  * JAP HISTORY OF  I/O  see: [ Journal of Applied Psychology  August 1997](http://www.apa.org/journals/apl/897tc.html)
  * History of Psychology Sites (From Mastrangelo)
  
[University of North Dakota's History of Psychology
Links](http://www.und.nodak.edu/instruct/rtill/linkshis.htm)  
[APS's History & Systems
Links](http://psych.hanover.edu/APS/teaching.html#history l)  
[APA History of Psychology Journal (new)](http://www.wpi.edu/~histpsy/)  
[University of New Brunswick's History of
Psychology](http://www.unb.ca/web/units/psych/likely/psyc4053.htm)  
[Wayne Weiten's Psychology: Themes and Variations- 3rd
Edition](http://www.unb.ca/web/courses/fields/module/textbook/index.html)

Psychology: Ethics & Social Issues  
[APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists & Code of
Conduct](http://www.apa.org/ethics/)  
[SPSSI's Journal of Social Issues](http://www.umich.edu/~sociss/JSI.html)  
[APA Press Releases on Various Social Issues](http://www.apa.org/releases/)  
[ACA's Public Policy](http://www.counseling.org/consumers_media/)

* * *

**_CLASS FORMAT_** : Discussion of the readings assigned and participation in
group activities

**_REQUIREMENTS_ : **A research paper and three essay exams.

(1) **Three Essay exams** : Each exam will cover one of the three topical
areas:

        History, Social Psychology, Ethics.

(2) **Research paper** :

A research paper will focus either on (1) the identification and explanation
of the historical roots of a particular subarea of Applied Psychology or (2)
how theories and findings from social psychology apply to your specialization
in counseling or industrial /organizational psychology.

The paper must be typed, double spaced, not more than twelve pages, and
written in APA style.

**_Evaluation:_ ** The quality of the research paper will be **judged on
content,** the extent to which the objective(s) of the paper was met, the
writing style, and conformance to APA style. Most importantly, **_how much the
paper reflects your own ideas_**.  This means how well you (1) integrate
relevant literature (2) support your thesis statement  based on your findings.

NOTE: The paper **_must include_** a **title, a one page abstract, a thesis
statement, and headings.**.

Policy on Academic Integrity (Plagiarism):  [Tulane University Policy on
Plagiarism](http://www.tulane.edu/~jruscher/dept/plagiarism.html)

"Plagiarism is the intentional or unintentional presentation of another
person's idea or product as one's own. Plagiarism includes, but is not limited
to the following: copying verbatim all or part of another's written work;
using phrases, charts, figures, illustrations, or mathematical or scientific
solutions without citing the source; paraphrasing ideas, conclusions, or
research without citing the source; and using all or part of a literary plot,
poem, film, musical score, or other artistic product without attributing the
work to its creator. Students can avoid unintentional plagiarism by carefully
accepted scholarly practices. Notes taken for papers and research projects
should accurately record sources of material to be cited, quoted, paraphrased,
or summarized, and papers should acknowledge these sources in footnotes."

(3) Additional short answer quizzes may be administered in class.  

* * *

**_GRADING SCALE_** : A = 90; B+ = 85; B = 80; C+ = 75; C= 70

Three essay exams:     (25 pts each) 75 points

                       Paper (25 pts each) 25 points

                                           Total 100 points

Note: **_Points will be deducted for late submissions._**  

* * *

**_SCHEDULE OF CLASSES AND ASSIGNMENTS:_**

#1     Sept 6             Overview of course and explanation of syllabus

#2     Sept 13       **[Bolles Chapter 1: The Beginnings of a
Science](bolles1.htm)**   p.1  
                           [Mind / body: Rene Descartes to W. James](http://serendip.brynmawr.edu/Mind/)   
                           [Madame Curie](http://curie.che.virginia.edu/scientist/curie.html)   
    
                            **[Bolles Chapter 3: Philosophical Themes ](bolles3.htm)** p.69

#3     Sept 20       **[Bolles Chapter 6: Wundt and
Structuralism](bolles6.htm)**   p.122  
                          **[NAME GAME (MATCH THEM UP)](names.htm)** [Answers](namesans.htm)   
                          [**Bolles Chapter 9: The American Pioneers** ](bolles9.htm)p.185

                                Video: Freud Biography (A&E)   (bring popcorn and soda)

#4     Sept 27        **[Bolles Chapter 10: American
Functionalism](bolles10.htm) ** p. 212

                                 **_**DUE: Topic proposal for paper on HISTORY **_**

#5     Oct 4          **[Bolles Chapter 15: Diversification of
Psychology](bolles15.htm)**   p.359  
                                  [Happiness movement (Balt Sun)](http://www.sunspot.net/content/news/story?section=news&pagename=story&storyid=1150340228360)

#6     Oct  11         ***** Exam #1 History *****

#7      Oct 18            Lesko: Chapter 1: The field of Social Psychology p.1

                                   [Social Psych Web Archive](http://swix.ch/clan/ks/CPSP1.htm)   
                            [MU Social Psych links (Miami University)](http://Miavx1.MUOhio.edu/~psy2cwis/webinfo.html)

                                Lesko: Chapter 2: Social Perception p.33

                           [Social Psychology Network  Scott  Plous  at Wesleyn University](http://www.wesleyan.edu/spn/)   
                                   [Other social psychology courses with websites](http://www.socialpsychology.org/)

**_                             ** DUE: topic proposal for paper on social
psych. influence **_**

#8      Oct 25            Lesko: Chapter 4: Attitudes p.92

                                      [Attitude Consistency (Steve Booth-Bloomfield)](http://www.as.wvu.edu/~sbb/comm221/chapters/abc.htm)   
                                      [Implicit Attitudes Test (U. Wash & Yale U.)](http://depts.washington.edu/iat/measure1.html)

#9       Nov 1          Lesko: Chapter 6: Prejudice and Discrimination p.145

                                "What's So Bad About Hate?"   
                              [Frontline PBS  Program on Jefferson's family](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/jefferson/)   
                                The issue of assigning rates based on group membership:   
                                    [American General Life and Accident Insurance Co](aglife.htm)

                                   **_**DUE: if Paper is on : Historical Roots of Applied psychology\_**

#10       Nov 8          Lesko: Chapter 9: Social Influence p.240

#11       Nov 15         Lesko: Chapter 12: Groups and Individual Behavior
p.332

#12       Nov 22      ***** Exam #2 Social Psychology *****  


#13      Nov 29           Ethical Ideology  and  **[APA Code of
Ethics](http://www.apa.org/ethics/code.html)**

                     **** _DUE: If Paper is on : Social Psychological Influence on Applied Psychology ***_**

#14       Dec 6          Ethical issues in counseling psychology (cases)

                                 Ethical issues in industrial/organizational psychology (cases)

#15       Dec 13 **        *** Exam #3 Ethical issues *****

