## [![Clio. The Departmentof History, University of
Pennsylvania](main.gif)](http://www.history.upenn.edu/index.html)

## Spring 1998 Undergraduate Courses

| Courses numbered from 1-99 are surveys along regional lines , e.g., American
history, Japanese history. Courses numbered from 101 to 199 are usually
topical surveys, e.g., urban history, Jewish history, economic history.
101-106 level courses are seminars for freshpersons; 201-206 level courses are
seminars designed for majors. All seminars are on special topics of interest
to the instructor; they vary from instructor to instructor and from year to
year. The department is committed to undergraduate seminar offerings that will
attract a modicum of student interest and cover the needs of students
concentrating in various areas. 300-400 level courses are on special topics
and are more advanced. They often presuppose some basic knowledge in the field
and should be more difficult courses than courses at the 1-199 levels. The
department is trying to ensure that some 400 level courses, although
substantially more difficult, are also small in size; they thus may be
suitable for graduate students.  
  
**[HIST-002 EUROPE IN A WIDER WORLD  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#001)****Thomas Childers----- MW
2  
** An examination of European social, economic, political and cultural
development from 1500 to the present. The course will deal with the Protestant
Reformation, the rise of the modern state, the French and Industrial
Revolutions, the emergence of modern political ideology, World War I, the
Russian Revolution the rise of Fascism, World War II, and Europe in the post-
war era.  
_Registration for Lecture and Recitation Required. Some sections will be WATU
affiliated._  

**[004 AMERICANS AND THEIR
CIVILIZATION](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#003)**  
**[M. Murphey](http://www.history.upenn.edu/faculty/murphey.html) \----- MW
12**  
An introduction to the environment, culture, population, and personality of
mankind in America from 1861 to the present.  
_Registration for Lecture and Recitation Required.  
  
_**[009-301 WRITING ABOUT
HISTORY](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#009-301)**  
**Herman Graham----- MW 3-4:30**  
Baby boomers have virtually made a pastime of bemoaning the lack of social
activism among today's college students. Yet such nostalgia often distorts the
history of social and political movements of the 1960s. This course provides a
forum to revisit the era and to think critically about four social movements:
the civil rights, anti-war, conservative, and women's liberation movements. We
will consider the following questions: who were the participants? What were
their politics and ideologies? What rhetorical styles and protest tactics did
they use to present their ideas to the nation at large? How did these
movements influence one another? What internal divisions and tensions did they
encounter? In what ways did they suicceed and fail? Students will write and
revise several short papers that draw upon course materials which include
secondary accounts, oral histories, primary documents, and media footage. In
addition, they will further develop critical thinking skills through
participation in class discussion. This course fulfills the College Writing
Requirement.  
  
**[009-302 VIOLENCE IN AMERICAN HISTORY  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#010)Kirsten Wood ----- MW
3-4:30  
** From colonial Salem's witchcraft trials to contemporary concerns about
urban crime, violence has beeen a constant in American history. Both now and
in the past, violence has structured relations between women and men, blacks
and whites, and insificuals and the state. In this class, we study how
violence can both express and destroy cherished beliefs about ourselves and
our world. Using a variety of primary sources -- letters, newspapers, legal
codes, and mass entertainment -- we explore how Americans have defined, used,
and tried to control violence. In seminar and in writing assignments, we
discuss what social conditions produce which kinds violence, when violence is
socially accepted, and who is violent and why. Topics of study include
slavery, war, lynching, domestic violence, capital punishment, and armed
resistance to the government. Class discussions, papers, and peer review will
help students to think, speak and write critically about disturbing subjects,
using the methods of historical analysis.  
  
**[009-304 WRITING ABOUT MULTICULTURALISM  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#020)Savita Nair ----- TR
3-4:30**  
Racism, sexism, homophobia, ethnic prejudice, discrimination against disable
people and against senior citizens, reproductive rights/ethics, and religious
intolerance are among the controversies facing multicultural campuses and
societies around the world. Debates over the politics of diversity are played
out in classrooms, workplaces, government offices, and neighborhoods. Should a
multicultural agenda be mandated on college campuses as a way to promote
understanding or does this violate academic freedom and constitutional rights?
What causes these debates and where do they take us as individuals and as a
society? This course begins by examining debates about political correctness
as an academic agenda and conflicts over promoting multicultural programs at
Penn. After looking at cultural policies locally and within the United States,
we will move into examine a number of global cases, focusing on South Asia and
Africa. We will use short stories, scholarly articles, personal narratives,
and films to think and write about the history of multiculturalism and
challenging global forms.  
  
**[011 THE WORLD: HISTORY AND MODERNITY  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#024)Lynn Lees/Sumathi Ramaswamy
----- MW 3-4:30  
** An explanation of major themes, milestones, and debates in the history of
the global community since 1300. Using examples from around the world, the
course will explore such issues as the causes of war and revolution; the
impact of religion, science and technology on human communities; the
development of global systems of slavery, colonialism, and labor migration;
the rise of nationalisms; and perceived differences between "East" and "West,"
and Atradition" and "modernity." The course will also introduce students to
the art and science of historical inquiry using primary sources, maps,
pictures, and material culture.  
  
**[021 HISTORY OF THE US - 1865 TO THE PRESENT  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#021)Walter Licht----- TR
10:30-11:30  
** This course covers the social, political, and economic history of the
nation from the Civil War to the present. Topics to be discussed include the
causes and course of the Civil War, Reconstruction, politics in the Gilded
Age, late nineteenth-century urbanization and immigration, Populism,
Progressivism, the sociology and politics of the twenties, the New Deal, post-
World War II America, the turbulence of the sixties, and contemporary affairs.
_Registration for Lecture AND Recitation is required._  
  
**[027 HISTORY OF ANCIENT ROME  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/sp98/uglist.html#027)B. Shaw----- MW 1  
** The Romans and their impact from the village to the dissolution of the
unified empire, emphasizing political and social history. _This course is
prmary to the ANCH department. Please contact them or the instructor if you
would like more information._  
  
**[031 WORLD OF THE MIDDLE AGES  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/sp98/uglist.html#031)Edward Peters ----- TR
9-10:30  
** The expansion of European population, patterns of settlement, and economy
from the eleventh to the sixteenth centuries. The development of European
culture in politics, religion, law, ideas, and the arts and technology. The
importance of the Middle Ages in shaping later European growth and rise to
world power. [Course Syllabus

**[040 EARLY MODERN EUROPE
1450-1750](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#040)**  
**[T. Safley](http://www.history.upenn.edu/faculty/safley.html) \----- MWF 1**  
This course examines those European developments which contributed to the
world we understand as modern. Special emphasis will be placed on the
transformation of Europe through the advent of new technologies, the creation
of a global economy, the consolidation of territorial states, the rise of
effective, central governments, the dissolution of religious unity, and the
dialect between modern and traditional worldviews.  
  
**[071 LATIN AMERICAN HISTORY
1791-PRESENT](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#051)**  
**Julie Franks -- MW 12  
** Surveys Latin American and Caribbean history from the Haitian Revolution of
1791 to the present. We will examine the legacy of Spanish colonialism and
slavery, movements for national and cultural independence, twentieth-century
radicalism, and the politics of race in contemporary Latin America. Readings
include fictional as well as analytical representations, and a film series
will accompany the course.  
  
**[075 AFRICAN HISTORY BEFORE
1800](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#076)**  
**Lee Cassanelli----- MW 2**  
Survey of major themes and issues in African history before 1800. Topics
include: early civilizations, African kingdoms and empires, population
movements, the spread of Islam, the slave trade era. Also emphasis on how
historians use archaeology, linguistics, and oral traditions to reconstruct
Africa's early history.  
_Registration for Lecture and Recitation is required._  
  
**[091 MODERN JAPANESE
HISTORY](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#081)**  
**Fred Dickinson ----- MWF 2  
** This course will survey the major political, economic, social and
intellectual trends in the making of modern Japan. Special emphasis wil be
given to the turbulent relationship between state and society from 1800 to the
present.  
  
**[093 PERFORMING HISTORY](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#086)**  
**Robert St. George----- TR 1:30-3**  
From medieval processions to the Mummer's Parade, from military reenactments
to Mardi Gras, communities do more than  "write" or "read" history in order to
feel its power and shape their futures. Drawing upon traditions in theater,
spectacle, religion, and marketing, they also perform their history--by
replaying particular characters, restaging pivotal events and sometimes even
changing their outcomes--in order to test its relevance to contemporary life
and to both mark and contest ritual points in the annual cycle. This course
will explore diverse ways of "performing history" in different cultures,
including royal passages, civic parades, historical reenactments, community
festivals, and film.  
  
**[097 CHINA IN THE TWENTIETH
CENTURY](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#096)**  
**Matthew Sommer----- MWF 10**  
This lecture course -- the second of a two part sequence -- provides a broad
survey of political history and social change from the fall of the imperial
order to the  "market socialism" of today, including the following themes: the
interplay of new and traditional forces which made the end of one dynasty the
end of a centuries-old political and social order; the political role of new
social classes; the search for viable models; war with Japan, civil war, and
rural revolution; socialist construction and the development of the two-line
struggle; the impact of Cold War; the Cutural Revolution; the opening to the
West, economic reforms, and social ferment since the death of Mao.  
  
**FRESHMAN SEMINARS** _\-- The history 101-106 seminars are freshman seminars.
They are open to freshman only during pre-registration. If by then the course
does not reach the enrollment maximum, it will be open to all students on a
first-come, first-serve basis._  
  
**[102-301 FLORENCE IN HISTORY  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#102-301)Ann Moyer----- W 2-5**  
[Course website](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist102)  
For centuries, the city of Florence was one of Europe's great economic and
cultural centers. Florentines excelled in art, in business and banking, in
political thought, in literature and learning. In this course we will examine
Florentine society and culture by means of primary sources and modern
scholarship. We will also consider the importance Florence has held in the
eyes of Florentines and others over the years, from Dante to E.M. Forster,
from  "home of the Renaissance" to modern tourist destination.  
  
**[106-301 COMPARATIVE NATIONALISM  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#104-301)Arthur Waldron ----- T
2-5**  
Nationalism is difficult to miss, whether one reads history or looks at the
news. But what is it, at root? And why does it seem so often to lead to
violence? The seminar will examine these and related questions comparatively,
placing emphasis on Asian and other non-Euopean cases, with a wide range of
both primary and interpretative readings.  
  
**[141-401 HISTORY OF JEWISH CIVILIZATION  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#104-302)Beth Wenger----- TR
1:30-2:30  
** A broad introduction to the history of Jewish culture and society from the
end of the Middle Ages until the present. Emphasis on the changing interaction
of Jews with the larger society as well as the transformation of Judaism in
its encounter with modernity. _Registration for Lecture AND Recitation
required.  
  
_**[147-401 ISLAMIC HISTORY TO
1517](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#107-301)**  
**Barbara Von Schlegeli----- MWF 1  
** This course consists of an overview of the history of the major Islamic
dynasties which ruled over the Middle East and North Africa from the beginning
of the "Islamic Empire" to 1517 A.D. This course is primary to the AMES
department. Please contact them or the instructor if you would like more
information. **  
  
[152-401 HELLENISTIC HISTORY  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#111-301)Shaw/McInerny----- TR
12-1:30**  
The Hellenistic Age corresponds broadly to the three hundred year period from
the career of Alexander the Great (354-324 BC) until the defeat of Antony and
Cleopatra at the Battle of Actium (31BC). This was a period during which the
world of the Greeks underwent extraordinary and far-reaching changes, as Greek
culture was established as far afield as northwestern India, central Asia and
Egypt. This class is about those changes, and we will attempt to evaluate the
nature of Hellenism using primary sources, many of which are contemporary
inscriptions and papyrus documents. This course is primary to the CLST
department. Please contact them or the instructors if you would like more
information.  
  
**[153-401 URBAN CRISIS: AMERICAN CITIES SINCE
WWII](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#113-301)**  
**Michael Kahan----- MW 3-4:30  
** An examination of the transformation of American cities since World War II.
Special emphasis on economic and demographic change, suburbanization, federal
policy, and major social issues -- education, crime and violence, and poverty.
[Course Syllabus](153syl.html)  
  
**[159-001 STRATEGY, POLICY AND WAR  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#116-401)Arthur Waldron----- TR
10:30-12  
** Comparative and interdisciplinary examination of successful and failed uses
of force in international relations, from ancient to modern times, using case
studies. Readings will include Clausowitz, Sun Tzu, and a variety of primary
and secondary sources for the wars considered each year. Issues of war's
fundamental origins, and its many impacts on society, will also be considered.  
  
**[163-001 AMERICAN SOCIAL
HISTORY](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#126-001)**  
**Edward Baptist ----- MWF 11  
** Social history is a broad label that signals a profound recent
transformation in how many historians approach the study of the past. It
implies a general commitment to understanding the lives of ordinary people and
often challenges historical literature based upon elite sources. This
introductory survey draws on some of the best examples in this new tradition
in order to understand the concerns and historical experiences of common
people in the United States from the American Revolution through the middle of
the twentiet century. A persistent concern of the course will be to evaluate
whether or not our reading, discussion, and writing are true to the spirit of
the past in its own terms while still being meaningful to the present.  
  
**[164-001 RECENT AMERICAN HISTORY  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#129-401)Bruce Kuklick --- TR
12-1:30  
** Recent national political history 1933-present; covers foreign policy as it
reflects domestic politics. The focus is on the Great Depression; Franklin
Roosevelt and the New Deal; World War Two and the Cold War; Truman, Korea, and
McCarthyism; Eisenhower, and the 1950s; the New Frontier and the Civil Rights
Movement; the Great Society and Vietnam; Watergate and the decline of
liberalism; and the end of the "American century." _Registration for Lecture
AND Recitation required._  
  
**[165-001 THE AMERICAN IDENTITY  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#129-401)Sheldon Hackney-- TR
10:30-12  
** This course will examine the history of what Americans have thought of
themselves and of how that self-conception has changed over time. It will
attempt to answer such questions the content of the core values and beliefs
that Americans are assumed to share, who belongs and who doesn't, what is the
American Dream and who is allowed to pursue it, is there an American national
character and in what ways is it distinctive, how is an American hero supposed
to act and how one can spot villains, why metaphors of identity are useful and
why they fail, and whether it is possible to know the meaning of being an
American, given our ever-changing cultural, racial and ethnic diversity.  
  
**[171-401 THE AMERICAN SOUTH, 1961 TO THE
PRESENT](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#140)**  
**Drew Faust----- TR 10:30-11:30**  
Southern culture and history from 1860 to the present. Mid-term, short paper,
and final exam. _Registration for Lecture AND Recitation required._  
  
**[177-401 AFRO-AMERICAN HISTORY, 1876 TO THE
PRESENT](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#146-401)**  
**Barbara Savage ----- TR 1:30-3  
** A study of the major events, issues, and personalities in Afro-American
history from Reconstruction to the present. It will also examine the different
slave experiences and the methods of black resistance and rebellion in the
various slave systems.  
  
**[179-001 INVENTING THE DREAM: CALIFORNIA THROUGH WORLD WAR
II](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#150-001)**  
**Edward Carter----- TR 1:30-3  
** Lecture and discussion, slide lecture, and video course. Topics
investigated: influence of California's unique geographical and environmental
character; Native peoples and cultures and impact of Hispanic and United
States settlement and government; the Spanish and Mexican years; the Gold Rush
and developing economies of California to 1900; the politics of water and
railroads; San Francisco and Los Angeles compared; growth of higher education,
literature, and the arts; Progressive politics; the Southern California boom
-- health, tourism, and the movie industry; World War II - military
preparedness and civil liberties; war industries, freeways, water projects,
and suburbanization; the growing African-American presence; and California and
the United States and the World.  
  
**_MAJOR SEMINARS_ \-- The history 201-206 seminars are open only to history
majors during pre-registration. If the course does not reach its enrollment
maximum, it will be open to all students beginning with drop/add on a first-
come first-serve basis.**  

#  Europe Post-1800

  
**[202-301 WORLD WAR II](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#202-301)  
Thomas Childers-- T 2-5  
** This course will examine the diplomatic origins, military course, and
domestic implications of World War II in Europe and Asia. Substantial reading
from the literature of the war. Research paper.  
  
**[202-302 THE SEPHARDIC EXPERIENCE: HISTORY OF JEWS IN
SPAIN](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#202-302)  
Jane Gerber----- W 2-5  
** A study of the Sephardic experience from the Muslim conquest in 711 until
the expulsion of the Jews from Christian spain in 1492. Special emphasis will
be given to a consideration of the Caliphate of Cordoba, the meaning of the
"Golden Age" of Spain, the erosion of Jewish life in Christian Spain and the
emergence of the problem of the conversos. The course will conclude with some
consideration of the Sephardic dispersion and the distinctiveness of Sephardic
Jewry.  
  
**[202-303 FASCISM AND CONSERVATISM IN 20TH CENTURY
EUROPE](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#202-304)  
Denise Davidson ----- T 2-5  
** In this seminar we will discuss the radical right in Europe since World War
One. From fascism in the interwar period to neo-nazi groups in the 1990s,
examples of the extreme right have existed across chronological and
geographical boundaries, albeit in different forms. Taking a comparative
approach, readings will encourage students to explore the historical roots and
the particular goals and tactics of movements in different times and places.
By the end of the semester, students will have a broader understanding of how
and why such groups have appealed to some people and not others.

# American Post - 1800

  
**[204-301 RESEARCH METHODS IN AMERICAN
HISTORY](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#204-301)**  
**Mark Lloyd----- M 2-5**  
Introduction and development of research strategies and interpretive
frameworks for primary sources in American history. Requires use of guides to
reference works, national bibliography, and short-title catalogs in rare books
and historical imprints; public and private manuscript and archival
collections; works of art on paper, photographic and film archives, and
iconography. Emphasis on  "virtual" archives and rapidly expanding on-line
resources in primary source research. Reading in core texts. Research
exercises in historical subjects. Short paper (5-7 pages) due monthly on real
historical problems. Final examination.  
  
**[204-302 COMPARATIVE SOCIAL
REFORM](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#204-302)**  
**Barbara Savage----- W 2-5**  
This course is a comparative historical study of the process of American
social reform employing case studies of several modern movements, including
those concerned with African Americans (antilynching, desegration, and civil
rights), gender equality (suffrage, feminism, reproductive rights), habits of
personal behavior (temperance, anti-smoking), gay and lesbian rights,
environmentalism and animal welfare. The thematic emphasis is on common and
peculiar cycles and strategies of reform movements, on the relationship
between citizen activism, the state, and the media, on the dialectic between
change and resistance as seen in shifts in attitudes, public policies, and
behavior, on the role of religious and moral belief in reform activity.  
  
**[204-303 HISTORY OF LAW AND SOCIAL POLICY  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#204-303)Mary Berry----- T
1:30-4:30  
** In this course we will consider and analyze the development of law and
policy concerning selected issues of historical significance. Based on the
discussion and the required papers we will be able to enlarge our
understanding about the role of law, lawyers and judges in providing solutions
to urgent social problems. We will assess how problems become urgent, and what
constraints have existed on the relationship between law and policy. We will
also consider the usefulness or uselessness of history and or legal expertise
in resolving the issues.  
  
**[204-304](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#204-304)[SEXUALITY
AND GENDER IN MODERN AMERICA  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#204-303)Beth Clement----- R
2-5**  
In this class we will examine the ways in which Americans have come to
understand sexuality, sexual identity and their role in culture and politics.
The class will begin with a broad overview of the history of sexuality in
American society and then will focus more specifically on the ways in which
the meaning of sexuality was formulated and changed throughout the 20th
century. Paying close attention to the shifting definitions of masculinity,
feminity and sexual identity, we will cover topics such as lynching, the  "new
woman," Prostitution, the birth control movement, the gay liberation movement,
feminism , sexuality in the armed forces, abortion, and sexual violence.  
  
**[204-305 WAR AND
SOCIETY](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#204-305)**  
**Drew Faust----- T 2-5  
** This course will take a thematic (rather than chronological) approach to
the understanding of American wars from the Revolution to the Gulf. Some of
the topics we will cover will include: war and the individual soldier; the
changing nature of the battlefield; strategy and society; the army as a social
institution; Americans and war, women and war, war and cultural expression.
The course will place a heavy emphasis on class discussion and on writing, and
assignments will consist of a series of short papers that students will
discuss together and then revise. There will also be an oral history project.  
  
**[204-306 THE VIETNAM WAR  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#204-305)Walter McDougall -- W
2-5  
** This seminar will examine the origins, conduct, and effects of the
Indochina conflict, 1945-75. We will view Stanley Karnow's Vietnam, A
Television History, but the reading and writing requirements will be heavy.
Admission is by Instructor's permission only and applications should be picked
up during pre-reg on Prof. McDougall=s office door at 332A, 3401 Walnut.

  
  
**World Post-1800**

**[206-301 DRUGS IN WORLD
HISTORY](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#206-301)**  
**Paul Howard----- T 2-5  
** This seminar will be an exploration of the various ways throughout the last
400 years that psychotropic substances have influenced social and political
structures from a comparative perspective. We will cover a range of topics,
including the medicinal and non-medicinal role of drugs in various
"traditonal" societies (such as opium in China, Qat in Africa, and Coca in
South America); the trade in and consuption of habit-forming substances (from
coffee to crack cocaine) in the Anglo-Saxon West; the eighteenth- and
nineteenth-century narcotics trade, its connections to the structures and
processes of European imperialism, and its political and social implications
for countries in Asia and elsewhere; and the twentieth-century expansion of
the global drug trade, particularly the rise of Asian, Russian, and Latin
American drug rings. This course will begin and end with a look at the US "war
on drugs" and the implications of drug consumption and drug policy for
American society. [Course Syllabus](206syl.htm)  
  
**[206-302 US EMPIRE AND THE THIRD WORLD  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#206-302)David Ludden----- T
1:30-4:30  
** In this seminar we explore the expansion and transformations of the US
power as it has been manifest in the economies, polities, cultures, and
societies of latin America, Asia, Africa, and the Middle East since 1820\. We
begin with a comparative study of the long-term expansion of the power and
influence of advanced capitalist nations, which constitutite the world's most
developed economies. Using this comparative framework to specify the general
context and character of US world expansion, we then turn to identify the
continents and peoples of the so-called Third World as they have been
constructed within the history of modernization and defined by dominant world
powers. In this part of the course, we will also consider US power in the
worldwide institutional regimes of "development" and multinational corporate
activity since 1920. Finally, we turn to case studies of specific Third World
countries. We will be particularly concerned with their transitions from
"colonialism" to "independence" (and most recently, "post-coloniality") and we
will consider these transitions as being historical settings for the
(re)definition of empire in distinctively American terms.  
  
**[206-303 REMEMBERING THE PACIFIC WAR  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#206-302)Fred Dickinson -- T 2-5  
** This seminar will analyze the Pacific War (1941-45) as it has been
preserved in the collective memory in Japan and the United States. Via a
survey of histories, personal reminiscences, film and literature, we will
examine the change in myutual perceptions over time and contrast the patterns
of remembrance in both countries. How does the memory of this pivotal
historical event continue to shape mutual images in the present? How do images
or politics in the present affect our historical memory? As we debate the
proclaimed causes of the US-Japan war, we will also discuss the politics of
remembrance as an integral component of US-Japan relations.  
  
**GENERAL HONORS SEMINARS** : _History 211-217 are advanced General Honors
seminars, mainly for juniors and seniors in the Benjamin Franklin Scholars
program. All other students need permission from the general honors office to
enroll for the course._  
  
**[214-301 UNDERSTANDING AMERICA  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#211-301)Sheldon Hackney----- W
2-5  
** Finding THE main theme of American history may be impossible, but the
search is also irresistable. This seminar for History majors will review
classic interpretations of American history and will challenge students to
develop and defend their own interpretive framework. Authors sampled will
include Turner, Beard, Hofstadter, Woodward, Hartz, Potter, Lasch, Kammen,
Wiebe and others.  
  
**[214-401 SEMINAR IN COMMUNITY AND MODERN SOCIETY  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#214-401)[I.
Harkavy](http://www.history.upenn.edu/faculty/harkavy.html) \----- W 2-5**  
American cities are increasingly pathological. Can we reverse that condition?
Can American universities reinvent themselves and help spark an Urban
Renaissance in the 21st century. Can Penn realize in practice Benn Franklin's
vision of a world-class cosmopolitan city? Specifically, what should Penn do
to try to realize in the 21st century Franklin's grand 18th century vision of
the Good University in the Good Society? Those are the basic question the
seminar addresses. To answer them, the seminar makes several assumptions: 1)
"Knowledge is power" to do good; 2) universities now constitute the primary
institutions responsible for advancing knowledge to the furthest possible
limits; 3) if American universitites act on those assumptions, they can learn
how to reinvent themselves and how to integrate the production and use of
knowledge for the progressive "betterment of the human condition." Are those
assumptions warranted? To test their validity and to provide undergraduates
with an opportunity to develop their capacities to think critically and
creatively, students in the seminar will 1) identify a specific West
Philadelphia/Philadelpohia problem which engages them morally and
intellectually: 2) write a seminar paper specifying what Penn can
realistically do to help solve that problem or why it is unrealistic to
imagine that Penn can develop the knowledge needed to help solve it.  
  
**[281-401 JAZZ HISTORY AND ITS PLACE IN AMERICAN  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#285)Susan Tappar ----- TR
9-10:30  
** This is a survey of jazz music with consideration of its social
implications from 1940 to the present. No prior knowledge of music is
required.  
  
**[315-001 MODERN FRANCE
1750-PRESENT](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#331-001)  
Denise Davidson----- TR 10:30-12**  
This course covers the political, social, and cultural history of France
beginning with the Enlightenment and the origins of the French Revolution, and
moving through the social and political upheavals of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries. No previous knowledge of French or European history is
required.  
  
**[320-401 ENVIRONMENTAL HISTORY  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#338-401)Robert Kohler----- W
2-5**  
The focus of this course will be on interactions between human and natural
agencies in migrations agricultural and technological systems and the use of
natural resources. _This course is primary to the HSSC department. Please
contact them or the instructor for more information.  
  
_**[342-001 EUROPEAN INTELLECTUAL
HIS](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#343)[TORY 1200-1600  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#342)Ann Moyer----- TR 1:30-3  
** [Course website](http://www.history.upenn.edu/hist342)  
This course will examine the formation of European traditions of scholarship
and letters, including medieval, Renaissance and early modern writings. Topics
will include court literature and romance; scholastic thought and university
scholarship; political thought; the humanist tradition. It will consider the
rise of printing, the formation of the  "republic of letters," and the
development of popular literature.  
  
**[363-401 CIVIL WAR AND RECONSTRUCTION  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#345)Robert Engs -- MW 1  
** Investigation of the major ingredients-political, social, and economic-
leading to the sectional crisis and war, an analysis of the war and leadership
on both sides, and the major issues of Reconstruction. _Registration for
Lecture AND Recitation required._  

**[390-001 PALESTINE & ARAB ISRAELI
CONFLICT](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#371)**  
**Thomas Ricks-- TR 9-10:30**  
If you want to go beyond the loud theater of politics and war and learn about
the social, economic, and cultural contexts of the Arab-Israeli conflict and
the events that led to the famous handshake on the White House lawn, this is
the course to take. This course aims to encourage critical discussion of the
nationalist constructions of history and to expose students to newly emerging
scholarship from both sides that questions much of what we take for granted.  
  
**[397-401 HONORS IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#373)Marc Trachtenberg -- T 3-6  
** Honors seminar in international relations. Second semester of a two
semester sequence including review of advanced international relations theory
and preparation of honors thesis.  
  
**[398-301 JUNIOR HONORS IN AMERICAN
HISTORY](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#375)**  
**Robert Engs ----- T 1:30-4:30**  
Seminar in which students learn how to do research, collect data, and
eventually write an Honors thesis in the senior year. Instructor's permission
required. A detailed list of application procedures and requirements may be
obtained from the History Department Office, Rm. 352B - 3401 Walnut Street.
Applications will be accepted from November 3, and must be received no later
than November 10\. Notification will be by November 13.  
  
**[398-302 JUNIOR HONORS IN NON-AMERICAN HISTORY  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#380-401)Alan Kors----- T
1:30-4:30**  
Seminar in which students learn how to do research, collect data, and
eventually write an Honors thesis in the senior year. Instructor's permission
required.  
  
  
**HIST-400 HONORS SEMINARS**  
**[401-301](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#400-301) American
Honors [T. Sugrue](http://www.history.upenn.edu/faculty/sugrue.html)  
[401-302](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#400-302) Non-American
Honors [E. Peters](http://www.history.upenn.edu/faculty/peters.html)  
** Completion of a Senior Honors Thesis which was begun in the Fall semester.  
  
**[408-001 WORLD OF DANTE](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#415)  
Edward Peters----- T 1:30-4:30  
** This course will consider important themes in European history between 1150
-1325 by using literary texts as historical evidence and in conjunction with
sophisticated group of modern historical studies. The primary reading will
Dante's DIVINE COMEDY and several of his other works as well as chronicles
(Salimbene), works of spirituality (St. Bonaventure), and political
theory.[Course Syllabus](408syl.htm)  
  
**[416-001 EUROPEAN INTELLECTUAL HISTORY IN THE 18TH CENTURY  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#420)Alan Kors----- TR 10:30-12  
** A survey based solely on primary sources of the main currents of
eighteenth-European thought: deism; natural religion; skepticism; evangelical
revival; political reform; Utilitarianism; materialism. The course will focus
on works widely-read in the eighteenth century and of enduring historical
significance.

  
**[421-001 HISTORY OF INTERNATIONAL
POLITICS](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#425)  
Marc Trachtenberg -- MW 10  
** The course will cover the origins of the First World War, the failure of
the peace of 1919, the coming of the Second World War, and U.S.-Soviet
relations since 1945. _Registration for Lecture AND Recitation is required.  
  
_**[435-401 AFRO-AMERICAN MATERIAL
CULTURE](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#430)  
C. Gunkel----- W 2-5  
** This course will consider a variety of hand-made objects and structures to
reveal African American notions of ethnicity, history, aesthetics, beliefs,
economic relevance, and cultural continuity. Readings will come from the
disciplines of folk art, historical archaeology, vernacular architecture,
anthropology, and ethnohistory. In addition to a few required texts,
additional articles and monographs will be assigned. _This course is primary
to the FOLK department. Please contact them or the instructor for more
information._  
  
**[442-001 AMERICAN REVOLUTION  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#441)Richard Beerman -- TR
9-10:30  
** An investigation both of the causes of the American Revolution and of the
social and political dynamics unleashed by that conflict.  
  
**[469-001 HISTORY OF AMERICAN LAW SINCE 1877  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#468-401)Mary Berry----- TR
10:30-12  
** This course covers the development of legal rules and principles governing
individual and group conduct in the United States since 1877. Such subjects as
regulation and deregulation of business enterprise, the convergence of private
and public law in contract, property, and personal injury law, the history of
taxation, the development of legal education and the legal profession, the
evolution of legal philosophy and concepts of judging, and the legal status of
women and minorities, will be included.  
  
**[477-401 WATER, POLITICS AND CONFLICT  
](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#481)[T.
Naff](http://www.history.upenn.edu/faculty/naff.html) \----- W 2-5  
** This course analyzes water as the historic and contemporaneous determinant
of social, political and economic life in the Middle East. These issues will
be approached within the framework of the relationship of vital natural
resources to conflict and conflict resolution, focussing on the 20th century.
_This course is primary to the AMES department. Please contact them for more
information._  
  
**[481-401 TUTORIAL ON THE MODERN MIDDLE
EAST](http://www.history.upenn.edu/f97/uglist.html#481)  
[T. Naff](http://www.history.upenn.edu/faculty/naff.html) \----- TBA  
** Selected topics and historiography of the modern Middle East. ****_This
course is primary to the AMES department. Please contact Prof. Naff or the
department for more information and the time of this course.  
  
**ALL COURSES NUMBERED 500 AND ABOVE ARE GRADUATE COURSES. UNDERGRADS NEED
PERMISSION FROM THE INSTRUCTOR TO REGISTER.**_ ****  
  
  
---|---  
[[Home](http://www.history.upenn.edu/index.html)]  
[[Search](http://www.history.upenn.edu/home/search.html)]  
[[About](http://www.history.upenn.edu/home/about.html)]  
[[Contact](http://www.history.upenn.edu/home/contact.html)]  
[[Penn](http://www.upenn.edu/)]  
  
  

* * *

| URL: http://www.history.upenn.edu/sp98/ugrad.html  
[(C) 1996 University of Pennsylvania  
](http://www.upenn.edu/)Last modified: October 28, 1997  
  
---|---

