#  Course Syllabus

# Youth in Russia

History 382, Fall 1999

T 1-3 p.m., Swift 25

* * *

Miki Pohl

Swift 36, e-mail "mipohl@vassar.edu"

Office Hours: MW 1-3 p.m., and by appointment

Course Description

> This seminar explores the history of youth and youth culture in Russia. We
will see how youth and teenagers were discovered and defined as an age group,
read accounts of being young (drawing on history, sociology, ethnography,
fiction, and memoirs), and explore the youth experience as depicted in films
and documentaries. Topics include the experiences of youth during periods of
reform (Russia's "Great Reforms," Khrushchev reforms, Perestroika), youth
legislation, youth institutions (orphanage, school, the Komsomol), youth and
Stalinism, the experiences of girls. The course concludes with an exploration
of contemporary Russian teen culture, focusing on rock music and its role in
the 1980s, and DJ and club culture of the 1990s. The seminar does not require
any previous course work in Russian history.



Required Books



Toby W. Clyman and Judith Vowles, eds., Russia Through Women's Eyes:
Autobiographies from Tsarist Russia, 1996

Ivan Turgenev, Fathers and Sons, 1996 (1862)

Alan M. Ball, And Now My Soul Is Hardened: Abandoned Children in Soviet
Russia, 1918-1930, 1994

Hilary Pilkington, Russia's Youth and Its Culture: A Nation's Constructors and
Constructed, 1994

Deborah Adelman, The "Children of Perestroika:" Moscow Teenagers Talk About
Their Lives and the Future, 1991



Recommended Books

These are also on reserve. The collection by Levi and Schmitt deals with the
topic of youth in Western Europe, not Russia. We will read about 1/3 of the
materials, for the purpose of comparison and to learn about theoretical
approaches to the topic of youth. Ordered for your convenience; purchase only
after careful examination. The Penguin Atlas is more essential, especially for
participants without any background in Russian history; and it is also priced
more reasonably.

John Channon, The Penguin Historical Atlas of Russia, 1995

Giovanni Levi and Jean-Claude Schmitt, A History of Young People in the West.
Volume Two: Stormy Evolution to Modern Times, 1997



Films (Depending on availability).

"The Road to Life." 1931. Street children and waifs after the revolution.

"Europa, Europa." 1990. Survival of Jewish teenager between Hitler and Stalin.

"The Thief." 1997. Youth in post-Stalin Russia.

"Is It Easy to Be Young?" 1988. Glasnost-era documentary on youth.

Music video clips.



Course Requirements



Keep a journal. A total of ten 1-2 page journal entries, consisting of
responses and discussion questions relating to the week's topic and readings.
The journal is due each Tuesday by 10 a.m, on e-mail (mipohl@vassar.edu). Four
of the journal entries should be music or film responses/analyses.



Read the books and articles. Self-explanatory. Some of the materials may be
read more lightly than others (without taking notes, browsing) others may
require more careful attention (note taking); I will distribute reading
questions and notes on e-mail when necessary.



Listen to the course tape. Two of your journal entries should be responses to
this tape. Tape and listening guides will be available later in the semester.



Watch films. Two of your journal entries should be film reviews. A separate
film review guide will be distributed.



Participate in discussion. More than two unexcused absences will result in a
grade penalty.



Lead discussion. You will be asked to facilitate class discussion at least
once during the semester, perhaps together with another participant (depends
on class size). After this session, you are required to do a write-up of the
discussion (summary and brief assessment).



Research Paper. A term paper of 15 pages on a topic that interests you and
that is relevant to the course. You are encouraged to use a variety of
sources, including films, music, pictorial sources, fiction. The paper is due
in a proposal and revised version, and you will be asked to give a brief
presentation on it during the last weeks of the semester. The proposal entails
a title, thesis statement, and list of sources, due in Week 7 (October 15).
The final version is due in Week 13 (December 3, 1999).



Students with Disabilities. Academic accommodations are available for students
with disabilities who are registered with the Office of Disability and Support
Services. Please schedule an appointment with me early in the semester to
discuss any accommodations for this course which have been approved by the
Director of Disability and Support Services as indicated in your accommodation
letter.



Grade distribution. For grading purposes, requirements will be distributed as
follows:



Journal 25%;

Participation 30% (including leading discussion and write-up);

Research Paper 45%.



Weekly schedule of readings and assignments

The format of the classes will usually be a brief lecture, including film and
video clips, followed by discussion. During some weeks the lectures will be
longer and more comprehensive (weeks 2-3, 6, 8-9). There are several feature
films that I would like us to watch as a group, outside of class time, place
and time TBA (in consultation with you). You are not required to come to these
showings, but will be asked to watch these films on your own. I have not put
them on this schedule because I will borrow some of them from other
institutions and cannot be sure when they will be here. More on this in class
and via e-mail.



Week 1

August 31

Mutual Introductions. Discovery of Youth.



Recommended reading (Materials on reserve are flagged with an asterisk *):

*Levi and Schmitt, A History of Young People, browse ch. 1, pp. 1-10, and photos between pp. 26-27 (after first meeting). 



Week 2

September 7

Childhood and youth in 19th century Russia



Required:

*Olga Semyonova, Village Life in Late Tsarist Russia, pp. 22-73. On reserve for my other course, H245! 

*David L. Ransel, "Infant Care Cultures in the Russian Empire," in Barbara Clements et al., eds., Russia's Women, pp. 113-132. 

*Levi and Schmitt, browse chapters 2-4, pp. 11-116. 



Week 3

September 14

Youth Between "Great Reforms" and revolution

Required:

Clyman and Vowles, Russia Through Women's Eyes. Browse the introduction, esp.
pp. 28-35; and read chapters 1-3, pp. 47-108; ch. 8-10, pp. 242-334.

Recommended:

*Levi and Schmitt, A History of Young People, ch. 5, "Young People in School." 

Week 4

September 21

Parents and Children



Required:

Turgenev, Fathers and Sons, pp. 3-157.



Recommended:

Some of documents in the second half of Fathers and Sons, esp. pp. 161-168,
185-206, 228-244, 253-259.

*Levi and Schmitt, A History of Young People, ch. 6, "Young Rebels and Revolutionaries." 



Week 5

September 28

The Road to Life



Required:

Alan Ball, And Now my Soul Is Hardened.



Week 6

October 5

Communism and Youth. The Komsomol. Soviet Educational Policy.



Required:

*Wolfgang Leonhard, Child of the Revolution, pp. 7-125. 

*Larry Holmes, "Part of history: the oral record and Moscow's model school No. 25, 1931-1937," Slavic Review, Summer 1997. 



Week 7

October 12

Youth Between Stalin and Hitler.



PAPER PROPOSAL DUE ON WEDNESDAY BY NOON



Required:

*Levi and Schmitt, A History of Young People, ch. 7-8, pp. 232-280. 



OCTOBER BREAK



Week 8

October 26

Thaw Generation. Virgin Lands. Stagnation.



Required:

Pilkington, Russia's Youth and its Culture, pp. 1-43.

Week 9

November 2

Living in Truth. Prague Spring. Guitar Bards. Rock music in Russia.



Required:

Course Tape, Part I.

Continue Pilkington, Russia's Youth and its Culture, pp. 44-85.

*Artemy Troitsky, Back in the USSR, pp. 38-111. Browse introductory chapters. 



Week 10

November 9

Children of Perestroika I: "Normal" youth.



Required:

Adelman, The Children of Perestroika.



Week 11

November 16

Children of Perestroika II: Subculture and deviance.



Required:

Pilkington, Russia's Youth and its Culture, pp. 89-315.

Course Tape, Part II.



Week 12

November 23

Youth in the New Russia. Student presentations.



PAPER DUE ON TUESDAY BY NOON



Week 13

November 30

Student presentations and wrap-up.





