[![University of
Washington](/home/graphics/uwlogotype0.gif)](http://www.washington.edu/) |
![](/home/graphics/space.gif) | ![](/home/graphics/space.gif)  
---|---|---  
 [Search](/home/search.html) | [Directories](/home/directories.html) |
[Reference Tools](http://www.lib.washington.edu/research/reftools.html)  
![](/home/graphics/space.gif)  
![](/home/graphics/rib0.gif)  
---  
[UW Home](/) > [Student Guide](/students/) > [Course
Catalog](/students/crscat/)  | ![](/home/graphics/space.gif) |
![](/home/graphics/space.gif)  
---|---|---  
  
![](/home/graphics/space.gif)  
  
# Instructor Class Description

Time Schedule:

  * [Summer Quarter 2002](/students/timeschd/SUM2002/fish.html)
  * [Autumn Quarter 2002](/students/timeschd/AUT2002/fish.html)

**Thomas P Quinn  
tquinn@u.washington.edu  
FISH 450  
Seattle Campus**

### Salmonid Behavior and Life History

Marine distribution, homing migration, and spawning behavior of adult salmon:
incubation, emergence, migration, and residence of fry; fingerling
distribution and residence with reference to species interaction and
population evolution. Recommended: FISH 311. Offered: A.

**Class Description**  

Course Outline for FISH 450 Salmonid Life History and Behavior Fall 1998 - Dr.
Thomas Quinn

Date Day Topic S-27 Mon Introduction, goals and course schedule; photos of N.
A. salmonids S-29 Wed General life history & distribution of Oncorhynchus,
Salmo and Salvelinus O-01 Fri Life histories and identification, continued
O-04 Mon Life histories compared with other N. A. fishes O-06 Wed Global
patterns of anadromy and catadromy; Speciation, glaciation O-08 Fri Oceanic
migration and orientation O-11 Mon Coastal and estuarine migrations O-13 Wed
Upriver migrations, energetics, hormones O-15 Fri Homing - evidence and
patterns O-18 Mon Homing mechanisms O-20 Wed Selection of spawning site and
reproductive behavior O-22 Fri Reproductive success O-23 Sat Weaver Creek
Field Trip O-25 Mon Ecology of adult salmon: predation, scavenging and
nutrient cycling O-27 Wed Mid-Term Exam O-29 Fri Egg mortality and incubation
schedules N-01 Mon Emergence and initial fry movements N-03 Wed Sockeye fry in
lakes: predation and feeding N-05 Fri Salmonids in streams, Part I N-06 Sat
Kennedy Creek Field Trip (?) N-08 Mon Salmonids in streams Part II N-10 Wed
Stream community structure N-12 Fri Smolt transformation & physiology N-13 Sat
Field trip to Cedar River (?) N-16 Mon Seaward migration: timing, orientation
N-18 Wed Estuarine residence and migration N-20 Fri Early marine migration and
distribution N-23 Mon Marine predation and survival N-25 Wed Marine feeding
and growth N-28 Fri Thanksgiving - Holiday N-31 Mon Age and size at maturity
D-02 Wed Population structure and local adaptation D-04 Fri Successes and
failures of transplants D-07 Mon Effects of forestry on salmonids D-09 Wed
Wild salmon and hatcheries D-15 Tues Final Examination 8:30-10:20 FISH 450:
OBJECTIVES and REQUIREMENTS

OBJECTIVES: It is the specific objective of the class to acquaint students
with the life cycles of Pacific salmonids, with emphasis on the anadromous
species. The broader objective is to give students an opportunity to think
critically about a very well-studied group of fishes, seeking lessons that
pertain to general themes in ecology and behavior. The life cycles of salmon
are studied from behavioral and ecological perspectives, and are first placed
in the context of general patterns of fish life histories. We then follow them
from the time when adults are migrating homeward from the ocean through
coastal waters and up rivers to the stream where they were spawned years
earlier. We discuss the factors affecting spawning site selection,
reproductive behavior, and the survival during the incubation period. We then
discuss the behavior and ecology of juvenile salmon in streams, lakes, and
during their migration out to the ocean. We consider factors affecting marine
survival, growth and the age at maturation. Finally, we address selected
topics that are both pertinent to salmon management and serve to integrate the
life cycle: the evolution of local adaptations, interactions between forestry
practices and salmonids, and the interactions between wild and hatchery-
produced salmonids. The course gives students experience collecting, analyzing
and writing about data in scientific format, and in designing and writing a
proposal to do scientific research.

Lectures, illustrated with slides and overheads; dialog with class; field
trips with associated data collection, analysis, and preparation of papers in
scientific format.

**Recommended preparation**  

Background in biological science, preferably basic principles of ecology or
fish biology. However, lectures are largely self-contained and students with
diverse backgrounds are encouraged to enroll.

**Class Assignments and Grading**  

PAPERS. There will be two field trips and all students are responsible for
collecting and handing data from both trips. Undergraduate students will write
papers in scientific format on both of the two data sets. Graduate students
will write a scientific paper on one of the two data sets (your choice) and
will write a research proposal for the second paper. (Undergraduates wishing
to write a proposal in lieu of the second paper may do so). The first trip
will be to the Weaver Creek Spawning Channel on October 23. We can also
provide you with comparable data collected in 1988 through 1998. We will give
you more details prior to the trip but the purpose is to observe, measure and
compare the behavior (digging and aggression) of adult male and female
sockeye, pink and chum salmon. We will record the number and severity of
attacks which males and females direct at other males and females and the
frequency of digging. Each of us will collect data and we will distribute a
summary. You will then think about, analyze, graph and otherwise fuss over the
data and figure out what they mean. SPECIAL NOTE: Weaver Creek is in Canada
and all students who are not US citizens must bring all relevant documentation
to cross the border. Please check with me or with US and Canadian immigration
departments if you are unsure as to what documents to bring. The second field
trip will be to Kennedy Creek on November 6 or 13, where we will study
spawning site selection by chum salmon. We may also have a trip to the Cedar
River on either November 6 or 13. You will work in teams, counting and mapping
the locations of redds and recording data on stream depth, width and velocity,
surface gravel composition and woody debris. As with the Weaver Creek study,
data from previous years (1991-1997) are available. You will write a paper in
scientific format, carefully adhering to the style of the Canadian Journal of
Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences (Instructions to Authors for this journal are
on reserve in the library). If you have not done so yet, you will note many
differences from the typical "term paper" in an English course. Everything
(yes, everything) is to be double-spaced and typed or word-processed, and the
pages numbered. The paper must have the following components in this order:

There will be two exams (counting 20% and 30%) and two papers (20% and 30%)
for this course. The mid-term exam will be Wednesday, October 27. The final
exam is scheduled for Wednesday, December 15. The first paper is due Friday,
November 12 and the second is due Mondayday, December 6.

* * *

_The information above is intended to be helpful in choosing courses. Because
the instructor may further develop his/her plans for this course, its
characteristics are subject to change without notice. In most cases, the
official course syllabus will be distributed on the first day of class._

* * *

tquinn@u.washington.edu  
Last Update by Thomas P Quinn  
Date: 06/29/1999 _

  
[![\[University of
Washington\]](/home/graphics/uwsealf6.gif)](http://www.washington.edu/) |
![](/home/graphics/space.gif) | ![](/home/graphics/space.gif)  
---|---|---  
|  Office of the Registrar  
icd@u.washington.edu  
Modified:June 22, 2002    |  
---|---  
![](/home/graphics/space.gif)

