

_University of Minnesota_ |  History of Medicine  
---|---  
  
[Home](home.htm)  


[The Program](program.htm)

[Faculty](faculty.htm)

[Graduate Studies](gradstudies.htm)

[Undergraduate Studies](undergrad.htm)

[Graduate Students](students.htm) [](degrees.htm)

[For Medical Students ](medstud.htm)

[Events Calendar](events.htm)

[Minnesota Medicine](minnesota.htm)

[Links](links.htm)



|

  
**Graduate Program**

The Program in the History of Medicine offers graduate training leading to the
M.A. and the Ph.D. degrees. Our students enter with diverse backgrounds in
medicine, science, or history. Some begin their graduate study immediately
after receiving their bachelor's degree. Others do their training in mid-
career. The graduate training they receive introduces them to current
scholarship in the history of medicine and science and prepares them to do
research in the field. The Ph.D. is intended for those who hope to pursue
academic careers in colleges, universities, and other research institutions.
The M.A. is appropriate for those who wish to use history to enrich careers in
medicine, public health, museum work, or journalism. The Program has close
working relations with the University's Program in the History of Science and
Technology, History Department, Program in American Studies, and Center for
Bioethics. Students are encouraged to take part in their graduate work in
these programs.

**Research Facilities**

The University of Minnesota and the Twin Cities of Minneapolis and Saint Paul
offer rich resources for historical research. The Owen H. Wangensteen
Historical Library of Biology and Medicine holds a fine research collection of
some 60,000 volumes in the history of medicine and biology published before
1925. Housed in the Biomedical Library's half million volumes include 4200
current journal titles; among medical libraries, it is the nation's leading
lender on Interlibrary Loan. The University holds other important collections
of manuscripts and papers relevant to the history of medicine. These include
the Social Welfare History Archives, the Immigration History Research Center,
and the Charles H. Babbage Institute -- Center for the History of Information
Processing. In the greater Twin Cities there are other important collections
at the Minnesota Historical Society and State Archives and at the Bakken
Library and Museum of Electricity and Life.

**Graduate Curriculum**

The graduate program in the history of medicine and biological sciences is
flexible, and every effort is made to tailor the student's training to his/her
background and interests. Students are expected to gain a wide acquaintance
with the current state of knowledge in this field as well as to demonstrate
their ability to do independent historical research. Our graduate students
take two history of medicine courses in their first year: HMed 5200, 5201, a
year-long introduction to the history of medicine, and HMed 5210, 5211, a
professional seminar on historiography, research methods, and current work in
the field. In the second and third years, they can pursue more specialized
areas via topical courses, seminars, and directed studies. We also insist on a
strong supporting program comprising courses taken in the History Department
and in the Program in the History of Science and Technology. Although the
period of time for completion of the Ph.D. degree in the Program has varied a
great deal, students who enter without previous work in the history of
medicine or history of science should plan on five years for the doctorate --
three years for course work, the foreign language examinations, and the
preliminary examinations, and two years to prepare and defend the
dissertation. The M.A. degree can usually be completed in a year or a year and
a half of full time study. Students may write a master's thesis (Plan A) or
take their degree under (Plan B) without a thesis but with additional
coursework.

**Intellectual Community**

The History of Medicine Program offers a congenial and stimulating environment
for graduate study. We provide a common space for students to meet, study,
work, and interact. In order to broaden our students' familiarity with the
discipline and its active participants, we host an annual series of lectures
by scholars from institutions throughout North America. Graduate students have
the opportunity to interact with these visitors on a regular basis. We also
encourage graduate students in history of medicine and biological sciences to
attend the lectures sponsored by the Program in the History of Science and
Technology, the Bioethics Center, the Center for Medieval Studies, the Center
for Women's Studies and to participate in workshops sponsored by the History
Department.

**Financial Aid**

Financial aid for graduate study in the history of medicine is available from
several sources. Each year the Program awards the Sara Wangensteen Fellowship,
a fellowship providing a living stipend, tuition, and health insurance. It is
ordinarily given to a promising beginning student. Teaching and research
assistantships and smaller fellowships are also available through the Program.
In addition, funds for student support are available through the Graduate
School and through teaching assistantships and research assistantships in
other programs. The faculty will also help students locate likely outside
sources of fellowship support and advise students in writing grant
applications. It is the intention of the Program to see that Ph.D. students
making a good progress toward completing their degrees have continuity of
financial support throughout their graduate careers. Applications for
financial aid must be made by February 15.

As an important part of a graduate student's training, we encourage advanced
students to attend and to deliver papers at professional meetings, and we
offer financial assistance for this purpose.

**Applications**

The history of medicine and biological sciences is an interdisciplinary field;
some training in both history and in one or more of the sciences is desirable.
Applications are welcome from those individuals possessing a bachelor's degree
in history or in one or the sciences, or a professional degree in one of the
health sciences. Students are normally admitted into the M.A. program first;
however, highly qualified applicants may be admitted directly into the Ph.D.
program. The master's degree is especially appropriate for people with MD or
MPH degrees seeking some training in history.

You may apply by mail or electronically via the internet. Call or write for
forms at our address. You may also use the on-line application form available
at the Graduate School web site. The original application goes to the Graduate
School. Please send a duplicate of your application to the Program.

Although the Graduate School does not require the Graduate Record Examination
or letters of recommendations, we require both. You should take the general
portion of the Graduate Record Examination and have your scores mailed to the
Graduate School. We also ask that you have three people who know your academic
work well send letters of recommendation directly to Director, Program in the
History of Medicine. Students are also encouraged to send a writing sample and
to explain in their accompanying letter their goals for graduate study. To be
considered for financial aid students must arrange to have all their
application materials submitted by February 15. We encourage you to contact us
before applying. A visit to campus is recommended, but at least we would like
to talk with you by telephone before you apply. We would be happy to introduce
you to our graduate students so that you can gain a student's perspective on
our Program.

[_Click here to go to the Graduate School application for admissions
form_.](http://www.grad.umn.educ/application.html)

**Graduate/Advance Undergraduate Courses**

**HMed 5002. Public Health Issues in Historical Perspective.** (3 cr; SP-
History of medicine or history of science course recommended for undergrads)
[Eyler](mailto:eyler001@tc.umn.edu)  
Introduction to the evolution of major recurring problems and issues in public
health including environment and health, food customs and nutrition, control
of alcohol and drugs, venereal diseases and public policy, contraception and
abortion, and relationship of science to promotion of health.  
**HMed 5035. The Germ Theory and the Medical Profession.** (3 cr; SP-History
of medicine or history of science course recommended for undergrads)
[Eyler](mailto:eyler001@tc.umn.edu)  
Development of the modern germ theory of disease and its applications in
medicine and public health. Emphasis on the developments between 1860 and
1950)  
**HMed 5045. Medical Profession in America.** ( 3 cr; SP-History of medicine
or history of science course recommended for undergrads)
[Eyler](mailto:eyler001@tc.umn.edu) or [Gunn](mailto:gunnx005@tc.umn.edu)  
Comparative history of the medical profession in the United States and select
northern European nations. Process of professionalization and the role the
profession has played in western industrial societies since 1800  
**HMed 5055. Women, Health, and History.** **** (3 credits)
[_Gunn_](mailto:gunnx005@tc.umn.edu)  
This seminar investigates women's historical roles as healers, patients,
research subjects, and health activists. Using secondary literature, diaries,
biographies and archival materials, students will have latitude within the
seminar format to explore individual interests. Topics to be covered include:
views of gender and the body; reproduction and childbirth, mental health;
nursing; women physicians, public health reformers; the Black Women's Health
Movement; alternative practitioners; disparities in diagnosis treatment,
research, and health careers; and the Women's Health Initiative. The course is
intended for mid-upper level undergraduates. It does not require previous work
in history or history of medicine. [Click here to see
syllabus](http://www.med.umn.edu/history/5055-syll.htm)  
**HMed 5200. Health and Healing in History 1.** **** (3 cr; A-F only)
[Eyler](mailto:eyler001@tc.umn.edu)  
This course is the first semester of a two-seminar introduction to the history
of disease and to the social and intellectual history of modern European and
American medicine. It is designed to be part of a general liberal arts
eduction, and it presupposes no special technical knowledge of the biomedical
sciences. The two semesters form a chronological sequence (HMed 5200, 5201),
but either may be taken separately. The focus of HMed 5200 is from classical
antiquity through the first third of the nineteenth century. We will explore
how some of the basic concepts of Western medicine came into being and
investigate the practice of physicians, surgeons, midwives, and some of the
alternative health care providers. We will also study the role of institutions
and of social and economic change in the development of health care in Europe
and America. During this semester the histories of bubonic plague and of
smallpox provide opportunities to consider the changing patterns of disease
and death and the human response to major epidemics.  
**HMed 5201. History of Medicine since 1700.** (3 cr)
[Eyler](mailto:eyler001@tc.umn.edu) or [Gunn](mailto:gunnx005@tc.umn.edu)  
Founding of hospitals, medical teaching at Leyden and Edinburgh, anatomical
teaching and the rise of surgery and pathological anatomy; inoculation for
smallpox and the discovery of vaccination; discovery of percussion and mediate
auscultation; anatomical definition of diseases; discovery of anesthesia;
epidemiology and public health; germ theory of disease; antiseptic surgery;
rise of bacteriology; discovery of diphtheria antitoxin.  [Click here to see
syllabus](5120-syll.htm).  
**HMed 5210. Seminar: Theories and Methods in Medical History.** (3 cr; A-F
only)[Gunn](mailto:gunnx005@tc.umn.edu)  
Historiography of the history of medicine.  
**HMed 5211. Seminar: Theories and Methods in Medical History.** (3 cr; A-F
only)[ Gunn](mailto:gunnx005@tc.umn.edu)  
Use of archives, primary sources, supervised research project.  
**HMed 5940. Topics in the History of Medicine.** **(** 3 cr; SP-History of
medicine or history of science course recommended for undergrads) Topics vary.
Emphasis on mid-18th century to the present. [
Eyler](mailto:eyler001@tc.umn.edu) and [Gunn](mailto:gunnx005@tc.umn.edu).
[Click here to see
syllabus.](http://www.med.umn.edu/history/5940-syllabus.htm)  
**Graduate Courses** **  
****HMed 8333. FTE: Master's.** (1 cr; SP-Master's student, adviser and DGS
consent)  
**HMed 8444. FTE: Doctoral.** (1 cr; SP-Doctoral student, adviser and DGS
consent)  
**HMed 8631. Directed Study.** (3-6 cr; A-F only)
[Eyler](mailto:eyler001@tc.umn.edu) and [Gunn](mailto:gunnx005@tc.umn.edu)  
**HMed 8632. Directed Study.** (3-6 cr; A-F only)
[Eyler](mailto:eyler001@tc.umn.edu) and [Gunn](mailto:gunnx005@tc.umn.edu)  
**HMed 8666. Doctoral Pro-Thesis Credits.** (1-18 cr; SP-Max 18 credits per
semester or summer; doctoral student who has not passed oral preliminary
exams)  
**HMed 8777. Thesis Credits: Master's.** (1-18 cr;SP-Max 18 cr per semester;
or summer; 10 cr total required (Plan A only)  
**HMed 8888. Thesis Credits: Doctoral.** (1-18 cr; SP-Max 18 cr per semester
or summer; 24 cr required).

Updated October 31, 2000

