

**POLITICS AND COMMUNICATION:  
THE MEXICAN MASS MEDIA AS AN ECOSYSTEM**

**Instructors:** [Doug Barkey](../DouglasBarkey/barkeyhome.html)
(barkey@ecology.coa.edu) and [Gray
Cox](http://www.coa.edu/%7Egray/fquilt.html) (gray@ecology.coa.edu)



  

* * *

[![](brodie/images/plazabut.jpg)](MMM.html)

* * *

**INTRODUCTION:** The problems and opportunities that human ecology addresses
arise because there are various aspects of our natural and social heritages
which we care about and which are at risk. Good and successful stewardship
requires holistic and interdisciplinary approaches to such problems and
opportunities -- every one with a stake in the outcome needs to have a voice
in process.The mass media play decisive roles in determining whose voices are
heard and how. This course is a study of the relationships between cultural
traditions and power systems which structure the mass media and determine
whose images of the future are viewed and in what style -- whose voices are
heard and how. We will look at art, design and political realities in public
forums such as plazas, churches, newspapers, and television. We will use
historical case studies to understand contemporary political realities.
Students will learn how to create Internet homepages. As a class we will
create an [Internetweb site](MMM.html) based on course themes:

* How do the mass media persuade, manipulate, and coerce? * How can mass media be used to liverate the oppressed? What would a useful and accessible "readers guide" to mass media in Mexico or the U. S. or elsewhere look like? How might it be presented on the Internet? * How was the Internet crucial to the success of the Zapatista revolt in Chiapas? * How has the experience of public space been changed through out history as Mayan ceremonial centers were deconstructed and transformed into Spanish plazas? * How are aesthetic and political traditions of the plaza informing the virtual world of the Internet? 

No Spanish is required for this course but people with varying levels of
language skill will have ample opportunities to practice them. This is an
introductory to intermediate course that is well suited to students with
strong interests in arts and design or in public policy issues.

**COURSE GOALS:** To develop skills in critically analysing how power is
exercised in political economies in general and other Latin American contexts
in particular. To develop design skills in visual analysis and production, in
particular, in design for the Internet. To develop skills in interdisciplinary
inquiry and collaborative production processes.

**READINGS:** Readings will include a variety of short handouts taken from
histories [Carlos Fuentes, Linda Schele], classic texts {e. g. Paulo Friere,
Michel Foucault, and Marshal McLuhan] and materials from current periodicals
and Internet publications.

**CLASS FORMAT:** Class format will vary considerably and include lecture,
discussion, small group activities, and computer work.

**OUTLINE:**

1 Introduction and Syllabus Review 30 min

Initial Discussion of Viewpoints and Metaphors through [Virgin of
Guadalupe,](virgen.html)

[Plaza de Toros,](toros.html) [Central Plaza](plaza.html), Zapata and the
Zapatistas 30 min

[How to use Macs](Macos.html), Netscaping the Internet 30 min

Assignment: Find specific information on the Internet -- a treasure hunt



2 Alternative Models of Understanding and Explanation 30 min

History of the Internet with examples dealing with Chiapas 30 min

Netscaping details, [Basic use of Adobe Pagemill](basicpm.html) 90 min

[Elements of Design](designele.html) 30 min



3 Politics in the Shadow of the Pyramid:

Mayan and Aztec politics and communication 60 min

[Principles of Design](designprin.html) 30 min



4 Initial Annotated Bibliography and Internet References DUE 60 min

[Working Parameters](parameters.html), Review of Pagemill and

[Creating Links in Pagemill](pmlinks.html) 90 min

Work time 30 min



5 VIDEO: The Virgin and the Bull 60 min

[Basic color theory](colort.html) [Feedback from Gray re:
Bibliographies](rr.html) 30 min



6 Bibliography as HTML document DUE - 60 min

Intro to Fractal Paint and managing internet graphics 90 min

Work time 30 min



7 Squaring the Triangle: Soldiers, Priests, Plazas and Peasants 60 min

[Basic Typography](type.html) 30 min



8 Film: El Bruto 60 min





9 Discussion of [Criteria for critique](critique.html) of Dimension 30min

Critique of Sites (Diario del Yucatan, CNN, Hotwired) 30min

Exercise: Develop a conceptual sketch of dimension 30min



10 Working Critique of each students dimension 120min

Discussion of article 30min

Midterm Review 30min



11 Audience, Community, and Political Economy 30min

Organization of POLCOM site: metaphors, links and user issues 60min

Midterm review



12 Organization of metaphors, links,Nancy Andrews performance,

and analysis of modernism, media, and art 60 min

13 Reviewing graphic templates and dimension mission statements.

Optional time: Worktime and review of Toffler manifesto



14 Humberto Suaste on: What is Mexican about Mexican Art?

and Guest Review of Website



15 Review of sketches for plaza metaphor. [Mythmaking as
ideology:](myths.html)

Images from the [Maya](cox/mythsoutline.html) to
[Siqueiros](http://www.conet.com.mx/macg/siqueiro.HTM),
**[Riviera](http://www.conet.com.mx/macg/RIVERA.HTM)** , and [Orozco .
](http://www.conet.com.mx/macg/orozco.htm)





16 [Markets](mercado.html) and [Malls](mall.html): Mythmaking as advertising:
how the

mass media constructs cultural ideology: Discussion of

Esther Parada article 60min

Pagemill: Forms and Imagemaps 30min

Fractal Design Painter: Type Effects 30min

WorkTime 60 min





17 Return to Overview of Metaphors, Themes and Theories

Discussion of Internet communities, politics, and Chiapas



18 Review and Production of Website



19 Final Critique of Dimensions and Website



20 Course Analysis and Celebration

**GR** **ADING:** Each student will design a Dimension for the Website that
includes cultural/social analysis and graphic design -- a dimension might be
defined, for example, in terms of a specific medium (Television), a specific
style (ranchera music), a political movement or event (the revolt in Chiapas),
a specific cultural community (e. g. contemporary Mayans), or landscape which
is represented in different ways through mass media (e. g. Calakmul Biosphere
Reserve). Worth 50% of final grade.

Everybody should participate fully in class activities and in on-line
newsgroup--mailing list discussions. Worth 25% of final grade

Each student will do production work for the Website as part of class
collaboration (e. g.develop templates, develop documenation on some feature of
the Web in Mexico, et cetera). Worth 15% of the final grade.

The HTML Bibliography document due at the start of the 6th class is worth 10%
of the final grade.

**SYLLABUS AND SCHEDULE:** The syllabus and course schedule is tentative and
should  
be updated when indicated by the instructors.

**COMPUTER LABTIME:** A consistent, weekly, minimum lab time of 3 sequential
hours per week will be necessary. This will be a time during the week for the
student to use  
the computer lab to work on web pages or net research outside of class time.
An attendance sheet  
is located in the computer lab to sign in on. The instructors keep office
hours  
as well as lab times.

**ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:** The following forms of academic dishonesty will result
in referral to the student's advisor and possible suspension of computer
laboratory privileges: changing EDS computer systen configurations, repeated
overdue checkout of library books related to the class, abuse of equipment,
lack of respect demonstrated towards other students or their work, disruptive
behavior in class, lack of cleanliness in computer lab,intentional
presentation of others work as your own, and refusal to follow computer lab
procedures.

**THE ELECTRONIC DESIGN STUDIO:**

  * Each student will leave each workstation in clean condition and neat order. 
  * It is recommended that each student purchase a Syquest removable hard drive. Each drive costs $35 to $40 and may be purchased through the instructors. 
  * Students will not access the the electronic material of other students without permission. 
  * Unsupported and unlicensed programs and utilities should not be placed on COA drives. 
  * The last person to leave a work session is responsible for: turning off all computers and peripherals, turning off all lights, and locking the door. 
  * The software program supported this semester will be Microsoft Word, HotMetal Pro, Pagemill, Fractal Design Painter, Netscape Navigator 2.0. The student may use the other programs available on the hard drive, but classtime will not be spent covering their use. 
  * The student is free to load any software they choose on to their removable hard drive cartridge. 
  * Coffee and other drinks may be brought into the electronic design studio, however food is not allowed. Great care should be taken not to place drinks where they might come in contact with computer equipment. 

**MATERIALS:**Some materials are supplied as part of the lab fee. These
materials will not last all semester. It is expected that the student purchase
sufficient materials to complete all the projects for the course. Full color
dye-sublimation prints are $5.00 each. Inkjet color prints are $.50
each.Poster size print prices are located in the GIS lab. Laserprints are
free.

**GRADING POLICY:**To achieve excellence, the student must go beyond the scope
of the written assignment through intellectual and intuitive thought portrayed
in his/her work. The student should also demonstrate sensitive craftsmanship
and the sharpening of his/her critical facilities through extensive
participation in the creative process, and through self and group evaluations.
In addition to the above, the grade and/or evaluation will be affected by
class attitude and faculty evaluation of student growth throughout the course.
The product of this course will be a web site that will be accessible from
anywhere on the planet and represents College of the Atlantic, therefore we
all need to commit ourselves to excellence.

ALL REQUIREMENTS MUST BE COMPLETED IN ORDER TO RECEIVE A GRADE AND/OR
EVALUATION.



  
  
  

[COA At a Glance](http://www.coa.edu/ataglance/index.html) |
[Admission/Financial Aid](http://www.coa.edu/index.html) | [Academic
Program](http://www.coa.edu/academicprogram/index.html) | [Summer
Programs](http://www.coa.edu/summer/index.html)  
[Campus Life](http://www.coa.edu/campuslife/index.html) | [Faculty &
Staff](http://www.coa.edu/faculty/index.html) | [Offices &
Facilities](http://www.coa.edu/facilities/index.html) |
[Alumni](http://www.coa.edu/alumni/index.html) | [News &
Events](http://www.coa.edu/news/index.html)  
[Associated Programs](http://www.coa.edu/assocprograms/index.html) | [What's
New](http://www.coa.edu/whatsnew/index.html) |
[Home](http://www.coa.edu/index.html)  
  
College of the Atlantic * 105 Eden St. * Bar Harbor, ME 04609  
Phone: (207) 288-5015 * Fax: (207) 288-4126  
Admissions/Financial Aid only: 800-528-0025  
e-mail: [inquiry@ecology.coa.edu](mailto:inquiry@ecology.coa.edu)

