Spring 2002  
![](/templates/styleC/images/shield.gif)  
![](/templates/styleC/images/shim.gif) |
![](/templates/styleC/images/shim.gif) |

### Chinese Literature 132

####  
  
---|---|---  
|  [Home](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chlit132/)  
---  
[Teaching Staff](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chlit132/instructors/)  
[WWW Links](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chlit132/wwwlinks/)  
[Syllabus](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chlit132/syllabus/)  
[eMailbag](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chlit132/emailbag/)  
[Discussions](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/cgi-
bin/webx/WebX?14@@/chlit132)  
[Slide Carousel](http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chlit132/slides/)  
![](/templates/styleC/images/shim.gif) |

# Chinese Literature 132. Chinatowns

Spring 2002. Thurs 1-3. 2 Divinity Ave, Room 213



Prof. Eileen Cheng-yin Chow

_office_  2 Divinity Avenue, Room 229

_phone_   495-8374  _email   _[echow@fas](mailto:echow@fas)



Office Hours: Wed  2-4, and by appointment



_ _

What happens at the crossroads of space and ethnicity? This seminar explores
the myriad ways in which "Chinatown" has circulated as 'memory, fantasy,
narrative, myth' in the dominant cultural imagination in the last century and
a half, and how the lived realities of overseas Chinese communities, Asian
American history, and changing conceptions of 'Chineseness' have productively
engaged with these real and phantom Chinatowns. Though the emphasis of the
seminar will be on cultural and theoretical issues rather than on a socio-
historical study of the "Chinatown" phenomenon, participants are encouraged to
pursue multi-disciplinary approaches to the subject, such as studies in urban
history, architecture, ethnography, economics, or creative endeavors for their
final projects.



# Requirements

Students are required to attend all the seminars, complete the assigned
reading, and present a short introduction to two of the readings in class,
facilitating discussion by directing our attention to a particular segment of
the reading for that day by raising a specific issue, question, or link to
other texts. The student or students making the presentation (you are very
welcome to present as a group) will be expected to write up a short, 2-3 page
precis on the readings to be distributed on-line or in hard-copy to all
members of the class _at least one_ _day_ before class, which will then become
part of the reading assignment for that week.



One short essay of  approximately  5 pages will be due on **March 7** (*please
see below for details*), and a 10-15 page research paper or  "think-piece" on
the issues raised in the course (there is a list of possible topics at the end
of this syllabus) will be due on by 5pm on **May 13, 2002**.   We will be
presenting our ideas to each other in workshop format at our final session
(tentatively scheduled for **May 9** ), so students are expected to have
preliminary materials on their projects ready for circulation to the other
members of the class, either in the form of a prospectus (5 pages--or could be
in 2-3 pages plus a detailed outline or bullet points) or a preliminary draft
of their paper.

_A warning note_ : Multi-media, oral historical, and creative projects tend to
require extra time and ongoing involvement--please plan out your schedule
accordingly.



First essay: 20%

Class presentation(s) and writeup: 20%

Attendance, contribution to class discussion: 20%

Final essay/project: 40%



## First assignment (Due March 7)

For the first assignment, you have the option to write a 5-page paper on a
topic or theoretical issue raised in class or in the readings; alternately,
you can choose to carry out one of the following assignments:



1) Write a five-page walking tour, based upon secondary sources and interviews
with

residents, businessmen, or workers, of a Chinatown (Boston is obviously the
most pragmatic choice, but if you have time to venture to another
Chinatown/Chinese community, that would be wonderful!). Assume that persons
taking the walking tour will have only your paper, and not you, as a guide.
Use precise addresses and be as visually descriptive as possible. Photographs
and illustrations would be helpful. Don't 'cadge' from an existing tour-book--
really get to know the neighborhood, and bring out a particular focus to your
tour that might dovetail with themes we have raised in this course concerning
"Chinatowns".



2) Conduct extensive media and on-line research of a Chinatown to which you
have never been, and write up a 5-page report of your findings.  Take into
account both 'official' (local tourism board, civic association materials) and
'unofficial' (local newspapers, newsletters, fiction/photographs, interviews
with residents) information that you may uncover.  What kinds of assumptions
are made for/about the first-time visitor?   You can also choose as your
'destination Chinatown,' one which no longer exists (but for which one can
still find historical records).  A great final project would be to combine #1
and #2!



3) Volunteer with one of Phillips Brooks House Association's Chinatown
Committee's extensive list of programs (see
[http://www.pbha.org/pbha/programsall.html](http://www.pbha.org/pbha/programsall.html))
and work with residents to address the needs of the neighborhood. These
programs require serious and on-going time commitment--however, they will also
be rewarding.  Write a two-page paper summarizing your experiences and
observations. Please note that you should give at least two hours every week
to this effort; if you choose this option, you will need to check it over with
both me and your program of choice by Week 2.





## Reference Texts

"Chinatowns" is not a historical survey, and since we proceed topically rather
than chronologically in this course, it might be helpful to you to consult
reference texts on the history of the Chinese diaspora and Asian America.  A
wealth of historical material is now also available on the web; the course
website (once it is up!) will contain useful links to some of the more
informative websites. Lynn Pan's book is essential to this course; copies are
available for sale at the Coop; all three will be on reserve at Yenching.





*      Lynn Pan, _Sons of the Yellow Emperor: A History of the Chinese Diaspora_.   New York: Kodansha Globe, 1990. 

*      Sucheng Chan, _Asian Americans: An Interpretive History_. Boston: Twayne, 1991.

*      Ronald Takaki, Strangers from A Different Shore _: A History of Asian Americans_.   New York: Penguin, 1989.





**Week One (1/31) Introduction**



## Week 2 (2/7) The Coming Man: China East/ China West



Philip P. **Choy** et al, eds. _The Coming Man: 19 th Century American
Perceptions of the  Chinese_

**Huang** Zunxian,  "Expulsion of the Immigrants" (1882) "The Election of
1884" (1885)

**Cai** Jun,  "How to Cope with Western Dinner Parties" (1881)

Him Mark **Lai** , et al, eds. Selections _Island: Poetry and History of
Chinese Immigrants on Angel Island,_ 1910-1940.

Marlon **Hom** ,  selections from _Songs of Gold Mountain_ : _Cantonese Rhymes
from San Francisco Chinatown_.

_ _

Suggested: Lynn Pan, _Sons of the Yellow Emperor_ , 1-58, 296-315.





**Week 3 (2/14) Early Chinatown: Bachelor Towns**

Louis **Chu** _, Eat A Bowl of Tea: A Novel of New York 's Chinatown_ (1961)

Maxine **Hong Kingston** , selections from _China Men_ (1977)

** **

Paul **Siu** , selections from _The Chinese Laundryman: A Study in Social
Isolation_ (1987)

Victor **Nee** and Brett de Bary Nee.  "Bachelor Society" in _Longtime
Californ '_ (1972)



Film: Wayne **Wang** , dir. _Eat A Bowl of Tea_ (1989) ****

** **

** **

**Week 4 (2/21) Picturing Chinatowns**

Arnold **Genthe** and John **Tchen** , _Genthe 's Photographs of San
Francisco's Old Chinatown--_read introduction and commentary by Tchen (photos
from 1895-1906)

Faith **Moosang** ed., _First Son: Portraits by C. D. **Ho**_ _y_ (photos from
1909-20)

Anthony W. **Lee** , "Revolutionary Artists," on the 1920s paintings of Yun
Gee in _Picturing Chinatown: Art and Orientalism in San Francisco (2001)_

Jeff **Gillenkirk** and James **Motlow** , _Bitter Melon: Stories from the
Last Rural Chinese Town in America_ (1987) --photographs and interviews from
Locke, California.   ****

** **

** **

** **

**Week 5 (2/28) Interracial Romance and the 'Yellow Peril'**



Siu Sin Far, "The Story of One White Woman Who Married a Chinese," "Her
Chinese Husband" from _Mrs. Spring Fragrance_ (1912)

Thomas **Burke** , "The Chink and the Child" from _Limehouse Nights_ (1916)



Gina **Marchetti** , introduction to and section on _Broken Blossoms_ in
_Romance and the 'Yellow Peril': Race, Sex, and Discursive Strategies in
Hollywood Fiction_ (1993)



Film: D. W. **Griffiths** , _Broken Blossoms_ (1919)





**Week 6 (3/7) Case Study: London**

** **

**Lao She** , _Ma and Son_

** **

Lynn **Pan** , "Limehouse and San Francisco" from _Sons of the Yellow Emperor_
(1990)

**Li** Minghuan, "Transnational Links among the Chinese in Europe: A Study on
European-wide Chinese Voluntary Associations" and David Parker, "Chinese
People in Britain: Histories, Futures, and Identities" from _  The Chinese In
Europe_, Gregor Benton and Frank N. Pieke, eds. (1998)



**[first assignment due beginning of class, Thursday, March 7]**





**Week 7 (3/14) Gendering Chinatown**

** **

Oral histories of Chinatown women from Judy **Yung** , _Unbounded Voices: A
Documentary History of Chinese Women in San Francisco_

** **

Lucie **Cheng Hirata** , "Free, Indentured, Enslaved: Chinese Prostitutes in
Nineteenth Century America." (1979)

Judy Tzu-Chun **Wu** , "`Loveliest Daughter of our Ancient Cathay!':
Representations of Ethnic and Gender Identity in the Miss Chinatown U.S.A.
Beauty Pageant"



Film: Henry Koster, dir. (Rodgers and Hammerstein musical), _Flower Drum Song_
(1961) based on 1957 novel by C. Y. **Lee**



Suggested: Sucheng **Chan**.  "The Exclusion of Chinese Women, 1870-1943."





**Week 8 (3/21) Politics, Labor and Activism**

** **

Fae Myenne **Ng** , _Bone_ (1994) ****



L. Eve Armentrout **Ma** , "Chinatown Organizations and the Anti-Chinese
Movement, 1882-1914" (1991)

Miriam **Ching Louie** , "Immigrant Asian Women in Bay Area Garment
Sweatshops: `After Sewing, Laundry, Cleaning and Cooking, I have no Breath
Left to Sing," (1992)

Lisa **Low** e, "Work, Immigration, Gender: Asian 'American' Women" (1996)

Monte **Williams** , "Neighborhood Report: Chinatown; Labor Dept. Hears Tales
of Sweatshops, Restaurants, and Fear," _New York Times_ , August 6, 1995;
Steven **Greenhouse** , "Big Chinatown Restaurant Sued on Wages and Tips,"
_New York Times_ , January 24, 1997.





**Week 9 (3/28) Spring Break**

** **

** **

**Week 10 (4/4) Criminality, Tongs, Triads and the Anti-Chinese Movement**

Sax **Rohmer** , _The Insidious Dr. Fu-Manchu_ (1913), or ,  "The Daughter of
Huang Chow" and "The Pigtail of Hi Wing Ho," from _Tales of Chinatown_ (1922)

Michael **Cimino** dir.,   _Year of the Dragon_ (1985) --film clips shown in
class

** **

K. Scott **Wong** , "The Eagle Seeks A Helpless Quarry: Chinatown, The Police,
and the Press: The 1903 Boston Chinatown Raid Revisited" (2000)

**Chin** Ko-lin   "Gang Characteristics." from _Chinatown Gangs: Extortion,
Enterprise, and Ethnicity (1996)_

Peter **Kwong**.   "The Pig Trade: The Contemporary Version." Pp. 19-46 in
Peter Kwong, _Forbidden Workers: Illegal Chinese Immigrants and American Labor
(1997)    _****



Suggested: Lynn Pan, "Triads" (338-356)



Film: Wayne Wang dir., _Chan is Missing_ (1982)





## Week 11 (4/11) Chinatown/Autobiography: The Debate Over Authenticity



Maxine **Hong Kingston** , _Tripmaster Monkey: His Fake Book_ (1990)

Frank **Chin** , "Come All Ye Asian American Writers of the Real and the
Fake," introduction to _The Big Aiiieeeee_! (1991)

Frank **Chin** , "Year of the Dragon" (1974)



Sau-Ling Cynthia **Wong** , "Autobiography as Guided Chinatown Tour? Maxine
Hong Kingston and the Chinese American Autobiographical Debate"

King-Kok **Cheung** , "The Woman Warrior versus the Chinaman Pacific: Must A
Chinese American Critic Choose between Feminism and Heroism?"







**Week 12 (4/18** )   **Case Study: New York/Los Angeles: the Making of Ethnic
Enclaves, Surburbs and Little Taipeis**



Gish **Jen** , _Mona in the Promised Land_ (1997)



**Chen** Hsiang-Shui.   "The Professional Class: Three Portraits" _Chinatown
No More: Taiwan Immigrants in Contemporary New York_ (1992)

Mark **Abrahamson**..  "An Overview" and "Chinatown in San Francisco and
Little Taipei in Suburban Los Angeles." Chapters 1 and 5 in _Urban Enclaves_
(1996). Vijay **Prashad** , Vijay **Prashad**. "Kung Fusion: Organize the
'Hood Under I-Ching Banners" from _Everybody was Kung fu Fighting: Afro-Asian
Connections and the Myth of Cultural Purity_ (2001)



Suggested: **Zhou** Min.   Introduction from _Chinatown: The Socioeconomic
Potential of an Urban Enclave_ (1992)

Jan **Lin**.   _Reconstructing Chinatown: Ethnic Enclave, Global Change_
(1998)

Peter **Kwong** , _Chinatown, N.Y.: Labor and Politics, 1930-1950_.





**Week 13 (4/25) Case Study: Southeast Asia**

Lynn **Pan** , "Jews of the East" (128-152), "Hybrids" (154-172)

Carl **Trocki** , "Boundaries and Transgressions: Chinese Enterprise in
Eighteenth- and Nineteenth-Century Southeast Asia" from _Ungrounded Empires_
(1997)

_Chinatown (Niu Che Shui/Kereta Ayer_ ) _: An Album of A Singapore Community_
(1983) ****

**Wang** Gungwu,  "Among Non-Chinese"; David Yen-ho **Wu** , "The Construction
of Chinese and Non-Chinese Identities" from _The Living Tree_ , ed. Tu Wei-
ming (1991)

Donald M. **Nonini** , "Shifting Identities, Positioned Imaginaries:
Transnational Traversals and Reversals by Malaysian Chinese" (1997)

Kwok Kian Woon, C. J. Wee Wan-Ling and Karen Chia, eds _. Rethinking Chinatown
and Heritage Conservation in Singapore_. Singapore: Singapore Heritage
Society, 2000.





**Week 14 (5/2) Global Chinatown**

**Tu** Wei-ming,  "Cultural China: The Periphery as the Center" from _The
Living Tree_.

Lucie **Cheng** , "Chinese Americans in the Formation of the Pacific Regional
Economy" (1999)

Aihwa **Ong** , "On the Edge of Empires: Flexible Citizenship among Chinese in
Diaspora" (1993) ****

** **

** **

**Final Session (To be held over Reading Period): Presentations/Workshop**

Our final session will be in the form of a mini-conference/workshop (as well
as a social gathering) for the class.  Students will give brief presentations
(5-10 minutes) of their final projects, followed by discussion from other
members of the class and invited outside discussants.  All students are
expected to have submitted a prospectus or rough draft of their project in
progress, to be distributed before the final session. ****









**Possible Final Projects:**

*      Compare Genthe's photographs (look up original published collections) with Edward Curtis' The North American Indian; or to social-documentarians such as Riis or Hines, or Genthe's student, Dorothea Lange

*      Chinatown tourism, tour guides

*      Chinatown 'memoirs': Louise Leung Larson's _Sweet Bamboo;_ Ben Fong-Torres's _The Rice Room;_ Edward Hall 's _Tea That Burns_ ; the poet Li-Young Lee's _The Winged Seed_

*      Southeast Asian Chinese communities: relationships between 'native' and 'Chinese'--case of Jakarta ****

*      Collecting oral histories--Judy Yung's _Unbound Voices_ is an exemplary text in this regard ****

*      New HK migration due to the 1997 transition: esp to new 'Chinatowns' in Toronto, Sydney ****

*      Honolulu, Manchester, and other Chinatowns not covered in this course

*      Collaborative project: build a website on one or several of the topics ("Picturing Chinatown", or a case study of a particular Chinatown). ****

*      Find out more about "A Chinatown Banquet": A Community-Based PublicArt and Education Project based in Chinatown. ****

*      food cultures of Chinatown: need I say more.

*      Immigration law and the making of Asian AmericaAnti-Chinese movements from the late 19th century, and more recently, Christine Choy's excellent documentary, _Who Killed Vincent Chin_

*      _http://www.120chinesestudents.org/_ The Chinese Students' Memorial Society and the first overseas student, Yale grad Yong Wing. 

** **  
  
![](/templates/styleC/images/shim.gif) |
![](/templates/styleC/images/shim.gif) |  
_URL: http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~chlit132/syllabus/_  
  
Copyright (C)The President and Fellows of Harvard College

