## **Oregon State University**

## **Department of Geosciences**

Professor [Ronald E. Doel](http://osu.orst.edu/dept/history/F-DOEL.htm) | 134
Wilkinson Hall; tel. 737-1243 (or 737-3469 in Dept. of History)  
---|---  
Winter 2002 | Office hours: 3:30-4:30 PM Thursdays or by appointment  
Geo 422 / Geo 522 | email: [doelr@ucs.orst.edu](mailto:doelr@ucs.orst.edu)  
T Th 9:00 - 10:20 AM | Wilkinson Hall 108  
  
> > > > * * *

>>>>

>>>> jump to seminar readings  
>>>> ---  
>>>>  
>>>> jump to _Reserve Readings_  
>>>>  
>>>> jump to ****_[Supplemental Course Readings](suppreadings.htm)_  
>>>>  
>>>> [log on to Blackboard](http://my.oregonstate.edu)  
>>>>  
>>>> [Sample research papers from Winter 2001](respapers.htm)  
  
****Reconstructing Historical Landscapes****

This seminar examines the use of historical methods to interpret the physical,
ecological, social, and cultural conditions of regions within the historical
past. While this research seminar will focus broadly on the methods employed
by historians and others to interpret the past, we shall place special
emphasis on using historical techniques to uncover the environmental
conditions of particular landscapes at earlier times.

Topics to be addressed in this seminar include environmental history;
historical inquiries into material culture; the utilization of archival,
narrative, photographic sources, and census data; and the history of urban
regions.

  
This course satisfies the Resource Geography distribution requirements in the
Department of Geosciences.

We will arrange a trip to the Oregon State Archives in Salem (or to the Oregon
Historical Society in Portland) early in the quarter.

  
**_Required Texts_** [all paperback; available at the Memorial Union
bookstore]

  
Cronon, William. _Changes in the Land: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of
New England_. (1983)

Meinig, D.W., ed. _The Interpretation of Ordinary Landscapes: Geographical
Essays_. (1979)

Russell, Emily W.B. _People and the Land Through Time: Linking Ecology and
History_. (1997)

Additional readings are available at Circulation / Reserves in Valley Library.

* * *

**_  
Requirements_**

This is a discussion seminar. Because the success of this course will depend
on students being prepared to discuss readings, it is imperative that all
reading assignments be completed before seminar meetings. All students will
write a one-page paper (circa 250 words) each week, based on a pre-assigned
theme, that addresses the week's reading; these are due at the start of class
each Tuesday.  
  
Seminar members will also prepare a research paper (for undergraduates, 12-16
pages, double-spaced, roughly 250 words per page, in Courier type 10 or
equivalent; for graduate students, 20-25 pages), whose topic will be chosen in
consultation with the instructor. Careful identification of critical problems
and high standards of analysis are expected. This paper will be due at the end
of the quarter; the final deadline shall be Friday, March 15, at 3 PM, in the
Department of Geosciences, 104 Wilkinson. All students will also make an oral
presentation and lead a brief class discussion of their analysis and
conclusions. These presentations will be concentrated in the final two weeks
of the seminar.  
  
Students are expected to be honest and ethical in their academic work.
Academic dishonesty is defined as an intentional act of deception in one of
the following areas: cheating-- use or attempted use of unauthorized
materials, information or study aids; fabrication-- falsification or invention
of any information; assisting-- helping another commit an act of academic
dishonesty; tampering-- altering or interfering with evaluation instruments
and documents; plagiarism-- representing the words or ideas of another person
as one's own.

  
All seminar members are to enroll in the Blackboard site for this class (which
also allow for on-line discussion and debate among students, access to course
documents, and participation in group projects). Log on at
[http://my.oregonstate.edu](http://my.oregonstate.edu); see
[FAQ](http://my.oregonstate.edu/Blackboard_FAQ.htm) at this site for further
instructions. Students are expected to have an active email account as well
(any account is fine) but be sure mail is forwarded from your ONID accounts!
To forward email, [logon to your ONID account](https://onid.orst.edu/cgi-
bin/my?type=want_auth), then click on the 'Change email forward' link in the
left column).  
  
  
_Grading and evaluation_ : There will be no mid-term or final exam. In their
stead, grades will be based on the following: the research paper (50% of
grade), oral presentations in seminar and weekly (brief) essays (30%), and
participation in general class discussions, including Blackboard discussion
forums (20%).  
  
Students are encouraged to take advantage of the university's Writing Center
in preparing research papers for this course. The Writing Center phone is
737-5640; you can also stop by the Writing Desk ( at The Valley Library ),
phone: 737-8385.

  
_Prerequisites_ : Senior or graduate student standing required for enrollment.

* * *

**_[On Reserve at Valley
Library](http://oasis.orst.edu/search/r?SEARCH=geo+422)_** : [request the
course packet; all readings are included. Several copies are available.]

  
_* **200 Years of Census Taking:** Population and Housing Questions,
1790-1990._ Washington, DC: Bureau of the Census, 1989.

  
* Barber, Russell J. **" Topolygy."** Chapter in Barber, _Doing Historical Archaeology: Exercises Using Documentary, Oral, and Material Evidence_ (Englewood Cliffe, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1994).

  
* Blumenson, John J.-G. _**Identifying American Architecture:** A Pictoral Guide to Styles and Terms, 1600-1945_ [revised edition]. Nashville, TN: American Association for State and Local History, 1981.

  
* Cloud, John and Keith Clarke. " **Through a Shuttle Darkly:** The Tangled Relationships Between Civilian, Military and Intelligence Remote Sensing in the Early American Space Program." [ _Draft_ from Workshop on Secrecy and Knowledge Production, Cornell University, 1997.]

  
* Cronon, William. _**Nature's Metropolis:** Chicago and the Great West. _ New York: W.W. Norton, 1991. [Excerpt.]

  
* Leffler, Phyllis K. and Joseph Brent. _Public History Readings._ Malabar, Florida: Krieger Publishing Company, 1992. **_[Readings from this volume cataloged as Leffler/Brent 1, L-B 2, and L-B 3; see below]_**

* Lewis, Pierce. " **Common Landscapes as Historic Documents** ," in Steven Lubar and W. David Kingery, eds., _History from Things: Essays on Material Culture_ (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1993).

  
* Miller, Frederic,  " **Archives and Historical Manuscripts,** " in Barbara J. Howe and Emory L. Kemp, eds., _Public History: An Introduction_ (Malabar, FL: Robert E. Krieger Publishing Company, 1986), pp. 36-56.

  
* Ryan, William B.F. and Walter C. Pitman. _**Noah's Flood** : The New Scientific Discoveries about the Event that Changed History. _New York: Simon & Schuster, 1998.

  
* Stephens, Hal G. and Eugene M. Shoemaker. _**In the Footsteps of John Wesley Powell** : An Album of Comparative Photographs of the Green and Colorado Rivers, 1871-1872 and 1968._ Boulder: Johnson Books; Denver: The Powell Society, 1987. (F767.G7 S74) [Excerpt.]

* * *

**_Seminar Topics and Readings_** :

Week 1 | Week 2 | Week 3 | Week 4 | Week 5  
---|---|---|---|---  
Week 6 | Week 7 | Week 8 | Week 9 | Week 10  
  
Week 1 January 8, 10

**_Introduction_**

Readings: Cronon, pp. vii-ix, 3-15

_AUDIO FEATURE_

**U sing Historical Evidence: _Is the Earth Warming_?**

_... On the use of historical data to understand earlier environments (in this
case, the ocean):_

Requires the [Real Audio player](http://www.npr.org/inside/realaudio.html)
[Need this free program? Download it
[here](http://www.npr.org/inside/realaudio.html)]

Oceanographer Profile
([14.4](http://www.npr.org/ramfiles/atc/20000323.atc.11.ram) |
[28.8](http://www.npr.org/ramfiles/atc/20000323.atc.11.rmm)) \-- Finding out
whether the earth is warming up or not  
depends on being able to compare present temperatures with those of the past.
One of the  
problems is - how do you find out what those past temperatures were? NPR's
John Nielsen  
finds out how a self - styled 'data archaeologist' helped scientists discover
that the oceans are  
warming up as well as the atmosphere. {4:30}

From **National Public Radio** 's _All Things Considered_ , Friday, March 23,
2000  
---  
  
  

* * *

Week 2 January 15, 17

**_American Landscapes: The Perspective of Environmental History_**

Readings: Cronon, pp. 19-81

> > Russell, pp. 1-18

  

* * *

Week 3 January 22, 24 -¡ì\- Please note: we will meet in the **[Autzen
Room](http://osulibrary.orst.edu/floormaps/floor2.htm) , Valley Library, on
Thurs. Feb. 24th**

**_Archival and Primary Source Research_**

Reading: Miller, "Archives and Historical Manuscripts," pp. 36-56 [skim] [
**Circulation / Reserves** ]

Russell J. Barber, "Toponymy," 17-26 [ **Circulation / Reserves** ]

  

* * *

Week 4 January 29, 31

**_Historical Landscape Transformations: Historical Uses of Landscapes_**

Readings: Cronon, pp. 82-170

> > William Cronon, _Nature's Metropolis_ , pp. xv-xix, 387-390 (look
particularly at maps in this work, such as on p. 175 and between pp. 274-291,
for what they reveal about regional landscape change) [ **Circulation /
Reserves** ]

  

* * *

Week 5 February 5, 7

**_Ecological History: Physical and Biological Changes_**

Readings: Russell, pp. 19-107

> > Leffler and Brent ( **1** ), pp. 215-221 [ **Circulation / Reserves** ]

>>

>> Video, _The Flood_ [skim conclusion of Ryan and Pitman, _Noah's Flood_ [ **
_Circulation / Reserves_** ]

>>

>>  
>  * Further information on Noah's Flood may be found [here](noahs_flood.htm)

_AUDIO FEATURE_

_Another Perspective on The Flood_ :

  
**Radio Expeditions** : _**[Legacy of the Black
Sea](http://www.npr.org/programs/RE/archives/991122.blacksea.html)**_ (see the
_second_ program, which aired November 23, 1999)  
  
** This program offers the views of[ **Bob
Ballard**](http://www.nationalgeographic.com/blacksea/) and others on the
Ryan-Pitman hypothesis. Click
[**here**](http://www.nationalgeographic.com/blacksea/) for a National
Geographic web site on this expedition.

(from National Public Radio and the National Geographic Society)  
---  
  
  

* * *

Week 6 February 12, 14

**_Patterns of Landscape Settlement: From Surveys to Census Data_**

Readings: Russell, pp. 108-173; skim pp. 237-246

> > Leffler and Brent ( **2** ), pp. 139-159 [ **Circulation / Reserves** ]

>>

>> _200 Years of Census Taking_ [ **Circulation / Reserves** ; entirety]

  

* * *

Week 7 February 19, 21

**_Investigating Modern Landscapes: Urban Regions and Material Culture_**

Readings: Meinig, pp. 33-48, 89-102

> > Pierce Lewis, "Common Landscapes as Historic Documents," pp 115-139 [
**Circulation / Reserves** ]

>>

>> Blumenson [ **Circulation / Reserves** ; skim carefully]

* * *

Week 8 February 26, 28

**_Interpreting Historical Landscapes Through Oral Testimony and
Photography_**

Readings: Meinig, pp. 164-192

> > Leffler and Brent ( **3** ), pp. 261-283, 308-321 [ **Circulation /
Reserves** ]

>>

>> Stephens and Shoemaker [skim carefully] [ **Circulation / Reserves** ]

>>

>> Cloud and Clarke, "Through a Shuttle Darkly: The Tangled Relationships
Between Civilian, Military and Intelligence Remote Sensing in the Early
American Space Program" [ **Circulation / Reserves** ]

_AUDIO FEATURE  
  
How Trustworthy are Photographs?_  
  
**Photo Fakery** ([14.4](http://www.npr.org/ramfiles/me/20000426.me.03.ram) |
[28.8](http://www.npr.org/ramfiles/me/20000426.me.03.rmm)) \-- Host Bob
Edwards talks to Dino Brugioni, a  
former senior officer of the CIA's National Photographic Interpretation  
Center about his new book, "Photo Fakery: The History and Techniques  
of Photographic Deception and Manipulation." Brugioni says people have  
been tampering with photos in order to fool or entertain others since the  
invention of photography. People and objects can be put in or taken out of  
pictures, or events can be staged for the camera. Brugioni says some  
manipulations in recent years...including the darkening of O.J. Simpson's  
mug shot on the cover of a national news magazine...can call into  
question the credibility of the news media. (7:17)  
  
from NPR'S **MORNING EDITION** , Wednesday, April 26, 2000:  
---  
  
* * *

Week 9 March 5, 7

**_Research presentations (seminar participants)_**

  

* * *

Week 10 March 12, 14 [OSU Dead Week; we shall meet only if in-class research
presentations are not completed during Week 9]

* * *

  
**Supplementary Reading List**

There are several general reference works of great value as supplementary
reading:

  
Crumley, Carole. _Historical Ecology: Cultural Knowledge and Changing
Landscapes._ Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research Press; distributed by
the University of Washington Press, 1994. GF90 .H57 1994

Hammond, Kenneth A., Macinko, George and Fairchild, Wilma B 1978. _Sourcebook
on the Environment: A Guide to the Literature._ University of Chicago Press,
Chicago : 1978. GF41 .S6 [ ** _On Reserve at Valley Library_** ]

Kingery, W. David, ed. _Learning from Things: Method and Theory of Material
Culture Studies_. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1996. [ **
_On Reserve at Valley Library_** ]

Orser, Charles E., Jr., ed. _Images of the Recent Past: Readings in Historical
Archaeology._ Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira Press, 1996. (A good overview of the
state of contemporary archaeological research, but with little emphasis on
studies of landscape.)

Turner II, B.L. _et. al._ , eds. _The Earth as Transformed by Human Action:
Global and Regional Changes in the Biosphere over the Past 300 Years_.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990. [ ** _On Reserve at Valley
Library_** ]

  
[Additional reading lists](suppreadings.htm) will be distributed in seminar
[[click here](suppreadings.htm) for current list].

  
[Back to Seminar Resources](http://osu.orst.edu/instruct/geo422) | [OSU
Department of Geosciences](http://terra.geo.orst.edu/index.html)  
---|---  
[Back to Geo 422 home page](http://osu.orst.edu/instruct/geo422) |  

