**![MB27 Syllabus](_derived/mb27syla.htm_cmp_leaves010_bnr.gif)**  
[![Home](_derived/home_cmp_leaves010_hbtn.gif)](./)
[![Up](_derived/up_cmp_leaves010_hbtn.gif)](newpage11.htm)

  
  
---  
  




##### MB 27 Management of Information Through Technology

### Fall 2000, M,W,F 9:05 - 9:55

 Dr. A. Lee Miller, Gibbs Hall, Room 23, 951-2906

Office Hours: M,W,F 10-11& 12-1 (see sign-up sheet on door in Gibbs) or
before/after class plus Tuesdays at noon by appointment only.

E-mail on campus: MillerA   Internet: MillerA@philau.edu

Web pages for course information:    http://faculty.philau.edu/MillerA

                It is assumed students have retained knowledge and skills from various undergraduate computer courses or practical experience. And further, that a student who is deficient in prerequisite knowledge or skills will review the information early in the semester. 

**Course description and goals:**   This course will focus on the latest
technological advances for managing data and communications effectively.
Students will acquire the skills and concepts necessary to use a system to
handle data efficiently for large and small organizations, national or
international in scope.  Network technology and usage of computer networks as
well as ethical and security issues will be addressed.  The concepts of
telecommunications and the costs and benefits associated with the transmission
of information will be explored.  Methods of instruction include hands
on/application oriented assignments and case studies.   Students will complete
assignments using Personal Computers with database, spreadsheet, presentation,
and word processing software.

**Texts:**  
Management Information Systems: Solving Business Problems with Information
Technology., G.V. Post and D.L. Anderson, Irwin McGraw-Hill, 2000, 2nd
Edition.

[Suggested _supplementary texts_ : Learning to Use windows Applications.
Shelly and Cashman Series, Boyd Fraser Pub. Access for Windows, Excel for
Windows, Word for Windows, PowerPoint for Windows.  Or any other Office
97/2000 book.]

**Supplies:** Two 3 1/2  " disks. (Buy High Density disks. Formatted for IBM
if you want to skip the formatting step.)

**Grading:**

Exams                      45% (Final 25, Midterm 20)

Quizzes                   25% (On Text, Lectures, and labs)

Assignments         20% (Written, presented, computer labs)

Class                       10% (Participation, Attendance)

_All written assignments must be typed._ All exams will be announced a least 1
week in advance. Quizzes will be announced via E-mail. ( _No make-up quizzes_
; the lowest quiz grade will be dropped.) Short quizzes will occasionally
occur PRIOR to the class discussion on a specific chapter to ensure that each
student has read the chapter.

                Students will be allowed one 3 X 5 index card for notes in all exams, not quizzes. (A larger index card, or more than one such card will result in ZERO for that exam.)

                Attendance will be taken via a sign-in sheet. (Abuses will result in a ZERO for the Class portion of the course grade.) Excused absences must be documented.

Hints for success.

 Successful completion of this course will require organization and diligence
on the part of the student.

 Students should:

 Read this document.

               Attend class regularly. It is impossible to make up the work discussed during class period. It is impossible to make up short quizzes. 

               Assignments turned in late will lose 5 points (out of 100) per class meeting day. (Unless prior arrangements are made with the instructor.)

               **_ALWAYS_** have backup copies of your work. A bad disk is not a valid excuse. You should have duplicates of all the files you work on. If you are working with a partner be sure both of you have good copies. Never go more than 30 minutes without saving your work.

               Read the text before the class discussion. Ask questions!

                 **Students are cautioned to keep abreast of day to day schedule details. Students are responsible for everything discussed or announced in class. _(** Get the phone number of one or more classmates so that you can call someone if you miss a class **.)**_

** ** READ YOUR E-MAIL frequently. Dramatic information, such as quiz
announcements (and sometimes the answers), will be on the system by late
Friday for the following week.

93-100 A  

90-92 A-  

87-89 B+  

83-86 B

80-82 B-

77-79 C+

73-76 C

70-72   C-

You are expected to be able to use DBMS and spreadsheet software as well as
Word Processing. You are expected to be comfortable with a basic set of
Windows skills.

 For spreadsheets you should be able to design a simple spreadsheet which
includes labels, numbers, formulas, and functions (AVG, SUM, IF). You should
know how to format cells, set column widths, save, print, retrieve and do a
simple graph. You should be very clear about the difference between relative
and absolute cell references. You should also be able to copy formulas to
other cells.

 Doing Assignments

All assignments may be worked on in small groups (1, 2, or 3). Always include
the names of partners on the work handed in. **_ALWAYS INCLUDE A STATEMENT
SIGNED BY all PARTNERS CONCERNING THE PERCENTAGE OF WORK EACH DID._** (- 5pts
if not included. Not necessary if working alone.)

Each student/group will do a  PowerPoint presentation plus question/answer.
The presentations are scheduled near the end of the semester.  See the
Assignment web pages for details.

When you have software problems use the following sources for help:

1\. Help facilities within the Microsoft programs.

2\. lab aids (when they know what they are doing.)

3\. peers (when they know what they are doing.)

4\. books

5\. reference books, see supplementary texts or buy your own.

6\. on-line tutorials

7\. question in class/lab

8\. e-mail to MILLERA

 It is very difficult learning to use complicated software packages. One
necessary skill is to learn _how to learn_. This often means reading books and
manuals and doing tutorials. It always means making lots of errors and
learning from your mistakes. It also, lamentably, means re-doing lost work at
times.

 Academic honesty: Refer to the student handbook for general guidelines. Note:
students who abuse academic honesty policies may fail the course and/or be
dismissed from the college.

 For this course: Any work turned in by a student or students must reflect
work done by that student or students. If you need to copy files from students
other than those in your group make arrangements with the instructor. (I.e.,
let her know.) Your disks should be available and contain only your own work.
You may be asked to print out the contents or turn your disks in.

 Quizzes and exams are, obviously, to be done independently. Any discussion of
specifics on such test between students who take the test at different times
will be considered cheating by BOTH parties.

  ** _ _BACK UP YOUR WORK AFTER EVERY SESSION.__** BE SURE EACH PARTNER HAS A
CURRENT BACKUP COPY!   Use your HOME directory or diskettes.



  
  
---  
These pages are maintained by A. Lee Miller, [Philadelphia
University](http://www.philacol.edu)  
For comments e-mail: [MillerA@philacol.edu](mailto:MillerA@philacol.edu)  
(215) 951-2906  
---

