**   [Home](../home.html)   |   [What's New](../whatsnew.html)   |
[Syllabus](../syllabus.html)   |   [Notices](../notices.html)   |
[Links](../links.html)   |   [Site Map](../sitemap.html)   |   [Email
Us](mailto:issues@ocf.berkeley.edu) **  
---  
![](../topleft.jpg) |

**_Spring 1998 Edition_**  
  
**Past Issues Online:**

**

  * [Fall 2000](../fall00.html)
  * [Spring 2000](../spring00.html) **
**

  * [Fall 1999](../fall99.html)
  * [Spring 1999](../spring99.html) 

  * [Fall 1998](../fall98.html)
  * [Spring 1998](../spring98.html) 

  * [Fall 1997](../fall97.html)
  * [Spring 1997](../spring97.html) 

  * [Fall 1996](../fall96.html)
  * [Spring 1996](../spring96.html) 

  * [Fall 1995](../fall95.html)
  * [Spring 1995](../spring95.html) 

  * [Spring 1994](../spring94.html) 

  * [Fall 1993](../fall93.html) 
** |

**Risking Transmission**  
_Increased medical knowledge leads to more options, but harder choices_

by Anna Vrska

In the United States, about 7,000 infants are born annually to HIV-positive
women. As many as 2,000 of these infants will acquire the virus in utero,
during childbirth, or through breast feeding. AIDS is the seventh leading
cause of death for children 1-4 years old. A pregnant woman with HIV has a
difficult choice to make. She can either risk that her child will be born with
HIV, or she can choose not to take the chance and have an abortion. With
compelling reasons and moral stances on both sides of the situation, how is
she supposed to decide?

A decade ago, there were not many options for pregnant women with HIV. The
virus itself was not well understood, and the process of transmission from a
pregnant mother to her fetus remained a mystery to doctors. According to
former Assistant Secretary of Health Philip R. Lee, M.D., "There was little
understanding of the whole process and no treatments of any kind." As a
result, an overwhelming 76% of pregnant women with HIV chose to have abortions
in 1987.

The option of having an abortion for an HIV-positive woman, however, did not
always have to do with lack of scientific information. Interviews conducted
with women who had abortions revealed reasons that ranged from the fear of the
risking the mother's health, to the additional financial burdens of raising an
HIV-positive child, to the quality of life that a young HIV-positive child
would have. "For me the decision to have an abortion was almost immediate. ...
Now I can never have children and this is a decision I have to live with,"
said a woman from Oakland who wishes to remain anonymous. However, for some
women, abortion is not an option because of their moral beliefs.

In a national survey done in 1995 on HIV positive pregnant women, only 26% had
or planned to have abortions; while, 61% planned to, or had carried the
pregnancy to full term. Only 13% of the women were unsure of what they would
do. This trend of fewer HIV positive mothers having abortions has to do with
better understanding of medicine.

In addition, there have also been advances in the understanding of the
pathogenesis of perinatal HIV transmission. It is now recognized that the
majority of perinatal transmission likely occurs immediately before to or
during delivery. Thus, new advancements in antiviral drugs, such as ZDV, are
giving pregnant women with HIV more options. In February 1994, the results of
Pediatric AIDS Clinical Trials Group demonstrated that ZDV could reduce
perinatal HIV-1 transmission by nearly 70%. In the three years since these
results became available, epidemiologic studies in the U.S. and France have
demonstrated dramatic decreases in perinatal transmission following
incorporation of the ZDV regimen into general clinical practice. This an
encouraging sign for patients who wish to carry their pregnancy to full term
and give birth to healthy children.

Taking ZDV, however, is not a risk-free endeavor. There are unique
considerations regarding use of antiretroviral drugs in pregnancy, including
the potential need to alter dosage due to the physiologic changes associated
with pregnancy, as well as the potential for adverse short or long-term
effects on the fetus and newborn. Furthermore, the drug's effectiveness at
reducing the risk of perinatal transmission is not guaranteed. Data to address
many of these considerations are not yet available. Although the drug
treatments are not "water tight," according to Dr. Raymond Ross of Newport
Beach Hoag Hospital Pediatric Ward, "They are the best thing available, and
the benefits far outweigh the risks."

For pregnant women with HIV, there are many difficult decisions to make.
Because each case is unique, it is impossible to say which is correct or to
judge the decisions made. A variety of considerations, such as the woman's
health, beliefs, financial situation, and willingness to take risks with new
treatments, must be taken into account. In the United States, however, each
woman is able to decide what is best for her. Due to improved antiviral
treatments, the risk of transmission during birth is greatly reduced. At the
same time, those women who do not wish to take the risk still have the choice
to terminate their pregnancy. The situation was best summarized by Oakland
Children's hospital psychologist and counselor Meriam Parker: "Although not
easy, the decision is theirs, and that is one thing to be thankful for."

* * *

_**Anna Vrska** is a sophomore majoring in MCB who likes to write._



Berkeley Medical Journal _Issues_ (C)



