For Links see: [Pam Mack's History of Technology
Links](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/links.htm)

For Pam Mack's Home Page see: [Pamela E.
Mack](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/) **History 491 Syllabus** History of
the Space Program Fall 1997, Section 1

Instructor: Pamela E. Mack

  * 203 Hardin Hall, phone: 656-5356
  * e-mail: [Pammack@clemson.edu](mailto:pammack@clemson.edu)
  * class meetings: MWF 12:20-1:10, Hardin 202
  * class web page: <http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/hist491.htm>
  * listserv address: [9708HIST__491001-L@clemson.edu](mailto:9708HIST__491001-L@clemson.edu)

**Office Hours:** MWF 8:30-9 am, 10:15-11 am, Tuesday 8:30-11:30, Wed. 2-4 pm.
I am often in at other times (except Thursday afternoons) but make an
appointment or call to check that I am in if you want to be sure of catching
me.

**Objectives:** This course focuses on the history of the U.S. space program,
examining the mix of politics and technology that have made it both a great
success and a disappointment. The major emphasis is on policy history, but
everything from technical issues to policy history comes into the story. No
prerequisites; non-history majors are welcome.

**Requirements:**

  * hour exam 1/6
  * term paper 1/3
  * listserv 1/6
  * final exam 1/3

The attendance policy for this course is as follows: 6 absences allowed
without penalty. Additional absences each count two points off the final
grade. Students are expected to use their allowed absences wisely to cover
special activities and minor illnesses, but in more serious circumstances you
may ask the professor to excuse absenses. Lateness will be dealt with in the
following way: no penalty for up to five minutes, one-half absence after 5
minutes. Please speak to the professor in advance if you must leave early. If
the professor or a substitute does not arrive within 10 minutes of the
scheduled starting time of the class students may leave.

A listserv has been created for this course to automatically send e-mail to
all enrolled students (if you prefer to use an off-campus e-mail address
please speak to the instructor about having that address added to the list).

The listserv assignments are a required part of the course, rather like the
journals some other courses assign. If you need help learning how to use a
listserv or using Eudora features (like mailboxes and sort) to manage the mail
you receive from the list the professor would be happy to help you (or we can
set up a training session if there are a significant number of people who need
help). It is recommended that you create a separate mailbox for the class
listserv and save all significant messages that you get from this listserv for
the entire term; you will find the discussion that took place on the listserv
useful when studying for exams.

The goal of the discussion listserv is to allow more thorough and more
informal discussion of the reading and the lectures than is possible in class.
You can read comments left by other members of your group and add your own for
everyone to read. The professor will place a new discussion topic on the
system each week. To a limited extent you will be able to go back and comment
on topics from previous weeks, but topics will be closed to further comments
after about a month.

Your participation in this system will be graded on the basis both of quality
and quantity. Contributions to the discussion listserv should be thoughtful
comments on the reading and/or the material presented in class and/or the
comments of other students, usually one or two paragraphs long (not less than
8 lines or more than two screens). Your replies to each topic will be graded
on the basis of understanding of material, thoughtfulness, and originality
(grammar and spelling do not matter so long as your point is clear and
controversy is encouraged). Those grades will be handed out at least once
during the first half of the term so that you can see how you are doing. You
will also be graded on the number of different topics you reply to on the
listserv: for an A you must contribute to at least 12 topics, for a B to 10,
for a C to 8, and for a D to 6. Note that the count is based on the number of
topics you reply to, not simply the number of notes you write; if you make
more than one contribution to the same topic it will only count as one.
However, if you get involved and want to write more than one reply to a topic
it can benefit you: I will look at all your replies in deciding your grade for
that topic. Your final grade on the listserv will be the average of your
quality grade (grading your replies to each topic) and your quantity grade
(based on the number of topics to which you replied).

One hour exams will be administered Oct. 10\. The final exam is scheduled for
Dec. 5. Open books and notes will be permitted for both the hour exams and the
final.

The term paper should be about 10 pages. It should be based on original
research, and should make an argument, not just tell a story. Late papers will
be penalized one third of a grade (3.3 points out of 100) for each class
meeting late. For more information see: [Paper
Assignment](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/paper491.htm)

**Required Reading:** Reading should be done before the class day for which an
assignment is listed.

  * One book is at the bookstore: Roger D. Launius, _NASA: A History of the U.S. Civil Space Program_ (Malabar FL: Krieger Publishing Company, 1994). Readings are described as follows: Launius I: 3 would be part I chapter 3, Launius II: 7 would be part II chapter 7.
  * The other reading is on the World Wide Web. Assignments are listed below. If you are using this syllabus on line there is a link (underlined text) to each reading assignment--all you need to do is click on the highlighted text to get to the assigned reading. If the link leads you to a text, you should read all the text on that page, unless otherwise specified. If the link leads you to a web page composed mostly of further links you should explore that page and its links enough to get a sense of the issues involved.

Class Schedule:

August:

  * 20 Introduction.
  * 22 Why space? [Historians and Policy Makers: Sylvia K. Kraemer](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/codez/pubhistf.htm)
  * 25 Early Speculations. Launius I: 1. [A Brief History of Rocketry](http://www.ksc.nasa.gov/history/rocket-history.txt) . [The life of Konstantin Eduardovitch Tsiolkovsky](http://deathstar.rutgers.edu/museum/tsiol.html) . [Ordway's Foreword](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4026/foreword.html) to Hermann Noordung, _The Problem of Space Travel: The Rocket Motor_.
  * 27 Rockets for Hitler. Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander, _This New Ocean_ [ch. 1-3](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4201/ch1-3.htm) . "[The Disney-Von Braun Collaboration and Its Influence on Space Exploration" by Mike Wright](http://history.msfc.nasa.gov/history/sf/disney.html)
  * 29 Early research in the U.S. Launius II: 1  & 2\. Bilstein, _Orders of Magnitude_ [ch. 4](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4406/chap4.html)

September:

  * 1 Sputnik. Launius I: 2. Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander, _This New Ocean_ [ch. 1-6](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4201/ch1-6.htm). [Russian Exhibit on Sputnik](http://www.ccas.ru/~chernov/vsm/h_sput.htm)
  * 3 Impact of Sputnik. Launius II: 3. [1957 Time Line](http://home.earthlink.net/~gillers/Gillers.1957.html). [Sputnik](http://www.csd.uu.se/~larsmats/blipp/Lyrics/English/sputnik.html) (lyrics by the Swedish synthetic pop group Blipp!).
  * 5 Founding of NASA. Launius I: 3 and II: 4  & 6\. [National Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958 (As Amended)](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/amendact.html)
  * 8 NASA vs. NACA Culture. Bilstein, _Orders of Magnitude_ [ch. 1](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4406/chap1.html)
  * 10 Goals of the Space Program. Launius II: 5. [The Space Race](http://www.nasm.edu/GALLERIES/GAL114/)
  * 12 Project Mercury. Launius II: 8. Swenson, Grimwood, and Alexander, _This New Ocean_ [Epilogue](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4201/epilog.htm)
  * 15 The decision to go to the moon. Launius I: 5, II: 9-11 (or see [Key Documents from the Apollo Space Program](http://www.gsfc.nasa.gov/hqpao/apollo_11/key_documents.html) ). [The Kennedy Perspective on Space](http://www.nasa.gov/hqpao/apollo_11/retrospective_pg2.html). [Wiesner Committee,"Report to the President-Elect of the Ad Hoc Committee on Space," January 10, 1961](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/report61.html).
  * 17 Project Gemini. Hacker and Alexander, On the Shoulders of Titans, [Summing Up](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4203/sum.htm)
  * 19 [The Apollo mode decision](apmode.html).
  * 22 Apollo management. Launius I: 6, II: 12, 15. Brooks, Grimwood, and Swenson, _Chariots for Apollo: A History of Manned Lunar Spacecraft_ [Epilogue](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4205/epilog.html) . [The Soviet Manned Lunar Program](http://www.interaxs.net/pub/spacey/sovspac1.htm) .
  * 24 Apollo success. Launius I: 7, II: 16. [The Saturn V Home Page](http://www.calweb.com/~ccorway/saturn-v/saturn-v.htm) . [The Apollo Program](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/apollo.html) .
  * 26 Reactions to Apollo. Compton, _Where No Man Has Gone Before_ , [ch. 1-4](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4214/ch1-4.html) , [14-5](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4214/ch14-5.html) , [14-6](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4214/ch14-6.html) (including linked pages), and [14.7](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4214/ch14-7.html)
  * 29 What next? Launius I: 8, II: 13. [Report of the Space Task Group, 1969](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/taskgrp.html), Launius II: 18.

October

  * 1 Beginnings of space science. Launius I: 4, II: 7, 14, 20
  * 3 Planetary exploration [Planetary Science Spacecraft](http://isr.co.jp/tnp/spacecraft.html) **Last day to reply to topics 1-4 on the computer conference**
  * 6 The Hubble Space Telescope. [Hubble Space Telescope](http://www.stsci.edu/hst/) .
  * 8 Review
  * 10 **Hour Exam**
  * 13 Weather satellites. [Sentinels in the Sky: Weather Satellites By Robert Haynes](http://solar.rtd.utk.edu/~jgreen/weather.html)
  * 15 Communication Satellites [Communications Satellites: Making the Global Village Possible by David J. Whalen](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/satcomhistory.html)
  * 17 Mission to Project Earth.[Earth Observations From Space: History, Promise, and Reality](http://www.nas.edu/ssb/cesexsum.html) . [NASA's Observatorium](http://observe.ivv.nasa.gov/nasa/core.shtml) . **Paper Topic Due.**
  * 20 Fall Break
  * 22 The Shuttle Decision. Launius I: 9, II: 19, 21, 22
  * 24 Shuttle technology. [Space Shuttle Program](http://www.ksc.nasa.gov/shuttle/technology/sts-newsref/sts_overview.html#sts_program) .
  * 27 Shuttle Operations
  * 29 The Shuttle accident. Launius II: 24. [FAS Challenger Accident Page](http://www.fas.org/spp/51L.html). [Spacecraft Calamities: Ask the Experts](http://eagle.online.discovery.com/cgi-bin/forums_view/dir845408323/Fresh%20Science/Spacecraft%20Calamities)
  * 31 The future of the Shuttle. Launius I: 10.

November

  * 3 Space programs in Europe and Japan. [European Space Agency Overview](http://www.esrin.esa.it/esa/descrip/descrip.htm) , [What ESA Does](http://www.esrin.esa.it/esa/descrip/esa1.htm) , and [The Fair Return Rule](http://www.esrin.esa.it/esa/descrip/esa2.htm) . [Japan Space Net](http://www.spacer.com/index.html) . [UN Space Treaties](http://www.un.or.at/OOSA_Kiosk/treat/treat.html) .
  * 5 The Soviet Space Program [Tovarich](http://www.airspacemag.com/ASM/Mag/Index/1995/DJ/tova.html) . Ezell and Ezell, The Partnership [ch. 1 pt. 4](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4209/ch1-4.htm) and [Epilogue](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/SP-4209/epilog.htm).
  * 7 No class meeting. Instead explore the links about MIR at: [Space Stations](mir.htm) and write about the subject on the listserv. [Space Station Mir and The Russian Space Program](http://www.reston.com/astro/space.station/mir.html). [Mir Space Station--History](http://maximov.com/Mir/mirhistory1.html)
  * 10 The military in space: reconnaissance. [NRO History](http://www.fas.org/irp/nro/nrohist.htm) . [Corona Program Profile](http://www.lmsc.lockheed.com/newsbureau/pressreleases/1995/9554.html) , [Imaging Space Reconnaissance Opprations during the Cold War: Cause, Effect and Legacy](http://www.hibo.no/asf/Cold_War/report1/williame.html)
  * 12 Space as the new high ground [FAS Military Space Programs](http://www.fas.org/spp/military/program/index.html)
  * 14 The Strategic Defense Initiative. AIAA Policy Paper on [Ballistic Missile Defense](http://www.aiaa.org/policy/papers/ball-miss-def.html) . [Ballistic Missile Defense Programs](http://www.acq.osd.mil/bmdo/bmdolink/html/programs.html) . Heritage Foundation, [Defending America](http://www.townhall.com/heritage/library/categories/natsec/bg1074.html) .
  * **Sunday Nov. 16, 6-9 pm, "The Right Stuff" film, Hardin 200 (optional)**
  * 17 Historical background to a space station. [Skylab Operations](http://www.ksc.nasa.gov/history/skylab/skylab-operations.txt) .
  * 19 The space station decision(s). Launius II: 23. [NAS Letter Report on Space Station](http://www.nas.edu/cets/aseb/station4.html)
  * 21 Current status of Space Station. [Science in the Sky](http://www.sciam.com/0696issue/0696trends.html) . [International Space Station](http://station.nasa.gov/) . [Recommendations Regarding NASA](http://www.cato.org/testimony/ct-hu-1.html) . **Paper Due.**
  * 24 Smaller, Quicker, Cheaper. [Mr. Goldin Goes to Washington](http://www.airspacemag.com/ASM/Mag/Index/1995/AM/mggw.html) . [Statement by Administrator Daniel S. Goldin March 19, 1996](http://spacelink.msfc.nasa.gov/NASA.Overview/NASA.Budget.Request.FY.1997/Administrators.FY97.Budget.Statement). [The New Millenium](http://www.airspacemag.com/ASM/Mag/Index/1996/AS/nmlm.html) .
  * 26 Mars? [Project Mars Home Page](http://personalwebs.myriad.net/tgunn/) . [The Whole Mars Catalog](http://www.reston.com/astro/mars/catalog.html) .
  * 28 THANKSGIVING BREAK

December:

  * 1 Does NASA have a future? Launius II: 25. [1996 NASA Strategic Plan](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/nsp/) . [The X-33 History Home Page](http://www.hq.nasa.gov/office/pao/History/x-33/home.htm) . [New Opportunities, Concerns for Cheap Access to Space](http://SEDS.LPL.Arizona.EDU:80/spaceviews/9705/articles.html#1)
  * 3 Review:  LAST DAY TO POST TO DISCUSSION LISTSERV
  * 5 Final Exam, 6:30-9:30

Send me e-mail at: [Pammack@clemson.edu](mailto:pammack@clemson.edu) For Links
see: [Pam Mack's History of Technology
Links](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/links.htm) Return to main page for
[History 491](hist491.htm) For Pam Mack's Home Page see: [Pamela E.
Mack](http://people.clemson.edu/~pammack/)

* * *

This page last updated Aug. 19, 1997

