History B355 C377

Grad. H509 C388



Europe: Louis XIV to French Revolution:



Gifts to the Tsars: The Treasures of the Kremlin in Historical and Cultural
Context.





Time: Wednesdays 5:45-8:25 p.m. Dr. Kevin C. Robbins

Place: Deboest Lecture Hall Associate Professor of History

Indianapolis Museum of Art Office Phone: 274-5819

Office Fax: 278-7800

E-Mail: [krobbin1@iupui.edu](mailto:krobbin1@iupui.edu)

Office Hours: M/W 12:30-2:00 p.m.

(And by Appointment.) CA 504Q.



**_Course Objective_** : This edition of B355/H509 will investigate the
social, political, and cultural history of early modern Europe (circa
1500-circa 1789) with special emphasis on the study of ritual, ceremony, the
grand material culture of diplomacy, the formation of ruling royal courts, and
associated state formation in an era of incessant warfare. This course will
take continental Europe as its center of gravity with close attention given to
France, the Habsburg Empire, north German principalities, the various Baltic
states (kingdoms of Denmark, Sweden, Poland-Lithuania, etc.), and Russia
(Muscovy)--with the development of a culture of absolutist imperial rulership
by the Russian Romanov dynasty a topic of special interest. Students will be
consistently encouraged to view these various European territories, kingdoms,
and empires as participants in a common, dynamic, contentious, and often
violent system of inter-state rivalry, beautifully ritualized diplomacy,
cultural conflict, and imitation. Students should strive to develop and
maintain a comparative analytical perspective, seeking consistently to
understand how increasingly elaborate inter-actions between these state
entities in western, central, northern, and eastern Europe shaped the socio-
political and socio-cultural history of early modern Europe as a whole--a
history that remains powerfully influential in modern western rites of
politics, civility, and display. Students should consider "the arts of power"
to be a key and vital unifying theme of this course and seek throughout to
appreciate how the kingdoms, empires, and dynasties under examination sought
to enhance, manipulate, and modify such arts for their own hegemonic social,
political, military, and cultural advantage.

Inter-disciplinary and multi-media analysis of the main course themes outlined
above will be greatly facilitated by a special visiting exhibition at the
Indianapolis Museum of Art: "Gifts to the Tsars 1500-1700, Treasures from the
Kremlin" running in the main galleries from September 23, 2001 to January 13,
2002. This special exhibition is a collaborative effort between the IMA and
the State Historical-Cultural Museum of the Kremlin in Moscow. Most of the
objects on display, including magnificent examples of gold and silverware,
finely-crafted, be-jeweled weapons, aristocratic dress, and equestrian
decorations have never been displayed outside of Russia before. The majority
of these precious objects came to the Romanov tsars of Russia as diplomatic
gifts from a variety of central and western European powers and from several
southern European, Balkan, and Middle Eastern potentates. This rare assembly
of such imperial gifts and favors emanating from all parts of the early modern
European world will provide students with a rich array of material objects
each embodying the diplomatic connections, ceremonial contacts, and rituals of
state that helped to form the early modern European "arts of power." Once this
exhibition opens in late September, students will be given privileged access
to these objects and will be encouraged to incorporate some of them in their
own research work and paper assignments relevant to course themes. Students in
B355/H509 will also be encouraged to take advantage of and incorporate in
their own class work special lectures and symposia in connection with the
exhibition to be offered by the IMA, its curatorial staff, and visiting
international guest lecturers. Schedules of these events will be distributed
in class in advance. Special tours of the exhibition for B355/H509 students
will be arranged. Students should also plan to take advantage of books and
other resources highly relevant to the course/exhibition which will be placed
on a study carrel in the IMA's own research library on the second floor of the
main museum building. This rare combination of art objects and course readings
will enable all students to explore in trans-disciplinary fashion the history
and the historiography of the era: not simply what happened in past time, but
also the interpretive and analytical techniques by which modern historians,
cultural historians, art historians, and museum curators attempt to
reconstruct past societies, their ceremonies, and their habits of behavior.
This course as a whole should also work to provide a richer historical and
cultural context in which to appreciate more fully the exemplary importance of
the decorative art objects on display.

B355/H509 will meet once per week on Wednesday evenings. Meetings will de
divided into introductory lectures by the instructor on key course problems or
themes followed by general class discussion of all assigned readings. Class
discussion of these readings will focus on the sources, methods of argument,
interpretive strengths and weaknesses, and general conclusions of the authors
read. In these discussions, the instructor will question students closely on
all aspects of the readings. The reading list for this course is very
demanding in terms of the beauty, length, and complexity of the texts
assigned. Students should plan their work outside of class accordingly,
leaving ample time to read, to reflect on, and to re-read the course text
assignments.



**_Required Course Readings_** : Primary required readings for this course
will be taken from recent masterworks in the fields of early modern European
social, political, military, and cultural history. All texts, with the
exception of the exhibition catalogue that students will be asked to purchase
at the IMA shop when available in late September, are for sale at the IUPUI
Bookstore, Cavanaugh Hall, Basement, History Section, B355 Shelves. Buy them
all.

Course texts (in order of use) are:

Koenigsberger, H.G., Mosse, G.L, and Bowler, G.Q. _Europe in the Sixteenth
Century_.

2nd Edition. Longman, London: 1989/2000.

Muir, Edward. _Ritual in Early Modern Europe_. Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, 1997.

Dukes, Paul. _The Making of Russian Absolutism_. 2 nd Edition. Longman,

London: 1990.

Frost, Robert. _The Great Northern Wars 1558-1721_. Longman, London: 2000.

Shifman, Barry and Walton, Guy (eds.). _Gifts to the Tsars 1500-1700:
Treasures_

_ From the Kremlin_. Abrams, New York: Forthcoming. (Exhibition

Catalogue.)

Burke, Peter. _The Fabrication of Louis XIV_. Yale University Press, New Haven
and

London: 1992.

Wheatcroft, Andrew. _The Habsburgs: Embodying Empire_. Penguin Books, London:

1996.



**_General Course Requirements_** : 1) regular attendance at all class
sessions, one unexcused absence will lower your final mark. Class rosters will
be circulated at every class meeting--be certain that your name is on them; 2)
completion on time of all assigned course readings; 3) informed participation
in all class discussions (your instructor really wants to hear your opinions
about what your are reading and seeing and your clearly expressed opinions in
civil class discussion are absolutely essential to assure the educational
quality of this course); 4) completion on time of one take-home final
examination; 5) completion on time of one short essay (6 pages minimum) on a
topic assigned by the instructor; and 6) completion on time of one final
research paper (10 pages minimum exclusive of notes and bibliography) on a
theme, problem, exhibition object or suite of objects either proposed by the
instructor or developed by the student in close consultation with the
instructor.

Students enrolled in H509 C388 for graduate credit will meet all of the
general requirements above **except** point 6) on the final paper. Graduate
students will prepare instead both a final annotated bibliography (20 sources
minimum) on their own research topic and a final research paper on that topic
of 20 pages minimum (exclusive of notes). Graduate students are especially
encouraged to make use of objects in the exhibition, to develop an inter-
disciplinary or trans-disciplinary research project, and, if practicable, to
make scholarly use of any relevant foreign language skills they may possess
for more extensive reading and research.

The instructor will be delighted to assist all students with the selection,
organization, and enhancement of their research paper projects. He will be
glad to provide frequent paper conferences with student writers throughout the
term and will be pleased to read, correct, and comment on drafts of all
student written assignments prior to their deadlines provided that such drafts
reach him in a timely and coherent manner.



**_Course Grading_** : Short Essay 15% of Final Grade; Final Exam 20% of Final
Grade; Main Research Paper 50% of Final Grade; Class Participation 15% of
Final Grade. For Graduate Students: Short Essay 15%, Final 10%; Annotated
Bibliography 20%; Research Paper 40%, Class Participation 15% of Final Mark.



COURSE OUTLINE AND READING ASSIGNMENTS

( **Note: All Readings Below to Be Completed By the Date Given)**



**** Wed. 8/22 Course Introduction. Distribution of Syllabus. Explanation of
Course

Objectives and Logistics. First Remarks on History and Historiography.

The Objectives of Cultural History: Manners and Mentalities (Modes of

Acting and Habits of Thinking.)



Wed. 8/29 Lecture/Discussion: The Geo-Political and Geo-Cultural Dimensions of

Early Modern Europe: Peoples and States, Demographic and Socio-Political

Patterns in the Sixteenth Century.

Readings: Koenigsberger, _et_. _al_., _Europe in the Sixteenth Century_ ,
Introduction and

Chapters 2-6, pp. 1-127. (N.B. Appendices in Koenigsberger--pp. 438ff--useful

for maps, chronologies of events, and genealogies of Europe's rulers.)

  

Wed. 9/5  Lecture/Discussion: Preliminary Study of Early Modern European
Religious

Strife and Cultural Conflict: The Politics of Reformation and Counter-

Reformation.

Readings: Koenigsberger, _et_. _al_., _Europe in Sixteenth Century_ , Chapts.
6, 7, and

9-12, pp. 127-181 and 207-330.



Wed. 9/12 Lecture/Discussion: Preliminary Study of Early Modern European Power

Politics and the Arts of Power. Forms of Political Organization and Forms

of Cultural Expression.

Readings: Koenigsberger, _et_. _al_., _Europe in Sixteenth Century_ , Chapts.
13-15,

pp. 331-437.

**Special Exhibition Gallery Tours to Be Scheduled.**

Wed. 9/19 Lecture/Discussion: The Historical Analysis of European Rituals: The
Culture

and Politics of Display.

Readings: Muir, _Ritual in Early Modern Europe_ , Introduction, Parts I and
II,

pp. 1-146. (N.B. Students should consult Muir's useful glossary--pp. 276ff--

for background definitions on key events/terms of analysis.)

**First Essay Topics to Be Distributed in Class.**



Wed. 9/26 Lecture/Discussion: Ritual and Representation in Early Modern Europe
and

Government as a Ritual Process.  Meanings and Implications.

Readings: Muir, _Ritual in Early Modern Europe_ , Part III, pp. 147-275.

Wed. 10/3 Lecture/Discussion: The Making of Russian Absolutism: Romanov
Statecraft.

and the Elaboration of Dynastic Imperial Rule: The Artful Cultivation of

Absolutism.

Readings: Dukes: _Making of Russian Absolutism_ , Chapts. 1-4, pp. 1-144.



Wed. 10/10 Lecture/Discussion: What Drives Early Modern European Diplomatic

Culture? Incessant Warfare and the High Stakes of Inter-State Rivalries in
Central Europe.

Readings: Frost, _The Northern Wars 1558-1721_ , Intro. and Chapts. 2-6,

pp. 1-155 (N.B. Excellent Text Appendices pp. 330ff.)

**First Essays Due in Class.**

** **

Wed. 10/17 Lecture/Discussion: Russia's Military Triumphs, Absolutism, and the
Military

Projection of Autocratic Power. Socio-Political Implications.

Readings: Frost, _Northern Wars_ , Chapts 7-11, pp. 156-329.



Wed. 10/24 Lecture/Discussion: Gifts to the Tsars and the Cultural History of

Early Modern European Diplomatic Ceremony.

Readings: _Gifts to the Tsars_ , Foreword and Essays 1-3, "Projection and

Celebration of Power," "Russian Foreign Relations and Diplomacy,"

and "Ambassadorial Ceremony at the Tsar's Court."

****

**  
** Wed. 10/31 Lecture/Discussion: Gifts to the Tsars: Ambassadorial Presents
and the

Arts of Power.

Readings: _Gifts to the Tsars_ , Essays 4-7, "Envoys and Treasures,"

"Diplomatic and Ambassadorial Gifts," "European Decorative Arts

as Gifts," and "Ambassadorial Gifts."



Wed. 11/7 Comparative Studies in the Arts and Powers of Early Modern European

Absolutisms: The French Case.

Readings: Burke, _The Fabrication of Louis XIV_ , Chapts. 1-7, pp. 1-106.

**Graduate Annotated Bibliographies Due in Class.**



Wed. 11/14 French Royal Statecraft and the "Fabrication" of Governing Power.

Readings: Burke, _Fabrication of Louis XIV_ , Chapts. 8-12, pp. 107-203.



Wed 11/21 NO CLASS THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY NO CLASS



Wed. 11/28 Comparative Studies in the Arts and Powers of Early Modern European

Absolutisms: The Habsburg Case.

Readings: Wheatcroft, _The Habsburgs: Embodying Empire_ , Preface and Chapts.

1-4, pp. xxv-140.



Wed. 12/5 "Embodying Empire" and the Arts of Projecting Autocratic Power.

Readings: Wheatcroft, _The Habsburgs_ , Chapts. 5-7, pp. 141-285.

**Take-Home Final Examination Distributed in Class.**

**All Final Research Papers Due From All Students (No Exceptions).**

** **

** **

Wednesday, December 12, **Final Examinations to Be Submitted (No Exceptions),
IUPUI Main Campus, Cavanaugh Hall, Room 504M, to Robbins' Mailbox by**

**10:00 a.m.**

