> * * *

>

> **Syllabus: Development of the American Frontier - Fall 2001**

>

> * * *

>

> Contents: Objective and Method, Elements of the Course, Schedule, Textbook,
Instructor, Grading, Grading Standards for Writing, Writing Online.

>

> * * *

>

>       This course is scheduled to meet Tuesdays from 5:30 until 8:15 p.m. in
ACD 310 beginning August 28 and continuing until December 11. See the schedule
below for details.  
>       You must have a basic working understanding of the internet and access
to an internet-capable computer and to complete this course. Having a working
e-mail address is highly recommended. All students have access to lab
computers on campus.  
>       Students are responsible for knowing the information included in this
syllabus. To ensure that you have had an opportunity to become aware of this
information, and to give the instructor a measure of the state of your
knowledge at the beginning of the course, and information to help assign you
to a group, you must complete a simple entrance survey before you begin. The
link to the survey is at the end of the syllabus.  
>       When your completed survey (see below) has been received and
enrollment verified, you will be sent the student number which you must have
to submit work online. This number is for this course only and is _not_ your
social security number, which the university uses as a student number. All
numbers have six digits and begin with  "4602," identifying you as a student
in this specific class.

>

> * * *

>

>        **Objective and Method.** This course offers you an opportunity to
gain a basic understanding of the Euroamerican colonization of North America
from the middle 18th century to the middle 20th century.  
>        This course is planned around the idea that considering and
reconsidering course content in different ways (in brief review, through group
and individual research in regional history, and finally through intensive
reading and discussion) will provide a better understanding than the
conventional sequential approach.

>

> * * *

>

>        **Elements of the Course.** Unit 1 is a brief, comprehensive review
in a lecture-discussion format coupled with online multiple-choice quizzes.  
>        This unit will ensure that you have a basic knowledge of the main
aspects of the history under consideration. Many students will already know
some or most of this information from previous schooling.  
>       Unit 2 is a group project leading to a presentation. Each group will
be given a region of the trans-Mississippi West to consider in terms of the
results of 19th and early 20th-century development for the environment, native
peoples, the economic and cultural character of the colonizers, and
opportunities offered and denied to traditionally excluded persons (including
women and non-Indian ethnic groups relevant to the regional).  
>       Unit 3 is an intensive review of the textbook focused on class
discussions based on study questions provided by the professor, which will be
available online. Students will be called on to answer and discuss the study
questions.  
>       Unit 4, the term paper, builds on the group project. It deals with the
development of a specific area within the region your group will consider in
terms of the same categories used for the group presentations, and also in
comparison to the development of the trans-Appalachian frontier.  
>       The term paper also serves as the final examination.

>

> * * *

>

>        **Schedule.** Tuesday, August 28: Introduction, questions and answers
about syllabus, the term paper, and the nature of history in general and
frontier history in particular. Brief review begins: American Origins and
Spanish Invasions. Complete Quiz 1 before the next class meeting.  
>        Tuesday, September 4: Discuss Quiz 1 material. Brief review
continues: British-American and Revolutionary Frontiers. Complete Quiz 2
before the next class meeting.  
>       Tuesday, September 11 Discuss Quiz 2 material. Brief review continues:
Expansion into the Original West. Complete Quiz 3 before the next class
meeting.  
>       Tuesday, September 18: Discuss Quiz 3 material. Brief review
continues: Conquest, Expansion, and Slavery to the Civil War. Complete Quiz 4
before the next class meeting.  
>       Tuesday, September 25: Discuss Quiz 4. material. Brief review
concludes: The Results of Expansion to the Turn of the Century. Complete Quiz
5 before the next class.  
>       Tuesday, October 2: Discuss Quiz 5 material. Discuss group assignment
and organize groups.  
>       Tuesday, October 9: Discuss study questions for chapters 1, 2, and 3
in the text (pages 3-84): Origins and Conquests.  
>       Tuesday, October 16: Discuss study questions for chapters 4 through 6
in the text (pages 85-154): Control, Exploration, and Occupation.  
>       Tuesday, October 23: Discuss study questions for chapters 7 through 9
in the text (pages 155-235): Government, Migration, and Change. Term paper
outline and bibliography (online) due at midnight.  
>       Tuesday, October 30: Discuss study questions for chapters 10 and 11 in
the text (pages 236-96): The New Economy.  
>       Monday, November 5: Complete the Unit 2 individual response no later
than midnight.  
>       Tuesday, November 6: Discuss study questions for chapters 12, 13, and
14 in the text (pages 298-386): Society and Politics.  
>       Tuesday, November 13: Discuss study questions for chapters 15 and 16
in the text (pages 391-456): The Bureaucratic Revolution.  
>       Wednesday, November 14: Group report for Unit 2 project must be filed
online by midnight.  
>       Tuesday, November 27: No class session to allow time for work on term
papers and group presentations.  
>       Tuesday, December 4: Group presentations.  
>       Tuesday, December 11: Term papers may be submitted 5:30-5:45 p.m. in
classroom, otherwise at my office or the history department office by building
closing time.

>

> * * *

>

>        **Textbook.** The textbook is _"It's Your Misfortune and None of My
Own": A New History of the American West_ by Richard White, published by the
University of Oklahoma Press. You will need the textbook as a source for the
group project and the term paper, and, of course, to respond the the
discussions of study questions based on the book, beginning October 2.

>

> * * *

>

>        **Instructor.** My name is E.A. Schwartz and I am an associate
professor at Cal State San Marcos. I teach U.S. history survey courses,
California history, courses about the American frontier, and courses in my
specialty, American Indian history.  
>        You may contact me through by email at
[schwartz@csusm.edu](mailto:schwartz@mailhost1.csusm.edu) and you may call me
at 760-744-8363. (This is my home number, which is where I will most often be
found.) I am also available for office appointments on campus. My office is in
Room 1205 of the administration building.  
>       For additional information, see <http://www.csusm.edu/schwartz/>.

>

> * * *

>

>        **Grading.** Your final grade will be based on how well your work
compares with the work of the class. Your score, used to calculate the final
grade, will be based on a 240-point scale.  
>        Unit 1 quizzes will count for 30 points. The Unit 2 individual
response will count for 40 points, but the grade is contingent on a successful
group presentation. The Unit 3 discussions will count for 60 points. The
online term paper bibliography and outline will count for 10 points, and the
term paper itself for 100 points.  
>       Your grade will be based on your point total, which will be adjusted
to a one-hundred-point scale on which an average score is assigned the average
grade, providing that the resulting grade is higher than your percentage of
possible points.  
>       Grade ranges are A 92-100, A- 90-91, B+ 88-89, B 82-87, B- 80-81, C+
78-79, C 72-77, C- 70-71, D+ 68-69, D 62-67, D- 60-61, F 0-59.  
>       An incomplete will not be given unless the student requesting it has
completed at least the first two units and has at least 60 percent of possible
points for work completed. An incomplete not finished within one year will
become an F.  
>       Other grades may be changed if work was completed but, for a reason
beyond your control, was not received by the instructor before the end of the
course. In such a case, after sixty days, until one year after the original
grade was assigned, a signed letter explaining the special circumstances
justifying the grade change must be given to the instructor, and the grade
change must be approved by the dean of the college of arts and sciences. After
one year, grade changes are no longer possible.  
>       The instructor cannot take responsibility for work not received,
whatever the reason.  
>       Deadlines for online writing are at midnight on the specified day
(unless otherwise specified). Five percent of the grade for any late written
work (including the term paper) will be deducted each day for two days, and
one percent for each of the following ten days, to a maximum of twenty
percent.  
>       Quizzes not finished by the deadline, that is, at the beginning of the
class during which the answers will be discussed, will not be graded.

>

> * * *

>

>        **Grading Standards for Writing.** An incompetent paper (F, less than
60 percent) does not respond meaningfully to the topic, _or_ could be
described as unfocused, illogical, or incoherent, _or_ provides no relevant
support.  
>        A weak paper (D, 60-69.9 percent) seems confused about the topic,
_or_ neglects important aspects of the asignment, _or_ often fails to
communicate its ideas, _or_ uses simplistic generalizations to support its
arguments, _or_ shows no more than traces of organization.  
>        A marginal paper (C, 70-79.9 percent) distorts or neglects aspects of
the task, _or_ is poorly organized, _or_ does not provide adequate or
appropriate details to support generalizations, _or_ provides details without
generalizations.  
>        An adequate paper (B, 80-89.9 percent) addresses the topic although
it may slight some aspects of the task, may treat the topic simplistically, is
adequately organized, and generally supports its arguments with reasons and
examples.  
>       A strong paper (A-, 90-91.9 percent) clearly addresses the topic
although it may respond to some aspects of the task more effectively than
others, shows some depth and complexity of thought, is well-organized, and
uses appropriate reasons and examples.  
>       A superior paper (A, 92-100 percent) addresses the topic clearly and
respond to all aspects of the task, explores issues thoughtfully and in depth,
is coherently organized, and uses well-chosen reasons and examples.  
>       Although I do not grade use of language as such, you should be aware
that I have limited patience with poor writing. Organization and coherence,
which are taken into account in grading, are the fundamentals of good writing,
and are much more important than spelling and syntax.  
>       Failure to show source notes when required may result in the loss of
as much as 50 percent of your score.

>

> * * *

>

>        **Writing Online.** You may have problems writing online because it
ties up the computer you are using until the job is done and makes you more
vulnerable to losing your work.  
>        You cannot, at this time, save online forms in such a way that your
work will be saved too. In other words, you cannot write part of an online
examination, save the form in your computer, then come back later and bring up
the form again with your work still in place, as you might if you were using a
word-processing program.  
>       There are are two strategies, described below, for dealing with these
problems.  
>       If you are using a dial-up connection, you have an additional problem.
You will probably be disconnected if you have not shown any activity within
some period of time.  
>       The internet service provider's server cannot see you writing on your
own computer, and so when you have finished writing an examination and try to
submit your work, you will find you have been disconnected, and you will have
to reconnect.  
>       Many users habitually enter and exit the Internet through their
browsers (usually Internet Explorer or Netscape). If you exit the browser to
reconnect, you will lose your work  
>       Remember that you must never, under any circumstances, leave the page
you are working on, refresh it, or close the browser until you have submitted
your work.  
>       (Advanced Internet users may be able to navigate a few pages forward
and back without losing their work, but unpredictable browser events may put
work out of reach. If you seem to have lost your work, however, check to see
whether there are additional copies of your browser running. Look at the bar
at the bottom if you are using Windows. The form with your work on it may be
in another window.)  
>       Most browsers will prompt you to reconnect when you click on the
submit button if you have lost your connection.  
>       Before you submit the work, you may want to mark and copy the exam and
paste it into a new word processing or text file. (You might use your usual
word processor, such as Word or Word Perfect, or one of the minimized word
processing programs that come with Windows, Wordpad and Notepad.)  
>       Should anything go wrong when you submit, you will have the work
saved. Then you can mark, copy, and paste the elements of the exam into the
form and try again, with a likelihood of completing the job before the ISP
disconnects you.  
>       This is also one of the two strategies mentioned above for dealing
with the problems of online writing. But remember that when you mark and copy
the form, you are actually only copying the data. The data will have to be
pasted back into the online form before it is submitted.  
>       The other approach is to begin by doing the work with your usual word
processor. First print out the exam from the Internet and then write the
responses in the word processing program. Then, as above, mark, copy, and
paste the responses into the online form.  
>       In this way, you can do the work without tying the computer up until
it is finished. If something should go wrong when you submit it, at least you
won't have to do the work over again.  
>      When you submit any online work, whether it is an exam or a quiz, you
will get an immediate response on the screen if the submission was successful.
You should mark, copy, and paste the complete response into a word-processing
or text file, and/or print it out, so that you have a complete record of the
submission.

>

> * * *

>

>  
> [Go to entrance exam.](eeframe.htm)  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>

