**HISTORY 1301: HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES TO 1865  **

**DR. BRUCE A. OLSON**

**SPRING 2001**

[_Del Mar College_](http://www.delmar.edu) | _[Social
Sciences](../../index.html)_ | [_FAQs_](../../FAQs.html) |
[_Faculty_](../../faculty.html) | [_Olson_](bolson.html)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  


[_Instructor_](bosyll01.html#boinstr) | [_Required
Readings_](bosyll01.html#boread01) | [_Grades; Key
dates_](bosyll01.html#bogrades01)  
---|---|---  
[_Course Description_](bosyll01.html#bodesc01) | [_Attendance Policy,
etc._](bosyll01.html#boattend01) | [_Course Outline & Reading
Assignments_](bosyll01.html#booutline01)  
  
**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

        This course examines the major themes of American development and change from the early years of discovery and exploration through the end of Reconstruction almost four hundred years later. Some of the topics we shall discuss include: the European background to colonization; the first permanent English settlements in North America; the transition from colonies to provinces;   the American Revolution; the formation and ratification of the Constitution; early attempts to define American nationality; the expansion of the economy and society; the westward movement; slavery; the sectional conflict; and the Civil War. 
        This course has no prerequisites and presumes no special knowledge of American history. This course encourages students to participate actively in class. Lectures/discussions are scheduled for each class meeting during the semester except when holidays, examinations, or films are planned. Lectures are primarily topical in nature, and are not designed to cover only text material. All material does not come directly from the text. Rather, the course presents an overview of each era by presenting pertinent, thought-provoking topics. The instructor encourages relevant discussion at any time. Students should be prepared to participate in the class by reading the assigned material listed in the syllabus before attending the class. Class periods begin and end as per the college schedule. Latecomers should quietly take their seats.
[_top_](bosyll01.html#bosyltop)

**READINGS**

Each of the following books are required for the course. You may purchase
these in paperback editions at the bookstores.



James Kirby Martin, Randy Roberts, Steven Mintz, Linda O. McMurry, James H.
Jones, and Sam Haynes,  _**A Concise History of America and Its People**_ ,
Volume One to 1877. HarperCollins CollegePublishers, 1995 (Text).

Charles W. Akers, **_Abigail Adams: An American Woman_**. Little, Brown  &
Co., 1980 (1st Bookd).

Anthony F. C. Wallace, **_The Long Bitter Trail: Andrew Jackson and the
Indians_**.   Hill and Wang, 1993 (2nd Book).

Harriet Beecher Stowe, **_Uncle Tom's Cabin or Life Among the Lowly_**.
Signet, 1981 (3rd Book).

Michael Shaara, _**The Killer Angels**_ , New York: Ballantine, 1974 (4th
Book).

[_top_](bosyll01.html#bosyltop)

**ATTENDANCE**

1\. Perfect attendance is not required, but regular attendance is strongly
encouraged. Please arrive on time and stay until the lecture has ended. The
instructor will record attendance at each class meeting. **Students may earn
extra credit for attendance as follows :**

            0 absences = 2 points added to final grade.
            1 absence   = 1 point added to final grade.


2\. **Please Note This _:_** If you are absent for any reason from **three**
or more lecture meetings, I can drop you from the course. Students should not
depend on the instructor to drop them from the course if they choose not to
complete it. Drops for excessive absences are made at the instructor's
discretion. If a student has a special problem requiring an unusual number of
absences, he/she must contact the instructor or be subject to withdrawal from
the course.



3\. If a student misses class, it is the student's responsibility to get class
notes from another student. DO NOT ASK THE PROFESSOR FOR THE NOTES.



4\. **Smoking** **Etiquette**    Del Mar is a "Smoke Free" Campus. Smoking is
prohibited in the classrooms and buildings.



5\. Del Mar College provides counseling for students who experience test
anxiety, need assistance in building examination competence, or taking
classroom or textbook notes.

[_top_](bosyll01.html#bosyltop)



**GRADES**

1\. The **final course grade** will be determined in the following manner:

    
    
    **Points Weight Total**  
  
---  
      
    
     First Book Exam -   10% 100 X 2 = 200  
      
    
    Second Book Exam -  10% 100 X 2 = 200  
      
    
    Third Book Exam -   10% 100 X 2 = 200  
      
    
    Fourth Book Exam -  10% 100 X 2 = 200  
      
    
    Map Exam -          10% 100 X 2 = 200  
      
    
    Mid-Term Exam -     25% 100 X 5 = 500  
      
    
    Final Examination - _25%_ 100 X 5 = _500_  
      
    
    __ 100%        = 2,000  
      
    
    _+ ?_ Attendance (Up to 2 points)  
  
**Please Note This _:_** **I will not pass you, regardless of your G.P.A. in
this class, unless you complete all exams. **

If you are unable to attend class on a scheduled exam date, it is your
responsibility to notify me **ahead** of time and to make alternate
arrangements. Failure to do so will result in a zero on the exam. **Makeup
exams will only be given in exceptional circumstances when the student
provides satisfactory proof (such as a doctor's note) of unavoidable
absence.**

      
2\. The **final course grade** will be based on the average of your scores,
plus any additional points for attendance as follows:

        90 and above = A
        80 through 89 = B
        70 through 79 = C
        60 through 69 = D
        59 and below  = F


**ADMINISTRATIVE NOTES**

a. **Classes begin** 16 January 1, 2001

b. **Final Exam** , Week of 4-10 May 2001

c. **Spring Break** , 19-24 March 2001

d. **Final course grades will be mailed out by the college registrar.**

[_top_](bosyll01.html#bosyltop)



**COURSE OUTLINE PLAN AND READING ASSIGNMENTS**



**Wk of 1/15/01:** Class Introduction; Emergence of Europe; Indians, Europeans

and the Discovery/Invasion/Conquest of the New World; Shakespeare's England.

**Text: Ch. 1.** "The Peopling and Unpeopling of America."

**Recommended Films:**

"The Rise of Europe";

"American Indians: When the White Man Came"(VT 1035);

"American Indians: The Indians Were the First"(VT 1034);

"Story of the Aztecs" (VT 1404);

"Monument to the Sun: Story of the Aztec Calendar Stone" (VT 1405);

"These Were the Maya" (VT 1406).



**Wk of 1/22/01:** Colonial Virginia and the Tidewater; New England Pilgrims
and Puritans;

**Text: Chs. 1-3.** "The Peopling and Unpeopling of America"; "Plantations

and Cities upon a Hill"; "Provincial America in Upheaval".



**Wk of   1/29/01:** Union of Scottish and English Crowns to the English Civil
War;

Enlightenment and the Great Awakening; Colonial Way of Life.

**Text: Ch. 2-3.** "Plantations and Cities upon a Hill"; "Provincial America
in Upheaval"



**Wk of 2/5/01:** From Empire toward Independence.

**Text: Chs. 3-4.** "Provincial America in Upheaval"; "Breaking the Bonds of
Empire."

**Recommended Films:** "Colonial America" (VT 1724);

"The Colonial Economy" (VT 1725).

*****First Book Exam :  Akers, _Abigail Adams: An American Woman_**



**Wk of 2/12/01:** The American Revolution

**Text: Ch. 5.** "The Times That Tried Men's Souls";

**Film:** "George Washington: The Man Who Wouldn't Be King" (VT 1797)



**Wk of 2/19/01:** The Articles of Confederation and the Constitution

**Text: Ch. 6.** "Securing the Republic and Its Ideals."



**Wk of 2/26/01:** Early Years of Independence; The Federalists and
Republicans;

Life in the United States in 1800; The Revolution of 1800.

**Text: Chs. 7-8.** "Shaping the New Nation"; "The Jeffersonians in Power"



**Wk of 3/5/01:** The Roots of the War of 1812; Aftermath of the War of 1812

**Text: Ch. 8.** "The Jeffersonians in Power"

******* Mid-Term Exam. *******

      
**Wk of 3/12/01:** Ideological Revolution, 1815-1830s

**Text: Ch. 9.** "Nationalism, Economic Growth, and the Roots of Sectional
Conflict."

*****Second Book Exam,   Wallace, _The Long Bitter Trail_**

**Spring Break**

**Wk of   3/26/01**

**:** Controversies of Jacksonian Democracy

**Text: Ch. 10.** "Power and Politics in Jackson's America"

**Recommended Film:** "Views of a Vanishing Frontier."

**Wk of 4/2/01:** Moral and Social Reform; Abolitionists  & Utopian Socialists

**Text: Ch. 11.** "Reforming American Society."

**Recommended Film:** "The Sins of Our Mothers" (VT 1798)

     
**Wk of 4/9/01:** Slavery and the South and North

**Text: Ch. 12.** "The Divided North, the Divided South"

**Recommended Film:** "Uncle Tom's Cabin" (VT 1567);

"Harriet Tubman and the Underground Railroad" (VT 1731);

"Negro Slavery" (VT 1737).

***** Third Book Exam, Stowe, _Uncle Tom's Cabin_**



**Wk of 4/16/01:** Westward Expansion; The Mexican War

**Text: Ch. 13.** "Surge to the Pacific"

**Recommended Film:** "The American West: Myth and Reality" (VT 1194);

"Texas and the Mexican Cession" (VT 1458).



**Wk of 4/23/01:** Sectional Political Polarization; The Impending Crisis

**Text: Ch. 14.** "The House Divided"

**Recommended Films:** "The Civil War: The Cause, 1861" (VT

*****Fourth Book Exam , Shaara, _Killer Angels_**

      
**Wk of 4/30/01:** Secession; Civil War

**Text: Ch. 15.** "A Nation Shattered by Civil War"

**Recommended Film:** "The Massachusetts 54th Colored Infantry" (VT 1799)

"The Red Badge of Courage" (VT 1124).

"Civil War: Fiery Trail" (VT 725)

     
*****Map Exam: May 2/3, 2001*****

      
**Final Exams : May  4-10, 2001**.

[_top_](bosyll01.html#bosyltop)

