## Geography 390

# Geography of California

> ## Fall, 2001

>

> **Tuesdays, 5 to 6:50 p.m., Stevenson 3036**

>

> **DESCRIPTION** : California as a state and as a region is in many ways
unique. This course examines both the singular physical and human aspects of
the State, from its unusual geologic history, climate, and vegetation, through
its earliest inhabitants, to its present day diverse population and trend-
setting economic, political, and cultural atmosphere. Issues discussed include
changing populations and regional differences, evolving urban areas, water
resources, agriculture, and forestry.

>

> **INSTRUCTOR** :

>

> Dr. Dorothy E. Freidel, Associate Professor.  
>  Office: 3056 Stevenson, 664-2314  
>  email: [dorothy.freidel@sonoma.edu](mailto:dorothy.freidel@sonoma.edu)

>

> **OFFICE HOURS:**

>

> Mondays and Wednesdays 9-10:30 a.m., Mondays 3:30-4:30 p.m., other times by
appointment. Make an appointment in class, email me, or call me at 664-2314.

>

> **TEXTBOOKS:**

>

> _Required_ : William A. Selby (2000) _Rediscovering the Golden State_. New
York: John Wiley, $61.50 new, $46.15 used.

>

> _Highly Recommended_ : Fradkin, Philip L. (1995). _The Seven States of
California_. New York: Henry Holt, $18.95 new, $14.25 used.

>

> **FIELD TRIP:**

>

> A field trip to the Oakland Museum California Ecology and History exhibits
is scheduled for Saturday, November 10, 9-3 p.m. Students will submit a short
report on this field trip. Students who cannot attend will present a research
paper to the class toward the end of the semester. The topic must be arranged
with Prof. Freidel.

>

> **GRADING:**

>

> Grades will be based on total points earned on two exams and one quiz (map
quiz, 10%, midterm, 25% and final, 25%) plus participation in the field trip
or a research paper and class presentation (20%), and participation in several
class assignments (20%).

>

> **STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS:**

>

> Since the class meets only once a week, _regular attendance is essential_
for success in this class. If you _absolutely must_ miss a class, please call
Dr. Freidel ahead of time, and arrange to obtain notes from another student.
You will also enjoy the class much more if you come prepared and participate.
_Read assignments_ before the lecture. Keep your eyes out for interesting and
relevant news items to share. Discussion is encouraged! _Turn in assignments_
on time. Ask questions, and if you have trouble with the material, _ask for
help_ right away! Don't wait until right before the exam.

>

> **REVISED SCHEDULE (as of 9/25):**

>

> **Week of**

>

> |

>

> |

>

> **Topic**

>

> |

>

> Readings in Selby  
>  
> ---|---|---|---  
>  
> 8/28

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Introduction, Physiographic provinces

>

> |

>

> Chapter 1  
>  
> 9/4

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Geologic history

>

> |

>

> Chapter 2  
>  
> 9/11

>

> |

>

> |

>

> No class

>

> |  
>  
> 9/18

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Physiographic regions, Earthquakes, Volcanoes

>

> |

>

> Chapter 3  
>  
> 9/25

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Natural Vegetation (walking fieldtrip) Climate lecture

>

> |

>

> Chapter 4  
>  
> 10/2

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Climate presentations; Vegetation lecture

>

> |

>

> Chapter 5  
>  
> 10/9

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Natural resources, issues **(map quiz** )

>

> |

>

> Chapter 6  
>  
> **10/16**

>

> |

>

> |

>

> **Midterm**

>

> |  
>  
> 10/23

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Native Americans, Spanish, Population

>

> |

>

> Chapter 7  
>  
> 10/30

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Politics, initiatives (class presentations)

>

> |

>

> handouts  
>  
> 11/6

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Ethnic groups, diversity

>

> |

>

> Chapter 8  
>  
> **11/10**

>

> |

>

> |

>

> **Field Trip, Oakland Museum**

>

> |  
>  
> 11/13

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Agriculture, natural resources

>

> |

>

> Chapter 9  
>  
> 11/20

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Industry

>

> |

>

> Chapter 10  
>  
> 11/27

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Urban landscapes

>

> |

>

> Chapter 11  
>  
> 12/4

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Class discussions, papers due.

>

> |  
>  
> **12/11**

>

> |

>

> |

>

> **Final exam 5-6:50 p.m.**

>

> |  
>  
> * Lectures will refer to Fradkin throughout the semester.

[Home](http://www.sonoma.edu/people/F/freidel/california/default.html) |
[Syllabus &
Schedule](http://www.sonoma.edu/people/F/freidel/california/390syllabus.htm) |
[Labs](http://www.sonoma.edu/people/F/freidel/california/390labs.htm) | [Study
Guides](http://www.sonoma.edu/people/F/freidel/california/390studyguides.htm)
| [Web Links](http://www.sonoma.edu/people/F/freidel/california/390links.htm)

> Last updated Sept. 25, 2001

