**OBERLIN COLLEGE  
Department of History**

[**Gary J. Kornblith**](http://www.oberlin.edu/~history/Gary.html) **  
King 141-G; x8526  
E-mail: **[**Gary.Kornblith@oberlin.edu**](mailto:Gary.Kornblith@oberlin.edu)

|

**History 422  
4 hrs., 4SS, WR  
Spring 1998**  
  
---|---  
  
|

**_RESEARCHING  
_****_THE_** ** _AMERICAN CIVIL WAR  
_****_AND_** ** _RECONSTRUCTION_**  
  
---  
  
[![Sgt. Henry Stewart, 54th Mass.
Infantry](54photo2.gif)](http://www.nara.gov/exhall/originals/54thmass.html)  
  
|

Sgt. Henry Stewart, 54th Massachusetts Infantry (National Archives and Records
Administration)  
  
* * *

**The electronic version of this syllabus is located at
<http://www.oberlin.edu/~history/History422/Hist422syl.htm>.  
**

* * *

**Objectives** ******Drawing on the resources of the Oberlin College Library,
the Oberlin College Archives, and various sites on the World Wide Web,
students will undertake major research projects on selected aspects of the
American Civil War and Reconstruction. The goal is to learn the historian's
trade by "mucking about" in the raw materials of the past rather than by
reading secondary sources or neatly packaged anthologies of reprinted
documents. Students will choose their own research topics, and they will have
the option of presenting their findings in either print or electronic format.
As the research projects develop, students will read and comment upon each
other's work. The final result of a research project should be a 25-35 page
research paper or a scholarly Web site of similar magnitude.**

**Format** ******The class meets regularly on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 1:00
to 2:50 p.m. Sometimes we will meet for discussion; other times we will have
"hands-on" sessions on the use of library, archival, and electronic resources.
In addition to meeting as a class in "real" space, we will get together
periodically in "virtual" space using E-mail and AltaVista Forum. _N.B.:
Students are required to attend all class sessions and to participate
faithfully in online exchanges of questions, comments, outlines, and paper
drafts._**

**Evaluation** ******Students will be evaluated on the basis of their in-class
participation (20%), their online participation (10%), their research
prospectus (10%), their rough draft (20%), and their finished research paper
or Web site (50%). _Students must complete all written and electronic
assignments to receive credit for the course._ The instructor reserves the
right to exercise some discretion in assigning final grades.**

**Purchases** ******The following books should be purchased at the Co-op
Bookstore. They are also available on reserve at the main library.**

  * **Winthrop D. Jordan, _Tumult and Silence at Second Creek: An Inquiry into a Civil War Slave Conspiracy_ (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State Univ. Press, 1993)**
  * **Gerald F. Linderman, _Embattled Courage: The Experience of Combat in the American Civil War_ (New York: Free Press, 1987).**
  * **Jacqueline Jones, _Soldiers of Light and Love: Northern Teachers and Georgia Blacks, 1865-1873,_ reprint ed. (Athens: Univ. of Georgia Press, 1992; orig. ed. 1980).  
**

**Schedule**

**Thursday, Feb. 5**

|

**Introduction

* * *

**

  
  
---|---  
  
**Tuesday, Feb. 10**

|

**Discussion: Primary Sources, Historical Analysis, and the Case Study
Approach**

  * **Jordan, _Tumult and Silence at Second Creek,_ entire, including appendixes**

  
  
**Thursday, Feb. 12**

|

**Print Resources and Library Research (meet at Mudd 212)

* * *

**

  
  
**Tuesday, Feb. 17**

|

**Discussion: The Causes and Coming of War**

  * **Eric Foner, "The Causes of the Civil War: Recent Interpretations and New Directions," in Foner, _Politics and Ideology in the Age of the Civil War_ (New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1980), 15-33. [on reserve]**
  * **Michael F. Holt, "The Problem of Civil War Causation," in Holt, _Political Parties and American Political Development from the Age of Jackson to the Age of Lincoln_ (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State Univ. Press, 1992), 313-322. [on reserve]**
  * **James Tice Moore, "Secession and the States: A Review Essay," _Virginia Magazine of History and Biography_ 94 (Jan. 1986): 60-76. [on reserve]**
  * **William Freehling, "Unlimited Paternalism's Problems: The Transforming Moment on My Road Toward Understanding Disunion," in Freehling, _The Reintegration of American History_ (New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1994), 105-137. [on reserve]**

** **  
  
**Thursday, Feb. 19**

|

[**Manuscript Resources and Archival Research**](His422archives.htm) **(meet
at Mudd 420)

* * *

**

  
  
**Tuesday, Feb. 24**

|

**Discussion: The Experience of War**

  * **Linderman, _Embattled Courage,_ 7-110, 156-265, skim 298-314**
  * **Jim Cullin, "'I's a Man Now': Gender and African American Men," in Catherine Clinton and Nina Silber, eds., _Divided Houses: Gender and the Civil War_ (New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1992), 76-91  [on reserve]**
  * **James Marten, "For the Good, the True, and the Beautiful: Northern Children's Magazines and the Civil War," _Civil War History_ 41 (Mar. 1995): 57-75 [on reserve]**

[**Research Project Assignment**](RESEARCH.htm) **Distributed**  
  
**Thursday, Feb. 26**

|

**Electronic Resources and Web Publishing (meet at Mudd 212)

* * *

**

  
  
**Tuesday, Mar. 3**

|

**Discussion: The Outcome of War, Emancipation, and Reconstruction**

  * **Jones, _Soldiers of Light and Love_ , 2-166, 191-208, skim 209-229**
  * **Nancy Cohen-Lack, "A Struggle for Sovereignty: National Consolidation, Emancipation, and Free Labor in Texas, 1865," _Journal of Southern History,_ 58 (Feb. 1992): 57-98. [on reserve]**
  * **Lou Falkner Williams, "The South Carolina Ku Klux Klan Trials and the Enforcement of Federal Rights, 1871-1872," _Civil War History_ 39 (Mar. 1993): 47-66. [on reserve]**

  
  
**Thursday, Mar. 5

* * *

Monday, Mar. 9**

|

**Discussion: Preparing a Research Prospectus

* * *

****Prospectus due online by 10 a.m.**  
  
**Tuesday, Mar. 10**

|

**Discussion: Research Prospectuses**  
  
**Thursday, Mar. 12**

|

**Discussion: Research Prospectuses

* * *

**

  
  
**Tuesday, Mar. 17**

|

**No class; professor available for consultation**  
  
**Thursday, Mar. 19**

|

**No class; professor available for consultation

* * *

**

******Spring Break******

**

* * *

**

  
  
**Tuesday, Mar. 31**

|

**Discussion: Scholarly Apparatus for Research Papers and Web Sites**

  * [**"History: _Chicago_ Style"**](http://www.bedfordbooks.com/rd/ctchicago.html) **in Diana Hacker,**[ ** _Research and Documentation in the Electronic Age_**](http://www.bedfordbooks.com/rd/index.html)
  * **Melvin E. Page,**[ **"A Brief Citation Guide for Internet Sources in History and the Humanities"**](http://h-net2.msu.edu/~africa/citation.html) ****

  
  
**Thursday, Apr. 2**

|

**No class

* * *

**

  
  
**Tuesday, Apr. 7**

|

**Discussion: Research in Progress**  
  
**Thursday, Apr. 9**

|

**Discussion: Research in Progress

* * *

**

  
  
**Tuesday, Apr. 14**

|

**No class**  
  
**Thursday, Apr. 16**

|

**Discussion: Outlines**

**Note: Outlines should be posted to AltaVista Forum by 10 p.m., Wed., April
15, and reviewed before class** **

* * *

**

  
  
**Tuesday, Apr. 21**

|

**Discussion: Outlines**  
  
**Thursday, Apr. 23**

|

**Class luncheon (beginning at noon at 271 West College St.);  
Tour of Civil War era sites in Oberlin

* * *

**

  
  
**Tuesday, Apr. 28**

|

**No class**  
  
**Thursday, Apr. 30**

|

**Discussion: Drafts**

**Note: Submit drafts on Alta Vista Forum by 10 p.m., Wed., April 29** **

* * *

**

  
  
**Tuesday, May 5**

|

**Discussion: Drafts**

**Note: Submit drafts on Alta Vista Forum by 8 p.m., Mon., May 4**  
  
**Thursday, May 7**

|

**Discussion: Drafts**

**Note: Submit drafts on Alta Vista Forum by 8 p.m., Wed., May 6** **

* * *

**

  
  
**Tuesday, May 12**

|

**Final papers and Web sites due by 4:30 p.m.**  
  
  

* * *

  

**Resources**

|

![](canonfiring.gif)[**Class E-mail addresses**](Hist422Email.htm)

  
  
---  
  
![](canonfiring.gif)[**AltaVista
Forum**](http://www.oberlin.edu/~www/aca/dispatch.cgi) **for History 422**

  
  
![](canonfiring.gif)[**List of research resources**](Hist422resources.htm)

  
  




**_![](4a39429r.jpg)_**

"Contrabands," 1863 (Library of Congress)

* * *

Background:  
![](images.gif)

