## World-Wide-Web Educator Resource Sites

##  

### _Associations and Organizations_



**ISTE - The International Society for Technology in Education**

  
[http://www.iste.org](http://www.iste.org/)

  
**NSTA - National Science Teachers Association**

[http://www.nsta.org](http://www.nsta.org/)



**The Education and Libraries Networks Coalition (EdLiNC) - The Education and
Libraries Networks Coalition**

<http://www.itc.org/edlinc/index.html>

**The National Education Technology Initiative**

[http://www.neti.org](http://www.neti.org/)

**The National Parenting Center**

[http://www.tnpc.com](http://www.tnpc.com/)



### _Classrooms of the Future_

Take a tour of the 21st Century Classroom

<http://www.ncsa.uiuc.edu/IDT/>



### _Grants and Grant Writing_

Grant writing and development consulting services for non-profits and
individuals

[http://www.libertynet.org/~grants/#I ](http://www.libertynet.org/~grants/#I )

An instructional workshop that teaches the process of gaining grant monies

[http://www.jcn.com/videos/woods/home.html
](http://www.jcn.com/videos/woods/home.html)

Grant writing services for schools, communities and non-profit organizations

[http://www.grantwriting.com ](http://www.grantwriting.com/)

Software and services for non-profit organizations; project planning, donor
research, and proposal writing

[http://www.grantwriteronline.com ](http://www.grantwriteronline.com/)

List of available grants and information on grant writing services for non-
profit and public agencies.

[http://www.seliger.com __](http://www.seliger.com/)



### _Contests_

ThinkQuest Internet Contest for Students between the Ages of 12 and 19

<http://io.advanced.org/thinkquest/>

###  

### _Resource Sites_



**ASD - American School Directory**

[http://www.asd.com](http://www.asd.com/)



**ENC - Eisenhower National Clearinghouse**

[www.enc.org](http://www.enc.org/)



**ERIC - Education Resources Information Center**

[www.aspensys.com/eric/index.html](http://www.aspensys.com/eric/index.html)

**ED's Oasis**

[www.EDsOasis.org](http://www.EDsOasis.org/)

**The Hub**

[www.hub.terc.edu/hub.html](http://www.hub.terc.edu/hub.html)

**ED WEB**

[www.k12.cnidr.org:90](http://www.k12.cnidr.org/90)

**Explorer**

[unte2.tisl./ukans.edu](http://unte2.tisl./ukans.edu)

**InfoList for All Teachers**

[www.electriciti.com:80/`rlakin](http://www.electriciti.com:80/%60rlakin)

**Kathy Schrock's Guide for Educators**

<http://www.capecod.net/schrockguide/index.htm>

**Microsoft Productivity in the Classroom**

<http://www.microsoft.com/education/curric/activity/index.htm>

**Teaching and Learning with Microsoft**

<http://www.microsoft.com/education/k12/>

**Mid-Continent Regional Educational Laboratory**

[http://www.mcrel.org](http://www.mcrel.org/)

**The North Central Regional Technology in Education Consortium**

[http://www.ncrtec.org](http://www.ncrtec.org/)

**The South Central Regional Technology in Education Consortium**

[http://www.scrtec.org](http://www.scrtec.org/)

**SuperKids Educational Software Review**

<http://www.superkids.com/aweb/pages/contents.html>

**CNN Newsroom and Worldview Teaching Tips**

[www.cnn.com/newsroom](http://www.cnn.com/newsroom)

**Electric Library -- Infonautics Corporation**

[www.education.elibrary.com](http://www.education.elibrary.com/)

**Technology Education Index**

[www.technologyindex.com](http://www.technologyindex.com/)

**The ComputED Gazette**

[www.computed.simplenet](http://www.computed.simplenet/)

**Teaching with Electronic Technology**

[www.wam.umd.edu/~mlhall/teaching.html](http://www.wam.umd.edu/~mlhall/teaching.html)  

**Cyber Kids**

[www.cyber.cy.net/cyber.html](http://www.cyber.cy.net/cyber.html)



**The Media Literacy Online Project**

[www.interact.uoregon.edu/mediaLit/HomePage](http://www.interact.uoregon.edu/mediaLit/HomePage)



**The Family Education Network**

[www.familyeducation.com](http://www.familyeducation.com/)

**T.H.E Journal**

[www.thejournal.com](http://www.thejournal.com/)

**SyllabusWeb**

[www.syllabus.com](http://www.syllabus.com/)



**WWW4Teachers**

<http://www.4teachers.org/>



### _Software Download Sites_

**TechWeb**

<http://www.cmpnet.com/itpro/tw/main>

**TuCows**

[http://www.tucows.com](http://www.tucows.com/)



### _Simulation Sites_

**Challenger Center Online**

<http://www.challenger.org/>



This site was created by Challenger Center for Space Science Education and
contains information about a variety of simulated space trips.



**International Space Station--Education Corner by NASA**

<http://station.nasa.gov/education/index.html>



**Spacelink by NASA**

<http://spacelink.nasa.gov/.index.html>

This page has a built-in index of about 20 topics with links. Topics include
astronauts, astronomy, the Hubble telescope, and satellites, and are very
helpful for science and mathematics teachers.



**Discovery Channel and IBM**

<http://school.discovery.com/spring98/activities/animatingmotion/index.html>

This site contains lesson plans and on-line activities regarding Physics in
Motion.  

[http://school.discovery.com/spring98/activities/weatherstation/index.htmlhttp://school.discovery.co](/school.discovery.co)m/spring98/activities/weatherstation/index.html

This site contains lessons on a variety of topics such as making a weather
station.



[http://school.discovery.com/spring98/activities/bearfacts/index.htmlv](/school.discovery.co)

An IBM/Discovery Channel on-line, highly interactive lesson about animals.



[http://school.discovery.com/spring98/activities/hesterprynne/index.htmlhttp://school.discovery.com](/school.discovery.com)/spring98/activities/hesterprynne/index.html

This site covers great books, has a variety of interesting activities for
students, allows the sharing of work with others and bulletin board
discussions.



[http://www.discovery.com/area/wayback/wayback961223/wayback1.html](http://www.discovery.com/whatsonline/previous.html)

This site has several events from the past including a rowdy crowd from 1849
in New York.



<http://www.discovery.com:80/area/history/history.html>

This provides a link for several very interesting history stories about early
American politicians including Burr, Hamilton, Jackson.



<http://school.discovery.com/specials/geogame/images/country/israel/finale/index.html>

This is a good site that includes the interesting and interactive geo-game. I



**United States Holocaust Memorial Museum**

[http://www.ushmm.org/exhibits/exhibit.htm](United%20States%20Holocaust%20Memorial%20Museum)

Currently, information is available on the 1936 Berlin Olympics and a portion
of the Nuremberg Trials. The Trials page contains actual testimony from
survivors and could be the basis of an excellent mock trial.



**Writer's Workshop sponsored by the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign**

<http://www.english.uiuc.edu/cws/wworkshop/writer.html>

This is a site which is useful to English teachers who want to teach writing
and is particularly helpful as a process writing resource site.



**The Write Site: Greater Dayton Public Television**

<http://www.writesite.org/>

This site is an interactive journalism site for middle grades instructors.
Students get information on how to write a variety of news articles and then
prepare their own newspaper. The assignments are clear and easy to use. It is
necessary to go to the newsstand to register in order to access task cards and
graphic organizers.



**The Heart: An Online Exploration -- The Franklin Institute Science Museum**

[http://www.fi.edu/biosci/heart.html](the%20heart:/%20An%20Online%20Exploration)

This site is an excellent on-line tour of the human heart.



**Creative Writing in a World Classroom on the Internet**

<http://www.mcn.org/ed/cur/liv/Units/Creative.htm>

This activity puts students in contact with kids from other countries for more
than a letter-writing activity. There are several activities which result in
children comparing themselves, their towns, and countries.



**Saint-Gaudens' Memorial to Shaw and the Fifty-Fourth -- National Gallery of
Art**

<http://www.nga.gov/feature/shaw/s3203.htm>

  
This site contains pictures and text regarding Robert Gould Shaw and the 54th  
Regiment from Massachusetts.



**The Story of Two Brothers - Pacific Communications**

[http://www.ipacific.com/samoa/brothers.html](The%20Story%20of%20Two%20Brothers)

A good link about American Samoa, myths, and tales.



**History/Social Studies Web Site for K-12 Teachers**

<http://www.execpc.com/~dboals/appli.html>

This is an excellent resources web and has many links for social studies
teachers.



**Helping Your Child Learn Math -- U.S. Department of Education**

<http://www.ed.gov/pubs/parents/Math/index.html>

This is a good location for basic math skills and has numerous hands-on
activities for exploring math concepts.



**The Internet Pizza Server**

<http://www.crpc.rice.edu/CRPC/GT/sboone/Lessons/Titles/pizza.html>

In this activity, students learn about the Internet, and mathematical concepts
while making a pizza.



**Pop Clock**

<http://www.crpc.rice.edu/CRPC/GT/sboone/Lessons/Titles/popclock.html>

Statistics investigation using census figures.



**Web Sites and Resources for Teachers**

[http://www.csun.edu/~vceed009/math.html](Web%20Sites%20and%20Resources%20for%20Teachers)

This source has lots of interesting, simple, quick and easy-to-use activities.
For  
example, students can figure out the amount a car payment will be on a loan.
They can learn how to figure out how much paint, carpeting, etc. is needed for
home repairs.



**Graphs, Stories, and Games**

<http://www.c3.lanl.gov/mega-math/workbk/graph/grgsm.html#instructions>

An interactive graphing activity.



**A Usual Day at Unusual School**

<http://www.c3.lanl.gov/mega-math/workbk/logic/loplay.html>

A play which helps students to determine that they do have the information  
to solve problems.



**The Ice Cream Stands Problem**

<http://www.c3.lanl.gov/mega-math/workbk/dom/doactiv.html>

A problem-solving activity for deciding where to locate an ice cream stand.



**Big Sky Telegraph**

<gopher://bvsd.k12.co.us:70/11/Educational_Resources/Lesson_Plans/Big%20Sky/math>

This is a listing of some 40 lesson plans that have interactive activities.



**Auto Loan Monthly Payment Calculator - Bank of America**

<http://www.bankamerica.com/tools/auto_payment.html>

Good application for students who are looking for ways to use percentages.



**Edustock -- Edustock Creators**

<http://tqd.advanced.org/3088/>

This site contains an actual stock market simulation and information on
various companies.



**How Far Is It? -- Bali Online**

[http://www.indo.com/distance/](How%20Far%20Is%20It?)

This site allows students to enter any two points in the world and find out
the  
distance between them.



**Inflation Quiz -- Northwestern Mutual**

[http://www.northwesternmutual.com/planning/quiz.html](Inflation%20Quiz)

This is a quiz which gives students a chance to apply their knowledge of
percentages to calculation of future costs.



**Electronic United Nations**

<http://www.simulations.com/eun/>

This is a simulation that shows how the United Nations operates. Classes can
pretend that they are individual member countries of the United Nations and
then discuss issues.



**Governments**

<http://www.simulations.com/eun/Manuscr1.htm>

This is a simulation that leads students through the steps involved in forming
a country. Its purpose is to help students understand how governments come
into being and how they operate. To use an online powerpoint presentation to
explain the setup, go to theClassroom Country PowerPoint.

