[![Crossroads logo](../../logo_sm.gif)](../index.html)

![](../point.gif)

|

[![horizontal red rule](../redrule.gif)](../conversations/index.html)  
[![Research & Study Project](../project.gif)](../index.html)  
[![Journal Reflections](../reflections.gif)](../journal.html)

|

![](../point.gif)REFLECTION II ONLINE:

| Lynne Adrian William Bryant Susan Butler Saul Cornell Barbara Ewell William
Grant Chris Lewis Kate Masur John McClymer Mary McGuire Rich Megraw Earl
Mulderink Sarah Robbins Jody Ross Carl Schulkin David Silver Kathy Walsh  
---|---  
  
**John McClymer's Second Reflection  
** Assumption College

_Reflection II_ posted 7/5/97 | Read _[Reflection I](mcclymer1.html)_

* * *  
  
_In what ways did you incorporate technology into your course(s)?_ |  I wound
up doing most of what I had planned by way of incorporating technology into my
courses. This entailed putting together several workshops (one for teachers,
K-12, in central Massachusetts in conjunction with the American Antiquarian
Society; a second for college teachers under the auspices of NerComp, a
consortion of New England colleges and universities that seeks to pool
computer knowledge) including a brief presentation at the recent Crossroads
workshop, editing course Web pages for 1997-98, and, most of all, compiling an
on-line archive of materials for the Worcester Women's History Project (WWHP).
This latter is part of an effort to commemorate the 150th anniversary of the
first national woman's rights convention, held in Worcester in 1850. WWHP
hopes to provide curricular materials for middle and high school teachers;
stage a reenactment of the 1850 convention; host a contemporary convention in
October 2000 over the same weekend to spur reflection on the path traveled and
the distance yet to go. The web-based component of the Worcester Women's
History Project has grown much larger than I had originally anticipated.  
---|---  
_What was the single most "successful" integration of technology that you
made?_ | My most "successful" use of technology was the "soul murder" project
I used in the American Antiquarian Society workshop and briefly reviewed for
the Crossroads workshop. This involved putting together five sets of primary
materials, all available [on-
line](http://www.assumption.edu/HTML/Academic/history/WWHP/Workshop.html). All
bore upon a single question: In 1870, at the twentieth anniversary woman's
rights convention, Paulina Wright Davis, president of the first and second
conventions (1850, 1851), was unanimously chosen to preside again. She devoted
her keynote address to reading a history of the movement in the course of
which she said that, were she to attempt to explain why women decided "thus to
do and dare," she would have to go into the long history of repression, what
"German jurists" call "soul murder," a system of oppression which bore more
heavily where least seen. What did she mean?

What made this project work, I argued at the Crossroads workshop, were two key
characteristics. One is the authenticity of the question. Unlike much that we
ask students to do, this asked them to look at a question that a real
practitioner, a historian of the woman's rights movement or a women's studies
scholar, might ask. It did NOT ask: Explain the origins of the woman's rights
movement. That question would require the better part of a career. Yet
everyone could see the immediate relevance of the "soul murder" question to
that larger issue. The other key characteristic, in my view, was the iterative
nature of the task. There were five quite diverse sets of materials. Each
afforded a different point of entry into the assignment; each offered
different interpretative possibilities. Each drew upon different analytic
skills. So someone encountering this project could do what real practitioners,
what real learners do, and that is try out different strategies. The
assignment, that is, rejected the need to designate some "single best" way of
approaching the question and instead invited participants to try out those
approaches they thought might work best for them.  
  
_What was the biggest surprise or disappointment that you had in using
technology this semester?_ |  I did not, fortunately, run into too many
surprises this semester. This is probably due to the nature of what I was
trying.

As for offering advice to someone introducing technology into a course for the
first time, I would strongly recommend that such a person start with the
question of assignments, projects, etc. Take a close look at what you want
students to do in the course. And THEN, and only then, ask yourself what kinds
of technologies you might employ. It is too easy to go the other way, to see
the possibilities in the technologies, and start from there. So, for example,
one can use listservs and various other online conversation technologies to
encourage students to communicate with each other more. At the risk of
sounding heretical, I would emphasize that you may very well NOT wish to
devote much energy to encouraging students to read each other's work-in-
practice. This is a model derived from composition courses where, for all I
know to the contrary, it is entirely appropriate. But, even though my courses
are quite writing intensive, I don't want my students to spend more time than
they already do critiquing each other's papers. So I encourage them to
communicate with me and I occasionally post samples of their work-in-practice
on the course webpage. I do not ask them to comment on each other's work. As a
result, I am more interested in forms, i.e., software that enables them to
respond directly to me on specific issues raised in the course, than in
listservs.

Other practitioners will have different needs and wants of course. That is my
point. Decide what YOU want your students to do and then ask IF some
technology or other can advance that agenda. In my experience the answer will
usually but not always turn out to be yes.  
  
_How did the use of technology affect the overall ecology of the course?_ |
Technology makes major changes in the overall ecology of the courses in which
I use it, largely by enabling students to play a more active role in tailoring
course projects and objectives to their own interests, learning styles, and
talents. It does not, in my case, much alter the balance between material and
process nor does it impose new constraints on coverage. It does dramatically
alter the dynamic between me and my students. Let me give an example by way of
explaining.

In Hi. 13-14, a two-semester survey of Modern European and U.S. history that
satisfies the college's general education requirement, I teach with several
colleagues. None of them use the internet or other hypermedia technologies.
But we share a common syllabus, common readings, and common assignments varied
just enough so that students in my sections cannot readily get away with
passing in as their own work papers done by students in one of the sections
taught by someone else. So, whatever I do, I MUST cover the same material as
my colleagues. Further I must approach it is ways sufficiently similar so that
my students can address our common assignments.

Yet, if all I were doing was putting our common syllabus online, the game
would hardly be worth the candle. What I try to do is cluster resources, some
visual, some literary, around the central themes of each unit of our course.
This is not "coverage" in the conventional sense. Instead I give students the
choice of using whichever of these resources they find help them "get" the
issues the course raises. For example, in the page on the Renaissance I write,
with appropriate links: There is an on- line Leonardo Museum in whose
galleries you can find images of his oil paintings, drawings, and other works
organized by genre. There is also a Leonardo page at the WebMuseum. You can
also find a number of other major Renaissance artists here. Go to the "Famous
Painting" page and click on "Italian Renaissance." You may find the curator's
comments of significant value for doing the essay on the differences between
medieval and Renaissance art. Those of you who are interested in the links
between Renaissance Art and mathematics and scientific investigations should
visit the Art of Renaissance Science site at CUNY. The material on the
development of perspective is particularly germane to our course.

My expectation, to repeat, is not that any student will visit all of these
sites, but that students puzzling over how to do the short essay (circa 4
pages) on what was new about Renaissance art will visit one or another of
these sites in search of ideas and examples. If the Leonardo page doesn't
"click" for a particular student, there is another and then another page on
which he or she can click.

What the technology does is enable students to recognize that there are
multiple points of entry into any given portion of the course, that it is
normal to find some more inviting than others, and that one of the goals of
the course is to allow them to take advantage of what they do best.  
  
_What critical, methodological, or theoretical assumptions about your
discipline were challenged by the transformative power of technology? _ |
This is a very daunting set of questions. Rather than attempt to answer, I
will simply rephrase one central componet as it applies most directly to my
discipline, history. Although there are manifold ways of doing history, in the
end, it is about narrative. Even when I am engaged in a highly quantitative
study of working-class family budgets, for example, I am still trying to
recount how blue-collar people thought about their situations, what strategies
they employed, what goals (beyond keeping body and soul together) they
pursued, and, most of all, how these changed over time. I am still telling a
story. What narrative looks like in media whose defining characteristic is
their non-linearity is a question I fully expect to spend the rest of my
career wrestling with.  
**The second journal reflections of these faculty investigators are online.**

**Or select a reflection listed by theme (arranged by author's last name).**

|  Lynne Adrian William Bryant Susan Butler Saul Cornell Barbara Ewell William
Grant Chris Lewis Kate Masur John McClymer Mary McGuire Rich Megraw Earl
Mulderink Sarah Robbins Jody Ross Carl Schulkin David Silver Kathy Walsh  
---|---  
Listservs in a Graduate Seminar Conducting Research on the Web Multimedia
Presentations in American Studies Teaching with PowerPoint Teaching an Online
Literature Course Ongoing Constructive Student Projects Transforming the
Architecture of a Course The Web as a Transnational Cultural Artifact Creating
Authentic Tasks Critically Evaluating Political Web Sites The Web as a Model
of Thinking Teaching Problems of Authenticity using the Web Quality and
Quantity in Listserv Posts Building a Dialectic among Students Incorporating
CD-ROMs into Teaching Balancing Ecological Changes Technology Brings Virtual
Classmates and Web Discussions  
  
* * *

[Reflections](../journal.html) | [Syntheses](../syntheses.html) | [Research
Home](../index.html)

![Annenberg/CPB Project](../annenbrg.gif)The Crossroads Research and Study
Project is funded by the [Annenberg/CPB Project](http://www.learner.org/). |
| Send comments to [Crossroads  
Research and Study Project](mailto:samplem@gusun.georgetown.edu).  
---|---|---  
  
This Page has been accessed ![](http://www.georgetown.edu/cgi-
bin/textcounter.cgi?http://www.georgetown.edu/crossroads/conversations/reflections/mcclymer2.html)
times since.

