ANTH 370 **ethnographic field methods**

MW, 12:30-1:45

Li 316

  
  
  

**instructor** : **office hours:**

Samuel Collins                                                 Room    Li-318A

x3199                                                             Mondays, 2-4
pm

                                                                       Wednesdays, 2-4 pm 

(e-mail) scollins@towson.edu                           Fridays, 11-12 pm

homepage: www.towson.edu/~scollins             or by appointment  
    
    
    
    


**course description**

Ethnography--both as a method and as a genre of writing--is now popular in a
number of disciplines. Sociologists, educators, social workers, law
enforcement officials and marketing departments all regularly utilize
ethnographic methods in their research. But ethnography is one of many
qualitative and quantitative methodologies utilized by practitioners in those
diverse fields. Cultural anthropology, on the other hand, is in many ways
_defined_ by ethnography and ethnographic methods; the history of cultural
anthropology is inseparable from the development of ethnography, and even
those anthropologists not engaged in fieldwork consider research questions and
theories inspired by ethnographic research.  


This course will, fittingly, consider ethnography (both process and product)
in its relationship--historical and theoretical--to cultural anthropology,
rather than as an independent, modular _method_. We will consider the
historical development of ethnography from early experiments in the mid-
nineteenth century up to the present and link those putatively methodological
developments to theoretical debates (then and now) in cultural anthropology.
Only in the most pernicious reduction are "ethnographic methods" the practical
"tools" of cultural anthropology.  


Additionally, as anthropological field research enters its second century, it
is appropriate to reflect not only on its importance but on its increasingly
dendritic shape as different strategies are appropriated and adapted to a
variety of research sites, questions and contexts that are rather far from
what Rivers meant by "intensive study" or what Malinowski meant by
"ethnography." We will, therefore, also review experimentation in ethnographic
methods as sometimes oblique challenges to anthropological thought.  


Finally, students will take the first steps towards their own ethnography, and
will begin background research and initial observations that could be utilized
in later research proposals or independent studies.  


**required reading**  


Janelli, Roger L. and Dawnhee Yim.

1993 _Making Capitalism: The Social and Cultural Construction of a South
Korean_

_Conglomerate._ Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.  


Mconnell, David L.

2000 _Importing Diversity._ Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.  


Stocking, George.

1983 _Observers Observed: Essays on Ethnographic Fieldwork._ Madison:

University of Wisconsin Press.

**reserved readings:** The following are available for "3 Day Reserve" at Cook
Library's reserve desk.  


Benedict, Ruth.

1945 _Chrysanthemum and the Sword_. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

DS821.B46  


Di Leonardo, Micaela.

1984 _Varieties of Ethnic Experience._ Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

F868.S156D48  


Evans-Pritchard, E.E.

1963 _The Nuer_. New York: Oxford University Press.

[1940] DT132.E8  


Franklin, Sarah.

1997 _Embodied Progress_. New York: Routledge.

GN296.F73  


Ginsburg, Faye.

1989 _Contested Lives_. Berkeley: University of California.

HQ767.5 U5G56  


Gregory, Steven.

1998 _Black Corona_. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

F128.68.C65.G74  


Gwaltney, John.

1980 _Drylongso_. New York: Random House.

E185.86.D77  


Scheper-Hughes, Nancy.

1992 _Death Without Weeping._ Berkeley: University of California Press.

HV1448.B72 N667  


Spradley, James.

1970 _You Owe Yourself A Drunk._ Boston: Little, Brown.

HV5298.S43S5  


Turner, Victor.

1957 _Schism and Continuity in an African Society_. Manchester, England:

Manchester University Press.

DT962.42.T8  


**graded assignments**  


_Journals_ ( **Due at the end of October, November and December 13** )
Students will complete a field journal describing their weekly meetings with
interview partners (arranged through Towson's English Language Center).  


_Book Reports_ ( **Due on assigned days, 5th-6th weeks** ) Students will write
one (1) 3-5 page book report comparing different approaches to or theories of
anthropological fieldwork. Each student should choose one (1) source from the
list of reserve readings above and compare that with the two, assigned
ethnographies in this course ( _Importing Diversity_ and _Making Capitalism_
). Book reports must answer the following questions: 1). How does (should) the
anthropologist do research? 2). How does (should) the anthropologist organize
ethnographic research into an ethnography? 3). What are the implications
(theoretical, methodological and otherwise)?  


_Research Proposals_ ( **Due October 4** ) Students must write a one-page
description of their proposed ethnographic research project. Proposals should
answer the journalistic 4 Ws and 1 H (Who, What, Where, When, Why and How).  


_Historical/Background Research_ ( **Due November 9** ) Students must complete
a five (5) page background report on their research site. Essays should both
contextualize and historicize the site, using relevant historical and archival
sources. Students should show how their particular research question arises
out of problems germane to the research site.  


_Ethnographic Reports_ ( **Due December 13** ) Using a modified (and less
intrusive) form of participant observation, students will spend between 2-4
weeks engaged in ethnographic research, after which they will write a report
summarizing method and analyzing data (however perfunctory) in the light of
the aforementioned Historical/Background Research. I will be handing out more
precise research guides later in the semester.  


**class schedule**  
    
    


1st week Introduction to the Course and explanation

of syllabus.  


2nd week Varieties of Ethnographic Research.

Assigned Reading: Stocking, pp. 70-120

**September 4: LABOR DAY**

3rd week The History of Anthropological Fieldwork

Assigned Reading: Stocking, pp. 53-69

**September 12: LAST DAY TO WITHDRAW FROM A COURSE**

**WITH NO GRADE POSTED TO ACADEMIC RECORD.**

4th week Contemporary Anthropological Fieldwork

Assigned Reading: McConnell, Preface-Japan's Image Problem

Janelli and Yim, pp. 1-18

5th week Challenges to the Anthropological Episteme

Assigned Reading: Stocking, pp. 121-156

Janelli and Yim, 19-52

**Book Reports**  


6th week Foundations of Ethnographic Research: Global histories _in situ_

**Library Research Methods**

Assigned Reading: Janelli and Yim, 53-88

McConnell, The Solution-The Start-up Years

**Book Reports**

**Research Proposal Due October 4**

7th week Fieldwork: "A Predicament Turned Into a Method."

Assigned Reading: Stocking, 208-232

McConnell, Managing Diversity

Janelli and Yim, 89-123

October 15: **LAST DAY TO WITHDRAW WITH A GRADE**

**OF "W".**  


8th week The Secret Lives of Informants

Assigned Reading: McConnell, Beyond the Stereotypes

Janelli and Yim, 124-155

9th week Participant Observation

Assigned Reading: McConnell, The Learning Curve

Janelli and Yim, 156-178

10th week Scratchnotes, Fieldnotes and Journals

Assigned Reading: Stocking, 13-52

McConnell, Millennium

Janelli and Yim, pp. 179-201

**November 9: LAST DAY TO WITHDRAWAL WITH A**

**GRADE OF "W"**

**Five page background essays due** **November 8**

11th week Varieties of Interviews

Assigned Reading: McConnell, Final Thoughts

Janelli and Yim, pp. 202-240

12th week Interviews/Visual Anthropologies

**November 23-26: THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY**  


13th week Building Ethnographic Theory

**Student Reports**

14th week **** Building Ethnographic Theory-Redux

**Student Reports**  


15th week ** December 13: LAST DAY OF CLASSES**

**Lecture TBA**

**Ethnographic Reports Due December 13**  


**grading**  


Field Journal: 15%

Attendance and Participation: 20%

Book Reports: 20%

Historical/Demographic Report: 20%

Ethnographic Report: 25%  


**notes**  


1\. Although exams and graded work will remain as stated above, I may have to
change different readings or films on the syllabus throughout the semester. I
will, in any case, try to give you ample warning of any syllabus changes.  


2\. Each student should be familiar with the University's rules regarding
cheating and plagiarism ( _Towson University Undergraduate Catalog,_ Appendix
F). Neither will be tolerated in my class and will result in a flunking grade.  


3\. Students with learning disabilities should register at the Disability
Support Services Office.  


**explanation of grading**

Following department policy, students will be assigned a letter grade
_without_ a qualifying "+" or "-".  


A: A superior performance surpassing assigned work in unique and novel ways
and

integrating diverse ideas from a wide range of sources in addition to those
discussed in

class.  


B: Excellent work surpassing the expectations of the assignment and
demonstrating initiative

and a willingness to move beyond the basic requirements of the assigned work.  


C: Satisfactory work meeting all basic requirements of the assignment.  


D: Work in some way less than satisfactory. Although conforming to basic
requirements in

some way, the completed work is nevertheless not a coherent response to the

assignment.  


F: A profoundly unsatisfactory performance which doesn't meet

the intent of the assignment at any level.

