![Portfolio of Case Studies](portfolio.gif)

###  Enhancing the United States History Survey Course With New Technologies

_Earl F. Mulderink III, Southern Utah University_

#### Introduction

"Higher education, in terms of teaching and learning, is an unfriendly
environment for innovation." So says Randy Bass of the Crossroads Project in
his provocative article, "Engines of Inquiry."(1) I could not agree more. In
fact, as I sit here and reflect upon my experiences in trying to adapt new
technologies to the teaching of United States history, his remarks seem all
the more forceful and accurate.

Bass suggests three key causes for higher education's resistance to
innovation. One explanation centers on time itself because, quite simply,
"innovation takes time." For me, the incorporation of new technologies to
enhance my teaching of history has been an ongoing, often frustrating process
of applying for grants, securing equipment, asking many questions,
experimenting continually with new software and hardware, and responding to
students' suggestions and concerns. Despite my high degree of self-motivation,
I have been pushed at times nearly to exhaustion by the amount of time (and
energy!) needed to acquire new teaching skills and knowledge. These efforts,
moreover, have competed for time devoted to more standard and expected
professorial responsibilities that have nothing to do with the use of
technology. The end result, one common to all "early adopters," is that I am
engaged in a constant cost-benefit analysis of the instructional uses of
technology. Time, after all, is a finite commodity.

A second explanation for the difficulty in moving forward with new teaching
and learning techniques, Bass suggests, lay in the evaluation and reward
process. Again, Bass's comments hit home with me. As an assistant professor of
history, I must answer to senior colleagues who justifiably oversee the
tenure-granting process. Some of these colleagues have not actively used
computers nor have they shown interest in applying new teaching and learning
technologies -- such as listservs, the World Wide Web, or presentation
software -- that are so vital to my own teaching endeavors. Randy Bass is
right, I believe, in noting that "most faculty reward processes do not
accommodate innovative work in teaching."

A third cause of higher education's head-in-the-sand mentality is related to a
"culture of autonomy," according to Bass. Consequently, he encourages more
collaborative teaching endeavors. Again, I heartily concur with this call, and
the American Studies Crossroads Project has been a godsend of sorts for
individuals like me who feel isolated as an "early adopter" at my institution.
At present, for example, I am the only person in a twelve-member
interdisciplinary department (History, Political Science, and Sociology) who:
1) employs listservs in all of my classes; 2) requires students to access and
critically evaluate the World Wide Web; and 3) uses a laptop computer and LCD
project for classroom presentations. I am thankful, both personally and
professionally, for the Crossroads Project's electronic efforts to sustain a
community of teachers and learners that can ameliorate higher education's
"culture of autonomy."

#### The Project: Methods, Goals, and Outcomes

For this particular case study, I wish to focus on teaching innovationss in
the standard United States history survey course. Compared with some teaching
practices across the nation, my methods are simple and relatively inexpensive
to implement. Yet, I have found that pushing forward with these new
instructional methods has required a huge expenditure of time and energy, not
to mention persistence, patience, and willingness to innovate in the face of
budgetary constraints and limited support. I am pleased to acknowledge that
some technical assistance has been provided to me through workshops sponsored
by the Center for Faculty Excellence at Southern Utah University.

At Southern Utah University, we presently offer a three-quarter sequence
survey in United States history: History 120 (1607-1828), History 121
(1829-1898), and History 122 (1898-Present). Within each of these courses, a
typical class consists of about 95 students who enroll to complete their
general education credits. In an effort to enliven the traditional
lecture/discussion format, I employ a laptop computer and LCD projector for
the presentation of a variety of course materials -- outlines, notes, maps,
and visual images. In addition, I use a standard college-level textbook,
require three examinations (all multiple-choice), and rely upon structured
small group discussions once each week in which students read and discuss
selected primary documents. (See a [sample History 120
syllabus](http://www.suu.edu/WebPages/Academic/ArtsLetters/SocialScience/his120.htm).)

In all of my teaching endeavors I am eager to encourage active, independent,
and self-motivated learning despite the large, somewhat impersonal class size
and the often limited motivations of those enrolled in history survey courses.
I urge students to view their study of history as an exercise in
interpretation and to be critical of what they read, hear, and see -- whether
the source is their instructor (!), the textbook, the Web, or the television
screen. I firmly believe that new technologies can aid this quest to promote
critical and reflexive thinking. When possible, I preach about the
"transformative power of technology" in reshaping the nature of historical
inquiry and analysis, illustrated most obviously by the proliferation of
sources and resources on the World Wide Web. New technologies allow me to add
to the mix of resources -- secondary and primary documents, movies, and
lecture/discussion format -- that I utilize in all of my history classes.

#### Email and Listservs

In his article, "Engines of Inquiry," Randy Bass posits six types of learning
that can be enhanced through information technologies: distributive,
authentic, dialogic, constructive, public, and reflexive. While I do not
consciously seek to fulfill all of these aims, most of them are pertinent to
my methods in teaching the United States history survey class. For example, I
require students to join a class listserv and to submit individual and group
commentaries to the listserv. Such learning can be distributive, dialogic,
public, and reflexive in nature.

At the outset of each quarter, I survey my students to find out how many are
familiar with electronic mail and listservs, and, typically, about 10% of the
students have had prior experience with these forms of communication and
learning. Since my introductory class is comprised mainly of first-year
college students, one of my key aims is to strengthen students' skills in
utilizing electronic and computer resources on campus. So, they are all
required to obtain an email address and to experiment with electronic mail.
Within the weekly small group meetings, for example, I ask that all students
rotate tasks so that everyone gains familiarity with the steps needed to send
email to me and to the class listserv.

Most of my assignments are relatively simple and also involve collaborative
learning. For example, students meet in small groups on a regular basis in
which they are given primary documents to read and discuss, and they are asked
to submit a group report to the listserv. Documents are chosen to illustrate
the variety of materials used by historians to interpret the past. Examples
include excerpts from Nathaniel Bacon's Manifesto, Phillis Wheatley's poetry,
the Declarations of the Stamp Act Congress, and the Sedition Act of 1798.
Students are asked to read the material on their own, then they participate in
structured discussions with seven or so other students who create a written
report that is sent via email to the instructor or the class listserv. (I must
admit that some students do not enjoy group-centered learning -- or grading --
and believe that they are losing out when the teacher is not the focus of the
classroom.)

The listserv is useful for another exercise that encourages students to think
critically about the course material as they prepare for the required
examinations. Students are asked to write their own sample multiple-choice
questions, provide the correct answer and source of information, and then post
these questions and answers to the rest of the class through the listserv. I
believe that this is a very valuable study aid, particularly for students new
to history and college, as many are in History 120. Also, to help students
prepare for their examinations, I distribute to the listserv study aids and
sample questions that they can read on-line or print for later use. This is an
efficient and inexpensive way to give all students (even those who miss class)
the same information at the same time. I like to think, in addition, that the
electronic distribution of course information may lessen complaints along the
lines of "I didn't know this was going to be on the test."

Listservs require structure to work most effectively. While I have managed to
sustain some dialogic learning through the listservs, rarely do students show
much initiative in generating discussion raising questions, or sharing
information. These electronic forums have been most effective when students
are required to answer short, simple questions about course materials, such as
documentary movies shown in class. In the future, I will try to pose more
provocative questions to generate greater debate and be more explicit about my
expectations for the use of class listservs. For example, I have found it
necessary to explain what is not permissible to share on the listserv, such as
non-academic chatter and offensive jokes. Nonetheless, the listserv is a
simple and inexpensive way to create an extension of the classroom and to
quickly and efficiently distribute course-related information.

#### Web-Based Inquiries

The most successful integration of technology in my classes is simple and
actually takes place outside of the classroom. After providing students with
some background information about using the World Wide Web, I ask students to
access the Web and find sources and resources for studying U.S. history.
Generally, I suggest that they search for historical topics that most interest
them by doing standard searches with one of the popular search engines. Then,
they are asked to critically evaluate one or more of the Web sites they find,
preferably by comparing the Web's information to more standard (print)
sources.

This assignment works well because it is easy, relatively fun, and student-
directed. Many students report that they are stunned to find so much history-
related information on the Web, and I often encourage this work because many
students in history classes at SUU are education majors who may later rely on
the Web in their own teaching careers. Perhaps, as more students come to
college with a advanced Internet skills, this exercise will lose its novelty
and effectiveness. But, at SUU in my introductory classes, I find that many
first-year college students have not been had opportunities to explore and
critically evaluate history-related sources on the World Wide Web.

This simple Web "hunt" often prompts students to respond more enthusiastically
to the study of history and to the use of new technologies in pursuing
historical research. Students also encounter a "public" dimension of learning
when they are required to share their critical evaluations of Web-based
materials with others through the class listserv. This strategy was recently
discussed in a article published in The Chronicle of Higher Education.(2)
Usually, I add a twist to the exercise by prohibiting the repetition of any
single Web site among all the students in a class. In the end, the entire
class creates a large storehouse of unique Web sites posted to the class
listserv, all of them with critical evaluations. This exercise fulfills
several kinds of "quality learning" outlined by Randy Bass, including those of
distributive, authentic, dialogic, constructive, public, and reflexive
learning.

#### Incorporation of Multimedia Presentations

Although I can claim some success in obtaining equipment for multimedia
classroom presentations (including a $4,000 laptop computer and a $3,500 LCD
projector), it took two years and numerous grant applications to obtain such
items. Now, I am proud to say that I have access to a "smart cart" that can be
wheeled into classrooms that are not otherwise equipped for multimedia
presentations. I was able to use this equipment for the first time in History
120 this past Winter Quarter, and I am quite pleased with the results -- as
are my students.

Previously, I used an overhead projector for the display of outlines, maps,
and other visuals, and now I use a laptop computer, LCD projector, and Corel
Presentations software for more sophisticated classroom "performances." My
computer is a Micron Millennia Transport with a 133 MHZ processor that is
equipped minimally for multimedia presentations, and the LCD projector is a
Panasonic DataPro Lite 592 with 600 lumens and SVGA resolution. Using the
Corel Presentations package, I continue to experiment with formats, fonts, and
the inclusion of visual images as JPEG and other graphics files.

The creation of individual multimedia presentations is incredibly time-
consuming, even for the most primitive displays. My method is still one of
trial-and-error, and perfection will be always elusive, I fear. But, after
working with Corel Presentations for many months, I can now use my standard
template to create a class presentation of eight to ten slides in about a half
an hour. Typically, my visual materials include slides that offer an outline
of the lecture and supporting information, supplemented by maps,
illustrations, and quantitative materials. I continue to struggle with
incorporation of trickier graphics images and sound. Generally, I scan and
digitize selected images, clean them up with Adobe PhotoShop, and then import
these images as JPEG files into my Presentations package. My technology-
enhanced classroom presentations are in need of constant refinement, I admit,
and individualized experimentation is probably the only proper method for
satisfying the teacher and students.

I will state unequivocally that the use of these technologies in the classroom
has been beneficial for me and my students. My evaluations from students in
the survey courses climbed after I began to use this equipment and format. By
using the projector and a remote control, I move more freely about the room
without relying excessively on a podium or lecture notes. While I am not yet
an Oprah Winfrey in moving among my audience, I do have a greater freedom in
the classroom. Also, since I am stimulated by this type of presentation, I
eagerly seek new materials that can be presented on big screen, including
better-quality maps, images of people, photographs, and quantitative
information that can be displayed for the entire class. I am energized by the
use of this equipment, and that undoubtedly leads to more enthusiastic
teaching on my part, particularly in the larger introductory classes where
student interest in history is often latent, at best.

#### Final Thoughts

My willingness to work with new technologies is obviously undercut by the
time, energy, and commitment it takes to learn and apply new skills. I do not
get release time to develop courses and I do not get any sustained
institutional support to do all that I want to do. As an untenured faculty
member, I worry about the lack of recognized institutional and professional
rewards for pursuing pedagogical approaches that rely upon computers and
electronic sources. Perhaps the Crossroads Project can play a role in
encouraging institutions and individuals within higher education to embrace,
encourage, and reward technology-enhanced instruction.

For my own part, I will persist in my efforts to stay on top of the tidal wave
of technological change, and I will remain cautiously optimistic that higher
education will not get swamped completely n decades to come. Finally, I must
add that the Crossroads Project has given me opportunities to learn new things
in new ways, and for this I am grateful.

#### End Notes

(1) Randy Bass, "Engines of Inquiry: Teaching, Technology, and Learner-
Centered Approaches to Culture and History," Engines of Inquiry: A Practical
Guide for Using Technology to Teach American Culture, American Studies
Crossroads Project, Georgetown University, 1998\.

(2) Kari Boyd McBride and Ruth Dickstein, "The Web Demands Critical Reading by
Students," The Chronicle of Higher Education (March 20, 1998): B 6.

![Annenberg/CPB Project](../annenbrg.gif)The Crossroads Research and Study
Project  
is funded by the [Annenberg/CPB Projects](http://www.learner.org/).

  
---  


