**Economics 279, Public Policy 271  
Economic Transition and Crisis: Russia, China, and Beyond  
  
**

Tuesday, Thursday 12:00-1:20 PM Winter 1999

Social Sciences 105 University of Chicago

Jim Leitzel  

* * *

**Course Requirements  
**

Requirements: Two short (4 page) papers; each worth 15% of grade  
One quiz; worth 10% of grade

One term paper; accounting for 50% of grade

Class participation; worth 10% of grade.  
  

* * *

**Office Hours  
**

Office Hours: My office is Gates-Blake 225. The telephone number is 702-8555,
and

my e-mail account is jaleitze@midway.uchicago.edu. Office hours are

Monday and Wednesday, 3-4:20 PM, and by appointment.  

* * *

**Textbook  
**

Text: It is highly recommended that students acquire a copy of _From Plan to_

_Market_ , the 1996 World Development Report of the World Bank (Oxford:

Oxford University Press, 1996).

* * *

The ongoing post-socialist transitions will be the main focus of this course,
particularly with respect to Russia and China. The basic tool of analysis will
be the emerging "economics of transition." Various programs of macroeconomic
stabilization, price liberalization, and privatization will be analyzed, and
their effects on inflation, unemployment, and living standards will be
assessed. Issues highlighted in the "post-Washington consensus," such as
corporate governance, competition policy, and the role of the state in
transition, also will be addressed. Finally, the Asian crisis and the
activities of international organizations such as the International Monetary
Fund will be examined.  

An outline of the term paper, including a short bibliography, will be due on
**Tuesday, January 19**. The term paper is due at the beginning of the final
class session, on **Tuesday, March 9.** The term paper assignment is to
analyze one aspect (credit markets, for example) of an economic transition (in
Vietnam, for instance), and to suggest what government (or international
organization) policy should be with respect to the chosen transition and
issue.  

The assigned topics for the short memos appear below. They are very broad
topics, and analyses of such issues could easily fill many scholarly volumes.
Your job is to do some limited background reading (a few articles, perhaps,
beyond the normal class assignments), and to distill the issues into a very
brief policy memorandum. While in these memos, as in the term paper, you are
expected to make recommendations, policy analysis, and not policy advocacy, is
the major concern. Weigh the costs and benefits of various alternatives,
without exaggerating the benefits or minimizing the costs of your preferred
option.  

The first 4-page memo is due on **Tuesday, February 2**. Your  "client" is
Yevgeniy Primakov, the Russian Prime Minister, and your assignment is to make
a recommendation for improving tax collections during the transition.  

The second memo is due on **Tuesday, March 2.** Here, your client is IMF chief
economist Dr. Stanley Fischer, and your assignment is to make a recommendation
on IMF lending policy towards countries that find themselves near the
beginning of a potential crisis. You may want to use Brazil as a concrete
case.  

The 45-minute quiz, which will cover the assigned readings up to that point,
is on **Thursday, February 25**.  

Please read the assigned papers prior to the class meeting for which they are
assigned.  

* * *

_**Preliminary Course Outline  
  
**_

**TUESDAY, JANUARY 5** Introduction: Gauging Economic Transition  

**THURSDAY, JANUARY 7** Highly Selective History  

Readings: F. A. Lutz,  "The German Currency Reform and the Revival

of the German Economy." _Economica_ 16: 122-142, 1949.  

Robert Higgs,  "Wartime Prosperity? A Reassessment of the

U.S. Economy in the 1940s." _Journal of Economic History_

52: 41-60, 1992.  

TUESDAY, JANUARY 12 Some Theoretical Preliminaries  

Readings: Gregory Grossman,  "Notes for a Theory of the Command

Economy." _Soviet Studies_ 15: 101-123, 1963.  

Friedrich A. Hayek, "The Use of Knowledge in Society."

_American Economic Review_ 35: 519-530, 1945.  

**THURSDAY, JANUARY 14** L'Ancien R egime, Theory and Practice (I)  

Readings: Richard Ericson, "The Classical Soviet-Type Economy:

Nature of the System and Implications for Reform."

_Journal of Economic Perspectives_ 5: 11-28, Fall 1991.  

Barry Naughton,  "The Command Economy and the China

Difference." Chapter 1, pp. 26-55, in B. Naughton,

_Growing Out of the Plan_. Cambridge: Cambridge

University Press, 1996.  
  

**TUESDAY, JANUARY 19** L'Ancien R egime, Theory and Practice (II)  

Term paper outline due! Some references must be included!  

Readings: Ed A. Hewett, "The Soviet Economic System as it Actually

Operates." Chapter 4, pp. 153-220, in Hewett, _Reforming_

_the Soviet Economy_ , Washington, DC: The Brookings

Institution, 1988.  

Joseph S. Berliner, "The Informal Organization of the

Soviet Firm." Chapter 2, pp. 21-46, in Berliner, _Soviet_

Industry from Stalin to Gorbachev, Ithaca: Cornell

University Press, 1988 [1952].  

Gregory Grossman,  "The 'Second Economy' of the USSR."

_Problems of Communism_ , pp. 25-40, September-October

1977.  
  

**THURSDAY, JANUARY 21** Reform and Transition  

Readings: Dani Rodrik,  "Understanding Economic Policy Reform."

_Journal of Economic Literature_ 34: 9-41, March 1996.  

Kevin Murphy, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny,  "The

Transition to a Market Economy: The Pitfalls of Partial

Reforms." _Quarterly Journal of Economics_ , pp. 889-906,

August 1992.  
  

**TUESDAY, JANUARY 26** Transition from Socialism: The Big Picture

Reading: David Lipton and Jeffrey Sachs,  "Creating a Market

Economy in Eastern Europe: The Case of Poland."

_Brookings Papers on Economic Activity_ , pp. 75-147, 1990.  

Yuan Zheng Cao, Gang Fan, and Wing Thye Woo,

"Chinese Economic Reforms: Past Successes and Future

Challenges," pp. 19-40 in W. T. Woo, S. Parker, and J. D.

Sachs, eds., _Economies in Transition. Comparing Asia and_

_Europe_. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.  
  

**THURSDAY, JANUARY 28** Liberalization and Inflation  

Readings:  "Liberalization, Stabilization, and Growth." Chapter 2, pp.

22-43, in _From Plan to Market, World Bank Development_

_Report_ , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.  

William Easterly, "When is Stabilization Expansionary?

Evidence From High Inflation." _Economic Policy_ , pp. 67-

107, April 1996.

.  

**TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 2** Privatization (I)  

**Memo 1 due!  
**

Reading: Yoram Barzel,  ""The Formation of Rights." Chapter 5, pp.

62-75, in Barzel, _Economic Analysis of Property Rights_ ,

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.  

Simon Johnson and Heidi Kroll, "Managerial Strategies for

Spontaneous Privatization." _Soviet Economy_ 7:281-316,

1991.  

Martin Weitzman,  "How Not to Privatize." Mimeo 1991.  
  

**THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 4** Privatization (II)  

Readings: Michael Burawoy and Pavel Krotov,  "The Soviet Transition

From Socialism to Capitalism: Worker Control and

Economic Bargaining in the Wood Industry." _American_

_Sociological Review_ 57: 16-38, 1992.

David Li, "Ambiguous Property Rights in Transition

Economies: The Case of the Chinese Non-State Sector."

_Journal of Comparative Economics_ 23: 1-19, August 1996.  

**TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 9** Government in Transition (I)  

Readings: Chapters, pp. 41-60,  "Securing the Economic and

Social Fundamentals." _World Bank Development Report_ ,

New York: Oxford University Press, 1997.  

Andrei Shleifer, "Government in Transition _. " European _

_Economic Review_ 41: 385-410, 1997.  

**THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 11** Government in Transition (II)  

Readings: Timothy Frye and Andrei Shleifer,  "The Invisible Hand and

the Grabbing Hand." American Economic Review 87: 354-

358, May 1997.  

David D. Li, "Changing Incentives of the Chinese

Bureaucracy." _American Economic Review_ 88:393-397,

May 1998.  
  

**TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 16** Corruption

Readings: Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny,  "Corruption."

_Quarterly Journal of Economics_ 108(3): 599-617, 1993.  

Cheryl W. Gray and Daniel Kaufmann,  "Corruption and

Devlopment." _Finance and Development_ , March 1998.  

Paolo Mauro, "Corruption: Causes, Consequences, and

Agenda for Further Research." _Finance and Development_ ,

March 1998.  
  

**THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 18** The Post-Washington Consensus  

Readings: Joseph Stiglitz,  "More Instruments and Broader Goals:

Moving Toward the Post-Washington Consensus." The

1998 WIDER Annual Lecture.  

At Error! Bookmark not defined.

Martin Raiser, "Informal Institutions, Social Capital and

Economic Transition: Reflections on a Neglected

Dimension." EBRD Working Paper No. 25, August, 1997.

At: www.ebrd.com/english/Public/transition/index.htm  

**TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 23** Foreign Assistance (I)  

Readings: P. T. Bauer,  "Foreign Aid: Issues and Implications."

Chapter 3, pp. 38-62, in Bauer, _Reality and Rhetoric_ ,

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1984.

J. Bradford DeLong and Barry Eichengreen, "The Marshall

Plan: History's Most Successful Structural Adjustment

Program." Available at: http://econ161.berkeley.edu/  

**THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 25** Foreign Assistance (II)  

**QUIZ on readings!  
**

Reading: Tsidi Tsikata,  "Aid Effectiveness: A Survey of the Recent

Empirical Literature." IMF paper on Policy Analysis and

Assessment PPA/98/1, March 1998. Available at:

http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/CAT/ppaa.cfm  

**TUESDAY, MARCH 2** Crises  

**Memo 2 due!  
**

Readings: Paul Krugman,  "Currency Crises."

Error! Bookmark not defined.  

Paul Krugman, "What Happened to Asia?" At:

http://web.mit.edu/krugman/www/DISINTER.html  
  
  

**THURSDAY, MARCH 4** Asian Crisis (I)  

Jeffrey A. Frankel,  "The Asian Model, the Miracle, the

Crisis, and the Fund," April 16, 1998. Available at:

www.whitehouse.gov/WH/EOP/CEA/html/19980416.html  

Robert Wade and Frank Venerosa, "The Asian Crisis: The

High Debt Model vs. the Wall Street-treasury-IMF

Complex." March, 1998. Available at:

http://epn.org/sage/imf24.html  
  

**TUESDAY, MARCH 9** Asian Crisis (II)  

**Term Paper Due!**

Readings: Stanley Fischer,  "Reforming World Finance: Lessons From

a Crisis." At www.imf.org/external/np/vc/1998/100398.htm  

Martin Feldstein, "Refocusing the IMF. _Foreign Affairs_ 77:

20-33, March/April 1998.  
  
  

