History H105

U. S. History I



James Haw Spring 2002

Office: CM 203; phone 481-6694; email haw@ipfw.edu

Office hours: MWF 9-9:50, 11-11:50, and by appointment



Course requirements and grades:



1. Four examinations, each counting 1/6 of the course grade. Examinations are 40% multiple choice, 20% ID, and 40% essay questions. A good essay should respond clearly and directly to the question; should display sound reasoning or interpretation; should support the major points with evidence or explanation; should be consistent with the facts available to you; and should answer the question as thoroughly as time permits.



A general makeup exam for students who have missed any of the first three
examinations will be given on April 22. The makeup will be cumulative,
covering the material for all three examinations. Students who have taken all
of the first three examinations have the option of taking the makeup in an
attempt to improve their grades. Individual makeups will not ordinarily be
given.



2. One paper based on one of the chapters listed on this syllabus from Wheeler and Becker, _Discovering the American Past_ , vol. 1, counts 1/6 of the course grade.





3. Twelve short quizzes count a combined 1/6 of the course grade. Five of the quizzes deal with the chapters being discussed from _Discovering the American Past_ , and will be given on discussion days. The other seven are pop quizzes based on the study guide questions for the reading assignments in _America Past and Present_. Two quiz grades will be dropped; the best ten will count. There are no makeups for quizzes.



Plagiarism or academic dishonesty will result in a grade of zero for the
assignment in question, and in such cases the course grade will be computed on
a strict numerical average. University regulations require a course grade of F
for unauthorized withdrawal. If a student stays in the course through the
final examination but fails to complete one or more course requirements,
grades of zero will be given for the uncompleted requirements and the course
grade will be computed on a strict numerical average.



_Tape recorders_ : History Department policy does not allow the use of tape
recorders in the classroom. The instructor will make exceptions on request for
students with disabilities.



_Student outcomes:_

Upon successful completion of this course, students will be better able to:

1\. Have a coherent general understanding of major developments in U. S.
history to 1877.

2\. Grasp the relationship between events.

3\. Synthesize information into a coherent overview.

4\. Develop a historical consciousness, including awareness of the different
perspectives and ways of life of people in the past.

5\. Use skills such as reading for content and thesis, effective listening and
note-taking, and clear writing, which are important for future learning and
career success.

6\. Evaluate primary source material and draw appropriate interpretive
conclusions.

7\. Develop a basic appreciation of historical method.

Assessment of the first five outcomes is primarily through examinations; of
the last two, primarily through the paper.



_Required reading_ :

Robert Divine et al, _America Past and Present_ , 6th ed., vol. 1

William Wheeler and Susan Becker, _Discovering the American Past_ , 5th ed,
v.1



_Course outline and assignments_ :



Jan. 14 Introduction

16 Expansion of Europe (Divine, pp. 3-10, 15-28)

18 Cortez and Montezuma (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 1)



23 Virginia, 1607-1630 (Divine, 33-42, 72-74)

25 Massachusetts, 1630-1640 (Divine, 43-51, 66-71)



28 Puritan Revolution and Restoration (Divine, 51-60, 80-82)

30 Massachusetts, 1640-1691, and the Glorious Revolution (Divine, 82-88)

Feb. 1  Slavery (Divine, 11 and 14-15, 74-80)



4 Studying for the first examination

6  Colonial Politics, 1690-1760 (Divine, 97-108, 115-118)

8  Enlightenment and Great Awakening (Divine, 108-115)



11  FIRST EXAMINATION

13 Toward Revolution (Divine, 118-126, 130-145)

15 Independence (Divine, 145-158)



18 Boston Massacre (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 4)

20 Fruits of the Revolution (Divine, 161-168)

22  Confederation on trial (Divine, 168-185)



25 Ratification and the Hamilton program (Divine, 185-189, 197-208)

27 Jefferson and political parties (Divine, 212-214)

Mar. 1 The 1794 Philadelphia election (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 5)



4  Foreign affairs and party conflict (Divine, 208-212, 214-222)

6 SECOND EXAMINATION

8 Origins of the War of 1812 (Divine, 225-230, 242-250)



18 Continental expansion, Monroe Doctrine (Divine, 234-237, 255-261, 275-276)

20 Republican ascendancy, 1800-1824 (Divine, 230-234, 237-242, 270-272,
274-275)

22 Economic change, 1800-1850 (Divine, 262-270, 350-360)



25  Working women of Lowell (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 7)

27  Political realignment (Divine, 272-274, 276-290)

29 Jacksonian democracy (Divine, 290-305)



Apr. 1 American slavery (Divine, ch. 13)

3 Slavery from the inside (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 8)

5 Romantic reform (Divine, 309-322, 324-331)



8 THIRD EXAMINATION

10 The abolitionists (Divine, 322-324)

12 Manifest destiny, Mexican War (Divine, 335-350)



15 Toward Civil War (Divine, 390-404)

17 Toward Civil War (Divine, 404-412)

19 Secession (Divine, 412-415, 423-429)



22 MAKEUP EXAMINATION

24 Civil War (Divine, 429-450)

26 Plans for Reconstruction (Divine, 455-461)



29 Results of reconstruction (Divine, 461-481)

May 1,3 Catch-up or reading days



FOURTH EXAMINATION Friday, May 10, 8-10 a.m.





HIST H105 Paper Requirements Spring 2002

James Haw



You are to write a paper on the major issue raised in _any one_ of the
chapters that are listed below from Wheeler and Becker, _Discovering the
American Past_ , vol. 1. The paper should be five to eight pages long, typed
double-spaced with one-inch margins, using 10-point or 12-point type. Papers
on chapters 1, 4, 5, 7, and 8 are due in class on the day that that chapter is
discussed in class. _Late papers on these chapters will not be accepted after
a chapter has been discussed in class_. (If you have written a paper on one of
these chapters and then are unable to attend class on the day it is discussed,
have someone bring it in for you on the due date, or mail it to me so that it
will be postmarked on the due date.) Papers on chapters 2, 9 or 10 are due in
class on April 29. Late papers on these chapters will be accepted through May
3 (but not after that), and will be penalized one letter grade.



Due dates and topics are listed below.



Chapter Date due ```` Topic

1\. Jan. 18

|

How did Cortez and other Europeans view the American Indians, and vice versa?
What consequences might these perceptions have had for European-Indian
relations?  
  
---|---  
  
2\. Apr. 29

|

Why was Anne Hutchinson expelled from Massachusetts Bay colony?  
  
4\. Feb. 18

|

Reconstruct what really happened at the Boston Massacre. Was Captain Preston
guilty?  
  
5\. Mar. 1

|

Why did John Swanwick defeat Thomas Fitzsimons in the election? Who supported
each candidate, and why? (The  questions to consider on pp. 113-116 are a good
guide to issues you should discuss.)  
  
7\. Mar. 25

|

How did Francis Lowell try to make it acceptable for young women to come to
Lowell and work in his factory? What did public opinion think about Lowell and
its workers?  How did the working women of Lowell react to their situation and
to criticisms of them? Did the Lowell women accept or reject the assumptions
of the "cult of true womanhood?"  
  
8\. Apr. 3

|

What did the slaves think about slavery and their lives? (The questions to
consider on page 202 are a good guide to issues you should discuss; feel free
to add others

if you wish.)  
  
9\. Apr. 29

|

What arguments were made for and against the Wilmot Proviso? How fundamental
were the disagreements between North and South that this dispute revealed?
What disagreements, if any, were there among Northern speakers? Among Southern
speakers?  
  
10\. Apr. 29

|

What were the arguments for and against using black soldiers in the North? In
the South? Why did both sides decide to enlist blacks? How and why did each
side's thinking on this issue change over time? (Hint: notice the date of each
piece of evidence. Using your textbook, what was the military situation at the
time it was written?)  
  


Helpful Hints for your Paper



<p class=MsoNormal style='t

