![](../images/TSUflamegif.gif) |

**TROY STATE UNIVERSITY FLORIDA & WESTERN REGION  
DISTANCE LEARNING COURSE SYLLABUS**  
**HIS 1111 - United States to 1877**  
  
---|---  
  
* * *  
  
**INSTRUCTOR**

> Charles E. Merkel, Jr., Ph.D.  
>  Post Office Box 1752  
>  Niceville, Florida 32588  
>  (850) 897-4505 (voice and fax)  
>  [DrCEMerkel@aol.com](mailto:DrCEMerkel@aol.com)

**AVAILABILITY**

I will be available after the weekly class discussions to answer questions. If
necessary, feel free to telephone me at home or send me an e-mail message with
specific questions that cannot be answered during the times specified above.

**TEXTS**

( **Required** ) Garraty, John A. and Mark C. Carnes. _The American Nation: A
History of the United States._ (Tenth Edition) New York: Longman, 2000.

( **Strongly Recommended** ) Turabian, Kate L. _A Manual for Writers of Term
Papers, Theses, and Dissertations._ (Sixth Edition) Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1996.

**NOTE:** _Activation of a FREE subscription to _The History Place_ web
resource located at _www.ushistoryplace.com__. The publisher provides twelve
months of FREE access to students purchasing a new textbook. If a used copy of
the textbook is purchased, students can purchase a subscription to _The
History Place_ for $12.00.

**DESCRIPTION**

HIS 1112. United States Since 1877 (3) (CCAF-GE; General Studies Course).
Survey of the last hundred years of American History, from the "gilded age" to
the nuclear era, with attention to the multiplying complexities to global
affairs and expanding government in our national life.

**PREREQUISITE**

None.

**ENTRANCE COMPETENCIES**

Students should be able to write a coherent paragraph and should understand
the basic elements of a research paper.

Some familiarity in research techniques would be helpful, but is not
essential, since those items will be covered during online instruction.

**OVERALL OBJECTIVE**

Upon successful completion of the course, the student will understand and
appreciate the events that helped to shape the United States from 1492 to
1877.

**SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES**

The student will be able to:

  1. Demonstrate a fundamental knowledge of the development and contributions of the west on our American civilization.
  2. Demonstrate a familiarity with the significant personalities, places and events of the topic studied (1492 - 1877).
  3. Explain how history is an aid to the understanding of other disciplines and the gradual enlightenment of mankind.
  4. Demonstrate an awareness of the vast fields of study open to him/her and the need for continuous lifelong learning.
  5. Demonstrate improvement in oral and written communication skills.

**ATTENDANCE POLICY**

Although physical class meetings are not a part of this course, participation
in all interactive, learning activities is required. Student assignments and
student/instructor communications will be conducted via Blackboard, although
students will be permitted access to the instructor via telephone, mail or
fax. No automatic cuts from weekly discussion groups are authorized. If there
is a valid reason why a student cannot participate during the scheduled time,
the student must send the instructor a detailed e-mail message explaining the
circumstances.

**ACADEMIC HONESTY**

Each student has the responsibility to maintain the highest standards of
academic integrity and to refrain from cheating, plagiarism or any other form
of academic dishonesty. Academic dishonesty is representing another's work as
one's own, actively complying in such falsification, or violating test
conditions. Plagiarism is stealing and passing off the ideas and words of
another as one's own or using the work of another without crediting the
source. Plagiarism is presenting writing or ideas other than one's own as
one's own. It is, simply put, cheating or stealing. It is also plagiarizing if
a student attempts to make the thoughts of another appear as his/her own by
altering the language, by paraphrasing, or by omitting, rearranging, or
forming new combinations of words.

**METHOD OF INSTRUCTION**

All instruction and study materials/assignments for this course will be
presented via the course management software: Blackboard. It is essential that
each student thoroughly review the appropriate material in the text prior to
each class discussion to insure he/she has an understanding of the material
being presented and discussed. .

**METHOD OF EVALUATION**

Each student will be presenting a synopsis of two or more topics, which will
be shared with the other students in the class. Students will also complete
one short writing assignment (3 - 5 typewritten pages of text plus a title
page, footnotes and a bibliography), which deals with a topic, event or
individual under discussion. To receive maximum credit for the written
assignments, the format outlined in Turabian's _A Manual for Writers_ will be
utilized. Students will also take a final examination at the end of the
course. The examination may consist of identification plus essay questions.
The short writing assignment and synopsis will count 50% of your grade, and
the final examination will count 40% of your grade. The additional 10% will be
based on student participation in weekly class discussions conducted on
Blackboard. Students are required to participate in this exercise and the
instructor will monitor student participation. An optional term paper may be
prepared by students for extra credit on a topic mutually agreed upon by you
and your instructor.

**MAKE-UP**

All classes must be made up. Make-up assignments will be made by the
instructor.

**ADA**

Any student whose disabilities fall within the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) must inform the instructor at the beginning of the term of any special
needs or equipment necessary to accomplish the requirements of this course.

**GRADING SYSTEM**

_Grade_ | _Description_  
---|---  
A | Excellent  
B | Above average  
C | Average  
D | Below average but passing  
F | Failure (academic)  
FA | Failure due to excessive absences  
I | Incomplete  
W | Withdrawal  
NG | No grade reported  
AU | Audit  
P | Pass  
DR | Dropped course  
  
**COURSE CONTENT**

**Week One** \- Introduction to course, assignment of research topics, review
of writing techniques, definition of terms, overview of the period being
studied (1492 - 1877). Students are responsible for reading the appropriate
chapters in _The American Nation_ prior to weekly discussions.

**Week Two** \- Establishment of the colonies and the Revolutionary War will
be the focus of this week.

**Week Three** \- Discussions will center on the establishment of a Government
and the writing of the Constitution. Some time will be spent discussing the
rise of political parties.

**Week Four** \- We will be discussing the War of 1812 and its aftermath, as
well as the Seminole Wars, the rise of sectionalism and the relationship
between the United States and Mexico.

**Week of Five** \- Discussions will shift to politics and expansion, as the
Age of Jackson is examined and Texas declares its independence from Mexico.

**Week of Six** \- The Mexican War and Westward expansion will be the focus of
this week, as well as a discussion of sectional disputes, which led to
secession.

**Week of Seven** \- Military activities during the War will be examined, as
well as politics during the war years and the effects on the civilian
population. The written assignment is due this week.

**Week of Eight** \- The post-war years of Reconstruction will be discussed
and what was happening in the different regions of the country will be
explored. Optional term papers must be turned in by this week.

**Week Nine** \- Wrap-up class to complete any presentations, which may still
be outstanding, answer any lingering questions and clarify any points or
events, which may be unclear.

NOTE: The above schedule is intended as a guide to assist students in
completing all assignments. Weekly discussions on a topic may be longer or
shorter, depending on the level of interest and student
participation/preparation.

Extracts from _The Chicago Manual of Style_ which may be helpful during the
preparation of your papers: Paragraph 17.3.

. . . The chief difference between a bibliography entry and a note is that in
a note the author's name is not reversed as it is in an alphabetically
arranged bibliography, and punctuation between [the] author's name, title of
the book, and facts of publication consists of commas and parentheses rather
than periods. Also a note usually carries the page number(s) or other specific
references to the source cited. . . .

Examples:

**CITATIONS**

1David Stafford, _Britain and European Resistance, 1940-1945_ (Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1980), p. 90.

**BIBLIOGRAPHY**

Stafford, David. _Britain and European Resistance, 1940-1945_. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1980\. Paragraph 17.13.

" _Ibid._ " Ibid. (ibidem, "in the same place") refers to a single work cited
in the note immediately proceeding. It should not be used if more than one
work is given in the preceding note. Ibid. takes the place of the author's
name, the title of the work, and as much of the succeeding material as is
identical. The author's name is never used with ibid., nor is a title. Ibid.
may also be used in the place of the name of a journal or book of essays in
successive references to the same journal or book within one note.

Example:

3John P. Roche, _The Quest for the Dream: The Development of Civil Rights and
Human Relations in Modern America_. (New York: Macmillan Co., 1963), pp.
204-6.

4Stevens to Sumner, 26 August 1865, Charles Sumner Papers, Harvard College
Library, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 5Roche, _Quest for the Dream_ , p. 175.
6Ibid., p. 176.

Electronic Documents

The following information is extracted from Kate L. Turabian's _A Manual for
Writers_ (Sixth Edition) pages 158-9.

8.141 Electronic media are of two main types: (1) physical entities such as
CD-ROMs, diskettes, and magnetic tapes, and (2) on-line sources such as
computer services, networks, and bulletin boards. The former are in relatively
fixed form, although they may be updated periodically; the latter may be
continually revised, making the precise date of access especially important.
Citations of electronic documents can follow the same general form as
citations of printed materials. The same basic information is needed: author
and title of the particular item; name and description of the source cited,
whether CD-ROM, some other physical form, or an on-line source; city of
publication, if any; publisher or vendor (or both); date of publication or
access (or both); and identifying numbers or pathway needed for access to the
material. Citations of material previously issued in print should include the
same information and use the same style as any references to books and
periodicals, as well as providing the additional information necessary to
locate the electronic version.

William J. Mitchell, _City of Bits: Space, Place and the Infobahn_ [book on-
line] (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1995, accessed 29 September 1995); available from
[http://www-
mitpress.mit.edu:80/City_of_Bits/Pulling_Glass/index.html;](http://www-
mitpress.mit.edu/City_of_Bits/Pulling_Glass/index.html;) Internet.

oanne C. Baker and William W. Hunstead, "Revealing the Effects of Orientation
in Composite Quasar Spectra," _Astrophysical Journal_ 452:L95-L98, 20 October
1995 [journal on-line]; available from
<http://ww.aas.org/ApJ/v452n2/5309/5309.html;> Internet; accessed 29 September
1995.

In the sample notes above, the access path is noted in the universal resource
locator (URL) format that has recently come into common use. Although the URL
is a complete specification of the retrieval method for a document, it should
never be substituted for the name of the publication and the publisher.
Electronic journals, for example, may move to other locations on the Internet
or may cease to exist as Internet publications, so a citation giving only the
URL becomes meaningless. In time the infrastructure may permit more abstract
methods of accessing materials on the Internet; a scheme using universal
resource names (URN) is being planned, providing a canonical name, not
specific to a machine, that applies even when a document is moved to another
location. We recommend using such abstract retrieval schemes as they become
available.

TITLE

____________

A Term Paper

Presented to

Charles E. Merkel, Jr., Ph.D.

Troy State University

____________

In Partial Fulfillment

of the Requirements for the Degree

Bachelor of Arts (Science)

____________

by

Your Name

Month Year

