##  Our National Pastime: Baseball and American Culture

Instructor: | [Allan Rossman](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman)  
---|---  
Office: | New Science Building 235 (x-1668)  
E-Mail | [rossman@dickinson.edu](mailto:rossman@dickinson.edu)  
Office hrs: | M 1:00-3:00pm, W 2:00-4:00pm (and by appointment and by chance)  
Meetings: | MWF 11:00-11:50, New Science Building 208 or 227  
Library liaison: | Kristen Senecal (x-1396,
[senecal@dickinson.edu](mailto:senecal@dickinson.edu))  
  
###  Overview:

> "Whoever wants to know the heart and mind of America had better learn
baseball." - Jacques Barzun

This seminar will study the national pastime and the literature that it has
inspired as a means of examining aspects of American culture. The infamous
1919 World Series; Jackie Robinson's breaking the color barrier; the trials
and tribulations of Charlie Brown and his perpetually losing team-- baseball
has touched each and every one of us. Some of the themes that we will explore
through baseball literature include teamwork and individuality, innocence and
betrayal, hope and redemption, charity and greed, fame and celebrity. We will
also investigate America's experiences with race, gender, labor, and media
relations as they are reflected through baseball. For the sake of comparison,
the seminar will not concern issues such as the mechanics of throwing a curve
ball, the effectiveness of the sacrifice bunt as a managerial strategy.

###  Readings:

Some of the works that we will read in this course include:

  * _Eight Men Out_ , by Eliot Asinof
  * _Me and Hank: A Boy and His Hero, Twenty-Five Years Later_ , by Sandy Tolan
  * _Wait Till Next Year_ , by Doris Kearns Goodwin
  * _A Great and Glorious Game_ , by A. Bartlett Giamatti
  * _Diamonds in the Rough: The Untold Story of Baseball_ , by Joel Zoss and John Bowman
  * _Baseball's Best Short Stories_ , edited by Paul D. Staudohar

###  Goals:

> "Writing is exciting and baseball is like writing. You can never tell with
either how it will go or what you will do." - Marianne Moore

The overarching goals of this course concern the concept of **argument** and
the use of **writing** to construct and communicate arguments. I have designed
the course to help you to develop your ability to recognize and critique the
arguments of others and to formulate and defend your own arguments on the
basis of evidence. More specifically, I hope that this course helps you to
develop your skills of:

  * effective writing
  * critical thinking
  * careful reading
  * engaged discussion
  * library research

Along the way you should also learn some things about baseball and its
relevance to American culture. Frankly, though, the subject matter of the
course is less important than your developing intellectual skills and habits
of mind that will serve you well throughout your college career and beyond.

###  Grading:

Your course grade will be determined by the following criteria:

  * four essays (65% total; 15% for each of the first three, 20% for the final one)
  * extensive informal writing (15%)
  * class participation (15%)
  * occasional quizzes (5%)

Most class periods will consist of discussion of the readings for that day,
although I will try to vary the formats of our meetings. Your class
participation grade will depend more on the quality of your contributions to
the discussion than on the extent of your comments. Also included in your
class participation grade will be miscellaneous assignments ranging from
finding information in the library to preparing discussion questions to
participating in a debate. You are also encouraged to participate by sending
discussion questions and comments to the class via e-mail.

Quizzes will be given occasionally during class meetings to test your reading
of the assignment. You may drop your lowest quiz score from the calculation of
your quiz average. Missed quizzes can not be made up.

Assignments of essays will be made as the semester progresses; you will be
given ample time to work on these. You will be given detailed directions and
expectations for these assignments; general guidelines for my evaluation of
your essays can be found
[here](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/essayguide.html). All essays must
be word-processed. You will be expected to prepare more than one draft for
most papers. I strongly encourage you to make use of the Writing Center.

Late work will be accepted only with a written medical excuse. Plagiarized
work (see the _Code of Conduct_ for its definition) will not be tolerated.

###  Schedule:

Click on the links below for information about class sessions and assignments:

  * [Class 1: August 26, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl1.html)
  * [Class 2: August 28, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl2.html)
  * [Class 3: August 30, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl3.html)
  * [Class 4: September 1, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl4.html)
  * [Class 5: September 4, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl5.html)
  * [Class 6: September 6, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl6.html)
  * [Class 7: September 8, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl7.html)
  * [Class 8: September 11, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl8.html)
  * [Class 9: September 13, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl9.html)
  * [Class 10: September 15, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl10.html)
  * [Class 11: September 18, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl11.html)
  * [Class 12: September 20, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl12.html)
  * [Class 13: September 22, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl13.html)
  * [Class 14: September 25, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl14.html)
  * [Class 15: September 27, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl15.html)
  * [Class 16: September 29, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl16.html)
  * [Class 17: October 2, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl17.html)
  * [Class 18: October 4, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl18.html)
  * [Class 19: October 6, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl19.html)
  * [Class 20: October 9, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl20.html)
  * [Class 21: October 11, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl21.html)
  * [Class 22: October 16, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl22.html)
  * [Class 23: October 18, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl23.html)
  * [Class 24: October 20, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl24.html)
  * [Class 25: October 23, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl25.html)
  * [Class 26: October 25, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl26.html)
  * [Class 27: October 27, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl27.html)
  * [Class 28: October 30, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl28.html)
  * [Class 29: November 1, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl29.html)
  * [Class 30: November 3, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl30.html)
  * [Class 31: November 6, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl31.html)
  * [Class 32: November 8, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl32.html)
  * [Class 33: November 10, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl33.html)
  * [Class 34: November 13, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl34.html)
  * [Class 35: November 15, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl35.html)
  * [Class 36: November 17, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl36.html)
  * [Class 37: November 20, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl37.html)
  * [Class 38: November 27, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl38.html)
  * [Class 39: November 29, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl39.html)
  * [Class 40: December 1, 2000](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman/FS/fscl40.html)

###  Study Hints (for Freshman Seminar and Beyond!):

I offer the following very simple but often ignored pieces of advice for your
consideration:

  1. **Come to class.**
  
It is extremely important for you to attend every class meeting. The vast
majority of class time will be devoted to group discussions; I will not be
lecturing at all. Although much learning often takes place outside of the
classroom, our classroom experiences set the stage for that learning to occur.  


  2. **Prepare for class.**
  
Of course your attendance in class is of limited value if you have not
prepared for class. Please read the assigned material for class so that you
can contribute meaningfully to the discussion. If there are rare occasions
when you are unprepared for class, please let me know ahead of time.  


  3. **Participate in class.**
  
In addition to preparing for class and coming to class, I ask you to
participate actively in class. Since most class time will consist of group
discussions, please feel free to take part enthusiastically.  


  4. **Defend your arguments.**
  
You will find that there are not sharp distinctions between right and wrong
answers for many of the issues that we will discuss. This does not mean,
however, that all arguments are equally valid. What matters is the degree to
which you defend your position with support from the text or from other
references or from personal reflections on the world around us.  


  5. **Use resources.**
  
Please take advantage of the variety of valuable resources that are available
to you in this course. In particular, I encourage you to utilize the Writing
Center as you work on your papers. You should also make use of the resources
in Spahr Library. Finally, please remember to use me as a resource: I'll be
more than happy to offer assistance when you come to me with questions.  


  6. **Write constantly.**
  
Writing is a process requiring constant reflection and revision, so I
encourage you to treat it as such in this seminar. Please begin your
assignments early to allow sufficient time for this reflection and revision.
Do not submit first drafts of papers unless you are specifically asked for
that. Please take informal writing assignments seriously, as well.  


  7. **Work together.**
  
I think you will find that you can learn a great deal from your peers. Some of
your assignments will ask you to work together in pairs or teams, but feel
free to ask for advice from your peers at other times as well. When you are
asked to comment on a peer's work, please make constructive suggestions.  


  8. **Respect others' opinions.**
  
Please show courtesy and respect for others' opinions and their right to
express them. Feel free to criticize the arguments of others, but do so on
substantive grounds.  


  9. **Have fun!**
  
I sincerely hope that you will enjoy both the subject matter of the course and
the process of learning. By all means you should try to enjoy the readings.
Even though we will try to dig deeper in our discussions, the entertainment
value of baseball is extremely important. I also hope that you will enjoy our
class discussions and participate in them enthusiastically.  


  10. **Think!!**
  
Please be prepared to open your mind as you investigate new ideas and think
about familiar ones from new perspectives.

A common theme emerges from these suggestions: **You are responsible for your
own learning.** What do your tuition dollars pay for, you ask? My answer is
that they provide you with an environment which fosters the learning
experience. Please be aware that you have a number of resources to support you
in this endeavor. My responsibility as an instructor is to provide you with
contexts and opportunities and feedback which facilitate your learning. Please
challenge me to assist you with your learning as much as I can. You can (and
should) also call on resources such as the Writing Center and the Waidner-
Spahr Library. Finally, realize that your peers can be a very valuable
resource to assist your learning process.

[Back to Rossman Page](http://www.dickinson.edu/~rossman)

[rossman@dickinson.edu](mailto:rossman@dickinson.edu)

