
    **Syllabus
    HISTORY 3338: History of Sports
    Spring 2000
    Dr. Jim Harper**
    
    
    **Office Hours** : **Holden Hall 48: 9:00-10:00 MWF & by arrangement.**
    
    
    **Format** : **lecture and discussion**
    
    
    **Required Texts:** **all are paperback**
    
    
    **Rader, Benjamin** ** _American Sports: From the Age of Folk Games to the Age of Spectators_** **, 
    Prentice-Hall, 4th Edition, 1999.**
    
    
    **Riess, Steven A.,** ** _Major Problems in American Sport History_** **, 1997. Houghton Mifflin, 
    paperback**
    
    
    **Guttmann, Allen,** ** _A Whole New Ball Game: An Interpretation of American Sports_** **,
     (North Carolina U. Press.)**
    
    
    **Writing Assignment** : **One 3-5 page (typed) sports fan autobiography. More about this later. 
    Due , Frebruary 7, 2000.**
    
    
    **Examinations & grade breakdown:**
    
    
    **Test One:	February 18, 2000				Test 2: March 31, 2000
    Final Exam:    May 9 Tuesday (History 3338 (10:00 MWF) exam 7:30-10:00**
    
    
    **All Make-ups of exams one and two : May 3, 2000.
    Tests count 30% each. Sports fan autobiography. 10%.**
    
    
    **NOTE: This is an upper level university class and students are expected to conduct
     themselves as responsible adults in such matters as adding and dropping, attendance, 
    punctuality and class demeanor.** **Being late for this class may cost the offender as much 
    as 5% of his semester grade for each instance. If you can't come on time, don't come**. 
    **Tape recorders are not permitted in this class without the consent of the instructor
     who rarely gives such consent. Any instance of cheating will result in an 
    automatic F for the course and the instructor reserves the right to pursue
     the matter further.**



**Tentative** **Schedule History 3338  
Spring 2000**

**Note: because this is the first semester to present this course in
PowerPoint, dates may be a bit more tenative.** **Test dates will not
change**.

    
    
    **Jan. 19 		INTRODUCTION
    			A. Poodah for Passing
    			B. Sport and Sports History**
    
    
    **Jan. 21**[ **The Western Sporting Heritage**](../Weblinks/Pre1900/Colonial/european.htm) **A. The Origins of Sport
    		B. Greece and the Olympics
    		Guttmann, ix-12; Riess, 3-19.**
    
    
    **Jan. 24	C. Sport in Ancient Rome
    		D.**[ **Sport in Medieval Europe**](../../../Harper/3338Sports/Weblinks/Pre1900/Colonial/european.htm) **E.**[ **The English Sporting Heritage**](../../../Harper/3338Sports/Weblinks/Pre1900/Colonial/english.htm) **Guttmann, 13-34**
    
    
    **Jan. 26**[ **Sport in Colonial America**](../../../Harper/3338Sports/Weblinks/Pre1900/Colonial/colonial.htm) **A.**[ **American Indian Sport**](../../../Harper/3338Sports/Weblinks/Pre1900/Colonial/indian.htm) **B.**[ **Obstacles to Colonial Sport**](../../../Harper/3338Sports/Weblinks/Pre1900/Colonial/obstacle.htm) **C.**[ **Colonial Pastimes and Sportsmen**](../../../Harper/3338Sports/Weblinks/Pre1900/Colonial/fathers.htm) **Rader, 1-18; Guttmann, 35-50; Riess, 21-48**
    
    
    **Jan. 28**[ **The Rise of Organized Sports**](../../../Harper/3338Sports/Weblinks/Pre1900/18001865.htm) **A. Continuing barriers to Sports
    		B. Changes
    		Rader 19-48; Riess, 49-81**
    
    
    **Jan. 31	C. Reasons for the Growth of Sport 
    		Riess, 82-110**
    
    
    **Feb. 2**[ **Baseball A Mirror on American History**](../../../Harper/3339BB/WebStuff/baseball.htm) **Rader, 49-63; 153-171;**
    
    
    **Feb. 4**[ **Baseball From a Game to a Business**](../../3339BB/WebStuff/Pre1900/earlybb.htm) **Riess, 90-93; 103-110; 223-230; 213-222.**
    
    
    **Feb. 7**[ **The National Pastime**](../../3339BB/WebStuff/20thCentury/DeadBall/deadball.htm) **A. Growth 1900-1920
    		B.The House of Baseball
    		Guttmann, 51-69.**
    
    
    **Feb. 9	John L. Sullivan and the Rise of Boxing
    		Sullivan and his Impact
    		Boxing Continuing Image
    		Rader, 64-79; Riess, 54-56; 207-208; 230-237.**
    
    
    **Feb. 11	The Rise of Collegiate Sports
    		A. Colleges Turn to Sport
    		B. College Baseball Leads the Way
    		Rader, 81-97; Riess 113-114; 121-128**
    
    
    **Feb. 14	A.**[ **The First Great Collegiate Football Era**](../Weblinks/Pre1900/footbal1.htm) **Rader, 172-189 Riess, 114-121; 128-139**
    
    
    **Feb. 16	B. Problems and Reform**
    
    
    **Feb. 18**	**Test Number 1**
    
    
    **Feb. 21	Sports and the American Society, 1880-1920
    		A. Sport Enters the American Mind
    		Rader, 116-132 ; Guttmann, 83-100; Riess 140-167**
    
    
    **Feb. 23	B. Organized Play
    		Rader 98-115; Guttmann, 70-100**
    
    
    **Feb. 25	The Glory of Their Times**
    
    
    **Feb. 28	The 1920s Sports Boom	
    		A. Causes
    		B. The Second Collegiate Football Boom
    		Rader, 191-205.**
    
    
    **March 1	       C. The Modern Sports Hero: Babe Ruth
    			Rader, 133-151; Riess, 309-337.**
    
    
    **March 3		D. Red Grange and Other Heroes
    			Rader, 133-151; Riess, 309-337.**
    
    
    **March 6		Sport and Race
    			A. The Era of Segregation
    			Rader, 292-303; Riess, 278-307.**
    
    
    **March 8		B.  Sport and Race: Integration 
    			Riess, 370-399**
    
    
    **March 10	C. Sports and Race: Beyond Integration
    			Guttmann, 119-138.**
    
    
    **March 13 -17 	Spring Break**
    
    
    **March 20 	Women and Sports, Pt. 1
    			Rader, 207-223; 303-314; Guttmann, 139-158; Riess, 234-277**
    
    
    **March 22 	Women and Sports From Didrickson to Billie Jean King
    			Riess, 338-369**
    
    
    **March 24	The Modern Olympics**
    
    
    **March 27	The Nazi Olympics, 1936**
    
    
    **March 29	The Modern Olympics Pt. 3**
    
    
    **March 31**	**Test 2**
    
    
    **April 3	The Sports Society
    		Rader, 224-240, 261-275.**

> >  
    
    
    **April 5	Sport and Media
    		A. Sportswriters**

> > > > >  
    
    
    **April 7	B. Radio***
    
    
    **April 10	C. Television
    		Riess; 417-425.**
    
    
    **April 12	The Rise Football,
    		A. The Rise of the National Football League
    		Rader, 241-259.**

> >  
    
    
    **April 14	B. The Dominance of of the Football**



    
    
    **April 17	The Rise of Basketball
    		A. College and Amateur
    		Rader, 256-259; 268-275; Guttmann, 70-82.**

> >  
    
    
    **April 19	Basketball: Continued**
    
    
    **April 21	The Sports Business
    A. From Mom and Pop to the Top
    B. Sports and Labor
    Rader, 276-291; 315-333	Guttmann, 159-172**
    
    
    **April 24 Day of No Classes**
    
    
    **April 26	Modern Sports Fiction 
    		A. From Kids Stuff to Adult Themes
    		B. Representative Sports Fiction**
    
    
    **April 28	Sport in Film ***
    
    
    **May 1	Review and Evaluation**
    
    
    **Riess, 3-19.**
    
    
    **May 3	All makeups for exams 1-2**
    
    
    **May 9 Tuesday Final exam 7:30-10:00 am.**



    
    
    **SOME IMPORTANT ADDITIONAL INFORMATION**
    
    
    **" Experience keeps a dear school, but fools will learn in no other."
    **				**Benjamin Franklin,** ** _Poor Richard's Almanac_**
    
    
    **The following information reflects your teacher's experience with more than 12,000 
    students** a **t Texas Tech and his belief that how you approach a university class may 
    be as important for your future and success as the material you encounter. 
    This information is also policy for everyone in the class.**
    
    
    **My office hours are there for your questions and problems. Please use them. 
    Your questions are also welcome in class.**
    
    
    **This class begins at 10:00 am and ends at 10:50 am.  If  this conflicts your inclinations, 
    habits, or schedule make adjustments before the end of the add drop/period.** **ARRIVING LATE OR LEAVING THIS CLASS EARLY MAY COST YOU 5% OF YOUR SEMESTER GRADE FOR EACH 
    OCCURRENCE. IF YOU CANNOT MAKE THIS CLASS ON TIME, 
    DO NOT COME! Missing class harms only you. Being late bothers others.**
    
    
    **If you have a vision or hearing problem, or some type of learning disability, 
    you should notify me as soon as possible and no later than the second day of classes.
    You should purchase all the books for this course as soon as possible. In the event a 
    book is out of print, out of stock, or there is some other problem, the bookstore
     can often do something if notified early. There is little that can be done later 
    in the semester.**
    
    
    **This is a classroom, not the UC or your dorm room. If you feel compelled to talk, 
    sleep, or read the** ** _University Daily_** **(or something serious), you should drop this class 
    immediately. If you persist, you may be asked to leave. Smoking, snuff, chewing tobacco, 
    food and drink are frowned on in this classroom.**
    
    
    **You are responsible for all material presented in class. This includes directions, 
    as well as subject matter. If you miss a class, it is your responsibility 
    to make up what you missed.**
    
    
    **Your grade will be based on your examinations and other required work.** **There is no opportunity for extra credit.**
    
    
    **The examination days** ** **including the final**** **are noted on the syllabus.** ** **If they conflict with your schedule (for example with weddings or 
    university sponsored events), you should remove the conflicts or drop this class 
    now while you can still add/drop**** **.** **For example if the** ** _Schedule of Classes_** **shows 
    that you have three finals the same day, the time to do something about it is now.**
    
    
    **If you do not perform as well as you expected on an exam, the time to see 
    me is as soon as possible after the exams are returned. Bad academic habits 
    like illnesses are best attacked in an early stage. Besides, instructors are not 
    very impressed with the seriousness or commitment of students who discover 
    that they have problems during the last two weeks of the semester.**
    
    
    **Grades are not posted in this class. I will return the first two examinations 
    as soon as possible during the semester. If you want your final grade 
    earlier than the registrar provides them, give me a stamped, self-addressed card on the day of the final examination.**
    
    
    **I promise not to call you at home with my personal problems, 
    please extend me the same courtesy. When you miss an examination, your grade
     is a "0" until that examination is made up. If you miss the final without an excuse, 
    you fail (forgetting the exam is not an excuse). With an excuse you may receive an 
    Incomplete until the final is made up**. **You cannot receive a grade of Incomplete 
    if you are failing.**
    
    
    **If I didn't think the required readings were important, I wouldn't assign them. 
    History is much more fun when you are making good grades than bad ones.**
    
    
    **Some questions you probably should not ask:**
    
    
    **1. Will this be on the test?**
    
    
    **If it is mentioned in class or the texts or given out to you, it is important.**
    
    
    **2. I was absent Friday, did I miss anything?**
    
    
    **On a good day your teacher will say: No, I just babbled nonsense for fifty minutes; on a bad day he might get angry.**
    
    
    **3. What are your office hours?**
    
    
    **These are on the syllabus or will be announced in class.**
    
    
    **4. When is the test?**
    
    
    **This too is on the syllabus.**
    
    
    **5. Do you count off for English?**
    
    
    **Your class is taught in English not Hindi or Finnish. Our primary concern is your mastery of the material, but abysmal English can hurt your grade.**



    
    
    **SAVE THIS SYLLABUS! A TREE GAVE ITS LIFE FOR IT!**





E-mail [JTJWH@ttacs.ttu.edu](mailto:JTJWH@ttacs.ttu.edu)

**This page was last updated  
August 21, 2002**

**![Hit
Counter](../../_vti_bin/fpcount.exe/harper/?Page=3338Sports/Study/syl2000.htm|Image=0)**

    
    
    [**Sports History on the Web**](../Weblinks/links.htm)

[**Home Page**](../../Default.htm)

**Background image, an oldtimer (George Herman Ruth) takes his cuts,  
during the 1940s.Photo provided by William R. Conroy.** ****

