[![Feature](../graphics/bar_feature.gif)](http://www.ups.edu/arches/)  
---  
|  **![ ](../resources/dot_clr.gif)** | **![ ](../graphics/430.gif)**  
| ![Arches Contents](../graphics/content_b2.gif)  
---  
[![Alumni Profiles](../graphics/alum_b2.gif)](../alumni_p.htm)  
[![Alumni Profiles](../graphics/around_b2.gif)](../around.htm)  
[![Press Box](../graphics/press_b2.gif)](http://www.ups.edu/athletics/)  
[![Features](../graphics/feature_b2.gif)](../home.htm)  
[![Their Own Words](../graphics/own_b2.gif)](../ownwords.htm)  
[![Letters](../graphics/Letters_b2.gif)](../letters.htm)  
[![Syllabus](../graphics/syllabus_b2.gif)](../syllabus.htm)  
![Other University Info Sources](../graphics/other_bar2.gif)  
[![Open
Line](../graphics/open_line_b2.gif)](http://www.ups.edu/news/OpenLine/home.htm)  
[![Events
Calender](../graphics/events_b2.gif)](http://www.ups.edu/events/home.htm)  
[![Press
Releases](../graphics/press_release_b2.gif)](http://www.ups.edu/news_events.htm?nav=2)  
| **The Sound of Justice**

By JAMES M. COBB

* * *

**RELATED LINKS**

  * [Read an unpublished short story about Kevin Pulaski, the hero in Cobb's new book _West on 66._](justice.htm)
  * [Read more about Jim Cobb at Amazon.com.](http://www.amazon.com) 

* * *

_**I**_ _n this unpublished short story, Cobb introduces us to Kevin Pulaski,
the hero of his new book_ West on 66 _. In it, we see Pulaski as an Indiana
teenager, years before he became a detective for the L.A. Police Department.
But his penchant for fast cars and fast thinking already are well
established._

Man, right up until then it had been a really, really smooth night.

You know, the kind we get back here in Indiana a lot during the summer. Two
gajillion stars overhead and warm enough to let you cruise 'til dawn with the
top down. However, it was just past midnight when I wheeled my black Deuce-
nosed '29 into the empty parking lot of the Route 22 Diner, spraying gravel
and feeling good.

I gave the little fenderless Ford a friendly slap on her hood because she had
been a very good girl that evening, then ambled on in through the stainless
art deco doors of the Route 22. Parking myself on one of the counter stools, I
slapped my palm on the Monel counter top. "Innkeeper, a malt of the chocolate
persuasion, if you please. Make it an extra thick."

Eddie, the night counterman, rolled his eyes toward the tin ceiling and
reached for a malt tumbler.

"You're happy and rich tonight, Puiaski. Somebody must have been suckered."

I reached into the pocket of my leather jacket and flashed the trio of
Lincolns. "Five dollars a gear with a college guy from Indy. He and his
buddies were out cruising in his dad's new '48 Caddy convertible, feeling real
impressed with themselves. You'd figure somebody bright enough to go to
college would realize that there ain't no way a big showboat Cadillac can
accelerate with a stripped-down and gowe-dup Model A."

"Yeah, but he should have busted you once you hit the high end," Eddie
replied, dumping a scoop of vanilla into the blender can. "That track roadster
of yours is quicker 'n spit off the line, but the big V8s can still kill you
in top gear.

While Eddie's not a rodney himself, our pack of local hop-up hounds have hung
around his joint long enough for him to pick up on the jive.

"That is the truth," I agreed, "but you see, I sort of organized for this race
to take place over on that little side street near the airport. It's prime for
drag racing; all paved and straight and no trafffic. The thing is, there isn't
too much of it. We went up through the gears and that college guy finally got
that big 'ol Caddy cranking and he was just starting to move in on me when,
clang, we ran clean out of road."

The little counterman sighed and dusted a last pinch of dry malt across the
top of my shake. "Pulaski, unless you manage to wrap yourself around a
telephone pole first, somebody is going to shoot you one of these days."

"Either way, man, I hope I go out grinning." I reached over and flipped a
nickel into the counter Play-O-Matic.

I was taking my first pull from my glass when the sound of a distant car
engine leaked past Peggy Lee's latest.

"You got two customers coming, in I said. "Steve Roccardi and Julie Kennedy
will be walking through that door inside of a minute."

Eddie cocked a sceptical eyebrow. "Now how do you know that."

I tapped the side of my shake tumbler. "Bet you the tab for this malt. Double
or nothing."

"You're on."

For the second time that night, it was no contest. The two-toned rippling
snarl grew in intensity and swung off the highway. I didn't need to look over
my shoulder and out the windows to know that a T-Bucket roadster, channeled,
Indy-nosed and fire engine red, was parking beside the A-Bomb. I also didn't
need to look to know that my buddy Steve would be driving the little rod. The
tricky part was Julie, but the odds favored her sitting at Steve's side these
days.

"I don't know how you do it," Eddie grumbled, filling a couple of water
glasses and setting them on the counter.

The thing was, when I did get around to taking a look at my friends, I could
see that we had grief. Steve has a dark, Greek-sailor kind of good looks and
generally is a pretty genial kind of guy. Tonight, though, he looked mad
enough to spit thunderbolts. Julie's pretty blue eyes were red from a whole
lot of crying too. It was time for ol' Uncle Kevin to make with the inquiries.

Steve and me are what you call _muey simpatio,_ even though he's graduated
while I'm still making the high school scene. Both of our dads work for the
railroad. Both of us are outsiders who'd come to Fairmont at about the same
time, and both of us live and breath hot rod. We've swapped car parts and
speed tips and have stood as pit crew to each other at half of the
unsanctioned circle tracks in Indiana.

Julie on the other hand is a local who comes from the other side of our dads'
tracks. She's a rare dish of a sweet little blonde and of late, she and Steve
have been spending a lot of time staring deep into each other's eyes.

And there lies the bitch. You see, Julie's father owns Fairmount's only
jewelry store, and while the little hole-in-the-wall place isn't exactly
Tiffanies, you'd never know it from the way Mr. Kennedy acts. His one-man
consensus is that his daughter is way too good for the Spanish-Italian son of
a GM&O section man. Of late, whenever Steve looked honked and Julie had tears,
it was generally because of some hangup with ol' Daddy-O.

"What's tickin', gang," I commented as they claimed the stools beside me.
"What gives with the bringdown?"

"The usual, Kev, only more of it," Steve replied grimly. "Static with Julie's
dad. Big time."

I dug my half-squashed pack of Luckys out of my jacket pocket and offered him
one. "So, like, what else is new?"

Julie gave a kind of shuddery sigh. "This is different, Kevin. Today dad put
his foot down. He says I can't see Steve anymore. Ever."

"And I'm talking to a mirage here?"

My friends grinned in spite of themselves. "Nope," Steve replied, reaching
over to squeeze Julie's hand. "But I guess it's time for a showdown. Julie and
me have to make some decisions, and we're not exactly sure what we're going to
do."

Heck, I knew what they needed to do. So did most everyone else in town who'd
ever seen them walking around totally gooney in love with eachother. Steve and
Julie just needed a chance to talk themselves into it.

"Okay, so lay the word on me. Maybe the Kev can help."

They hit Eddie up for a couple of cokes and started the yarn.

"I've been helping Dad out in the store this summer," Julie began. "And late
this afternoon, yesterday afternoon now I guess, Steve dropped in for a minute
to see me. Dad doesn't like it when Steve hangs around, but I couldn't see how
it could hurt just for a little while. Anyway, Dad had been called down to the
bank, and I always feel kind of nervous minding the place myself."

Julie gave a shuddery kind of sigh and took a disinterested sip of her coke.
"We were just standing at the counter talking, when all of a sudden my father
comes storming out of the back room. I mean he just tears into Steve right
there and then. I don't think it even would have made any difference if we'd
had any customers. He just starts threatening Steve and yelling these awful
things."

"Yeah," Steve added scowling. "I could have taken it if he'd just kept it to
me, but he went after my family. He called my father a damn, dirty wop and a
bunch of other stuff. And then he said some things about Julie, too. I'm
tellin' you, Jackson, I almost decked him on the spot. As it was, I said some
stuff back and walked out before I blew totally."

"Smart move, kid" Eddie commented. And it was. You know what they think about
teenagers these days. If Steve had hung a fat lip on Julie's old man, no
matter how well deserved, he'd have caught hell for it.

"So then?" says I.

Steve shrugged, "So nothing. I was so steamed I couldn't stand being still. I
got in the T-Bucket and I started cruising. Man, I burned a full tank of gas
just driving around all over the county trying to cool down. Once I did, I
came back to town and picked Julie up. We have to start getting some things
straight."

"Didn't her dad have anything to say about that?"

Julie smiled one of her "for Steve only" smiles and rested her hand on his
shirt collar. "We got lucky. Dad got called down to the store for some reason
tonight and I snuck out the back door when I heard Steve's car drive past. I'm
sure Mom's called Dad by now but I don't care. They've already grounded me
'till I'm about 40, so what else are they going to do?"

I gave her a thumbs up. "Cool, Sweetness. That's flyin' with Doolittle."

I dig hanging around with fighters.

I'd just started thinking about my friends' problems when one of my own showed
up. Gravel crunched in the parking lot and a black and white Ford sedan with a
Fairmont police badge on the door pulled up in front. A few moments later the
massive, slope-shouldered silhouette of Officer Hyram Dooley loomed in the
doorway.

Dooley's been playing Elmer Fudd to my Bugs Bunny for better than a year now,
ever since the ABomb and I started to develop our rather rapid reputation on
the local back roads. He hasn't caught us yet of course, but hey, he's always
in there pitchin you know? Generally I don't pack a grudge about it. In a way,
having somebody like old Dewlap hanging on your tailpipes isn't such a bad
thing. It keeps a guy from getting sloppy.

Dooley's patrol partner follows him into the diner, and the two cops eye us
balefully, trying to look ominous.

"Top 'o the evenin' Officer Dooley" quoth I, rotating my stool to face the
justice merchants. "What can I be doin' for ye this foin night?"

My natural suspicion is that this has to do with that little acceleration
contest out by the airport. However I'm swiftly proved wrong.

"Nothing for once, Pulaski," he growled back. "Beyond keeping your trap shut
and staying out of my way. I've got business with Roccardi here."

Steve's brows came together. "Me? What's the problem, officer."

"No problem, son. We just want to talk to you."

When a cop tells you that in that tone of voice, yeah, there is a problem.

Julie, Eddie and I watched as they leaned Steve against the counter for a
patdown. "Alright, Roccardi," Dooley said crisply. "Where were you about 10:30
tonight?"

"Uh, just around." Even to Julie and me it sounded a little lame. And we knew
what he was talking about.

"What do you mean by 'around?'"

"I mean that I was just cruising around. I couldn't say exactly where I was at
10:30. Out east of town somewhere, I guess."

"Or maybe you were around Main Street at about that time," Dooley's partner
cut in, double-teaming Steve.

"No, I was clear out of town." Steve started getting a little hot under the
collar. "Hey, what's going on here? What's with the questions?"

Dooley answered with another one. "You mind if we have a look at your car,
son."

"Why?"

"You have a reason you don't want anyone looking at your car, boy?"

This was an accusation, not a question.

"No! But I wish somebody would tell me what you're looking for."

"Don't worry, son. You'll know if we find it." Dooley gave his partner a curt
nod and the second patrolman headed out to the parking lot to shake down
Steve's rod.

It got real quiet in the diner. Out of the corner of my eye, I saw Steve's
fingers start to curl into fists. "Be cool, man," I murmured. "Be cool."

"Listen to your friend, Rocarrdi," Dooley growled. "For once he's making
sense."

It didn't take 'em long to score.

Dooley's partner came back inside, holding up a plastic-handled screwdriver.
'I found this under the front seat," he announced, "It's the same make of
screwdriver as we found in the store. It looks like it might be part of a set.
I found these too."

The patrolman held out his other hand. Gold gleamed in his palm.

Dooley dug a folded sheet of paper out of his shirt pocket. Flipping it open,
he methodically consulted it. "One opal ring in a gold setting and a gold
chain necklace. Yeah, they're both on the preliminary list Kennedy gave us."
He turned to Steve and unhooked the handcuffs from his belt. "Okay, son,
you're coming with us. Don't make any more trouble for yourself by making any
trouble for us."

It was a hard call to say which of us was the most stunned, Steve, Julie or
me.

"Under arrest? Why?" Julie cried, her voice rising as she came to her feet,
"Why?"

Dooley finished slapping the cuffs on my bewildered buddy. "It seems, Miss
Kennedy, that someone broke into your father's store last night and cleaned
the place out. And we've just found some of the stolen jewelry in your
boyfriend's car."

Things got kind of crazy after that. I called a mutual friend of ours to come
out and pick up Steve's car. Then, leaving the T-Bolt's keys with Eddie, I
took a halfways hysterical Julie back to her place. After that, I headed down
to the Fairmont police station to get the straight skinny on what was going
on.

I'm sort of _persona non grata_ at the local justice dispensary, but one of
the younger automotively oriented cops knows me from the dirt track circuit,
and he passed me the word.

Late on last evening, Ben Schyler, the night watchman hired by the Fairmount
Merchant's Association, had been making his rounds along Main when he spotted
what looked like a light inside Kennedy's jewelry store. He crossed the street
to take a closer look, and just as he started to check the front door he heard
a hot rod blasting out of the alley behind the building.

Mr. Schyler is sort of stove up, so it took him a minute to get around in
back. By that time, the car was long gone, but the busted rear door of
Kennedy's Jewelry was still standing open.

Schyler yelled for the cops and when the night cruiser showed up, they found
that several of the display cases inside the store had been cleaned out. They
found some other interesting stuff, too. An 18-inch screwdriver that had been
used as a jimmy and a two-cell flashlight, dropped apparently when the burglar
had fled the scene. Steve Roccardi's name had been scratched on both.

Steve's fingerprints had also been found all over the piace, although Steve
had an explanation for that. What he couldn't explain was what his screwdriver
and flashlight were doing inside the jewelry store. Last time he'd looked,
both items had been rattling around under the seat of his car.

Likewise, Steve couldn't provide the name of anyone who could prove his
whereabouts between his gassing up on the outskirts of town at 8 o'clock and
his arrival at Julie's place shortly before midnight. Between those hours he'd
just been a set of headlights on a back road.

It looked rank, man. Steve would have had more than enough loose time to do
both the dirty deed and stash the loot.

Steve's dad showed up, looking kind of blasted, like someone you'd see
wandering around in the road after a bad car crash. Because of Steve's
otherwise clean record, and because he was technically still only "under
suspicion," he was released to his father. There would be a hearing at 10 the
next morning, when the call would be made as to whether charges would be
pressed.

I had a hunch this was only a formality. From the way things were sounding,
they already had Steve convicted and in the can. I could only give Steve a
thumb's up as he and his Dad took off. Then I headed for home, feeling lower
then a bull snake's balls.

It was almost 3 o'clock by the time I turned the A-Bomb into the alley behind
our house and the lights were glowing in the kitchen. I was way past due and
the folks were waiting up. For once I was glad.

Dad's a big old raw-boned, pan-faced Polack with dark hair and eyes and the
only beard in town worn by anyone under the age of sixty. The beard sort of
gives him a little bit of a sinister air, like the classic image of a
Bolshevik bomb-thrower. (In fact, during one rather heated election meeting
down at the Railroad Workers Brotherhood, Big Red Sullivan actually accused
Dad of being a Bolshevik. However, Red apologized after Dad threw him down two
flights of stairs, so there weren't any hard feelings.)

Mom's a lot more like me, brown-haired and blue-eyed and on the short and
quick side. She does smiles as well as Dad does scowls, but even she was
frowning as I came through the back door.

Dad gave me one of "those" looks from his seat at the kitchen table. 'Three
o'clock," he said.

'Yeah, dad, I know," I replied hanging my ponyskin up by the door. "But for a
change, I got a good reason."

I pulled a chair up to the kitchen table and started laying out the story. By
the time I was finished, Mom had materialized a slab of cherry pie and a glass
of milk at my elbow so I knew all had been forgiven.

Dad frowned and shook his head. "That doesn't sound like the Steve Roccardi I
know. Joe Roccardi is a good man, and I haven't heard anything different about
his son. A little hot headed maybe, but no kind of thief."

"I can't see it either," my mother added, "but even the best people can
surprise you at times."

"Ah, come on, Mom, no way! Somebody is setting Steve up on this thing."

"That's a pretty melodramatic claim, son," she replied arching an eyebrow.
"Most people in town will prefer the simpler explanation, that your friend did
commit the burglary."

"But there isn't a living soul in town who can say they actually saw Steve
bust into Mr. Kennedy's place. Even the night watchman only saw a light in the
front window. All the evidence is, what do you call it..."

"Circumstantial," Mom finished. "That's true. But a lot of people have been
convicted and sent to prison on circumstantial evidence alone. All the
prosecuting attorney needs is enough of it."

Mom worked as a secretary for a law firm before she married Dad, so she's up
on this legal jazz. "You also have to remember that the boy had a powerful
motive beyond mere theft. Retaliation against Mr. Kennedy over the matter of
his daughter. And as your father said, Steve apparently has a reputation as a
hothead. This doesn't look good, Kevin."

"He also has the reputation of running with a pretty wild crowd," Dad added,
giving me one of his patented pointed looks.

"Oh, jeez, Dad! Come on! There's all the difference in the world between, uh,
engine testing out on Alsbury Pike and knocking off a jewelry store!"

Dad cocked a bushy eyebrow. "You know that and I know that, but a lot of
people around this town aren't going to see it that way. Young people these
days seem have a knack for making older people nervous."

"Yeah, well, that's their tough luck. I don't give a damn, sorry Mom, about
what people around this town think. Steve's being sold up the river for
something he didn't do! And if nobody else is going to do anything about it, I
am!"

"Good," Dad said, stealing my last forkful of pie, "You'd best get at it, too.
It looks like it's going to be a job of work."

Man, that left me with my jaw hanging open.

Dad nodded. "If you really believe your friend is innocent, then probably
you're the best man to go about proving it. You know how he thinks, what he
does, where he goes. You know the situation and the people involved. If anyone
can prove that Steve Roccardi is, in fact, being railroaded for this burglary,
likely it'll be you."

That's my Dad. Go to him and say that you're setting out to do just about any
damn fool stunt you can name and he'll probably just nod and say, "Have fun."

The thing is, once you've made your brag, he expects you to deliver. And he
isn't goingto sit there and hold your hand while you try.

"Yeah, I guess so." I got up from the table and took my pie plate and glass to
the sink.

"Well, I guess I'll turn in. I've got some thinking to do."

"I imagine so, son. Good night and good luck."

As I climbed the stairs up to my room I heard Mom say quietly. "]oe, are you
sure it was such a good idea to encourage Kevin to get involved in this thing?
It could cause trouble."

Dad gave a short laugh. "I never worry about my sons causing trouble, Mary.
Some of the greatest men in history have been troublemakers. My concern is
that they always do what's right. And, by God, a man standing up for a friend
can't be wrong."

It's easy to spot the dividing line between my brother's half of the room and
mine: The pictures of the football and baseball players stop and the cars
start. You can also get a clue from the pinups. Frank has a chubby blonde
fixation, while my taste runs towards slim brunettes.

Frank halfways woke up while I was getting ready for bed and grumbled at me
and I told him to kiss my ass, in a brotherly fashion. Switching our radio on
low, I dialed in the Indianapolis colored music station. With a whisper of
rhythm and blues playing, I flopped on my bed to do that heavy thinking.

I'm not really a big whodunnit fan, you know? So I'm not really up on this
detective jazz. Cars take up most of my free time. (Girls too, That's another
story.) But one thing I learned from putting the A-Bomb together is that you
have to be methodical. If you aren't working to a plan, you're in trouble from
the start.

Another thing I learned is that you have to have a specific starting point to
work from. With my rod, it was a Riley four-port racing head for a Model B
Ford engine that I picked up for three bucks at a junk sale. The whole rest of
the car sort of grew outward in all directions from that one component as I
mixed and matched parts and figured out what worked and what didn't.

Could I apply the same technique here? And what kind of starting part did I
have to work with?

All I had at the moment was this sense down deep where I lived that there was
no way my buddy could be guilty of the crime he was charged with.

And you want to know something funny? That was enough.

Oh, it took awhile to work out who'd set Steve up. And it took even longer to
figure out what I could do about it. The sky beyond our bedroom window had
gone from black to gray to blue by the time I'd worked all of the details out,
and the birds were yelling about how neat the new day was going to be.

I rolled out of bed and started to get dressed. I was running empty on sleep,
but that didn't matter. Steve's arraignment hearing was at 10 o'clock, and I
had a lot to get organized.

I guess that an attorney is supposed to wear a suit and a tie into the
courtroom. However, I'd had to lay under a couple of cars that morning
preparing my case and Mom would have killed me if I'd wrecked my Sunday blue
serge, good cause or not. They were going to have to take me as I came, in
Levi's and a greasy leather jacket.

They were all there, the center aisle of the little hearing room dividing the
accused from the accusers. Steve and his parents were on the right. His dad,
pale and haggard under his work tan, his little plump mom, despairing, yet
proud. And Steve, still defiant but kind of resigned, like a gladiator who
knows he's going to get the thumbs down no matter how hard he fights. I hadn't
had the chance to talk to him yet, so he had no notion that maybe the cavalry
was coming.

On the other side sat Mr. Harmon Kennedy of Kennedy's Quality Gold and
Jewelry, pink, bald and generating sweat and self-righteousness in equal
amounts. A comfortably cool breeze flowed in through the open hearing room
windows, but still every few seconds a white handkerchief would flash
nervously across his set features.

Officer Dooley was there, a red-headed mountain, and Mr. Schyler too, wearing
his night watchman's uniform and with his bummed-up leg stretched out ahead of
him. There was another legal-looking customer there as well. I recognized him
from campaign posters, Mr. Frank Archer, the town district attorney.

It looked like everyone was lining up to take a swing at Fairmont's first real
genyewine juvenile delinquent.

And straight at the head of the aisle was the lean and vultury figure of Judge
Carl Johannson, a man I'd worked very hard not to come to the attention of.
That was going to change here in a few minutes, though.

I kept my mouth shut during the first part of the hearing, keeping cool on the
back bench while the DA deftly laid out his case. The break-in at the Kennedy
store. The hot rod pulling away into the night. Steve's fingerprints at the
scene of the crime. The evidence recovered from the store and Steve's car.
Steve's lack of an alibi. He dolled it all up with the appropriate questions
asked of the appropriate people and managed to insinuate Steve's lousy
relationship with Mr. Kennedy as well as broad hints about Steve's wild and
antisocial ways. Oh, Mr. Archer just did a honey of a job painting the accused
as a budding John Dillinger who needed to be nipped in the same.

And then the DA was finished and Judge Johannson was set to make the call and
man, it was time to choose off and drop the hammer. I stood up.

"Your Honor, (Damn it, what was that phrase they use in the movies? Oh yeah.)
may I approach the bench." Judge Johannson gave me the cold, cold eye, but
after a second he nodded. "You may approach the bench, son. What can we do for
you."

I approached the bench, that being the five-dollar word for Judge Johannson's
desk. "My name is Kevin Pulsaki, your honor, and with the court's permission,
I'm here to offer evidence in the case against Steven Roccardi."

Johannson frowned. "Well, firstly, son, this is not a trial. It's only a
hearing into the charges."

"I understand that, your honor. My Mom... my legal advisor has explained that
this is a hearing to ascertain if enough evidence exists to bind Steve over
for trial. I think that if you'll give me the chance, sir, I can show that
there isn't."

"What the hell is going on here," I heard the stage whisper behind me, and I
glanced back over my shoulder. Mr. Kennedy was leaning over and angrily
tugging at the DA's sleeve. Mr. Archer didn't look too happy either as he
stood to address the judge. "Your honor, the city has already presented its
case in this matter. There is more then ample evidence to bind Steven Roccardi
over for trial on the charges of burglary in the first degree. I fail to see
how this...disruption could further the cause of justice."

Judge Johannson didn't reserve that cold stare of his just for teenagers. "I'm
sure that the District Attorney's Office feels this is the case, Mr. Archer.
However, this hearing is to review the evidence outstanding against Steven
Roccardi. All of it. If there is more to be heard on this matter, then it will
be."

The Judge looked back to me and somehow he didn't look quite as spooky as he
did a second ago. "Proceed, Mr. Pulaski. You seem to indicate you can refute
some of the county's evidence against Mr. Roccardi. How so?"

I swallowed hard and started speaking the words I'd carefully laid out in my
mind. "This is how it goes, your honor. There are three pieces of evidence
being held against Steve. One is that his fingerprints were found in Mr.
Kennedy's store. Well, that really isn't a big deal. Anyone can tell you that
Steve hangs around there a lot, because of Julie, uh, Mr. Kennedy's daughter.

"Next is the fact that a screwdriver and a flashlight belonging to Steve were
found in the Kennedy store and some of the stolen jewelry was found in Steve's
car. Heck, Judge, you know how it is around Fairmont. Who ever locks their
car? Besides, Steve drives an open roadster, usually with the top down. It
would have taken only a second for someone to swipe those tools out of his rod
or to plant that jewelry, tying Steve into the crime."

The Judge cocked an eyebrow. "And you have proof this was done, young man?"

"No, I don't, your honor, but you have to admit the potential exists for it to
have been done."

After another deliberate pause, Judge Johannson nodded again. "The court
concedes the possiblity. Continue."

"What I would like to do, your honor, is work on the third piece of evidence,
the one that's supposed to put Steve at the scene of the crime. If it's okay
with the court, I'd like to ask Mr. Schyler a couple of questions."

"Proceed."

Ben Schyler is sort of Fairmont's personal war hero. He went off to New Guinea
during the Pacific campaign and came back packing a Silver Star and a load of
shrapnel. He's too banged up for regular work but he's also too proud to take
charity, so the night watchman job is sort of a town makedo for a brave guy.
He looked up at me with a scar-twisted smile as I approached him.

"What do you want to know, son."

"I know you've already told your story here once, Mr. Schyler, but I need to
make sure about a couple of things," I replied. "For one, you never actually
saw the car that drove away from behind the Kennedy jewelry store."

"No, I couldn't get around the building fast enough, but I sure heard it haul
out of there."

"But even though you never saw it, you're certain it was a hot rod?"

"It'd be hard to mistake that. It was so loud it darn near rattled the windows
when it took off."

"So it's safe to say, Mr Schyler, that you heard that car real good."

I crossed the hearing room to it's windows. "With the court's permission, I've
arranged for a kind of a demonstration here today."

Judge Johannson's hearing room was on the ground floor of the Fairmont
courthouse, separated from the city parking lot by only a narrow strip of
lawn. A row of cars sat in that a parking lot now, four of them hot rods and
one that wasn't. And in each set of wheels sat a kid who wanted to see that
Steve Roccardi got an even break.

I gave a wave out the window and held up one finger. Out in the A-Bomb, One
Speed Dean fired up the engine of my little roadster. In a moment the familiar
light, fast-revving snarl of her four banger power plant reverberated in
through the open window. I let One Speed blip the gas pedal a couple of times,
letting the RPMs peak out, then I drew my finger across my throat in the "cut"
gesture.

The Bomb's mill grumbled down into silence, and I turned back to face the
hearing room.

"That's my car. A '29 Model A Ford with a Model B four-cylinder engine in it.
I run a split manifold and a set of gutted stock muffflers on her. I oil-
burned and tuned those cans myself, and they sound pretty good if I do say
so."

I held two fingers out of the windows and a second engine started, a rolling
motorboat bubbling that rose and peaked and then backed off again with a sharp
angry crackle.

"That's Jeff Muiready's '40 Ford Deluxe coupe. He's got a half-race Mercury
flathead with a custom-built Hollywood exhaust system by Mellowtone. There's
some money tied up in that car."

I extended three fingers. A third engine kicked over, a deep and vibrant purr
that climbed smoothly into a solid, flowing roar of power. It made the windows
buzz in their frames. then faded into a rumbling shut down.

"That's Clint Flock's chopped '35. He's running a Lincoln V12 with Porter
steel packs and 3-inch pipes. A real cherry machine."

"Is there some purpose behind all this, Mr. Pulaski?" Judge Johannson asked
impatiently.

"Yes, sir, there is," I replied, returning to face the judge's desk. "I'm what
you call establishing a precedent. You see, your honor, every hot rod ever
built has a kind of a fingerprint. Something about it that is totally
different then any other car in the world. The sound of its engine exhaust.

"It has to be that way. Hot rods are one-of-a-kind creations. Different cars
with different engines set up different ways. Different exhaust system with
different muffflers and different pipe lengths and diameters, all unique."

I started back toward the window again. "Mr. Schyler has told how he heard a
hot rod pull away from behind the Kennedy jewelry store last night. The thing
is, every time he's said "hot rod" everyone here has heard 'Steve Roccardi.'
Sure, Steve's a hot rodder and he drives a rod, but that doesn't necessarily
signify."

I shot a look at the night watchman. "Mr. Schyler, I've got another car here
for you to listen to. Listen carefully please."

Crossing to the window again, I held up four fingers. Out in the parking lot,
Steve's T-Bolt lit off. Julie Kennedy, her face pale and pinched sat behind
the wheel of the low slung little bomb, rewing its engine, fighting for her
guy in the only way she could. The sharp-edged two-tone snarl of the T-Bolt
lifted and peaked and held for half-a-minute and then faded as I gave the
"kill" signal.

"Okay, Mr Schyler," I said, turning back to face the hearing room. "Is that
what you heard last night behind Mr. Kennedy's store?"

The night watchman's expression became puzzled and thoughtful. "No," he said
after a second, "the car I heard last night didn't sound like that at all."

It took three fast steps back to the Judges' desk. "Your honor, Steve runs a
real unusual set up with his rod, a 270-cubic-inch GMC truck engine blowing
through a homemade V4 split manifold and a set of Smitty mufflers. Probably
not another set of wheels in the state comes close to sounding like it. That
is Steve's car, and I can bring 50 kids in here who can testify to it."

The judge had a thoughtful expression on his face now, too. And the DA, and
Officer Dooley. At long damn last, they were thinking and not just assuming.
Everybody but one.

"Your honor. This is ridiculous!" Mr. Kennedy exploded. "Why is the court
wasting time with this ridiculous dog and pony show. This young ...thug's a
crony of the Roccardi boy. Probably he was in on the robbery, too. So maybe
they borrowed another car or stole one. I want this wop punk in jail!"

I kind of went cold inside then. I'd given him his chance. I mean, Mr. Kennedy
could have admitted there was a reasonable doubt to Steve's guilt now and just
let it die. I would have been willing to let it go at that. The thing was, he
wasn't, and so we were going to have to go all the way, even though it was
going to hurt some people.

"Your honor, I think I've proved my point about hot rods all sounding
different," I said, starting back for to the open window for the last time.
"But that rule doesn't apply to unmodified Detroit assembly line automobiles.
Mr Schyler, there's one more car I want you to listen too."

I held up five fingers.

Out in the parking lot, Amy Vickers pressed the starter of the sedan she'd
borrowed from her dad's car dealership. A hoarse chugging roar echoed in from
the parking lot, louder then any other car we'd heard so far. I let it run on
for a minute or so, then signaled Amy to kill it.

I didn't even have to ask the question, Ben Schyler was already nodding.
"Yeah, that's it. That's a lot more like what I heard last night."

"Your honor," I said. "That's a stock Pontiac straight eight with the mufffler
taken off to make it sound like somebody's idea of a hot rod." I turned slowly
to face that somebody. "Mr. Kennedy, you drive a '47 Pontiac Chieftain, don't
you?"

The perpetual pink flush had drained from the jeweler's face, and he
wordlessly rose to his feet. But then Officer Dooley was at his side, pushing
him back down into his chair.

All of a sudden, that night without sleep caught up with me and I felt really
tired. "Hey Dooley," I said. "If you want to go out and have a look under Mr.
Kennedy's car, you can see the marks on the exhaust pipe where the mufffler's
been recently removed and remounted."

Even though I was the guy who'd solved the thing, I got chased out of the
hearing room pretty quickly after that. I replaced Amy's dad's mufffler and
turned the other rodneys loose with my thanks. Then I staked a claim on a park
bench across from the courthouse and awaited developments.

About an hour or so later, Dooley came out and crossed the street, looking
like a man who needed to sit in the shade for awhile. As he approached I
untwisted my pack of Luckys from my t-shirt sleeve and offered him one. He
gave me an instinctive glower, then halfways smiled. Accepting the smoke, he
sat down on the bench beside me.

"How's it going?" I asked.

"It's pretty much wrapped up," Dooley replied. "Kennedy isn't exactly a
hardened criminal, so he spilled pretty quick. He sank every dime that he had
into that jewelry store of his and come to find out, Fairmont isn't big enough
to support it. He's in debt up to his ears and he has mortgage payments on
both his house and store coming due. When he got desperate enough, he decided
to try and fake a robbery. Between his insurance and the money he would have
gotten selling his stock to a fence, he figured he would have been able to get
out from under."

"Yeah, and by railroading Steve for the job, he'd be killing two birds with
one stone. He'd get rid of the boy he couldn't stand seeing his daughter
with."

The big cop nodded. "That's about the shape of it. Kennedy's confessed to
planting both the flashlight and the jewelry and to gimmicking his car to
sound like a hot rod. He timed his fake burglary to coincide with Ben
Schyler's rounds specifically to throw additional suspicion in the direction
of the Roccardi boy, gambling that Roccardi wouldn't have a solid alibi for
that time frame. And it almost worked."

"So what happens now? How bad is Mr. Kennedy going to get burned?"

"That's hard to say. The DA and the judge are working that out now with
Kennedy's lawyer. Kennedy has a couple of things going for him. For one, he
hadn't filed his insurance claim yet, so technically he can't be hit for
insurance fraud. And for another, the Roccardi boy has refused to press
charges. That'll help. Still though, the Kennedys have some hard times ahead."

Across the street, a little group of people left the courthouse. The
Roccardis, plus one. Julie Kennedy was with them. Steve's arm was around her
shoulders and his mom and dad were walking family close. No matter what, Julie
at least wouldn't be facing her hard times alone. And who knows, Mr. Kennedy
might even come to realize that his future inlaws were pretty good folks after
all.

"Okay, Pulaski," Officer Dooley went on. "Now you can tell me something. All
that business with the car exhausts was pretty cute, but what I want to know
was what put you on to Kennedy in the first place. Was it just because he had
a grudge on against Roccardi?"

"Sure, there was that, Dooley," I replied, snubbing my cigarette butt out on
the arm of the bench. "But there was something else, too. Something that, when
you thought about it for awhile, pointed straight to Mr. Kennedy and nobody
else."

The Dewlap looked puzzled. "Okay, I'll bite. What was it?"

"The jewelry you guys found planted in Steve's hotrod. Look at what you call
"the chain of events" yesterday. Steve goes over to the Kennedy jewelry store
late in the afternoon to visit with Julie. Her dad walks in. There's a big
blowup and Steve honks out of there feeling frosted. In fact, Steve is so
honked off, he cruises around the county all evening working off his mad. When
he does hit town again, he goes straight over to Julie's place, picks her up,
then goes straight out to the diner where you pick him up.

"Get it, man? There is no way anyone could have put that jewelry in Steve's
rod after the burglary, because, from the time of the burglary on, Steve was
sitting in his car, driving it randomly around the county. At a minimum, those
pieces of jewelry must have been planted several hours before the burglary was
ever committed. And the only guy who could have done that was Mr. Kennedy
himself. Probably he stashed the stuff under Steve's seat at the same time he
lifted the tools out of the car, just before he picked that big fight in the
jewelry store. You dig?"

Dooley nodded his head and gave a grudging smile. "Yeah, I 'dig.' I have to
admit it, Pulaski. That was a smart piece of detective work."

"You think?" I slouched down on the bench, stretching my legs out onto the
gravel path in front of me. "I don't know. All the time I just had this
feeling in my gut that it wasn't Steve.

"Guts and brains are what its about, Pulaski," Dooley paused for a second then
continued. "Hey, kid, you ever thought about going on the cops?"

I threw my head back and had the best laugh I'd had all day. "Me? A cop? Come
on, Dooley!"

After a minute he started laughing too.  
[Back to James Cobb page](cobb.htm)

[Read an excerpt from SeaFighter](excerpt.htm), Cobb's new book due out this
fall.

[Read more about Jim Cobb at Amazon.com.](http://www.amazon.com) |  
  
![Page bottom navigation](../graphics/page_bottom2.gif)

![ ](../resources/dot_clr.gif)

[Contact: arches@ups.edu](../contact.htm)

