 ![Boldline](boldline.gif)

>   **INTERPERSONAL RELATIONS** **AND GROUP PROCESSES** **Psychology 513**
**_Fall, 2000  
>  _**   M & W, 3:45-5:00 1077 BSB  
>

* * *

  
**Instructor:**  
Office:  
Phone:  
Office Hours:  
e-mail:  
web:  
|  Dr. Jim Larson  
1046-C BSB  
312.413.2642  
T & Th 1:45-3:00, or by Appointment  
jlarson@uic.edu  
http://www.uic.edu/~jlarson/  
---|---  
  

* * *

**Overview**  
  
This is as an introductory, graduate-level course in interpersonal relations
and group processes.   It surveys a broad range of topics, including
aggression, altruism, social facilitation, social loafing, social comparison,
social identity, in-group/out-group bias, cooperation and social dilemmas,
social power, coalition formation, minority influence in groups, group
cohesion, group problem-solving and decision-making, and leadership.  These
topics are examined with two goals in mind.  The first is to provide an in-
depth analysis of one or more of the theories or perspectives that dominate
each topic area.  The second is to develop an appreciation for some of the
methodological approaches that have been used to investigate these topics
empirically. To help accomplish these goals, the typical reading assignment
for each topic (week) consists of one book chapter or review article that
examines the relevant literature in some detail and/or presents a theory on
the topic in question, plus several journal articles that reports empirical
studies in that topic area. The weekly reading assignments are listed below.  
  

* * *

**Grading**

__Class Participation__.   The course will follow a seminar format.
Therefore, _your active participation is essential to the quality of the
course_.   You are expected to have read in advance all of the material
assigned for each class meeting, and to be able to discuss and answer
questions about that material in class.  Your preparation for and active
participation in class will be evaluated, and will constitute 25% of your
overall course grade.

__Exams__.   Two exams will be given.  Each will comprise roughly a half-dozen
essay-style questions, and each will be "closed book, no notes."  The Mid-Term
Exam will be given in class on Thursday, October 16th, and will constitute 20%
of your course grade. The Final Exam will be given at 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday,
December 11th, and will constitute 30% of your course grade.

__Term Paper__.   You are required to write a paper for the course, which will
be due at the beginning of the last class meeting.  The grade you get on this
paper will count  for 25% of your course grade.  The paper is to be an in-
depth review of the empirical literature on a topic that is (a) of interest to
you, (b) relevant to the content of the course, and (c) not extensively
covered in the assigned readings. You must get the topic of your paper
approved on or before Thursday, October 23th.  You are free to organize this
paper in whatever way you like, but in all cases it should focus on the most
recent _empirical_ work that has been done on the topic you choose. Roughly
one-third of the readings assigned for the course are literature reviews,
either in part or in whole. These should give you some ideas for the various
ways in which your own review might be structured. The text of your paper is
limited to no more than 5,000 words (roughly 20 typed, double- spaced pages,
not including references, tables, and figures). All references and other
matters of form should follow APA style. The term papers will be graded on
three _equally-weighted_ criteria: (1) the thoroughness of your literature
review, (2) the quality of your own analysis and integration of that
literature, and (3) the quality of the writing.

  

**Grading Summary**

  
Class Participation  | 25%  
---|---  
Mid-Term Exam  | 20%  
Final Exam  | 30%  
Term Paper  | 25%  
**Total  ** | **100%**  
**  
**

* * *

**  
WEEKLY READING ASSIGNMENTS**

_Note_ : The supplementary references listed for each topic are provided for
those who are interested, and may be of use as you begin to explore topics for
your term paper.  They are not required reading for the course.  
  

* * *

**WEEK 1**  
(8/26 & 8/28) |

* * *

**LEVELS OF ANALYSIS IN SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY**

Bond, C. F., Jr.  & Kenny, D. A. (2002).  The triangle of interpersonal
models.   _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_ , _83_ , 355-366.

_  
Supplementary Readings_  

Allport, G. W. (1985). The historical background of social psychology. In G.
Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), _Handbook of Social Psychology_ (3rd ed., Vol. 1,
pp. 1-46).

Jones, E. E. (1985). Major development in social psychology during the past
five decades. In G. Lindzey & E. Aronson (Eds.), _Handbook of Social
Psychology_ (3rd ed., Vol. 1, pp. 47-107).  

Pepitone, A. (1981).  Lessons from the history of social psychology. _American
Psychologist_ , _36_ , 972-985.  
  
Taylor, S. E. (1998). The social being in social psychology. In D. T. Gilbert,
S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), _The Handbook of Social Psychology_ (4th
ed., Vol. 1, pp. 58-95). New York: McGraw-Hill.  
  
---|---  


* * *

**WEEK 2**  
(9/4) |

* * *

**AGGRESSION: WHY DO WE HURT?**  
  
**> >> No Class Monday, 9.2.02; Labor Day Holiday <<<  
**

Berkowitz, L. (1989).  Frustration-aggression hypothesis: Examination and
reformulation. _Psychological Bulletin_ , _106_ , 59-73.

Reifman, A. S, Larrick, R. P., and Fein, S. (1991). Temper and temperature on
the diamond: The heat- aggression relationship in major league baseball.
_Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin_ , _17_ , 580-585.

Bushman, B.  (2002).  Does venting anger feed or extinguish the flame?
Catharsis, rumination, distraction, anger, and aggressive responding.
_Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin_ , 28, 724-731.  

_  
Supplementary Readings_  

Anderson, C. A., Anderson, K. B., Dorr, N., DeNeve, K. M., & Flanagan, M.
(2000). Temperature and aggression.  In M. B. Zanna (Ed.) _Advances in
experimental social Psychology_ (vol. 32, p 63-133).   San Diego: Academic
Press.  

Catalano, R., Novaco, R., & McConnell, W. (1997). A model of the net effect of
job loss on violence. _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_ , _72_ ,
1440-1447.  

Cohen, D., Nisbett, R. E., Bowdle, B. F., & Schwarz, N. (1996). Insult
aggression and the southern culture of honor: An "experimental
ethnobiography." _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_ , _70_ ,
945-960.

Geen, R. G. (1998). Aggression and antisocial behavior. In D. T. Gilbert, S.
T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), _The Handbook of Social Psychology_ (4th ed.,
Vol. 2, pp. 317-356). New York: McGraw-Hill.  

Josephson, W. L. (1987). Television violence and children's aggression:
Testing the priming, social script, and disinhibition predictions. _Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology_ , _53_ , 882-890.

Pedersen, W. C., Gonzales, C., & Miller, N. (2000).  The moderating effect of
trivial triggering provocation in displaced aggression. _Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology_ , _78_ , 913-927.  
  
  
---|---  


* * *

**WEEK 3**  
(9/9 & 9/11) |

* * *

**ALTRUISM : WHY DO WE HELP?**

Batson, C. D. (1987).  Prosocial Motivation: Is it ever truly altruistic?
(1987). In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),  _Advances in experimental social Psychology_
(vol. 20, p 65-122).   San Diego: Academic Press.

Batson, C. D., Ahmad, N., Yin, J., Bedell, S. J., Johnson, J. W, Templin, C.
M. & Whiteside, A. (1999).  Two threats to the common good: Self-interested
egoism and empathy and empathy-induced altruism. _Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin_ , _25,_ 3-16.

Pembrerton, M. & Sedikides, C. (2001).  When do individuals help close others
improve?  The role of information diagnosticity. _Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology_ , _81_ , 234-246.  


_Supplementary Readings_  

Carlson, M., & Miller, N.  (1987).  Explaining the relation between negative
mood and helping.  _Psychological Bulletin_ , _102_ , 91-108.  

Betancourt, H. (1990).  An attribution-empathy model of helping behavior:
Behavioral intentions and judgments of help-giving.  _Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin_ , _16_ , 573-591.  
  
  
---|---  


* * *

**WEEK 4**  
(9/16 & 9/18) |

* * *

**SOCIAL FACILITATION AND SOCIAL LOAFING:  DOES THE PRESENCE OF OTHERS HURT OR
HELP OUR PERFORMANCE?**

Geen, R. G. (1989).  Alternative conceptions of social facilitation. In P. B.
Paulus (Ed.), _Psychology of group influence_ (2nd ed., pp. 15-51). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.  

Sanna, L. J. (1992).  Self-efficacy theory: Implications for social
facilitation and social loafing. _Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology_ , _62_ , 774- 786.

Messe, L. A., Hertel, G., Kerr, N. L., Lount, R. B., Jr., & Park, E. S.
(2002).  Knowledge of partner's ability as a moderator of group motivation
gains: An exploration of the Kohler discrepancy effect. _Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology_ , _82_ , 935-946.  
  

_Supplementary Readings_  

Blascovich, J., Mendes, W. B., Hunter, S. B., & Salomon, K. (1999).  Social
"facilitation" as challenge and threat.  J _journal of Personality and Social
Psychology_ , _77_ , 68-77.  

Butler, J. L. & Baumeister, R. F. (1998).  The trouble with friendly faces:
Skilled performance with a supportive audience.   _Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology_ , _75_ , 1213-1230.  

Hoeksema-van Orden, C. Y. D., Gaillard, A. W. K., & Buunk, B. P.  (1998).
Social loafing under fatigue.  _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_
, _75_ , 1179-1190.

Hertel, G., Kerr, N. L., & Messe, L. A. (2000).  Motivation gains in
performance groups: Paradigmatic and theoretical developments on the Kohler
effect. _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_ , _79_ , 580-601.  

Shepperd, J. A. (1993). Productivity loss in performance groups: A
motivational analysis. _Psychological Bulletin_ , _113_ , 67-81.  
  
---|---  


* * *

**WEEK 5**  
(9/23 & 9/25) |

* * *

**SOCIAL COMPARISON:   OTHERS AS CONTEXT FOR SELF- ASSESSMENT**  

Wood, J. V. (1989). Theory and research concerning social comparison of person
attributes. _Psychological Bulletin_ , _106_ , 231-248.  

Kulik, J. A., Mahler, H. I. M., Moore, P. J. (1996). Social comparison and
affiliation under threat: Effects on recovery from major surgery. _Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology_ , _71_ , 967-979.  

Blanton, H., Buunk, B. P., Gibson, F. X., & Kyper, H. (1999).  When better-
than-others compare upward: Choice of  comparisonand comparative evaluation as
independent predictors of academic performance.  _Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology_ , _76_ , 420-430.  
  

_Supplementary Readings_  

Brewer, M. B., & Weber, J. G. (1994). Self-evaluation effects of interpersonal
versus intergroup social comparison. _Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology_ , _66_ , 268-275.  

Taylor, S. E., & Lobel, M. (1989).  Social comparison activity under threat:
Downward evaluation and upward contacts.  _Psychological Review_ , _96_ ,
569-575.  

Wheeler, L., Martin, R., & Suls, J. (1997). The proxy model of social
comparison for self-assessment of abilities. _Personality and Social
Psychology Review_ , _1_ , 54-61.  

Wilson, A. E., & Ross, M. (2000).  The frequency of temporal-self and social
comparisons in people's personal appraisals.   _Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology_ , 78, 928-942.  
  
Wood, J. V., Giordano-Beech, M., & Ducharme, M. J. (1999).  Compensating for
failure through social comparison.  _Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin_ , _25_ , 1350-1386.  
  
---|---  


* * *

**WEEK 6**  
(9/30 & 10/2) |

* * *

**SELF-CATEGORIZATION, SOCIAL IDENTITY, AND** **IN-GROUP/OUT-GROUP BIAS**  

Turner, J. C., & Oakes, P. J. (1989). Self-Categorization theory and social
influence. In P. B. Paulus (Ed.), _Psychology of group influence_ (2nd ed.,
pp. 223- 275). Hillsdale NJ: Erlbaum.  

Brewer, M. B. (1991).  The social self: On being the same and different at the
same time.  _Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin_ , _17_ , 475-482.  

Jackson, L. A., Sullivan, L. A., Harnish, R., & Hidge, C. N. (1996). Achieving
Positive Social Identity: Social mobility, social creativity, and permeability
of group boundaries. _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_ , _70_ ,
241-254.

Leonardelli, G. J., & Brewer, M. B. (2001).  Minority and majority
discrimination: When and why?   _Journal of Experimental Social Psychology_ ,
_37_ , 468-485.

_  
Supplementary Readings_  

Branscombe, N. R., Spears, R., Ellemers, N., & Doosje, B. (2002).  Intragroup
and intergroup evaluation effects on group behavior.   _Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin_ , _28_ , 744-753.

Brewer, M. B., & Gardner, W. (1996). Who is this "we"?: Levels of collective
identity and self representations. _Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology_ , _71_ , 83-93.  

Crisp, R. J., Hewstone, M., & Rubin, M. (2001).  Does multiple categorization
reduce intergroup bias?   _Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin_ , _27_
, 76-89.  

Diehl, M. (1990). The minimal group paradigm: Theoretical explanations and
empirical findings. In W. Stroebe & M. Hewstone (Eds.), _European review of
social psychology_ (Vol. 1, pp. 263-292). Chichester: Wiley.  

Dovidio, J. F., Gaertner, S. L., & Validzic, A. (1998). Intergroup bias:
Status, differentiation, and a common in-group identity. _Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology_ , _75_ , 109-120.

Otten, S., Mummendey, A., Blanz, M. (1996). Intergroup discrimination in
positive and negative outcome allocations: Impact of stimulus valence,
relative group status, and relative group size. _Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin_ , _22_ , 568-581.

Pickett, C. L., & Brewer, M. B.  Assimilation and differentiation needs as
motivational determinants of perceived in-group and out-group homogeneity.
_Journal of Experimental Social Psychology_ , _37_ , 341-348.  
  
---|---  


* * *

**WEEK 7**  
(10/7 & 10/9) |

* * *

**SOCIAL DILEMMAS AND MIXED-MOTIVES SITUATIONS: "ME" vs. "US** "

Messick, D. M. (1991).  Social dilemmas, shared resources, and social justice.
In H. Steensma & R. Vermunt (Eds.) _Social justice in human relations_ (Vol.
2, pp. 49-69).   New York: Plenum.

Allison, S. T., McQueen, L. R., & Schaerfl, L. M. (1992).  Social decision
making processes and the equal partitionment of shared resources.  _Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology_ , _28_ , 23-42.

Winquist, J. R., & Larson, J. R., Jr. (2002).   _Sources of the discontinutity
effect: Being in a group versus playing against a group_.   Manuscript under
review.  
  
Wildschut, T., Insko, C. A., & Gaertner, L. (2002). Intragroup social
influence and intergroup competition.  _Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology_ , _82_ , 975- 992.

_  
Supplementary Readings_  

Anderson, L. M., & Pearson, C. M. (1999).  Tit for tat? The spiraling effect
of incivility in the workplace.  _Academy of Management Review_ , _24_ ,
452-471.  

Bouas, K. S., & Komorita, S. S. (1996). Group discussion and cooperation in
social dilemmas. _Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin_ , _22_ ,
1144-1150.  

Chan, X-P. (1996). The group-based binding pledge as a solution to public
goods problems. _Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes_ , _66_
, 192-202.

de Drew, C. K. W., Koole, S. L., & Steinel, W. (2000).  Unfixing the fixed
pie: A motivated information-processing approach to integrative negotiation.
_Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_ , _79_ , 975-987.

Kerr, N. L., Garst, J., Lewandowski, D. A., & Harris, S. E. (1997). That
still, small voice: Commitment to cooperate as an internalized versus a social
norm.  _Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin_ , _23_ , 1300-1311.

Kurzban, R., McCabe, K., Smith, V. L., & Wilson, B. J. (2001).  Incremental
commitment and reciprocity in a real-time public goods game.  _Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin_ , _27_ , 1662-1673.  

Messick, D. M., & Liebrand, W. B. G. (1997). Levels of analysis and the
explanation of the costs and benefits of cooperation.  _Personality and Social
Psychology Review_ , _1_ , 129-139.  

Thompson, L., Peterson, E., & Brodt, S. E. (1996).  Team negotiation: An
examination of integrative and distributive bargaining. _Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology_ , _70_ , 66-78.

Van Lange, P. A. M., & Visser, K. (1999).  Locomotion in social dilemmas: How
people adapt to cooperative, tit-for-tat, and noncoopertative partners.
_Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_ , _77_ , 762-773.  

Wade-Benzoni, K. A., Tenbrunsel, A. E., & Bazerman, M. H. (1996). Egocentric
interpretations of fairness in asymmetric, environmental social dilemmas:
Explaining harvesting behavior and the role of communication. _Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes_ , _67_ , 111-126.  
  
---|---  


* * *

**WEEK 8**  
(10/14 & 10/16) |

* * *

**MEDIATORS VERSUS MODERATORS**  

Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable
distinction in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and
statistical considerations. _Journal of Personality and Social Psychology_ ,
_51_ , 1173-1182.

**> >> Mid-Term Exam, Thursday, October 16th <<<**  
  
---|---  


* * *

**WEEK 9**  
(10/21 & 10/23) |

* * *

**SOCIAL STRUCTURE AND SOCIAL POWER**  

**> >> Term Paper topic approval due Thursday, 10.23.02  <<<**  

Molm, L. D. (1987). Power-dependence theory: Power processes and negative
outcomes. In E. J. Lawler, & B. Markousky (Eds.), _Advances in group process_
(Vol. 4, pp. 171-198). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.  

Molm, L. D. (1997). Risk and power use: Constraints on the use of coercion in
exchange.  _American Sociological Review_ , _62_ , 113-133.

Galinsky, A. D., Gruenfeld, D. H., & Magee, J. C. (2002).   _Power and Action:
Lessons from first offers, fairy tails, fans, and social funds_.   Manuscript
under review.  

_  
Supplementary Readings_  

Kipnis, D. (1972). Does Power Corrupt?  _Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology_ , _24_ , 33-41.  

Molm, L. D., Quist, T. M., & Wiseley, P. A. (1994). Imbalanced structures,
unfair strategies: Power and justice in social exchange. _American
Sociological Review_ , _59_ , 98-121.  

Podsakoff, P. M., & Schriesheim, C. A. (1985). Field studies of French and
Raven's bases of power: Critique, reanalysis, and suggestions for further
research. _Psychological Bulletin_ , _97_ , 387-411.

Raven, B. H. (1990). Political applications of the psychology of interpersonal
influence and social power. _Political Psychology_ , _11_ , 493-520.

Tornblom, K. Y. (1988). Positive and negative allocations: A typology and a
model for conflicting justice principles. In E. J. Lawler, & B. Markovsky
(Eds.), _Advances in group processes_ (Vol. 5, pp. 141-168). Greenwich CT: JAI
Press.  
  
---|---  


* * *

**WEEK 10** (10/28 & 10/30)  |

* * *

**COALITION FORMATION**  

Cook, K. S., & Gillmore, M. R. (1984).  Power, dependence, and coalitions. In
E. J. Lawler, & B. Markousky (Eds.), _Advances in group process_ (Vol. 1, pp.
27- 58). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.  

Mannix, E. A. (1993). Organizations as resource dilemmas: The effects of power
balance on coalition formation in small groups. _Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes_ , _55_ , 1-22.  

_  
Supplementary Readings_  

Cook, K. S., & Yamagishi, T. (1992).  Power in exchange networks: A power-
dependence formulation. _Social Networks_ , _14_ , 245-265.

Komorita, S. S., & Parks, C. D. (1995).  Interpersonal relations: Mixed Motive
interaction. _Annual Review of Psychology_ , _46_ , 183-207.

Miller, C. E., & Wong, J. (1986).  Coalition behavior: Effects of earned
versus unearned resources. _Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes_ , _38_ , 257-277.

Willer, D. (1992).  Predicting power in exchange networks: A brief history and
introduction to the issues, Special Issue: The location of power in exchange
networks. _Social Networks_ , _14_ , 187-211.  
  
---|---  


* * *

**WEEK 11**  
(11/4 & 11/6) |

* * *

**MINORITY INFLUENCE AND DYNAMIC SOCIAL IMPACT THEORY**  

de Drew, C. K. W., & West, M. A. (2001).  Minority dissent and team
innovation: The importance of participation in decision making.  _Journal of
Applied Psychology_ , _86_ , 1191-1201.  

Kruglanski, A. W., & Webster, D. M. (1991). Group members' reactions to
opinion deviates and conformists at varying degrees of proximity to decision
deadline and of environmental noise. _Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology_ , _61_ , 212-225.

Latane, B., & Bourgeois, M. J. (2001).  Successfully simulating dyanmic social
impact: Three levels of prediction.  In J. P. Forgas & K. D. Williams (Eds.),
_Social influence_ : _Direct and indirect processes_.    _The sydney symposium
of social psychology_ (pp 61-76).   Philadephia, Psychology press.  

_  
Supplementary Readings_  

Crano, W. D. (1994).  Context, comparison, and change: Methodological and
theoretical contributions to a theory of minority (and majority) influence. In
S. Moscovici, A. Mucchi- Faina, & A. Maass (Eds.), _Minority influence_ (pp.
17-46). Chicago: Neslon-Hall.

Hastie, R., & Stasser, G. (2000).  Computer simulation methods in social
psychology.  In H. T. Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), _Handbook of reserach methods
in social and personality psychaology_ (pp. 85-114).   New York: Cambridge
University Press.

Levine, J. M., & Russo, E. M. (1987). Majority and Minority influence. In C.
Hendrick (Ed.), _Group processes_ (pp. 13-54). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.  

Nemeth, C. J., & Staw, B. M. (1989). The tradeoff of social control and
innovation in groups and organizations. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), _Advances in
experimental social psychology_ (Vol. 22, pp. 175-210). New York: Academic
Press.

Peterson, R. S., & Nemeth, C. J. (1996). Focus versus flexibility: Majority
and minority influence can both improve performance. _Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin_ , _22_ , 14-23.

Trost, N. R., Maass, A. & Kenrick, D. T. (1992). Minority influence: Personal
relevance biases cognitive processes and reverses private acceptance. _Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology_ , _28_ , 234-254.

Wood, W., Lundgren, S. Ouelette, J. A., Busceme, S., et al. (1994). Minority
influence: A meta-analytic review of social influence processes.
_Psychological Bulletin_ , _115_ , 323-345.  
  
---|---  


* * *

**WEEK 12**  
(11/11 & 11/13) |

* * *

**GROUP COHESION AND LOYALTY**  

Berkowitz, L. (1954).  Group standards, cohesiveness, and productivity.
_Human Relations_ , _7_ , 509-519.

Zdaniuk, B., & Levine, J. M. (2001).  Group loyalty:  Impact of members'
identificatoin and contributions.   _Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology_ , _37_ , 502-509.  

Moreland, R. L., & McMinn, J. G. (1999).  Gone but not forgotten: Loyalty and
betrayal among ex-members of small groups.  _Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin_ , _25_ , 1476-1486.

_  
Supplementary Readings_  

Dion, K. L.  (2000).  Group cohesion: From "field of forces" to
multidimensional construct. _Group Dynamics_ , _4_ , 7-26.

Klein, H. J., & Mulvey, P. R. (1995).  Two investigations of the relationship
among group goals, goal commitment, cohesion, and performance.
_Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes_ , _61_ , 44- 53.  

Mullen, B., & Cooper, C. (1994).  The relation between group cohesiveness and
performance: An integration.  _Psychological Bulletin_ , _115_ , 210-227.  

Podsakoff, P. M.,, MacKenzie, S. B., & Ahearne, M. (1997).  Moderating effects
of goal acceptance on relationship between group cohesiveness and
productivity.  _Journal of Applied Psychology_ , _82_ , 974-983.  

Zaccaro, S. J., & McCoy, M. C. (1988).  The effects of task and interpersonal
cohesiveness on performance of a disjunctive group task.  _Journal of Applied
Social Psychology_ , _18_ , 837-851.  
  
---|---  


* * *

**WEEK 13**  
(11/18 & 11/20)  |

* * *

**GROUPS AS INFORMATION INTEGRATORS AND IDEA GENERATORS**

Stasser, G. (1992).  Pooling of unshared information during discussion. In S.
Worchel, W. Wood, & J. A. Simpson (Eds.), _Group process and productivity_
(pp. 48- 67). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.  

Wittenbaum, G. M., Hubbell, A. P., & Zuckerman, C. (1999).  Mutual
enhancement: Toward an understanding of the collective preference for shared
information.   _Journal of Personality and Soccial Psychology_ , _77_ ,
967-978.  

Moreland, R. L., & Myaskovsky, L. (2000).   Exploring the performance benefits
of group training: Transactive memory or improved communication?
_Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes_ , _82_ , 117-1337.

Nijstad, B. A., Stroebe, W., &  Lodewijkx, H. F. M. (1999). Persistence of
Brainstorming groups: How do people know when to stop. _Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology_ , _35_ , 165-185.  

_  
Supplementary Readings_  

