[![Computers and Composition](../../graphics/tinylogo.gif)](../../../toc.html)

* * *

vol 15(1), April, 1998 pages xx-xx

**From a High-Tech to a Low-Tech Writing Classroom:  
"You Can't Go Home Again"**

**Charles Moran  
_University of Massachusetts at Amherst_ **

**ABSTRACT** This article describes one teacher's study of the effects of
changes in teaching environments upon the teacher. The author-subject moves
from a computer-equipped classroom, where he has become accustomed to teacher
first-year writing, to a conventional classroom. He finds that he must change
his teacher radically in this new-old environment. He finds himself unable to
make these changes, at least in a single semester, and understands that we
can't expect teachers to adapt easily or rapidly to new teacher environments.

* * *

composition, computer-equipped classrooms, first-year writing course  
networked classroom, resistance, teacher change

* * *

In the spring semester of 1996, I taught our first-year writing course,
"College Writing," in a traditional classroom-that is to say, a classroom with
chairs and tables, a blackboard and chalk, a classroom _without_ 22 computers
and a print-station-for the first time in almost a decade. I'd taught College
Writing in traditional classrooms from 1982 through 1986; then in 1986 we set
up our computer-equipped classrooms, and I taught this course steadily for
eight years in our new facility, first with stand-alone PCs and then with a
local area network. Working closely with colleagues (Marcia Curtis, Paul
LeBlanc, Nick Carbone, Margaret Daisley, Liz Klem) during this time, we tried
to understand how we might best teach writing in this computer-equipped
environment. We developed and tested a range of techniques, often writing
about what we were doing, and even publishing a bit in the process (See
Carbone, Daisley, Federenko, McComas, Moran, Ostermiller,  & Vanden Akker,
1993; Curtis & Moran, 1992; Klem & Moran 1991; LeBlanc & Moran, 1989). Then a
break: I went on sabbatical, another colleague filled my place in the computer
classrooms, and the Writing Program director and I agreed that when I returned
from sabbatical in the spring 1996 I'd teach College Writing in a traditional
classroom. I approached this semester with excitement and interest, thinking
that this was a fine chance to do a comparative study, perhaps of my
perceptions of the difference between teaching our first-year writing course
in two different teaching environments.

It did not turn out as I had thought it might-a joyful return to the delights
of face-to-face communication in a small room with eager students. My
teaching-semester in the traditional classroom was a good one, by most
standards, but I often found myself uncomfortable, irritable, even
occasionally angry at my teaching situation, deprived of computers and forced
to change the way I taught. My students seemed to me to be uncomfortable too,
less engaged with one another than I was used to, and less self-directed than
they had been in the computer-equipped classrooms.

In the pages that follow, I will try to understand my discomfort at finding
myself in a traditional classroom--what was to me a new and different teaching
--place. To move toward this understanding, I will excerpt from my teaching
logs and from my students' evaluations of my teaching and their learning. My
methods are those of the autoethnographer, as described by Linda Brodkey
(1996, pp. 28, 172). The study is a personal account, of course, rooted in my
own sense of my experience, drawing on teaching logs written in class, close
to the moment, and upon my students' written evaluations of my teaching. The
result is a representation of my experience as a teacher in what might be
considered the "contact zone" between two technologies: the technology of the
nineteenth century classroom and what may be something like the technology of
the twenty-first century classroom.

I am not the usual autoethnographer, as defined by Brodkey (1996, p. 172),
who, drawing from Mary Louise Pratt (1992), sees the autoethnographer as
writing from the margins, a marginalized or colonized person who undertakes to
represent the self "in ways that engage with the colonizer's own terms"(Pratt,
p. 7). I am light-years from the margins--a professor of English comfortable
in tenure. When I began this study, I would have said that I was _entirely_
comfortable. After writing this piece, however, I find myself able to
empathize with--indeed make common cause with--writing teachers, usually
poorly-paid teaching assistants or part-time lecturers who are asked/forced to
adapt to computer-equipped classrooms. True, I was "going back," and not
"forward," but this was still a forced change, and the discomfort I felt at
this change helps me appreciate the discomfort I have seen others feel as they
were asked or forced to change; to move from a traditional-classroom to a
computer-equipped teaching environment. Between 1986 and 1996, as a teacher of
College Writing, I had apparently made a gradual transition from traditional
to computer classroom. My teaching goals and strategies had changed, at least
in part in response to the environment of the computer-equipped classroom.
Apparently, the transition was more radical than I had realized. Trying to "go
back," to return to the traditional classroom, proved to be more of a change
than I could handle in one semester. The change was substantial and the effect
expensive, certainly for this teacher and almost certainly for the students,
whose learning is at least in part a function of the teacher's comfort with,
and engagement in, his teaching.

* * *

This from my teaching log of January 30, 1996, my first day as a teacher of
College Writing in a traditional classroom. This log entry was written as my
students wrote. In this entry, I seem to be trying to like my new environment
but with only intermittent success.

It's day 1. . . and people are writing. It's just the same! Though I'm
experiencing a bit of writer's cramp, and the day is moving along fast. . .

I'm sitting _close_ to students as I write--I hear sniffles, pens  & pencils
on paper, _smell_ students-there's no white-noise-hum-of-cooling fans and air-
conditioners. . . So this is a more physical relationship--and people are in
radically different poses, too--one writing on a pad supported by a crossed
leg, another with a white baseball cap, bill almost touching the paper,
another sitting straight up, keeping the words at a distance.

I'm not solving any lab-problems, either. No word-processor problems. . . I've
not had to identify (student) software experts here either-and there's been no
pairing to learn the system.

Most of all, there's less _room_ here-less visual space, students crowded
close to one another, less cubic footage. In the labs I could walk around
freely, or stop at a station and type like mad. In the lab, too, I could enter
the system's virtual space and travel there. Here there's virtual space too,
but it's cerebral, inaccessible [to me]. I miss my walks through physical and
virtual space. Cramped. No _room_.

I continue on, ambivalent: pleased and irritated:  I've had to bring in lots
of _paper_ , which they'll take away with them, lose. I'll have to do more
copies--I don't have the control I did have--papers can get lost-- have the
feeling that I'll be less well-organized here than I was there. Maybe more
responding to writing? But I do feel closer to these people--despite the lousy
chalkboard--this close writing together is really quite extraordinary.

On day two I continue to be ambivalent about my new teaching environment. I
note the wonderful silence ("There are sounds of people reading!"), and I
note, and therefore must have felt discomfort at, the students' physical
proximity: "Someone across the table from me--that's 12 inches!--asks Jack for
a piece of paper." I enjoy the new variety in my visual field: "I notice that
I'm reading handwriting. Randi's paper is in blue ink with green-ink notes on
it. In my group there's black ink, blue ink, my long yellow pad, the green
letter-writing assignment, the ivory syllabus, the deep-yellow no-show form. .
. spiral notebooks, legal pads, 3-ring binders. Variety!" And I note that all
this is "in my very small space!"

I begin, on this second day, to worry about the fact that my students either
have to take their writing with them, or leave it with me. This really shakes
me.

I'm troubled, and so may the students be--I won't be able to see these pieces
_at all_ until they are due next Thursday. On line, I'd have their drafts in
digital form-- _now they take their writing away_. No copy-service can help me
here--we'd burn up the machine. And I can't make them bring in copies, or can
I? Maybe it's just as well--why not have them be their own editors, and me the
final reader/evaluator. Maybe the technology is pushing my pedagogy here--I
won't be able to see all the writing.

I begin to resent, too, the amount of new work I seem to have to do.  I'm just
back from constructing a Hacker exercise (to [my office] computer, type, print
on blue paper, copy on blue paper, cut in half) and a mid-process-draft letter
(to the computer, type, print, copy on yellow paper, cut in half). All this
cutting and copying is time- and resource-consuming!

I resent the grade book I have to construct for myself and my need to discover
a new way of organizing the course. I wonder: should I purchase a 3-ring
binder? And an ominous note: I begin to feel that as a teacher I have to
become more active, because I'm feeling that not much is happening.  I'm
thinking that the class is pretty quiet-not sure how to bring them together in
groups. Maybe--the problem may be that I've taken on too much direction here?
I'm feeling very directive, disciplinarian, standards. 'Read the damned
assignment-sheet!' What's going on?

In the third week, I note, "I'm starting to like this!" What I like, again in
retrospect ominously, is this:  I ask them to write spelling words they have
trouble with; they do so; they speak them, I collect them on the blackboard.
We joke back and forth--I am a bad speller too. I'm drawing on all my
experience here--as a writer. And I'm at the board, all (most) looking at me.
I'm the entertainer! I could not have done any of these things in the computer
lab. I'm the teacher. It feels like fun. I have no idea how good or useful
this is to the students.

* * *

I wish that I could say that I learned and adapted as the semester progressed,
but my teaching logs say otherwise. At the end of the semester, I am still
bothered by the fact that students are taking their work away with them. I am
still bothered by the amount of copying I have to do. And in my notes taken
during the last class, I'm clearly troubled, not only about the strategies
unavailable to me in this traditional classroom, but also by the possibility
that I've not taught particularly well. In this last class of the semester,
students are working away individually at their portfolio reviews, due before
the end of class. I have brought their portfolios into class in the file-crate
that I've resorted to. And I've brought in extra portfolio review-forms, two
staplers, a staplepuller, lined pads of paper: 40 pounds of stuff, at least.

As they work, I write this:

Today, again, the copy-problem: they take their portfolio reviews with them,
so I won't see them before the final conference. Another glitch. I put on the
board the goals I've had for them in this class: to have them become
independent writers, use other writers for response, know and use writers'
tools, get lots of practice. I tell them that I'll be available for references
when they graduate. But my lips get dry-this is forced! They work away, but it
does not feel good. . . a sad end to a bad semester. Or was it? I can't wait
to see the evaluations-some of them may be OK. But I'm guessing that they're
not-that the semester has been a bust.

Well, it wasn't a bust, but it was not what I hope for. My doubts about my
effectiveness as a teacher were echoed by the students in their anonymous,
end-of-semester teacher/course evaluations. These are administered and
collected by a student, returned to the Writing Program office, and not
available to the instructor until well after the end of the semester. Students
know this and are therefore quite candid in their responses.

I read through these evaluations at the end of the summer, when they became
available to me. There seemed, to my eye, a real difference between these
teacher-course evaluations and those of the students I had taught in computer
classrooms. Let me be clear: this class was not a disaster. On the op-scan
program questionnaires, 10 out of 19 respondents said that this class had been
either "the most valuable" or "the second most valuable" course they had taken
at the University, not bad for a class that is required and becomes a "common
experience," like dining-commons food. But when I teach in the computer
classroom, students responded much more positively to the teacher/course
evaluations. Typically, 75-80% of the students in these classes have ranked
the course "most" or "second most" valuable. And, from this-year's students'
essay-responses, I received disturbing confirmation that our teaching and
learning had not gone smoothly.

As I read the students' written evaluation of the teacher and the course, it
seemed clear that the students felt, as I had, that we as a class had not
"bonded"; that there was something wrong with the human communication in the
room. Somehow I had moved into the center of the class, assuming more
authority than I have recently been accustomed to having, and therefore giving
the students less. One student wrote, pleased, "My instructor includes
everyone and tries to encourage them to speak." She also wrote, however, "My
instructor might open the class more and encourage discussion between students
instead of doing all the talking and directing." Another said, "Lectures seem
to be a little too boring." Lectures? Did I lecture? Well, yes, there was the
blackboard and chalk. I must have done more of this than I realized: using, as
I do in the computer classroom, the available technology--in this case,
blackboard and chalk. Reactions to class format were really mixed. One student
wrote, "Charlie makes the whole class revolve on class activities." Another
wrote, "Class time was kind of long." One student complained that I was not
"fair" in my comments on the writing--a first, for me. And the same student
wanted more comments, noting that "a great deal of my papers had no responses
on them." This is my normal practice: to comment on mid-process drafts, and
not on final drafts. Somehow, in this traditional classroom, my practice was
not entirely well-received. In the students' responses there was, too, more
than the usual discomfort at my practice of not grading individual essays.

If I had to put all of this together, and I guess I do, I'd say this: that
when I taught in the traditional classroom, my students and I felt that the
focus of the class was on their relationship to me, the teacher, not on their
relationship to one another--despite the fact that I had created reading-and-
responding groups. In contrast, in the computer-equipped classrooms the
students and I felt that the focus was on the task and on groups assigned to
complete the tasks. In the new-to-me traditional classroom, this is what
students see me as doing best: "Prof. Moran treats students with a lot of
respect and talks to them like real people. His comments are always
constructive and usually very helpful," and "He is very well prepared for the
class and can generate ideas for us as writers." That's fine, but I note their
focus on my ideas, not theirs. "He listens when we speak and is very
interested in our writing." And, perhaps most telling, some students wanted
more one-to-one conference-time: "I would like to see more conference time to
review my writing. I feel peer evaluation helps, but I feel more comfortable
with the professor reading my work and offering advice," and "He runs the
class very well in every way (lectures, conferences)." I'd swear on a stack of
bibles that I did not lecture! But I must have, or have seemed to.

* * *

When I set out on this voyage, I intended to look for the differences between
teaching in a traditional classroom and in a computer-equipped classroom. I
found these differences, it should be clear, from my teaching journal
excerpts. What I found and entirely did not expect, however, was the degree to
which as a teacher I refused to adapt to my new environment. I began the
semester complaining, and I never stopped. I did make a conscious effort to
enjoy what was new to me in the traditional classroom: the variety, the
closeness, the sounds and silences. But I was not able in one semester to
adapt. During this attempted transition, I talked with other teachers about
what was happening as I was teaching, too--it is not as if I'd suddenly become
an unreflective practitioner. Yet despite what I know about teaching, and
despite my reflection upon what was happening, I continued to try to do in the
traditional classroom what I'd done for the past eight years in the computer-
classrooms. And I couldn't. Once I found these strategies ineffective, I tried
to return to strategies that had been successful in traditional classrooms in
my 30 years of teaching B.C. (before computers). There was the blackboard,
there was the chalk. So I used them! But because these strategies were old and
perhaps mis-remembered, and because I didn't entirely believe in them, and
because the kind of constructivist classroom I had come to think of as "good"
was not supported by these strategies, they didn't feel right either. I was a
teacher resisting the old technology!

Let me unpack and interpret just a bit more here. In the spring of 1996, I
taught College Writing in what was to me a new environment. To me, the old
technology--blackboard, chalk, students at desks/tables--was new. It required,
therefore, a new pedagogy which I was unable to develop in this first
semester. I brought to this environment my "old" pedagogy, which I now need to
understand.

In our years of teaching College Writing in computer-equipped classrooms, we
had gradually developed a pedagogy that "worked" in this environment. We had
begun with stand-alone computers, had moved to a networked computer
environment, and now looked forward to fiber-optic web-access. As our
environment evolved, our pedagogy did as well. With the advent of networking,
our computer-equipped classrooms had become for me and many others
"constructivist" classrooms, spaces in which students work, usually in groups,
on tasks: responding to others' writing, editing and publishing bi- or tri-
weekly class anthologies, working with community organizations on writing
tasks defined by these organizations, and reviewing and organizing their own
writing portfolios. In these classrooms the teacher is responsible for
structuring the students' writing activities, but generally the teacher is not
in the center of these activities. During class, the teacher chiefly
circulates, helping student teams accomplish the tasks that have been
assigned. By and large, in these classrooms students go about their work
independently. They do not steadily look to the teacher for direction.

This constructivist pedagogy, I'll argue, has evolved in part as a response to
the environment of the computer-equipped writing classrooms. One of the
salient aspects of this environment is that in a computer classroom, we have
available to us two agendas: writing and computers. If we let them, students
can be the computer experts. They then meet over the computers, and become
therefore more able to meet over their writing. In our computer-equipped
classrooms, many of us start the semester by having students teach one another
aspects of computer-use, knowing as we do that students are usually more adept
at this than we are (Carbone, 1993). In the area of computer expertise,
students become teachers, and this teacher, at least, a student. We, students
and teacher, meet over computers, and therefore potentially over writing, as
something like equals. In this classroom, teacher and students are accustomed
from day one to helping one another, to working together, in pairs or small
groups--to find a lost file, to solve a printing problem, to solve a writing
problem. The alternative to this distribution of authority is the assumption
by the teacher of the dual roles of computer expert and writing expert. This
simply doesn't work, as teachers new to the computer classroom find out each
semester. If the teacher sets up to be the computer-expert, then she spends
her classtime dealing with students' computer-problems, which effectively
takes her out of what should be our principal work: orchestrating and
improving our students' writing.

What has seemed to us to be the inherently social nature of our computer
classrooms has encouraged teachers in these classrooms to move towards social-
constructivist, task-based curriculum. I am not entirely sure why this is the
case, but, as an autoethnographer, I am permitted to speculate. The classroom
filled with computers looks to me not like a classroom but like a workplace--
in the worst case, an insurance office. Students are at their desks, uniform.
In my semester's return to the traditional classroom, I noted variety of
prose, of paper, of ink-color. In the computer classroom there is still
variety-colors of clothing, style of dress. But all students are typically
facing their computer screens, seemingly paying attention. This looks like a
workplace. The computers, too, are powerful work-tools, asking to be used.
With desktop publishing capability, why not publish our own anthologies? And
if so, shouldn't we create anthology-publishing teams, trying to put one
wizard computer-person in each group for the fancy stuff? The color-printed
covers and innovative page-layout? With web access, why not generate group
projects that involve research? Or ask a group to put together a guide to the
Internet, 1997?

Teachers who have taught College Writing successfully in traditional
classrooms, and I have to include my pre-1986 self in this group, have evolved
strategies for helping the students relate to one another, as well as to the
teacher, in this setting. In my return to the traditional classroom, I'd
forgotten, or declined to use, these strategies. Instead, in my teaching logs
I recorded a feeling of loss, even a low-level anger at the fact that I could
not in this new environment use the strategies that we'd developed in the
computer classrooms: e.g., establishing students as software experts and
advisors, encouraging those who know something--for instance, how to move a
document easily from double to single space and to share that knowledge with
others. Should I teach College Writing again in a traditional classroom, I
will have to spend much more time developing groups, creating community. In
the computer classroom, community just seems to happen. Of course it does not
--we make it happen--but after a decade in the computer classroom, my
strategies for community-building in that environment have become second
nature, tacit, transparent to me.

In addition to what I'll argue is the inherently constructivist bias of our
computer classrooms is a second, related characteristic: in the computer
classroom we have infinite and cheap copying. Through the miraculous
compression made possible by the microchip, all class writing is potentially
available to all: theirs and mine. Our writing--all of it--can simultaneously
be on our class network, on my computers at home and in my office, and on the
students' computers in their dormitory rooms. I'd become used to this: being
able to stop in at any time to read through the rough or mid-process drafts,
or the short writings my students were working on, and being able to easily
review all my comments on their writing. And I've expected students to be able
to read one another's writing, and my writing back to them--on our chat
program and in our class folders where all our writing is stored. Outside of
the computer classrooms, multiple copies are not always possible in the same
way. In the traditional classroom, writing is private, not public. When a
student turns in a piece of writing to me, she loses it. It's not hers any
longer. When she takes her writing with her, it is lost to me. That's
different, and it's OK. And it's not what I'm used to.

A corollary to this is that in the computer classroom, writing is relatively
public. This came clear to me recently, when (yes, I have returned to the
computer classroom!) a teacher new to the system, noting that students'
writing and our comments on that writing were online and available to all,
said, "Do you mean that they can read all these? How do they feel about that?"
To her, writing was private. She'd just written something, and now we could
all read what she had written! Given my years in the computer classroom, I
_knew_ that my writing--e.g., my comments on students' writing--was semi-
public, and so I was writing to be read by the author and by anyone else who
had our class password. Why should I have private correspondence with
students, after all? That's different, and it's OK. And it's what I'm used to.

A third salient characteristic of the computer classroom is that in this
environment we have more space/person than in our traditional classrooms. This
is in part a function of our particular history--in 1986 we took over two huge
rooms that had been language labs, rooms with lots of equipment in them, yet
carried on the university's books as having a capacity of 20 students. So, as
newcomers in these huge rooms, we were permitted to limit our class size to
20. The space we enjoy in these computer classrooms is a function, too, of the
actual floor-space that computers now require. A room that would hold 24
students in a traditional layout has space for at most fifteen computer
stations. The space we enjoy is a function, too, of the talismanic effect
computers have on administrators. The argument seems to go like this:
"Computers don't sweat. They can't therefore regulate their body temperatures.
They need good places to function in: air-conditioned space,with good
lighting, anti-static carpets, and lots of room to move about, should the
computers choose to move about. People, on the other hand. . . ." You know the
rest.

This extra room permits teacher and students to get up, move from place to
place, whiz around on our castered chairs--a form of in-class locomotion that
has not yet sufficiently been studied, I think, by our discipline! Every
semester there are a number of students in my classes who have marginal, or
not so marginal, Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD). These people need to get up
and move. And so do I! The computer classrooms make this movement possible and
nondisruptive. The space, too, permits us easily to form workgroups at
sufficient distance from one another to make the groups seem autonomous. In
the traditional classroom, I missed this space, and I did not develop ways of
making our new physical closeness a virtue, rather than a liability.

This physical space is related to something that, drawing on Foucault's (1997)
_Discipline and Punish_ , I'll call "gaze" (pp. 171-77, 195). In a writing
classroom, who is looking at whom/what, and for what purposes? In computer
classrooms, students are looking at their screens. To me, they seem to be
working. I can look at them, the I-hope-gentle supervisor. To get students to
look at me I have to act, sometimes with almost-violence, and I do this as
little as I can, because I don't want to interrupt students' writing without
good reason. I am accustomed, in computer classrooms, to watching, but not
being watched. In contrast, teachers new to our computer classrooms often find
the fact that students are _not_ looking at them to be profoundly disturbing.
To become themselves the center of their students' attention, they often break
their students away from the computers, pulling them into a circle as far from
the infernal machines as they can get. There, they attempt to engage students
in full-class, off-line discussions. In my return to the traditional
classroom, I found the students' gaze disturbing. When I was being looked at
by 22 sets of eyes, this seemed a call to act--apparently, all too often, a
call to lecture at the blackboard. When students were looking out the window,
they seemed off-task; when they were looking at one another, they seemed to me
to be off-task; when they were looking at me, they made me feel off-task. I
had become used to the computer classroom, in which, like an insurance office,
each worker is at her keyboard, eyes fixed on the screen. In this setting,
everyone is working, apparently; I, the teacher, am released. I am not at the
center of the class, fully responsible for its progress. I am, rather, in and
of the class, a roving editor, helper, checking in with the writers, or teams
of writers, as they work. The responsibility for what is happening in the
class is mine, of course, but I am discernible through my effect, not through
the centrality of my voice and person. I am the "clockmaker" god of the Age of
Reason, not speaking in the whirlwind but visible in the creation.

* * *

This has been the story of a teacher who resisted his new teaching environment
and has since arranged his return to the old. In much of the writing we've
done in our field, we've felt, explicitly or implicitly, that teachers who
resisted emerging technologies were somehow deficient: Luddites, humanists,
technopeasants. When we're gentle about this, we speak of what Palmquist ,
Kiefer, Hartvigsen,  & Godlew (in press) called "teacher reluctance." When
we're less gentle, we speak of resistance. In the popular imagination, and in
the language of educational reform, this is presented as a teacher problem, to
be solved by administrative force, teacher-training, or time.

This self-study argues that the presence of computers in a writing classroom
does make a difference, that technologies are not transparent, and that the
change in moving from a traditional classroom to a computer classroom (or
back!), is substantial and, in this case, for the teacher and his students,
expensive. In 1992, Elizabeth Klem and I studied teachers working for the
first time in computer classrooms in what we termed "A Strange LANd." We saw
these teachers' pedagogies in unproductive conflict with their new
environment-teaching against the classroom, not with it-and argued that "even
if a writing program can provide the necessary training and support, it is
unlikely that it can expect radical and rapid change in the way teachers
teach." To this finding my self-study says, "Amen."

* * *

_**Charles Moran**_ teaches at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst,
where he is co-director of the Western Massachusetts Writing Project. With
Anne Herrington, he is coeditor of _Writing, Teacher, and Learning in the
Disciplines_ , the first book in the MLA series, "Research and Scholarship in
Composition." With Gail E. Hawisher, Paul LeBlanc, and Cynthia L. Selfe, Moran
coauthored _Computers and the Teaching of Writing in American Higher
Education, 1979-1994: A History_ , which is part of the New Directions in
Computers and Composition Studies series. His e-mail address is:
[cmoran@titan.ucs.umass.edu](mailto:cmoran@titan.ucs.umass.edu).

* * *

**REFERENCES**

Brodkey, Linda. (1996). _Writing permitted in designated areas only_.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Carbone, Nick. (1993). Trying to create a community: A first-day lesson plan.
_Computers and Composition, 10_ (4) 81-88.

Carbone, Nick, Daisley, Margaret, Federenko, Ed, McComas, Dix, Moran, Charles,
Ostermiller, Dori, & Vanden Akker, Sherri. (1993). Writing ourselves on-line.
_Computers and Composition, 10_ (3), 29-48.

Curtis, Marcia, & Moran, Charles. (1992). Userhome, sweet home: A review of
Novell's NETWARE. _Computers and Composition, 10_ (1), 63-75.

Foucault, Michel. (1977). _Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison_ (A.
Sheridan, Trans.). New York: Vintage. (Original work published 1975)

Klem, Elizabeth,  & Moran, Charles. (1991). Computers and instructional
strategies in the teaching of writing. In Gail E. Hawisher & Cynthia L. Selfe
(Eds.), _Evolving perspectives on computers and composition studies_ (pp.
132-149). Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.

Klem, Elizabeth,  & Moran, Charles. (1992). Teachers in a strange LANd:
Learning to teach in a networked writing classroom. _Computers and
Composition, 9_ (3), 5-22.

Klem, Elizabeth, & Moran, Charles. (1994). 'Whose machines are these?'
Politics, power, and the new technology. In Patricia A. Sullivan & Donna J.
Qualley (Eds.), _Pedagogy in the age of politics: Writing and reading (in) the
academy_ (pp. 73-87). Urbana IL: National Council of Teachers of English.

Leblanc, Paul,  & Moran, Charles. (1989). Adapting to a new environment: Word
processing and the training of writing teachers. In Selfe, Cynthia L.,
Rodrigues, Dawn, & Oates, William R. (Eds.), _Computers in English and the
language arts_ (pp. 111-131). Urbana IL: National Council of Teachers of
English.

Palmquist, Michael, Kiefer, Kathleen, Hartvigsen, James, and Godlew, Barbara.
(in press). _Transitions: Teaching writing in computer-supported and
traditional classrooms_. Greenwich, CT: Ablex.

Pratt, Mary Louise. (1992). _Imperial eyes: Travel writing and
transculturation_. London: Routledge.

