| ![](../templates/parts/toptop.gif)  
---  
![](../templates/parts/topleft.gif) |  |  
  
---  
  
![Apply Now!](../templates/parts/applynow.gif)  
  
---  
  
|  ![](../templates/parts/alumni.gif) |  Take Me To... Accounting Accts
Receivable Addictions Admin. Justice Admissions Advising AE/GED/ESL
Agriculture Allied Health Art Athletic dept. Athletic Training Automotive
Behavorial/Math Science Division Behavioral Science Banner 5.x Baseball Basis
Training Basketball - Mens Basketball - Womens Biology Bookstore Business
Ed/Technology Business Tech & Wfd Division Butler Online Career/Employment
Service Center For Independent Study Center For Teaching Excellence Chemistry
Clubs & Organizations Computer Technology Cooperative Education Dance Drafting
& CAD Early Childhood Development EC Apprenticeship Economics Educare
Emergency Med Tech Engineering English Facilities Mgmt Faculty/Staff Dev.
Financial Aid Fire Science Football Foreign Langauage Foundation Grizzly
Magazine History Housing Hospitality Mgmt Human Resources Humanities/FA Dept.
Information Services Division Inservice Information Institutional Research
International Advising Learning PACT Project Learning Resource Library Live
Schedule Livestock Judging Marketing Communications Mass Comm Mathematics MRC
Music News & Information Non-Credit Education North Central Study Nursing
Division Nursing Office Of The President PC Technical Services Phil/Religion
Physical Ed Physical Science/Physics pipeline@butler Registrar Resource
Development Soccer Secretarial Center Softball Special Needs Spirit Squad
TEC-E Program Tech-Prep Tennis Theater Track/CC Volleyball Web Services
Welding Workforce Development  
---|---  
|  |

|

**_CRITERION FIVE_**

**_ _**

**_BCCC demonstrates integrity in its practices_**

**_and relationships._**

**_CHAPTER SEVENTEEN: INSTITUTIONAL INTEGRITY_**



**INTRODUCTION**



For an institution such as BCCC "integrity" may be defined as "the consistent
and complete application of the college's stated and unstated ethical values
in all its policies, procedures and practices." BCCC values quality
performance from its students, faculty, staff and administration. This value
is fostered by the college's student -centered learning environment, which
expects integrity and a caring attitude in service to the college's
constituents. Linkages with the community are valued, promoting economic and
work force development while preparing responsible lifelong learners. The
college values accessibility for students, faculty, staff and the community by
positioning itself to provide the latest in technology, enhancing
affordability, and maintaining fiscal stability. The college also values the
dignity, worth and potential of each employee, nurturing personal growth and
professional development while fostering a sense of community. The college
conducts its activities in conformity with its written contracts, agreements
and stated policies and procedures as found in college publications. The
college projects an honest image of itself and its purposes through the many
publications distributed to its constituents.



**ETHICAL VALUES AND POLICIES, PROCEDURES AND PRACTICES**



BCCC values _quality performance_ from students, faculty, staff, and
administration. "Quality" is the fist of the Timeless Institutional Values
included in the college's Statement of Mission and Purposes. The college's
academic assessment program demonstrates a commitment to quality performance
by the student body. The various evaluation policies and procedures used to
assess the performance of administrators, faculty and staff also evidences a
commitment to quality performance. The adjunct faculty handbook emphasizes the
value. The handbook outlines a list of "professional standards" expected of
all BCCC faculty. The annual "Celebrating Excellence" awards are a vivid
example of recognition given to quality performance by employees. The Center
for Teaching Excellence serves as a resource center nurturing the furthering
of quality education at the college. The college's plan for employee
professional advancement is a strong impetus for professional development in
quality performance. The honor roll issued each semester and the activities of
Phi Theta Kappa in the college are examples of recognition given to
outstanding student performance. Outstanding graduates receive honor through
induction into the Orders of the Purple and Gold. The Board of Trustees and
Administrative Council periodically recognize outstanding accomplishments by
employees and students as an encouragement of quality performance. A peer
recognition program, "Great Grizzly Deeds," was begun in 1998-99 as a means
for BCCC employees to reward the exemplary efforts of their fellow employees.
A concern in this area is the lack of consistent leadership in the Honors
Program, Center for Learning Excellence, Orders of the Purple and Gold and Phi
Theta Kappa. The flux in organizational leadership for these programs in
recent years has weakened their effectiveness.



The maintenance and promotion of a _student centered learning environment_ is
a central value to the mission and purposes of BCCC. The creation of a
"Student Bill of Rights" witnesses the students centered focus of the
institution. The college staff actively works to address student concerns that
are apparent through the Noel Levitz Student Satisfaction Survey. Graduation
reports have shown an 80 to 90 percent satisfaction rate among student
receiving degrees over the last several semesters. Concern for students who
are struggling in their college experience is apparent in the Student-At-Risk
reporting procedures. The college's student services staff survey students who
have withdrawn from the institution. A strong Peer Tutor program is available
for all students through the Center for Independent Study.



The college promotes _integrity_ as one its Timeless Institutional Values. The
college's Academic Honesty Policy, in practice, serves as an evidence of the
institution's emphasis on integrity. BCCC practicing of Affirmative Action
policies witnesses its valuing of institutional integrity. The Drug and
Alcohol policy for all employees demonstrates a concern for the individual
integrity of all the staff. BCCC has grievance procedures in place for
students and staff. For example, the Student Review and Appeals Committee
processed six appeals made by four students during the 1997-98. In the past
eight years, only one student appeal needed to be addressed directly by the
Board of Trustees. One op-staff grievance was in process during the 1998-99
school year. Eight faculty grievances have been filed since 1992. One of those
was settled in favor of the grievant who went to court. Three were settled at
the informal level. One was settled after the grievant talked with the
academic Vice President. One grievance resulted in a finding against the
grievant in court. One resulted in a cash settlement, but the major grievance
item was settled against the grievant. One grievance pertained to the
dismissal of a probationary instructor. The hearing panel upheld the
dismissal. This record of processed grievances establishes a pattern of
integrity for the institution.



Another Timeless Institutional Value is "Caring." This value is evident in the
content of the Student Bill of Rights. The development of an Educare Center
which helps meet the childcare needs of students and staff demonstrates a
caring attitude in the institution. The collegial response to various
individual employee and student crises and tragedies, such as illness, floods,
fires, tornadoes, and deaths, evidences a caring attitude in the college
community. A faculty sick leave bank was recently inaugurated as a means of
addressing employee needs. The establishment of staff and administrative sick
leave banks would further promote a caring atmosphere meeting employee
critical needs. Members of the college community participate in the American
Cancer Society Relay for Life and contribute to the Butler County United Way
as expressions of the caring concern for the larger community. Limited support
for international students and their special situations needs to be addressed
to promote a more globally conscious caring atmosphere.



The college promotes _community linkages to meet economic and work force
development needs._ This ethical practice is embedded in the institution's
Mission and Purposes. The "One-Stop-Shop" design for enrollment facilitates
such community linkage. On-site advising at Boeing, Inc. strengthens the
college's efforts in work force development. The institution's Business and
Industry (B &I) was established for the express purpose of promoting this
pattern of ethical practices. Students may participate in Work-Based Learning
projects as a means of developing their work skills in the surrounding work
community. Another example of work force development in the community is the
Microsoft Certification program that is operated at Butler of Rose Hill. In
both official and unofficial institutional capacities, college employees
participate on various community boards and service organizations. Recently,
the college has explored the joint construction of YMCA with El Dorado and the
local hospital as a possible further instance of community linkage.



BCCC's nurturing of Lifelong Learning is apparent in the inclusion of this
value in the college's Mission statement and listing of the "Lifetime Learning
Abilities and Skills." The whole age range of potential learners may benefit
from various college offerings. Retirees enjoy the Life Enrichment program and
senior citizen discounts to numerous college activities. Non-credit courses
offer learning experiences to community members of all ages. Allied Health
provides continuing education for members of the nursing profession. High
school students throughout the state participate in the institution's annual
High Q (scholarship bowl) competition. Preschool aged children are encouraged
to begin their lifelong learning experience through the EduCare curriculum.
Such events as the Bull Frog Roundup (folk arts festival), Brown Bag series,
various BCCC Fine Arts theatre productions and music concerts and special
exhibits in the White Art Gallery promote lifelong learning among interested
community members of all ages.



The college values _accessibility_ throughout its operations. Nine outreach
centers make coursework accessible throughout the college's service area.
Courses are offered through traditional, telecourse, and on-line delivery
methods in daytime, evening, and weekend sessions so that classes are
accessible to the broadest possible range of students. The Centers of
Independent Study operate with as much flexibility in scheduling as possible
to promote accessibility. Efforts in the last seven years to address special
needs students have increased their number from 10 enrolled to 351. Limited
available dorm space on the El Dorado campus hinders accessibility to those
students seeking a traditional residential education.



BCCC strives to make current educational _technology_ available to its
students and employees. The college established the Technology Support
Services department in response to these institutional needs. Open student
computer labs make technology limited as discussed in the chapter on
Technology. In recent years, computer and internet access for faculty and
staff has increased rapidly. Since the last self-study, technical support for
the college's library system has been greatly enhanced. The college has
received numerous technology grants which aid in the promotion of this value.



BCCC's intention to maintain _affordability_ for its students is evidenced in
its financial aid policies. Using 1996-97 as an example, $870. 314 was awarded
to 1,201 students. That figure represents almost 9 percent of the student
enrollment for that academic year. Fifteen percent of the awarded scholarships
were Presidential, while 15 percent were Dean's scholarship and 24 percent
Academic/Endowment scholarships. Twenty-four percent of the scholarships were
awarded to students in other student activities. Thus 52 percent of
scholarships were awarded for academics and 48 percent were awarded for
participation in student activities.



The tuition rates established by the Board have been held to a level
considered to be affordable for potential students. In 1997/98, BCCC's tuition
and fees ranked fourth among the state's community colleges. Out of state
tuition ranked 12th, while international student's tuition and fees ranked the
highest among the community colleges in Kansas.



The college has demonstrated its commitment to _fiscal stability_ strongly in
recent years through its budgeting approaches. In 1997-98, "Zero Based
Budgeting" was used as a means of assuring that budgeting was based on the
reality of current operations, rather than the momentum of years of fiscal
status quo. The 1999-2000 budget has been prepared using a base budget process
which has been built from the clean slate approach of the ZBB process two
years earlier.



There are numerous evidences of the college _valuing the individual employee._
All full-time employees and their families may receive tuition waivers.
Approved health insurance for employees increases the college's premium
contributions to its employees. College-wide inservices each semester serve as
a means of professional development for all employees. The Steering Committee
for this self-study was composed of representatives from all arenas of the
college's employees, and, thus, is a strong example of an appreciation of the
value of the individual employee.



The college's commitment to a _sense of community_ is the hardest of these
values to document. References to the college "family" are made verbally and
in written memos frequently, particularly by the top administrators. However,
the building of a stronger sense of community has not been stated in written
policy. There is no apparent sense of community among students at any
attendance site other than El Dorado. Even at El Dorado the atmosphere is that
of a commuter institution, with the exception of those students who live in
the campus housing. The student union, library, and other lounge facilities
function only minimally as centers for student congregation. There is little
sense of community among the employees between the various campuses and
attendance sites. A sense that one or another site is being favored in
budgeting and planning is evident in employee opinion. This concern, which
also appears in the college 1999 Commination Audit, is addressed in the
1999-2000 Planning Priorities.



**EQUITY OF TREATMENT**



The Student Handbook describes BCCC's commitment to "a policy of
nondiscrimination involving equal access to education and employment
opportunities to all regardless of sex, race, age, religion, color, national
origin, or disability." Enrollment statistics for the fall of 1998 showed a 19
percent minority population and a 4.7 percent international student
population. In the BCCC service area, only four percent of the population is
African America, the area's single largest minority population. In the fall of
1997, 9 percent of the college's employees were non-Caucasian. The large
number of international students attending BCCC provides a more global
perspective and strengthens the diversity of the educational community. The
tremendous growth of the Special Needs program in recent years demonstrates
the college's commitment to equity of treatment. The absence of any kind of
minority affairs office or programs for citizens evidences a lack of maximum
commitment to complete equity of treatment.



**THE ETHICAL BEHAVIOR OF STUDENTS AND EMPLOYEES**



The BCCC policies for academic honesty, sexual harassment, and substance abuse
demonstrate that BCCC expects ethical behavior of all administrators, faculty,
staff, and students. Other evidences are the Affirmative Action Plan, the
various grievance procedures, and the procedure for student review and
appeals. The BCCC Timeless Institutional Values which are part of the
college's mission statement explicitly refer to "Integrity" as an expectation
for the members of the college community. The BCC Education Association
upholds a Code of Ethics, as does the college's Board of Trustees.



Documentation shows that the Human Resources Department develops policies that
allow it to hire, promote, and otherwise deal with all employees on an equal
basis. The department develops functions and budgets to apply non-
discriminatory processed for hiring, promotion and professional development.



There has been question in recent semesters whether the requirement for all
activity and athletic scholarship students to sign a drug testing consent form
constitutes due process. It is also unclear under what conditions a person is
declared a "student driver" and thus subject to testing or what constitutes
"random testing." There is no formal appeals process for the drug testing
policy. Clarification of these confusions would make the expectations and
practice in this area be shown to be more consistent with other policies.



**THE COLLEGE'S ETHICAL TREATMENT OF ITS INTERNAL PUBLIC**



The BCCC Graduation Report for 1997-98 showed an 80 to 90 percent satisfaction
rate in the areas of instruction, advising, admission, registrar, housing and
library resources. The college operations in adherence to all policies listed
in the Student Handbook, including the Student Bill of Rights, which outlines
grievance procedures. The Teaching Handbook states that the course syllabus is
a legally written contract between the instructor and student. This practice
provides a framework for honesty with students.



Numerous examples demonstrate the college's commitment to treat its internal
public with equity. The Human Resources' stated mission is to serve as the
catalyst for providing quality services to a diverse work force through
equitable employment practices, compensation and benefit provisions.
Educational advancement budget requests were made for qualifying full-time
professional employees. The inequity of men's and women's locker room space on
the El Dorado campus has been remedied. The inequity of men's and women's
athletics continues to be addressed. At-risk students have been targeted to
determine what help they need to assure success.



**THE COLLEGE'S ETHICAL TREATMENT OF ITS EXTERNAL PUBLIC**



BCCC practices honesty and candor in its relationships with its external
publics and responds to these publics as far as the law and professional
ethics allow. Butler has made an ethical effort to keep the external public
informed of its institutional and educational goals through the college
catalog and its program brochures. The college catalog includes mission and
purposes statements, discussion of the college's various programs and
services, and requirements for the certificate and degrees offered. Individual
department and program brochures clearly present course requirements and
certification/degree programs. The program brochures do not state all the
institutional and educational goals found in the college catalog. The design
and content of program brochures is coordinated through Public Relations so
that these publications present a consistent and appropriate image of the
institution. The Student Viewbook accurately and fairly described the
institution, its operations, and its programs. Press releases, which are made
available to all employees for their inspection, also accurately and fairly
describe activities of the college.



BCCC maintains ethical relationships with other educational institutions. The
college is in relationship with surrounding unified school districts for
collaborative educational efforts. The institution is an active member in
consortia with other colleges and universities and has singular agreements
with other institutions of higher education for dual degree programs and
student transfer. Evidences of the college providing adequate support for
resources shared with other educational and corporate institutions include the
microwave tower on the El Dorado campus, the new Workforce Development Center,
and the shared facilities at the Andover and Rose Hill campuses. Also, the
college maintains ethical agreements with other institutions for sharing
physical plant, personnel, and supply costs at other attendance sites. BCCC is
an active, well-respected member of the National Junior College Athletic
Association. Oversight processed for the monitoring of contractual
arrangements with government, industry, and other organizations are in
conformity with the requirements made by the agencies involved. The majority
of these agreements involved grants from various agencies extended to various
programs administered by the college.



**STRENGTHS OF INTEGRITY**



* BCCC values quality performance from its students, faculty, staff and administration.

* Quality is fostered through enhancement of a student-centered learning environment, which expects integrity and a caring attitude in its service to constituents.

* Linkages with the community are valued, meeting the needs of economic and work force development while preparing responsible lifelong learners.

* The college values accessibility for students, faculty, staff, and the community in positioning itself to provide the latest in technology, enhancing affordability, and maintaining fiscal stability.

* BCCC values the dignity, worth and potential of each employee, nurturing personal growth and professional development while fostering a sense of community.

* These ethical values are in general consistently applied to the college's policies, procedures, and practices.

* Full and candid disclosure is encouraged and generally practiced throughout the institution.

* BCCC lives up to the commitment it makes to its students.

* The college's catalog, promotional publications, and press releases, supervised by the Public Relations Department, present an ethical and appropriate picture of the institution to is public constituency.

* The college maintains a variety of ethical relationships with other educational, corporate, and government agencies, which help to fulfill the college's stated purposes.



**CONCERNS OF INTEGRITY**



* The Honors Program/Center for Learning Excellence/Orders of the Purple and Gold/Phi Theta Kappa lack leadership.

* There is no staff/administrative sick leave bank.

* There is not sufficient dorm space available for students wanting to attend the El Dorado campus.

* There is no sense of "community" among students at sites other than El Dorado.

* There is a sense of alienation between employees at different sites tied to suspicions of administrative favoritism.

* There is no minority affairs office which would serve as a student/employee resource.

* There are confusions regarding issues of due process in the activity/athletic scholarship student drug testing policy.

* There is no formal ongoing institutional examination of issues of ethical practice.

**RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INTEGRITY**



* The leadership of the various Honors related activities needs either a full time position or a clearer distribution of responsibilities among a team with adequate release time or overload compensation.

* BEARS should recommend to the President's Cabinet and the Board of Trustees that the same sick leave policy and procedure be applied to administration and staff as to faculty.

* A study of international student needs should be conducted so that an action plan could be developed by Student Services.

* The college should continue to monitor existing outside efforts to build additional student housing.

* A study should be conducted by the Student Services working with the Office of Institutional Research to determine student desire for more "community" building activities at sites other than El Dorado.

* A task force appointed from the Planning Council should study the problems involved in lack of harmony among the various sites and develop an action plan to address those problems. 

* BEARS should study the possibility of the creation of a minority affairs office.

* The Office of Student Services working with the Deans should further articulate and publish the specifics of the athletic/activities scholarship student drug testing policy.

* The President's Cabinet should generate a program for an ongoing institutional examination of ethical practice.



**_CHAPTER EIGHTEEN: FEDERAL COMPLIANCE_**



**I.C.9. Credits, Program Length, and Tuition**



Butler County Community College offers four associate degrees: Associate in
Arts, Associate in Science, Associate in Applied Science, and Associate in
General Studies.

A minimum of 62 credit hours must be completed for a student to earn any of
the four degrees. Courses designated as developmental or remedial do not count
toward fulfilling degree requirements. The degrees are consistent with those
offered in community colleges throughout the U.S. and observe Kansas State
Board of Education statutes and guidelines.



The college's academic year is divided into a fall semester, a spring
semester, and a summer term (eight weeks). Each credit hour earned by students
represents a state required 900 minutes of instruction for lecture classes and
1350 minutes for a lab setting.



Tuition and fees are determined periodically by the Board of Trustees and are
higher for out-of-state students as is typical throughout Kansas community
colleges. Tuition and fees per credit hour are:



In-state $44.50 per credit hour

Out-of-state $90.50 per credit hour

International students $137.00 per credit hour



The Class Schedule published each semester contains specific amounts of
tuition and fees. Some technical and laboratory courses require additional
course fees to cover additional equipment expense. Cost for the 19 hour
program at Butler of Rose Hill required for Microsoft Certification is $3,000.
A three-hour credit course is $473.67 ($157.89 per credit hour). This cost
covers tuition, fees, media books and supplies.  
The fee examination necessary by Microsoft Certification is not included. This
rate is applicable only to the program offered at Rose Hill.



Calculation of credit remains the same for all students in all coursework.



I.A.5 Institutional Compliance with the Higher Education Reauthorization Act



Butler County Community College is in compliance with the Higher Education
Reauthorization Act. The college has lowered its default rates since 1992. The
default rates are as follows:



| FY | #of | #of |   | Official  
---|---|---|---|---  
  | Borrowers | Borrowers |   | Cohort  
  | Entering | in Default |   | Default  
  
Repayment Rate



1992 | 372 |   | 65 | 17.5%  
---|---|---|---|---  
1993 | 459 |   | 73

