**

##  HISTORY 3327 - FALL 2001

# U.S. Environmental History

Professor Mark Stoll

742-1004 ext. 250    Holden Hall 135  
E-mail: [mark.stoll@ttu.edu](mailto:mark.stoll@ttu.edu)   Web:
<http://www2.tltc.ttu.edu/stoll/>  
Office Hours: Monday 11:00-12:00; Wednesday 10:00-12:00

## DESCRIPTION OF COURSE

**

Through lectures, readings, and film, the course explores two evolving topics
in American history: the impact of humans on the land and its plant and animal
life; and environmental thought.

## **TEXTS**

Dan Flores, _Caprock Canyonlands_ |  Aldo Leopold, _Sand County Almanac_  
---|---  
John Muir, _My First Summer in the Sierra_ |  Mark Stoll, _Protestantism,
Capitalism, and Nature_  
Donald Worster, _Dust Bowl_ |  Rachel Carson, _Silent Spring_  
  
## **ASSIGNMENTS** _

10% | Class participation  
---|---  
15% ea. | Three examinations  
30% | Six short (500-word) reaction papers  
15% | A 4-6 page analytical book review  
  
_**

Exams: **Exams will be essay exams. Students will have an opportunity to
demonstrate their knowledge of environmental history as well as to engage
issues raised in lectures, discussions, and readings.

**

Reaction Papers: **Students will write a short reaction paper to each book
read for class. About a week before each paper is due, the professor will give
the class a topic to write on.

**

Papers: **The course contains one _analytical book review._ For each review,
students will select a book on environmental history from a
[bibliography](../Environmental%20History%20Bibliography%20Fall%2001.htm) that
the professor will provide. Students may select another book _if the professor
approves it._ 1000-1500 words in length, the book review will have three
sections:

  1. A short summary (not a table of contents or outline) of the book's contents; this should not take more than a paragraph or two
  2. An explanation of the book's thesis, with a discussion of how the author has supported the thesis
  3. Most important, an analysis of the book, including its success (or lack of success) in supporting its thesis, the author's bias or point of view, whether it agrees or disagrees with other class material, how it might be improved, how well it is written, and whether you agree with the book's conclusions.

**

Attendance: **The professor will take role at the beginning of each class.
Students with a perfect attendance record will receive **three bonus points on
their final grades**. Students with more than two absences will receive **one
point off their final grades for each absence over two**. The instructor will
accept excuses in cases of true need as documented by the Dean of Students
Office.

**Note:** Students who, because of a disability, require some special
arrangements in order to meet course requirements should contact the
instructor as soon as possible to request necessary accommodations. Students
should present appropriate verification from the Disabled Student Support
Program in the Dean of Students Office. No requirement exists that
accommodations be made prior to completion of this approved university
process.

The professor reserves the right to change this syllabus at his discretion.
Changes will be announced in class and posted at the Web address listed above.

**

##  FALL 2001 COURSE SCHEDULE

**

_**Date**_ | _**Assignment**_  
---|---  
Aug 28 | Introduction  
Aug 30 | [Were Indians
environmentalists?](Indians%20as%20environmentalists/index.htm)  
Sept 4 | Guest lecture  
Sept 6 | Guest lecture  
Sept 11 | No class  
Sept 13 | Reading: Flores, _Caprock Canyonlands_  
Sept 18 | [Arrival of the Europeans: ecological
imperialism](Ecological%20imperialism/index.htm)  
Sept 20 | [Industrialization and the rise of the
cities](Industrialization/index.htm)  
Sept 25 | [American Romanticism](Romanticism/index.htm)  
Sept 27 | Reading: Muir, _My First Summer in the Sierra_  
**Oct 2** | **MIDTERM EXAM**  
Oct 4 | [Transformation of the
West](Western%20ecological%20transformation/index.htm)  
Oct 9 | [The Progressive Conservation
Movement](Conservation%20movement/index.htm)  
Oct 11 | Reading: Worster, _Dust Bowl_  
Oct 16 | [Urban environmental
problems](Urban%20environmental%20problems/index.htm)  
Oct 18 | [The 1920s and the New Deal](New%20Deal/index.htm)  
Oct 23 | [Early ecology](Early%20ecology/index.htm)  
Oct 25 | Reading: Leopold, _Sand County Almanac_  
Oct 30 | [War, Cold War, and the
Environment](Postwar%20environmentalism/index.htm)  
Nov 1 | **MIDTERM EXAM**  
Nov 6 | Film: "[Cadillac Desert](http://www.pbs.org/kteh/cadillacdesert/): The
American Nile"  
Nov 8 | [The 1960s: The Rise of the Environmental
Movement](The%201960s/index.htm)  
Nov 13 | [The 1960s: The Rise of the Environmental
Movement](The%201960s/index.htm), continued  
Nov 15 | Reading: Carson, _Silent Spring_  
Nov 20 | [The 1970s: The Environmental
Decade](The%201970s,%20The%20Environmental%20Decade/index.htm)  
Nov 27 | Reading: Stoll, _Protestantism, Capitalism, and Nature in America_  
Nov 29 | [New trends: ecojustice; ecofeminism; "deep ecology"; "social
ecology"](The%201980s,%20Retreat/index.htm)  
Dec 4 | [The 1980s: Retreat from
environmentalism](The%201980s,%20Retreat/index.htm)  
**Book review due**  
Dec 11 | 4:30 p.m.-7:00 p.m. **FINAL EXAM**  
  
This page has been accessed ![Hit
Counter](../_vti_bin/fpcount.exe/stoll/?Page=HIST%203327/American%20Environmental%203327%20F01%20syllabus.htm|Image=0)
times.

Last edited: 09/24/2001 12:48 PM

