  
**History 334**

**The Provinces of the Roman Empire**  
Spring 1999  

  
Instructor: Gary Reger
Meeting times: WF 1.15-2.30

Office: 405 Seabury
Meeting place: McCook 305

Office hours: W 9-12
Phone: 297-2393

email: [gary.reger@mail.trincoll.edu](mailto:gary.reger@mail.trincoll.edu)
Webpage: <http://shakti.trincoll.edu/~greger/index.html>  

  
At its height, the Roman empire stretched from Britain to the Euphrates and
embraced hundreds of different ethnic and linguistic groups. The empire was
constructed over centuries on the basis of Roman administration of Italy built
in the fourth and third centuries BC and then on models of provincialization
in Sicily, Spain, and the East over the next several centuries. While it is
clearly impossible to do justice to such a sprawling phenomenon in the course,
there are a few unifying aspects of Roman rule in the provinces, especially in
the three centuries after Augustus (31 BC - AD 14), which will serve as anchor
points for our explorations. We end with more detailed examination of two
regions, Spain and Palestine, which displayed contrasting reactions to Roman
authority.

_Books and Articles_  
  

Books available for purchase in the Bookstore are marked (B). Books or other
material on reserve in the Library are marked (R).  

Benjamin Isaac, _The Limits of the Roman Empire_ (B)

Josephus, _The Jewish War_ (B)

John S. Richardson, _The Romans in Spain_ (Cambridge, MA 1996). __ (B)

David Braund, _Administration in the Roman Empire_ (R)

A.T. Fear, _Rome and Baetica. Urbanization in Southern Spain c. 50 BC-AD 150_
(Oxford 1996). (R)

Josep-Maria Carret¨¦, Simon Keay, and Martin Millet, _A Roman Provincial
Capital and its Hinterland. The Survey of the Territory of Tarragona, Spain,
1985-1990_ , JRA Suppl. 15 (Ann Arbor 1995). (R)

Yiguel Yadin, _Masada. Herod's Fortress and the Zealots' Last Stand_ (New York
1966) (R)

Nachman Ben-Yehuda, _The Masada Myth_ (Madison 1995) (R)

J.M. Blazques, "The Latest Work on the Export of Baetican Olive Oil to Rome
and the Army," _Greece & Rome_ 39 (1992) 173-189 (R)

Julian Gonzalez, "The Lex Irnitana. A New Copy of the Flavian Municipal Law,"
_Journal of Roman Studies_ 76 (1986) 147-243 (R)

Keith Hopkins, "Taxes and Trade in the Roman Empire," _Journal of Roman
Studies_ 70 (1980) 101-125.

Bert de Vries, _Umm el-Jimal. A Frontier Town and its Landscape in Northern
Jordan_. 1\. _Fieldwork 1972-1981_ , JRA Supplementary Series 26 (Portsmouth
1998). (R)

Miriam Griffin, "The Senate's Story," _JRS_ 87 (1997) 249-263. (R)  

Duane W. Roller, _The Building Program of Herod the Great_ (Berkeley 1998).
(R)

In addition, a course reader is available for purchase from Gigi St. Peter in
the History Department office. Assignments in there are indicated as CR in the
syllabus below.

  
  
_Assignments_  
  

1\. Do the reading and participate fully in discussion.  
  
2. __ Reading summaries. For each discussion class, one or more students will be assigned to summarize the reading and help generate discussion. Discussion classes are marked with a (D) in the Schedule of Classes below.   

3\. Reaction papers. Two (2) brief papers, 3-5 pp., reacting to the reading
and discussion for a discussion class. These papers are due one (1) week after
the class to which they react.  

4\. Research paper. A research paper of roughly 15-18 pp., _based on primary
source material_ , will be developed on the following schedule:  
  
    1\. Meet with me to decide on a topic by no later than Friday, February 19\.   
    2\. Turn in a thesis statement of roughly 2 pp. and a bibliography of primary and secondary sources, the latter of which must include at least three (3) articles from scholarly journals, on Wednesday, March 3.   
    3\. Give an oral presentation of your work on April 28 or 30 (time to be determined by enrollment).   
    4\. Turn in completed final draft on Monday, May 3.   
  

_Schedule of Classes_  
  

    Part I. Introduction. The Development of the Roman Empire   

January 20: Introduction (no special reading)  
  
January 22: The Problem of Creating Provinces under the Roman Republic (no
special reading)  

January 27: The Solutions of Augustus. Read Braund, pp. 1-14; Richardson, pp.
127-149; CR, chap. 1.  

    Part II. A Survey of the Provinces from Augustus to Septimius Severus 

January 29: Library orientation

February 3: The Role of the Allies and the "Client Kings." Read Braund, pp.
69-96; Isaac, pp. 219-268; CR, chap. 3.  
  
February 5: The Role of the Army. Read Isaac, pp. 101-160; CR, chap. 9.  

February 10: Urbanization in the Provinces. Read Braund, pp. 53-68; Isaac, pp.
332-371; Fears 6-30; CR, chap. 5.

February 12: Urban Administration. Read Gonzalez; CR, chap. 2.  

February 17: The Economy of Provincial Administration. Read Hopkins; CR, chap.
6-7.  

February 19: The Provincial Aristocracy. Read CR, chap. 4.  

February 24 and 26: Reading Week (no classes)  
  

    Part III. Two Case Studies. Spain and Judea   
  
A. Spain  

March 3: Spain before the Provinces. Read Fears, pp. 31-62; Richardson, pp.
9-82.  

March 5: Urbanization in Spain. Read Fears, pp. 105-130; Richardson, pp.
149-263.  
  
March 10: Spanish Provincial Government: Discussion of the text in Miriam
Griffin, "The Senate's Story," _JRS_ 87 (1997) 249-263. (D)  
  
March 12: Administration. Read Fears, pp. 131-169.  

March 17: A Provincial Capital I: Tarragona. Read Carrete, pp. 9-62.  
  
March 19: A Provincial Capital II: Tarragona. Read Carrete, pp. 167-282.  
  
March 24: TBA  

March 26: A Model for an Economy? The Trade in Olive Oil. Read Blazques;
Carrette, pp. 64-115, 160-161.  
  
March 31 and April 2: Spring Break (no classes)  
  
B. Judea  

April 7: Judea and Rome before Herod. Read Isaac, pp. 269-310.  
  
April 9: Herod and Caeserea. Read Roller, pp. 10-65, 85-124, 254-262.  

April 14: The Jewish Revolt and Josephus I. Read Josephus, _The Jewish War_
(D)  
  
April 16: The Jewish Revolt and Josephus II. Implications of the revolt.  

April 21: Masada. Read Yadin; Ben-Yehuda 50-68.  

April 23: A Border Town in Jordan. Read de Vries, pp. 15-21, 91-127, 229-241.  
  
  
    Part IV. Research Paper Presentations   
  
April 28: Presentations I  

April 30: Presentations II  
  

