



_____________________________________________________________________

**

Week 1 (9/18)

Topic **\- Introduction to the concept of Environmental System. Discussion of
physical, chemical, biological and hydrological mechanisms of interaction in
the natural environment. The relationship between hydrologic regime and
hydrological variability and the dynamics of the ecological landscape. River
basins and watersheds as fundamental environmental systems. Freshwater
resources and freshwater needs.

**

Workshop** \- From water quantity, to water quality, to environmental quality,
to sustainability: History of water resources Development and Infrastructure
Building. Students will watch portions of the PBS series, Cadillac Desert
(Episode 1 - Mulholland's Dream. The focus will be on the history of aqueducts
and water transfers across long distances. Discussion will follow.

**

Independent Activities -** Students will be asked to write a discussion paper
on the evolution of conservation philosophies in the U.S. during the 20 th
century. Required reading: Theodore Roosevelt's Seventh Annual Message to
Congress (12/3/1907), the Declaration of the Conservation Conference
(5/15/1908), the Executive Summary of the Clean Water Act.

________________________________________________________________________

**

Week 2 (9/25)

Topic -** Anthropogenic modification of landscapes by urbanization. Land-use
change. Life-line infrastructure. Flood control. Detailed discussion of
selected case-studies: The Willamette River in Oregon, the Everglades and the
Rhine River in Europe, Part I - landscape modification and river engineering.

**

Workshop -** The focus will be on downstream effects of "anthropogenic"
change. Students will watch portions of the PBS series, Cadillac Desert
(Episode 2 - The American Nile).

**

Independednt Activities -** Reading and preparation of discussion paper for
following week:

Collier, M., Webb, R.H., Schmidt, J.C., 1996: "Dams and Rivers- Primer on the
Downstream Effects of Dams", U.S. Geological Survey, Circular1126, 94pp.



________________________________________________________________________

**

Week 3 (10/2)

Topic - **The relationship between Land-cover and land-use and environmental
quality. Detection and Quantification of Non-Point Source Pollution.
Introdyuction to research at CRREL.

**

Independent Activities -** Preparatory reading to the field trip.

________________________________________________________________________

**

Week 4 (10/9) VISIT to CRREL

**

_____________________________________________________________________________________

**

Week 5 (10/16)

Topic -** Aquatic Ecosystems. The importance of hydrological variability and
hydrological connectivities. The Willamette River in Oregon, the Everglades,
and the Rhine River in Europe, Part II - conservation and restoration.

**

Workshop -** Discussion of Collier et al. (1996) . Introduction of
Environmental Disasters such as the Danube and the Black Sea, The Aral Sea,
The Missouri River, etc. Integrated Environmental Systems Analysis. Research
Project #1 - Develop a qualitative, process-based systems model for a selected
environmental disaster.

**

Independent Activities -** Reading and preparation of discussion paper for
following week. Select one of the following (all available in the WEB):

_Contaminants in the Mississippi Rive_ r, 1987-1992. US.Geological

Survey, Circular 1133.

_

Nutrients in the Nation's Waters -- Too Much of a Godo Thing?

_

U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1136

_

Water Quality in the Willamette Basin_ , Oregon, 1991-1995. U.S.

Geological Survey, Circular 1161.

_

Water Quality in the South Platte River Basin_ , Colorado, Nebraska and

Wyoming, 1992-1995, US. Geological Survey, Circular 1167.

________________________________________________________________________

**

Week 6 (10/23)

Topic- **Surface-Groundwater Interactions. Groundwater Mining. Subsidence.
Recharge. Water Resources, water needs, water use and water rights. The
Ogallala Aquifer. Blue water/ Green Water.

**

Workshop-** Discussion of water quality papers. Students will watch portions
of the PBS series, Cadillac Desert (Episode 3 - The Mercy of Nature).

**

Independent Activities-** Reading and preparation of discussion paper for
following week (all available in the WEB):

_Land Subsidence in the United States._ U.S. G. S. Circular 1182.

_Sustainability of Ground-Water Resources_. U.S.G.S. Circular 1186.

________________________________________________________________________



**

Week 7 (10/30)

Topic -** Environmental Information Technology. Introduction to GIS.

**

Workshop -** GIS practicum. Learning how to use ARCVIEW.

**

Independent Activities -** Simple GIS exercises. Proposal for research project
#2. Project must

Contain a substantial quantitative element using GIS and use of environmental
data.

_____________________________________________________________________________________

Week 8 (11/6)

Presentations of Research Project #1. Discussion.

**

Topic -** Biodiversity. Introduction to Hydroecology. Focus on vegetation
dynamics. Food Production. Ecosystems Services. Sustainable Development.

**

Workshop -** Discussion of groundwater papers. Students will watch portions of
the PBS series, Cadillac Desert (Episode 4 - Last Oasis).

**

Independent Activities -** Reading and preparation of discussion paper:

Lubchenco, J. 1998: Entering the century of the environment: a new social
contract for science. _Science,_ 279: 491-496.

Falkenmark, M., et al., 1998: Water Scarcity as a key factor behind global
food

insecurity: Roundtable discussion _. Ambio_ ,21 (2):148-154.

Constanza et al., 1997: The value of the world's ecosystem services and
natural

capital. _Nature,_ 387:253-260.

Frank, D. A., and R.S. Inouye, 1994: Temporal variation in actual

evapotranspiration of terrestrial ecosystems: patterns and ecological
implications _.

J . of Biogeography_, 21:401-411.

Peterson, G., C.R. Allen, and C.S. Holling, 1998: Ecological Resilience,

biodiversity and scale **.** _Ecosystems,_ 1: 6-18.

________________________________________________________________________



**

Week 9 (11/13)

Topic -** Introduction to Remote-Sensing of the Earth System. Inventory of
remote-sensing techniques and derived data products. Focus on vegetation, soil
moisture and land-use data imagery.

**

Workshop -** GIS practicum. Manipulation of spatial data.

**

Independent Activities -** Project (continued)

________________________________________________________________________





**

Week 10 (11/20)

Topic -** Integrated Hydro-ecosystems. Environmental Planning. Data needs.
Objectives. Cost-benefit analysis. Policy Implications.

**

Workshop -** GIS practicum. Trend Analysis. Metrics of environmental change
and spatial interactions.

**

Independent Activities -** Project (continued)

________________________________________________________________________

**

Week 11 (11/27)

Topic -** Modeling in Environmental Planning and Restoration. Water Budgets.
Landscape change. Impact Assessment.

**

Workshop -** GIS practicum. Modeling applications using public domain software
from the USGS and the U.S. Corps of Enginers.

**

Independent Activities -** Project (continued)

________________________________________________________________________

**

Week 12 (12/4)

Workshop -** GIS Practicum. Modeling (cont.)

**

Independent Activities -** Project (continued)

________________________________________________________________________

Week 13 - Project Presentation

**

Presentation January, 8

Project Due January, 11

_





**_

