History B421 V610

(Herron H495 V098)

Topics in European History:

The City as a Work of Art in Modern Europe: 1850-1925





Summer Term I, 2001 (May 9-June 20, 2001)      Instructor: Dr. Kevin C.
Robbins,

Class Meetings: Wednesdays, 5:45-8:45 p.m.         Associate Professor,
History, IUPUI

Saturdays, 9:00 a.m.-12:00 p.m..             Telephone: 317-274-5819

Place:     Indianapolis Museum of Art,                 FAX: 317-278-7800

   Deboest Lecture Hall                E-Mail:
[krobbin1@iupui.edu](mailto:krobbin1@iupui.edu)

       Office: 504Q Cavanaugh Hall

       Office Hours: IMA Art Library, Sats.

       12:00-1:00 and by appointment.



Course Required Readings:



Brettell, Richard, _Modern Art, 1851-1929_ , Oxford History of Art, Oxford
Univ.

Press, 1999. (To be sold to students with museum member discount on at class
on Wednesday 05/16.)



Olsen, D.J., _The City as a Work of Art, London, Paris, Vienna_ , Yale Univ.
Press, 1986.

(Free copies of all assigned chapters to be distributed to students in advance
and in

class.)



**Course Requirements** : Regular student attendance at all course lectures,
discussions, presentations by museum staff, and gallery visits. Course
attendance rosters will be circulated at all class sessions and students must
make certain to sign them at each session. All unavoidable student absences
from this intense and brief summer course should be signaled to the instructor
in advance if at all possible. More than one unexcused absence from this
course will lower your final grade. Be warned. Student completion of all
reading assignments and active student participation in post-lecture
discussions of course themes. Student completion of one short essay (4 pages
minimum) on an assigned topic to be distributed in class and one course
independent research paper (10 pages minimum) complete with notes and
bibliography on a topic relevant to course themes and museum resources to be
approved in advance by the instructor. Student completion of course final
written examination in essay format.



No late work will be accepted for this course. Make-up exams or exams at some
other time than the scheduled final may be arranged but only if absolutely
necessary and at the complete discretion of the instructor.



**Course Grading Standards** : first student essay 15% of final grade,
research paper 50% of final grade, final essay examination 20% of final grade,
course attendance and participation 15% of final course grade as measured by
signed course rosters and instructor's personal assessment of frequency and
quality of student's active participation in discussion sessions.



**Course Objectives** : This class on the socio-political and socio-cultural
history of European metropolises in modern times seeks to familiarize students
with the impact of great cities on the forms, themes, problems, and modes of
artistic production and display during this era. The course will work to
impress upon students how trends in the fine arts but also in the decorative
arts, interior decoration, architecture, and industrial design reflect the
opportunities, tensions, and challenges artists faced in the great urban
communities of the era. How artists working in multiple genres sought to
represent, critique, celebrate, and mitigate what they perceived as the
effects of modern city life on the environments and psyches of urbanites will
be sustained themes of course inquiry. The essentially urban genesis of
modernism as an artistic and cultural movement will be surveyed, investigated,
and verified. To accomplish these goals the course will take full advantage of
the permanent collections of fine, graphic, and decorative arts on display and
in storage at the Indianapolis Museum of Art. Especially relevant to the
pedagogical objectives of this course will be the rich Josefowitz Collection
of late Impressionist and post-Impressionist paintings and prints recently
acquired and installed by the IMA. This collection, in conjunction with the
IMA's already respected holdings of European fine art of the era, furniture,
and decorative arts will provide students with individual objects or suites of
objects on which to focus their attention as cultural historians of European
modernism. This course will include gallery tours, special guest lectures, and
tours of the IMA print vaults by museum staff whose curatorial specialties are
relevant to course themes. Through a better understanding of modern artistic
production in multiple genres of expression students will come to appreciate
not only how the great cities of modern times became objects themselves of
representation, but also how the metropolis came to be regarded by many
artists and cultural critics as an art form in itself whose manifold beauties
and inventions embodied modern life for good and ill.



**Museum Resources to Aid Students in Class Work:** The IMA contains excellent
research library facilities ( second floor of the main museum building, open
10:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. M,T,W,F,and S, and until 8:00 p.m. Thursdays) and the
Dutton Educational Resource Center (adjacent to Deboest Lecture Hall) with a
complete slide library and video collection containing materials highly
relevant to this course. **All Students Should Note** that a research carrel
will be created for this course in the IMA main library with a suite of
relevant books for student use in the library only. In addition, slide boxes
of images utilized in class lectures will also be kept for student use and
consultation in the Dutton Center. Students should feel free to contact museum
librarians and Resource Center staff for assistance with their class written
work. Note also that the instructor has scheduled regular office hours at the
IMA main library on Saturdays to meet with students independently as to aid
them in all phases of their class work. The instructor is happy to provide
this service and only requests that students inform him in advance if at all
possible of their intention to meet during scheduled office hours.



**Student Responsibilities For Good Academic Conduct** : In accord with
Indiana University policies, the instructor is obligated to remind all
students of the following regulations governing appropriate use of University
resources and proper academic conduct.



First, all students are personally responsible for all activity on their
university computer accounts, including e-mail and web use. Regulations of
I.U.'s IT Policy Office state:

"use of Indiana University technology resources (computing, networks, phones,
etc.) is restricted to purposes related to the university's mission of
education, research, and public service. Access to I.U. technology resources
is a privilege granted to students in support of their studies, instruction
official business with the university and other university-sanctioned
activities." Abuse of this privilege may lead to its revocation.



Second, students are here advised that any and all forms of plagiarism will
not be tolerated by the instructor and may lead to the student's failure on
key assignments and failure in the course. According to the I.U. Bulletin of
the School of Liberal Arts, "Plagiarism is the offering of the work of someone
else as one's own. Honesty requires that any ideas or materials taken from
another source for either written or oral use must be fully acknowledged. The
language or ideas taken from another may range from isolated formulas,
sentences, or paragraphs to entire articles copied from books, periodicals,
speeches, or the writings of other students. The offering of materials
assembled or collected by others in the form of projects or collections
without acknowledgment is also considered plagiarism. Any student who fails to
give credit for ideas or materials taken from another source is guilty of
plagiarism." In academic written work, proper acknowledgment of ideas and
materials taken from another person or source is accomplished through careful,
accurate, and consistent use of footnote or endnotes in the student's own
text. Students should consult standard guides to paper writing and
presentation for guidance on this basic and required process of paper
composition.

Course Outline, Readings, and Assignments



(N.B. The Course Syllabus Below Has Been Very Carefully Planned, It is Neither
Tentative

Nor Likely to Change in Any Way. **All Readings Are to Be Completed By The**

**Date on Which They Are Listed**.)



Wed. 5/9 Course Introduction, Distribution of Syllabus. Introductory Remarks
on Course

Themes, Methods, and Goals. What It Means to Investigate the Cultural History

of the Modernizing European Metropolis. First Readings to be Distributed in

Class.



Sat. 5/12 Reading Assignment: Olsen, _City as a Work of Art_ , Chapts. 1-3,
pp. 3-34.

Lecture: London as the First Modern Metropolis.

Discussion: What are the Sources, Historic and Artistic, Exemplified in

Olsen's Modern Urban History?



Wed. 5/16 Reading Assignment: Olsen, _City as Work of Art_ , Chapts. 4-5, pp.
35-81.

Lecture: The New Paris, The New Vienna, and the Processes of

Urban Embellishment.

Discussion: The Aesthetics and the Ethics of Urban "Renewal."

**First Essay Topics Distributed in Class**.

Second Readings to be Distributed in Class. Brettell Text on Sale in Class.



Sat. 5/19 Reading Assignment: Olsen, _City as a Work of Art_ , Chapts. 6-8,
pp. 82-131.

Lecture: Making and Filling the Modern Urban House: What are the

Necessary Accoutrements of City Life?

IMA Gallery Tour: Nineteenth-Century Furniture and Decorative Arts.

Discussion: The Bourgeois Interior: Refuge or Theatre of Conspicuous

Consumption?



Wed. 5/23 Reading Assignment: Olsen, _City as a Work of Art_ , Chapts. 9-11,
pp. 132-185.

Lecture: Reading the Social Geographies and Pathologies of Modern Cities.

What is the Purpose and Cultural Significance of "Villa Suburbia?"

Discussion: What Material Artifacts Reveal the Most about the Lives of

Urbanites in the Modern Metropolis?

Third Readings to Be Distributed in Class.



Sat. 5/26 Reading Assignment: Olsen, _City as a Work of Art,_ Chapts. 12-14,
pp. 189-248.

Lecture: The City as Playground and Modern Urban Opportunities for the

Display and Amusement of the Self.

Discussion: Nervous Citizens and Their Urban Personas: Showing Off and

Questionable Characters in the Metropolis.

**First Essay Due in Class**.

**Final Paper Research Topics to be Submitted to Instructor for Approval**.



Wed. 5/30 Reading Assignment: Olsen, _City as Work of Art_ , Chapts. 15-17,
pp. 251-294

Lecture: Modern Urban Architecture and the Embodiment of Metropolitan

Beauty.

Discussion: Architecture: The Modern Art You Can't Escape: What do the Details
of Buildings Tell Us About the Lives, Emotions, and Psyches of

Captive Urban Audiences?



Sat. 6/2 Reading Assignment: Brettell, _Modern Art_ , Introduction and Part I,
pp. 1-47.

Lecture: The Movements of Modern Art: Distinctions and Commonalities.

Discussion: Why the Movements of Modern Art? The Cosmopolis as

Site and Instigation of Artistic Innovation.



Wed. 6/6 Reading Assignment: Brettell, _Modern Art_ , Part II, Chapts1-2, pp.
49-78.

Lecture: The Intertwined Dynamics of Capitalism, Commodification of

Culture, and the Circulation of Images.

Discussion: How Many Reproductions Do You Have on _Your_ Walls--or Why

Do Museums Have Shops?



Sat. 6/9 Reading Assignment: Brettell, _Modern Art_ , Part III, Chapts. 3-4,
pp. 81-123.

Lecture: The Artist's Response to Urban Life and Traffic in the Graphic.

Discussion: Why are Fragmentation, Dislocation, and Recombination in the

Arts the Central Themes of Brettell's Book Now?

Private Tour of IMA Print Vaults and Guest Lecture by Martin Krause, IMA

Curator of Prints and Drawings, on The Markets and Marketing of Graphic

Art in the Modern Metropolis.



Wed. 6/13 Reading Assignment: Brettell, _Modern Art_ , Part IV, Chapts. 5-6,
pp. 125-178.

Lecture: Picturing the Citizen's Body: Themes of Dress and Undress.

Discussion: What's the Modern City Got to do with Sex in Pictures?



Sat. 6/16 Reading Assignment: Brettell, _Modern Art,_ Part IV, Chapts. 7-8,
pp. 181-209.

Lecture: Cosmopolitanism, Nationalism, and New Images of Identity in

European Modern Art.

Discussion: How Do These Pictures Tell You Who "You" Are?



Wed. 6/20 **Final Exam in Class at IMA. Room Location TBA**.

**Final Research Paper Due in Class**.

