### History 786  
Colloquium in the History and Philosophy of History



_Course Description_

History 786 and 787 are designed to introduce graduate students in history to
the basic philosophical problems of recreating and understanding the past, to
the history of historical writing, and to the practical skills needed by a
professional historian. History 786 is devoted to the first two objectives,
History 787 to the third.



_Required Reading_

Available at SBX under History 786 (Roth):

  1. History 786 Reader: Colloquium in the Philosophy of History 
  2. Graham Swift, _Waterland_
  3. Edward H. Carr, _What Is History?_
  4. Peter Novick, _That Noble Dream: The "Objectivity Question" and the American Historical Profession_
  5. Joyce Appleby, Lynn Hunt, and Margaret Jacob, _Telling the Truth About History_ 

Recommended:

  1. Edward P. J. Corbett and Sheryl L. Finkle, _The Little English Handbook_ (6th ed.) 
  2. Kate L. Turabian, _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations_ (5th ed.) 
  3. Joseph M. Williams, _Style: Ten Lessons in Clarity and Grace_ (3rd ed.). 

We will consult these books on matters of grammar, style, and documentation.



_Reserve reading_

Reserve readings are available in the History Department's Hockett Library
(Dulles 164).



_Suggested reading_

  1. James Davidson and Mark Lytle, _After the Fact_
  2. H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills, eds., _From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology_
  3. Stanley Lieberson, _Making It Count_
  4. William McNeill, _A History of the Human Community_
  5. Charles Tilly, _Big Structures, Large Processes, Huge Comparisons_
  6. Hayden White, _Metahistory_
  7. Gene Wise, _American Historical Explanations_
  8. Eric Wolf, _Europe and the People without History_ 



_Evaluation_

The object of the course is to help us think historically, not to accumulate
information. You should concentrate on relating what you have read to the
issues involved in doing history, rather than on memorization. In line with
these objectives, there will be no final examination, though there may be
unannounced quizzes. In addition, expect to be called on in class to summarize
and comment upon what you have read. Evaluation will be based on class
participation (25%) and written work (75%). The requirement of written work
will be satisfied by writing two papers in addition to the quizzes.

  1. _Three Short Papers_ (5 page maximum) (50% of final grade). Topic options for the first two papers are included in the course outline. The first short paper is due January 17, the second February 19, and the third March 4. 
  2. _One Historiographical Paper_ (5-6 pages maximum) (25% of final grade). The historiographical paper is due February 5. To write this paper you will choose one of the pre-1500 histories, myths, or epics we will be reading (or another with the instructor's approval) as the subject of a critical historiographical essay. You will be responsible for reading at least one major work and finding secondary materials you deem necessary. You must make 15 copies of your paper so that each student in the class can receive one. The questions which your essay should address are those we shall discuss throughout the quarter: 
    1. What purpose guides your historian in writing history? What personal or cultural factors, if any, shaped her or his historical consciousness? 
    2. What does your historian believe to be the proper subject matter or scope of history? 
    3. How critical and how accurate is your historian? How did your historian select her or his facts? From what point of view did your historian choose her or his subject matter and how does your historian's point of view shape her or his narrative? 
    4. Does your historian seek to explain why events occurred, and if so, what is her or his theory of causation? 
    5. Does your historian have a 'metahistory,' i.e. does your historian believe that history has meaning or at least direction, and if so what meaning has it, what direction has it taken and will it take? What patterns does your historian detect in making generalizations about historical events?  
_

All papers are to be typed, double-spaced. No paper will be accepted after the
date of the last meeting of this course.

_



_

Schedule of Topics and Readings

_

Part I: Historical Consciousness and Postmodern Criticism

We will first consider the origins of historical consciousness and the
implications of postmodern criticism for our understanding of the relationship
between history, fiction, and myth. Why do some people prefer history to other
kinds of stories about the past? Why do some people draw sharp distinctions
between history, fiction, chronicle, and myth, and others not? We will
consider Graham Swift's novel about a history teacher coming to terms with a
painful past, Donald Brown's theory of the relationship between social
hierarchy and historical consciousness, Max Weber's theory of the impact of
world religions on social psychology, and several theories of the relationship
between modern nationalism and personal identity. We will also read several
essays by historians on the relationship between history and myth.

Weeks 1 & 2 (1/3, 1/8, 1/10): Myth, fiction, and history

Swift, _Waterland_.

J. H. Plumb, "The Sanction of the Past"

William McNeill, "Mythhistory" (reserve)

E. H. Carr, _What Is History?_ Chs. 1  & 2

Recommended:

D. Brown, _History, Hierarchy, and Human Nature

_

M. Weber, "The Social Psychology of World Religions"

D. Potter, "The Historians' Use of Nationalism and Vice Versa"

E. Gellner, _Nations and Nationalism

_

B. Anderson, _Imagined Communities

_

P. Chatterjee, _Nationalist Thought and the Colonial World

_

E. Hobsbawm, _Nations and Nationalism since 1788

_



Part II: The History of History

We will now study the history of myth and history-writing in ancient and
medieval times. We will have the help of several members of the Department of
History, who will teach us about historians from the periods and places they
know best. We will focus on the great historians of the past--Herodotos, Sima
Qian, Ibn Khaldun--so that we can better appreciate the heritage of our
profession, which came into being in the nineteenth century. We will also,
however, consider the impact of religion, politics, and social structure on
historical consciousness, and discuss in historical context the relationship
between history and myth.

Weeks 3 & 4 (1/17, 1/22, 1/24, 1/29): Near Eastern, Persian, Greek, Jewish,
Roman, Chinese, Christian, and Islamic historians

1/17: Ancient History (Professor Balcer)

Ancient Near Eastern Texts

Old Persian Texts

_

The Bible: 2 Chronicles

_

Herodotus, Thucydides



1/22: Medieval Islamic History (Professor Dale)

Ibn Khaldun

Islam and Periodization

P. Hardy, _Historians of Medieval India_



1/24: Chinese History; Roman History (Professor Roth)

_

Tso Chuan_ , Sima Qian

Recommended:

Polybius, Livy, Tacitus

Plutarch, "Timoleon"



1/29: Medieval Christian History (Professor Lynch)

Einhard, _The Life of the Emperor Charles

The Memoirs of Abbot Guibert of Nogent

_

Jean de Venette, _The Black Plague

_

"Historiography, Western European"



Part III: Scientific History, Professional History, and the Reconstruction of
the Past

Finally, we will turn to the history of the modern historians and to the
philosophical questions that have preoccupied the historical profession since
its appearance in the nineteenth century:

  1. Can the historian can establish what happened in the past, and if so, how? 
  2. Can history help us discover uniformities in human behavior? Render more informed judgments upon human conduct? 
  3. Can we know why historical events occurred? 
  4. Can the lessons of the past tell us anything about the future? 

We will consider as always the impact of religion, politics, and social
structure on our profession's understanding of the past, and our effort to
distinguish history from other ways of knowing the past.

Week 5 (1/24, 1/31): Scientific History; The Enlightenment

E. H. Carr, _What Is History?_ Chs. 3

J. S. Mill, "Historical Facts, Uniform Laws, and Statistics"

H. T. Buckle, "History of Civilization in England"

C. G. Hempel, "The Function of General Laws in History"

Visitor: Prof. Rule (1/31)

Week 6 (2/5, 2/7): The Laws of History; Marxist and _Annales_ History

Carr, _What Is History_ , chapters 4-6.

I. Kant, "Idea for a Universal History"

F. Engels, "Socialism"

P. Geyl & A. Toynbee, "Can We Know the Pattern of the Past"

G. R. Elton, "The Purpose of History"

Recommended: A. Toynbee and P. Geyl.

Visitor: Prof. Rothney (2/5)

Week 7 (2/12, 2/14): The Historian and Society; Feminist History; African
History

C. Read, "The Social Responsibilities of the Historian"

H. Zinn, "History as Private Enterprise"

L. Benson, "Changing Social Science to Change the World"

L. Benson, "Explanations of American Civil War Causation"

Visitor: Profs. Rupp (2/12) and Sikainga

Week 8 (2/19, 2/21): Relativism and Objectivity I

Peter Novick, _That Noble Dream_ , 1-278.

R. G. Collingwood, "The Idea of History"

Recommended: C. Becker, C. Beard, E. Nagel.

Week 9 (2/26, 2/28): Relativism and Objectivity II

Appleby, Hunt, Jacob, _Telling the Truth about History

_

T. Haskell, "Objectivity Is Not Neutrality"

A. Schlesinger, Jr., "The Disuniting of America"

L. Mink, "Narrative as a Cognitive Instrument"

_______, "Ignoble Intentions and Noble Dreams"

Week 10 (3/4, 3/6): Postmodernism and the Problem of Narrative

Harold Mah, "Suppressing the Text" (reserve)

William Cronon, "A Place for Stories" (reserve)

L. Gossman, "History and Literature"

P. Veyne, "Writing History: Essay on Epistemology"

L. Stone, "The Revival of Narrative" (reserve)

M. Kousser, "The Revivalism of Narrative" (reserve)

R. Roth, "Is History a Process?" (reserve)

R. Roth, "Environmental History" (reserve)

Recommended:

Hayden White, _Metahistory

_



_

Short Paper Topics

_

SHORT PAPER #1:

1\. Compare your decision to become a historian with Tom Crick's. Were you
drawn to history by a sudden confrontation with the "Here and Now?" By a
"Bruise-upon-a-Bruise?" (26) Would you agree that history "begins only at the
point where things go wrong," that it "is born only with trouble, with
perplexity, with regret?" (106)

2\. Reflect upon your decision to become a historian in light of Donald
Brown's comparative theory or the experience of an ancient historian(s). Do
you think Brown's theory has merit? Do you think the experience of the ancient
and medieval historians differs vastly from your own, and if so, how might
those differences affect the history you will write and teach?



SHORT PAPER #2

1\. Imagine the following scenario: You are approached by a wealthy alumnus of
The Ohio State University who wants a 'history' of the institution, and offers
you a contract to write it, if you are willing to submit a sample chapter on
OSU in the 1980s and early 1990s. In writing this, you will have to devise
your own answer to Carr's question _What Is History?_ and to plan your work
step by step from research to completion. Which facts will you seek? Where
will you find them? How will you present them? In this connection you will
have to resolve in your own mind where you stand in the debate between Charles
A. Beard and philosophers like Nagel. You will also have to consider whether
your history will have any useful or practical purpose if the alumnus does not
offer the contract.

2\. At what point, if any, in the recent demise of the Soviet Union (or in the
recent repression of dissent in the People's Republic of China) do you think a
thoughtful historian could have predicted the eventual outcome? If you think
such a prediction might have been possible at some point, describe the
historical reasoning that would have supported it?

3\. Do you think professional historians have made a helpful contribution to
the debate over capital punishment? If so describe it. If not, could they make
such a contribution? How? Why have they not made it so far? (If you like,
answer the same questions about the contribution of historians to the debate
over abortion or gun control or the use of nationalist symbols (burning flags,
wearing swastikas, etc.)

4\. Do you think there are more appropriate metaphors for what historians are
or should be? Are we midwives to the past? Gentlemen? Detectives? Social
workers? Propagandists? Monk? Teacher? Pursue a metaphor of your choice.

5\. Do you think that there is any likelihood that Howard Zinn's suggestion
that writing a doctoral dissertation in history means investing "several years
of intense labor" in a "monstrous irrelevancy" may prove true in your own
case? If so, explain how your choice of topic and reseaerch materials could
avoid such an outcome. How will you avoid the alternative danger, if there is
one, of "presentism" rapidly making research outmoded?

6\. Should we, as Martin Anderson recommends in _Impostors in the Temple_ ,
dispense with dissertations in most cases and grant "teaching" Ph.D. for
"mastery of the field?" Is there no necessary connection between teaching,
research, and public service?

7\. Does Toynbee's history attempt to do what most people think history should
do? Is this a desirable objective for history? If so, how could Toynbee's
method be improved upon? (You may if you wish consider different popular
historians, such as Shelby Foote or Will and Ariel Durant.)

