For info about Math 204, section 5, spring 1998 click
[here](math20498syllabus/math20498syllabus.html).

For info about Math 156, section 1, spring 1998 click
[here](97syllabus2/97syllabus2.html).

For info about Math 147, section 1, spring 1999, click
[here](M147_Spring_99_syllabus/M147_syllabus.html).

For info about Math 147, section 1, fall 1999, click
[here](M147_syllabus/M147_syllabus.html).

Students in Math 387 section 1, spring 2000 should look
[here](M387syllabus/node1.html). Here is the [first take-home
exam](takehome1.ps). Here is [Test 1 (Postscript)](test1.ps). Here is [ the
Postscript version of the lecture notes so far](holmes/syllabus.ps). Here is
[the takehome part of test 2](holmes/takehome_2.ps). Here is the [take home
part of the final](holmes/takehomefinal.ps). Here is [a set of study
questions](holmes/study_questions.ps).

For info about Math 143, sections 2 and 3, fall 2000, look
[here](m143syllabus)

Students in Math 175, section 5, spring 2001 should look [here](m175syllabus).

Students in Math 108, section 720, summer 2001 can find resources here:

  * [course syllabus (Postscript)](holmes/m108syllabus.ps)
  * [course syllabus (PDF)](holmes/m108syllabus.pdf)
  * [homework schedule (Postscript)](holmes/m108homework.ps)
  * [homework schedule (PDF)](holmes/m108homework.pdf)
  * [final grade report](holmes/m108_grade_report.txt) 
**NOTICE for 108 Students (August 2, 1:30 pm):** 12 pm July 9: I am leaving my
office in Boise and coming to Nampa as soon as I can (I have to go home by bus
to pick up my car). I have graded 7.2-9.3 papers, for what it's worth. I hope
to be at the Canyon County campus by 3 pm if not a little before. {\bf
UPDATE:} 3 pm is looking very unlikely - I'm still hoping to be there by 3:30
or 4.

Students in Math 257, section 030, summer 2001 can find resources here:

  * [course syllabus (Postscript)](holmes/m257syllabus.ps)
  * [course syllabus (PDF)](holmes/m257syllabus.pdf)
  * [homework schedule (Postscript)](holmes/m257homework.ps)
  * [homework schedule (PDF)](holmes/m257homework.pdf)
  * [final grade report](holmes/m257gradereport.txt) 
Students in Math 147, section 007, fall 2001 should watch this space for
developments. Here is the [syllabus](2001math147syllabus/index.html). Note
that this section is participating in the Core Online project: there will be
substantial administrative and course content materials available through the
[ SMITC Blackboard site ](http://blackboard.boisestate.edu).

Here is the space for ON LINE LESSONS (there are now two -- you can also look
at these from Blackboard; also, the Blackboard grade book is now installed).

  * [Lesson 1](holmes/coreonline/lesson1/lesson1.html) (covering sections 3.1 and 3.5 in the book). I have changed the colors to make the graphs readable! 
  * [Lesson 2](holmes/coreonline/lesson2/lesson2.html) (covering sections 4.5 and 4.6 in the book). 
  * [Lesson 3](holmes/coreonline/lesson3/lesson3.html) (covering sections 4.5 and 4.6 in the book). (posted to the web page Nov. 20 -- link should appear later today on Blackboard) 
Students in Math 307 = CS 367/567 (Cryptology I), section 001, fall 2001
should watch this space for developments. Here is the
[syllabus](M307syllabus/index.html).

**M 307 = CS 367/567 NOTE:** Here is a description of [Assignment
1](holmes/assignment1.html), answering the frequently asked questions.

Here is the NEW [directory of public keys](holmes/publickeys.html).

Versions of files in public/holmes are posted [here](holmes/cryptofiles/) They
are in plain text format, so not especially pretty, but they should be
suitable for cut and paste. The class example of Vigenere decryption is now
commented.

Cryptology Test Two is in the public directory on baron/packrat -- it is
called testtwo.mws. It is also found here in a text version -- follow the
pointer in the previous paragraph.

  * **Math 333, section 1:** You can look at the syllabus [here](M333syllabus/index.html).

To access an online solutions manual (in pdf format), click [
here](http://www.whfreeman.com/diacu/). (don't get too excited -- this is an
instructor-only password protected site, and the link is here for my
convenience).

For a list of known errors in the text, look
[here](http://www.math.uvic.ca/faculty/edwards/Math201_2001/errors.html).

[Here](holmes/M333_2002) are dvi files for all the tests.

  * **Math 175, section 2:** You can look at the syllabus [here](M175syllabus/index.html). It's useful to know that we are currently two days behind schedule: on Friday the 15th, I am assigning the first homework for 7.1, which was scheduled for the previous Tuesday. I'm not planning to revise the posted schedule -- this would be quite laborious!

[Here](holmes/M175_2002) are dvi files for all the homework quizzes and tests.

  * **Math 171, section 8:** You can look at the syllabus [here](M171syllabus/index.html).

Here is [Assignment 1](holmes/assign1.ps) (a Postscript file).

  * Math 333 spring 2002 grades have been computed. You can request them from me by e-mail; I'm sorry I forgot about codes for posting grades! 
  * Math 175 spring 2002 grades are [here](holmes/M175grades.txt) (both final exam score and course letter grade). 
  * Math 171 spring 2002 grades will be sent by e-mail. 
Math 170/1, summer 2002:** You can see the
[syllabus](M170summer2002/index.html) here. You can see policies, exam dates,
and the full homework schedule.

The [department generic syllabus](http://math.boisestate.edu/dept-
stuff/Generic/M170.html) contains the department's definition of the course
and the Core Curriculum objectives.

If you are trying to get into this course, please be aware that I will not
under any circumstances sign a class size override, but there is a second
section!

**Final Exam runs from 9:05--12:05 (there is no reason it should take anyone
this long); open book but no calculators with graphing or symbolic
computation.**

