![](./12im19.gif)| History of  
Western Christianity  
70 - 1400 A.D.  
  
Rel. 700a  
Fall 1996  
---|---  
  
  
| [Syllabus](700asyl.htm) | Schedule | [Midterm](700midtm.htm) | Final |  
  
This survey introduces students to the major intellectual, institutional, and
popular developments within Christian culture in Europe and the Mediterranean
from the first to the fourteenth century. Primary texts will include martyrdom
accounts, saints lives, the literature of monasticism, records of miracles and
pilgrimage, documents of major ecclesiastical councils and controversies,
liturgical poetry and drama, Crusade accounts, Jewish-Christian theological
debate, heresy trials, and the theological writings of monastic and scholastic
figures.  
  
A central course goal is the close observation of the ways in which different
historical societies and individuals have received, expressed and defined a
complex and not always (or obviously) consistent nexus of beliefs, ideas and
practices. Relatedly, the course focuses on the reciprocal ways social values
and a religious values have shaped each other. Other organizing concepts and
emphases of the course are: the dynamism of historical Christianity, the
almost perpetual presence of movements, reforms and revivals in its long
history, and the diversity of perspectives that characterize Christianity at
any given time. Hopefully this encounter with ancient and medieval
Christianity will keep participants poised between an increasingly informed
sense of identity and disjunction. If participants who regard themselves as
part of one of the Christian traditions gain a palpable sense of the otherness
of historical Christianity which may, in turn, serve them amid the diversity
of religious positions which face them nationally and globally today, then an
additional objective will have been achieved.  
  
Reading and writing assignments emphasize primary sources and aim to promote
close reading, textual analysis and evidence based cultivation of a historical
the imagination. The course also attempts to make the past more vivid through
the use of images and music as sources.  
![](images/courseinfo.gif)  
Lectures are Tuesdays and Thursdays at 1:00 p.m.  
Sections meet once a week for 50 minutes. Section assignments will be given in
class or posted on the 700A website.  
  
Course Instructor: Katherine Gill  
Office: Sterling Divinity Quadrangle, Chapel 130  
Office Telephone: 203-432-5023  
Office Hours: Thursdays, 3:00-5:00

### ![](images/readings.gif)

A source book in two volumes and 3 books include all the required readings.
The textbooks for the course will be available through the YDS Student Book
Supply. The course packets will be available through MIS, 155 Whitney Ave. The
primary readings for this course are also available through course website.

  * Sourcebook I: Weeks I-VI* 
  * Sourcebook II: Weeks VII-XIII* 
  * J. Lynch. _The Medieval Church._ New York: Longman, 1992. 
  * H. Grundmann. _Religious Movements in the Middle Ages._ Trans. By S. Rowans. Notre Dame: University of Notre dame press, 1995. 
  * J. Vitry. _Life of Marie D'Oignes._ Trans. By Margot King. Toronto: Peregrina Publishing Co., 1993. 
  
* Note: The abbreviation OR stands for On-line Resources. The version of the syllabus available on-line through the Ad Hoc website contains a section for each class listing On-line Resources that are thematically or chronologically related to lectures and readings. The designation OMS indicates that the source is The On-line Medieval Sourcebook. 

#### ![](images/Requirements.gif)

Lecture, attendance, section preparation and participation. Two questions
suggested by reading assignment due in section each week. Two short papers
(3-5 page) papers. Midterm. Final.  
  
Midterm and final will exams will consist of short answers, identification
questions, multiple choice questions, and short essay questions. The final
will also have a take-home segment which will be distributed on the last day
of class and due at the time of the final. Students will receive study
questions for both the midterm and the final.  
  
Lecture and section attendance and participation: 10%  
Section written exercises: 10%  
Midterm: 20%  
Two short papers: 30%  
Final: 30%

#### ![](images/adhochead.gif)

In addition, lectures and readings have been coordinated with some of the
quickly expanding resources for teaching and learning on the World Wide Web.
The Ad Hoc Website consists of resources for the Teaching and Research of the
History of Christianity. This Website, the 700a History of Christianity Web
Site, includes the [syllabus](700asyl.htm), course outline, handouts as well
as extra weekly reading materials, images, bibliography and links to others
resources.  
  
It will be important for students to acquire a Yale email account in order to
access the course website and other materials linked to it. An account is free
for full time Yale Divinity School students. You may access the website from
any computer in the Yale Divinity School Library or the YDS Computer Cluster.
If you have a computer and modem, you will be able to access the site from
your home.  
  
The web address for Ad Hoc is: http:\\\ www.yale.edu\adhoc  
  
The web address for this site is:
**http:\\\www.yale.edu\adhoc\700index.html**. Questions? Email Anne Martino at
webassist.yale.edu.

The course newsgroup is a medium for announcements about the course, questions
regarding course material, etc. In addition, the MIDTERM, study questions for
the readings, and information on sections will be posted here.

Go to [Newsgroup](news:yale.rlst.div700).

##

* * *

SCHEDULE

### Thurs. 9/5. Introduction.

What is our subject? Historical approaches and methods. The goals and purposes
of this course. Overview of the syllabus and requirements. A visual tour of
places and monuments in the Hellenistic world important to the history of
early Christianity.

## ![](images/wk1icon.gif)![](images/wk1head.gif)

### [1) Tues. 9/10. Religious Thought and Practice in the Roman
Empire.](wk1a.htm)

Philosophical Schools. Mystery Cults. Judaism: Religious and Political
Movements in Late Antiquity. The Hellenized Jew. Imperial Cult. The Christians
as the Roman's Saw Them. Conversion. Religion and Identity. Religion and
Society.

### [2) Thurs. 9/12. Diversity of Thought and Practice Among Early
Christians](wk1a.htm)

Size, geographical distribution and character of early Christian communities.
Gnosticism and Rival Versions of Christianity. Jewish Christianity. What was
normative Christianity in the first three centuries? Forms and elements of
early liturgy: creeds, prayers, readings, song. Baptism and Eucharist.
Discipline and charity. Development toward a canon. What are our sources for
early Christianity? Literate spokespersons: the Apologists. Who were the
'Fathers'? What is Patrology or Patristics?

## ![](images/wk2icon.gif)![](images/wk2head.gif)

### [3) Tues. 9/17. The Popular Face of Christianity. ](wk2a.htm)

Martyrdom and Persecution. The Blood of the Martyrs. Beginnings of Cult of the
Saints. Some late antique martyrs and their communities: Justin, Cyprian,
Perpetua and Felicity. Relics and commemoration of the dead. Patterns of
leadership and worship. Early institutional structures. The social presence of
early communities. Poverty, wealth and the importance of charity. The end of
state sponsored persecutions. Constantine and his conversion. Edict of
Toleration. Assessing the impact and import of Constantine.

### [4) Thurs. 9/19. The Creation of a Christian Elite.](wk2a.htm)

The Patronage of Constantine and his family. Old St. Peters in Rome. The Holy
Sepulcher in Jerusalem. The New Rome of Constantinople. Christianization of
the aristocracy. Christianity and intellectual culture. Philosophers. Orators.
Bishops. Essence, substance, nature and likeness: the Council of Nicaea (325)
and the Arian Controversy. The Cappadocian Fathers. Ascetical movements of the
third and fourth centuries. Athanasius and Anthony. Gregory of Nyssa and
Macrina. Martyrdom and asceticism. Social dimensions of asceticism.
Theological debates and the late antique body. Theology and hagiography.

## ![](images/wk3icon.gif)![](images/wk3head.gif)

### [5) Tues. 9/24. Early Forms of Monasticism.](wk3a.htm)

Desert virtuosi. Renunciation and self-denial: some social consequences of
living the 'angelic life.' Varieties of early monasticism in the East.
Monasticism travels West: Cassian. Benedict. House monasteries. Jerome, Paula
and Eustochium. Melania. Monasticism and Pilgrimage. Holy women in the Holy
Land. Egeria. Byzantine travelers. Monastic life and the scriptures. The art
of holy reading. Scripture and learning. The quest for perfection and the
challenge of Pelagius. Free will and Grace. The Benedictine Rule in the light
of early ascetical movements and communities. Benedict as Exemplar.

### [6) Thurs. 9/26. Christianity from Augustine to Gregory I.](wk3a.htm)

How Rome 'Fell.' Who were the 'barbarians.' Emperors and officers; popes and
bishops. Shift from urban to rural recruitment. Augustine's life, work,
audiences and impact. The City of God. Gregory the Great: bishop, pope and
exegete. The world and world views of Augustine & Gregory compared. Post-Roman
Christianity.

## ![](images/wk4icon.gif)![](images/wk4head.gif)

### [7) Tues. 10/1. Mediterranean Changes and New Cultural Settings.
](wk4a.htm)

Fifth through Eight Centuries. Byzantium. Rise of Islam. Rome and the Papacy.
Ravenna. Overview of Christianity in Italy, the Iberian Peninsula, Gaul, and
northeastern Europe. Missionaries and Roman Models. The Life of St. Martin.
Christianity in Britain and Ireland. The role of monasticism in the spread and
reception of Christianity. Bede and his Ecclesiastical History of the English
People. Exporting Roman commodities: relics, monks, liturgy and manuscripts.
Opus dei: the Divine Office. Liturgy and Gregorian Chant in early medieval
Europe.

### [8) Thurs. 10/3. Modes and Agents of Conversion.](wk4a.htm)

Conversion, coercion, persuasion. Preaching, poetry and holy lives/sanctity.
What is Hagiography? Holy places, images and objects. Orthopraxis and
orthodoxy. Penitentials. Synod of Whitby. Holy reading: the Bible in the early
Middle Ages. Liturgy, time and cosmos. Rituals and power in early medieval
Europe. The Ruthwell Cross and early medieval spirituality.

## ![](images/wk5icon.gif)![](images/wk5head.gif)

### [Tues. 10/8. YDS Convocation. No class.](wk5a.htm)  
  
[9) Thurs. 10/10. Charlemagne, Europe, and the Concept of Christendom.
](wk5a.htm)

Kingdoms and Communities in Carolingian Europe. Europe, Byzantium and Islam.
Schism between the Eastern and Western Churches. The Pirenne Thesis. Economies
and Societies. The mechanisms and values of a gift economy. The rise of
Charlemagne. The Carolingian reforms. The contexts of learning. Texts,
transmission and manuscripts. Likeness and presence: mediating the divine
through image, word and ritual. John of Damascus and the Iconoclastic
Controversy.

## ![](images/wk6icon.gif)![](images/wk6head.gif)

### [10) Tues. 10/15. Midterm. ](wk6a.htm)  
[11) Thurs. 10/17. European Society in the central middle ages.](wk6a.htm)

. Economies and Societies. The Gift Economy: its mechanism and values. The
ritual ordering of human and divine relationships. Feudal society. The three
orders. Those who fought: Taming warrior society. Peace of God movements
(Lynch , p. 120). The Christian Warrior. Travel and pilgrimage in the central
middle ages. Liturgy, song and poetry.

## ![](images/wk7icon.gif)![](images/wk7head.gif)

### [12) Tues. 10/22. Those who prayed: monks and priests. ](wk7a.htm)

The new model monastery: Cluny. Cluny and Benedictine Monasticism in the 10th
& 11th Centuries. Liturgical culture of central Middle Ages. The Old Testament
and the Biblically shaped imagination. Other religious movements: wandering
preachers, hermits, experimental women's houses. Investiture Controversy. Pope
Gregory VII. The papacy defines its powers. The new model priesthood. Simony,
concubinage, homosexuality and the life of the average priest. The price of
purity. The birth of a persecuting society?

### [13) Thurs. 10/24. Those who fought: Crusaders and Crusading](wk7a.htm).

Western and Eastern Christians. Christians and Non-Christians. The Muslim
world in the 9th-11th centuries. Jews in Muslim and Christian Culture. The
Crusaders' Set Off. Domestic enemies. Crusade against the Jews. Beyond the
Sea: Jews, Muslims and Christians appraised each other. Cultural encounter,
perception and conflict.

## ![](images/wk8icon.gif)![](images/wk8head.gif)

### [14) Tues. 10/29. Church government and ecclesiastical structures from
Gregory VII to Innocent III](wk8a.htm).

Defining belief and practice. Canon law. Heresy and dissent. Intellectual and
popular heresies. The position of the laity in Christian society.
Institutional structures from the Investiture Crisis to the Fourth Lateran
Council. Slides: Romanesque architechture and sculpture. Art of Rome and the
papacy.

### [15) Thurs. 10/31. Anselm and His Context: Intellectual, Political,
Monastic.](wk8a.htm)

Apostolic Life and Evangelical Awakening. Religious texts and manuscript
culture. Feudal and courtly culture. The Life and Writings of St. Anselm.

### ![](images/wk9icon.gif)![](images/wk9head.gif)  
[16) Tues. 11/5. The Evangelical Awakening](wk9a.htm)

Monastic experiments. Cistercians. Carthusians. Canons Regular. The
Victorines. Women in religious life. New types of religious texts. The
"Twelfth Century Renaissance." Art. Music.

### [17) Thurs. 11/7. Schools, Cathedrals and Towns](wk9a.htm)

Urban learning. Cathedral Schools. Wandering Scholars. Intellectual Encounters
with Arab and Jewish intellectual culture. New Learning. New audiences.
Professionalization of religious learning and clerical culture. Vocies of
opposition. Lovers and courtiers. Abelard. Heloise.

## ![](images/wk10icon.gif)![](images/wk10head.gif)

### [18) Tues. 11/12. Heretics and New Types of Religious Orders ](wk10a.htm)

Wandering preachers. Waldensians. Cathars. Albigensian Crusade. Inquisition.
Apostolic life and voluntary poverty.

### [19) Thurs. 11/14. Urban Religious Life. ](wk10a.htm)

The Rise of the Mendicant Orders. Preaching. Heresy. Beguines. Francis and
Dominic.

## ![](images/wk11icon.gif)![](images/wk11head.gif)

### [20) Tues. 11/19. Men and Women in Religious Culture in the Middle
Ages.](wk11a.html)

Role of women in religious movements and institutions. The other Monasticism.
Levels of culture and modes of piety. Varieties of literacy and illiteracy.
Texts and their audiences. Courts, courtly love and religious quest. Urban
religious institutions and genres of literature. Liturgical and paraliturgical
forms of religious expression. Religious theatre. Collaboration, inspiration
and conflict between religious men and women. The problem with men's models of
religious life for men.

### [21) Thurs. 11/21 Love, Annihilation and Danger. Beguine Culture and its
Analogues in Europe, 1200-1400  
](wk11a.html)

* * *

_11/26 & 11/28 . FALL BREAK/THANKSGIVING_  

* * *

## ![](images/wk12icon.gif)![](images/wk12head.gif)

### [22) Tues. 12/3. The "Other": Mendicants and Jews.](wk12a.htm)  
  
[23) Thurs. 12/5. Ordering of Christian Life and Thought. ](wk12a.htm)

Intellectual trends. Universities. Political Developments. Theology and
Theologians in the Later Middle Ages. Devotional forms. Religious Writers in
the Later Middle Ages. Latin and Vernacular Theology. S. Maria Novella.
Spanish Chapel Frescoes. Assisi, S. Francesco Assisi, frescoes of upper church
and Bonaventura's life of Francis. The Arena Chapel.

## ![](images/wk13icon.gif)![](images/wk13head.gif)

### [24) Tues. 12/10. The Practice of Christianity at the End of the Middle
Ages](wk13a.htm).

Last class. The church and the cycles of life. The Festival Year. Religious
Theater: Theology, devotion, dissent. Points of tension in the administration
of Christianity. Marsilius of Padua. William Ockham. Fiscal woes: Gospel of
the marks of Silver. The cost of Purgatory. Indulgences. Vernacular
Christianity: democratic or destabilizing? conventional or innovative?.
Conclusion: Consensus and dissonance in Christian culture at the end of the
Middle Ages.  
  
[Ad Hoc](http://www.yale.edu/adhoc/index.htm) | [Syllabus](700asyl.htm) | Top
of Page  

* * *

700a The History of Western Christianity: 70 - 1400 AD Adhoc--Teaching and
Research Resources  
for the History of Christianity  
Yale Divinity School, 409 Prospect Street  
New Haven, CT 06511  
  
Contact: [Anne Martino, Yale Divinity School Faculty Web
Assistant](mailto:%20ydsweb.assist@yale.edu)

    
    
    All contents copyright (C) 1996
    Yale University Divinity School
    All rights reserved
    Academic year 1996-1997 
    URL: http://www.yale.edu/adhoc/

