
          **UMBC **                                       **CMSC -443
    **      Spring 2001           **Cryptography and Data Security** 
    ____________________________________________________
                                                     443syl.html
                           **Syllabus**      **Instructor**
    
    
          Brooke Stephens (stephens@cs.umbc.edu)      
          Computer Science and Electrical Engineering Department
          Engineering and Computer Science, Room 233E
          Tele. (410) 455-3535,
                      455-3500 (department secretary)
          Office hours: Monday 4:00-5:00, Wed 4:00-5:00
                        or by appointment
    
          TA Peter DSouza  pdsouz1@gl.umbc.edu
    
                         
    
    
           
          **Prerequisites**
    
    
          The formal prerequisites are CMSC-203 Discrete Structures, and Math-221:
          Introduction to Linear Algebra. Students are expected to be able to
          program in some high-level programming language (such as Basic, Pascal,
          C,C++).
    
          **Texts**
            
              1. Richard Mollin, An Introduction to Cryptography, Chapman and 
                 Hall/ CRC (2001)     
         
              2. Simon Singh, The Code Book, Doubleday, 1999         
                 see [www.simonsingh.com ](http://www.simonsingh.com)
                 and [a related site ](http://www.channel14.com/nextstep/secrecy)and a site [ for Singh's cipher challenge ](http://www.4thestate.co.uk/cipherchallenge)      
    
          **Course Web Page**         A good deal of material associated with this course can
             be found on my web site  at [     www.cs.umbc.edu/~stephens/crypto ](http://www/cs.umbc.edu/~stephens/crypto)
    
             Topics that can be found at this site include: ciphers past and
             present, class programming projects, course syllabus, titles of
             past handouts, factoring large numbers - challenges, class grades
             and dates, lecture material, links to other sites.
    
          **Topics** 
             We will try to cover most of the topics in Mollin (our primary 
             text), and our readings will include all of Singh's book. Topics      
             will include: Symmetric-Key Cryptosystems, Public Key Cryptosystems,
             Primality testing, Factoring and various advanced topics.
          
          
          **Grading Policy**      One of the goals of this class is  "learning by doing". As a
          result of this philosiphy the grading method used in this
          class is a little different from most other classes. **Grades**      **will be based on how many points a student can accumulate**      **from a maximum number of 875 points.**      These points can be accumulated from
    
    
              1. **exams**          2. **decryption projects**          3. **programming projects**          4. **selected homework problems.**          5. **bonus points**
    
    
                    The breakdown of possible points is as follows:
    
                                           total  max allowed  %
                    i   exams                400       **400**    46
                    ii  decryption projects  250      **175**   20
                    iii programming projects 250       **200**   22
                    iv  homework problems    100      **100**    12
    
    
                                             925       **875**                                                                           =
              The various points needed for each grade are:
                       points     %
    
                  A      760*    **87**              B      648**   **74**   **Be aware of these values and how**              C      590     **67**   **you stand in relation to them**              D      437     **50**   **during the semester !**
             * In order to receive an A, a student must accumulate at least 760
               points and have an average of at least 83 on the exams.
    
            ** In order to receive a B, a student must accumulate at least 648
               points and have an average of at least 73 on the exams.
    
         Incomplete grades are given only under
         extreme conditions described by University policy for granting
         incompletes.
    
              1. **[exams](sampleexams.html)**
    
    
                 There will be three 75 minute exams and one two
                 hour final. Each exam will be worth 100 points.
                 Exams, for the most part, are not cumulative. The
                 emphasis is on material covered since the last exam.
                 Sometimes, extra credit questions will be given which
                 cover handouts given to the class and reference  
                 materials available in the library.
    
              2. [**decryption projects](cipherspandp.html)**
    
    
    **** We will give the class 6 or 7 instances
    **** of encrypted material. In each case the material
                 must be decrypted to reveal the plaintext. There will
                 be a spectrum of difficulty associated with the
    **** encrypted materials. Some of them will be relatively
                 easy, some of them of medium difficulty, and a few
    **** will be more challenging. Some of the ciphers will
                 have both an  "easy" and a "hard" version. In that case, a
                 student can only receive credit for one of the versions.
                 Hints will be given for some of the ciphers. The number of
                 points each cipher is worth will be proportional to its
                 difficulty. See the courses Web page for examples of past
                 ciphers that have been used for CMSC 443.
    ** In addition, bonus points are given to the first four
                 students to solve each cipher.
                
    **        [**decryption tools available-](tools.html)
    
    **             Also I will try and provide a few programs written in
    ****    Pascal, C, C++, and Java  which can be used as tools to
                 help decipher the encrypted material. These tools are available
                 from the course Web Page. These tools in almost every case
                 are programs that previous students have written as projects.
    
                 **[submitting solutions - possible bonus points](first00.html)
    
    **             Whenever you are able to decrypt one the ciphers and believe
                 that you are one of the first then you should write up a
                 description of the technique you used, together with any
                 interesting details and submit it to me (Stephens) electronically 
                 as soon as possible. All students who solve a cipher need to turn
                 in a hard copy of their solution before the due date.
                 ( **if you believe that you**            **are one of the first four solvers then send your**           ** solution to me as soon as possible- preferably by e- mail;
                 see the e-mail address on the first page of this
    **             **syllabus)**. This  "write-up" must be in type-written
                 form and not handwritten. [Examples](solutions.html) of such a write-
                 up can be found on this course's Web page. The details of how
                 you should turn in your solution will be given to you
                 as a handout.
    
                 Remember - You must turn in a hardcopy of your
                 solution even if you initially sent your solution by  
                 email.
    
    
                 **Be Aware of[Due Dates](imdates.html) 
    
    **             **None of these problems are to be turned in**             after **an announced due date. This date is will be
                 announced in class.** **** Be sure that you are aware of it.
                 **There are is only one exception to this rule.
                 That one exception is: an illness (certified by a
                 physican) where a student misses four or more class
                 periods.** There is a maximum (excluding bonus points) of 175
                 points associated with this category. Additional bonus
                 points may be earned by solving one or more "challenge
                 ciphers" which I sometimes make available during the
                 semester. These challenge ciphers are not included in
                 the regular seven or eight ciphers ment **i** oned above.
    ****  They are apt to be more difficult or of some
                 historical interest.
    
    ** ***All work on these cyphers must
                  be your own work. No team efforts. This is important.
    
              3.[ programming projects](project1.html)**
    
    
                 We will give the class approximately five different
                 projects concerning different aspects of cryptography.
                 These projects will be programming projects.
    
                 Any programs associated with each project can be
                 written in any language available on machines
                 accessible from your accounts or can be written on a
                 home computer. The programs will be graded in a manner
                 similar to the way that programs are evaluated in
                 beginning programming courses. Although you may talk about
                 these projects with your classmates, all programs must be
                 your own work. Copying someone else's code or allowing someone
                 else to copy your code will result in a 0 for the project
                 at the very least. The two best programs for the semester
                 will quite possibly earn extra bonus points.
    
    ** There is an emphasis on correctness, style,
                 readability and documentation.
    
    **             Turning in undocumented code is a sure way to lose
                 points. If the your program does not give correct
                 answers or has serious errors then no points will be 
                 given.In some cases, (when your program is interactive),
                 I will ask you to demonstrate it to me and/or the teaching
                 assistant. Your completed project should be as close as
                 possible to a polished product.The number of points
                 assigned to a project depends on the project's difficulty
                 or in the case where the project is open-ended how much the
                 student has accomplished.
    
    
    **For projects there are two due dates. Projects turned in by the
                 first due date receive no penalty. Projects turned in between the
                 first and second due dates receive an immediate  30% reduction
                 in points. Projects are not accepted beyond the second due date
                 even if they are near completion. These due dates will be 
                 announced in class (and posted on the web page) for each project.
                 A little partial credit will be given to incomplete projects
                 turned in on the second due date.[See important dates. ](imdates.html)
    
               4.[ homework problems**](homework.html)
    
    
    
    ****   Some of the homework problems tend to be of a
                  theoretical nature and some of them are computational.
                  Some homework problems involve programming. More difficult
                  problems are worth more points. There is a due date for
                  each homework problem. Each problem cannot be turned in
                  after its due date. There is a maximum of
                  100 points in this category.
    
    **5.[ class handouts](handouts.html)**
    
    
    **** Various handouts are given in class. These handouts
                  pertain to homework, projects, ciphers, extra
                  reading assignments, etc. If you miss class and are
                  unable to get the handouts then you are responsible
                  for getting the handouts from classmates or from the
                  table inside the hallway outside my office. Do not
                  ask us for these handouts at a later time.
    
    **6.[ Important Dates](http://www.cs.umbc.edu/~stephens/crypto/imdates.html)
     
                    exam 1   Feb. 26     
                    exam 2   March 28     
                    exam 3   April 23     
                    final    May       
    
     
                    final date for homework problems 
                    final dates for projects (I)  March 28, April 11
                                             (II) May 7, May 14           
                    Spring break              March 19-25       
                    last day to drop          April 9           
                    last day of classes       May 15       
                    final exams               May 17-23       
         
    
              7. Supplemental Reading
    
    
                Survey Textbooks and related reading
         
    **              1. Denning, Dorothy, Cryptography and Data Security
                       Addison-Wesley (Reading, MA 1983) Past text
                       for CMSC 443
    
                  2. Patterson, Wayne, Mathematical Cryptography for
                       Computer Scientists and Mathematicians, Roman
                       and Littlefield
      
                  3. Seberry, J. and Josef Pieprzyk, Cryptography: An
                       Introduction to Computer Security, Prentice-Hall
    
                  4. Welsh, D. Codes and Cryptography, Oxford Univ.
                       Press
      
                  5. Brassard, Gilles, Modern Cryptography: A Tutorial, Springer
                     Verlag, Lecture Notes in Computer Science
    
                  6. Beutelspacher, Albrect,, Cryptology, translation from German
                     into English by J. Chris Fisher, The American Mathematical Association of America, Spectrum Series (1994)  
    
                  7. Garrett, Paul Making, Breaking Codes, Prentice-Hall, (2001)
    
                  8. Buchman, Johannes  Introduction to Cryptography, Springer, 
    
                  9. Stinson, Douglas  Cryptography Theory and Practice, CRC Press 
    
                 10. Rhee, Man Chu Cryptography and Secure Communications, McGraw-Hill
    
    
    
    
    
    
                 
    
    
    **Cryptanalysis**              1.  Gaines, Helen, Cryptanalysis: A Study of Ciphers
                       and Their Solution, Dover
      
                  2. Sinkov, Abraham, Elementary Cryptanalysis, A
                       Mathematical Approach, The Mathematical
                       Association of America, New Mathematical Library
                       No. 22 (1966)
    
    **Number-Theoretic Cryptology**  1.  Kranakis, E. Primality and Cryptography, John
                       Wiley
    
          **Algorithms and Complexity Theory**
    
                 1.  Cormen, T., Leiserson, and Rivest, Introduction to
                       Algorithms, MIT Press and McGraw-Hill
    
                 2. Garey, M. and Johnson, Computers and
                       Intractability: A Guide to Theory of NP-
                       Completeness, W. H. Freeman
    
                **History and General Reading**             1.  Clark, R., The Man Who Broke Purple: The Life of
                       William F. Friedman, who Decrypted the=20
                       Japanese Code of World War II, Little, Brown and
                       Company
    
                 2. Hodges, A., Alan Turing: The Enigma, Simon and
                       Schuster
    
                 3. Hoffman, Paul  Archimedes Revenge, Fawcett Crest
    
    
                 4. Kahn, D., The Codebreakers: The Story of Secret
                       Writing, Macmillan (There is also an abridged
                       version).
    
                 5. Kippenhahn, Rudolf Code Breaking, The Overlook Press
    
                 6. Stalllings, William, Network Security Essentials, Prentice-Hall
    
                 7. Yardley, H. , The American Black Chamber, Bobbs-
                       Merrill
    
    
               **Specialized Reading**
    
                1.  Colin Williams , Scott Clearwater,
                      Explorations in Quantum Computing, Springer 
    
                2. Gareth Penn , Times 17, Foxglove
                   Press
    
    
    

