**

_ENLIGHTENMENT AND REVOLUTION (HUMANITIES 205)

_

Dr. George Dameron--Library 306-Campus Phone ext. x2318

Office Hours: Monday and Wednesday, 11-12; Tuesday 1-2, and by appointment

Email: [gdameron](mailto:gdameron@smcvt.edu)

Website: <http://academics.smcvt.edu/gdameron/>

**

"In general, the art of government consists in taking as much money as
possible from one class of citizens to give it to the other."

Voltaire (1694-1778)

Humanities 205 (Enlightenment and Revolution) is one of five Humanities
courses that fulfill the Liberal Studies requirements in "Culture and
Civilization." There are no prerequisites for the course.

**PURPOSES

**

The purposes of this course are four: (1) to offer an inter-disciplinary
introduction to the culture and intellectual history of Europe in the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries; (2) to encourage students to think and
write critically and analytically; (3) to inspire greater interest on the part
of the student in the history of these two centuries; and (4) to explore the
intellectual and cultural origins of the modern world.

**FORMAT

**

There will be no formal lectures, and the format will emphasize discussion of
and writing about the assigned readings.

**REQUIREMENTS

**

The requirements of the course are the following: (1) an hourly examination
(10% of final grade) on **October 14** ; (2) one eight to ten-page paper on a
topic associated with the required readings in the course due **November 23**
(30% of final grade); (3) a final examination (30% of final grade); 4) short
written quizzes in class on the assigned readings (10%) and (5) class work
(attendance, participation in discussions) (20% of final grade).

The dates of the bi-weekly quizzes are September 18 (Friday), October 5
(Monday), October 16 (Friday), October 30 (Friday), November 13 (Friday),
November 30 (Monday), and December 7 (Monday).

The paper is due on at my office. For every day it is late, I will deduct five
(5) points from the grade of the paper. I refer each student to the Writing
Center, a free service of the college offered to each student. It is located
in basement of the library, and it is usually open six days a week. I will
distribute specific guidelines regarding the paper after the mid-term
examination.

As a courtesy, students should inform the professor of any anticipated
absence. Students should also arrange travel plans so that they do not fall on
days of exams.

**ACADEMIC INTEGRITY

**

The Academic Integrity policy ( _St. Michael's College Catalog 1998-1999_ ,
pp. 23-24) is operative in this course. _The Student Handbook and Code of
Conduct_ in particular addresses the issue of plagiarism and its penalties.
For the purpose of this course, plagiarism is the  "presenting of another
person's ideas as your own, by directly quoting or indirectly paraphrasing,
without properly citing the original source".

**DOCUMENTED LEARNING DISABILITIES

**

Students with documented learning disabilities by the Office of the Associate
Dean will receive special accommodations in the areas of testing and the paper
assignment where appropriate. Please see me should you like to request such
arrangements.

**THE INTERNET

**

I reserve the right to adjust the syllabus in the course of the semester, and
I will do so on the online syllabus. Students should weekly consult my web
page for any changes (which I will also announce in class).

All readings other than those for purchase on in then [Internet Modern History
Sourcebook](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/modsbook.html). Students can
get access to those readings by clicking on the highlighted texts in the
online syllabus.

_**

Required Books for Purchase (all paperbacks)

**_

Henry Fielding, _Joseph Andrews_ (Viking Penguin 1977);

Galileo Galilei, _Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo_ , trans. with an
introduction by Stillman Drake (Garden City: Doubleday Anchor 1957);

Edward Gibbon, _The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire_ (Viking Penguin
1980)'

John Locke, _Second Treatise of Government_ , ed. C. B. Macpherson
(Indianapolis: Hackett, 1980);

Jean-Jacques Rousseau, _Social Contract_ (Viking Penguin);

Mary Shelley, _Frankenstein_ (New York: New American Library Penguin, 1983).

_**

Required Readings and Websites on the Internet (Internet Modern History
Sourcebook)

**_

[David Hume, "On Miracles"](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/hume-
miracles.html)

[Selected Prints of William
Hogarth](http://www.english.upenn.edu/~jlynch/hogarth.html)

[Selected paintings by Rembrandt van
Rijn](http://sunsite.unc.edu/wm/paint/auth/rembrandt/)

**

Introduction to Course                 September 2

**Film: "Art in the Western World

(17th/18th Centuries)" **                 September 4

The Scientific Revolution, the Triumph of Rationality, and the Visual Arts

**

Galileo, "The Starry Messenger" (1610) **Sept. 7, 9

** Galileo, "Letter to the Grand Duchess

Christina" (1615) **                 Sept. 11, 14

**[David Hume, "On Miracles"](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/hume-
miracles.html) **         Sept. 16

**Artemisia Gentileschi and [Rembrandt van
Rijn](http://sunsite.unc.edu/wm/paint/auth/rembrandt/), selected paintings

    [Italian Baroque](http://witcombe.bcpw.sbc.edu/ARTHbaroque.html#Baroque) **                Sept. 18**

**

Political Theory and Revolution

**John Locke, "The Second Treatise of

Government" (1690) **                 Sept. 21, 23, 25,

Art and Social Commentary

**Henry Fielding, _Joseph Andrews_ (1742) **Sept. 28, 30, Oct. 2

                                        Oct. 5, 7, 9

****October Break** **                 Oct. 12**

**Hourly Examination** **                 Oct. 14

**The Visual Arts: The Work of

[William Hogarth **    ](http://www.english.upenn.edu/~jlynch/hogarth.html)
Oct. 16

Political Theory and Social Criticism

**

Jean-Jacques Rousseau, _The Social

_

_Contract_ (1762) **                         Oct. 19, 21, 23,

                                        26, 28, 30

History and Social Commentary

**Edward Gibbon, _The Decline and Fall of

_

_the Roman Empire_

**

** (1776-1788) **                         Nov. 2, 4, 6,

                                        9, 11, 13,

                                        16, 18, 20, 23

**Paper Due**                         Nov. 23

**Thanksgiving Break"** **                 Nov. 25-29

The French Revolution and the Rights of Woman

   **(Mary Wollstonecraft, "A Vindication **

**     of the Rights of Woman")           November 30**

The Revolt Against Rationality

**

Mary Shelley, "Frankenstein" (1816) **    Dec. 3,

                                        5, 7, 9

Conclusion

**

[William
Wordsworth](http://www.wsu.edu:8080/~wldciv/world_civ_reader/world_civ_reader_2/wordsworth.html),
"The World is Too Much

With Us" (1807) **                         Dec. 11**

**

Examination                            December 16 (9-11:30)

**

