[![](banner.gif)](index.html)  
---  
[![](story.gif)](story.html)  
[![](courses.gif)](courses.html)  
[![](research.gif)](research.html)  
[![](links.gif)](links.html)  
[![](comments.gif)](mailto:edwardwoell@maristb.marist.edu)  
[![](marist.gif)](http://www.marist.edu)  
![](rest.gif) |  

[Back](courses.html)

Marist College  
Fall Semester, 1999  
History 293. L111  
Special Topics: World War One and the Making of Modern Society.  
Tuesdays and Fridays, 12:30-1:45 p.m.  
**_Syllabus

**_ **

THE INSTRUCTOR

**

Name: Dr. Woell  
Office: Student Center, Room 149-A, Unit 10  
Office Hours: Tuesday, 2:00-3:30 p.m.  
Wednesday, 9:30-11:00 a.m.; 3:30-5:00 p.m.  
Thursday, 1:30-3:30 p.m.  
Friday, 9:30-11:00 a.m.  
And by appointment  
Phone: 575-3000 Ext. 2542  
Email: jfbe@maristb.marist.edu.  
Check out my Web Site! The address is: **www.academic.marist.edu/woell** **

COURSE MATERIALS

** **

Textbook

**

Lyons, Michael. _World War One: A Short History_. Second Edition. Upper Saddle
River,  New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2000.

**

Supplementary Text

**

Coetzee, Frans and Marilyn Shevin-Coetzee. _World War I and European Society:
A Sourcebook_. Lexington, Massachusetts: Heath, 1995.

These texts are available at the Student Center Bookstore. Please bring both
the textbook and the supplementary text to class with you.

**

Additional Readings

**

Horne, Alistair, "The Price of Glory: Verdun, 1916," from Richard M. Golden,
ed., _The Social Dimension of Western Civilization_, Volume Two, _Readings
from the Sixteenth Century to the Present._ Fourth Edition. Boston:
Bedford/St. Martin's, 1999.

Ellis, John, "Natural Miseries" and "Battle: The Reality," from Ellis, _Eye-
Deep in Hell: Trench Warfare in World War I_. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press, 1976.

Mosse, George L., "The Brutalization of German Politics," from Mosse, _Fallen
Soldiers: Reshaping the Memory of the World Wars_. New York: Oxford University
Press,  1990.

Schmitt, Bernadotte E. and Harold C. Vedeler, "The World Reshaped," from
Schmitt and  Vedeler, _The World in the Crucible 1914-1919_. New York: Harper
and Row, 1984.

**

Videotape Series and Companion Book

**

Winter, Jay, and Blaine Baggett. _The Great War and the Shaping of the
Twentieth Century_. Eight Parts. Alexandria, Virginia: PBS Home Video, 1996.

Winter, Jay, and Blaine Baggett. _The Great War_. New York: Penguin, 1996.

This video series and companion book are on reserve at the library.

**

OBJECTIVES

** _

The years had given them kindness. Dawn was theirs,

And sunset, and the colours of the earth.

These had seen movement, and heard music; known

Slumber and waking; loved; gone proudly friended;

Felt quick stir of wonder; sat alone;

Touched flowers and furs and cheeks. All this is ended.

_

-Rupert Brooke, "The Dead"

Of all the singular events in the twentieth century, arguably the one that had
the most profound and lasting impact upon humankind was the First World War.
Indeed, the war marked a key turning point in human history; it saw the
introduction of "total war," characterized by technology-based slaughter on an
industrial scale; it led to the demise of three age-old empires and gave rise
to the world's first Communist government; it economically drained what had
been the most wealthy and prosperous continent in the world and ushered in the
era of American economic dominance; it wiped out almost an entire generation
of Europeans. But perhaps most importantly, it forever changed the mental
outlook of human beings by desensitizing them toward violence and brutalizing
much of human endeavor; it helped make modern society what it is today.

This course invites us to consider the monumental impact that the "Great War"
had, but it also asks us to enter into the thoughts and actions of those who
participated in the war or were profoundly changed by it. In keeping with this
invitation, the objectives of this course are as follows:

1\. To understand better the First World War by figuratively sitting in the
trenches, going "over the top," confronting suffering and death, starving on
the homefront, protesting against the conflict, experiencing profound loss; to
place ourselves in the shoes of ordinary people affected by the war while
temporarily abandoning our own.

2\. To understand better what the discipline of history is; to realize what it
is to "do" history; to practice critical thinking, analysis of text and
context, interpretation, and coherent and creative writing.

3\. To enhance skills that are needed, not only to learn about the past or to
do history, but to engage in most any kind of career, profession, or vocation;
such skills include critical thinking, attentive reading, intelligible
writing, and comprehensible speaking.

**

GRADING CRITERIA AND COURSE POLICIES

**

A. The scale for all grades in the course is as follows:

**

A** 94.0 - 100 % **B+** 88.0 - 90.9 **C+** 79.0 - 81.9 **D+** 70.0 - 72.9

**

A-** 91.0 - 93.9 **B** 85.0 - 87.9 **C** 76.0 - 78.9 **D** 64.0 - 69.9

**

B-** 82.0 - 84.9 **C-** 73.0 - 75.9 **F** 00.0 - 63.9

B. A student's final grade will be based on the following criteria and
percentages:

Film Reviews (Eight) 40 % Mid-Term Exam 15 % Quizzes (Three of Five) 15 %
Final Exam 15 Participation 15

C. Reading

You are expected to do all of the assigned reading, both from the textbook and
from the supplementary texts. The specific reading assignments for each class
are listed in the next section of the syllabus. You are also expected to
complete the assigned reading **before** the class period so that you will be
ready to participate in class discussion and satisfactorily complete the
quizzes.

D. Quizzes

There will be five quizzes in this course. The quizzes will not be announced
in advance and will be given at the beginning of class. They are given to
insure that students are doing the assigned reading, and thus each quiz will
be based upon the reading assigned for the day when that quiz is held.
Typically, the quizzes will consist of several questions requiring a written
short answer no longer than two or three sentences long. The grading of the
quizzes will be based upon the accuracy of the answers as well as the cogency
of what is written; both content and style are important. The quizzes will be
given grades of A (100%); B (86); C (77); D (68); or F (60). The quizzes
cannot be made up and those who are not in class for a quiz will receive a
zero. At the end of the semester the two lowest quiz scores for each student
will be dropped and not factored into the final grade.

E. Exams

There will be two exams in the course, each of which will cover material from
one-half of the semester. The two exams will consist of two sets of essay
questions. One set of questions will be based on the readings from the
textbook and discussions about them in class. The other set of questions will
be based upon the supplementary text read for that part of the semester and
discussions about them in class. Approximately two class periods before the
exam the instructor will further clarify how to prepare for the exam and
specify what the exam will cover.

F. Video Reviews

You will be required to write eight video reviews, one for each part in the
series, _The Great War and the Shaping of the Twentieth Century_. The reviews
should discuss the theme or thesis of each video and include personal
assessments and reactions to the production. Further stipulations for both of
the papers (spacing, margins, et cetera) will be given before the first video
review is due.

A warning to all students: **Plagiarism, that is, the stealing of words or
ideas from another and the presentation of them as one's own, will not be
tolerated in this assignment in any way, shape, or form!** If you are unsure
of what does and what does not constitute plagiarism, you should talk to the
instructor. **The penalty for committing plagiarism will be severe!

**

The evaluation of the reviews will be based on several factors. The cogency
and clearness of the writing are among the most important criteria, but the
reviews will also require critical thought as well. Moreover, the review's
content must be grammatically correct and devoid of any spelling or
typographical errors. Finally, failure to follow any of the stipulations will
result in a reduction of the review's score. Late papers will be accepted, but
will be penalized 10 percent off the top for every week day that a paper is
late.

G. Attendance and Participation

You are expected to attend and participate in class on a regular basis. You
are permitted to miss a total of three classes during the course of the
semester without penalty. However, each absence thereafter will result in a
3.00 % reduction of your overall grade. This reduction will automatically drop
your grade from A- to B+, B+ to B, B to B-, and so forth.

Your participation grade will be based on the following criteria:

1\. **Tardiness**. Show up to class on time.

2\. **Courtesy and respect for other students**. Give other students the
opportunity to express themselves.

3\. **Courtesy and respect for the instructor**. Give the instructor a chance
to instruct.

4\. **Contribution to thoughtful discussion**. You are **expected** to be
assertive, ask questions, make comments, and express yourself in a thoughtful
manner.

It is also expected that you will stay in class for the entire period. Unless
of an emergency, bathroom or beverage breaks are not permitted. Please do not
bring food or drink (other than water) to class with you.

H. Policies for Excused Absences, Makeups, and Disabilities

If you are unable to take an examination or submit an assignment because of a
religious holiday or a school-related extracurricular activity (i.e.
intercollegiate athletics), you must make necessary arrangements with the
instructor within the first three weeks of the semester to take exams or
submit assignments at different times.

The only other excused absences permitted will be those concerning the serious
illness of a student or death within a student's immediately family. In such
cases, Marist College's Academic Services usually notifies instructors of the
situation, explains how long the student will miss class, and requests some
form of documentation from the student. In the case of a serious illness,
students should be prepared to provide documentation from a medical _doctor_
regarding the illness in question. Notes from the nurse at Student Health
Services will not be accepted.

Students who have a physical or mental disability and need special
accommodations in order to meet any of the requirements of this course should
speak to the instructor at the beginning of the semester.

**

COURSE AGENDA AND READING SCHEDULE

**

## [Readings for World War One and the Making of Modern
Society](readings2.html/)

August 31. Introduction. Review of Syllabus.

September 3. Europe before 1914.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter One.

September 7. Alliances and Imperial Crises.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Two.

September 10. The Balkans.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Three.

September 14. The July Crisis and the Mood of 1914.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Four.

September 17. _The Great War_ Video, Part One: Explosion.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Five.

September 21. Movement and Stagnation in the West. VIDEO REVIEW ONE DUE.

Reading: Lyons, Chapters Six and Thirteen.

September 24. _The Great War_ Video, Part Two: Stalemate.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Seven.

September 28. Slaughter in the East. VIDEO REVIEW TWO DUE.

Reading: Lyons, Chapters Eight and Nine.

October 1. _The Great War_ Video, Part Three: Total War.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Eleven.

October 5. The Homefront. VIDEO REVIEW THREE DUE.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Fourteen.

October 8. The War Experience.

Reading: Ellis, "Natural Miseries;" "Battle: The Reality."

October 12. MID-TERM EXAM

October 19. The Air and Sea Fronts.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Twelve.

October 22. The War beyond Europe; Propaganda.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Eighteen.

October 26. The Paramount Battle: Verdun.

Reading: Lyons, First Half of Chapter Ten (pp. 140-48); Horne, "The Price of
Glory."

October 29. _The Great War_ Video, Part Four: Slaughter.

Reading: Lyons, Second Half of Chapter Ten (pp. 149-55).

November 2. Revolution in Russia. VIDEO REVIEW FOUR DUE.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Fifteen.

November 5. _The Great War_ Video, Part Five: Mutiny.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Sixteen.

November 9. Allied Crises. VIDEO REVIEW FIVE DUE.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Seventeen.

November 12. _The Great War_ Video, Part Six: Collapse

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Nineteen.

November 16. The Central Powers' Disintegration and End of the War. VIDEO
REVIEW SIX DUE.

Reading: Lyons, First Half of Chapter Twenty (pp. 281-89).

November 19. _The Great War_ Video, Part Seven: Hatred and Hunger.

Reading: Lyons, Second Half of Chapter Twenty (pp. 289-98).

November 23. The Paris Peace Conference and Treaty of Versailles. VIDEO REVIEW
SEVEN DUE.

Reading: Lyons, Chapter Twenty-One.

November 30. Revolution and Dissolution in Central Europe.

Reading: Lyons, First Half of Chapter Twenty-Two (pp. 313-26).

December 3. _The Great War_ Video, Part Eight: War Without End.

Reading: Lyons, Second Half of Chapter Twenty-Two (pp. 326-330).

December 7. The Immediate Aftermath. VIDEO REVIEW EIGHT DUE.

Reading: Schmitt and Vedeler, "The World Reshaped."

December 10 The Long-Term Impact.

Reading: Mosse, "The Brutalization of German Politics."

**FINAL EXAM** (The Date and Time to be Announced).

Top

