  
  
  
|  
.  
| **CLASS OF 1980**  
|  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
|  
| ******Jason C. Moriarty
[(JMoriarty@mtwcorp.com)](Mailto:JMoriarty@mtwcorp.com)**  
**      I must confess that my history major was one of default rather than
choice. As a pre-med student my focus was on the sciences until the scholastic
reality of Medical school, sank in. Dickinson's balance of liberal arts
studies afforded me the opportunity to finish school (as a** **History major)
and make my way into a very uncertain future.**  
**      My career path--the last 18 years--has been primarily in the
Information Technology realm. I am currently a managing consultant for a
national consulting firm specializing in providing architectural solutions to
Fortune 100 companies. Many of the most successful people I have encountered
have been graduates of liberal arts colleges with degrees in** **fields other
than Computer Science. They say that the 2 professions that produce the best
quality programmers are teachers and artists. They say it's due to their
ability to think and communicate abstractly. I would agree.**  
**      While the History major itself may not have played the most
significant role in my future, I can say that it helped me see that there are
lessons to be learned in everything that we do. And history--despite what
Henry Ford may have said--allows one to witness, learn and most definitely
improve upon the situation. Whatever that situation may be.**  
|  
  
  
  
|  
.  
| **CLASS OF 1982**  
|  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
|  
|  | **Cindy Raiton      [Raitonc@aol.com](Mailto:Raitonc@aol.com)**  
**    Since my graduation at Dickinson College, I have been working in
international sales and marketing for the leading book wholesalers.**  
**    I worked from 1982 - 1995 for a company that was owned by W. R. Grace,
called Baker & Taylor, which is the largest US book wholesaler.  I was Sales
Director travelling the world setting up deals with major bookstores overseas
to supply them with US books.  In 1991 W. R. Grace divested themselves of B&T
and the Carlyle Group an investment firm in Wash., D.C. organized a management
buyout.  From 1991 - 1995 I was the Director of Business** **Development and
spent those years travelling in the developing world working with projects
funded by the aid agencies (World Bank, USAID, Regional Dev. Banks, etc...)
that supported educational projects involving the sale of books.   I spent
many years travelling throughout Africa, Asia and Latin America.**  
**    I became an independent contractor in 1995 and have been doing this
since that time.  I work with US bookwholesalers that do not have any
international divisions in setting up their business with my international
contacts.  I have successfully completed deals with Amazon overseas to supply
them with many of their US books.**

**Tracy Wisniewski      [tww@lucent.com](Mailto:tww@lucent.com)**  
**     I am sorry that I didn't send this response off sooner, but I was
travelling for business 6 out of the last 8 weeks of the year and just did not
have time to do this any sooner.**  
**     I majored in both History and English at Dickinson. Although my career
path is not an obvious match to my undergraduate studies, I firmly believe
that my liberal arts background has been the most important part of my success
at Lucent Technologies. I started with AT&T as a Technical Writer working on
data and optical networking products documentation. Although my writing skills
were top-notch, I had to learn some highly technical product**
**specifications which was certainly a challenge. From there, I became a
Systems Engineer, responsible for writing the technical requirements for our
software developers to use in producing our management system software. I also
did an extensive amount of pre-sales work, giving demonstrations and technical
overviews of our products. It was during this period that Lucent Technologies
was spun off and that became my new employer. From there I became a Technical
Manager with responsibility for Customer Engineering. My team was responsible
for all of the deployment and maintenance of our software products**
**globally. Currently, I have left the technical side of the company and have
become a Sales Director serving our Global Crossing customer.   I have
responsibility for all their subsea and network management sales globally. I
am doing projects in Africa, South America, Japan, and in the U.K.
currently.**  
**      I would be happy to talk about my career path with any of your history
majors. It is certainly not the typical path of business or law school!**  
  
---  
  
  
  
  
|  
.  
| **CLASS OF 1983**  
|  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
|  
|  | **John Philips     [jsphilips@yahoo.com](Mailto:jsphilips@yahoo.com)**  
**    I am currently the Social Studies Coordinator and Head Teacher at the
Bedminster School in Bedminster, New Jersey.  I am in my 12th year at the
school.  Since I teach history, my experience at Dickinson is one that I never
forget.  I still refer to my class notes and books from college.  I even
borrow test questions from past exams.  I currently teach American History,
but when I started at the school, I taught both world and American history.
After graduation, I earned a Masters in Theology from Rutgers University with
a concentration in the Reformation and 19th century American Protestant
philosophy and another masters from Princeton in divinity.**  
**    I've been working on several projects, but the presence of a wife and
two kids have made it difficult to finish them.**

**Gregory Zimmerman
[gzimmerm@therousecompany.com](Mailto:gzimmerm@therousecompany.com)**  
**      I graduated from the University of Pennsylvania Law School in 1986
where I was on the Law Review and was fortunate to be elected to the Order of
the Coif.  From September, 1986, through September, 1987, I was a law clerk
for the Honorable Joseph J. Longobardi, United States District Court for the
District of Delaware in Wilmington, Delaware.  In 1987, I joined Venable,
Baetjer and Howard in Baltimore, one of Maryland's oldest and largest firms.
In 1994, I left Venable to join The Rouse Company in Columbia, Maryland as in-
house counsel.  Rouse is traded on the NYSE and is one of the nation's premier
shopping center and master-planned community developers.  In 1999, my wife
Robin, '83, also a history major, and I were transferred to Las Vegas, Nevada,
where Rouse owns The Howard Hughes Corporation, the remnants of Howard
Hughes's estate and the leading real estate developer in Nevada.  Earlier this
year, I moved from the legal side of the Company to the business side.  I am
now a Development Director.  In this role, I am responsible for all aspects of
the renovation and expansion of Fashion Place, a 1,000,000 square foot mall in
Salt Lake City, Utah with a budget in excess of $120M. While at Dickinson, I
spent one semester in London at the Institute for European Studies.**  
**    Robin and I were the co-chairs of the Baltimore Alumni Admissions
Committee from 1987 until we moved to Las Vegas in 1999.  I was on the Alumni
Council from 1993-1998, serving as president from 1997--1999.  I am currently
in the last year of a 4 year ex officio term on the Dickinson Board of
Trustees.**  
  
---  
  
  
  
  
  
|  
.  
| **CLASS OF 1984**  
|  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
|  
| **Lisa Ann Deon      [Lad462@aol.com ](Mailto:Lad462@aol.com)**  
**      Received Paralegal Certificate in 1985 -**  
**      Worked as a Paralegal in the Trust and Investment Group of First
Pennsylvania Bank, now First Union.**  
**      Currently employed as the Chief of Staff to PA State Representative
Matthew Wright (R- Bucks County).**  
**      Owner of Cafe Abruzzi in Langhorne Bucks County PA**  
**      My job as a Chief of Staff involves researching problems and laws. My
History education taught me logical thinking in order to fully complete a
research project. The discipline learned as a history major is unmatched.**

**Mary Jean O'Sullivan (nee McDonald)
[osullima@shu.edu](Mailto:osullima@shu.edu)**  
**        To say that majoring in history at Dickinson has had an effect on my
life would be understating it a bit.  I remember watching Clark Garrett as a
freshman and thinking how great it would be to know all that he knew and to
share it in the relaxed, interesting way he did.  He was a huge influence on
me, as was John Osborne.  They encouraged my thinking and actually took what I
said and wrote seriously, and responded to both in a like manner.  When I
graduated, I found I missed the intellectual pursuit of the classrooms.
Consequently, after about 18 months in the NYC real world, I enrolled in the
graduate history department at New York University and eventually received my
Ph.D. in 1993.  (My dissertation looked at the evolution of child advocacy
within the postwar welfare state; focused on the Citizens' Committee for
Children of NY.)  Since then, I've published an article in Child Welfare based
on the dissertation; contributed to _The Encyclopedia of New York City_ ;
written a piece on the history of the New York State Children's Court for NY's
Permanent Judicial Commission on Justice for Children, published as part of a
larger piece of the Commission's on juvenile justice; and am currently working
on contributing some pieces for a new _Who's Who Among American Women._   I've
also been teaching fairly steadily throughout New Jersey, most recently at
Seton Hall, where I've been since 1998.  With four kids produced in between,
it's been difficult to keep up the writing, and I've been frustrated by the
semi-temporary status of my teaching jobs, but teaching is what I truly love,
so I'll take whatever status I can get.  I don't think too many people can say
that their undergraduate experience absolutely shaped their professional
lives.  I'm very grateful to Dickinson's history department for that.**

|  
  
  
  
|  
.  
| **CLASS OF 1985**  
|  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
|  
| **Peter Churchill    [pchurchill@hlw.com](Mailto:pchurchill@hlw.com)**  
**    I graduated in '85 and for a while thought of teaching History/ Social
Studies since I went through the Education Minor program.  I decided to enter
the business world, and today find myself representing one of the larger
architectural and engineering firms in the country, HLW, and I also consult
part-time to a small Business Consulting firm, Harding & Co., teaching sales
and business development to professionals.**  
**    Though my being a History Major does not play a crucial role in my daily
life, it does play an active role.  The greatest thing about being a History
major is that you study the world, and all that fits into it.  Hence, one
becomes a bit of a Renaissance person without really trying.  I love the fact
that I know a bit about most things that have shaped our culture.  Granted I
have forgotten much and there are many things unfamiliar to me (never learned
or studied), yet I am pleased to be where I am, and I owe much of this to my
studies.  Given all that I had to read, sometimes 30-40 books in a semester,
and the amount of papers I had to write, too many to count or remember (I
almost did a second minor in English), Dickinson as a whole, taught me to
think.  Thanks. **

**David H. Ferrall
[deferrall@compuserve.com](Mailto:deferrall@compuserve.com)**  
**      Let me start by saying that I was never much of a student, nor
terribly interested in academic pursuits. But I always had a love of history,
and though I felt my future was in business, I can still hear my father saying
"spend these next four years in college studying what interests you, not what
you will spending the rest of your life doing."  Wonderful paternal wisdom
that served me well.**  
**      I therefore entered the History Department my sophmore year with
fairly dismal grades. That being said, summer school was in my future. At my
parent's urging, I enrolled in the summer-semester-abroad program in Britain,
taught by John Osborne and Mary Moser. The courses were Roman Britain and the
Industrial Revolution. The physical aspects of both classes  were overwhelming
to me, I was wide-eyed and awed at every new site. Off** **syllabus sites were
also explored, I stare now on my wall at the picture of Stonehenge I took that
summer, on my first of many visits there. The experience of seeing and feeling
England's history firsthand was a profound awakening.   I had the feeling then
that a life changing moment had occured, but it wasn't until after graduation
that the lure of Europe again called.**  
**      I spent my last two years at Dickinson with a renewed interest in
history. My GPA almost doubled, and I enjoyed related courses such as Art
History and French. The latter being a real influence on me, as later in life
when I was in a position to need a second and third language it sort of came
readily  (I thus heartily endorse Dickinson's language requirement, though
that's another ramble..). I spent my remaining summers in Washington in the**
**securities department at Riggs National Bank, and interned at Prudential
Bache Securities in Harrisburg. Thus I was enjoying History in study, and
business on my own time.**  
**      After graduation I spent half a year in Harrisburg at a local radio
station, an interest I had aquired at WDCV. But I really wanted to get into
the money business, and get back to Europe. After my girlfriend (and now wife)
Elizabeth spent the summer of 1986 on the Britain program, the UK again called
to my senses and I went back to London to look for a job.  Through the friend-
of-a-friend I hooked up with a Dutch financer who hired me to teach me the
derivatives business in Amsterdam. I was good at the wheeling-dealing
environment of exchange floors, and worked for this fellow for several years
in Amsterdam and London, and set up a business for him in Philadelphia and New
York. But I wanted my own firm, and with several Dutch partners and a large
bank, we opened one up in Amsterdam in 1991. When I left the partnership five
years later, we were a sizeable firm with traders in Amsterdam, London,
Frankfurt, and Singapore. Elizabeth and I had just** **had our first child,
and we thought it was time for us to return to the US. After several years
living in the Wall Street suburb of Fairfield County, Connecticut, we
relocated to the slower paced lifestyle of the Charlottesville, VA countryside
where we now reside. I remain an active member of the Eurex, the largest
derivatives exchange in the world. I trade** **mornings over phone lines that
route from our farm to a nuclear bomb-proof bunker in Frankfurt, where the
exchange is located. The wonders of technology never cease to amaze...**  
**      I can honestly say a day never went by when I lived in Europe that I
didn't revel in the history of everyday life that surrounded me. A simple walk
around Amsterdam's canals, or through London's business district was always
enlivening. And Elizabeth and I sought this enlightenment together with
extensive travel. Though living in the present, I always felt the presence of
the past. This feeling I will always carry with me, though sadly I find it
harder to replicate in the US. But the world will always call to us, and we
look forward to sharing it with our three daughters in the years ahead.**  
**      Sorry to ramble, but your letter has provoked deep emotional happiness
which I could never succinctly put into words. Sufice to say my Dickinson
experience, through fluke or destiny, opened up and developed my love for most
things historical. John Osborne showed me to how to appreciate the past, and
Becky Kline (Professor, French) showed me a different way to enjoy the
present. To them and to the Dickinson community I am eternally** **grateful.**  
**      Please feel free to use these thoughts as you see fit. I am not
terribly active in Dickinson today, though I am an Admissions alumni
representative for this area. I invite any and all contact from prospective,
current, and alumni Dickinsonians.**

**Rich Hayes      [hayesrr@us.ibm.com ](Mailto:hayesrr@us.ibm.com)**  
**      Thank you for the note.  Let me give you my quick thoughts and
perspectives 16 years after graduation:**  
**      First:  Clark Garrett taught me to have passion for what you do else
don't do it.  I have learned that if your heart is not in it you will reach no
lasting success.  As a sophomore I gathered I should commit to the study of
history for deep personal reasons, not just the motivations of the moment.
The best moment of my history career came when he shook my hand after I
received the senior history honors award.**  
**      Second:  John Osborne taught me the rule of P6; Prior preparation
prevents piss poor performance.  Pardon the French but that phrase has earned
me more professional success than any other facet of study while at Dickinson.
Hands down, I owe much of my professional success to John.**  
**      Third: Neil Weissman taught me to sign up with a revolution.  It's the
fastest way to advance and take advantage of change.  To that end I got
involved with computers and information management shortly after graduation.
The rest is history (chapter 1) and I have built a solid professional career
in information services.  The future is bright.**  
**      Fourth:  Jim Carson taught me to never throw out a book.  They are of
perpetual value.  His books provided this student useful employment in the
Summer or '83, boxing and moving them from Denny Hall for renovation.  Can I
still apply for workers' comp?**  
**      Bottom line is majoring in History allowed me to fully pursue a
passion to a degree I could not have done since.  Although now an amateur
historian, I believe I carry skills and capabilities that distinguish me
professionally and uniquely from others in my field.  If nothing else I have a
great library and a ready stream of unread books that connects me to my
college roots.  That in itself is contentment.**

**Heidi Hormel      [hormelh@dickinson.edu](Mailto:hormelh@dickinson.edu)**  
**      Since graduation I followed a number of paths but most recently I
finished my masters in Journalism at Temple University was a newspaper
reporter and editor and have since moved back to my alma mater as assistant
director of media relations.**  
**      While I did not go into a field that is directly related to history,
the research methods I learned as a history major certainly were helpful when
I was tracking down a story. I would also say, in general, my interest in
history continued through my job as I researched some old myths for the
newspaper and covered a variety of events and stories that had history at its
core.**  
**      Of course, history was also helpful when I had to take that Journalism
History course for my masters.**  
**      As far as study abroad, I did that as an undergraduate and graduate.
I was at the University of Durham (before it became a place just for classics
students).  I had a chance to study archaeology--what a blast.  I felt that I
learned a lot about looking at the landscape and buildings to determine their
history and to think about history and the past in ways other than written
word.  And having done my junior year abroad, I was eager and more than
willing to do a short course in London as part of graduate studies, which
focused on journalism.**

**Chris Kennedy      [CKPACKER@aol.co ](Mailto:CKPACKER@aol.com)**  
**      I was a History and English major, choosing the former because I
enjoyed it so much and the latter because I found it interesting and
challenging.   I wound up enjoying 19th Century European History as well as
Puritan Poetry and Barbara Pym.  A rare combination, I guess.**  
**      After a number of years working at smaller papers and doing a variety
of things, I recently started covering the New England Patriots for the
Springfield Union-News/Sunday Republican, a daily paper in western
Massachusetts where I have worked for the last eight years. I have had a
chance to travel fairly often, covering both a men's and women's Final Four as
well as a Super Bowl along the way.  I still remember a day my senior year
walking past Old West and asking Prof. Winston if he thought I could work as a
journalist. He said sure.  I'm still not sure, though, whether I should thank
him or curse him.  Just kidding.  There are, of course, many intangible
benefits from my education that have helped me as a sports writer, but I am
also somewhat surprised that there have been so many practical ones.**  
**      Most notably, I can never make a statement in a story without
immediately thinking that I need some sort of evidence, either a statistic or
a quote to back it up.  I have both disciplines to thank for that.**  
**      I also often think back to the lists of causes and effects that
history teachers like Prof. Weissman used to love to jot on the chalk board.
So often, the most important part of writing stories is deciding what fact is
at the root of the issue and which are simply causes or effects, then making
that all clear as efficiently as possible.**  
**      I think my favorite history course, Introduction to History with Prof.
Garrett, and the passion of teachers such as Prof. Osborne for their subject
matter showed me just how important the past is and traditions are to every
individual.  I see that often, such as recently when I did some stories about
the 1972 undefeated Miami Dolphins.  The past was still very much a part of
their present.**  
**      Studying Shakespeare's sonnets with Prof. Krantz or Puritan poetry
with Prof. Winston drove home the importance for a writer to select every word
carefully, that every phrase, image, analogy or whatever needs to relate or at
least be comfortable with every other word you've written.**  
**      My studies in the History and English departments prepared me to
write, but also taught ways to approach and analysis my work.  I just wish I
knew about spell check back then.**

**Paul Riggs       [riggs@dickinson.edu](Mailto:riggs@dickinson.edu)**  
**1985:        BA (History), Dickinson College**  
**1985-86:    Took a year off from higher education to earn money for graduate
school.**  
**1986-90:    Teaching Assistant, Department of History, University of
Pittsburgh.  Taught**  
**                 variety of courses in American and European history.  Also
spent most                               summers** **in Scotland conducting
research for MA thesis and other projects.**  
**1988:         MA (History), University of Pittsburgh**  
**1990:         Passed Comprehensive Examination and admitted to candidacy for
the Ph.D.**  
**1990-91:     Pre-doctoral research residency in Edinburgh, Scotland.  Funded
by                                 university ** **fellowships.**  
**1991-94:     Returned to Pittsburgh to write dissertation; taught courses at
Pitt and nearby **  
**                  colleges.   Also worked part-time as academic advisor to
undergraduates.**  
**1994-98:      Assistant to the Office of Academic Affairs, Dickinson
College.  Used **  
**                  administrative experience gained as advisor to get entry-
level position in**  
**                  academic affairs.**  
**1997:          Ph.D. (History), University of Pittsbrugh.  Dissertation
Title:  "Scottish Criminal **  
**                  Law and Procedure in the Nineteenth Century"**  
**1998-2000: Executive Assistant to the President, Dickinson College.**  
**2000-pres: Elected Secretary of the College by Board of Trustees.   Added
board**  
**                  professional staffing role to duties as Exec. Asst.**  
**      I would be happy to discuss with students careers in higher education
administration as well as the challenges of remaining active as a scholar and
teacher.**

  
|  
  
  
  
|  
.  
| **CLASS OF 1987**  
|  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
|  
| **Jeffery Hartley
[jeffery.hartley@arch2.nara.gov](Mailto:jeffery.hartley@arch2.nara.gov)**  
**      History has indeed had an effect on my life and career.  After
graduating from Dickinson in 1987, I took a semester off because I wasn't sure
what I wanted to do.  I knew that I didn't want to teach or go to law school,
but that I did want to pursue a higher-level history degree.  With that and a
love of books in mind, I discovered the HiLS program at the University of
maryland College Park.  It is a dual degree program designed to educate/train
archivists (see http://www.clis.umd.edu/academics/programs/mlsarch.html).  Two
and a half years later I obtained an M.A. in History (concentrating on
American colonial history) and an M.L.S. (Master of Library Science).  While
at UMCP I had one internship with the Center for Legislative Archives, part of
the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA).  After graduating
from Maryland in 1990 I took an intermittent position in the NARA Library, and
5 months later obtained a full-time position.  I am currently the Senior
Reference/Systems Librarian for the NARA Library
(http://www.nara.gov/alic/index.html).  The program at Maryland trained me to
be an archivist or a librarian, and now I'm a librarian in an archives--it's a
very nice fit.  My coursework at Dickinson ably prepared me for graduate
school, and both programs prepared me well for my professional career.**  
**      NARA does have an internship program for students interested in
archival or library work.  Information on these opportunities is available on
the NARA web site at http://www.nara.gov/professional/intern/intern.html.
Summer employment in the Library or elsewhere in the agency is also sometimes
a possibility.  I would welcome the opportunity to talk with anyone about my
experiences at Dickinson, NARA, library school or the archival/library
profession in general. **

**Michael Hoffman
[mhoffman@vartec.net](http://www.dickinson.edu/departments/hist/mhoffman@vartec.net)**  
**      Great website.  It is good to see what fellow alums have done with
their lives and careers post-Dickinson and how they have made use of their
history degrees.**  
**      As for me, I attended law school at the American University's
Washington College of Law immediately following graduation from Dickinson, and
earned a JD, with honors, in 1990.  At WCL, I served on the law school's
International Law Journal as well as served as president of the school's law
fraternity.  During law school, I clerked for the Legal Division of the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in Washington, DC where I worked on
assisted acquisitions and transactions involving troubled banking
institutions.  I clerked in the Washington, DC office of Arter & Hadden law
firm during my final year of law school, and accepted a position with the**
**500-attorney firm following my law school graduation. My practice included
appellate litigation as well as administrative work before numerous state and
federal agencies and courts.   In 1992, I accepted a position as corporate
counsel and Director of Regulatory Affairs for a start-up telecommunications
company in Dallas, Texas called VarTec Telecom, Inc.  Nearly nine years and
several promotions later, today I serve the $1 billion global telecom company
as its Executive Vice President for Legal and Regulatory Affairs and General
Counsel.  VarTec currently has operations in the United Kingdom, Germany and
Mexico in addition to the U.S.  My Dickinson education and History major have
certainly significantly contributed to my** **understanding of the world and
ability to perform my various responsibilities.   In 1996, I married Jackie
Balkin, a health care attorney who had been working for the Pennsylvania
Department of Health.  Jackie and I purchased a home in Dallas and, to date,
have filled it with a chocolate** **lab and two sons Jake (20 months) and
Aaron (2 weeks old).**

**Shawn Thornton     [sbkb@sunlink.net](Mailto:sbkb@sunlink.net)**  
**      I graduated from Dickinson in 1987 with a major in History and a
Teaching Certificate.  For the past 14 years I've been a teacher at
Stroudsburg H.S. in Stroudsburg, PA and have taught US History I & II
(Constitution to the present), World History and Cultures, Economics,
Sociology and Psychology.  My education at Dickinson has been instrumental in
my success as a teacher, not just because of my History classes (from which my
old notebooks and class books have always come in handy), but also because of
the overall Dickinson experience that enabled me to grow as a person who could
have a positive impact on my students.  Currently I am out of the classroom,
having taken a position as Dean of Students at the school.  I also have served
as the head basketball coach for the past 9 years.  I would welcome any
inquiries from students about what my Dickinson experience has done for me,
most especially from anyone thinking about going into education.  Thanks for
your initial inquiry.**

|  
  
  
  
|  
.  
| **CLASS OF 1988**  
|  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
|  
| **John Keane      [John.Keane@converg.com](Mailto:John.Keane@converg.com)**  
**      I graduated from Dickinson in 1988. My grades were good, but not
perfect due to too much time in my fraternity and not enough time in the
library. I woke up second semester Junior year with the realization that I
needed to do something to get into a good graduate school. I studied a lot,
partied a little less and began my search for graduate schools with decent
history programs. Applying for graduate school is a lot like applying for
college, you have to take tests and fill out applications. The key is to
figure out which programs will need more students of a certain type. Racial
and gender biases aside, if a program has 4 professors all of whom graduated
or lost students, they will be looking for more people. This can result in
some unusual dynamics where students who may not be in the top slots may be
picked before others because the professor knows that next year he is going to
need a teaching assistant for a particular series of courses.**  
**      I sent out 24 applications and received two acceptances that I thought
were worth while. NYU and Boston College. The day after graduation I got on a
plane and went to NYU. After five minutes I realized that I would go crazy in
New York. I opted to go to Boston College. When I got there I was assigned an
advisor. I cannot stress how important the advisor is to you.  Mine decided to
go Israel and go into politics my second semester. In a two year masters
program the first paper I wrote as a graduate student turned out to be my
masters thesis. It was very hard. Additionally, once he left I was basically
without an advisor. I finished the program pretty much on my own. I decided to
continue and get my doctorate in Medieval history. One advantage that I had
was that my Dickinson advisor had suggested that I get into a masters program
first, get good grades and then apply for a doctorate** **somewhere else. With
better grades, I received a series of hand written rejection letters, and a
few offers. I decided to attend the University of Virginia. My advisor was a
well known historian who really stressed knowledge of languages. Since I am
dyslexic learning languages from books is very hard. To get your doctorate in
Medieval history you need to know at least 3 additional languages. Every
summer for the next 6 years I was in an** **intensive language program, Latin
took forever.....I learned to read French in two weeks......It took 2 years of
work to get to the point where I could read German. My first advisor was a
control freak, going to the point where he would tell his female students when
they could plan on having their children. He took total control over his
students lives. The bonus was that as long as none of them did anything to get
him mad, they finished their degrees and he got them their first contract
positions. This is very important. Unfortunately I did not get along with my
advisor too well, after he told me that I could not study the area that I
wanted because he already had a student working on that area.**  
**      I switched advisors. This also had its problems, this guy had not had
a student finish his program in 13 years. I found this out after I had been
his student for 3 years. I finished my classes and wanted to get some more
teaching experience.  I was not able to get a class to teach because I did not
get a teaching assistantship when I was at Boston College (problem with not
having an advisor to get you into these things) Finally after a lot of effort
I was granted a class to teach, it was fun. I was also studying for my oral
exams. My area covered was 400-1700ad anywhere from Iceland to Moscow East
West and Norway to Alexandria Egypt North-South, one of the virtues of not
having an advisor was that I took a lot of courses in a wide area of subjects.
This came back to haunt me for my orals. I read 2 books a day for 3 months to
get ready. (going through 2 changes in my eyeglasses) I passed my orals, the
first person to do it in my department in a year without having to go back and
retake them. Following this ordeal I began working on my dissertation, I wrote
it 5 times after my advisor suddenly decided that I was unable to write the
English language. Finally I threw up my hands, often times your department
will not let you graduate until you have a job lined up, this is done to keep
the value of their degrees high.  Of the 30 people who entered my UVA program
I know of 4 who graduated with their doctorate, many like myself are ABD. (All
but Dissertation) I was also trying to get a job in academics during the
height of the political correctness craze, no one wanted to hire teachers for
"dead white male"** **medieval history, and if they had to they were not going
to hire a white male. The job outlook is bad. On average there are 250
applications for each position available. You cannot get a tenure track
position out of the slot, you have to get one or two contract positions first.
The competition is very tough.**  
**      Finally my wife to be got a job in Georgia, I left Virginia to be with
her, it turned out to be the best decision I made since I graduated from
Dickinson. It was hard to get a job in the real world because I was not
"qualified" but finally some companies realized that I had excellent reading
and recall skills (from years of study) as well as a good understanding of**
**technology (Earned by working at the university library for 3 years when we
went from a paper card catalogue to one of the best web based libraries in the
country.) I got a job, then I got a good job, after hard work I got a great
job. Now I change the way companies do work, as a Business Process Engineer I
make about 5x more than I would as a full professor. The trade off is that I
have very little personal time and I am on planes several** **times a month. I
would not do the graduate school in history thing again knowing what I now
know. It is a hard life with little financial reward, those who succeed at it
are testaments to their determination and commitment to education. Expect long
years of sacrifice and poverty before you begin to see the tangible fruits of
such an endeavor.**  
|  
  
  
  
|  
.  
| **CLASS OF 1989**  
|  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
|  
| **Mario Einaudi
[meinaudi@huntington.org](Mailto:meinaudi@huntington.org)**  
**    I graduated from Dickinson in 1989 without a clear idea of where I was
headed.  I had enjoyed very much my time at Dickinson, but frankly had
graduated without a clear goal in mind.  I worked for several law firms in
Washington DC thinking that law was a possible direction for me.  But I soon
discovered that it was not and so entered into the Graduate Program at George
Washington University to earn a MA in history.  I found during my** **graduate
work that my true passion was in doing the historical research that went into
writing what seemed to be the innumerable papers that one must write.   But
upon earning my MA in 1994, I found it difficult to find work that satisfied
this passion.  Ultimately I wound up in Tucson, Arizona, working for a friend.
It was there that I began to work for the Arizona Historical Society (AHS),
first as volunteer, then full time as an archivist.  I learned on the job,
becoming a journeyman archivist, if you will.  The skills of historical
research and writing that I first learned at Dickinson and later honed at
George Washington were finally put to full use.**  
**    In 1998, at the encouragement of my then fiancee, now wife (Jana and I
were married in 1999), I left Tucson and moved to Los Angeles.  Shortly after
I moved, I was hired by the Huntington Library to work in the Technical
Services Department, as the cataloging unit is called, on a long term project
--processing and cataloging a very large collection of maritime ephemera.  The
John Haskell Kemble Maritime Ephemera Collection contains materials
(brochures, schedules, passenger lists, even soap wrappers) from over 600
companies--including Cunard, White Star, and United States Lines--covering a
date range of 1856 to 1989.   Working at the Huntington Library
([www.huntington.org](http://www.dickinson.edu/departments/hist/www.huntington.org)),
which is home to one the largest collections of rare books and manuscripts in
the United States, has been a real pleasure.  I have been able to work on
several interesting projects, including rare maps and art education materials
from the late 19th Century.  It has been a long road from Dickinson to the
Huntington, but a fruitful one.  I graduated from Dickinson with no clear
goal, but have found, like many others, that working in an academic setting
such as a library or an archive is a perfect fit for a history major.  I
welcome any email from current students or alums who are interested in talking
with me about my circuitous educational path or the Huntington.**

**Lee Anne Mangone
[pmangone@email.msn.com](Mailto:pmangone@email.msn.com)**  
**     I am so grateful for my degree in History at Dickinson and welcome this
opportunity to thank you for the experience!  After graduating from Dickinson
in 1989, I went to Emory Law School in Atlanta.  I received my J.D. in 1992
and went to work for the DeKalb County (Atlanta) District Attorney's Office.
During my 6 and a half years there, I tried over 100** **felony cases and
headed up the office's Crimes Against Children Division.   It was a marvelous
and challenging experience.  Though I rarely had time to examine the
"historical perspective" of my work, I credit much of my Dickinson education
for any success I achieved.  Because of the small class size and the careful
attention of my professors, I developed confidence to speak in front of others
and the ability to think quickly on my feet.**  
**     I am now at home with our three small children, a son age 5 and twin
daughters who are 2.  With the little spare time I have, I do enjoy
scrapbooking \- perhaps a credit to Professor Rogers and her oral history
class!**  
**     Thank you for the opportunity to hear about what other history majors
are up to and the chance to express my gratitude for such a great education.
I have such fond memories (with the exception, of course, of finals!) of all
of the great professors in the department whose classes I was fortunate enough
to take.**

  
|  
  
  
  |   |    **[TO TOP OF ALUMNI
PAGE](http://www.dickinson.edu/departments/hist/alums.htm)**

**[TO HISTORY HOME
PAGE](http://www.dickinson.edu/departments/hist/index.html)**

|    |  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
    
  
  

