CMS 206

Roman Civilization

Week 11 Class 1 Lecture

* * *

Reminders:

  * Your tests are done. 60% of the class received an A- or better. Congratulations, you did a great job with a large quantity of challenging material.  
  

  * Your last book report is due Friday of the las week of classes (March 29,2002) in the mailbox on my office door. For those of you who want some extra help with the project: a) you can always come visit me; b) you should check out the CGU writing center's page on [book reviews](http://writecenter.cgu.edu/students/bookreviews.html).  
  

  * We will not meet during Reading Week (i.e., no class on April 2nd and 4th)  
  

  * Your final is Wednesday of Finals Week (April 11, 2002) at 1:15.  
  

  * Literary recommendations: 
    * _Memoirs of Hadrian_ , Marguerite Yourcenar  



* * *

The Antonines:

  * According to Gibbon, the era of the Antonines, was perhaps the best time to be alive in the history of the west. He was, of course, talking from the perspective a free, male, citizen. From Trajan's day until the death of Marcus Aurelius, Rome was ruled by emperors who were reasonably popular and reasonably effective. There are, in other words, no great sexy stories of passion and intrigue to catch our attention. Thus, our survey of the Antonines will be pre-occupies less with biography (though there will be some) than with a study of how the imperial system worked. If Gibbon was right, why was he right?  
  

  * Nerva, Trajan and Hadrian were not technically members of the Antonine family, but they and the Antonines are typically studied together because the rule of the five good emperors (as they're called) was a prolonged period of peace, prosperity and stability within Rome. These five emperors, with some exceptions as we'll see, pursued similary governmental policies. The policies worked. 

  * Cast of Characters - [or 5 good things you should know about the first three of _**The Five Good Emperors**_ ]   
  

    * [Nerva](http://www.roman-emperors.org/nerva.htm), CE 30-98; Emperor: 96-98 [Marcus Cocceius Nerva]  

      1. Nerva was from a family that had become prominent under the Julio-Claudians and indeed some of his distant relations had married minor memebers of the rulling family. Nevertheless his own career was not particularly distinguished and tthe news that he had become Emperor in 98 must have been greeted by most Romans with a "huh?" The army was incensed - not so much about Nerva in particular, but about the fact that the Senate had the temerity to depose an emperor whom soldiers loved (pay raises and campaigns in Germany) and replace him without much consultation. Some speculate that the Senate picked Nerva because he was a bit of a nobody and would do what _eminence grises_ in the Senate wanted.  
  

      2. Nerva, however, proved to be a wily old bird. He inaugurated a propaganda campaign against Domitian ( _damnatio memoriae_ ) which a) characterized Domitian as a psychotic tyrant; and b) characterized himself as a gentle, liberating kind of guy (he freed everyone Domitian had jailed and recalled everyone that Domitian had jailed). Nerva ordered that all statues of Domitian be torn down and declared all legal actions and decisions taken by Domitian null and void. Nerva also instituted a program of land grants, tax relief and subsidized loans that benefited poorer, free families in Italy. The goal of the _alimentary_ program was to help and encourage free Italians to have more children.   
  

      3. Nerva's _consilium_ and _amici_ consisted of reliable old Flavian senators. He tended to pick men who knew how to get the job done (e.g., manage the water supplies) regardless of their relationship to Domitian. So, for example, there is a famous story of Domitian exiles having dinner one night with Nerva and gossiping about a notorious Domitian informer who had recently died. One speculated,  "I wonder where he'd be today, if he were still alive." Nerva replied, "eating with us." Nerva, in fact, rather quickly asserted his institutional independence from the Senate, a fact which earned him some senatorial displeasure.   
  

      4. The Praetorian Guard expressed its displeasure when the new Emperor and Senate refused to deify Domitian by revolting. They took Nerva hostage and insisted that he agree to prosecute the murders of Domitian [a tricky issue since Nerva must have participated in the conspiracy to some degree]. To add insult to injury, after he agreed to this demand, they insisted that he give a public speech _thanking_ them for the mutiny [I'm sure they came up with better wording]. Nerva was thus publicly humiliated and this could have led to disaster [his loss of prestige inspiring other Senators to vie for his position].  
  

      5. Proving his resilience [although he appears to have contemplated resigning], Nerva announced that he was adopting Trajan, the governor of Upper Germany who had recently won an important victory. The legions of Upper Germany, by the way, were the ones who could have most easily marched on Rome. The soldiers were estatic and the Senate was stumped. Despite having never met his newly adopted son, Nerva generously gave him the _tribunicia potestas_ and named him his co-consul. He then had the uncommon good sense to die with in three months. Trajan proved to be a loyal son and asked the Senate to deify Nerva.  
  

    * [Trajan](http://www.roman-emperors.org/trajan.htm), CE 53 - 117; Emperor, 98-117 (Marcus Ulpius Traianus)  
  

      1. Trajan's family, way back in the 3rd century BCE, had emigrated from Italy to Spain. Over the centuries they prospered and Trajan's father, a _novus homo_ , brought the family into the Roman nobility (his competence as a military commandar in the Jewish wars had brought him to Vespasian's attention). Trajan himself was probably raised and educated in Rome and followed his father's path into the military. Trajan proved to be a great soldier in Domitian's German campaigns and his own imperial career would be marked by a committment to campaigning. Thus with Trajan we have an emperor who was not Spanish, not Italian. We should start to ask, however, what these provincial designations mean? Is a family of Italian origins who has been living in Spain for 400 years Spanish or Italian? Do you call a man who was born in Spain but raised in Rome and who spent his entire adult life travelling on military campaigns throughout the Roman empire, "Spanish, Italian or Roman" [in the sense of "Roman empire" not city of Rome].  
  

      2. Trajan spent much of his career as Emperor outside of the city of Rome. Although he was named emperor in January 98, for example, Trajan didn't actually go to Rome until the year 100. He felt his time was better spent settleing affairs on the German frontier. When he did go to Rome he manage to win the Senate's support and affection. Trajan   
  

        * rarely took the the office of consul as emperor, 
        * strengthened Nerva's alimentary support system, 
        * reformed municipal and provincial finances by creating _curatores_ who made recommendations back to the imperial adminstration about local conditions throughout the empire (thus increasing the role and power of the imperial bureaucracy)  

        * reformed and improved the grain supply  
  

        * built a massive new forum ([reconstruction](http://www.archaeology.org/magazine.php?page=9801/abstracts/captions/trajan)) in Rome, new baths, new harbors and new roads and bridges 
          * The forum is marked by _Trajan's Column_ [[reconstruction](http://cheiron.humanities.mcmaster.ca/%7Etrajan/decor_img/forum2.gif)], a 100 foot tall marble column set on a huge rectangular base and topped by a statue of the Emperor on his horse (which the Christian's subsequently replaced with a statue of St. Peter]. On the column scroll are engraved scenes ([pix](http://www.chch.school.nz/mbc/images/traj03.jpg)) from the Dacian wars.  
  

        * had no children with his wife (with whom he enjoyed a happy marriage). He was very close to his sister Marciana and her daughter Matidia. Matidia's daughter Sabina married _**Hadrian**_ in the year 100, shortly after Trajan took the throne.Hadrian was Trajan's first cousin once removed, and ward after the death of his parents. Trajan's wife, Pompeia Plotina was fond of Hadrian and promoted his career. Although Trajan did not adopt Hadrian until his death bed (and some have questioned whether the adoption really happened or was rather Plotina's pr to help Hadrian succeed), Hadrian's position as heir was clear (although it did suffer some setbacks). Thus, like Nerva, Trajan was able to ensure his succession by a competent and respected Roman.  
  
  
  

      3. Trajan spent most of his time expanding Rome's frontiers. Augustus had recommended to his successors that they not expand the empire. The Julio-Claudians followed this advice. Claudius, it is true, incorporated Britain into the empire, but that was arguably the mere completion of a project begun by Julius Caesar. The Flavian annexations had been designed soley to acquire territory which would permit better defense of the existing frontiers. Trajan, however, loved to fight. In 101 and 102, he fought (using 11 legions) in _**Dacia**_ (modern Rumania - basically the Balkans east of Serbia). The Dacian's continued to rebel and it actually took Trajan until 106 to complete the conquest. The conquest, however, brought Trajan, and hence Rome, a vast quanity of slaves, war booty, and ownership of Dacian gold mines. Trajan had a [tropeum](http://domino.kappa.ro/guvern/diverse.nsf/toate/ist_ilustrata/$file/21.jpg) built in Dacia, near modern Adamklissi to mark his victory and remind the locals of the immediate presence of their new Emperor, now matter how far Rome might be. He used the funds from the war to build the Imperial Forum in Rome and erect a huge column to remind Romans of his victories during the lengthy periods when he was away from Rome.  
  

      4. Trajan spent the seven years after the conquest of Dacia in Rome attending to domestic business and preparing for a military campaign against Parthia. The period began with the expansion of Rome's eastern frontier into Arabia. In 105/106, Nabata, an Arab kingdom bordering Judea, on relatively voluntary terms agreed to become a Roman province. In 110, the Parthians who had been a thorn in the side of Rome's ambitions in the east since the days of Marcus Crassus, gave Trajan the prextext he wanted to follow in Alexandar the Great's footsteps. Rome and Parthia had come to treat Armenia as a buffer state and agreed to agree upon the identity of the Armenia king. Parthia decided to depose the Armenian king and did not consult Rome first. In 113, Trajan took the legions east, all the way to Ctesiphon (about 20 miles from modern Baghdad), the winter capital of the Parthian empire. Rome's empire (measured geographically [[map](http://www.croatianmall.com/lupic/belmonte/rome/empire/a116eu.gif)]) had reached its height.  
  

      5. No sooner had Trajan reached the gulf of Arabia when Jews in Egypt and Cyrene, and the newly conquered denizens of Mesopotamia (egged on by Parthia) began to revolt. Then Trajan had a stroke and died.  
  

    * [Hadrian](http://www.roman-emperors.org/hadrian.htm), CE 76-138, Emperor, 117-138 (Publius Aelius Hadrianus)  
  

    1. Hadrian was probably born in Rome. His family, like Trajan's however, came from Spain, and more distantly, Italy. His father was Trajan's cousin and had reached the praetorship before his death. At the time of his father's death, Hadrian was only 10 and Trajan and a Spanish gentleman named P. Acilius Attianus, served as his guardians. With a guardian like Trajan (who became Emperor when Hadrian was 22), Hadrian's rise was meteoric. He received and achieved success in a series of military commands and served as consul for the first time when he was only 32. He married Trajan's grand-niece in 100, at the age of 24. His wife Vibia Sabina was only 14, at the time. It is reported that they cordially loathed each other, although they never divorced. [One account suggests she had an abortion rather than give birth to a child who cvould be as monstrous as he was]. Hadrian's status as "heir apparent" was promoted by Trajan's wife and one of Trajan's closest friends, Lucius Licinius Sura. Sura died in the year 108 (when Hadrian was consul) and his career appears to have slowed down dramatically thereafter. By the time Trajan moved on Parthia, however, Hadrian was back in favor and Trajan made him legate of the army in Syria (the critical base and supply line of the Parthian campaign). Hadrian's adoption was announced on the eve of Trajan's death, and he was immediately hailed as emperor.   
  

    2. Hadrian took almost a year to get Rome after he took office. He was preocuppied settling matters in the East (everyone Trajan had conquered seemed to be in revolt) and in his absence Attianus, the prefect of the praetorian guard (and Hadrian's other guardian) had executed four senators, each of whom had achieved consular rank, and each of whom had been closely allied with Trajan. When he got to Rome, Hadrian claimed Attianus had been acting without his authority, and named new prefects of the praetorian guard. The Senate remained suspicious and Hadrian indeed had the habit of blaming others for unpopular decisions and policies. He made the masses happy by offering games, cancelling debts and giving away a lot of money. He also continued the alimentary programs of Nerva and Trajan. Appeasing the army was more complicated. Hadrian believed that Trajan had gone too far. He wanted to position Rome's frontiers behind natural boundaries in order to make them easier and cheaper to defend. He wanted to abandon Mesopatemia and Dacia. The generals were aghast and they compromised by abandoning the eastern province alone.   
  

      * The composition of the army had changed significantly by Hadrian's day. Augustus had initiated the practice of settling the legions on the frontiers of the most difficult provinces. Probably more than 70% of the army of Augustus' principate had been born in Italy. By Hadrian's day only about 1% of the army had been born in Italy. All the soldiers were in the provinces and their sons, born outside of Italy, tended to follow their father's into the family business. Compensation of the army had continued to improve and the civic rights of soldiers were now virtually identical to those of ordinary citizens. While it is true that the army had learned that it could name Emperors, it proved, once the emperors were named, to be loyal to the man at the top.   
  

    3. Even more than Trajan, Hadrian was rarely in Rome. Part of his time was spent in military campaigns suppressing revolts (e.g., the Second Jewish Revolt, which Hadrian brutally suppressed). Part of Hadrian's time was spent simply moving throughout the empire, supervising provincial administration and military affairs. Part of the time he was also a tourist. Hadrian was a great lover of Greece and Greek culture and enjoyed spending as much time in the eastern part of the Empire as possible. He also fancied himself an architect and personally supervised the planning and construction of buildings in the imperial forum and elsewhere. One of his most famous constructions is the [Pantheon](http://www.chch.school.nz/mbc/images/pantheon1.jpg), the [dome](http://www.chch.school.nz/mbc/images/intorpan.jpg) of which remains to this day an amazing achievement. Perhaps Hadrian's most stunning architectural achievement, however, was the villa he built for himself near modern Tivoli in Italy. What you and I would call a [small city](http://wings.buffalo.edu/AandL/Maecenas/black/tivoli/ab660828.html), Hadrian called a villa. The confines include the [canopus](http://spruce.evansville.edu/%7Eic2/canopus.html), a mock canal (reminiscent of one in Egypt) with a [temple](http://wings.buffalo.edu/AandL/Maecenas/black/tivoli/ab660831.html) in honor of the god Serapis and a [maritime theater](http://spruce.evansville.edu/%7Eic2/maritime.html). In addition to such personal lodgings, Hadrian supervised and sponsered signficiant building projects (e.g. Hadrian's Wall) throughout the Roman empire. As might be expected, he was especially active in Athens. During the 21 years of his reign he was absent from Rome from 10 years. We may conclude from his absences that Rome, Italy, indeed most of the Republican west had ceased to be an area of the empire requiring much attention. By Hadrian's day the Senatorial class had become a landed aristocracy who wasn't particularly interested in running the empire. Under Hadrian, the empire perfected its bureacracy, now populated by equites (no longer the freedmen of the Julio-Claudian era). Appointment to the Senate was often the equivalent of "knighting." Equites who had served the empire well were honored by a grant of "consular insignia." Equites, indeed, flourished during this period of imperial history and had a career track that seemed to parallel that of the senatorial cursus honorum.   
  

> _procurators_ : administered the personal possessions and estates of the
Roman Emperor (the equivalent of the senatorial quaestor). In senatorial
provinces where the Emperor owned significant property, the _procurator_ 's
importance often rivaled or eclipsed that of the senatorial governor.
Procurators could also serve as the Roman equivalent of cabinet secretaries
administering bureaucratic offices which managed infra-structure (e.g.,
aqueducts, grain supply).  
>

>

> _prefects_ : Outside of Rome, prefect usually administered imperial
provinces that didn't need a large military presence (note: Egypt is an
importanbt exception). Inside of Rome, like _procuratores_ , prefects
supervised bureaucratic offices which managed manpower (fleet, fire brigade,
praetorian guard)  
>

>

> _secretaries_ : Management of imperial correspondence either diplomatic,
adminstrative or legal was of extreme importance. Claudius had begun this
bureacratic office with freedman. By Hadrian's day the job was controlled by
equites.

>

>  
>  
>

    4. Administratively, Hadrian's most significant achievement was the codification of the _**Praetor's Edict**_. Praetors were the senators who administered the law courts. During the republic, each Praetor would publish an edict describing the legal rules that would govern litigation in his courts. Often subsequent praetors would simply copy the previous praetor's edict and add a few new contributions of his own. No praetor was required to adopt a previous praetor's edict, but after 67 BCE, all praetors were legally required to stick to the terms of their own edict. The praetors edict thus became a source of experimentation and change (although slow and careful change) in Roman law. This era of innovation closed when Hadrian codified the edicts. In doing so, however, he created a legal monument which formed the basis for the subsequent development of Roman law as a science.   
  

    5. Hadrian's personal life has been the subject of much speculation. He met and became obsessed with a young man named [Antinous](http://www.aztriad.com/antinous.jpg). Antinous was Hadrian's constant companion until his mysterious death by drowning in 130. Hadrian had him deified and built temples in his honor throughout the empire. The _Scriptores Historiae Augustae_ (a text which  "continues" Suetonius' lives of the Caesars) characterizes this a gay relationship. By 136 when Hadrian returned to Rome he was an old, lonely and childless man. He chose as his successor a maan named L. Ceionius Commodus, who had no military background and a rather undistinguished career. Commodus, however died and hadrian then adopted Antoninus Pius, one of the most distinguised senators of the day. He required Antoninus to adopt Commodus' son Lucius Aelius Aurelius Commodius and Marcus Annius Verus, a young man from a prominent senatorial family upon whom Hadrian appears to have had a massive crush. Antoninus was married to Marcus' aunt and Hadrian may have thought of him as a "place holder". Hadrian's dynastic machinations paid off as Antoninus and Marcus Aurelius are remembered as two of Rome's greatest emperors.

> >  
>>

>>  

* * *

[The Age of the
Antonines](http://www.sewanee.edu/Theology/patristicsw/f030/p036.html)

Prof. MacKay on: [Nerva &
Trajan](http://www.ualberta.ca/%7Ecsmackay/CLASS_378/Trajan.html); [Trajan's
Wars](http://www.ualberta.ca/%7Ecsmackay/CLASS_378/Trajan.2.html); [Hadrian &
Antonius Pius](http://www.ualberta.ca/%7Ecsmackay/CLASS_378/Hadrian.html);
[Marcus Aurelius](http://www.ualberta.ca/%7Ecsmackay/CLASS_378/Marcus.html);
[Marcus Aurelius, part
2](http://www.ualberta.ca/%7Ecsmackay/CLASS_378/Marcus.2.html),

[The End of the Antonines: Civil
War](http://www.ualberta.ca/%7Ecsmackay/CLASS_378/Commodus.html)

[Nerva Through the
Antonines](http://www.people.ukans.edu/%7Eprehak/RomeNotes/09_NervaAnton.html)

Antonine coins: [1](http://www.numae-
marci.com/Imperial%20Bronzes/Antonines1.htm), 2

[Gibbon on the Age of the
Antonines](http://www.bibliomania.com/2/1/62/109/25644/1/frameset.html) /[
Bibliography on
Hadrian](http://www.ncl.ac.uk/classics/teaching/cah314/bibliography.html)

De Imperibus Romanis on

> [Nerva](http://www.roman-emperors.org/nerva.htm) /
[Trajan](http://www.roman-emperors.org/trajan.htm) /
[Hadrian](http://www.roman-emperors.org/hadrian.htm) / [Antonius
Pius](http://www.roman-emperors.org/tonypis.htm) / [Marcus
Aurelius](http://www.roman-emperors.org/marcaur.htm) / [Lucius
Verus](http://www.roman-emperors.org/lverus.htm) /
[Commodus](http://www.roman-emperors.org/commod.htm)

UST clickable reconstruction of [Trajan's
forum](http://www.ust.ucla.edu/ustweb/Projects/trajans_forum.htm); an
excellent web site on [Trajan's
column](http://cheiron.humanities.mcmaster.ca/%7Etrajan/introductory_essay.html#)

















* * *

[Course Home Page](rciv.html) / [Syllabus](syllabus.htm) / [Imber's Home
Page](http://www.bates.edu/~mimber)

