##  MEMORY AND MEANING IN JEWISH HISTORY

### History 204-302 Fall 2001  
Thursday: 3:00-6:00

INSTRUCTOR: Beth S. Wenger  
OFFICE: 320 College Hall  
OFFICE HOURS: Tues. 2:00 - 4:00 and by appointment  
PHONE: 898-5702  
E-MAIL: [bwenger@sas.upenn.edu](mailto:bwenger@sas.upenn.edu)

Course Description Requirements Grading Readings Schedule Papers



#### COURSE DESCRIPTION:

This course explores how historical events have been remembered, interpreted,
and understood by Jewish communities and individuals. The central premise of
the course is that the popular reconstruction of the Jewish past has been a
powerful force shaping Jewish identity and self-definition in the modern
period. The seminar focuses on the ways that Jews have recreated their past
through the writing of history and literature as well as through the creation
of museums, memorials, and other public institutions.

The course will be conducted as a seminar, requiring diligent preparation and
active participation from all students. Students are expected to read and
analyze all assignments before class and contribute to class discussions.
_Class preparation and participation are crucial elements of this course and
will be considered as part of the final grade._



####  COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

\- _At every class session_ , students should be prepared to offer a one-
minute oral response to the week's reading, raising one question, criticism,
or issue that relates to the assignment. Students are expected to participate
actively in all class discussions.

\- _Once during the semester_ , one or two students will be responsible for
leading class discussion. This requires formulating questions, identifying key
issues raised in the week's reading, and guiding discussion.

\- _3 papers_ will be assigned throughout the semester. A description of each
paper assignment is included on the last page of this syllabus.

#### GRADING:

> > Class Participation 20%  
>  3 Papers 80% (first two papers 25%; last paper 30%)

**** NO LATE WORK WILL BE ACCEPTED ****

#### REQUIRED READINGS AVAILABLE AT HOUSE OF OUR OWN BOOKSTORE:

-Yosef Hayim Yerushalmi, Zakhor: _Jewish History and Jewish Memory_  
-James E. Young, _The Texture of Memory: Holocaust Memorials and Meaning_  
-Edward T. Linenthal, _Preserving Memory: The Struggle to Make America's Holocaust Museum_  
-Yael Zerubavel, _Recovered Roots: Collective Memory and the Making of Israeli National Tradition_  
-Eva Hoffman, _Lost in Translation: A Life in a New Language_  
-Steven Zipperstein, _Imagining Russian Jewry: Memory, History, Identity_

* A packet containing all other required reading is available for purchase at the Wharton Reprographics.

**CLASS SCHEDULE:**

**September 6 Introduction: Jewish History and Jewish Memory**

**September 13 Situating Jewish Memory**

> Yosef Hayim Yerushalmi, Zakhor: Jewish History and Jewish Memory

>

> Yael Zerubavel, Recovered Roots: Collective Memory and the Making of Israeli
National Tradition , pp. 3-12.

>

> Pierre Nora , "Between Memory and History: Les Lieux de Memoire."
Representations 26 (1989): 7-25.

**September 20 Portraits of the Shtetl**

> Steven Zipperstein, Imagining Russian Jewry: Memory, History, Identity

>

> Sholom Aleichem, "Hodl," in Irving Howe and Eliezer Greenberg, eds., A
Treasury of Yiddish Stories, pp. 168-82.

>

> Seth Wolitz, "The Americanization of Tevye or Boarding the Jewish
Mayflower," American Quarterly 49 (1988): 514-36.

  
**September 27 NO CLASS: YOM KIPPUR [to be made up on November 4]**

**October 4 In Their Own Words: Immigrant Autobiographies**

> Israel Pressman, "Roads That Passed: Russia, My Old Home," YIVO Annual 22
(1995): 1-80.

>

> "Why I left the Old Country and What I Have Accomplished in America," By The
Man From Lodz in Paterson, New Jersey (typescript).

>

> Daniel Soyer, "Documenting Immigrant Lives at an Immigrant Institution:
YIVO's Autobiography Contest of 1942," Jewish Social Studies 5:3
(Spring/Summer 1999), pp. 218-243.

**October 11 The Lower East Side in American Jewish Memory**

> Deborah Dash Moore and David Lobenstine, "Photographing the Lower East Side:
A Century's Work," in Hasia R. Diner, Jeffrey Shandler, and Beth S. Wenger
eds., Remembering the Lower East Side: American Jewish Reflections, pp. 28-69.

>

> Paula E. Hyman, "Beyond Place and Ethnicity: The Uses of the Triangle
Shirtwaist Fire," in Hasia R. Diner, Jeffrey Shandler, and Beth S. Wenger
eds., Remembering the Lower East Side: American Jewish Reflections, pp. 70-85.

>

> Jack Kugelmass, "Turfing the Slum: New York City's Tenement Museum and the
Politics of Heritage," in Hasia R. Diner, Jeffrey Shandler, and Beth S. Wenger
eds., Remembering the Lower East Side: American Jewish Reflections, pp.
179-211.

>

> Beth S. Wenger, "Memory As Identity: The Invention of the Lower East Side,"
American Jewish History, 85:1 (March 1997): 3-27.

**October 18 Holocaust Memory: Testimony and Interpretation**

> James E. Young, Writing and Rewriting the Holocaust: Narrative and the
Consequences of Interpretation, pp. 83-116.

>

> Saul Friedlander, Memory, History, and the Extermination of the Jews of
Europe, pp. vii-xiv, 42-63, 102-37.

>

> Lawrence L. Langer, Admitting the Holocaust: Collected Essays, pp. 13-23,
179-84.

>

> Toby Blum-Dobkin, "Videotaping Holocaust Interviews: Questions and Answers
from an Interviewer," Jewish Folklore and Ethnology Review 16:1 (1994): 46-50

**October 25 Holocaust Memory: Monuments and Memorials**

> James E. Young, The Texture of Memory: Holocaust Memorials and Meaning, pp.
1-241, 263-349.

>

> Deborah Dwork and Robert Jan van Pelt, "Reclaiming Auschwitz," in Geoffrey
H. Hartman, ed., Holocaust Remembrance: The Shapes of Memory, pp. 232-51.

**November 1 Holocaust Memory: Museums**

> Edward T. Linenthal, Preserving Memory: The Struggle to Make America's
Holocaust Museum, selections.

>

> James Ingo Freed, "The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum," in Young,
The Art of Memory, pp. 89-101.

>

> Leon Wieseltier, "After Memory: Reflections on the Holocaust Memorial
Museum," The New Republic May 3, 1993, pp. 16-26.

>

> Oren Baruch Stier, "Virtual Memories: Mediating the Holocaust at the Simon
Wiesenthal Center's Beit Hashoah-Museum of Tolerance," AAR: Journal of the
American Academy of Religion 64:4 (Winter 1996): 831-51.

>

> Sabine Offe, "Sites of Remembrance? Jewish Museums in Contemporary Germany,"
Jewish Social Studies (new series) 3:2 (Winter 1997): 77-89.

**SUNDAY NOVEMBER 4 TOUR OF JEWISH SOUTH PHILADELPHIA**

> Rakhmiel Peltz, From Immigrant to Ethnic Culture: American Yiddish in South
Philadelphia, pp. 14-25, 73-100.

>

> Online Exhibition and Oral Histories of Jews in South Philadelphia:
http://nmajh.org/exhibitions/stillhome/index.htm  
>

**November 8 Memory and Identity in Israel**

> Yael Zerubavel, Recovered Roots: Collective Memory and the Making of Israeli
National Tradition, pp. 13-237.

**November 15 Memoirs: A Case Study**

> Eva Hoffman, Lost in Translation: A Life in a New Language

**November 29 Memory and the Domestic Sphere**

> Joelle Bahloul, "Remembering the Domestic Space: A Symbolic Return of
Sephardic Jews," YIVO Annual 21 (1993): 133-50.

>

> Cara De Silva, ed., In Memory's Kitchen: A Legacy from the Women of Terezin,
pp. xxv-xliii, 3-20.

>

> Jack Kugelmass, "Green Bagels: An Essay on Food, Nostalgia, and the
Carnivalesque," YIVO Annual 19 (1990): 57-80

>

> Anita Schwartz, "The Secular Seder: Continuity and Change among Left-Wing
Jews," in Jack Kugelmass, ed., Between Two Worlds: Ethnographic Essays on
American Jewry, pp. 105-27.

>

> Film: Gefilte Fish

**December 6 Travel and Tourism**

> Daniel Soyer, "The Travel Agent as Ethnic Broker Between Old World and New:
The Case of Gustave Eisner," YIVO Annual 21 (1993): 345-68.

>

> Oren Stier, "Lunch at Majdanek: The March of the Living as a Contemporary
Pilgrimage of Memory," Jewish Folklore and Ethnology Review 17: 1-2 (1995):
57-67.

>

> Jack Kugelmass, "The Rites of the Tribe: The Meaning of Poland for American
Jewish Tourists," YIVO Annual 21 (1993): 395-453.

>

> Seth Kamil, "Tripping Down Memory Lane: Walking Tours on the Jewish Lower
East Side," in Hasia R. Diner, Jeffrey Shandler, and Beth S. Wenger eds.,
Remembering the Lower East Side: American Jewish Reflections, pp. 226-240.

####  

#### MEMORY AND MEANING IN JEWISH HISTORY HISTORY 204-305

#### PAPER ASSIGNMENTS

**PAPER 1 BOOK REVIEW DUE OCT. 4**

Choose any book included on the syllabus and write a critical review of the
text. In completing this assignment, you should consider what the author
intends to accomplish in the book, what historiographic debates are engaged,
what evidence the author relies upon, and how he or she constructs the book's
central arguments. In this review, you should use the same critical skills
that we have used in class. This should NOT be a summary of the book's
contents, but rather a careful analysis of the arguments, sources, and
perspective employed in the text. (6-8 pages; 25% of final grade)

**PAPER 2 VEHICLES/GENRES OF MEMORY DUE NOV. 15**

Choose one "vehicle" of memory (e.g. museums, monuments, fiction, memoirs,
film, photographs, travel, etc.) and consider how it works to shape Jewish
memory. Using the material assigned in the course, discuss how the genre you
have chosen presents the past. The purpose of this assignment is to consider
different means of constructing memory, rather than to analyze any particular
text or institution. You should, of course, use specific examples to support
your claims, but your focus should be on the different means of presenting the
past and their particular strengths and limitations. (6-8 pages; 25% of final
grade)

**PAPER 3 ANALYSIS OF AN EVENT/INSTITUTION DUE DEC. 13**

Choose a commemorative moment, event, or institution and offer a close
analysis of its construction of Jewish memory. Possible topics might include:
the re-opening of Ellis Island as a tourist attraction, the creation of the
Lower East Side's Tenement Museum, the reconstruction and preservation of the
Lower East Side's Eldridge Street Synagogue, the opening of the Holocaust
museum in Washington, the construction of a particular monument, the release
of a film, the Religious Liberty monument in Philadelphia, or the celebration
of the tercentenary of Jewish settlement in America (1954). There are many
other possible topics and you should meet with me in making your selection. In
this assignment, you should focus on the institution or event and how it
presents the past . You might also want to use press accounts to follow
coverage of the event. This is a relatively short paper, so you will not be
asked to conduct extensive research, but you will have to do a limited search
of newspapers and/or institutional publications. In your paper, you must
provide a careful and critical analysis, not merely a summary or descriptive
account. (7-10 pages; 30% of final grade)

** Papers are due in class on the date that they are assigned. (The paper on
Dec. 13 is due at noon.) **NO LATE WORK WILL BE ACCEPTED.**

**** WRITING COUNTS!!!** You should prepare your papers carefully and
construct a well-written and concise argument. Take the time to re-write and
revise in order to provide your best possible work.

