History 409 - Introduction to Modern European History



Dr. Jay Lockenour
Office Hrs: MW 11-12 or by appt.

Spring 2002
Phone: (215) 204-7437

Monday 5:10 - 7:10pm
Email: jay.lockenour@temple.edu

TUCC: 1515 Market St. Rm. 305
Web: nimbus.temple.edu/~jlockeno/409/409.html



**Description:**

This course will provide students with an overview of the principal themes,
trends, and methodologies involved in the study of Modern European History.
The readings will introduce students to both classic and some of the most
current research in the field, ranging from more "traditional" topics such as
the French and Russian revolutions, the industrial revolution and World War
One to very recent explorations of cultural and gender history.

**Format:**

The class will center around discussions held at our fourteen weekly meetings.
The object of the course is to acquaint students with the themes and issues
that dominate the study of European history, and a discussion format is best
suited to that purpose.  The aim of the course is NOT to provide an exhaustive
survey of events in the European past.  For those students who feel they need
more background in the basic narrative of European history since 1789, I can
recommend the relevant volumes of The Norton History of Modern Europe as
concise, readable, and affordable.

**Assignments:**

1)     Presentation - Each student will be responsible for leading class
discussion for one week.  Presenters are required to do enough extra reading
(from the supplemental list for the week or from other sources) to be able to
introduce the class to the context in which the work we are reading can be
situated.  The presenter will lead the class in a discussion of the major
issues presented by the primary reading for the week.  Do not merely summarize
the arguments of the works you read, but present the major issues for the
purposes of discussion.  Presenters will meet with me on the Wednesday before
each class to discuss questions, concerns, and progress.  
Depending on the number of students enrolled, more than one student may be
assigned to a particular week, in which case we will discuss the changed
parameters of the assignment.  If you would like some "extra credit" you can
volunteer to lead discussions on more than one week, if there is any space
available.

2)     Precis - You are responsible for writing a precis for the primary
reading each week.  You will receive a separate sheet describing the precis
format in more detail, but basically, a precis is a concise form of book
review.  You have no large writing assignment for this class, so you can
really devote yourself to crafting concise and insightful precis.  You must
turn in precis for 11 of the 13 class meetings.  You may not turn in precis
for weeks when you are absent.

3)     Published Reviews - You must submit a photocopy (or printed copy, in
the case of on-line publications) of one scholarly review of the principle
reading each week.  This review will be due at the end of each class period,
so that you may refer to it as required during class.  Your name and the
source of the review must be clearly indicated.  I will return the reviews to
you the following week, so there is no need to make an extra copy for
yourself.  In conjunction with the precis, the use of these reviews allows for
much more effective discussion because they help us to situate each of the
readings within the existing historiography.  You must submit reviews for 11
of the 13 class meetings. You may not turn in published reviews for weeks when
you are absent.

**Grading:**

The focus of this course will be on class discussions; the grading reflects
that priority.  It is imperative that you participate regularly in class
discussions and that your contributions reflect both careful thought and
engagement with the specific readings in question.  Quality and regularity
count for more than sheer volume.

40% - Participation in class discussions, 25% - Presentation (outlined in
"Assignments")

25% - Precis (11 required, see attached sheet), 10% - Published Reviews (11
required, outlined in "Assignments")

**Attendance:   **

It should be clear from the discussion of the assignments and grading that
attendance at every class meeting is mandatory.

**Reading List:**

All of the primary readings are available for purchase at the TUCC Bookstore.
I strongly recommend purchasing these books, as competition for copies in
local libraries and on reserve is likely to be stiff because of the typically
large enrollments in this course.  I recognize that financial constraints may
limit the number of books you can purchase, but I will hold every student to
the same standard for class participation and writing assignments.  It is much
easier to contribute and to write effective papers if you have reliable access
to the readings.

*       Lynn Hunt, _Politics, Class, and Culture in the French Revolution_ , California, 1986.

*       David Landes, _The Unbound Prometheus:   Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe_, Cambridge, 1969.

*       William Hamilton Sewell, _Work and Revolution in France: The Language of Labor from the Old Regime to 1848_ , Cambridge, 1980.

*       Jonathan Sperber, _The European Revolutions_ , Cambridge, 1994.

*       Lucy Riall, _The Italian Risorgimento_ , Routledge, 1994. 

*       Joan Wallach Scott, _Gender and the Politics of History_ , Columbia, 1989. (New edition, 1999)

*       ~~Eric Hobsbawm, _Nations and Nationalism since 1870: Programme, Myth, Reality_ , Cambridge, 1993 (2nd ed.).~~ ****

**Replace Hobsbawm with:**

**Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities, Verso Books, 1983.**

*       Peter Jelavich, _Berlin Cabaret_ , Harvard, 1996. 

*       Ian Kershaw, _The 'Hitler Myth: ' Image and Reality in the Third Reich_, Oxford, 2001.

*       Hanna Schissler, _The Miracle Years, a Cultural History of West Germany, 1949-1968_ , Princeton, 2000\. 

*       Richard F. Kuisel, _Seducing the French: The Dilemma of Americanization_ , California, 1997.



Note: There have been some problems acquiring the Hobsbawm and Kershaw books
above. Look for Benedict Anderson, _Imagined Communities_ , Verso, 1991 to
replace Hobsbawm. If Kershaw doesn't arrive in time for us to read it in
April, I will order a replacement then.

