**

Department of History

Graduate Courses

Fall 2001



History 300:33

Constructing Identities in the Americas

Tuesday 6-9:00 Spalding

**

This comparative seminar will examine recent research on the ways in which
members of colonial societies in the Americas defined themselves, and others,
through social categories like race, gender, ethnicity, rank, and status,
assigning distinct social functions, roles, and rewards to social categories
and the people included in them according to particular criteria assigned to
those categories. The seminar will draw upon the work of scholars specializing
in both colonial North America and Latin America. The professor is a
specialist in the history of Colonial Latin America, but the syllabus will
make an effort to focus on the growing body of work by scholars who seek to
make sense of their own data by drawing on the insights of people working in
research fields different from their own.

We will examine a variety of studies through class discussion and written
analyses. Members of the seminar will also develop a research project focusing
on a problem or question that has emerged from reading and/or discussion.
Suggestions for topics and reading material from prospective members of the
seminar are welcome. Please send suggestions to "spalding@uconnvm.uconn.edu."

**

History 300:35

Modern European Jewish History

Wednesday 7 - 9:00 Kassow

**

This course will cover selected topics in Modern European Jewish History
between the Enlightenment and the establishment of the State of Israel. It
will provide an intensive survey of major trends in Modern Jewish History
since 1750. Topics covered will include Emancipation, Hasidism, European anti-
Semitism, Zionism, Bundism, the transformation of East European Jewry in the
20th century, the Holocaust and the creation of the State of Israel.

**

307-01  
_The History of Science  
_ Tuesday 2 - 5:00 Roe

**

This seminar is designed as an introduction to the field of history of
science, with an emphasis on historiographical issues. We will focus on
science in early modern Europe, partly because this is a foundational period
in history of science but more importantly because early modern science has
generated some of the most interesting new scholarship in recent years. We
will explore the impact of social and cultural history on the field and the
contextual histories that have resulted. Topics will include science on the
continent as well as in England, and will emphasize the political, religious,
and social context. A background in science is not necessary. Requirements
include short essays and a final historiographical paper.

**





History 323

Europe: State and Society

Tuesday 6:30 - 9:30 Davis

**

The course offers a broad critical introduction to major themes and debates in
the social, economic and political history of Europe's long 19th century. The
approach is comparative and thematic, looking to explore the criteria that
have driven debates on the relationship between economic and political change
from the analyses of contemporaries (e.g. Smith, Mill, de Toqueville, Marx) to
more recent debates on industrialism, class, nationalism, religion, gender and
identity.

**

History 337  
American Social and Cultural History To 1876  
Monday 1 - 4:00 Brown

**

This course treats major themes in recent scholarship: settlement; community;
family and sex roles; agricultural-industrial transition; politics and class;
religion; slavery; popular culture. In at least one topic area there will be
substantial attention to primary sources. Assignments emphasize careful
reading and analysis, and short written exercises.

**

History 349

Topics in History of American Foreign Relations

Tuesday 6:30 - 9:30 Costigliola

**

This course will focus on theoretically-informed approaches to the study of
U.S. foreign relations while also considering major historiographical debates.
The seminar will note how newly available documents from the former Soviet
bloc have affected our understanding of the Cold War. Topics include the role
of culture, emotion, and language in foreign relations; the nature of the
Soviet and U.S. hegemonies; U.S.- Latin American relations; and the
intersection of domestic and foreign policies. Assignments will emphasize a
close reading of documents and secondary sources, oral presentations, and a
research paper.

**

History 391**  
**Administration of Archives and Manuscripts**  
**Thursday 6 - 9:00 Trost

**

An overview of the history and development of the American archival
profession, including basic archival theory and methodology. Emphasizes
principles of collection, organization, and reference service for historical
manuscripts and archives.

**

History 401-01  
Introduction to Historical Research** ,  
**Porter** **Benson** , **Monday 6 - 9:00

**

An introduction to the variety of sources utilized by professional historians.
Students will learn where to find primary sources both qualitative and
quantitative, how to evaluate them for accuracy and usefulness, how to
organize data into a coherent argument, and do writing exercises based on the
sources. Students will be required to produce a proposal (fully annotated) for
a major research paper to be written in the subsequent semester



