![](engldepsyllsmall.jpg)

Professor Judith L. Sensibar Spring 2000

Mons. 6:05-8:55

Office Hrs: M/W 11:40-12:40; Thurs 4-6 and by appt.

Phone: 5-7445; email: [jlsensi@aol.com](mailto:jlsensi@aol.com)



_Syllabus_ : English 591: Seminar in Faulkner and Modernisms

Traditionally when William Faulkner is studied in the context of Modernism
that modernism is canonically constituted. This seminar focuses on Faulkner's
relationship with British and American Modernism as it has been constituted by
what I am calling the New Modernist Studies, that is, the rapidly changing
field of modernist studies after feminism, multiculturalism,
poststructuralism, post-colonial studies, gay and lesbian studies, and
cultural studies. In the first two or three weeks we will focus on some past
and current theoretical overviews of what constitutes modernism, emphasizing
issues particularly relevant to the poetics of Faulkner's texts and to the
texts of other modernists we will be reading. Topics we might consider are
Definitional Problematics; Gender; Race; History and Myth, and Modernism and
Cultural Studies. And always, questions of aesthetics and their relationship
to all of these other issues. The rest of the seminar will be spent examining
5 Faulkner novels in the context 5 other modernist novels and one avant-garde
film in the light of relevant theoretical/cultural critiques. The reading load
is heavy and often difficult so take this seminar only if you are prepared to
invest the necessary time, thought, and energy. We will read these works with
two objectives: Pleasure in and analysis of texts as literary expressions of
representative modernist writers; and 2) Exploration of the following
questions: What is, was, or might be this radical movement called Modernism
and in what ways do these texts represent modernity? What are the
relationships (of all kinds) between these texts? How do our readings re-
configure the field of modernist studies, particularly as it relates to
Faulkner?

More specific questions concerning Faulkner in particular are: What was this
Mississippian's relationship with this radical movement? How did his lived
perception of Southern History, most particularly its legacy of slavery and
attendant myths and realities, shape his Modernist vision?

As a graduate English seminar, this course presumes some familiarity with
theory and with issues and texts in the field of modernist studies, but
students who do not have much background in modernism are welcome.

Another objective of the seminar will be to provide guidance for the
preparation of papers for a submission to a journal or conference to which you
might submit your paper. More details about this in class. This course
fulfills graduate seminar and theory requirements.



_Requirements_ :



*Attendance and active participation. You must have all the reading done and be ready to discuss them in class by the assigned date

*Co-lead one or two classes. Topics and dates to be assigned

*Two or more (500 word) summaries/abstracts (to be distributed to and discussed by class).

*Preliminary Conference. _Please see me by March 24th at the very latest_.

*Seminar Paper Topic paragraph (due April 3)

*Prelim. annotated Bibliography (due April 10)

*Optional: introduction to seminar paper or draft (due April 24th)

*Abstract of Seminar Paper (due on Friday, April 28, at my office by 12 noon, with copies for every class member )

*Seminar Paper due May 8th



_Required Texts_ :



William Faulkner, _Soldiers' Pay_ , _The Sound and the Fury_ , _Absalom,
Absalom!_ , _Light in August_ , _Go Down, Moses_

Sherwood Anderson, _Dark Laughter_

Gertrude Stein, _3 Lives_ and _Picasso_

Jean Toomer, _Cane_

Virginia Woolf, _Mrs. Dalloway_

Nella Larsen, _Passing_

Toni Morrison, _Beloved_

Wayne Booth, _The Craft of Research_



_Recommended Critical/Theoretical Texts_ :



Houston Baker, _Modernism and the Harlem Renaissance_ ; Judith Butler, _Bodies
that Matter_ ; Michael North, _The Dialect of Modernism_ ; Peter Nicholls,
_Modernisms: A Literary Guide_ ; Bonnie Kime Scott, ed., _The Gender of
Modernism_ ; Astradur Eyesteinsson, _The Concept of Modernism_

_ _

_Assignments_ :

Note: most assignments will be supplemented with readings from Scott and/or
criticism)

** **

**Week 1**

_Jan. 17_ : No class. Martin Luther King Day



**Week 2**

_Jan. 24_ : Introduction to the course



**Week 3**

_Jan. 31_ : Modernisms: Background readings.



**Week 4**

_Feb. 7_ : Complete reports and discussion of background  reading. Begin
discussion of _Soldiers' Pay_.



  **Week 5**

_Feb. 14_ : Faulkner, _Soldiers' Pay_ (1926) and Anderson, _Dark Laughter_
(1925). James Watson, ed., _Thinking of Home: William Faulkner's Letters to
His Mother and Father,_ Intro. and  "January to July, 1925", pp. 167-214;
Davis, _Faulkner's "Negro": Art and the Southern Context_, pp. 1-32; North,
_The Dialect of Modernism_ , pp. 3-34.

Optional: Toni Morrison, _Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and The Literary
Imagination_ and Davis,  "From Jazz Syncopation to Blues Elegy: Faulkner's
Development of Black Characterization" in _Faulkner and Race_ , eds., Fowler
and Abadie.



**Week 6** __

_Feb 21_ : Stein, "Melanctha" from _3 Lives_ (1909).  Scott, ed., _Gender of
Modernism_ , Stein headnote, "What are Masterpieces", "How Writing is
Written", and "Transatlantic Interview,"pp. 502-508; selected letters from
_Sherwood Anderson/Gertrude Stein Correspondence_ (xerox on Reserve); North,
_The Dialect of Modernism_ , Ch.3; DeKoven, _Rich and Strange_ , Ch.3; Shawn
H. Alfrey, "'Oriental Peaceful Penetration': Gertrude Stein and the End of
Europe" (xerox handout)

Optional: DeKoven, _A Different Language_ , Intro., Chs. 1-3; Wayne
Koestenbaum, "Stein is Nice"; Joseph Boone, _Libidinal Currents_ , "Queer
Sites in Modernism," pp. 205-220.



**Week 7**

_Feb. 28_ : Toomer, _Cane_ (1923) and all correspondence with his backers and
editors in the _Norton Critical Edition_ ; Ralph Ellison, "Change the Joke and
Slip the Yoke" in _Shadow and Act_ , pp. 45-59; Baker, _Modernism and the
Harlem Renaissance_ , pp. 1-24; North, Ch.7; Laura Doyle, _Bordering on the
Body_ , Preface, intro and ch.4; browse through Alain Locke's 1925 anthology,
_The New Negro_ ; review Carla Kaplan's review essay.

Optional: Barbara Foley, "Jean Toomer's Sparta," AL, 67.4 (December 1995,
pp.747-777.



**Week 8**

_March 6_ : Faulkner, _The Sound and the Fury_ ; Gayle Rubin, "The Traffic in
Women"; Diane Roberts, _Faulkner and Southern Womanhood_ , intro. and Chs. 1,
2, and 4; Deborah Clarke, _Robbing the Mother: Women in Faulkner_ , pp.3-35;
Thadious Davis, "Reading Faulkner's Compson Appendix: Writing History from the
Margins" in _Faulkner and Ideology_ , eds. Kartiganer and Abadie.



**Week 9**

_March 13_ : SPRING BREAK--NO CLASS (but I suggest you read Woolf and start
_Light in August_ \--it's a big and rewarding read)

** **

**Week 10**

_March 20_ : Woolf, _Mrs. Dalloway_ ; Woolf "Modern Fiction" in  Scott,
_Gender of Modernism_ ; Boone, _Libidinal_ _Currents_ , Ch. 3, pp. 142-51 and
172-203.

Optional: Felski, _The Gender of Modernity_ , Ch. 3 "Imagined Pleasures: The
Erotics and Aesthetics of Consumption; De Meester, Karen, "Trauma and Recovery
in Virginia Woolf's _Mrs_. _Dalloway_ "; Low, Lisa, "Refusing to Hit Back:
Virgina Woolf and the Impersonality Question." (xerox essays on Reserve)



**NOTE** : Seminar Members: please plan to see me this week for preliminary
paper conferences. I will hold extended office hours this week



**Week 11**

_March 27_ : _Light in August_ ; Judith Butler, _Bodies that Matter_ ,
pp.ix-55; Mary Jo Dondlinger essay in _Faulkner and the Natural World_ , eds.
Kartiganer and Abadie.



**Week 12**

_April 3_ :Larsen, _Passing_ and _Borderline_ (film); H.D. Headnote  and "The
Borderline Pamphlet" in Scott, _Gender_ ; Susan  Stanford Friedman, "Modernism
of the 'Scattered  Remnant'" (reserve xerox); Review Butler, Intro. and Ch.6,
_Passing_ chapter in _Bodies that Matter_ ; Deborah McDowell, "The 'Nameless .
. .Shameful Impulse': Sexuality in Nella Larson's _Quicksand_ and _Passing_ "
in her _The Changing Same_ ; Roberts, _Faulkner and Southern_ _Womanhood_ ,
Ch.3.



***Seminar Essay Topic paragraph due this Thurs. by 7pm

**_ _**

**Week 13** __

_April 10_ : _Absalom, Absalom!_ ; Gwin, _The Feminine and Faulkner_ , Chs. 1
and 4; Barbara Ladd, _Nationalism and the Color_ _Line in George Washington
Cable, Mark Twain, and William_ _Faulkner_ , ch.4.

Optional: Gwin, _Black and White Women of the Old South_ , ch.3 (this really
supplements the other Gwin reading)



***Preliminary Annotated Bibliography due

_  
_

  __

**Week 14** __

_April 17_ : _Absalom, Absalom!_ (cont.) and Toni Morrison,  _Beloved_.



**Week 15**

_April 24_ : _Go Down, Moses_ ; selections from Linda Wagner- Martin, ed.,
_New Essays on _Go Down, Moses__ ; Lillian Smith, _Killers of the Dream_ , pp.
1-50.

***Optional: Introduction to seminar paper or draft due

_ _

_Friday, April 28_ : Paper Abstracts due (You may hand in your introduction,
if you prefer). Place appropriate number of copies in box outside my office
door by _12 noon_ and pick up others' Abstracts.



**Week 16**

_May 1_ : Last Class: _Go Down, Moses_ (cont.) and discussion of your Essay
Abstracts





_Monday, May 8th: Term Papers due in my office by 12 noon_

_ _



Note: This syllabus may be subject to adjustment during the course of semester
--in response to seminar members' interests and needs.

