**History 61: Women in Russian and Soviet History**

**University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Spring 2000**



**Instructor:** Professor Donald J. Raleigh, Hamilton Hall 410, 962-8077,
djr@email.unc.edu

**Class Meetings:** T/Th, 9:30-10:45, Wilson Library 304

**Office Hours:** Tuesday 11-12 A.M., Thursday, 3:30-4:30, and by appointment

**Course Objectives:** Charles Fourier remarked that  "the extension of
women's rights is the basic principle of all social progress." Many Russian
radicals agreed with Fourier, arguing from the mid-nineteenth century on that
the status of women provided the measure of freedom in a society, and
proclaiming women's liberation to be among their chief aims. As a result of
the Russian Revolution of 1917, dramatic transformations in the legal status
of women appeared to support their claim and attest to their commitment to the
goal of women's emancipation. According to Bolshevik theorists, the revolution
was to bring about the achievement of socioeconomic and also of sexual
equality under socialism and, eventually, communism. The actual experiences of
Soviet women in the post-revolutionary period, however, did not bear out that
promise. Critics contend that Russian radicals never sincerely embraced the
women's cause, that legal equality in the USSR merely masked the continued
oppression, and even exploitation, of women.

History 61 will explore these issues, as well as others, by examining the
social status and cultural representations of Russian women. The course will
first familiarize students with the status of women in "traditional" Russia
before the emergence of the so-called woman question in the mid-nineteenth
century. It then will provide more in-depth coverage of the subject from the
mid-nineteenth century to the present, and the efforts made by various groups
in Russian society to improve women's lot or to emancipate them. For the
various periods we will focus on, students should be able to:

  * Trace the role of women in traditional Russian society before the nineteenth century.
  * Evaluate the forces in Russian society and culture that determined and determine relations between the sexes. 
    * Account for the emergence of the woman question and society's responses to it. 
    * Describe the development and evolution of women's movements in Russia before the Revolution of 1917\. 
    * Assess the themes of art, love, politics, and personal freedom as depicted in Anastasya Verbitskaya's novel _Keys to Happiness_ , the most sensationally popular Russian novel on the eve of World War I. 
    * Consider the woman question within Marxist ideology, the impact of revolution and civil war on women's lives, and how ideology and circumstances shaped the fledgling Soviet state's attempts to introduce sexual equality. 
    * Understand the limitations and possibilities of consciously transforming social, especially gender, relations through revolutionary means. 
    * Investigate how the woman question was "solved" during the Stalin years. 
    * Appreciate the trauma of World War II on Soviet women. 
    * Appraise the life stories of women in Soviet history before the 1950s as depicted in oral testimonies. 
    * Analyze the expansion of their role in public life under Khrushchev, the recognition that the woman question had not been solved, and the experience of Soviet women during the Gorbachev revolution. 
    * Discuss how perestroika has touched the lives of women and at how Russian feminists today evaluate the status of the country's women. 
    * Familiarize yourself with efforts to manage the female organism, and with sexual and popular subcultures. 
    * Give voice and agency to Russian peasant women who, until recently, made up the majority of women in the country.

In addition, assignments are designed to help you to acquire and sharpen basic
skills that will assist you in all of your academic endeavors. You should
demonstrate improvement in:

  * Using different types of historical sources.
  * Reading critically and writing clearly
  * Identifying an author's thesis and evaluating how she or he supports it with evidence. 
  * Articulating arguments of your own based on historical evidence. 
  * Writing logical and coherent arguments and accurate exams.

**Required Readings:** The following books can be purchased in the textbook
department at Student Stores.

Pushkareva, Natalia. _Women in Russian History: From the Tenth to the
Twentieth_

_Centuries_

Verbitskaya, Anastasya. _Keys to Happiness_.

Buckley, Mary. _Women and Ideology in the Soviet Union_

Engel, Barbara and Anastasia Posadskaya-Vanderbeck. _A Revolution of Their_

_Own: Voices of Women in Soviet History_

Marsh, Rosalind, ed. _Women_ _in Russia and Ukraine_

_Coursepack_ **Requirements:** All students will take two midterm exams and a
final examination, write a 4-5-page paper (on the novel, _Keys to Happiness_
or on a woman's memoir selected from the list I will distribute) and
participate actively in class. Class attendance is required and your
participation grade will be based on attendance, extent and quality of
participation in class discussions, grades on quizzes, and completion of
homework assignments, which will include the previewing of Soviet films (see
below). Please note that all assignments must be completed on time. They are
worth the following percentage of your final grade:

Midterm I 17.5%

Midterm II 17.5%

Final 25%

Paper 20%

Participation 20%

**Paper Assignments:** Instructions for your paper on _Keys to Happiness_ will
be passed out later. Those opting to write a paper on a memoir may turn it in
at any time during the semester, but not later than April 25. Your paper might
consider some of the following issues if they are appropriate.

Think about how women write their lives: is there anything your author is
silent about? How does she find her voice and use language? How does she
separate the public and the private? If the author provides an introduction it
might help you address these concerns. Analyze the introduction. Is the author
sure of her authority? If so, on what basis?

What narrative strategy does your author employ? Is she at the center of her
autobiography or is she a kind of impersonal chronicler? How does your author
represent family relations, particularly her relationships with her mother,
father, grandparents, siblings, children, and other relatives?

What period of her life does your author opt to highlight and why? Are there
any particular experiences or turning points that have defined her life as
depicted?

How does your author address men and women in the text? What does this tell
you about gender roles? Does she adapt any male or female role models for
herself?

Does the author's ideology or public persona affect her self-representation?
How does your author represent herself?

How does the text make you feel?

**Film Assignment:** Students must preview and write two-page reaction papers
that analyze gender relations and how women are depicted in two films: _Bed
and Sofa,_ and _Moscow Doesn't Believe in Tears,_ or _Adam's Rib_. _Bed and
Sofa_ will be shown in class on March 23 (reaction papers are due on March
30). You may view the other films at the Undergraduate Library at your
convenience or rent them from a commercial video dealer such as Blockbuster or
Visart. The homework assignment on _Moscow Doesn't Believe in Tears_ is due on
April 20; the reaction piece to _Adam's Rib_ is due on May 2.

I would like your papers to discuss, in brief, the focus and purpose of the
film, and to analyze gender relations and how women are depicted in them.
Explain what type of film each is (e.g., drama, comedy, etc.), why you liked
it (or didn't), and what techniques the director used effectively. Discuss
what each film tells us about the Soviet Union at the time the film was made.
In other words, contextualize each film.

**Association for Women in Slavic Studies:** Students with a serious interest
in the field of Slavic studies are urged to join the Association for Women in
Slavic Studies by sending a $10 check to Dr. Mary Zirin, Secretary-Treasurer,
AWSS, 1178 Sonoma Drive, Altadena, CA 91001. Students may also purchase an
excellent and comprehensive bibliography of women in Russia and Eastern Europe
by sending a $15 check to Dr. Zirin.

**Honor Code:** I encourage you to study together; however, you are bound by
the Honor Code in taking exams and quizzes, and in writing your papers. As per
university guidelines, students must sign the Honor Code on all papers and
exams in order to have the grade received officially recorded. Please consult
with me if you have any questions about the Honor Code.

**Academic Support Services:** The College of Arts and Sciences has developed
several support programs to assist students in their endeavors to succeed
academically. Learning Disabilities Services provides individual support to
students with diagnosed learning disabilities (962-7227). The Learning Skills
Center offers free instruction in a variety of academic learning strategies
(962-3782, 962-6389). The Writing Center--which fills up quickly--provides
free tutorial services (962-7710, 962-4060).

**Lecture and Discussion Topics and Assignments:** On average, I will lecture
once a week, and we will discuss the readings on the other day the class
meets. All readings are to be completed by the time class meets. Please note
that I have used the following abbreviation in listing reading assignments
below: CP=Coursepack.

Jan 13 Introduction: Themes and Objectives; Preview and Discussion of film
"Early on Sunday"

Jan 18 Accommodation, and Resistance: Russian Women Past and Present
(Pushkareva, xiii-xvi, 3-60)

Jan 20 **Discussion:** Women in Traditional Russian Society (Pushkareva,
61-120) **Homework assignment:** Bring to class one essay question on today's
reading and select two or three of the most important terms, people, or events
discussed in it.)

Jan 25 **Discussion:** (CP, _Domostroi_ )

Jan 27 Russian Women in the Age of Enlightenment (Pushkareva, 121-86)
**Homework assignment:** Bring to class one essay question on today's reading
and select two or three of the most important terms, people, or events
discussed in it.)

Feb 1 **Discussion:** (Marsh, 31-41)

Feb 3 On the Eve (Pushkareva, 187-220)

Feb 8 Birth of the Woman Question

Feb 10 Responses to the Woman Question (Pushkareva, 233-66; Marsh, 55-71)

Feb 15 The Peasant Woman between City and Field (Pushkareva, 221-33; Marsh

45-52)

Feb 17 **Midterm Exam**

Feb 22 Women and the Revolution of 1905 (Begin reading Verbitskaya, including
the translators' introduction)

Feb 24 Origin of the Bolshevik Vision (Buckley, 18-27, Verbitskaya)

Feb 29 **Discussion:** Verbitskaya, Keys to Happiness (Complete novel)

Mar 2 **Film:** Women and Early Russian Cinema

Mar 7 Impact of World War I on Women's Lives ( **Paper on Verbitskaya due** )

Mar 9 War, Revolution, and Civil War (Buckley, 1-16, 28-57)

Mar 14-16 Spring Break

Mar 21 **Discussion:** Bolshevik Women's Organizations (Buckley, 60-105; CP,
Kollontai story,  "Three Generations"; Slide Show: Representations of Women in
Soviet Political Iconography)

Mar 23 **Film:** "Bed and Sofa" (Engel and Posadskaya, 1-16)

Mar 28 Utopian Dreams and Postrevolutionary Realities (Buckley, 108-20)

Mar 30 Soviet Women at War (Buckley, 121-37; Engel and Posadskaya, 175-218)

Apr 4 **Discussion:** Voices of Soviet Women (Engel and Posadskaya, 17-100)

Apr 6 **Discussion:** Voices of Soviet Women (Engel and Posadskaya, 100-174)

**Apr 11 Midterm** **Exam**

Apr 13 The Khrushchev Thaw and _Zhensovety_ (Buckley, 139-59)

Apr 18 The Woman Question Has Not Been Solved After All (Buckley, 160-88;
Marsh 94-105)

Apr 20 **Discussion:** CP, Baranskaya, _A Week Like Any Other Week_

Apr 25 **Discussion:** Managing the Female Organism and Abortion (Marsh,
111-18; 121-27; 131-51; 269-82; CP,  "Maternity Care in the Soviet Union")

Apr 27 The First Soviet Feminists and Sexual Minorities (CP, Mamonova, Actions
and Counteractions and a Discussion with the KGB; Marsh, 156-70)

May 2 Women and Perestroika (Marsh, 214-23; 228-37; 241-53)

May 4 **Discussion:** Post-Soviet Women, Subcultures, and Sexual Policies
(Marsh, 173-95; 255-64; 286-94; 298-304)

May 11 **Final Examination, 8:00 AM**



