![](../Images/Header3.gif)  
  
---  
[![](../Images/Buttons/admin_1a.gif)](admin.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/faculty_1a.gif)](faculty.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/grad_1a.gif)](graduate_p.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/ug_1a.gif)](under_g.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/search_1a.gif)](search.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/news_1a.gif)](news_e.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/site_1a.gif)](sitemap.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/help_1a.gif)](mailto:ethnicstudies@ucsd.edu)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
**Research Seminar in Ethnic Studies**

**Ethnic Studies 210**

**Spring 2002**

Robert Alvarez

SSB223

[oloberto@ucsd.edu](mailto:oloberto@ucsd.edu)

534-1739

The objectives of this course are the understanding of research design and the
production of a research prospectus.  The primary paradigm we will utilize is
anthropological which aims at both the humanities and Ascience@ providing us
with a broad spectrum of possible research venues.  Within this context we
will examine the role of insider or indigenous researchers, the ethics of
involvement, and the application of experiential knowledge to research
problems. Class periods will be devoted to both required readings and
participant=s own progress in designing a research topic.

**Introduction**

April 3 - Introduction to the structure of research design. Overview of
readings and assignments.

**_Part I: Indigenous paradigms and ethics_**

April 10 Reading assignment:  Medicine Part 1-4,

written assignment: (1) reading summary and questions, (2) Preliminary
research idea  (about one double-spaced page, but not to exceed two pages). Be
prepared to discuss this  in class.

April 17- Doing AIndigenous research@

Medicine Part 4-6, Appendices; Limon, Abu-Lughod, Gonzales

 Written assignment: reading summary and questions

April 24- Ethics: Harrison, Berreman, AAA, Mills, Horowitz,

Disciplinary Boundaries: Limon, Abu-Lughod, Gonzalez

Written Assignments: (1) Reading questions. (2) Preliminary draft of

initial research plan. Be prepared to discuss this in class.

May 1- Participant Reports  

**_Part II. Analyzing Research Design   _**

May 8- Reading assignment: _All Our Kin_ -

Written assignment: (1) analysis and questions.(2) Abstract and annotated
bibliography of primary literature on your research topic.

May 15- Reading assignment: _Long Engagements_

Written assignment: analysis and questions

May 22- Reading assignment: _A Thrice Told Tale_

Written assignment: (1) analysis and questions (2) Research topic, focus and
framework.

May 29-- Reading assignment _:   Shadowed Lives_,

Written assignment: (1)analysis and questions (2) Proposed methodology and
significance  

June 5- Reading assignment: _Wisdom Sits in Places_

Written assignment: (1)analysis and questions

June 12 - Written assignment: Final Research Prospectus/Party Time

**_Required assignments:_** As outlined above each participant in the class
will be required to come prepared to discuss reading assignments, and to turn
in various written assignments.

**_Part I: Indigenous paradigms and ethics_**

( April 10-24) For each class period reading  a double spaced typewritten
critique/review of one to two pages.

**_Part II. Analyzing Research Design_** :

A double spaced analysis not to exceed two pages of **_each text_** to address
the following when appropriate:

  What is the purpose of the research? Where and how did the research
originate? What questions frame and organize the argument and discussion of
the author?  How was the study/research conducted (what methods were used)?
Where and of what significance is the Aplace,@people, or community or research
site?  Why is this research and or study relevant and significant to ethnic
studies and social science?  How does this relate to your own research?  

**_The Research Prospectus._**  In order to construct a research prospectus
each participant will turn in periodical assignments:

April 10- Preliminary Research Topic

April 24- Annotated Bibliography of research topic (to be explained in class)

May 22- Second Draft of Research Topic/Question and supporting literature

May 29- Draft of proposed methodology and significance

June 12 Final Research Prospectus.

Grading: Class Participation 30%; Reading summaries and written assignments
30%; Final Research Prospectus 40%.

**_Required Texts:_**

Basso, Keith _ _Wisdom Sits in Places,__ University of New Mexico Press:1996

Chavez, Leo _ _,   Shadowed Lives__: __Undocumented Immigrants in American
Society,__ , Harcourt, Brace and Javonovich:1997(Second Edition)

__ __ Medicine, Bea. __   Learning to be an Anthropologist and Remaining
____A__ _ _Native__ _ _@__   University of Illinois Press, 2001

Plath, David _ _Long Engagements. Maturity in Modern Japan__ ,, Stanford
University Press:1980 _ ___

Stack, Carol _ _All Our Kin,__ , Basic Books: 1997. _ ___

Wolf, Margery, _ _A Thrice Told Tale. Feminism, Postmodernism and Ethnographic
Responsibility,__ Stanford University Press:1992  

**_Recommended Text_** :

Bernard, Russell H _ _,   Handbook of Methods in Cultural Anthropology__,
Altimira Press:1998

(Especially pp. 1- 256)

**_ES 210 Reader_**  

Abu-Lughod, Lila

   1994 Writing Against Culture _in_ _Recapturing Anthropology_. Richard G.
Fox ed.   School of  American Research: Santa Fe, 135-162

Berreman, Gerald

   1973 AThe Social Responsibility of The Anthropologist,@  _in_ _To See
Ourselves_ , ed. Thomas  Weaver. Scott, Foresman and Company: Glenview Ill.
8-9.  

American Anthropological Association

   1973 (1946,1952) AResolutions@, _in_ _To See Ourselves_ , ed. Thomas
Weaver. Scott, Foresman  and Company: Glenview Ill.43-45.

   1973(1970) Principals of Professional Responsibility. _in_ _To See
Ourselves_ , ed. Thomas  Weaver. Scott, Foresman and Company: Glenview Ill.
46-48.  

Gonzalez, Jorge A.

   2001 Cultural Fronts: Towards a Dialogical Understanding of Contemporary
Cultures. _Culture   in the Communication Age_.  James Lull, Ed. Routledge:
London 106-131.

Horowitz, Irving Louis

    1965  The Life and Death of Project Camelot. _in_ _To See Ourselves_ , ed. Thomas Weaver. Scott, Foresman and Company: Glenview Ill 130-148.

Harrison, Faye

    1991  Ethics and Ethnography. In _Decolonizing Anthropology_.   Ed. Faye Harrison, American  Anthropological Association: Washington D.C. 

Limon, Jose.

   1994 Representation, Ethnicity, and the Precursory Ethnography. Notes of a
Native  Anthropologist. _in_ _Recapturing Anthropology_. Richard G. Fox ed.
School of American Research: Santa Fe, 115-135.

Mills, C. Wright

   1973(1959) On Politics _in_ _To See Ourselves_ , ed. Thomas Weaver. Scott,
Foresman and Company: Glenview Ill. 10-18.



[Return to Main Page](../index.html)  
  
---  
  

9500 Gilman Drive - La Jolla, CA 92093-0522 - 858.534.3276  
  
---  
  

[![](../Images/official.gif)](http://www.ucsd.edu/)  
  
---  
  

