Advanced Legal Research

**Syllabus** \- Law 267.1

Spring 2001

Syllabus | [Schedule](schedule.htm) |

[Readings](readings.htm)

| [Exercises](exercises.htm) | [Faculty](index.htm#faculty)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  


Course Summary

|

Course Goal

|

Prerequisites  
  
---|---|---  
  
Course Requirements

|

Grading

|

Text  
  
Course Summary: The purpose of the course is to offer students an in-depth
working knowledge of legal bibliography and research methods both in
traditional print sources and in electronic formats including loose-leaf
services, the Internet, Westlaw, and Lexis. The research tools deployed will
be both more sophisticated and more complex than those offered in the first-
year RRWA class. The course will expose students to many materials that are
not necessarily covered in other areas of study. The course will focus on the
conceptual structure and pragmatic applications of CD-ROM and Internet
sources, specialized legal, nonlegal, and cross disciplinary databases and
publications, and will offer advanced training in Westlaw and Lexis.

Course Goal: The goal of the course is better prepare students for the
research demands of legal practice, academia or other legal environments. The
class will expose students to a wide range of materials in preparation for the
inevitable legal questions that are outside of their range of expertise.
Perhaps more importantly, students will gain a better understanding of the
research process that should help with any new materials. As a result of this
course, the students will have a greater knowledge of the research materials
available and an enhanced ability to work in unfamiliar areas of the law. At
the completion of this course students should be able to make a more rational
choice of what research materials to use for a specific project based on the
relative merits of different sources and media.

Prerequisites: Open to second and third-year students who have completed the
first-year RRWA course.

Course Requirements:

  1. Weekly reading assignments in the course text, legal research manuals, and representative literature. 
  2. Short weekly written exercises and class presentations that respond to readings and solve practical research problems. 
  3. A two hour multiple choice final examination. **{3/6/2001 This may be revised to a combination of short answer and multiple choice}**

Grading:

+50 = homework exercises  
+50 = final  
*** Attendance policy: Students are expected to attend and participate in this
class. The professor reserves the right to lower grades, perhaps even to fail,
those students who miss or are unprepared from more than 25% of the class
meetings (including lab sessions). Those arriving late for class may be
counted as absent at the discretion of the professor. There is a waiting list
for this course. Students who fail to attend at least one of the first two
class meetings will be dropped from the course.

Students will be expected to have read the READING ASSIGNMENTS for the class
on the subject.

The homework EXERCISES for each subject area are due the week following the
class on the subject. The two lowest homework grades will be dropped.  
*** Assignments handed in late will be penalized.

Study groups: Working with classmates on homework assignments is allowed only
under the following conditions: Each student must participate in all
components of the assignment. Each student must prepare all components of his
or her written work. Individual homework is required, students may not pass in
a group answer to the weekly exercises. Students may ask for guidance from
librarians, classmates or other individuals, but the work must be done
primarily by the students.

Instructors: This class is being taught by a team of librarians this year.
Each of the instructors is available for consultation in the library and by
email. Their office numbers and email links are below.

**Name**

|

**Office Number**

|

**Phone Number**

|

**Email Address**  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
Martha Barefoot

|

4030

|

962-2295

|

[martha_barefoot@unc.edu ](mailto:martha_barefoot@unc.edu )  
  
Ann-Marie Berti

|

4029

|

962-2561

|

[amberti@email.unc.edu](mailto:amberti@email.unc.edu)  
  
Scott Childs

|

4025

|

962-1605

|

[schilds@email.unc.edu](mailto:schilds@email.unc.edu)  
  
Laura N. Gasaway

|

3030

|

962-1049

|

[laura_gasaway@unc.edu](mailto:laura_gasaway@unc.edu)  
  
Anne Klinefelter

|

3028

|

962-6202

|

[klinefel@email.unc.edu](mailto:klinefel@email.unc.edu)  
  
Steven Melamut

|

4031

|

843-7898

|

[melamut@email.unc.edu](mailto:melamut@email.unc.edu)  
  
Text: _Fundamentals of Legal Research_ (7th ed.) by Jacobstein, Mersky and
Dunn

return to top | [schedule](schedule.htm) | [law library web
site](http://library.law.unc.edu/home.shtml) | [law school web
site](http://www.law.unc.edu)  
---|---|---|---  
  
last modified  Wednesday 07-Mar-2001 11:38  
  

