[![Library Information](../assets/library_info2.gif)](javascript:;)

[![Public Services](../assets/public_services2.gif)](javascript:;)

[![Student Services](../assets/student_services2.gif)](javascript:;)

[![Research Resources](../assets/legal_links2.gif)](javascript:;)

[![Legal Guides](../assets/legal_guides2.gif)](javascript:;)

[![menu 6](../assets/research_guides2.gif)](javascript:;)

[![menu 7](../assets/online_catalog2.gif)](javascript:;)

[Library Hours](../library_info/library_hours.htm)

[Directions](../library_info/library_directions.htm)

[Library Policies](../library_info/library_policies.htm)

[New Books](../library_info/new_books.htm)

[Legal Research Courses](../library_info/research_courses.htm)

[Copiers & Printing](../library_info/copiers_printing.htm)

[Faculty Publications](../library_info/searchFacpubs.cfm)

[Faculty Presentations](../library_info/searchFacPres.cfm)

[Librarian & Staff Directory](../library_info/library_directory.htm)

[Contact the Library](../library_info/library_contact.htm)



[Circulation Policy](../library_info/library_policies.htm)

[Reference Services](../public_services/reference_services.htm)



[Email](../student_services/email_portal.htm)

[Law Forums](../student_services/forums_splash.htm)

[Sample Exams](../student_services/examsLogin.cfm)

[CALI](http://www.cali.org)

[Legal Research Courses](../library_info/research_courses.htm)

[Circulation Policy](../library_info/library_policies.htm)

[Interlibrary Loan](../library_info/library_policies.htm)

[Reference Services](../library_info/reference_services.htm)

[Electronic Service](../student_services/electronic_services.htm)



[Legal Links Index](../legal_links/index.htm)

[Federal Links](../legal_links/federal/index.htm)

[Arizona Links](../legal_links/arizona/index.htm)

[State Links](../legal_links/state/index.htm)

[Foreign & International Links](../legal_links/topical/international.htm)

[General Legal Reference
Links](../legal_links/general_legal_reference/index.htm)

[Legal Subject Links](../legal_links/topical/index.htm)

[Bar Associations& Ethics Links](../legal_links/bar_assocs_ethics.htm)



[Legal Guides Index](../legal_guides/index.htm)

[Arizona Landlord Tenant Law](../legal_guides/landlord_tenant.htm)

[Civil Procedure](../legal_guides/civ_pro.htm)

[Consumer
Protection](../legal_guides/consumer_protection/Consumer_Protection_Legal_Guide.htm)

[Criminal Law](../under_development.htm)

[Family Law](../under_development.htm)

[Government Benefits](../legal_guides/uiguide/uiguidefinal.htm)

[Military Issues](../legal_guides/USERRA/default.htm)



[Research Guides Index](../research_guides/index.htm)

[Arizona Legislative History](../research_guides/az_leg_history_guide.htm)

[Arizona Primary Legal Materials](../research_guides/az_primary_guide.htm)

[Cyberlaw Research Resources](../research_guides/cyberlaw_guide.htm)

[ Government Documents](../research_guides/gov_docs.htm)

[Federal Agency Decisions](../research_guides/fed_agency_dec.htm)

[Shepard's Citators](../research_guides/federal_shepards_guide.htm)

[Deciphering Legal Citations](../research_guides/cite_abbr_guide.htm)

[Introduction to Law School Materials](../research_guides/intro_law_bib.htm)

[Law Library Reference Resources ](../research_guides/referenceguide.htm)

[Legal Self-Help Publications](../research_guides/self_help_bib.htm)

[ United States Treaties and Other International Accords in Print
Format](../research_guides/treaties_bib.htm)

[Military Legal Material](../research_guides/militaryguide.htm)

[UCITA](../research_guides/ucita_guide.htm)



[Search UA Catalog](http://sabio.library.arizona.edu/)

[SABIO Gateway](http://dizzy.library.arizona.edu/)





Welcome to the law library at the James E. Rogers College of Law.

We have some new ["Friends of the Law
Library"](http://www.law.arizona.edu/alumni/info.html) information available.

All the heading above have menus underneath when clicked on.



![Law Library James E. Rogers College of Law](../assets/internet_banner.png)

[UA Home](http://www.arizona.edu/) | [UA Law
Home](http://www.law.arizona.edu/) | [Law Library Home](../home.htm) | [Online
Catalog](http://sabio.library.arizona.edu/) | [Legal
Links](../legal_links/index.htm) | [Site Map](../sitemap.htm) |
[Search](../search.htm)

[Law Library](../home.htm) : Library Information : [Law Library
Publications](library_publications.htm) : Advanced Legal Research Syllabus

ADVANCED LEGAL RESEARCH SYLLABUS

Professor Mike Chiorazzi  
Fall 2000

We are scheduled to meet Monday, Wednesday, and Thursday from **10:00 \- 10:50
AM in room 201** of the Law College.

There will be three short research assignments during the course of the
semester. A research paper, called a pathfinder, is the core work of the
course. Your final grade will be primarily based on the pathfinder. More on
the pathfinder later in the syllabus. You will also be required to give a 15
minute presentation on your pathfinder at the end of the semester. The
presentations provide an opportunity for you to learn from the varied research
experiences of your classmates as well as providing you with an opportunity to
work out the organization of your paper. There will also be a short quiz on
the last day of class on the readings.

The presentation, research assignments, class attendance and participation all
affect your grade. I can guarantee that much of what you will learn in this
course you will use at one time or another in practice - a claim few other
courses can make. I will provide more details in the first class.

**Warning:**   In addition to the normally scheduled times, you will also meet
with me on an individual basis a minimum of two times to discuss your
pathfinder project. These conferences will take approximately one half hour.
The first conference will take place in early September and the second in
early October. There will also be hands on training in Lexis and Westlaw which
will require some flexibility in scheduling. If you have a very tight schedule
this Fall, Advanced Legal Research may not be the course for you. I will give
you as much warning as possible about schedule changes. This class will
involve active learning; it is a combination of lecture, independent study,
hands-on training, library exercises and student presentations. Most of the
assigned reading takes place in the first weeks of the semester. Thereafter,
you will be actively researching - that means lots of time in the library. If
you prefer to sit at home reading a casebook - this is not the class for you.

**OFFICE HOURS:**   As a general rule, I will always be available the
afternoons before class, but if I'm not in a meeting, you can come by and talk
to me anytime. My office is located in the administrative area of the library
on the main floor, through the reference office.

**REQUIRED TEXT:**   J. Myron Jacobstein, Mersky and Dunn. Fundamentals of
Legal Research, 7th ed. (Foundation 1998). **PLEASE NOTE:   This book is not
yet in the bookstore. It has been rush ordered and should arrive shortly.**
There are two copies of the book on reserve.

I also recommend you purchase a "Bluebook," The Uniform System of Citation,
16th ed., if you do not own one. Assigned readings will also be put on
reserve.

**Suggested Reading:**   Toni M. Fine, American Legal Systems:  A Resource and
Reference Guide (Reserve KF 240 F46 1997). Good overview of how and why
different sources are used in legal research. (E.g., how a bill becomes a law,
stare decisis, legislative history, etc.)

Readings:

Week one (August 14):

  * Berring, "Legal Research and Legal Concepts:  Where Form Molds Substance," 75 Cal. L. Rev. 15 (1987) (On reserve) 
  * Berring, "Chaos, Cyberspace and Tradition:   Legal Information Transmogrified," 12 Berkeley Technology L. J. 189 (1997). (On reserve) 
  * **Fundamentals** , Ch. 1 & 2, pp. 1 - 21. 

Week two ( August 21):

  * **Fundamentals** , Ch. 3 - 7, pp. 22 - 139. 

Week three (August 28):

  * **Fundamentals** , Ch. 11-14, pp. 230 - 333. 

Week four (September 4):

  * **Fundamentals** , Ch. 16 - 19, pp. 374 - 475. 

Week five (September 11):

  * **Fundamentals** , Ch. 22-23, pp. 547 - 597. 

There will be other limited assigned reading throughout the semester.

Pathfinder Assignment

Simply stated, a pathfinder is a critical analysis of all of the legal and
non-legal literature available in a specific area of law. Think of a
pathfinder as an articulation of everything you wished you knew _before_ you
started a research assignment. Not only will you determine what types of
materials are available in a particular area, but you will also determine
their relative value and suggest the best sources to understand your topic as
well as those sources to be avoided. You will be providing a "path" or
alternative paths to the best way or ways to learn about the law within your
chosen subject area.

You will pick your own topic. In order to insure that the project is
meaningful and manageable, you will have to pick your topic carefully. There
is a tendency to pick a topic which is overly broad. It is also important to
pick an area which covers a wide variety of legal materials. How will you know
if you have picked a good topic? Simple - that's where I come in. Your first
individual conference will be to discuss potential topics. I will expect that
you have done some preliminary investigation into your topic - I will explain
how to do this in the first class. I am also available to discuss your topic
before the required first conference.

I will put some examples of good pathfinders on reserve at the circulation
desk. You can also skim the Legal Reference Services Quarterly (located in law
review area of reading room) for other examples of published pathfinders.
There is no one right format to use in creating a pathfinder. They are part
essay, part annotated bibliography and part research guide. There is no one
way to create or organize a pathfinder. The topic may help define the shape of
the product. Some will look much like the ones on reserve, others much
different. Several former students created web pages which served as
electronic pathfinders. We will be able to discuss your options in the
individual conferences.

How do you (or I) know when you have created a good pathfinder? When someone
who knows little or nothing about the subject of your pathfinder can pick it
up and immediately start researching the topic in a efficient and effective
manner.

Copyright (C) 2002 Arizona Board of Regents, All Rights Reserved.

Content updated: 01 March 2002 by [Michael Chiorazzi
](mailto:chiorazzi@nt.law.arizona.edu).  
Mail: UA Law Library, 1201 East Speedway Blvd, Tucson, AZ 85712, USA.  
E-Contact: [Iain
Barksdale](http://www.law.arizona.edu/library/internet/library_info/bioResults.cfm?LastName=barksdale)

![W3C HTML and CSS Validated](../assets/wc3_valid_combo.png) |  
---|---  
  
[![Contact Us](../assets/mailv.gif)](mailto:helpdesk@law.arizona.edu)

[![Law Library Home](../assets/homev.gif)](../home.htm)

P7 MenuMagic dwt Control Layer -Do Not Alter

