Lisa Abend
Rice 305

Lisa.Abend@oberlin.edu
x8528

Office hours: MW 1:30-2:30
Spring 2002

T 3-4



**_History 102: MODERN EUROPEAN HISTORY_**

The second half of a 2-semester survey, this course introduces students to the
events, institutions, people, and beliefs that characterize the "modern" age
in Europe. Beginning with the Reformation and ending with the fall of the
Berlin Wall, we will consider, among other things, the rise of the nation
state, the spread of secularization, the outbreak of revolutions, the growth
of industrial society, the emergence of new political ideologies, and the
implications of world war.



_Readings_

All readings should be completed by the class period for which they are
assigned. Although some texts will be discussed in sections specially devoted
to them, others will come up during lectures--please make sure you are
prepared. The following books are available for purchase at the bookstore:

Natalie Zemon Davis, _The Return of Martin Guerre_

Jean-Jacques Rousseau, _The Social Contract_

Charles Dickens, _Hard Times_

Karl Marx, _The Communist Manifesto_

Erich Marie Remarque, _All Quiet on the Western Front_

Ian McEwan, _Black Dogs_

John Merriman, _A History of Modern Europe_ (textbook)



In addition to these books, we will be reading primary sources available
through the Internet Modern History Sourcebook at:



<<http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/modsbook.html>>



These readings are all marked "IMHS" on the syllabus. Please print them out
and bring them to class for discussion on the day indicated.



_Requirements:_

This course combines lectures and discussions, and I expect your active,
engaged, and prepared participation in all class sessions. The lectures will
generally focus on a specific topic or mode of historical interpretation; and
in many cases will not provide a basic synthetic chronology; for that, you
will need to keep up with the textbook reading (Merriman, _A History of Modern
Europe_ ). Beyond that, there are a few more formal requirements:



**Attendance:** In your time at Oberlin you have perhaps experienced classes
where regular attendance was less important than your performance on papers
and exams. **This is not one of those courses. Unexcused absences will
negatively affect your grade, and may result, if they are frequent enough, in
a final grade of "No Entry."** At midterm and at the end of the semester, I
will ask you to turn in a sheet indicating how many classes you have missed in
that period.



**Response Papers:** For each of the assigned books, I will ask you to write a
typed, one-page response paper in which you identify and analyze the central
issues and arguments raised in each piece. These response papers are designed
to get you to engage with the readings before class, and to help foster in-
class discussion. Together with your oral participation in discussions, these
papers will constitute your class participation grade, which will be 30% of
your final grade. Response papers are due in class on the day signalled on the
schedule below.



Unless true catastrophe (which does not include having too much work) has
befallen you, late papers will be penalized half a grade per day, (which means
that after 8 days even a paper that would have earned an A+ will receive a
grade of NE).



**Exams:** There will be a midterm and a final exam, both of which will be
based on material covered in lectures, the textbook and other readings. The
midterm will be held in class on Monday, March 18; the final exam, which is
cumulative, will be held on May 18. Both exams will consist of essay and
identification questions, and students may not use books or notes for it. The
midterm counts for roughly 30% of your final grade; the final counts for 40%.



_ _

**_Schedule_**

_Unit One: Europe at the Time of the Reformations_

M Feb 4: Europe in 1500

W Feb 6: The Protestant Reformation

                        Merriman, Chapter 3 

                        Luther, "95 Theses" (IMHS-Reformation)

                        Calvin, "On Predestination" (IMHS-Reformation)



M Feb 11: The Impact of the Reformations

                        Merriman, Chapter 4

                        Loyola, from _The Spiritual Exercises_ (IMHS-Reformation)

W Feb 13: Elite and Popular Culture

                        Discussion: Davis, _The Return of Martin Guerre_ (entire)

                        ***Response Paper #1 due in class**



_Unit Two: Toward the Creation of the Modern State_

M Feb 18:       Constitutionalism

                                    Merriman, Chapter 6

                                    Hobbes, from Leviathan (IMHS-Absolutism)

                                    Locke, from Second Treatise on Government (IMHS-

Constitutionalism)

W Feb 20        Absolutism

                                    Merriman, Chapter 7

                                    Bossuet, "Treatise on Politics" (IMHS-Absolutism)

                                    Duc de Saint-Simon, Court of Louis XIV (IMHS-Absolutism)



M Feb 25        "New" Worlds, New Economies

                                    Merriman, Chapter 5

W Feb 27        New Science

                                    Merriman, Chapter 8

                                    Descartes, from Discourse on Method (IMHS-Scientific 

Revolution)



_Unit Three: Reason and Revolution_

M Mar 4          Enlightenment

                                    Merriman, Chapter 10

                                    Montesquieu, from _The Spirit of the Laws_ (IMHS-Enlightenment)

                                    Voltaire, "On Toleration" (IMHS-Enlightenment)

W Mar 6         Enlightenment

                                    Discussion of Rousseau, _The Social Contract_ (entire)

                                    ***Response Paper #2 due in class**



M Mar 11        French Revolution

                                    Merriman, Chapter 12

                                    Sieyes, "What is the Third Estate?" (IMHS-French Revolution)

                                    Declaration of the Rights of Man (IMHS-French Revolution)

                                    Olympe de Gouges, "Declaration of the Rights of Woman"

W Mar 13       French Revolution

                                    Robespierre, Terror and Virtue (IMHS-French Revolution)



M Mar 18        **Midterm Exam**

W Mar 20       Napoleon and Everthing After

                                    Merriman, Ch. 13 and 14

Metternich, "Political Confession of Faith" (IMHS-Conservative

Order)



M Mar 25: Spring Break

W Mar 27: Spring Break



_Unit Four: Capitalism and its Discontents_

M Apr 1          Industrial Rev

                                    Merriman, Chapter 16 to p. 708

Discussion: Dickens, _Hard Times_ (entire)

***Response Paper #3 due in class**



W Apr 3          Making of Class I: the Bourgeoisie

                                    Merriman, Chapter 15

                                   

M Apr 8:         Making of Class II: The Working Class

                                    Merriman, Chapter 16 from p. 708 and Chapter 17

                                    Marx, _The Communist Manifesto_ (entire)

W Apr 10        Darwin, Imperialism, Nationalism

                                    Merriman, Chapters 18 and 19

                                    Darwin, from _The Origin of the Species_ (IMHS-Darwin, Freud)

                                    Kipling, "White Man's Burden" (IMHS-Imperialism)

                                    Mazzini, "On Nationality" (IMHS-Nationalism)



_Unit Five: The Age of Anxiety_

M Apr 15        Modernism

                                    Merriman, Chapter 22

                                    Freud, from _Five Lectures of Psycho-Analysis_ (IMHS-Darwin,

Freud)

W Apr 17        WWI

                                    Merriman, Chapter 23

                                    Discussion: _All Quiet on the Western Front_

                                    ***Reponse Paper #4 due in class**



M Apr 22        The Russian Revolution

                                    Merriman, Chapter 25

                                    Lenin, from _State and Revolution_ (IMHS-Russian Revolution)

W Apr 24        The Second Age of Isms: Communism, Facism, Nazism

                                    Merriman, Chapters 26 and 27

                                    Mussolini, "What is Fascism?" (IMHS-Fascism)

                                    Hitler, "Speech of April 12, 1921 (IMHS-Nazism)



_Unit 6: The Making of Contemporary Europe_

M Apr 29        World War II and the Holocaust

                                    Merriman, Chapter 28

                                    The Munich Pact (IMHS-WWII)

                                    Churchill, "Their Finest Hour" (IMHS-WWII)

                                    The Nuremberg Laws (IMHS-Holocaust)

W May 1:       The Cold War

                                    Merriman, Chapter 29 to p. 1313

                                    Stalin and Churchill, "Iron Curtain Speeches" (IMHS-Bipolar

World)



M May 6: Challenges to the Cold War Order: Decolonization and 1968

                                    Merriman, Chapter 29 from p. 1313

                                    Nkrumah, "I Speak of Freedom" (IMHS-Africa since 1945)

                                    Nehru, "Speech on the Granting of Indian Independence" (IMHS-

PW Asia)

W May 8: Fall of Berlin Wall

                                    Discussion: McEwan, _Black Dogs_ (entire)

                                    ***Response paper #5 due in class**

