#

American Culture/History 373  
Course Requirements

### Description

The reading assignments are an essential part of this course. In fact, if you
do not read the assignment for a particular week you will find it difficult to
follow along with the lecture material. Because we cover such a vast amount of
time and material, you will be responsible for each assignment and I will
expect you to come prepared to discuss any of the assigned material on each
day. You, of course, must read the assignment by the time your section meets
for that week so that you can have interesting and lively discussions.

In addition to mastering the particular subject matter I will also ask that
you work on improving your writing and speaking skills. I suggest that you
purchase E.B. White, _Elements of Style_. This is an excellent, concise guide
that will benefit your writing. Also, in all of your papers you should follow
the Katherine Turabian, Chicago Manual of Style for paper presentation.
Furthermore, class participation is 20% of your final grade and I expect each
of you to participate in our classroom and section discussions. Effective
communication is an essential part of your education and I hope to help you
improve these skills.

### Readings

The reading assignments for this class are substantial, averaging 100 pages a
week, but are not difficult and have been chosen for their readability.
Required texts are listed below. Texts will be available at the Shaman Drum
Bookstore. All books and xerox packets will be available at Library Reserve.
Try to keep the readings in good order. If you find something missing let me
know immediately.

  * Clyde Milner, III, ed., _Major Problems in the History of the American West._
  * Richard White, _It's Your Misfortune and None of My Own_
  * William Cronon, _Changes in the Land_
  * Susan Shelby Magoffin, _Down the Santa Fe Trail and Into Mexico_
  * John G. Neihardt, _Black Elk Speaks_
  * Donald Worster, _Dust Bowl_
  * Annie Clark Tanner, _A Mormon Mother_
  * Leslie Marmon Silko, _Ceremony_
  * Rodolfo Anaya, _Bless Me, Ultima_ 

_Major Problems_ and _It's Your Misfortune_ will be used as textbooks and as
the basis for our many class discussions. These two books will the most useful
to you in supplementing the material from the lectures. The other books will
give you specific information and illuminate specific time periods and themes
of the class.

### Writing Assignments

There will be two writing assignments for this course:

  1. Information Packet 

You will write a 10-15 page paper on one of the topics I hand out in class or
one that you find particularly fascinating. The packet must include a map, one
primary source, and three secondary sources. You will be asked to go to the
library, gather the sources and then synthesize them into a coherent and
interesting discussion.

Topics include: Civilian Conservation Corp, Tennessee Valley Authority, Yucca
Mountain, Hetch Hetchy, Quiviera, Wampum, Northwest Ordinance, Santa Fe Trail,
Mormons, Sioux, Kaiser Aluminum, Zoot Suit Riots, Exodusters, and Lewis and
Clark.

  2. Primary Source Paper 

You will be asked to log onto the World Wide Web and access the [Library of
Congress](http://www.loc.gov) source material in the WPA papers. There is a
vast array of material and I would like you to choose two accounts of people
who were living in the American West during the early nineteenth century. What
were there lives like? How were they similar or different? I would also like
you to address questions of how to use these sources. We will discuss this in
more detail as the assignment draws nearer. 5-7 pages.

### Exams

The mid-term and final exam will be take home exams of essay questions. You
will also come on the appointed days of the examinations to take a short test
on ID's and geography. As we get closer to the exams I will explain the
logistics.

### Class Participation

Class attendance and participation is an essential part of your grade and I
expect you to attend all sessions unless you are ill or otherwise can not
attend. Please let me know if you need notes or other help in making up work.
You will be responsible for all material covered in class regardless of your
participation.

THE FINAL EXAM WILL BE ON DECEMBER 18TH AT 10:30 A.M.. THE FORMAT IS EXACTLY
THE SAME AS THE MID-TERM: 2 ESSAYS: ONE BASED ON READINGS OF SECOND HALF AND
ONE BASED ON ALL MATERIAL COVERED OVER THE SEMESTER. THERE WILL ALSO BE THE
IN-CLASS PORTION OF GEOGRAPHY AND IDS. THE FINAL WILL BE CUMULATIVE OF THE
WHOLE SEMESTER. YOU CAN PICK UP THE TAKE HOME PORTION OUTSIDE OF MY OFFICE ON
THE FIRST DAY OF EXAMS, FRIDAY, DECEMBER 13TH AT 9:00 A.M.. BRING YOUR ESSAYS
TO THE SCHEDULED EXAM AND THEN ANSWER THE GEOGRAPHY AND ID PORTION.

### Final Grade

Your Final grade will be based on the following

  * Class Participation - 20% 
  * Mid-Term - 20% (Two essays, I.D.s, and map) 
  * Final Exam - Cumulative - 30% (Two essays,I.D.s, and map) 
  * Primary Source Paper -10% 
  * Information Packet - 20% 

### [Syllabus](syll.html)

### [Back to course homepage](index.html)

