**Exploring American Spiritual Worlds**

**First Year Program (FRPG 187H)**

**Holmes College Fall 2000 Syllabus**

  
  
  
  
  

Plenary: T/Th 10:10-11:40 a.m. in Hepburn 113

Seminar: TH 2:50-4:15

Seminar Locations:

Csete: Piskor 016

MacWilliams: Hepburn 011

O'Shaughnessy: Hepburn 111  
    


**Faculty and College Staff:**  
    
    
  Mark MacWilliams (Chair)

Anne Csete

Laura O'Shaughnessy

Res Coord: Jennifer Lewitas

College Assists:

Alicia Jessmer

Cathie Wright

Writing Mentor:

Amanda Morrison

** ** |  Richardson 207  
    


Piskor 116

Hepburn 212  
    


105 Whitman  
    


102

202  
    


114 | #5128  
    


#5827

#5209  
    


#5527  
    


#6141

#6182  
    


#7050 | T/TH 1:30-2:30 (or appt.)  
    


M/W 3:30-:4:30 (or appt.)

M 3:30-4:30/W 10-12  
    


** ** | [mmacwilliams@stlawu.edu](mailto:mmacwilliams@stlawu.edu)  
    


[acsete@stlawu.edu](mailto:acsete@stlawu.edu)  
    


[lnos@stlawu.edu](mailto:lnos@stlawu.edu)  
    


[x2ajess@music.stlawu.edu](mailto:x2ajess@music.stlawu.edu)

Cathie2@hotmail.com  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
    **Description:**

**Many spiritual traditions in addition to the Judeo-Christian have taken root
in American soil, providing us with a pluralistic spiritual landscape. This
semester we will explore selected religious traditions and diversity in
America. We will look at how faith gets lived rather than focus only on
doctrines or sacred texts. We will pay attention to practice as well as
notions of the sacred. We will gain first-hand experience with these
traditions through discussion, role playing, art, music, rituals, speakers,
field trips, films, and research projects. Throughout the year, we will work
with elders, masters, teachers, and leaders from several spiritual traditions,
including Native American, Muslim, Christian, Zen Buddhist, and Goddess
spirituality. We will be self reflective about what it means to engage in an
exploration of, or be a "guest" in, traditions other than our own. Themes we
will consider include the search for self-identity, creating boundaries and
community in a pluralistic society, defining "religion," recovering and
maintaining tradition, and diversity within religious traditions.**

**Required Textbooks:** **Julia Mitchell Corbett, _Religion in America_
(fourth edition)**

**Carl Hammerschlag, _The Dancing Healers_**

**Scott Momaday, _The Way to Rainy Mountain_**

**James McBride, _The Color of Water_**

**Natalie Goldberg, _Long Quiet Highway_**

**Diana Hacker, _A Writer's Reference_ (fourth edition)**

**Selected Handouts** **Course Requirements:** **Attendance**

**Attendance is required. More than four absences (from seminar and plenary)
will substantially reduce your grade. Three tardies will be counted as one
absence. If you enter the room after your name has been called in roll, you
are tardy. (It is your responsibility to contact your seminar leader
immediately after class to change an absence into a tardy.) When you are
absent or tardy, be sure to tell your seminar leader why you missed class
time. An absence because of sickness or a game or practice is still an
absence; this is why we give you four. Use your absences wisely.**

**In class, we expect your active, informed, and respectful class
participation in plenary and seminars. If we are having a discussion, you need
to be an active conversation partner. This means that you have to learn to be
a good speaker and a good listener. That means speaking up when you have a
point and letting other people have the time to have their say. Also, during
lectures or when someone has the floor, you need to show some courtesy by not
talking or engaging in rowdy behavior. Put yourself in the position of the
speaker. How would you feel? Students who sit silently throughout the semester
and students who monopolize the discussion will be encouraged to change their
behavior. Your level and quality of participation will be considered in your
final course grade.**

**Note on the schedule: Read your syllabus every week to find out what is
happening in class. There really is no excuse for you not to know when papers
and readings are due. Changes in the schedule may have to be made during the
semester and will be announced in class. You are responsible for knowing about
these announced changes whether you are in class or not. If you are absent,
you should check with a professor or classmate about any information you
missed.**

**Tuesday Reading Quizzes (15%): There are twelve weekly quizzes to test
whether or not you have done the reading. These will be given on Tuesdays at
the beginning of class. We will average your top ten quiz grades for fifteen
percent of your grade. Why are we doing this? The reason is that reading is
essential. If you haven¨ªt read the assignments, you can have little
understanding of what the class session will be about and can not contribute
anything of your own. We will not summarize the book for you in lecture. We
assume you have read the material and are prepared to talk about it. When you
read for class, read carefully. Read for comprehension, not simply to get
through it. You may have to read through a selection several times. You may
need to have a dictionary next to you. If you are having trouble understanding
the reading, see your seminar leader early in the semester. Reading an
assignment for the first time the night before it is due is not acceptable.
Your syllabus shows you what is scheduled so you have plenty of time in
advance to prepare before the class. Please note that you are also responsible
for out of class video assignments. Questions on these videos will appear in
the quizzes.**

**Mid-Term Examination (20%): We will give you a set of questions on the
readings and course materials in advance of the test date so you can prepare
for this in class examination. We will select a few questions from these for
you to write on for the exam.**

**[Writing Project #1](http://it.stlawu.edu/~mmac/Writingpro1.html) (N.G.):
You will write _two short papers_ (one and a half pages each) that you will
revise into a _final three page essay_.**

**Writing Project #2 (10%): You will revise your mid-term in-class essay exam
into a three page paper.**

**Writing Project #3 (15%): You will revise your notes/speech for oral report
#2 into a three page paper.**

**Our Writing Mentor: Ms. Amanda Morrison is our Holmes College writing mentor
for this year. She is your writing mentor because she is an excellent writer
and is well trained to assist you in improving your writing skills. A key goal
of the FYP is to help you become a better writer in order to meet the high
standards of college level writing. You are free to consult with Amanda at her
convenience. You can use her to go over rough drafts of your papers, to
proofread your work, to brainstorm with her over ways to approach a writing
assignment, and to work on revising essay assignments. It is your
responsibility to make the appointment with her and to appear at the time you
have reserved. If your seminar leader decides that you would need assistance
from Amanda, s/he will ask you to schedule a conference with her. It is your
responsibility to make and keep this appointment. Amanda will keep an
attendance record that we will consult when determining your final course
grade.**  
    
    
    


**Please Note: All writing projects are typewritten. Text should be double-
spaced in 10-12 point font with one inch margins on all sides. All pages
should be numbered. Your name, the date, and the name of the assignment should
appear in the top left corner of the first page. All written assignments are
due on Friday at 4 p.m. in your seminar leader's departmental mailbox. Late
papers will be marked .5 off for every 24 hours they are late (for example, a
4.0 paper that is two days late will be reduced to a 3.0 grade). Papers will
be graded according to the following scale:** **4.0 (A) This grade is reserved
for clearly superior work. A paper with this grade argues a particular point
of view clearly and effectively. The paper is well researched, well written,
and skillfully draws upon the class readings and lectures to support its
thesis. It shows that the author has assimilated the material, integrated it
into his or her own point of view, and developed a line of thinking that
offers a novel and interesting take upon the material. An "A" paper is
enjoyable to read. It has a strong voice that speaks from the page and has
something serious to say that grabs the reader's attention. It stimulates
thought and provokes discussion.**

**3.0 (B) A "B" paper is well researched and well written, but exhibits a less
well developed argument and point of view than an "A" paper. It shows a
competent handling of the material, but does not have a clear thesis, organize
the argument as clearly, or use sources as effectively within the body of the
paper. It may also have some stylistic problems that make its ideas unclear to
the reader. It is easy enough to read but not exciting.**

**2.0 (C) This grade is given to a paper that shows a satisfactory knowledge
of the subject matter. There is a thesis and an argument. It shows that you
have read the material and that you have tried to say something about it with
some thought and effort. A "C" paper is not as focused, lacking a clear
statement of your thesis or an effective argument that builds your case. There
are organizational or stylistic problems that make it difficult for the reader
to understand what you are trying to say. A "C" paper often contains errors in
grammar, spelling and punctuation that hurt the presentation. It's also boring
to read. The reader feels the paper is at best a no frills treatment of the
issue.**

**1.0 (D) This grade is given to a paper that is deficient in many respects.
It is not well researched. It does not show that you have carefully read the
material. It is poorly organized, lacking a clear thesis and a logical
supporting argument that builds your case. There are also numerous
grammatical, spelling, and punctuation errors throughout the text. It is too
short. There is either no use of sources or quotations are strung together to
make the paper. It is very difficult to understand what you are trying to say.
A "D" grade indicates that you have to improve your writing, or work harder on
the course material. Receiving a "D" means that you need to talk with me right
away so that I can help you.**

**0.0 (F) Work that is not done or shows little evidence of working with the
class material deserves this grade.**  
    
  **Please note: Average work gets an average grade (2.5). Our expectations of
average are based on the typical first year student. It¨ªs rare that everyone
is above the mean. When we first get a paper, we assume it¨ªs average. If it
shines, we will give a higher grade. Please be aware that expectations of
performance are much higher in college than in high school.**  
    
    
    
    
  **Oral Report #1 (10%): This is a graded group presentation/performance on a
passage from _The Way to Rainy Mountain_ that you will do during seminar. Your
group will do a dramatic reading of a passage from the book and then discuss
the passage¨ªs importance in terms of the themes/issues of the course. More
specifics on the nature of this assignment will be forthcoming.**

**Oral Report #2 (10%): You will do library research on a current event that
highlights an important religious issue for Americans today. American
religious pluralism has caused many conflicts over religious freedom and
expression, the separation of church and state, and basic social and family
issues. For example. Wiccans (contemporary witches) who are in the military
are free to practice their religious rituals at military facilities. However,
this Spring, a group of fundamentalist Christians criticized the army for
encouraging "Satanism" by allowing an open circle of Wiccans to practice at
Fort Hood. If you chose this topic, your research group would investigate the
facts of what happened, and the issues involved in this controversy. Your
research will form the basis of your group¨ªs oral presentation that you will
practice and present during seminar at the end of the semester. More
information on possible issues/topics, the research group¨ªs structure, and
what is expected is forthcoming.**

**Final Exam (15%): This will be a comprehensive examination during final exam
week that will test you on the key terms and ideas of the course. The exam
will include a take home essay that will encourage you to reflect on the
issues and readings that we have discussed throughout the semester.**

**Portfolio (5%): You must submit a final portfolio of all the written work
that you have done for this course (such as class notes, essays, revisions of
essays, oral report notes and outlines, etc.). There should be a "table of
contents" page listing the contents of your portfolio. The end of the
portfolio should also include a thoughtful _two to three page essay_
evaluating your work as a writer this semester. Your seminar leader will be
looking for evidence that you have looked critically at your strengths and
weaknesses as a writer: what went wrong, what went right, how you have
improved, what do you need to work on in the semester ahead. Please don¨ªt
complain or argue for a better grade in this essay. Your portfolio should be
organized by date, collected in a brown envelope, and submitted to your
seminar leader during the final exam period. Neatness and organization
count.**  
    
  **Weekly Schedule**

**_Week #1_**

**Th 8/31 Introduction**

**Seminar: Introductions/Discussions on Issues of the Course**

**_Unit 1_ : Spiritual Pluralism in America: An Introduction**

**_Week #2_**

**S 9/3 and M 9/4 Video on the Network:["The Hate Crimes Question"
](http://it.stlawu.edu/~mmac/Hatecrimes.html)6, 8, 10 and 12 p.m.**

**T 9/5 Studying Religion and American Spiritual Diversity**

**                 Reading: Corbett, Introduction and Ch 1**

**                 Reading Quiz #1**

**Th 9/7 Religious Life in the United States**

**                 Reading: Corbett, Ch 2**

**Seminar: Yeshiva at Yale Debate¨®Religious Pluralism and Controversy on the
College Campus/ Discussion on Assignment--Short Paper#1**  
    


**F 9/8 First Short Paper #1 for Writing Project #1 is due (This is an account
of your personal and your family's religious background).**

**_Week #3_**

**T 9/12** Consensus Religion Reading: Corbett, Ch 3 up to p.46

Reading Quiz #2 Guest Speaker: Reverend Mike T 9/12 and W 9/13 Movie on the
network _Protestant Spirit U.S.A,_ 6, 8, 10, & 12 a.m.

Th 9/14 The Impact of Protestantism on American Culture Reading: Corbett, Ch 3
pp.46-69 Seminar: Discussion of Short Paper #1/ Discussion on Assignment,
Second Short Paper

F 9/15 Second Short Paper for Writing Project #1 is due (This is your summary
of Corbett's academic approach to studying American religiosity)

**Saturday Sept. 16th 8 a.m.-5 p.m.[Class Field Trip to
Ottawa](http://it.stlawu.edu/~mmac/itinerary.html)**

**\--Religious Diversity in North America**  
    


**_Week #4_**

T 9/19 Discussion of the Field Trip/ Intro to Catholicism: Guest Speaker:
Father Harry

Sign Up Sheet for an optional student conference with your seminar leader for
discussion of Writing Project #1 or for Optional Computer Class

Th 9/21 Plenary is cancelled (Optional workshop on reading skills with Steve
Runge, Academic Skills Coordinator)

Seminar: Seminar leaders will be available in their offices for private
student conferences/ Optional Class on Learning Microsoft Word/ P-Drives and
E-Mail, Valentine 124, 2:50-3:50).

F 9/22 Writing Project #1 is due. This is the three page revised essay based
on your earlier short writing assignments)   **_Week #5_**

T 9/26 Catholicism¨®The Role of Acculturation and Conflicts within the Church
Reading: Corbett, Ch 4

Reading Quiz #3  
    
  T 9/26 and W 9/27 Movie on the network: _Judaism: The Religion of a People_
at __ 6, 8, 10 and 12 p.m.

Th 9/28 Judaism¨®"What the Son Wishes to Forget the Grandson Wishes to
Remember"

Reading: Corbett Ch 5

Seminar: Discussion **** /Seminar discussions on Writing Project #1   **Unit
#2: "Searching Stories"-- Finding Oneself in Native American Religions**

**_Week #6_**

S 10/1 and M 10/2 Movie on the Network: _Momaday: Voice of the West_ at __ 6,
8, 10 and 12 p.m.  
    


T 10/3 Making Identifications: Who are Native Americans? Who are the Kiowas?
Who is N. Scott Momaday? Reading: _Way to Rainy Mountain,_ pp.1-43

Reading Quiz #4  
    
  Th 10/5 Themes in Native American Religions

Reading: _Way to Rainy Mountain,_ finish

Seminar: Discussion of _TheWay to Rainy Mountain_ _/_ Mid-Term Exam Prep/ Oral
Report #1 Explanation

**_Week #7_**

T 10/10 Mid-term Examination/ Mid-Term Review

Th 10/12 Mid-term break

**_Week #8_**

S 10/15 and M 10/16 Movie on the Network: _The Sun Rise Dance_ at __ 6, 8, 10
and 12 p.m.

T 10/17 Rituals for Self Transformation/ Assignment Overview

Reading: Hammerschlag, _Dancing Healers,_ pp. 1-98. Reading Quiz #5 Th 10/19
Sacred Truths to Tell Plenary Speaker Jake Swamp, Chief, Mohawk Nation

Preparation for Oral Report #1 Seminar: Oral Report #1

**_Week #9_**

T 10/24 Encountering the Sacred Other: Native American Spirituality as an
Alternative Reading Quiz #6

Reading: Finish Hammerschlag  
    
  **_Unit 3: What Color is God?_**

T 10/24 and W 10/25 Movie on the Network: _Religion and Race in America_ at __
6, 8, 10 and 12 p.m.

Th 10/26 Black Christianity/Explanation of Oral Report #2

Reading: Corbett, Ch. 9, pp.201-202,212-230 Handouts: Oral Report #2
Assignment Description and Research Group Choice Sheet Seminar: Role Play
(Read Handout: _Letter from the Burmingham Jail_ ) Announcement of the
Research Groups/ Group #1 (Anne¨ªs) goes to the library to learn research
techniques for the oral report (3:30-4:15). F 10/27 Writing Project #2 is due
(This is the three page revision of your mid-term essay)

**_Week #10_**

T 10/31 Islam in America

Movie: _Malcolm X --El Hajj Malik El Shabazz_ (Partial screening in class)

Speaker--To be Announced

Corbett, Ch.10 Reading Quiz #7 Th 11/2 The Impact of Christianity on McBride¨ªs
Life

McBride, _Color of Water,_ pp.1-85

Seminar: Discussion/Group #2 (Mark¨ªs) will go to the library(2:30-3:15)/ Group
#3 (Laura¨ªs) will go to library to learn research techniques for the oral
report (3:30-4:15).

**_Week #11_**

T 11/7 McBride, pp.85-193 Reading Quiz #8 Th 11/9 McBride, finish reading

**_Unit 4:_ Waking Up in America**

**_Week #12_**

T11/14 Open¨®Prepare for Your Oral Reports

W 11/15 Wednesday: Lunch with Dr. Carl Hammerschlag, author of _The Dancing
Healers_ (Rebert Lounge)

Th 11/16 Asian Religions in America

Reading: Corbett, Ch. 11 Reading Quiz #9

Speaker Rev. Roko Osho Sherry Chayat, Hoen-ji Zen Temple, Syracuse Seminar:
Practice Session for Oral Report #2 (Video-taped)

(Oral Report #2 Write Up is due). **Please note:** We expect that this class
will run over to 4:45. Please check your schedule, and make sure nothing will
interfere with your full participation in this session. We have cancelled a
seminar session near the end of the semester to make up for this time.
**Thanksgiving Break!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!**

**_Week #13_**

**T 11/28 New Age Spirituality**

**Reading: Corbett Ch. 12** **Reading Quiz #10** **(Feedback on oral report
write ups with comments for revision)**

**Th 11/30 Goldberg**

**Reading: Goldberg, pp.1-51**

**Seminar: Oral Report #2 (in Shuffled Seminar Groups)** **Please note: We
expect that this class will run over to 4:45. Please check your schedule, and
make sure nothing will interfere with your full participation in this session.
We have cancelled a seminar session near the end of the semester to make up
for this time.** **_Week #14_**

**T 12/5 Reading: Goldberg, pp.55-99** **Reading Quiz #11** **Th 12/7 Where
the Streams Cross"**

**Reading: Goldberg, pp.103-175** **Workshop on Core Shamanism by Kathy
Montan** **Seminar: Workshop: Altars¨®Sacralizing People¨ªs Spaces (All seminars
meet together in Hepburn 113)**

**S/12/10 and M 12/11 Movie on the Network: Principles and Practice of Zen 6,
9, and 12 p.m.**

**_Week #15_** **T 12/12 Goldberg, pp.179-238//Review for Final Exam**

**Reading Quiz #12** **Th 12/14 Evaluations**

**Seminar: Cancelled**

**F 12/15 Writing Project #3 is due.**

**Final Exam is during the examination period.**

**Your portfolio is due on the day of the Exam.**  
    
    
    


