**Theoretical Positions in Native American Studies**

**Dr. Alexandra (Witkin) New Holy**

Native American Studies (NAS) 540

Fall 2000

  

**Office hours:** 2-186 Wilson Hal

W 4-6; R 1-3 994-5261 Office & Voice Mail

T 12:30-1:30 (For grads) anewholy@montana.edu  


This course provides an introduction for graduate students to the central
conceptualizations of the academic discipline of Native American Studies
including several of the theoretical paradigms operative within it. In the
process, students gain an understanding of the contributions of Native
American Studies to theoretical understandings within, across, and beyond
dominant academic disciplines.  


This course is _required_ for the M.A. in Native American Studies at MSU.  


**Prerequisites:**

NAS 100 -- Introduction to Native American Studies, _or equivalent_

_and_ NAS 330 -- Federal Indian Law and Policy, _or equivalent_  


This course is intended as the foundation course of the Master's curriculum in
Native American Studies. It provides an in-depth understanding of the
development and purposes of Native American Studies as well as multiple
theoretical models for understanding historical, contemporary and future
Native American issues. The course provides a basis for students to think
critically and multi-dimensionally about the areas they will research during
the course of their graduate studies, as well as areas they are likely to
confront after graduation should they opt for a career involving Native
Americans. Even if students have no further contact with Native peoples after
graduation, the course develops the student's ability to conceptualize
problems and issues from multiple positions, and to consider and develop
ethical approaches in their work. It provides insight into a wide-range of
research areas in the discipline, other required courses in the Master's
program (541, 572, and 530), and most of the topics covered in the
Department's "elective" Master's courses (520-525). In conjunction with a
required methodology course (NAS 541, or an equivalent methodology course in
another discipline), the student will have a solid foundation for approaching
and completing the required Master's thesis or professional paper. Finally,
the proposed course prepares the student for the level of reading, critical
thinking, and communication (written and oral) they will encounter both within
the Department's curriculum and in other Master's level courses outside of the
Department.  
    
    
    
    
    
    


**Grades and responsibilities:**

There are 3 components of the course grade:

Seminar participation 20%

Two seminar presentations 40%

Seminar paper 40%  


**Seminar participation**. Each student will be required to do the assigned
readings before seminar and be prepared to discuss the readings during
seminar. Readings consist of up to 200 pages per week for 15 weeks. Each
student will be evaluated according to overall attention to and participation
in seminar discussions. Attendance is a factor in the evaluation. Students are
expected to communicate with the Professor during office hours regarding their
attendance and comfort level with discussion so that individualized
evaluations can be made according to student temperament.

**Seminar presentations** are required in order to develop oral communication
skills, confidence, and ability. Because many of the students are preparing to
enter administrative or teaching positions oral communication will be a key to
their success. Oral communication is especially important in Native American
communities as it has been a traditional method for transmitting knowledge.
Oratorical skills have been a standard skill for Native leadership positions.
This requirement is also intended to provide the Professor with a more broad-
based assessment of the student's comprehension of the subject matter as well.
Two presentations are required so students have an opportunity to improve
based on the Professor's assessment of their initial presentation. If students
improve on their second presentation their grade will be greater than the
average grades of the two presentations. If they do equally well on the two
presentations their grade will reflect that fact. If they fail to improve or
sustain their grade on the second presentation, their final presentation grade
will be an average of the two presentation grades.

On the first day of class, each student will choose two weeks for which they
will lead the discussion. This requires extra preparations listed below. The
following is to be word-processed and turned into the Professor at least 24
hours before the class time in which they will be moderating the seminar:

1) An outline summarizing the week's readings, including the main points of
each article / theoretical position, and the main points for that week's
topic(s)

2) Strengths and weaknesses of each article / theoretical approach

3) Questions the article / theoretical position presents

4) Particular points that you agree or disagree with, and the reasoning for
your positions

5) Discussion questions for the seminar  


The **seminar paper** Each student will choose one of the primary academic
areas addressed in Native American Studies. Many of these are listed on the
syllabus, however some are not, and with Professor approval one not on the
syllabus may be the subject of the seminar paper. The seminar paper should
address the main theoretical positions for the particular academic area
chosen, the strengths and weaknesses of each position, and include an analysis
of the theoretical positions in terms of the student's academic interest(s).
The seminar paper is due on the last day of class.

A "graduate-level" paper is at least 15 pages, includes at least 35 citations
and 20 sources including leading academic journals and books in the
appropriate fields. Critical analysis and synthesis of at least three
theoretical concepts are required. It will be graded on a 100 points possible
basis:  


Length 10 points

Spelling & typos 10 points

Sentence clarity 10 points

Bibliography 10 points

Citations 10 points

Coherency, Organization,

Style 25 points

Content 25 points  
    
    


**Professor Responsibilities:**

The Professor is responsible for the assessment of the student's performance
in the course, including the student's weekly participation, discussion
leadership, and seminar paper.  


The Professor is responsible for helping the student discussion leader
facilitate the weekly presentations and discussions. The Professor is
responsible for the overall tempo and tenor of the seminar sessions.  


The Professor is responsible for being available and responsive to the
students for support and help with any aspect of their work in the course, or
their graduate studies.  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**COURSE OVERVIEW**

**Theoretical Positions in Native American Studies**

**NAS 540**

  

**Part 1. The Development, Evolution, and Future of Native American Studies as
Both Haven and Differentiated Discipline**

Part one traces the development of Native American Studies including debates
on its ideological purposes. Unlike most academic disciplines Native American
Studies was in large part initiated to address the exigencies of Native
American university and college students: an institutional comfort zone and
clearinghouse for their specific needs and issues. In many instances offering
courses developed around Native American content was either equal to, or
secondary to the service responsibilities borne by early programs. Today,
Native American Studies retains a unique character in that it still wears a
large and comprehensive "service" hat. However the humble course or two
initially offered in most programs has now generated a unique (but not well-
understood) academic discipline.

The first part of the course is designed to provide the student with a greater
understanding of the origins and development of Native American Studies
including the discipline's primary mission today, namely the emphasis on
theories, applications, curriculum, and outcomes based in indigenous
worldviews.  


**Part 2. Native American Identity: Definitions, Representations,
Appropriations**

Definitions of "Native American"

Gender Identity

Mixed-bloods and Identity

Representations and Appropriations  


An overview and analysis of the multiple definitions of the subjects of Native
American Studies. Demographic, sociological, historical, and postmodern
meanings of "Native American" are presented with a focus on the shifting
nature of both institutional and self-referential identification. Sub-sections
emphasize the need for a multi-faceted, layered understanding of Native
American identity. The course proposes that gender and mixed-blood identities
are as critical to individual Native American identity as tribal affiliation
is to communal identity. The fluidity between representation and appropriation
is presented. Such fluidity demonstrates the need for every scholar in the
discipline of Native American Studies to carefully consider the representation
of his or her subjects, and his or her ethical responsibilities to both
individual subjects and (the) subject(s') communities. One benchmark of
misrepresentation and appropriation of Native American identity is the lack,
on the part of the perpetrator, of a "tribal" identity derived from
integration into authentic Native community. Such a person, for example, often
lacks a "lived understanding" of the "group first" ethic central to all
indigenous worldviews. This ethical concept, as well as others are introduced
in this section.

Goal: to encourage consideration to the interface between communal identity
and individual identity formation.

Goal: to provide multiple understandings of Native American identities and to
encourage critical thinking _within_ Native ethical frameworks when
representing Native peoples.  
    
    


**Part 3. Imperialism, Colonialism, and Research**

A critical cultural and historical assessment of the context for research
involving Native peoples: imperialism and colonialism. These two factors
affect all research on Native peoples whether the research is past, present,
or future. Thus, a critical understanding of the terms' meanings and
influences is necessary before an examination of the theoretical positions in
the rest of the course.  


**Part 4. Indigenous Theories** **and Ethics as Primary Paradigms**

Native Lifeways (Philosophy, Religion, and Spirituality)

Environment

Native Politics and Society

Science

Education

Aesthetics (Art and Film)

Contemporary Native Literatures

Oral Narratives  


An introduction to theoretical paradigms that are specifically and almost
wholly derived from indigenous worldviews. These theoretical positions start
from a specific western-defined field of study such as religion, environmental
studies, politics, science, education, aesthetics, or literature. However,
their approach denies western conceptual frameworks, including disciplinary
boundaries almost entirely. Indigenous theoretical constructs of education,
for example, flow freely into religious and environmental studies. Fundamental
western categories and premises are not assumed nor engaged, (i.e. "scientific
method," "freedom," "art"). They are often completely displaced by indigenous-
derived values, metaphors, and constructs. The essential characteristics of
part four theories are their positions that the area they address can be (and
for the purposes of Native peoples, _must be_ ) completely re-theorized based
on indigenous understandings.

Goal: to become conversant in and cognizant of, the language of indigenous
theory; and, to be fully aware that it is an appropriate option to discard
western theoretical models if they can not explain indigenous reality or
needs.  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


**Part 5. Western Theoretical Positions: Counter-hegemonic Strategies,
Engagements, Readings, and Appropriations from Within**

Native Lifeways (Philosophy, Religion, and Spirituality)

Oral Traditions and Science

History

History, Ethnohistory, and New History

History and Gender

History and Environment

Oral History

Tribal History

Oral Narratives

Ethnography

Contemporary Native Literatures

Critical Theory / Postmodern Theory

Economic Development

Cultural Patrimony

Language Loss and Retention  


A continuation of the examination of theoretical positions applied to
indigenous peoples. These positions however, are ones that engage more
directly with dominant theoretical constructs. These positions are more likely
to advance the expansion of dominant theoretical concepts, as opposed to
entirely transcending and transforming them. As in part four it is a goal for
students to see how certain western theoretical sites are limited when applied
to the Native American issues. In this section though the sites are still
applicable, with qualifications. Students will be expected to understand the
limitations, qualifications, and reasoning behind the qualifications proposed.
For example, we will examine the limitations of certain theoretical approaches
to dreams, culture, nature, history, ethnography, and economic development and
how those theoretical approaches may be expanded to accommodate Native
American understandings, cultures, and issues.

Goals: understandings of unique theoretical sites produced by the application
of dominant theoretical positions to Native peoples and issues. The
applicability of critical theory and postmodern theory to Native cultures is
also discussed, in part because of their currency in academia today; and in
part because of their promises and problems when applied to indigenous
peoples. This section, as well as the others in part five also demonstrate to
the student Native American Studies' participation in and contributions to the
major academic disciplines and discourses.

Goal: to become conversant with and aware of these two major strands of
interdisciplinary academic discourse.

Two final issues that will be addressed for their significance to Native
peoples and Native Studies are cultural patrimony and language loss. These
topics are intended to facilitate critical thought and discussion around two
of the most confounding issues confronting Native peoples today.  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


**Seminar Schedule:**

Page counts are estimates based on the pages of text **excluding** endnotes .  


**Sept. 6**

Introductions

Course Description, Overview of Syllabus

Selection of Discussion Topics by Students  


**Sept. 13** (119 pp.)

**Part 1.** **The Development, Evolution, and Future of Native American
Studies as Both Haven and Differentiated Discipline**  


**Sept. 20** (179 pp.)

**Part 2. Native American Identity: Definitions, Representations,
Appropriations**

Definitions of "Native American"

Gender Identity  


**Sept. 27** (161 pp.)

Mixed-bloods and Identity

Representations and Appropriations  


**Oct. 4** (106 pp.)

**Part 3. Imperialism, Colonialism, and Research**  


**Oct. 11** (165 pp.)

**Part 4.** **Indigenous Theories and Ethics as Primary Paradigms**

Native Lifeways (Philosophy, Religion, and Spirituality)

Environment  


**Oct. 18** (146 pp.)

Native Politics and Society  


**Oct. 25** (221 pp.)

Science  


**Nov. 1** (200 pp.)

Education  


**Nov. 8** (202 pp.)

Aesthetics (Art and Film)  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


**Nov. 15** (204 pp.)

Contemporary Native literatures

Oral Narratives

**Part 5.** **Western Theoretical Positions: Counter-hegemonic Strategies,
Engagements, Readings, and Appropriations from Within**

Native Lifeways (Philosophy, Religion, and Spirituality)

Oral Traditions and Science  


**Nov. 22 or ???** (136 pp.)

History

History, Ethnohistory, and New History

History and Gender

History and Environment  


**Nov. 29** (141 pp.)

Oral History

Tribal History

Oral Narratives

Ethnography  


**Dec. 6** (152 pp.)

Contemporary Native Literatures

Critical Theory / Postmodern Theory  


**Dec. 13** (103 pp.)

Economic Development  


**Dec. 20** **time???** ( 112 pp.)

Cultural Patrimony

Language Loss and Retention  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


