![](Hist.2070.htg/img.gif)

Instructor: Bruce L. Venarde

Office: Forbes Quad 3M26, 624-8437

Office hours: Wednesdays, 11-1

E-mail: bvenarde+@pitt.edu

* * *

**Description and Goals**

What is Europe, how has it developed, and why has this little peninsula off
the western end of Asia come to matter so much in world history? These are the
organizing questions of History 2070/Cultural Studies 3070, Readings in Early
European History. The course introduces major themes in European history, East
and West, from the early Middle Ages to the nineteenth century. The work of
the seminar is oral and written discussion of major scholarly studies with
broad implications for understanding pre-modern European societies,
institutions, and cultures. The events of the last decade or so make it clear
that to divide Europe into "Eastern" and "Western" does not reflect the long
view of the European past, and that the nation-state is often still an
inadequate basis for understanding Europeans' own identities. This colloquium
will seek out the origins of European exceptionalism and European diversity.  
  

**Format**

This is a discussion course, with a) common reading, usually a book, each
week, b) short weekly papers, and c) supplementary reports.

Each week _before the class meeting and no later than Wednesday morning at 10_
, students will submit a short (500-700 words) critical commentary on the
common reading at hand; these papers will serve to organize discussion and
debate. Papers might take the form of a summary analysis, focus on a specific
aspect of a given book's subject matter, or discuss nitty-gritty matters (e.g.
source use, organization, style). The only strict guidelines are that the
papers demonstrate serious thought about the work at hand and are written in
elegant and lucid prose making your reflections readily accessible to others.

Each participant will also present to the colloquium another book in oral and
written form once during the semester. An oral report of about 10 minutes will
summarize the book and its conclusions and make comparisons to the common
reading to elicit further discussion. No more than two weeks later, there will
also be a formal written review of 1200-1500 words, in the style of reviews in
academic journals, to be distributed to all members of the colloquium.  
  

**Grade weighting**

Engaged participation in discussions: approximately 40%

Weekly papers and book review: approximately 60%  
  

**Schedule of Readings**

* = available in the Book Center and on reserve in Hillman 

\+ = on the TransEuropean Comprehensive Examination list  
  

Note: The syllabus works in roughly chronological order. You may find it
helpful to review the major events and themes as we go along. The first volume
of Thomas F.X. Noble et al., _Western Civilization: The Continuing Experiment_
, 2nd edition (1998), which covers the pre-modern West, is available in the
Book Center under History 0100.  
  

**January 12 th**

*Peter Brown, _The Rise of Western Christendom: Triumph and Diversity, AD 200-1000_ (1996) 

_Report_ : J. M. Wallace-Hadrill, _The Barbarian West, 400-1000_ (1952)  
  

**January 19 th**

*+Robert Bartlett, _The Making of Europe: Conquest, Colonization, and Cultural Change,_

_950-1350_ (1993)

_Report_ : R.W. Southern, _The Making of the Middle Ages_ (1952)  
  

**January 26 th**

*+Harold J. Berman, _Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal Tradition_ (1983) 

_Report_ : James A. Brundage, _Law, Sex, and Christian Society in Medieval
Europe_ (1987)  
  

**February 2 nd**

*+ R. I. Moore, _The Formation of a Persecuting Society: Power and Deviance in Western_

_Europe, 950-1250_ (1987)

_Report_ : Eve Levin, _Sex and Society in the World of the orthodox Slavs,
900-1700_ (1989)  
  

**February 9 th**

*+Renate Bridenthal et al., _Becoming Visible: Women in European History_ , 3rd edition (1998), 

selections TBA

Articles by David Herlihy and Caroline Walker Bynum TBA

**February 16 th**: Sanity Break: NO CLASS MEETING  
  

**February 23 rd**

*+Jerome Blum, _Lord and Peasant in Russia from the Ninth to the Nineteenth Century_ (1961) 

_Report_ : Simon Franklin and Jonathan Shepard, _The Emergence of Rus:
750-1200_ (1996)  
  

**March 1 st**

*Peter Burke, _The European Renaissance: Centres and Peripheries_ (1998) 

_Report_ : +Lauro Martines, _Power and Imagination: City-States in Renaissance
Italy_ (1978)  
  

**March 8 th**: Spring Break: NO CLASS MEETING  
  

**March 15 th**

*Fernand Braudel, _The Perspective of the World_ , volume 3 of _Civilization and Capitalism, 15th-18th Century_ (1979) 

_Report_ : Immanuel Wallerstein, _The Modern World-System: Capitalist
Agriculture and the Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth
Century_ (1974)  
  

**March 22 nd**

*+Emmanuel Le Roy Ladurie, _The Peasants of Languedoc_ (1966) 

_Report_ : +Peter Burke, _Popular Culture in Early Modern Europe_ (1978)  
  

**March 29 th**

*+Geoffrey Parker, _The Military Revolution: Military Innovation and the Rise of the West, 1500-1800_ (1988) 

_Report_ : +Hugh F. Kearney, _Science and Change, 1500-1700_ (1971)  
  

**April 5 th **

*+Daniel Chirot et al., _The Origins of Backwardness in Eastern Europe: Economics and Politics_

_from the Middle Ages Until the Early Twentieth Century_ (1989)

_Report_ : Simon Schama, _The Embarrassment of Riches: An Interpretation of
Dutch Culture in the_

_Golden Age_ (1988)  
  

**April 12 th**

*+Larry Wolff, _Inventing Eastern Europe: The Map of Civilization on the Mind of the Enlightenment_ (1994) 

_Report_ : Peter Gay, _The Enlightenment_ , volume 1: _The Rise of Modern
Paganism_ (1966)  
  

**April 19 th**

*+Jared Diamond, _Guns, Germs and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies_ (1997)   
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

