Syllabus for SOLAR SYSTEM ASTRONOMY  
(Physics 395G)  
Fall, 2002

This course is designed primarily for the non-science student who wishes to
explore in depth a single topic in astronomy without becoming involved in
detailed mathematical developments.  In the process, we will see how
scientific ideas develop and how scientists think about or approach problems.
This syllabus provides you with important information about the organization
and administration of this course. Please read it carefully (you are
responsible for knowing all the policies that pertain to this course) and keep
it for reference throughout the semester. This syllabus is only available
electronically on the World Wide Web on the [Astronomy Courses](/astronomy)
homepage (at http://webs.wichita.edu/astronomy).

Education, to be successful, must produce some type of change in the learner.
The type of change that occurs may or may not be easy to see or define.  At
the end of this course, you should be able to:  

  1.  | Understand the basic concepts of an astronomer's view of how the universe got to be the way it is.  
---|---  
  2. | Define the limits and uncertainties of our astronomical knowledge.  
  3. | Critically read and evaluate articles on astronomy and other science topics  
  
The basic skill required to achieve these goals is the ability to analyze
ideas; that is, to make rational inferences about natural phenomena,
especially in an astronomical context. In order to achieve these goals, each
of you will need to be actively involved in the learning process.  This
participation can take many forms.  I strongly encourage questions and
discussion in class.  Ask questions to clarify confusing points or to initiate
discussion of topics of special interest to you. I also want you to feel free
to talk to me in my office about any topic of interest or concern to you.

If you would like to pursue additional knowledge of astronomy after completing
this course, two other introductory courses are available. [Introduction to
Modern Astronomy](../ModAst195/default.htm) (Physics 195G) provides a broad
survey of the universe beyond the solar system. As the title implies, this
course emphasizes the concepts and objects discovered by modern astronomers.
The Laboratory in Modern Astronomy (196) affords you an opportunity to become
acquainted with the techniques astronomers use to interpret observational
data. It is offered only in the fall semester.  Feel free to talk to me about
either of these courses, or about the more advanced astrophysics courses
offered by the physics department, if you would like more information.

You can also explore the universe through the telescope at the [Lake Afton
Public Observatory](http://webs.wichita.edu/lapo/), located at 25000 W. 39th
South. The computer-controlled, 16-inch telescope provides several views for
each person during a program, while many other exhibits and displays allow you
to experience other aspects of our universe. Public programs are given on
Friday and Saturday evenings. Call 978-STAR for program information and times
or see me for a current programs brochure. The
[Cosmosphere](http://www.cosmo.org) in Hutchinson offers weekend programs in
their planetarium (star projector) and a wide variety of general science and
space exhibits.  

**Instructor**

I encourage you to talk to me individually whenever you need to discuss your
progress in the course or whenever you have a topic of special interest you
want to discuss individually.  My office information is:  

  Instructor: | Dave Alexander  
---|---  
  Office: | 003 Jabara Hall  
  Phone: | 978-3988  
  E-Mail: | [david.alexander@wichita.edu](mailto:david.alexander@wichita.edu)  
  Office Hours:  | Anytime from 8:00 -- 5:00 during the week. I will make a
special effort to be available just before and just after class whenever
possible. However, I often have appointments with other students, or other
commitments.  If you want to see me at a specific time, please make an
appointment by checking with me at class.  
  
  **Grades**

The grading method has been designed to allow you to work for the grade you
want for the course without competing with everyone else. Your grade at the
end of the semester is completely determined by the total number of points
earned during the semester according to the schedule given below. The graded
activities for the semester will include your scores from 2 examinations, your
best 8 scores on 10 weekly quizzes, your grade on 5 internet inquiries, and
one Moon observation project. These activities are worth a total of 600
points.  

**Grade** | **Points Needed** | **Average Percentage**  
---|---|---  
A | 510 | 85%  
B | 450 | 75%  
C | 390 | 65%  
D | 330 | 55%  
  
There is a great variety of material available in the electronic web pages for
[_astronomy courses_](../default.htm) at WSU which will help you be successful
in this course. The address of those pages is given at the beginning of this
syllabus. One of the items present on the web pages is a section on [_How to
Study for this Class_](how_to_study_for_this_classss.htm). Experience with
many students has demonstrated that those students who follow the steps
outlined in that section will do significantly better in the course than will
those who do not. Again, it cannot be emphasized enough that you must take
responsibility for your own learning in this class.

You will be responsible for the material that we discuss in class as well as
the material in the assigned readings from the textbook.  The text for this
class is _The Cosmic Perspective_ by Bennett, Donahue, Schneider, and Voit.
It will be an essential learning tool for this course.

It is expected that all work turned in for a grade will be due to the effort
of the individual student. Do not copy your work from that of a class-mate.
While you may work together on a project, the material you turn in should be
your own work and not the result of a group effort. Be careful to avoid
plagiarism on your summaries. Plagiarism occurs not only when you use directly
someone else's words as your own, but also when you paraphrase some of the
ideas or sentences from another work. If you are caught cheating in any of
these ways, you will get a zero for that activity in your final point total
the first time and an F for the course the second time you are caught.

1\. **Weekly Quizzes:**  
    
Ten quizzes will be given during the semester, generally each week that an
exam is not scheduled. Each quiz will be worth 25 points and your best 8
scores will count in the final point total. Each quiz will contain two to five
short answer questions which can be answered in about 15 minutes at the end of
class. No make-up quizzes will be scheduled, and no excused absences will be
given for the quizzes. If you must miss one, it will merely count as one of
the quizzes dropped at the end of the semester. Not all quizzes will be
announced in advance. A copy of my course notes and a study guide for the
course are also available electronically on the [Astronomy
Courses](../default.htm) homepage.  
    
2\. **Exams:**

There will be two exams during the semester. They will include both multiple
choice and short answer (from a few lines up to a paragraph) questions which
cover material both from the book and from class sessions. Each exam is worth
100 points. A test bank of possible multiple choice questions is available on-
line on the [Astronomy Courses](../default.htm) homepage. You may use it to
help prepare for the types of questions which will appear on the exams.  A
copy of my course notes and a study guide for the course are also available
electronically on the [Astronomy Courses](../default.htm) homepage.

Dates given in the course schedule are **tentative**. The exact date for each
exam will be announced at least a week in advance. Please come to class on
time on the days that exams are scheduled. No one will be allowed to begin an
exam after the first person has left and no one will be allowed to work beyond
the scheduled time for the exam.

If you must miss an examination due to illness, work, athletic team or other
school group travel, or family responsibilities, please see me as soon as is
practical (and no later than one week after you return to campus) to determine
if you will be permitted to take a make-up exam. Unless the nature of your
absence would reasonably prevent you from notifying me before the examination,
you must obtain your permission before the examination. You will be permitted
to take the make-up exam only if you are prevented from taking the regular
exam due to circumstances beyond your control.

3\. **Internet Inquiries:**

Astronomy is a rapidly changing subject, with new discoveries announced every
week.  No printed source could possibly be up-to-date.  Announcements of new
results are often made via the internet.  Searching on the internet is an
excellent way to find the most recent material on a given subject, although
beware - old announcements may linger for years but sound like they have just
been released.  Always check the date!

To give you an opportunity to find, interpret, and describe some of the most
recent discoveries in solar system astronomy, there will be five internet
inquiries assigned during the semester.  These assignments will be announced
at irregular intervals during class, as we discuss a topic for which recent
information is important.  You will be expected to locate the most recent
information on the topic using the internet, and report on what you have
found.  Each internet inquiry will be worth 20 points.  
    
4\. **Moon Observation:**  
    
Astronomy is a a very visual subject, with many breathtaking and enchanting
images. It is desirable that every student have an opportunity to explore the
night sky on their own.  It is also important to see for yourself the regular
pattern of changes that occur in the sky.  The easiest object to observe (it
requires no instruments!), is the Moon.  In this class we will meet this goal
by observing the moon for about 10 minutes at the same time each night for two
to three weeks. During these observations you will see the moon change in
shape and move across the sky. At the end of the observation cycle, you will
be asked to report what you have seen and describe why those changes have
occurred. Detailed instructions for moon observation projects are at the end
of this syllabus. This project can earn up to 100 points.

    **Tentative Schedule**  
Fall, 2002

All dates in this schedule are _tentative_. Especially in the case of exams,
be sure to confirm the date of the exam several days before the tentatively
scheduled date.  

**Chapter**   | **Subject** | **Approximate**  
**Starting Date**  
---|---|---  
1, 3.4 | Introduction to the Course | August 23  
2 | The Night Sky | August 30  
8 | Formation of the Solar System | September 9  
9.1-3 | Terrestrial Planet Interiors | September 20  
9.4-5, 13.1-2 | Terrestrial Planet Surfaces | September 25  
10; 13.3, 13.5 | Terrestrial Planet Atmospheres | October 11  
11.1-2 | Jovian Planet Interiors | October 25  
11.3-4 | Jovian Planet Atmospheres | November 1  
11.6 | Planetary Rings | November 6  
11.5 | Planetary Moons | November 15  
12.3 | Meteorites | November 25  
12.1-2, 5-6 | Asteroids | December 4  
12.4 | Comets | December 9  
  |   |  
Mid-term Exam |

(Chapters 1, 2, 3.4, 8, 9, 13.1-2) | October 18  
Final Exam | (Chapters 10-12; 13.3, 13.5) | December 18  
at 8:00 am  
Moon Project  |  | December 3  
  
  **Internet Inquiries**

 The internet has become a powerful resource for locating information. In
addition to being an international network of thousands of computers, it is
also a storehouse of information on virtually any subject imaginable. It is
just as valuable a resource as the library, and available anywhere that you
have a computer connected to the internet. It is essential that all college-
educated people become proficient in its use, in the same way that library
skills are important for all college students to develop. Both represent
essential tools for finding information in the changing world you live and
work in.  
    
The part of the internet that we will use in this course is called the World
Wide Web (the web or WWW, for short). It is a collection of homepages from all
over the world. Anyone with access to the internet can post pages to the WWW,
so it is important to check and evaluate your sources as you use the web. In
addition to a lot of very useful, up-to-date information, there is a fair
amount of trash and garbage on the web.

To access the web, locate any computer that is connected to the internet. If
you have a computer at home with a modem, you can gain access to the internet
by subscribing to an internet service provider for a fee of between $10 and
$20 a month. WSU students have access to
[Shocknet2](http://ucats.wichita.edu/shocknet2/), an internet service provider
available through the university.  Other local internet service providers
include [_Southwind_](http://www.southwind.net/),  [Southwestern
Bell](http://public.swbell.net/), and the [Wichita
Eagle](http://www.wichitaeagle.com/advertising/access.htm), among others.

If you do not have a computer at home or do not wish to subscribe to an
internet service provider, you can still gain access to the internet through
the public computer terminals on campus. Many departments operate computer
labs for their students which provide internet access. Check with your
department to see if they have one you can use.

A general computer lab for all WSU students is operated by the computing
center in room 120 of Jabara Hall. The normal hours for this lab are 7 am --
midnight Monday through Thursday, 7 am -- 6 pm on Friday, 10 am -- 8 pm on
Saturday, and 1 pm -- 8 pm on Sunday. There are several computers in this lab
which provide internet access, although some computers in the lab do not
provide internet access and none of the computers in the lab next door provide
internet access. Ablah Library also provides many computers near the reference
desk and in the 24-hour study room which provide internet access.

Once you find a computer that provides internet access, you must identify the
program on it that puts you on the World Wide Web. The two most common
applications for this purpose are Netscape and Internet Explorer. Most
computers on campus use Netscape. Other internet service providers may supply
other programs for the web, but these two are generally recommended and can be
downloaded freely from the web. See me if you would like more information on
how to install another program on your computer.

Once you find the internet program on the computer, click twice with the mouse
on the picture of that program. That will start the program and connect you to
the web. On some home computers, you may have to first dial the local internet
service provider. Once you've started the internet program, enter the address
for [Astronomy Courses](../default.htm) (http://webs.wichita.edu/astronomy)
into the address section of the program and press enter.

Generally speaking any text in blue or any picture outlined in blue represents
a link to another page on the web. Simply click on it and it will send you to
the page. For example, to view the syllabus for this course, simply click with
the mouse once on the word syllabus under the heading for Solar System
Astronomy.

Like any library, finding the information you want can be a real challenge.
Fortunately, a number of organizations provide cataloging services for the web
that work much like the computerized catalogue of a regular library. Several
of these services are listed on the [Astronomy Internet
Addresses](/astronomy/astbook.htm) page under the heading "Web Search and
Catalogues."  The [Astronomy Internet Addresses](/astronomy/astbook.htm) page
also lists a number of astronomy-related pages that I have found useful or
interesting.

If you are new to the internet, I would encourage you to begin exploring the
web before the project assignments are given. It may feel a bit strange or
awkward at first and require some practice before you can navigate on the web
to find things you want. Do not be intimidated by the computer or the web.
Short of physical violence, it is hard to damage a computer. If you get lost
or confused, just start over and try something else. If you need help or
encouragement, just ask me. I think you will discover that the internet is an
intriguing and valuable resource, for which you will find many applications in
many areas of your life.

####   **Suggestions for Observing the Moon**

 The Moon goes through a cycle of changes over the course of each month.  You
can observe the evening portion of this cycle by noting its position and shape
each clear evening for about two to three  weeks after new moon.  Choose a
convenient time in the evening (between one and four hours after sunset works
well, but later times are ok if they are more convenient to you), and take
your observations **at the same time each night.** This way the rotation of
the Earth will return you to the same position in space for each observation;
any changes you see will be due solely to the motion of the Moon.  If the
change to daylight savings time occurs during your observation, continue to
observe at the same physical time.  For example, if you began observing at
10:00 pm before daylight saving time, then you would need to observe at 11:00
after the change in time to be observing at the same physical time.  It is not
crucial that you observe from the same place each night.

If the Moon is not visible on a particular night, be sure to note that
observation in your log and explain why the Moon was not visible that evening
in your summary. Begin your observation project an extra day after new moon
for every hour after sunset you will be observing. For example, if you will be
observing the Moon 3 hours after sunset, begin your observations 3 days after
new moon. If the Moon is not visible then, simply try again the next night
until it becomes visible. New moons this semester occur on **September 7,
October 6, and November 4**.   Continue observing the Moon until it is no
longer visible at your observing time - usually about 14-16 days after it is
first visible.

Your report should consist of both a log of your observations and a summary.
The observing log should contain a record of each observation that you took.
Each entry in the log should include the following information:

  * Date, time, and location of observation.
  * Description of the weather at the time of the observation.
  * Description of specifically where in the sky the object was located. Specificity is important for comparing subsequent observations. Include both direction along the horizon and altitude above the horizon. One technique that works well is to use the width of your fist held at arm's length as an angle measuring aid. For example, an object might be three fists east from due south and five fists above the horizon.
  * Detailed description of what you saw, including an accurate drawing. Trace a circle from some round object before you go out to observe the Moon, and then shade in the portion which you can see.
  * Preliminary comparison with previous observations or comments on interesting phenomena observed in the sky.

A [log sheet](moon.log.sheet.PDF) for recording your observations (in pdf
format) is available for downloading.   You will need a copy of the Acrobat
reader on your computer to view and print this log sheet.  If you do not
already have a copy of this program on your computer, you can obtain a [free
copy here](http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep.html#reader).   If
you compile an incomplete log, you will also find it very difficult to write a
thorough summary. Be sure to turn in all your original log sheets with your
project.

Your summary should include both an overall description of what you observed
during the project (for example, what was the pattern of change in the Moon)
and an analysis of why things appeared the way you saw them in the sky (for
example, why did the Moon change position and shape). The analysis is an
important part of the overall project.  

   **Guidelines for Completing Your Moon Observation Project**

 A complete moon observation project consists of at least five components.
Each of these components should be present in the project you turn in.

  * (10 points) A summary of what you did for this project and how you did it. Describe the methods you used to measure and record the moon's position and shape. It should be written in such a way that someone who has never had this class would know how to perform the observations.
  * (20 points) A summary of your observations, taken as a whole. What patterns did you see in the moon's changing position and shape?
  * (15 points) A diagram which shows the positions of the moon you observed. I suggest you use something like the diagram on the sample log sheet, with the directions of due East and due West clearly labeled. Each entry on the diagram should be identified with a particular observation from your observing log.
  * (35 points) An explanation of your observations, using (and explaining) appropriate diagrams. Why did the moon change its position and shape in the sky? Your explanation should be understandable and convincing to someone who has not yet observed or studied the moon.
  * (20 points) A log of your observations. I suggest that you use the sample log sheet on the next page, or some adaptation of it. Record only one observations per sheet.

