HIST 350/W St 350, Fall 2000

### European Women's History, 1400-1800



Tuesdays and Thursdays, 10:35-11:50  
Classroom Building 131  
Prof. Sue Peabody, peabody@vancouver.wsu.edu  
Office: Library Building 210 T  
Phone: (360) 546-9647  
Office Hours: Mondays, 1-2 pm and Thursdays 12-1 and 5-6 pm and by appointment  
Department Number (inclement weather, closings, information, etc.): (360)
546-9441

**Themes  
** The early modern period, 1400 to 1800, has traditionally been portrayed as
the time of "Renaissance," "Reformation" and "Enlightenment." Through a survey
of women's family life, sexuality, work, spirituality, education and
persecution this course seeks to reexamine these categories to see how they
apply (or do not apply) to continuity and change in the lives of European
women. We will explore the strengths and shortcomings of the theoretical
framework of "gender" which has influenced much of the recent historiography
on women.

**Required Texts** (prices for new books are approximate)

Merry Wiesner, Women and Gender in Early Modern Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1993. (0-521-38613-6) $15.95

Judith C. Brown, Immodest Acts: The Life of a Lesbian Nun in Renaissance
Italy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986. (0-19-504225-5) $12.95

The Memoirs of Gluckel of Hameln. New York: Schocken, 1987. (0-8052-0572-1)
$15.00

Cougprint Coursepack (about $25.00)

**Grades  
** 20% Class Participation (Attendance, discussions)  
20% Think Questions  
30% Mid-Term Exam  
30% Final Exam

Reasonable Accommodations are available for students who have a documented
disability. Please notify the instructor during the first week of class of any
accommodations needed for the course. Late notification may cause the
requested accommodations to be unavailable. All accommodations must be
approved through Wayne Brown, in the Student Services Office, 546-9567.

**Writing Assignments**

_Think Questions  
_ Think Questions are short written assignments (1-2 pp., typed) designed to
get you thinking about an issue before a class discussion. They are listed on
the syllabus. Be sure to do the associated reading assignment before you
answer the Think Question. The grade is based on the depth of your discussion
of the issue in question. PLEASE run a spell-check program before you submit
your Think Question. A Think Question is marked down one full grade for every
day that it is late.

_Revisions_  
You may revise and resubmit a Think Question. If the revised answer is an
improvement on the original, the higher grade will replace the lower one.
"Improvement" is based upon a deeper understanding of the issues, not merely
correcting typographical errors. All such revisions are due NO LATER THAN the
last day of classes.

**Exams  
** Exams consist primarily of essay questions based on readings, lectures, and
discussions. They are graded on how well you integrate all of these materials
into a correct and clear essay.

**Grades**  
Grades for writing assignments are based on the following criteria:

A = An intelligent, insightful, clear, and well organized essay that shows a
sophisticated awareness of historical argumentation (i.e., that history is a
written discussion with evidence offered to support a thesis).

B = Mostly correct, well written, this essay is solid but does not sparkle
with independent thinking or analysis

C = This essay contains some errors of fact or interpretation and/or numerous
stylistical problems

D = This essay does not show evidence of much effort or contains unforgivable
errors

F = Usually reserved for plagiarism or for papers that have been submitted
several days late

**Attendance  
** Attendance is required at all class meetings. If you cannot attend a class
due to illness or other personal emergency, you may obtain an "Excused
Absence" by notifying the instructor prior to the class session. Leaving a
message by voice mail is sufficient to obtain an Excused Absence. Please note
that whether or not an absence is excused, you are responsible for learning
what happened in class and mastering that material (e.g. obtaining notes and
Think Question assignments from a reliable classmate).

Tardiness disturbs the teacher and your classmates. Furthermore, it can affect
your work in the class. I usually make important announcements at the
beginning of class (e.g. announce the location of exams, a change in
assignments). If you miss these announcements, there is no guarantee that
information will be repeated later. On occasion, tardiness is unavoidable. If
you find yourself arriving late to class, please take your seat with a minimum
of commotion. Three late arrivals constitute an unexcused absence. (Note: if
your work schedule necessitates regular late arrivals, please clear this with
me in advance).

**Plagiarism and Cheating  
** Plagiarism and Cheating are serious offenses that may be penalized
severely. You are plagiarizing or cheating if you:

* present someone else's words or ideas as your own, in writing or in speaking  
* present ideas without citing the source  
* paraphrase without crediting the source  
* use direct quotes with no quotation marks  
* use direct quotes without footnotes or other textual citation of the source  
* present work in a group project that is not your own or the work of the group  
* submit the same paper for credit in more than one course without discussing this option with the instructors  
* submit material written by someone else as your own (this includes purchasing a term or research paper)  
* submit a paper or assignment for which you have received so much help that it is no longer your own work  
* do not do an equal part of the work on a group project  
* copy someone else's exam or graded homework  
* refer to a text, class notes, or other materials during an exam without being authorized to do so  
* purposefully allow another student to copy your work or submit work you have written as his/her own  
* collaborate with others on a take-home exam, or spend more time than that specified by the instructor on a take-home exam.

**Assignments**

_August 29th_  
Introduction: Gender/Sex

_Augutst 31st  
_ Wiesner, Women and Gender in Early Modern Europe, Introduction, 1-7 and
"Ideas and Laws Regarding Women," 9-38  
THE MATERIAL WORLD

_September 5th  
_ The Female Life Cycle  
Wiesner, "The Female Life Cycle," 41-81

_September 7th  
_ COURSEPACK: Christiane Klapisch-Zuber, Women Family and Ritual in
Renaissance Italy, Foreward, vii-xi, and Chapters 6 and 7 (pp. 117-164)  
Think Question #1 Due: Read the assignment above and CHOOSE ONE of the
following questions:

*Who is the "cruel mother" to whom Klapisch-Zuber refers in her title? And what makes her so cruel?  
*Who used wetnurses in Florence and why did this group change after 1450?

_September 12th  
_ Women and Work: The Household Economy  
Wiesner, "Women's Economic Role" in Women and Gender in Early Modern Europe,
82-114

_September 14th  
_ STATE AND HISTORY

_September 19th  
_ Historical Change: "Renaissance"  
CHOOSE TWO of the following western civilization textbooks and take notes for
yourself on: 1) What aspects of the Renaissance appear in both books? 2) How
do the two accounts differ? 3) How did the Renaissance affect women?  
RESERVE: Kagan, Ozment, Turner, The Western Heritage: Brief Edition. Vol. I:
To 1715, pp. 224-245  
RESERVE: Perry, Chase, Jacob, Von Laue, Western Civilization: Ideas, Politics
and Society. Vol. 1: To 1789, pp. 259-281  
RESERVE: Merriman, A History of Modern Europe. Vol. I: From the Renaissance to
the Age of Napoleon, pp. 47-86  
RESERVE: A History of Western Society. Vol. I: From Antiquity to the
Enlightenment, pp. 403-433

_September 21st  
_ COURSEPACK: Joan Kelly-Gadol, "Did Women Have a Renaissance?" in Becoming
Visible, 2nd edition (Houghton Mifflin, 1987), 175-201  
Think Question #2 Due: Joan Kelly-Gadol's article asks the question, "Did
Women Really Have a Renaissance?" Based upon your reading of Kelly-Gadol's
article and of Western Civilization textbooks, what do you think?

_September 26th  
_ COURSEPACK: Sarah Hanley, "Family and State in Early Modern France: The
Marriage Pact," in Connecting Spheres, 53-63

_September 28th  
_ HANDOUT: Susan Doran, "Elizabeth I" Historian 54 (1997): 10-13 on Elizabeth
I

_Octoaber 3rd  
_ Mid-Term Review

_October 5th  
_ Mid-Term Exam  
SPIRIT AND POWER

_October 10th  
_ Reformations Wiesner, "Religion," 179-217

_October 12th  
_ Judith Brown, Immodest Acts, 3-74

_October 17th  
_ Judith Brown, Immodest Acts, 75-142, 158-164

_October 19th  
_ Witchcraft  
Wiesner, "Witchcraft," 218-238  
COURSEPACK: Kramer, Heinrich and James Sprenger. The Malleus Maleficarum.
Translated with Introductions, Bibliography and Notes by Rev. Montague
Summers. New York: Dover Publications, 1971. Pages i-iv, 41-48.

_October 24th  
_ COURSEPACK: Roper, Lyndal. "Witchcraft and Fantasy in Early Modern Germany."
In Oedipus and the Devil: Witchcraft, Sexuality and Religion in Early Modern
Europe. New York and London: Routledge, 1994\. Pages 199-225.  
COURSEPACK: Warnicke, Retha M. "Sexual Heresy." In The Rise and Fall of Anne
Boleyn. New York and Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989\. Pages
191-233, 294-306.  
COURSEPACK: Geis, Gilbert and Ivan Bunn. "Appendix." In A Trial of Witches: A
Seventeenth-Century Witchcraft Prosecution. New York and London: Routledge,
1997. Pages 212-228.

_October 26th  
_ Think Question # 3 Due: Read all of the above reading assignments for class.
Be prepared to discuss them all. Then select one of the following questions.
Please write the title of the question you select at the top of your paper.

1\. The Malleus Maleficarum  
Why do the authors of Malleus Maleficarum (first published in 1486) believe
that women are especially susceptible to engaging in witchcraft and
"superstition"? What are the causes and/or effects of these assertions?

2\. Roper: "Witchcraft and Fantasy"  
According to historian Lyndal Roper, why were lying-in maids in seventeenth-
century Augsburg particularly vulnerable to accusations of witchcraft? Do you
find her explanation persuasive?

3\. Warnicke: "Sexual Heresy"  
According to historian Retha Warnicke, why was Anne Boleyn accused of
witchcraft? Do you find her explanation persuasive?

4\. A Tryal of Witches  
Why do you think the accusers of Amy Duny and Rose Cullender brought charges
against the women?

-OR-

What role, if any, did skepticism play in the 1664 "Tryal of Witches"?

_October 31st  
_ Jewish Women  
Wiesner, "Literacy and Learning," 117-145  
Gluckel, Memoirs of Gluckel of Hameln, vi-39

_November 2nd  
_ Gluckel, Memoirs of Gluckel of Hameln, 40-145

_November 7th  
_ Gluckel, Memoirs of Gluckel of Hameln, 146-221

_November 9th  
_ Class canceled.

"ENLIGHTENMENT" AND THE MODERN WORLD

_November 14th  
_ Gluckel, Memoirs of Gluckel of Hameln, 222-277

_November 16th  
_ Wiesner, "Women and the Creation of Culture," 146-175

_November 21st & 23rd  
_THANKSGIVING BREAK

_November 28th  
_ Public and Private Spheres  
COURSEPACK: Jean Jacques Rousseau, Politics and the Arts, Letter to M.
D'Alembert on the Theatre, 47-57, 75-92

_November 30th  
_ Think Question # 4 Due: Why does Jean-Jacques Rousseau object to women's
participation in theatre so much?

_December 5th  
_ Women and the French Revolution  
COURSEPACK: Darline Gay Levy and Harriet Branson Applewhite, "Women and the
Political Revolution in Paris," in Becoming Visible, 2nd edition (Houghton
Mifflin, 1987), 279-306

_December 12th  
_ COURSEPACK: Declaration of the Rights of Man and of Citizens  
COURSEPACK: Olympe de Gouges, The Rights of Woman

_December 14th  
_ Final Exam Review

_December 18th & 22nd  
_Final Exam TBA

