**SYLLABUS and COURSE OUTLINE**

**for**

**_LIFE IN THE STONE AGE_ **

**_Fall 2000_** P210/G117 + (PR) G118; E400/G115 + (PR) G116 _MW 2:30-3:45_ RH
207

**Practicum:** Tom Dillard, Friday/Saturday, September 22-23

**Course Objectives:** An overview of human culture with an emphasis on modern
humans from 100,000 years ago to the rise of civilization. Practical hands-on
demonstration will include the making of stone tool, fire-making, paper and
papyrus manufacture, metal casting, home and hearth crafts, and early writing.
Lecture topics will provide a broad conceptual framework of connections,
implications, and consequences of cultural development and technology.

**Textbooks:** Three are required. Each is in a paperback.

Cavalli-Sforza: _Great Human Diasporas_..............HUMAN

Wilson: _Domestication of the Human Species_.......DOME

Blankenship: _Earth Knack, Stone Age Skills_.........KNACK

**Instructor:** Clarke Johnson DDS, PhD Northwestern and the University of
Chicago; IUN Visiting Lecturer in Anthropology, Assistant Professor UIC
College of Dentistry.

**Office Hours:** Mondays and Wednesdays 10:00 A.M. to 11:00 A.M. My office
space is Lindenwood 230. Also, I'm usually in the office after lunch until my
afternoon class at 2:30. If the door is closed, check with the department
office, room 214. You may leave a message with the department secretary; I
check with her regularly when I am on campus. Your visit and conversation are
always welcome.

**Telephone:** My office phone number is 981-5601. There is voice mail. When
you leave a message, clearly identify yourself and leave a legitimate phone
number. I will return your call. You may call me at home after 6:00 P.M.;
however, I am rarely home during the day and am often gone in the evening. The
home number is (815) 939-4242. In the event of no answer, leave a message
after the fourth ring. Due to telemarketers, you MUST identify yourself as
from IUN! If I am slow to get back to you, you are not being ignored. This
semester I'm also at UIC. I am here only Monday and Wednesday.

**Email:**
[cjohnson@iunhaw1.iun.indiana.edu](mailto:cjohnson@iunhaw1.iun.indiana.edu)
_or try this one_[ _CLJ@uic.edu_](mailto:CLJ@uic.edu)

**Registration in E400:** Independent Study/Term Paper. This is your
opportunity to focus on some specific aspect of Life in the Stone Age. A
senior level term paper is asked of you. What will that paper be about? Each
student is asked to document his/her classroom project by writing a ten page
paper about it, with bibliography.

**This Syllabus:** The topics and dates are tentative. An updated syllabus
will be provided if significant changes are made in the schedule.

**Class Participation:** Discussion in class is encouraged. Your ideas are
welcome.

**Requirements:** You are expected to attend lectures, attend the practicum,
read the texts, watch the audiovisuals, and to study your notes. Each student
will be asked to prepare and present a class demonstration. Separate
instructions will be issued to you.

**Classtime:** Each major topic will be rigorously organized and presented in
a concise manner. Lectures will be on Monday. You are encouraged to look over
the outline presented in a lecture as you study the textbook readings. Many
topics covered do not appear in the texts. There will be many video
presentations during the course.

**Practicum and other Demonstrations Writeup:** You are asked to take notes
during Tom Dillard's presentation, write them up, and turn them in for a 20
point credit. Your notes will assist you in the mastery of stone tool making.
If you don't attend, you can to a writeup based on library materials.

**Examinations:** There will be three, including the final exam. The dates
appear in the syllabus. Study guides will be issued for them and there are
reminders in class.

**Inclement Weather:** In the event that IUN is officially closed or if class
in canceled, any scheduled examination will be given at the next scheduled
class period. Official campus closings are announced on the radio and may be
confirmed by calling campus police. If you call them, please don't tell them I
gave you that suggestion!

**Final Grade Breakdown for P210:** Points

First Hour Exam.....................................50

Second Hour Exam.................................50

Tom Dillard Practicum Writeup...............20

Classroom Presentation...........................30

Third Hour Exam (Final).........................50

Total Points for the Course..............400 points PLUS other writeups as
announced

**E400 Students:** The P210 requirements plus 80 points for the term paper for
a total of 480 points PLUS other writeups as announced. The total scores are
plotted graphically. Letter grades are distributed according to University and
Department guidelines.

**Incomplete:** Listen up! Department rules require that at least two-thirds
of the required course work be completed to qualify for the grade of
incomplete instead of a failure. If you want an incomplete, you must let me
know. It is your responsibility to stay in touch with the registrar's office,
and to complete course work a month before it is due.

**Major Illness or Crisis:** Let me know what has happened in your life so
that we may assist you in successful completion of this course. Be sure to
call.

**Anthropology Club:** There is an active anthropology club on campus.
Meetings are informative and your participation in club activities is welcome.
Announcements will be made in class from time to time. Watch for posters. You
may visit the club's website by way of the IUN website on the Internet.

**Anthropology in the News:** Articles about anthropology appear frequently
and they often pertain to what we are doing in class. If you see an article of
interest, bring it in. Many excellent programs about anthropology appear on
Channel 11 and 56 in Gary. See also to see are A &E, Discovery, TLC, History,
and others. Check your local library for videos on anthropology; many are
available for rental.

****CLASS SCHEDULE FOR P210/E400 Autumn, 2000****

**WEEK 1........** Introduction; A Walk Through Time;The Stone Age; Prehistory
I;

Aug 28, 30 Connections and How Innovations Are Linked (example: the plow);

Technology, the Axemaker's Gift; the Life of Hunter-Gatherers I.

HUMAN Ch 1 p 1 only to p 18 The Oldest Way of Life

KNACK: _Introduction_ pp 9-11

**WEEK 2........** Life of Hunter-Gatherers II: Subsistence, Social
Organization, Cosmology, Lifeways

No Class 9/04

Wed Sept 06 KNACK: Ch 3 _Tools_ I p 66-only to p 80

**WEEK 3........** Hominids on Parade; Ages of Ice; Giant Stones/Megaliths

Sept 11, 13 HUMAN: Ch 2 pp 27-48 _Portraits from the Past_

KNACK Ch 2 pp 32-65 _Rope, String, Thread_

**WEEK 4........** Life of Neandertals, First Humans; Diaspora

Sept 18, 20 HUMAN Ch 3 pp 49-73 _One Hundred Thousand Years_

KNACK: _Flintknapping_ , the remainder of Ch 3 pp 80-89

Sept 22, 23 **Practicum in Flintknapping with Tom Dillard**

Friday/Saturday 9 AM - 4 PM RH 207

**WEEK 5........** Upper Paleolithic Life; Venus Figures; Cave Art;
Domestication; After the Ice Age

Sept 25, 27

HUMAN CH 6 pp 126-163 _The Last Ten Thousand Years_

KNACK: Ch 4 _Color_ pp 90-97

**Study Guide Issued for First Exam, next week

**WEEK 6........ FIRST EXAMINATION** Monday, October 2nd

Oct 02, 04 The Domestication of Ourselves Long Ago; the Living Environment

DOMES: Ch 1 pp 1-22 _Attending to Assumptions_

**WEEK 7........** the Open Society; Household Order; Sharing; the Use and
Designation of Space; Life in Ancient Egypt

Oct 09, 11

DOMES: Ch 2, 3 pp 23-78 _The Opening Society_ ; _House in Order_

KNACK: _Fire_ Ch 1 pp 12-31

**WEEK 8........** Open House; Work for Gain; Hospitality; Privacy; Ancient
Lives in

Oct 16, 18 Egypt; Special topic: The Practice of Mummification (mask mummies
are a separate topic in week 13)

DOMES: Ch 4 pp 79-116 _Open House_

KNACK: _Pottery_ Ch 6 pp 114-125

**Special Topic:

**WEEK 9........** Graves to Monuments; Households to Palaces; The Power of
Place

Oct 23, 25 DOMES: Ch 5 pp 117-150 _The Surrealities of Power_

KNACK: Ch 7 _Food and Cooking_ pp 126-139

**Special Topic:

**WEEK 10.......** The Domestic Influence; privacy and intimacy; The Origins
of Accounting and Mathematics; Craftsmen of Ancient Egypt

Oct 30, Nov 01 DOMES: Ch 6 pp 151-184 _The Domestic Influence_

KNACK: Ch 8 _Soap_ pp 140-143

**Study Guide issued for Second Exam, next week

**Special Topic:

  **WEEK 11....... SECOND EXAMINATION** Monday, November 6th

Nov 06, 08 Otzi, The Iceman from Europe

KNACK: Ch 11 _Glue_ pp 158-164

**Special Topic:

**WEEK 12.......** Joseph; Ancient Surgery and Trephination; Scarification;
Health and Disease in prehistory; Rise and Fall of State Societies; Languages

Nov 13, 15

HUMAN Ch 7 _The Tower of Babel_

KNACK: __ Ch 9 _Animals_ pp 144-158

**Special Topic Special topic: Papyrus, making a papyrus sheet, and handmade
paper,

  **WEEK 13.......** Life In Ancient Egypt; Life in Early Cities; Mask
Mummies; The Nile's other Gift:  Nubia and the Sudan

Nov 20, 22

HUMAN Ch 8 pp 203-226 _Cultural Legacies, Genetic Legacies_

**Special Topic: Do your own cartouche in hieroglyphics

****Thankgiving Holiday is November 23rd

  **WEEK 14.......** The Age of Metals; The Origins of Writing, Money and
Credit

Nov 27, 29 HUMAN Ch 10 pp 245-265 _Evolution and Progress_

**Special topic: metallurgy; casting by lost wax technique in class.

**WEEK 15.......** Ancient Seafarers of the Old World; Ships; Navigation at
Sea; Astrolabes and the Sextant; Longitude

Dec 04, 06

**Special topic:

**WEEK 16.......** FINAL EXAM Wednesday, December 13th, 2:30 PM

