# The Post-Conference

#  Wednesday July 29 - Friday July 31

* * *

# Wednesday

**Area Tours** (Additional fee required)

**Tour #3** -"An Afternoon in Sonoma." Come visit Sonoma County. Visit the
town square and a variety of quaint boutiques. Whether it's a fresh croissant,
some ice cream or bakery goods, there are tons of things to see and enjoy. (4
hrs. 1:00-5:00)

### **1:30PM-4:30PM Post-Conference Half-Day Workshops**

(Additional fee required)

**H01** **Translating Face-to-Face Courses into Effective Online Courses**
(Hands-on)  
Workshop leaders: Robert Fulkerth, Ph.D., Assistant Professor, School of
Technology and Industry, Golden Gate University and Walt Stevenson, Ph.D.,
School of Business, Golden Gate University. GGU is highly active in designing
and delivering distance education courses and programs, and the presenters
regularly use bulletin board, real-time audio/video and Internet/World Wide
Web formats for teaching.

This hands-on workshop will help you design course materials for delivery in
electronic formats. Bring material from your face-to-face courses, along with
ideas, questions, and works in progress. Participants will take traditional
course materials and translate them for use in online courses. The workshop's
emphasis will be on creating and managing deliverables, getting over the first
2-week hump, managing the course, creating an interactive atmosphere, use of
conferencing and chats, e-mail, and assessing the course while it is in
progress.

**H02 All that is Worth Knowing: Using and Teaching the Information Highway**
(Hands-on)  
Workshop leader: [Lillian Wehmeyer, Ph.D.](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiowehmey),
author of The Educator's Information Highway, is Professor and Director of the
Ed.D. program in educational leadership and administration at Azusa Pacific
University, California.

How do students, faculty, and researchers accomplish a comprehensive search
yielding the best information in a reasonable length of time? This workshop
demonstrates a step-by-step search procedure. It is applicable to all
disciplines. It integrates information in all formats (print, audiovisual, and
electronic) and from all sources (experts and organizations). Although most
information still resides in books and other archived media, nearly all of it
can be located from the desktop. There, one connects with libraries,
periodical indexes, databases, people, and organizations. Experience this
search procedure and leave with materials and ideas for teaching it to your
students.

**H03 Creating a Web Course Design Template with FrontPage** (Hands-on)  
Workshop leader: [Sharon Gray](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiogray), MSS is Director
of Instructional Technology at Briar Cliff College.

Academic institutions putting courses on the Web are faced with two daunting
challenges: (1) insuring academic rigor and pedagogical integrity, and (2)
enabling faculty to master the necessary technology. An accompanying challenge
is maintaining a consistent institutional look. Creating a Web course design
template addresses all these challenges by directly integrating instructional
design elements, providing a uniform, flexible, easy-to-use front-end to Web
course design. This workshop provides hands-on experience designing a course
template using Microsoft FrontPage and will include "virtual field trips" to
actual courses on the Web. Special attention will be devoted to integrating
collaborative elements (joint projects, synchronous and asynchronous
discussions, and workgroups).

**H04 A Guide to Planning and Executing a Multimedia Project** (Hands-on)  
Workshop leader: [Erica Wadley](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiowadley), D.M.A., is a
Professor of Academic Computing and Viola at the University of Arizona.

Creating effective presentations for classroom use has and will always
challenge teachers. To ensure that instructional technology facilitates
learning, effective design of a multimedia presentation project is crucial.
Thirteen steps are presented as true working hinges for a successful
multimedia project. Story boarding is at the heart of these steps, and will
receive detailed attention. At the conclusion of the workshop, everyone will
have a detailed outline of a project of their choice.

**H05 Create a Course on the Web in an Afternoon Using Web Course in a Box**
(Hands-on)  
Workshop leaders: [Susan Polyson](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiopolyso) is the
Project Manager for Virginia Commonwealth University's Instructional
Development Center, and [Steven Saltzberg](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiosaltzb),
Ph.D., is the Director of Information and Technology Services at Randolph-
Macon College.

Web Course in a Box is designed to allow faculty to create and serve online
courses using fill-in forms and online templates. It also allows faculty to
easily control access by assigning student logins and passwords. In addition,
no knowledge is required of HTML (the standard language for working with the
Web), and Web Course in a Box automatically puts pages on the Web server. By
the end of this session, faculty will have an understanding of how to create
online course materials including a syllabus, announcements, discussion
groups, home pages, and more.

### **Discipline-specific workshops/seminars**

**H06 Sciences: The Use of Online Simulations to Teach in the Sciences**
(Hands-on)  
Workshop leaders: [Steven J. Wolf](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiowolf) is Associate
Professor of Botany at California State University (CSU) Stanislaus. [Jeffrey
R. Bell](syll98_fac.htm#anchor biobell) is Associate Professor of Biological
Sciences at California State University (CSU) Chico.

This workshop will allow hands-on exploration of the biology simulations of
the Biology Lab On-Line Project, a collaborative effort among eleven
biologists from the California State University System and the Center for
Distributed Learning.  
The project is exploring ways to use technology to improve learning in
introductory biology laboratories for non-science students. Participants will
experiment with Web-based, interactive computer simulations that demonstrate
the basic concepts of evolution and the nature of the genetic code. As well as
trying the simulations hands-on with guidance from their creators, attendees
will learn how members collaborate via e-mail, video conference, face-to-face
meetings, and through the use of Web pages.

**H07 Humanities: Teaching Humanities on the Web** (Classroom seminar)  
Workshop leaders: [Connie Braun](syll98_fac.htm#anchor biobraun) is Electronic
Resources Specialist at Winona State University; [Richard
Bazillion](syll98_fac.htm#anchor biobazillion) is Dean of Library and
Information Services at Winona State.

Web-based courses can encourage active learning and critical thinking, if they
are designed to include these elements: hyperlinks to both primary and
secondary source materials, interpretive commentaries written by the course
professor, an active listserv, appropriate multimedia, and electronic reserve.
The instructors will demonstrate how they built an integrated Web-based
history course around "Seven Principles for Good Practice in
UndergraduateEducation." Participants will be introduced to FrontPage, and
will see how the ATM networking standard facilitates both Web course
presentation and a program of universal student access to laptop computers.
Classroom design and renovation for network access also will be emphasized.

**H08 Social Sciences: Academic Technologies for the Behavioral and Social
Sciences** (Classroom seminar)  
Workshop leaders: [Philip Schatz Ph.D.](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbioschatz), Kelly
L. Davis, B.S., and [Douglas L. Chute, Ph.D.](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiochute),
National Academy of Neuropsychology distanCE Center and BC Technology Center,
Neuropsychology Program, Department of Psychology, Sociology, Anthropology,
Drexel University.

Various Web demonstrations, courseware packages, and software applications
will illustrate the use of academic technologies in the behavioral and social
science curriculum. We will include examples of asynchronous and distance
learning technologies, reviews of offerings from publishers, academic
courseware CDs, experiment-generating packages, and some of Russ Hurlburt's
statistics modules. Our focus is on actual classroom technologies that work.
Some principles of what does and doesn't work will be discussed, and audience
participation and experience will be encouraged.

# Thursday, July 30

### **9:00AM-4:00PM Post-Conference**

**Hands-On Workshops**  
(Additional fee and registration required)

**Hands-On Workshops** (The following are Core Courses in the Syllabus
Curriculum.)

[101](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor101) The World Wide Web in Education (HD)  
[Tom Goodrich](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiogoodri), Stanford University  
[102](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor102) Power Browsing for Educators (HD)  
[Tom Goodrich,](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiogoodri) Stanford University  
[103](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor103) Presentation Technology for Educators (FD)  
[Reza Azarmsa](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbioazarms), Humboldt State University  
[201](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor201) Developing Courses: Web Publishing (FD)  
[Rachel Smith](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiosmithr), Sonoma State University  
[203](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor203) Developing Courses: Interactive Web Pages
(FD)  
Gerald Viers, Cal Poly Pomona  
[204](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor204) Introduction to Multimedia Tools/Macintosh
(FD)  
[Coco Kishi](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiokishi), University of Texas-Austin  
[205](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor205) Introduction to Multimedia Tools/Windows
(FD  
[Tom Hall](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiohallt), Pitt Community College  
[301](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor301) Web Course Management Systems (FD)  
[Sue Polyson](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiopolyso), Virginia Commonwealth
University and  
[Steven Saltzberg](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiosaltzb), Randolph-Macon College  

#  Friday, July 31

### **9:00AM-4:00PM Post-Conference**

**Hands-On Workshops**  
(Additional fee and registration required)

**Hands-On Workshops** (The following are Core Courses in the Syllabus
Curriculum.)

[201](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor201) Developing Courses: Web Publishing (FD)  
[Rachel Smith](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiosmithr), Sonoma State University  
[203](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor203) Developing Courses: Interactive Web Pages
(FD)  
Gerald Viers, Cal Poly Pomona  
[206](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor206) Multimedia Authoring/Macintosh (FD)  
[Coco Kishi](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiokishi), University of Texas-Austin  
[207](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor207) Multimedia Authoring/Windows (FD)  
[Tom Hall](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiohallt), Pitt Community College  
[301](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor301) Web Course Management Systems (FD)  
[Sue Polyson](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiopolyso), Virginia Commonwealth
University and  
[Steven Saltzberg](syll98_fac.htm#anchorbiosaltzb), Randolph-Macon College  
[302](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor302) Animation and the Web (FD)  
[Jeffrey R. Bell](syll98_fac.htm#anchor biobell), California State Univ.-Chico  
[303](syll98_prepost.htm#anchor303) Multimedia and the Web (FD  

