

|



|

  
  
---|---|---  
  


|

**U** **  
R  
P**

|

SYLLABUS  
URP 512: URBAN AND REGIONAL PLANNING THEORY AND PRACTICE  
  
  


|



`**COURSE**` **  
**

`**HOME**` **  
**

`**PAGE**`

|



### FALL 2001 COURSE SYLLABUS

* * *

_CATALOG DESCRIPTION:_   Application of planning theory to planning practice.
Use of planning methods, research techniques, and decision theory in
application to a range of urban problems.  2 hours lecture-discussions; 2
hours seminar-discussions.



_COURSE OBJECTIVES:_



This course provides 1) a reflective overview of the intellectual concepts and
theories that underlie urban and regional planning, and 2) experiences of
planning based on observation and in-class activities.  We will bridge the
domains of theory and practice through discussion, debates, writing and group
activities.  Current issues in urban and regional planning will be used to
illustrate issues in theory and practice, focusing on the Los Angeles region.



There are many competing views on how planners should plan, ranging from
planning as a technical activity, to planning as a communicative activity, to
planning as social action.  This is an exciting time to study planning theory
because ideas about what constitutes good planning are changing rapidly.  The
course, therefore, does not provide a "cookbook" for planning.  Instead it
asks you to learn about and critically evaluate alternative approaches to
planning process.  By the end of the course, you should be able to recommend
planning strategies that are appropriate to a given planning context and your
own values, and understand the effects of process on planning outcomes.



In meeting the overall course objectives, you will:



            1) understand how planning thought and practice has evolved in the last century;



2) evaluate alternative planning processes and develop your ability to match a
planning process with the context for a planning exercise;



            3) increase your understanding of the issues involved in practice;



            4) develop strategies for effective planning.



You are invited to consider the ways you wish to use computers to expand
interaction beyond the classroom.  The address for the previous class's web
page is http://www.csupomona.edu/~rwillson

The class will make joint decisions on whether to have on-line discussions,
using a threaded discussion group on the web, e-mail or other methods.



_  
_

_INSTRUCTOR AND CLASS INFORMATION:_



Class times:                  Monday and Wednesday, 5:00 - 6:50 PM

Office Location:            7-206

Office Hours:                Monday/Wednesday: 3:00-5:00; Tuesday 11:00-12:00

Communication:            Telephone (909) 869-2701; Planning office (909)
869-2688;

                                                                [E-mail--RWWILLSON@CSUPOMONA.EDU](mailto:E-mail--RWWILLSON@CSUPOMONA.EDU)

                                                No faxing of material

_ _

_COURSE ORGANIZATION:_



Course lectures and discussion will generally follow the schedule provided
below.  Modifications may be made as the quarter progresses.  Student-led
discussions will take place throughout the course.



Week



1          What is Planning?  What Do Planners Do?



2          A Brief History of Planning



3          Justifications for Planning



4          Approaches/Processes for Planning



5          Approaches/Processes for Planning



6          Planning as Communicative Action



7          Planning Strategies

           

8          Planning Case Studies



9          Social Transformation and Planning



10        Summary and Student Presentations

           

_READING MATERIALS:_



The required texts are:



Campbell, Scott and Susan Fainstein (1996) _Readings in Planning Theory_.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.



Forester, John (1999) _The Deliberative Practitioner: Encouraging
Participatory Planning Processes.   _Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.



The texts are available at the Bronco Bookstore.  A compilation of additional
required readings is available at "University Copy and Printing", 3530 Temple
Avenue.  That compilation contains the schedule for weekly readings.  Be
prepared to discuss the assigned readings in each session.  Failure to prepare
for discussions will seriously affect your participation grade.



_COURSE REQUIREMENTS:_



Course requirements include prompt completion of reading assignments, regular
class attendance and participation, and the following: participation in
discussions; three short papers, a midterm review, and an oral final exam.
The oral final will take place during exam week, during regular class hours.
You may be asked to lead one discussion during the quarter.



The short paper assignments are due October 21, November 14, and December 5.
They will ask you to analyze issues in planning theory based on the
literature, class discussions and planning activities in which you will be
involved.  The midterm will be October 31.  The final will be held on the
normal exam time during exam week.

_ _

You must have reliable and convenient access to a computer with web
capabilities to participate in the class.  You will need to have this access
set up by the second week of class, either using a Cal Poly account or a
commercial on-line service provider. __

_ _

_GRADING_



The grade will be determined as follows:



            Short papers                             45%

            Midterm                                   15%

            Final                                         20%

            Class Participation                    10%

            Attendance                               10%



If you fail to fulfill any one of the course requirements, a passing grade
cannot be granted. Incompletes cannot be granted unless consultation between
the student and faculty member has occurred, and an agreed upon set of
conditions is established.  See University Catalog for details.



_OTHER COURSE POLICIES_



Missed classes and late arrival at class will affect the attendance and class
participation grade.  All late submissions will be penalized in grading.
Missed midterms or final examinations for medical reasons require written
certification from a qualified professional.



_PLAGIARISM_



The University considers plagiarism a serious academic offense that subjects
those engaging in the practice to severe disciplinary measures.  Plagiarism is
not just buying a paper for a class or copying work.  It is also failing to
cite another person's idea and presenting it as your own.  Be very careful
with citations in your work.  If you are confused on a particular issue, ask
me.



  
  


|

 [Return  
to TOC](512TOC.htm)

|

* * *

INSTRUCTOR: [RICHARD WILLSON](mailto:rwwillson@csupomona.edu) PH.D. AICP  
[Department of Urban and Regional Planning](http://www.csupomona.edu/urp/),
[California State Polytechnic University, Pomona](http://www.csupomona.edu/)  
  


