**Biology 105X**

**Fundamentals of Biology - Semester I**

**Fall 2001**



Instructor \- Dr. Kent Schwaegerle - ffkes@aurora.alaska.edu



Office - 305C Bunnell; 215 Irving

Mailbox - 302 Bunnell; 211 Irving



Office Hours - Th 10:00 to noon in Bunnell and by appointment anytime



Phone - 474-5920 (305C Bunnell); 474-5622 (215 Irving) ; 479-5134 (home)



Text \- Campbell, N. A., J. B. Reece, and L.G. Mitchell. 1999. Biology, 5th
edition.

Benjamin/Cummings, New York.



Course Outline - provides an outline of course materials and is also available
online at the Biology 105 web site.



Teaching Assistants: Chris Blankenship 1978 Matt Bowser 6677

Merben Cebrian 6688 Chris Foshee 7918

Judy Hamilton 7918 Aram Lecis 1978

Marta Mueller 6677 Cyndi Schiff 1978

Biology 105 Facilities:  Laboratories - Bunnell 302 and 308

Computer Labs - Bunnell 301 (access through 305); Bunnell 407

TA Conference Room - Bunnell 307E; Phone = 1978

Study Room - Bunnell 301A (access through 305)

Web Site - http://mercury.bio.uaf.edu/courses/biol105





GRADING



1. Points will be awarded for performance on lecture and laboratory exercises.



2. Grades will be based on percentage of total possible points according to the scale:



A  90-100%

B  80-90%

C  70-80%

D  60-70%

F  0-60%



3. Lecture and laboratory exercises



400 pts Four one-hour exams will cover assigned readings, lecture, and
laboratory material.

200 pts Final exam, two hours.

200 pts Two lab reports - 100 pts each.

85.pts Three Group Presentations.

25 pts Group Web Page.

75 pts Three short reports - 25 points each.

195 pts 13 take-home, open-book quizzes - 15 pts each.

<75 pts Five lab exercises; 5-15 points each.



4. If you are going to miss an exam, it is essential that you contact Dr. Schwaegerle as soon as possible to discuss your excuse. Unexcused absences from exams will be recorded as a zero.



5. If you are going to miss lab, you must contact your teaching assistant as soon as possible to make arrangements for making up the exercises you will miss. If you miss a lab and don't make arrangements, you are individually responsible for mastering material and completing assignments made during that lab. Unexcused absence from a lab exercise will be recorded as a zero.



6. Academic dishonesty - The UAF Honor Code is presented on page 22 of the 01-02 UAF Catalog. No collaboration among students will be allowed on exams and quizzes, and although we will work together in collecting, analyzing, and interpreting data, no collaboration is permitted in writing of lab reports and lab assignments. Copying or paraphrasing another student's writing is a violation of the Honor Code. Evidence of academic dishonesty will be presented to the University Disciplinary and Honor Code Committee and may result in an F for the course and/or expulsion from the University.





Course Schedule



SECTION ONE

**Ecology** ****



This section of the course explores the diverse ways that living organisms
interact with their environment. These interactions are important because they
determine the distribution and abundance of biological species on the surface
of the earth. An understanding of these interactions is essential for making
wise decisions about managing our environment and will provide a framework for
studying life processes throughout Biology 105-106.



F Sep 7 L1 \- Introduction - Science and methods for learning about nature
p13-19



M Sep 10 L2-What is ecology? p1026-28

W Sep 12 L3-Global patterns of life  p1028-34; 1042-47

F Sep 14 L4-Population ecology - theory Ch 52



LAB 1 - Methods of Science; Field Trip

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________



M Sep 17 L5-Population ecology - real populations - **Quiz 1** due 11:45 AM Ch
52

W Sep 19 L6-Population ecology - human population growth  Ch 52

F Sep 21 L7-Community interactions Ch 53



LAB 2 - Field Ecology Experiment

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________



M Sep 24 L8-Community Ecology - competition between species - **Quiz 2** due
11:45 AM Ch 53

Data Analysis; Writing Lab Report #1

W Sep 26 L9-Principles of ecosystem ecology Ch 54

F Sep 28 **EXAM 1** (11:45-12:45 Bunnell Auditorium) covers lecture and lab
material from

September 7 through September 24. 100 points.



LAB 3 - Paramecium Population Growth;

**Group Presentations** \- Field Ecology - 25 pts

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________



M Oct  1 L10-Role of science in building public policy - **Quiz 3** due 11:45
AM p1024-25; (Ch 55)

5:00 PM **LAB REPORT #1** -Field Ecology - due 302 Bunnell





SECTION TWO

**Genetics**



The next two sections of the course will focus on the properties of organisms
that explain evolution. You will see that biological species are made up of
individuals that are genetically unique. Mendel's rules of inheritance explain
how these genetic differences are passed from generation to generation. You
will see that evolution is a necessary consequence of genetic variation in
populations. You will also see that the prevailing scientific views on
evolution have changed radically during the last 200 hundred years and that
these views continue to change as we learn more about the genetics and ecology
of living organisms.

W Oct 3 L11-What is a gene? (Ch 16, 15)

F Oct 5 L12-Functions of DNA (Ch 12, 13); (p312-313)



LAB 4 - Paramecium Competition and Predation Experiments;

**Group Presentation** **-** Population Growth of Paramecium - 10 pts

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________



M Oct 8 L13-Gene expression - **Quiz 4** due 11:45 AM (Ch 17)

W Oct 10 L14-Mendelian inheritance, meiosis, and chance Ch 14

F Oct 12 L15-Mendelian genetics - 2 loci;  Ch 14



LAB 5 - Computer Simulation of Population Growth

Group Web Page

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________







SECTION THREE

**Evolution** ****



M Oct 15 L16-Evolution and the process of science - **Quiz 5** due 11:45 AM Ch
22

W Oct 17 L17-Darwin and natural selection  Ch 22

F Oct 19 **EXAM 2** (11:45-12:45 Bunnell Auditorium) covers lecture and
material from

September 25 through October 15. 100 points.



LAB 6 - Genetics problem solving; Drosophila genetics

**Group Presentation** \- Paramecium Experiments - 50 pts

**Web Page** due 5:00PM Friday

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________



M Oct 22 L18-Modern evolutionary theory - **Quiz 6** due 11:45 AM Ch 22;
p412-413

W Oct 24 L19-Evolution \- fact or theory?  Ch 22

F Oct 26 L20-How evolution works; Genetic structure of populations Ch 23



LAB 7 - Genetics computer simulation;

**LAB REPORT #2** due - Paramecium experiments

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________



M Oct 29 L21-Hardy-Weinberg Model; Evolutionary change \- **Quiz 7** due 11:45
AM Ch 23







SECTION FOUR

**The Diversity of Life** ****



This section of the course will help you become familiar with the diverse
forms of life that have existed on the earth. When you are walking in the
forest or on the beach the question often comes up, "What is THAT??!" as IT
squirms away into the darkness. After completing this section of the course we
hope you will often be able to answer that question, and if you don't know
what IT is you will be able to use your knowledge of evolutionary
relationships to speculate about what IT is.



W Oct 31 L22-What is a species?  Ch 24

F Nov  2 L23-Biological species concept Ch 24, 25



LAB 8 - Bacteria experiments

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________



M Nov 5 L24-History of life on earth \- **Quiz 8** due 11:45 AM Ch 26;
p488-489; (Ch 27)

W Nov 7 L25-Monera and viruses (Ch 28, 18); Ch 32

F Nov 9 **EXAM 3** (11:45-12:45 Bunnell Auditorium) covers lecture and
material from October

16 through November 5. 100 points.



LAB 9 - Monera, protista, fungi





M Nov 12 L26-Protista and fungi - **Quiz 9** due 11:45 AM Ch 33

W Nov 14 L27-Cambrian Explosion Ch 34





SECTION FIVE

**Plant Biology**



We will examine the external and internal structures of plants and learn how
these structures allow the plant to acquire materials from its environment
that can be used for the construction of more structures. We will see that
hormones coordinate the acquisition and deployment of growth resources.
Ultimately, resources from the environment are used for construction and
deployment of reproductive propagules. The structure of plant communities is
determined primarily by these simple relationships between plants and their
physical environment.



F Nov 16 L28-Plant diversity and evolution Ch 29



LAB 10 - Animal diversity; **Short Report #1** due - bacteria experiments

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________





M Nov 19 L29-Mosses; Ferns \- **Quiz 10** due 11:45 AM Ch 29

W Nov 21 L30-Conifers  Ch 30

F Nov 23 NO CLASS - Thanksgiving



LAB 11 - NO LAB this week

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________





M Nov 26 L31-Angiosperms \- **Quiz 11** due 11:45 AM p567-572; p730-738

W Nov 28 L32-Angiosperm diversity

F Nov 30 **EXAM 4** (11:45 - 12:45 Bunnell Auditorium) covers lecture and
material from November 6 through

November 26. 100 points.



LAB 12 - Plant Growth Analysis

____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________





M Dec 3 L33-Plant structure and function \- **Quiz 12** due 11:45 AM Ch 35

W Dec 5 L34-Acquisition of external growth resources Ch 10; Ch 37

F Dec 7  L35-Allocation of internal growth resources Ch 36; Ch 39



LAB 13 - Plant water relations; **Short Report #2** due - Drosophila genetics;

___________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________





M Dec 10 L36-Plant life cycles - seed dispersal and dormancy - **Quiz 13** due
11:45 AM Ch 38

W Dec 12 L37-Plant life cycles - seed germination and growth  Ch 38

<p class=MsoPlainText style='tab-s

