[HST 432 Home Page](index.html) | [DRSmith's Home Page](../index.html) |
[World History Home
page](http://www.class.csupomona.edu/his/WorldHistory.html) |
[Syllabus](hst432syllabusspg.html) | [Assignments](hst432assignmentsspg.html)
| [E-mail Dr.Smith](mailto:drsmith2@csupomona.edu) |
[outline](hst432outline.html)| [Paper Guide](hst%20432%20paper%20guide.html)

Teaching and Assessing the Doing World History Method in the World History
Survey

On July 12, 1996, at the Aspen Institute for World History I made a
presentation on technology in the world history survey. The way I treat
technology is so closely related to the Doing World History Method and the
attempt to involve students in the historical process that we spent much of
the time that day talking about teaching methods. Assessing students progress
also came up several times in the course of our discussions. When I returned
home, the editors were kind enough to request that I write up a description of
the Doing World History method and how I assess students work. The two are
necessarily tied together as periodic assessments lead to improved student
work, but for presentations sake I will discuss them in separate sections.



TEACHING

Given the overwhelming task of teaching all the civilizations in the year
survey of world history course, it occurred to me that teaching students how
to do world history would give them techniques they could use on any time
period and any set of cultures. Offering them a foundation of what the basic
work of world history is also seemed fundamental to their developing an
understanding for what the course was attempting to do. This may seem obvious,
but the reason for studying world history is to learn to think about the past
from a cross cultural and comparative perspective.

This conclusion entailed a new problem: Just what does a world historian do?
And how do world historians differ from other historians? For an answer, I
turned to the professional publications in world history, the _World
HistoryBulletin_ and the _Journal of World History._ From my reading in these
sources and various classics of world history (Alfred Crosby, _The Colombian_
_Exchange_ ; Eric Wolf, _Europe and the People Without History_ ; Jerry
Bentley, _Old World Encounters_ ), I pieced together a rough and ready hand-
out that I titled "Doing World History."

After a brief description of the nature of world history and how it differs
from other histories, I offer 5 suggestions for doing world history: (1) Big
Picture, 2) Diffusion (3) Syncretism, the result of cross-cultural contacts,
(4) Comparison and (5) Common Phenomena. These are briefly explained in the
hand-out, and I spend a few minutes in class explaining them and offering
examples. See Appendix for a copy of the hand-out.

The Big Picture offers a broad overview, stressing chronology of major events
and an explanation of their significance. Care needs to be taken here, for the
students tend to list far too many events, often having no idea of their
importance. I suggest that they choose only four or five events from any
single assignment and that they zero in on what the ultimate significance of
each event is. I also try to get them to include events from more than one
culture on their time lines so they can do comparisons and understand what is
going on in different places at any given time.

Often the ultimate significance will not be directly stated in the textbook,
and the students will have to think for themselves to come up with an answer.
Take the invention of writing as an example. From the textbooks it is easy to
acquire the date of about 3400 b.c.e. and to attribute the invention to the
Sumerians. The ultimate significance is not in most books, so the students
must stretch to come up with an explanation. They usually come up with
something to the effect that a tradition across many generations can be built
through writing, history can be preserved, and communication with future ages
is possible through written materials.

Diffusion involves the spread of natural entities, people and cultural items
from one region to others. It is fairly easy to explain this concept by
pointing to the contemporary spread of televisions and computers around the
world, or to baseballs popularity in countries like Mexico and Japan.

If enough items spread the result is syncretism, the most important result of
contacts between cultures. Syncretism is from the Greek root for "mixing," and
in a historical context means the mixing of cultures to produce a new
civilization. The easiest and most familiar example of this is the United
States, and I spend some time discussing with the students some of the various
cultural elements found in the U.S.A. We have some fun with the fact that
sushi and nachos are both available in the refreshment stands at Dodger
Stadium. Another historical example that can be easily explained is the
Chinese influence on Japan in high cultural elements during the middle period.

As mentioned above, I think that comparison is an integral part of practicing
world history. But what is to be compared? All the societal elements that
historians are interested in, from social structure and religion to politics,
technology and economics. Students are dependent on what is in the textbook,
so to a certain extent the selection of possible comparative elements has been
made by the authors. Students can still have some input here, however, because
they must select from the plethora of facts that the book offers. The most
difficult part of teaching this concept is getting the students to specify
what is different and what is similar about the civilizations they are
comparing. They have an almost natural proclivity to discuss two civilizations
in tandem, merely juxtaposing their comments about them. Many textbooks do it
that way, and it is an easy way to escape thinking about the assignment by
merely copying or summarizing the text. I label this practice as
"juxtaposition," and suggest that they need to explicitly state what is
similar and different about the societies. This process involves some
translating of the books material and some analyzing of the facts in a new
context of like and different. Other methods for helping students make
comparisons include pointing out examples in the book and reading aloud
appropriate student papers.

Common phenomena refers to natural or historical events that affected more
than a single civilization. That is, two or more civilizations experienced
something in common. Climatic change, disease, invasions or common
developments all fall into this category. The idea of comparision is also
implicit here, for although the events may be shared, the results or the way
societies responded to the events will differ. For example, the Mongol
invasions turned out differently in China in comparison to Japan. When
students write about this concept, they tend to forget to express what is
common, so this must be stressed, particularly at the beginning of the term.

The procedure I follow is to have the students keep notebooks in which they
place their daily writing assignments. For each chapter, or sometimes even
part of a long chapter, I ask them to use Doing World History on the
particular civilizations being covered. Sometimes I ask them to apply the
method to this weeks civilization and last weeks. I usually leave it up to the
students to decide which technique to use, unless I see a method being
overused or underused. Since comparison is such an important element of doing
world history, occasionally I will ask them to compare two or more
civilizations. Reviewing earlier material is critical to retention, so every
few weeks I will ask them to cut through all the chapters from a certain
perspective, say technology, using the doing world history methods. There is a
danger here that students may neglect the specific historical material and
offer only glittering generalities about the assignment. For the notebook
assignments, I give no credit for such responses and write a comment on their
papers explaining that generalities and specific information have to be
balanced. For the review exercises, if the same thing occurs the grade is
reduced, and I write a similar note.

By the way, I do have them read primary sources and write journal entries on
them, but only occasionally do they use Doing World History on them. I think
this is because we have to spend time explaining the texts themselves on a
weekly basis. Only when a complete work has been digested are we able to put
it in a world historical context and bring Doing World History into play. This
seems appropriate as a texts specific cultural context must be understood
before it can be discussed in a more general framework.

When class begins, I ask the students to divide into groups to discuss the
days assignment and to produce some kind of chart or graph to illustrate their
consensus version of the homework. After about thirty minutes of work, they
hang their work on the walls around the room, and one person from each group
presents that groups project. Each person is required to speak at least twice
during the quarter. Extra credit can be earned by speaking more than twice.
When all the groups have made their presentations, I comment on their efforts,
stressing doing world history and offering criticism. Creative interpretations
and those involving thinking skills come in for special praise. Any egregious
errors are gently (I hope) pointed out. Usually I have ten or fifteen minutes
left at the end of the 65 minute class period to offer my own interpretation
of the material and to present background material for the next assignment.

For testing purposes, every two or three weeks I hold a review exercise, in
which each student has to produce a chart or graph about the chapters covered
in that period. Originally I allowed them to use the textbook and their
notebooks, but through experience have found that they learn more if they are
not permitted to use notes or books. The chart or graph can follow any format
they choose--pictorial, written phrases, maps, time lines or whatever they
come up with. Some students, although not many, choose to write traditional
essays. The criteria are that they cover the material and use the doing world
history methods. Often before the exercise they will ask me the answer or what
I want, and I explain that history is an art and that they are responsible for
finding meaning in the material. I also explain that their work will be judged
on how well it utilizes doing world history and on its comprehensiveness and
creativity.

At Cal Poly Pomona we offer a three quarter world history survey divided
chronologically into Ancient (HST 101), Medieval--Early Modern (HST 102), and
Modern (HST 103) units. I use doing world history in all three courses, but I
have discovered some interesting differences in the way the various methods
can be applied. Contacts in the ancient period are relatively limited, so
syncretism is not as important as it is in later periods. Notable exceptions
here would be the Late Bronze Age syncretism in the eastern Mediterranean and
vicinity and Greeces impact on Rome. Comparison, however, can be easily
employed for the various cultures, many of which meet similar challenges and
go through similar stages of development. For example, the Bronze Age in China
has many parallel developments to those of the Bronze Age in the eastern
Mediterranean. I also like to have the students compare the three great
civilizations of antiquity, China, India and the Mediterranean, whose
emergence I make one of the themes of the course.

In the Medieval--Early Modern period there is greater global integration, and
I make the rise of the first and second global civilizations the theme (Islam
and Western Europe). Here syncretism plays a much more prominent role,
although comparison can easily be brought into play. I begin with Islam which
clearly offers many opportunities to explore syncretism, both in its own
response to more mature civilizations like the Byzantines and the Persians,
and in the way it diffuses through much of Eurasia and Africa and affects the
cultures it comes into contact with. The regional influence of China and India
also offer good material for employing the concept of syncretism. The
influence of China on Islam and western Europe, intensified by the spread of
the Mongol Empire, is one of the contributing factors to the rise of western
Europe as the second global civiliation which the students can treat from any
of the several doing world history perspectives.

HST 103, the Modern Period, differs considerably from the Ancient and Medieval
--Early Modern courses because the single theme of modernity unifies the
material in a unique way. The Big Picture involves a definition of modernity
and how it developed. It is a Common Phenomenon because all civilizations had
to deal with it in one way or another. Diffusion and syncretism come into play
because each civilization adapts to modernity in different ways. Comparison
can be easily brought to bear as the process of modernization in various
countries can be compared, or the consequences of decisions regarding
modernization can be compared. For example, Japan and China in the 19th
century made radically different decisions about modernization that led to all
kinds of western interventions and internal problems in China, while Japans
wholesale adoption of modernity allowed it to become a competitor of the West.

Although HST 103 hangs together thematically more easily than HST 101 and HST
102, I find similar problems in the early assignments--students do not
understand the method and merely repeat what they find in the textbook. Often
they will borrow sentences and phrases, even paragraphs and pages, straight
from the book. This is plagiarism, of course. Doing World History requires
thinking about the material in the book and recasting the information in the
students own words. For example, many texts treat China and Japan in the
modern period in the same chapter, without really comparing them. Students who
merely borrow from the book go no further than juxtaposing the books material
on the two civilizations. A true Doing World History paper carefully points
out similarities and differences between the two societies. The actual
information may be the same, but in the Doing World History process the
student actually interprets the material and creates a historical product.

Getting the students to understand and use the methods takes a few weeks. In-
class treatment of the assigned readings from a world historical perspective
helps reinforce the Doing World History methods. It is necessary to
demonstrate through in-class work that whichever method is chosen becomes the
focus of the essay. After several practise essays, coupled with criticism,
positive examples and group discussions, students soon begin employing the
methods more successfully.

I think there is a period in every course when the students have to learn to
translate their ordinary discourse into historical discourse. This takes a few
weeks, and the instructor has to pay close attention to the process, offering
criticism and positive examples of successful uses of the methods. To help the
students maintain their focus, I also give them a guide called "Suggestions
for Doing World History" which offers specific directions about reading the
chapters, taking notes and the process they need to follow in preparing their
notebook entries. It is included in Appendix 1.

In particular, Comparison and Big Picture awareness of the course framework
become second nature to most of the students. Some of them becme creative in
their use of the methodology, advancing on Blooms taxonomy to the
interpretation and application levels and actually playing with the material.
The groups begin to function more easily and their projects become more
creative. Some students ask me if I knew that this was a very effective way of
teaching.

As the developer of the method, its difficult for me to criticize it
objectively. From my observations of the students and from their comments,
almost all who make an effort learn to use the Doing World History techniques.
The students claim the classes are more interesting and they learn more than
they would in a traditional lecture class. That is because they have to work
through the material themselves and discuss it with their classmates. Getting
multiple points of view helps clarify the material and reinforce it. As my
students like to point out, the requirement to write about the material,
create a group chart or graph and speak about it brings multiple learning
styles into play and helps everyone learn. The daily writing assignments help
them develop historical writing ability, and the note-taking practice hones
their research skills.

As for retention and performance on standardized tests, I have no data except
from my students comments. They claim that in traditional lecture, memorize
and test courses, they forget the material immediately after the test. With
Doing World History they retain it longer. This makes sense to me from
personal experience. If you work through something yourself and understand how
all the parts fit together, you will retain more of it. From my own course
work, the stuff I remember the most is from papers and presentations I had to
produce, not from lectures I heard.



ASSESSING

In assessing the students efforts, I emphasize their mastery of Doing World
History and their attention to participating in the class on a daily basis. In
particular I look at the notebook and the review exercises critically to see
that doing world history has been applied to the assignment. Notebook entries
usually need to be a page or two in length, and I can usually judge at a
glance whether the entry is sufficiently long enough to cover the material. If
the entry is long enough, I will read over it to see if the students chosen
method was adequately followed. I grade these entries as either acceptable or
not, awarding 5 points for each.

For the review exercises, I follow a similar process, although I offer partial
credit for not so successful efforts. Each review exercise is worth 20 points,
and I use three criteria for judging them, how well doing world history is
applied, comprehensiveness and creativity. Like any other historical method,
doing world history can be used in more or less effective ways. For example,
if comparison is the chosen method, a very few obvious comparisons may be
offered, or complex and thorough treatments of two societies could be
sketched. My evaluation will reflect the students choice between those two
options. Similarly, if the review assignment covers three chapters, how well
the student integrates the whole assignment into the exercise is considered in
awarding the grade. If the student makes an effort at creativity, in
particular by going beyond the textbook and advancing to higher levels of
thinking, I make an upward adjustment in the grade.

At this point lets examine the work that the participants in the Aspen Summer
Institute produced.

PHOTO OF "Technology of Flight" PROJECT

First of all, let me say that this group of teachers is more knowledgeable and
mature than my students, and they have produced a chart far more sophisticated
than anything my students do. You will notice a chronological overview that
goes back to Greek and Roman mythology, then skips to Chinese kites and
Leonardo DaVinci before moving on to the Wright brothers and twentieth century
developments. All without the aid of reference books or advanced warning! On
the right hand side is a list labelled "significance," which fits the method
called "Big Picture." Since the chart also includes a time line of sorts, I
would evaluate it as an excellent presentation using Big Picture. On Blooms
taxonomy, which I also introduce to my students, I would say that the chart
exhibits both interpretation and application, two of the higher orders of
cognition that I am trying to encourage. My only criticism is that the chart
leaves out the experimental glider flights of the 1890s which were precursors
to the Wright brothers flight. The inclusion of that element would helped
depict the technological evolution of flight, one of the main concepts I
emphasize in teaching technology in world history. But remember this group had
no recourse to books and that omission is merely a factual matter.

In order to insure that students come to class prepared, I sporadically check
to see if they have the daily notebook entry in hand. I give 5 points for each
check, and I do this four to six times per quarter. Advance warning about this
practice is included in the syllabus, but once I begin checking there is
usually a dramatic increase in the number of people coming to class with the
assignment written out in advance.

Each student is required to speak twice during the quarter, with five points
being awarded for each presentation. Usually this involves presenting the
group s chart or graph. For many students, this is a very demanding
requirement, and I have learned through experience not to be critical of any
individual. After all the presentations have been made, I may come back to
specific group efforts to offer constructive criticism, but without calling
attention to their speaker. For extra credit a student may speak more than
twice, but I limit it to ten extra credit points.

For the final exam, I require each group to create a chart or graph that
employs doing world history to explain the significance of the course. This is
different from their other charts in that it covers all the course material
and in that they have to bring it into the final instead of working on it in
class. As a result, there is much cooperative work outside the classroom and
some very creative material emerges. Once the students have arrived for the
exam, each group gets ten minutes to present its interpretation, and we have a
contest to see which group presents the best chart. They are also required to
bring their daily charts created during the rest of the quarter in case there
is a tie on the final chart. The criteria for judging are the same as for the
review exercises. The winning group gets 50 points, and the other groups
receive points according to how they place in the contest, with two points
between each place.

For a given quarter, then, there will be about 20 or so notebook assignments,
two or three review exercises, four to six notebook checks, two required
speaking assignments and a 50 point final exam. I use a 90% =A, 80% =B grading
scale. A conscientious student should have no trouble making a good grade. As
many of my students are general education students, some of them choose not to
earn high grades, and that is usually determined by their performance on the
notebook and review exercises.

Admittedly, there is a large element of subjectivity built into this
assessment system. I believe this is inevitable in the light of history nature
as an art. Higher grades will go to those papers and projects that I think
best apply Doing World History. My students do not have a problem with that
aspect of the grading system. ( Most questions arise about the bookkeeping) In
fact, when I explain my evaluation of their work they are satisfied and try to
improve the next time. The most important consideration is consistency. I
teach them Doing World History and require them to work with it throughout the
course. The evaluations of their work are based on how well, how thoroughly
and how creatively they apply the methods. On the whole, students are happy
about what they learn in the course and satisfied with the grades they earn.
This is reflected in positive course evaluations and anecdotal comments from
the students.



David R. Smith

History Dept

California State Polytechnic University, Pomona

Appendix 1 Introduction to Doing World History

Most fundamentally, doing world history involves the study of cross cultural
events or phenomena. History may be defined as research into how cultures
develop through time. World history is more general than traditional history
and emphasizes trends that transcend cultural boundaries. World history
stresses the treatment of inter-action between societies. In eras where such
inter-action is limited, it compares different patterns of development around
the world. Hence, a world history study may involve cultures that actually had
contact and influence on one another, or cultures that went through various
stages of development with little or no outside influence. Since history is
full of this kind of material, the number of possible world history treatments
is very large.

World history tends to be more superficial and general than local or national
histories. This is not meant in a negative way, but in the sense of a
comprehensive view of history. The old cliche of not seeing the forest for the
trees applies here. World history looks at the forest in that it searches for
the overall, global meaning of history. The major changes over the time the
earth has existed, and particularly since the advent of humans, are emphasized
and often displayed on time lines. This is a diachronic (through time)
approach to world history.

For any particular time period, world historians may view all areas in a
synchronic (at the same time) way and compare the way different societies
responded to the environment and met basic human needs. In order to simplify
this material they look for patterns of government or religion or other
cultural and social institutions.

They also stress connections between civilizations and how they influenced one
another. There are many variations of cultural influence due to the different
kinds of contacts that occurred, but the most common and most important is
syncretism. As items and cultural developments diffuse from society to
society, changes take place in any given civilization that fundamentally alter
it. A mixing of new and old elements takes place that results in a new
civilization. This mixing is called "syncretism."

In looking for global events, world historians often find natural or human
movements that affect many cultures. These could be climatic developments,
diseases, natural disasters or human movements like invasions and migrations.
They could include dealing with new technologies and life styles. These events
and processes are called "common phenomena."

To simplify and limit these nearly infinite possibilities, I have selected
five methods which I believe capture the essence of the world history
approaches. I call them "Doing World History." Remember, the methods are meant
as focusing devices to help interpret and give meaning to historical events.
They are listed below:

1\. Big Picture, a time line of the most important events of those under
study, accompanied by a written explanation of their ultimate significance.

2\. Diffusion or the spread of natural elements, people, artifacts, ideas or
other cultural creations from one civilization to others.

3\. Syncretism or mixing of elements from two or more cultures that results in
a new civilization.

4\. Comparison or the pointing out of similarities and differences between two
civilizations in terms of their histories, institutions, cultural
accomplishments and economies.

5\. Common phenomena, the natural or historical events and developments that
two or more societies share. Examples could be climate, disease, natural
disasters or invasions, shared technologies or other human developments. The
basic question here is What is shared?

































Appendix 2

Suggestions for Preparing Notebook Entries Using Doing World History

1\. Read over the chapter quickly, noting or marking topics that lend
themselves to Doing World History methods.

2\. Choose one or two of the Doing World History methods that you think
appropriate for interpreting the chapter. In your own words write a paragraph
or two interpreting the chapter from the chosen perspective.

3\. Go back to the pertinent sections of the chapter and re-read them. If you
need facts and information to back up your interpretation, take notes. Again,
remember to take notes in your own words so you will have to think about the
information you are taking down. Avoid repeating the phrases and sentences of
the author(s). This is an important part of the learning process.

4\. Return to your original version and tinker with it until you are satisfied
that you have offered an interpretation of the chapter focusing on one or more
of the Doing World History methods.

5\. If you chose Big Picture, do you offer a time line and an explanation of
the ultimate significance of the selected events? Do you have too many dates
and events to remember? Do the chosen events adequately reflect the most
important points of the chapter?

6\. If you chose diffusion, is the idea of something spreading explicitly
stated in your paper? Is this spreading process important to the themes of the
chapter?

7\. If you chose syncretism, is the idea of mixing cultural elements clearly
stated in your paper? Can the reader discern from your explanation who
borrowed from whom and with what results? Is the syncretism you mention
important in understanding the events discussed in the chapter?

8\. If you chose comparison, did you point out similarities and differences
between the cultures you discuss? Did you offer significant comparisons, or
are they merely superficial and obvious?

9\. If you chose common phenomena, are the items mentioned really shared by
the two or more civilizations you discuss? In other words, be careful to point
out what is shared.

10\. Finally, did you go beyond merely repeating or rephrasing what is in the
book? Remember, Doing World History means thinking and writing about the past.

[HST 432 Home Page](index.html) | [DRSmith's Home Page](../index.html) |
[World History Home
page](http://www.class.csupomona.edu/his/WorldHistory.html) |
[Syllabus](hst432syllabusspg.html) | [Assignments](hst432assignmentsspg.html)
| [E-mail Dr.Smith](mailto:drsmith2@csupomona.edu) |
[outline](hst432outline.html)

