

![](vicport.jpg)

|  ![](britflag.gif) |

![](churchill002.gif)  
  
---|---|---  
  
> **HISTORY OF MODERN BRITAIN**

Dina Copelman ([dcopelma@osf1.gmu.edu](dcopelma@osf1.gmu.edu)) |

> > > History 322  
  
---|---  
History Department, [George Mason University](http://www.gmu.edu) |

> > > Fall 1999  
  
Robinson B348 |

> > > TR 12:00-1:15  
  
Office hours: T 2:00-2:30; R 2:00-3:30 & by appt. |

> > > Robinson B203  
  
993-1260; 993-1250 (department) |
http://chnm.gmu.edu/courses/copelman/hist322  
  
On this page you will find basic information and links which you will use
throughout the course



> > ![](hogarthfair.jpg)

>>

>> William Hogarth, _Southwark Fair  _, 1733/34

>>

>>  

> home

|

> description

|  syllabus  
---|---|---  
  
> [assignments](assn.htm)

|  [documents](docs.htm) |

> > [resources](resources.htm)  
  
`





**_HISTORY OF MODERN BRITAIN_**

Instead of racing through three centuries of history, this course will attempt
to cover key issues shaping modern Britain since the late seventeenth century
by focusing especially on England and on the social, political and cultural
origins and impact of industrialization. To accomplish this the nature of
political and economic structures will be studied alongside the contours of
everyday life. Male and female, the powerful and the powerless, "high" and
"low" culture, public and private identities--all will be considered in order
to understand the forces that shape history as well as how history shapes
people's lives. Since a great deal of emphasis is placed on the complexity of
past experience and our understanding of that experience, close attention to
primary documents, focused reading, and discussion will be important aspects
of this class. That may mean that we will have to sacrifice comprehensiveness
for depth--not every important event or person will be studied and coverage of
the later twentieth century will be relatively brief.

Additionally, this course is also a part of the "Technology Across the
Curriculum" initiative so an essential (and required ) aspect of the work you
will be doing is using email and information available through the internet
and web. You will have to keep up with information and materials available
through the class web page and you will have to do some web-based assignments.
One of these assignments will require you to produce a group project where you
have to integrate and evaluate research you have obtained through the Web and
assigned class texts. All components of the class will be described in more
specific handounts.

**_REQUIRED BOOKS_** \- all books available at the GMU campus bookstore

> T. W. Heyck, _A History of the British Peoples_ , vol. II

>

> Friedrich Engels, _The Condition of the Working Class in England_

>

> Judith R. Walkowitz, _City of Dreadful Delight_

>

> Alan Sillitoe, _The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner_

>

> Peter Clarke, _Hope and Glory_

There will additional readings and other materials which you will have to
access from this class Website. The Website also has separate pages for each
week where I will post specific guidelines and questions. Finally, you should
bookmark and browse an excellent online encyclopedia, the _Spartacus Internet
Encycolpedia, British History 1700-1950_ (available at
[http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/Britain.html](http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/britain.html)).
Some of the readings below come from that collection. You should also get used
to referring to it regularly to help you identify people, places, events and
key ideas.

**_COURSE REQUIREMENTS AND GRADES_**

All students are required to attend regularly and be prepared. All students
will be assigned to a small group at the beginning of the semester and active
participation in your group is a required and graded component of this course.
Main assignments will be **1)** a 4-6 page paper based on your reading of
Engels's Condition of the Working Class and primary documents you will be
obtaining from the Web; **2)** a take-home midterm; **3)** a group/individual
project focusing on a topic to be chosen from a list of topics. These projects
will be generally dealing with Britain between 1870 and 1920 and they will
require you to do considerable Web-based research both in your groups and
individually. Groups will present their findings to the class by posting a
discussion question and assigning a Web reading on their chosen topic. All
class members will submit a 4-6 page paper summarizing the group's findings,
and analyzing a web source you found particularly interesting; **4)** a final
examination; **5)** a few brief in class writing assignments focusing on texts
relevant to topics being considered at a particular time.

> >  
>>

>>   **Breakdown of Final Grade**

>>

>>> > Engels paper 20 %

>>>>

>>>> Web project 25

>>>>

>>>>> Group component 10

>>>>>

>>>>> Individual submission 15

>>>>

>>>> Take-home midterm 20

>>>>

>>>> Final 20

>>>>

>>>> In class writing, group and class participation 15

**_HONOR CODE_**

This course is governed by the University's Honor Code and all violations of
that code will be handled in accordance with University regulations. You are
especially cautioned that it is **your** responsibility to be familiar with
what constitutes plagiarism. If you are unsure, I will be happy to go over
this with you both in class and individually. A full description of the Honor
Code is available in the 1998-1999 GMU Handbook and on the GMU  Website.

**_SCHEDULE OF READINGS AND ASSIGNMENTS_**

**The table below links you to individual pages for each week. On those pages
you will find additional information pertinent to our work week by week. It is
your responsibility to keep up with the class and to be informed of any
changes in class assignments.**

[week 1](week1.htm) |  [week 2](week2.htm) |  [week 3](week3.htm) |  [week
4](week4.htm) |  [week 5](week5.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---  
[week 6](week6.htm) |  [week 7](week7.htm) |  [week 8](week8.htm) |
[week9](week9.htm) |  [week 10](week10.htm)  
[week 11](week11.htm) |  [week12](week12.htm) |  [week 13](week13.htm) |
[week 14](week14.htm) |  [week 15](week15.htm)  
  
[**WEEK 1:**](week1.htm) **August 31 and September 2**

> **Introduction; Racing to the 18th Century**

>

>> **T. W. Heyck, A History of the British Peoples [hereafter Heyck], chs. 1 &
2**

>>

>> **Documents on website [hereafter DOCS] : **[**Bill of
Rights**](http://wwlia.org/uk-billr.htm)

[**WEEK 2:**](week2.htm) **September 7 and 9**

> **Eighteenth Century Society and Politics**

>

>> **Heyck, chs. 3-5, 7**

>>

>> **DOCS:**[ **Swift, "A Modest Proposal"**](http://art-
bin.com/art/omodest.html)

>>

>> [**Hogarth prints**](http://www.haleysteele.com/hogarth/toc.html) **\--
Election, Rake's Progress; Harlot's Progress; Marriage a la Mode**

>>

>> **Adam Smith "Of Colonies" and "The Cost of Empire" at the**[ **Modern
History Sourcebook,
Enlightenment**](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/modsbook10.html) **,
section on "The Enlightenment and Economics"**

[**WEEK 3**](week3.htm) **: September 14 and 16**

> **Revolution**

>

>> **Heyck , chs. 8 , 11**

>>

>> **DOCS: Burke, _Reflections_ [from Baylor] and Paine, _Age of Reason,_
Conclusion [Yale] \-- available through the **[**Modern History Sourcebook ,
French Revolution**](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/modsbook13.html) **,
section on Responses;**[
**Wollstonecraft**](http://www.bartleby.com/144/13.html) **, _Vindication of
the Rights of Woman_ , Chapter XIII, sections II, IV, VI**

>>

>>   **[ Begin Engels]**

[**WEEK 4**](week4.htm) **: September 21 and 23**

> **Europe at War; Industrialization**

>

>> **Heyck, chs. 10, 12**

>>

>> **Friedrich Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England , pp.
37-125**

>>

>>   **DOCS:**[ **Inventors and
Innovators**](http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/textiles.htm) **,**[
**Peterloo**](http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/peterloo.html) **(see Week
4 page)**

[**WEEK 5:**](week5.htm) **September 28 and 30**

> **Economic and Social Changes**

>

>> **Heyck, chs. 13, pp. 299-307**

>>

>> **Engels, 126-215**

>>

>> **DOCS:**[ **Child Labor, Opposing
views**](http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/textiles.htm) **(see Week 5
page)**

[**WEEK 6**](week6.htm) **: October 5 and 7**

> **Political Instability and Stability**

>

>> **Heyck, pp. 307-322, chs. 15-16**

>>

>> **Engels, pp. 239-266, 301-325**

>>

>> **DOCS:**[ **Chartism**](http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/chartism.htm)
**,**[ **Irish Famine**](http://vassun.vassar.edu/~sttaylor/famine/) **, (see
Week 6 page)**

**ENGELS PAPERS DUE OCTOBER 7**

[**WEEK 7**](week7.htm) **:**

> **Oct. 12**

>

>> > > > > **MIDSEMESTER BREAK &endash;NO CLASS**



> **Oct. 14** **GROUP MEETINGS**

** **

**   **[ **WEEK 8**](week8.htm) **: October 19 and 21**

> **Victorianism**

>

>> **Heyck, ch. 16**

>>

>> **DOCS: Crystal Palace**

  **TAKE HOME MIDTERM DUE OCTOBER 21**

 [ **WEEK 9**](week9.htm) **: October 26 and 28**

> **Late Victorian Britain I: New Identities and Experiences**

>

>> **Judith R. Walkowitz, City of Dreadful Delight, chs. 1, 2, 5, 6**

>>

>> **GROUP ASSIGNMENT: to be determined**



**INDIVIDUAL ESSAYS DUE A WEEK AFTER GROUP REPORT**



[**WEEK 10**](week10.htm) **: November 2 and 4**

> **Late Victorian Britain II: Anxiety and Expansion**

>

>> **Heyck, ch. 17**

>>

>> **Walkowitz, ch. 7**

>>

>> **DOCS: Kipling, White Man's Burden**

>>

>> **GROUP ASSIGNMENT: to be determined**

 [ **WEEK 11**](week11.htm) **: November 9 and 11**

> **Edwardians and the Drift to War**

>

>> **Peter Clarke, _Hope and Glory_ , pp. 1-70**

>>

>> **GROUP ASSIGNMENT: to be determined**

[**WEEK 12**](week12.htm) **: November 16 and 18**

> **World War I and Interwar**

>

>> **Clarke, pp. 70-181**

>>

>> **DOCS: Trench Warfare; Responses to the War**

>>

>> **GROUP ASSIGNMENT: to be determined**

[**WEEK 13**](week13.htm) **: November 23 (Nov. 25 THANKSGIVING &endash;NO
CLASS)**

> **World War II**

>

>> **Clarke, pp. 182-215**

>>

>> **DOCS: London During the Blitz**

[**WEEK 14**](week14.htm) **: November 30 and December 2**

> **Welfare State**

>

>> **Clarke, 216-318**

>>

>> **Alan Sillitoe, The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner**

[**WEEK 15**](week15.htm) **: December 7 and 9**

> **Postmodern Britain**

>

>> **Clarke, 319-404**

>>

>> **DOCS: Browse the Web for current British news**



**FINAL EXAM IS SCHEDULED FOR DECEMBER 14, 10:30-1:15**

** **



> home

|

> description

|  syllabus  
---|---|---  
  
> [assignments](assn.htm)

|  [documents](docs.htm) |

> > [resources](resources.htm)

