![](../ORIGINAL_IMAGES/upper_left.jpg)

|

![](../ORIGINAL_IMAGES/top.jpg)

|  
---|---|---  
![](images/early_18.jpg) |  
  
     [ ](http://www.cuw.edu/home.htm) [HOME](http://www.cuw.edu/home.htm)  /  [SITE INDEX](http://www.cuw.edu/index_of_site_text.htm)  /  [SEARCH](http://www.cuw.edu/searchpage.htm)  / [INFORMATION](http://www.cuw.edu/info.htm)  /  [CONTACT US](http://www.cuw.edu/questionsatcuw.htm)

|  
  
|

[**  
**](facts.htm) **[HISTORY HOME](default.htm)**

**[FACULTY](Faculty.htm)**

**[COURSES](Courses.htm)**

[**AMERICAN CIVILIZATION I**](americancivI.htm)

[**AMERICAN CIVILIZATION II**](americancivII.htm)

**[EARLY AMERICA 1492-1787](early_america_syllabus.htm)**

**[INTRODUCTION TO LATIN AMERICAN HISTORY](intro_latin_american_history.htm)**

[**MODERN EUROPE**](modern_europe.htm)

**[MODERN CHINA](modern_china.htm)**

[**WORLDVIEWS**](worldviews.htm)

**[WRITING CENTER](writing_center.htm)**

**[ACTIVITIES](Activities.htm)**

**[TEACHER RESOURCES](Teacher%20Resources.htm)**

**[WEB LINKS](Web%20Links.htm)**

**[CUW HOME](http://www.cuw.edu/home.htm)**

  
  
---  
  
**HISTORY DEPARTMENT  
  
**

|

**HIST 309 Early America 1492-1787**  
William R. Cario  
TR 1:10-2:25 pm, Barth 105  
Spring 2002  
LU 221/262-243-4263  
[William.Cario@cuw.edu](mailto:William.Cario@cuw.edu)

**Course Overview** ** _ _**

This course will explore the origins of the United States and its people.  It
will cover such topics as the Columbian Exchange, the European colonization in
North America, the maturing of an American identity, the American Revolution,
and the establishment of a new government under the Constitution.  Through
lectures, readings, videos, and discussions the student will gain insight into
the colonial and revolutionary American experience.  In addition, the student
will sharpen such important skills as analytical reading, critical
questioning, oral presentations, and essay writing.

**Texts _ _**

Countryman, Edward, ed.  _What Did the Constitution Mean to Early Americans?_
Boston:  Bedford/St. Martins, 1999.

Kupperman, Karen, ed.  _Major Problems in American Colonial History_ , 2d ed.
New York:  Houghton Mifflin, 2000.

Schutz, John A.  _The Dawning of America 1492-1789_.   St. Louis:  The Forum
Press, 1981.

**Grading Policy _ _ **

Each student's work will be evaluated according to the formula below:

            2 tests and a final examination (including       50%  
                      an essay on the Constitution)

            2 essay papers                                                  20%

            primary source project                                      20%

            oral presentation                                                10%



Late paper policy:  Any paper handed in after 3pm on the due date is
considered late.  I will accept late papers for seven calendar days after the
due date, but I reserve the right to penalize the paper up to a full grade
(e.g., A to B, B- to C-).  I will not accept a paper the eighth day after the
due date.  You will not be able to make up your oral presentation if you miss
it with an unexcused absence.

I will not allow a student to make up a test if the student has not informed
me of the problem before the scheduled day of the test.  I reserve the right
to refuse to give a makeup test for a student who has an unexcused absence.

A separate sheet will give details about each of the assignments.

**Attendance _ _**

Class attendance is very important.  We will cover material in class that will
be accessible from no other sources.  Please be aware of my option to withdraw
a student who has 10 intermittent or 6 consecutive unexcused absences.  It is
the student's responsibility to recover material missed as a result of an
absence.

**Office Hours _ _**

If you have questions or concerns about the course, do not hesitate to speak
with me.  I will be available before and after class.  My office hours are MWF
11am to noon, TR 10-11am, and at other times by appointment.  I also encourage
you to leave me a message by telephone or email; I will get back to you.

**Course Schedule _ _**

Week 1 - 29 Jan       The Columbian Exchange  
            Read Kupperman, cpt. 1

Week 2 - 5 Feb      Indigen responses and Spanish colonization  
            Read Schutz, cpt. 1 and Kupperman, cpts. 2 & 6

Week 3 - 12 Feb      The English Tidewater  
            Read Schutz, cpt. 2 and Kupperman, cpt. 3 

Week 4 - 19 Feb      New England Colonies  
            Read Schutz, cpt. 3 and Kupperman, cpts. 4 & 5 

Week 5 - 26 Feb      The Middle Colonies  
            Read Schutz, cpts. 4 & 5 and Kupperman, cpt. 7 

Week 6 - 5 Mar         Caribbean & the Deep South  
            **Test 1** (weeks 1-5); read Kupperman, cpts. 8  & 9 

Week 7 - 12 Mar       Slavery in the New World  
            Read Kupperman, cpt. 10 

Week 8 - 19 Mar       Colonial Religion & the Great Awakening  
            Read Schutz, cpt. 7 and Kupperman, cpt. 11

Week 9 - 26 Mar            SPRING BREAK -- NO CLASSES

Week 10 - 2 Apr      English Colonies in Imperial World  
            **Primary Source Essay due 4 Apr** ; read Schutz, cpt. 6 and              Kupperman, cpt. 12 

Week 11 - 9 Apr       Backcountry Realities and Challenges  
            Read Schutz, cpt. 8 and Kupperman, cpt. 13 

Week 12 - 16 Apr      Toward Independence  
            **Test 2** (weeks 6-11); read Schutz, cpt. 9 and Kupperman, cpt.             14 

Week 13 - 23 Apr      The Revolutionary War  
            Read Schutz, cpt. 10 

Week 14 - 30 Apr      The Constitution  
            Read Schutz, cpt. 11, plus Countryman, introduction & cpts.             1-3 

Week 15 - 7 May     The Constitution, cont'd  
            Read Countryman, cpts. 3-5

Week 16 - 14 May     **Final Examination 1:10-3pm, Thursday, 16
****essay due on day of exam**

"I have but one lamp by which my feet are guided, and that is the lamp of
experience.  I know of no way of judging the future but by the past."  
Patrick Henry



_Concordia University Wisconsin is a Lutheran higher education community
committed to helping students develop in mind, body, and spirit for service to
Christ in the church and the world._

**Spring 2002  
Assignments Description**  

**Essay One -- Review of secondary articles** _ _

This essay focuses on the chapter you have chosen in Kupperman, ed., _Major
Problems in American Colonial History_.   After reading the articles by
historians (the secondary sources) in that chapter, you will write a 3-4 page
paper in which you identify and discuss the issues and answers that the
historians provide regarding the chapter's topic.  You may also discuss the
methodologies the historians use in their works.  Your thesis should deal with
what these articles tell you about the chapter's topic.  Your paper will be
due at the end of the week that your chapter is assigned.  (I will make some
allowances for people who sign up for chapters during the first couple of
weeks of the semester.)

**Primary source presentation** _ _

You will also be responsible for the primary sources (documents) in the
chapter that you have chosen.  On the Thursday of the week that your chapter
is assigned, you will give a 5-10 minute presentation of the documents in the
chapter.  Your goal is to share with the class insights about what these
documents tell you about colonial Americans.  You may use the following hints
about reading a primary source (found in Davidson & Lytle, _After the Fact_ ):

> 1. Find out about the context of the document (who, what, where, when).

>

> 2. Ask what the document might have said but did not.

>

> 3. Find out about the worlds behind the words.

>

> 4. Be sure to know the intended (& unintended) audience.

**Essay Two -- Constitution essay** _ _

In an essay that you will turn in as a part of your final exam, write a paper
in which you discuss the issues and responses that Americans raised during the
1780's, when the Constitution was written and ratified.  Use the articles in
Countryman, ed., _What Did the Constitution Mean to Early Americans?_ , as
source material for your 2-4 page paper.

**Primary source essay** _ _

You will have an opportunity to work with and write about a primary source in
Concordia's library.  Your finished product will be a 4-5 page paper in which
you use that primary sources to share some insight about early Americans.  You
may use any of the following sources:

> New-York Journal - CUW microfilm

>

> Benjamin Franklin account books - CUW microfilm

>

> Samuel Adams papers, 1635-1826 - CUW microfilm

>

> Letters of Delegates to Congress, 1774-1789 - JK1033.L471, 2 hour reserve

**Note on citations** _ _

For all of the papers above, you will need to cite your sources.  You will
need to use the citational style most historians use, Chicago Manual of Style.
**Parenthetical citation will not be accepted.**   Listed below are examples
of two footnotes (initial and subsequent) citing sources from the Kupperman
text.  I will supply further samples in subsequent class periods.

            1A.G. Roeber, "Dutch Colonists cope with English Control," in _Major Problems in American Colonial History_ , 2d. ed, Karen O. Kupperman, ed. (Boston:  Houghton Mifflin, 2000) 206. 

2Roeber, 211. ** **

**TEST ONE**

**I. The test will cover:**

A.  Topics:     The Columbian Exchange

                        Other European colonization efforts

                        Seventeenth-century English colonies:  
                               Tidewater  
                                New England  
                                Middle Colonies

B.     Kupperman, chapters 1-7

C.     Schutz, chapters 1-5

D.     Lectures, discussions in class



**II.** ******The test will consist of:**

A. Short Answer responses (35 points)

Answer the questions with a word, a phrase, or a sentence, at most.  As there
are 37 possible points, you will choose to pass on two points.

B. Essay question -- one of the following will be on your test: (30 points)

1.  An important component of the Columbian Exchange was the meeting of Europeans and Americans in the New World.  How would you describe what happened when Americans and Europeans encountered each other in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries along North America?  How does this encounter shape the development of colonization? 

2.  What characteristics strike you as you read and learn about the European immigrants to the New World in the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries?  In an essay describe the settlers' characteristics and qualities which stand out.  Then speculate about what those characteristics say about the colonization that took place in North America.  
---  
  
     
  
![](../ORIGINAL_IMAGES/menu_bottom.jpg)

