
                                    NETFUTURE
    
                       Technology and Human Responsibility
    
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Issue #72       Copyright 1998 Bridge Communications          June 2, 1998
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 Editor:  [Stephen L. Talbott](http://www.oreilly.com/~stevet/index.html) [(stevet@oreilly.com)](mailto:stevet@oreilly.com)
    
         You may redistribute this newsletter for noncommercial purposes.
    
    
    CONTENTS:
    *** Editor's Note
    
    *** Quotes and Provocations
          _Next: Pigs That Fly?_
          _Ties That Bind_
    
    Departments
    
    *** Tech Knowledge Revue (Langdon Winner)
          _Report from the Digital Diploma Mills Conference_
    
    *** Announcements and Resources
          _Media, Democracy, and the Public Sphere_
          _The Global Problematique_
    
    *** Who Said That?
    
    *** About this newsletter
    
    
    
    
    

* * *

### What Readers Are Saying about NETFUTURE

"I use issues of NETFUTURE in a course I teach in our administrator
preparation program. I think it is a terrific resource, and a great eye-opener
for my students, who when they think of computers in schools tend to think
uncritically. They are sure that they must get more kids in front of more
computers. I spend a lot of time in the course getting them to think about why
they would want to do that."

(For the identity of the speaker, see "Who Said That?" below.)

* * *

*** Editor's Note

With this issue Langdon Winner inaugurates his column, Tech Knowledge Revue.
It's a lengthy inauguration, but well worth reading for its clear-eyed look at
the forces promising (or threatening) to dismantle higher education as we know
it. Professor Winner carries you into the midst of the passionate
deliberations at the recent "Digital Diploma Mills" conference.

SLT

Goto table of contents  

* * *

*** Quotes and Provocations

## Next: Pigs That Fly?

Andrew Kimbrell, founder of the International Center for Technology Assessment
in Washington, D.C., describes one of the "classic" experiments in genetic
engineering this way:

> Dr. Vernon Pursel inserted the human growth gene in a pig. Pursel hoped to
create giant pigs that would be major meat producers. The problem was that
though the human growth gene was in every cell of the pig's body it did not
act in the manner the scientists expected. Instead of making the pig larger it
made it squat, cross-eyed, bow-legged, smaller than an average pig, with huge
bone mass, a truly wretched product of science without ethics. Pursel tried to
find a silver lining in his experiment gone wrong by claiming that the pig was
leaner. Pursel's argument was that people are worried about cholesterol, so
maybe we can sell this as lean pig. Did he really think the public was ready
for pork chops with human genes?

That pig strikes me as a good metaphor for the constructions of the
Information Age. The prevailing notion is that we have this massive collection
of information -- exemplified by several hundred thousand snippets of human
genetic code -- which we can merrily pass from one database to another,
inserting this piece here and that piece there.

But there is no such thing as an "objective piece of information". Like a word
in a sentence, a bit of information _means_ a particular thing only within a
given context. Pursel's pig symbolizes the kind of result you get when you
ignore context and try to build things from the bottom up -- that is, when you
start with the reduced products of your sophisticated analyses, forgetting
what it was you were analyzing in the first place.

Context in the present case means, to begin with, the pig itself. Pursel was
willing to see fragments of DNA -- and even lean pork chops -- but did not
care to see the pig. Such is the technological mindset we now trust to re-
engineer the human being.

Exactly the same trust is at work wherever information is glorified as the
decisive form of capital, the basis for problem-solving, and the fundamental
ingredient of all knowledge.

(Kimbrell's remark, incidentally, occurs in a remarkable new book from the
Sierra Club, called _Turning Away from Technology_ , edited by Stephanie
Mills. I hope to review it in the near future.)

## Ties That Bind

At the nursing home where my wife works there is an old man -- an Alzheimer's
patient -- who wears an electronic bracelet. An irrepressible sort, he freely
wanders the halls from morning to evening. While his whimsical and
unpredictable journeying occasionally leads him off-limits, no one worries
about this; his passage through a forbidden door automatically triggers an
alarm, whereupon a staffer routinely sets the fellow upon a new course.

The gains in safety and convenience seem obvious. Of course, as most people
realize, there are also risks. What happens when the bracelet or alarm system
fails? Or when the patient figures out, accidentally or otherwise, how to
neutralize the bracelet? Suddenly the staff's habit of ignoring him poses an
extraordinary danger. The recent satellite failure, with its unhappy
consequences for various emergency communication systems, illustrated some of
the chain reactions that can occur in the wake of a technical failure.

Wherever the dangers of technology are acknowledged, this is the sort of thing
that usually gets mentioned. Many such problems come under the heading,
"technical glitches", and the mind-numbing range of possibilities is covered
superbly in Peter Neumann's online RISKS forum.

As most NETFUTURE readers know, my own penchant is to deal with a different
class of risks: those showing up when the technology performs exactly as
hoped. For example, do those wrist bracelets, by increasing the "efficiency"
of the nursing home operation, make it an even more inhuman terror for aging
folks than it already is? (Do family members or neighbors or staff members
ever take that old man _through_ the forbidden doors and outside, where he can
experience grass, tree, and sun for a few minutes? Or, now that he is so well
watched after by technology, do they increasingly forget him?)

As important as our dogged pursuit of technical glitches is and will remain, I
don't think the "what can go wrong?" school of technology criticism will carry
us very far against the most crucial issues of our day. After all, for every
technical glitch there is a technical fix. And while the more alert among us
may rightly point out that the fix poses its own risk of new glitches, perhaps
even making the problem worse, the fact is that the technological arms race
between glitch and fix seems to give us a balance of risk and benefit that
society is happy to accept. The death rate on our highways may be high (we
probably wouldn't tolerate it if it were instead the result of a foreign war)
but ... well, do you really expect me to give up my ease of travel from here
to there?

It will, then, be difficult to cultivate a more sober public attitude toward
technology merely by pointing to glitches, however pervasive. The challenges I
am most concerned about, on the other hand, arise not when something goes
wrong, but when everything goes right. These challenges can be shown to grow
more acute with every successful fix and with every new, more sophisticated
generation of devices.

When the bracelet functions so well that it becomes a prison shackle or an
isolation cell; when we can travel the globe so conveniently and safely that
we unthinkingly abstract ourselves from place and community; when the new,
improved voice recognition system enables us to reduce ever more meaningful
aspects of human exchange to dialog with telephone answering systems -- these
are the times I worry most. (For an elaboration of this point, see "Is
Technological Improvement What we Want?" in [NF
#38](../1997/Jan1697_38.html#2), [#40](../1997/Feb0597_40.html#3), and
[#48](../1997/May1497_48.html#3).)

Finally, do not think there is a neat symmetry between the risks and the
benefits of technology, as I have framed them here. The subtleties of risk-
benefit analysis notwithstanding, not all risks and benefits can be weighed in
the same balance. The bracelet, by offering safety and convenience, does not
elevate our humanity; but the bracelet we allow to become a shackle helps to
destroy our humanity.

That's the way it is with technology. The real benefits we stand to gain --
the ones that truly elevate us -- always result from our _overcoming_
technology rather than yielding to its invitations. It requires a wrenching
inner effort to make that bracelet an occasion for _more_ humane and loving
attention rather than less. We gain from technology by learning how to work
against its pull -- a gain of inestimable value, essential for our future.

The deepest risks of technology, on the other hand, are realized without
effort on our part. In fact, this lack of inner effort is itself the
realization of the risk. It is the disappearance of ourselves -- the loss of
the power and will to struggle against technology toward higher ends (higher,
for example, than convenience).

We can be positive about technology, in other words, only by being negative
about it. Look at contemporary discussions of technology and you will almost
invariably find that one or the other side of this paradox is overlooked. The
most common denial of the paradox consists of the attempt to weigh all of
technology's pluses and minuses in the same balance. This is to forget that we
must stand _above_ technology, and that what we gain through our mastery of it
(or lose through our failure of mastery) is of an entirely different order
from any supposed goods (or ills) the technology offers in its own right.

SLT

Goto table of contents  

* * *

*** Report from the Digital Diploma Mills Conference

    
    
    

From Langdon Winner (winner@rpi.edu)

    
    
                                                          TECH KNOWLEDGE REVUE
                                                            1.1   June 2, 1998
    

It was billed as "a second look at information technology and higher
education," a gathering of students, professors, administrators, and union
leaders concerned about the effects of computer-based learning in our colleges
and universities. Organized by historian and social critic David Noble, the
conference on "Digital Diploma Mills?" took place in late April at Harvey Mudd
College in Claremont, California, and featured some of the most intense,
personally moving discussions I have ever heard in a scholarly setting. While
descriptions and diagnoses ranged across a broad spectrum, there was a widely
shared sense that a crisis in higher education is now at hand.

At one level the question had to do with how well the new media of
computerized instruction compare to conventional, classroom-centered methods
of teaching. As students connect to new networks of "distance learning," what
exactly are they getting? How does their experience compare to that gained on
traditional college campuses?

Almost all speakers at the conference took care to recognize that there are
some definite advantages in what the new technologies and digital institutions
offer. Several professors described ingenious attempts to use the Internet and
Web in their teaching, for example, a seminar in global political economy that
links teachers and students across several continents. Many acknowledged that,
for great numbers of students today, sources of electronic information and
occasions for on-line instruction are actually superior to what would have
been available to them otherwise. Especially for non-traditional learners --
those who have jobs and families and want to return to college to expand their
learning and earn new credentials -- computerized settings offer varieties of
access and flexibility that traditional campuses do not provide. This is no
small accomplishment.

## Weighing the Costs

Enthusiasm about the success stories, however, was countered by reports that
distance learning is often a counterfeit of education, replacing well
recognized essentials of teaching with glitzy software and shoddy pedagogy.
Most sobering in this regard was the conference keynote, "Absence Makes the
Heart Grow Colder," by Mary Burgan, General Secretary of the American
Association of University Professors. Burgan argued that the methods of
distance learning often lead teachers "to abandon our students to their own
devices at exactly that stage in their learning when they most need guidance,
exhortation and demanding critique from us." She noted that distance
instruction tends to amplify some of the worst habits of today's students: an
inability to concentrate in a sustained way, a tendency to read uncritically
and a willingness to believe that one interpretation of a text or topic is
just as good as the next.

Particularly troubling, Burgan observed, is the way that computerized methods
sever personal bonds between students and teachers. Speaking of participants
in her own classes, she noted that "their intellectual difficulties are very
personal," often tied to troubles with family, friends, lovers, substance
abuse and the like. It is difficult enough to spot these problems in direct,
face-to-face classroom encounters. If teaching increasingly takes place in the
abstract realms of cyberspace, will teachers be able to respond to students'
highly individual needs?

Burgan's thoughts gave focus to a dispute that erupted repeatedly during the
gathering: how to weigh the benefits and costs of on-line learning. For some
vocal techno-optimists in the crowd, the central promise seemed to be that of
"content." Content, they explained, is the crucial substance of any field of
knowledge -- physics, math, history, etc. -- such that it can be "delivered"
through a set of institutions, practices and technical equipment. Content plus
delivery equals "access." From this standpoint, computerized education looks
like a godsend. As Casey Green, Director of Campus Computing for the Claremont
Colleges, exclaimed about the new technology,

> This stuff is great. This stuff is fantastic. This stuff is wonderful. This
stuff offers tremendous opportunities for me as a scholar ... and tremendous
opportunities for engagement for me and my students focused on the issue of
content: what we teach, what we bring into the classroom and what we bring
into the syllabus.

Some in the group, however, balked at the enthusiasm over "content", wondering
whether coming generations of students were fated to be taught by machines
rather than living human beings. Mary Burgan acknowledged that knowledge of a
certain complexion can be transferred via the new media. But she asked, "What
happens to people who get their knowledge and then don't have to interact with
other people in other settings?" Throughout the discussions there was a
gnawing sense that even the most exquisite applications of distance learning
run roughshod over crucial, social dimensions of learning.

## Gathering Forces of Change

As the debate continued, it became clear that the pros and cons about the
computer and Net were just the tip of an iceberg, one that the Titanic of
higher education seems destined to ram. Enormous economic, demographic and
political forces are gathering in ways that now promise (or is it threaten?)
to transform higher education from top to bottom. How education is offered, by
whom, for what audience, at what cost, and with what consequences for society
-- all of that, conference participants agreed, is up for grabs.

Among the most powerful forces are those in the corporate sector that see
education as a huge, largely untapped market for new goods and services. If
one totals all the money spent on education and training in every setting and
every institution, public and private, in the United States each year, the
amount comes to perhaps $600 billion. Several speakers pointed to the
expanding reach of corporate innovations aimed at capturing markets that
traditional colleges and universities now serve. New firms, the University of
Phoenix and the Home Education Network, for example, have already taken a
substantial bite of the growing market for distance learning and look forward
to huge profits in the future. As the emerging Wal-Mart in this field, the
University of Phoenix has some 31,000 students enrolled.

Meanwhile, conventional institutions are scrambling to find a role, sometimes
renting their reputations and even some of their faculty to cyberspace
business concerns. Rick Worthington, professor of public policy at Pomona
College, called attention to the controversial link between U.C.L.A. and the
strictly for-profit Home Education Network. "Why would this firm be interested
in the university?" he asked. "The reason is clear: U.C.L.A. is a good brand!"

Another arrangement between business and the university that drew considerable
fire was the California Education Technology Initiative, a sweetheart deal
announced in December 1997, linking the entire California State University
system to a consortium of information technology firms -- Fujitsu, Hughes,
Electronics, GTE and, of course, Microsoft in the group first announced. The
plan involves a $300 million upgrade of the CSU digital "backbone" and the
transfer of the $80 million a year that CSU budgets for computing services to
the new CETI monopoly.

University administrators see the plan as a convenient way to improve
information technology services within the college system. But students and
faculty at the Harvey Mudd conference blasted the scheme as a corruption of
the fundamental purposes of a public university, renaming it the "Corporate
Education Takeover Initiative." Several speakers voiced fears that CETI
corporate partners would begin to control the content of courses, reducing
professors to a distinctly secondary role. One faculty member from a CSU
campus reported that in the original CETI contract, professors were expected
to become members of an active sales force, hawking products of the corporate
partners to the 365,000 students on CSU's twenty-two campuses.

[It's worth noting that as campus protests about CETI roiled this spring,
Microsoft and Hughes Electronics withdrew from the negotiations. University
officials remain hopeful that a deal of some kind can be worked out.]

## Social Pressures and the Educational Paradox

The background for commercial innovations like CETI can be found in social
pressures rapidly building in American society. First is a huge demographic
bubble in which growing numbers of college age and returning students seek
higher education, placing tremendous stress on existing institutions. At the
same time state governments, facing tax revolts from angry voters, are far
from eager to spend the funds needed to build new campuses and hire permanent
faculty. The situation was depicted most vividly by Lev Gonick, University
Dean for Academic Computing at California Polytechnic University, Pomona.

> We are facing `Tidal Wave II' -- an additional 110,000 to 125,000 students
in the next fifteen years. That represents building an institution the size of
Cal Poly Pomona with 20,000 students every year for the next seven years.
That's not going to happen. The brick and mortar solution is not going to
happen.

What is going to happen, Gonick made clear, is that public universities will
look for ways to stretch their present campus facilities and faculties through
the use of digital communications.

Whether or not this strategy will work was hotly debated. Several who spoke on
the economics of information technology noted with bemusement that
universities rushing to the game are largely clueless about how much the new
equipment and services will actually cost. "I.T. is as much marketing
phenomenon as it is scholarly tool," educational policy analyst Christopher
Oberg observed. "It is as much about keeping up with the Joneses as it is
about keeping up with research." Even the notion that information technologies
bring increased efficiency seems suspect. There now appears to be an
"education paradox" at least as puzzling as the "productivity paradox" oft-
reported in the business literature. As Oberg put it, "In the literature
searches I've done and research reviews I've conducted, I cannot find a single
claim that I.T. has delivered an equal learning product at a reduced cost."

David Noble chimed in on this point, recalling that his studies of industrial
automation two decades ago had reached similar conclusions. In fact, the
managers and engineers he talked to simply did not want to talk about matters
of cost, efficiency and profit that ostensibly motivated them. "We hear all
the time about the bottom line ... cost effectiveness, austerity. The reality
is otherwise. Trying to identify gains in productivity or economic gains --
the results are always ambiguous and quite contrary to the assumptions."
Studies of supposed "gains from the introduction of computers in the service
sector," he added, "have thus far yielded no gains in productivity .... Now
all of this is coming to the universities."

Many in the room called attention to another feature of the brave new academic
economy -- increasing reliance on a corps of contingent workers, the tens of
thousands of poorly paid "adjunct" professors, "Roads Scholars" if you will,
who now teach a growing share of courses offered on American campuses. Nearly
50% of all college classes nationwide are taught by non-tenure track, part-
time teachers, a source of increasing distress among students and faculty
alike.

Ann-Marie Feenberg, Associate Dean at the University of Redlands, called
attention to one disturbing aspect of this trend: the de- professionalization
of a whole generation of scholars. "We see our junior colleagues becoming
independent contractors," she lamented. As members of the new generation of
PhDs move from one part-time slot to another, it is all but impossible for
them to build coherent careers in teaching, research and collegial relations.

This result, of course, has little to do with computers or high speed networks
as such. But as the use of temporary academic workers spreads, the idea of
building new "wired universities" around them is a temptation that academic
administrators and entrepreneurs find difficult to resist. Welcome to the
global economy and its lean, flexible, just-in-time work places. These days I
often hear unemployed PhDs say how thankful they are for the $3,500 fee they
receive for doing occasional, on-line courses. As they adapt to this new
regime, deplorable conditions are accepted as normal.

## Who Controls Education?

A spark of humor on these dreary trends was injected by Christine Maitland,
Coordinator of Higher Education for the National Education Association, who
sketched several fantasies of campuses of the future. One of them, McCollege,
yellow arches and all, would offer a complete line of drive-through, fast-
consumption educational products including "The Big Degree." A special
attraction of "Wired U," would be occasional performances by "The Three
Tenures," the last three tenured professors on the planet. On the walls of her
projected E.M.O. -- Education Maintenance Organization -- were signs reading:
"Truth is the best commodity," "Scholarship means dollarship," and "Money in
the bank is the best tenure."

Maitland's point, however, was a serious one. Whether they realize it or not,
college teachers are now involved in a fierce struggle over the control of the
curriculum. The increasing use of technology in higher education raises
persistent questions about what the curriculum will include and who decides.
"It is the faculty that are the best judges of the content and quality of
courses in their discipline," she insisted. With a "knowledge explosion" under
way in all areas of learning, the idea that software developers can simply
package lectures and lessons and pump them through digital pipes year after
year is an illusion. Such knowledge would have a limited shelf-life. Hence,
the best strategy is to allow those active in various fields of learning to
oversee changes in the substance of courses.

Maitland cited the example of the University of Maine, which attempted to
institute distance education without including faculty in curriculum planning.
Faculty fought back, eventually forcing the chancellor to resign. "The union
won the right to have faculty review of distance education courses. There is
now some very good distance education offered by the University of Maine and
it is controlled by the faculty."

This does not mean that college teachers should see themselves as protectors
of traditional sinecures. Indeed, many at the meeting saw the true challenge
of information technology as that of democratizing education, transforming
deeply entrenched structures of prestige and privilege. Phil Agre, professor
of communication at UCSD, observed that the very ideal of liberal education
has long presupposed a distance between the educated person and the rest of
society. A possible benefit of distance learning might be to overcome this
distance. "The model of liberal education depended on a kind of leisure that
our students mostly don't have and do not expect to have and can't identify
with." Agre called for "a positive, democratic vision of what a liberal
education is," one that would draw upon the power of digital technologies as
an occasion for progressive social change.

Andrew Feenberg, professor of philosophy at San Diego State University, chided
college teachers for missing the boat on exactly this challenge. "University
faculties have not been willing to address non-traditional learners. Because
they haven't, those learners have been addressed by entrepreneurs and
administrators who have created a whole parallel education system which they
now control." In contrast to the kinds of high-cost pedagogy that now produce
de-skilling and automation in education, Feenberg described some time-tested,
inexpensive forms of computer-centered learning that bring students and
teachers together around projects of shared inquiry. But he admitted that few
have been willing to move forward with these approaches.

## And What about the Students?

As the conference wound to a conclusion, voices strangely absent from most
discussions about technology and education announced themselves forcefully. A
panel of students from the Claremont colleges and CSU system wondered openly
how agendas for the corporatization, commercialization, and technological
transformation in their learning environments had been launched without anyone
bothering to ask them about their needs. While they appreciated the advantages
that email and on-line information could provide, they were incensed at the
mind-numbing foolishness that computer and media-centered presentations often
involve.

"We don't want edutainment," Maria Quintero exclaimed. "What we want is people
to inspire or infuriate us." In a rambling monologue worthy of a stand up
comic, Evan Blumberg described a fellow he'd noticed in a campus computer lab,
one who would stare into his cathode ray tube for days on end, oblivious to
the passage of time, the need for food or drink and the presence of people
sitting right next to him. "Because these labs have no windows, you can't tell
whether it's day or night. They're a lot like the casinos in Las Vegas. I
think I know who `the house' is."

Another of the students, Julia Baker, spoke as a leader of the revolt against
CETI in the California State University system. Ms. Baker pointed to the
destruction of the partnership between students and professors that systems of
distance learning sometimes entail. Suggesting that the problem was ultimately
one of corporate domination of education rather than technology itself, she
announced that a "revolution in consciousness" is on the horizon, one quite
different from the educational revolution corporate managers and university
bean counters have in mind, an uprising that would bring students to renew
their commitment to social justice and ecological principles. "When the revolt
arrives," she asked, "will the faculty stand with us?"

The event ended with no firm resolve other than a firm desire to keep the
conversation moving. Evidently, there will be a second "Digital Diploma Mills"
gathering in Wisconsin this fall. If it's anything like the first one, it will
be well worth the journey to Madison.

## A Two-tiered Educational System?

I came away from the conference with several firm impressions:

** The extent of corporate penetration of higher education is even greater
than I'd previously known and is spreading fast.

** State legislatures would now rather invest in digital bandwidth than spend
money on conventional settings for teaching and learning.

** Most faculty of college and universities now seem unaware of or indifferent
to changes slated for their ways of working in the years ahead.

** If professors ever do begin to squawk about the erosion of their scholarly
autonomy, the general public probably won't care.

** In the coming decade, higher education seems likely to split into two
distinctly different sectors: (1) two hundred or so institutions that deliver
high quality, face-to-face teaching for those slated to become social elites;
(2) several thousand semi-campus, semi-cyberspace, hybrid organizations --
colleges, universities and business firms -- ready to pump instruction and
credentials to a flexible global workforce.

** The goal of shaping information technology to democratize education is
highly appealing, but there are, at present, no strong, well-organized forces
promoting that end.

** I plan to advise my sons to avoid college teaching as a profession, unless
any of them demonstrates a taste for protracted conflict.

    
    
    

* * *
    
    
    

Tech Knowledge Revue is produced at the Chatham Center for Advanced Study,
P.O. Box 215, North Chatham, NY 12132. Langdon Winner can be reached at:
winner@rpi.edu and at his Web page: http://www.rpi.edu/~winner .

Copyright Langdon Winner 1998. Distributed as part of NETFUTURE:
http://www.oreilly.com/~stevet/netfuture/. You may redistribute this article
for noncommercial purposes, with this notice attached.

Goto table of contents  

* * *

*** Announcements and Resources

## Media, Democracy, and the Public Sphere

NETFUTURE reader Bob Jacobson passes along an announcement for the UDC '98
conference in San Francisco, June 11 - 14. Sponsored by the Union for
Democratic Communications (UDC), the conference will be hosted by the
University of San Francisco. The theme is "Media, Democracy, and the Public
Sphere".

The UDC encourages (by its own advertisement) "critical perspectives in
communication theory, media production and the study of popular culture". It
brings together "media producers, researchers, policy makers, and grassroots
communications activists".

> The UDC calls for critical academics and media activists, practitioners, and
producers to address issues that might include: the notion of the "public
interest," the role of public media systems in the creation of a democratic
public sphere; the role of media policy in helping or hindering democracy; the
role of media in (trans)national democratization processes; the dissemination
of radical claims through alternative community and mainstream media; the ways
in which the everyday media practices of the public help or hinder the
creation of a democratic public sphere; the education of media workers in the
interest of democracy, and the utilization of information technologies for and
against democracy.

The conference schedule is extensive and impressive. You can check it out at
http://www.udc.org/.

## The Global Problematique

Some of you may be interested in the periodic "Literature Notes on the Global
Problematique" by NETFUTURE reader John McRuer. The postings are sponsored by
the Canadian Association for the Club of Rome. In them, McRuer usefully
digests material from newspapers, books, and articles.

McRuer describes his undertaking this way:

> The problematique presents a long list of interacting symptoms of
labyrinthine complexity: Global warming, ozone depletion, anxiety about the
global food prognosis, population growth, global carrying capacity,
deforestation, declining biodiversity, collapse of fish stocks, air and water
pollution, threats to wildlife, so called overconsumption, accumulating
garbage, undisposed nuclear waste, aquifer depletion, poverty, environmental
refugees, globalization of the economy, and a wide range of resulting
political conflicts including growing corporate power, water rights,
transboundary pollution, fish wars, transportation gridlock, NIMBY (Not in My
Back Yard), carbon taxes, voluntary simplicity, and "full cost accounting". On
a more esoteric level the problematique has generated growing academic
tensions concerning the paradigm of economics, the nature and future of
technology, the legitimacy of long-term global simulations, the implications
of growing complexity in human interactions, the influence of the media on
cultural change, and the underlying drivers of ecological decline.

>

> In most cases the notes I post are a series of bullets which condense the
content of an item down to its essentials, often with brief comments from my
own analysis. They are aimed at an audience consisting of informed generalists
and specialists whose fields are influenced by a broad range of external
factors with roots in ecological change.

To subscribe, send a note to mcruer@golden.net asking to be added to the list.

Among the previous postings (which I imagine you can still obtain), McRuer
lists these:

  * Avery in Bailey: Saving the Planet with Pesticides: Increasing Food Supplies While Preserving the Earth's Biodiversity. 

  * Bright: Bioinvasions. 

  * Brown: The Acceleration of History. 

  * Calvin, William H: The Great Climate Flip-Flop. _Atlantic Monthly_. 

  * Campbell, Collin J; Jean H Laherre: The End of Cheap Oil. _Scientific American_. 

  * Crook, Clive: The Future of the State. _Economist_. 

  * _Economist_ : Genetic Engineering: The Year of the Triffids. 

  * Harris: World Agricultural Futures: Regional Sustainability and Ecological Limits. 

  * Kane: Sustainable Industries. 

  * Moore in Bailey: The Coming Age of Abundance. 

  * Platt: Infectious Diseases. 

  * Princen: Environmental NGOs: Carving Out a New Niche. 

  * Roodman: Harnessing the Market. 

  * Sachs: Human Rights & Environmental Justice. 

  * Sedjo in Baily: Forests: Conflicting Signals. 

  * Vaillancourt: The Green Movement and Globalization. 

Goto table of contents  

* * *

*** Who Said That?

Bill McInerney is a professor of educational administration in Purdue
University's School of Education, where he teaches courses on technology and
planning. He previously spent seventeen years as a teacher and administrator
in secondary and middle schools. Music, he says, has always been central to
his life, and, with an appealing technological backwardness, he enjoys
collecting vinyl records.

McInerney teaches a course on "Information Systems in Education", whose
description and fascinating reading list you will find at
http://www.soe.purdue.edu/fac/bmcinern/teaching.html. He co-teaches a second
course (Topics in Educational Restructuring) wholly online. In his
introduction to the latter course, he cites this remark by J. F. Covaleskie:

> When I talk about resistance, I do not mean to suggest that ... reforms are
actively opposed. They rarely are. Quite the contrary, they are often
enthusiastically embraced by teachers and administrators alike. For this
reason, the ability of the system to resist efforts to change it is an
interesting phenomenon. As such reforms diffuse through the system they tend
to become less reforms as they are modified to conform to the systemic demands
for efficiency.

SLT

Goto table of contents  

* * *

*** About this newsletter

NETFUTURE is a newsletter and forwarding service dealing with technology and
human responsibility. It is hosted by the UDT Core Programme of the
International Federation of Library Associations. Postings occur roughly once
every week or two. The editor is Steve Talbott, author of "The Future Does Not
Compute: Transcending the Machines in Our Midst".

You may redistribute this newsletter for noncommercial purposes. You may also
redistribute individual articles in their entirety, provided the NETFUTURE url
and this paragraph are attached.

Current and past issues of NETFUTURE are available on the Web:

> http://www.oreilly.com/~stevet/netfuture/ http://www.ifla.org/udt/netfuture/
(mirror site) http://ifla.inist.fr/VI/5/nf/ (mirror site)

To subscribe to NETFUTURE, send an email message like this:

> To: listserv@infoserv.nlc-bnc.ca

>  
>  
>  
>

> subscribe netfuture yourfirstname yourlastname

No Subject: line is needed. To unsubscribe, the second line shown above should
read instead:

> signoff netfuture

Send comments or material for publication to:

> Steve Talbott (stevet@oreilly.com)

If you have problems subscribing or unsubscribing, send mail to:

> netfuture-request@infoserv.nlc-bnc.ca

Goto table of contents

* [Goto NETFUTURE main page](../index.html)

