**TED 401  
Human Growth and Development**

[Home](../../homehtml)  
[Syllabus](../../syllalbus.html)  
[WeeklyAssignments](../weeklyassignments.html)  
[Papers/Projects](../papersprojects.html)  
[Text and Readings](../textreadings.html)  
[Assessment](../assessment.html)  
[Field Experience](../fieldexp.html)  
[Student Discussion  
](../studentdiscussion.html)[Links](../links.html) |

**Cal Poly Pomona**

**Dr. Fred Baker**

**Department of Education**  
---|---  
  
**PART FIVE:**

**NATIVE AMERICAN GROUP INTERDISCIPLINARY RESEARCH PROJECT AND EXHIBITION**



**" We always had plenty; our children never cried from hunger, neither were
we people in want...The rapids of Rock River furnished us with an abundance of
excellent fish, and the land being very fertile, never failed to produce good
crops of corn, beans, pumpkin, and squashes... Our village was healthy and
there was no place in the country possessing such advantages, nor hunting
grounds better than those we had in possession. If a prophet had come to our
village in those days and told us that the things were to take place which
have since come to pass, none of our people would have believed him."**

**-Ma-ka-tai-me-she-kia-kiak, or Black Hawk, Chief of the Sauk and Fox**



**THE PROJECT**

**Working in groups of 4-5 members, students will research and exhibit
information on one Native American Nation (or group of neighboring tribes).
This interdisciplinary project consists of research, written, multi-media,
statistical analyses and live, oral presentation components.**



**This project provides an opportunity for students to demonstrate mastery of
important concepts and skills presented by instructors during the academic
term, which are based on the model curriculum standards of the California
Department of Education.**



**The final due date for all components is ___________________.**



**OBJECTIVES**



**The objectives/skills of this project include, but are not limited to the
following. Students will :**



**o Learn and utilize essential research skills, including: using interviews,
E-mail, Internet and other on-line resources, using library resources, note
taking and outlining, paraphrasing and organizing data (compilation,
synthesis, analysis).**



**o Learn and utilize writing-as-process skills, including brainstorming,
outlining, creating a draft document, editing and revising, citing references
and creating bibliographies.**



**o Learn and utilize group planning, problem solving and decision making
skills, including fulfilling the roles of facilitator, recorder, mediator,
time keeper, resource manager, etc.**



**o Set realistic timelines and goals for completing project tasks and
demonstrate "follow-through" by meeting component deadlines.**



**o Interpret scientific and mathematical data though various types of graphs
and charts.**



**o Identify important historical and cultural customs, norms, rites and
rituals of a specific cultural group utilizing a variety of media.**



**o Analyze, evaluate, compare and contrast cultural markers among sub-groups
of a specific cultural group (ie N. American nations), and between specific
cultural groups (ie English Protestants and North Americans nations).**



**o Learn and utilize speech skills through a formal presentation.**



**o Make connections among disciplines, i.e. how climate and geography might
affect history and culture, or how economics and politics affect migration
patterns and decisions.**



**o Develop a "thick" understanding of a topic by utilizing research data in
order to describe, explain, compare, contrast, predict, and prescribe.**



**o Develop proficiency in the applicable model curriculum standards of major
subject areas as defined by the Department of Education, State of
California.**



**o Self-evaluate using essays, short-answer questions, and/or discussion.**



**ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS**



**As a scholar, your search for information and answers begins with asking
important questions. In terms of researching, understanding and presenting
information on Native American culture, the following questions will provide
depth and meaning to your project. Use them as a guide for pursuing
information on each particular nation, tribe, or group of tribes:**



**o What are these individuals' dominant characteristics?**



**o What are the cultural markers of this group of individuals?**



**o What evidence can you show to support your findings?**



**o How does this group define its own culture?**



**o How has this culture been defined by other sources?**



**o How are these cultural portrayals alike or different?**



**o What is history? Who or what determines historical accuracy?**



**o By what methods, and in what forms, is history transmitted within
cultures?**



**o What significant events/actions have occurred?**



**o Where did these actions/events take place?**



**o Who was involved in the actions/events?**



**o What circumstances gave rise to those events/actions?**



**o What were the results and/or consequences of those events/actions?**



**o What are the possibilities for cooperation, competition and/or conflict
when divergent cultures engage each other?**



**o How have these people been changed by their experiences?**



**o What might happen in the future as a result of these events and actions?**



**o What role, if any, do you, or can you, play in these actions and events?**



**o What roles, if any, does, or can, society and/or government play in these
actions and events?**



**This is only a partial list. Add any questions you feel are relevant.**



**ASSESSMENT/PROJECT CRITERIA**



**This project will be assessed by your project advisor, the other instructors
and your colleagues after your exhibition. A project will be considered
proficient if it contains at least the following (exemplary if it contains
more):**



**o Demonstration of group process skills and organizational and planning
documentation as outlined in Building Effective Groups handbook, including:**



**o Group planning chart, with roles and objectives**



**o "3 T" planner with relevant information**



**o Weekly reports by groups to house and advisor**



**o A working bibliography of references, interviews, authors, sources,
periodicals, etc.**



**o A research paper outline**



**o A research paper (rough draft and final draft) based on the selected topic
consisting of the following (see attached sheet on criteria):**



**o 15 pages minimum of text, typed and double-spaced (20 page minimum for
exemplary)**



**o a minimum of 7 references/authors/sources (10 references minimum for
exemplary)**



**o correct citations/annotations as described in I-POLY Stylebook**



**o paraphrasing of important ideas in students' own words**



**o a title page, table of contents and bibliography (in addition to the 15/20
pages of text)**



**o complete and thorough coverage of the topic**



**o An interview with Native American or historical/cultural expert**



**o A folk art/multi-media component representing native crafts, art,
sculpture, ritual, music, dance, etc. This component must consist of a minimum
of 3 (5 for exemplary) of the following:**



**o photos**

**o slides**

**o maps**

**o labeled illustrations**

**o audio tapes**

**o video tapes**

**o 3-D models**

**o artifacts/realia/replicas/transparencies**

**o collage**

**o poster**

**o display board**

**o diorama**

**o computer graphics/animation**

**o scrapbook/genealogy charts**

**o family heirlooms**

**o music/musical instruments**

**o skits**

**o live performance**

**o statistics**

**o graph/chart (pie, line, tables, etc.)**

**o technical data**

**o time line**

**o flow chart**

**o ratio and proportion**

**o blueprint/floorplan of native dwellings**

**o rates of exchange or barter**

**o drawings, paintings, sculpture, etc.**



**o A math component showing measurement and interpretation, consisting of a
minimum of 2 of the following:**



**o A science component consisting of an overlay transparency map indicating
the following:**



**o Region of habitation within North America**



**o Population distribution/migration within this region**



**o Natural resource distribution of this region**



**o Relevant geographic/topographic information about this region (ie
elevation, geographic landmarks, rivers, lakes, etc.)**



**o A written literary analysis of contemporary Native American Literature**



**o Minimum of 250 words (typed, double spaced)/500 word limit**



**o Follows written guidelines of I POLY Stylebook**



**o A one page summary handout for each audience member (125 copies)**



**o A written oral presentation outline**



**o An oral presentation dress rehearsal**



**o An oral presentation to a selected audience (including advisor) consisting
of the following:**



**o Important and unique information**



**o 30-40 minutes in length (40-60minutes for exemplary)**



**o presented in professional dress**



**o includes all components**



**o note cards, but not read directly from research paper**



**o See attached sheet for additional criteria**



**o Deadlines for all project components must be met.**



**o Submission of a personal time log.**



**o Completion of a self-evaluation.**



**PLEASE NOTE: Projects which do not meet either the Exemplary or Proficient
standards will be rated Incomplete, and will be redone at a later date.
Incomplete projects may only attain a Proficient rating when redone. Students
who do not fulfill group commitments, or do not participate in fulfilling
project criteria, will receive No Credit for this project. Please consult the
I-POLY handbook for further assessment guidelines.**



**DEADLINES**



**The following project components are due on the dates indicated, and will be
checked off and approved by your project advisor. Each student must meet all
deadlines in order to attain a proficient rating. (Insert appropriate
deadlines).**





**ADDITIONAL CRITERIA AND CRITICAL QUESTIONS:**



**THE RESEARCH PAPER**



**In addition to previously stated criteria, the research paper will be
compiled and organized professionally in a notebook or binder in the following
way:**



**SECTION I/GEOGRAPHY**



**o What physical features occur in this region?**



**o How do these physical features affect the culture?**



**o What are the natural resources (flora and fauna) of this region?**



**o How do they influence the culture?**



**o How were they used by the culture?**



**o What is the climate of this region?**





**SECTION II/CULTURE**



**o What is the lifestyle of this group?**



**o How is food/clothing/shelter obtained?**



**o How is the group governed and/or leadership determined?**



**o Are there specific roles for men, women, and/or children?**



**o How is knowledge experienced and/or gained?**



**o Are there traditional rites of passage?**



**o Is there a religious/spiritual practice?**



**o How is it practiced? Who practices it?**



**o How was this practice influenced by other groups/cultures?**



**o How does this culture relate to other similar cultures? Cultures which are
different? Animals? The environment?**



**o What means are used to settle disputes?**



**o How are treaties made and observed?**



**o How has this culture influenced others?**



**o How has this culture been influenced by others?**



**SECTION III/ARTISTIC EXPRESSION AND COMMUNICATION**



**o What is the nature of arts and crafts for this group (ie merely
functional, spiritual, economic, symbolic, etc.)**



**o How is religion/spirituality reflected in the arts?**



**o What is the function of song and dance?**



**o How is history, tradition and ritual preserved within this group?**



**o What form(s) of communication does this group employ?**



**SECTION IV/HISTORY-PAST, PRESENT AND FUTURE**



**o How did European colonization affect this group?**



**o How has the current US government dealt with this group for the last 50
years?**



**o What is projected for this group in the 21st century (ie population
trends, literacy, health, assimilation, etc.)**



**o Will this group preserve all, much, little or none of its culture? Why or
why not?**



**THE ORAL PRESENTATION**



**In addition to previously stated criteria, the formal, final oral
presentation must include:**



**o Each group member must speak for a minimum of 5 minutes, not to exceed 10
minutes.**



**o Approx. one visual component for each 2 minutes of speaking time.**



**o Visual diversity must be maintained to sustain audience interest**



**o All media equipment requests must be given to house advisor one week prior
to presentation.**





**THE LITERARY ANALYSIS**



**In addition to previously stated criteria, the literary analysis component
must include:**



**o Group-selected poetry, short story, critical essay, and/or novel
significant to group being studied**



**o Approval by project advisor of above material.**



**o Written analysis should include discussion of symbolism, structure,
metaphor,**

**relationship to culture and artistic merit of work(s).**



**o Copy (copies) of selected work(s) to be provided to advisor. Copies to
audience if possible.**



**NOTE TO PARENTS**



**Thank you for taking the time to read through this project. As you can see,
this is an ambitious project with tightly structured deadlines. Project groups
will need to access information and resources, as well as meet, in addition to
regular school hours in order to successfully complete the various components
of this project. Your encouragement and support are vital to your
son's/daughter's success!**



**By providing support for your son/daughter during this project, you are
insuring that he/she can experience the sense of accomplishment and self-
confidence that accompanies a job well done. Please review the project
handbook with your son/daughter, and sign the tear-off below. The tear-off
needs to be returned to the project advisor by ____________.**



**Thank you for your attention and cooperation.**



**RETURN TO Mr/Ms/Mrs on ______________________.**



**I have read the above material, and have reviewed the requirements and due
dates of the Native American Interdisciplinary Group Research Project and
Exhibition with my son/daughter. We both understand the requirements necessary
for my son/daughter to attain an Exemplary or a Proficient rating on this
project.**



**(Parent signature) (Student signature)**

  
  
* * *

Please feel free to use/reproduce these materials as you feel appropriate.
This represents the official syllabus for TED 401/401A, and is subject to
change without notice to anyone but students currently enrolled in this class.

Last revision February, 2002

  * Send mail to Fred Baker [fjbaker@csupomona.edu](mailto:fjbaker@csupomona.edu)
  * [Return to Fred Baker's home page ](../../index.html) 

