### R310. COURSE SYLLABUS



#### 1\. T Jan 8: Introduction: Background and Approach

#### 2\. R Jan 10: Beginning in Religious Studies

> **Read the following carefully:** Handouts entitled ["Introduction to the
Academic Study of Religion"](relintro.htm), ["A Religion: Its Major Dimensions
and Relationships"](dimensions.htm), and ["Student Roles in Group
Discussions"](student_roles.htm)

#### 3\. T Jan 15: Historical Overview of the Prophetic Period

> **Read the following carefully:** ["Chronological Sketch of Major Events
Relating to the Hebrew Prophets"](chronological_sketch.htm); H. H. Rowley,
"History of Israel," in The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, vol. 2, ed.
G. A. Buttrick (Nashville: Abingdon, 1962), pp. 751-765 [in Reference section
of University Library]

>

>  A less complicated overview of the history can be found on the Internet.
Access the following URL:

>

> <http://www.wsu.edu:8000/~dee/HEBREWS/HEBREWS.HTM> click on "Contents" and
then select the following Read the following carefully s: "The Monarchy," "The
Two Kingdoms," "Exile," "After the Exile," and "Yavan in the House of Shem"

#### 4\. R Jan 17: Seeking a New Critical Context

> **Read the following carefully:** Mullen, "Preface, Chapters 1-2

#### 5\. T Jan 22: Reconstructing the Architects

> **Read the following carefully:** Mullen, Chapters 3-5

#### 6\. R Jan 24: Religion and Ethnicity--Creating Identity

> **Read the following carefully:**["Ethnic Identity and Ethnic
Myths"](ethnicmyth.htm) and ["Prophecy--Some initial problems that present a
focus for this course"](prefaceproph.htm); Nehemiah 8-10

#### 7\. T Jan 29: Problems of Context: Prophetic Words--Joel

> **Read the following carefully:**["Joel--A Fresh Translation"](joel.htm)

#### 8\. R Jan 31: Problems of Comparison: Prophetic Activities--Elijah and
Elisha

> **Read the following carefully:** Deuteronomy 18:15-22; 1 Kings 17-22; 2
Kings 1-9; 13:14-21; Blenkinsopp, pp. 7-64

#### 9\. T Feb 5: Defining Prophecy in its Ancient Near Eastern Context

> **Read the following carefully:** "The Background of Hebrew Prophecy";
[Available on [electronic reserve](http://errol.iupui.edu) at University
Library]; Review Blenkinsopp, pp. 40-55; Supplementary materials may also be
found in H. B. Huffmon, "Ancient Near Eastern Prophecy," _The Anchor Bible
Dictionary_ , Vol. 5, pp. 477-482 [in Reference section of University
Library].

#### 10\. R Feb 7: Models of Interpretation: Classifying Prophetic Activities

> **Read the following carefully:** T. W. Overholt, "Prophecy in History: The
Social Reality of Intermediation," _JSOT_ 48 (1990), 3-29; A. G. Auld,
"Prophecy in Books: A Rejoinder," _JSOT_ 48, 31-33; R. P. Carroll, "Whose
Prophet? Whose History? Whose Social Reality? Troubling the Interpretative
Community Again: Notes towards a Response to T. W. Overholt's Critique,"
_JSOT_ 48, 33-49; T. W. Overholt, "'It is Difficult to Read," _JSOT_ 48,
51-54, and, H. M. Barstad, "No Prophets? Recent Developments in Biblical
Prophetic Research and Ancient Near Eastern Prophecy," _JSOT_ (1993), 39-60
[Available on [electronic reserve](http://errol.iupui.edu) at University
Library]

#### 11\. T Feb 12: Prophecy and the Political Processes

> **Read the following carefully:** ["National Religion and the Background of
Hebrew Prophecy"](natrel.htm)

#### 12\. R Feb 14: Discussion of Papers: Each student should come prepared to
present a precis of the arguments developed in the paper and the evidence
employed to support them.

> **R Feb 14: Paper #1 Due:** Defining Prophecy: Each student will prepare a
750-1000 word paper that summarizes the main arguments developed in the course
to this point and that presents a definition of "prophecy" that reflects an
understanding of the problems involved in studying this phenomenon.

#### 13\. T Feb 19: Amos: The Beginnings of Classical Prophecy

> **Read the following carefully:** Amos 1-3, 7-9; Blenkinsopp, pp. 72-82

#### 14\. R Feb 21: Hosea: Prophecy and Israelite Cultic Practices

> **Read the following carefully:** Hosea 1-4, 11-14; Blenkinsopp, pp. 82-90

#### 15\. T Feb 26: Micah of Moresheth: Another Viewpoint

> **Read the following carefully:** [Micah](micah.htm); Blenkinsopp, pp. 91-97

#### 16\. R Feb 28: Discussion of Papers: Each student should come prepared to
present a precis of the arguments developed in the paper and the evidence
employed to support them.

> **R Feb 28: Paper #2 Due:** Each student will prepare a 750-1000 word paper
that focuses upon the definition of prophet and prophecy developed in the
previous essay and that uses explicit examples from Amos, Hosea, and Micah to
illuminate and substantiate that definition.

#### 17\. T Mar 5: Isaiah of Jerusalem: Zion and David--Covenantal Assurances

> **Read the following carefully:** Isaiah 1-12; Blenkinsopp, pp. 97-110

#### 18\. R Mar 7: Isaiah of Jerusalem--Continued

> **Read the following carefully:** Isaiah 36-39; Review Blenkinsopp, pp.
97-110

#### 19\. T Mar 12: NO CLASS--SPRING BREAK

#### 20\. R Mar 14: NO CLASS--SPRING BREAK

#### 21\. T Mar 19: Prophecy in Transition--The Josianic Period

> **Read the following carefully:** 2 Kings 21-25; Nahum 1-3; Habakkuk 1-3;
Blenkinsopp, pp. 111-129

#### 22\. R Mar 21: Jeremiah and the Fall of the Kingdom

> **Read the following carefully:** Jeremiah 1-4; 7:1-8:3; 26:1-24;
35:1-36:32; Blenkinsopp, pp. 129-147

#### 23\. T Mar 26: Jeremiah and the Fall of the Kingdom--Continued

> **Read the following carefully:** Jeremiah 19:1-20:6; 24:1-10; 28:1-17;
30:1-33:26; 52:1-34; Review Blenkinsopp, pp. 129-147

#### 24\. R Mar 28: Discussion of Papers: Each student should come prepared to
present a precis of the arguments developed in the paper and the evidence
employed to support them.

> **R Mar 28: Paper #3 Due:** Each student will prepare a 750-1000 word paper
that focuses upon the religious traditions that seem to provide the foundation
for the prophetic proclamations of Isaiah of Jerusalem, Jeremiah, and
Habakkuk. In addressing these issues, the historical and cultural background
of each figure should receive attention. As with the previous paper, the ways
in which these materials related to the problems of defining prophecy should
be addressed.

#### FRIDAY, MARCH 29--LAST DAY TO WITHDRAW

#### 25\. T Apr 2: Ezekiel: Priest/Prophet/Seer--Visions of Judgment

> **Read the following carefully** : Ezekiel 1-12; 16:1-23; 23:1-49;
Blenkinsopp, pp. 148-180

#### 26\. R Apr 4: Ezekiel: Visions of Restoration

> **Read the following carefully:** Ezekiel 36-37; 40:1-43:12; 48:1-35; Review
Blenkinsopp, pp. 148-180

#### 27\. T Apr 9: Deutero-Isaiah: A New Creation

> **Read the following carefully:** Isaiah 40-48; Blenkinsopp, pp. 181-193

#### 28\. R Apr 11: Deutero-Isaiah: The Servant of Yahweh

> **Read the following carefully:** Read carefully Isaiah 42:1-4; 49:1-6;
50:4-11; 52:13-53:12; Review Blenkinsopp, pp. 181-193

#### 29\. T Apr 16: Competing Visions: A Community Divided

> **Read the following carefully:** Haggai 1-2; Zechariah 1-8; Blenkinsopp,
pp. 194-212

#### 30\. R Apr 18: Third Isaiah: The Conflict Heightens

> **Read the following carefully:** Isaiah 56-66; Blenkinsopp, pp. 213-222

#### 31\. T Apr 23: Reinterpreting the Prophetic Visions

> **Read the following carefully:** Isaiah 24-27; Zechariah 9-14; Blenkinsopp,
pp. 226-239

#### 32\. R Apr 25: Discussion of Papers: Each student should come prepared to
present a precis of the arguments developed in the paper and the evidence
employed to support them.

> **R Apr 25:** **Paper #4 Due:** Each student will prepare a 2000 word paper
that focuses upon the transformations in prophecy that are associated with the
demise of the kingdom of Judah, the exile, and the subsequent restoration. Do
these events necessitate a change in definition for prophecy? How do the ways
in which one chooses to define Israel, prophecy, and prophetic books influence
the definition and interpretation of the prophetic materials? Defend your
position.

