**TED 401  
Human Growth and Development**

[Home](../../homehtml)  
[Syllabus](../../syllalbus.html)  
[WeeklyAssignments](../weeklyassignments.html)  
[Papers/Projects](../papersprojects.html)  
[Text and Readings](../textreadings.html)  
[Assessment](../assessment.html)  
[Field Experience](../fieldexp.html)  
[Student Discussion  
](../studentdiscussion.html)[Links](../links.html) |

**Cal Poly Pomona**

**Dr. Fred Baker**

**Department of Education**  
---|---  
  
**PART SIX:**

**INDUSTRIAL AGE GROUP RESEARCH PROJECT AND EXHIBITION**



**" The usual routine....the workshop, factory, yard, office, store or desk;
Manufactures...commerce...engineering...the building of cities, and every
trade carried on there... and the implements of every trade, The anvil, tongs
and hammer...the axe and the wedge... the square and the mitre and jointer and
smoothingplane; Ironworks and whiteleadworks...the sugarhouse...steam-saws,
and the great mills and factories; Leatherdressing, coachmaking, boilermaking,
ropetwisting, distilling, signpainting, limeburning, coopering, cottonpicking;
The walkingbeam of the steam-engine...the throttle and governors, and the up
and down rod.... In them the heft of the heaviest...in them far more than you
estimated, and far less also... In them your themes and hints and
provokers..."**

**\- Walt Whitman, "A Song for Occupations" from Leaves of Grass, 1855**



**THE PROJECT**

**Working in groups of 4-5 members, students will research and exhibit
information on what has come to be known as "The Industrial Age" of the United
States. This project covers the chronological time period from roughly 1840
through 1900. This interdisciplinary project consists of research, a written
report, a working model, statistical analyses, and live, oral presentation
components utilizing multi-media.**



**This project provides an opportunity for students to demonstrate mastery of
important concepts and skills presented by instructors during the academic
term, which are based on the model curriculum standards of the California
Department of Education.**



**The final due date for all components is_________________.**

**Presentations and exhibitions will be held the week of______________.**



**OBJECTIVES**



**The objectives/skills of this project include, but are not limited to the
following. Students will :**



**o Utilize essential research skills, including: using interviews, E-mail,
Internet and other on-line resources, using library resources, note taking and
outlining, paraphrasing and organizing data (compilation, synthesis,
analysis).**



**o Utilize writing-as-process skills, including brainstorming, outlining,
creating a draft document, editing and revising, citing references and
creating bibliographies.**



**o Utilize group planning, problem solving and decision making skills,
including fulfilling the roles of facilitator, recorder, mediator, time
keeper, resource manager, etc.**



**o Set realistic timelines and goals for completing project tasks and
demonstrate "follow-through" by meeting component deadlines.**



**o Utilize specific mathematical concepts and formulae in order to design and
build a working model factory or related industrial production complex.**



**o Utilize specific scientific concepts and formulae in order to design and
build an industrial production system which employs pulleys, gears, levers,
belts, inclines, wedges, etc.**



**o Utilize specific scientific concepts and formulae in order to identifyand
utilize natural resources/raw materials and manufacturing/production.**



**o Interpret scientific and mathematical data though various typesof graphs
and charts.**



**o Analyze and evaluate the impact of the Industrial Age on American society,
including political and social movements, historical events, literature, the
arts, migration, the economy and international relations.**



**o Analyze and evaluate such popular American myths as "work hard, play
hard," "the business of America is business," "workers' rights," and the
general impact of industry/technology on the quality of life.**



**o Utilize speech skills through a formal presentation.**



**o Make connections among disciplines, i.e. how climate and geography might
affect economic development, or how migration patterns within a country might
result in new genres of literature or music.**



**o Develop a "thick" understanding of a topic by utilizing research data in
order to describe, explain, compare, contrast, predict, and prescribe.**



**o Develop proficiency in the applicable model curriculum standards of major
subject areas as defined by the Department of Education, State of
California.**



**o Self-evaluate using essays, short-answer questions, and/or discussion.**



**ESSENTIAL QUESTIONS**



**As a scholar, your search for information and answers begins with asking
important questions. In terms of researching, understanding and presenting
information on the Industrial Age, the following questions will provide depth
and meaning to your project. The questions can be addressed in many ways: as
part of a written report, incorporated into your model, presented verbally, or
as part of your multimedia presentation.**



**o What were the dominant characteristics of the Industrial Age? For example,
was it an era of change or stagnation, an era of prosperity or decline, an era
of tolerance or intolerance, an era of scientific advancement, etc.?**



**o What were the major historical, political, sociological, economic and
artistic events and movements of the Industrial Age?**



**o Where did these events/movements take place?**



**o Who was involved in these events/movements?**



**o What circumstances gave rise to these events/movements?**



**o What were the results and/or consequences of those events/movements?**



**o What might happen in the future as a result of these events/movements?**



**o What role, if any, do you, or can you, play in these events/movements?**



**o What roles, if any, does, or can, society and/or government play in these
events/movements?**



**o What impact did events/movements in the US during the Industrial Age have
upon other countries? What impact did they have on international relations
between the US and other nations?**



**o What evidence can you show to support your findings?**



**o What is history? Who or what determines historical accuracy?**



**o What examples of cooperation, competition and/or conflict arose between
and among various groups of people during the Industrial Age?**



**o Were these groups of people changed by their experiences? If so, how?**



**o How did events in the Industrial Age alter the United States? How did
these events help shape our notions of success and quality of life?**



**o What role has/does technology play in our lives? How has it made our lives
easier and more enjoyable? How has it made our lives harder and more
challenging?**



**This is only a partial list. Add any questions you feel are relevant.**



**ASSESSMENT/PROJECT CRITERIA**



**This project will be assessed by your project advisor, the other instructors
and your colleagues after your exhibition. A project will be considered
proficient if it contains at least the following (exemplary if it contains
more):**



**o Demonstration of group process skills and organizational and planning
documentation as outlined in Building Effective Groups handbook, including:**



**o Group planning chart, with roles and objectives**

**o "3 T" planner with relevant information**

**o Weekly reports by groups to house and advisor**

**o A working bibliography of references, interviews, authors, sources,
periodicals, etc.**

**o A three dimensional, scale model of a factory or other type of industrial
complex. This cutaway model should reflect the manufacture or production of a
specific product commonly made during America's Industrial Age. The model must
show all aspects of the production line, from bringing in the raw materials to
the shipment of the finished product. The model must use moving and working
parts. Use a minimum of five different devices using parts from the following
list:**



**o pulleys**

**o belts**

**o treadles**

**o levers**

**o wedges**

**o flywheels**

**o fulcra**

**o cranes**

**o plumbing**

**o sprockets**

**o hinges**

**o vents/shafts**

**o pistons**

**o joints**

**o conduit**

**o inclines**

**o planks**

**o skyhooks**

**o gears**

**o shafts**

**o motors (if appropriate)**

**o wheels**

**o axles**

**o steam engine (if appropriate)**



**o The model may reflect an original design, or a pre-existing one, but it
must be based on what was actually possible during the Industrial Age. For
example, you cannot incorporate electricity, nuclear power,
telecommunications, plastics, etc. into the model unless they are historically
and technologically appropriate.**



**o The model must be large enough so as to clearly demonstrate the processes
necessary for production, including a power source.**



**o The model must be proportioned correctly, both in the blueprint/floorplan,
and in the finished product.**



**o Written description of model should appear in research paper.**



**o A research paper outline**



**o A research paper (rough draft and final draft) based on the selected topic
consisting of the following (see attached sheet on criteria):**



**o 12-15 pages minimum of text and graphics, typed or word processed**

**o 1 " margins; text must be 10 or 12 point font and double-spaced**

**o a minimum of 10 references/authors/sources**

**o correct citations/annotations as described in I-POLY Stylebook**

**o paraphrasing of important ideas in students' own words**

**o a title page, table of contents and bibliography (in addition to the 12/15
pages of text and graphics)**

**o complete and thorough coverage of the topic**

**o includes written description of model, environmental impact report, and an
interview section**



**o A science component consisting of an environmental impact report detailing
how the construction and operation of your factory model would have impacted a
specific geographic area during the Industrial Age.**



**Your report should include the following:**

**o raw materials/natural resources needed to manufacture your product.**

**o how raw materials/natural resources will be collected**

**o how raw materials/natural resources will be transported to the factory**

**o description of factory locale, including soil types, bodies of water,
seasonal changes, topography, flora and fauna, etc.**

**o description of local populations potentially affected**

**o types of wastes produced during the manufacture of your product**

**o how these wastes will be disposed of**

**o An interview with an expert in any two of the following related fields
(Interview should relate directly to either your model design or your
understanding of the topic):**

**o manufacturing o business management**

**o engineering o quality control**

**o architecture o physics**

**o systems design o environmental science**

**o transportation o business financing**

**o stock market/investments o organized labor/unions**

**o marketing o business law**

**o history, literature or the arts o banking/business financing**



**o A multi-media component representing the particular product, geographical
region, and/or era with which your model is related. For example, a
carriageworks located in Boston during 1855 would be represented differently
than a grain mill located in Chicago during 1900. This component must consist
of a minimum of 3 of the following:**



**o photos o slides**

**o maps o labeled illustrations**

**o audio tape o video tapes**

**o 3-D models o artifacts/realia/replicas**

**o transparencies o collage**

**o poster o display board**

**o diorama o computer graphics/animation**

**o scrapbook o genealogy charts**

**o family heirlooms o music/musical instruments**

**o drawings, paintings, sculpture, etc.**

**o digital slides (PowerPoint, Astound, Adobe Presentation, Hypercard)**



**o A math component showing measurement and interpretation, consisting of a
blueprint/floorplan of your model and the information below. This information
should be incorporated into your blueprint, written description, presentation,
and other project components:**



**o appropriate equation representation**

**o use of formulae/ use of functions**

**o modeling geometric figures**

**o analytic description of design/model**

**o statistical analysis**

**o maximum/minimum functions**

**o equipment specifications**

**o velocity/acceleration/force**

**o vector analysis**

**o ratio and proportion**

**o percentages**

**o time management/personnel usage**



**You can use the following formats to represent the math data:**



**o graphs (pie, line, tables, etc.)o charts**

**o time lines o schematics**

**o flow charts o product samples**

**o illustrations o transparencies**

**o A one page summary handout for each audience member (125 copies),
including:**

**o names of all group members**

**o a small state map indicating the location of the city/model**

**o brief data on city/state (dates founded, population, etc.) at the time of
the Industrial Age**

**o a small illustration of the model**

**o brief information/statistics on model/product, including main features of
the model, and impact this product had on American society.**



**o A written oral presentation outline, including:**

**o topics to be presented w/brief description**

**o length of each topic**

**o name of the presenter for each topic**



**o An oral presentation to a selected audience (including advisor), following
these criteria:**



**o A "tour" and demonstration of your model**

**o Important and unique information about model, city, state, era**

**o 30-40 minutes in length**

**o presented in professional dress**

**o includes all components**

**o note cards, but not read directly from research paper**

**o Each group member must speak for a minimum of 5 minutes, not to exceed 10
minutes.**

**o Approx. one visual component for each 2-3 minutes of speaking time.**

**o Visual diversity must be maintained to sustain audience interest**

**o All media equipment requests given to house advisor one week prior to
presentation.**

**o Completion of a self-evaluation, including a personal time log.**



**PLEASE NOTE: Projects which do not meet either the Exemplary or Proficient
standards will be rated Incomplete, and will be redone at a later date.
Incomplete projects may only attain a Proficient rating when redone. Students
who do not fulfill group commitments, or do not participate in fulfilling
project criteria, will receive No Credit for this project. Please consult the
I-POLY handbook for further assessment guidelines.**



**DEADLINES**



**The following project components are due on the dates indicated, and will be
checked off and approved by your project advisor. Each student must meet all
deadlines in order to attain a proficient rating. (Insert appropriate
deadlines here).**



**MODEL SUGGESTIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL AGE PROJECT AND EXHIBITION**



**1.Foundry**

**2.Ironworks**

**3.Coal Mine**

**4.Locomotive building**

**5.Ship building-steam**

**6.Ship building-frigates/sails**

**7.Manual sewing machine manufacturing**

**8.Bicycle manufacturing**

**9.Threshing machine manufacturing**

**10.Plough manufacturing**

**11.Wheel works**

**12.Garment manufacturing**

**13.Textile manufacturing/loom**

**14.Telegraph equipment manufacturing**

**15.Newspaper presses**

**16.Printers/publishing house**

**17.Mint/coins**

**18.Mint/paper currency**

**19.Rifle/gun manufacturing**

**20.Cannon/artillery manufacturing**

**21.Munitions works (bullets, cannon balls, gunpowder)**

**22.Slaughterhouse**

**23.Fish/seafood processing**

**24.Dairy**

**25.Cannery**

**26.Mills/grains and flours**

**27.Glassworks**

**28.Paint and varnish manufacturing**

**29.Pottery/ceramics**

**30.Furniture manufacture**

**31.Carriageworks**

**32.Tannery**

**33.Coopersmith/shoes, boots**

**34.Lumber mill**

**35.Cutlery/ swords, knives, utensils**





**LOCATION SUGGESTIONS FOR INDUSTRIAL AGE PROJECT AND EXHIBITION**



**1.New York City,NY**

**2.Boston, MA**

**3.Pittsburgh, PA**

**4.Philadelphia, PA**

**5.Washington, DC**

**6\. Providence, RI**

**7.Baltimore, MD**

**8.Chicago, IL**

**9.Detroit, MI**

**10.Cincinatti, OH**

**11.Cleveland, OH**

**12.Gary, IN**

**13.Richmond, VA**

**14.Atlanta, GA**

**15.Raleigh, NC**

**16.St. Loius, MO**

**17.Kansas City, MO**

**18.Kansas City, KS**

**19.New Orleans, LA**

**20.Baton Rouge, LA**

**21.Denver, CO**

**22.San Francisco, CA**

**23.Houston, TX**

**24 Dallas, TX**

**25.Phoenix, AZ**

**26.Tulsa, OK**

**27.Des Moines, IO**

**28.Indianpolis, IN**



**A NOTE TO PARENTS/GUARDIANS**

**Thank you for taking the time to read through this project.**



**Interdisciplinary group projects are the heart of the I-POLY curriculum.
They are designed to integrate a number of ideas, skills and model curriculum
standards, so that students will involve themselves at high levels of critical
thinking and problem solving. In addition, these projects allow students to
exhibit mastery of course concepts in tangible, meaningful ways, by having
them apply course concepts, rather than simply memorizing and repeating
them.**



**As you can see, this is an ambitious project with tightly structured
deadlines. Project groups will need to access information and resources, as
well as meet, in addition to regular school hours in order to successfully
complete the various components of this project. Your encouragement and
support are vital to your son's/daughter's success!**



**By providing support for your son/daughter during this project, you are
insuring that he/she can experience the sense of accomplishment and self-
confidence that accompanies a job well done. Please review the project
handbook with your son/daughter, and sign the tear-off below. The tear-off
needs to be returned to the project advisor by______________________.**



**Thank you for your attention and cooperation.**



**RETURN TO Mr/Ms/Mrs**



**I have read the above material, and have reviewed the requirements and due
dates of the Industrial Age Interdisciplinary Group Research Project and
Exhibition with my son/daughter. We both understand the requirements necessary
for my son/daughter to attain an Exemplary or a Proficient rating on this
project.**





**(Parent signature) (Student signature)**  
  
* * *

Please feel free to use/reproduce these materials as you feel appropriate.
This represents the official syllabus for TED 401/401A, and is subject to
change without notice to anyone but students currently enrolled in this class.

Last revision February, 2002

  * Send mail to Fred Baker [fjbaker@csupomona.edu](mailto:fjbaker@csupomona.edu)
  * [Return to Fred Baker's home page ](../../index.html) 

