**DYNAMICS OF TEACHING IN A PLURALISTIC SOCIETY**

**SCHOOL OF EDUCATION AND INTEGRATIVE STUDIES**

**CAL POLY POMONA UNIVERSITY**

**FREDERICK J. BAKER, PH.D**



**PREFACE**

**This paper is addressed to the students who enroll in the EDU 420 section
taught by Dr. Fred Baker. This course is commonly referred to as a "Core Class
in the Foundations of Education." It is a course taken by all teacher
credential candidate students in the beginning of their studies. It
traditionally covers the sociology, philosophy, and history of education with
specific reference to multicultural populations. This course is combined with
an educational psychology class and an early field experience class before
students begin work in the pedagogy of teaching.**

**This is not a course syllabus in the strictest sense of the term. It is an
attempt by the instructor to set down his belief system in terms of how to
structure a positive learning environment for all students. However, it does
suggest the kinds of multicultural activities that may be engaged in, the
content that will be considered, and the manner in which learning will be
assessed. It presents a rationale for the course organization, and attempts to
clarify the role of the students and the instructor.**

**The major ideas for the organization of this course are taken from Carl
Rogers book; FREEDOM TO LEARN. You are encouraged to read this book (along
with others I will recommend). I hope you will find it stimulating and thought
provoking. Especially applicable, so far as this course is concerned, is
chapter two, "A College Professor "Gives Freedom Within Limits," and chapter
six, "Personal Thoughts on Teaching and Learning." For purposes of day to day
reading I have recommended Ornstein's FOUNDATIONS OF EDUCATION by Houghton
Mifflin.**



**INTRODUCTION**

**James C. Stone, Professor of Higher Education at the University of
California, Berkeley, succinctly pointed out changes that must surface in
American education if our schools are to be and remain viable institutions in
a multicultural world:**

**Our schools must change...........**

**From offering curriculum about life,**

**To curriculums that are life.**

**From providing teacher-imposed content,**

**To student-composed content.**

**From being teacher directed,**

**To pupil inner and self-directed.**

**From concentrating on book-centered learning,**

**To community-centered learning.**

**From emphasizing a credential concerned society,**

**To competence concerned society.**

**From having the goal make a difference in the minds of students,**

**To the goal of making a difference in the minds & hearts of students.**

**From being depersonalized, dehumanized oriented schools,**

**To person-to-person, humanistic-oriented schools.**



**But before changes in these directions can become widespread--or even
implemented at all--teachers themselves must change...**

**From using the model "T" teacher (who believes teaching is talking,**

**usually from up front and on high),**

**To the model "A" teacher (who believes teaching is action...being**

**around and about the classroom listening to students... emphasizing**

**inquiry, social sensitivity, and self-direction, guiding, probing,**

**feeling, encouraging).**



**From being learned,**

**To life-long learners.**



**From being self-contained,**

**To organizers of multiple teaching resources.**



**From offering whole-class teaching,**

**To individual, small group, family-size teaching.**



**From having concerns for what and who,**

**To concerns for why and how.**



**From emphasizing answer-centered instruction,**

**To answer-asking instruction.**



**From centering on product learning,**

**To process learning.**



**Preparing school teachers in multicultural classrooms to effectively fit
this teaching role precludes the practice of instructing all students in this
class as though they had identical backgrounds, strengths, needs, and
interests. Opportunities are provided in this course for students to assume
responsibility for their learning goals and learning activities. At the same
time, students will be held accountable for the achievement of these goals. It
is hoped that the experiment in organization and methodology employed in this
course will help you to become teachers who can function competently in our
pluralistic society. The instructor shares Stone's conviction that:**

**" teacher education is not something that necessarily**

**submits to a highly structured format, but is rather**

**a highly personal phenomenon which amalgamates**

**theory and practice, teaching and learning, content and**

**process, behavior and attitudes, acting and contemplating,**

**the concrete and abstract, the affective and cognitive... all**

**reciprocal, confluent relationships, not polarities or entities**

**as they generally and traditionally are described. "**



**ASSUMPTIONS**

**The organization of this course is based upon several assumptions which we
believe are tenable, and which may be explicated as follows:**

**1\. It is undesirable and probably impossible to explicitly set down and
verbally impart a methodology of teaching from one person to another.**

**2\. Learning that has been personally appropriated and assimilated in
experience cannot be directly communicated to another.**

**3\. Teaching is not a matter of transmitting stored information, concepts,
and patterns of thinking from one persona to another; rather it is a way of
working with students to facilitate their acquisition of information,
attitudes, and skills so that they may understand and cope with their
environment.**

**4\. Students' learning styles differ; some students find certain methods
more appealing and effective than others. A variety of resources, methods, and
paths should be provided for different students to attain the objectives of a
course.**

**5\. Learning must be accomplished by the individual him/herself. Active
student involvement is the key element for learning. To learn that with which
one cannot identify is futile, and such learning is irrelevant. The student
will find most meaningful and helpful that which he or she can identify "here
and now." Each student should be involved in determining the goals of his or
her own learning. If the learner must be an active participant in his/her
learning and not a passive vessel into which knowledge is poured, then the
instructor can only hope to be an effective facilitator of learning, not a
teacher in the sense of "giver of directions."**

**6\. It is impossible within any course to anticipate, examine, and find
answers to every problem that will face you as a teacher. Many questions have
no "correct' answers. Problems and perplexities of teaching in a multi-
cultural classroom require the combined efforts of many, including teachers in
preparation, so that at least partial and tentatively useful approaches may be
developed. Your best preparation for teaching is to become involved in
discovering for yourself answers to some of the problems of teaching to a
pluralistic audience.**

**7\. The instructor is not the absolute authority in the field, but he is a
learner who is deeply concerned with educating people to live in a multi-
cultural society. Because of past experiences, he may be looked upon as a
resource available to students.**

**WE BEGIN WITH YOU**

**How should one start this course? Students begin most courses with an air of
tolerance for the content of the course and the instructor, but no really
great expectations. They expect the instructor to communicate a list of
assignments to be completed by the end of the course and a prescribed method
of completing these assignments. They view the instructor as an experienced
authority in the field who can provide them with many recipes, which may later
be tried out with their own pupils. There is a basic assumption that a
specific body of knowledge exists which the instructor is to teach and the
students are to learn.**

**While in some courses it may be important to begin with content, we prefer
in this course to begin with you as a person. You are a unique individual,
having feelings and emotions, capabilities and qualities which are valid to
you and important to others. You are capable of deciding what your goals will
be, of determining what you wish to learn, and how you wish to learn it, of
evaluating your progress, and of revising your goals as you deem necessary.**

**So that this course will, in fact, begin with you, it is necessary that you
and I establish a relationship of openness, understanding, freedom, and trust.
Hopefully, our first activities will be directed toward those aims.**

**OPERATING PROCEDURES**

**Throughout most of your schooling, you have been asked to solve problems
that were not your own, but have been posed by other people. This course is
organized in a manner that makes you responsible for deciding on what learning
to pursue, how to pursue it, and for evaluating your learning. It attempts to
give you the kinds of experiences that many thoughtful educators hope you, in
turn will give to pupils in schools. The instructor will attempt to be a
facilitator of learning activities. Together, instructor and students can
learn from this experience. Some structure, although that structure is
unorthodox, will be necessary in order for all of us to operate comfortably.
Some, of course, will need more than others.**

**The various components making up a course include: 1) persons, 2)
interactions, 3) procedures, 4) content, and 5) institutional expectations.**



**1) PERSONS**

**People are the most important element in any course. Their ideas, feelings ,
and needs are not secondary to the content. Students and professors should be
free to pursue inquiry and establish relationships which are beneficial to
them. Academic freedom is a presupposition in this context. Students and
professors are free to propose, explore, and test the merits of any idea;
there are no foregone conclusions, no sacred cows. The merit of the idea, not
the person proposing or explaining it, is judged. In the process, some ideas
will be found to be more powerful, worthwhile, and relevant than others. You
are encouraged to have ideas, and to explore and express them freely.**

**2) INTERACTIONS**

**If meaningful interaction is to take place, the barriers between people must
be lowered to the point that there is an appreciation of the humanity and
personality of the other. Following are some of the conditions which
facilitate meaningful interaction:**

**a) CONFRONTATION WITH REAL PROBLEMS. A student will find a course boring and
irrelevant if he/she deals only with ideas and issues that are of no real
concern to him/her as an individual. You are encouraged to**

**confront multicultural problems, questions, and ideas which are real to you,
with which you can identify through classroom experience.**

**b) TRUST IN THE HUMAN ORGANISM. In this course you are asked to have ideas
of your own and pursue inquiry which you feel have a chance of solving these
problems. Don't look for the correct answer from the teacher's guide, or an
authority's pat solution. Trust your experience and observation.**

**c) REALNESS OF THE TEACHER. The instructor does not plan to put on a show
for you or entertain you. What he presents in class is important to him and
that he feels is important about teaching the multicultural student. He will
share his real opinions, concerns, convictions, and questions, and is open to
your ideas and feelings.**

**d) ACCEPTANCE. Unless we deal with one another as individual persons, and
not as stereotypes, there can be little meaningful interaction.**

**e) EMPATHY. As we step into the other's shoes and identify with that
person's thought patterns and value structure, we begin to understand how
his/her ideas and behaviors emerge. Sensitivity and perceptiveness are
essential qualities of teachers and must not be ignored in this course.**

**f) PROVIDING RESOURCES. Meaningful inquiry and learning do not take place in
a vacuum. All, instructor and students alike, should feel responsible for
suggesting resources. The teacher's role is one of fellow-learner, together
with the students; one who is willing to give and take, to provide and accept
resources.**

**3\. PROCEDURES**

**The following paragraphs describe the procedures which we feel are necessary
to implement what is being proposed.**

**a) STATEMENTS. Three statements should be made. The first is a statement of
objectives describing your plan of work relating to the dynamics of teaching
in a pluralistic society. Identifying and formulating your objectives will be
one of your significant and difficult tasks, so serious and thoughtful
preparation is encouraged. The instructor is ready to assist you. Your initial
draft of objectives should be submitted as soon as possible. If and when your
goals change, feel free to change your objectives.**

**A second statement is a statement of the criteria by which your work is to
be evaluated. The main purpose of the criteria is to enable you to accurately
and adequately access your progress toward the achievement of your objectives.
You may want to design a course contract to fulfill this requirement.**

**The third statement, to be filed near the end of the course, is a self-
assigned grade and a rationale for that grade. The purpose of this is not to
self-grade per se, but to self-assess.**

**b. INTERVIEWS. Interviews may be given in order to discuss objectives,
criteria, and rationale. They need not be formal and structured. They may even
be given in small groups, unless you prefer an individual session. These
sessions provide us with an opportunity to accomplish that which we consider
central to the course...Individual sessions can be had at any time.**

**c. CLASS PRESENTATIONS. The responsibility for presentations in this class
will be different from most courses. It is hoped that many different things
will be going on at the same time during any given session. The range of
topics is virtually unlimited--dependent upon your needs and interests.**

**d. PERSONAL INTERACTIONS. We anticipate a major part of your learning will
be derived from your personal interactions with students. Since you are free
to choose those activities which are meaningful to you, irrelevancy should be
at a minimum. We want to avoid the mistake of trying "to teach what is not
very useful, not very well, to the not-very interested."**

**e. FILE FOLDER-JOURNAL. It will be a good idea to keep a file folder of
activities you are engaged in. In it you could keep a statement of your
objectives, some evidence of the products of your multicultural study, the
criteria by which you wish to be graded, and self-assessed grade, together
with the rationale for that grade. It may also be a good idea to keep and
share a journal of significant learning experiences.**

**4\. CONTENT**

**It is impossible to describe what content this course will have for you
since we cannot anticipate your objectives. You may wish to pursue reading and
writing activities in your academic content area as regards multicultural
education, developing curriculum projects, activities with students, field
work, or multicultural research connected with your needs. In the day to day
operation of the class the instructor will be sharing material helping you to
explore the legal, economic, political, demographic, cultural and linguistic
issues confronting contemporary educators. As professionals we will need to
understand the legal precedents underlying equity in educational programs, and
the relationship and authority of school boards, principals and teachers.**

**We also need to be able to understand the legal responsibilities of teachers
in areas of instruction, discipline, and child abuse, along with analyzing the
impact of changing demographics, effects of increased cultural, linguistic,
and socioeconomic diversity on the future structural organization of schools.
The following includes the beginning of a list of options from which you might
select activities as the focus of your study. The list of activities given
here should not be considered definitive or limiting. Feel free to select,
change, or add to these suggestions.**

**SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES RELATING TO THE DYNAMICS OF TEACHING IN A PLURALISTIC
SOCIETY:**

**1\. When studying multicultural education, students might examine text books
in their content area and accompanying teacher's manuals to determine what
organizational pattern is recommended, if any, for the teacher to follow?**

**2\. Organize the class into committees on the basis of content level
interests and assign the task of determining for each subject multicultural
dimensions that must be considered. Scope and sequence for that content may
also be issues for consideration.**

**3\. Analyze and compare the content in five different courses of study for
your particular area, with special reference to multicultural implications. In
which areas do they generally agree? In which do they most differ?**

**4\. Collect and compare several different types of units reflecting multi-
cultural perspectives that are actively being used in the schools. What type
of organization offers the greatest advantage for teacher use?**

**5\. Report recent articles from professional journals or texts describing
provision for practice in essential study skills in multicultural
classrooms.**

**6\. Using criteria of various authors for evaluating basic materials,
evaluate materials in your discipline; evaluate basic text books, teacher's
manuals and workbooks in terms of multicultural perspectives.**

**7\. Make a survey of a school district in which you might like to teach
including as much information as possible relating to pluralistic elements.**

**8\. Read, interview, and research, in order to understand and analyze how
individual perceptions are affected by culture, language, dialect, and gender.
How is the prevalence of cultural, linguistic and dialectal diversity
reflected by staff and students in the public school setting?**

**9\. How is educational theory, research and practice related to the
education of language minority students?**

**10\. What is the role of the monolingual teacher in the education of
language minority students? Identify strategies for motivating and instructing
limited English proficient students in the regular classroom setting.**

**11\. Work to identify strategies for motivating and instructing speakers of
diverse English dialectal backgrounds by demonstrating those aspects of
teacher behavior that facilitate problem-solving in diverse instructional
settings.**

**12\. Formulate a plan to maximize the potential for positive interaction
with and utilization of the community as an educational resource, especially
by understanding the role of the teacher as a partner in this process with
parents and the community.**

**Attached you will find a bibliography of materials that you may find
interesting. Enjoy your travels!**

**BOOK LIST: DYNAMICS OF TEACHING IN PLURALISTIC SOCIETY**

**The following is not meant to be an exhaustive, objective list of books
pertinent to the dynamics of teaching in a pluralistic society. It is,
however, a list of those books that have been important to my development, and
for that reason I want to share them with you. Those with an * are those I
would choose as part of my basic library. They have made the greatest impact
on the evolution of my philosophy as an educator. Pick and choose and
enjoy!!!!**



**Achebe, Chinua. Things Fall Apart, Fawcett, 1959.**



**Adler, J. The Paideia Proposal, New York, Macmillan, 1982.**



**Allen, Paula. The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Feminine in American Indian
Tradition, Beacon Press, 1987.**



**Alinsky, Saul. Rules For Radicals, Vintage, 1972.**



**Allport, Gordon. Becoming.**



**ASCD Yearbook. Perceiving, Behaving, Becoming, 1962.***



**Ashton-Warner, Sylvia. Teacher, Simon and Schuster, 1971,***



**Assagioli, Roberto. Psychosynthesis, Viking, 1971.**



**Banks, James. Multiethnic Education: Theory and Practice, Allyn & Bacon,
1988, Multicultural Education: Issues and Perspectives, Allyn & Bacon, 1989,
Teaching Strategies for Ethnic Studies, Allyn & Bacon, 1991.**



**Belenky, Mary. Women's Ways of Knowing, Basic Books, 1986.***



**Bell, Inge. This Book is Not Required, Fort Bragg, CA, The Small Press.**



**Bettelheim, Bruno. Love is Not Enough, The Free Press, 1950.**



**Benjamin, Harold. The Saber-Tooth Curriculum, McGraw-Hill, 1939.**



**Bly, Robert. Iron John, Addison Wesley, 1990.***



**Borton, Terry, Reach, Touch and Teach, McGraw-Hill, 1970.**



**Boyer, E.L. High School, New York, Harper and Row, 1983.**



**Brown, Claude. Manchild in the Promised Land, MacMillan, 1965.***



**Buscaglia, Leo, Love, Slack, 1972,* Living, Loving, Learning.**



**Camus, Albert. The Rebel, Vintage Books, 1956.**



**Capra, Fritjof. The Tao of Physics, Bantam, 1976.**



**Carnegie Forum on Education A Nation Prepared, Chronicle of Higher
Education, (May 21) 43-54, 1986.**



**Dahms, Alan. Emotional Intimacy.**



**deMille, Richard. Put Your Mother On The Ceiling, Walker, 1967.**



**Denison, George. The Lives of Children, Random House, 1970.**



**Dewey, John. Democracy in Education, MacMillan, 1944, How We Think, Gateway,
1933.**



**Ellison, Ralph. Invisible Man, New American Library, 1952.***



**Fader, Daniel. Hooked on Books, Berkley, 1968, The Naked Children,
Macmillan, 1971.**



**Farber, Jerry. Student as Nigger, Pocket Books, 1969,***



**Freire, Paulo. Pedagody of the Oppressed, Herder and Herder, 1972.***



**Fuller, Buckminster, F. Operating Manual for Spaceship Earth, Pocket Books,
1970,* Critical Path, St. Martin Press, 1981.***



**Furgeson, M. The Aquarian Conspiracy, Tarcher, 1980.**



**Gilligan, Carol. In a Different Voice, Harvard University Press, 1982.***



**Giroux, Henry. Teachers as Intellectuals, Bergin & Garvey, 1988.***



**Glasser, William. Schools Without Failure, Harper & Row, 1969,* Reality
Therapy, Harper & Row, 1965, Control Theory in the Classroom, Harper & Row,
1986.**



**Goodlad, J. A Place Called School, New York: McGraw Hill, 1984, Teachers For
Our Nations Schools, Josey, Bass, 1990.**



**Goodman, Paul. Compulsory Mis-education, Vintage, 1962, Growing Up Absurd,
Vintage,1956.**



**Griffin, John H. Black Like Me, Signet, 1960.***



**Hammarskjold, Dag. Markings.**



**Hendricks, Gay. Transpersonal Education.**



**Henthoff, Nat. Our Children Are Dying, Viking Press, 1966.**



**Hernandez, Hilda. Multicultural Education. Merrill Publishing, 1989.**



**Herndon, James. The Way it Spozed to Be, Bantam, 1968,* How to Survive in
Your Native Land, Bantam, 1971.**



**Henry, Jules. Culture Against Man, Vintage, 1965.**



**Hersey, John. The Child Buyer.**



**Hesse, Herman. Steppenwolf, Bantam, 1969,* Sidhartha, Bantam, 1971.**



**Holt, John. How Children Fail, Pitman, 1964,* How Children Learn, Dell,
1967,* What Do I Do Monday, Delta, 1970, Freedom and Beyond, Delta, 1974,
Instead of Education, Dutton, 1976.**



**Honig, Bill. Caught in the Middle, California State Department of Education,
1987.**



**Huxley, A. Island, Bantam Books, 1962.**



**Illich, Ivan. Deschooling Society, Harrow, 1970,* Tools For Conviviality,
Harper and Row, 1973.**



**Jershild, Arthur. In Search of Self, Teachers College, 1952.* When Teachers
Face Themselves, Teachers College, 1955.***



**Jones, Richard. Fantasy and Feeling in Education, New York University Press,
1970.**



**Jung, Carl. Memories, Dreams, Reflections, Collins & Routledge, 1963.**



**Keen, Sam. Fire In The Belly, Bantam, 1991.**



**Kelly, Earl. Education For What is Real, Prentice Hall, 1947,* In Defense of
Youth, Spectrum, 1962.**



**Kohl, Herbert. 36 Children, New American Library, 1967,* Open Classroom,
Vintage,1969, Half the House.**



**Kozol, Jonathan. Death at an Early Age, Houghton Miffin, 1967, The Night is
Dark and I Am Far From Home, Bantam,1975,* On Being a Teacher, Free Schools,
Bantam, 1972, Illiterate America, Anchor Press, 1985, Savage Inequalities,
Bantam, 1995.***



**Lame Deer, John.Lame Deer Seeker of Visions, Touchstone, 1972. ***



**Leonard, George. Education and Ecstasy, Delta, 1968, The Transformation.**



**Malcom X. Autobiography, Grove Press, 1966.***



**Maslow, A.H. Towards a Psychology of Being, Van Nostrand, 1962,* Motivation
and Personality, Harper, 1970, The Farther Reaches of Human Nature, Esalen,
1971.**



**McLaren, Peter. Life In Schools, Longman, 1989.***



**National Commission on Excellence in Education A Nation at Risk, U.S.
Department of Education, Washington, D.C., 1983.**



**Neill, A.S. Summerhill, Hart, 1960,* Freedom Not License.**



**Ornstein, Robert. The Psychology of Consciousness, W.H. Freeman, 1972.**



**Pearce, Joseph. The Crack in the Cosmic Egg, Julian Press, 1971, Exploring
the Crack in the Cosmic Egg, Washington Square Press, 1974.**



**Pirsig, Robert. Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, Morrow, 1974.**



**Postman & Weingartner. Teaching as a Subversive Activity, Delta, 1969,* The
School Book, Delacorte, 1973, The Soft Revolution, Dell, 1971.**



**Reich, Wilhelm. Listen Little Man.***



**Rogers, Carl. On Becoming a Person, Houghton Mifflin, 1961, Freedom to
Learn, Charles Merrill, 1969,* A Way of Being, Houghton Mifflin, 1980.**



**Rose, Mike. Lives On The Boundary, Penguin, 1989.**



**Rozak, Theodore. The Making of a Counter Culture.**



**Russell, Peter. The Global Brain, Tarcher.***



**Samples, Robert. The Metaphoric Mind,* Mind of Our Mother.**



**Schrank, Jeffrey. Teaching Human Beings: 101 Subversive Activities for the
Classroom, Beacon Press, 1972.**



**Shor, Ira. Critical Teaching and Everyday Life, South End Press, 1980.**



**Silberman, Charles. Crisis in Black and White, Vintage, 1964,* Crisis in the
Classroom, Vintage, 1970,* The Open Classroom Reader, Vintage, 1973.**



**Simonson & Walker. The Graywolf Annual Five: Multicultural Literacy,
Graywolf Press, 1988.**



**Sizer, T.R. Horace's Compromise, Boston, Houghton Miffin, 1984.**



**Skinner, B. F. Walden Two, Macmillan, 1948. ***



**Tillich, Paul. The Courage to Be, Yale, 1952.***



**Toffler, Alvin. Future Shock, The Third Wave, Learning For Tomorrow.**



**Tolstoy, Leo. On Education, University of Chicago, 1967.**



**Trumbo, Dalton. Johnny Got His Gun, Bantam Books, 1939.***



**Whitehead, Alfred. The Aims of Education, Mentor Books, 1929.**



**Wilson, Colin. The Outsider.***



**Wright, Richard. Black Boy, Harper and Row, 1966.***



**Zukav, Gary. The Dancing Wu Li Masters, Bantam Books, 1979.***



**Fred Baker, Ph.D**

**School of Education and Integrative Studies**

**California State Polytechnic University, Pomona**

**5-226 Phone: (909) 869-2308**

