**EUROPE, 1815-1914**

(HIST 4370/5370)

Spring 1998

[Dr. Mary Chalmers](mailto:Chalmers@mail.uca.edu)

****

**Syllabus**  
  
This course uses primary and secondary sources to study the history of Europe
from the time of Napoleon to World War I. It seeks to understand the
political, economic, social, and cultural developments in Europe during this
century filled with revolutions and the consolidation of European state power,
both within Europe and around the world. This course will be run as a seminar
with a very long break in the middle (Tuesday 12:05 to Thursday 10:40); As a
seminar, the class will focus mainly on group discussion and presentations,
and so your attendance and participation will be crucial. If you lose or
misplace this syllabus, you can find a copy of the syllabus on the [UCA
history web page.](http://www.uca.edu/divisions/academic/history/history.htm)  
  

**Important Information** :

The University of Central Arkansas adheres to the requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act. If you need an accommodation under this Act
due to a disability, contact the Office of Disability Support Services at
450-3135.  
  
Throughout this course you are encouraged to work with fellow students to
share ideas and develop your understanding of the skills and knowledge being
taught. However, cheating and plagiarism will not be tolerated. **All
completed assignments must be your own work.** Discussing ideas is terrific;
sharing in the writing of a paper or copying, (even if you change some words)
is not. Plagiarism is the use of anyone else's work (published or unpublished)
without citing your source. Use quotation marks when quoting directly and cite
your source. When paraphrasing or taking an idea from someone else, you must
also cite your source. It is better to add the citation if you are uncertain
than to leave it out. Any case of copying, plagiarism, or cheating, or
otherwise submitting work that is not your own will result in a  "zero" for
that assignment, (papers, exams, or any other assignment). A second instance
will result in an F for the course.  
  
If you find yourself struggling during the semester, do not wait until the end
of the semester to say something. Come speak to me or e-mail me. Other
resources are also available on campus depending on the nature of your
concerns or difficulties.  
  
My office hours are times for you to come speak to me if you would like to
review your progress, discuss an assignment (past or future), etc. If my
office hours are not convenient for you, see, call, or e-mail me to set up
another time we can meet.  
  
  
_Course Objectives_

1) to enable you through the study of primary and secondary sources to deepen
your understanding of the history of nineteenth-century Europe.

2) to encourage you to gain greater skill in the reading and critical analysis
of primary and secondary sources.

3) to strengthen your skills in writing.

4) to develop your skills in making oral presentations and in leading and
participating in discussions.  
  

_Course Requirements_ : All students will have the same requirements, except
the graduate students will write two book reviews (see #5 below). They will
also be expected to show a level of historical understanding and analysis
commensurate with their status as graduate students.

1\. (25%) **Attendance and Participation** : You are expected to attend all
classes, to read all assigned materials prior to class on Tuesday and to
participate fully in class discussions and activities. Participation will
count for 150 points (15%); Agenda items for 100 points (10%). Because
attendance is expected, for each four classes that you miss, your grade will
be dropped by one letter. If you are frequently late to class, your grade will
be dropped by one-half letter. For weeks 2-16, **except when** you are
assigned presentations or papers, you will be responsible for sending to the
class **questions or agenda items** raised by the readings. These must be
submitted to the distribution list on e-mail by 10:00a.m. on Tuesday. We will
use these agenda items to guide discussion after presentations are completed.
Agenda items will be graded -, , + and will be marked late if they come in
after 10:00. I will send your grade back to you on e-mail, sometimes with
comments or responses. Turning in all agenda items and receiving a on all of
them will result in a B for this portion of your grade.  
  
2\. (20%) **Response Papers** : Each week some students will write a 1-2 page
response (max. 500 words) to the assigned reading. Each response should
include a brief summary of the highlights and themes of the reading. The
majority of the paper should raise questions about the reading and make
connections within the reading and to other weeks' topics. You will write two
of these responses, one during weeks 4-9 (excluding week 7), one during weeks
10-15. You will sign up for these at the next class. Written assignments are
to be turned in during class on the date assigned for submission to the
instructor. (One letter grade will be deducted for late assignments.) Papers
should be typed and double spaced, with proper citations of sources for all
quotations and paraphrased information. Quotations or paraphrased information
from the assigned text may be referenced simply with the author's last name
and page number in parentheses: [e.g. (Gildea, p. 45)]. Written assignments
should be well organized, clearly written, grammatically correct and checked
carefully for spelling and typographical errors. The quality of analysis and
writing will be reflected in the final grade.  
  
3\. (15%) **Paper on Book Reading** : You will write one 3-4 page paper on one
of the books we are reading (excluding Gildea). You must choose from among the
questions provided at the end of the syllabus. Your paper will be due in class
the

Tuesday we start discussing the book, i.e. weeks 3 or 7 or 16. You will sign
up for this paper on Thursday. See #2 above for instructions about writing.  
  
4\. (20%) **Group Presentations** : Twice in the semester, you will
participate in a group presentation, covering the readings for that week. You
will sign up for these at the next class. One or two people within the group
will be responsible for finding, reading, and summarizing a recent article
(1993 or later) on the topic of discussion for the week; (look at chapter sub-
headings for range of topics). In addition, you should explain how the article
enhanced (or complicated) understanding of the topic. The other members of the
group will introduce the topic of the week's readings and guide discussion.
You should briefly address the main themes and highlights of the reading, but
your presentation should **not be a summary** \--all students should have read
the same material and so a summary is not necessary. Instead, you should make
connections and raise questions that will generate discussion. Cooperation
among presenters is recommended. Duplication of articles or material covered
will result in a drop of one letter grade for those who duplicated work.
Because everyone will have an e-mail account, you can at least communicate via
this medium, if other methods prove difficult for your group.  
  
5\. (20%) **Book Review** : a 4-6 page paper (max. 1500 words) [Graduate
students will write two such book reviews, first one will be due Thursday,
March 19; each will be worth 10% of your grade] on a historical monograph
written since 1990 on some aspect of nineteenth-century Europe. You must be
able to find three published book reviews on your book to include in your own
review, so before you settle on a book make sure you can find the book
reviews. See #2 above for instructions about writing. Guidance for finding
book reviews will be provided on Thursday. See [Book Report
Guide](http://www.uca.edu/divisions/academic/history/bkrpt.htm) for additional
requirements. Use [Turabian
Style](http://www.wisc.edu/writing/Handbook/DocChicago.html). Your book
reviews will be due on Thursday, April 30. All reviews will be returned during
the assigned time of exam week **_only_** (Thursday, May 14 at 2:00p.m.).

__

_Texts_ : (The following required books are available for purchase in the
bookstores.)

Robert Gildea, _Barricades and Borders, Europe 1800-1914, Second Edition_

_Napoleon in Egypt: Al-Jabarti's Chronicle of the French Occupation, 1798_

Elizabeth Gaskell, _North and South_

Robert D. Kaplan, _Balkan Ghosts: A Journey Through History_  
  
  
\--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

_Weekly Reading Assignments_

Wk 1, Jan. 13-15: Introduction. On Thursday, we will go to the library to
learn about how to search for articles and to find book reviews. We will also
sign up for presentations and papers.  
  
**Part I: Europe, 1800-1850**

Wk 2, Jan. 20-22: Setting the Stage

Gildea, chp. 1-2.

Wk 3, Jan. 27-29: _Al-Jabarti's Chronicle_ , all

Wk 4, Feb. 3-5: Metternich's Europe

Gildea, chp. 3  

Wk 5, Feb. 10-12: 1848 & Culture

Gildea, chp. 4-5 [ **Biblio of Book and Three Reviews due Thursday** ]

  
**Part II: Europe 1850-1880**

Wk 6, Feb. 17-19 : Market Economies

Gildea, chp. 6

Wk 7, Feb. 24-26: Gaskell, _North and South_ , all

Wk 8, Mar. 3-5: Nationalism and Unification

Gildea, chp. 7  

Wk 9, Mar. 10-12: Revolution Contained

Gildea, chp. 8

Wk 10, Mar. 17-19: Mid-Century Culture **[Grad Book Reviews Due Thursday]**

Gildea, chp. 9  

Spring Break: March 21-29  
  
**Part III: Europe 1880-1914**

Wk 11, Mar. 31-Ap. 2: Economic Struggle

Gildea, chp. 10

Wk 12, Ap. 7-9: National Integration?

Gildea, chp. 11 or

Charles Sowerwine in _Becoming Visible_ , chp. 13, available on reserve

Wk 13, Ap. 14-16: Imperialism

Gildea, chp. 12 or

Margaret Strobel in _Becoming Visible_ , chp. 14, available on reserve

Wk 14, Ap. 21-23: Society and Culture

Gildea, chp. 13-14  

Wk 15, Ap. 28-30: Break-Up **[Book Reviews Due Thursday]**

Gildea, chp. 15

Wk 16, May 5-7: Kaplan's _Balkan Ghosts_ , all  
  

**Questions for the Papers on the Book Readings**  

Below are the questions from which you may choose to write your paper on the
book readings. If you want to write about a different topic, you **must get my
approval** first. If not, you must write on one of the topics below.  
  

__Al-Jabarti's Chronicle__  
1\. Contrast the European view of the invasion with Al-Jabarti's.  
2\. How does Al-Jabarti view European society? What interests him? What
appalls him?  
3\. How does Al-Jabarti's perspective problematize Europe and its view of
itself?  
  
  
_Gaskell's _North and South__  
1\. In what ways are people of Milton connected to the larger world? How and
why and with what consequences?  
2\. What does North and South represent? Why are they so antithetical to each
other? Use examples from the novel. Do not rely solely on the introduction to
write this.  
3\. Who are the working-classes in England? Describe them in all their
variety, using examples from the novel.  
4\. How does Gaskell depict the class struggle? What does she advocate
instead?  
5\. How does gender (views of masculinity and feminity) contribute to what
Gaskell despicts in the novel? Do not rely solely on the introduction to write
this.  
6\. Who, besides Margaret, is changed during the novel? Why and with what
effect?  
  

_Kaplan's _Balkan Ghosts__  
1\. How does the history of the Balkans affect its present?  
2\. What are the issues in the Balkans and why are they so intractible?  
3\. What place do the Balkans have in the history of Europe? or alternatively,
what effect do they have on the history of the rest of Europe?  
  

