#  GEO 1440 - Geomorphology Class Syllabus

_This page was last updated on September 20, 2001 by[Patrick M.
Colgan](http://www.casdn.neu.edu/~geology/department/staff/colgan/colgan.html)_  

* * *

Prof. Patrick M. Colgan            office: 14 Holmes Hall        phone:
617-373-4381  
email: pcolgan@lynx.neu.edu    web notes: http://www.casdn.neu.edu/~geology  
Office hours: M, T, Th 9:00 am to 12:00 pm

###  Course Description

This course focuses on the origin and evolution of landscape features created
by processes operating at or near Earth's surface. We will focus on
continental landscapes excluding coastal and glacial landforms. Laboratory
exercises will introduce you to geologic field techniques, topographic maps,
interpretation of remotely sensed data, and digital elevation models. _Prereq.
GEO1212_.

###  Course Goals

Geomorphology is the study of Earth surface processes and landforms. The
overall form of Earth's surface is the result of isostatic, tectonic, and
volcanic forces that have created the ocean basins, the continents, mountain
ranges, and rift basins. Modification of these features results from the
interaction of geologic structure with gravity and climate. We will focus on
how continental tectonic features are modified by weathering, fluvial, and
aeolian processes. We will use topographic, and remotely sensed images in
combination with structural geology, stratigraphy, sedimentology and pedology
to understand the origin and age of terrestrial landforms.

###  Required Texts

Ritter, D.F., Kochel, R.C., and Miller, J.R., 1995, _Process Geomorphology_ :
Dubuque, Wm. C. Brown Publishers, 546 p.

Short, N.M. and Blair, R.W., Jr., 1986, _Geomorphology From Space_ , NASA,
Washington DC, (this is available via the internet at:  
http://xtreme.gsfc.nasa.gov/DAAC_DOCS/geomorphology/GEO_HOME_PAGE.html)

###  Examinations and Homework

  * Midterm Exam - 25%
  * Seven  Lab Assignments - 35%
  * Final Examination  \- 25%
  * Field Trip or Term Paper - 15%

###  Late Labs

Labs turned in late will be penalized one point (on a ten point scale) per day
they are late. Late labs will not be accepted after they have been returned to
class. It normally takes me 7-10 days to grade and return your labs.

###  2001 Geomorphology Field Trip to Pennsylvania, October 5-8

This year we will travel to Pennsylvania to examine geomorphic processes and
landforms in the Appalachain Mountains and Allegheny Plateau Region. These
regions have been extremely important in the development of geomorphology as a
science because they illustrate the evolution of fluvial systems in a fold and
thrust mountain belt. We will leave on Friday October 5 and return on October
8. We will camp for three nights. The department will provide tents for those
who need them. I will provide you with a list of necessary equipment. All
food, lodging, and transport will be provided by the department. Below is a
itinerary for the trip.

**October 5, Friday** \- Leave Holmes Hall at 8:00 am.

This day will mainly consist of driving to Pennsylvania. We will discuss the
major physiographic provinces that we pass through along the way. Stops
include: Connecticut River Valley Rift basin, Hudson Highlands of New York,
Great Valley in New York, Delaware Water Gap, Delaware National Scenic River
Way, We will camp at Hickory Run State Park, in eastern Pennsylvania.

**October 6, Saturday** \- Leave camp at 8:30 am

On this day we will examine an unusual boulder field in northeastern
Pennsylvania. We will then drive to northcentral Pennsylvania and examine
weathering, mass wasting, and fluvial processes in the [Allegheny
Plateau](syllabus/alleghenyp.jpg) Region at [Worlds End State
Park](syllabus/worldsend.jpg). Stops include: [boulder field at Hickory Run
State Park](syllabus/hickoryrun.jpg), fold and thrust belt in Pennsylvania,
water and wind gaps, Allegheny Plateau, we will examine fluvial processes in a
gravel dominated stream, We will camp at Worlds End State Park.

**October 7, Sunday -** Leave camp at 8:30 am

Today we will follow Loyalsock Creek to its junction with the Susquehanna
River in central Pennsylvania. We will then follow the [Susquehanna
River](syllabus/harrisburgr.jpg) south as it cuts across the fold and thrust
belt of the Appalachain Mountains. Stops include fluvial terraces along
Loyalstock Creek, [Susquehana River overlook at
Williamsburg](syllabus/alleghenyf.jpg), [Millersburg
PA](syllabus/berrymtngap.jpg), Five major [water gaps](syllabus/secmtngap.jpg)
of the Susquehanna River.We will camp at Locust Lake State Park.

**October 8, Monday-** Leave camp at 8:30 am

Today we will drive home and examine the physiographic provinces along the
way. Stops include: Delaware River Water Gap, Piedmont of New Jersey,
Palisades of New Jersey, Hudson River Overlook. We should return home before
7:00 pm.

###  Alternative Term Paper Assignment

If it is not possible for you to attend the field trip, you can do a term
paper instead. The term paper must be approved by me. I will provide you with
a list of suitable topics related to the field trip. I will assign 3 or 4
journal articles for you to read and write a paper about. The paper must cover
one of the topics covered on the field trip.

* * *

  


