![Monogram](mc.gif)  [ **Maurice Crouse's home page**](home.html "Maurice
Crouse's home page")  ![->](arrowtny.gif) [ **  Summer 2002
courses**](summer02.html "Summer 2002 courses")  ![->](arrowtny.gif)  Current
page  
---  
  
# History 4620/6620: Colonial America

## 1st Summer Term 2002

### Instructor: Maurice A. Crouse
<[mcrouse@memphis.edu](mailto:mcrouse@memphis.edu)> \-- Mitchell 103

  

## Course Requirements

You will not be required to purchase a textbook or collection of supplemental
readings, nor will you be required to use them. But if you should feel the
need for more factual material than the lectures or your various projects
provide you, ![Map of colonial South](mapcolva.jpg)they will be available in
the Reserve Room of the Library (see [Suggested Background
Readings](4620back.html) for guidance on a day-to-day basis).

This course will use the concept of contracting for course grades. Below you
will find the requirements for various letter grades. You will find that the
requirements "pyramid," and if you fall short of a particular goal, you will
nevertheless have satisfied the requirements for some lower grade. You are not
required at the beginning of the course to commit yourself to any particular
contract (though you may, if you wish). You should, of course, set some goal
for yourself and seek diligently to achieve it. Your grade for the course will
depend on which contract level you actually achieve.

  

### General Conditions

All requirements of the contracts must be fulfilled by 10:35 a.m. on
Wednesday, July 3 (which would be the end of the examination period for the
course, if an examination were given). You are encouraged to submit materials
earlier than July 3. A comfortable schedule for both student and instructor
would be fulfilling the requirements for a C at the rate of one book report
each week, the requirements for a B by the end of the fourth week, and the
requirements for an A by the end of the course. The grade which you will
receive for the course will depend upon the valid materials actually delivered
by the deadline.

![Carter's Grove](cartergv.jpg)

All materials submitted for a particular grade must actually fulfill the
requirements for that grade; any that do not will not be counted. For example:
if the term paper does not contain a proper bibliography or reference list, or
if the notes and bibliography or reference list are not in prescribed
scholarly form, the term paper will not be accepted as earning the grade of A.

All materials must be substantial. They must really say something; they must
be organized; and they must be literate.

The instructor is the judge of whether contracts have been fulfilled. While he
cannot insist on absolute perfection in meeting the requirements, he does
expect honest, good-faith efforts on the part of students.

Any doubts about requirements should be clarified early in the course.

  

### Specific Requirements for Course Grades

**_Grade of F:_**

  * Attend fewer than 17 of the 23 class sessions.

**_Grade of D:_**

  * Attend at least 17 of the 23 class sessions.

**_Grade of C:_**

  * Fulfill requirements for D.
  * In addition, submit book reports on 4 books (graduate students must do 5) chosen from the [Select Bibliography](4620bibl.html). Each report must be in the following format: 
    * The report must consist of 2 or 3 type-written double-spaced pages.
    * The heading of the report must include author, title, place, date, publisher, number of pages, and the library call number. For example: David Hawke, _The Colonial Experience_ (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1966), xx, 774 (E188.H3).
    * The body of the report must indicate the nature of the book, showing what subject matter is covered and what contribution the book makes toward the understanding of the colonial period. (see [Guide for Book Reports](4620rep.html) for more complete guidance)

**_Grade of B:_**

  * Fulfill requirements for C.
  * In addition, choose a topic from the following list and submit for it: (a) note cards, (b) an outline of a possible term paper on the topic, (c) a bibliography or reference list in proper bibliographical or reference-list form. For the grade of B, you will not actually write a term paper, but you will do all the preliminary work that would be involved with a term paper. 
    * Mercantilist theory
    * The British colonial system
    * Colonial merchants
    * Indian relations
    * Everyday life in the colonies
    * The status of the working class
    * Education in the colonies
    * Colonial science
    * Colonial literature
    * Colonial journalism
    * Colonial finance
    * The status of women in the colonies
    * Witchcraft
    * Colonial architecture
    * Colonial furniture and furnishings
    * The fine arts in the colonies
    * Colonial agriculture
    * Social class and status in the colonies
    * Justice, law, and order in the colonies
    * Political theory in the colonies
    * Forms of local government in the colonies
    * National and racial contributions to colonial culture
    * Land policies in the colonies
    * The Great Awakening
    * Religions in colonial America
    * The development of Puritan theology
    * The Navigation Acts and the American Revolution
    * The Stamp Act
    * Religion and the American Revolution
    * The American Revolution from the British point of view
    * Loyalism in the War for Independence
    * The Declaration of Independence
    * Spies and Traitors in the War for Independence
    * The opposing armies in the War for Independence
  * There must be at least 30 note cards, taken from at least 8 distinct sources (graduate stuents must have at least 50 note cards, taken from at least 10 distinct sources). Books used in the contract for the grade of C may be used as sources here. Each note card must contain a clear reference to the page or pages of the book or article used as the source of the material on the card.
  * The outline must be a clear indication of the form which the term paper, if written, would take. It must indicate a clear theme and intelligent coverage and development of that theme.
  * The bibliography or reference list must include at least the 8 sources (10 for graduate students) used in the note cards and may include more.

**_Grade of A:_**

  * Fulfill requirements for B.
  * In addition, submit a term paper developed from the materials used in the contract for the grade of B. The term paper must be in the following format: 
    * It must consist of 10 to 15 typewritten double-spaced pages (graduate students must have 15 to 20 pages).
    * Its form and style must follow standard examples. The History Department uses as its official style manual Kate Turabian, _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations_ , 6th ed. The most comprehensive guide is the University of Chicago Press, _The Chicago Manual of Style_ , 14th ed. For documenting electronic information, use [Citing Electronic Information in History Papers](elcite.html).
    * It must contain a bibliography or reference list of materials used. It may be the same bibliography or reference list used to satisfy the requirements for the grade of B, or it may include additional items. Items in the bibliography or reference list must follow standard scholarly form.
    * It must have notes to acknowledge your use of sources, whether paraphrased or quoted directly. The notes must follow standard scholarly form. If you use a bibliography rather than a reference list, the notes may be placed at the bottom of each page or separately at the end of the paper, just before the bibliography.
    * It must be original work. Plagiarism will not be tolerated. It is essential that you know how to acknowledge use of other writers' facts, ideas, and phraseology. Below is a copy of The Use of Sources to clarify this point. If you need further guidance, read the documents under the heading of [ The problem of plagiarism](http://www.people.memphis.edu/~history/lit.html#plagiarism) at the Department of History's Web page on Writing and Literature Resources .

  

### Note About Research Materials

Research materials can be compiled from many sources. The [Select
Bibliography](4620bibl.html) for this course is a good beginning point. Every
student of American history should be familiar with Frank Freidel, ed.,
_Harvard Guide to American History_. Supplementing its listings is Grace
Gardner Griffin, and others, _Writings on American History_. Limited help is
available in _The American Historical Association's Guide to Historical
Literature_ and the Library of Congress, _A Guide to the Study of the United
States of America_. Useful articles and reviews of books on the early American
period are found frequently in the _William and Mary Quarterly_ , and to a
lesser extent in major journals such as the _Journal of Southern History_ ,
the _New England Quarterly_ , the _Journal of American History_ , and the
_American Historical Review_. You will probably observe a  "snow-balling"
effect: one item in your bibliography may contain listings for several other
items. Range widely in your search--you may be surprised by the odd places in
which pertinent information may be found.

  

### The Use of Sources*

A writer's facts, ideas, and phraseology should be regarded as that writer's
property. Any person who uses a writer's ideas or phraseology without giving
due credit is guilty of plagiarism.

Information may be put into a paper without a footnote or some kind of
documentation only if it meets **_all_** of the following conditions:

  * It may be found in several books on the subject.
  * It is written entirely in the words of the student.
  * It is not paraphrased from any particular source.
  * It therefore belongs to common knowledge.

Generally, if a student writes while looking at a source or while looking at
notes taken from a source, a footnote should be given.

Whenever any idea is taken from a specific source, even when the student
writes the idea entirely in his or her own words, there must be a footnote
giving credit to the author responsible for the idea. Of course methods of
documentation vary and it is possible to cite in the text itself rather than
in a footnote. The point is that the student should give credit when credit is
due and should give the credit in a manner specified by the instructor.

The student is entirely responsible for knowing and following the principles
of paraphrasing. The student should neither retain a sentence pattern and
substitute synonyms for the original words nor retain the original words and
alter the sentence pattern. In other words, paraphrasing means alteration of
sentence pattern **_and_** changing the words.

**_Any_** direct quotation should be footnoted (or documented in an acceptable
fashion). Even when a student uses only one unusual or key word from a
passage, that word should be quoted. If a brief phrase that is common or
somewhat common is used as it occurs in the source, the words should be in
quotation marks. The source of every quotation should be given in a footnote
or in the prescribed manner.

A student who uses a secondary source (and this includes the editor's
introduction to a primary text) must remember that the very act of consulting
such a source should be considered as a pledge that the student will use the
material according to the principles stated above.

*This is a slightly adapted version of "The Use of Sources in Writing Research Papers in the Emory University College f Arts and Sciences."

  
![Valid XHTML 1.0!](valid-xhtml10.gif)

