## ![](../major/images)

**AIS 565 Siouan Tribal Culture**  
**Old Main 305**  
**MW 3:00P -4:20P** | **Fall 1998**  
**Leonard Bruguier**  
[**bruguier@usd.edu](mailto:bruguier@usd.edu)**  
---|---  
  
* * *

![](../images/UPDATED.GIF)**I have been informed by Dean John Carlson's office
that we have been moved from Old Main 305 to School of Education 112,
effective today, 17 September 1998. Please pass this message on to classmates.
Thank you for your patience in this matter.  

* * *

![](../images/UPDATED.GIF) For those preparing for the Monday discussion,
remember to read and interpret your chosen article with the Tylor definition
of culture firmly in mind. "Culture is that complex whole which includes
knowledge, belief, art, law, morals, custom, and any other capabilities and
habits acquired by man [and women] as a member of society" (Tyler, _Primitive
Culture_ , 1871). Be prepared (notes, etc.), to participate in the discussion
on the enumerated themes.  

* * *

**

### COURSE DESCRIPTION

This course examines the culture of Siouan-speaking tribes of the Northern
Plains. Uses historical, anthropological, and linguistic approaches to the
three divisions of the Sioux peoples - namely _Dakota_ , _Lakota_ , and
_Nakota_ \- as well as _Mandan_ , _Omaha_ , and _Hochunk_. Prerequisite: AIS
257/HIST 257 - American Indian History and Culture I or equivalent, or
permission of instructor.  

* * *

### GRADUATE STUDENT REQUIREMENTS

[UNDER CONSTRUCTION] Graduate students will enhance their understanding of
American Indian thought with additional readings, composing book reviews, and
submitting a project as agreed upon with the instructor.

In addition to reading the required books for AIS 465, you will choose ten
(10) other volumes from [General](../indianstudies/courses/dak460sy.html),
[collateral](../indianstudies/courses/collread.html), or from your own
readings list. One page book reviews (see attached sample), with copies for
the instructor and fellow graduate students, will be composed and distributed
during the semester. Before writing the review, you must consult (and cite) at
least two printed reviews of the book you have read.

A capstone project, whose format and content will be agreed upon in
consultation with the instructor, will satisfy the course requirements.  

* * *

![](../images/new_tiny2.gif) Reviews are due on the below listed days.

September 16, 23, 30  
October 7, 14, 21, 28  
November 4, 18  
December 2, 9  

* * *

### FORMAT FOR BOOK ANALYSIS

Bannon, John F. _The Spanish Borderlands Frontier, 1513-1821_. Albuquerque,
NM: University of New Mexico Press, 1970.  
**_

Author**_ : John Francis Bannon was born April 28, 1905, in St. Joseph,
Missouri. He received his A.B. and M.A. from St. Louis University and his
Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley in 1939\. Father Bannon was
a member of the Society of Jesus, professor of history at St. Louis University
from 1939-1973, and now professor emeritus from 1973 to 1986. Bannon, a
protege of Herbert Eugene Bolton, specialized in Latin American colonial
exploration and settlement in the field of Borderlands history. _Latin
America: A Historical Survey_ and _Bolton and the Spanish Borderlands_ also
represent his many published works.

**_

Thesis**_ : The history of the American Frontier must antedate the most
commonly held years of 1607 and 1620 by over a century. The first American
Frontier was explored and settled by the Spanish in a south to north migration
pattern and the Spanish colonies that emerged were a unique blend of European
and native culture, unlike the later Anglo-Saxon east to west migration with
its penchant for cultural dominance.

**_

Scope and Analysis**_ : The history of the Spanish Borderlands began in 1513
when the Spanish advanced upon the mainland from their colonial holdings in
the Caribbean, establishing themselves in the Floridas, and planting their
outposts as far north as the Carolinas and Virginia. A second and more
important migration began from Mexico in the 1520s. From that Spanish
stronghold a northward-moving frontier advanced steadily during the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, filling the wilderness plateaus of
northern Mexico, and pushing on into Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and
California. By the early nineteenth century New Spain's mission stations,
presidios, and ranches formed a large ring of provinces from eastern Texas to
the San Francisco Bay. By 1821, Spain had withdrawn from Florida and had
yielded her sovereign territory west of the Sabine River and south of the Red
River to Mexican Colonials. Within a few decades later her Borderland holdings
of three centuries were absorbed by the relentless drive of the westward
moving Anglo-American pioneers. But that conquest did not remove the strong
cultural tradition planted there by the remarkable Spanish frontiersmen.

New Spain did not have a "manifest destiny," nor was the Spanish frontiersman
completely free to exercise self-determination. Spanish expansion carried out
from Cuba and Mexico City was based on hope for wealth, conversion of pagan
souls for Christianity, and strategic defense. From the beginning to the end
the Spanish Borderlander was the subject of an absolute monarch and part of a
royal plan. Bannon emphasizes that despite a life of rigid regimentation and
the handicaps and challenges of a rugged frontier environment, the Spaniard in
the Borderlands proved to be an adept pioneer. Many Borderlanders engaged in
mining activities in Arizona but the majority quickly developed prosperous
range industries in Texas and California. Bannon explains that the Indians
were the reasons behind the sixteenth century Franciscan mission approach.
Particular attention is given to the sixteenth century Franciscan mission
approach. Protected by the presidio, the Borderland missions began to
integrate the Indian into Spanish society and provide an essential food supply
and economic structure for the frontier. There were Indians that the
missionaries failed to win, like the Apache, the Commanche, and the Hopi. But,
by and large, Bannon asserts that the mission was a successful frontier
institution and the presidio an adequate defense post.  
**_

Reviews**_ : "The Borderlands story is recounted as the great pageant that it
was...It is the story of the indelible impression left by Spain that Father
Bannon brings to life in a single volume." Donald C. Cutter in _American
Historical Review_ 77 (February, 1972): 196-197.  

* * *

  
[Return to Siouan Tribal Culture Syllabus](465f98.html)  
[Return to Institute mainpage](../index.html)**

2 August 1999, lrb  

