Eastern Washington University

Department of Education

Course Syllabus: EDUC. 502

History of American Education

Winter, 2002

Dr. Harvey B. Alvy (359-6093)

  
  

_**Required Texts** :_ Spring, Joel, _The American School: _1642-2000__ , 5th
Edition; and _Lessons of a Century_ , written by the staff of "Education
Week".

**_General Description of Course Content:_ ** This course will survey the
broad spectrum of American educational history from pre-colonial times to the
modern period. The unique nature of American education will be examined from
our European roots, and the specifics of our national experience. Examples of
important historical topics include: the colonial experience, the early
national period, the common school movement, contributions and differences
among important educators from Europe and the United States, the struggle of
various ethnic groups and the oppressed for both excellence and equality, the
growth of teacher education, curricular development, the role of local, state
and the federal government, the education of masses of immigrants in urban
centers, and recent trends in teaching and learning, curriculum, governance
and accountability. Additionally, recent issues, such as the events of
September 11th and President Bush's educational initiatives will be addressed,
when appropriate. It is hoped that as a result of the course we will all
become _better teachers_ , understand historical and current issues through
the lens of the historian, and more effectively use descriptive, analytical,
interpretation, evaluation, communication, and application skills.
Questioning, throughout the course, will be a primary means for all of us to
expand our understanding of the History of American Education.

**_Course Objectives/Outcomes Include:_**  
****

      * Addressing David Tyack's question: "Is there a central story to tell?"
      * Reflecting on, and possibly _redefining,_ one's educational philosophy based on historical influences
      * Considering the European roots of American education from ancient to modern times
      * Reviewing the consequences of historical events and movements as they relate to American education (e.g. life in various colonial regions, the Early National Period, the Civil War, Frontier Life, Urban Expansion, Immigration, Integration)
      * Examining the organization and growth of elementary schools, high schools and higher education
      * Reflecting on the evolution of the "management" of students in schools
      * Examining important educational movements, such as the Common School Movement, the Progressive Movement, Growth of Behavioral Psychology, the Use of Technology, Back to Basics, and recent reform movements
      * Considering key individuals, such as, Noah Webster, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Emma Willard, Horace Mann, W. E. B. Du Bois, and John Dewey.
      * Analyzing local, state and federal historical initiatives, funding, and governance
      * Considering the role of the courts, especially related to school integration and other equity and fairness issues
      * Discussing influential teaching, learning, and curriculum movements
      * Considering both excellence and equality related to: integration, gender equity, ethnic groups, class equity, and exceptional students
      * Reviewing the role of teacher unions, associations and various influential committees
      * Considering international school comparisons with American schools
      * Addressing recent trends, such as, restructuring, standards, exceptionality, student and teacher accountability, and increased testing
      * Identifying and reviewing the role of special interest groups
      * Addressing the issues of September 11, 2001
      * Discussing Educational Futures
      * Refining one's interpretation, questioning and presentation skills

**_Tentative Course Outline_**

**_January 9 th, 2002_**

**_Orientation to class: ice-breaker, discuss syllabus, student expectations,
reflect on philosophical positions, and overview main historical themes of the
class._** Following orientation activities, students will identify their
general educational philosophy to gain an historical perspective.
Additionally, we will review the rationale of a course in educational history
and discuss important historical themes. A key question for this class is: How
can a History of American Education course contribute to more effective
teaching, learning, and leadership for today's schools?

**_Assignments for January 16th_** : _The American School_ , Chapter 1-2, and
3 (pp. 35-48, 52-54; _Lessons of a Century_ , pp. 195-200; Weekly Issue Paper.  
    


**_January 16 th, 2002_**

_**The European Influence, Colonial America, Native American Education, and "A
Teaching Gem** "._ This class will focus on how Europe, especially England,
influenced colonial education based on authority, religion and class
structure. Native American transmission of cultural values will also be
examined, along with a "modern" example of values expresses by a successful
teacher. Key question: Can we begin to identify important characteristics of
modern American schools during the colonial and revolutionary period?  
    


**_Assignments for January 23 rd _**_: The American School,_ Chapters 4-5;
Weekly Issue Paper.  
    


**_January 23 rd, 2002_**

_**The New Nation, Moving Toward a Common School**. _ Today's contemporary
issues, such as cultural pluralism and multiculturalism, will be examined in
their historical context beginning with Noah Webster, Thomas Jefferson, and
reviewing the plight of Irish, Black and Native Americans. The organization of
schools and student management will also be explored along with developments
toward higher education. Key question: Should schools educate for free
thinking citizenship and/or formal patriotic values?

**_Assignments for January 30 th:_** _The American School,_ Chapters 6-7;
_Lessons of a Century_ , pp. 4-12; 14, Weekly Issue Paper.  
    
    


**_January 30 th , 2002_**

_**The Common School Movement and It's Ambassador--The Schoolmarm**._ This
class will consider the goals of the Common School movement, and debate the
success of that movement. Horace Mann will be discussed as the central figure
of the period. The development of the teaching profession, high schools, and
the school bureaucracy will be addressed along with the role of the
"schoolmarm," the female educational pioneer Emma Willard, Johann Pestalozzi
and the McGuffey Reader. Key question: Have we, today, achieved Mann's goal's?

**_Assignments for February 6 th _**_: The American School,_ Chapters 8-10;
Submit one page joint research presentation proposal.  
    


**_February 6 th, 2002_**

_**The Struggle for the American Dream: Addressing the Educational Inequality
Faced by Native, Asian, Hispanic/Latino, and African Americans** _ Although
particular themes dominate the experiences of each "minority" group,
segregation and substandard educational opportunities were dominant features
of schooling for American minorities well into the 20th Century based on
racism, cultural ignorance, economic inequity, and unfair citizenship and
naturalization laws. A close look at the struggles of African Americans
concerning the 14th Amendment, literacy, and the "debate" between Booker T.
Washington and W.E.B. Du Bois will help to raise issues concerning school
inequities. A key question, still with us today is: Are _we_ reaching the
"American Dream"?

**_Assignments for February 13 th _**_: The American School,_ Chapter 11 (pp.
229-234, 238-250), Chapter 12 (pp. 253-273, 281-282), Chapter 13 (pp.
296-313); _Lessons of a Century_ , (pp.16-18, 93-103 and pp. 153-165). Weekly
Issue Paper.  
    


**_February 13 th, 2002_**

_**The Progressive Movement and the influence of John Dewey**._ Progressive
educational ideas from Friedrich Froebel, Johann Herbart and John Dewey will
be explored, along with the influential ideas of Edward Thorndike. The pros
and cons of the Progressive Education Movement will be examined, along with
important ideas related to the Committee of Ten and the high school, junior
high school, vocational education and the influence of Behavioral Psychology
and educational testing. Key question: What is John Dewey's legacy?

**_Assignment for February 20 th :_ Gather a variety of important resources,
and draft a preliminary outline for extended meetings with research partners
on February 20th**.  
    


**_February 20 th , 2002_**

_**Preparing the Research Presentations: Independent Meetings with Partners**
:_ During this class, students will have the opportunity to spend the entire
period working on their research presentations with partners. Organizing
resources, outlining presentations, finalizing different responsibilities for
the research report, possibly rehearsing oral presentations, and spending time
in the library to gather additional data, are all activities that should be
considered for the evening.

**_Assignment for February 27 th _**_: The American School,_ Chapters 15 and
16; _Lessons of a Century_ , p. 15, pp. 232-337, and pp. 250-253. Weekly Issue
Paper  
    


**_February 27 th, 2002_**

_**The Contemporary Quest for Improving America's Schools**._ Tension between
the federal government and local schools have been an enduring educational
theme. Reflecting on the Cold War, elements of the War on Poverty ( e.g.,
Title I and Head Start), the role of television, Brown vs. Board of Education,
multicultural education, the Women's Movement, Bilingualism, and Special Needs
students can all be addressed as part of this national vs. local tension. Key
question: Are local efforts to improve schools more effective than "grand"
plans?

**_Assignment for March 6 th_** _:_ Begin joint presentations on research
topics.  


**_March 6, 2002_**

**_Begin Presentations._**

**_Assignment for March 13 th_:** Complete joint presentations and submit all
individual research reports.  


**_March 13 th, 2002_**

**_Complete Presentations._** Explanation and Distribution of Take Home Final
Examination

**_Assignment for March 20 th _**: Complete and Return Final Examination.  


**_March 20 th, 2002_**

**_Where do we go from here: reflections on the History of American Education
and speculating on future trends._** We will return to David Tyack's question:
Is there a central story to tell? Also, a class activity will address the
following question: What will schools look like in fifty years?  
    
    
    


**_Evaluation/ Assessment Procedures_** Note: regarding the rationale behind
the forms of assessment: The quality/success of the course will depend a great
deal on the individual and group contributions that you make. Educators should
be successful askers of questions, communicators, decision-makers, listeners,
problem solvers and reflective practitioners. We will work on these skills
together.

**Final grades will be based on the following four areas:**

**1\. Constructive class participation, keeping up with texts, and other
handouts**. **(15%)** This includes presenting your insights each evening,
formulating insightful questions, and positively interacting with colleagues,
individually and in groups (thus, attendance is critical)

**2\. Weekly Issue Paper on a text issue from the readings that you support,
take a dissenting position on, OR are skeptical about. (25%)** Issue Papers
will be assigned most weeks. Focus on an issue from the assigned reading that
arouses or stirs your interest. The paper should include the following
**four** sections: a) a short quote from an assigned chapter that stirs your
interest in an issue (briefly cite the book and page # of the quote), b) a
brief summary of the issue, c) your commentary on the issue, d) an insightful
question on the issue that may serve as a discussion question. The weekly
issue paper should be a maximum of two, typed pages.

**3\. Paired Group Presentations and Individual History of American Education
Research Papers (Pair Presentations 20%; Individual Research Reports Graded
Separately 20%)**

Students will make paired, class presentations, and write individual, research
papers, on a **joint topic** critical to the course. The highlights of the
topic will be addressed during the joint class presentations on the evenings
of March 6th and March 13th. The individual research reports should address
separate issues/ideas relating to the topic. Thus, coordination of ideas will
be critical for both the presentation and the individual reports. The
objectives of the course, weekly discussions, historical topics, and the two
texts can serve as a "starting point" for ideas for your joint topic. The
topic must be an examination/review of any of the following: an important
historical educational event, biography, historical movement, historical
philosophical position, contemporary, or perennial issue/problem. The topic
must be presented in an historical context or have historical implications.
SELECT A TOPIC THAT IS IMPORTANT TO BOTH MEMBERS OF THE GROUP--SELECT A
PASSION! Present a one-page description to Harvey for topic approval no later
than week four of the class.

The final product will include the following:  
a) 30 minute class presentation. Please rehearse your joint presentation to
make sure it does not exceed 30 minutes.

b) a one-page "fact sheet" on the presentation topic to be distributed to
classmates immediately before your presentation. This fact sheet must be an
original document, organized and written by the presenters. It should not be a
pre-fabricated handout. However, you may attach pre-fabricated handouts to
your original fact sheet. The fact sheet is part of the oral presentation.

c) a five to six page individual research report including: 1) an
introduction, briefly reviewing the topic and organizational plan for your
report, 2) the main body, 3) conclusion. Use headings and subheadings to
organize different aspects of the report. Beyond the five to six pages, the
report will include a separate title page and separate reference page.

**Presentations will be made on the evenings of March 6 th , and March 13th .
The final research papers are due for all students on March 13th.**

**4\. Take Home Final Exam** due Wednesday, March 20, 2002 **(20%)**

  
  
  
  

**_Selected Bibliography for History of American Education_**

Adler, Mortimer. (1982). _The paideia proposal: an educational manifesto_. New
York: Macmillian.

Apple, M. W. (1993). _Official knowledge: democratic education in a
conservative age_. New York: Routledge  & Kegan Paul.

Banks, J. A., & McGee Banks, C. A. (Eds.). (1993). _Multicultural education:
Issues and perspectives_ (2nd ed.) Boston: Allyn  & Bacon.

_Breaking ranks: changing an American institution_ (1996). Reston, VA: The
National Association of Secondary School Principals.

Cremin, Lawrence. (1961). _The transformation of the school_. New York:
Vantage Books.

Cuban, Larry. (1984). _How teachers taught: constancy and change in American
classrooms_ , 1890-1980. New York: Longman

Dewey, John, (1916). _Democracy and education_ , New York: Macmillian.

Gardner, Howard. (1983). _Frames of mind: the theory of multiple
intelligence_. New York: Basic Books.

Giroux, H. (1988). _Teachers as intellectuals: Toward a critical pedagogy of
learning_. Mass.: Bergin and Garvey.

Goodlad, John. (1984). _A place called school: prospects for the future_. New
York: McGraw-Hill.

Hirsch, E. D. (1987). _Cultural literacy_. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Hutchins, Robert.. (1954). _Great books: The foundation of a liberal
education_. New York: Simon and Schuster.

Kozol, J. (1991). _Savage inequalities: children in America's schools_. New
York: Crown.

Ravitch, Diane. (2000). _Left Back: a century of failed school reforms_. New
York: Simon and Schuster.

Robbins, Pam & Alvy, Harvey. (1995). "Asking the Right Questions About
Curriculum and Instruction" Chapter 12, in _The principal's companion._
Thousand Oaks, California: Corwin Press.

Postman, Neil. (1995). _The end of education_.. New York: Vantage.

Pulliam, John, and Van Paten, James (1999). _History of Education in America_.
New Jersey: Merrill

Sarason, Seymour. (1990). _The predictable failure of educational reform._ San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Sizer, Ted. (1984). _Horace's compromise: the dilemma of the American high
school._ Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Tyack, David B., and Cuban, Larry. (1995). _Tinkering toward utopia: a century
of school reform_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Urban, Wayne, and Wagoner, Jennings. (1996). _American education: a history_.
New York: McGraw-Hill.  
  

