**SYLLABUS**

**University of Kentucky**

**AEN/ME 480G Heating, Ventilating and Air-Conditioning**

**Spring 2001**



**Class Description:**

An introductory course emphasizing the engineering systems aspects of thermal
environmental design. Principles and applications of building energy
requirements and thermal comfort criteria. Prereq: ME 325 and engineering
standing or consent of instructor.



**Course Goals:**

The goals of this class are to:

    Have the students understand the application of basic thermodynamics, fluid mechanics and heat transfer in sizing HVAC systems and estimating their operating costs, and have the students perform HVAC load and energy calculation procedures that are consistent with current accepted industry standards, and familiarize the students with many of the system types and the various aspects of engineering design of HVAC systems used for acceptable environmental conditions in buildings, and have the students be capable of presenting to their peers the results of an independent study in a particular area of HVAC systems. 

  

**Learning Outcomes:**

At the completion of this course the students should:

\- Have a working knowledge of basic HVAC terminology, systems and design
processes.

\- Be able to compute basic heating and cooling loads and component energy
consumption using fundamental heat and mass balances on buildings and system
components.

\- Be familiar with industry standard methodologies for calculating building
heating/cooling loads, and ventilation and building energy design requirements

\- Be able to write a concise summary of a specific area of HVAC systems and
present the findings to peers.

  

**Prerequisites:**

ME 325 elements of Heat transfer and Engineering standing, or consent of
instructor.



**Textbook:**

McQuiston, Faye; Parker, Jerald; Spitler, Jeffery. 2000. Heating, Ventilating
and Air Conditioning Analysis and Design, 5th ed. John Wiley & Sons.



**Recommended:**

1997 ASHRAE Handbook - Fundamentals. American Society of Heating,
Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers. Atlanta. (Can be obtained with
student ASHRAE membership)

Principles of Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning. Ronald Howell, Harry
Sauer and William Coad. 1998\. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and
Air-Conditioning Engineers. Atlanta. <http://www.ashrae.org/>



**Class Meeting Time:**

Tuesday & Thursday 4:30-5:45



**Scheduled Final Exam:**

Thursday, 5/3/01, 3:30pm



**Instructors:**

_Dr. Donald G. Colliver,_ (859)257-3000x211, Rm 211 AEN Bldg,
colliver@bae.uky.edu, http://www.bae.uky.edu/~colliver/colliver.htm. Usually
in office 9-6 and it's open for visitation or consultation at any time. Will
usually be able to see you but due to extensive travel schedule an appointment
is always helpful. Feel free to call at home  before 9:00pm. If I'm not home
please leave a message.

_

Dr. William E. Murphy_, (270) 534-6341, Rm 205 Crounse Hall,
[wmurphy@engr.uky.edu](mailto:wmurphy@engr.uky.edu). I will usually be
available before or immediately after class. However, due to my erratic
schedule, you can come most any time to my office and if I am there I can
usually see you. Call in advance before making a special trip to be sure I am
in. I check my e-mail several times a day, so you can always get me that way.

     

 **Course and Grading Policies \- Spring 2001**  

**Grading:**

Computer assignments - 10%

Quizzes/Homework \- 15%

Mid Term Examination - 20%

Load calculation - 20%

Report and presentation - 10%

Final Examination - 25%



No penalty for unexecused absences.

90-100=A, 80-90=B, 70-80=C, 60-70=D, <60=E



**Computer Assignments:** There will be two computer programs assigned during
the semester and problems will be assigned to be solved with these programs.
You are free to use any Windows95/98 computer or system that you prefer
however Excel or MatLab are prefered. Most structured languages are acceptable
but languages other than FORTRAN, C ++, BASIC need prior approval.



**Weekly Quizzes:** There will be a short (i.e.10 minute) quiz nearly every
week at the end of the class period. The quizzes will be based upon previously
assigned homework problems or on topics covered in the lecture. Homework
problems will be taken up and solutions will be available in the library or on
the web. Although the homework will not be graded in detail, it will make up
1/3 of the quiz grade. Always bring your textbook and calculator to class.
Quizzes will be announced in advanced. No makeup quizzes. The two lowest quiz
grades will be dropped.



**Exams:** One examination will be given near the middle of the semester. A
comprehensive final exam will be given at the scheduled time. It will
emphasize material covered after the midterm.



**Load Calculation:** The plans for a simple building will be distributed for
you to calculate the design heating and cooling loads. This will be a take
home problem and you will be expected to work on it individually.



**Report and Presentation:** In keeping with ABET's emphasis on providing
opportunities for students to develop communication skills, you will be
required to write a short (i.e. 5 pages) report and give a 10 minute
presentation in class. A list of potential topics will be distributed or you
may chose a topic of our own interest. The written report and the presentation
will be given equal weighting.



**Late Paper Policy:** 10% reduction the first day late, 20% the second, 30%
the third, etc. Papers not received by the time the others are returned will
be given a zero. Papers due at being of class on day indicated. Any extension
to a due date will be e-mailed to address student indicates on info form.



**Late Grading Policy:** Papers will be returned within one week of due date.
If papers are not returned on time, the same percentage reduction used for
late papers will be added to the paper grade.



    

##### ![back.gif \(354 bytes\)](../../images/back.gif)  [Back to AEN/ME 480G
Introduction Page](../intro.htm)

dgc 1/11/01

  

