Dr. Linda Tate 3:30-5:00MW, 11:00-12:30TR  
English 204, Survey of American Literature and by appointment  
Email: _ltate@shepherd.edu_ Room 210 Knutti, 876-5365  
Course Website: _http://webpages.shepherd.edu/ltate/204.htm

_

This course is designed to familiarize sophomore-level students (both majors
and non-majors) with the wide variety of American literature from its earliest
beginnings before the arrival of European settlers to its latest
manifestations in multicultural contemporary literature. As we travel from the
precolonial era to our own, we will read works by a number of writers: poets
and novelists, essayists and autobiographers, men and women, European
Americans, Native Americans, and African Americans.

The required text is _The Harper Single Volume American Literature_ (Third
Edition). From time to time, you will also be required to photocopy materials
on reserve at Scarborough Library (as indicated on the syllabus); purchasing a
CopiCard will reduce your photocopying expenses. Please note that I have
sometimes specified the order in which items for a particular day are to be
read. Before you read the assigned texts for each class period, please make
sure that you have read the introductory material on each author; this
material will provide you with helpful background information as you read. All
assigned reading is to be done by the beginning of class for the day assigned,
and the care with which you complete the reading assignment will be assessed
each day with a brief quiz at the beginning of class. You will have a much
better chance at success in this course--and you will enjoy the course more--
if you keep up with the reading assignments. Don't fall behind!

The first and foremost requirements of the course are preparation for class
(doing the reading!), attending class regularly, and participating actively.
Ten percent of the final grade will be devoted to citizenship (participation,
attendance, general improvement). To receive high marks for citizenship, you
must participate actively in class discussion. Everyone will be allowed three
absences (though a few points will be deducted for each absence after the
first); missing more than three classes makes you ineligible to receive any
points for citizenship and will make it difficult for you to pass the class.
Arriving for class more than five minutes late is the equivalent of one-half
class absence. In other words, to do well on this portion of the course (and
to boost your overall grade), _you should attend every class period,
participate actively in the discussion, and do the reading carefully and
conscientiously (in preparation for quizzes)._ Note that I do not distinguish
between excused and unexcused absences. Everyone is allowed to miss the same
number of classes. Plan ahead, and use your absences judiciously.

Quizzes will be given at the beginning of most class periods and will take the
form of a direct, short-answer question. If you have read the work, you will
know the answer. Plan to arrive on time so that you can take the quiz. No
makeup quizzes will be given, but everyone will be allowed to drop five quiz
grades without penalty. This allows for absences, tardies, and days when you
simply cannot complete the reading. Quizzes--which assess your completion of
the reading assignments--are worth ten percent of the final grade. Quizzes
will take place during the first few minutes of the class period, so it is
essential to be on time.

There will be three examinations, each one lasting 75 minutes. Each of these
exams is worth 20% of your final course grade. Although we will read and
discuss a large number of works, you will be responsible for a limited
selection of works on each exam. I will provide a list of works to be covered
approximately one week prior to each exam. These works will be those we have
discussed most fully. If you must reschedule an exam (due to field trip,
etc.), you must inform me as far ahead of time as possible.  
  
The remaining portion of the course grade comes from one out-of-class essay of
1000 to 1500 words. This essay will be worth 20% of your final course grade.
Essay topics and guidelines will be distributed three weeks before the due
date, and you are _strongly encouraged_ to meet with a tutor in the Writing
Center as you prepare your essay. Schedule your appointments in advance with
the same tutor, and plan to meet with the tutor at least twice as your essay
develops. This is not a research paper; therefore, your essay should reflect
ONLY your analysis of the texts you are discussing. Moreover, you must focus
solely on texts we have studied in this course. _NO LATE PAPERS WILL BE
ACCEPTED FOR ANY REASON, AND EXTENSIONS WILL NOT BE GIVEN.

To earn extra credit in this course_, you may visit the course website
(address noted above), follow the links I have provided on that site, and
explore some of the author-related sites on the Internet. By the class period
_following_ our discussion of a particular author, you should send me an email
briefly describing what you have learned by exploring the relevant Internet
sites. (For example, if you wish to explore the Thoreau sites, you should do
so and send an email response to me no later than classtime on Thursday,
February 17. Please do not post responses more than a week early.) Your email
responses do not need to be lengthy, but they do need to demonstrate careful
reading and exploration of the Internet material. For every substantial
response you email to me (no more than one per class period), you will receive
_up to_ four points of extra credit. The highest points will go to those
responses that are thoughtful and substantive. Sample responses are included
on the course website. Because I grade on a 1000-point scale and because there
are 25 possible extra credit Internet assignments, this extra credit option
will enable you to boost your final course grade by as much as one full letter
grade.  
  
In-class and out-of-class assignments and activities will be utilized to
encourage you to reflect thoughtfully on the central problems and issues
raised in these texts, to make significant connections between the texts, and
to encourage and assess careful critical reading and critical thinking about
the texts. A variety of writing and exam experiences will give you the
opportunity to synthesize the critical reading and thinking undertaken
throughout the semester. Your ability to think critically, reflectively, and
independently about the deeper issues invoked by the texts will be emphasized.

All work should be your own and should not be borrowed from another student,
from a published source, or from your own work done in another course.
Plagiarism or academic dishonesty of any kind will result in automatic failure
of the course. Although you are encouraged to use the Twayne guides to enhance
your understanding of the assigned readings (see below), in no case should you
borrow wording from the editor's headnotes in the anthology, from the Twayne's
guides, from Cliff's Notes, or from other published sources. _The use of
Cliff's Notes FOR ANY REASON is strongly discouraged.

_

The Shepherd College bookstore has available for purchase study guides for
several of the works we will be studying. These are published by Twayne and
are sanctioned as approved study guides by the Department of English. If you
feel that you need extra help in understanding a text, please refer to these
guides. Twayne guides are available for: Franklin's _Autobiography_ ;
Thoreau's _Walden_ ; Whitman's _Leaves of Grass_ ("Song of Myself"); Twain's
_Huck Finn_ ; and Kate Chopin's _The Awakening_.

I will regularly post course materials on the course website (see address
above). You will always find there a copy of the syllabus, all handouts, and
links to interesting sites about each author. If you are unable to attend a
particular class, the easiest way to get any handouts you missed is to check
the website. I will let you know as I post additional materials on the web.  
  
R 1/13 Introduction to course  
**Seneca:** "The Story-Telling Stone" (17-20)

\------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 1/18 **The Literature of the New World** (3-13)  
**Cultural Portfolio: The European Conquest of America** (21-36)  
with selections from the Greenlanders, Michele De Cuneo, the Aztecs,  
Bernal Diaz, Giovanni da Verrazano, Pedro de Casteneda, Thomas Hariot  
**Cultural Portfolio: The Ways of the Native Americans** (155-164)  
with selections from Robert Beverly, Roger Williams, William Byrd,  
Thomas Jefferson  
**Powhatan:** "Letter to Captain John Smith" (53-54)  
**John Smith:** Excerpt from _The Generall Historie of Virginia, New England,
and  
_ _the Summer Isles_ and excerpt from _A Description of New England_ (55-63)  
R 1/20 **The Literature of Colonial America, 1620-1776** (65-79)  
**Taylor:** "Meditation 26" (handout--in class)  
**Edwards:** Excerpt from "Personal Narrative" and "Sinners in the Hands of
Angry  
God" (175-182)

\------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

T 1/25 **Cultural Portfolio: The Witchcraft Trials** (107-116)  
with selections from C. L'Estrange Ewen, Cotton Mather, Samuel Sewall  
**Anne Hutchinson's Trial** (117-121)  
**Bradstreet:** "The Prologue," "The Author to Her Book," "Here Follows Some  
Verses upon the Burning of Our House" (95-99, 101-102)

**Hawthorne:** "Young Goodman Brown" (786-791, 804-813)  
R 1/27 **The Literature of the New Republic, 1776-1836** (257-272)  
**Cultural Portfolio: Asserting a National Language and Literature** (399-407)  
with selections from Noah Webster, Hector St. Jean De Crevecoeur,  
Walter Channing, James Kirke Paulding  
**Franklin:** All selections from _The Autobiography_ (182-222)  
\------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 2/1 **Hawthorne:** "My Kinsman, Major Molineux" (786-804)  
R 2/3 **Irving:** "The Author's Account of Himself" and "Rip Van Winkle"
(361-378)  
\------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 2/8 **EXAMINATION I  
** R 2/10 **Literature of the American Renaissance, 1836-1865** (461-475)  
**Cultural Portfolio: Nature's Nation** (589-596)  
with selections from Thomas Cole, R.W. Emerson, James Brooks,  
H.D. Thoreau, James Fenimore Cooper  
**Emerson:** "The American Scholar" and "Related Voices" (480-486, 514-526)  
\-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 2/15 **Thoreau:** _Walden_ (Excerpts: Biographical headnote, 597-601;
"Economy,"  
602-643; "Where I Lived, and What I Lived For," 643-652; "The Ponds,"  
658-671; "Spring," 679-689; "Conclusion," 689-696)  
R 2/17 **Whitman:** "Preface to the 1855 Edition of _Leaves of Grass_ ," "Song
of Myself"  
(1146-1209)  
**Pound:** "A Pact" (skim 1966-1971, read 1972)  
**Ginsberg:** "A Supermarket in California" (skim 2444-2446, read 2451-2452)  
\------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 2/22 **Dickinson:** Background (1254-1257), Letters (1279-1287), Poems 435,
1129,  
303, 632, 501, poems on handout  
**Rich:** "I Am in Danger--Sir--" (skim 2493-2495, read 2498-2499)  
R 2/24 Continue discussion of Dickinson  
\------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 2/29 **Cultural Portfolio: Slavery, Freedom, and Identity** (327-341)  
with selections from Samuel Sewall, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas  
Jefferson, Black Petitions for Freedom, Hector St. Jean de Crevecoeur  
**Douglass:** _Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, An American Slave,  
_ _Written by Himself_ (1017-1081)  
**Jacobs:** excerpts from _Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl_ (982-1007)  
R 3/2 **Cultural Portfolio: Oral Traditions and Turn-of-the-Century
Literature**  
(1609-1638)  
with selections from Franz Boas, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Marietta  
Holley, Eastern European Jewish Oral Tradition, Mark Twain,  
Owen Wister, George Washington Harris, Cherokee Oral Tradition,  
Joel Chandler Harris, Zora Neale Hurston, African American  
Spirituals, W.E.B. DuBois, Ballads and Work Songs  
**Twain:** "The Notorious Jumping Frog of Calaveras County" (1333-1342)  
**ESSAY ASSIGNED  
**
\------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 3/7 **Mark Twain:** _Adventures of Huckleberry Finn_ (1354-1522)  
R 3/9 **EXAMINATION II**  
\------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 3/14 **The Literature of an Expanding Nation, 1865-1912** (1289-1305)  
**Melville:** "Bartleby the Scrivener" (853-879)  
R 3/16 **Native Americans and "Westward the Course of the Empire"** (356-361)  
with selections from Thomas Jefferson, Northwest Ordinance,  
Andrew Jackson, Timothy Flint, R.W. Emerson, Herman Melville,  
William Apess  
**Native American Assimilation and a Reemerging Tradition** (1322-1332)  
with selections from Francis Parkman, Andrew Johnson, U.S. Supreme  
Court, Armstrong Custer, Walt Whitman, Hamlin Garland, William  
Faulkner, Seattle, Sarah Winnemuca Hopkins  
**Zitkala Sa:** "Impressions of an Indian Childhood" and "School Days"  
(1849-1861)  
\------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 3/21 S P R I N G B R E A K - -  
R 3/23 E N J O Y ! !  
\------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 3/28 **Gilman:** "The Yellow Wallpaper" and "Why I Wrote 'The Yellow
Wallpaper'" (1733-1746)  
**Howells,** "Deciding to Publish 'The Yellow Wallpaper'" (1746)  
**DUE: ESSAY

**

R 3/30 **Chopin:** _The Awakening_ (1646-1733)  
\------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 4/4 **The Literature of a New Century, 1912-1945** (1863-1878)

**Eliot:** "The Hollow Men" (1992-1995, 2021-2024)  
**Hemingway:** Biographical headnote (2213-2218), "The Big Two-Hearted River,  
Parts I and II" (reserve)  
R 4/6 **Cultural Portfolio: The Harlem Renaissance** (2079-2117)  
with selections from Alain Locke, James Weldon Johnson, Langston  
Hughes, Zora Neale Hurston, Sterling A. Brown  
**Hughes:** "The Negro Speaks of Rivers," "The Weary Blues," "I, Too," "Dream  
Boogie," "Theme for English B" (2223-2229)  
\------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 4/11 Continue discussion of the Harlem Renaissance  
R 4/13 **Williams:** "The Glass Menagerie" (2290-2338)  
\-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 4/18 **Cultural Portfolio: The Southern Renaissance** (2183-2205)  
with selections from W.J. Cash, Thomas Wolfe, William Faulkner,  
Richard Wright, Eudora Welty, Erskine Caldwell and Margaret  
Bourke-White, James Agee and Walker Evans  
**Faulkner:** "That Evening Sun" (2143-2147, 2159-2170)  
**Welty:** "Why I Live at the P.O." (2249-2259)  
R 4/20 SPRING WEEKEND RECESS--NO CLASS (unless making up a snow day)  
\-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

T 4/25 **Cultural Portfolio: The New Immigrants** (1307-1321)  
with selections from Emma Lazarus, Henry James, Abraham Cahan,  
Angel Island, Lee Chew, Anzia Yezierska  
**Cultural Portfolio: Who Is an American Writer?** (2811-2814 only)  
**Yezierska:** "America and I" (1951-1959)  
**Gold:** "The Soul of a Landlord" (excerpt from _Jews without Money_ ,
reserve)  
R 4/27 **Carved on the Walls: Poetry by Early Chinese Immigrants** (reserve)  
**Rivera:** Excerpts from _y ne so lo trago la tierra/And the Earth Did Not  
_ _Devour Him_ (reserve)  
**Kingston:** "No Name Woman" (excerpt from _The Woman Warrior_ , 2623-  
2632)  
\---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
T 5/2 **Walker:** "In Search of Our Mothers' Gardens" (reserve), "Everyday
Use"  
(2632-2639)  
**Smith:** "Ole Man Ira Keen" (from _The Devil's Dream_ \--reserve)  
R 5/4 **Momaday:** Biographical headnote (2554-2555), excerpts from _The Way
to  
_ _Rainy Mountain_ (reserve)  
**Harjo:** "Remember" (handout in class)

The final exam for the 1:50 class will be held on Thursday, May 11, from 3:00
to 4:15 p.m. The final exam for the 3:15 class will be held on Tuesday, May 9,
from 3:00 to 4:15 p.m. Students in the 1:50 class are welcome to take their
exam on Tuesday with the 3:15 class.

