**Department of Theatre Arts** **Mount Holyoke College**   **D350(02)
POSTCOLONIAL CINEMAS** Tuesdays and Thursdays 10.30-11.50am Franklin Patterson
West Hall   Professor Awam Amkpa Office: 203 Rooke Theatre  Telephone: 538
2658  Email: aamkpa@mhc.mtholyoke.edu URL: http://www.mtholyoke.edu/~aamkpa
[constantly up-dated] Consulting hours at Hampshire College, Music/Dance Room
1   **Course Description:** The course invites your participation in
critically examining functions of films and cinemas in contexts and countries
whose nationhood and cultural references are informed by colonial and
anticolonial histories. The films will be looked at as modes of
_signification_ and _representations_ of discourses and identities audiences
use in negotiating conditions of _being, belonging_ and _becoming._ Cinemas as
locations of spectating and as contexts for articulating desires and fantasies
will be critically studies as performance sites for tropes of cultural
selfhood and subjectivity. The films and the contexts they are made for will
enable tracing colonial geographic frames and postcolonial desires for re-
articulating these frames. Issues of nationhood and nationalism, citizenship,
gender, ethnicities, class and race will be explored in the course.
**Requirements:**   As a student centered course your attendance and full
participation is a primary requirement. Assigned texts and films must be seen
before sessions scheduled for discussions and students are encouraged to bring
their own personal experiences and interpretations to bear on the class'
learning experience. We aim to provide a safe environment where students can
express their opinions and engage in debating issues raised by lectures and
materials studied. You will be required to work in small groups leading
seminars on films, the conditions of their production and reception.
**Evaluations:**   Your responsibilities include constant assessment of your
participation in the overall delivery and reception of the course. There will
be three sessions during which you will be invited to publicly assess what you
have and haven't learnt, your specific needs and ownership of the course with
others. This process of evaluation is called Self and Peer assessment.
**Required Reading:**   All required reading will be in a study pack you will
pay for. Though researching other subjects and materials is encouraged the
study pack offers texts that will be specifically referred to in class.
Syllabus  Thu 9/4 |  General Introduction and course orientation  
---|---  
 Tue 9/9 |  Establishing colonial frames, their overlapping histories and
gegraphies: _Selfing_ Europe/ _Othering_ Others  
 Thu 9/11 |



Identities and Representations:Nations and the traumas of being.   Viewing:
Frantz Fanon's _Black Skin_ , _White Masks_ by Issac Julien, _Un Certain
Martin_ by Fanta Nacro  
 Tue 9/16 |  Cinematic traditions and Tropes of Postcoloniality: Textualizing
opposition and resistance  
 Thu 9/18 |



The Postcolonial and Postmodern: REdrawing frames of globalization and local
subjectivities.   Viewing: _Guelwaar_  
 Tue 9/23 |   Seminar: _Guelwaar_ led by Bicole Bland and Shalini Kantoyya  
 Thu 9/25 |

 Banditry and governance: Neocolonialism and negotiations of citizenship.

Viewing: _Kasar mu ce_  
 Tue 9/30 |   Seminar: _Kasar mu ce_ led by Stephen Edel and Deborah Holzman  
 Thu 10/2 |

 Competing nationalisms and topologies of race, gender and class.

Viewing: _Mapanstula_  
 Tue 10/7 |   Seminar: _Mapanstula_ led by Fernanda de Affonseca and Niqe Ware  
 Thu 10/9 |

 Memories of home and routing sites of becoming.

Viewing: _Rue Case Negres_  
    MID SEMESTER BREAK    Tue 10/16 |   Seminar: _Rue Case Negres_ led by Susie Bohannon and John Ziniewicz  
---|---  
 Thu 10/21 |

 Desires of belonging and textualizing conditions of becoming.

Viewing: _The Harder They Come_  
 Tue 10/23 |   Seminar: _The Harder They Come_ led by Kate Kretzman and Sekou
Frye  
 Thu 10/29 |

 Self and Peer evaluations

Guest lecture on nationalisms, nativisms and Identities in India.

Viewing: _Mother India_  
 Tue 11/4 |   Seminar: _Mother India_ led by Vanphouthon Souvannasane and
Margaret Raintree  
 Thu 11/6 |

 The burden of representations

Viewing: _Khandar_  
 Tue 11/11 |   Seminar: _Khandar_ led by Dartania Lilly and Carlos McBride  
 Thu 11/13 |

 Questioning of citizenship and subjectivities in postcolonial states

Viewing: _Salaam Bombay_  
 Tue 11/18 |   Seminar: _Salaam Bombay_ led by Lee Chatametikool and Steve
Gevurtz  
 Thu 11/20 |

 Overlapping Identities and Brutalities of Nationhood.

Viewing: _Kiss of the Spider Woman_  
 Tue 11/25 |   Seminar: _Kiss of the Spider Woman_  
 Thu 11/27 |

 Centering the Margins: The Empire Strikes back.

Viewing: _Surname Viet, Given name Nam_

_Bhaji on the Beach_  
 Tue 12/2 |  Seminar: _Surname Viet, Given Name Nam/Bhaji on the Beach_ led by
Awam. Final essays due.  
 Thur 12/4 |



Colloquium on tropes of Postcoloniality in the USA.

Viewing: African-American identities and American Cinema.

Native American identities and cultural erasures in American cinemas.  
 Tue 12/9 |   Self and Peer Evaluations  
 Thu 12/11 |   Conclusions and reframing the questions.  
  PS: 1\. Check the course web-site for brief description and analysis of
films each week before seminars. 2\. Your seminar based essays are due a week
after the seminar.

