**Journalism 340**  
**Press & Society**  
**Spring 2001**

Floyd J. McKay, CH 213, 650-3244; fmckay@cc.wwu.edu  
Office Hours: Monday 1-3 and Thursday 10-12; and by appointment.  


  

Catalog: "Historical backgrounds of journalism, tracing the rise of mass
communications in the Western world, with social, economic and political
trends."

Instructor's aims:  We will examine the development of American journalism,
from its English and colonial roots through the maturing of the broadcast
media.  The history of journalism will be viewed in the context of American
history, including the Western movement, progressive reforms, American
involvement in international affairs, and political movements at home ranging
from Jacksonian Democracy to the McCarthy Era and Vietnam.

Grading will be based a take-home essay covering Weeks 1-2 (20 points); a
research paper (30 points); a mid-term (20 points) and a final examination
covering weeks 5-10 (30 points).  Bonus points will be given for an
outstanding performance on any of the graded assignments.  Papers and essays
will be graded for content and for writing organization and proper use of the
language.

**_Texts:_**  
Baldasty, The Commercialization of News in the 19th Century.  
Baughman, The Republic of Mass Culture.  
Streitmatter, Mightier than the Sword.

Required reading is noted in the syllabus and will be on reserve in Wilson
Library, in the following books:  
Cloud, The Business of Newspapers on the Western Frontier  
Commission on Freedom of the Press, A Free & Responsible Press  
Hallin, The Uncensored War: The Media and Vietnam  
Lofton, The press as guardian of the first amendment  
Lippmann, Public Opinion  
Wolfe, New Journalism  
Wolseley, The Black Press

**_Lecture and reading schedule_**

Week 1 April 4-6: The foundations of the American press  
   An introduction to the class  
  The English tradition: coffee-house news  
  Printers are revolutionaries: the Colonial press  
   Reading: Streitmatter, Ch 1

Week 2 April 9-13: A Constitution, Bill of Rights and a new system  
The Constitution, its framers and their view of the press  
   Reading: Lofton, Ch 1  
  Putting it into practice: Early political papers  
   Reading: Baldasty, Ch 1

Week 3 April 16-20: A press for the masses, war and expansion  
**  Brief essay due April 16 in class**  
  The Penny Press, its roots and effects  
   Reading: Baldasty, Ch 2  
  Advocacy journalism and the Civil War  
   Reading: Streitmatter, Ch 2  
    Wolseley, Ch 2   
  The Press on the American Frontier: A Western Model  
   Reading: Cloud, pp 3-32

Week 4 April 23-27: An industrial model: The Penny Press matures  
**Research Paper Topic Due April 23**  
 New Journalism, news as commodity  
   Reading: Baldasty, Ch 5-6  
    Streitmatter, Ch 3-5   
  Muckraking, Progressives and reform  
   Reading: Streitmatter, Ch 6

Week 5 Aril 30-May 4: The 20th Century dawns: Power and reaction  
 World war, propaganda and Public Opinion  
   Reading: Lippmann, Parts 1 and 7  
  Voices of the disenfranchised  
   Reading: Wolseley, Ch 1, Ch 3 pp 43-61  
    Video: Ida B. Wells 

Week 6 May 7-11: Technology and Tabloids between the wars  
**  Mid-term exam May 7, bring large-format Blue Book**  
  Radio invents itself: The challenge of regulation  
  Tabloids, radio demagogues; the slide into Depression  
   Reading: Streitmatter, Ch 7-8

Week 7 May 14-18: Patriotism, Censorship and Criticism in the Forties  
 "The good war," new forms of coverage and control  
   Reading: Baughman, Ch 2  
  Harsh words for a complacent press  
   Reading: Commission on Freedom of the Press, 79-106  
  First stirrings: the emergency of television  
   Reading: Baughman, Ch 3, Ch 4 pp 59-74

Week 8 May 21-25: Cold War: A nation and a press with the jitters  
 The Frightened Fifties, press reaction  
   Reading: Streitmatter, Ch 10  
   Video: Post War Hopes, Cold War Fears  
  Journalists become a force for civil rights  
   Reading: Streitmatter, Ch 11  
   Video: Dateline Freedom

Week 9 May 30-June 1:  From a New Frontier to a nation torn apart: The Sixties  
 John F. Kennedy and the maturing of television news  
   Reading: Baughman, Ch 5  
  A second New Journalism fits the age  
   Reading: Baughman, Ch 6 pp 117-137  
    Wolfe, 1-36   
  The Uncensored War and its effects at home  
   Reading: Streitmatter, Ch 12  
    Hallin, 103-110, 127-158 

Week 10 June 4-8: A powerful Presidency clashes with a powerful media  
**Research Paper is Due March 12 in class.**  
 The American newspaper adapts to changes in culture  
  and techology. Emergence of public journalism.  
   Reading: Baughman, Ch 7, Ch 8 pp 175-200  
  The changing image of the White House, Post-JFK  
   Reading: Streitmatter, Ch 13  
    Video: Presidents and the Press 

**Final Examination:   Thursday, June 14: 12:30 p.m.**  
**Bring large-format Blue Book**

**_Research Paper Guidelines_**

 Select an individual who has been prominent in the news media at any time
studied in this course.  Examine this person's role of leadership and the
contributions he/she made to the news media in terms of a specific area or
aspect of their career and their times.  Remember, we are examining
journalists, not entertainment figures.  Please do not use journalists whose
careers began after 1970; our primary interest here is history, and
contemporary writers are seldom the topic of serious research.  See my home
page for some Wilson Library [Media History
](http://www.library.wwu.edu/ref/subjguides/journlism/primarysources.htm)resources.

 The paper should not attempt to cover the entire career of the person under
study.  Entire books have been written about most of the people you are likely
to select--a brief research paper must be focused.  Select an area of
concentration and provide only as much biographical support as is necessary to
place your subject in context.  (Example of focus: Horace Greeley and the
birth of the Republican Party; James Gordon Bennett and the development of the
reporter; Ida Tarbell's relationship to the feminist movement; W.E.B. duBois
and the influence of the Crisis.)

 The paper should be six to eight pages, double-spaced.  For citation style,
visit the [Resources Section](http://www.ac.wwu.edu/~writepro/resources.htm)
of the Western Writing Center or consult my WWW page "How to Write a
[Journalism Research Paper."](http://www.ac.wwu.edu/~fmckay/writingpaper.html)
Citing sources properly is important.

 You must submit your topic by April 22.  Submit a paragraph describing why it
is important, and a brief list of sources.  The sources need not have a full
bibliographic citation, but must be specific (book titles, articles, etc.).
Material from the Internet is acceptable but must be cited as to its source
(see my guidelines). Hand-written material is not acceptable¨®print it out.

_  The paper is due in class on June 4 and late papers will be penalized 10
percent per day._

 I will be happy to discuss your papers and research at any time.  Do not
delay your research--this is a large class, and several of you will have
similar topics, putting pressure on the resources.  Please be courteous--do
not check out a book when you can copy a few pages, and in any event do not
keep a book longer than absolutely necessary.  Others may need it.

**Plagiarizing, as defined in the Western Catalog, Appendix C, is a serious
offense and will result in grading penalties or a failing grade.**  


**_Possible sources for research papers_**

Other names are acceptable, of course; but be sure you can find sufficient
sources.  Regional or specialist journalists can be very interesting, if
source material is available.  Check with me.

Colonial and revolutionary period:  John Milton, Joseph Addison, Richard
Steele, Daniel Defoe, Benjamin Franklin, Samuel Adams, James Rivington, Tom
Paine, John Peter Zenger, William Bradford, Isaiah Thomas, Sarah Goddard, Sam
Adams.

Federalist and partisan press:  Phillip Freneau,  John Fenno, William Cobbett,
Noah Webster, Amos Kendall, Francis Blair, Benjamin Franklin Bache.

Penny Press, Civil War era:  Benjamin Day, Horace Greeley, James Gordon
Bennett, Margaret Fuller, Jane Gray Swisshelm, Charles Dana, Henry Raymond,
William Cullen Bryant, Frederick Douglass, Elijah Lovejoy, William Lloyd
Garrison, Robert Barnwell Rhett, Mathew Brady, Henry Villard, Henry Raymond.

Industrial era, New Journalism:  Joseph Pulitzer, William Randolph Hearst, E.
W. Scripps, Henry Watterson, Henry Grady, E. L. Godkin, Thomas Nast, Elizabeth
Cochran (Nelly Bly), Arthur Brisbane, Ida B. Wells, Richard Harding Davis,
Jacob Riis, William Rockhill Nelson, Jane Croly (Jenny June), Harvey Scott,
Abigail Scott Duniway, Adolph Ochs.

Progressive Era, Muckraking, World War I:  S.S. McClure, Will Irwin, Ida
Tarbell, Lincoln Steffens, Ray Stannard Baker, John Reed, Josephus Daniels,
Abigail Scott Duniway, George Creel, Finley Peter Dunne, Frank I. Cobb, Edward
Bok, David Graham Phillips, W.E. B. duBois, Osward Villard, William Allen
White, Robert Vann, Robert Sengstacke Abbott.

Between the wars, radio emerges:  Walter Lippmann, Dorothy Thompson, Melville
Stone, Ernest Hemingway, Floyd Gibbons, Henry Luce, William S. Paley, David
Sarnoff, Harold Ross, H. L. Mencken, Walter Winchell, Frank Munsey, Bernarr
McFadden, Robert McCormick, Roy Howard, Lorena Hickok, H. V. Kaltenborn, Elmer
Davis, William Shirer, George Seldes, Edgar Snow, Louise Bryant, Anne O'Hare
McCormick, Anna Louise Strong, Heywood Broun, Westbrook Pegler, A. J.
Liebling.

World War II, Cold War:  Edward R. Murrow, John Hersey, Bill Mauldin, Ernie
Pyle, Marguerite Higgins, Margaret Bourke-White, David Duncan, Joseph Alsop,
James Reston, Drew Pearson, Lowell Thomas, Fred Friendly, Eric Severeid,
Sigrid Schultz, Martha Gellhorn, Robert Capa, Dickie Chapelle, W. Eugene
Smith, Ralph McGill.

Turbulent era, Vietnam:  David Halberstam, Tom Wolfe, Gloria Steinem, Walter
Cronkite, David Brinkley, Chet Huntley, Harrison Salisbury, Neil Sheehan, Carl
Rowan, Gloria Emerson, Theodore White, Ben Bradlee, Katharine Graham, Dorothy
Day, I. F. Stone, Carey McWilliams, William F. Buckley, John Johnson, S. I.
Newhouse, Alan Neuharth, Jann Wenner, Don Hewitt.  


