Welcome to Chemistry 231

  
INTRODUCTORY ORGANIC CHEMISTRY - I

  
Lecture I - 9/3/95

  
Review Handouts:

  
Syllabus - meetings and exams

  
Course Information - possibly useful survival guide

  
Study Group memberships - more later

  
Multi-media approach to lecture/learning. (Show molecular modelling animation)

  
Note: Schedule is ambitious, but do-able. Tues. & Thur. a.m.;

  
T. p.m. - recitations, quizes, exams; occasional lectures.

  
Useful advice: Keep up, Get Ahead, Study effectively

  
Study groups - refer to list of study group memberships.

  
Electronic study groups [maybe] now established:

  
CH231-L@BINGVMB

  
...use model sets

  
Materials on 2-hour reserve in the Science Library:

  

  
a. Textbook and Studyguide

  
b. Computer discs: spectroscopy

  

  
Additional materials for sale in bookstore:

  
1\. printed lecture notes [perhaps available on disc, see BEN]

  
2\. exam/quiz file

  
Address recommended problems

  

  
Organize study

  
Utilize office hours of graduate and undergraduate TA s.

  
Note: Announced quizzes and exams; all on Tuesday

  
nights [except for last quiz].

  
WHY do we study organic chemistry?

  
a. required for a curriculum.

  
b. MASSIVE effect on our lives. (slides)

  
c. And, of course, the source of wazzu truth, justice and the American way...

  
WHAT is organic chemistry?

  
I. The chemistry of compounds of Carbon - atomic number 6.

  
II. (Archaic) - The chemistry of compounds associated with life (vital force)
[or is it so archaic after all?].

  
Berzelius, 1807, popularized the idea that organic compounds at some time had
contact with LIFE, which imparted a VITAL FORCE. "Every-one" knew the
difference between ionic (non-vital force, inorganic compounds) and "organic"
compounds.

  
But WOHLER, in 1828, conceived a neat experiment:

  
heat

  
NH4 +NCO- ------------------------> H2 -CO-NH2

  
(ammonium cynate) (urea)

  
Producing urea, a well-recognized pure organic compound, from ammonium
cyanate, an equally well-

  
recognized IN-organic salt.

  
****************************

  
{Note - What else was happening in 1828?

  
1\. Russia declared war on Turkey.

  
2\. "Tarif of Abomination" passed by U.S. Congress, curtailing imports (shades
of NAFTA?).

  
3\. Andrew Jackson becomes U.S. president, defeating J.Q.Adams.

  
4\. Henrik Ibsen born in Norway, (d. 1906) & Jules Verne in France(d 1905).

  
5\. Noah Webster published American Dict. of English Language.

  
6\. Francisco d' Goya, Delacroix were active.

  
7\. Gilbert Stewart died (b. 1755).

  
So, the concept of isomerism (different compounds with the same elemental
composition) came as a bonus with the loss of the idea of vitalism.

  
Together with advances from other natural philosophers (i.e. - scientists),
including Kekule (in 1854, also the year the modern Republican Party was
founded), generated the useful:

  
STRUCTURAL THEORY

  
...a precise (three-dimensional) arrangement of atoms uniquely defines a
(pure) substance.

  
Structural Theory makes

  
connections between the then-

  
known fundamental atomic

  
quantities:

  
protons

  
neutrons --->atoms-(via -->

  
electrons bonding)

  
(inner & outer)

  
to

  
\----> MOLECULES <\---

  
Some questions occupying greater and lesser portions of the 18th, 19th and
20th centuries:

  
What kind of energy relations are there between inner and outer electrons?

  
What do we mean by the word "BONDS", and are there any interesting questions
of energy when talking about bonds?

  
So - Our key points for this week:

  
(1): STRUCTURAL THEORY

  
(molecules are uniquely defined by a fixed arrangement in space of atoms held
together with bonds (electrons))

  
To approach this, we will review:

  
ATOMIC THEORY

  
(how atoms are made up of neutrons, protons and electrons, and how they are
held together with BONDS to form MOLECULES.)

  
As part of this process, we will review:

  
THE PERIODIC TABLE (once again!)

  
And, we will approach the study

  

  
of

  
ORGANIC CHEMISTRY via FUNCTIONAL GROUP ANALYSIS

  
Functional group analysis is an organizing principle that allows one to study
a particular grouping of related atoms (alcohols, ketones, carboxylic acids,
etc.), and, by extrapolation, believe one knows quite a bit about all the
other compounds with that functional group.

  
We will use this idea more later on.

  
SO, NOW TO BEGIN:

  
Elements, with unique atomic numbers, we MODEL as being made up of neutrons,
protons and electrons.

  
Let's look at the first 10 elements:

  
first second period or shell

  
subshells

  
orbitals

  
1s 2s 2px 2py 2pz Element

  

  
1 Hydrogen -H

  
2# Helium - He

  
2 1* Lithium-Li

  
2 2# Berylium-Be

  
2 2 1* Boron -B

  
2 2 1 1* Carbon - C

  
2 2 1 1* 1 Nitrogen - N

  
2 2 2 1 1 Oxygen.- O

  
2 2 2 2 1 Fluorine - F

  
2 2 2 2 2# Neon - Ne

  
Elements fomed according to HUND'S rule and PAULI EXCLUSION PRINCIPLE:

  
Hund"s rule: Two electrons ordinarily do not occupy a given orbital in a
subshell (with more than one orbital) until all the orbitals (of the same
relative energy) have at least one electron.

  
Pauli Exclusion Principle: No orbital (atomic or molecular) can contain more
than two electrons, and those two electrons must have opposite spin (i.e., be
paired).

  
EMPERICAL OBSERVATION

  
We see a stable entity -- ion, molecule, BOND, - to be a result of an
arrangement of electrons (ordinarily the OUTER electrons) and nucleii that
results in a LOWER ENERGY of some kind.

  
That is, energy is GIVEN OFF when a bond is formed - an increase in stability.

  
We view electrons in stable situation as ordinarily being PAIRED. Some
evidence:

  
1\. Periodic table: rare - or nobel- gases (NOT INERT gases!)

  
2\. Ions - completed octets/pairs

  
3\. Covalent bonds/electron pairs

  
To review: Ionic compounds come in pairs - a cation and an anion - resulting
from (in our model), an exchange of electrons:

  
Na - sodium ATOM, atomic number 11, has one outer (3s 1) electron, and willing
gives it up to an atom of Cl, atomic number 17, which has seven outer
electrons (3s 2, 3p 5) to give a sodium cation and a chlorine anion:

  
![](ls1p1.jpg)

  

  
Consider periodicity and ionic and covalent reactivity. We are dealing with
ion formation as a result of electron transfer between elements, reflecting
RELATIVE ELECTRON AFFINITIES and IONIZATION ENERGIES.

  
![](ls1p2.jpg)

  
(Note an additional convention -

  
we may show explicitly SOME or ALL of the whole set of outer electrons, and
"lump" all the rest into the ATOMIC SYMBOL, which stands for the "core", or
"kernel" of the elements: the nuclus and all BUT the outer electrons.

  
Given a chance, the IONS form an ionic compound, sodium chloride, in the solid
form of which the ions forming the crystal lattice are held together by the
STRONG attraction between opposite charges.

  
We call this attraction, (probably unwisely), an IONIC BOND.

  
This is a shorthand way to refer to the quite complicated idea of the
ATTRACTIVE FORCE BETWEEN ATOMS, be it very polar, as with oppositely charged
ions, or quite covalent, as in a homonuclear molecule such as H2. (the
hydrogen molecule). Note - the question of an exact definition of a molecule
is significant. See J. Chem Ed., 65(7), 581-84 (1988) for interesting
discussion. Can/should we call NaCl a molecule?

  
![](ls1p3.jpg)

  
So, besides thinking of ions, let's address:

  
1\. Atomic Orbital geometry

  
a. "s" orbitals

  
SPHERICALLY SYMMETRICAL

  
b. "p" orbitals DIRECTED ORBIALS

  
("Figure eights/dumbells")

  

