Nineteenth-Century Europe

Fall 2000 HIST-572, Ref. # 12390

Prof. Marion (Buddy) Gray

EH 202; Off. Hrs. M.10:00-11:00, U. 1:30-3:00

<http://www-personal.ksu.edu/~mgray/>

e-mail: [mgray@ksu.edu](mailto: mgray@ksu.edu)

* * *

CONTENTS  
  Books |  Course Requirements |  Assignments |  Assignments August |
Assignments September  
---|---|---|---|---  
Assignments October |  Assignments November |  Assignments December |  K-State
Online |  Invitation to Discuss  
Academic Honesty |  Graduate Credit |  Special Ac-commodations |  Out-of-Class
Essays | Instructor Letters  
  |   |   |   |  
  
* * *

REQUIRED READING: AVAILABLE IN BOOKSTORES

Dickens, Charles, _Hard Times_. London, 1854; 1964.

Engels, Friedrich. _The Condition of the Working Classes in England._ 1845,
1993.***

Hunt, Lynn, ed. _The French Revolution and Human Rights: A Brief Documentary
History_. Boston, 1996.**

Kent, Susan Kingsley. _Gender and Power in Britain 1640-1990._ London and New
York, 1999. *

Mason, John W. _The Dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire 1867-1918._
London, 1997. *

Rude, George. _The French Revolution: Its Causes, Its History, and Its Legacy
after 200 Years._ New York, 1988\. *

Sperber, Jonathan. _The European Revolutions, 1848-1851._ Cambridge, 1994. **

Williamson, D.G. _Bismarck and Germany 1862-1890._ London, 1998. **  
    


*Also on reserve in Hale Library

**Ordered for reserves in Hale; will probably be placed on reserves during the
semester.

***On reserves in Hale but _in a different edition._

* * *

COURSE REQUIREMENTS **Reading and preparation** to discuss assigned material
before each class. Attendance and participation will be an informal factor in
grading, with the exception of cases in which a student misses more than five
classes. This will lower the grade by one-half of a letter; eight absences
will lower the grade by one letter, and so on. This is not intended as a
punitive measure. It is designed to help relate the grade to the learning
experience. In-class participation is a essential part of the course, and
regular attendance and participation clearly enhances the quality of the
learning.

**Three essays** written out of class and based primarily on previously
assigned material. You will select your own topic, but I will be a resource
person for you. Guidelines are found at the end of the syllabus. The essays
should be between five and eight pages, typed, double-spaced. The three essay
grades together will constitute 60% of the final grade.

**Quizzes** to offer a structure for familiarizing yourself with the subject
matter. Combined average equal 40% of  
the grade.

**Instructor letters.** Evaluated on a pass/fail system. The letters will not
be graded, but failure to turn one in will deduct three points from the final
average. (See further instructions below.)

* * *

CALENDAR OF ASSIGNMENTS

I. The French and other Revolutions

August

T. 22: Introduction: The Old Regime; Major issues in Nineteenth-Century Europe

U. 24: Why was there a Revolution in France? Rude, pp. 1-11 and 25-46.

T. 29: Enlightenment Values and "Human Rights," Hunt, pp. 4-12 and 35-70.

September

U. 31: Triumph of bourgeois values? Rude. pp.47-79.

T:5 Whose Revolution? The Poor, the Propertied, and Jews. Hunt, pp. 71-100.

U. 7: Whose Revolution? Slaves and Women. Hunt, pp. 101-138.

T 12:The Revolutionary era and the Construction of Gender. Kent, Ch.6
((125-148).

U. 14: **QUIZ** In Class: the Course of the Revolution

T. 19: The struggle for Power, Rude. pp. 80-126.

U. 21: Napoleon: End of Revolution or Culmination of Revolution? Rude. pp.
127-163

T. 26: **Your Conclusions: Papers Due. ** (Will be discussed in class)

II. Revolutions of 1848 and Industrial Revolution

U. 28: How die the Industrial Revolution Change People's Lives? Engels,
Introduction and Ch. 1 (15-35).

October

T. 3: Revolutionary Conditions? Sperber, Ch. 1

U. 5: Political Ideologies and Nationalism. Sperber, Ch. 2. **Instructor
Letter due.**

T. 10: ** QUIZ; **In Class: The Course of the Revolutions of 1848

U. 12: The Working Classes. Engels, Ch. 2 (36-86

T: 17: Revolutionary Experiences, Sperber, Ch.4.

U. 19: The Domestic Ideal for Women. Kent, Ch. 7 (153-177)

T. 24: The "Characters" of Industrial England. Dickens, Book the First

U. 26: Social Classes and Values. Dickens, Book the Second.

T. 31. **QUIZ** ; In Class: The Politics of Industrializing Europe

November

U. 2: What do we Learn about Industrial Society and its Values? Dickens, Book
the Third

T. 7: **PAPERS DUE.** We will discuss them in class.

III. Nation-States, Nationalism, Citizens and Non-Citizens; Gender.

U. 9: What kind of Entity was "Germany"? Who Was Bismarck? Williamson, Ch.
1-4.

T. 14: Who Lived in the Habsburg Empire? Mason, Ch. 1-4.

U. 16: **QUIZ. ** In Class: The Unification of Germany and Development of
Nation-States.

T. 21: Women, Work, and Politics. Kent, Ch. 8 (179-200) **Instructor Letter
due.**

U. 23: Thanksgiving (enjoy it!)

T. 28: What Kind of State Was Germany? Williamson, Ch. 8-11.

U. 30: Politics and Culture in the Habsburg Empire. Mason, Ch. 5, 6.

December

T 5: Challenging the Separate Spheres? Kent, Ch. 10 (229-253)

U. 7: **QUIZ. ** In class: Crises leading to the "Great War"

**Thursday, Dec. 14:**. **FINAL PAPERS DUE** _._ The "Final Exam" will consist
of our discussion of papers.

* * *

K-STATE ONLINE

Each student should set up an account on K-State Online. Using a browser
(Netscape 4.5 or higher is recommended) go to the URL: http://online.ksu.edu/.
Click the "Create Account" Button. Fill in the fields appropriately--click the
help button on the bottom to see a description of what is expected in each
field. The system requires you to enter your university identification number
so that it can determine your course enrollment from the registrar's records.
The userid will be your login name. It is suggested that you use the same one
as you use for other accounts so that it will be easy to remember. Passwords
must be at least 5 characters long, must contain at least one letter and at
least one number and cannot contain underscores.

* * *

INVITATION

The class is invited to extend class discussions, make inquiries regarding
paper topics, and generally stay in contact with one another via the class
discussion list available through K-State Online. This will offer an
opportunity to make connections between past and present by calling to our
attention current events that are related to nineteenth-century themes. For
this purpose, class members should stay abreast of the news, using whatever
medium you find suitable, including media you find on the World Wide Web. As
we attune ourselves to the historical issues, we will begin to see
automatically their connections to contemporary events in Europe.

* * *

  
INSTRUCTOR LETTERS

Twice during the semester (October 5 and November 21) instructor letters are
due. This is your opportunity to be in communication with me about any topic
that you wish to discuss. They will not be graded. The only requirement is
that you turn one in by the dates indicated.

* * *

ACADEMIC HONESTY

Kansas State University has a new Honor Code. For information see
_http://www.ksu.edu/honor/_. The provisions of this code will be followed in
this class. For all papers, quizzes and other work, the Honor Pledge is
implied, whether or not it is stated: "On my honor, as a student, I have
neither given nor received unauthorized aid on this academic work."

* * *

GRADUATE CREDIT

It is possible for students in fields other than History to enroll for
graduate credit. In such cases, there will be one research-based paper, a
larger project than the three assigned essays. Please consult with the
instructor.

* * *

SPECIAL ACCOMMODATIONS

I will be happy to make any accommodations necessary for any student requiring
such under the Americans with Disabilities Act. Please contact me promptly if
this is the case.

* * *

GUIDELINES FOR OUT-OF-CLASS ESSAYS

  
A. General criteria for historical writing  
  1\. **Development of an argument or interpretation**. Good history does not
merely tell "what happened." Rather it interprets events of the past. Given
the nature of your assignments, writing interpretive essays will not be
difficult, but be sure that you convey clearly the argument or interpretation
you wish to make. A descriptive title, a clear thesis sentence in an opening
paragraph, and a conclusion are important elements of communication. (20%)

2\. **Substantiation of your argument with historical data**. Elaborate
thinking about a historical subject is meaningless unless it rests solidly on
concrete evidence. In writing history it is important to show your evidence,
not only to support your argument, but also because the details of human
activities give history its interest and bring readers into the historical
situation. Merely restating the conclusions of historians is not a good way to
substantiate your argument. Using their data is what is important. (20%)

3\. **Utilizing historical perspective**. The factor that distinguishes
history from other academic disciplines is its concern with the phenomenon of
_change over time._ Historians deal with all facets of human experience
including economics, culture, religion, politics and social customs, but they
always focus on how the issues they are investigating are shaped by the
particular _historical context_. In other words, one cannot explain the
division of labor by gender in pre-industrial Europe without particular
attention to cultural, legal, political, religious and social factors that are
unique to that period. Moreover, historians always avoid judging historical
situations by standards belonging to an era different from the one they are
investigating. One would not, for example, criticize a pre-industrial European
practice on the grounds of its being undemocratic, since democracy is a notion
belonging to the post eighteenth _century world. Finally, the appropriate
practice of historical scholarship requires using appropriate rules in
describing cause and effect._ While it is tempting to conclude that because
one event follows another, the former caused the latter, but this is not
necessarily appropriate. It would be wrong, for example, to assume that
because a few radical thinkers in the 1840s desired significant social change,
they actually _caused_ the Revolutions of 1848. One thing following another
sequentially does not _necessarily_ imply causation.(40%)

4\. **Clear communication**. In writing history, it is essential that you use
a precise, grammatical, well-organized writing style. (20%)   B. Techniques to
use in this assignment.  
  1\. _Choice of topics_. Essays are to be written primarily from assigned
reading material and discussions. They are not research papers in which the
object is uncover new material from library sources. The essays should give
you the opportunity to make sense of a topic that personally interests you.

2\. _Choosing a methodology or factor of analysis_ _._ Identify from what
perspective you are analyzing the events you have under consideration: social
class; local customs; politics; religion; gender; environment; etc.

3. _Using non-assigned material_. a. If you find that, in order to substantiate your argument, you need data not found in assigned readings, feel free to use library resources. But the major thrust of your argument should come from material you have read and discussed.

b. One of your three essays may be on a topic not specifically covered in the
syllabus, although it should be within the confines of the geographical and
chronological material discussed during the unit of study. This will allow
class members to pursue their own interests and will broaden the scope of the
course. All topics of this type must be discussed with me prior to the writing
of the paper.  
__  _4\. Documenting sources_. It is important to identify the exact source(s)
of your information in order to convey your method of utilizing information.
The simplest way to do this is to indicate in parenthesis sources and page
numbers. For those sources assigned in class, very abbreviated references can
be made. For other sources, simply give the appropriate bibliographical
information. __

_5\. Numbering_ _._ Please number your pages. Please indicate the number of
words in your essay. __

_6.   Final Paper_. The final paper, while dealing with a subject covered in
the last third of the semester, should employ a theme that transcends that
particular era and belongs to the entire chronology of eighteenth and
nineteenth-century Europe. Appropriate themes might be nationalism;
imperialism; parliamentary democracy; socialism; changing gender norms;
regionalism; or industrialization. If the theme were nationalism in the era
1890-1914, it would be appropriate to demonstrate the evolution of nationalism
from an earlier era __

_7.   Creative Options_. I am happy to discuss options with you about the form
your paper can take. Creative historical fiction, for example, can often
depict history excellently. What about creating a fictional historical family,
placing them in a specific context, and analyzing how unification or
industrialization affected them? Go for it. My goal is for you to place
yourself in a historical context and analyze it from there.

* * *

Return to top

[Prof. Gray's Homepage](http://www-personal.ksu.edu/~mgray/)

