![](../pts-pagelogo2.GIF) |

* * *

| **334 - Freedom and the Catholic Church**  
---|---|---  
  
Freedom and the Catholic Church  
By Leonard Swidler

> > _"It is in the nineteenth century-the century of freedom and liberalism-
that we witness an extraordinary growth of arch-conservative authoritarianism,
of Catholic ghettoism. . . . If the first session of Vatican Council II can be
said to mark the wedding anew of the Catholic Church and freedom, the Catholic
University affair of the spring, 1963, was its consummation. . . . The issue
of freedom in the Catholic Church is one that suddenly and providentially has
a glowing future."_

The issue of freedom has long been an issue of increasing concern in the
Catholic Church. It certainly was not missing even in the earliest days of
Christianity. But it was particularly sharpened during the latter part of the
so-called Dark Ages and the Middle Ages as the church and the state became
more closely wedded. This marriage was especially pregnant with mischief for
Christian freedom: witness the essentially new Christian phenomenon of burning
heretics at the stake; witness the inquisition and all its horrors,
particularly the horror of thinking one could force people to believe in and
love Jesus Christ under the threat of the torch.

Still there was a great deal of liberty within Christendom-inside of certain
limits-and in some ways this liberty was in practice expanded at the time of
the Renaissance, though only partly because the papacy suffered terrific blows
against its authority and prestige with the rise of the national monarchies,
the Avignon Papacy, the Western schism, and conciliarism. Unfortunately these
evils, and others, helped to prepare the ground for the Reformation that was

![](../pts-pagelogo2.GIF) |

* * *

| **335 - Freedom and the Catholic Church**  
---|---|---  
  
long overdue. Also unfortunately the reform attempted by Luther, Calvin, and
others did not produce a unified reformed Christian Church as they had hoped.
Rather it divided Christianity into warring camps which proceeded to close
ranks, to whip their citizenry into phalanxes prepared for total war. Thus the
Protestant Reformation exacerbated the problem of freedom-at least for Roman
Catholics.

I

In the latter half of the seventeenth century and into the eighteenth century
there was a certain relaxation of this closed-rank, vigilant attitude among
Catholics if only because of weariness, the in-Toads of the Enlightenment and
rationalism, and the attacks upon the authoritarianism of the church by the
_Philosophes_ and others; witness the dissolution of the Jesuits, the rise of
Gallicanism, Febronianism, and Josephism.

But it is in the nineteenth century-the century of freedom and liberalism-that
we witness an extraordinary rolling back of Christian freedom, an
extraordinary growth of arch-conservative authoritarianism, of Catholic
ghettoism.

This is the century that saw the condemnation by Pope Gregory XVI of
Lammenais, who had attempted to foster a rapprochement between Catholicism and
liberal thought. This was also the century which witnessed the pontificate of
the longest reigning pope in the history of the Catholic Church, Pius IX. It
was he who, on the strength of the papacy, declared the doctrine of the
Immaculate Conception, and also he who issued the "infamous" syllabus of
errors in 1864 in which he stated that it was erroneous for anyone to say: "In
our times it is no longer necessary that the Catholic religion should be the
only religion of the State to the exclusion of all others whatsoever." It was
also declared false for anyone to say: "The Roman Pontiff can and should
reconcile and align himself with progress, liberalism, and modern
civilization." All this reached a plateau of climax with the declaration of
papal infallibility in 1870 and the forbidding of all Italian Catholics to
participate in Italian politics or even to vote, consequent to the loss of the
Papal States to the newly unified Italian national state. Thus in a way all
liberalism, all democracy, all science, all contact with the non-Catholic and
modern world were condemned as being at best wasting time and highly
dangerous.

![](../pts-pagelogo2.GIF) |

* * *

| **336 - Freedom and the Catholic Church**  
---|---|---  
  
However, the reaction on the part of Roman Catholics-perhaps best exemplified
on the civil scene by Count de Maistre and his insistence on the re-
establishment of those two pillars of society, the Pope and the executioner-is
by no means unintelligible historically and psychologically.

Already during the Enlightenment the Catholic Church was attacked from many
sides under the banner of liberty. During the French Revolution, with its
slogans of _libert e, fraternite, egaite,_ the church was tremendously
ravaged-even on the physical level. Priests and religious were persecuted,
exiled, and murdered. Church property was desecrated-some being rededicated to
the goddess of reason-and confiscated all over France and central Europe. The
situation was only somewhat ameliorated by Napoleon who was capable of
kidnapping and brow-beating Pope Pius VII But the church's troubles were just
starting. The movement of democratic liberalism in its wider nineteenth-
century sense rose up to cut away at the foundation of the authoritarian,
hierarchical structure of the church and society in general. This was followed
by the more perverse movement of socialism, which would destroy the very basis
of society-and hence the church-that is, private property. And if this were
not enough, there then came the satanic development of communism-the
embodiment of materialism and atheism. Add to this the fact that the period
between 1815 and 1870 was constantly filled with revolutions all over Europe
and North and South America, the development of anarchism, scientism,
evolution, and Protestant "liberal theology" with its debunking of the Bible
as a Jesus myth foisted upon humanity by a dozen or so Jewish fishermen, and
you will begin to see why so many nineteenth-century Christians were in a
panic. Nothing seemed certain, nothing seemed stable anymore. Everything
appeared to be washed away in the deluge of revolution and isms that swept
across nineteenth-century Europe. In terror people frantically searched for
something stable. Many Catholics found it in an authoritarian church with its
structured-from-above hierarchy and the papacy at its apex. The cry among many
seemed to be "To Peter, to the rock!" An impenetrable bastion was built around
the rock fortress and the condemned world was shut out. Until better times
would come only invectives and sallies were to come forth from the rock.

![](../pts-pagelogo2.GIF) |

* * *

| **337 - Freedom and the Catholic Church**  
---|---|---  
  
Those Catholics who attempted to resist the mad, though in a way explainable,
rush of the time were badly mauled and trampled under foot; for example,
Cardinal Newman, Lord Acton, Archbishop Strossmayer, and many of the German
bishops.

The conservatives pretty well reigned supreme during the rest of the
pontificate of Pius IX and on into the time of Leo XIII, although here they
were gradually restricted and held back. Leo, for example, gave the Cardinal's
hat to the aged and almost broken John Henry Newman; many of the Vatican
archives were thrown open to all scholars; the relatively revolutionary social
encyclical "Rerum novarum" was written, etc. There was the beginning of a
renaissance, an upsurge of Catholic freedom; Catholic historical and biblical
studies began to catch up with the rest of the world; there was even a
beginning of a flowering of a Catholic lay movement in this country.

But this seemed to be only a hiatus, for soon after Pius X came to the papal
throne in 1903 a terrible purge took place under the guise of rooting out the
heresy of "Modernism." Doubtless there were non-orthodox elements in the ideas
of several so-called modernists. But unfortunately these elements were used as
an excuse for the conservatives to conduct a campaign of terror, driving
practically all of the Catholic Church's best scholars into silence, for
example, Pere Marie La Grange, the real founder of modern Catholic biblical
scholarship. Vigilance committees were ordered to be set up in every diocese
throughout the world which were to meet periodically-in secret-to report on
any modernist tendencies noted among the priests or their writings and take
appropriate measures to stamp them out. The censors worked overtime; Catholic
scholarship was relegated to mouthing old out-dated, and hence ineffective,
formulas.

Only after many years did the fervor of the heresy-hunt wear off. But the
restrictions on Catholic freedom remained nevertheless very severe. Gradually
in slow piece-meal fashion Catholic scholars pushed forward in various areas,
but one will never know the number of books that never saw the light of day
because of lack of ecclesiastical permission. Not that all of the books would
have been good or that none of them would have contained non-orthodox ideas;
but in our human condition we must be permitted to make errors in the search
for truth-there is no other alternative.

![](../pts-pagelogo2.GIF) |

* * *

| **338 - Freedom and the Catholic Church**  
---|---|---  
  
II

Gradually the so-called "new theology" developed, almost in underground
fashion. At any rate the impression was given by the conservatives, who held
most of the key positions of power, that this "new theology" was at best very
dangerous and most likely contained large heretical elements. Those who had
"liberal" ideas in the Catholic Church were made to feel that they were a very
small minority with very suspect ideas who were kicking against the goad of
the majority. All of the liberals apparently believed this; whether or not in
their ecclesiastical vantage points the conservatives also sincerely believed
this is difficult to say. judging, however, from their very negative reaction
to Pope John's suggestion that a Council be convened-and the even dogged
resistance on the part of some, notably in the Curia-the conservatives either
knew they were a minority overruling a majority, or at least had a terrible
fear-a justified one I might say-that it would turn out to be proved so.

The liberals all strove mightily before the Council in a sort of desperate
hope that a break-through in progress and liberty could be made. For the most
part they were not optimistic, at least not in public and not in print. Hans
Kung's book on reform and the Council, which came out in German in the middle
of 1961, was mildly optimistic, but mostly urgent in its plea that everything
be done to make the Council a success. By a year later, shortly before the
Council opened, his articles on the Council indicated a growing pessimism. It
was not only the liberals who were striving mightily to promote their cause at
the Council. The conservatives were diligently at work, too. Moreover, they
seemed to have all the advantages. They surrounded Pope John and influenced
him in many ways; look at the papal statement "Veterum Sapientia" in 1962
legislating greater insistence on the use of the Latin language in the church.
Pope John, who by his own admission never could speak Latin with any facility,
certainly did not think of this himself. Probably even more important, the
conservatives held most of the chairmanships and other key positions on the
various commissions that worked to prepare the draft material to be discussed
by the Council fathers. The conservatives were all set to push through the
Council their rather polemic, nineteenth-century scholastically phrased schema
with a minimum of discussion.

![](../pts-pagelogo2.GIF) |

* * *

| **339 - Freedom and the Catholic Church**  
---|---|---  
  
But then that which the conservatives most feared and the liberals most hoped
for happened. A number of liberal cardinals spearheaded resistance against the
conservatives' attempt to make the Council a rubber-stamp affair. For the
first time in a century the Catholic episcopate began to learn to know one
another. The liberals found to their surprise and joy that they were not some
small suspect minority, but that they formed a large part of the church, and
before the first session of the Council was over they formed an overwhelming
majority on many issues. Doubtless all those who voted for the reform schemas-
notably on the liturgy-did not go to the Council as liberals. But the liberals
appeared to be the ones with the most dynamic ideas. Moreover, those very
theologians who had been constantly plagued with restrictions and censorship
were at the Council, and increasingly were asked to address various national
groups of bishops: men like Hans Kung, Karl Rahner, Yves Congar, John Courtney
Murray, Godfrey Diekmann, Jean Danielou. The influence of these theologians
and the contact with liberal bishops, and particularly the more free-wheeling
missionary bishops, wrought amazing changes in many bishops-including American
bishops. A spirit of ecumenism and freedom reigned as it had not for a long,
long time in the Catholic Church.

III

The conservatives, however, were by no means completely displaced or cowed, as
was indicated by the Catholic University affair last spring. This affair,
however, marked not only a new high point in the intransigence of the
conservatives but also a turning point in the history of freedom in the
Catholic Church in America. There had been some very forward-looking American
bishops at the end of the last century who promoted a lay revival and a
progressive attitude in the church in general, men like Archbishop Ireland,
Bishop Spalding and Cardinal Gibbons. But in many ways the open spirit of
these and like-minded men dried up in the reaction against the phantom heresy
of Americanism at the turn of the century and the modernist hunt shortly
thereafter. The Catholic press was usually quite conservative, the diocesan
newspapers being official organs for the hierarchy. _Commonweal_ , founded in
the middle 1920's by a group of Catholic laymen, often provided a single
beacon light. But here, too, in America, the climate changed very, very
slowly. The

![](../pts-pagelogo2.GIF) |

* * *

| **340 - Freedom and the Catholic Church**  
---|---|---  
  
influence of the "new theology" made itself slowly felt among the American
clergy and educated laity.

If the first session of Vatican Council II can be said to mark the wedding
anew of the Catholic Church and freedom, the Catholic University affair of the
spring, 1963, was its consummation.

Perhaps the main points of this celebrated event should be here briefly
reviewed. A list of potential speakers for a lenten series of lectures to be
sponsored by the University was submitted by the appropriate committee of
graduate students. The Rector of the University then struck from the list the
names of Gustav Weigel, John Courtney Murray, Godfrey Diekmann, and Hans Kung,
four of the most respected theologians of the Catholic Church. This was all to
remain private-in the usual fashion. But it didn't. The student newspaper
bravely protested. _Time_ picked up the story and so did a few Catholic
diocesan newspapers. In the past such a situation would probably never have
developed even that far. But if it had, the most that would have been
forthcoming would have been a few scattered remarks and then silence. But the
old days were gone. Dozens of Catholic newspapers carried the story week after
week. Many of them courageously criticized the administration of Catholic
University, whose board of trustees is composed of all the American Cardinals,
a number of bishops, and a few laymen. Several of the faculties of C.U.,
including the Theology faculty and the Canon Law faculty, publicly censured
the administration for its actions. Other Catholic university faculties
reacted publicly, as for example the Duquesne University Chapter of the
Association of American University Professors, which sent a public letter of
protest to the Rector of C.U. As the protests spread and grew the evidence of
a practice of past suppression came out. Msgr. John Tracy Ellis, that most
highly respected American Catholic church historian' publicly stated that
similar suppression had been going on for at least the past ten years at
C.U.-with specifics given. An article was published by a Pittsburgh priest, in
the Steubenville, Ohio, Catholic newspaper, criticizing openly the Apostolic
Delegate, Archbishop Vagnozzi, in Washington, D. C., for having been behind
the whole suppression.

In the midst of all this Hans Kung, the celebrated-and banned at C.U.-German
theologian arrived in this country for his previously scheduled lecture tour.
Several other places beside C.U. forbade him to lecture, notably Philadelphia
and Los Angeles. But wher-

![](../pts-pagelogo2.GIF) |

* * *

| **341 - Freedom and the Catholic Church**  
---|---|---  
  
ever he did speak the hall was jammed to overflowing. His audiences ran as
high as five and six thousand. When he arrived at Duquesne University, he
spoke in the auditorium which normally holds one thousand persons. Chairs were
put everywhere, including two hundred on the stage, so that sixteen hundred
could be packed in. For days ahead of time it was announced to people not to
come if they didn't have tickets. Still, there were over an additional two
hundred who sat in the cafeteria to hear by loud speaker his speech entitled
"Freedom and the Church." Hans Kung had suddenly become the symbol of the new
freedom of the Catholic Church. Without the first session of Vatican Council
II all this would have been impossible. But since it happened the Catholic
Church could never be the same again.

Indeed, this spirit of freedom continues to make new advances. Pope John
followed his epoch-making encyclical on the social question, "Mater et
Magistra," by his even more epoch-making encyclical "Pacem in Terris" ("Peace
on Earth") in which amid a wealth of wisdom he pointed out that even though
error itself has no right to exist, those persons who may be erroneous are the
bearers of rights; one may not force a conscience for any reason. This was a
landmark for freedom in papal statements. The second session of the Council
has continued on this path with its presentation and discussion of statements
on the condemnation of anti-Semitism and religious freedom, for whose cause
the American bishops did yeomen's work.

Thus we can conclude that the issue of freedom in the Catholic Church is one
that suddenly and providentially has a glowing future.

