**  UTAH STATE UNIVERSITY**  
**  Department of Health, Physical Education and Recreation**  
  **PEP 6430 - History & Philosophy of Physical Education and Sport**  
 Fall Semester, 2000

**Instructor:**   Dr. John M. Kras
**Phone:** 797-3881  
**Office:** HPER 130
**Time:  ** M - 7:00-10:00

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

This course has been designed to familiarize the physical education major (or
non-major) with the history of physical education and sport and the
philosophical influences which have contributed to the development of
contemporary physical education and sport.  For the first portion of the
course, primary consideration will be given to the historical  development of
yesterday's pastimes into today's complex, institutionalized forms of sport
and physical education.

The second portion of the course will focus on various philosophical variables
and  positions which have been influential in producing changes within the
profession of  physical education and in the analysis of sport in its many
forms.

**COURSE OBJECTIVES**

            1.     To review the development of physical education and sport in the United States and the World from ancient   
                    times to the present, with an emphasis on the mid 1800's to the present 

            2.     To give the student some understanding of and the  practice in historical research and philosophical writings. 

            3.     To present and discuss the major branches of philosophy as they relate to personal values and teaching   
                    practices in sport and physical education. 

            4.     To help students gain an understanding of the influences that the history of   physical education and sport have   
                    on present day activities. 

**COURSE ASSESSMENT**

Students will be expected to research several different topic by using library
sources as well other outside sources to gain information on these topics.
Students will present these topic for discussion in class.  Presentation
skills as well as writing skills will be assessed by the instructor.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

**Attendance:**   Class attendance is expected.   Each student will receive
**2 (two)** free absence.   After that, each absence will reduce your grade to
the next level.  (EXP.- Contract B, three absences will result in a grade of
B-.

**Class Format:**   Lecture, seminar, and "hands on" learning experiences.

**Assignments and Examinations:  **  All class assignments must be typewritten
and must follow the guidelines for each included at the end of this syllabus.
Use American Psychological Association Publication Guidelines (APA) for all
assignments.  Graduate students should purchase these guidelines.  Bring text
to class everyday.

**CONTRACT A** \- Each student will complete the assignments for contract B
and complete one major research paper due at the end of scheduled classes.
This research paper will include Title page, Table of Content, Research topic,
Reference list (15) and any Figures or Tables needed to complete the project.
This research paper will be in the area of 25 pages when completed.  A
schedule of due dates for the paper's parts will be distributed to those who
choose this contract.

**CONTRACT B** \- Each student will be required to complete **3 (three)**
short papers and oral reports on those papers given to the class.   A schedule
of possible topics and presentation dates will be distributed to the class.
These reports will be scheduled as the topics interact with the covered
material for that class period.  Report length is in the range of  3-5 pages
with 2 or more references.

**RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DISABILITIES**

Students with disabilities are encouraged to discuss their needs with the
instructor, preferably during the first week of the quarter.  All reasonable
accommodations will be made to see that disabilities do not restrict a
student's opportunity to learn.  Help is also available from the Disability
Resource Center (TSC 302, Ext. 7-2444).

**CHILDREN IN THE CLASS ROOM**

HPER desires to accommodate all students.  In fairness to students attending
classes, it is recommended that no children accompany parents to HPER courses.
The department of HPER understands that exceptional circumstances arise.  Such
circumstances will be resolved under the direction of the course professor.

**PEP 6430, THE HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION AND SPORT**  
**TOPICAL OUTLINE AND ASSIGNMENTS** ****

**Week of:** 8/28 | Introduction, class procedures and overview of the History
of Physical Education and Sport.  
---|---  
  |  
9/4 | **NO CLASS - LABOR DAY**  
  |  
9/11 | Major Philosophies and how they apply to Physical Education and Sport  
  |  
9/18 | Ancient Greece and The Romans  
  | Contract A - Topic must be chosen.  
  |  
9/25 | The Middle Ages and The Renaissance and Reformation  
  |  
10/2 | The Age of Science and The Enlightenment  
  | Contract A - List of 15 references to be turned in (APA format)  
  |  
10/9 | Nineteenth-Century Europe and Colonial America  
  |  
10/16  | Professional Development in Physical Education - 1885-1900.  
  |  
10/23 | The New Physical Education 1900-1930.  
  | Contract A - First rough draft of research paper due.  
  |  
10/30 | Modern Physical Education 1930 to Present.  
  |  
11/6 | Sport in the Twentieth Century.  Physical Education programs of the
Twentieth Century.  
  |  
11/13 | Continue with Sport of the Twentieth Century  
  |  
11/20 | **NO CLASS - THANKSGIVING HOLIDAYS**  
  |  
11/27 | The Modern Olympics  
  | Contract A - Last chance to have paper reviewed by instructor.  
  |  
12/4              | **FINAL CLASS** \- The Future of Physical Education and
Sport in the world.  
   | All research papers due today for Contract A.

