**HISTORY RESEARCH SEMINAR GENDER AND SOCIAL MOVEMENTS DURING THE PROGRESSIVE
ERA IN THE UNITED STATES**

**History 591 #11195**  
Fall 1998  
Arizona State University  
T 3:40-6:30  
SS 212A  
| **Gayle Gullett**  
Office: SS 225B  
Phone: 965-4787  
[gayle.gullett@asu.edu](mailto:gayle.gullett@asu.edu)  
|  **Office hours:**  
T, Th 11:00-noon  
T, Th 1:30-2:30  
or by appointment  
---|---|---  
  
**Course Objectives:**

The objective of this class is to provide history graduate students with an
opportunity to conduct research and write a scholarly paper that analyzes
gender and social movements during the progressive era.

This class begins with readings about the progressive era, gender and social
movements. The point of the readings is to provide models of writing in
history that are informed by various theoretical understandings. Students are
free to chose and/or develop a model; however, every student must write a
paper that is focused on an analysis of gender that is placed in an American
social movement during the progressive era, 1880-1920.

To aid students in this process of learning how to create history, the class
attempts to take students through each step of the process that historians
follow: designing a research project, conducting research, writing drafts,
collaborating with colleagues, presenting their findings at professional
meetings, and writing the final paper. The final paper should be ready or
nearly ready to submit to a journal for publication.

**Course Organization:**

The course is divided into three sections. In the first section, students will
read, discuss and analyze the required readings. Each student will write a
review essay that is based on the required reading but focused on the
student's own research agenda. During the same time students will pick a
research topic and prepare a research proposal. This proposal must discuss the
primary documents that will be used in the paper and their availability.
Students are urged to discuss this proposal with me in advance and with
research librarians, if needed. I must approve this proposal and the class
will critique it. In the second section of the class, students will conduct
research and start writing the paper. Class time will be devoted to individual
conferences with me rather than formal sessions. Toward the end of this
section students will submit a first draft to be evaluated simultaneously by
me and a peer in the class.

In the final section students will complete their papers and present their
findings to the class.

**Course Requirements:**

The chief requirement for this course is a 20-22 page research paper whose
chief finding is based on primary documents; the paper must also use and show
a knowledge of relevant secondary documents. The paper must be double-spaced,
12 pitch, with one inch margins. No paper of less than 20 or more than 22
pages will be accepted. The page requirements include footnotes or endnotes
but not a bibliography. Notes and bibliography should be in a format
consistent with one of the major style manuals or the profession journal where
you wish to submit your paper.

The paper must fit the requirements listed on the first page of this syllabus;
the paper must focus on an analysis of gender that is placed in an American
social movement during the progressive era, 1880-1920. All topics must be
approved by me. The draft may be incomplete but it must be free from all
grammatical, spelling and typographical errors. It must also be written in an
easy to understand style of writing. The final draft must also be free of
mistakes and, in addition, be written in clear, polished writing. If you have
questions about the mechanics of writing, see me and/or a writing tutor.

Students will also be graded for the five page review essay and the three page
research proposal. Both must follow the conventions of good writing. The
review essay must use endnotes or footnotes. The research proposal must be two
pages: one page of single-spaced text and one page, a single-spaced
bibliography of the crucial primary and secondary sources.

Much of the learning that happens in this class will occur through class
discussions and peer review. Therefore, attendance and participation are
mandatory.

The course grade will be determined as follows:

Review Essay 10%  
Research Proposal 10%  
Research Paper 60%  
Participation 20%

**Required Core Readings:**

The first three books listed below are available for purchase at the ASU
Bookstore. The last book is on reserve at Hayden Library.

Alan Dawley, _Struggles For Justice: Social Responsibility and the Liberal
State_

Ellen DuBois, _Harriet Stanton Blatch_

Ava Baron, ed., _Work Engendered: Toward a New History of American Labor_

Aldon D. Morris and Carol McClurg Mueller, _Frontiers in Social Movement
Theory_

**Course Schedule**

8-25 Introductions

9-1 The Progressive Era  
Dawley, Struggles for Justice (read only through the progressive era, to p
294)

9-8 Women's Movement and Biography  
DuBois, Harriet Stanton Blatch

9-15 Labor Movement and Gender  
Baron, Work Engendered (read pp 1-46, 92-113, 142-167, 243-295

9-22 Theories of Social Movements  
Morris and Mueller, pp 3-25, 53-155, 174-202 Research Proposals Due (submit 3
copies)

9-29 Critique of Proposals Review Essay Due

10-6 Critique of Proposals (if necessary)

10-13 No Class (meetings with instructor)

10-20 No Class (meetings with instructor)

10-27 Drafts Due (submit 3 copies)  
Paper must be in history department no later than 5

11-3 Discussion of Drafts

11-10 Discussion of Drafts (if necessary)

11-17 No Class (meetings with instructor)

11-24 No Class (meetings with instructor)

12-1 Presentations and Comments

12-8 Presentations and Comments

12-11 Final Paper Due  
Paper must be in history department no later than 5

