The Place of Language in the Theory of Ethnicity and Nationalism and Migration
A Discussion Paper for a Conference in the University of Maryland at College
Park by John Rex, Professor Emeritus, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV47AL,
England. The theory of ethnicity is concerned to understand the nature of the
social bonds which exist within small-scale communities of birth, in larger
groups conveniently called ethnies, in ethnic nations, in modernising
industrial nation states, in empires and multi-national states, in post-
imperial nationalisms, irrredentist movements and in transnational migrant
communities. In each of these questions of language play a significant role
which should be specified and made the basis of a specific agenda for socio-
linguistic research. Dealing first with ethnicity in communities of birth. I
would suggest that all human beings in the early years of life find themselves
caught up in a network of social relations which has a peculiarly strong
emotional strength, even of sacredness. In analysing these connections the
following elements appear important: (1) kinship, (2) neighbourhood or shared
territory, (3) shared religious beliefs, (4) shared language, (5) shared
customs, (6) a shared history or narrative of origin. Taken together the ties
involved in these elements create a profound sense of belonging to a group.
This is why there is a certain credibility in speaking of a "primordial"
ethnicity Each of these elements merits separate analysis. For the purposes of
this paper, however, it is useful to concentrate on religion and language
which have it in common that, while they have a specific internal significance
for the group, they also have the capacity to generate wider memberships going
beyond the bounds of the primary community In the case of religion, there is a
form of religion common to all groups which is purely internal. This is that
which sees the dead as well as the living who are related by kinship as
constituting a single group. This helps to give the community of kinship a
supernatural or sacred quality arising from what Herbert Spencer called "fear
of the dead". In fact, however, religious ideas are elaborated in various ways
especially in the salvation religions, so that the religion inherited in the
community of birth is often shared with a much more extensive group of co-
believers (e.g Catholics, Orthodox, Protestant and their sub-varieties
,amongst Christians, Sunni and Shia and their sub-varieties amongst Muslims)
Thus loyalty to the wider religious group may threaten the loyalty to the
primordial community. Langugage is a means of ensuring communication within
the group but it is also more than this. Language makes thought possible and,
in doing so, not merely describes the world; but also interprets and evaluates
it, and the shared evaluations which are implicit in it constitute an
important bond between those speaking the same language, beyond the bonds
created by other ties. Languages, however, like elaborated religions, are
shared with wider groups and shared linguistic affiliation may also challenge
affiliation to the primordial ethnic community. One of the tasks of socio-
linguistics must therefore be to show what belief systems and evaluations are
implicit in language and how the ties which language generates are
subordinated to other ties in the "primordial" community. To some extent the
processes of socialisation result, as individuals grow up, in the sense of
belonging being installed as what one might call "ethnicity in the head" as
part of the individual's personality. But it is also the case that such
individuals sustain their identities through seeking larger groups with which
they identify and which have the capacity to create in the individual a sense
of belonging with some of the same qualities as are to be found in primary or
primordial groups. These larger groups or "ethnies" are united by real or
imagined kinship, attachment to a territory, shared religious beliefs, shared
language and narratives of origin. They may also be structured in terms of the
kinds of authority which members recognize and through forms of social
stratification. The boundaries of the group so united may be determined by
giving primacy to one or other of the elementary types of bonding. Amongst
other possibilities attachment to a territory supported by a narrative of
origin, religion, and language are particularly important. Again religion and
language may create the possibility of wider ties beyond the ethnie, but in
both cases the ethnie will distinguish itself from other ethnies with
different religions and languages. Closely related to the linguistic bond is
that created by symbolism. When actual partners in bonding are not concrete
individuals, symbols may be created which stand for such partners. Attachment
may then be to the symbol rather than to another concrete individual. The
bonding of the ethnie may come to rest upon this newly created language of
symbols, which are capable in themselves of evoking positive emotions of a
quasi-primordial kind. The possible size of an ethnie is greatly increased
when a community develops a written language. At this point the bond rests not
merely upon relatively evanescent spoken language but upon written texts
capable of being perpetuated over longer times and over wider territories.
Claims to a specific territory and the right to excercize sovereignty over it
are not an absolutely necessary feature of the life of the ethnie. Ethnicity
may be cultural rather than political. Nonetheless such claims are commonly
made, and when they are, we may speak of an ethnic nation. Quite different
from ethnic nations are modernising nation states of the kind created in
nineteenth century Europe. In these states a controlling group organises the
populace as equal subjects and citizens. A citizen is deemed to have rights
and duties assigned to him or her by the state and the bonds created by these
rights and duties have primacy over all others, including all those associated
with a more "primordial" ethnicity. Inter alia the existence of separate
languages is deemed to be a threat to the unity of the modern nation. One
language is therefore adopted as the official language and ethnic languages
are either eliminated or confined to areas of private or communal intercourse.
Often, however, where these ethnic languages continue in use, and, where their
speakers are incapable of speaking the official languages interpretation may
be employed to ensure that the purposes of the dominant group are nevertheless
achieved. There may, of course, be ethnic resistance to the dominant group in
the modernising state and such resistance may be focussed on extending the
scope of the subordinate ethnic language in ways which go beyond its use for
private and communal purposes. In the struggle to control subordinate
ethnicities the question of education is usually, as Gellner has emphasised, a
central question. The state needs a universal education system which inter
alia will give primacy to the official language. Ideally it requires that the
official language should be the medium of instruction, and that, in terms of
content, the syllabus should emphasise the learning of this language. Since
this disadvantages those whose home language is an ethnic minority one, it is
to be expected that the subordinate ethnic communities will, as part of their
agenda of resistance, fight for the use of ethnic languages as the medium of
instruction and for the teaching in the schools of mother tongues. In more
sophisticated nation states these demands are likely to be partially
recognized, not with the intention of perpetuating minority languages but with
using them to establish the foundation of an education in which the longer
term objective is fluency in the official language. Other ways in which the
official language is spread is through the creation of a national army whose
members are required to communicate with each other in the official language
and movement oif bureaucrats to regions in which their own native languages
are not spoken and where they communicate with those whom they administer in
the official language. The modernising nation state has to deal with threats
to its integrity, moreover, not simply from subordinate ethnicities and
languages, but from the forms of bonding and interaction through which
citizens develop external affiliations. Most important here are ties of an
economic kind, religion and language. Such a modernising nation state
therefore aims at economic autarchy, at controlling its priesthood and
preventing external ties based upon shared language constituting a political
threat. Exercising linguistic control is, however, more difficult than
subordinating businessmen and priests and it may well be inevitable where the
official language is an international one that the state will have to form a
loose alliance with other nations in which the official language is spoken.
Thus, for example, despite the nationalism of various Arabic speaking states,
the separate national governments are bound to become affiliated to an
international community like the Arab League, though the national language of
Arabic might perhaps be understood as a dialect continuum in which the members
of one community are able to understand their immediate neighbours although
those at the ends iof the contnuum might not be able to understand each other
as easily.. The internal problems of modernising nation states are likely to
be recapitulated in empires and multi-national states. Imperial conquest
involves the conquering imperial nation putting its own soldiers, bureaucrats,
business-men, settlers, missionaries and teachers into the subordinate
territories This is most evident as a matter of policy in the French colonial
empire. Not surprisingly, given that in the metropolis a universal and equal
citizenship is maintained, the aim in the colonial territories is to turn the
native populations into Frenchmen and Frenchwomen who also speak French. The
alternative promulgated in the British Empire is that of indirect rule under
which s degree of subordinate autonomy is accorded to native rulers. Inter
alia they are allowed to conduct their subordinate official business in native
languages. In practice of course both of these ideals have to be modified in
the direction of the other. Usually a native elite comes to use French/English
as its main language but rules over a population continuing to speak native
languages. The problems here are not dissimilar to those involved in dealing
with internal ethnic minorities, though it is true that the tasks facing the
empire are harder than those facing the nation internally and usually involve
greater concessions. Within the empire, so long as it remains strong, native
families ambitious for power and promotion will come to have an interest in
becoming acculturated and fluent in the imperial language, or at least in
seeing that their children do. This may also be true in many modern situations
in which there is no formal empire but in which certain nations are
economically dominant. Ambitious Hungarians today are likely to want their
children to learn German or English and will be apathetic about their own
national language or fostering internal minority languages. Similarly Irish
children may be unenthusiastic about their Gaelic lessons when the best
economic prospects lie in migration to England or America. This situation
changes, of course, when empires collapse or where, for any reason,
metropolitan control is weakened. At this a point the role of the imperial
language will be questioned and some native language is likely to be given
equal or even superior official status.In fact the change in the official
language is likely to become the primary focus of national liberation
movements. Settlers and collaborators with empire in the native population
find themselves at a disadvantage in the situation of national liberation.
They must now either look to the metropolis to defend their rights or fight
for these rights as minorities in the newly liberated territories. In this
situation irredentist movements arise in the metropolis which may seek to
liberate the formerly dominant minorities and those who speak the metropolitan
language, or, at least, to defend their cultural and linguistic rights. The
new government of national liberation may be unwilling to concede even this
second lesser demand for fear that the formerly dominant minority will use its
cultural and linguistic unity as a base for political subversion. This is the
sort of problem faced by the governments of the Baltic states, Kazakhstan or
Moldova in dealing with their Russian minorities or by the goverment of
Slovakia in dealing with its Hungarian minority. All that has been said above
centres around the problems of nationalism and empire in dealing with internal
or native minorities, and liberation governments in dealing with formerly
dominant minorities. Similar problems, however, arise, when established nation
states have to deal with immigrant mimorities, particularly with those which
are from geographcally distant countries and from sharply distinct cultural
and linguistic regions. The problem here is how far and with what purpose
these minorities will seek to sustain their own culture and languages and how
far the national states are willing to allow this type of cultural
mobilisation. So far as the minorities are concerned shared language, religion
and customs are important for two reasons. On the one hand they provide the
basis for personal, moral and psychological security in the situation of
potential anomie which faces migrants when normal communal and kinship ties
are disrupted. On the other they provide a basis for collective political
action which is necessary to supplement individual action in the fight for
equality and social justice in the land of settlement. On the other hand,
since the very purpose of migration is to gain access to the advantages and
priveleges available in the society of settlement they will want to equip
themselves, and still more, their children, to speak the language of the
society of settlement and to perform roles within it. Bilingualism and
biculturalism are both necessary to these communities. Loose talk about multi-
cultural societies sometimes leads to a belief that, for better or for worse,
migrant communities will fundamentally alter the culture of the land of
settlement. Few migrants, however, would wish to do this. Their position is
quite different from that of imperial settlers who did have such an aim. The
demands of working class and trading immigrant minorities are far less than
this. What they do wish to do is simply to sustain their culture,language and
organisations over a period of several generations to give them a greater
chance of ultimate equal opportunity. To this end they will need the help of
intepreters in dealing with the courts and social services, early education
for their children through the mother tongue, as well as effective instruction
in the host society's language. Beyond this they may wish to perpetuate their
cultural heritage and to gain respect for it, but are usually able to do this
with little governmental support if they are not actually prevented from doing
so. On the goverment side what is done is likely to depend upon overall
policy. One possibility here is that of complete assimilationism. In this case
the objective of government would be to educate children completely in the
national culture and language, using the national langage as a medium of
instruction. Within this option, however, there are two possibilities. One is
that children faced with early education in what for them is a foreign
language will be seriously disadvantaged and forced into the position of an
undereducated underclass. The other is that early education using the medium
of the minority language could facilitate learning in general and prepare the
way for effective instruction in the official national language. The other
alternative to assimilationism is a moderate version of multi-culturalism. In
this case the value of sustaining immigrant minority languages and culture
over several genertaions would be recognized. Here, however, there are also
two possibilities. One is that minority languages and culture would be
recognized to the extent that they are important for the achievement of the
goverment's own purposes, as for example making official forms available in
minority languages so that goverment services can be more effectively
administered. The other is that the needs felt by the minority community for
the sustaining of their culture mentioned above would be recognized as
actually contributing to the workings of democracy. So far as the deliberate
fostering of minority heritages are concerned there may be real dangers to
democracy in a modern state in doing this if what is fostered is a static view
of the minority cultures usually represented by male elders in this community.
Any policy of multi-culturalism would need to provide for diversity within the
minority community and for the recognition of the needs of those in the second
and subsequent generations who aim to be equal and assimilated citizens. It
also has to be recognized that in a more global world migrant minorities would
not simply be motivated by a desire to achieve assimilation to one country of
settlement. They may well be seeking to equip themseves for moves of a more
international kind. In an American dominated workd this will mean learning
English, but there are still parts of the world where the greatest available
opportunities result from learning other languages such as French or German.
The European Union has its own special problems. It has a large number of
official languages and the claim of any one of them (e.g.English or French) to
be the official language would be strogly contested. It has also concerned
itself with the right of migrants from one European country to another to have
their own languages encouraged. In this limited sense the EU has recognized a
right to mother tongue instruction. In practice, however, this right has not
been extended to extra-European minority languages. What will be done about
these languages remains a problem within a problem. Probably it will be left
to the individual nation states to resolve. Probably, also, the question of
what legal rights intra-European migrants and those coming from outside will
have may be less important in practice than that of what facilitates action by
the EU and gives the maximum chances to individuals within each nation. Even
in the EU itself individuals and national representatives would do best to be
bilingual in their own languages and English or French. Looking at a the
larger world, moreover, the question for Europeans as Europeans as well as for
the individual nations and trans-national migrant communities is how well they
can speak the language of, and adjust to living, in those countries which are
politically the most powerful and offer the best economic rewards. . Finally
something should be said about the emergence of what is now commonly referred
to as a globalised world. In what has been said above we have emphasised the
need of nations and empires to achieve a kind of functional integration
between their various institutions. It was recognized, however, that this
functional unity might be threatened where economic ties, language and
religion create alternative and more widespread ties. The possibility has
always existed, however, that such ties might come to threaten the unity of
the nation state. Where the national polity and economy is not of itself
sufficiently powerful to enforce functional unity the bonds created by some
international institutions, particularly in the economy, in military alliances
and international organisations, and the media may begin to have the effect of
creating a supranational unity. Such a supranational unity, however, is thus
far only imperfectly achieved in the sense of a set of fully functionally
integrated international institutions. Rather the various institutions are
brought together on a regional basis, and, even then, often have to act
through using national states as their agents. So far as language is concerned
there is stiil a great need for interpretation from one language into another
although undoubtedly a smaller number of languages are likely to predominate
in official international discourse. Probably at the moment English exercizes
the widest influence largely because of American power in the economic and
political spheres, but this will be subject to change even in the West as sub-
regions such as those of the French, German and Russian speaking worlds, and,
still more, in the Middle and Far East resist American dominance. Footnotes
and References to Follow. 

