Humanties Courses

##  ![](/gifs/button_courses.gif) Humanities Courses

* * *

### AAH 219:, 220,History of Architecture I:, II

Comprehensive background as well as concentration on individual cultures and
their architects from ancient to modern times. Emphasis on the West, but some
discussion of architecture of other cultures. Specific details and expressions
of more generalized theories and strategies will be explored. (2-0-2); (2-0-2)
(H)

### AAH 301,Thinking About Art

A course designed for those who find art pleasing, meaningful, or significant
and who want to extend the range of their sensibilities. Theories of art will
be studied for insight, as well as for historical interest and continuity.
Works of art will be studied for their intrinsic value, for their relation to
ideas and events, and as cultural artifacts. Regular visits to area museums
and galleries will be required. (3-0-3) (H)

### AAH 491,Independent Reading and Research

For advanced students. Prerequisite: Consent of the department. (Credit:
Variable) (H)

### AAH 494,Senior Seminar: Theories of Architecture in Historical Perspective

An investigation of the development of formal architectural theory in the
West. Writings by architects from Vitruvius to the present will be studied,
analyzed, and criticized. The relation between theory and practice will be
emphasized. The implications of particular theories for such other questions
as tradition, change, innovation, revolution, and meaning will be considered.
Prerequisites: AAH 219, 220, and ARCH 319, 320, or consent of instructor.
(3-0-3) (H)

* * *

## English

NOTE: All English courses numbered above 300 require as prerequisites
satisfaction of the Basic Writing Proficiency requirement (usually by
completion of ENGL 101) and a HUM 100-level course.

### ENGL 101,Techniques of Prose Writing

A course that offers an introduction to college-level writing, including
intensive practice in prose forms, rhetorical principles, and clear style.
(3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 105,Intensive Composition

Equivalent to ENGL 101, this course demands two additional hours each week of
practice in a writing laboratory. For students whose placement tests indicate
a need for additional work. (3-2-3) (H)

### ENGL 110,English Structure in Academic Prose

ENGL 110 and ENGL 111 comprise a one year sequence for students whose native
language is not English. ENGL 110 helps students with the complex structure
and vocabulary of academic writing, with an emphasis on short compositions.
(3-0-3)

### ENGL 111,Techniques of Prose Writing for Non-Native Students

Equivalent to ENGL 101. Designed to deal with the special writing problems of
those students whose native language is not English. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 301,Introduction to Linguistics

The objective analysis of language structure and structural hierarchies; a
survey of the basic concepts of linguistics; the phoneme, the morpheme,
language change over time and space. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 305,Aspects of the American English Language

Beginning with a survey of the development of the English language and its
place in the world's languages, the course examines the structure of
contemporary standard American English from a linguistic perspective and
develops the concepts and vocabulary briefly to examine existing geographic
and socio-economic variation. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 332,Rhetoric of Technology

A literary examination of reports and articles about technology. The course
analyzes assumptions about technical progress and the relation between experts
and nonexperts, through a study of style, arrangement, selection and omission
of contents, genre conventions, and the social and political dynamics of
writing in technology. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 334,Literature of Modern Science

A study of the literature of science from the Renaissance to modern times.
(3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 335,Intercultural Communication

An introduction to the problems of communication across cultures, with
emphasis on the interplay of American civilization with those of other
cultural areas. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 337,Shakespeare I

Analysis of Shakespeare's dramatic and nondramatic works before 1600;
histories, comedies, and tragedies through Hamlet. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 338,Shakespeare II

Analysis of the later plays, ``problem'' plays, major tragedies, and romances.
May be taken independently of ENGL 337. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 339,The Short Story

Development of the short story as a literary form from the early masters to
such major modern writers in the genre as de Maupassant, Chekhov, Mann, Joyce,
and Hemingway. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 340,World Drama

Study of the major dramatists of Western civilization. Sophocles, Lope de
Vega, Marlowe, Shakespeare, Moliere, Goethe, Ibsen, and others. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 341,Modern Drama

Study of major dramatists and movements in the theater since Ibsen and
Strindberg, with special emphasis on such writers as Chekhov, Shaw, Brecht,
O'Neill, Ionesco, and Pinter. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 342,Theater in Chicago

Designed to introduce students to the variety of professional theater
performances in and around Chicago. Main emphasis on seeing plays, ancient to
contemporary; essays and oral reports; study of dramatic genres and theater
history. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 343,Film Analysis

Examination of the style and language of film as shown in a number of feature
films, with emphasis on the various ways individual directors use the cinema
for personal and cultural ends. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 345,The Art of the Novel

Analysis of the novel as a literary form with attention to its historical
development and its function as a tool in the shaping of man's social,
political, and cultural environment. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 347,The Novel Today

An examination of major world fiction since World War II. Readings will be
chosen from such writers as Graham Greene, Alexander Solzhenitsyn, Heinrich
Boll, Saul Bellow, Robertson Davies, and Gabriel Marquez. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL348,American Poetry

Study of poetry and imaginative prose by recent American poets. Course
includes the study of theoretical, literary, and social backgrounds of these
works. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 351,American Literature Before 1900

Study of representative works of such writers as Franklin, Poe, Emerson,
Hawthorne, Melville, Whitman, Mark Twain, Kate Chopin, and Emily Dickinson.
(3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 353,Outside the Mainstream:: Ethnic and Minority Literature

An examination of works written by those authors often relegated ``outside the
mainstream''- women, ethnic, and/or minority writers. Authors may include
Alice Walker, Charlotte Perkins Gilman, Bernard Malamud, Isaac Bashevis
Singer, Anne Sexton, and Richard Wright. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 360,Chicago in Literature

A survey of great American writers--novelists, poets, and dramatists--who have
lived and worked in Chicago from the time of the Great Fire to the present
day, and who have made Chicago one of the great world literary centers.
Writers discussed include such figures as Theodore Dreiser, Carl Sandburg, and
Richard Wright. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 366,Twentieth-Century American Literature

Study of such writers as Steinbeck, Frost, Eliot, Anderson, O'Neill,
Hemingway, Wolfe, Faulkner, and contemporary writers such as Updike and Toni
Morrison. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 371,Religion and Tradition of Romance

An historical examination of the beginning of English Literature to its first
Golden Age under Elizabeth I: Arthurian romance, Chaucer, and English drama
through Marlowe and Shakespeare. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 372,Science:, Reason:, and Imagination in English Literature

The impact of the Scientific Revolution of the seventeenth century and the Age
of Reason upon English literature as expressed in the works of John Donne and
the metaphysical poets, Milton, and later, Dryden, Pope, Fielding, and
Johnson. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 373,The Romantic Rebellion and Its Aftermath

The foundations of modernism growing out of the upheaval that brought forth
the poetry of Wordsworth, Keats, and Shelley, and a new vision of an
industrialized world in the works of Dickens, Carlyle, Ruskin, and Tennyson.
(3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 374,Twentieth-Century British Literature

Study of such writers as Shaw, Yeats, Virginia Woolf, Joyce, Huxley, Auden,
Spender, and Dylan Thomas. (3-0-3) (H) Note: No more than one of the following
may be used for humanities General Education: ENGL 401, 411, 421, 423.

### ENGL 401,Advanced Composition and Prose Analysis

Critical analysis of various types of prose, with stress on the art as well as
the craft of writing. The student is required to write several critical
papers. (3-0-3) (H: see note above) ?

### ENGL 411,Workshop in Creative Writing

A workshop demonstrating principles of composition in fiction, poetry, or
drama, studied from a writer's vantage point. Works by modern authors are
analyzed. Student manuscripts are discussed and evaluated. (3-0-3) (H: see
note above)

### ENGL 421,Technical Writing

Principles and practice in the communication of technical materials. Writing
of reports, articles, manuals, procedures, proposals. The use of technical
graphics. Works by modern writers are analyzed. (3-0-3) (H: see note above)

### ENGL 423,Communications for Management

Study and practice of business communications related to the productive and
efficient management of personnel and resources. (3-0-3) (H: see note above)

### ENGL 425,Writing Workshops

Writing workshops in professional fields, such as technical writing, arranged
in cooperation with departments of the university or with industry. (3-0-3)

### ENGL 427,Verbal and Visual Communication

Designed to assist students in effective integration of verbal and visual
materials for presentation. Analysis of audience types and presentation
situations. Practice in public address, oral reports, and panel discussions.
Critiques. (2-0-2)

### ENGL 429,Technical Editing

An introduction to the fundamentals of editing technical prose, with emphases
on proofreading versus substantive editing, and on the art of conveying tables
and supporting visual materials. (3-0-3)

### ENGL 435,Organizational Communication

Examines the theory and practice of managing document projects and explores
strategies for developing effective roles as technical writers and editors in
an organization. (3-0-3)

### ENGL 480,Special Problems in Shakespeare

An independent research project addressing a particular Shakespearean work or
theme, to be arranged in advance with the instructor. Enrollment limited.
Prerequisite: ENGL 337 or 338. (3-0-3) (H)

### ENGL 485,Internship Program

A program of individual work and study designed to give the student practical
experience in writing and editing scientific, technological, and managerial
material. The student will work with an appropriate organization in these
fields under the joint supervision of an editor or writer and a staff member
at IIT and will design, write, and edit reports. (Credit: Variable)

### ENGL 491,Independent Reading and Research

For advanced students. Prerequisite: Consent of department. (Credit: Variable)
(H)

### ENGL 497,Special Project

(Credit: Variable)

* * *

## French

Foreign language courses below the 200 level may not be taken for General
Education credit in Humanities. Most students may take 200-level foreign
language courses for General Education in the Humanities, but students seeking
engineering degrees must receive the permission of the Dean of Armour College
in order to assure that they satisfy accreditation requirements. A student
with prior acquaintance of a language is placed in a course at the proper
level by the instructor. Most students with two years of high school French
are prepared for FREN 201.

### FREN 101,Elementary French I

An introduction to modern French, with exercises in translation, grammar,
conversation, and comprehension. (3-0-3)

### FREN 102,Elementary French II

A study of modern French emphasizing structural analysis and developing
comprehension, translation, and conversation skills. Reading of selected
French texts and exercises in composition. Prerequisite: FREN 101. (3-0-3)

### FREN 201,Intermediate French I

Continuation of training in written and oral expression. Study of French
literary works and composition of reports. Prerequisite: FREN 102. (3-0-3) (H)

### FREN 202,Intermediate French II

Training towards fluency in modern French. Classroom analysis of French
literature, with collateral readings, and with an emphasis on written reports.
Prerequisite: FREN 201. (3-0-3) H)

* * *

## German

Foreign language courses below the 200 level may not be taken for General
Education credit in Humanities. Most students may take 200-level foreign
language courses for General Education in the Humanities, but students seeking
engineering degrees must receive the permission of the Dean of Armour College
in order to assure that they satisfy accreditation requirements. A student
with prior acquaintance of a language is placed in a course at the proper
level by the instructor. Most students with two years of high school German
are prepared for GER 201.

### GER 101,Elementary German I

An introduction to modern German, with exercises in translation, grammar,
conversation, and comprehension. (3-0-3)

### GER 102,Elementary German II

A study of modern German emphasizing structural analysis and developing
comprehension, translation, and conversation skills. Reading of selected
German texts and exercises in composition. Prerequisite: GER 101. (3-0-3)

### GER 201,Intermediate German I

Continuation of training in written and oral expression. Study of German
literary works and composition of reports. Prerequisite: GER 102. (3-0-3) (H)

### GER 202,Intermediate German II

Training towards fluency in modern German. Classroom analysis of German
literature, with collateral readings, and with an emphasis on written reports.
Prerequisite: GER 201. (3-0-3) (H)

* * *

## History

All history courses numbered 300 and above require as prerequisites
satisfaction of the Basic Writing Requirement (usually by completion of ENGL
101) and a HUM 100-level course. HIST 300,History of Western Civilization to
the Renaissance Development of Greek and Roman civilization; beginnings of
Christianity; Europe in the Middle Ages; feudalism and manorialism;
organization of the Church; the Crusades; medieval intellectual life; the
Renaissance. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 301,History of Western Civilization

from the Renaissance Protestant Reformation; the Scientific Revolution; Age of
Louis XIV; Enlightenment; the Age of Democratic Revolution; Industrial
Revolution; Nationalism and Imperialism; World War I; Communism and Fascism;
World War II and after. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 310,Nineteenth-Century Europe: 1789-1900

Survey and analysis of nineteenth-century European history. The French
Revolution and Napoleon; conservatism, liberalism, and romanticism; Industrial
Revolution; nationalism and the unification of nation states; revolutions of
1848; imperialism, and major intellectual movements. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 311,Twentieth-Century Europe:,1890-1945

Nationalism and nation states; patterns of diplomacy; origins, conduct, and
settlement of World War I; Russian Revolution; fate of democracy; rise of
totalitarianism; World War II and the Holocaust. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 312,Introduction to Contemporary Europe:, 1945-Present

Settlement of World War II; political and economic reconstruction; Cold War;
Third World nationalism and the end of colonialism; the United States and
Europe; Soviet Union and Eastern Europe from Stalin to Gorbachev; the end of
communism in Eastern Europe and the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
(3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 320,Nineteenth-Century European Intellectual and Cultural History

Survey of major developments in political, literary, scientific, religious,
philosophical, and social thought. Topics vary and may include Romanticism,
Positivism, Liberalism, Socialism, Darwinism, Religion and Science
Controversy, and movements in art and literature. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 321,Twentieth-Century European Intellectual and Cultural History

Survey of major developments in political, literary, scientific, religious,
philosophical, and social thought. Topics vary and may include Neo-Idealism,
Neo-Marxism, and Neo-Orthodoxy; Freud and Jung; Durkheim and Weber; the New
Physics; Weimar Culture; and Existentialism. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 333,Ethnicity in American History and Life

Examines the creation of the American nationality from its diverse roots,
which include almost all of the world's great cultures. Special stress on
immigration, African American history, and the relationships among concepts of
race, class, and gender. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 334,The Creation of America:: The New World to 1789

Examines how the U.S., its values, and institutions came to be. Colonization,
``Indian'' relations, slavery, the American Revolution, and the Constitution
are studied in the context of the colonial world, including Latin America.
Controversial issues and the challenge of discovery are stressed. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 336,The Industrialization of America:, 1789-1898

Traces America's transformation from agrarian republic to Industrial Empire.
Stresses impact of industrialization on all aspects of life, the nature of
slavery, the failures of ``Reconstruction,'' and the western and urban
frontiers. Explores the adventures that made America a great power. (3-0-3)
(H)

### HIST 337,The American Century:, 1898-1975

Traces how America attained economic and military power and what she did with
that power at home and abroad. Discusses the World Wars, the Great Depression,
the limits of the ``welfare state,'' the movement for Black equality, and the
transformations of the 1960s. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 338,Contemporary America:: 1960 and After

Explores the historical roots of contemporary issues. Topics vary by semester
but always include the Cold War and America's international position, tensions
over immigration and racial integration, and the historic roots of changes in
popular culture and daily life. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 340,History of American Business

Surveys America's ``business civilization'' and the forces shaping its
institutions. Charts advent of management, marketing, decentralization, and
evolving government-business relations. Concludes with ``reindustrialization''
case study. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 341,Modern East Asia

A survey of East Asia history since 1800, with a special emphasis on the
political and cultural history of China, Japan, and the Koreas. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 346,America and Vietnam

Utilizing video materials, course covers the history of Vietnam under French
domination, independence, civil war, and the eventual participation of the
United States in its longest and most divisive war. (3-1-3) (H)

### HIST 349,Afro-American Experience

A study of the Afro-American experience since 1800, including African roots,
formal and informal institutions of oppression, change in continuity in folk
culture, and history of social institutions. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 350,U.S. Urban History

Basic facts and issues of U.S. urban history; reasons for the growth,
development, and decay of cities; origins of contemporary urban political,
social, and economic problems. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 352,History of Chicago

Basic institutions of the contemporary city studied in their historical
context, using Chicago as a case study. Political machines, social and
political reform traditions, planning agencies, ethnic neighborhoods,
organized crime, and many other urban institutions. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 372,History of Engineering

An introduction to the history of engineering in the United States. The course
will focus on the contributions of individual engineers and a social history
of the engineering profession. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 380,The Origins of Modern Science

An examination of the profound change in our conception of the natural world
from Copernicus (1500 A.D.) to Newton (1700 A.D.). How the adoption of
experimentation, quantification, and new instruments created a new conception
of scientific method and the goals and nature of scientific knowledge. (3-0-3)
(H)

### HIST 381,Science in Industrial Society 1750-1900

The transformation of the physical and biological sciences from the
Enlightenment to the 20th Century and its effects on culture, politics, and
belief; the creation of science-based technologies and the creation of the
profession of scientist. Prerequisites: ENGL 101, HUM 102, or equivalents.
(3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 382,Technology in History:, 1500-1850

Explores the process of technological change during the birth of industrial
societies. Considers the context of early industrial development in Europe,
then examines the industrial revolution in Britain and America. Concludes by
assessing technology's role in European domination of Asia and Africa. (3-0-3)
(H)

### HIST 383,Technology in History:, 1850 to Present

Examines technological change as a characteristic activity of modern
societies. Investigates the science-based ``second'' industrial revolution in
Europe and America. Explores the varied responses of artists, writers,
architects, and philosophers to the machine age. Concludes by discussing
technology's place in the modern nation-state. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 384,Science in the Twentieth Century

Development of quantum theory, relativity, and molecular biology; the growth
of science to its present important position in government, economic life, and
technological development. (3-0-3) (H)

### HIST 491,Independent Reading and Research

For advanced students. Prerequisite: Consent of department. (Credit: Variable)
(H)

### HIST 494,Senior Seminar in European History

(3-0-3)

### HIST 495,Senior Seminar in American History

(3-0-3)

### HIST 496,Senior Seminar in Urban History

(3-0-3)

### HIST 497,Senior Seminar in the History of Science and Technology

(3-0-3)

* * *

## Humanities

The Basic Writing Proficiency requirement is a prerequisite for all Humanities
courses. This requirement is usually satisfied by the completion of ENGL 101
or its equivalent. All 300-level Humanities courses also require the
completion of a HUM 100-level course as prerequisite.

### HUM 102,Industrial Culture

An interdisciplinary course which examines the development of modern
industrial society and the impact of science and technology on our culture.
Readings drawn from history, literature, and philosophy. (3-0-3) (H)

### HUM 104,Age of Darwin

An introduction to the humanities through an investigation of important
changes in our culture associated with Darwin's theory of evolution. Readings
drawn from literature, philosophy, and science. (3-0-3) (H)

### HUM 106,Life Stories

An interdisciplinary study of autobiographies, written chiefly by Americans.
The syllabus varies, but may include Harriet Jacobs, Maya Angelou, Malcolm X,
Richard Rodriguez, Thomas Merton, Frank Lloyd Wright. In addition to
considering the nature of autobiography as a genre, the course examines the
historical events and the philosophical issues that have shaped the lives and
attitudes of these writers. (3-0-3) (H)

### HUM 315, Creativity in Art, Science, and Technology

An exploration of processes of creative thinking and action across the fields
of art, science, and technology. The course examines creative cognitive
styles, creativity in individuals, and the dynamics of creative groups. It
aims to discover patterns of thought or techniques that can enhance
creativity. Empahsis on student projects. (3-0-3) (H)

* * *

## Music History and Appreciation

### MHA 301,Introduction to Music

The aim of the course is to familiarize the student with the language of
Western music and to enhance his or her listening enjoyment. The course will
present musical examples ranging from seventeenth-century polyphonic music to
contemporary jazz in order to extract from these styles a view of the basic
components of musical experience: rhythm, melody, harmony, color, and
structure. Prerequisites: ENGL 101 or equivalent and HUM 100- level course.
(3-0-3) (H)

* * *

## Philosophy

All philosophy courses numbered above 300 require as prerequisites
satisfaction of the Basic Writing Requirement (usually by completion of ENGL
101) and a HUM 100-level course.

### PHIL 301,Ancient Philosophy

A study of major works by Plato, Aristotle, and other important ancient
philosophers. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 302,Origins of Modern Philosophy

A study of major 17th and 18th century philosophers, such as Descartes,
Hobbes, Spinoza, Locke, Leibniz, Berkeley, Hume, and Kant. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 304,19th Century Philosophy

A study of major 19th century philosophers, such as Hegel, Comte, J. S. Mill,
Peirce, James, Nietzsche. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 305,20th Century Philosophy

A study of recent philosophical trends (or movements), including logical
positivism, existentialism, ordinary language philosophy, etc. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 310,American Philosophy

A survey of the most important thinkers and movements in American Philosophy.
(3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 311,Great Philosophers

An in-depth study of a single outstanding philosopher, chosen by the
instructor. The focus of the course will be announced when the course is
scheduled. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 326,Philosophy of Language

An analysis of the concept of language in both the works of philosophers and
the works of linguists. The course looks into theories of linguistic meaning,
sentence structure, the speech acts, and the assumptions underlying research
in modern linguistics. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 335,Theory of Knowledge

An inquiry into how knowledge in general is possible, whether we can achieve
certainty, and the role of reason and experience in the acquisition of
knowledge. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 340,Symbolic Logic

An introduction to propositional and predicate calculus, with applications to
the theory of language, the concept of argumentation, and the foundations of
mathematics. (3-0-3)

### PHIL 341,Philosophy of Science

Through an analysis of the concepts of explanation, theory, hypothesis,
experiment, and observation, this course seeks an understanding of how the
growth of scientific knowledge is possible. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 342,Philosophy of Mind

An examination of the conception of ``mind'' as opposed to body, and its
implications for psychology, artificial intelligence, and neuroscience.
(3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 343,Philosophy of Social Inquiry

An examination of the methods and theories of the social sciences, especially
sociology and anthropology, and their relationships to the natural sciences.
(3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 344,Proof and Paradox

An investigation into problems of the foundations of mathematics, the concept
of proof, the relationship of mathematics to logic, the reality of
mathematics, etc. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 345,Space and Time

An investigation into philosophical problems of space and time raised by
modern physics and geometry. Issues include problems raised by studies of
relativity, the topology of space and time, the direction of time, etc.
(3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 346,Philosophy of the Life Sciences

An examination of the philosophical problems arising from the study of the
biological sciences, including controversies in evolutionary theory and the
reduction of biology to physics and chemistry. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 350,Science and Method

A history of the interaction between science and philosophy in recent
centuries, showing how changing conceptions of metaphysics and scientific
method have influenced the development of Renaissance astronomy, nineteenth
century atomic theory, ether theories, theories of geological and biological
change, etc. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 360,Ethics

A study of the fundamental issues of moral philosophy. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 361,Political and Social Philosophy

An analysis of the concepts of legitimate political authority, social justice,
natural rights, sovereignty, etc. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 362,Philosophy of Law

An analysis of the concept of law and how it differs from custom, religion,
and morality. The course looks into issues of judicial reasoning, the
assumptions that underlie the criminal justice system and the imposition of
liability, and legal ethics. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 363,Aesthetics

The philosophy of the fine arts, including an analysis of the concepts of
beauty, representation, expression, and the purpose of art. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 370,Moral Issues in Engineering

A study of the problems of moral and social responsibility for the engineering
profession, including such topics as safety, confidentiality, government
regulation, etc. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 371,Moral Issues in Architecture and City and Regional Planning

Examination of moral problems faced by architects and planners; the concept of
professional behavior. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 373,Business Ethics

Ethical issues relating to individual and corporate responsibility, self- and
governmental regulation, investment, advertising, urban problems, the
environment, preferential hiring. (3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 374,Moral Issues in Computer Science

Moral problems that confront professionals in computer-related fields,
including questions raised by the concept of intellectual property and its
relationship to computer software, professional codes of ethics for computer
use, responsibility for harm resulting from the misuse of computers. (3-0-3)
(H)

### PHIL 380,Topics in Philosophy

An investigation into a topic of current interest in philosophy. The topic for
the course will be announced by the instructor when the course is scheduled.
(3-0-3) (H)

### PHIL 490/491,Independent Study

Supervised individual research for advanced students. (Credit: Variable.) [H:
with permission of the Dean of Lewis College]

* * *

## Spanish

Foreign language courses below the 200 level may not be taken for General
Education credit in Humanities. Most students may take 200-level foreign
language courses for General Education in the Humanities, but students seeking
engineering degrees must receive the permission of the Dean of Armour College
in order to assure that they satisfy accreditation requirements.

A student with prior acquaintance of a language is placed in a course at the
proper level by the instructor. Most students with two years of high school
Spanish are prepared for SPAN 201.

### SPAN 101,Elementary Spanish I

An introduction to modern Spanish, with exercises in translation, grammar,
conversation, and comprehension. (3-0-3)

### SPAN 102,Elementary Spanish II

A study of modern Spanish emphasizing structural analysis and developing
comprehension, translation, and conversation skills. Reading of selected
Spanish texts and exercises in composition. Prerequisite: SPAN 101. (3-0-3)

### SPAN 201,Intermediate Spanish I

Continuation of training in written and oral expression. Study of Spanish
literary works and composition of reports. Prerequisite: SPAN 102. (3-0-3) (H)

### SPAN 202,Intermediate Spanish II

Training towards fluency in modern Spanish. Classroom analysis of Spanish
literature, with collateral readings, and with an emphasis on written reports.
Prerequisite: SPAN 201. (3-0-3) (H)

* * *

_Last Updated October 28, 1994_ Comments, suggestions, complaints can be
addressed to: [Falke Bruinsma](http://www.iit.edu/~sysfalke/).

