





WORLD CIVILIZATION SINCE 1500



History 1112-05 Spring Semester, 2002 Dr. Goldstein

MW 3:30-4:45pm TLC RM 1-200



Learning Outcomes

This course introduces students to a critical, historical approach to
civilization since 1500. Major topics which will be examined include: the age
of discovery and exploration; the Scientific Revolution; the development of
constitutional and parliamentary government; the Enlightenment;
industrialization and its effects upon society; "scientific" socialism;
totalitarianism; and the crises of the twentieth and twenty-first century.



I want you to envision yourself as a member of our class that can hover in a
satellite station 200 or more miles above the earth, yet with great mobility
to shift to various parts of the globe. There is also a time factor, as we are
constantly moving down the time tract from 1500 toward 2002. We will observe
change: the slow emergence of constitutional government, a middle class, and
modern industry. And we will note those countries where change does not take
place, where the safety valve does not respond, and where revolution takes
place. You will become familiar with the heavy and often cumbersome cultural
baggage that we all carry, particularly when our ancestors migrated to distant
lands. Most important, we will try to see world civilization passing into the
21th century, through imperialism, racism, terrorism, and the shifting haves-
and-have-nots. Keep in mind that we must constantly try to identify ourselves;
"Who am I through World History?"



_Required Materials_



Craig, Albert, et al. _The Heritage of World Civilizations,_

Volume 2. Since 1500 (paperback) Fifth Edition.

Paine, Thomas. _Common Sense._ New York: Penguin, 1776 (1983) .

(paperback)

Marx, Karl and Engels, Fredrich. _The Communist Manifesto_.

New York (paperback)



Additional required reading may be assigned in class during the course of the
semester, especially page-long handouts on specific topics. You will be
responsible for reading such handouts.



_Class Meetings and Course Organization_



Of the scheduled class meetings, approximately all but one will be given over
to lectures and discussion. One will be devoted to an hour examination. The
final exam will be given at the time specified in the Spring Semester
Bulletin, in the classroom, on Monday, May 6 from 2 to 4 pm.



Topically the course will be divided into three main parts:

(1) Early Modern Europe: The Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries, 1550-1815

(2) The Nineteenth Century: Europe and the Wider World, 1815-1914

(3) Europe and Wider World in the Twentieth and Twenty First Century.



  

Approximately equal time will be devoted to each part. A detailed assignment
and schedule sheet for each part is attached. Unless otherwise noted,
assignments should be read by the Tuesday of the week for which they are
assigned and a reading quiz is possible on that Tuesday. _Notes should be
taken on all homework and readings, and these notes, along with questions on
them should be brought to class_. There is no need to bring the textbook
_Heritage of World Civilization_ to class. You _should_ bring the Paine and
Marx/Engels books to class _during the specific weeks when these books are
being discussed._



_Examinations/Grades_



There will be one one-hour examination during the course of the term, and a
final examination. These examinations will cover all lecture material, class
discussion, and the assigned readings. The exact date, scope, and form of the
exams will be announced at the appropriate time. The final exam will be given
as specified in the Spring Semester Bulletin, on Thursday, May 3 from 11:00 am
to 1:00 pm in Bonner A.



Consistent with college regulations, _graduating seniors_ will not be
obligated to take the final exam in this course. If you wish to omit your
final exam please let the professor know at least one week before it is
scheduled to be given. In that case your course grade will be the prorated
average of all _other_ grades in this course calculated as: midterm 33%, term
paper 33%, and quiz average 33%.



For all students other than graduating seniors, your grade will be calculated
on the basis of: midterm (25%), final exam (25%), quiz average (25%) and
required essay (25%).

_ _

_Attendance Policy_

_ _

1. Regular Class Meetings. _This is a two day a week class and attendance will be taken. No more than three cuts without special permission. More than three cuts is grounds for dismissal from class. Two latenesses to class equal one cut. Leaving class at the break is also equivalent to an entire cut._ It should be made very clear that (a) students are responsible for all materials presented in class, (b) examinations will be based substantially on this material, (c) a positive attitude shown by an absence of cuts _and_ _lateness_ can work to raise a students's letter grade in borderline grading situations.



_Under no circumstances_ should this class be used as a study period for other
classes, for reading newspapers, or for chatting with your neighbors. Students
are expected to concentrate and take notes during the entire period and not
disrupt other students or the professor.



If a medical or other emergency arises and you think you _may_ have to leave
class early, please notify the professor at the beginning of class. You will
be then assigned a seat near the door, so that you can leave quietly, without
disrupting other students and the professor. Getting up and leaving in the
middle of class will be counted as anabsence.



2. Examinations. Attendance at all announced examinations is required. Except under very exceptional circumstances, make-up exams will not be allowed unless the student is excused _before_ the regular exam time.



3. Out of courtesy to those students trying hard to concentrate please refrain from smoking, drinking, eating, chewing, and nail clipping and polishing in class. _Please do not bring_ _children to class_.



  

4. Cell phone courtesy. For the reasons stated in #3 above, please do not bring cell phones, audible pagers, or alarm watches to class. In a class this large, it is not sufficient to say Aoh, i am sorry, I forget to turn it off.

_Office Hours_



My office is located in room 3-208 of the TLC. Office hours will be held
Mondays from 3:45 to 6:15pm, Wednesdays from 8 to 10:30 pm, and by
appointment. Students who have questions, who are concerned about their
performance in class or on tests or would like simply to confer over a free
cup of coffee should take it upon themselves to see the professor in his
office. If you have any problems or questions, please do not hesitate to come
by. Also feel free to telephone me at 836-4557 and leave a message.



_Required Essay: Who am I Through World History?_



When someone asks "Who are you?" we usually reply, " I'm a man (or woman),"
"I'm a student (or a teacher)," "I'm a Christian (or a Jew)", or "I'm an
American". From a more personal observation, we say I have parents,
grandparents, aunts and uncles". Rarely do we go beyond this point. Seldom do
we add that our ancestors may have come form England, Ireland, Scotland,
Wales, Germany, France, Italy, Eastern Europe, Africa, and even Asia.



Since our ancestors came from distant lands, the questions may be asked: _Why_
did they come to America? Was it to escape religious persecution? The military
draft? Starvation (Irish potato famine)? Enslavement? Adventure? To seek a
fortune? The answer to these questions can be partially be answered from
research into the origin of one's ancestry and the approximate year that they
entered this country. _The origin of one's name is also a clue to ancestral
origin._

Where we live and why, occupations, political beliefs, religion, avocations,
education, service in defense of one's country are all part of our individual
heritage. Thus, in the research of your heritage, include the following:



1) _At the beginning of your paper, using Ingram Library resources, explain
the origin of your present last name._



2) _Then trace your ancestry to your present home_ (both sides of the family).
_Include in your paper separate paragraphs on your mother's side and your
father's side._ Use the attached ancestry chart _to gather your information_
but do not turn in this chart. _Then proceed with each of the following eight
points, devoting separate paragraphs to your mother's side of the family and
to your father's side of the family (sixteen paragraphs in all)_. Include the
following _subheadings_ (1-8) for each side of your family:



1) _Occupation of ancestry._ Is there continuity? What were/are the principle
occupations and/or professions?



2) _Religion._ How important has been religion through the generation of your
ancestors? Ministers? Mention _by name_ the religions/churches involved.



3) _Political and racial beliefs._ What role has politics and attitudes toward
race played through the generations of your ancestors? Have political office
been held? Offices in groups like the Democratic or Republican parties, the
KKK or NAACP or White Citizens Councils? Did your ancestors participate in
activities lead by such groups?



4) _Education._ How important and what role has education played in your
ancestral heritage? Which relatives have graduated grade school? High school?
College?



  

5) _Military service._ Who served his or her country in the Revolutionary War,
War Between the States, Spanish-American War, World Wars I and II, Spanish
Civil War (Abraham Lincoln Brigade), undeclared wars in Korea, Dominican
Republic, Lebanon, Vietnam, Bay of Pigs fiasco, Cambodia? In Operation Desert
Storm, Bosnia, or Kosovo? In what role? What has been, in general, _each side_
of the family's attitude toward military service?



6) _Languages._ This is a good clue to one's ancestral origins. What languages
did your ancestors speak? Was the language passed down through succeeding
generations?



7) _Mobility._ In general have your ancestors been sedentary or actively on
the move?



8) _Customs, celebrations, rituals, traditions, superstitions, that have been
passed down._ This would also include recipes and cuisine passed to new
generations.



9.) _Values._ Contrast and compare your present values with those of your
parents, grandparents, great grandparents and others. Do your values differ
sharply or tend to follow those of your ancestors?



10) _Who has made the greatest influence on your life and outlook? Why? and
how?_ Discuss one (or several) actual people you have had contact with ( _not_
historical personalities or imaginary figures).



Points 9 and 10 should constitute 50% of your written paper, and will be so
emphasized in grading.



Your research will include: The use of the Ingram (College) Library (origins
of names); conversations with family and relatives; deeds, tombstones,
diaries, and records in county court houses, state archives, and the Atlanta
Federal Records Center. The center located about forty-five minutes east of
here off Route 166 in East Point, Atlanta.



When using books, microfilm, and periodicals in Ingram (College) Library, DO
NOT RESHELVE THEM. This is how the library keeps track of usage.



The paper should be a minimum length of _eight to ten double-spaced
typewritten pages (not counting title page, footnotes, bibliography, etc.)_.
_Page numbering and proper bibliographical form for footnoting and
bibliography are expected._ The paper should show logical essay organization
with a thoughtful introduction, clearly stated thesis, and conclusion. Credit
direct quotations of ideas or data of others in footnotes at the bottom of the
page. _Allow a few days before the due date to make final corrections and
editorial improvements. Check punctuation carefully, and look up the spelling
of words you don't know in the dictionary. Points will be deducted for
spelling errors._ Do not enclose photos or any other valuable family document.
_If you use a word processor/printer, please be sure the print is as black and
legible as this syllabus. Show professor a printing sample in advance if you
are in doubt._ The bibliography should list each and every source cited in the
footnotes, in alphabetical order.



Numerous mechanical errors are inexcusable in a take-home assignment of the
sort. _Leave out meaningless words like "basically,"_ _" in fact,"_ or _"
actually."_ Points will be taken off for the use of these words. For the most
complete style manual of footnotes and other mechanical matters, consult _The
Chicago Manual of Style_ (13th ed.), multiple copies of which are in the
Reference section of the library.



  

The professor is available during office hours and at other times by
appointment to discuss your program with this paper and suggest sources. _The
paper is due before class on Wednesday, April 10._ One full letter grade will
be deducted for each day _including each weekend day_ the paper is turned in
beyond the due date. _A paper turned in after the beginning of class is
considered one day late_. _Computer glitches are not an excuse for lateness_.



_Footnotes: use this format only!_



Footnotes are used to provide the reader with additional information and to
indicate the source of the statement. _Footnotes are numbered sequentially,
always 1/2 space above the written text, either at the bottom of the page or
at the end of the paper_. Footnotes should never be listed out of sequence,
ie. A4, 3, 2, 4.@



_Never use parentheses with the footnote number._



_Examples_



He is said to have been one of the pall bearers at Washington's funeral.[1]



They are both buried in Hitchcock Cemetery.[2]



_Listing of footnotes/use this format ONLY:_



1Information obtained from conversation with Reverend James Campbell,
Carrollton, Georgia, March 24, 2000, twenty minutes.



2John Jones, _Southern Cemeteries_ (Atlanta: Dixie Publishers, 1990), p. 31.



Note above listings. The numerical number of the footnotes is _indented five
spaces followed immediately by the text._ All footnote references _also_ need
to be listed on a separate page at the end of the paper, as part of an
alphabetized bibliography.



Internet sources appear and vanish constantly. If you use an internet source,
include a xeroxed hard copy of the actual pages you have consulted at the end
of your written paper. On the first page of these xeroxed copies fully
identify the internet site where you found this information.



_Useful Addresses:_



A. For military records, write, with individual's full name, birthdate, and
Social Security Number for people employed after 1933 to:



Chief, Record Reconstruction Branch

National Personnel Records Center

Military Personnel Records

9700 Page Boulevard

St. Louis MO 63132



A blank form is attached to this syllabus which you can mail directly. Allow
three weeks for a response. A sample response (Dr. Goldstein's father's
record) is also attached and gives you some idea of what kind of information
you may receive.



  

B. For U.S. Census Information, it is best to personally visit:



Atlanta Regional Archives Branch

(Atlanta Federal Records Center)

1557 St. Joseph Avenue

East Point, GA 30344

(404) 763-7474 or 7477



The Archives are usually open Monday through Friday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m. and sometimes on Tuesday evenings and on Saturdays, budget permitting.
St. Joseph Avenue is located near Main Street, East Point, just off Carrollton
Highway 166, before you reach Atlanta. It is about a 45 minute drive from
Carrollton. This Archives has Census Information for the entire United States.



The Ingram (College) Library, Carrollton Public Library and the Georgia State
Archives in downtown Atlanta also have some census information, but only for
the state of Georgia.





![](file:///D|/./GoldsteinHIST1112sp02_files/image001.gif)





TENTATIVE CLASS SCHEDULE: Assignments should be read by the Monday of the week
for which they are assigned. Unannounced reading quiz possible on the day the
assignment is due.



WEEK OF:

Jan 7 INTRODUCTION TO COURSE AND TO TERM REPORT

READ THIS SYLLABUS THOROUGHLY



Jan 14  _Craig._ pp. 658-668,

Jan 21 No class- Martin Luther King Birthday

Jan 23 _Craig_ , pp. 806-810



Jan 28 _Craig_ , pp. 669-692; Paine, _Common Sense_.

The Enlightenment/Enlighted Monarchy/American Revolution as a Product of
Enlightenment Ideas;

Feb 4 _Craig_ , pp.692-708; Paine, _Common Sense_.

French Revolution and Napoleon: A Second Product of Enlightenment Ideas

Vienna Congress/role of Metternich; additional wars of independence



Feb 11 Review _Craig_ , pp. 692-708; Paine, _Common Sense_.





PART II: THE NINETEENTH CENTURY: EUROPE AND THE WIDER WORLD



Feb 18 _Craig_ , pp. 718-26; 739-43.

Nationalism and Liberalism

Failure of Liberal and Nationalist Revolts, 1815-48; Russia, France, Austria;
The Decembrists



Feb 25 EXAM ONE



  

March 4 _Craig_ , pp. 626-635; 730-739; _Communist Manifesto._

The Industrial Revolution



March 11 Review Craig, pp. 626-635; 730-39; _Communist Manifesto_



March 18-23 NO CLASSESBSPRING BREAK



March 25<s

