**02414/History**

**_More detailed descriptions of all undergraduate courses in history at
Temple are available on the department website
at[www.temple.edu/histdept/und_course.html](http://www.temple.edu/histdept/und_course.html).**_  
---  
  
---  
  
**

### Core Courses

**

**C060. Third World History (3 s.h.) **SS**. Core: IS. **  

Third World History offers a form of global history since 1500 that focuses
upon the Third World, approximately three-quarters of the world's population
whose experience has been powerfully shaped by colonialism and imperialism as
well as by resistance to these forces. The historical issues raised in the
course constitute some of the most fundamental elements shaping the present-
day world as well as the immediate future. Particular attention is given to
the twentieth century. Assignments in the course are concerned with both
historical issues and with the development of student analytical and writing
skills.

_Note: This course fulfills the Core non-Western International Studies
requirement._

**C061/X093. World History-Ancient (3 s.h.) Core: IS. **  

This course deals with the emergence and diffusion of civilizations and their
interactions with each other as well as with the environment from the
beginning of time until c. 1500 C.E. Equal weight is given to the
civilizations of Africa, Eurasia, and the Americas.

**C062/X094. World History-Modern (3 s.h.) Core: IS. **  

Over the last 500 years, the world has become an intensely interwoven and
interdependent place. While the world has been made considerably more unequal
and conflictive, it has also become potentially more subject to being
influenced by the mass actions of ordinary people. We will examine the global
forces that have made this happen, looking at some "facts" but mostly paying
attention to relationships among areas of the world, among types of historical
factors, among varieties of people, and among periods of time. Four focal
points will guide the course across the semester: 1) the material basis of
life; 2) the organization and maintenance of human communities; 3) the impact
of science and technology; and 4) the operations of the international
relations system.

_Note: The course fulfills the non-Western International Studies requirement
of the Temple University core curriculum._

**C063/H091. War and Society (3 s.h.) Core: IS. **  

This course is a thematic introduction to the history of warfare and its
impact on society. We will examine such topics as the definition of warfare
and its role in early human civilizations, changes in the nature of warfare
over the past two millennia, the interplay between technology, warfare, and
social change, and the future of warfare as a tool in politics. Students will
not only read some of the classic secondary literature on these subjects, but
will also be asked to engage key primary sources as well, in order better to
understand some of the problems (and the rewards) involved in studying the
past. The course is organized around six "units" of varying length dealing
with prehistoric warfare: ancient Greece, the Middle Ages, the invention of
Gunpowder, Total War, and World War Two.

**C065/H095. Gender and History (3 s.h.) **SS**. Core: IS. **  

This course will introduce you to the history of feminine and masculine roles
from a comparative international perspective. It will cover basic facts,
concepts, and themes relating to six topics: The state, the sacred, work, the
family, the body, and modern social movements (feminism, women's suffrage,
pacifism, and socialism), using as case studies Ancient Greece, Medieval
Europe, West Africa, Modern Europe, and the United States.

**C066. Modern Europe (3 s.h.) **SS**. Core: IS. **  

This core course focuses on major developments in Europe in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries. Those were momentous times during which the modern state
system was created, economies industrialized, societies urbanized, too many
and too disastrous wars were fought, and governments expanded and evolved,
often through revolutionary experiences. And of course there were immense
advances in science and technology, which quite literally changed the whole
world causing a mental transformation of incredible dimension, affecting all
aspects of life, thinking and culture.

**C067/H097. U.S. History to 1877 (3 s.h.) **SS**. Core: AC. **  

As it examines the revolutionary and early national periods (1776-1830's),
this course will help you understand the origins of republicanism, democracy,
the presidency, and American political culture in general. Such concepts as
republicanism, democracy, and liberty are often assumed to have universally
accepted definitions, but it is essential to understand the conditions of the
late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries that gave these concepts a
specifically American caste and molded the unique pattern of American
political development. Analysis of the institution of slavery and its role in
the coming of the Civil War will lead to a clearer understanding of the
history of American Blacks during this period and of the historical
development of race relations in this country. In addition, the course will
also pay considerable attention to American society as a whole throughout the
period, examining such phenomena as urbanization and assessing how wealth and
power were distributed at various points in American development. In this
connection the status and activities of women will receive detailed analysis
to draw some conclusions about the historical role of American women.

**C068/H098. U.S. History since 1877 (3 s.h.) **SS**. Core: AC. **  

This is a general survey course of the main currents in American history since
1877. The past 123 years have witnessed major transformations in the makeup of
American society and culture. Thus, the history of this era is a story of
capital development and economic crises, labor unrest, social class formation,
urbanization, militarization, regional diversification, and cultural
innovations. During this century the political and economic status of women
and minorities changed significantly. This course will focus on many of the
traditional themes usually covered in a general survey. But, it will also
concentrate on the individual and collective struggles of ethnic groups,
African-Americans, and women to make America live up to the promises of peace,
justice, dignity, and freedom for all.

**

###

**

**0100\. Introduction to History (3 s.h.) **  

This course presents offers students from all fields of study a broad view of
the issues and methods that comprise historical study at the start of the 21st
century. As an intermediate level course, this class will develop analytical
skills in the identification and comprehension of historical arguments and
sharpen writing and research skills. The course instructor will guide students
in the use of traditional primary sources as well as electronic databases and
the world wide web. Guest professors will acquaint students with the diverse
fields and concerns of history.

**0102\. Peace, Conflict, and Social Change (3 s.h.) **  

This course addresses the question of conflict/violence from domestic, local,
national, and international perspectives using particular case studies.
Introductory material includes a general discussion showing case studies of
violence and conflict resolution at these various levels. The course also
incorporates some discussion of human rights plus theoretical and pragmatic
alternatives to violence. It also considers a number of key themes: the
family, racial conflict, economic and political violence. In the final weeks
of the semester, students are encouraged to consider options for the peaceful
resolution of case studies discussed during the semester.

**0103/H193. World Economy Since 1945 (3 s.h.) **  

At the turn of the millennium, economic globalization is profoundly
transforming many long-standing patterns of human existence. Public discussion
about globalization, nevertheless, remains often shallow and misleading. This
course aims to offer a deeper perspective on the present by examining the
experience of the world economy over the formative period since World War II.
It concentrates on two basic questions: 1) How did the domestic and global
foundations of the current world economy come into being over the last half
century? and 2) What are the implications of this historical process for our
immediate and future lives? As an intermediate level course, the World Economy
Since 1945 assumes no prior student backgrounds in either history or economics
--only a lively interest in learning about broad historical trends and in
developing intellectual skills. In addition to discussion, lecture, and common
readings, methods of instruction in the course include use of a computer-
assisted classroom to provide image and text projections, video clips, and
internet linkages.

**0104\. Nationalism and Revolution (3 s.h.) **  

Beginning with the establishment of civil and political rights during the
French Revolution, the course will address the relationship of the individual
to the nation-state in Western Europe from the French Revolution to World War
I. The course will include problematical issues that emerged during this
period such as: the Napoleonic wars and the emergence of the modern nation-
state; the development of the industrial revolution and its socio-economic
impact on members of the working and middle classes; the consolidation of the
nation-state and its impact on personal and political freedom. But in addition
to considering the expansion of liberal political developments in the West,
the course will consider the effects of imperialism on Asian and African
countries during the final decades of the century. The final unit will
consider how nationalism and imperialism contributed to the outbreak of the
First World War and to the breakdown of old political states and traditional
values in the Western societies.

**0105\. Love, Marriage, and Family (3 s.h.) **  

It is easy to assume that love, marriage, and family go together; but this has
not always been the case. These concepts have a history. This course is a
comparative examination of love, marriage, and family and the related themes
of gender and sexuality in different historical periods and geographical
areas. It includes ancient, medieval, and modern texts and materials and
covers both western (European and American) and non-western (Asia, Africa, and
perhaps Middle Eastern and Latin American) case studies. Each instructor may
place a different emphasis among those topics and regions.

**0106\. World War I (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0151**_.)

In 1914 the major powers of Europe went to war and things were never the same
again. The war was expected to be a short one but it lasted more than four
years, killing millions, destroying economies, overthrowing empires, and
setting the stage for a second war that was, if possible, even more terrible
than the first. The course will analyze what led to this war, how it was
fought and experienced, its mental and material impact, its end and its
legacies.

**0107\. World War II (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0152**_.)

This course is a global survey of the Second World War, from its origins in
the 1930s to its horrifying conclusion in 1945. "World War Two" is an
intermediate course which will address broad historical themes and
interpretations and will require students to read a number of important
secondary works in the field. However, as a survey, it will also serve as an
excellent introduction to the subject for students with an interest, but
little prior knowledge of the Second World War.

**R108. Anti-Semitism/Holocaust/Racism (3 s.h.) Core: RS. **  

A history of anti-semitism with a focus on the Holocaust and racism. This
course will investigate the development and implementation of racial anti-
semitism in Germany and compare Nazi anti-semitism with other forms of racism
and anti-semitism in Europe and America. It will also explore the social
construction of race, the connection between anti-semitism and anti-Zionism,
the growth of neo-Nazism, and the complex relationship between American Jews
and African Americans.

**R109. Imperialism, Race, and Empire (3 s.h.) Core: RS. **  

This course introduces key themes and issues central to an understanding of
race in modern history. Examining the intersection of race and imperialism-
empire over the last two centuries, it places special importance on: how ideas
about race were profoundly affected by the colonial encounter; how
rationalizations for imperialism have often depended on race; and the
resistance of subordinated people to racialist discourses and forms of rule.

**0110\. African Diaspora (3 s.h.) **  

This course deals with the history of the African Diaspora in the Americas for
the last five hundred years. How this African presence impacted upon the
social, economic, cultural, religious, and demographic set-up of the Americas
will be addressed. Themes like pan-African nationalism and racial discourse
will also be discussed.

**0111\. Asian Diaspora (3 s.h.) **  

Spurred by pressures of colonialism, economic change, nationalism, political
repression and war as well as individual needs and adventurism, Asians have
migrated from their homelands to new regions of the world - within Asia as
well as in Africa, Caribbean, and Latin America, North America, and Europe. In
considering the diaspora, familiar terms such as Asian, American, Community,
and Nation are called into question by the multiplicity of experiences and
identities of those who have ventured out from Eastern regions of the globe.
This course examines the social experiences and cultural productions of
Chinese, Japanese, and Filipinos who have journeyed to far flung lands and the
terms that can employed to analyze their experiences and culture.

**0112\. Jewish Diaspora (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0155**_.)

Jewish history from the destruction of the Second Jewish Commonwealth to the
creation of the State of Israel. Focus on minority status, migration,
persecution, economic adaptation, gender roles in different environments,
acculturation and identity. Will include the medieval Jewish experience under
both Christian and Islamic rule; the development of Jewish communities in
Eastern Europe, Western Europe, and the United States; the changing role of
Jewish women; the rise of Zionism; and the Holocaust.

**0113\. Third World Issues through Film (3 s.h.) **  

Films bring alive the texture of society and the context of ideas, events,
lives, and conflicts in a way that standard textbooks and readings cannot.
This survey course introduces repeating, powerful, and important themes in
modem history through the study of issues raised in Asian, African, and Latin
American cinema. Unit I presents issues of Colonialism, Nationalism, and
Independence Movements. Unit II, Post-Colonial Themes, includes nation
building, neocolonialism, and responses to neocolonialism as well as issues of
cultural reconstruction, political leadership, class, gender, race, and
ethnicity in post-independence eras. Written texts complement the films; class
discussion and assignments focus on analysis of the characters, events,
institutions, and ideas represented in the films and readings.

**0115\. Introduction to East Asia: China (3 s.h.) **  

Overview from ancient times to the present. Designed to provide students with
a basic understanding of major themes and broad processes of social change in
Chinese history. Emphasizes those aspects of continuity and change that are
particularly relevant to contemporary China. Topics include: state formation;
the development of characteristic institutions, thought, and cultural
practices; long term trends in social dynamics and the economy; imperialism
and semi colonialism; revolutionary transformation in the early 20th century;
the Maoist road to socialism after 1949; and the post-socialist trajectory of
the past two decades and its critique. Course materials include films, primary
documents, and literature.

**0116\. Introduction to East Asia: Japan (3 s.h.) **  

This introductory course surveys Japan's evolution from an isolated island
kingdom in ancient times to a world power in the twentieth century with a
focus on on continuity and change in religion, government, and family life.
Topics include birth of the early state, myths, and civilization; aristocratic
high culture; rise of the warrior class; the modern transformation into urban,
industrial nation-state; and World War II. The course emphasizes continuity
and change through the interpretation of primary documents in translation.

**0117\. Introduction to Southeast Asia: Insular (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0130**_.)

This course covers the histories of the Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia, and
Singapore from the sixteenth century until modern times. It will introduce
students to the island worlds of Southeast Asia, its peoples, their histories,
societies, and economies. To familiarize students with non-Western worlds,
lectures will be illustrated with videotapes, slides, and transparencies.
Excerpts of articles and indigenous documents will also be used for
discussion. Course work will include readings, discussions, examinations, and
book reviews.

**0118\. Introduction to Southeast Asia: Mainland (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0129**_.)

This course covers the histories of Burma, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, and
Vietnam, from the sixteenth century until modern times. It is a course
designed to introduce students to the analysis of such forces as religion,
statecraft, ideology, and trade, and the manner in which they have shaped the
mainland countries of Southeast Asia. Mainland Southeast Asia's role in world
politics and economy will also be analyzed. Reference will be made to
contemporary events taking place in the region, and students will be
encouraged to follow these developments through the media and integrate their
knowledge in class discussions.

**0119\. Introduction to African History (3 s.h.) **SS**. **  

This course is an introduction to the study of African history. History is the
record of human activities transmitted to posterity either in written or oral
form. Africa has the longest record of human habitation, making African
history the oldest in the family of human history. Given the immense
complexity and richness of African history, we could only scan through the
major themes of African history by studying the intertwining of African
culture with African history proper. There are six books assigned for this
course. They cover interdisciplinary issues pertaining to cultural studies,
anthropological explorations, gender relations, and historical studies proper.

**R120. Latino Caribbean World (3 s.h.) Core: RS. **  

**_(Formerly: History 0346**_.)

This course offers an interpretation of the long-term historical evolution of
the Caribbean region and of Caribbean peoples within the United States. While
its primary emphasis is given to the experience of Cubans and Puerto Ricans,
Dominicans, Haitians, and people from the English-speaking Caribbean also
receive attention. Race constitutes a central thread of the course in the
context of colonialism and slavery in the Caribbean, migratory patterns to and
from the United States, and matters of cultural identity and labor-force
participation at dawn of the 21st century. As an intermediate-level history
course, the Latino Caribbean World places an emphasis on careful analysis of
readings and upon the writing of historical essays. It treats its material in
a broad, comparative manner aimed at linking the course to other fields of
knowledge.

**0121\. Latin America to 1930 (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0340**_.)

This course provides an overview of Latin American history to l930. Topics for
the pre-l930 period of Latin American history include: 1) the discovery and
conquest of native. American societies by Europeans; 2) the transfer and
construction of European, i. e., Spanish and Portuguese institutions, culture
and languages to Latin America; 3) the creation of new societies comprised of
Native Americans, Africans, and Europeans; 4) efforts of Latin American
peoples to create republican institutions and independent economies since
winning independence in the nineteenth century. For generations, these topics
have been largely researched and discussed by historians with a Eurocentric
point of view. However, other viewpoints are now being asserted that stress
the actions of Latin American peoples in crucial moments in their own history.
The discovery and conquest of Latin America, the creation of a Latin American
culture, and the struggle to establish the republican form of government and
independent national economies are the main topics of the course. Attention is
given to different interpretations.

**0122\. Latin American Social Struggles (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0118**_.)

Latin Americans have participated dramatically in twentieth century processes
of change and historical acceleration. They have created dynamic economies and
polities. They have also differed and quarreled over such questions as who
shall control power, and how it shall be exercised, and over approaches to
economic growth and social development. Latin Americans have often vehemently
disagreed over economic and political relations with the great powers such as
the United States, and Great Britain, with Germany during the period
l933-l945, and with the Soviet Union until its collapse in l989. The politics
of these issues was played out against a background of continual social
struggle and sometimes of murderous civil war and severe repression. At the
same time, popular movements that strove to overcome social injustice and
discrimination based on class, race, and ethnicity steadily grew in
importance. In recent decades, Latin America has reached a position of world
leadership, or world prominence in the development of grassroots movements and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), in the emancipation of women, in
certain areas of intellectual work (the production of theology and human
rights ideology), and in literature, art, and music. Contemporary Latin
America concentrates on the changes in Latin America since l930, and covers
the history of roughly the last three generations of Latin Americans.

**0123\. Modern Islamic History (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0313**_.)

This course compares Modern Islamic history, viewed as a political economy,
with Modern Islamic history viewed through modernization theory. We also
consider issues relating to gender in Modern Islam, and consider notions of
reformation of modern society.

**0140\. Pre-Modern Europe (3 s.h.) **  

The evolution of Europe from Roman times until 1750. The different cultures
that went to make up Europe-Roman, Christian, "Barbarian", Muslim; formation
of proto-states; technological and economic change; contact with non-
Europeans; social and cultural movements over the medieval and early modern
periods. Europe before the modern era was not a static, fossilized culture but
rather a dynamic one marked by important discontinuities as well as
continuities.

**0141\. Irish History (3 s.h.) **  

Irish and Irish American culture, society, religion, and problems associated
with minority status and oppression. Special questions relating to the
changing structure of family ties and women and related issues; Irish American
consciousness as exemplified by support over the recent troubles in Northern
Ireland. The recent and dramatic improvements in the standard of living in the
Republic and the growing disparity amongst the urban Irish will serve to
complete this study.

**0144\. History of England (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0109**_.)

How the kingdom of England was created and how its government evolved from a
feudal monarchy to a constitutional democracy that has been a model for other
countries, especially the United States. How England became the first
industrial nation and how its society and culture responded to this change.

**0145\. Rome and Italy: Renaissance to the Present (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0188**_.)

A broad survey of Italian history from medieval to modern times. Although the
unified Italian state is a modern creation little more than a century old,
Italy gave birth to Europe's first urban civilization in its glorious
renaissance cities. Italy finally achieved unity and played a major role in
European affairs, which unfortunately included two world wars and the fascist
dictatorship of Benito Mussolini. More than is the case with most countries
Italian history is the history of its great cities like Rome, Florence,
Venice, and Milan. We will focus on those centers, especially Rome, which is
also the home of the Popes whose role in Italian and world history is immense,
and Florence, the home of great artists and such great modern figures as
Dante, Machiavelli, and Galileo.

**0146\. Russia: Nationality and Empire (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0110**_.)

This course surveys Russian political and cultural developments from earliest
times to the present emphasizing the issues of empire and nationality that
have shaped the multicultural Russian/Soviet/Russian state. Peasant issues,
the political role of Russian intellectuals, and the empire's ambiguous
relationship to the West will also be stressed. The course will also examine
the difficult situation left behind after the fall of communism and the
implications of the end of the Cold War.

**0147\. History of Spain and Portugal (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0185**_.)

Chronological and thematic survey of the history of Spain and Portugal.
Includes the impact of ancient era Roman occupation, the medieval era Islamic
conquest and Christian Reconquista, the apogee of Spanish and Portuguese
influence and world power in the sixteenth century, and the experiences of
mid-twentieth century fascism and late twentieth century social democracy.

**0150\. History of Nazi Germany (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0182**_.)

This course studies the rise and decline of Hitler's Third Reich, from its
"intellectual" origins in the 19th century and World War I, through the
meteoric rise of the National Socialist movement during the early 1930's, to
its demise in the ruins of Berlin in 1945. Special attention is given to the
sources of support for Nazism among German voters, the structure of the
National Socialist state, the role of Adolf Hitler, the Holocaust, and the
causes and consequences of the Second World War.

**0155\. Film in European History (3 s.h.) **  

The renowned film historian Anton Kaes once wrote: "Historical films interpret
national history for the broad public and thus produce, organize, and, to a
large degree, homogenize public memory. Surpassing schools and universities,
film, and television have become the most effective (and paradoxically least
acknowledged) institutional vehicles for shaping historical consciousness."
This course seeks to right that imbalance by acknowledging and studying the
way that films (and other visual media) teach us about history. Using
prominent American and European films (primarily), students will learn to
critically analyze visual media, examining them for content, bias, and
interpretation. The course will be organized around a small number of units
covering key episodes in modern European history (for example, the French
revolution, the World Wars, imperialism) and will provide both the historical
background/context for the period and the intellectual tools necessary to
evaluate and study films as historical documents.

**0156\. Gender, Class, Nation (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0140**_.)

An exploration of social and economic roles of women and men in modern Europe.
Comparison of the impact of gender, class, and nationality on middle-class,
working-class and peasant women and men in England, France, Germany, Italy,
and Russia. The effects of industrialization, nationalism, war, fascism,
communism, and the welfare state on women's and men's lives. The evolution of
the role of girls and women in the family and the changing status of single
and married women in the home and the workplace.

**0157\. Gender, War, and Society (3 s.h.) **  

In wartime, the traditional organization of society is often radically altered
to meet the pragmatic and ideological needs of triumphing in the ongoing
conflict. Ideas about gender - i.e., how masculinity and femininity are
defined - are frequently subject to radical revision in the context of a
society at war. This course examines the European and, to a lesser extent, the
American experiences of war during the two World Wars and the intervening
twenty year period, to understand how war and ideas of gender are related.
Using both primary and secondary source materials, as well as films about
World Wars I and II, the course looks at the experiences of men and women on
the front lines and on the home front, those who participated in the wars and
those who resisted them, those who benefited from war and those who were its
victims. The course examines not only how wartime experiences construct and
revise ideas about gender, but also how the rhetoric of gender is often used
to further wartime aims.

**0225\. History of Brazil (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0348**_.)

Brazil is one of the world's largest nations being inferior in territorial
size only to the United States, Russia, and China. With more than 150,000,000
people, Brazil is second in population among western hemisphere nations to the
United States, and far larger than any Latin American nation. Brazilians can
claim national unity solidly based on a common language and common cultural
heritage. Brazilians are descended of native Americans, Africans, and
Europeans, but can claim a recent history relatively free of ethnic or racial
strife. Brazil is rich in natural resources, and has one of the world's few
natural resource frontiers. Finally, Brazil continues to produce outstanding
architects, artists, writers, composers, social scientists and legal
intellectuals, religious and political leaders, entrepreneurs and athletes. At
the same time, persistent problems block Brazilian development. They include
widespread racism and class bias, excessive dependence on foreign capital and
technology, a shamefully inadequate public school system, a perverse
distribution of income that favors the wealthy, and fragile democratic
institutions. After 500 years of history, Brazilians have immense tasks before
them, while the promise of national greatness remains unfulfilled.

**

### Lower Level

**

**R160. Race and Ethnicity in American History (3 s.h.) Core: RS. **  

This course deals centrally with the social process by which societies create
racial and ethnic groups and define their place in relation to other racial or
ethnic groups. Because the emergence of racial and ethnic groups is a
historical process, the course will examine American history from the colonial
period to the present in order to understand the changing ways that Americans
have viewed each other and divided into groups. In short, the course will be
rooted in specific processes in American history, but will examine how America
formed groups that are given power and prestige, recognized as "real"
Americans, discriminated against, marginalized, enslaved or killed. The groups
to be examined include, but are not limited to, Blacks, Native Americans,
Irish-Americans, Italian-Americans, Chinese-Americans, Jews, and Chicanos.

**R161. African American History to 1865 (3 s.h.) Core: RS. **  

**_(Formerly: History R233**_.)

This course will examine the activities of African Americans in America from
slavery to 1865. Among the topics to be studied are: Slavery, The American
Revolution, and the Civil War. In addition, much attention will be devoted
toward emphasizing the multi-dimensional aspect of the African American
Community, and the crucial role which African American women have played in
America will be stressed. The course will focus on themes and questions which
are essential to an understanding of the past and to an understanding of the
present struggles for full citizenship on the part of African Americans. This
course meets the university Studies in Race requirement.

**R162. African American History 1865- Present (3 s.h.) **SS**. Core: RS. **  

**_(Formerly: History R234**_.)

This course will examine the activities of African Americans in America from
Reconstruction to the present. Among the topics to be studied are:
Reconstruction, the evolution of African American leadership, the Harlem
Renaissance, the Civil Rights Movement, and Black Power. In addition, much
attention will be devoted toward emphasizing the multi-dimensional aspect of
the African American Community, and the crucial role which African American
women have played in America will also be stressed. The course will focus on
themes and questions which are essential to an understanding of the past and
to an understanding of the present struggles for full citizenship on the part
of African Americans. This course meets the university Studies in Race
requirement.

**R163. Asian American History (3 s.h.) Core: RS. **  

**_(Formerly: History R237**_.)

An introductory survey of the historical experiences of Chinese, Japanese,
Filipino, Korean, South, and Southeast Asian immigrants in the United States.
Considers economic, social, political, and cultural trends, beginning with the
arrival of the Chinese in the 1830s and ending with issues facing Asian-
Americans today. Includes the development and significance of Asian-American
communities and culture as well as approaches to the study of Asian-Americans
in racial hierarchies. The aims of the course are to analyze commonalities and
differences in the historical and contemporary experiences of Asian ethnic
groups and to explore perspectives on the position of Asians in U.S. society -
assimilation, model minority, institutional racism, and internal colonialism.
Instructional methods include lectures and audio-visual materials, but they
also emphasize active student participation in learning through discussion,
oral reports, and written assignments. This course meets the university
Studies in Race requirement.

**R164. California Dreams, California Nightmares (3 s.h.) Core: RS. **  

Over the century and a half since California was forcibly incorporated into
the United States, it has exercised a powerful role upon the imagination and
reality of every generation. California has been, at once, the golden gate of
opportunity and the grapes of wrath of the downtrodden; social mobility and
the policy of incarceration, the glamour of Hollywood and monotony of tract
housing, the high-tech of Silicon Valley and the high-sweat of agricultural
labor, the Eden of natural bounty and the ecological disaster of sprawl and
smog. This course concentrates on the historical role that categories of race
have played in defining by whose means, to whose benefit, and in whose image
California's wealth would be produced and consumed. As an intermediate-level
history course, California Dreams, California Nightmares offers a mix of
primary and secondary sources, emphasizes the interaction of multiple causal
factors, and encourages students to interpret and to write analytical
historical arguments. It is also designed to fulfill the Studies in Race
requirement. In addition to discussion, lecture, and common readings, methods
of instruction in the course include use of a computer-assisted classroom to
provide image and text projections, video clips, and internet linkages.

**0167\. History of Philadelphia (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0071**_.)

This course is intended as an introduction to the History of Philadelphia,
broadly defined as the region as well as the city, and assumes no background
or deeply developed interest in American history. It presents a general survey
that can pique the curiosity of anyone who wants to explore one of the
nation's most exciting cities, but it is also meant to be especially useful to
students imagining careers in such diverse fields as hospitality and tourism,
journalism and education, environmental studies and law. The course will
examine both how national and international events (say, the Revolution or the
rise of the modern global economy) impacted the city, and also how the city
experienced forces (like the adoption of the automobile) that transformed it.

**0170\. Establishments, Sects, and Cults in the Modern United States (3 s.h.)
**  

In the years between 1945 and the present many Americans insisted, with great
fervor, that the U.S. government and the U.S. way of life were both based on
what they called the "Judeo-Christian tradition." But those years also saw an
increasing American fascination with a whole range of religious practices, the
practices of Pagans, Muslims, Native Americans, Buddhists, and Hindus, for
example, that seemed to clearly lie outside of "the Judeo-Christian tradition"
that (some) Americans wanted to naturalize.

**0171\. Growing Up in America (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0220**_.)

This course will examine the changing perception and experience of growing up
in the United States from colonial times to the present. It will argue that
childhood and adolescence are social constructions that change over time. The
course will explore the emergence of childhood and adolescence as distinct
stages in the life cycle, the evolving role of the family in the process of
growing up, and the increasing importance of social institutions other than
the family in the lives of the young. Particular attention will be paid to the
difference between growing up rich or poor, black or white, male or female,
and rural or urban. Finally, it will consider the reciprocal relationship
between popular culture and the lives of young Americans.

**0172\. Sexuality and Gender in American History (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0102**_.)

How do sexuality and gender shape the way a society views the behavior of men
and women? How do they create images and stereotypes of ideal or "typical"
female and male behavior? And how do the ways in which people actually act
compare to the society's conventional ideas about how they ought to act? This
course takes us from the beginning of the end of the nineteenth century to the
present, exploring the social, cultural, and political dimensions of the
public and private roles of women and men in the United States. It examines
changing cultural values and social norms of masculinity and femininity and
consider the actual behavior of women and men in the family, at work and at
play, in love, and in the live of the nation. It also probes the ways in which
race, social class, and sexual orientation have affected the experience of
gender.

**0173\. Modern U.S. History Through Film (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0010**_.)

This course will examine aspects of U.S. history in the twentieth century
through the use of public released feature motion pictures. In this visually
oriented society, every student encounters images of history and culture on an
almost daily basis. Critical thinking about the visual media must be learned.
Every motion picture is a primary document that can be read, interpreted, and
studied with as much depth as a written document. Because of their complexity,
however, motion pictures reveal a vast array of contemporary attitudes
specific to their period. A series of motion pictures will be shown
illustrating different aspects of American history. All the films are produced
in the historical period under discussion. As an intermediate course in the
history department's curriculum, the students will learn to critically examine
these historical documents for different levels of meaning. They will analyze
not only the surface plots of the films, but the underlying historical
assumptions that provided the intellectual underpinning of the movies. They
will write papers based on their abilities to analyze the visual documents and
fashion an historical argument.

**0174\. Popular Culture in 20th Century America (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0217**_.)

This course examines the roles that stereotypes, fashions, sports, the
automobile, movies, radio, television, and leisure activities, have played in
twentieth century American culture, and the manifestations of political and
cultural life that the artifacts and leisure activities of the average
American exemplified. A knowledge of the history and development of poplar
culture reveals the roots of modern American society and culture, and explains
why Americans have not only developed in a unique way, but why their cultural
influence has been so great on a global scale. As such, the course allows
students to gain a broader view of American society while providing depth and
clarity of understanding of it through areas not usually addressed by more
traditional avenues of learning. Toward this end, students will write a
research paper on a topic in popular culture using written, oral, and visual
materials. Emphasis will be placed on the development of the student's topic
through an analysis of historical context, asking a proper historical
question, analyzing multiple historical factors, and formulating historical
arguments.

**0175\. Recent American History (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0215**_.)

The purpose of this course is to describe the political, social, and economic
changes that the United States has experienced in making the transition from
the Cold War era to the post-Cold War (and post-industrial) society of the
late 20th century. The subject matter should be of interest to students in
Education, Journalism, Urban Studies, and Psychology, as well as History
majors. The course covers the entire period since World War II, but there is
more emphasis on social change since 1970. Topics covered include: the origins
of the Cold War; anti-Communism in American society and politics; the Civil
Rights movement; the Vietnam War and anti-war movement; conservative backlash;
Nixon and Watergate; the rise of a post-industrial economy; post-industrial
social trends (gender, race, and the new immigration); and the growing impact
of media on society and politics.

**0176\. History of the American Economy and American Business (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0242**_.)

This course is intended to provide the student with a history of the
development of the American economy with an emphasis on the part which
business played in its development. Topics covered include the agricultural
economy; the rise of manufacturing; the development of the corporation, the
stock exchanges, finance capitalism, and the rise of banking; nineteenth
century business cycles; the expansion of the American corporation in the
years between the Civil War and the Great Depression; the overseas expansion
of business and the development worker's capitalism in the 1920s; the changes
produced by the Great Depression and the Second World War; and the rise of the
modern economy with its trans-national connections, the movement towards
deregulation, and the move from manufacturing to a service economy. Students
will be introduced to a number of skills aimed at making them better able to
understand the current American economy, to the use of historical data as a
means of judging current trends in finance and business, and to some of the
major web sites and journal literature on the subject. They will make written
and oral presentations in which they defend their ideas, take a mid-term and a
final exam, both of which will require students to answer essay questions, and
write a short paper (10-15 pages) on a historical topic dealing with business
or economic issues.

**0177\. U.S. Environmental History (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0242**_.)

This course is intended as an introduction to the new field of environmental
history, which studies the changing relationships between human beings and the
natural world through time. It assumes no background or deeply developed
interest in American history, geography, or environmental studies. It presents
a general survey that is meant to be especially to students imagining careers
in fields as diverse as law and tourism, communications and chemistry. Our
central premise throughout will be that much of the familiar terrain of
American history looks very different when seen in its environmental context,
and that one can learn a great deal about both history and the environment by
studying the two together. We will be approaching American environmental
history from at least three different angles. First, we will ask how various
human activities have historically depended on and interacted with the natural
world. Second, we will trace the shifting attitudes toward nature held by
different Americans during various periods of their nation's history. Finally,
we will ask how human attitudes and activities have worked together to reshape
the American landscape. At the same time, we will be tracing the evolution of
environmental politics in the United States, so that the course is also a
history of conservation and environmentalism in our nation's political life.

**0180\. American Empire (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0247**_.)

This course surveys and interprets the creation and growth of the American
empire from the colonial era to contemporary times. In doing so, it addresses
the fundamental questions of how and why a republic, founded on the lofty
principles concerning liberty and equality eloquently expressed in the
Declaration of Independence, behaved so aggressively in pursuing territorial
and commercial aggrandizement, including the subjugation and in some cases
extermination of peoples and nations. The course will also examine the
instruments the United States employed to expand its influence and dominion.
These include traditional means like force, diplomacy, and economics, and less
orthodox methods and agents, ranging from missionaries to movie moguls to the
"Marlboro Man." Consequently, a major challenge of this course will be both to
arrive at an appropriate definition of "empire," and further, to identify the
constituencies from within the private as well as public sectors, and to a
degree from the international community, that contributed to the realization
of George Washington's vision of the United States as a "rising empire."

**0181\. United States at War (3 s.h.) **  

**_(Formerly: History 0254**_.

