                                                                                                      [Jews of Europe Syllabus](Jews%20of%20Europe%20Syllabus%20Spring%202000.htm)

Study Questions, Week 6

_Vital, pp. 29-98_

What is the significance of the title of Part I of this book?

In the section introduction, on pp. 29-30, Vital introduces an issue that he
describes as central to the history of Europe's Jews from the late 1700s to
the 1930s.  What was this change? Explain.

Does Vital think that Jews had much active input into the late 1700s
discussions of Jewish emancipation?

How does Vital explain the willingness of many European states to consider
Jewish rights in the late 1700s?  Why did integrating Jews into society seem
important to many Enlightened, _raison d'etat_ thinkers, and does Vital see
their attitude towards Jews as benevolent?

If, as Vital argues, the _raison d'etat_ approach of late 18th century
continental European states tried to fit Jews into  "Universalistic"
categories, did governments treat Jews as "the same" as other subjects?
Explain.   What sorts of attitudes towards Jews were common among ruling
elites in the late 1700s?

Vital says there were differences between the approach to Jews in Austrian
Empress Maria Theresa's 1764 "Judenordnun" and the 1782 "Toleranzpatent" of
her son, Emperor Joseph II.  What were the differences?  And what does Vital
mean by terms like the "therapeutic"  approach to Jews and the "patronizing
idea of improvement"?  Did Joseph II actually emancipate Austria's Jews?  What
was his aim (according to Vital)?

Vital contrasts the approach to Jews in Britain to that on the continent.  How
does he characterize the English government's way of dealing with the "Jewish
problem"?  Why did Jews in England "have little to complain of" by the late
1700s, and was this the result of specific reform legislation?  Explain.

How does Vital explain the relative absence of popular anti-Semitism in
England (compared, say, to Poland)?

What question regarding Jews did the French National Assembly debate in 1789?
What were the basic positions taken by both sides in this debate (e.g., by
Clermont-Tonnere, by Abb¨¦ Maury, and by Bishop Lefarre)?

What were the results of  the first two votes on Jewish emancipation in 1789,
and when did France finally recognize the full rights as citizens of all
French Jews?

According to Vital, where the leaders of the revolution particularly concerned
with protecting the rights of Jews?  Explain.  How did revolutionary
legislation define Jews, and in what sense does Vital see this as an attempt
to change Jews?

Does Vital think that emancipation in France solved the question of how Jews
"fit" into French society?  Explain.  Did the revolutionary leaders conceive
of the French nation in terms of diversity, and what did this infer for Jews?

What three "difficulties" did the Napoleonic regime (1799-1814) face regarding
Jews?  Explain how these relate to mercantilist and Enlightenment ideas we
have discussed in earlier class sessions.

Why did Napoleon convene the Assembly of Jewish Notables in 1806 and the
Sanhedrin in 1807, and what were the results?

In 1808 Napoleon issued three decrees regarding Jews; explain the main point
of each, and in particular be ready to discuss the significance of the third
decree.

It is always a good idea to glance at the footnotes!  In footnote 32 on page
59, what does Vital say about the charge that Jews controlled money lending in
France during the revolutionary era?

For Vital, what was the "lasting significance" of the 1791 emancipation decree
in France?

Where besides France were Jews emancipated during the era of the French
Revolution?

Vital has discussed the idea that governments were willing to consider
granting civil liberties to "useful Jews" (in German, _schutzjuden_ ), and
wanted to use the law to "improve" Jews.  He fits the "emancipation" of Jews
in Prussia into this paradigm.  In 1812, Prussian King Frederick William
issued a decree granting Jews equal civil rights; what restrictions were
lifted as a result?   According to Vital, why had Prussia lifted these
restrictions, and how did this differ from emancipation in France?

Did Emancipation in Prussia solve the question of how Jews would be integrated
into Prussian society?  Explain.  Did all Prussian elites favor recognizing
Jews' rights?  And did all Jews endorse the ideal of "improving" themselves so
that they could "become German" (by giving up elements of Jewish culture and
taking up Prussian values, etc.)?  Explain.

Did state treatment of Jews in Poland differ from that in Germany in the
mid-1700s, and did that mean that Jews were "safe" in Poland?

What sort of social factors complicated the debates over Jewish rights in the
Polish Commonwealth in the 1770s-1790?  Why couldn't Jews be "made into"
peasants or burgers?  And why was it commonly assumed by Polish elites that
Jews should pay for their own emancipation?

According to Vital, how did the culture and economy of Jews in Poland differ
from that of Jews in Western and Central Europe, and why was that important?

When Poland was partitioned (3 times) between Austria, Prussia, and Russia,
what became of Poland's Jews?

Did the Russian government under Catherine II ("The Great") have a clear plan
on what "to do" with the 400,000 Jews it "inherited" from Poland?   Why was
formulating such a policy difficult?

What was a _shtetl_?

How did the issue of religion shape the Russian government's approach to Jews?

In what ways did the ideas regarding Jews of Russian officials, like I. G.
Frizel (governor of Lithuania) resemble those of "reformers" in Austria and
Prussia?   Explain.  What kinds of "improvements" did Frizel want to make in
Jewish life?

Did all Russian government officials agree with Frizel?  Explain how G. R.
Derezhavin wanted to "reform" Jewish life.

What were the main points of the 1803 proposal by Russia's "Committee on the
Improvement of the Jews," and what were the main points of the 1804 "Statute
on the Jews" finally adopted by Tsar Alexander I?  Were the 1804 laws entirely
oppressive?  Were they fully implemented?

What is Vital's main point regarding Russian state policy towards Jews in the
early 1800s?



_Documents_ :

_Declaration of the Rights of Man, 1789_
(<http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/rightsof.htm>)

Read carefully through this declaration (on of the most important documents in
history); what does it suggest about the conditions under which Jews would be
granted equal rights?  Explain.



_Hourwitz, Vindication of the Jews (1789)_ (From Hunt, _The French Revolution
and Human Rights_ )

How does Hourwitz propose making Jews "happy and useful"?

What sort of changes in Jewish economic life does he advocate?

In what sense does he advocate Jewish "assimilation" into French cultural
life?

In what sense is he critical of Jewish communal authority?

Why, at the end, is he critical of the need to even ask how Jews can be made
useful and happy?

In what sense does this document reflect the Enlightenment world view, as
described by both Israel and Vital?



_Petition of the Jews of Paris, 1790_ (From Hunt, _The French Revolution and
Human Rights_ )

In this petition, do the authors agree that the National Assembly did not have
a clear idea of whether  Jews wanted to be citizens?  Explain.  According to
the petitioners, what did Jews want?

According to the petitioners, what prejudices did Jews have to battle against
in arguing for rights as citizens?  Explain.  How do the petitioners respond
to these charges?

How, in the final analysis, do the petitioners defend the idea of recognizing
Jews as citizens?



_LaFare, Opinion on the Admissibility of Jews_ (1790) (From Hunt, _The French
Revolution and Human Rights_ )

What is the essence of La Fare's argument against granting Jews citizenship?

In what sense is La Fare suggesting that denying Jews citizenship is a means
of protecting them?  Explain.



_The Assembly of Jewish Notables: Answers to Napoleon_
(<http://www.acs.ucalgary.ca/~elsegal/363_Transp/Sanhedrin.html>)

How would you describe the tone of the Assembly's description of Napoleon in
the preface to this document?

Read over the list of questions that Napoleon asked the Assembly--What was
Napoleon "getting at" with these questions?  Explain.

Read over the Assembly's answers to Napoleon's questions--What was the
Assembly "getting at" in the way it answered?  Explain.  Did the Assembly
intend that Jews be treated as "separate" from the French nation?  Explain.



_Documents on the Status of German Jewry and the Debate over Jewish
Emancipation_ (from Goldstein and Boyer, _Nineteenth century Europe_ )

The first document in this pair is an exchange between author H. Paulus, who
in 1831 published a book advocated legal serration of Jews, and the Jewish
jurist G. Reisser.

What is Paulus' reasoning in advocating that Jews must not (and do not want
to) be citizens with full civil rights?

What is the main point of Reisser's reply?



The second document is a 1820 letter from A. Mendelssohn, son of Jewish
Enlightenment (Haskalah) leader Moses Mendelssohn, to his daughter Fanny (a
great composer and musician, and the sister of Felix Mendelssohn).

How does Abraham Mendelssohn explain his decision to raise his daughter as a
Lutheran?   In what sense does the approach to religion expressed in this
letter reflect "universalistic" Enlightenment principles?  And to what extend
is the "outward" practice of religion discussed here as a matter of public
acculturation?

                                                                                                      [Jews of Europe Syllabus](Jews%20of%20Europe%20Syllabus%20Spring%202000.htm)

