` **HISTORY 352  
** **MODERN GERMANY**  
1648-present  
  
Prof. Jacqueline R. deVries  
Office: Memorial Hall 115B  
Phone: 330-1193 (o)  
Campus Box: 24  
Internet: devries@augsburg.edu  
Office Hours: TTh 8:30-10 am; W 3-4 pm  
and by appointment  
  
  
History 352 is a survey of modern Germany since the seventeenth century. We
will concentrate on the social, political and intellectual development of the
area that in 1871 became the German Empire, with occasional treks into
Austria. While proceeding chronologically through the material, we will be
pausing to explore many of the grand themes of German history: the problem of
defining  "Germany"; Germany's "sonderweg" (its special way of development);
the "failure" of German liberalism and the origins of fascism. A secondary
goal is to introduce you to the rich variety of historical scholarship on
Germany: from the biographical, "great man" approach (as with Bismarck or
Hitler); to interpretations that stress social and economic factors as the
major forces in the nation's historical development; to the most recent
efforts to penetrate cultural "mentalities" of, for example, eighteenth
century peasants or twentieth century Nazis.  
The course is organized as a combination of lectures and discussions designed
to promote active understanding and critical evaluation of the material. The
overriding purpose of the lectures is to present possible and sensible ways of
understanding significant historical events. You will find the lectures and
discussions more engaging if you read the assigned materials beforehand and
approach the lectures critically as you should any model of historical
explanation. In addition to the regular reading assignments, we will be
discussing four outstanding German films.  
There will be two midterms, a final exam, a short (4-5 page) paper and a
longer (8-10 page) paper. More information on these assignments will be
provided in the first week of class. For those of you skilled in German
language, I would be happy to provide an amended syllabus which substitutes
some readings in the original German for those assigned here.  
  
**Grading:**  
  
Midterm #1 10%  
Midterm #2 10%  
Final 20% [40% tests]  
Paper #1 15%  
Paper #2 25% [40% papers]  
Attendance, Preparation, and  
Discussion Leadership 20% [20% oral]  
  
**Note:** Attendance will be taken each class period. More than two absences
will result in a lower grade. If you must miss a class, please notify me ahead
of time.  
**  
** **Augsburg's Policy on Academic Honesty:** You are asked to review the
Augsburg Campus Policy on Academic Honesty (7.03 of the Student Handbook) and
to sign a statement (to be distributed in class) pledging your adherence to
this policy. You should also sign all papers and tests as an indication of
your honesty.  
  
  
**Books Available for Purchase from Augsburg's Bookstore:**  
  
J. W. von Goethe, _The Sorrows of Young Werther_  
Holger H. Herwig, _Hammer or Anvil? Modern Germany 1648-present_  
George Mosse, _Nazi Culture_  
Frederic Morton, _A Nervous Splendour: Vienna 1888-89_  
Otto Pflanze, _The Unification of Germany, 1848-1871_  
  
  
**COURSE OUTLINE**  
  
All reading assignments marked with an asterix are on reserve in Augsburg's
library; the movie assignments can be viewed in Augsburg's Media Room, Foss
Center.  
  
  
**September 7-12 Defining German History**  
  
The problem of defining  "Germany"; the major issues in German historiography;
17th and 18th century backgrounds  
  
_Reading_ : Herwig, ch.1  
  
**September 14 Culture and Society in a Revolutionary Age**  
  
Enlightenment and Romanticism; the concepts of _Kultur und  
_ _Bildung_  
  
_Reading_ : J. W. Goethe, _Sorrows of Young Werther_  
  
**September 19-21 Politics in a Revolutionary Age**  
  
**MAP QUIZ on September 19**  
  
The impact of the French Revolution in Germany; Austrian and Prussian reforms  
  
_Reading:_ Herwig, ch.2  
* "Declaration of the Rights of Man"  
*"Prussian Civil Code"  
  
_Due Sept. 26_ : Short (4-5 pp.) _paper_ comparing the notions of  
freedom, individualism, and the state as embodied in  
the French Declaration of the Rights of Man (1789)  
and the Prussian Civil Code (1794)  
  
**September 26-28: Blood and Iron, 1815 1862**  
  
The stirrings of industrialization, liberalism and nationalism  
after 1815; the Revolution of 1848  
  
_Reading:_ Herwig, ch.3  
Pflanze, pp.11 18; 29-39  
  
**October 3-5 Nation Building, Prussian Style**  
  
Prussian conquest of Germany; interpreting unification a  
Bismarckian invention?  
  
_Reading_ : Herwig, ch.4  
Pflanze, pp.40-56; 69-79; 88-105; 114-119  
  
**October 10** **FIRST MIDTERM EXAM**  
  
  
**October 12-17 Imperial Germany**  
  
The political and social history of the Second Empire: institutions of the
Reich, emergence of socialism, political  
Catholicism and popular anti semitism; women and the family  
  
_Reading:_ Herwig, ch.5  
  
_Due October 17:_ Paper _prospectus_ (1-2 pp.) and _bibliography_  
(late or inadequate information will adversely affect  
your term paper grade)  
  
**October 19: Austria Hungary to 1914**  
  
Psychoanalysis, Suicide and the Failure of the Liberal Ideal  
  
_Reading_ : Frederic Morton, _A Nervous Spendour_ (all)  
  
  
**October 24-26, Germany in Crisis: War and Revolution**  
  
The outbreak of war and the question of German responsibility;  
the soldiers' experience; the Revolution of 1918/19  
  
_Reading:_ Herwig, ch.6  
*Ernst J unger, _Copse 125_ , selections  
  
**Oct.31 Nov.2 Weimar Germany**  
  
Burden of Versailles; cultural efflorescence and political  
myopia  
  
_Reading:_ Herwig, ch.7  
  
_Viewing:_ "Blue Angel" (Josef von Sternberg, 1930)  
  
**November 7-9 Hitler and the Nazi Seizure of Power**  
  
Hitler's biography and ideology; the formation of the Nazi  
party; the collapse of Weimar; the consolidation of Nazi  
power  
  
_Reading:_ Herwig, ch.8  
Mosse, _Nazi Culture_ , selections  
  
_Viewing:_ "Triumph of the Will" (Leni Riefenstahl, 1934)  
  
**November 14-16, The SS State: Conformity and Terror**  
  
Policies toward labor, women, Jews and the churches;  
the Nazi ideal of _Volksgemeinschaft_ fantasy or reality?  
  
_Reading:_ Mosse, _Nazi Culture_ , selections  
  
_Due Nov.14:_ Paper _thesis statement_ and more fully developed  
bibliography (again, failure to hand this in will  
adversely affect your paper grade)  
  
**November 21** **SECOND MIDTERM EXAM**  
  
**November 28-30 World War II and the Holocaust**  
  
Europe under Nazi occupation; the implementation of the  "final  
solution"; German resistance; genocide and responsibility  
  
_Reading:_ Herwig, ch.9  
*Bridenthal, et al., _When Biology..._ , selections   
  
_Viewing:_ "Shoah" part 4 (Claude Lanzmann, 1985)  
  
**December 5-7 Memory and Identity in Postwar Germany**  
  
The two Germanies; the lingering legacy of the Nazi past; revolution of 1989
and prospects for the future  
  
_Reading:_ Herwig, ch.10-12 (skim)  
  
_Viewing:_ "The Nasty Girl" (Michael Verhoeven, 1990)  
  
_Due December 5:_ Longer (10-12 pp.) _paper_ analyzing a  
significant issue in German history and historiography  
  
**Due December ?** **TAKE HOME FINAL EXAM**  

