**TERM PAPER ASSIGNMENT**

**quick links:**  
**Term Paper Assignment**  
**Bibliography**  
**[Grading Rubric for Term
Paper](http://www.csulb.edu/~dschwart/gradingrubric.html)**

* * *

History is more than simply what happened in the past; it is more accurately
the historian's interpretation of those events. Historical questions do not
address what happened in the past; rather, they seek to answer questions of
interpretation and analysis. Thus historians present a thesis in which they
argue a point of view. Suggested topics are on the other side of this paper.

  
_The Assignment_

This paper requires you to read at least five sources on a topic related to
the Holocaust. These should include a combination of primary and secondary
sources, and journal articles where appropriate. The bibliography included at
the end of this book provides a good starting point. Keep in mind that the
CSULB library may not have the book you are looking for, so you may have to go
to Interlibrary Loan, or you may want to purchase a copy by calling up

www.amazon.com on the Internet. Also, Barnes and Nobles has an extensive
section on the Holocaust under "Judaica." Since it takes some time to get a
book from another library, you should begin your search soon.You should also
consult the internet sources listed in this booklet.  


_Format_

The paper you submit should be typewritten, double-spaced, with one-inch
margins on left and right. It should be no less than 12 pages in length, and
no more than 15 pages. It should have a cover page containing your name and
the topic of the paper.

The first paragraph should introduce the question or questions you address. It
should also give some hint of your thesis, the argument which you will set out
to prove in this paper. The body of the paper should consist of historical
narrative: a discussion of the topic based on historical evidence. This is the
part of the paper in which you present the facts and an interpretation based
on the factual evidence. You will refer to the sources you have consulted, but
avoid extensive use of quotations! The last paragraph of the paper represents
a summary and conclusion of the topic and arguments contained in the body of
the paper.  


_When to Use Citations_

1\. all word-for-word quotations (except common sayings)  
2\. all passages that you have paraphrased  
3\. all charts, graphs, and diagrams that are not your own  
4\. all statistics that you have not compiled yourself  
5\. all theories and interpretations that are not your own  


_Plagiarism_

To plagiarize is "to steal and use the writings of another as one's own"
(American Heritage Dictionary, 1969). This can take the form of deliberate
plagiarism in which the student copies someone else's words without giving
credit to that source. Inadvertent plagiarism is when the student writes the
words of someone else without realizing it. This happens when the student

copies someone else's words on note cards without citing the source. In the
process of writing the paper the student then copies from the note card
without realizing that he/she is stealing someone else's words. Ignorant
plagiarism occurs when the student is not aware of the rules. Each of these
types of plagiarism is illegal and can result in a failing grade and dismissal
from the university (see page 86 in 2000-01 CSULB Catalog).  


_Suggested Topics_

In addition to the topics below, you should consult the questions included
under each topic and reading assignment in the syllabus which can give you
additional ideas on research topics.  


1\. Who was guilty for the Holocaust and the Nazi terror: only Hitler? Hitler
and Nazi officials? The German people?

2\. Were the British, French, and Americans, who took so long to react to the
Nazi horror, also guilty? Explain.

3\. To what degree was Austria responsible for the Holocaust?

4\. Was the Holocaust an inevitable result of German history and culture, or
was it mostly the creation of Hitler and the Third Reich? To what degree can
German anti-Semitism in the 19th and early 20th century be regarded as
responsible for the Holocaust?

5\. Do you agree with Intentionalists who argue, "No Hitler, No Holocaust"?

Or do you agree with Goldhagen, who argues "No Germans, No Holocaust".

6\. Was the Holocaust the result of a precise pre-established plan, or did it
unfold without a set plan?

7\. Was there a direct relationship between ideology, planning, and policy
decisions in the Third Reich? Was the road to Auschwitz clearly charted when
Hitler assumed power in 1933, or even earlier?

8\. What is the 'war of the historians'? Which side of the debate do you think
has more validity?

9\. Was there a concrete decision made for the Final Solution? Was it fixed in
Hitler's mind even before the war? Did it begin in 1933, when Nazis came to
power? Or 1938 with Kyrstallnacht? Or did the decision not crystallize until
the invasion of Russia in 1941? Or 1942 at the Wannsee Conference?

10\. Did Jewish leaders collaborate in the Holocaust? Do the Jewish council
bear any responsibility for the Holocaust?

11\. Did the Catholic Church collaborate in the Holocaust? Does the Church
bear any responsibility for the Holocaust?

12\. What was the nature of Jewish resistance? Did Jews go to their death,
"like sheep to the slaughter"?

13\. What did people know about the Holocaust? When did they know it?

14\. How can we account for the behavior of FDR and the State Department
concerning Jewish refugees, and the refusal to bomb concentration camps during
the war?

15\. Comparative studies: Why were proportionally fewer Jews deported from
France than from Belgium or the Netherlands? Did the Nazis have different
priorities for Jews from different countries?

16\. What role did German professionals and industries play in the Holocaust?

17\. How were women and children particularly victimized?

18\. Does Switzerland bear special responsibility for the Holocaust?

19\. Non-Jewish Victims: Gays, Gypsies, others

20\. Do you agree with the Goldhagen thesis? Were ordinary Germans
responsible? To what degree?  


You may be interested in writing about the experience of women in the
Holocaust, as victims, perpetrators, or by-standers. the experience of women
was in many ways decidedly different from that of men. If you are interested
in this topic, you should consult at least three monographs written by women
on the female experience in the Holocaust, and several journal articles.

These sources can be found at <http://interlog.com/~mighty/.>  


THIS PAPER IS DUE APRIL 19TH!!! LATE PAPERS WILL BE PENALIZED  


_GRADING POLICY_

You will be graded on the quality of your thesis and how well you support your
argument with historical evidence. The physical presentation of the paper
should meet university standards. You should consult a style manual on writing
history papers. Spelling and grammar count!  
See the history department's rubric for grading criteria.  
    
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**_BIBLIOGRAPHY_**

  
  

**A. GENERAL HISTORIES ON THE HOLOCAUST**

Bauer, Yehuda, _The Holocaust in Historical Perspective_ , Seattle: 1978

\--------------, _A History of the Holocaust_ , New York: 1982

\-------------- and Nathan Rotenstreich, eds., _The Holocaust as Historical
Experience_ , New York: 1981

Bierenbaum, Michael, ed., _The World Must Know: A History of the Holocaust as
Told in the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum_ , Boston: 1993

Bracher, Karl, _The German Dictatorship: The Origins, Structuresand Effects of
National Socialism_ , New York: 1970

Dawidowicz, Lucy, _The War Against the Jews_ , New York: 1986

\----------------, _A Holocaust Reader_ , West Orange, N.J.: 1976

_The Encyclopedia of the Holocaust_ , New York: 1990

Friedlander, Henry, and Sybil Milton, eds., _The Holocaust: Ideology,
Bureaucracy, and Genocide_ , Millwood, N.Y.: 1980

Furet, Francois, ed., _Unanswered Questions: Nazi Germany and the_

_Genocide of the Jews_ , New York: 1989

Gilbert, Martin, _The Holocaust: A History of Jews in Europe During the Second
World War_ , New York: 1986

Grobman, Alex and Daniel Landes, eds., _Genocide: Critical Issues of the
Holocaust_ , Chappaqua, N.Y.: 1983

Gutman, Israel, ed., _Encyclopedia of the Holocaust_ , New York: 1990

\-------------, _Atlas of the Holocaust_ , New York: 1993

Hilberg, Raul, _The Destruction of the European Jews_ , New York: 1985

\-------------, _Perpetrators, Victims, Bystanders: The Jewish Catastrophe,
1933-1945_ , New York: 1992

Jackel, Eberhard, _Hitler's World View_ , 1981

Katz, Steven, _The Holocaust in Historical Context_ , New York: 1994

Kren, George, _The Holocaust and the Crisis of Human Behavior_ , New York:
1994

Lang, Berel, _Act and Idea in the Nazi Genocide_ , Chicago: 1990

Laqueur, Walter, _The Terrible Secret: The Suppression of the Truth about
Hitler's 'Final Solution'_ , Boston: 1980

Levin, Nora, _The Holocaust: The Nazi Destruction of European Jewry,
1933-1945_ , Melbourne, FL: 1990

Marrus, Michael, _The Holocaust in History_ , New york: 1990

Mosse, George, _Nazi Culture: A Documentary History_ , New York, 1981

\-------------, _Toward the Final Solution: A History of European Racism_ ,
London: 1978

Noakes, J., and G. Pridham, eds., _Nazism: A History in Documents and
Eyewitness Accounts, 1919-1945_ [2 vols.], New York: 1990

Poliakov, Leon, _Harvest of Hate: The Nazi Program for the Destruction of the
Jews of Europe_ , New York, 1979

Rubenstein, Richard L., and Roth, John K., _Approaches to Auschwitz:The
Holocaust and Its Legacy_ , Atlanta: 1973

Rubenstein, Richard, L., _The Cunning of History_ , New York: 1987

Yahil, Leni, _The Holocaust: The Fate of European Jewry, 1932-1945_ ,

New York: 1991  
    
    


**B. ANTI-SEMITISM IN EUROPEAN HISTORY**

Berger, David, ed., _History and Hate_ , 1997

Carroll, James, _Constatine's Sword_ , 2000.

Cohn, Norman, _Warrant for Genocide: The Myth of Jewish World Conspiracy and
the Protocols of the Elders of Zion_ , 1966

Davies, Alan T., _Antisemitism and the Foundations of Christianity_ , New
York: 1979

Dimont, Max, _Jews, God and History_ , New York: 1962

Flannery, Edward H., _The Anguish of the Jews: Twenty-Three Centuries of
Antisemitism_ , New York: 1985

Hay, Malcolm, _The Roots of Christian Anti-Semitism_ , 1981

Heller, Celia, _On the Edge of Destruction_ , New York: 1977

Hoffman, Eva, _Shtetl: The Life and Death of a Small Town_ , 1997

Katz, Richard, _From Prejudice to Destruction: Anti-Semitism 1700-1933_ ,
Cambridge: 1980

Levy, Richard S., _Anti-Semitism in the Modern World: An Anthology of Texts_ ,
Lexington, MA: 1991

Littell, Franklin H., _The Crucifixion of the Jews_ , Macon, Georgia:1986

Mosse, George, _Toward the Final Solution: A History of European Racism_ ,
London: 1978

Nicholls, William, _Christian Anti-Semitism: a History of Hate_ , 1993

Poliakov, Leon, _A History of Anti-Semitism_ , 4 vols., New York:1965-1986

Prager, Dennis, and Joseph Telushkin, _Why the Jews? The Reason for
Antisemitism_ , New York: 1983.

Reuther, Rosemary, _Faith and Fratricide: The Theological Roots of
Antisemitism_ , New York, 1974

Weinberg, Meyer, _Because the Were Jews_ , 1986

Wistrich, Robert s., _Anti-Semitism: The Longest Hatred_ , 1991  
    
    


**C. THE JEWS AND THE GERMANS**

Bering, Dietz, _The Stigma of Names: Anti-Semitism in German Daily Life,
1812-1933_ , Ann Arbor: 1992

Finkelstein, Norman, _A Nation on Trial: The Goldhagen Thesis and Historical
Truth_ , 1998

Fischer, Klaus, _The History of an Obsession: German Judeophobia and the
Holocaust_ , 1998

Goldhagen, Daniel, _Hitler's Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and the
Holocaust_ , New York, 1996

Gordon, Sarah, _Hitler, Germans, and the "Jewish Question"_ Princeton: 1984

Hitler, Adolf, _Mein Kampf_

Mosse, George, _Germans and Jews_ , New York: 1970

Rose, Paul Lawrence, _Revolutionary Anti-Semitism in Germany, From Kant to
Wagner_ , Princeton, N.J.: 1990

Shandley, Robert, _Unwilling Germans? The Goldhagen Debate_ , 1998

Weiss, John, _The Ideology of Death_ , 1996  
    
    


**D. NAZISM AND ANTI-SEMITISM, 1933-1938**

Gellately, Robert, _The Gestapo and German Society: Enforcing Racial Policy_ ,
New York: 1992

Gilbert, Martin, _The Holocaust_ , New York: 1985, Chs. 1-6

Herzstein, Robert, _The War that Hitler Won: Goebbels and the Nazi Media
Campaign_ , New York: 1978

Kaplan, Marion, _Between Dignity and Despair: Jewish Life in Nazi Germany_ ,
1998

Van Houten Dippel, John, _Bound Upon a Wheel of Fire: Why So Many Jews
Remained in Germany_ , 1996  


**E. ORIGINS OF THE HOLOCAUST**

Breitman, Richard, _The Architect of Genocide: Himmler and the Final Solution_
, 1991

\-----------, _Official Secrets: What the Nazis Planned, What the British and
Americans Knew_ , 1998

Browning, Christopher, _The Final Solution and the German Foreign Office_ ,
New York: 1978

\-----------, _The Path to Genocide_ , 1995

Cesarani, David, _The Final Solution_ , 1994

Fleming, Gerald, _Hitler and the Final Solution_ , Berkeley: 1984

Friedlander, Henry, _The Origins of the Nazi Genocide_ , 1997

Laqueur, Walter, _The Terrible Secret_ , 1998

Reitlinger, Gerald, _The Final Solution: An Attempt to Exterminate the Jews of
Europe, 1939- 1945_ , New York: 1961

Schleunes, Karl A., _The Twisted Road to Auschwitz_ , Urbana: 1970  


**F. THE HOLOCAUST EXPERIENCE - THE TESTIMONY OF SURVIVORS**

Browning, Christopher, _Ordinary Men: Reserve Battalion 101 and the Final
Solution in Poland_ , New York: 1992

Delbo, Charlotte, _None of Us Will Survive_ , New York: 1968

Datni, Reuven, and Yehudit Kleiman, _Final Letters: From the Victims of the
Holocaust_ , New York: 1991

Des Pres, _The Survivor: an Anatomy of Life in the Death Camps_ , 1976

Epstein, Helen, _Children of the Holocaust_ , 1988

Freeman, Joseph, _Job: The Story of a Holocaust Survivor_ , N.Y. 1995

\--------, _The Road to Hell: A Survivor's Account of the Nazi Death March_ ,
1997.

Gilbert, Martin, _Th Boys: The Untold Story of 732 Young Concentration Camp
Survivors_ , 1997

Gill, Anton, _The Journey Back from Hell_ , 1988

Gutman, Israel, _Anatomy of the auschwitz Death Camp_ , 1998

Kaplan, Chaim, _The Warsaw Diaries of Chaim Kaplan_ , New York: 1973

Lanzmann, Claude, _Shoah: An Oral History of the Holocaust_ , NY: 1987

Lifton, Robert, _The Nazi Doctors: Medical Killings and the Psychology of
Genocide_ , New York: 1988

Levi, Primo, _Survival at Auschwitz_ , New York: 1969

Millu, Liana, _Smoke Over Birkenau_ , Philadelphia, 1991

Moore, Bob, _Victims and Survivors: Nazi Persecution of Jews in the
Netherlands_ , 1998

Niewyk, Donald, _Fresh Wounds: Early Narratives of Holocaust Survival_ , 1998

Rubinowicz, Dawid, _The Diary of Dawid Rubinowicz_ , Edmonds, WA: 1982

Segev,Tom, _The 7th Million:The Israelis and the Holocaust_ ,NY:1993

\-----------, _The Unfinished Road: Jewish Survivors of Latvia Remember_ ,
N.Y. 1991

Sierakowiak, David, _The Diary of David Sierakowiak: Five Notebooks From the
Lodz Ghetto_ , 1998

Zuckerman, Abraham, _A Voice in the Chorus: Life as a Teenager in the
Holocaust_ , Hoboken, NJ: 1991  
    
    


**G. JEWISH RESISTANCE**

Bauer, Yehuda, _They Chose Life: Jewish Resistance in the Holocaust_ , New
York: 1973

Gutman, Israel, _Resistance: The Warsaw Ghetto Uprising_ , 1998

Krakowski, Shmuel, _The War of the Doomed: Jewish Armed Resistance in Poland_
, New York: 1984

Langbein, Hermann, _Against All Hope_ , 1996

Masters, Peter, _Striking Back_ , 1997

Suhl, Yuri, ed., _They Fought Back: The Story of Jewish Resistance in Nazi
Europe_ , New York: 1975

U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum, _Days of Remembrance, April 18-23, 1993: Fifty
Years Ago_ , Washington, D.C.: 1993

Weiner, Harold, _Fighting Back_ , 1992  


**H. EUROPE AND THE DESTRUCTION PROCESS**

Braham, Randolph, _The Politics of Genocide: The Holocaust in Hungary_ , 1981

Gellaty, Robert, _The Gestapo and German Society: Enforcing Racial Policy,
1935-1945_ , Oxford: 1990

Jong, Louis de, _The Netherlands and Nazi Germany_ , Cambridge, MA:1990

Mendelsohn, Ezra, _The Jews of East Central Europe Between the Two World Wars_
, Bloomington, IN: 1983

_My Brother's Keeper? Recent Polish Debates on the Holocaust_ , London: 1990

Steinberg, Jonathan, _All or Nothing: The Axis and the Holocaust_ , London:
1990  
    
    


**I. RESCUERS AND BYSTANDERS**

Abella, Irving, and Harold Troper, _None is Too Many: Canada and the Jews of
Europe_ , Toronto: 1982

Bar Zohar, Michael, _Beyond Hitler's Grasp: The Heroic Rescue of Bulgaria's
Jews_ , 1998

Bercher, Elinor, _Schindler's Legacy_ , 1994

Block, Gay and Malka Drucker, _Rescuers: Portraits of Moral Courage in the
Holocaust_ , New York: 1992

Cesarani, David, _Genocide & Rescue: The Holocaust in Hungary_, 1997

Feingold, Henry, _The Politics of Rescue: The Roosevelt Administration and the
Holocaust, 1938- 1945_ , New York: 1980

Feingold, Henry, _Bearing Witness: How America and its Jews Responded to the
Holocaust_ , 1998

Fogelman, Eva, _Conscience and Courage_ , New York: 1994

Gies, Miep and Alison Gold, _Ann Frank Remembered_ , New York: 1988

Gilbert, Martin, _Auschwitz and the Allies_ , New York: 1981

Gittleman, Zvi, _Bitter Legacy: Confronting the Holocaust in USSR_ , 1997

Gutman, Israel, and Efraim Zuroff, eds., _Rescue Attempts During the
Holocaust_ , Jerusalem: 1974

Haeslen, A., _The Lifeboat is Full: Switzerland and the Refugees, 1933-1945_ ,
New York: 1969

Hallie, Philip, _Lest Innocent Blood be Shed: The Story of the Village of Le
Chambon and How Goodness Happened There_ , New York: 1985

Heppner, Ernest, _Shanghai Refuge: A Memoir of the WW II Jewish Ghetto_ , 1995

Kenally, Thomas, _Schindler's List_ , New York: 1982

Laqueur, Walter, _The Terrible Secret: An Investigation into the Suppression
of Information About Hitler's "Final Solution_ , 1980

Lester, Elenore, _Wallenberg: The Man in the Iron Web_ , N.J.: 1982

Levine, Hillel, _In Search of Sugihara_ , 1996

Lipstadt, Deborah, _Beyond Belief: The American Press and the Coming of the
Holocaust_ , New York: 1986

Lookstein, Haskel, _Were We Our Brother's Keepers?_ , N.Y.: 1988

Meltzer, Milton, _Rescue: The Story of How Gentiles Saved Jews in the
Holocaust_ , New York: 1988

Morse, Arthur D., _While Six Million Died: A Chronicle of American Apathy_ ,
New York: 1968

Mochizuki, Ken, _Passage to Freedom: The Sugihara Story_ , 1997

Oliner, Samuel P., and Pearl M. Oliner, _The Altruistic Personality:Rescuers
of Jews During the Holocaust_ , Hoboken, NJ: 1993

Paldiel, Mordechai, _Sheltering the Jews_ , 1997

Ramati, Alexander, _The Assissi Underground_ , New York: 1978

Ritter, Carol and Sondra Myers, ed., _The Courage to Care: Rescuers of Jews
During the Holocaust_ , New York: 1986

Rohrlich, Ruby, ed., _Resisting the Holocaust_ , 1998

Rubenstein, William D., _The Myth of Rescue: Why the Democracies Could Not
Have Saved More Jews from the Nazis_ , N.Y., 1997

Ryan, Donna, _The Holocaust and the Jews of Marseilles_ , 1996

Ryan, Michael D., _Human Responses to the Holocaust_ , New York: 1981

Schwarz, Ted, _Walking With the Damned: The Shocking Murder of the Man Who
Freed 30,000 Prisoners From the Nazis_ , N.Y.: 1992

Silver, Eric, _The Book of the Just: The Unsung Heroes Who Rescued Jews from
Hitler_ , New York: 1992

Tec, Nechama, _When Light Pierced the Darkness: Righteous Christians and the
Polish Jews_ , New York: 1985

\------------, _In the Lion's Den_ , New York: 1990

Wasserstein, Bernard, _Britain and the Jews of Europe, 1939-1945_ , London:
1979

Wyman, David S., _The Abandonment of the Jews_ , New York: 1985

\---------, _Paper Walls: America and the Refugee Crisis, 1938-1941_ , New
York: 1985

Zuccotti, Susan, _The Italians and the Holocaust_ , 1996  


**J. THE HOLOCAUST AND THE CATHOLIC CHURCH**

Aarons, Mark and Loftus, John, _Unholy Trinity_ , 1992

Chadwick, Owen, _Britain and the Vatican During WW II_ , 1988

Cornwall, John, _Hitler's Pope_ , 1998

Friedlander, Saul, _Pius XII and the Third Reich: A Documentation_ , New York:
1966

Hochhuth, Rolf, _The Deputy_ , New York: 1964

Morley, John, _Vatican Diplomacy and the Jews During the Holocaust: 1939-1943_
, New York: 1980

Rhodes, Anthony _The Vatican in the Age of the Dictators_ , New York: 1973

Tec, Nechama, _When Light Pierced the Darkness: Christian Rescue of Jews in
Nazi-Occupied Poland_ , New York: 1987

Weisbord, Robert G., _The Chief Rabbi, the Pope, and the Holocaust_ , New
Brunswick, U.S.A.: 1992  
    
    


**K. WOMEN, CHILDREN, AND OTHER VICTIMS OF THE HOLOCAUST**

Adler, David A., _We Remember the Holocaust_ , New York: 1989

Bridenthal, Renate, et. al. _When Biology Becomes Destiny: Women in Weimar and
Nazi Germany_ , New York: 1984

Cheles, Luciano, et al., eds., _Neo-Fascism in Europe_ , London: 1991

Delbo, Charlotte, _Auschwitz and After_ , 1997

Dwork, Deborah, _Children With a Star: Jewish Youth in Nazi Europe_ , New
Haven, CT: 1991

Eliach, Yaffa, _We Were Children Just Like You_ , New York: 1990

Epstein, Helen, _Children of the Holocaust_ , New York: 1988

Gurewitsch, Bonnie, _Mothers, sisters, Resisters_ , 1998

Heger, Heinz, _Men With the Pink Triangle_ , 1994

Holliday, Laurel, ed., _Children in the Holocaust & WW II_, 1996

Grynberg, Henryk, _Children of Zion_ , 1998

Koonz, Claudia, _Mother's in the Fatherland: Women, the Family and Nazi
Politics_ , New York: 1988

Lagnado, Lucette Matalon, and Shiela Cohn Dekel, _Children of theFlames: Dr.
Josef Mengele and the Untold Story of the Twins of Auschwitz_ , New York: 1947

Laska, Vera, _Women in the Resistance and in the Holocaust: TheVoices of
Eyewitnesses_ , Westport, CT: 1983

Lukas, Richard, _Did the Children Cry? Hitler's War Against Jewish and Polish
Children_ , 1994

Meltzer, Milton, _Never to Forget: The Jews of the Holocaust_ , New York: 1977

Ofer, Dalia, _Women in the Holocaust_ , 1998

Peck, Jean, _At the Fire's Center: Love and Holocaust Survival_ , 1998

Rittner, Carol and John K. Roth, _Different Voices: Women and the Holocaust_ ,
1993

Sliwowska, Wiktoria, _The Last Eyewittnesses: Children of the Holocaust Speak_
, 1998

Toll, Nelly S., _Behind the Secret Window: A Memoir of Hidden Childhood During
World War Two_ , New York: 1993  


**L. SWITZERLAND AND OTHER CONTEMPORARY ISSUES**

Bower, Tom, _Nazi Gold_ , 1997

Lebor, Adam, _Hitler's Secret Bankers_ , 1997

Pross, Christian, _Paying for the Past: The Struggle for Reparations for
Surviving Victims of the Nazi Terror_ , 1998

Ziegler, Jean, ed., _The Swiss, the Gold, and the Dead_ , 1998  
    
    


**M. THE HOLOCAUST IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE**

Baldwin, Peter, ed., _Reworking the Past: Hitler, the Holocaust,and the
Historians' Debate_ , Boston: 1990

Evans, Richard, _In Hitler's Shadow: West German Historians andThe Attempt to
Escape from the Nazi Past_ , New York: 1989

Lipstadt, Deborah, _Denying the Holocaust: The Growing Assault on Truth and
Memory_ , New York: 1993

Mayer, Arno, _Why Did the Heavens Not Darken?: The Final Solution in History_
, New York: 1988

Maier, Charles, _The Unmasterable Past: History, Holocaust and German National
Identity_ , Cambridge: 1988

Miller, Judith, _One By One By One: Facing the Holocaust_ , New York, 1990

\---------, _Reworking the Past: Hitler, the Holocaust, and the Historians'
Debate_ , Boston: 1990  
    
    


**N. GENOCIDE AS A GLOBAL PHENOMENON**

Aarons, Mark, _East Timor: A Western Made Tragedy_ , 1992

Becker, Elizabeth, _When the War Was Over: the Voices of Cambodia's Revolution
and Its People_ , New York: 1986

Carlton, Eric, _Massacres: A Historical Perspective_ , 1994

DesPres, Terrence, "Remembering Armenia," in _The ArmenianGenocide in
Perspective_ , ed. by Richard G. Hovannisian, New Brunswick, N.J.: 1986

Fein, Helen, ed., _The Prevention of Genocide: Rwanda and Yugoslavia
Reconsidered_ , 1994

Jernazian, Ephraim K., _Judgement Unto Truth_ , translated by Alice Haig, New
Jersey: 1984

Kuper, Leo, _Genocide: Its Political Use in the Twentieth Century_ , New
Haven, CT: 1985

Sarafian, Ara, _United States Official Documents on the Armenian Genocide_ ,
Watertown, MA: 1994

Ternon, Yves, _The Armenians: History of a Genocide_ , translated from the
French by Rouben C. Cholakian, New York: 1991

Totten, Sam, et. al, _Century of Genocide: Eyewitness Accounts and Critical
Views_ , N.Y., 1997

Walker, Christopher, _Armenia: The Survival of a Nation_ , N.Y.: 1980  
    
    


**O. THE LITERATURE OF THE HOLOCAUST**

Borowski, Tadeusz, _This Way for the Gas, Ladies and Gentlemen_ , New York:
1992

Colin, Amy D., _Paul Celan: Holograms of Darkness_ , Bloomington, IN: 1991

Delbo, Charlotte, _None of Us Will Survive_ , Boston: 1968

Fuchs, Elinor, ed., _Plays of the Holocaust: An International Anthology_ , New
York: 1987

Glatstein, Jacob, _Anthology of Holocaust Literature_ , N.Y.: 1973

Keneally, Thomas, _Schindler's List_ , New York: 1992

Levi, Primo, _Survival in Auschwitz_ , New York: 1987

Wiesel, Elie, _Night_ , New York: 1960  


