  
  
  
  
  
  

[Home](/911/)  
  
Syllabus  
  
[assignments](/911/stories/storyReader$84)  
  
[the day](/911/stories/storyReader$7)  
  
[The Media](/911/stories/storyReader$9)  
  
[Islam and  
the Arab World](/911/stories/storyReader$10)  
  
[Terrorism](/911/stories/storyReader$11)  
  
[Afghanistan](/911/stories/storyReader$12)  
  
[war against  
terrorism](/911/stories/storyReader$13)  
  
[International  
Relations](/911/stories/storyReader$14)  
  
[American  
Government](/911/stories/storyReader$15)  
  
[Literary/Artistic  
Themes](/911/stories/storyReader$16)  
  
[Other  
Topics](/911/stories/storyReader$17)  
  
[library and  
information resources](/911/stories/storyReader$57)  
  
[Causes and  
Consequences Weblog Writing Center (editors
only)](http://wl.middlebury.edu/911onlinewriting)  

* * *

**Discussion  
  
**[Recent Discussion](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/discuss/)  
  
[Create New Topic](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/discuss/edit/newTopic)  

* * *

[Join Now](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/member/signup)  
[Login](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/member/login)

|

[ Search this site](http://search.freefind.com/find.html?id=7216058) or [ the
web](http://search.freefind.com/find.html?id=7216058&t=w)

powered by [FreeFind](http://www.freefind.com)  
  

Site search  Web search

|  [![300banner: ](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$48)
](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/ "September 11: Causes and
Consequences")  
**Welcome! September 11: Causes and Consequences First Year Seminar**

### Syllabus - FS 028, Fall 2002

|

###### [Reading list](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/about#readinglist)

|

###### [Bibliographies](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/about#bib)

|

###### [Course
requirements](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/about#require)  
  
---|---|---  
  
**General Information**

_**Course meeting times**_

The first meeting of FS 028 will be from 8:30 - 10:30 a.m. on Tuesday,
September 3, in Munroe 214.

Subsequent meetings will be on Mondays and Wednesdays, from 2:35 - 3:50 p.m.,
in the Ross Commons seminar room.  Please note that the class will not meet on
Wednesday, October 23 (the Friday class schedule is observed that day, prior
to the midterm break) and on Wednesday, November 27 (Thanksgiving break).

On three Thursdays - November 7, 14, and 21 - we will have the opportunity to
meet simultaneously, using PictureTel technology, with students in
"Projektgruppe Amerikanistik: September 11: Causes and Consequences," a course
at the [Johannes Gutenberg-Universitat](http://www.uni-mainz.de/) in Mainz,
Germany (a partner university of the [C.V. Starr-Middlebury School in
Germany](http://www.middlebury.edu/~msa/germany/index.html)) that is studying
much of the same material that will be covered in FS 028.  The PictureTel
sessions, which will be conducted in English, will be held from 12:30 - 1:30
p.m. on those Thursdays at the [Center for Educational
Technology](http://www.cet.middlebury.edu/), in the old court house in the
center of town.  I hope that as many members of FS 028 as possible will be
able to attend these sessions.  The German students will also be participating
with us in on-line discussions of several readings.

_**Contacting the instructor**_

I will hold office hours on Thursdays from 2 to 4 p.m. in Old Chapel 105.  No
appointment is necessary.  I will often, but not always, be available at the
Ross Commons classroom 15-20 minutes before the start of class.

E-mail is the best way to communicate with me outside of class.  I respond to
e-mail messages promptly.

I recognize that there are some situations where e-mail is not an appropriate
means of communication.  My office phone is 443-5871.  If you need to talk
with me right away, including on evenings and weekends, and cannot reach me on
the office phone, you may call my cell phone at (802) 236-0991.  I check voice
mail on both my office and cell phones regularly.

_**Class meetings, attendance, and deadlines for assignments**_

All students are expected to attend class on a regular basis.  Attendance will
be taken into account in determining the portion of the course grade for
"informal writing and class participation."

The Commons deans may grant excuses for absences from class for medical and
compelling personal reasons.

If you are a member of an athletic team that has games on Monday or Wednesday
afternoons during the fall term, please consult with me as soon as you have
received the schedule from your coach so we may determine how you may make up
the work covered on game days.

Unless otherwise specified, assignments must be posted on the course Weblog no
later than 11:59 p.m. on the date they are due.  Late assignments will be
marked down one-third of a grade (e.g., from a B+ to a B) for up to three days
late and one full grade if they are more than three days late.

The Commons deans may extend deadlines for papers and projects if warranted by
compelling personal circumstances, illnesses, or injuries.

_**Collaboration, citation, and the Honor Code**_

You are encouraged to discuss the course and the readings with other students
outside of class, in both face-to-face and on-line discussions.  You may talk
with other students in the class about the paper assignments, and receive
comments and suggestions from other students, and from peer writing tutors,
about your paper drafts.  However, all words that appear in papers submitted
under your name must have been composed by you.  Peer tutors are told, as part
of their orientation, that their responsibility is to serve as editors and
critics, not as substitute writers.

Groups of students working on research projects should divide the work up in
such a way that all members of the group contribute substantially and equally
to the conception, research, design, and presentation of the project.  The
same grade will be assigned to all members of a group working on a particular
project.

We will talk about the Middlebury College academic honesty statement in class
on Monday, September 9.  You are encouraged to read the section on research in
Troyka's _Quick Access_ handbook early in the semester, especially the
material on quotations, paraphrasing, and plagiarism on pp. 126-134.  If you
have questions about the applicability of this section to a paper on which you
are working, please ask!

The documentation style that should be used in FS 028 is the MLA (Modern
Language Association) style.  This style includes in-text citations within the
body of the paper and a list of "Works Cited" at the end of the paper.  Guides
to MLA style documentation, including how to cite online sources, may be found
on pp. 138-182 of Troyka, at the [MLA Web site](http://www.mla.org/), and on
the [Middlebury College Libraries Web
site](http://www.middlebury.edu/%7Elib/citing.mla.html).

Please include the Honor Code pledge ("I have neither given nor received
unauthorized aid on this assignment.") and your name at the end of the four
papers, draft as well as final versions, that you submit for FS 028.

**Reading list**

Students in FS 028 will be expected to read [The New York
Times](http://www.nytimes.com/) and/or [The Washington
Post](http://www.washingtonpost.com/) on a daily basis during the fall term.
Although these newspapers' Web sites require registration, there is no charge
for accessing them on-line.

Details of the required reading for each day will be posted on the
[Assignments](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/stories/storyReader$84)
page on the course Weblog.

**_Required texts_**

There will be five required texts for this course.  These books will be
available for purchase at the Middlebury College Store.

Karen Armstrong, _Islam: A Short History_

Joseph Conrad _,_[ _The Secret
Agent_](http://www.bibliomania.com/0/-/frameset.html) __ (Oxford World's
Classics edition)

Gideon Rose and James Hoge, eds., [_How Did This Happen? Terrorism and the New
War_](http://www.foreignaffairs.org/bookreviews/bookpromo.html)

Strobe Talbott and Nayan Chanda, eds., [_The Age of Terror: America and the
World After September 11_](http://www.yale.edu/opa/v30.n5/story5.html)

Lynn Quitman Troyka, _Quick Access: Reference for Writers,_ 3rd edition

**_Library reserve list_**

The following books will be on two-hour reserve at Starr Library.  In some
instances, reading assignments will be made in these reserve books.  All of
the books will be available to you as resources for your research papers.

Fouad Ajami, _The Dream Palace of the Arabs: A Generation's Odyssey_

Karen Armstrong, _The Battle for God_

Karen Armstrong, _Holy War: The Crusades and Their Impact on Today's World_

Karen Armstrong, _Muhammad: A Biography of the Prophet_

Benjamin Barber, _Jihad vs. McWorld_

Aaron Beck, _Prisoners of Hate_

Peter L. Berger, _Holy War, Inc: Inside the Secret World of Osama Bin Laden_

Jonathan Bloom and Sheila Blair, _Islam: A Thousand Years of Faith and Power_

John Bowker, _What Muslims Believe_

Thomas L. Friedman, _The Lexus and the Olive Tree_

Rohan Gunaratna, _Inside Al Qaeda: Global Network of Terror_

Fred Halliday, _Two Hours That Shook the World: September 11, 2001: Causes and
Consequences_

Samuel Huntington, _The Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of World
Order_

Roland Jacquard, _In the name of Osama bin Laden_

Chalmers Johnson, [_Blowback: The Costs and Consequences of American
Empire_](http://www.thirdworldtraveler.com/Blowback_CJohnson/Blowback_CJohnson.html)

Mark Juergensmeyer, _Terror in the Mind of God: The Global Rise of Religious
Violence_

Robert D. Kaplan, _The Coming Anarchy: Shattering the Dreams of the Post-Cold
War_

Paul Kennedy, _The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: Economic Change and
Military Conflict from 1500 to 2000_

Walter Laqueur, [ _The New Terrorism: Fanaticism and the Arms of Mass
Destruction_](http://www.oup-usa.org/publicity/pr_0195118162.html)

Bernard Lewis, _What Went Wrong?: Western Impact and Middle East Response_

John J. Mearsheimer, [_The Tragedy of Great Power
Politics_](http://www.wwnorton.com/catalog/fall01/002025.htm)

Karl Ernest Meyer and Shareen Blair Brysac, _Tournament of Shadows: The Great
Game and Race for Empire in Central Asia_

Judith Miller, Stephen Engelberg, and William Broad, _Germs: Biological
Weapons and America's Secret War_

Benny Morris, _Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist-Arab Conflict,
1881-2001_

Joseph S. Nye, _The Paradox of American Power: Why the World's Only Superpower
Can't Go It Alone_

Paul Pillar and Michael Armacost, [_Terrorism and U.S. Foreign
Policy_](http://www.brook.edu/dybdocroot/press/books/terrorism.htm)

Ahmed Rashid, _Jihad: The Rise of Militant Islam in Central Asia_

Ahmed Rashid, _Taliban: Militant Islam, Oil, and Fundamentalism in Central
Asia_

Olivier Roy, _The Failure of Political Islam_

Edward Said, _Covering Islam: How the Media and the Experts Determine How We
See the Rest of the World_

Robin Wright, _Sacred Rage: The Wrath of Militant Islam_

[top](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/about#top)

**Bibliographies**

[_The Threat of Terrorism and the Attacks of September 11,
2001_](http://www.odl.state.ok.us/usinfo/terrorism/911.htm) is an annotated
bibliography presenting a sampling of the U.S. Government information and
materials concerning terrorism and the September 11 terrorist attacks.
(Oklahoma Department of Libraries)

Links to many other bibliographies are available through Brenda Ellis' Weblog
[_Resources on September 11, 2001_](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/ellis/)

[top](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/about#top)

**Course requirements**

  1. Informal writing (participation in on-line discussion) 
  2. Formal writing (four critical and analytical papers, each 750 to 1500 words).  Since revision is an important part of writing, you will be asked to submit multiple drafts of these papers for revision and further development over the course of the semester.  You will submit the final versions of your papers as part of portfolios due at mid-semester and at the end of the term.  Assignments[Reactions on the day paper](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/stories/storyReader$7) 
  3. Multimedia "news documentaries" on topics related to September 11, including sound, images, and accompanying research papers.  These assignments will be group projects in which students will work together, thus providing preparation for collaborative work in both academia and "the real world."  The projects will also be designed so that you will develop your "information fluency" skills.  Students in each group will be responsible for making oral presentations of their work to the class as a whole, and leading discussions of their projects.  The completed projects and digitized video of the class presentations and discussions will be added to the course weblog.

**_Due dates for written work and research projects_**

Friday, September 13 - first draft of paper 1

Friday, September 20 - second draft of paper 1

Friday, September 27 - first draft of paper 2

Friday, October 4 - second draft of paper 2

Monday, October 21 - porfolio with final draft of papers 1 and 2

Friday, November 1 - first draft of paper 3

Friday, November 8 - second draft of paper 3

Friday, November 15 - first draft of paper 4

Monday, November 18 and Wednesday, November 20 - research projects presented
in class

Friday, November 22 - second draft of paper 4

Monday, December 9 - portfolio with final draft of papers 3 and 4; final
version of research projects

**_Computation of grades_**

Informal writing and class participation - 25%

First portfolio - 25%

Second portfolio - 25%

Research project - 25%

[top](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/about#top)

[![](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/images/skull)](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/discuss/msgReader$2)  
[Mail This Story](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/mail/mailStory$2)  
[Print-Friendly Version](/911/about?print-friendly=true)  
  
---  
  
[![Create your own Manila site in minutes. Everyone's doing
it!](http://www.scripting.com/images/thisIsAManilaSite2.gif)](http://manila.userland.com/
"Create your own Manila site in minutes. Everyone's doing it!")  
  
  
  

* * *

  

This site is using the [MinimalWhite](http://minimalwhite.weblogs.com/) theme.

