**Terrorism**



   POLS 295B                                                      Office
Hours: TTh  10-12 and MWF 1-2

   Professor Strong
Office: Room 308

   Winter 2002                                                          Email:
[strongr@wlu.edu](mailto:strongr@wlu.edu) Phone: 8905



**Purpose**

            This course will explore the modern phenomenon of terrorism.  We will define terrorism, consider its motivations, review the new dangers associated with terrorist access to weapons of mass destruction, and debate policy proposals that might be taken by democratic regimes to reduce the likelihood of terrorism or to mitigate its consequences. 



**Required Reading**

            Students should purchase the following books:

                        _Inside Terrorism_ , Bruce Hoffman

                        _Arab and Jew_ , David Shipler

                        _Terror in the Mind of God_ , Mark Juergensmeyer

                        _The Ultimate Terrorists_ , Jessica Stern

                        _Germs_ , Judith Miller, et .al.

                        _Terrorism and American Foreign Policy,_ Paul Pillar

                        _Rebel Hearts_ , Kevin Toolis

            In addition, there will be occasional handouts and discussions of current national and international events related to terrorism that would be facilitated by regular reading of a national newspaper, either the _Washington Post_ or the _New York Times_.



# Guest Speakers and "Lab" Sessions of Friday Afternoons

            This course has three separate sections, but students in all the sections will meet on selected Friday afternoons to hear guest speakers, watch videos, or take examinations.  These Friday afternoon sessions, from 2 to 3 p.m. (listed by the registrar as the "lab" hour for this course), are not voluntary and particular importance will be assigned to those classes with outside speakers.  Failure to attend these sections will result in a lowered grade at the end of the term.



**Grading**

            There will be three elements in the calculation of final grades:

                        Mid-Term Exam                                             30%

                        Final Exam or Research Paper                       30%

                        Quiz Grades & Executive Summaries            40%

            Regular attendance and participation in class discussions are expected for this course and final grades may be raised or lowered depending on attendance and evidence of preparation for class discussions.  Excessive absence will result in a grade of F.  All tests and papers will be completed in accordance with Honor Code regulations.



# Quizzes and Executive Summaries

            There will be occasional unannounced quizzes at the beginning of class.  The topic for the quiz will be the reading assignment for that day and/or any special event (guest speaker or video) from the previous class period.  In addition, there will be several one-page writing assignments called executive summaries.  These will involve writing a brief synopsis of the important ideas in a given reading assignment.  Executive summaries are due in class on the day the summarized material is being discussed.  There are no make-up quizzes; and late summaries will _not_ be accepted.

           



## POL 295B Terrorism Topics and Reading Assignments



**             Date                Topic & Reading Assignment**

**              **

            1/7                   Introduction

            1/9                   Defining Terrorism (Hoffman, chp 1-2)

            **1/11*                Video, "The Battle of Algiers"**   (Hoffman, chp 3) **               **

            1/14                 Religion & Terrorism (Hoffman, chp 4)                   

            1/16                 Modern Terrorism (Hoffman, chp 5-6)         

            1/18                 Terrorism Today and Tomorrow (Hoffman, chp 7)              

            1/21                 Terror in the Mind of God (Juergensmeyer, chp 1-4)                        

            1/23                 Sikhs and Subways (Juergensmeyer, chp 5-6)

            **1/25*                Video, "Arab & Jew Wounded Spirit in a Promised Land"        **

            1/28                 Arab & Jew (chp   )

            1/30                 Arab & Jew (chp   )

            **1/31*                Special  Evening Lecture by David Shipler**

**2/1*                  Guest Lecture: David Shipler**

            2/4                   Theater of Terror (Juergensmeyer, chp 7-8)

            2/6                   Martyrs and the Mind of God (Juergensmeyer, chp 9-11)    

**2/7*                  Special Tuesday class & evening lecture Bob Gates**

**             2/8*                 Guest Lecture: Winston Davis **Aum
Shinrikyo

            2/11                 _Mid-Term Exam_

            2/13                 Germs  (Miller, preface & chp 1-3)

            2 **/15*                Guest Lecture: Gary Crocker**

                                    _Winter Term Break_

            2/25                 Germs  (chp 4-6)

            2/27                 Germs  (chp 7-8)

            **3/1*                  Guest Lecture: Martha Crenshaw**

            3/4                   Germs  (chp 9-10)

            3/6                   Germs  (chp 11-12)

            3/8                   Terrorism and American Foreign Policy (Pillar, chp 1-3)

            3/11                 Terrorism and American Foreign Policy (chp 4)

            3/13                 Terrorism and American Foreign policy (chp 5-6)

            **3/15*                Guest Lecture: Paul Pillar**  (chp 7-8)

            3/18                 Rebel Hearts (Toolis, chp 1-2)

                        3/18     **Special Evening Session with General Anthony Zinni**

            3/20                 Rebel Hearts (chp 3)

            3/25                 Rebel Hearts (chp 4-5)

            3/27                 Rebel Hearts (chp 6-7)

            **3/29*                Guest Lecture: Rick Kirgis**

            4/1                   Nuclear Terrorism (Stern, chp 1-4)

            4/3                   Nuclear Terrorism (chp 5-8)

            4/4                   Special Thursday Evening Review Session 

                                    _Final Exam_

_ _

*Dates in bold type are sessions when all three sections will meet together in Science Addition 214 (or another assigned room) at 2 p.m. or in the evening.

