  **PHL 313 ZP AND ZS - BUSINESS ETHICS**  
**E-LEARNING [Home Study]**  
**SUMMER, 2002**  
---  
**Lawrence P. Ulrich, Ph.D.**  
**[Lawrence.Ulrich@notes.udayton.edu](mailto:Lawrence.Ulrich@notes.udayton.edu)**  
**SYLLABUS**  
  
* * *

[General](index.htm)  
[Homepage](index.htm) |  [Course](313s02.html)  
[Homepage](313s02.html) |  [Course](313s02coursedes.html)  
[Description for](313s02coursedes.html)  
[Registration](313s02coursedes.html) |  [Syllabus](313s02syllb.html) |
[Registration](313s02regprocd.html)  
[Procedures](313s02regprocd.html)  
[(and Contract)](313s02regprocd.html) |  [Reading](313s02assign.html)  
[Assignments](313s02assign.html) |  [Course](313s02deadline.html)  
[Assignment](313s02deadline.html)  
[Deadlines](313s02deadline.html) |  [Readings](313ereserve.html)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
[Links](313links.html) |  [Exam 1](313s02exam1.html) |  [Exam
2](313s02exam2.html) |  [Exam 3](313s02exam3.html) |  [Case
Study](313s02casestudy.html)  
[Outline](313s02casestudy.html) |  [Threaded](313s02threddisc.html)  
[Discussions](313s02threddisc.html) |  [Chat Rooms](313s02chatrooms.html) |
[Q & A](313s02q&a.html)  
  
* * *

**Home Study [e-learning] Course :**

As an **e-learning** [Home Study] Course, this course is primarily designed as
a form of independent study. Thus, this experience involves minimal contact
with the professor. However, the professor will be more than willing to
discuss matters related to the course over the phone or by e-mail and will
also meet with students in the office if the periodic need arises for that
personal contact. Since there will be little, if any, face-to-face contact
between the professor and the student, the only way that learning can be
assessed will be through the student's communication through writing and
electronic communication. Therefore, the student will have to write more for
this course than would be the case with an in-class course in order to
demonstrate mastery of the subject matter.

**_This course has been approved as a General Education Course and for the
Business Professional in a Global Society Cluster._**  
  **REGISTRATION:**

**This is a permission course so the student will need to consult with the
professor, sign a contract ([CLICK HERE](313s01contract.html)), and secure the
approval of the student's adviser to register. [CLICK
HERE](313s01regprocd.html) to see some (hopefully helpful) guidelines for
registration.**  
---  
  
**General Course Characterization:**

This course will explore the ethical issues underlying the role of business on
both a macrocosmic (global and national) and microcosmic (practices in the
workplace) level. It will consider the following issues: (1) ethical
frameworks for national and international business practices; (2) truth-
telling and advertising; (3) the nature and moral responsibility of
corporations; (4) private property and profit; (5) employer-employee
relationships; (6) diversity and affirmative action; and (7) the role of
business and environmental concerns.

**While accommodations will be made to students who do not have access to
computers over the summer, the preferable way to take this course is through
the professor's website
<[http://homepages.udayton.edu/~ulrich/](file:///c:/documents and
settings/faculty/my documents/Faculty/Desktop/)>**

**Course Requirements:**

There will be three (3) essay examinations and one (1) case study paper. Essay
questions will be posted on the website early in the course to act as a study
guide. [ **[CLICK HERE](313s00exam1.html)** for a sample.] There will be six
(6) questions to be answered per period and the answers to the questions
should be about one (1) to two (2) pages in length, typed double-spaced. Thus,
the writing that the student will do for the 3 examinations will vary from
eighteen  (18) to thirty-six  (36) pages in length. There will be a total of
452 pages of required reading material from the text books and the website
readings for the three examinations.

There will be three threaded discussions during the course. **[CLICK
HERE](313s01threddisc.html)** to see what is involved in a threaded
discussion. Essentially a threaded discussion involves making a series of
comments (5) on a case or topic that is posted on the website. This exercise
will allow students to have some direct contact with each other even though
there are no class sessions. Each of the threaded discussions will count as
ten (10) points toward each of the exams (exams are worth 90 points each).

Three (3) chat rooms (live sessions) will also be held during the course. Each
chat room will count as ten (10) extra credit points. **[CLICK
HERE](313s01chatrooms.html)** to see what is involved in a chat room (live
session).

The case study paper should be about eight (8) to ten (10) pages (double-
spaced or the equivalent) in length. Thus, you will generate about twenty-six
(26) to forty-six (46) pages overall (including the 3 examinations and the
case study) for the course. While this may look like a great deal of writing,
students must remember that this work must compensate for no class meetings.
The final grade will be determined by an average of the three examinations and
the case study paper. The extra credit chat room will be figured into the
total points as a basis for the average of the three examinations and case
study paper.

**[CLICK HERE](313s01assign.html)** to see the course assignments.

**KEEP COPIES OF ALL MATERIALS SENT TO THE INSTRUCTOR.**

**Grading Scale:**

90-100 = A; 80-89 = B; 70-79 = C; 60-69 = D; 59 and below = F.

**Video:**

The Department of Philosophy has produced a series of three videos under the
general title of "Navigating to Ethical Decisions." These videos are intended
to increase understanding of ethical systems ------ a goal of the first
assignment of this course. Copies of the videos will be made available to
students by the end of the Winter term. The videos must be returned to the
professor. A final grade will not be assigned to a student if the video is not
returned to the professor.

**Texts:**

**The textbooks will be available in the bookstore prior to the end of the
current term.**

Donaldson, Werhane and Cording. _Ethical Issues in Business: A Philosophical
Approach. 7_ th edition. Prentice Hall, 2002. ISBN 0-13-092387-7.  
Newton, Lisa and Schmidt, David. _Wake Up Calls: Classic Cases in Business
Ethics_. Wadsworth, 1996\. 0-534-25338-5.  
Articles [Readings](313ereserve.html) selected from ERESERVE in the library.  

* * *

  


