Email: _[Senate@unlinfo.unl.edu _](mailto:Senate@unlinfo.unl.edu)_

_Website:[http://www.unl.edu/asenate/welcome.htm](http://www.unl.edu)_

_**UNL ACADEMIC SENATE MEETING MINUTES**_

**_City Campus Student Union Centennial Room**_

**_December 2, 1997**_

_**Presidents James Ford, Patricia Kennedy, and Peter Bleed Presiding**_

**_1.0 Call to Order**_

_President Ford called the meeting to order at 2:30 p.m._

_**2.0 Announcements**_

__2.1 Voting Policy at Senate Meetings_

President Ford reminded the members of the meeting that only Senators were
allowed to vote. He stated that this could be distinguished with the yellow
name card for each of the Senators.

_2.2 Shades of Fashion Show_

President Ford announced that a Shades of Fashion show was to be held at the
East Campus Union Ballroom on December 4th and Senate members were welcome to
attend.

_2.3 Martin Luther King's Birthday Observance Committee_

President Ford announced that a committee to plan activities to honor Dr.
Martin Luther King's birthday was voted on and approved by the Executive
Committee with Pat Kennedy designated as Chair. Kennedy reported that the
committee was formed on November 5th and members currently were Evelyn
Jacobson, Associate Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs, Ron Stevens,
Communication Studies, and Omar Valentine and Sarah Russell, Undergraduate
Students. Kennedy reported that activities were being co-sponsored with ASUN
and the African American program and the Senate Executive Committee. She
stated that the Chancellor's office was being very supportive and had obtained
the Lied Center for that day. Kennedy welcomed anyone else who would be
interested in working with the committee. She reported that a mailing will be
sent to all faculty announcing the activities scheduled for Dr. Martin Luther
King's birthday.

**3.0 Approval of 9/9/97 Minutes _(Secretary Albrecht)**_

Haller, English, moved and Hallbeck, Industrial Management and Systems
Engineering, seconded approval of the minutes as amended.

_**_4.0 Dale Ekart - Recycling Program at UNL**

Ekart distributed information concerning the recycling program at UNL. He
stated that containers for aluminum cans and plastic bottles were placed in a
few locations on campus but that this will be expanding. He reported that the
trend indicated that waste was down and recycling was up with paper
representing the biggest portion of waste. Ekart reported that nearly all of
the products recycled are sold with income varying from $16,000 - $40,000
depending on the market. Scheideler asked about the usage of styrofoam in the
Unions. Ekart reported that he has been trying to convince the vendors in the
Union to use alternative containers since we have no facilities to recycle
styrofoam. Ekart reported that his staff would try to estimate space and time
for pick up but he urged anyone in need of pick up should contact his office.
****

**6.0 Committee Reports**

_6.1 University Appeals_

_6.2 University Judicial Board_

DeShayes, Chair, University Judicial Board, introduced Charles Greene,
Director of Student Judicial Affairs. Greene reported that the Office of
Student Judicial Affairs' role was to make students abide by the Student Code
of Conduct but he stated the office should be seen as an office of education
rather than an office of punishment. He stated that the majority of the
students come into the office after a violation has occurred and that he has
found that most have not read the Student Code of Conduct. Greene reported
that drinking continues to be the main problem on campus. Mientka,
Mathematics, thanked Greene for the work that he has been doing.

**7.0 Honorary Degree Approval**

Owomoyela, English, reported that the nominations came to the Honorary Degree
committee anonymously and not from the Senate and that they were to be voted
on during the Senate meeting. Mientka, Mathematics, stated that the degrees
received by the nominees were not stated. Osorio, Veterinary and Biomedical
Sciences, asked why they did not receive the ballots earlier. Jensen,
Psychology, stated that the ballots were not distributed earlier through
campus mail due to confidentiality concerns. Ford stated that the issue would
be discussed by the Executive Committee.

**8.0 Faculty Salary Resolution Vote _(Kennedy)**_

Kennedy reviewed the resolution presented at the November 4th meeting and
stated that the goal was to close the gaps in salary and benefits with our
peer institutions by the year 2000. Motion passed.

**9.0 Unfinished Business**

_9.1 University Wide Calendar Committee Resolution_

Sartori reported that the University Wide Calendar Committee developed a new
plan to address the Dr. Martin Luther King holiday observance as presented in
Resolution 1. Sartori stated that staff and employees should have the
opportunity to participate without having to take leave. He reported that he
discussed the resolution with the Chemistry department and they reported that
they could accept the Resolution. Jensen, Psychology, asked if the resolutions
were passed, would there then be an equal number of days in both semesters and
stated that he would argue for complete equality between the two semesters as
this facilitated planning. Sartori reported that there would be an equal
number of days in both semesters. Woodward, Mathematics, supported honoring
MLK day but did not agree that canceling classes was a good way to honor Dr.
King and he stated that some people may not be able to attend a Saturday class
due to religious reasons. Woodward stated that he preferred graduation being
pushed back one week. This would enable finals to be spread out over a longer
period of time and would allow more time for grading. Sartori stated that the
Calendar Committee discussed extending the academic semester but the Committee
agreed that it would be a greater inconvenience to a greater number of people
than having a Saturday class. Sartori replied that Saturday classes were
already a part of the academic calender and that some classes were currently
being taught on Saturdays. Bender, Journalism, stated that scheduling the
makeup day on a Saturday at the discretion of the instructor places the burden
on the instructor and suggested that the Saturday before MLK day be designated
as a regular class day. Sartori reported that the expectation was that each
campus would designate a particular Saturday as a makeup day. Harbison,
Chemistry, stated that the Chemistry department would like a Saturday
designated as the makeup day, although they preferred adding a Monday to the
schedule. Hallbeck, Industrial and Management Systems Engineering, stated that
Saturday would be a problem for those teaching CorpNet classes because some of
the sites are shut down for the weekend. Owomoyela, English, stated that
faculty were creative in designing their syllabus to fit one less day into the
schedule. Roysircar Sodowsky stated that faculty arrange their schedule to
allow time off for conferences they need to attend and there should be no
difference for observing MLK day. Zorn proposed an amendment to the motion
stating that "we in principle endorse the idea of a holiday celebrating Martin
Luther King's birthday with details of how to accommodate the holiday
discussed at a later date". Sartori did not accept this as a friendly motion.
Gay, Physics, seconded Zorn's motion. Clegg, Agronomy, suggested changing the
makeup day from "a Saturday" to "a day". Zorn accepted the change to his
substitute motion. Gay did not accept changes to the substitute motion.
Sartori suggested his original motion be changed to "arrangements will be made
to provide a makeup day". Ford, called for limiting the discussion. Harbison,
Chemistry, declared a procedural motion to override the emergency vote. Brand,
Parliamentarian, stated that the President had the option of limiting the
discussion. Motion failed to override the emergency motion. Weiss,
Agricultural Meteorology, stated that a one credit course should be taught for
freshmen to study non-violence and diversity issues extending over the
semester rather than just a one day holiday which will eventually turn into
just another extended three day weekend. Hodges, Horticulture, offered a
friendly amendment to Zorn's substitute motion, that "The Senate endorses the
proposal to observe Martin Luther King Day on the third Monday of January, by
instituting a set of programs, workshops, and other activities that will
appropriately commemorate the life of Dr. King and the ideals for which he
stood." Zorn did not accept the motion as a friendly amendment to his motion.
Hallbeck seconded Hodges amendment. Roysircar Sodowsky, reporting for the Town
Hall Diversity group, offered a substitute for the substitute motion, "We urge
that the third Monday of January be designated as an official holiday for the
University of Nebraska to honor the life, work, and message of the Rev. Martin
Luther King, Jr." Motion seconded by Bender. Hallbeck called the question.
Motion to end debate on the Roysircar Sodwosky substitute motion passed: 30
yes, 13 no. The Roysircar Sodwosky motion failed: 26 no, 16 yes. Brand,
Parliamentarian, stated that a quorum consisted of 43. Senior Vice Chancellor
Edwards urged the Senate to vote for the original motion. He stated that it
was time for the University to have a holiday to honor Dr. Martin Luther King
and that a positive vote would reaffirm the University's commitment to
diversity. Zorn called the question on the Hodges motion. Motion to end debate
on the Hodges motion passed: 41 yes, 2 no. The Hodges motion failed: 36 no, 8
yes. Question called to end debate on the Zorn amendment. Harbison, called for
quorum. Quorum counted at 44. Original motion as amended passed: 36 yes, 8 no.
Zorn amendment passed: 40 yes, 3 no.

The meeting adjourned at 5:00 p.m. The next Senate meeting will be January 13,
1997 in the Auditorium, Nebraska Center for Continuing Education, East Campus.
Respectfully submitted, Julie Albrecht, Secretary.

