Political Science 231 Video, Spring 2002  
Introduction to International Relations

[Back to PS 231 home page](231hmp.htm)

Instructor: Dr. Roland Stephen   (W) 513-1768  
Office: Caldwell 223                  (H) 832-7638

http://www2.chass.ncsu.edu/stephen/231hmp.htm  
[stephen@social.chass.ncsu.edu](mailto:stephen@social.chass.ncsu.edu)

Office hours: Tuesday 3:00- 5:00 p.m., and by appointment.

**INTRODUCTION**

The goal of this course is to understand why conflict--sometimes peaceful,
often violent--is so common in the world community.  For the most part (but
not exclusively) it will focus on the problem of conflict between nations or
countries.  However other actors, such as ethnic groups and firms, are also
important.  Why has war been so common in the past?  Is it now obsolete, at
least for the great powers? How do civil wars influence international
politics?  Could international economic competition lead to wider conflict?
Will countries ever be able to cooperate over environmental problems?  By
combining theory with knowledge of history and current events, students will
look for answers to these and other questions.

**REQUIREMENTS**

Students are required to write a paper on a subject they will choose from a
list of topics I supply.  There is a separate handout giving more details on
the paper.  It will be worth 25% of the final grade.

There will be two mid-term exams and one final exam (the final will be
cumulative, that is, it will draw on material from the whole of the class).
They will address the material covered in the readings and the lectures.  They
will be made up of a mixture of identifications and longer answers.  Each mid-
term will be worth 15% of the final grade, the final 25%.  The mid-terms and
final must be submitted online before the date indicated on the syllabus.
**_Contrary to statments made in the video there will be no map quiz in the
first mid-term._**

Different topics will be covered on a (roughly) weekly basis.  Homeworks must
be submitted online before the beginning of the last class in each topic.  We
will discuss the homework during that class.  Late submissions will be
accepted, but will be penalized.  The homework will consist of open-book
answers to a set of questions posted on the class web page.  Participation in
the discussion forum will be worth 10% and performance in the homework will be
worth 10% of the final grade.

The final letter grade will follow a plus/minus grading system.  Grading will
not be done on a curve.

**READINGS**

Most of the readings will be drawn from two textbooks, which students are
required to purchase from the student store.

Nye, Joseph S. Jr., 1999, 3rd. ed., _Understanding International Conflicts: An
Introduction to Theory and History_   (New York: Harper Collins).

Barry B. Hughes, 1999, 4th. ed., _Continuity and Change in World Politics:
Competing Perspectives_ (Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall).

There will be other readings, which are listed below with asterisks (**).
These have been placed in the library, and are available to be photocopied.
They are also available on electronic reserve--each of these readings has an
html link in the syllabus.  In order to make the most of this class students
are also urged to read a good newspaper, for example the New York Times or
Wall Street Journal (it is very easy to view [the web version of the New York
Times](http://www.nytimes.com/) .  I also recommend weekly, monthly or
quarterly journals such as the Economist, or Foreign Affairs (a wide-ranging
list of U.S. and foreign newspapers may be accessed through [the International
Links Page](hirlhmp.html) .

**PART I**  
**ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK**

_Topic A:   Introduction to the class.  _ 1/7-1/11

The new world disorder and the problem of conflict and cooperation under
anarchy.  Actors, level of analysis, power.  Economic, technological and
political change.

   Nye, Chapter 1, pp 1-29  
   Hughes, Part I, Chapter 1, pp 1-26

[Facts and Concepts](231f&ca.html)  
[Homework](homeworkfms/231hmwka.html)

_Topic B: Realism and the uses of history.   _ 1/14-1/25

The Peloponnesian War in Greece. The rise of Europe and the Treaty of
Westphalia. Realism in international politics.

   Nye, Chapter 2 (part), pp 30-39, 47-53  
   Hughes, Part II, Chapter 3 (part), pp 41-45, and  Chapter 4 (part), pp
61-69  
   [ **Thuycdides, "The Melian dialogue."](http://www.lib.ncsu.edu/cgi-
bin/e-res-wrap.pl?semester=Spr99&doc=d515.pdf)

[Facts and Concepts](231f&cb.html)  
[Homework](homeworkfms/231hmwkb.html)  
[Map of Europe: 1648, The Treaty of Westphalia.](images/europe_1648.html)

_Topic C: Liberalism, international law and ethics._   1/28-2/1

The political revolution in Eastern Europe, the economic revolution in Asia,
and international standards of human rights.

    Nye, Chapter 2 (part), pp 39-46   
   Hughes, Part 2, Chapter 3 (part), pp 46-51  
  [ **Immanuel Kant, "Perpetual peace."](http://www.lib.ncsu.edu/cgi-
bin/e-res-wrap.pl?semester=Spr99&doc=d516.pdf)  
   [ **Russett, "A community of peace."](http://www.lib.ncsu.edu/cgi-
bin/e-res-wrap.pl?semester=Spr99&doc=d517.pdf)

[Facts and Concepts](231f&cc.html)  
[Homework](homeworkfms/231hmwkc.html)

_Class Discussion of Paper Assignment_ 2/5

Paper assignment, mid-term review.

**_Contrary to what you hear in the video, there will be no map questions on
the mid-term_**

_2/7 Midterm Exam I_

**PART II**  
**WAR**

_Topic D: The nineteenth century and World War One._ 2/11-2/15

The balance of power, alliances and change in the distribution of power.

   Nye, Chapter 3, pp 54-80  
   Hughes, Part II, Chapter 4 (part), pp 70-93, Chapter 5 (part) pp 94-117

[Facts and Concepts](231f&cd.html)  
[Homework](homeworkfms/231hmwkd.html)  
[Map of Europe: 1876, After German unification.](images/europe_1878.html)

_Topic E: World War Two._ 2/18-2/22

Nationalism, ideology, dictatorship and economic failure. Collective security
and appeasement.

   Nye, Chapter 4, pp 81-107  
   Hughes, Part II, Chapter 10 (part), pp 227-249

[Facts and Concepts](231f&ce.html)  
[Homework](homeworkfms/231hmwke.html)  
[Map of Europe: 1919, The Treaty of Versailles](images/europe_1919.html)

_2/19 Paper topics due_

_Topic F: The Cold War, Cuba and the arms race, Vietnam._ 2/25-3/5

The security dilemma and deterrence. Bureaucratic decision making and
misperception.

   Nye, Chapter 5, pp 108-146  
   Hughes, Part II, Chapter 7 (part), pp 158-182

Facts and Concepts  
[Homework](homeworkfms/231hmwkf.html)  
[Map of Europe: 1972, The Iron Curtain](images/europe_1792.html)

_Topic G: International law, the Gulf War, Bosnia and the United Nations._  
3/6-3/19

Order and justice in the international community, norms and humanitarian
crimes. Ethnic and religious conflict.  Cooperation and intervention by the
international community.

    Nye, Chapter 6 (part), pp 147-176   
   Hughes, Part II, Chapter 6 (part), pp 124-138, Chapter 8, pp 183-206,
Chapter 9 (part), pp 207-215

Facts and Concepts  
[Homework](homeworkfms/231hmwkg.html)  
[Map of Europe:  Europe today.](images/europe.html)

_3/20 Paper outlines and bibliography due_

_3/21   Midterm Exam II_

**  PART III**  
**  INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY**

_Topic H: Mercantilism and Liberalism.   _   3/25-4/5

Power and interdependence.  The processes of the international economy in
historical perspective.

   Nye, Chapter 7, pp 177-206  
   Hughes, Part III, Chapter 11 (part), pp 256-266  
   [ **Coughlin et. al., "Protectionist trade policies: A survey of
theory."](http://www.lib.ncsu.edu/cgi-bin/e-res-
wrap.pl?semester=Spr99&doc=d518.pdf)

[Facts and Concepts](231f&ch.html)  
[Homework](homeworkfms/231hmwkh.html)

_Topic I: Free trade and international cooperation._ 4/8-4/12

The political sources of tariff and non-tariff barriers, the search for
economic openness and the role of international institutions in trade.

   Hughes, Part III, Chapter 12 (part), pp 274-285, Part II, Chapter 9 (part),
pp 216-224  
   [ **Krasner, "State power and the structure of international
trade"](http://www.lib.ncsu.edu/cgi-bin/e-res-
wrap.pl?semester=Spr99&doc=d522.pdf)  
   [ **Milner, "Resisting the protectionist
temptation"](http://www.lib.ncsu.edu/cgi-bin/e-res-
wrap.pl?semester=Spr99&doc=d523.pdf)

[Facts and Concepts](231f&ci.html)  
[Homework](homeworkfms/231hmwki.html)

_4/12 Paper drafts due_

_Topic J: International Finance and Foreign Investment._   4/15-4/19

Financial interdependence and the role of international institutions in
finance. Bargaining among states and firms.

    Hughes, Part III, Chapter 12 (part), pp 287-295   
   [ **Lairson & Skidmore, "Globalization and the World
Economy"](http://www.lib.ncsu.edu/cgi-bin/e-res-
wrap.pl?semester=Spr99&doc=d519.pdf)  
   [ **Susan Strange, "States, firms and
diplomacy"](http://www.lib.ncsu.edu/cgi-bin/e-res-
wrap.pl?semester=Spr99&doc=d520.pdf)

[Facts and Concepts](231f&cj.html)  
[Homework](homeworkfms/231hmwkj.html)

_4/26 Paper final drafts due_

_Topic K: Economic underdevelopment.  _ 4/23-4/26

Domestic and international obstacles to development.

   Hughes, Part III, Chapters 13, pp 296-326  
   [ **Lairson and Skidmore, "Multinational corporations in the Third
World"](http://www.lib.ncsu.edu/cgi-bin/e-res-
wrap.pl?semester=Spr99&doc=d521.pdf)

[Facts and Concepts](231f&ck.html)  
[Homework](homeworkfms/231hmwkk.html)

_Conclusions.   _ 4/29-5/4  


