#### May 10, 2000

###

* * *

A Note from Sidney Gold

#### [golds@mail.oes.edu](mailto:golds@mail.oes.edu)

#### Experiential education at OES refers to a broad range of learning
experiences that complement and supplement the academic program. In the Lower
School, we provide a number of age-appropriate field trips for all our
students. These trips are intended to broaden students' understanding of
concepts taught in the classroom and heighten their appreciation of Nature.
The trips also build cooperation and self-awareness, teach skills, and allow
students to increase their knowledge in a number of topics of interest. Until
Fourth grade, these trips occur only during the school day. Beginning School
students visit farms and our own wetlands in connection with their study of
animals. First and second graders visit Hispanic communities nearby to sample
Mexican food, shop at a Mexican grocery store, and use some Spanish phrases.
Third graders visit a Pioneer school as a culmination of their study of the
Oregon Trail. Each class takes at least one such field trip each year.

#### Beginning in fourth grade, students are introduced to overnight field
trips. The fourth graders spend three days at Camp Magruder on the coast,
where they supplement their ocean studies. Fifth graders will leave on Monday
for OMSI's Camp Hancock, where they will spend a week living in cabins, hiking
and learning more about land ecology and geology. In Middle School, each class
takes two extended field trips, one in the fall and another in the spring.
Upper School has trips, Winterim, Discovery, service learning and a host of
other experiential learning opportunities.

#### For some of our 4th and 5th grade students, this is their first
experience away from parents for this length of time. Often there are some
"jitters" among the departing students--and among their parents. Our teachers
are experienced at providing just the right amount of support, so that even
the most hesitant child soon forgets his or her worries. While the students
are away, they work and play very hard, eat well and sleep well. They learn an
appreciation for Nature in a setting

#### we couldn't hope to duplicate at school. They also learn they don't need
TV or Nintendo to have fun! Those who brought enough clothes for a family of
four find that they can live simply, with a pair of jeans and a T-shirt or
two.

#### When students return, they seem to stand taller and have a newfound
feeling of independence. This is the time when mentally I begin to see the
fifth graders as Middle Schoolers, and while I'm delighted to see them grow
up, I'm also a little sad to let go. It always brings back memories of my own
children at this age, and I urge you to treat fifth grade parents with extra
care during the next few weeks. Leaving LS is a milestone in their children's
lives, and while the students do just fine, parents can usually use a hug or
two!



###

* * *

Lunch Menu

#### THURS, 5/11 - Chicken Yakisoba/BBQ Bar

#### FRI, 5/12 - Rueben or Grilled Cheese Sandwich/Pasta Bar

#### MON, 5/15 - Spaghetti/Fajita Bar

#### TUES, 5/16 - Chicken Nuggets, Musaka/Indian Bar

#### WEDS, 5/17 - Pizza/Sandwich Bar



###

* * *

LOWER SCHOOL CALENDAR

#### FRI, 5/12  
O'Toole/Hunger Play, 1:00PM, LS Library

#### MON, 5/15  
Deadline for teacher requests

#### MON, 5/15 - 5/19  
5th Grade Trip to Camp Hancock

#### THURS, 5/18  
Final 99-00 PAL Meeting,8:00 AM, LSCH  
Extended Care Family Dinner, performances -5-6PM, dinner at 6 PM, LSCH

#### FRI, 5/19  
3rd Grade Field Trip to Pioneer School, 8:50AM - 2:30PM  
Kindergarten classes to the Zoo, 9AM - 1:00 PM

#### WEDS, 5/24  
Pre-K Assembly, 8:10AM, LSCH  
GOBS, LS Library

#### THURS, 5/25  
1st Grade Farm Field Trip, 9AM - 2:30PM  
GOBS, LS Library  
Lower School Choir Performance, 7PM, St. John's Church

#### FRI, 5/26  
Discovery Day, 8:15AM - 2:20PM

#### MON, 5/29  
NO SCHOOL (Memorial Day)

#### WEDS, 5/31  
2nd Grade Global Fair, 2:00-2:45PM

#### THURS, 6/1  
Ascension Day Chapel, 8:00 AM  
LS Choir Field Trip (2nd - 5th grade), 12:30 - 1:30 PM

#### FRI, 6/2  
Field Day

#### MON,6/5-6/7  
4th Grade Trip to Camp Magruder

#### FRI, 6/9  
Last Day of Lower School



###

* * *

Thank You, Thank You, Thank You!

#### Our thanks to all of you who sent hotel toiletry samples to school. Mrs.
Carrithers' and Mrs. Beemer's classes have assembled over 400 gift packages
that have been delivered to Greenhouse, a day shelter for street teens. They
are so appreciative of our generous and useful donations.

#### As you travel this summer, remember that these buddy classes will
continue this project next year.



###

* * *

GOBS

#### This Friday, May 12, is the LAST day to turn in your gently used books
for the Great OES Book Swap. Bring your books to the Lower School Library
marked with your student's name, teacher's name, and grade. We have a
wonderful selection of children's and adult books in many genres. Plan now to
attend the Book Swap on Wednesday, May 24 in the LS Library. You must have
book credits to swap books on Wednesday. Remaining books will be on sale for
cash on Thursday, May 25.



###

* * *

Class of 2003 Bulb Sale

#### The Class of 2003 is having a bulb sale to raise money for the freshman
class! Parents, faculty, and anyone associated with a member of the OES
community can order bulbs to plant next fall and watch them bloom in the
spring. There are a wide variety of bulbs at excellent prices! Order forms are
available in the LS Office.



###

* * *

"Thanks a Latte!"  
Volunteer Appreciation Day

#### Attention, all volunteers! Please come to the dining hall on Wednesday,
May 17th, 8-9AM, for an Appreciation Social. Baked goods, juice, and coffee
will be served, and there will be many fabulous and unique door prizes! Please
join us for this festive Social.



###

* * *

Sign up for the May 18th

###  Annual EC Family Barbecue!

###

* * *

PAL News

#### We REALLY need a volunteer. . to coordinate the school packets for next
year! The person in this position fills the requests for school supplies
during the summer so that people can pick up their packets before the first
day of school. Nancy Chapman, who filled the position last year, can provide
all the details about how to accomplish this task, Also, you will be working
with the Anthill School Store on campus to order the supplies. If you are
interested in filling this position, please call Dorothy Schock, 646-9331 or
Nancy Chapman, 638-4444.

###

* * *

Outreach Committee Meeting May 12th

#### This Friday, May 12th, our end-of-year Outreach Committee Meeting will be
held in the Guild Room. There will be an Appreciation Coffee from 8 - 10AM for
all our volunteers who worked so hard this year. We'll be reviewing our
projects, taking notes on revisions for next year, and brainstorming new
possibilities for the next year. Toni Holmberg and Tna Meyerhoff, Service
Learning Coordinators for the Middle School and Upper School respectively,
will be joining us. Please come and bring your wildest ideas for service
projects that we could do with our children. This should be fun and fruitful!
Any questions or ideas? Call Peg at 452-4112 or Sue at 497-9082.

###

* * *

LS Choir Performances

#### We would like to invite you to our final performances of the year! On
Thursday, May 25th we will be performing for the entire Lower School in the
Chapel at 8:10 AM. That evening, at 7:00 PM, we will be sharing our music with
our parents and friends. Please come and join us!

#### Kris Van Auken and the Lower School Choir



###

* * *

Car Wash Rescheduled

#### The Sophomore Class fundraising car wash has been rescheduled for May
17th. It will be held on the playground in front of the gym from 2:30 - 4:30
PM. Any donations will be greatly appreciated and will support the Class of
2002. Come get your car washed before you pick up your child!

###

* * *

LEGO Physics' 25th Display a Success!

#### Jane Kenney-Norberg, Shannon Hacker, 47 LEGO students, and 10 Teaching
Assistants wish to thank the numerous parents, teachers and staff that helped
to make our 25th LEGO Display a grand success. Thank you to Lorena Gransbury,
Danne Greene, Elizabeth Tsao, Mrs. Loy, Patty Fendall and her sons, Ian &
Ramsey (from Markham School), Shelley Stoffer, Diane Flack, Judy Pinkerton,
Kelly Yustin, Paula Hunger, Sue Larson, Arleene McCabe, Rudy Mijo, Steve Brown
and Allie Mickiewicz (from St. Thomas Moore).

#### As a special note, Britta Ross helped us all look spiffy by designing a
logo for our OES LEGO Physics T-shirts. A highlight of our OES display last
Friday was a half-hour visit from K103 FM Morning Talk & News personality,
John Erickson. He was nothing short of amazed, and was enthralled over how
LEGOs could be computer and sensor controlled. If you missed our Display, or
want to see more and spend more time, come to see us at the Oregon Zoo, May
20th and 21st, in the Elephant Museum, from 9AM - 7PM. This is our third
annual show for the Zoo.

###

* * *

Portland Million Mom March

#### On Mother's Day, May 14, 2000, million of moms and their supporters will
hold rallies across the country and march in support of enacting common sense
gun control legislation. See www.millionmommarch.com for more details.
Questions? Contact Becky Tooley, ext.205.

###

* * *

Teacher Appreciation Luncheon

#### Thank you to all the parent volunteers who helped make this year's
Teacher Appreciation Luncheon a success. The food was amazing!!!

#### Special thanks to Robin McArthur-Phillips for willingly taking on kitchen
clean-up duty. Thanks to Sammy's Flowers, Raleigh Hills Fred Meyer, for the
help purchasing the bonsai centerpieces, Uwjimaya for the two gift
certificates and Mimi's Pizzeria in Salem for the fortune cookies.

#### Thank you to the OES kitchen staff and maintenance crew for helping with
set-up. This was a special day thoroughly enjoyed by all!

#### Thanks from Debra Eberwein and Julie Sheppard

#### (Please pick up your bowls and dishes from the table outside the LS
Office.)

###

* * *

Lower School PAL Meeting

#### Just a reminder . . . Join us on Thursday, May 18th in the LS Common Hall
at 8:00 AM. Dr. Sharon Bast, Clinical Psychologist with The Children's Place,
will speak on micro-managing children, when parents should step in, and how to
empower children socially.

###

* * *

Lost and Found

#### Looking for a lost item? We encourage you to rummage through our large
collection of clothing items in the famous "Lost & Found"!

###

* * *

Discovery Day Update  
Discovery Day May 26th!

#### Parents, in today's Wednesday Envelope you will find the Discovery Day
syllabus and sign-up sheet. Please take a few moments to go through this with
your child and help them to make good age/time appropriate choices.

#### The sign-up sheets are due back at school on Friday, May 12th by 2:30 PM.
(Please return only the sign-up sheet - keep the syllabus for your reference).
Your child may return the sign-up sheet to their teacher, or directly to the
Lower School Office. If you have any questions regarding the sign-up sheet or
the syllabus, please don't hesitate to call Debbie Lewis at (222-2422). It's
going to be a fun day with a wide variety of choices and we're certain every
student will have a wonderful day!

#### We still need assistants for workshops. In many cases, the assistants
will only have to collect the group of children at the start of each workshop
and stay in the workshop in case a child needs help. There are also many
opportunities where the workshop leaders will not need help once the workshop
begins. Please call if you can help.

#### We are continuing to collect artificial flowers, ribbons, and greens of
any size for a Discovery Day project. Drop off your donations at the LS
Office.

###

* * *

Volunteer Helpers Needed

#### We need some parent volunteers to help with the Jump Rope Tricks Workshop
on Discovery Day. Your main job will be to assist in turning the rope for
Double Dutch. Jump Rope Tricks is offered the first session of Discovery Day,
from 8:15-9:35 am.

#### Please call Janelle Janutka (246-7771, x 129) as soon as possible if you
can volunteer.

####

* * *

Dear Parents,

#### I have recently had hand surgery and have been recovering. I received so
many wonderful get well wishes from your children that I thought you all
should know how well you have taught your children. The notes were kind,
compassionate and uplifting. In other words - perfect. I loved receiving them.
They made me happy and they made me laugh. Thank you for having such wonderful
children.

#### Affectionately,

#### Diane Flack

###

* * *

The Anthill School Store is having a  
Gigantic Annual Clearance Sale!

#### (They're NOT selling ants, but they ARE offering some great buys on OES
items!)

#### In-Store Special: Sweatshirts and uniform vests at reduced prices!

#### Shop early for desired sizes and colors!

#### Extended hours on Friday, May 12th - Open until 5 PM !

####  

