**UTAH STATE UNIVERSITY**  
  **Department of Health, Physical Education and Recreation**  
  **PEP 5430 - History & Philosophy of Physical Education and Sport**  
 Fall Semester, 2000

**Instructor:** John M. Kras
**Phone:** 797-3881  
**Office:** HPER 130
**Room:  ** HPER 135  
                                                                                                                                    **Time:**   TT 1:30-2:45   
**Office Hours:** T-TH 10:00-10:30, 11:20-12:00, 1:00-1:30, W 10:20-11:00

**COURSE DESCRIPTION**

This course has been designed to familiarize the physical education major (or
non-major) with the history of physical education and sport and the
philosophical influences which have contributed to the development of
contemporary physical education and sport.  For the first portion of the
course, primary consideration will be given to the historical  development of
yesterday's pastimes into today's complex, institutionalized forms of sport
and physical education.

The second portion of the course will focus on various philosophical variables
and  positions which have been influential in producing changes within the
profession of  physical education and in the analysis of sport in its many
forms.

In keeping with the above course content, PEP 5430 has the following
objectives, educational opportunities and course assessments.

 I.            (1) to review the development of physical education and sport
in the United States and the World from ancient  
               times to the present, with as emphasis on the mid 1800's to the present and (2) to help students gain   
               an understanding of the influences that the history of physical education and sport have had on present day activities.   
               A.         Students will be responsible for teaching units associated with the topics they choose and to write a   
                            report that is "in style" with current professional writing.   
               ASSESSMENT:   
                           Students will be graded on presentation skills and writing according to current APA standards.   
 II           (3) to give the students some understanding of and the practice
in historical research and philosophical writings  
              and (4) to present and discuss the major branches of philosophy as they relate to personal values and   
              teaching practices in physical education and sport.   
              A.         Same as objective I above   
              ASSESSMENT:   
              Same as above 

**COMMUNICATION INTENSIVE**

The History and Philosophy of Physical Education and Sport replaces your final
English requirement because of the amount of writing and style corrections you
must make for grading and successful completion of the assignments.  This is
an important part of this course.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

**Attendance:  ** Class attendance is expected.   There will be small tests
given at the beginning of class from time to time that will not be made up if
absent.  That will be the price you will pay for not attending class.

**Class Format:**   Lecture, seminar, and "hands on" learning experiences.
Individuals will be expected to make reports in class.

**Assignments and Examinations:**    All class assignments must be typewritten
and must follow the guidelines for each included at the end of this syllabus.
Use American Psychological Association Publication Guidelines (APA) for all
assignments.  Graduate students should purchase these guidelines.  Bring text
to class everyday.

A.         Four exams will be given as outlined in the syllabus.  No make-up
will be given!!  All four exams will include a  
            variety of questions from class discussion and outside readings.  Each student will be allowed to drop the lowest grade.   
            (300 pts.) 

B.         Each student will be required to write and present four (4) papers
over some   specific aspect of the history of  
            physical education.  Topics will be picked from a list presented in class and papers will be graded on content,   
            grammar and style.  Each paper will be 3-5 pages in length and each presentation will be no more than 5 minutes   
            in length.   
            (100 pts. each for 400 total pts.) 

**EVALUATION**

                700 - 630    =    A                        479 - 410    =    D   
                629 - 560    =    B                        409 - below    =    F   
                559 - 480    =    C 

**RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DISABILITIES**

Students with disabilities are encouraged to discuss their needs with the
instructor, preferably during the first week of the quarter.  All reasonable
accommodations will be made to see that disabilities do not restrict a
student's opportunity to learn.  Help is also available from the Disability
Resource Center (TSC 302, Ext. 7-2444).

**CHILDREN IN THE CLASS ROOM**

HPER desires to accommodate all students.  In fairness to students attending
classes, it is recommended that no children accompany parents to HPER courses.
The department of HPER understands that exceptional circumstances arise.  Such
circumstances will be resolved under the direction of the course professor.

**PEP 5430, THE HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY OF PHYSICAL EDUCATION AND SPORT**  
**TOPICAL OUTLINE AND ASSIGNMENTS** ****

**Week of:** 8/28 | Introduction, class procedures and overview of the history
of Physical Education.  
---|---  
| Introduction to the philosophy of physical education and sport.  
  |  
9/4 | Continue philosophy  
| Ancient Greece and The Romans  
  |  
9/11 | Continue Ancient Greece and The Romans  
  | The Middle Ages and The Renaissance and Reformation  
  |  
9/18 | **TEST ONE - TUESDAY**  
|  The Age of Science and The Enlightenment  
  |  
9/25 | Nineteenth-Century Europe and Colonial America  
  |  
10/2 | Continue with last week and Nineteenth-Century America  
  |  
10/9 | Professional Development in Physical Education - 1885-1900  
  |  
10/16 | **TEST TWO - TUESDAY**  
  | The New Physical Education - 1900-1930  
  |  
10/23 | Physical Education from 1930 until the present day.  
  | The beginning of modern sport.  
  |  
10/30 | Modern sport continued.  
  |  
11/6 | Modern sport continued.  
  |  
11/13 | **TEST THREE - TUESDAY**  
|  The Modern Olympics.  
  |  
11/20 | Tuesday (11/21) Make up day  
  |  
11/27 | The Modern Olympics Continued.  
  |  
12/4 | Dead Week, final review and make up reports.  
  |  
12/13                 | **FINAL EXAM (TEST FOUR)** \- 9:30-11:20.  
****

