Syllabus for Antropology 658 Professor Janet Hart  
Anthropology 658  
Spring Half-Term 1996  
Lane Hall Commons  

Office Address: 2040G LSA Building  
Office Hours: Wednesday, 10-12  
Phone: 764-5371  
Email: janeth@umich.edu  

* * *

##  NARRATIVE ANALYSIS, ORAL HISTORIES, FOCUS GROUPS: APPROACHES TO IDENTITY
AND SOCIAL ISSUES

* * *

This course is designed in connection with the CREES Ford Foundation Project,
"Identity Formation and Social Issues in Estonia, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan."
Its purpose is to help prepare participants to study emergent social
identities in collaboration with colleagues from the three former Soviet
republics; however, the broader aim is to use these approaches (narrative
analysis, oral histories and focus groups) as tools for research on questions
of identity and social issues that is both comparative an d context-sensitive.

Both the class and the project as a whole are based on a philosophy of
interaction, mutual learning, and cooperation with team members from the three
regions of the former Soviet Union (FSU). Thus, we hope to avoid the kinds of
traps that often plagu e collaborative relationships when funds from advanced
industrial economies are used to support research in so-called "less
developed" sites. We do not seek to impart information in a self-styled
mission of civic modernization cum intellectual guidance. Nor are we inclined
to exploit local assistants to yield what one scholar has recently called "the
research equivalent of fast food,"* that involves native researchers in a
semi-colonial arrangement based on financial need, allowing p rivileged
academics to skim the surface for cultural insights and force indigenous
information into imported molds. We recognize that our partners will have much
to tell us, not only about regional histories, values and standpoints, but
also about the ex perience and practice of conducting oral historical research
in their countries. Similarly, we will all benefit from the expertise that
CREES participants have developed in pursuing projects on other topics and in
some cases using other methodologies.

(*See Salim Tamari, "Tourists with Agendas" Middle East Report,
September/October 1995, p. 24.)

We will explore issues of data-gathering and analysis in readings, class
discussion, and practical exercises designed to help members envision how
interviews might actually play out on the ground. The course is divided into
three interrelated parts. We will begin with the topic of **oral histories** ,
then proceed to **narrative analysis** , and end with **focus groups**. Hart
will teach the oral history and narrative sections; specialists John Knodel,
Chanpen Saengtienchai, and David Morgan will lead the sessions on focus group
methodology. Class meetings will combine: a) discussion of
theoretical/empirical aspects of the assigned readings; b) collective
consideration of research designs for further on-si te investigations; c) mock
interviews and other activities. We will also be joined at various points by
visitors with special expertise in relevant areas.

### Course requirements:

The course will involve a range of participants, including U-M graduate
students, staff and faculty members, scholars and researchers from Uzbekistan,
Estonia, and Ukraine, and, at various points, outside visitors. These
differences notwithstanding, a common expectation is that all participants
will come to class prepared to discuss each week's readings. Occasional
lectures will help introduce basic concepts and points of information.
Otherwise, the course will follow a seminar format, whose succe ss as a
collective enterprise will depend on the dynamic, constructive, and critical
engagement of all members.

Two books have been ordered for the course and will be available at Shaman
Drum Bookshop, 313 South State Street (Tel: 662-7407): Daphne Patai,
Brazilian Women Speak and Sharon Vaughn, Focus Group Interviews in Education
and Psycho logy. Copies of these books will also be on reserve at the CREES
Reading Room in Lane Hall. A coursepack with the remaining readings can be
purchased at Michigan Document Service, 603 Church Street, Tel. 662-4530.

For those students taking the course for credit, written assignments will
consist of three short book reviews (5-8 pgs.), due at the end of each section
( **oral history-May 17; narrative analysis-May 31; focus groups-June 17** )
in which you consider one of the assigned readings or a relevant piece of your
own choosing, in light of issues raised in class discussion and your own past,
present and/or future scholarship. Final grades will be based on the essays
(75%) and also on class parti cipation (25%).

* * *

### PART I: ORAL HISTORY

#### May 7-17

**Oral histories** are spoken memories about the past. In the most basic view,
researchers question their subjects to elicit observations about **what**
informants believe happened to them in the course of their lives, and seek
explanations about **why** these events may have occurred. Further evaluations
are made based on **how** subjects describe and characterize various
individual and collective experiences which they now find relevant from a c
ontemporary standpoint. Methodologically, oral histories can stand alone, to
be read and analyzed on their own terms, or they can supplement other types of
information to be found in archives, quantitative data bases, written records
and memoirs.

During the term, we will want to tackle such fundamental issues as: What is
distinctive and important about the oral history method? What can oral
histories contribute to our "ways of knowing" about cultures, historical
events, individual psychologi es, motivations, social interactions and
collective understandings? How do oral histories, sociological interviews,
testimonials, novels, autobiographies, and life stories differ from and/or
complement one another? What is an ethnography? What are some problems and
challenges associated with conducting oral histories and assembling oral
historical data? What kinds of intellectual, cognitive, ethical, and political
dilemmas emerge in the course of oral history research?

Such questions have inspired lively debate in academic circles over the past
ten years. Part of the interactive learning process in this class will be to
think about where we would position ourselves in these conversations. {Also
see pp. 8-9}

* * *

#### Week 1  
May 7-9  
ORAL HISTORY: THEORIES, PRACTICES AND CHALLENGES

**Reading:**

Daniel Bertaux, "From the Life-History Approach to the Transformation of
Sociological Practice" (pp. 29-45) in  Biography and Society: The Life History
Approach in the Social Sciences, Daniel Bertaux (ed.), Sage, 1981.

L.L. Langness and Geyla Frank, (Ch. IV) "Biography and the Structure of Lives"
(87-116) and (Ch. V) "Ethical and Moral Concerns" (117-155) in Lives: An
Anthropological Approach to Biography, Chandler & Sharp, 1981.

James P. Spradley, "Ethnography and Culture," "Language and Fieldwork," and
"Informants" in The Ethnographic Interview, Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1979,
pp. 3-39.

Kathryn Anderson and Dana C. Jack, "Learning to Listen: Interview Techniques
and Analyses" (11-26); Katherine Borland, "'That's Not What I Said':
Interpretive Conflict in Oral Narrative Research" (63-75) in Women's Words:
The Feminist Practice of Or al History, Sherna B. Gluck and Daphne Patai
(eds.) Routledge, 1991.

Eva Huseby-Darvas, "Migrating Inward and Out: Validating Life-Course
Transitions through Oral Autobiography" (379-403) in Life History As Cultural
Construction/Performance, Tamas Hofer and Peter Niedermuller (eds.),
Proceedings of the IIIrd A merican-Hungarian Folklore Conference, Budapest,
1988.

Mary Gergen, "The Social Construction of Personal Histories: Gendered Lives in
Popular Autobiographies," (Public Documents as Sources of Social
Constructions) in Constructing the Social, Theodore R. Sarbin and John I.
Kitsuse (eds.), Sage, 19 94, pp. 19-44.

Daniel Bertaux, "Oral History Approaches to an International Social Movement"
(151-171) in Comparative Methodology: Theory and Practice in International
Social Research, Else Oyen (ed.), Sage, 1990.

**Recommended:**

Alice Kessler Harris, "Introduction" (1-9); Ron Grele, "Riffs and
Improvisations: An Interview with Studs Terkel" (10-49); Panel discussion:
Studs Terkel, Jan Vansina, Alice Kessler Harris, Dennis Tedlock, Saul Benison,
Ron Grele, "It's Not the Song, It's the Singing" (50-105) in  Envelopes of
Sound: Six Practitioners Discuss the Method, Theory and Practice of Oral
History and Oral Testimony, Ronald J. Grele (ed.) Precedent Publishing, 1975.

* * *

#### Week 2  
May 14-16  
IDENTITY AND SOCIAL ISSUES IN ORAL HISTORY: A COMPARATIVE APPROACH

Katherine Verdery, "Notes toward an Ethnography of a Transforming State:
Romania, 1991," in Articulating Hidden Histories: Exploring the Influence of
Eric R. Wolf, Jane Schneider and Rayna Rapp (eds.) University of California
Press, 1995, pp. 228-242.

Daniel Bertaux, "From Families' Case Histories to the Understanding of Social-
Historical Processes: Analysis in the Inductive Mode," Paper presented at the
International Workshop "Methodology and Methods of Oral History and Life
Stories in Sociological an d Historical Research, Lviv, Ukraine, 5-7 September
1994.

Daphne Patai, Brazilian Women Speak: Contemporary Life Stories, Rutgers
University Press, 1988, "Introduction: Constructing a Self" (pp. 1-35).

**[You should try to read as much of the book as possible. The class will be
divided into 5 groups, with each responsible for analyzing a set of texts for
insights into identity, social issues, and the oral history approach and
making a short prese ntation based on findings to the entire group.]**

Sondra Hale, "Feminist Method, Process, and Self-Criticism: Interviewing
Sudanese Women" (121-136) in  Women's Words.

* * *

### PART II: NARRATIVE ANALYSIS

#### May 20-31

**Narrative analysis** examines how individuals and communities conceptualize
social processes in the form of stories, with leading characters, plot
structures and time boundaries. From this standpoint, embedded in oral and
life histori es are narratives that speakers use to help them make sense of
various occurrences in their lives.

At a broader level of analysis, local and national cultures also create and
foster narratives that represent composite understandings, shared by larger
groups of people at particular points in history. In the case of social
movements, these "grander ," collective interpretations may offer powerful
rationales that help initiate collective protest and the possibility of
sweeping social change. In so-called critical legal studies (CLS), legal
systems have also been "read" for the crucial narratives the y contain,
through the examination of trial records, judicial decisions, media portrayals
of key incidents, and popular opinion on notable crimes.

Closely related to the narrative method is **theme analysis**. Here, the
researcher scans the texts of interviews for themes which subjects identify as
particularly significant in narrating episodes in their lives and attempting
to accou nt for past and present circumstances. A wide range of topics or
themes may be salient in eyewitness testimony, including: nationalism, race
and racism, folkloric traditions, regionalism, standards of femininity and
masculinity, sexuality, individual per sonality traits, family myths and
history, legal and political transactions with governmental structures,
colonial relations of power and domination, honor/shame/reputational politics,
social networks, colonial power relations, popular cultural preference s,
opinions about pivotal historical and political events, psychological coping
mechanisms, material/financial concerns and strategies, thoughts on ageing,
participation in radical/revolutionary causes, mentorship, intergenerational
relations, life trauma s. Note that **how** thoughts related to themes are
expressed -- evidence of emotion, tone, choice of language -- can be as
important as pinpointing particular themes. **Theme analysis** is a useful
prior step in the process of isolating and identifying operative narratives.

* * *

#### Week 3  
May 21-23  
ARTFUL INTERPRETATION: LOCATING THEME, VOICE, PLOT, METAPHOR, AND AUDIENCE IN
SOCIAL NARRATIVE

**Reading:**

Catherine Kohler Riessman, "Introduction: Locating Narratives" and
"Theoretical Contexts" (1-24) in  Narrative Analysis: Qualitative Research
Methods Series, Sage, 1993.

Natalie Zemon Davis, "Introduction," Fiction in the Archives: Pardon Tales and
Their Tellers in Sixteenth-Century France, Stanford University Press, 1987,
pp. 1-6.

Luisa Passerini, "Introduction: Oral sources and the historical study of
culture" (1-16) and "Memories of self: autobiography and self-representation"
(19-63) in Fascism in Popular Memory: The Cultural Experience of the Turin
Working Class, C ambridge University Press, 1988.

Janet Hart, "Cracking the Code: Narrative and Political Mobilization in the
Greek Resistance," Social Science History (16), No. 4, Winter 1992, pp.
631-668.

Zuzana Kusa (Institute for Sociology/Slovak Academy of Sciences), "To Be of
Bourgeois Origin--An Insurmountable Stigma? (On erosive power of social
networks in the period of communism), Paper presented at XIII World Congress
of Sociology, 18-23 July 1994, Bielefeld, Germany.

* * *

#### Week 4  
May 28-30  
THE SUBLIME AND THE SLIPPERY: PERFORMANCE, MEMORY, AND CONSCIOUSNESS

Erving Goffman, "Introduction" (1-16), The Presentation of the Self in
Everyday Life, Doubleday Anchor, 1959.

Kristin M. Langellier and Eric E. Peterson, "Family Storytelling as a Strategy
of Social Control" (pp. 49-76) in Narrative and Social Control: Critical
Perspectives, edited by Dennis K. Mumby, Sage Annual Reviews of Communication
Research, Vo l. 21, Sage Publications, 1993.

Marjorie Mbilinyi, "'I'd Have Been A Man': Politics and the Labor Process in
Producing Personal Narratives" (204-227) in Interpreting Women's Lives:
Feminist Theory and Personal Narratives, Personal Narratives Group, Indiana
University Press, 1989\.

Mira Marody, "Antinomies of Collective Subconsciousness," Social Research 55
(1-2), Spring/Summer 1988, pp. 97-110.

Alberto Melucci,"The New Social Movements Revisited: Reflections on a
Sociological Misunderstanding" (107-119) and Alain Touraine, "Democracy: From
a Politics of Citizenship to a Politics of Recognition" (258-275) in Social
Movements and Social Cla sses: The Future of Collective Action, Louis Maheu
(ed.), Sage, 1995.

Susan Gal, "Bartok's funeral: representations of Europe in Hungarian political
rhetoric," American Ethnologist, Vol. 18, No. 3, August 1991, pp. 440-458.

* * *

### PART III: FOCUS GROUPS

#### June 3-14

In the last section of the course, we turn to  focus group methodology. David
L. Morgan states that "(a)s a form of qualitative research, focus groups are
basically group interviews, although not in the sense of an alternation betwe
en the researcher's questions and the research participants' responses.
Instead, the reliance is on interaction within the group, based on topics that
are supplied by the researcher, who typically takes the role of a
moderator...From a social science poi nt of view, focus groups are useful
either as a self-contained means of collecting data or as a supplement to both
quantitative and other qualitative methods...The hallmark of focus groups is
**'the explicit use of the group interact ion to produce data and insights
that would be less accessible without the interaction found in a group.'"**
According to John Knodel, "(a) focus group consists of a small number of
participants (typically six to ten) recruited from a specifie d target
population who are called together to discuss topics of importance to a
particular research study. The discussions are tape-recorded and transcribed.
The transcripts serve as the data for analysis."

The topics and issues to be considered include: a general orientation to focus
groups as a method; when to use focus groups; options in research designs
incorporating focus groups; writing discussion guides; moderating and other
mechanics of conducting f ocus groups; how focus groups might be combined with
surveys; problems and prospects of cross-cultural applications of the method;
strategies of analysis; and use of the Ethnograph program as an aid to
analysis. Examples of the use of focus groups will d raw on experiences in the
U.S. and Asia.

* * *

#### Week 5  
June 4-6  
WORKSHOPS WITH DAVID MORGAN

**Reading:**

David Morgan,  Focus Groups as Qualitative Research (2nd ed.), Sage
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA (forthcoming 1996).

Sharon Vaughn, Focus Group Interviews in Education and Psychology, Sage, 1996.

Judith S. Kullberg, "The Ideological Roots of Elite Political Conflict in
Post-Soviet Russia," EUROPE/ASIA STUDIES, Vol. 46, No. 6, 1994, pp. 929-953.

* * *

#### Week 6  
June 11-13  
WORKSHOPS WITH CHANPEN SAENGTIENCHAI/JOHN KNODEL

David Morgan, "Using Qualitative Methods in the Development of Surveys" Social
Psychology (Newsletter) 19(1): 1-4.

Brent Wolff, John Knodel and Werasit Sittitrai. "Analysis of Concurrent Focus
Groups and Surveys: A Case Study" in David Morgan (ed), Successful Focus
Groups: Advancing the State of the Art, Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1993, pp.
118-136.

John Knodel, "The Closing of the Gender Gap in Schooling: The Case of
Thailand" Research Report No. 96-362, Population Studies Center, University of
Michigan, March 1996.

John Knodel, "Focus Groups as a Qualitative Method for Cross-Cultural Research
in Social Gerontology" Journal of Cross-Cultural Gerontology 10: 7-20 (April
1995).

John Knodel, "Conducting Comparative Focus Group Research: Cautionary Comments
from a Coordinator," Health Transition Review 4(1): 99-104, (Winter 1993).

John Knodel "The Design and Analysis of Focus Group Studies in Social Science
Research," in David Morgan (ed), Successful Focus Groups: Advancing the State
of the Art, pp. 35-50.

Jane Bertrand, Judith Brown, and Victoria Ward. "Techniques for Analyzing
Focus Group Data" Evaluation Review 16(2): 198-209 (April 1992).

Qualis Research Associates. The Ethnograph v4.0: Demo Version Documentation.
1995/1996.

* * *

### WRAP-UP  
NARRATIVE ANALYSIS, ORAL HISTORIES, FOCUS GROUPS: APPROACHES TO IDENTITY AND
SOCIAL ISSUES

#### June 17-21

During the final wrap-up sessions, among the issues we will consider regarding
focus groups in the general context of the course are: What are possible links
between focus groups, oral histories and narrative analysis? How do focus
groups and group oral histories differ? How can focus groups help us identify
themes and stories present in the accounts of individual subjects and groups?
What do focus groups help us learn about individuals, communities, societies,
and nation-states?

### Discussion Questions

#### ORAL HISTORIES

**Topics to be considered include:**

  * What is collective memory? How does it affect individual memory? Is it possible or desirable, for that matter, to know about and "control for" faulty memory? What kinds of problems arise in trying to access subjects' memories of key events and of e veryday life? How do these distinct areas of analysis (i.e. crisis and quotidian) affect and interact with each other? How can we trace the myriad ways that memories of the past are conditioned by current perceptions? 

  * Given that oral histories are based on often very personal transactions, what kinds of strategies are useful in generating trust between and among researchers and informants? How can we avoid getting people into trouble with authorities as a result o f what they have shared with us, and avoid generating or inflaming conflict within families? When do we run the risk of hurting/disappointing/insulting/dominating informants, to name a few possibilities, and how can we minimize such prospects? When shou ld an oral history be terminated? When are oral historical data unusable? How do we confront issues of stylized and formulaic responses, exaggeration, deliberately misleading information, "showing off", resentment toward what designated outsiders repres ent or symbolize, etc. in testimony?

  * How much and what kind of meaning can we assign to culture -- local, national, international -- as an influence on conceptions of identity, general behavior, social values, collective action? To individual personality or psychology?

  * When can we confidently generalize across oral histories? What are the comparative advantages of eliciting smaller numbers of testimonies, i.e. 1-10 vs. larger numbers of oral histories? Can we necessarily assume that smaller numbers work best to r eveal specific, layered, deeper structural meanings and larger numbers, macro-tales about more global social problems and processes?

  * How are issues of gender, sexual preference, class, race, ethnicity and other fundamental characteristics and allegiances dealt with and represented in oral histories? How can oral histories help us explore these subjects?

  * How do we incorporate and assess the role of emotions (anger, sorrow, joy, idealism, timidity, passion) expressed in the course of interviews?

  * What do we, as researchers, have the right to know about people's lives? In what sorts of instances can we learn more by probing on particular (perhaps sensitive) issues and at what points and in what ways do we become invasive in our questioning?

  * What role do researcher attributes play (i.e. race, nationality, personal history, etc.) in shaping the oral history session and its results? What kinds of bridges may be built between oral historian and subject?

  * How far might we want to go in acknowledging our own positions (called "reflexivity") vis a vis particular individuals or groups interviewed, and topics raised during actual exchanges? In subsequent writings and analysis?

  * What is experience and what might our relationship be, as scholars, to others' testimonies about their own experiences?

#### NARRATIVE ANALYSIS

Issues which may arise as we uncover themes and identify stories:**

  * When does a story begin and when does it end? What is the significance of the "author"'s selection of a particular starting point and not another?

  * What is **emplotment**? When we listen carefully, what kinds of stories are we hearing? What do protagonists want us to know, and what kind of information is absent or glossed over?

  * How do people cast themselves (and significant others) in the stories they tell? Which individuals and groups can be identified as major players, and how are these characters portrayed?

  * What sorts of precipitating events encourage different kinds of stories to be told, stories perhaps not possible in the past? How do popular cultural myths shape personal stories?

  * What stories do we "tell ourselves" about social problems and political events in our own lives and environments?

* * *

Return to | [FSU Grant Homepage](index.html) | [CREES
homepage](http://www.umich.edu/~iinet/crees/)

