[![University of
Washington](/home/graphics/uwlogotype0.gif)](http://www.washington.edu/) |
![](/home/graphics/space.gif) | ![](/home/graphics/space.gif)  
---|---|---  
 [Search](/home/search.html) | [Directories](/home/directories.html) |
[Reference Tools](http://www.lib.washington.edu/research/reftools.html)  
![](/home/graphics/space.gif)  
![](/home/graphics/rib0.gif)  
---  
[UW Home](/) > [Student Guide](/students/) > [Course
Catalog](/students/crscat/)  | ![](/home/graphics/space.gif) |
![](/home/graphics/space.gif)  
---|---|---  
  
![](/home/graphics/space.gif)  
  
# Instructor Class Description

Time Schedule:

  * [Summer Quarter 2002](/students/timeschd/SUM2002/polisci.html)
  * [Autumn Quarter 2002](/students/timeschd/AUT2002/polisci.html)

**Margaret Levi  
mlevi@u.washington.edu  
POL S 249  
Seattle Campus**

### Introduction to Labor Studies

Conceptual and theoretical issues in the study of labor and work. Role of
labor in national and international politics. Formation of labor movements.
Historical and contemporary role of labor in the modern world. Offered:
jointly with HIST 249/SOC 266

**Class Description**  

Description. In this interdisciplinary course, we explore conceptual and
theoretical issues in the study of work, workers, and unions. We shall
consider a range of perspectives on the formation, internal organization, and
influence of unions in different industries, national settings, and historical
periods. We shall discuss the effect of changes in the labor process and in
the international political economy on the nature of the working day, patterns
of unemployment, and the racial, gender, and skill composition of the labor
force. Finally, we shall investigate the ways actions by workers affect and
are constrained by their employers, their governments, their environments, and
their economies. Consideration of applied settings in the local area will
supplement the readings to clarify the relationship between theory and the
actual experience of work and unions. Because the aim is to introduce students
to a broad and vast subject, we shall be using films, service learning, and
independent research projects in addition to the normal reading requirements
and classroom lectures.

NOTE: For papers and papers presentations, students may opt for one of the
following: a). Community service for an average of 3-4 hours a week during the
quarter (10 weeks) with a union or other organization dedicated to improving
working, living, and health conditions for workers (broadly defined).
Descriptions of options are in a separate packet. Students must keep a weekly
journal to be reviewed by T.A. A final paper of approximately 6-8 pages in
length is required. Further details will follow. b). Research assistance to a
union or academic project for an average of 2-4 hours a week during the
quarter (10 weeks). The T.A.'s and the project supervisors will monitor the
progress of work. A final paper will be required, and its content and size
negotiated among the student, project supervisor, and TA.'s. c). A research
paper on a labor action, organizing effort, or an important piece of labor
legislation. The subject can be recent or historical, and it can have occurred
anywhere in the world. The student will have to engage in library research or
in interviewing, or both. The paper must be 10-15 pages in length. Students
who choose this option must submit a 4-page proposal and bibliography in the
seventh week of class. Up to 10% extra credit for 2-3 page reports on films
and readings listed at end of syllabus. Make arrangements with T.A.

**Recommended preparation**  

Ellen Borris and Nelson Lichtenstein, eds. Major Problems in the History of
American Workers Michael Evan Gold, An Introduction to Labor Law Politics &
Society 28, 3 (2000) Ruth Milkman and Kent Wong, Voices from the Front Lines
Selected readings

**Class Assignments and Grading**  

Texts. Eileen Boris & Nelson Lichtenstein, Major Problems in the History of
American Workers; Dana Frank, Buy American!; Gay W. Seidman, Manufacturing
Militance; Andrew Martin & George Ross, The Brave New World of European Labor;
Miriam Ching Yoon Louie, Sweatshop Warriers. All required readings are
available from the UW Bookstore.

Grading. Class Participation: 12.5 % Midterm Exam: 25 % Final Exam: 25 %
Papers & papers presentations: 37.5 % TOTAL: 100 %

* * *

_The information above is intended to be helpful in choosing courses. Because
the instructor may further develop his/her plans for this course, its
characteristics are subject to change without notice. In most cases, the
official course syllabus will be distributed on the first day of class._

* * *

_[Additional Information](http://www.polisci.washington.edu/home.html)  
mlevi@u.washington.edu  
Last Update by Suman C. Chhabra  
Date: 11/30/2001 _

  
[![\[University of
Washington\]](/home/graphics/uwsealf6.gif)](http://www.washington.edu/) |
![](/home/graphics/space.gif) | ![](/home/graphics/space.gif)  
---|---|---  
|  Office of the Registrar  
icd@u.washington.edu  
Modified:June 22, 2002    |  
---|---  
![](/home/graphics/space.gif)

