#  _ELDERLEARNING INSTITUTE (ELI)  
**_At the_**_

![University of Minnesota](colorwdm.gif)   **University College** **Twin
Cities Campus**

* * *

**ELI WINTER 1998 SESSION** "Outside of a dog, a book is  man's best
friend..... and inside of a dog, it's too dark to read."

_**\--** Groucho Marx_

** ** **MONDAYS**  


Need a map to Coffman Union on the East Bank Campus of the University of
Minnesota?  [(map available](Coffman_Union.html)[)](Coffman_Union)

**MINNESOTA WRITERS - F. SCOTT FITZGERALD AND SINCLAIR LEWIS (CONTINUED)**
Participants will delve into further aspects of these two very different
writers who began their careers in Minnesota. Readings and discussion will use
novels and short stories as springboards for exploring the people, places and
social attitudes of the 1920's and 1930s. **John Koblas** , author and
lecturer .  
10:00 - 11:30 a.m.

Site: The Kenwood, 825 Summit Ave., Mpls. [(](../Maps/Kenwood_Map)[map
available](Kenwood_Map.html)[)](The%20Kenwood%20Map)

**CHARLAS** **Hola!** Join the informal lunch-time conversation group in the
Campus Club. Discuss current events to trip planning. Working knowledge of
Spanish is recommended. **Maria Larsen and Betty Schloner** .  
11:15 a.m. - 12:30 p.m.  
Site: Dining Room - 4th floor Coffman Union

**CULTURES OF MESO-AMERICA (CONTINUED)** This six-week series will continue an
exploration of the multi-layered cultures of Mexico and Central America. Guest
lecturers and videos will focus on literature, music and popular culture. No
classes March 2 and 10. Series will conclude with highlights from the 1998 ELI
trip to Oaxaca. Guest lecturers will be introduced by **Steve Benson** , ELI
Executive Director .  
12:30 - 2:00 p.m.  
Site: Coffman Union (room to be determined)

**THE WORLD OF IMMIGRANTS - THEN AND NOW** How the world looked to America's
immigrants of the past and how it appears today. The influence of immigrants
on U.S. foreign policy will also be examined. Speakers will include the Irish
Consul General and the Honorary Swedish Consul, Wendell Anderson. Latin
American, Southeast Asian and European immigrants will also share their
stories. **Pat Quinlan** , Retired U.S. Foreign Service Officer; **William
Rogers** , Director Emeritus of the World Affairs Center and **Fran Paulu** ,
Director Emeritus of the Minnesota International Center .  
2:15 - 3:45 p.m.  
Site: Coffman Union (room to be determined)  

* * *

**TUESDAYS**

**MINNESOTA BIOGRAPHY** This series will highlight the personalities that
helped shape our state, including flamboyant Ignatius Donnelly; hard-driving
James J. Hill; the Lone Eagle, Charles Lindbergh Jr. and early settlers Anna
and Alexander Ramsey. Guest speakers will lift these figures out of the
history books and show them as complex human beings. Optional tour of Ramsey
House. Leader: **Donn Coddington** , Retired Assistant Director, Minnesota
Historical Society .  
10:00 - 11:30 a.m.  
Site: The Kenwood, 825 Summit Ave., Mpls. [(](Kenwood_Map)[map
available)](Kenwood_Map.html)

**THE MYTHS BEHIND MYTHS** For centuries, observant people have noted that
some common themes, symbols and motifs are found in the myths of peoples
widely separated in space and time. Attempts to explain this phenomenon have
lead to many fascinating explanations which ultimately involve views on the
nature of "human nature" and the human mind; (Are there innate patterns of
thought?); on religion (Do people create their gods?) and on social history
(How do changes in myths reflect changes in society?). There are also
significant differences in myths that will also be considered. A syllabus will
be distributed giving brief assigned readings in The Greek Myths by Robert
Graves and occasional handouts. These, along with lecture material will
provide a common basis for discussion. Other relevant reading will be
suggested. Text: The Greek Myths by Robert Graves (available in two paperback
volumes) **Gerald Erickson** , Professor Emeritus of Classical and Near
Eastern Studies, U of M .  
10:00 - 11:30 a.m.  
Site: Wayzata Community Church, 125 E. Wayzata Blvd.
[(](../Maps/WAYZATA_COMMUNITY_CHURCH)[map
available](WAYZ_COMMUNITY_CHURCH.html)[)](WAYZATA_COMMUNITY_CHURCH)

**PUBLIC ART IN MINNESOTA** The wealth of murals, sculpture and environment
works found in parks, plazas and on buildings are the focus of this slide-
lecture series. Guests, including artists and art facilitators, will explain
their work and ideas. Visits to works, some famous, some virtually unknown,
will be encouraged either individually or by carpooling. **Moira Harris** ,
PhD, art historian, writer and publisher.  
12:30 - 2:00 p.m.  
Site: 230 Vo-Tech Bldg., St. Paul Campus [(](Vo-Tech%20Building)[map
available](Vo-Tech_Building.html)[)](Vo-Tech_Building)

**A SENSE OF PLACE FOR BLOOMSBURY WRITERS AND ARTISTS** This lecture and
discussion series will look at the English Bloomsbury artists and writers with
an emphasis on "place" as a source of meaning. The course will explore Mrs.
Dalloway's London, based on the novel by Virginia Woolf, and will also study
the meaning of place for Vanessa Bell, John Maynard Keynes and Lytton
Strachey. **Ann Pflaum** , PhD. Associate Dean of University College, U of M,
and devotee of Victorian and Edwardian social issues.  
12:30 - 2:00 p.m.  
Site: Wayzata Community Church, 125 E. Wayzata Blvd.
[(](WAYZATA_COMMUNITY_CHURCH)[map available](WAYZ_COMMUNITY_CHURCH.html))

**STOICISM AND THE MEDITATIONS OF MARCUS AURELIUS** This series will examine
the ancient philosophy of Stoicism with particular emphasis on the Meditations
of Roman Emperor, Marcus Auewlius. Text: Meditations of Roman Emperor, Marcus
Aurelius. **Dell Reed** , Librarian and PhD candidate in Philosophy, U of M.  
2:15 - 3:45 p.m.  
Site: 230 Vo-Tech Bldg., St. Paul Campus [(map available](Vo-
Tech_Building.html)[)](Vo-Tech_Building)

**THE GREAT DEPRESSION AND THOSE WHO LIVED THROUGH IT** The text for this
series is Studs Terkle's Hard Times, a collection of interviews with farmers
and factory workers, city and small town dwellers, rich and poor, the
unemployed, New Deal insiders and a few who thrived during the period.
Participants will be encouraged to share their own stories and those they have
heard from others. Chapters from the book will be assigned and form a
framework for discussion. Text: Stud Terkle's Hard Times. **Trudy Glaman** ,
retired educational psychologist and history buff.  
2:15 - 3:45 p.m.  
Site: 6th floor Coffman Union

Need a map to Coffman Union on the East Bank Campus of the University of
Minnesota?  [(](../Maps/Coffman_Union)[map available](Coffman_Union.html))  

* * *

**WEDNESDAYS**

**INTRODUCTION TO T'AI-CHI CH'UAN** (pronounced tie-gee-chwan) This is an
ancient Chinese slow-motion exercise which today people of all ages practice
for health, strength, balance, awareness and meditation. Loose clothing and
comfortable shoes are needed for practice. There will be warm up and relaxed
breathing exercises. Participants will practice T'ai-chi Ch'i Kung and begin
the first section of the solo form Yang style T'ai-chi Ch'uan. **Sally Polk**
, leader, has been practicing T'ai-Chi Ch'uan since 1982.  
10:00 - 11:30 a.m.  
Site: Twin Cities T'ai-Chi Ch'uan studio, suite 207, 2242 University (at
Hampden - entrance on Hampden) 3 blocks east of Highway 280 [(](T%27ai-
Chi_Ch%27uan_Studio)[map available)](T%27ai-Chi_Ch%27uan_Studio.html)

**INTRODUCTION TO THE GREAT BOOKS** Members of ELI are invited to join in this
nation-wide program of interpretive reading and discussion. Short fiction,
fiction and non-fiction including works by Freud, Chekov, James and Thucydides
will be featured in this first series. Six meetings, Jan 28 - March 4. Text:
Introduction to Great Books, Series One - $10.95 + shipping. (To pre-order,
call 1-800-222-5870 or Dorothy Lamberton, 926-3851.) **Dorothy Lamberton** ,
former Faculty Member, English Department, U of M, and experienced Great Books
leader.  
10:00 - 11:30 a.m.  
Site: Good Shepherd Lutheran Church 4801 France Ave. S., Minneapolis
[(](Good_Shepherd_Lutheran_Church)[map available](Good_Shep_Luth_Church.html))

**20TH CENTURY BRITISH VOICES** This series will survey the speeches and
unique styles of British orators from early 20th century speakers like
Emmeline Pankhurst and David Lloyd George, through Winston Churchill, Aneurin
Bevan and Clement Attlee in the 30's and 40's, to the present with Margaret
Thatcher and current Prime Minister, Tony Blair. Audio recordings, videos and
slides of those speakers and videos of House of Commons debates and the famous
open-air Hyde Park corner will complement the course. $10.00 materials fee.
**Vernon Jensen** , Professor Emeritus, Department of Speech - Communications,
U of M.  
10:00 - 11:30 a.m.  
Site: 1666 Coffman St., Falcon Heights, MN across from U of M golf course on
Larpenteur Ave. [(](1666_Coffman)[map available)](1666_Coffman.html)

**THE LATE PLAYS OF SHAKESPEARE** Participants will read and discuss works
including the later tragedies Othello, Macbeth, King Lear, Anthony and
Cleopatra and two romances, Cymbeline and The Tempest. **Edward Savage** ,
Professor Emeritus of English, U of M.  
12:30 - 2:00 p.m.  
Site: 1666 Coffman St. Falcon Heights, MN across from U of M golf course on
Larpenteur Ave. ( [Map available)](1666_Coffman.html)

**THE PANDORA'S BOX OF SCIENCE: CLOSE IT OR WORSHIP IT?** Science, coupled
with the concepts of progress and evolution, has become a dominant force in
the activity of humankind. Participants will discuss whether society needs to
consider science as a forbidden fruit, a necessary tool for reaching the
utopia of our choice or a part of the unavoidable evolution of the species,
uncontrollable as such. Suggested readings: Forbidden Knowledge, Roger
Shattuck; The Idea of Progress, J.B.Bury; God and The New Physics, Paul
Davies; Reason In the Age of Science, Hans George Gadaner. **Andreas
Rosenberg** , Professor of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Biochemistry and
Biophysical Sciences, U of M. Adjunct Professor at Humanist Institute, New
York, and former Director of Research, Dept. of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathology, U of M.  
12:30 - 2:00 p.m.  
Site: 6th floor Coffman Union

**GERMANY TODAY** Participants will examine recent German history,
institutions and culture, including the educational system, youth and elders,
politics, the role of religion, the media, cultural life and the on-going
effects of reunification. An optional two week trip to Berlin is planned in
late May. **Frank Hirschbach** , Professor Emeritus of German, Dutch and
Scandinavian Studies, U of M, and leader of numerous trips to Germany.  
2:15 - 3:45 p.m.  
Site: 6th floor Coffman Union.  

* * *

**THURSDAYS**

**CHESS** Investigate the history and evolution of this game of games. Improve
your skills by studying strategies, master games and end games. Find out about
chess activities around the Twin Cities. This series is considered an activity
and need not be counted as a topic group. Six sessions begin Feb. 12. **Mort
Hamermesh** , Professor Emeritus of Physics and Astronomy, and chess buff.  
10:00 - 11:30 a.m.  
Site: 6th floor Coffman Union

**MEMOIR WRITING: TELLING IT LIKE IT WAS** Participants will need to bring
writing materials and their memories. They will experiment with free writing
and guided exercises. All can consider shaping their material for informal
publication for their families. **Madeline Hamermesh** , writer and retired
teacher.  
10:00 - 11:30 a.m.  
Site: The Kenwood, 825 Summit Ave., Mpls. [(](The%20Kenwood%20Map)[map
available](Kenwood_Map.html)[)](../Maps/Kenwood_Map)

**AMERICAN FOLK ART REVISITED** : 1780-1840 First meeting is at the
Minneapolis Institute of Arts, Jan 22 at 11:00 a.m., to tour the exhibit of
the highly-renowned Nina and Bertram Little Collection of New England Folk
Art. The following meetings will explore and define Americans at work,
practicing religion, attitudes toward death, patriotism and house interiors
through dazzling slides from Colonial Williamsburg. Artists such as Hicks and
early collectors will be highlighted. Seven meetings including visit to MIA
exhibit: Jan 22 - March 5. **Barbara B. Braman** , collector.  
10:00 - 11:30 a.m.  
Site: Weisman Art Museum Seminar Room (first meeting, MIA, 2400 3rd Ave. So.,
Minneapolis) [(map available](Weissman_Art_Bldg.html)[)](Weissman_Art_Bldg)

**ARCHITECTURE AT THE MILLENNIUM: LOOKING FORWARD - LOOKING BACK** This series
will explore the eclectic legacy of the architecture of buildings, churches
and homes in the Twin Cities, USA and abroad. Talks, tours and videos will
illustrate the mix of traditional, modern and iconoclastic architecture as we
approach the 21st century. **Bette Hammel** , architecture writer and
**Virginia Sweatt** , historic preservation advocate.  
12:30 - 2:00 p.m.  
Site: Weisman Art Museum Seminar Room  [(map
available)](Weissman_Art_Bldg.html)

**REVISITING THE COLLECTIONS OF THE MIA: CULTURAL REFLECTIONS AND DIVERSITY**
The "material world" of quilts, dyed fabrics, and the glorious color of Kaffe
Fasset will be the focus of this course. Also to be toured are new galleries
that highlight the arts of India, the Himalayas and Southeast Asia. **Pat
Wuest** , Docent, Minneapolis Institute of Arts.  
2:30 - 4:00 p.m.  
Site: Minneapolis Institute of Arts 2400 3rd Ave. So., Minneapolis  [(map
available)](Mpls_Institute_of_Art.html)  

* * *

**FRIDAYS**

**LENSES ON FRANCE** A quartet composed of a retired physician, Boyd Thomes, a
retired mayor, Art Naftalin, and their wives, Maria and Fran (all enthusiastic
photographers) filmed and drove through France on five different occasions.
Through the aid of two screens and two projectors the cities, villages and
countryside of France return in summer color to wintry Kenwood. Francophiles
and armchair travelers are welcome. Space limited. This series is an activity
and need not be counted as a topic, but participants must register. **Boyd
Thomes** , Professor Emeritus of Medicine, and photo buff.  
10:00 -11:30 a.m.  
Site: The Kenwood, 825 Summit Ave., Mpls. [(](Kenwood_Map)[map
available](Kenwood_Map.html)[)](Kenwood_Map)

**DEMOCRACY IS A DISCUSSION** Civil, civic discussion is the essence of the
democratic process. Participants will read and discuss essays and articles
based on civic engagement. Topics include the democratic rule of law;
understanding a civil society; democracy and the free market; ideas, the media
and public sphere. Guests from HH Humphrey Center will add a global
perspective. Handbook: Democracy is a Discussion, approximately $10.00
(available at first meeting) **Pat Greene** , corporate/free-lance writer and
editor.  
10:00 - 11:30 a.m.  
Site: St. Lawrence Catholic Church, 1203 5th St. SE. (Dinkytown) free parking
in un-reserved or non-re served stalls in 6th St. lot.
[(](../Maps/StLawrence_Catholic_Church)[map
available)](StLawrence_Cath_Church.html) [Return to ELI Home Page](index.html)

* * *

Regarding ELI'S website, please send all suggestions, questions, requests to:
__[Bob Ulstrom:
ulstr001@maroon.tc.umn.edu](mailto:ulstr001@maroon.tc.umn.edu)__ __[
](mailto:bensoneli@aol.com)__ **[University College Home
Page](http://www.cee.umn.edu/) | [University of Minnesota Home
Page](http://www.umn.edu/)** **(C) Regents of the University of Minnesota,
1998** **The University of Minnesota is an equal opportunity educator and
employer.** **Page URL - http://www.cee.umn.edu/eli** **ELI webmaster:RAU.
Last update: 3/31/1998.** ** **

