**Political Science 030:040**

**Government and Politics of Industrialized Democracies**

**Spring Semester 2002**

**Lecture: Tuesdays and Thursdays, 1:30-2:20 P.M., 40 Schaeffer Hall**

**Professor: Denise V. Powers**

369 Schaeffer Hall; 335-0901

email: Denise-Powers@uiowa.edu

Office Hours:

Tu & Th 11:30-1:00, and by appointment



**Teaching Assistant: Jeremy Youde**

330 Schaeffer Hall; 335-2238

email: Jeremy-Youde@uiowa.edu

Office Hours:W 1:30-2:30; Th 9:30-11:30, and by appointment

  

******Course Objectives**

Industrialized democracies are characterized by several common features, the
most notable of which are the ability of citizens to choose their leaders
through a free and open process of debate and selection; a complex and
differentiated economy centered on industrial and post-industrial productive
enterprises; and a political system that has assumed some measure of
responsibility for the economic well-being of its citizens. However, the way
in which representatives are chosen, the dimensions of political competition,
the organization and scope of political decision-making processes, and the
role that government plays in managing the economic system all vary
substantially from country to country.

While industrialized democracies are found on several continents, this course
focuses on Europe with the goal of comparing the origins and processes of
democratic governance in three West European countries-The United Kingdom,
Germany, and to a lesser extent, France-and the emerging democracies of post-
communist Central Europe. We will examine how historical variations in the
processes of economic development, political incorporation of citizenries, and
the creation of the nation-state have resulted in quite different political
traditions and institutions in each European country. We will also learn how
policy outcomes across the countries differ as a result of social forces and
the "rules of the game": representative institutions, electoral systems, and
party systems. In the final portion of the course, we will see how democracy
within European nation-states and, indeed, the very concept of the nation-
state itself is undergoing fundamental change as cross-national political and
economic integration proceeds under the auspices of the European Union.

Democratic variation within Europe exposes us to a broad range of contemporary
political possibilities and allows us to evaluate the factors that make
different forms of democratic governance fair and effective. By the end of
this course you should be able to understand the contemporary developments of
industrial democracies within a coherent framework, to identify important
events and actors in the history of European politics, and to understand how
to explore problems effectively through the use of comparative analytical
techniques.

**Course Requirements**

**_Texts_** ___European Politics in Transition (Fourth Edition)_. 2002.
Kesselman, Krieger _et al._ ( **K & K**)

_Annual Editions: Comparative Politics 01/02_ , Christian Soe, ed. ( **AE** ).

_Comparative Governance_. 2002. W. Phillips Shively ( **Shively** ).

The required texts are available for purchase at the IMU bookstore. Occasional
handouts may be distributed in class or on the class web site, and
supplemental readings may be assigned (infrequently) with one week's advance
notice.

**_![](sylla0{image1}.gif)Assignments and Performance Evaluation_**

Midterm Exam: 25%

Final Exam: 35%

Paper (due April 16th) 20%

Discussion Section 20%

_Exams_

Both exams will consist of short-answer identification questions and essays.
The final exam is cumulative, but identifications will draw upon material from
the second half of the semester.

_Paper_

A paper, six to eight pages in length, is due in lecture on April 16th.
Detailed instructions for the paper will be distributed in discussion sections
during the week of February 12 th. Students must submit a paper topic for
approval in their discussion section the week of February 26th.

_Attendance and Participation_

This course follows a lecture/discussion format with two lectures and one
discussion section per week. Regular attendance at both lectures and
discussions is necessary for the successful completion of this course.
Students who miss class are responsible for getting notes from their peers.

_Discussion Section_

You should be registered for one of the four discussion sections:

DIS A01 Mondays, 4:30-5:20 P.M. ( **note day change!!** ) (51 Schaeffer Hall)

DIS A02 Thursdays, 8:30-9:20 A.M. (132 MacBride Hall)

DIS A03 Thursdays, 11:30 A.M.-12:20 P.M. (248 Jessup Hall)

DIS A04 Thursdays, 4:30-5:20 P.M. (151 Schaeffer Hall)

Your participation in discussion section is not only one of the most important
determinants of your final grade, it is also likely to be the most important
influence on the quality of your experience in this course. It is your
responsibility to have the readings completed before coming to class, to be
ready to engage the material directly, and to be able to discuss it with your
peers in both small- and large-group discussion formats. In assessing your
participation, we look, above all, for comments that reflect an understanding
of the material, exhibit a willingness to think critically about it, and raise
thoughtful questions. Active listening is also important. In short, quality of
participation is more important than quantity. At the discretion of the
teaching assistant, unannounced reading quizzes and other in-class exercises
may be given throughout the semester in discussion sections. All quizzes will
be administered at the beginning of the class and cannot be made up for
reasons of absence or late arrival.

Students are strongly encouraged to keep up with current developments in
European politics. Inexpensive subscriptions to the _New York Times_ are
available for 40 cents per day; a subscription order form will be distributed
in class. _The Economist_ is a weekly magazine with very good coverage of
European affairs. Portions are available at http://www.economist.com, but the
full text is available by subscription only.

_Web Page_

The address for the course web page is http://www.uiowa.edu/~c030040/. There
you will find class handouts, useful links, and copies of the lecture
outlines, which are posted after each lecture.

**Reading Assignments**

_Date.........................................................Topic_............................................................
_Reading Assignment_

January 22 .........................................European Politics in
Transition............................. **K & K**, Introduction

January 24......................................... Comparing Political
Systems **................................Shively** , Chapter1

**_Week 1 Discussions: Problems in Comparative Analysis_** __

January 29......................................... State, Nation and the
Consolidation of Control...... **Shively** , Chapters 2 & 3

January 31......................................... Social Cleavages,
Political Conflict........................ **Shively** , Chapter 4

**__****_Week 2 Discussions: Formation of the Modern Nation State_**

February 5......................................... Forms of
Government.......................................... **Shively** , Chapter 5

February 7......................................... Political
Economy................................................ **Shively** , Chapter
6

**_Week 3 Discussions: Presidential vs. parliamentary
systems...................................._** **AE** #27, #28

February 12....................................... Britain: The Emergence of
the Modern State......... **K & K**, Chapter 6

February 14....................................... Britain: Governance and
Policy............................. **K & K**, Chapter 8, **AE** #2

**_Week 4 Discussions_** __

February 19....................................... Britain:
Representation.......................................... **K & K**, Chap. 9,
pp. 206-10

_(video presentation: question time)_

February 21....................................... Britain: Party
System............................................. **K & K**, Ch. 9, pp.
210-21, **AE** #1

**_Week 5 Discussions: Constitutional
Reform..............................................................._**
**AE** #3, #4

February 26....................................... Britain: Political and
Economic Development........... **K & K**, Chapter 7

February 28....................................... Britain: Politics in
Transition.................................... **K & K**, Chapter 10

**_Week 6 Discussions: Devolution_**
__...................................................................................
**AE** #5

(paper topic due in discussion section)

March 5............................................ France: The Creation (and
Re-creation)................... **K & K**, Chapter 11

of the Modern State

March 7............................................ France: Governance and
Policy................................ **K & K**, Chapter 13; Excerpts from
Constitution (web); **AE** #11

**_Week 7 Discussions: French/British Political Development_** __

March 12.......................................... France: Representation and
Party System.................. **K & K**, Ch. 14, **AE** #10

March 14 Midterm Exam

**_Week 8 Discussions: Review_** __

**Spring Break March 18-22**

March 26........................................ Germany: Forging the Modern
State............................ **K & K**, Chapter 16; **AE** #6

March 28........................................ Germany: Governance and
Policy................................ **K & K**, Chapter 18; Excerpts from
the German Basic Law (web)

**_Week 9 Discussions: Healthcare and Immigration
Policy............................................_** __**AE** #33, #34

April 2............................................ Germany:
Representation.............................................. **K & K**, Ch.
19, pp. 379-85

April 4............................................ Germany: Party
System................................................ **K & K**, Chapter 19,
pp. 385-401; **AE** #9, #7  

**_Week 10 Discussions: Party Reform and Gender_**
__........................................................... **AE** #23, #24,
#25

April 9............................................ Germany: Political and
Economic Development............. **K & K**, Chapter 17

April 11.......................................... German Politics in
Transition......................................... **K & K**, Chapter 20;
**AE** #8

**_Week 11 Discussions: Democrastan, Pt. I_**
__.......................................................................Handout
from web

April 16........................................... East-Central Europe:
Overview.................................... **K & K,** Chapter 26; **AE** #35

April 18........................................... East-Central Europe:
Political Economy........................ **K & K**, Chapter 27; **AE** #36

**_Week 12 Discussions: Democrastan, Pt. II_**
__.......................................................................Handout
from web

April 23........................................... East-Central Europe:
Governance and............................ **K & K**, Chapter 28

Policymaking

April 25........................................... East-Central Europe:
Representation and Parties............. **K & K**, Chapter 29

**_Week 13 Discussions: East-Central Europe in Transition_**
__................................................ **K & K**, Chapter 30

April 30........................................... European Union:
Origins.................................................. **K & K**, Chapters
1 & 2

May 2............................................. European Union:
Institutions and Functioning..................... **K & K**, Chapter 3; **AE**
#31

**_Week 14 Discussions: The Euro_**
___...........................................................................................Economist_
Jan. 5, 2002

May 7............................................. European Union:
Policies................................................... **K & K**, Chapter
4

May 9............................................. European Union:
Integration, Regionalism,......................... **K & K**, Chapter 5;
**AE** #32

and the "Democratic Deficit"

**_Week 15 Discussions: Review for Final Exam_** __

May 14 **_Final Exam, 9:45 A.M._** __

Please visit the Political Science Department's web site:
http://www.uiowa.edu/~polisci/ . It is frequently updated regarding new events
and procedures in our department, changes in the Schedule of Courses, plus TA
and faculty office hours when available. You also may find current information
on pre-advising and registration. Our Vernon Van Dyke Computing Facility
(Political Science ITC) is located in room 21 Schaeffer Hall. Available hours
are listed at our web site and also posted outside room 21 Schaeffer Hall.

Department Chair: Professor William T. Reisinger

Department Office: 341 Schaeffer Hall, 335-2358

