_THE BOOK REVIEW_

****************************************************************************

WRITING THE BOOK REVIEW

1\. After you've chosen your book, you should begin the pre-writing process AS
YOU READ. Take notes. Notice: the main ideas, supporting examples (weak or
strong? convincing or not?) use of specifics, use of the personal (if
applicable), techniques of characterization, dialogue, description, narrative,
etc. Pay attention to how you as a reader react and respond to the language,
the ideas, the presentation, the points the author makes and how s/he makes
them. READ CLOSELY. If you take good notes as you read, you'll find that 3/4
of your work will already be done as you sit down to write the review!  

2\. If possible, (and I recommend this), let the book "lie" for a couple days.
Let the ideas swirl around in your head. Don't consciously think about it, but
notice (and even write down) thoughts as they come to you.  

3\. While you're doing 1 and 2, study other examples of book reviews. Make a
habit of reading any reviews (can be other types of reviews) whenever you see
them--NY Times, Times Union, Metroland, magazines, web, etc. How do the
authors organize the review? What information do they convey? How do they
express their opinion? How do they make their review convincing (or not)? How
do they say good things? How do they say bad things? (We'll also be reading
and talking about some examples in class, but I encourage you to read others
outside of class.)  

4\. Begin writing the review. Go through the process of pre-writing, rough
drafts, and revisions we've discussed in class.  

REMEMBER: A REVIEW STATES AN OPINION AND GIVES INFORMATION ABOUT A BOOK. AND
IT'S _YOUR_ OPINION THAT COUNTS HERE, NOT OTHER CRITICS' OR SCHOLARS'!  

_Book Review: Ideas for Readings_  

For your book review, you may choose any book-length work of nonfiction
(memoir, biography, autobiography, reminiscenses,
journals/diaries,critique,research, reportage,handbook,travel
narrative,perspective, essays,"true novels," etc.)  

A good place to start for authors is in the reading for class: many good
authors are collected in the Norton. If you like an essay you've read here,
you may want to read a book by that writer. Several writers are also mentioned
in Philip Gerard's _Creative Nonfiction_. Another resource is the list of
writers that are coming or who have come to the New York State Writers'
Institute Visiting Writers Series. Or, you might check out one of the authors
below. For recommendations on specific books, please see me.  

  * Edward Abbey, _Desert Solitaire_ * 
  * James Agee 
  * Isabel Allende, _Paula_ , memoir about the death of her daughter 
  * Dorothy Allison, essays on writing & growing up in the South 
  * Julia Alvarez, _Nothing to Declare,_ essays 
  * Russell Baker 
  * James Baldwin 
  * John Berendt, _Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil_ * 
  * Susan Brownmiller, feminist writing 
  * Rachel Carson, _The Silent Spring_ (ecology) 
  * Ana Castillo, _Massacre of the Dreamers: Essays on Xicanisma_ , personal & political essays on being a Chicana feminist 
  * Susan Cheever, a memoir about alcoholism by the daughter of John Cheever 
  * Michelle Cliff 
  * Dennis and Vicki Covington 
  * H.D. 
  * Joan Didion, essay collections: _The White Album,Slouching Towards Bethlehem, After Henry_
  * Pietro Di Donato, _Christ in Concrete_ * 
  * Annie Dillard, _Pilgrim at Tinker Creek_
  * Isak Dinesen, _Out of Africa_ , account of living in Africa 
  * F. Scott Fitzgerald, _The Crack-Up_
  * John Gardner, _The Art of Fiction_
  * Susan Griffin, various feminist writings 
  * Stephen Jay Gould, science writing; _The Mismeasure of Man_ * 
  * Pete Hamill 
  * Patricia Hampl, memoir 
  * Barbara Grazzutti Harrison, _An Accidental Autobiography_
  * Kathryn Harrison, _The Kiss_ Memoir about incest 
  * Ernest Hemingway 
  * bell hooks, memoir of growing up as a poor, black girl 
  * Ruth Prawer Jhabvala 
  * Rodger Kamenetz 
  * Alfred Kazin 
  * Tracy Kidder, _Home Town_ * 
  * Jamaica Kincaid, _Annie John_ (a novel but is autobiographical) 
  * Barbara Kingsolver, essays 
  * Maxine Hong Kingston, _Woman Warrior_ (a novel/memoir) 
  * Jon Krakauer, _Into Thin Air_ , _Into the Wild_ * 
  * Anne Lamott, _Bird by Bird: Some Instructions on Writing and Life_ and _Operating Instructions_
  * Ursula K. Le Guin, essays on writing, science fiction & feminism 
  * Shirley Geok-lin Lim, _Among the White Moon Face_ , memoir of growing up in Malaysia 
  * Anne Morrow Lindbergh, various writings by the wife of Charles Lindbergh 
  * Norman Mailer 
  * Nancy Mairs, various memoirs & essays; she writes on writing, women, concepts of home, and disability 
  * James McBride, _The Color of Water_ , a memoir by a bi-racial man searching for his roots 
  * Frank McCourt, _Angela's Ashes_ *, memoir of growing up in Ireland; the sequel, _'Tis_ has also just come out. 
  * Hannah Merker 
  * Diane Middlebrook, biography of Anne Sexton 
  * Anchee Min, _Red Azalea_ a memoir of growing up in China 
  * Toni Morrison, essays on African-American writing 
  * Bharati Mukherjee 
  * Vladimir Nabokov, _Speak, Memory_ Memoir by the author of _Lolita_
  * Anais Nin, diaries 
  * Robert Olmstead 
  * Sylvia Plath, _The Bell Jar_ , a novel/autobiography 
  * Richard Rodriguez, _Hunger of Memory_
  * Linda Gray Sexton, memoir by the daughter of the poet Anne Sexton 
  * Alix Kates Shulman, _Drinking the Rain_ woman living alone on an island, self-sufficient 
  * Susan Sontag 
  * Gloria Steinem, political feminist writings, also a biography of Marilyn Monroe 
  * William Styron, _Darkness Visible_ *, a memoir about depression* 
  * Gay Talese, biographies 
  * Lewis Thomas 
  * Hunter S. Thompson, crazy, political, druggie writings 
  * Henry David Thoreau, _Walden_ , the classic 
  * Barbara Tuchman, biographies/histories 
  * Gore Vidal, biographies & essays 
  * Joseph Wallace, _The Autobiography of Baseball_ * 
  * Alice Walker, _In Search of Our Mother's Gardens_ , on black women's writings 
  * Eudora Welty, _One Writer's Beginnings_
  * Richard Wright 
  * Tobias Wolff, _This Boy's Life_ * 
  * Elizabeth Wurtzel, _Prozac Nation_ * 
  * William Zinsser 

I'll add more as I think about them, and may even try to break them down into
categories. If you have any suggestions, please e-mail me
(ac8153@csc.albany.edu)!

*denotes books that were read and reviewed by students of ENG300Z in Fall 1999: See [Book Briefs](http://www.albany.edu/faculty/ac8153/eng300/reviews.htm)

_[Back to Syllabus](http://www.albany.edu/faculty/ac8153/eng300/syllabus.htm)

[Course Schedule and Daily
Assignments](http://www.albany.edu/faculty/ac8153/eng300/schedule.htm)

