**PSCI 267**

**Middle East Politics: The Arab-Israeli Conflict**

**Fall 2000**

**[ preliminary syllabus, still under construction]**

Professor Marc Lynch

[mlynch@williams.edu](mailto:mlynch@williams.edu)

Stetson G-20

Phone: 597-2572

My home page:
[http://lanfiles.williams.edu/~mlynch/mlynch/marc_lynch.htm](http://lanfiles.williams.edu/~mlynch/mlynch.htm)

The international and domestic politics of the Middle East have been
profoundly shaped by the creation of the state of Israel and its conflicts
with its Arab neighbors. Beyond the clashes of interests between the states of
the region, there has been an existential struggle between Israeli and
Palestinian nationalism. The struggle by each side to establish a recognized,
legitimate national identity and political entity has been at the base of much
of the instability of the region. Six major wars have been fought, in addition
to low-level violent conflict which has created a deep sense of personal
insecurity on all sides. In the 1990s, the Oslo Accords established a
framework for negotiations towards a comprehensive peace. Jordan and Israel
signed a full peace treaty, and most states in the region began to move
tentatively towards regional economic cooperation and conflict reduction. In
July 2000, the Oslo process brought the leaders of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority to Camp David in a failed attempt to finally resolve the conflict.

This course examines the international politics of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
It begins with an overview of the structure of international politics of the
region: the creation of borders, superpower competition, the balance of power,
conceptions of regional order, and the patterns of alliances and conflicts. It
explores the origins and impacts of the major wars between Israel and the Arab
states and the process of negotiations which led to Israel's peace treaties
with Egypt and Jordan. The final section of the course focuses on the current
peace negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians, Syria, and Lebanon. We
will approach these negotiations both from the perspective of rational
bargaining theory and as deeper conflicts of identity and historical
narrative. What does peace mean in the Middle Eastern context?



**Books and Readings:**

A required [course reader](psci_267_00reader.htm) in two parts will be
available in the Political Science Department. Be sure to complete the
assigned readings before the class session. Some days I will lecture, other
days will be primarily discussion; always be prepared to talk about the
readings. There will be a course list-serve for ongoing discussion of course
issues; I will also use the list-server to post discussion questions. In
addition, you are expected to follow news and opinion about the Arab-Israeli
conflict and to be ready to discuss current events. I recommend that you read
at least two major newspapers: the New York Times and a Middle Eastern
newspaper (Israeli or Arab). [Links](web_resources.htm) to on-line American,
European, Israeli, and Arab newspapers can be found on my home page and on the
course home page.

Purchase these at Water Street Books or at the on-line bookseller of your
choice:

Charles Smith. Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict. Third Edition.
(St.Martin's 1997).

Laura Eisenberg and Neil Caplan, Negotiating Arab-Israeli Peace (Indiana
University Press, 1998).



**Requirements:**

Map Quiz: Identify the major states and basic information in an in-class quiz.
The quiz is graded on a pass/fail basis; it is not factored in to the final
grade, but you must pass this quiz in order to pass the class... no matter how
many tries it takes!

Response Papers: Two 1-2 page response papers to questions distributed in
class. 10% each.

Midterm Essay: 4-6 page midterm take-home essay. 20%

Book Review: 7-10 page analytical/critical review of a recent book on some
dimension of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The course home page has a [list of
possible books](psci_267_books.htm), with those already selected by someone in
the class indicated; you are welcome to choose a book not on the list, but it
must be approved by me in advance. 30%.

Final Exam: In-class written exam during exam period. 20%

Participation: Regular attendance and constructive participation are taken as
a requirement for successful completion of the course. I will take attendance
at my discretion; more than two unexcused absences will result in a
substantial grade penalty.You are also expected to participate in the
discussions on the course list-server. 10%.



Schedule: Please be sure to complete assigned readings before the scheduled
class session. This schedule of topics and readings is likely to change over
the course of the semester as current events dictate or as our discussions
develop, so be prepared to be flexible!



Sep 8 Course Introduction

I. FOUNDATIONS OF THE ARAB-ISRAELI CONFLICT

Sep 11 Passions and interests: establishing a framework for understanding the
conflict

READ: Amos Oz, "The meaning of homeland": 1967 essay by a major liberal
Israeli

Edward Said, "Ideology of Difference": 1985 essay by major Palestinian
intellectual

Benny Morris, "Zionism: a personal experience": the leading Israeli New
Historian

Rashid Khalidi, "Israel at 50: Not a Universal Jubilee": a major Palestinian
intellectual

Daniel Pipes, "Israel's Moment of Truth": leading American conservative
Zionist

Jerome Slater, "Can Zionism and Justice for the Palestinians be Reconciled?"
and Michael Lerner, "No to Slater's Path for Reconciliation": debate between
two prominent American Jewish liberal scholars



Sep 13 Colonial legacies and state formation

READ: Smith, Chapter 1-3

Screening and discussion of "Lawrence of Arabia", place and time TBA



Sep 18 The Jewish Question, Zionism and the struggle for Palestine

*Map quiz in first 5 minutes of class -- don't be late!!

READ: Smith, Chap. 4



Sep 20 1948: competing interpretations and their significance

READ: Smith, Chap. 5

Avi Shlaim, "The debate over 1948": overview by a leading New Historian

Shabtai Teveth, "Charging Israel With Original Sin": the first major response
to the New Historians by a leading Zionist historian





Sep 25 1948, part 2: Palestinian refugees

READ: Benny Morris, "The causes and character of the Arab exodus": excerpt
from an early New Historian book, the touchstone of the debate

Nur Masalha, "A critique of Benny Morris": a Palestinian who claims that
Morris's biases makes even him misread his own evidence

Efraim Karsh, "Were the Palestinians expelled?": recent restatement of the
Zionist version, a reminder that evidence alone can not resolve these debates!

Meron Benvenisti, "Sacred Landscape": a convincing reconstruction of events in
1948



Sep 27 Superpowers and the Middle East

READ: Smith, Ch 6;

Fred Halliday, "The Middle East, the Great Powers, and the Cold War"

Michael Hudson, "To play the hegemon: 50 years of American policy"

Martin Indyk, "Beyond the balance of power": Jewish Australian, former
director of research for AIPAC, who ran Middle East policy for the Clinton
Administration; published shortly before taking office

Samuel Lewis, "The United States and Israel": former US ambassador to Israel

Charles Lipson, "American support for Israel": a dispassionate scholarly
account

Norman Podhoretz, "Israel and the United States: A Complex History": a less
sanguine view by a leading Jewish American conservative



Oct 2 Israel's foreign policy.

READ: Shibley Telhami, "Israeli foreign policy": Realist interpretation

Yoav Peled and Gershon Shafir, "The roots of peacemaking": domestic and
economic

Alan Dowty, "The Jewish dimension of Israel's foreign policy": cultural



Oct 4 The Arab order

READ: Paul Noble, "The Arab system": straightforward overview of power,
patterns

Michael Barnett, "Regional security after the Gulf war": interesting analysis
of the game of Arab politics



October 9 is Yom Kippur. Class will be held on Friday instead of Monday this
week.



Oct 11 Arab-Israeli wars: 1967 and 1973

READ: Smith, Ch 7, 8



Oct 13 Israel's wars with Lebanon, 1975-1983

READ: Itamar Rabinovich, "The War for Lebanon": leading Israeli historian and
policymaker, who later became the chief negotiator on the Syrian track

Robert Fisk, "Terrorists": journalist first on the scene at Sabra and Shatilla
-- be warned, his descriptions of what he found there are graphic and
disturbing

Oct 16 FALL READING PERIOD



Oct 18 The Peace Process: Israel's negotiations with Arab states

READ: NAIP, Introduction

Shibley Telhami, "From Camp David to Wye": Realist interpretation

Amer Samet, "The Politics of Conflict Resolution": theoretical considerations

David Holt, "Barak's Coordination Game": bringing the story up to date

Daniel Pipes, "On Arab Rejectionism": an American Jewish conservative's
skepticism

Itamar Rabinovich, "Peace and Normalization": mainstream Israeli perspective

Mohammed Sid Ahmed, "The meaning of peace": a leading Egyptian intellectual

Benjamin Netanyahu, "A durable peace": former Likud Prime Minister of Israel

Shimon Peres, "New Middle East": former Labor Prime Minister of Israel



Oct 20 Egypt: Camp David and after --- MAKEUP CLASS

READ: Smith, Ch 9; NAIP, Chap.1, Appendix Text 2, 3, 4

William Quandt, "Camp David and Peacemaking in the Middle East"

Kenneth Stein, "Egyptian-Israeli Relations"

Fawaz Gerges, "Cold peace"



Oct 23 Jordan

READ: NAIP, Chaps. 3 and 5, Appendix Text 5, 7, 14, 15

Aharon Klieman, "Israel's Jordan Option": rethinking by a longtime Israeli
advocate of the Jordan option.

Ali Jarbawi, "The Triangle of Conflict": a Palestinian explains the mistrust
of Jordan

Marc Lynch, "The Jordanian-Israeli peace process": figure it out for yourself.



Oct 25 NO CLASS



Oct 30 Lebanon

READ: NAIP, Chap. 2, Appendix Text 6

A.R. Norton, "(In)security zones in South Lebanon": impact of the Security
Zone

Laura Zittrain Eisenberg, "Israel's Lebanon Policy" and "Do good fences make
good neighbors?": two short descriptive analyses of Israeli options

Shai Feldman, "Israel's Deterrent Power": impact of Israel's withdrawal



Nov 1 Syria

READ: Itamar Rabinovich, "The Brink of Peace": Israel's chief negotiator with
Syria

Patrick Seale, "Asad's regional strategy": Asad's biographer and most
authoritative Western interpreter of Syrian foreign policy

Muhammed Muslih, "The Golan": overview of the issues surrounding the Golan

Sadek Jalal Azm, "The View from Damascus": leading Syrian intellectual

Patrick Seale, "Who is telling the truth?": controversy over where the
negotiations left off



III. ISRAEL AND THE PALESTINIANS

Nov 6 Palestine-Israel principles: Partition, Binationalism, Confederation,
Domination

READ: Harvard Working Group, "The Future Israeli-Palestinian Relationship":
group of Palestinian and Israeli intellectuals try to find common ground

Aharon Klieman, "Compromising Palestine"

Mark Heller, "Towards a Palestinian state": one of the first Israeli centrist
intellectuals to publicly call for a Palestinian state, revisiting his
argument after Oslo

Jamal Tutunji and Kamal Khaldi, "A binational state for Palestine": reviewing
the possible outcomes, with a surprising conclusion

Edward Said, "The One-State Solution": the most prominent Palestinian
spokesman in the US reverses his support for a Palestinian state



Nov 8 The PLO, the Intifada, and Palestinian identity

Rashid Khalidi, "Palestinian Identity": Palestinian historian

Graham Usher, "What kind of nation?": the rise of Hamas

Glenn Robinson, "The logic of state-building after Oslo": the contradictions
of the creation of the Palestinian National Authority

Khalil Shikaki, "Peace Now or Hamas Later": the leading researcher on
Palestinian public opinion explains his findings



Nov 10 Israeli-Palestinian negotiations: overview

**This is a make-up class for Nov 20.

READ: Smith, Ch 10; NAIP, Chaps. 4, 6, Conclusion, Appendix Texts 9-13

Clovis Maksoud, "Peace Process or Puppet Show?"

Herbert Kelman, "The limits of pragmatism"

Douglas Feith, "A Strategy for Israel": right wing Israeli hostility to the
Oslo process



Nov 13 Security Implications of a Palestinian State

READ: Yezid Sayigh, "Redefining the basics"

Joseph Alpher, "Israeli security interests in the peace process"

Jerome Slater, "Netanyahu, A Palestinian state and Israeli security"

Ahmad Khalidi, "Some components of Palestinian national security"



Nov 15 Final Status Issues: Settlements

READ: Ian Lustick, "Unsettled States, Disputed Lands": excerpts from an
innovative comparative analysis of the efforts to incorporate the West Bank
into Israel

David Newman, "Settlement and Borders": short analysis of creating facts



Nov 20 and 23 No Class: Thanksgiving break.



Nov 27 Final Status Issues: Jerusalem

READ: Meron Benvenisti, "City of Stone": former Israeli deputy mayor of
Jerusalem critiques the existing plans and offers one of his own

Ian Lustick, "Reinventing Jerusalem": what exactly do we mean by "Jerusalem"?

Karen Armstrong, "The holiness of Jerusalem"



Nov 29 Final Status Issues: Refugees

READ: Harvard Working Group, "The Palestinian refugee problem": group of
centrist Israeli and Palestinian academics try to find common ground

Isabel Kershner, "Back to Haunt the Peacemakers": journalist reviews the issue

Rex Brynen, "Imagining a solution"

Rashid Khalidi, "Attainable Justice": leading Palestinian intellectual's
proposal

Salman Abu Sitta, "The Feasability of the Right of Return": highly provocative
proposal based on Israeli demographic analysis



Dec 4 Personal, cultural, and psychological issues

READ: Galia Golan and Zahira Kamal, "Bridging the Abyss": the benefits and
limitations of Track 2 dialogue

Neil Caplan, "Victimhood and Identity": psychology and perception



Dec 6 Overview discussion: Is peace possible?





