**Dr. A. H. Ibrahim  
Southwest Missouri State University  
History 543 (History of the Arab-Israeli Conflict)  
Spring 2002  
Office Hours: M-W-F 2:30-4:30 PM  
Strong Hall-431  
Voice Mail: 836-5099  
****_E.Mail:_**[ ** _ahi058f@smsu.edu_**](mailto:ahi058f@mail.smsu.edu) ** _  
_****_Internet:_**[ ** _http://courses.smsu.edu/ahi058f/ahi.htm_**](ahi.htm)

**Syllabus**  
  
This course deals with the central issues in the Arab-Israeli conflict in its
historical and contemporary terms. The course will cover three periods: The
first period examines the roots of Arab and Jewish historical/biblical claims
to Palestine before 1939\. The second period from 1939 to 1982 analyzes the
causes and effects of the Arab-Israeli wars. The third period from 1982 to
1993 covers the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, the Palestinian uprising
(Intifada), and the peace process.

The objectives of this course are: 1) to systematically examine the question
of Palestine and Arab-Israeli relations together with the literature
concerning the subject, and 2) to provide an objective history of the conflict
and to encourage an engaged and sympathetic understanding of the parties
involved. To achieve such goals, students will be able to understand that
Arabs and Jews have legitimate and inalienable rights. These rights are rooted
in the historical experience of each People. Students will be urged to pay
attention to sources of information and to recognize the importance of
diversity in this connection. Students will be required to read specific
material in common, but the major task will be individual study and reporting.  
**  
****Required Texts**  
Charles D. Smith, _Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict_ (New York: St.
Martin Press), 1992.

Walter Laqueur and Barry Rubin, eds., _The Israel-Arab Reader: A Documentary
History of the Middle East Conflict_ (New York: Penguin Books), 1987.  
  
**Expectations** **  
** Attendance is important. Attendance involves more than merely showing up
for class; be prepared to participate in class discussions. Reading
assignments prior to coming to class will enable you to better understand
lecture topics. _there will be no make-ups for any work missed.  
The use of cell phones is prohibitited. Please make an effort to avoid late
class arrival and departure._

**Grading Scale**  
The final grade will be based on the following scale:

A ( 180-200)  
B (160-179)  
C ( 140-159)  
D (120-139)  
F ( 0-119)  
**  
****Evaluation** **  
** The final grade will be determined on the following bases:  
1\. Four written exams (80 points)  
2\. 2 Book Reviews due 6 March and 22 April (80 points)  
3\. Final Examination (40 points)

**Short Examinations** **  
** Some will consist of definition and identification of terms and historical
figures and others will consist of short essay questions. There will be a
total of 4 short examinations over a period of 16 weeks.  
  
**Book Review**

2 book reviews (5 pages each). Books must be selected from the attached
'Select Bibliography' list. Please visit the [**Book
Review**](http://www.uky.edu/LCC/HIS/review.html) web page for all the details
on how to prepare and write the review.

**Final Examination** ** **  
**** An all essay final examination covering the entire course material. ** **  
  
********Academic Integrity Policy****  
Plagiarism, cheating, and other forms of academic dishonesty are prohibited.
Plagiarism refers to the use of materials from books, notes, and others
sources, in the student's written work without due credit to the sources used.  
It is strongly advised that every student review the ** ******[****SMSU
Academic Integrity Policies and
Procedure****](http://www.smsu.edu/recreg/acintegrity.html) ** ** __**** that
define various forms of academic dishonesty. Any form of cheating or
plagiarism will result in a failing grade of the entire course. No grade-
related sanction may be imposed until a student admits misconduct and/or
forgoes appeal rights, or is found in violation by the Academic Integrity
Policies and Procedures.

****Nondiscrimination/Disability Accommodation Policy**** ** **  
**** Students who need special accommodation for a disability should make an
appointment to see their professors during office hours the first week of
classes. University College encourages participation in sponsored activities
inside and outside class by all students regardless of disability. Information
about[ ** **********disability Support
Service****](http://www.smsu.edu/affirm.html) ** ****** is well detailed in
the SMSU academic catalog. SMSU is an AA/EO institution.

****A**** ** **********Note on Academic Dishonesty**** **  
** Plagiarism, cheating, and other forms of academic dishonesty are
prohibited. Plagiarism refers to the use of materials from books, notes, and
others sources, in the student's written work without due credit to the
sources used; it is the presentation of materials as if these are the
student's own. Cheating refers to securing or giving help in a test,
unauthorized copying of tests, assignments, reports, term papers, etc.  
Plagiarism is a major form of academic dishonesty involving several methods
such as the presentation of the work of another as one's own.  
It is strongly advised that every student review the current issue of the SMSU
student handbook, _Bear Facts,_ which defines various forms of academic
dishonesty. _  
_ Any form of cheating or plagiarism will result in a failing grade of the
entire course.

**Reading Assignments** **  
**  
**Week 1-10** **  
1\. Rival Nationalism in Palestine To 1939**  
Ancient Israel: Its Origins and History to the Roman Conquest: An Overview  
Palestine Under Roman and Byzantine Rule: An Overview  
Palestine under Muslim rule: An Overview  
Ottoman Rule to 1800: An Overview  
Ottoman Society in the Arab Land in the Nineteenth Century  
Palestine in the Nineteenth Century  
Zionism, Its Origin and Development to 1947  
The Arab Response to Zionism  
Palestine and World War I  
The Sykes-Picot Agreement and the Hussain-McMahon Correspondence  
The Balfour Declaration  
The Great Powers, Zionism, and the Arabs  
Palestine Under British Mandate  
British Policy in Palestine  
The Palestinian Arab National Movement  
Zionist Expansion, Arab Rebellion, and British Response  
The Peel Commission  
Great Britain on Palestine on the Eve of World War II **  
Smith (chs.1-4) and Laqueur (doc.1-18)**

**Week 11-15**  
**2\. The End of the Palestine Mandate, the Establishment of Israel, and the
Beginning of the Arab-Israeli Conflict:1939-1982**  
Palestine: Jewish Immigration and the British Response  
The Whit Paper, Partition, and Britain's Place in the Middle East  
Jewish Terrorism, the Hagana, and the British  
Palestinian Arab Leadership and Arab Unity  
The End of Mandate and Establishment of Israel  
United Nations Ramification of Partition  
The First Arab-Israeli War, 1948  
Superpower confrontations in the Middle East  
The Israeli-Egyptian Arms Race  
The Suez Crises and Its Ramifications 1956  
Inter-Arab Politics and the Creation of the United Arab Republic  
Arab Unity in Crisis  
The Establishment of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)  
The Six-Day War, 1967: Causes and Consequences  
The War of Attrition Between Egypt and Israel  
The 1973 War and Arab oil Embargo  
Sadat's Pragmatism  
Egypt , Israel, and the Search for Peace  
The Camp David Accords and the Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty  
The death of Sadat  
**Smith (chs. 5-8), Louis (pp. 1-136), Laqueur (doc. 19-4 & part 4-6)**  
  
**Week 16**  
**3\. The War in Lebanon, Palestinian Uprising and Peace Process, 1982-1993**
The Israeli Invasion of Lebanon  
The Intifada and the Gulf Crises  
The Peace Process  
**Smith (chs. 9-10) and Laqueur (part 6)**

**Important Dates and deadlines** ** **  
**** 21 January (Martin Luther King Jr. Holiday)  
23 March-2 April (Spring Break-No Classes)  
9 May (Last Day of Classes)  
15 May (Final Examination: 8:45-10:45) **  
  
****Select Bibliography**  
David Shipler, _Arab And Jew_ (New York: Penguin Books), 1987.  
  
Edward Said, _The Politics of Dispossession: The Struggle For Palestinian
Self-Determination: 1969-1994_ (New York: Random House, 1994

Edward Said, _The Question of Palestine_ (New York: Random House), 1979.

Edward Said, _The End of the Peace Process_ (New York: Random House), 2000.  
  
Rashid Khalidi _, Under Siege: P.L.O. Decisionmaking During the 1982 War_ (New
York: Columbia University Press) 1986.

Rashid Khalidi, Palestinian Identity: The Construction of Modern National
Consciousness (New York: Columbia University Press),1997.

Neville Mandel, _The Arabs and Zionism Before World War I_ (Berkeley:
University of California Press), 1976.

Shlomo Avineri, _The Making of Modern Zionism: The Intellectual Origins of the
Jewish State_ (New York: Basic Books), 1981.

Don Peretz, _Intifada: The Palestinian Uprising_ (Boulder, Co: Westview Press)
1990.

Glenn Frankel, _Beyond The Promise Land: Jews and Arabs On The Hard Road to A
New Israel_ (New York: Simon &Schuster), 1994.

Michael Cohen, _Palestine , Retreat From the Mandate: The Making of British
Policy, 1936-1945_ (New York: Holmes and Meier), 1978

Helena Cobban, _The Palestine Liberation Organization: People, Power, and
Politics_ (New York: Cambridge University Press), 1984.

William B. Quandt, _Peace Process: American Diplomacy and the Arab-Israeli
Conflict Since 1967_ (Berkeley: University of California Press), 1993.

Yaacov Bar-Siman-Tov, _The Israeli-Egyptian War of Attrition, 1969-1970: A
Case Study of a limited War_ (New York: Columbia University Press), 1980

Mohamed Heikal, _The Road To Ramadan_ (New York: Quadrangle Books), 1975.

Ze'ev Schiff and Ehud Ya'ari, _Intifada,The Palestinian Uprising: Israel's
Third Front_ (New York: Simon and Schuster), 1989.

Ze'ev Schiff, _Octobe Earthquake: Yom Kippur 1973_ (Tel Aviv: University
Publication Projects), 1974.

Galia Golan, _Yom Kippur and After: The Soviet Union and the Middle East
Crisis_ (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press) 1977.

Lawrence L. Whetten, _The Canal War: Four-Power Conflict in the Middle East,
1967-1974_ (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press), 1974.

Laura Zittrain Eisenberg _, My Enemy's Enemy: Lebanon in the Early Zionist
Imagination, 1890-1948_ (Wayne State University Press), 1994.

Richard B. Parker, _The Politics of Miscalculation in the Middle East_
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press), 1993.

Annelies Moors, _Wommen Property, and Islam: Palestinian Experience,
1920-1990_ (New York: Cambridge University Press), 1995.

Suha Sabbagh, _Palestinian Women of Gaza and the West Bank_ (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press), 1998.

Joseph Heller, _The Stern Gang: Ideology, Politics, and Terror, 1940-1949_
(Portland: Frank Cass Publisher), 1995.

Zeev Sternhell, _The Founding Myths of Israel: Nationalism, Socialism, and the
Making of the Jewish State_ , Trans. David Maisel (Princeton: Princeton
University Press), 1998.

Ayala Emmett, _Our Sisters' Promised Land: Women, Politics, and Israeli-
Palestinian Coexistence_ (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press), 1996.

Michael Berkowitz, _Western Jewry and the Zionist Project, 1914-1931_
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 1997.

Alwyn R. Rouyer, _Turning Water into Politics: The Water Issue in the
Palestinian-Israeli Conflict_ (New York: St. Martin's Press), 2000.

Ritchie Overndale, _The Orgins of the Arab-Israeli Wars_ (New YorK: Longman
Group), 1992.

Martin Sicker, _Reshaping Palestine: From Muhammad Ali to the British Mandate
1831-1922_ (London: Praeger Publishers), 1999.

Haim Gordon, ed., _Looking Back at the June 1967 War_ (London: Praeger
Publishers), 1999.

David Schoenbaum, _The United States and the State of Israel_ (New York:
Oxford University Press), 1991.

Nadav Safran, _Israel, The Embattled Ally_ (Cambredige, Mass: Belknap Press),
1978.

Edward Tivnan, _The Lobby: Jewish Politicall Power and American Foreign
Policy_ (New York: Simon and Schuster), 1983.

Hanan Ashrawi, _This Side of Peace, A Personal Account_ (New York: Simon and
Schuster), 1996.

Sara Roy, _Gaza Strip: The Political Economy of Re-development_ (London: I. B.
Tauris), 1996.





