# From Praxis to Postmodernism

    Robert Goldman
    goldman@lclark.edu
    Albany 207
    768 7662
    Office hours: MW 10:30-12:30; Th 1:30-3:30

This course began as an attempt to pull together a course on 20th century
social theory. That of course was a foolish goal from the get-go given how
much social theory was written during the 20th century. So, I shifted my focus
toward critical theoretical concerns at the end of the 20th century. Much of
this gets lumped under the rubric of postmodernism, but could as easily be
considered as issues of hypermodernism. As I imagined that course, I saw my
main themes focused on relationships between time, space and capital in the
emergent era of global capitalism; representation and simulation in the
society of the spectacle; technoscience and the production of value; and
relationships between ideology and the production of value, as well as
fundamental changes in the relationship of ideology and power.

Well, those are my issues. But do they necessarily make for a good way of
structuring an undergraduate theory course? Maybe. But maybe not. So, I
thought about other narratives that I might use to narrow down the thinkers
that we read and study. Rather than begin this theoretical journey in the new
millennium, I thought about beginning in the writings of critical theory from
the 1920s through the 1960s. Here I had in mind thinkers from Antonio Gramsci,
Georg Lukacs, Rosa Luxemburg, Georg Simmel, Theodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer,
Herbert Marcuse, Erich Fromm, Walter Benjamin, Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Jean-
Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, C. Wright Mills, Jurgen Habermas, Henri
Lefebvre, Louis Althusser, to Michel Foucault. From there, I reasoned, we
could quickly jump to the postmodern, post-Fordist, post-colonial, global
society of the spectacle, along with the works of Guy Debord, Roland Barthes,
Jean Baudrillard, Jacques Lacan, Donna Haraway, Judith Butler, Jessica
Benjamin, Stuart Hall, Cornel West, Fredric Jameson, David Harvey, Celeste
Olalquiaga, Gayatri Spivak, Jacques Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Jean-Francois
Lyotard, Paul Virilio, and Dick Hebdige. If I've left your favorite theorist
out, I apologize. But that is my point.

So after deciding that all-inclusive reading assignments are self-defeating
and the notion of achieving coverage is futile, I decided to go with what you
see below: a syllabus that addresses _selected_ issues in contemporary social
theory.

This first part of the course addresses questions regarding Modernity, along
with the struggle of critical social theory to make sense of historical
changes in the mode of capitalist societies -- particularly the transition to
corporate capitalism. Other questions raised by critical theory concerned
relationships between class formations and ideology, along with heightened
concerns over how ideology figures in the reproductions of power relations and
how science and technology contribute to emancipation or domination. In search
for a new theory of praxis, critical theorists looked anew at how social power
reproduced itself.

We'll end this section with Foucault, who though a student of modernity, is
often labeled as postmodern. I've selected Fred Jameson and Jean Baudrillard
to frame the issues of postmodernism. Shifting the focus from society to
culture, the debates that ensue have to do both with the contradictions of
modernity, as well as their supercession driven by the institutional form of
the Spectacle and the evolution of the Subject. The book by Ann Game, Undoing
the Social, addresses relationships of the Ego (Subject, Identity, Self, Mind)
and the history of Capitalism. One of the major theoretical shifts of this
century has been the calling into question of the authoritativeness of
knowledge. Writings by Foucault, Berger and Luckmann, Haraway, Butler, and
Spivak all address this in various ways. While many of these works aim at
empowering those who have previously been marginalized and dispossessed, do
they accomplish this by undermining unified theories of praxis?

This course remains unfinished in conceptualization. I expect it to continue
to mutate over the space of this term and our conversations.

## Readings:

> Marshall Berman, _All That Is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of
Modernity_. NY: Penguin, 1988.

>

> Georg Lukacs, History and Class Consciousness. Cambridge: MIT Press.
[Introduction to 1967 edition](http://home.mira.net/~gaffcam/phil/lukacs.htm).
1971

>

>> "Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat," pp.82-149

>>

>> ["The Antinomies of Bourgeois
Thought](http://home.mira.net/~gaffcam/phil/lukacs2.htm)" (online version of
pp.110-149).

>

> Antonio Gramsci, _The Prison Notebooks_. "Americanism and Fordism,
pp.277-318. NY: International Publishers. 1971.

>

> Stuart Hall, "Gramsci's relevance for the study of race and ethnicity"
pp.411-440, in _Stuart Hall: Critical Dialogues in Cultural Studies_ , ed.
David Morley and Kuan-Hsing Chen. Routledge, 1996.

>

> Stuart Hall, "The problem of ideology; marxism without guarantees."
pp.25-46, in _Stuart Hall: Critical Dialogues in Cultural Studies_ , ed. David
Morley and Kuan-Hsing Chen. Routledge, 1996.

>

> Walter Benjamin, [The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical
Reproduction](http://www.aber.ac.uk/~ednwww/Undgrad/ED10510/benjamin.html).
Pp.217-52 in Hannah Arendt (ed.) _Illuminations_. 1969. NY: Schocken Books.

>

>> Marshall Berman, [Angel in the
City](http://www.thenation.com/issue/970512/0512berm.htm). About Benjamin.
1993

>

> Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno, ["The Culture Industry," from Dialectic
of
Enlightenment](http://www.msu.edu/user/sullivan/TangCritTheoryAdornoCultInd.html).
1947. NY: Seabury Press.

>

> Michel Foucault, _Discipline and Punish_. NY: Knopf, 1995.

>

> Steven Best and Douglas Kellner, _Postmodern Theory_. Guilford, 1991.

>

> Guy Debord, _Society of the Spectacle_. 1977. Detroit: Black  & Red Press.

>

> Ann Game, _Undoing the Social_. U. of Toronto Press, 1991.

>

> Donna Haraway, [A Cyborg Manifesto: A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology,
and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century," in Simians, Cyborgs and
Women: The Reinvention of Nature (New York; Routledge, 1991),
pp.149-181.](http://www.stanford.edu/dept/HPS/Haraway/CyborgManifesto.html)

>

> Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, "Can the Subaltern Speak?" pp.609-614 in Charles
Lemert (ed), _Social Theory: The Multicultural and Classic Readings_. Boulder:
Westview Press, 1993.

>

> Cornel West, "The New Cultural Politics of Difference," pp.577-589 in
Charles Lemert (ed), _Social Theory: The Multicultural and Classic Readings_.
Boulder: Westview Press, 1993.

>

> Fredrick Jameson, ["Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late
Capitalism](http://home.mira.net/~gaffcam/phil/jameson.htm)

>

> David Harvey, "From space to place and back again: Reflections on the
condition of postmodernity," pp.3-29 inJon Bird, et al., _Mapping the Futures:
local cultures, global change_. Routledge, 1993.

>

>> > David Harvey. _The Condition of Postmodernity_. Oxford: Blackwell. 1989

>

> Jean Baudrillard, _Symbolic Exchange and Death_ , Sage, 1993.

>

>> "The End of Production," pp.6-49.

>>

>> "The Order of the Simulacra," pp.50-86.

>

> Paul Virilio, [The Art of the Motor. (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1995), pp.
133-156.](http://www.stanford.edu/dept/HPS/Virilio/Virilio_ArtoftheMotor2.html)

>

> Paul Virilio, [Speed and Information: Cyberspace Alarm!
](http://www.ctheory.com/a30-cyberspace_alarm.html)

>

> Paul Virilio and Sylvere Lotringer, _Pure War_. NY: Semiotext(e). 1983.

>

>  

Course assignments and grading:

I hope to organize this class as a seminar on most days. That doesn't mean
that from time to time you won't have to listen to me ramble on. But in the
interest of minimizing that possibility and achieving the didactic virtues of
a seminar, I am going to ask students in the class to take turns in terms of
facilitating class discussions of theorists and their arguments. This will
count for 30% of your course grade.

The primary writing assignments for this course will be the weekly writing we
share with one another about the materials we have been reading and
discussing. We will do this writing online (electronically) in the form of
something like an online e-mail conversation. Here we can raise questions, go
off on riffs, or muse about connections between ideas and issues. If everyone
contributes to this, it will also raise the level of our discourse in the
classroom by allowing us to practice or rehearse our intellectual struggles.
This will count for 40% of your course grade.

Finally, I will ask everyone to write a 12-15 page paper. Either on a theorist
that we haven't covered -- mind the gaps -- or a synthetic piece on the
materials that we have covered. 30%





