![](smlogo2.gif)

**

Luzerne County Community College

Standard Course Syllabus

**



**

Course Number**: **HIS102**

**Course Title** : **History of Civilization II**

**

Department**: **Social Science/History**

**

Credits**: **3**

**Lecture Hours: 3**

**Laboratory Hours:** **0**

**

Clinical Hours**: **0**

**

Prerequisites:** **None**

**

Co-requisites**: **None**



**

Course Description**: This course is a continuation of History of Civilization
I beginning with the 18th century. It, too, emphasizes the concepts, ideas,
events and people that shaped the complex dimensions of the contemporary
world. It begins with a consideration of the forces influencing the West's
dominance of the globe between 1700 and 1900\. It concludes with analysis of
the 20th century as each major civilization confronts the forces of modernity.



**

Course Goals**:

This course provides students the opportunity to:

1\. Improve understanding of the major historical concepts, ideas, events and
people from the 18th century through the 20th century that have influenced the
modern world.

2\. Understand the influence of the past from the 18th century through the
20th century on contemporary concepts, ideas, events, people, and problems.

3\. Become intelligent consumers and evaluators of information about
historical and contemporary concepts, ideas, events, and problems on a global
scale.

4\. Develop a perspective that recognizes the historical, political, economic,
and cultural interdependence of all nations.









**

Student Learning Objectives or Outcomes** :

Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to:

Goal 1:

1.a. Distinguish the main stages of civilization (from 1700 C.E. to the
Present) that produced important forms of political, social, economic, and
cultural organization that are the common heritage of human beings.

1.b. Identify major historical concepts, ideas, events and people (from 1700
C.E. to the Present) that contributed to western and non-western attitudes and
institutions.

1.c. Develop concepts that give meaning and order to the raw material of the
human recorded past.

1.d. Comprehend how historians explore the past and the types of understanding
that can be gained through the study of history.

1.e. Initiate interpretative and synthetic thinking about the past based on a
variety of both quantitative and qualitative data.

Goal 2:

2.a. Identify and analyze significant historical issues and situations as they
relate to issues in contemporary life.

Goal 3:

3.a. Manage information. This involves such things as sorting data, ranking
data for significance, identifying and synthesizing facts, concepts, and
principles.

3.b. Understand and use organizing principles or key concepts to evaluate
miscellaneous data.

3.c. Form questions in order to clarify clearly a problem, topic, or issue

3.d. Compare and contrast the relative merits of opposing arguments and
interpretations.

3.e. Organize thoughts and communicate them clearly and concisely in written
form.







Goal 4:

4.a. Identify and analyze significant contemporary issues and situations as
they as they demonstrate the global interdependence of nations.



**

Sequence of Topics** :

1\. The Transition from a World of Isolation to Global Interaction

2\. The Origins of Western Dominance of the Globe - 1763-1914

A. The West's Scientific Revolution

B. The West's Political Revolutions

C. The West's Industrial Revolution

3\. Global Europeanization and Colonization

4\. The World of Western Imperialism

A. Africa

B. Asia

C. Latin America

5\. World War I and the Beginning of Western Decline - 1914-1939

A. World War I

B. Nationalism in the Colonial World

C. The Age of Anxiety and the Great Depression

6\. World War II and Its Global Repercussions - 1939-1980

A. The End of Colonial Empires

B. Cold War and Its Aftermath

C. Global Technology and Economics

7\. The Contemporary World

A. Global Interdependence

B. Ideologies

C. Global Politics in Historical Context









Assessment and Grading:

The following are acceptable assessment methods for this course.

1\. Exams: all exams will contain both objective and essay questions focusing
on reading assignments and classroom lecture content.

2\. Text Reading Assignment Quizzes

3\. Documented Writing Assignments

4\. Group Projects

5\. Research Paper

6\. Class Participation and Attendance

7\. Open Computer Laboratory Activities



**

Reference, Resources, and Learning Materials:**

Required Texts:

McKay, Hill, Buckler, _A History of World Societies_ (4th ed.), Volume II
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.

McKay, Hill, Buckler, _A History of World societies Study Guide_ (4th ed.),
Volume II, Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.

Additional References:

R.I. Moore, ed., _A Historical Atlas of the World

_

W. Langer, ed., _An Encyclopedia of World History

_

J. Gibaldi, _MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers

_

Microsoft _Encarta_ Online or CD

_The Gateway to World History_ : www.hartford-hwp.com

_Internet Global History Sourcebook_ : www.fordham.edu

_World History Archives_ : www.hartford-hwp.com













**

Required Equipment** : None



**

Computer Software** : None



**

Other Course Requirements** : None









