

######
[![](germany.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)**Introduction
to International
Politics**[![](croatia.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)

######
[![](togo.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](eeu.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](bulgaria.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)**PoliSci
103 B
**[![](albania.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](un.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](benin.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)

  
**Sec. 21 MTuWThF 3:00pm-4:45pm**  
**06/11/00-07/13/00**  
**Eads 212**

[![](argentin.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](australia.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](brazil.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](burkina.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](china.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](colombia.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](cuba.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](iceland.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](france.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)

Michael Popovic  
Washington University  
Political Science  
Campus Box 1063  
Eliot Hall 106  
mjpopovi@artsci.wustl.edu  
  
---  
**[Syllabus](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~mjpopovi/syllabus.html)**

**[Time Table](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~mjpopovi/Timetable.html)**

**[Terms](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~mjpopovi/Terms.htm)**

**[Map of the World](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~mjpopovi/WORLDR-W2.gif)**

**[General IR Pages](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~mjpopovi/IR_Pages.html)**

**[Think-Tanks, Institutions and
Universities](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~mjpopovi/ThinkTank.html)**

**[International Governmental](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~mjpopovi/IGO.html)**  
**[Organizations](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~mjpopovi/IGO.html)**

**[International Non-Governmental
Organizations](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~mjpopovi/NGOs.html)**

**[News](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~mjpopovi/News.html)**

**[U.S. Foreign Policy](http://artsci.wustl.edu/~mjpopovi/US_Foreign.html)**

**[Email Michael](mailto:mjpopovi@artsci.wustl.edu)** |  **What is this course
all about?**

> **This course introduces the study of world politics and approaches
political scientists use to understand international relations. We will mostly
use events of the 20 th century as a backdrop to understand what occured. For
this purpose the class is divided in four sections: **

>

>> ![](blackbal.gif)**Introduction \- Important concepts in International
Politics are introduced and the purpose of models will be discussed. The
readings for this section will focus on international historical events of the
20 th century.**

>>

>> ![](blackbal.gif)**Structural Theories - In this part we will focus on
explanations that center around concepts of influence, order and conflict. The
two World Wars and the Cold War will serve as examples for the explanatory
power of these concepts.**

>>

>> ![](blackbal.gif)**Theories of Power, Psychology and Economics - Here, we
will focus on alternative explanations that concentrate on the domestic and
individual level. In addition, we will try to take a look at alternative and
non-traditional theories.**

>>

>> ![](blackbal.gif)**International Organizations and Global Issues - In this
last section, we are going to apply the theories that we have covered to
actual cases. International organizations and current global issues are going
to be the focus of our attention. We will concentrate on the United Nations
and the European Union as representatives of two very different kinds of
international organization. The global issues that will be analyzed will be
determined by the students.**

>

> **In addition to the regular lectures and readings, we will be watching two
movies (Dr. Strangelove and James Bond), which illustrate the relevance of the
discussed topics for today's real world.**

>

> **At the end of the course you should have a solid base for higher level
classes in political science and a better understanding of events in world
politics. You should then have the necessary tools to understand international
events and evaluate their news coverage.**  
  
---|---  
|  
  


[![](indones.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](israel.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](japan.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](philipp.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](russia.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](safrica.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](saudi.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](gambia.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)[![](uk.gif)](ftp://artsci.wustl.edu/home/artsci/students/m/mjpopovi/public_html)

