[![](../ccimages/ggu_logo.gif)](http://www.ggu.edu/)

[![](../ccimages/cchome.gif)](http://cybercourses.ggu.edu/)  
[![](../ccimages/home.gif)](searchingdemo.html)  
[![](../ccimages/syllabus.gif)](demo_syllabus.html)  
[![](../ccimages/conferences.gif)](http://wellengaged.com/engaged/GGUcybercampus.cgi?H=1&c=netsearch)  
[![](../ccimages/resources.gif)](/ccsite/default_resources.html)  
[![](../ccimages/help.gif)](/help/help.html) |

![CyberCampus](../ccimages/smcclogoban.jpg)

  
DEMONSTRATION COURSE

![](support_files/sherlock.gif)

    Module 2     

* * *

**Objective:**

     Learn three simple ways to better define your searches with search engines. 

**Conference:**

    [What problems have you had using search engines?](http://wellengaged.com/engaged/GGUcybercampus.cgi?c=netsearch)

**MicroLecture:**

**A Few Easy Ways to Make  
Better Inquiries with Search Engines**

The best way to work with a particular search engine is to read it's own Help
page. Each search engine works differently.

Basically, be as specific as possible in making your search, include several
words that are relevant to the subject. If you are still getting thousands of
results use the three simple techniques below which work with several of the
most widely used search engines:

**1\. Using Quotation Marks to Find Phrases and Names**

""

If you look for several words at once the search engine will look for
occurences of each of those individual words, BUT, the words you're looking
for might not have any relationship to each other! Put phrases between
quotation marks to keep all the words together.

Here's an example: If you are looking for your horoscope and you are a Cancer
you might enter "Cancer horoscope" (note that the phrase is between quotation
marks) in the search engine field. Using the search engine Alta Vista this
yields 28 helpful web pages. On the otherhand, if you had left off the
quotation marks you could get as many as 20,769 documents that would include
web pages dealing with the disease cancer, and horoscope pages for all
astrological signs, not just Cancer.

Also use quotation marks when you're looking for a name. Put the entire name
between quotes and you'll guarantee that you will find the first and last name
together.

**2\. Using + (plus) and - (minus) Symbols to Include and Exclude Terms**

+ and -

Plus signs, minus signs and quotation marks are called simple operators when
they are used with a search engine. The + sign indicates that you always want
a particular word or phrase to occur. Using the - sign indicates that you do
not want a particular word or phrase to appear.

|  ![](http://cybercampus.ggu.edu/demo_course/support_files/scwithgun.gif)  
Can I help you  
find something? |

Here's an example:

If you are interested in finding web pages about James Bond -- but you are
particularly interested in Sean Connery's portrayal of the British super spy,
**not** Pierce Brosnan's or Roger Moore's portrayal you could try

**" James Bond" +"Sean Connery" -"Pierce Brosnan" -"Roger Moore"**  
---|---  
  
Using simple operators also helps when a search word has multiple meanings,
for example if you are looking for web pages about Sun computers, you would
use the minus sign to indicate that you DID NOT want to know about the sun
which is the center of the solar system!

Example: "Sun" +"computers" -"solar system"

**3\. Using Case Sensitivity with Certain Terms**

A or a

Case sensitivity refers to whether or not the word, or PART of the word, is
capitalized.

If you aren't sure how a term is capitalized use all lower case letters. Using
lower case letters will return results that include both uppercase and lower
case instances.

If you are sure that the term you are looking for only appears correctly using
a certain mixture of cases, then use that to get the best results.

For example:

NeXT - The name of this computer company is distinctive, the "e" is the only
letter which is lower case. In a situation like this one you would type NeXT
exactly, with 3 capitals and one lowercase letter. To give you some
perspective, just typing "next" results in 7,290,428 documents being found (in
Alta Vista) versus "NeXT" resulting in 12,590 documents (still a lot of pages,
but it's a start in beginning to further specify your search).

Now you have three very simple, but powerful, tools to more effectively search
the web.

**Feedback/Assessment:**

1\. True or False:

There are only a few search engines and guides on the web.

2\. Name three simple operators and how they work.

3\. You are searching the web for oatmeal raisin cookie recipes, but you hate
nuts. Design a simple search for finding what you want.

4\. Conferencing plays a crucial role in student/teacher and student/student
communication in CyberCampus. Use the **[online conference for this
module](http://wellengaged.com/engaged/GGUcybercampus.cgi?c=netsearch)**. Post
any questions you might have in the Simple Operators topic.  

[**MODULE 3** ](demo_module3.html)

* * *

[ CYBERCAMPUS HOME](http://cybercourses.ggu.edu/) | [HOME
](searchingdemo.html)| [SYLLABUS](demo_syllabus.html) |
[CONFERENCE](http://wellengaged.com/engaged/GGUcybercampus.cgi?H=1&c=netsearch)

[ONLINE RESOURCES](/ccsite/default_resources.html) |
[CYBERHELP](/help/help.html)

