**History 314  ** **Ancient and Medieval Christianity** Fall 1999 Monday and
Thursday, 4:05-5:25

  

**Professor Tom Head**

**Office hours (Hunter West 1507):** Monday and Thursday, 2:45-3:45, or by
appointment

**E-mail (preferred):** thead@shiva.hunter.cuny.edu

**Phone:** 212-772-5484 **Fax:** 212-772-5545

**Website:** http://urban.hunter.cuny.edu/~thead/index.htm

**ERes (Electronic Reserve Shelf):** http://maxweber.hunter.cuny.edu/eres

**  Course code:** Hist314.00 **Password:** perpetua

** **

**Course textbooks:**

  1. Justo Gonzalez, _The Story of Christianity, Volume 1: The Early Church to the Dawn of the Reformation_.
  2. Gloria Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, Volume 2: Medieval Europe and the World Beyond  _
  3. Gloria Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, Volume 3: On the Threshold of Modernity: The Renaissance and the Reformation_

**Major primary sources:**

  1. Augustine, _Confessions_ , trans. Henry Chadwick
  2. _The Life of Christina of Markyate_ , trans. Monica Furlong
  3. Thomas Aquinas, _On Faith and Reason_ , trans. Stephen F. Brown

All readings taken from these six books are required, as outlined in the
syllabus below. Copies of them have been ordered and are on sale at the Hunter
College Bookstore. A copy of each has also been placed on reserve in the
Hunter College Library in the East Building.

** **

**Other primary and secondary source readings** will be required or suggested
as "illustrative reading" over the course of the semester. Such readings will
be made available either through the reserve shelf in Hunter College Library
or through ERes (the Electronic Reserve Shelf for Hunter College, on entrance
to which see the information provided above). It will be necessary to do some,
but by no means all, of the illustrative reading in order to perform well on
the tests and essays. A complete list of the books placed on reserve at the
Hunter College Library for this course will be posted on ERes.



**Course requirements:**

Regular attendance in class and completion of the required reading assignments
are both crucial requirements of the course. The written requirements for the
course are: three short essays (approximately three pages) on primary sources
(worth respectively 15%, 15%, and 20% of the final grade); a mid-term and a
final exam (each worth 20% of the final grade). Attendance will be worth 10%
of the final grade.



**Course policies and guidelines:**

Detailed guides to the assignments, as well description of the policies about
grading, makeups, incompletes, and other information about the course will be
posted on ERes. All students should familiarize themselves with these policies
in due course. **Any infringement of academic honesty by plagiarism or
cheating will be taken seriously and a grade of 0 given for the assignment in
question.**





**Schedule of Class Topics and Reading Assignments**



Monday 8/30. Introduction.

Thursday 9/2. The Message of Jesus.

Required Reading: Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 2,_ chap. 8; a canonical
gospel from the New Testament, such as the _Gospel of Mark_ OR Colman Barry,
_Readings in Church History_ , pp. 3-14 (Library Reserve).

Illustrative material may be found in files on "Jesus and the New Testament"
posted on ERes. Also excerpts from such non-canonical works as the _Gospel of
Mary_ , _The Gospel of the Nativity of Mary_ and the _Acts of Paul_ have been
placed on ERes.

Monday 9/6. **Labor Day.**

Thursday 9/9. **Class canceled.**

Monday 9/13. The message of Paul.

Required Reading: Gonzalez, chaps 1-5; a Pauline epistle such as _The Epistle
to the Romans_.

Illustrative material may be found in the files on Paul and on Judaism of that
era on ERes. Also see the _Letter of Aristeas_ , one of the most informative
texts about Judaism in the second temple period (ERes).

Thursday 9/16. The Age of the Apologists and Martyrs.

Required Reading: Gonzalez, chaps 6-12 (you may skim chaps. 8-10); _Martyrdom
of Polycarp_ (ERes) OR _The Passion of Sts. Perpetua and Felicity_ (ERes).

Illustrative Reading: Colman Barry, _Readings in Church History_ , ##6 (Justin
Martyr), 8 (Irenaeus of Lyons), 10 (Tertullian); texts on Roman attitudes to
Christians and Jews (collected as "guide16" on Eres); Justin Martyr, _The
First Apology_ (ERes).

Monday 9/20. **No classes. Yom Kippur.**

Tuesday 9/21. Christianity and Empire. **Note special day.**

Required Reading: Gonzalez, chaps. 13-21; letters of Ambrose of Milan (ERes).

Illustrative Reading: Eusebius, excerpts from _The Life of Constantine_ ;
Athanasius, excerpts from _The Life of Antony of Egypt_ ; Mark the Deacon,
_The Life of Porphyry of Gaza_.

Thursday 9/23. The Christian Intellectual Tradition.

Required Reading: Gonzalez, chaps. 22-25; Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 2_
, chap. 9.

Illustrative Reading: Bill East's "Short History of the Bible" (ERes).

**First essay assignment handed out.**

Monday 9/27. Augustine of Hippo. **Discussion.**

 Required Reading: Augustine, _The Confessions_ , books 1-9.

 Suggested Reading: a guide to a variety of aids in reading and understanding
Augustine will be posted (as "guide27") on ERes.

Thursday 9/30. The Heirs of Rome and their Religions.

Required Reading: Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 2_ , chap. 10.

Suggested Reading: texts on the conversion to and practice of Christianity in
the early middle ages (ERes).

 Monday 10/4. Christianity and the New European Political Order.

Reading: Gonzalez, chaps. 26-28; Colman Barry, _Readings in Church History_ ,
pp. 223-256 (Library Reserve); Marshall Baldwin, _Christianity Through the
Thirteenth Century_ , pp. 181-188 (Library Reserve).

 Thursday 10/7. The Development of the Book and the Christian Intellectual
Tradition.

Required reading: "The Production of Manuscript Books" (ERes); Philippe Wolff,
_The Awakening of Europe_ , Part I, chapter 4. (Library Reserve [also under
title _The Cultural Awakening_ ]: CB351. W613. 1968).

Illustrative Reading: Marshall Baldwin, _Christianity Through the Thirteenth
Century_ , pp. 144-58 (Library Reserve); Jean Leclercq, _The Love of Learning
and the Desire for God: A Study of Monastic Culture_ , chaps. 5 and 7 (Library
Reserve).

  **First essay due.**  

 Wednesday 10/13. Spirituality and Monastic Reform. **Note special day.**

Reading: Gonzalez, chap. 29; texts on Cluniac and Cistercian monasticism
(ERes).

Illustrative Reading: Colman Barry, _Readings in Church History_ , pp. 401-417
(Library Reserve); Marshall Baldwin, _Christianity Through the Thirteenth
Century_ , pp. 170-181 and 243-75 (Library Reserve); Ray Petry, _A History of
Christianity, Volume I_ , pp. 280-93 (Library Reserve); Jean Leclercq, _The
Love of Learning and the Desire for God: A Study of Monastic Culture_ , chaps.
9 and 10 (Library Reserve).

Thursday 10/14. Women and the Religious Life. **Discussion**.

Required Reading: _The Life of Christina of Markyate_.

Illustrative Reading: A guide to on-line resources about women in medieval
monasticism and religion will be posted (as "guide14") on ERes.



Monday 10/18. **Midterm**.



Thursday 10/21. The Age of the Crusades: Christians and Others.

Reading: Gonzalez, chap. 30; texts on the First Crusade (ERes) OR Colman
Barry, _Readings in Church History_ , pp. 401-417 (Library Reserve); Susan
Einbinder, "The Jewish Martyrs of Blois" (ERes).

Illustrative Reading: Colman Barry, _Readings in Church History_ , pp. 539-51
(Library Reserve); Ray Petry, _A History of Christianity, Volume I_ , pp.
342-65 (Library Reserve)

 Monday 10/25. The Pastoral Initiative and the Mendicant Orders.

Reading: Gonzalez, chap. 31; excerpts from contemporary works about Francis of
Assisi (ERes).

Illustrative Reading: Marshall Baldwin, _Christianity Through the Thirteenth
Century_ , pp. 276-323 and 344-67 (Library Reserve).

 Thursday 10/28. **No class: catch up time.**

 Monday 11/1. The Practice of Christianity in the High Middle Ages.

Required Reading: Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 2_ , chap. 11; Caroline
Bynum, "Fast, Feast, and Flesh: The Religious Significance of Food to Medieval
Women" (xerox handout).

Illustrative Reading: Ray Petry, _A History of Christianity, Volume I_ , pp.
339-41 (Library Reserve).

 Thursday 11/4. The Universities and Christian Intellectual Life.

Required Reading: Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 2_ , chap. 12; Paul
Vignaux, _Philosophy in the Middle Ages_ , pp. 17-33 (Library Reserve).

Illustrative Reading: Marshall Baldwin, _Christianity Through the Thirteenth
Century_ , pp. 363-80 (Library Reserve); Ray Petry, _A History of
Christianity, Volume I_ , pp. 393-410 (Library Reserve); Paul Vignaux,
_Philosophy in the Middle Ages_ , pp. 69-90 (Library Reserve); Gordon Leff,
_Medieval Thought_ , chap. 7 (Library Reserve).

 Monday 11/8. Religion and the Arts.

Required Reading: Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 2_ , chap. 13; Annie
Shaver-Crandell, _The Cambridge Introduction to Art: The Middle Ages_ , chap.
2 (Library Reserve).

Illustrative Reading: Colman Barry, _Readings in Church History_ , pp. 348-56
(Library Reserve); Ray Petry, _A History of Christianity, Volume I_ , pp.
410-32 (Library Reserve).

 Thursday 11/11. The Scholastic Synthesis. **Discussion**.

Required Reading: _Aquinas on Faith and Reason_ (pages TBA).

Illustrative Reading: E. Harris Harbison, _The Christian Scholar in the Age of
the Reformation_ , pp. 1-30 (Library Reserve); Etienne Gilson, _Reason and
Revelation in the Middle Ages_ (Library Reserve).

**Topics for second essay handed out.**

 Monday 11/15. The Crises of the Fourteenth Century.

Required Reading: Gonzalez, chap. 32; Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 3_ ,
chap. 15.

Illustrative Reading: Colman Barry, _Readings in Church History_ , pp. 464-503
(Library Reserve); readings on the Black Death (ERes).

 Thursday 11/18. The Development of Humanism and Conciliarism.

Reading: Gonzalez, chap. 33; Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 3_ , chap. 16.

Illustrative Reading: Ray Petry, _A History of Christianity, Volume I_ , pp.
497-543 (Library Reserve); E. Harris Harbison, _The Christian Scholar in the
Age of the Reformation_ , pp. 31-68 (Library Reserve); Gordon Leff, _Medieval
Thought_ , chap. 9 (Library Reserve).

 Monday 11/22. **No class: catch up time. Second essay due.**



Thursday 11/25. **Thanksgiving.**



Monday 11/29. Humanism and the arts of devotion.

Required Reading: Gonzalez, chap. 34; Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 3_ ,
chap. 17; Erasmus, _Paraclesis_ (ERes). Guides to on-line resources about
religion and art in the late middle ages and to the development of the printed
book will also be provided on ERes.

Illustrative Reading: readings on biblical scholarship (ERes); E. Harris
Harbison, _The Christian Scholar in the Age of the Reformation_ , pp. 69-102
(Library Reserve); Ray Petry, _A History of Christianity, Volume I_ , pp.
442-66 (Library Reserve).

 Thursday 12/2. Luther: from reformer to Reformation

Required Reading: Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 3_ , chap. 18, pp. 79-93;
Luther, excerpts from _Freedom of a Christian_ (ERes); Marie Denti ere,
excerpts from _A Very Useful Letter to the Queen of Navarre_.

Illustrative Reading: Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 3_ , chap. 18; E.
Harris Harbison, _The Christian Scholar in the Age of the Reformation_ , pp.
103-36 (Library Reserve).

**Topics for third essay and study guide for final examination handed out.**

 Monday 12/6. Christianity in a world of Diversity.

Required Reading: Gonzalez, chaps. 35 and 36; Fiero, _The Humanistic
Tradition, 3_ , chap. 19.

Illustrative Reading: excerpts from the writings of Bartholome de Las Casas
(ERes); Colman Barry, _Readings in Church History_ , pp. 621-632 (Library
Reserve).

 Thursday 12/9. **Final examination given in class.**

 Thursday 12/16. **Third essay due.**



