> ![](../banner.gif)

>

> ##

>

> |

>

> # Gender and Sexuality in Antiquity*

>

> **SYLLABUS**  
> ---  
>  
> **CLS 321**

>  
> Tuesdays & Thursdays

> 11:00-12:15

>  Sullivan House

>  
> |

>

> Dr. Scott M. Rubarth

> French House 104

> Office Hours: M/W 1:00-2:00

> Office Phone: 646-2177

> **Email** : [srubarth@rollins.edu](mailto:srubarth@rollins.edu)  
> ---|---  
>  
> * Syllabus is tentative and may be change to respond to needs and interests
of students  
>  
> ## Course Summary:

>

>> CLS 321 Gender and Sexuality in Antiquity [1 C.U.] An examination of the
meaning and the role of gender and sexuality in antiquity. A careful study of
status of women in the Greek and Roman world will set the context for further
discussion on misogyny, same-sex relations, and the representation of gender
and sexuality in literature, art and religion. The basic reading will survey
related issues in the Classical World. Discussion of readings will be
supplemented by analysis of primary source materials often illuminated by
ancient art and archaeology. Suitable for non-majors.

>

> ##

>

> * * *

>

> Course Objectives:

>

>   * Informational component

>     * assigned readings

>     * class lectures and discussion

>   * Experiential component

>     * primary texts

>     * visual evidence

>   * Skills component

>     * skills in managing complext content of subject matter

>     * reading ancient texts

>     * skills in evaluation and critical thinking

>     * skills in writing and research

>     * skills in communication

>   * Synthesis component

>     * understanding complexity of issues

>     * methodology

>     * grasping relevance and significance of material

>     * developing a well based historical and cultural perspective

>

>

> ##

>

> * * *

>

> **Required Texts:**

>

> ** ![](WCW.jpg) |  ![](eur1.jpg) |  ![](henderson.gif) |  ![](cobb.gif)  
> ---|---|---|---  
> **

>

>>   * Elaine Fantham, Helene Foley, Natalie Kampen, Sarah Pomeroy, and H.
Alan Shapiro, _Women in the Classical World._ Oxford University Press, 1994.

>>   * David Green and Richard Lattimore eds., _Euripides 1_ , Chicago.
(Alcestis, Medea, Heracleidae, Hippolytus)

>>   * Jeffrey Henderson, _Three Plays by Aristophanes_ , Bantam Routledge
(Lysistrata, Women at the Thesmophoria, Assembly women)

>>   * William S. Cobb ed.,trans., _Plato's Erotic Dialogues_ , SUNY

>>

>

> ##

>

> * * *

>

> **Course Evaluation:**

>

>> > 15%

>>>

>>> |

>>>

>>> Discussion/Participation  
>>>  
>>> ---|---  
>>>  
>>> 15%

>>>

>>> |

>>>

>>> Focus Paper  
>>>  
>>> 35%

>>>

>>> |

>>>

>>> Research Project  
>>>  
>>> 15%

>>>

>>> |

>>>

>>> Midterm Exam  
>>>  
>>> 20%

>>>

>>> |

>>>

>>> Final Exam  
>>  
>> **Preparation/Participation**

>>

>> Class time is reserved for synthesizing, responding to, and discussing the
significance of the material covered in the reading. Coming in fully prepared
for the discussion is therefore absolutely essential for a successful class.
Students are encouraged to use the class time clarify loose ends and to extend
the content of the material to other fields and domains. To encourage student
preparation, the instructor reserves the right to give pop quizzes.

>>

>> #### Emphasis in Writing

>

>     As an "R" course this is a writing intensive course. WRITING IS A
PROCESS; it is in the process of writing that we generate many of our best
insights and discoveries. The course will incorporate writing in prep
asssignments, class activities, and graded asignments.

>

> #### Focus Paper:

>

> The student will write a 3-5 page focus paper on an approved topic related
to the course subject. The topic and thesis is of your choosing but should be
confirmed by me to enhance the probabilty of success and avoid an unneccesary
rewrite. The essay MUST have a clear and interesting thesis. Your argument
needs to be focused and well-organized. The thesis should be supported with
evidence and argument. The essay should present a thoughtful and well-
organized reflection on how the evidence supports your position. The purpose
of this focus paper is to do preliminary research and writing in the area in
which you anticipate writing your Major Research Project. If you have
questions please contact me well before the due date (if possible). Please
refresh yourself with my policies on papers and make sure that you use the
evaluation guide. I encourage all students to utilize the Writing Center and
my [Evaluation Guide](http://fox.rollins.edu/~srubarth/eval.htm) in order to
produce the best possible paper. I am looking forward to reading your essays.

>

> #### Research Paper:

>

> The student will write a research paper on an approved topic relating to sex
and gender in antiquity. The paper should be in the neighborhood of 10-15
pages in length and should and show significant research and analysis. The
paper must argue a specific thesis and support the position with primary and
secondary evidence. The paper may develop and expand a topic related to the
focus paper. Secondary sources (books and journal articles) are required and
must be properly cited (MLA style -- see handbook in library). Internet
sources may be used sparingly. The paper is to be developed in drafts and
these drafts are due in class on the assigned dates. Students will also share
their findings in class and should assist fellow students in a cooperative
writing environment. The writing center MUST be utilized at least twice in the
writing process. If you have any questions, see me. I encourage all students
to utilize my [Evaluation Guide](http://fox.rollins.edu/~srubarth/eval.htm) in
order to produce the best possible paper.

>

> **Exams**

>

> The exams evaluate reading comprehension, comprehension of class lectures
and discussion, and the ability to think actively about the material. Exams
may include multiple choice questions, short answers, and essay questions. You
have up to one hours to complete the exam, two hours for the Final Exam. If
you have a diagnosed learning disablitity and need extra time, you must notify
the instructor in advance.

>

> * * *

>

> [Return to CLS 321 Home](home.htm)

