* * *

**T HE WESTERN HERITAGE** second semester

* * *

HIST 002 PENN STATE MONT ALTO *** Dr. Kurt L. Noll kxn12@psu.edu
ktnoll@blazenet.net **** MWF 8:00-8:50 a.m. Get outta bed!  Come to class!
Note Room Change  \--  GNRL STD 110 GNRL STD 110 **** Office Hours: MWF
9:00-9:50 a.m. **** Office Location: Bookstore Building, Lower Level, Offices
Suite;  First Door on Your Left. (If the door is open, I'm there.)

* * *

  * Course Description and Objectives
  * Syllabus
  * [Study Guides](http://egghead.psu.edu/~kxn12/his002/studyguide.html)
  * Web Sites of Interest

* * *

  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


* * *

Course Description and Objectives

This is the second half of a humanities course that surveys the social and
political history of the West.  The title of the course is the Western
_Heritage_ , and that term includes within it the philosophical, artistic and
cultural inheritance derived from Europe.  Therefore, we will study wars and
kings to be sure, but a substantial portion of class discussion will be
devoted to a survey of the world views, religions, sciences and arts that
have, collectively, shaped the modern Western (and, increasingly, non-Western)
world.

**Objectives:**  
You are expected to do each of the following:

(1) Develop a full comprehension of chronological history from the Roman
Empire to the present day.

(2) Develop a full comprehension of the geography of the Western world.

(3) Recognize and discuss individuals and groups who have played significant
roles during the course of Western history.

(4) Recognize and discuss significant intellectual trends, cultural artifacts
and artworks of the Western heritage.  
    
    


* * *

Return to Top

* * *



          
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


* * *

Syllabus

**Student Requirements:**  
You are required to:

(1) Attend every class session and participate in class discussion.

(2) Read every assignment prior to the date for which that assignment is
scheduled (see Calendar).

(3) Pass four scheduled exams and a final comprehensive exam.  Note:  Any
student who has earned an "A" (91% or above) average on the four scheduled
exams is exempt from taking the Final Exam.  


**Student Evaluation:**  
Your grade will be based on a percentage system.  The math is easy.  Add the
total number of possible points listed on each exam.  Then add the total
number of points you have earned from each exam and each bonus quiz.  Then do
simple division  \--  Total Earned divided by Total Possible.  This is your
grade as a percent of points earned.  A = 91% or above.   B = 81% - 90%.   C =
71% - 80%.   D = 61% - 70%.  F = Less than 61%.

**Class Participation:**   I take attendance at most sessions.  If you show a
pattern of absence, your grade might drop by as much as one letter grade.
_However,_ if you show a pattern of presence and class participation, your
grade will rise one letter grade.   (Come to class!  Pay attention!  Get
involved!)

**Unannounced Quizzes:**   There might be an occasional Bonus Quiz.  These
will be unannounced.  Your grade cannot be hurt by a bonus quiz, but can be
helped.  (Come to class!  Come to class prepared!)

**Scheduled Exams:**   There will be four scheduled exams on the dates listed
in the Calendar, plus a fifth and Final Exam during Finals Week.  Every exam
question that you will see this semester can be seen on the web page [Study
Guides](http://egghead.psu.edu/~kxn12/his002/studyguide.html) prior to the
exam.  Any student who has earned an "A" (91% or above) average on the four
scheduled exams is exempt from taking the Final Exam.  (Class attendance does
not play a part in that computation, but Bonus Quizzes do.)

Note:  You MUST attend class on the scheduled exam days.  If you are absent
FOR ANY REASON without contacting me prior to the exam, then you CANNOT take a
make-up exam.  Mark the exam days on your calendar, get out of bed, and come
take the exam.  If you contact me with a legitimate excuse **prior** to the
scheduled exam, you can take a make-up exam on the scheduled make-up day
listed on the calendar.   Most excuses are **not** acceptable:   I am not
insensitive if a family member has died or you are very seriously ill (i.e.
dead but still walking for some reason), but if you miss an exam for any other
reason, you are out of luck.  


**Required Text:**  
Alcock, Antony, **_A Short History of Europe:   From the Greeks and Romans to
the Present Day_**  (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1998).  


**Calendar:**  
The reading assignments for this course are relatively light.  You are
expected to read each assignment carefully, several times through.  Study the
following portions of the textbook **before** the date indicated for each:

**Week 1 (January 8-12)   **\--  Introduction to the course.  
 Setting the Stage: From the Roman Empire to the Italian Renaissance.  
No reading assignment.  Study Chronology and Geography.

**Week 2   (January 15-19)  **\--  Setting the Stage: From the Roman Empire to
the Italian Renaissance.  
Read textbook, chapter 7.

**First Exam   \--  Monday, January 22.**  See [Study
Guides](http://egghead.psu.edu/~kxn12/his002/studyguide.html).

**Week 3   (January 22-26)  **\--   Christendom's World View and the Pivotal
Events of the 15th Century.  
Review textbook, chapter 7.

**Week 4   (January 29-February 2)  **\--   An Age of Discovery and
Reformation:  The 16th Century.  
 Read textbook, chapter 8.

**Week 5   (February 5-9)  **\--    An Age of Discovery and Reformation:  The
16th Century.  
 Read textbook, chapter 9.

**Week 6   (February 12-16)  **\--   A Turning Point:  The Wars of Religion
and the Thirty Years' War.  
 Review textbook, chapters 8 and 9.

**Second Exam   \--  Monday, February 19.**  See [Study
Guides](http://egghead.psu.edu/~kxn12/his002/studyguide.html).

**Week 7   (February 19-23)  **\--    The 17th Century in Political
Perspective.  
 Read textbook, chapter 10.

**Week 8   (February 26-March 2)  **\--   Galileo, Spinoza and the
Enlightenment.  
Review textbook, chapter 10.

**Spring Break   \--  March 5-9.**

**Week 9   (March 12-16)  **\--    The 18th Century in Social Perspective, and
the Effect of Enlightenment.  
Read textbook, chapter 11.  
    
**Week 10   (March 19-23)  **\--     The French Revolution and the Death of
Christendom.  
Review textbook, chapters 10 and 11.

**Third Exam   \--  Monday, March 26.**  See [Study
Guides](http://egghead.psu.edu/~kxn12/his002/studyguide.html).

**Week 11   (March 26-30)  **\--    The Rise of Socialism, Liberalism and
Nationalism.  
Read textbook, chapter 12.

**Week 12   (April 2-6)  **\--   The Birth of Modern World:  From 1848 to
1914.  
Review textbook, chapter 12.

**Week 13   (April 9-13)  **\--   Two World Wars:  The Death of the Modern
World?  
Read textbook, chapter 13.

**Week 14   (April 16-20)  **\--   From the Cold War to the Politics of
Identity.  
Read textbook, chapter 14.

**Week 15   (April 23-27)  **\--   From the Modern to the Postmodern.  
Review textbook, chapters 12, 13 and 14.

**Fourth Exam   \--  Wednesday, April 25.**  See [Study
Guides](http://egghead.psu.edu/~kxn12/his002/studyguide.html).

**Make-up Exam Date   \--  Friday April 27.**  Students who missed one of the
four regularly scheduled exams, and who had a valid excuse, will take a Make-
up Exam on this date.  The Make-up Exam will NOT be identical to the original
exam.  Students who do not need to take a Make-up Exam have this day off, but
you may pick up your graded Fourth Exam at this time.

**FINAL EXAM**   \--  Finals Week, April 30-May 4.  Date and Time will be
posted on the PSU Mont Alto [Information
Page](http://www.ma.psu.edu/level2/geninfo.html).  Please note:  The Final
Exam covers all materials from the entire semester.   (Students who have
earned an averaged grade of 91% or higher on the four regularly scheduled
exams [plus Bonus Quizzes, if there are any] are exempt from the Final Exam.)  


* * *

Return to Top

* * *

  




Web Sites of Interest  


  * [Resources for the Study of the Ancient Near East](http://www-oi.uchicago.edu/OI/DEPT/RA/ABZU/ABZU.HTML)
  * [Resources for the Study of Greece and Rome](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/)
  * [Resources for the Study of Byzantium](http://www.bway.net/~halsall/byzantium.html)
  * [Resources for the Study of Medieval Europe](http://netserf.cua.edu/)

  * [Penn State Mont Alto Home Page](http://www.ma.psu.edu/)
  * [The University Libraries at Penn State](http://www.libraries.psu.edu/)
  * [HIST 100 Ancient Greece](http://egghead.psu.edu/~kxn12/his100/)
  * [HIST 102 Canaan and Israel in Antiquity](http://www.ma.psu.edu/~kxn12/his102/)
  * [RL ST 004 Foundations of Judaism and Christianity](http://egghead.psu.edu/~kxn12/rlst004/)

    


* * *

Return to Top

* * *

                                                                    The past is the heritage of all, the possession of none.

