  
  
  
  
  
  

[Home](/911/)  
  
[Syllabus](/911/about)  
  
[assignments](/911/stories/storyReader$84)  
  
[the day](/911/stories/storyReader$7)  
  
[The Media](/911/stories/storyReader$9)  
  
[Islam and  
the Arab World](/911/stories/storyReader$10)  
  
[Terrorism](/911/stories/storyReader$11)  
  
[Afghanistan](/911/stories/storyReader$12)  
  
[war against  
terrorism](/911/stories/storyReader$13)  
  
[International  
Relations](/911/stories/storyReader$14)  
  
[American  
Government](/911/stories/storyReader$15)  
  
[Literary/Artistic  
Themes](/911/stories/storyReader$16)  
  
[Other  
Topics](/911/stories/storyReader$17)  
  
[library and  
information resources](/911/stories/storyReader$57)  
  
[Causes and  
Consequences Weblog Writing Center (editors
only)](http://wl.middlebury.edu/911onlinewriting)  

* * *

**Discussion  
  
**[Recent Discussion](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/discuss/)  
  
[Create New Topic](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/discuss/edit/newTopic)  

* * *

[Join Now](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/member/signup)  
[Login](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/member/login)

|

[ Search this site](http://search.freefind.com/find.html?id=7216058) or [ the
web](http://search.freefind.com/find.html?id=7216058&t=w)

powered by [FreeFind](http://www.freefind.com)  
  

Site search  Web search

|  [![300banner: ](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$48)
](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/ "September 11: Causes and
Consequences")  
**Welcome! September 11: Causes and Consequences First Year Seminar**

### Terrorism

|  |  Previous topic: **** |  Next topic: ****  
---|---  
|  ![inactiveTopic](/mainResponderResources/icons/folder2) **Terrorism** |
topic started 1/11/2002; 12:41:31 PM  
last post 1/11/2002; 12:41:31 PM  
---|---  
|  | ![user](/mainResponderResources/icons/user) [Hector
Vila](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/profiles/$hvila@middlebury.edu) \-
**Terrorism**
[![blueArrow](/mainResponderResources/icons/leftArrow)](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/discuss/msgReader$11?y=2002&m=8&d=27
"Permanent link to this message in archives.")  
1/11/2002; 11:41:31 AM (reads: 2124, responses: 0)  
---  
|  |  ![bomb: ](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$72)  
---  
![amisrael: ](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$71)  
|  ![trial: ](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$76) |  ![passport:
](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$69)  
---|---  
![death: ](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$77) |  ![viralwarfare:
](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$78)  
---|---  
|  ![see: ](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$73) |  ![viral:
](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$74)  
---|---  
![soldier1a: ](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$75) |
![hijackers: ](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$70)  
  
###### [Osama Bin Laden and Al-
Qaeda](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/stories/storyReader$11#osama)

|

###### [Terrorism Beyond September
11](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/stories/storyReader$11#beyond)

###### [Legal Proceedings Against Alleged Memembers of Al-
Qaeda](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/stories/storyReader$11#legal)

|

###### [Other Resources on
Terrorism](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/stories/storyReader$11#other)  
  
****Citation** : all photos on this and subsequent banners are from [the AP
Multimedia Archive](http://ap.accuweather.com/apphoto/)  
**

**Osama Bin Laden and Al-Qaeda**

![Osama Bin Laden: ](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$39)

[A Recruiting Tape of Osama Bin
Laden,](http://www.ciaonet.org/cbr/cbr00/video/cbr_v/cbr_v.html) with
commentary and analysis (Columbia International Affairs Online)

[Background report on Osama Bin Laden](http://www.al-
bab.com/arab/background/laden.htm) compiled by Brian Whitaker, Middle East
editor of _The Guardian_ (London)

[Osama Bin Laden and Al Qaeda: Origins and
Doctrines](http://meria.idc.ac.il/journal/2001/issue4/jv5n4a3.htm)   This
research essay, by Benjamin Orbach of Johns Hopkins University, examines the
evolution of Al Qaeda's doctrine as well as Bin Laden's origins and
experience.  It shows how Al Qaeda's strategy switched from an emphasis on
promotion revolution in Saudi Arabia to a priority on attacking the United
States.  Published in the December 2001 issue of the  _Middle East Review of
International Affairs._

[Hunting Bin Laden,](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/binladen/)
PBS Frontline documentary

[Al-Qaeda Training Manual.](http://www.usdoj.gov/ag/trainingmanual.htm)  This
manual was located by the Manchester (England) Police during a search of a
suspected Al-Qaeda member's home.  The manual was found in a computer file
described as "the military series" related to the "Declaration of Jihad."  The
English translation was done by the United States Department of Justice.

[Ooqaz.net](http://www.qoqaz.net/), a Web site whose purpose is to "provide
authentic news and information about jihad and the foreign Mujahideen
everywhere."   A February 4, 2002 __[Wall Street Journal
article](http://online.wsj.com/article/0,4286,SB1012773398275634680,00.html?mod=special%5Fpage%5Fterror%5Fhs%5F1)
presents evidence gathered by U.S. and French intelligence sources that
Zacarias Moussaoui used this site to recruit fighters for the war in Chechnya.

[Al-Qaeda's Fantasy Ideology](http://www.policyreview.org/AUG02/harris.html)
In this article, Lee Harris argues that military analogies have been
inappropriately applied to Al Qaeda.  Al Qaeda is not an organization that
pursues war for "rational" and "instrumental" purposes: the attainment of a
political objective.  Rather, Harris argues that Al Qaeda is motivated by a
"fantasy ideology," defined as "political and ideological symbols and tropes
used not for political purposes, but entirely for the benefit of furthering a
specific personal or collective fantasy."  If Al Qaeda's behavior can be
explained in these terms, responses couched in traditional military terms are
not likely to succeed.  _Policy Review_ , August 2002.

Planning the September 11 Attacks

[Manual for a 'raid'](http://www.nybooks.com/articles/15106)  An analysis of a
document found in luggage and cars belonging to the September 11 hijackers.
This document sets forth the ideas that the hijackers would have been expected
to accept.  _The New York Review of Books_ , January 17, 2002

[Key 9/11 Planner is Named](http://www.latimes.com/news/nationworld/world/la-
na-sheikh5jun05.story)  Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, a top Bin Laden officer, was
probably mastermind of the attacks, officials say.  _Los Angeles Times_ , June
5, 2002

[German at center of September 11 inquiry](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/articles/A34740-2002Jun11.html)  Mohammed Haydar Zammar, a German citizen,
is reported by intelligence agencies to have been the key link between
Hamburg-based hijacker Mohammed Atta and the Al Qaeda leadership in
Afghanistan.  _Washington Post_ , June 12, 2002

[Key meetings in Spain prior to execution of the September 11
attacks](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A1503-2002Jul13.html)
Spanish officials have concluded that an important meeting to plan the 9/11
attacks took place in southern Spain in July 2001.  In attendance were
Mohammed Atta and Atta's old roommate in Germany, Ramzi Binalshibh, who also
attended a meeting of Al Qaeda operatives in Malaysia in January 2000.
_Washington Post_ , July 14, 2002

[A mosque in Hamburg and the 9-11
pilots](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/16/international/europe/16GERM.html)
Mohammed Atta and others involved in the September 11 attacks all attended the
same mosque in Hamburg.  Sermons preached at this mosque may have helped
create the belief system of Atta and the other hijackers.  _The New York
Times_ , July 16, 2002

[Money transfers by hijackers and American banking
laws](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/17/national/17TERR.html)  Those involved
in the September 11 attacks transferred hundreds of thousands of dollars from
bank accounts in the Middle East to accounts in American banks.  But the
transfers did not set off alarms for banking regulators.  _The New York Times_
, July 17, 2002

[German investigators present more evidence of plans for the
attacks](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/08/24/international/europe/24PLOT.html)
German investigators have concluded that Mohammed Atta, Marwan al-Shehhi, and
Ziad al-Jarrah, pilots of three of the four September 11 planes, left Hamburg
to attend Al Qaeda training camps in Afghanistan in late 1999 and early 2000.
A few months after leaving Afghanistan, the men enrolled in flight schools in
the United States.  _The New York Times_ , August 24, 2002  
  
Bin Laden and Al Qaeda after the Afghan war

[Al Qaeda says Bin Laden is
well](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/06/23/international/asia/23ARAB.html)  An Al
Qaeda spokesman said Osama Bin Laden is still alive and that the organization
carried out the April attack on a synagogue in Tunis that killed 17 people.
_New York Times_ , June 23, 2002

[Intelligence officers read between the enemy
lines](http://www.latimes.com/news/nationworld/world/la-adfg-
intelwar23jun23.story)  In a "battle of wits," United States intelligence
operatives are attempting to extract information from Al Qaeda operatives
captured in Afghanistan.  _Los Angeles Times_ , June 23, 2002

[Dead or alive? The Bin Laden guessing
game](http://www.latimes.com/news/nationworld/nation/la-na-
binladen18jul18.story)  United States intelligence officials reach different
conclusions about the lack of intercepted communications indicating that Osama
Bin Laden is alive.  _Los Angeles Times_ , July 18, 2002

Inside the Al Qaeda Camps

[Al Qaeda's Grocery Lists and Manuals of
Killing.](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/03/17/international/asia/17DOCU.html)
Documents obtained by _The New York Times_ tell a rich inside story of the
network of radical Islamic groups that Osama bin Laden helped assemble in
Afghanistan.  _NYT_ , March 17, 2002  

[Letter from the
Front.](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/03/17/international/asia/17LETT.html)
Excerpts from a letter found in a house used by Al Qaeda members in Kabul.
Handwritten in Arabic by an unknown author, it appears to describe a battle
between Arabs allied with the Taliban and Northern Alliance forces. The
letter, which includes poetry that appears to have been written by the author,
was translated by _The New York Times_. _NYT_ , March 17, 2002

[Afghan Camps Turn Out Guerrillas and
Terrorists.](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/03/18/international/asia/18DOCU.html)
Documents show that Osama bin Laden and other jihad leaders turned
Afghanistan's network of training bases into a two-tiered university for
Islamic war.  _New York Times_ , March 18, 2002

[A Dutiful Recruit's
Notebook.](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/03/18/international/18NOTE.html)
Excerpts from a notebook found at one of the Al Qaeda camps.  _New York Times_
, March 18, 2002

[Diary of a Terrorist.](http://www.harpers.org/online/diary_of_a_terrorist/)
Excerpts from the prison diary of Ahmed Omar Sayed Sheikh, the main suspect in
the murder of _Wall Street Journal_ reporter Daniel Pearl.  Sheikh, a British
Muslim, trained in an Al Qaeda camp in Afghanistan and then joined a terrorist
group operating in Kashmir.  This document was published in _Harper's
Magazine_ in January 2002. ****

[Tapes shed new light on Bin Laden's
network](http://www.cnn.com/2002/US/08/18/terror.tape.main/)  A large archive
of al Qaeda videotapes obtained by CNN in Afghanistan sheds new light on Osama
bin Laden's terror network, revealing images of chemical gas experiments on
dogs, lessons on making explosives, terrorist training tactics and previously
unseen images of bin Laden and his top aides.  _CNN.com_ , August 18, 2002.

[Top](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/stories/storyReader$11#top)

**Terrorism Beyond September 11**

[All Suicide Bombers Are Not
Alike,](http://www.nytimes.com/2001/10/28/magazine/28TERRORIST.html) an
article by Joseph Lelyveld from _The New York Times Magazine_ , October 28,
2001

[New Terrorism Beyond September
11,](http://www.columbia.edu/cu/news/vforum/02/terrorism_in_21c/index.html) a
video roundtable discussion with Ehud Sprinzak, author of _Brother Against
Brother: Violence and Extremism in Israeli Politics_ ; Gustavo Gorriti, author
of _The Shining Path: A History of the Millenarian War in Peru_ ; and Martha
Crenshaw, editor of _The International Encyclopedia of Terrorism_ (Columbia
University Video Forum)

[Al Qaeda's New
Links](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/06/16/international/16QAED.html)
Intelligence officials believe that many midlevel Al Qaeda operatives escaped
from Afghanistan at the end of the war and have established links with
extremists across the Islamic world.  _The New York Times_ , June 16, 2002

[Cyber attacks by Al Qaeda feared](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/articles/A50765-2002Jun26.html)  Some government experts believe that Al
Qaeda might be able to carry out a cyber attack against computers that control
dams, electric power stations, and other important parts of the national
infrastructure.  _The Washington Post_ , June 26, 2002

[Terror cells might be active in the
U.S.](http://www.latimes.com/news/nationworld/nation/la-na-
sleepers12jul12.story)  Al-Qaeda 'sleeper' cells might continue to be active
in the U.S., awaiting word to execute another terrorist operation, according
to the Justice Department.  _Los Angeles Times_ , July 12, 2002

[Links to terrorism probed in
Northwest](http://www.latimes.com/news/nationworld/nation/la-na-
terror13jul13.story)  Some government investigators believe that a terrorist
cell may be operating in Washington state and Oregon. _Los Angeles Times_ ,
July 13, 2002.

  
  
[Top](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/stories/storyReader$11#top)

**Legal Proceedings Against Alleged Members of Al-Qaeda**

Zacarias Moussaoui

![Zacarias Moussaoui: ](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$47)

[Moussaoui's first court
appearance](http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/world/americas/newsid_1737000/1737991.stm)
A US court has entered a plea of not guilty for the first man charged with
offences linked to the 11 September attacks. BBC News, January 2, 2002

[Stephen Sackur on proceedings against Zacarias
Moussaoui](http://news.bbc.co.uk/olmedia/1735000/video/_1739552_terror22_sackur_vi.ram)
January 2, 2002, BBC News

[US 'seeks death penalty' in terror
case](http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/world/americas/newsid_1880000/1880659.stm)
US prosecutors are reportedly planning to seek the death penalty for Zacarias
Moussaoui, the only person charged over the 11 September attacks. BBC News,
March 19, 2002

[The dealth penalty
debate](http://online.wsj.com/article/0,4286,SB1016574242503458080-moussaoui,00.html?collection=wsjie/30day&vql-
string=%28Moussaoui%29%3Cin%3E%28article%2Dbody%29) Reports indicate federal
prosecutors will seek the death penalty against Zacarias Moussaoui.  Is this a
case of justice or revenge?  _The Wall Street Journal_ , March 20, 2002.

[US to seek death penalty for
Moussaoui](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/03/29/national/29TERR.html)  The
Justice Department said in court papers that Moussaoui shouild be executed
because he helped plan attacks that ended in "the largest loss of life
resulting from a criminal act in the history of the United States."  _The New
York Times_ , March 29, 2002.

[Terrorism case puts judge in quandary](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/articles/A5981-2002May11.html)  The federal judge who must decide whether
Zacarias Moussaoui can fire his attorneys and represent himself in his
terrorism conspiracy trial could face a stark choice, legal analysts say:
allow an alleged terrorist to use his defense as a political platform or find
him mentally incompetent and cancel the trial.  _The Washington Post_ , May
12, 2002.

[Judge likely to let Moussaoui represent
self](http://www.latimes.com/news/nationworld/nation/la-na-moussa8jun08.story)
Prosecutors say that Moussaoui is mentally competent and may represent himself
in his upcoming trial.  _Los Angeles Times_ , June 8, 2002.

[Moussaoui allowed to defend himself](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/articles/A45814-2002Jun13.html)  The federal judge presiding over the
Moussaoui trial ruled that Moussaoui is mentally competent to dismiss his
attorneys and defend himself.  _Washington Post_ , June 14, 2002.

[Moussaoui tries to plead
guilty](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/19/national/19TRIA.html)  The judge in
the Moussaoui trial refused to accept the defendant's guilty plea and told him
to take a week to consider the consequences of his plea.  _The New York Times_
, July 19, 2002.

[Evidence against Moussaoui is called
weak](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/20/national/20MOUS.html)  Some government
investigators now believe that Zacarias Moussaoui may not have been part of
the September 11 plot, but might have been in the United States to take part
in another Al Qaeda operation.  _The New York Times_ , July 20, 2002.

[Moussaoui backs off on plea](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-
dyn/articles/A63712-2002Jul25.html)  In a chaotic courtroom session, Zacarias
Moussaoui rescinded his guilty plea and claimed that, although he was a member
of Al Qaeda, he had no advance knowledge of the September 11 operation.  _The
Washington Post_ , July 26, 2002.

[Judge grants Moussaoui delay in start of his
trial](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/08/17/national/17TERR.html)  A federal
judge has granted Zacarias' Moussaoui's motion to delay the start of his trial
until January 6, 2003, in order to give the defendant more time to prepare.
_The New York Times_ , August 17, 2002.

Richard Reid

![Smallest Richard Reid: ](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$46)

[Explosives scare forces down
plane](http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/world/americas/newsid_1725000/1725627.stm)
An American Airlines plane diverted to Boston after explosives were found in a
passenger's shoe.  BBC News, December 23, 2001

[Shoe bomb suspect's unusual
profile](http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/uk/newsid_1729000/1729472.stm) The
background of the would-be suicide bomber who tried to blow himself up aboard
an American Airlines jet appears to be very different to that of the
perpetrators of the 11 September attacks on the United States.  BBC News,
December 26, 2001

[Shoe bomb suspect pleads
innocent](http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/world/americas/newsid_1767000/1767368.stm)
Briton Richard Reid pleaded "not guilty" on charges relating to his alleged
attempt to blow up a US airliner in December 2001 by detonating explosives in
his shoes.  BBC News, January 18, 2002

[Shoe bomb suspect to say he was on a mission from
Allah](http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/main.jhtml?xml=/news/2002/07/21/wshoe21.xml&sSheet=/news/2002/07/21/ixnewstop.html)
Richard Reed's attorneys say that he will not plead guilty but wants a "show
trial" where he will argue that he was carrying out God's will.  _The Sunday
Telegraph_ (London), July 21, 2002

John Walker Lindh

![John Walker Lindh: ](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/picture$43)

[US shocked by "American
Taliban"](http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/world/americas/newsid_1692000/1692712.stm)
Family and friends of a 20-year-old American expressed shock that the young
man they knew was fighting with the Taleban. BBC News, December 5, 2001

["American Taliban" appears in
court](http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/world/americas/newsid_1779000/1779116.stm)
The American suspected of being a Taleban fighter, John Walker Lindh, made his
first appearance in a US court in January 2002, two months after being
captured in Afghanistan. BBC News, January 24, 2002

[Walker Lindh faces August
trial](http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/world/americas/newsid_1823000/1823553.stm)
John Walker Lindh is set to go on trial in late August after a US judge turned
down a defence request to wait until after the anniversary of the 11 September
attacks on America. BBC News, February 15, 2002

[Key hearings to begin in Lindh
trial](http://www.nytimes.com/aponline/national/AP-Lindh-Taliban.html)  Pre-
trial hearings in the Lindh case will revolve around the question of whether
prisoners captured on the battlefield and later transferred to the civilian
courts should be immediately advised of their rights to remain silent and to
have an attorney present during questioning. _The New York Times_ , July 12,
2002

[In deal, Lindh pleads guilty to aiding
Taliban](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A10050-2002Jul15.html)
In a plea-bargain, John Walker Lindh pleaded guilty to aiding the Taliban and
will spend up to 20 years in federal prison. The deal saved Lindh from a
possible life sentence and meant the government would not have to introduce
sensitive intelligence evidence at Lindh's trial.  _The Washington Post_ ,
July 16, 2002

[A plea suited to both
sides](http://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/16/national/16ASSE.html)  In spite of
all the buildup following the arrest of John Walker Lindh, government
officials were relieved that a plea-bargain was reached with Lindh.  In the
end, law enforcement officials concluded that the Lindh case was not worth a
protracted courtroom battle.  _The Washington Post_ , July 16, 2002  

[Back home, Lindh seen as no
terrorist](http://www.boston.com/dailyglobe2/197/nation/Back_home_Lindh_seen_as_no_terrorist+.shtml)
How was John Walker Lindh perceived in his home community of Marin County,
California?  _The Boston Globe_ , July 16, 2002  

  
  
[Top](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/stories/storyReader$11#top)

**Other Resources on Terrorism**

[Target America,](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/target/) PBS
Frontline documentary

[Looking for
Answers,](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/terrorism/) PBS
Frontline documentary

  
[Top](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/stories/storyReader$11#top)

[![](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/images/skull)](http://manila.cet.middlebury.edu/911/discuss/msgReader$11?mode=day)  
  
  
  
  
  
  
[Print-Friendly Version](/911/discuss/msgReader$11?print-friendly=true)  
  
---  
  
[![Create your own Manila site in minutes. Everyone's doing
it!](http://www.scripting.com/images/thisIsAManilaSite2.gif)](http://manila.userland.com/
"Create your own Manila site in minutes. Everyone's doing it!")  
  
  
  

* * *

  

This site is using the [MinimalWhite](http://minimalwhite.weblogs.com/) theme.

