![](image002.jpg)

#  **SYLLABUS, GREAT DECISIONS 2002 (INTS 093)**

[www.unc.edu/student/orgs/grtdecsn](http://www.unc.edu/student/orgs/grtdecsn)

Welcome to Great Decisions 2002!

The student Coordinating Committee is pleased to present you the Great
Decisions 2002 Lecture Series featuring distinguished speakers.Our purpose is
to raise critical thinking on current issues regarding American foreign
policy, and to do so through challenging discussions and debates.

Great Decisions is a national outreach program sponsored by the Foreign Policy
Association (FPA).The FPA is a nonprofit, nonpartisan, nongovernmental,
educational organization founded in 1918 to educate Americans about the
significant international issues.The Great Decisions program at UNC is a
eight-week, for credit, lectures series.The lecture topics are selected each
year by the FPA.Our program is the largest of some 1,100 Great Decisions
programs nationwide, engaging over 450 participants each year through the
lecture series and outreach programs.We serve as a model for Great Decisions
programs at other universities nationwide.

For their continuous support, we would like to thank Provost Robert Shelton,
Prof. James Peacock and the University Center for International Studies; Prof.
James Hevia and the Curriculum in International Studies; Vice Chancellor Susan
Kitchen and the Student Life Enhancement Fund, Dr. Noel Lateef and Mr. Robert
Greenan from the Foreign Policy Association.Thank you to Dr. Niklaus Steiner,
our advisor, for his commitment.

**CLASS POLICIES**

**LECTURES:** Tuesdays, 7:00-8:30 p.m. in Carroll Auditorium

**REQUIRED TEXTBOOK:** Great Decisions Handbook, available at Student Store

**RECITATIONS:** Each student is required to register and attend a recitation
section led by a TA once a week

**GRADING:**

Your grade is determined by your attendance at lectures, as well as your
attendance and participation in discussion sections.

**ATTENDANCE:**

Your teaching assistant (TA) will check attendance at each lecture and
recitation.You must attend the entire lecture.You are permitted one absence to
a lecture OR one absence to a discussion session.By notifying your TA of your
absence in advance, you can make arrangements to attend another discussion
session that same week.If you miss more than one lecture or discussion
session, you will be required to write a letter to a policy leader (proofread
and mailed by your TA) regarding an international issue that concerns you and
thereby make up for your additional absence. THREE OR MORE ABSENCES CONSTITUTE
AN AUTOMATIC FAILURE.For questions regarding attendance, contact Sonia Mondor
at [mondor@email.unc.edu](mailto:mondor@email.unc.edu)

**TARDINESS:**

The lectures will begin promptly at 7:00 pm on Tuesdays in Carroll
Auditorium.Late arrival to lectures will constitute an absence.

**ASSIGNMENTS** :

Discussion sessions meet for fifty minutes at various time each week.In
addition to your attendance and participation, you are required to submit a
weekly assignment designed by your TA.These assignments will be collected at
the beginning of each discussion session along with the weekly opinion
ballot.The ballots are included in the Great Decisions Briefing Book.You are
expected to read the assigned articles prior to the corresponding lecture.

**_All lectures are free and open to the public. They will begin promptly at
7:00 p.m. and last approximately until 8:30 p.m., including a question and
answer period._**  

**January 22 KOREAN SECURITY ISSUES**

Coordinators:Katherine Carter and Jon Miles

**Selig S. Harrison** is a former _Washington Post_ Bureau Chief in Northeast
Asia and the author of five books about the continent. He served as Senior
Fellow and Director of Asian Studies at the Brookings Institution and, for
twenty-two years, as a Senior Associate of the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace. He has visited North Korea seven times and met the late
President Kim Il Sung twice.

**January 29 SOUTH ASIA **

Coordinators:Ryan Newton and Carolyn Shook

**Dr. Hari Sharma** is Professor Emeritus of Sociology at Simon Fraser
University (Canada) and  serves as President of both the International South
Asia Forum (INSAF), and the South Asian Network for Secularism and Democracy
(SANSAD).

**February 5 TERRORISM: WHY DO THEY HATE US?**

Coordinators:Britt Lake and Susie Ustariz

**Mr. Graham Fuller** is a Senior Political Scientist at the RAND Corporation
in Washington D.C. and former Vice-Chairman of the National Intelligence
Council at the CIA. He is also the author of various books, including _Islamic
Fundamentalism in Afghanistan: Its Character and Prospects_ and _A Sense of
Siege: The Geopolitics of Islam and the West._

**February 12 MIDDLE EAST PEACE PROCESS**

Coordinators:Rebecca Jeffries and Yasmin Salama

**Mr. D on Peretz** is Professor emeritus of political science at Binghamton
University of the State University of New York.  He has written extensively on
the Middle East, the Arab-Israeli conflict and the Palestinian refugees.  He

  
 has worked in the Middle East as a correspondent for NBC.

**February 19 COLOMBIA AND DRUG TRAFFICKING**

Coordinators:Daniel Perera and Tina Singh

**Dr. Bruce Michael Bagley** is Professor at the University of Miami and
author of 40 publications on US-Latin American affairs , including the co
edition of _Drug Trafficking in the Americas._

**February 26 RUSSIA**

Coordinators:John Dalton and Dan Folliard

**Colonel David M. Glantz** is a Russian military historian and has over
thirty years of service in the US military. He is editor of the _Journal of
Slavic Military Studies_ and has  authored numerous articles and books on
Soviet and Russian military affairs.

**March 5 AIDS IN AFRICA**

Coordinators:Sasha Bernier and Marnie Hanel

**Dr. Ties Boerma** is Associate Professor at UNC's Carolina Population Center
as well as medical demographer, adviser to WHO and UNAIDS. His research
focuses on child and adult health in developing countries, with specific focus
on AIDS and Africa.

**March 19 ENERGY AND THE ENVIRONMENT**

Coordinators:Kristen Johnson and Thomas Thekkekandam

**Mr. Robert Healy  **is veteran political strategist and Principal and Senior
Director of The Wexler Group, a public policy consulting firm.Mr. Healy has
over 30 years of experience in commercial investment, energy, environmental,
regulatory, international trade, and global public policy.

**2002 Great Decisions Coordinating Committee**

Dr. Niklaus Steiner, Advisor Sasha BernierKristen JohnsonCarolyn Shook

Sonia Mondor, Chair Katherine CarterBritt LakeTina Singh

Karine Dube, TreasurerJohn DaltonJon MilesThomas Thekkekandam

Sarah Motley, Outreach ChairDan FolliardRyan NewtonJohn Yeatts

Allyson Lippert, Publicity Chair Marnie HanelDaniel PereraSusie Ustariz

Jim Doggett, Logistic Chair Rebecca JeffriesYasmin Salama

David Chapman, Webmaster

**_For questions and comments, contact Sonia Mondor at mondor@email.unc.edu_**

