RELIGIONS OF THE MIDDLE EAST  
(Formerly Religions of the Near East)  
REL 203 (Registration #41267)  
Spring 2002  
TuTh 1:00 - 2:20 PM, Bldg 13/Rm 102  
Prof. Borrowdale

OFFICE: Center Bldg, Rm 436 (in the courtyard of offices near the Social
Science Department)  
OFFICE HOURS: MW 2:00-2:50, TuTh 4:00-4:50 and by appointment  
PHONE: 463-5434  
EMAIL: borrowdalej@lanecc.edu  
MAILBOX: Social Science Department (Center Bldg, Rm 413)  
WEBSITE: http://teach.lanecc.edu/borrowdalej/ (note that there is no "www" in
this address)

NOTE: The instructor welcomes and encourages dissenting opinions, especially
those backed up by good arguments. On the other hand, if the critical and
analytical discussion of religion offends you, you may want to consider taking
another course.

SUBJECT MATTER: This is course in religious traditions originating in the
Middle East (modern day Israel and Saudi Arabia): Judaism, Christianity and
Islam. Over the course of the term, we will examine the origin and early
historical development of these traditions and study their sacred texts. We
will then go on to discuss the essential beliefs and practices and the major
sects of each tradition.

REQUIRED TEXTS:

|

Theodore M. Ludwig, _Sacred Paths of the West_  
  
---|---  
  
|

_The Bible_ (New Revised Standard Version with Apocrypha)  
  
|

N.J. Dawood, trans., _The Koran_  
  
A WORD ON BIBLE TRANSLATIONS: I've ordered The New Revised Standard Version of
the Bible for this course. It is one of the most recent accurate, and readable
translations. Moreover, the edition we'll be using is an inexpensive paperback
one, published by the non-profit American Bible Society, so you're not likely
to find a better buy elsewhere. However, if you already have a Bible and want
to use it for this course, make sure it is a good, modern translation. The
King James Version (KJV, sometimes also called the "Authorized Version" or
AV), was completed in 1611 and is thus NOT a modern translation. While good
for its time, the KJV is written in what is now antiquated, Elizabethan
English and not based on the best ancient manuscripts in existence today.
Also, please make sure you have a genuine translation done by a scholar or
committee of scholars--no paraphrases or anonymous translations. If in doubt,
ask the instructor.

REQUIREMENTS

WebBoard Notes

|

See below

|

5% of grade  
  
---|---|---  
  
Religious Service or Faith Interview Report

|

Due Tues, May 21st, minimum of 3 full pages

|

20% of grade  
  
First Exam

|

Dates TBA, 3rd or 4th week of classes

|

25% of grade  
  
Second Exam

|

Dates TBA, 7th or 8th week of classes

|

25% of grade  
  
Final Exam

|

Wednesday, June 5th - Tuesday, June 11th

|

25% of grade  
  
ATTENDANCE AND DROP POLICY: It is essential to come to class. Class lecture
and discussion will clarify the readings and material not covered in the
readings will also be presented. Students who miss class regularly will do
poorly on exams. Since class sessions will not merely regurgitate material in
the text, it is important to attend and, if absent, to obtain notes from the
web board. You should also make sure to look on my home page, listed above,
for any handouts which may have been distributed. If you decide that you can
not or do not want to complete the course, it is your responsibility to drop.
If you simply stop attending class and taking exams and do not drop by the 8th
week deadline, you will receive an F.

READING: It is important to read the material before class in order to
understand the lectures and participate in class discussion.

EXAMS: The exam format will be primarily multiple choice and true/false
questions. There may be some fill in the blank, matching, short answer and/or
short essay questions. Exams will be taken in the Social Science Computer and
Testing Lab (Center Bldg, Rm 423). You may also take an exam at any LCC
Outreach or Community Learning Center (excluding the Downtown Center). The
Main Campus lab hours are: Mon-Thurs 9am-8pm, Fri 9am-5pm. You will have a
window of several days during which you may take the exam. For your final
exam, final exam week hours are: Mon-Wed 10am-8pm. A 3 x 5 card of notes (both
sides) is allowed for each exam. MAKE-UP EXAM POLICY: Since you will have
several days to take the exam, make-up exams will only be given in the most
extraordinary circumstances. Contact the instructor immediately if you become
ill or face some serious crisis which will prevent you from taking the exam by
the deadline. Also, if you have some prior commitment which conflicts with an
exam window, notify the instructor right away.

GRADING: The class will be graded on a curve. At the end of the semester each
student's scores for the exams and other requirements will be added up and the
point totals will be curved. However, in order to help students know how well
they are doing, a rough scale giving each student a grade estimate will be
drawn up for the first two exams. Though plus and minus grades will be
utilized, grade estimates will only give ranges in terms of whole letter
grades, with the upper and lower ranges of the grades indicating plus and
minus grades.

NOTE-TAKING: Each day two or more students will be responsible for taking
notes for the class. These notes are to be typed on a computer and posted to
the class web board by the beginning of the next class period. It will thus be
important for you to date your class notes, if you do not do so already. To
post notes, go to the instructor's website above and follow the "notes" link
for this class. Make sure you post your notes to the right class! Your notes
must have (1) A SUBJECT LINE with the DATE the notes were taken (including the
day of the week, i.e. Tuesday or Thursday) (2) "Religions of the Middle East"
and the date the notes were taken (including the day of the week) at the top
of the notes themselves, so students can keep track of printed copies. (3)
Coverage of material discussed in class, including announcements, exam scales,
and notations about handouts distributed (e.g. " 'Early Creeds' and 'Gospel of
Thomas' handouts distributed"). Each student must type up notes for 2 class
sessions. It should be emphasized that obtaining these notes and reading the
text is not an adequate substitute for regularly attending class. Also, it is
recommended that every student take notes for his or her own use each class
day and use the internet notes only as a backup or supplement. In order to
receive credit, the notes must be sufficient length and completeness. Notes
will be downgraded which are too brief, missing subject lines and dates,
missing announcements, etc. If you have difficulties with the web board, come
by office hours, email or phone me. Even though 5% of your grade may not seem
like much, keep in mind that this represents half of a letter grade.

THE SOCIAL SCIENCE COMPUTER LAB: Computers are available for word processing,
and surfing the internet. The fee is $1/hour. Enrollment in this class comes
with 1-2 hours of computer time in ANY and ALL of the LCC computer labs. There
is no charge for taking computerized exams. The charge DOES apply when using
any LCC computer lab to use the internet to visit the class website, get
handouts, or see grades.

EXTRA CREDIT: An educational activity will be scheduled for the final exam
day, Thursday, June14th, 12:00 - 1:50 PM. Details will be announced near the
end of the term.

