Harvard University

Spring 2000

SYLLABUS

LING 176--History of the Japanese Language

Thurs. 3:00-5:00, Vanserg 26b

Instructor: Wesley M. Jacobsen, 5 Bryant St. (Rm. 203),
<jacobsen@fas.harvard.edu>, TEL 495-2982

Office Hours: MWF 11:00-12:00 or by appointment

**

Class Schedule** (subject to change)

**

Class session: Topic and Related Readings **(* indicates supplementary
readings) **:

**

Feb 3 Introduction: methodologies for reconstructing earlier stages of
Japanese

Feb 10 Internal and comparative evidence for reconstructing the consonant
system of early Japanese (Martin _Japanese Language Through Time_ Ch. 1, pp.
1-42)

Feb 17 Reconstructing the consonant system of early Japanese (continued)

Feb 24 Reconstructing the vowel system of early Japanese (Martin _Japanese
Language Through Time_ Ch. 1, pp. 43-80)

Mar 2 The sound system of Nara (eighth century) Japanese: native Japanese
scholarship (Lange, Chs. 1-2)

Mar 9 (no class due to annual meeting of the Association for Asian Studies)

Mar 16 The sound system of Nara Japanese: _manyoogana_ and evidence from
reconstructions of phonetic value of Chinese characters (Lange, Chs. 3-4)

Mar 23 Theories of the genetic origins of Japanese: the Altaic and
Austronesian hypotheses (Shibatani Ch. 5; *Miller Ch. 1-3)

PAPER ABSTRACTS DUE

Mar 30 (no class due to spring break)

April 6 Relationship of Japanese to Korean (Martin, "Problems in establishing
the prehistorical relationships ...", "Recent research on the relationships of
...", *"Lexical Evidence...", )

April 13 Relationship of Japanese to Korean (continued) (Whitman, "A rule of
medial *-r- loss..."; *"The phonological basis for the comparison...")

5-PAGE PROGRESS REPORT ON PAPERS DUE

April 20 Development of verb and adjective morphology from classical to modern
Japanese, _onbin   _(Martin, _Japanese Language through Time,_ Ch. 3; for
classical Japanese grammar see, for example, *Komai and Rohlich)

(Meet with instructor for consultation on paper this week)

April 27 Historical syntactic developments from classical to modern Japanese:
case particles, _kakarimusubi_ , etc. (Shibatani Ch. 11, Sec. 5)

May 4 The pitch accent system of Japanese (Martin _Japanese Language Through
Time_ Ch 4 pp. 138-190, 252-256; McCawley, "Accent in Japanese"

May 11 Paper presentations

PAPERS AND TAKE-HOME EXAMINATIONS DUE: Thursday, May 18, 4:00 p.m.

**

Textbooks and Readings:

**

Lange, Roland. _The Phonology of Eighth Century Japanese._ (to be distributed
in class)

Martin, Samuel. _The Japanese Language Through Time_ (Harvard Coop)

Martin, Samuel. "Problems in Establishing the Prehistoric Relationships of
Korean and Japanese" in _Proceedings of the International Symposium
Commemorating the 30th Anniversary of Korean Liberation._ 1975\. Seoul:
National Academy of Sciences, Republic of Korea.

Martin, Samuel. "Recent Research on the Relationships of Japanese and Korean"
in Lamb and Mitchell (eds.), _Sprung from Some Common Source._ 1991\. Stanford
University Press. (to be distributed in class)

Shibatani, Masayoshi. _The Languages of Japan._ (available through the website
<www.varsitybooks.com> for $17.97)

Whitman, John. "A Rule of Medial *-r- loss in Pre-Old Japanese" in _Linguistic
Change and Reconstruction Methodology_ (Philip Baldi, ed.) _._ 1990\. Berlin:
Walter de Gruyter. (to be distributed in class)

**

Supplementary works** as background to lectures:

Habein, Yaeko Sato. _The History of the Japanese Written Language._ 1984\.
University of Tokyo Press.

Komai, Akira, and Thomas Rohlich. _An introduction to classical Japanese._
1991\. Tokyo: Bonjinsha. (On reserve at Yenching library under course listing
Japanese 209b)

Martin, Samuel. "Lexical Evidence Relating Korean to Japanese," _Language_
42:2, 185-251.

McCawley, James. "Accent in Japanese" in _Studies in Stress and Accent_ (Larry
Hyman, ed.). 1977. Southern California Occasional Papers in Linguistics 4.

Miller, Roy. _Japanese and the Other Altaic Languages._ 1971\. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Miller, Roy. _The Origins of the Japanese Language._ 1980\. Seattle:
University of Washington Press.

Unger, James. _Early Japanese Morphophonemics._ 1975\. Yale U. Ph.D.
Dissertation. (Available through UMI Dissertation Services at website
<www.umi.com>).

Whitman, John. _The phonological basis for the comparison of Japanese and
Korean._  1985\. Harvard Ph.D. dissertation. (available as Microfiche HT 85878
at Pusey Library, Harvard or through UMI Dissertation Services at website
<www.umi.com>).

_ _**

Course Goals** : to introduce scholarly work on the following issues related
to the history and prehistory of the Japanese language.

(1) Based on what we know about modern Japanese and its dialects, what did
Japanese look like at earlier stages of its history?

(2) What kind of evidence do written documents provide about the sound and
structure of Japanese at earlier stages of history?

(3) What kind of changes have occurred in the language from these earlier
stages to modern Japanese as we know it today?

(4) How is Japanese related to other languages of the world in its genetic
origins?

**

Prerequisites** : Some knowledge of Japanese (two years study recommended) OR
of historical linguistic issues in other languages. Familiarity with basic
linguistic terms, especially phonetic. If you have not had an introductory
linguistic course or are not familiar with phonetic terminology, a helpful and
accessible source for such terminology is _A Course in Phonetics_ by Peter
Ladefoged.

**

Grade:** Based on one of two choices (Graduate students will be expected to
choose (b) unless special arrangements are made with the instructor):

(a) A take-home essay examination which will be given out on the last day of
class and which will be due on Thursday, May 18 at 4:00 p.m. in 5 Bryant St.
You may use the notes and published materials from the course, but may not
consult anyone else about the content of the examination.

(b) A paper of about 20 pages typed or word-processed, dealing with some issue
of relevance to the history or prehistory of Japanese. Specific suggestions
for topics include the following:

(i) (based on secondary sources) Choose some topic or issue related to the
historical study of Japanese, preferably one on which the opinions of scholars
differ, and write a critical or comparative review of work which has been done
on that topic. Your bibliography for this paper may include any of the course
readings, but must in addition include works other than the course readings
(ideas for these may be found in the bibliographic references listed at the
end of the course readings).

(ii) (based on primary data) Choose some dialect of Japanese other than
standard Japanese with which you may be familiar or for which you have access
to native informants. Provide an analysis of some phonological, morphological,
or syntactic phenomenon in that dialect which has implications for
reconstructing an earlier stage of the Japanese language.

(iii) (based on primary data) Choose some phonological, morphological, or
syntactic phenomenon within standard Japanese and, using the method of
internal reconstruction, provide an analysis of that phenomenon which sheds
light on what the Japanese language may have looked like at an earlier stage
in history. You may pick a topic covered in the readings, but make sure you
provide new data of your own not found in the readings.

(iv) (translation) Pick an article or a section of some influential work on
the historical study of Japanese written in Japanese and not, to your
knowledge, translated into English, and translate it into English. Be sure to
submit a copy of the original together with the translation.

If you are writing a paper, a one-page abstract is due on March 23 (Thurs)
which describes the topic you want to write on, what particular problem the
paper will deal with, how you will deal with the problem, and lists the major
works you will read (or data sources you will consult) for the paper. I will
return this to you with comments. On April 13 (Thurs) a more detailed five-
page report will be due describing the progress you have made in writing your
paper, with a more complete bibliography appended. I will meet individually
with registered students during the week of April 17 to discuss progress on
their papers and will return the progress reports with comments at that time.

Papers and exams will be graded on the basis of their clarity, coherence,
comprehensiveness, and (in the case of papers) originality.

Regular attendance and participation in class is expected and will be taken
into consideration in the final grade.



