



|

**Welcome! German 274 Fall 2002**

**The Dialogue of the Sexes: Women and Men in Contemporary German-Speaking
Societies**

![](./274sylf02_files/image002.jpg)

**Tues. & Thurs. 12:30-1:45 pm **

Modern Languages Bldg. 214 and COHLab, Modern Languages 412

**Gen.Ed. Tier II Course in Individuals & Society and **

[General Education Gender, Race, Class, Ethnicity, or Non-Western Area
Studies](http://catalog.arizona.edu/2001-02/gened.html)

Call Number 60103

**Instructor: Prof. Mary E. Wildner-Bassett**  
**Office: LSB 310 (Corner of Vine and 1 st St.)**  
**Tel.   621-7385**  
**Email: wildnerb@u.arizona.edu**  
**Office hours:**

**Tuesdays 2:00-4:00 pm  **

  
**Brief Description of the Course:  **This course views many aspects of the
daily lives of individuals in the contemporary European German-speaking
societies. The course content includes recent historical perspectives, such as
the Wall and unification; daily life, including the political issues that
affect daily living; and personal profiles of women and others in German-
speaking countries. Collaborative computer-mediated activities in the COHlab
in ML 412 will be integrated as essential elements of the course.

**Texts:  **  
**A reader for the class will be made available, as will occasional additional
handouts.**  
  

[Course Website on WebCT--Check here twice
weekly!](http://www.webct.arizona.edu/)

**Weekly Schedule of Topics and Activities:**  
  
**Week of August 26-30:  **

Introduction to the course and formation of working dialogue groups  
Begin discussion of "Intellectual and Cultural Autobiography". Students will
be asked to find a partner who can be somehow defined as "other", i.e. of
other gender, background culture, family background, or other preference, etc.

Reading: Aptheker, B. 1989. _Tapestries of Life: Women's Work, Women's
Consciousness, and the Meaning of Daily Life_ (excerpts).

First introduction to the COHlab in ML 412.

  
**Week of September 2-6** : Daily life from women's and men's perspectives:
are there differences?  
  

Reading: Aptheker, B. 1989. _Tapestries of Life: Women's Work, Women's
Consciousness, and the Meaning of Daily Life_ (excerpts).

First working session in the COHlab in ML 412

**Week of September 9-13:  **Daily life from women's and men's perspectives in
Germany: what are the similarities and differences?  
Reading: Bohnen, Agnes. 1993. _Women in Society: Germany._ pp. 37-65

Document discussions in COHlab postings for the Dialogic Portfolio.

  
**Week of September 16-20:** Daily life from women's and men's perspectives in
Germany: what are the similarities and differences?

Discuss first draft of "Intellectual and Cultural Autobiography" with partner
in synchronous and asynchronous COHlab sessions. Penultimate draft due next
week.

Reading: _Women in Austria_ , pp. 104-119."Politics, Gender, and Equality".

Exploring the WWW and/or other sources for information on women in German-
speaking societies. Discuss in detail with your partner and your discussion
group.

Document discussions in COHlab postings for the Dialogic Portfolio.

**Week of September 23-27** : Historical views: Milestones in German-speaking
women's lives.

Reading: Bohnen, 1993\. pp. 11-35.

Draft of Autobiographies due. Begin informal presentations of Autobiographies
to discussion groups  
Document discussions in COHlab postings for the Dialogic Portfolio.

**Week of September 30-October 4:** Historical views: Social Situation and
Personal expectations of women and men in the immediate post war years  
**First quiz on readings and discussions** **.**

**Autobiographies final draft due**. Include final draft in dialogic
portfolio. Continue presentations of Autobiographies to discussion groups.
Discuss reactions to Autobiographies in COHlab.

![*](image003.gif)    Begin work on  ** _research profiles_** a woman or
another  "other" in German-speaking society. Focus on aspects of the person's
life that **_overlap or are very similar_** with your own interests, goals,
talents, personal history, or other overlaps.The second focus will be on
aspects of the person's life that are **_different or "other" than_** your own
interests, goals, talents, personal history, or other overlaps.

Reading: _Women in Austria_ , pp. 213-234, "War and Gender Identity: The
Experience of Austrian Women 1945-1950."

**Week of October 7-11:** Diversity in the German-speaking world:  "Other"
women and men

Discuss progress on your researched personal profiles in detail with your
partner and your discussion group in the COHlab session.

Document discussions in "dialogic diary" entries for the Dialogic Portfolio.

Reading: Bohnen, pp. 67-81.

**Week of October 14-18:** Review sessions: Historical perspectives, daily
life and personal profiles of women and others in German-speaking cultures.

Continue work on personal profiles. Interview with women or another "other" in
your society. Compare with researched profile of a woman or another "other" in
German-speaking society.

**Week of October 21-25:  **Equal rights: Women, men and the law in German-
speaking countries.

Critical discussion of readings in COHlab session with your partner and your
discussion group.

Document discussions in "dialogic diary" entries for the Dialogic Portfolio.

Reading: _Women in Austria_ , pp. 56-82, "Rights at last? The first generation
of female members of parliament in Austria."

**_Final version of Research Profile due_**.

**Second quiz on readings and discussions** **.**

**Week of October 28-November 1:  **Women and men in the "New Germany".
Unification (the _Wende)_ and change.

Reading: Excerpts from Dodds & Allen-Thompson. 1994. _The Wall in my Backyard_
and Kolinsky pp. 259-294

Critical discussion of readings in COHlab session with your partner and your
discussio group.

Begin work on  ** _Interview profile_** , similar to those you have read in
the readings for this week. Interview someone you know who you consider to be
"other" than you are. Ask them about their general life experiences, but focus
on one of the general topics from our class (e.g. world of work, family life,
educational experiences, political involvements, etc. )

Write a summary and description of your interview, including what your
criteria were for the choice of the person.

Document discussions in COHlab postings for the Dialogic Portfolio.

**Week of November 4-8:  **Women and men in the "New Germany". Unification
(the _Wende)_ and change.

Reading: Weedon, Chris. "Changing Subjectivities? Women and Identity." In Boa
& Wharton (eds.) _Women and the Wende._ pp. 115-123.

Discuss one or more ways which the following issues from Weedon's summary of
life for women after the unification is both similar and different in lives of
people you know, in other contexts. **Issues** : attitudes toward politics;
passivity; guilt or shame; consumerism; loss of shared values; feeling of
being "occupied or colonized"; breaking down and dispersal of close groups of
friends.

Continue work on interview profile.Post your interview summary on the class
WebCT site.Read and respond to at least 3 interviews by class members.

  
**Week of November 11-15** : Women and men in the "New Germany". Unification
(the _Wende)_ and change.  
  

**Shoemaker, Simone. 1996. _My Second Life. Video viewing and discussion._**  
Discuss your reactions to the film in detail with your partner and your
discussion group. Document discussions in  "dialogic diary" entries for the
Dialogic Portfolio.

**Week of November 18-22** : Gender identities and life stories

Reading: _Austrian Women_ , pp. 197-212, "Representations of the beginning:
Shaping Gender Identities in Written Life Stories of Women and Men"

**Final version of Profiles due**.

After reading this section, reflect once again on cultural and personal
shaping of identity. Compare your own experiences to what have read. Discuss
in detail with your partner and your discussion group in the COHlab session.

Document discussions in COHlab postings for the Dialogic Portfolio, as well as
including a draft of a summary reflection on gender identities and life
stories in the portfolio.

**Third quiz on readings and discussions**.

  
**Week of November 25-27** : Girls and boys, women and men in schools and
higher education

Write a description of your own schooling experiences to date, with a focus on
gender issues that might occur to you. Compare your own experiences to what
have read. Discuss in detail with your partner and your discussion group.
![](Festive.gif)Document discussions in "dialogic diary" entries for the
Dialogic Portfolio, as well as including your descriptive anecdotes in the
portfolio.

Reading: Kolinsky pp. 100-150.

**Thanksgiving RecessNovember 28 - December 1, 2002Enjoy the turkey and/or
veggies of your choice!**

**Week of December 2-6:  **Class summary and review. What is the "dialogic
emergence of culture"? Where are you in the process of entering a dialogue
with the German speaking cultures? Where are you in the dialogue of the sexes?

Illustration of class concepts in viewing and critical discussion of the film
**_Run Lola Run_**.

Discuss in detail with your partner and your discussion group in the COHlab
session.

Document discussions in COHlab postings for the Dialogic Portfolio, as well as
including a final summary reflection on gender identities and life stories in
the portfolio.

**Week of December 9-11:** Last day of class is December 11.Continue class
summary and review. What is the "dialogic emergence of culture"? Where are you
in the process of entering a dialogue with the German speaking cultures? Where
are you in the dialogue of the sexes?

**Final Exam: Thursday, December 19 from 11 a.m.- 1 p.m.**

  
**Description of the Writing Assignments:**

![*](image003.gif)    **An intellectual and cultural autobiography** **.**
This writing assignment will have several steps in its process, including
discussion and two drafts before the final draft. The content will be
presented and discussed orally in the discussion group, and the assigned
partners will have special feedback input. The final version will be included
in the Dialogic Learning Portfolio.

![*](image003.gif)    **Dialogue journals** **,** which will consist of 7-10
entries throughout the semester. These journal entries will be the result not
only of one student's writing, but will be collections of discussions and
process evaluation in the small groups and with partners.  

![*](image003.gif)   **The dialogic learning portfolio  **will contain the
above two sets of entries (drafts and written discussions), and it will also
contain assignments which address particular topics. The assignments will be
in the form of short, relatively formal written summaries and essays, and they
will be based on interviews, comparative readings, etc. The process approach
will be fully integrated by having portions of the discussion groups, as well
as the electronic synchronous discussions, dedicated to the topics and content
that will eventually be reflected in the written assignments.

![*](image003.gif)   **The profiles project  **will consist offour general
types of profiles:

1.    Standpoint (intellectual and cultural) Autobiographies of class members (see separate rubric above)

2.    Researched profiles of women or other Others in German-speaking societies written by class members

3.    Interview profiles of women or other Others in local societies written by class members

4.    Published profiles of women from the past and present in our reading and handouts

5.    Written reflections on the connections among these pieces and the lives of class participants.

Each portion will have writing projects, including drafts and discussions with
feedback.Then each student will collect these portions, including drafts, in a
folder or in a web-based portfolio.

**Description of Class Conduct and Grading Policies, Procedures, and
Percentages:**

Integrity is expected of every student in all academic work. The guiding
principle of academic integrity is that a student's submitted work must be the
student's own. Students engaging in academic dishonesty diminish their
education and bring discredit to the academic community. Students shall not
violate the Code of Academic Integrity and shall avoid situations likely to
compromise academic integrity. Students shall observe the provisions of the
Code. Failure of faculty to prevent cheating does not excuse students from
compliance with the Code. For the complete Code, refer to
<http://catalog.arizona.edu/policies/994/acacode.htm>.  


Students with disabilities who require reasonable accommodations to fully
participate in course activities or meet course requirements must register
with the [Disability Resource Center](http://drc.arizona.edu). If you qualify
for services through DRC, bring your letter of accommodations to me as soon as
possible.  


Since this course is based on in-class discussion and writing, and on the
assumption that students will co-create the content of the course, any absence
is the equivalent of missing content that can not necessarily be
reconstructed. Therefore, any absence will result in the need to make up work
and review content of the class discussions. It is the **_individual student's
responsibility_** to take the following steps if an absence is unavoidable:

  1. **Notify the instructor by phone or email before the class meeting that you will be absent**
  2. **Using email, phone, or personal contact, reach a fellow student or the instructor to inform yourself about everything you have missed**
  3. **Make up any written work you have missed, and work on COHlab assignments, readings, and discussions you have missed, so that you will be caught up by the next class session**
  4. **Make sure your written work is turned in as soon as possible after your absence.**
  5. **Absences for quizzes is to be avoided. Make-up sessions for quizzes will be very limited, and granted only if documented dire emergencies or illness were that cause of the absence.**

**Assignment of class grade will be based on the following:**

![*](image003.gif)    **Autobiography: 100 points**

![*](image003.gif)    **Quizzes: 200 points**

![*](image003.gif)    **Dialogue Portfolio: 150 points**

![*](image003.gif)    **Participation (documented by attendance, classroom,
and COHlab discussions): 150 points**

![*](image003.gif)    **Profiles project: 300 points**

![*](image003.gif)    **Final exam: 100 points**

**Total Possible Points: 1000**

**A = 900-1000 points**

**B = 800-899 points**

**C = 700-799 points**

**D = 600-699 points**

**E = 599 points and less**  
  
---|---  
  


|

  
  


