

[![syllabus](syl.gif)](324syl.html)  
**Syllabus**

** **

** **[
**![Dictionary](dict.gif)**](http://dictionaries.travlang.com/GermanEnglish/)  
**Dictionary**



[![Home](desk.gif)](http://ml.hss.cmu.edu/FacPages/amgreen/)  
**Home**



[![e-mail](mbox2.gif)](mailto:amgreen@andrew.cmu.edu)  
**Mail**



** **

[**![department](people.gif)**](http://ml.hss.cmu.edu/ml)  
**Department**

|  **Contemporary Germany, Austria, and Switzerland  
** 82-324

**Kursleiterin:**[ Anne Green](mailto:amgreen+@andrew.cmu.edu), Ph.D.

**Sprechstunden:** M 2.30-4pm and by appt.

**B uro:** PH 225 A **Telefon:** x88050

**Postfach:** 160 Baker Hall (Department of Modern Languages)

**Course Goals**

This course is new and is therefore an experiment. I will do everything I can
to make it an interesting and successful one for you, but you must also make a
commitment to going the extra kilometer, as it were.

You should already be able to do the following well:

  * use and understand German in everyday situations. 
  * communicate effectively in general areas and in individual areas of interest.
  * understand cultural perspectives in contemporary Germany.
  * use authentic materials from German-speaking countries on the web.

In order to expand on these areas and enhance your knowledge of the German
language and culture, it is important that you actively participate in all
classroom activities and keep up with out-of-class assignments, such as
essays, written homework, and web activities. A balance of activities will
help the development of all four skills and of cultural knowledge, and
assessment of progress will occur across skills throughout the semester.
Throughout this course, the emphasis is on effective communication, without
neglecting linguistic accuracy.

This is a content-based (rather than a grammar-based) course. We will read and
discuss articles, books, films, etc. relating to contemporary (i.e., 21st
century) German-speaking countries. Because of the topic, materials to be read
will often come from the internet and will be handed out on short notice. This
means that support materials made by me (e.g., vocabulary lists and content
questions) will NOT be common tools for you. I anticipate that the work in the
"Arbeitsgruppe" (see below) will help, as will a good dictionary.



**C** **OURE** **R** **EQUIRMENTS**

**Aufgaben**

You are responsible for noting the due dates of all homework and other
assignments from the syllabus, and for handing in the homework on the day that
it is due. I will not normally mention the assignments in class, but will
expect you to have looked at the syllabus. You will generally have a written
homework assignment for each class period, in addition to a reading
assignment. The homework is to be neatly written or typed. Illegible,
incomplete, or copied assignments will receive no credit. Late assignments may
receive partial credit, depending on the individual situation.

Homework is not given a letter grade, rather it is corrected and given a check
if complete. At the end of the semester, the number of homeworks completed is
divided by the number assigned for the homework portion of your final grade.

**Arbeitsgruppe (AG)**

The "Arbeitsgruppe" is an attempt to give you more opportunities to speak and
to work in a small group (of no more than 4 students) outside of class. You
should meet with your group for at least one hour BEFORE the Wednesday listed
on the syllabus to discuss the stories and do the assignments together, with
everyone participating, asking and answering questions. Attendance will be
take by one group member every week, and the attendance list will be given to
me on the Wednesday listed on the syllabus. These AG Wednesdays will give us
the opportunity to do activities in class that go beyond the homework and to
have discussions that go beyond the content of the articles, etc.

Working in the Arbeitsgruppe should provide some additional speaking practice,
but cannot entirely make the time needed. I will do all I can to give you
opportunities to speak; you must also be diligent in working on your skills
outside of class.

You will need to decide when and where to meet. My only request in this regard
is that you meet in a public place, like the basement of the library or
somewhere in the UC, UNLESS ALL MEMBERS agree on meeting in someone's room and
arrive and leave at the agreed-upon time.

**Aufs atze**

To help improve your writing skills, you will write 4 essays of at least 250
words. The essays should be typed, double-spaced, with words counted and
printed at the bottom. The essays are due on the dates indicated on the
syllabus. The topics of the essays will be given at least one week before the
due date. I will hand out essay grading information before the first essay
assignment.

You will write two drafts of your essays. The first draft (NOT notes, NOT an
outline, but a true draft) will be turned in to me on the due date for
comments and suggestions. You will correct it using my comments and write a
second (clean) draft and then turn in both drafts to me for a final grade.

**Vortr age**

You will give two10-minute oral reports in this course: one on music, film, or
another approved topic from contemporary Germany, and one on a contemporary
topic from one of the other German-speaking countries. (Lichtenstein FL,
Austria A, Switzerland CH, or Luxemburg L). The specifics of the assignments
will be given to you well beforehand.

You will make a written version (of at least 500 words) of your oral report.
This written version will have two drafts, just like the essays.

THERE WILL BE NO FINAL EXAM in this course. Hooray!

**Mitarbeit**

If you register for the course but don't show your face in class, your
participation grade will be in the proverbial cellar. Your participation is
usually a function of your attendance. If you are not in class, you can't
participate. But I expect more than simply attendance. Speak up, speak out,
throw your hat into the ring! We are all learners, and we can all learn from
each other.

If you must miss a test or a class due to illness or emergency, please call me
at my office (268-8050), or send me email. Homework, projects, tests, etc. in
other classes do not constitute an illness or emergency and are not legitimate
excuses for late homework, essays, or other assignments.

As always, don't hesitate to mention any problems with particular assignments
or ask any questions about the course, either in class or privately. Those
students with learning or other disabilities should make me aware of their
situation so that additional resources (e.g., tutoring) can be obtained.



**Academic Integrity**

Students who copy assignments or essays, allow assignments to be copied, or
cheat on tests will fail the assignment or test on the first offense and fail
the entire course on the second. Don't make me have to deal with cheating of
any kind.

Many students have questions as to what constitutes too much "help" on essays
or homework. Of course, you may ask a friend (who may have studied German
longer than you) if a certain phrase or sentence is correct. BUT, the line
between legitimate help and cheating is this: Could you reproduce this "help"
on a test or on your own? If the answer is yes - i.e., you learned something
from your question and won't make the same mistake again, that's okay. If the
answer is no - (e.g., you can't identify the parts of speech in the phrase)
then you shouldn't turn in the assignment as your own work. You should, at the
very least, indicate those parts of the assignment that are not your own work.

I have been teaching for a number of years. I can recognize essays that are
written by native, near-native, or advanced speakers, or are copied from other
sources. Don't try to take advantage of me in this regard. Although I am
loathe to deal with this kind of situation, I will continue to uphold the
university's policy on academic integrity and report offenders. This is
serious business. If you are unsure about your particular situation, please
ask me for clarification BEFORE you turn in an assignment as your own work.



**Grading**

Notenverteilung

Aufgaben (25) und Mitarbeit in der AG (10x Treffen) -- 50%

Vortrage: 2 Mundliche, 2 Schriftliche, jeweils 5% -- 20%

Aufsatze 4, jeweils 5% -- 20%

Mitarbeit in der Stunde (40 Unterrichtsstunden) -- 10%



**My Responsibilities as Instructor**

I see my role as facilitator of your German language and cultural learning in
the classroom. I am happy to work with you individually as well, during my
office hours or at another mutually agreed-upon time. I am responsible for
giving you feedback on your work, as well as on your status in the class
(i.e., overall grade). I will give you formal written evaluative feedback at
mid-semester, but am willing to provide you with other feedback upon request.

I include for your reference the goals for Advanced-level German students from
Teaching Language in Context: Proficiency-Oriented Instruction by Alice C.
Omaggio. (see last page of this handout - on hardcopy from 1st day of class
only) These are my guidelines and should be your goals for the course.

I look forward to working with you this semester. Please don't hesitate to
contact me if you have any questions or concerns during the course of the
semester.



**Viel Erfolg in Deutsch 324!**

    
|  
  
---|---|---

