HISTORY 812:

RESEARCH SEMINAR IN MODERN UNITED STATES HISTORY:

TWENTIETH-CENTURY MASS POLITICS

Syllabus, Fall 2000

  
  

Time: Tuesdays 3:00-5:50, 300 Auditorium Building

Instructor: Mark Kornbluh

Office: 310 Auditorium

Office Hours: by appointment

  
  

This course is a graduate research seminar in modern United States political
history. The focus will be on collective action and mass politics. Our
readings will encompass a wide range of approaches and span the course of the
twentieth century. We will look at how, when, and why Americans have acted
together politically and in what ways this has changed over the last hundred
years.  Seminar discussions will center on how historians have explained
political behavior.

\-----------------------------------------------------------------

REQUIRED BOOKS:

  
  

Lawrence Goodwyn, _The Populist Moment_.

William Tuttle, _Race Riot_.

Joseph Gusfield, _Symbolic Crusade_.

Alan Brinkley, _Voices of Protest_.

Christopher Tomlins, _The State and the Unions_.

George Lipsitz, _Ivory Perry and the Culture of Opposition_.

William Chafe, _Civilities and Civil Rights_.

Faye D. Ginsburg, _Contested Lives_.

Kristen Luker, _Abortion and the Politics of Motherhood_.

Todd Gitlin, _The Sixties._

__Jack Whalen and Richard Flacks, _Beyond the Barricades_.

E.J. Dionne, Jr, _Why Americans Hate Politics_.

\-----------------------------------------------------------------

August 29: Introduction

  
  

September 5: __Charles Tilly, Readings from _From Mobilization to Revolution_
(photocopies). Lawrence Goodwyn, _The Populist Moment._

  
  

September 12: Packet of Readings on Electoral Politics (TBA: photocopies).

PAPER PROPOSAL IS DUE.

  
  

September 19: William Tuttle, _Race Riot_ , Joseph Gusfield, _Symbolic
Crusade_

  
  

September 26: __Alan Brinkley, _Voices of Protest_. (Additional readings TBA)

BIBLIOGRAPHY IS DUE

  
  

October 3: Christopher Tomlins, _The State and the Unions._ (Additional
Readings TBA)

  
  

October 10: George Lipsitz, _Ivory Perry and the Culture of Opposition_ ;
William Chafe, _Civilities and Civil Rights_.

DETAILED PAPER OUTLINE IS DUE

  
  

October 17: Todd Gitlin, _The Sixties;_ Jack Whalen and Richard Flacks,
_Beyond the Barricades_.

  
  

October 24: Faye D. Ginsburg, _Contested Lives_ and Kristen Luker, _Abortion
and the Politics of Motherhood._

  
  

October 31: E.J. Dionne, Jr, _Why Americans Hate Politics._ (Additional
Readings TBA)

  
  

November 7: No Meeting (Research Week)

  
  

November 14: No Meeting (Research Week)

  
  

November 21: No Meeting (Research Week)

  
  

November 28: Paper Presentations

  
  

December 7: Paper Presentations

  
  

**Paper due December 15.**

=========================================================

  
  

HISTORY 812 COURSE REQUIREMENTS:

  
  

This class is a readings, discussion, and research seminar.  Both attendance
and participation at seminar meetings are essential, as is participation on
HST812, the electronic discussion list for this course. Discussions will
center around the readings. Class participation will count for 25 percent of
the course grade.

  
  

The major written requirement for this class is an independent research paper
which will count for 75 percent of the course grade. Paper proposals are due
on September 12. Proposals must be approved and may have to be modified to
ensure that each student is undertaking a meaningful project that can be
completed within one semester. A bibliographic report following a proscribed
form is due on September 26 and a detailed paper outline is due on October 10.
Each student will present his or her project orally to the seminar during the
final weeks of the semester. The final paper is due on December 15.

  
  
  
  

HST812 DISCUSSION LIST:

  
  

This course has an electronic discussion list to facilitate further
discussion. All members of the class are expected to participate in this
electronic discussion list. Before we meet each week, everyone will be
expected to post a response to the week's readings on HST812. I also expect
students to utilize the list to extend our discussions beyond the classroom
after we conclude our in-class discussion.

  
  

The list is unmoderated so that messages submitted by class participants are
immediately distributed to other class members.

  
  

This discussion list is linked to a website to facilitate retrieval of
messages(http://coursesa.matrix.msu.edu/~hst812). The HST812 logs which are
stored on this site will allow class participants to look back over past
conversations on the discussion list and comment upon them. The Web site
includes a variety of additional information relevant to HST812 course
materials including the course syllabus.

  
  

* * *

To _subscribe_ to HST812, send an e-mail message to
[listserv@h-net.msu.edu](mailto:listserv@h-net.msu.edu)

with no subject and only this text: ****

    
    
    **sub HST812 firstname lastname**

Your request should look something like this: ****

    
    
    **sub HST812 John Smith**

You will receive a confirmation that your request has been received.

  

To _unsubscribe_ , send this message to
[LISTSERV@h-net.msu.edu](mailto:LISTSERV@h-net.msu.edu) ****

    
    
    **unsub  HST812**

If you have any questions or experience any difficulties in attempting to
subscribe or unsubscribe, please send a message to me at
[Mark@mail.matrix.msu.edu](mailto:Mark@mail.matrix.msu.edu)  

