# SOC309 -- Fall 95

## COLLECTIVE BEHAVIOR AND SOCIAL MOVEMENTS

Kuechler -- Section 01 -- M, Th 1:10-2:25 -- HW 506

Office Hours in HW 1628: M, W 5:30-6:30 and by appointment (Tel. 772-5588)

### Syllabus

_**Objectives:**_

This class will focus exclusively on social movements which constitute one
particular form of 'collective behavior'. Sociologists use the term
'collective behavior' to refer to the behavior of groups of people or
'collectivities'; more specifically, the behavior of collectivities that are
defined by particular circumstance -- in contrast to formal organizations
(e.g., member s of a church, students in a class, players on a sports team,
etc.). Examples include the behavior of crowds in natural or man-made
disasters or emergencies (e. g. , blackouts, fires, hurricanes) or the actions
of crowds defying public order (e. g. , riots, violent demonstrations), but
also fads, fashion, and public opinion. Some of these forms of collective
behavior are relevant for the study of social movements as well and they will
be discussed in this specific context. However, I will not try to cover the
full range of 'collective behavior'.

The term social movement describes a situation in which a loosely organized
group of people challenges the existent social norms and values often defying
established rules of behavior in their actions. To varying degrees, social
movements question the established political and/or social order and seek to
pursue their interests in direct ways mostly bypassing the institutional
channels (e.g., voting, petitioning, lobbying) of pursuing their interest. The
sociological literature shows many different and sometimes conflicting
definitions of 'social movement'. In the older literature, scholars placed
much emphasis on the rule-breaking behavior associated with social movement
actions (demonstrations, riots, etc. ). More recently, sociologists tend to
discuss social movements less value-laden. They also look more comprehensively
at the impact of a social movement on the established social and political
order. Thus, the "unconventional" behavior of social movement followers is
just one of many other aspects. Also, many social movements develop a formal
organizational structure and a quite a few make use of the established,
conventional channels to express their interests as well. In addition, pre-
existing organizations may become part of the movement. The distinction
between "social movements" and "special interest group", then, is often rather
blurred. To fully understand social movements, an interdisciplinary
perspective is helpful. We need to combine sociological theory with social
history and social psychology. Our main textbook offers such a perspective.

_**Approach:**_

We will use an inductive approach: After a brief and preliminary discussion of
relevant sociological concepts and definitions, we will look at a variety of
social movements in some detail trying to find similarities and
dissimilarities between them. Our textbook discusses eight such movements
(more precisely: eight formal organizations each linked to a more widely
defined social movement) in detail. In addition, students will write and
present papers on six additional movements. In the final part of the semester
we will return to social movement theory and deepen our understanding of
relevant concepts.

_**Prerequisites:**_

Since this is an upper level course, students should have taken several
substantive sociology classes. SOC 101 ('Introduction to Sociology') is an
absolute minimum.

_**Requirements:**_

I expect students to attend all classes, to complete all reading assignments
before class, and to meet all deadlines as specified below. I will assign the
final course grade based on the following four components:

  1. a midterm exam (25%)
  2. paper including classroom presentation (35%)
  3. a final exam (25%)
  4. classroom participation/ mini-quizzes (15%)

To obtain a passing grade for the course, passing grades for the paper and at
least one classroom exam are necessary. All assignments must be completed by
the deadlines specified below. For each day of delay, I will lower the grade
by a full credit point (e. g. , a paper late by one day cannot receive a grade
higher than a 'B', etc. ). If a student cannot meet a deadline due to illness
or other important personal reasons, s/he must contact me _before_ the paper
or report is due. As a matter of principle, I do not assign a grade of
'incomplete' at the end of the semester.

_**Paper and classroom presentation**_ :

In the second part of this course students will present their papers on select
social movements. I will assign an equal number of students to each of the
following topics:

  * Black Nationalist movement (1960s/1970s)
  * Environmental movement
  * Gay and Lesbian movement
  * Freedom-of-Choice movement
  * Right-to-Life movement
  * Animal rights movement 

The topics reflect the subject matter of a movement. Some of these movements
are rather diverse; different organizations may have sprung from a particular
movement or organizations may have themselves associated with the movement. In
contrast, the textbook focuses on specific organizations. To some extent,
then, the textbook chapters overlap with some of these paper topics.

Students will have an opportunity to express their preferences in terms of
topic. I will try to make assignments in line with these preferences as much
as possible. Each student will write an individual paper (see the appendix for
more detail on the paper assignment). No team work is allowed except for
sharing information on relevant literature and/or other sources. Each student
must submit a **_"progress report" by September 21**_ (or earlier). This
progress report should contain a preliminary list of sources (books, articles,
etc. ) to be used and a first outline for the paper. _**The final paper is
due** **October 23._ ** During the first three weeks of November the students
will present their papers in class (one movement per session). I will select
one or two papers on each movement for primary presentation. The other
students who have worked on the same subject will provide additions and/or
comment. Alternatively, the students may take the initiative in coordinating
the classroom presentation among themselves (this worked quite well in
previous years).

_

**Midterm/Final Exam:_ **

These will be 'closed book', 'short answer' exams dealing with concepts,
terms, and facts. I will ask questions based on both the textbook and
additional material presented in class.

_**Mini-Quizzes:_ **

These quizzes will be given in the first 10 minutes of selected class sessions
without previous announcement to check on the assigned reading for that
particular class or on comprehension of material presented in the preceding
class session. No make-ups will be given and non-participation counts as an
"F"; students that cannot attend a particular class on time must give _prior_
notice directly to the instructor (e.g., by leaving message on instructor's
answering machine) to be excused. However, the two worst results on these
mini-quizzes will not count for the final grade.

_

**Textbook (required):**_

Goldberg, Robert A. 1991. __Grassroots Resistance -- Social Movements in
Twentieth Century America_._ Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.

_

_

    
    
    **Detailed schedule**
    
         M    Th
    
    Aug       31   Course overview
    Sep  06 (Wed)  Introduction to Social Movements             Ch. 1
                   Preference ballot on paper topics
    Sep       07   Excursus: Paper writing and topic assignments 
    Sep  11        Excursus: Searching for information -- CLASS WILL MEET IN HW606
    
                    **Part I: Case studies from textbook**
    
    Sep       14   Anti-Saloon LeagueCh. 2                           
    Sep  18        Industrial Workers of the World (IWW)        Ch. 3
    Sep       21   Ku Klux Klan                                 Ch. 4
                   [PROGRESS REPORT DUE!!] 
    Sep  25        No class (relig. holiday)          
    Sep       28   Communist Party                              Ch. 5
    Oct  02        John Birch Society                           Ch. 6
    Oct       05   Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee    Ch. 7
    Oct  09        No class (COLUMBUS DAY)  
    Oct       12   Berkeley in the Sixties (Film)                    
    Oct  16        Free Speech MovementCh. 8                         
    Oct       19   National Organization for Women              Ch. 9
    Oct  23        Review session
                   [FINAL PAPER DUE!!!]
    Oct       26   Midterm 
    
                 **Part III: Case Studies (student papers)**
    
    Oct  30        Black Nationalist movement
    Nov       02   Environmental movement 
    Nov  06        Gay and Lesbian movement
    Nov       09   Freedom-of-Choice movement
    Nov  13        Right-to-Life movement
    Nov       16   Animal rights movement                  
    Nov  20        Summary of case studies
    Nov       23   No class (Thanksgiving Day)
    
           **Part IV: Social Movements - Theoretical Perspectives**
    
    Nov  27        Social movements in context:
                        - Activists, Sympathizers, Bystanders, Opponents
                        - Movements and Counter-Movements
    Nov       30   Movements and Organizations
    Dec  04        Classifying social movements: "New" vs. "Old"
    Dec       07   Strategies and tactics: "institutional" vs. "uninstitutional" means
    Dec  11        Social movements and social change
    Dec       14   Review session
    
    Dec 15-22      **Final Exam  (1:45-3:45p)**
    

### _Appendix: Paper Assignment_

_**Content:**_

The paper should provide basic information about the assigned movement as it
emerged and changed over time. This "history" of the movement should include
information on goals and ideology, major events, leaders, internal structure,
membership, public support, strategy and tactics, organizations emerging from
the movement and pre-existing organizations in (partial) alliance with the
movement, and -- last but not least -- successes and failures. Depending on
the specific movement, some items will be more important than others. You will
have to use your judgment to select and present the most important facts. In
addition to this "history", a second part of the paper should deal with recent
(within the last year or so) events related to the movement. Finally, in a
brief third section, you should state your evaluation of the movement's
success. What did it or has it achieved, where and why did it fail, what are
the prospects for the future?

_Sources:_ For the "history" part, you should utilize scholarly sources, i.e.
books and journal articles written by scholars and aimed at the scientific
community rather than at the general public. Such works typically try to give
a balanced picture, they avoid blatant partisanship (being "against" or "in
favor" of a particular movement), and -- as a formal criterion -- they include
a bibliography which lists the sources used. It is important to use several
sources and compare the accounts given in each. Watch for discrepancies and
always try to reconfirm information you found in one book or article. Given
the (limited) length of the paper, you will need to condense the information
found. However, if you use text verbatim (as it appears in the source), you
must properly indicate such direct quotations. Failure to do so, constitutes
plagiarism which is a serious academic offense. You will receive a handout
describing proper citation.

For the "recent events" part, you can use all available sources including
newspapers, magazines, flyers, pamphlets, etc. Matter of fact, these may be
the only sources available.

You may want to contact one or more organizations linked to the social
movement directly to obtain illustrative material. Some organizations are very
accessible, some even have "home pages" on the Internet, the World Wide Web
(WWW) by now.

_**Length and Format:**_

The paper should be between 15 and 20 pages (double spaced, one inch margins).
Take this as a general guide, contents is more important than volume. The
"history" part should be about 2/3 to 3/4 of the paper (e.g., 13-15 pages of
an 20-page paper), the rest should be divided about evenly between "recent
events" and "evaluation". The paper must be printed (dot matrix printer draft
mode acceptable if the ribbon is not worn out) or typewritten -- no
exceptions. The three section must be clearly separated and adequately
labeled. Follow standard reference format (see separate handout) and include a
bibliography. Keep in mind that you are writing the paper for your fellow
students, so do not assume that the reader is knowledgeable about the subject.
Let a friend (not in this class) read a first draft of your paper and ask for
a critique. What he or she does not understand, most likely needs improvement.
Start as early on the paper as you can, so that you have time for revisions
before the deadline on October 23.

_**Search and information retrieval strategies:**_

For scholarly books, search the CUNYPLUS catalog or the catalog of the
Research Branch of the New York Public Library. For scholarly articles, your
best bet is "sociofile", a database on CD-ROM (available in the Hunter
Library, 4th floor) which lists titles and abstracts of a large number of
academic journals in the social sciences. -- To check on recent events, you
may want to search the New York Times database, also available on CD-ROM in
the Hunter library. But there are numerous other possibilities to extend your
search beyond NYC. We will have the use of a computer lab for the class on
September 11 to get you started on the latest in information retrieval.

