![](../Images/Header3.gif)  
  
---  
[![](../Images/Buttons/admin_1a.gif)](admin.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/faculty_1a.gif)](faculty.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/grad_1a.gif)](graduate_p.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/ug_1a.gif)](under_g.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/search_1a.gif)](search.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/news_1a.gif)](news_e.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/site_1a.gif)](sitemap.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/help_1a.gif)](mailto:ethnicstudies@ucsd.edu)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
Professor Shalanda D. Dexter  
Spring Quarter 2002  
UCSD Ethnic Studies Department M,W,F 10:10-11:00

Soc. Sci. Bldg Rm. 222, x2-2824

Office Hrs:  11:30-2:30 or by appointment

e-mail: [sdexter@weber.ucsd.edu](mailto:sdexter@weber.ucsd.edu)

ETHNIC STUDIES 188/USP 132

AFRICAN AMERICANS, THE CHURCH, AND THE CITY

_COURSE DESCRIPTION:_ This course examines the development of an urban
African-American religious tradition that develops as a result of the Great
Migration.  Structured thematically and historically, this class explores the
impact of the migration upon African-American culture and religious identity.
The first part of the quarter will focus on the history and development of
African-American religion.  The second part of the term will address urban
issues confronting the "black church" and how it attempts to address them.

_REQUIRED TEXTS:_

  * Milton Sernett, _Bound for the Promised Land_.
  * Clarence Taylor, _The Black Churches of Brooklyn_.
  * C. Eric Lincoln and Lawrence Mamiya, _The Black Church in the African American Experience_.
  * George McKinney and William Kritlow, _Cross the Line_.

  * Course Reader available from University Readers Printing Services

_COURSE REQUIREMENTS:_

  * Site Visit
  * Participant Observation Paper 30% of grade (Due May 3rd)
  * Term Paper (Due June 7th) 45% of grade
  * Ethnic Studies Lecture Series Response Paper 20% of grade
  * Attendance and Class Participation 5% of grade

More detailed assignment guidelines will be provided in class.

PART ONE:  THE BLACK CHURCH IN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

The first part of this course is devoted to providing a historical perspective
of the Black Church.  It is important to understand its roots and how it has
functioned in the lives of African Americans in an urban context.  We will
look at issues of gender roles, music, and specific case studies of Black
Churches in an urban context.

WEEK ONE--WHAT IS THE BLACK CHURCH?

Unfortunately, the term "black church" has become a monolithic entity.  The
term is used to describe the religious experiences of African American but
often these description privileges Christianity, particularly Black Protestant
Christianity.  This first week is devoted to deconstructing this term "black
church" and coming to a more complicated and inclusive understanding of
African-American religious experiences.

  * C. Eric Lincoln, "The Religious Dimension: Toward a Sociology of Black Churches," in _The Black Church in the African American Experience_ , pp. 1-19. 
  * Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, "African-American Woman's History and the Metalanguage of Race," in the reader, pp. 28-41.
  * Lowell Livezey, "The New Context of Urban Religion," in the reader, pp. 15-27.
  * Hans Baer, "Introduction" and "Social Transformation in African-American Religions," in the reader, pp.1-14.

# WEEK TWO--THE GREAT MIGRATION

The Great Migration was a watershed event in African-American history.  It
marked the first significant move of African Americans to northern cities.
The result of this migration was significant in regards to racial politics and
church development in northern cities.  This week we will look at this
phenomenon and its impact upon African-American religion.

  * Milton Sernett, _Bound for the Promised Land_ , pp. 1-153, 180-209.

WEEK THREE--GROWTH OF URBAN CHURCHES/STOREFRONTS

One of the results of the Great Migration was the development of storefront
churches.  The proliferation of storefront churches and the increased
membership in more traditional churches led to tremendous church growth.  This
week we will look at the development of urban churches.

  * C. Eric Lincoln, "In the Streets of the Black Metropolis: A Profile of Black Urban Clergy and Churches," in _The Black_ _Church in the African American Experience_ , pp.115-163.
  * Clarence Taylor, "Brooklyn's Black Churches and the Growth of Black Culture, " in _The Black Churches of_ _Brooklyn_ , pp. 67-98.
  * Milton Sernett, "When Chicago was Canaan," in _Bound for_ _the Promised Land_ , pp.154-179.

WEEK FOUR--MICRO-STUDY BLACK PENTECOSTALISM IN CHICAGO AND BROOKLYN

This week we will focus on Black Pentecostal churches in Chicago and growing
and most popular churches in the city.  We will analyze their developments and
their role in these major urban cities.

  * C. Eric Lincoln, "The Black Pentecostals: The Spiritual Legacy with a Black Beginning," in The Black Church in the African American Experience, pp. 76-91.

  * Clarence Taylor, _The Black Churches of Brooklyn_ , pp.1-66.
  * Excerpts from Professor Dexter's Dissertation (to be distributed in class).

# WEEK FIVE--THE DEVELOPMENT OF GOSPEL MUSIC

Sacred music has long been central in African American religious experiences.
In the city, gospel music became immensely popular.  The music influences the
culture of the city but the city also influenced the music.

  * C. Eric Lincoln, "The Performed Word: Music and the Black Church," in _The Black Church in the African American Experience_ , pp. 346-381.
  * Michael Harris, "Old-Line Religion and Urban Migrants: 1920-1930" and "The Emergence of Gospel Blues, 1931-1932," in the reader, pp. 121-157.
  * Bernice Johnson Reagon, "Twentieth-Century Gospel: As the People Moved They Sang a New Song," in the reader, pp. 88-103.
  * Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, "Rethinking Vernacular Culture: Black Religion and Race Records in the 1920's and 1930's," in the reader, pp. 76-87.
  * Portia Maultsby, "The Impact of Gospel Music on the Secular Music Industry," in the reader, pp.104-120.

WEEK SIX--A GENDERED PERSPECTIVE--BLACK WOMEN AND THE BLACK CHURCH

The pivotal role of Black women in the "Black Church" has never been
contested.  Their access to power, particularly in the pulpit, has been
challenged, however. This week we will look at the historic role and their
influence of Black women in the church.

  * C. Eric Lincoln, "The Pulpit and the Pew: The Black Church and Women," in _The Black Church in the African American Experience_ , pp. 274-308.
  * Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham, "The Black Church: A Gender Perspective," in the reader, pp. 42-51.
  * Cheryl Townsend Gilkes, _" If it wasn't for the Women . . ." Black Women's Experience and Womanist Culture in Church and Community_, in the reader, pp. 52-75.

WEEK SEVEN--ANOTHER DIMENSION OF THE BLACK CHURCH: BLACK MUSLIMS AND BLACK
CATHOLICS

Up until this point in our study, much of our attention has been focused on
Black Protestant Christianity.  Now, we will turn our focus to two other
important expressions of the African-American religious tradition-Islam and
Catholicism.

Richard Brent Turner, _Islam in the African-American_ _Experience_. In the
reader, pp. 239-328.

C. Eric Lincoln, "Reaching for the Masses," in the reader, pp. 329-348.

Cyprian Davis, O.S.B., "Coming of Age: Black Catholics in the Mid-Twentieth
Century," in the reader, pp. 190-201.

PART TWO:  ISSUES OF URBANIZATION AND ITS CHALLENGES

African Americans move into urban areas, north and south did not occur without
its challenges.  The promises of moving to the Promised Land were often left
unfulfilled.  Issues of living in urban areas confronted Black Churches, which
grappled with effective means of meetings these challenges.  The last two
weeks of the term will be devoted to addressing these challenges and analyzing
the "black church's" response to them.

WEEK EIGHT--ALTERNATIVE RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS IN THE BLACK CHURCH

Living in the city created a fertile environment for the growth of alternative
religious movements.  Many of these movements were not rooted in a Christian
experience but drew many followers.  Many of these alternative movements are
in existence today.

  * Arthur Huff Fauset, _Black Gods of the Metropolis_ , in the reader, pp. 156-185.
  * Rabbi Matthew, "Black Judaism in Harlem," in the reader, pp. 186-189.

  * Hans Baer, _The Black Spiritual Movement: A Religious Response to Racism_ , in the reader, pp. 202-238.

# WEEK NINE--SEXISM

An issue still facing the "black church" is sexism.  Though not an issue that
is particular to urbanization, it yet remains a severe challenge to the "black
church."  It is important to give some attention to the critiques that black
women are posing to the "black church" and its effects that it has had upon
the "black church."

  * Katie Geneva Canon, _Katie 's Canon: Womanism and the Soul of the Black Community_, in the reader, pp. 368-384.
  * Jacquelyn Grant, "Women's Experience Revisited: The Challenge of the Darker Sister," in the reader, pp. 348-367.
  * Cheryl Townsend Gilkes, "Hearing and Empowering 'Poor' Black Women," in the reader, pp. 384-393.

WEEK TEN--POVERTY, HOMELESSNESS, ECONOMIC INJUSTICE, AND RACISM

In this final week, we will look at issues that every "black church" in the
city must deal with.  We will look at the writings of a San Diego inner city
pastor and black theologians who provide us with their views and possible
solutions concerning these issues.

  * George McKinney, _Cross the Line_ , pp. 1-38, 55-84.
  * Gayraud Wilmore, "Black Power, Black People, and Theological Renewal," in the reader, pp. 393-419.
  * Cornel West, _Prophesy Deliverance!_ , in the reader, pp. 419-461.
  * James Cone, _God of the Oppressed_ , pp. 461-512.
  * Lawrence N. Jones, "The Black Churches: A New Agenda," in the reader, pp. 527-532.



[Return to Main Page](../index.html)  
  
---  
  

9500 Gilman Drive - La Jolla, CA 92093-0522 - 858.534.3276  
  
---  
  

[![](../Images/official.gif)](http://www.ucsd.edu/)  
  
---  
  

