|

![](../../images/ed&bob1.jpg) |

[ ![](../../images/NewcrossRed.gif)](http://www.cts.edu/default.htm) |

![](../../images/communion.jpg) |

[ ![](../../images/LOGOCTR.jpg)](../../default.htm) |

![](../../images/groupoutside1.jpg)  
---|---|---|---|---  
**    [Welcome](/Welcome/welcome.htm)   |
[Community](/community/onecommunity.htm)   |
[Admissions](/Admissions/ADMISN.html)   |   [Bookstore](/bookstore/)   |
[Stewardship](/stewardship/stewardship.htm)   |
[Programs](/programs/programs.htm)   |   [Library](/Library/LIBRARY.html)   |
[Grants](/Grants.htm)   |  **  
---  
  


**

Course Syllabus

Christian Theological Seminary

H-711 Problems in Church History:

The African-American Methodist Churches

Fall 1999 Ron Sommerville, instructor

Th 2:40-5:25 **[ronsomerv@cts.edu](mailto:ronsomerv@cts.edu)

**_

Course Description_:

The emergence of African-American Methodist denominations in the early
nineteenth century has been attributed to a variety of factors: the legacy of
American denominationalism, the quest for African-American autonomy or an act
of divine providence. Despite their differing social and theological
rationales for organizing independent Methodist bodies, African-American
Methodist denominations remained strongly loyal to the Wesleyan spirit and
movement. The purpose of this seminar is to reexamine the theological, social,
historical contexts that led to the formation of these bodies, and to trace
their growth and development in the twentieth century. The course will compare
their respective histories, polities, doctrinal statements, as well as their
involvement in Pan Methodist ventures and other ecumenical projects. The
course will provide students a greater awareness and appreciation of the rich
gifts African-Americans have brought to the global Wesleyan family.

_

Required Texts_:

Campbell, Ted A. _Methodist Doctrine: The Essentials_. Nashville: Abingdon
Press, 1999.

Hildebrand, _The Times Were Strange and Stirring: Methodist Preachers and the_
_Crisis of Emancipation_. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1995.

Sawyer, Mary R. _Black Ecumenism: Implementing the Demands of Justice_. Valley

Forge, PA: Trinity Press International, 1994.

Sernett, Milton C., ed. _Afro-American Religious History: A Documentary
History_.

Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1985.

Sernett, Milton, _Bound for the Promised Land: African-American Religion and_
_the Great Migration_. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1997.

_

Library Reserves_

Several assigned readings have been placed on reserve on the reserve shelf at
the CTS Library. These readings are indicated in the course calendar and
should be considered required reading for the class.



_

Course Requirements_:

_

    1. Midterm Examination_: An in-class exam is scheduled for Oct. 21. The midterm exam will comprise 40% of the final grade.

> > 2\. _Biographical/Theological Profile_ : Each student will be responsible
for a 10-page biographical/theological profile of an African-American
Methodist figure. The profile will make up 20% of the final grade.

>>

>> 3\. _Final Project_ : Each student will complete a 20-25-page research
paper on a selected aspect of African-American Methodism in the twentieth
century. The final project is due by Friday, Dec. 17 of Exam Week. The final
project is worth 40% of the final grade.

_

Course Calendar_:

Week 1

Sept. 2 Introduction to Seminar

> > > >     1. Overview of African-American Methodist Bodies

>>>>     2. Description of AfricanAmerican Methodism

>>>>     3. The "Problem" of African-American Methodism

Reading: C. Eric Lincoln and Lawrence Mamiya, _The Black Church_ _in the
African-American Experience_ , chapter 3 (reserve).

Week 2

Sept. 9 Africans in the Early Wesleyan Movement

> > Reading: Campbell, _Methodist Doctrines_ , John Wesley, _Thoughts Upon
Slavery_ in _The Works of Wesley_ , XI: 59-79(reserve).

Week 3

Sept. 16 African-American Methodists in the Antebellum North

Reading: Sernett, _Afro-American Religious History_ , 135-79, 213-26; Will
Gravely, "African Methodisms and the Rise of Black

Denominationalism," in _Perspectives on American Methodism_ , 108-126
(reserve).

Week 4

Sept. 23 African-American Methodists in the Antebellum South

Reading: Sernett, _Afro-American Religious History_ , 69-75, 100-109.

Week 5

Sept. 30 African-American Methodists in War and Freedom

Reading: Hildebrand, _The Times Were Strange and Stirring_ ;

Sernett, _Afro-American Religious History_ , 229-38, 244-52, 260-66.

Week 6

Oct. 7 The Origins of African-American Methodist Ecumenism

Reading: Sawyer, _Black Ecumenism_ , introduction and chapter 1;

Sernett, _Afro-American Religious History_ , 296-308; Dennis Dickerson, "Black
Ecumenism:Efforts to Establish a United Methodist Episcopal Church, 1918-1932"
(reserve).

Week 7

Oct. 14 African-American Methodists and the Great Migration

Reading: Sernett, _Bound for the Promised Land_.

Week 8

Oct. 21 Midterm Exam

African-Americans in the Methodist Church: The Central Jurisdiction and the
Emergence of a United Methodism

Reading, Grant S. Shockley, ed. _Heritage and Hope: The African_ _Presence in
United Methodism_ , chapters 2-5 (reserve).

Week 9

Oct. 28 African-American Methodists and the Civil Rights Movement

Reading: Sawyer, _Black Ecumenism_ , chapter 2;



Nov. 3-5 Focus on Ministry Seminars (no class)

Week 10

Nov. 11 African-American Methodist and Twentieth-Century Ecumenism

Reading: Saywer, _Black Ecumenism_ , chapters 4, 5, 6 and 8.

Week 11

Nov. 18 Models of Ministry among African-American Methodists

Reading: Sawyer, _Black Ecumenism_ , chapter 7; Jon Michael Spencer, _Black
Hymnody_ , chapters 1-3 (reserve); Nile Harper et. al.,

_Urban Churches, Vital Signs_ , 30-41, 101-109, 223-34.

Nov. 22-26 Reading Week and Thanksgiving Holdiay

Week 12

Dec. 2 African-American Methodist Theologies

Reading: Sawyer, Sernett, _Afro-American Religious History_ ,

465-88, Sawyer, _Black Ecumenism_ , chapter 3; James Cone and Gayraud Wilmore,
_Black Theology: A Documentary_

_History_ , vol. 2, chapters 6, 12, 16, and 20.

Week 13

Dec. 9 The Future of African-American Methodism

A. Roundtable Discussion

Week 14

Nov. 13-17 Exam Week

Final Project Due on Friday, Nov. 17





 **  
---  
  
---

