Autumn 1999
Professor Verta Taylor  
Wednesdays 3:30 - 6:18
Office:  320 Bricker Hall  
385 Bricker Hall
Phone:  292-0320 or 292- 6681  
Office Hours: Wednesday 1:30 - 3:00 and by appointment

**Sociology 704:   Qualitative Research Methods**

_Course Objectives_

This course provides an overview of qualitative approaches to social research.
It is structured as a research practicum with three objectives.  The first is
to examine the various paradigms and approaches for doing qualitative
research.  The second and major emphasis of the course is to introduce you to
the most commonly used techniques for collecting and analyzing qualitative
data:  participant observation, interviewing, and documentary or textual
analysis.  Students will gain experience using these qualitative strategies
through conducting a mini-research project.  Members of the class interested
in pursuing a qualitative project for the M.A. thesis are encouraged to use
this course as an opportunity to begin your research.  Third, the course
concludes by considering procedures for the analysis of qualitative data,
issues pertaining to reliability and validity, and different strategies for
the presentation of qualitative research.

_Required Texts_

Bruce L. Berg.  1998.  (Third Edition).  Qualitative Research Methods for the
Social Sciences.  Boston, MA:  Allyn and Bacon.

Ragin, Charles C.  1994.  Constructing Social Research.  Thousand Oaks, CA:
Pine Forge Press.

Packet of readings available at Cop-ez  in the basement of Bricker Hall.

_Requirements for Evaluation_

Student evaluations will be based on the following work and assignments:

l.  Class Participation

First, the nature of the work we will do in this course requires that you
attend class regularly and participate actively in classroom discussions.
There will be few formal lectures.  Rather, the readings will be used as
background for discussion, and students will share their work and discuss
methodological issues raised by their field assignments.  Students will be
assigned a grade for class participation.  It will not be possible to earn an
"A" without meaningful participation in classroom discussion.

Second, beginning with our second session, you will bring to class and hand in
at least two discussion questions each week as part of your participation
grade.  These questions can address a methodological ambiguity, a conceptual
contradiction, an ethics concern, a challenge to an author's stated
perspective, or some other issue of interest to you.

Third, each of you will present one of the required readings to the class.
(However, as with all graduate courses, you are expected to have read all of
the required readings.)  The presentation should be 15-20 minutes long and
should address the following questions:  What is the author's main
contribution?  How does s/he make it (i.e., using what data and/or emphasizing
what issues)?  What are the central conclusions?  How do these conclusions
relate to other course readings?  How do they relate to your individual
projects?  What are 2-3 questions for class discussion?

2.  Short Paper Comparing Qualitative and Quantitative Research 

Select a journal article or book illustrating qualitative research and a
second article or book illustrating quantitative research.  Write a short (3 -
4 page) paper in which you identify and discuss similarities and differences
in the methodologies and presentation styles of these two pieces of research.
How are they alike or different, specifically in terms of issues such as
problem formation, conceptualization, measurement, sampling, strategies and
procedures of data collection, analysis, and theorizing? Why and how are these
approaches appropriate for the problems studied?  In what ways do these
studies raise the issues of validity and reliability?  And how do they
illustrate the paradigm differences and issues discussed in the readings?
This paper is due on October 13.

3.  Student Mini-Projects 

Each student will complete a qualitative mini-research project using at least
one of the major qualitative techniques.  You may chose either the method of
participant observation or intensive interviewing.  Students also have the
option of using more than one technique where appropriate.

 Participant Observation Option.  For an observational study, you should
observe three different times for about 1 and 1/2 to 2 hours each.  Select a
setting and explore possible entre.  Get a feel for the situation, observe
what is going on, talk with participants, and check out your impressions with
them and through repeated observations,  Keep field notes and turn them in as
a appendix to your final paper.

 Intensive Interview Option.  For an interview study, develop an appropriate
interview guide and try it out on another student.  Then set up and conduct
three interviews, using both a tape recorder and handwritten notes.  Revise
your interview guide as needed following each interview and explain the
reasons for your modifications.  Transcribe one of your tape-recorded
interviews.

Students may also collaborate on their projects, but must check with the
instructor first.

The project will involve several steps.

Step l:  Submit a one paragraph statement of the topic and setting for your
study on October 20.

Step 2:  Do a very brief literature review to determine who else has studied
this phenomenon or something similar.  Note especially the theoretical
standpoints and conceptualizations used by others, major findings, and any
gaps or inconsistencies in existing knowledge about the topic.  Describe how
your research project draws from and informs this literature.

Step 3:  Collect your data.

Step 4: Keep ongoing notes of your field experiences, reflections,
impressions, questions, descriptions, observations, and personal reactions.

Step 5:  Make a brief (15 minute) presentation to the class describing
progress on your mini-research project.  You should approach this presentation
as if you were delivering it in a regular paper session of an academic
conference.  There are several questions the presentation should address.
What is your central research question?  Why is it worth answering?  What
method(s) are you using to answer it?  Why that method?  What problems have
you encountered in the field?  How did you overcome them?  What preliminary
findings have you made?  What preliminary conclusions can you provide?

Step 6:  Write up your paper.  The final paper should summarize the
procedures, problems, and successes of your field work and should emphasize
the research methodology.  Substantive observations and findings should be
noted primarily to the extent that they are relevant to the methodology.  Make
certain to incorporate course readings in your analysis by framing your paper
to address issues and debates in the literature on qualitative research
methods.

The first half of the paper should focus on describing the problem,
summarizing the existing literature on the subject, describing the data, and
presenting and analyzing your preliminary findings.  The second half of the
paper should be a critical discussion of the methods used, any problems, you
encountered and how you managed them, and what you have learned about field
work and qualitative research.  Make certain to use the course readings to
frame this discussion.

The paper will be evaluated on the basis of its clarity, organization,
understanding of the readings and class discussion, and what you have learned
from the experience.  Reports of mistakes, errors in judgement, failures, etc.
will NOT result in a poor evaluation.  Where these occur, make certain to
suggest what you might do differently the next time.

You are encouraged to discuss your work with other students, and you may
choose to collaborate in gathering data for this project.  However, each
student should complete the final paper individually.  The paper to be handed
in should not exceed 18 double-spaced pages and is due on Monday, December 6.  


_Criteria for Evaluation_

Final grades will be based on the following:

Class participation                   10  
Review of qualitative research  10  
Presentation on Mini-Projects  20  
Paper on Mini-Projects           60  
                                              100 

_Incomplete Grades_

Incompletes are discouraged and will be allowed only as a result of illnesses
and emergencies.  When possible, requests for incompletes should be made in
writing before the last regularly scheduled class meeting.  Students with
incompletes should turn in their papers at least 10 days prior to the date on
which the final grade must be submitted during the following quarter.  


_Disabilities Policy_

This syllabus is available in alternative formats upon request to students
with disabilities.  Please contact Ms. Dianne Del Bianco, Academic Advisor in
Sociology and Criminology, 302 Bricker Hall, 292-2056.   Students with
disabilities are responsible for making their needs known to the instructor
and seeking available assistance in a timely manner.  


**CLASS SCHEDULE**  


Week  Date  Topic

1   9-22  INTRODUCTION TO QUALITATIVE RESEARCH

2  9-29  DIFFERENT TRADITIONS IN QUALITATIVE RESEARCH

    1\. Ragin, chapters 1, 2, 3, and 4   
    2\. Denzin and Lincoln, "Entering the Field of Qualitative Research"   
    3\. Reinharz, "The Ritual of Survey Empiricism"   
    4\. Grant and Fine, "Sociology Unleashed: Creative Directions in   
        Classical Ethnography"   
    5\. Guba and Lincoln, "Competing Paradigms in Qualitative Research"   
    6\. Stacey, "Can There Be A Feminist Ethnography?"   
    7\. Taylor, "Feminist Methodology in Social Movements Research" 

3  10-6  FIELD WORK, ENTRE, ETHICS, AND ROLE DILEMMAS

    1\. Berg, Chapters 1, 2, and 3   
    2\. Thorne, "Political Activist as Participant Observer"   
    3\. Thorne, "You Still Taking' Notes?"   
    4\. Williams & Hiekes,"The Importance of Gender in the In-Depth      Interview"   
    5\. Mitchell, "Secrecy and Disclosure in Fieldwork"   
    6\. Adler and Adler, "Stability and Flexibility"   
    7\. Blee, "White-Knuckle Research: Emotional Dynamics in Field   
     Work with Racist Activists." 

4  10-13  PARTICIPANT OBSERVATION

    1\. Berg, Chapter 6   
    2\. Boelen, "Street Corner Society:  Cornerville Revisited"   
    3\. Whyte, "In Defense of Street Corner Society"   
    4\. Ragin, "Cases of 'What is a Case?'" 

  SHORT PAPER DUE:  QUALITATIVE & QUANTITATIVE METHODS

5  10-20  INTERVIEWING

    1\. Berg, Chapters 4, 5, and 9   
    2\. Tremblay, "The Key Informant Technique"   
    3\. Oakley, "Interviewing Women"   
    4\. DeVault, "Ethnicity and Expertise: Racial-Ethnic Knowledge in   
       Sociological Research." 

  TOPIC FOR MINI-PROJECT DUE

6  10-27  NO CLASS: RESEARCH DAY

7  11-3  USING AND INTERPRETING DOCUMENTS  
    
    1\. Berg, Chapters 8 and 11   
    2\. Ragin, Chapter 4   
    3\. Denzin, "The Interpretive Process"   
    
8  11-10  ORGANIZING AND ANALYZING DATA  
    A.  USING COMPUTERS   
    B.  RELIABILITY AND VALIDITY   
    C.  WRITING RESULTS 

    1\. Dohan and Sanchez-Jankowski, "Using Computers to Analyze   
        Ethnographic Field Data"   
    2\. Burawoy, Chapters 1 and 2 from Ethnography Unbound   
    3\. Taylor and Rupp, "We Make Our Own History, But Not Just as We Please"   
    4\. Krieger, "Beyond Subjectivity"   
    5\. Strauss and Corbin, "Grounded Theory Methodology"   
    6\. Charmaz, "The Grounded Theory Method"   
    7\. Berg, Chapter 12   
    8\. Morse, "Designing Funded Qualitative Research" 

9  11-17  STUDENT PRESENTATIONS

10  11-24  STUDENT PRESENTATIONS

11  12-1  STUDENT PRESENTATIONS

Monday 12-6  FINAL RESEARCH PAPER DUE AT 5:00 PM  


