![](/~core/images/shield.gif)|

![Core Curriculum](/~core/images/core-curriculum-mr.gif)  
  
---|---  
  
[Core Home](/~core/index.html)  
[Announcements](/~core/announce.html)(7/29/02)  
  
[Core Curriculum Guide for students who entered between September 1999 and
September 2002](/~core/redbook.html)  
  
[7-Course Core Requirement Form](/~core/7course_form.html)  
  
[Core Curriculum Guide for students who enter in September 2002 and
thereafter](/~core/redbook_2002.html)  
  
_Areas_  
  [Foreign Cultures](/~core/areas/01-02/fc/index.html)  
  [Historical Studies](/~core/areas/01-02/hs/index.html)  
  [Literature & Arts](/~core/areas/01-02/la/index.html)  
  [Moral Reasoning](/~core/areas/01-02/mr/index.html)  
  [Quantitative Reasoning](/~core/areas/01-02/qr/index.html)  
  [Science](/~core/areas/01-02/sci/index.html)  
  [Social Analysis](/~core/areas/01-02/sa/index.html)  

(C) 2000, President and Fellows  
of Harvard University

|  

[[Description](/~core/descriptions/00-01/mr/index.html#mr54)] [[Course
Site](/~mr54/)]

## Moral Reasoning 54  
Theism and Moral Reasoning

### Jay Harris

**Moral Reasoning 54:   "If There Is No God, All is Permitted:" Theism and
Moral Reasoning**

Jay Harris,  6 Divinity Ave.
495-0829

For centuries Jewish, Christian (and Muslim) thinkers have asserted that moral
judgment is impossible without some concept of the deity. So convincing were
they that one important Russian author of the nineteenth century was led to
exclaim, "if there is no God, all is permitted." In more recent times some
thinkers have challenged this assumption, and insisted that removing (or
reducing) the role of God is indispensable to proper moral discourse. This
course will examine the ways in which a concept of God has informed Western
moral discourse, trying to help students engage the literature as they
confront the basic question, why might one think "if there is no God, all is
permitted?" and why might one think if there _is_ a God human moral
achievement is impossible.

Belief in God and denial of God's existence have each figured prominently in
Western moral discourse. Arguments have been advanced that: autonomous human
reasoning is incapable of arriving at moral truths without a supreme principle
to ground the system (which is sometimes invested with "personality" and  and
called God); that autonomous human reasoning can have no impact on moral
behavior due to human failure that only God can "correct"; that autonomous
moral reasoning is impossible, and morality can only be understood as the
submission to the will of a superior moral being; that a concept of God is
necessary to direct and regulate moral reasoning, but the actual confessional
versions of theism are metaphysically implausible or impossible; that
autonomous human moral reasoning is impossible _with_ God, and thus only
a-theism can lead to moral conclusions. This course will engage all these
different themes.

The following books should be available at the Coop:

Fyodor Dostoevsky, _The Grand Inquisitor_

Plato, _Five Dialogues_

Soren Kierkegaard, _  Fear and Trembling_

Plato, _  The Republic_

Augustine, _Confessions_

Augustine, _On Free Choice of the Will_

Isadore Twersky, ed., _A Maimonides Reader_

Thomas Aquinas, _On Law, Morality and Politics_

David Hume, _The Natural History of Religion_

David Hume, _Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals_

Immanuel Kant, _Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals_

Immanuel Kant, _Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone          _

Lucretius, _The Nature of Things_

Ludwig Feuerbach, _The Essence of Christianity_

Friedrich Nietzsche, _Genealogy of Morals_

Martin Buber, _I and Thou_

Mary Daly, _Beyond God the Father_

  

Topics and Assignments:

Jan. 31 **  Introduction**\--The historical manifestations of theism

**Topic: The Problem**

Feb. 5 Dostoevsky, _The Grand Inquisitor_ (= _The Brothers Karamazov_ , book
5, chapters 3-5, book 6)

Feb. 7 Plato, _Euthyphro     _in _Five Dialogues_ pp. 6-22.

**Topic: Can God be beyond morality? or, God as the morally inscrutable.**

Feb. 12 Bible, Genesis, chapters 18-22,

Feb. 14 Bible, Job, chapters 1-10,  32-42

**Topic: God as the ground of moral reasoning**

Feb. 21 Plato, _The Republic_ books 6-9

Feb. 26 Augustine, _Confessions_ , books 1, 7, 10, 13

Feb. 28 Augustine, _On Free Choice of the Will_

March 5   _A Maimonides Reader_ , pp. 361-386.

March 7 _  A Maimonides Reader_, pp. 246-274; 291-296; 299-310;  349-358.

March 12 Aquinas, _Aquinas on Law, Morality and Politics,_ pp. 1-55

March 14 Aquinas, pp. 56-114

**Topic: God as the creator of the conditions necessary to translate moral
reasoning into practice**

March 19 Bible, Genesis 3-11, Exodus 20-23,  Deuteronomy 4-6, 8, Psalm 119

March 21 Bible, I Thessalonians, I Corinthians, Romans (New Testament)

**Topic: The irrelevance of God to autonomous moral reasoning**

April 2  Hume, _The Natural History of Religion_

April 4 Hume, _A Inquiry Concerning the Principles of   Morals_, pp. 13-51
(chapters 1-5)

**Topic: God as regulative idea**

April 11  Kant, _Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals_ , chapters (or
sections) 1 & 2

April 13 FRIDAY, Kant, _Grounding,_ chapter (or section) 3

  _Critique of Practical Reason_ , pp. vii-xix, 113-140 (on reserve)

April 16  Kant, _  Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone _ 15-39, 50-72,
79-105

**Topic: Is God Compatible With Kantian Ethics?**

April 18 Kierkegaard, _  Fear and Trembling_ pp. 5-81

**Topic: A-theistic moral reasoning**

April 20 FRIDAY Lucretius, _The Nature of Things_ , books 1 and 3.

April 23 Feuerbach, _The Essence of Christianity_ , pp. 1-49, 185-203, 247-269

April 25 Nietzsche, _Genealogy of Morals_ , first two essays

April 27 FRIDAY Nietzsche, _Genealogy_ , third essay

**Topic: The recovery of God**

April 30  Buber, _I and Thou_ (focus especially on part 3)

**Topic: A Feminist View**

May  2   Mary Daly _, Beyond God the Father_ , chapters 1-4.

Students will be asked to write three short papers (6-8 pp., due March 5,
April 4, and May 4) designed to be critical  evaluations of specific works,
focusing on their strengths and weaknesses as moral arguments, and take a
final exam. The final will be 30% of the final grade, and each paper 20%.
Section performance will account for the remaining 10%.

There will be weekly sections, which will be devoted to a selected short text
that will lead to discussion of the specific theme being addressed in a given
segment of the course, or that provides important challenges to such
positions.

My office hours are M,W 10:30-11:30. I am available by appointment on Tuesdays
as well. Justin Cammy will be the Head Teaching Fellow for the course;  he can
be reached at 493-3131, jcammy@fas.



