POLITICS 305 R MODERN POLITICAL THEORY

Fall 2001 Sammy Basu

1:40-2:40 sbasu@willamette.edu

Smullin 314 Smullin 322

www.willamette.edu/~sbasu/poli305/ 503.370.6264



COURSE SUMMARY

This course examines selected modern political theorists. Emphasis is placed
upon evaluating the assumptions, cogency, and contemporary relevance of their
respective philosophical systems or 'isms'. Topics to be addressed include
human nature, ethical judgement, and the purposes of politics.



COURSE OBJECTIVES

In addressing the above subject-matter, the objectives of this course include
improving the student's abilities to:

think: "Man is only a reed, the weakest thing in nature; but he is a thinking
reed."

m Blaise Pascal (1623-1662), Pensees (1670, vi.347).

read: "Read not to contradict and confute, nor to believe and take for
granted, nor to find talk and discourse, but to weigh and consider."

m Francis Bacon (1561-1626), 'Of Studies,' Essays, (1597).

write: "Then, rising with Aurora's light,

The Muse invoked, sit down to write;

Blot out, correct, insert, refine,

Enlarge, diminish, interline."

m Jonathan Swift (1667-1745), On Poetry (1733, I.85).

speak: "'The time has come,' the Walrus said, 'To talk of many things:

Of shoes -- and ships -- and sealing wax -- Of cabbages -- and Kings --

And why the sea is boiling hot -- And whether pigs have wings.'"

m Lewis Carroll (1832-1898), Through the Looking Glass (1872)



research: "Know then thyself, presume not God to scan,

The proper study of mankind is man,

Plac'd on this isthmus of a middle state,

A being darkly wise, and rudely great:

With too much knowledge for the sceptic side,

With too much weakness for the stoic's pride,

He hangs between: in doubt to act or rest,

In doubt his mind or body to prefer;

Born but to die, and reas'ning but to err;

Alike in ignorance, his reason such,

Whether he thinks too little or too much."

m Alexander Pope (1688-1744), An Essay on Man (1733, Epistle, ii.1.1).

COURSE EVALUATION CRITERIA



All four components of this course must be passed in order to complete the
course:

(1) Regular participation in class discussions (30%) - to allow you to engage
with the readings, and one another. You should complete assigned reading
before the class. In addition to general participation, you will be assigned
responsibility for leading class discussion on readings on a rotating basis
throughout the semester.

(2) Essay paper (30%) - to enable you to write a research paper involving a
modern political theorist, concept, or issue of your own choosing. 20-25 pages
in length.

(3) Mid-term Examination (20%) - to test your understanding of crucial themes
and differences between various modern political theorists.

(4) Final Examination (20%) - to test your understanding of crucial themes and
differences between various modern political theorists.



**REQUIRED COURSE READINGS**

It is important that the student complete the assigned reading and take the
time to reflect on the meaning of the reading before coming to class. The
required texts listed below are available for purchase at the WU Bookstore.
Copies of the additional required readings will be available on reserve at the
circulation desk of the Hatfield Library.

Immanuel Kant. 1991. Political Writings. Second Edition. New York: Cambridge
UP.

Mary Wollstonecraft. 1988. A Vindication of the Rights of Woman. New York: WW
Norton.

Georg W F Hegel. 1991. Elements of the Philosophy of Right. New York:
Cambridge UP.

Karl Marx. 1994. Early Political Writings. New York: Cambridge UP.

Friedrich Nietzsche. 1994. On the Genealogy of Morals. New York: Cambridge UP.



RECOMMENDED COURSE READING

David Held. (ed.) 1991. Political Theory Today. Stanford: Stanford UP.



COURSE SCHEDULE

Day Date Topic

Wed 8/29 Introduction

Fri 8/31 Modern Political Theory and Isms

Read: David Held. 1991. "Editor's Introduction," in Political Theory Today.
Pp.1-21

Mon 9/3 Holiday: Classes Do Not Meet

Wed 9/5 Modern Political Theory and Isms

Read: David Held. 1991. "Editor's Introduction," in Political Theory Today.
Pp.1-21



[ 1 ] IMMANUEL KANT (1724-1804) R COSMOPOLITANISM

Political Writings.

Recommended Reading

Hans Reiss, 1991. "Introduction," in Writings, 1-40.

Wolfgang Kersting. 1992. "Politics, freedom, and order: Kant's political
philosophy," in The Cambridge Companion to Kant. Ed. Paul Guyer. New York:
Cambridge UP, 342-66.



Fri 9/7 Kant and the History of Cosmopolitanism

Mon 9/10 Being Presumptuous

Read:

"Idea for a Universal History," pp. 41-53.

"What is Enlightenment," pp. 54-60.

"On the Common Saying," pp. 73-92.

Wed 9/12 Peace-Making

Read:

"Perpetual Peace," pp. 93-130.

Fri 9/14 Sovereignty and International Community

Read:

"The Metaphysics of Morals," pp. 131-175.



The Contemporary Debate

Mon 9/17 Read:

Onora O'Neill. 1991. "Transnational Justice," in Political Theory Today. pp.
276-304.

Christopher Kayne. 1994. "Kant or Cant: The Myth of Democratic Peace."
International Security, 19, 2.

Wed 9/19 Read:

Robert E. Goodin. 1985. "Foreign Assistance," in Protecting the Vulnerable.
Chicago: U of Chicago P, pp. 154-69.

David Miller. 1988. "The Ethical Significance of Nationality," Ethics, 98, pp.
647-62.

Due Self-evaluation of Participation



[ 2 ] MARY WOLLSTONECRAFT (1759-1797) R FEMINISM

A Vindication of the Rights of Woman.

Recommended Reading

Carolyn W. Korsmeyer. 1988. "Reason and Morals in the early Feminist Movement:
Mary Wollstonecraft," in Vindication, 285-97.

Elissa S. Guralnick. 1988. "Radical Politics in Mary Wollstonecraft's A
Vindication of the Rights of Woman," in Vindication, 308-17.

Fri 9/21 Wollstonecraft and the History of Feminism

Mon 9/24 Feeling Inferior

Read:

"Introduction," pp. 3-11.

"The Rights and Involved Duties," pp. 11-19.

"Observations," pp. 50-77.

Skim:

"The Prevailing Opinion," pp. 19-49.

"Animadversions," pp. 77-115.

Wed 9/26 Morality and Demoralization

Read:

"The Effect," pp. 115-120.

"Modesty," pp. 121-30.

"Morality undermined," pp. 131-139.

"Of the Pernicious Effects," pp. 140-49.

Fri 9/28 Talking about Revolution

Read:

"Parental Affection," pp. 150-2.

"Duty to Parents," pp. 152-7.

"On National Education," pp. 157-78.

"Some Instances," pp. 178-194.

The Contemporary Debate

Mon 10/1 Read:

Susan Moller Okin. "Gender, the Public and the Private." 1991. in Political
Theory Today. pp. 67-90.

Allan Bloom. 1987. The Closing of the American Mind. New York: Simon and
Schuster, pp. 97-137.

Wed 10/3 Read:

Iris Marion Young. 1993. "Impartiality and the Civic Public: Some

Implications of Feminist Critiques of Moral and Political Theory." In
Paradigms in Political Theory, (Ed.) Steven Jay Gold. Ames: Iowa State UP, pp.
139-62.

Pauline Johnson. 1994. Feminism as radical humanism. Boulder: Westview, pp.
1-24.



[ 3 ] GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH HEGEL (1770-1831) R COMMUNITARIANISM

Elements of the Philosophy of Right.

Recommended Reading

Allen W. Wood. 1991. "Editor's Introduction," in Elements, vii-xxx.

Z.A. Pelczynski. 1984. "Political Community and individual freedom in Hegel's
philosophy of state," in The State and Civil Society. Ed. Z.A. Pelczynski. New
York: Cambridge UP, 55-76.



Fri 10/5 Hegel and the History of Communitarianism

Mon 10/8 Individuality

Read:

"Introduction," "Abstract Right," pp. 9-23, 67-80, 102-6, 135-42, 185-6.

Wed 10/10 Civil Society

Read:

"Ethical Life," pp. 189-200, 219-26, 250-73.

Fri 10/12 The State

Read:

"The State," pp. 273-313, 359-71.

The Contemporary Debate

Mon 10/15 Read:

Amitai Etzioni. 1995. "The Responsive Communitarian Platform: Rights and
Responsibilities," in Rights and the Common Good: The Communitarian
Perspective. Ed. Amitai Etzioni. New York: St.Martin's Press, 11-23.

Russel Hardin. 1995. "Contested Community." Society, 32, 5, 23-29.

Wed 10/17 Read:

Ronald Beiner. 1995. "Liberalism: What's Missing." Society, 32, 5, 18-22.

George Kateb. 1989. "Democratic Individuality and the Meaning of

Rights," in Liberalism and the Moral Life. Ed. Nancy L. Rosenblum. Cambridge:
Harvard UP, 183-206.



Due Self-evaluation of Participation

Fri 10/19 Mid-semester day: Classes Do Not Meet

Mon 10/22 MIDTERM EXAM



[ 4 ] KARL MARX (1818-1883) R SOCIALISM

Early Political Writings.

Recommended Reading

Joseph O' Malley, 1994. "Editor's Introduction," in Writings, vii-xxiv.

K. Lowith. 1990. "Man's Self-Alienation in the Early Writings of Marx," in
Karl Marx's Social and Political Thought: Critical Assessments. Eds. Bob
Jessop and Charlie Malcolm-Brown. New York: Routledge, 572-92.

Wed 10/24 Marx and the History of Socialism

Fri 10/26 Demystifying Hegel

Read:

"From the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right," pp. 1-27.

"A Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy," pp. 57-91.

"Critical Marginal Notes on 'The King of Prussia and Social Reform. By a
Prussian," pp. 97-115.

Mon 10/29 Finding Ourselves

Read:

"On the Jewish Question," pp. 28-57.

"From the Paris Notebooks," pp. 71-97.

Wed 10/31 Communism Eventually

Read:

"On Feuerbach," pp. 116-8.

"From the German Ideology," pp. 119-81.



The Contemporary Debate

Fri 11/2 Read:

Michael Harrington. 1986. "What Socialists Would Do in America -- If They
Could," in Essential Works of Socialism. Third Ed. (Ed.,) Irving Howe. New
Haven: Yale UP, 480-503.

Friedrich Hayek. 1944. "Planning and Democracy," and "Economic Control and
Totalitarianism" in The Road to Serfdom. Chicago: U of Chicago Press, pp.
56-71, 88-100.

Mon 11/5 Read:

Steven Lukes. 1991. "Equality and Liberty: Must they Conflict?" in Political
Theory Today. pp. 48-66.

Robert Nozick. 1974. "Distributive Justice," in Anarchy, State, and Utopia,
New York: Basic Books, pp. 149-82.



[ 5 ] FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE (1844-1900) R POSTMODERNISM

On the Genealogy of Morals

Recommended Reading

Keith Ansell-Pearson. 1994. "Editor's Introduction," in Genealogy, ix-xxxvi.

Arthur C. Danto. 1988. "Some Remarks on The Genealogy of Morals," in Reading
Nietzsche. Eds. Robert C. Solomon and Kathleen M. Higgins. New York: Oxford
UP, 13-28.

Wed 11/7 Nietzsche and the History of Postmodernism Masters and Slaves

Fri 11/9 Masters and Slaves

Read:

"Preface," pp. 3-10.

First Essay," pp. 11-37.

"Supplementary Material," pp. 131-41, 155-68.

Mon 11/12 Bad Conscience

Read:

"Second Essay," pp. 38-71.

"Supplementary Material," pp. 142-54, 169-75.

Wed 11/14 The Ascetic Ideal

Read:

"Third Essay," pp. 72-128.

The Contemporary Debate

Fri 11/16 Read:

Michel Foucault. 1984. "Nietzsche, Genealogy, History," pp. 76-100;
"Panopticonism," pp. 206-213; and "On the Genealogy of Ethics: An Overview of
Work in Progress," pp. 351-372, in Foucault Reader. New York: Pantheon.

Sheldon Wolin. 1988. "On the Theory and Practice of Power," in After Foucault.
(Ed.) Jonathan Arc. New Brunswick: Rutgers UP, 179-201.

Mon 11/19 Read:

Jean-Francois Lyotard. 1984. The Postmodern Condition. Minneapolis: U of
Minnesota P, pp. xxiii-xxv, 3-17, 71-82.

Morton G. Wenger. 1994. "Idealism Redux: The Class-Historical Truth of
Postmodernism." Critical Sociology, 20, 53-78.

Wed 11/21

Fri 11/23

Mon 11/26

Wed 11/28

Fri 11/30

Mon 12/3

Wed 12/5 Review

Fri 12/7 Review

Mon 12/10 FINAL EXAM, 2:00-5:00pm

