### History 567  
American Environmental History



American Environmental History will focus on the history of American
ecosystems from last Ice Age to the present. We will study scientific and
historical debates over the causes of environmental change. We will spend some
time on the history of the environmental movement and environmental
philosophy, but our main purpose is to consider the historic impacts of humans
and nonhumans on each other.



**Required Readings** :

  1. William Cronon, _Changes in the Land: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of New England_
  2. William Cronon, _Nature's Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West_
  3. Alfred Crosby, _Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 900-1900_
  4. Andrew Hurley, _Environmental Inequalities: Class, Race, and Industrial Pollution in Gary, Indiana, 1955-1980_
  5. Arthur McEvoy, _The Fisherman's Problem: Ecology and Law in the California Fisheries, 1850-1980_
  6. Donald Worster, _The Dust Bowl: The Southern Plains in the 1930s_
  7. Greyden Press reader (GP) 

The syllabus provides a detailed outline of what we'll cover in the course.
Please refer to it often as you plan your studying. All required texts are
available at the Student Book Exchange.

We will not read all these books in their entirety and all are available on
reserve at the Undergraduate Library. You needn't purchase all of them, if you
can't afford them. Please feel free to share books with classmates or borrow
them from the State Library or the Columbus Metropolitan Library System.



**Examinations**

  * Quizzes: There will be four or five quizzes on the readings in the course. The quizzes will ask you to report fully and accurately on the content of readings in the course. 
  * Midterm and final: There will be a midterm examination and a final examination. The midterm will ask you to write one comprehensive one-hour essay, the final two. 
  * Essay: You will be asked to turn in an interpretive essay (no more than 6-8 pages in length), in which you reflect on a major problem in environmental history. You should devote these essays to an analysis of a particular historical and/or scientific debate. The essays should not be mere book reports, but should reflect your effort to engage, critique, and move beyond the ideas of particular authors as you strive to integrate their work into the larger framework of the course.

Please think seriously and creatively about the content of these essays, and
write them as well as you know how. They will be evaluated for the quality and
concision of their prose as well as for the breadth and depth of their
thought. That said, try to have fun with the essays: they're your chance to
play with the ideas in the course and to test out different ways of looking at
this complicated material.

(If you would like to replace the essay with a short research paper, you are
welcome to do so provided you make prior arrangements with me by no later than
the fifth week of the quarter.)

Be forewarned that late essays will be marked down by at least one-third of a
grade unless other arrangements are made well prior to the due date. No essay
will be accepted after the final exam. Your grade will be determined as
follows:

    
    
    Quizzes                          20%
    Midterm                          15%
    Final                            25%
    Essay                            25%
    Discussion and attendance        15%
    



**Schedule of Readings and Discussions**

**Week 1 -- Introduction**

    
    
    What Is Environmental History?
    Conversing with the Earth
    
    William Cronon, "A Place for Stories:  Nature, History, and Narrative,"
       _Journal of American History_ , 78 (1992), 1347-76 (GP)
    



**Week 2 -- European Invasion**

    
    
    Migration, Disease, and Death
    Co-invasion
    Selling Animals
    
    Crosby, _Ecological Imperialism_
    Russell W. Graham and Ernest L. Ludelius, Jr., "Coevolutionary Equilibrium
       and Pleistocene Extinctions," in Paul S. Martin and Richard G. Klein,
       eds., _Quaternary Extinctions_ (1984), 223-49.  (GP)
    



**Week 3 -- Native American Ecology**

    
    
    The World that Coyote and Raven Made
    Fishers, Hunters, Gatherers, and Farmers
    
    McEvoy, _Fisherman's Problem_ , 19-40
    Dan Flores, "Bison Ecology and Bison Diplomacy:  The Southern Plains from 1800
       to 1850," _Journal of American History_ (1991).  (GP)
    



**Week 3 (cont.) -- European Settlement**

    
    
    A World of Fields and Fences
    The Machine in the Garden:  Agricultural Revolutions
    
    Cronon, _Changes in the Land_
    



**Week 4 -- Developing a New Nation**

    
    
    Nature and Civilization
    Cultivation and Exploitation
    
    Cronon, _Nature's Metropolis_ , xiii-206
    Hazel R. Delacourt and Paul A. Delacourt, _Quaternary Ecology:  A
       Paleoecological Perspective_ (1991), 154-161. (GP)
    



**Week 5 -- An Urban, Industrial Destiny**

    
    
    Improving Nature
    Developing the Midwest
    
    Cronon, _Nature's Metropolis_ , 207-390
    



**Week 6 -- The Contradictions of Progressive Conservation**

_MIDTERM EXAMINATION_ , Monday, February 10

    
    
    The Conservation Vision
    Planning Against Disaster
    
    Reading to be announced.
    



**Week 7 -- Environmental Disaster**

    
    
    Settling the Great Plains
    The Dust Bowl
    
    Worster, _Dust Bowl_
    V. T. Holliday, "Middle Holocene Drought on the Southern High Plains,"
       _Quaternary Research_ (1989).  (GP)
    J. E. Weaver, "Replacement of True Prairie by Mixed Prairie in Eastern
       Nebraska and Kansas," _Ecology_ (1943).  (GP)
    



**Week 8 -- Ecology and Resource Management**

    
    
    Managing the Environment
    Conserving Resources
    
    McEvoy, _The Fisherman's Problem_
    



**Week 9 -- Environmental Decades: The Perils of Success**

_PAPER DUE_ , Monday, March 3

    
    
    Urban Pollution
    Redefining Risk:  NEPA and the Rise of Environmental Law
    Energy Crisis
    
    Hurley, _Environmental Inequalities_
    



**Week 10 -- Environmental Politics in the Reagan/Bush/Clinton Era**

    
    
    Toxic Torts
    Backlash:  Environmental Politics in the 1980's
    Scale Shift:  The Prospect of Global Change
    Taking Heart from Planetary Peril:  Our Common Future
    
    Terence Kehoe, "Merchants of Pollution?  The Soap and Detergent Industry
       and the Fight to Restore Great Lakes Water Quality, 1965-1972,"
       _Environmental History Review_ (1992).
    



**_FINAL EXAMINATION_** , Wednesday, March 19, 7:30-9:30am

