# **24.601 TOPICS IN MORAL PHILOSOPHY**

FALL 1997

Instructor: Ralph Wedgwood  
Office: E39-315  
3-4453  
wedgwood@mit.edu

Tuesdays, 2-5 pm, 24-112

This graduate seminar will focus on Kant's practical philosophy. We will aim
to cover a large amount of Kant's philosophy in some detail, including the
basis of his whole critical philosophy in his general metaphysics of the human
person, the various aspects of his moral philosophy, his political philosophy,
his philosophy of religion, and his philosophy of history.

We will pursue two principal aims: first, we will attempt to develop the most
accurate interpretation of Kant's view, on the basis of an extensive, careful
study of the texts; second, we will attempt to assess Kant's views, to see how
plausible they are, and what can be learned from them. In pursuing these aims,
we will also look at some recent scholarly works on Kant, examining both their
interpretations of Kant's views, and their evaluations of them.

I have ordered a number of Kant's works for the bookstore, all of which are
strongly recommended.

  1. _Critique of Pure Reason_ , tr. Norman Kemp Smith (Macmillan, St Martin's Press) 
  2. _Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals_ , tr. Lewis White Beck (MacMillan, Library of Liberal Arts) 
  3. _Critique of Practical Reason_ , tr. Lewis White Beck (MacMillan, Library of Liberal Arts) 
  4. _Kant: Political Writings_ , ed. Hans Reiss, tr. H.B. Nisbett (Cambridge University Press) 
  5. _The Metaphysics of Morals_ , tr. Mary J. Gregor (Cambridge University Press) 
  6. _Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone_ , tr. T.M. Grene and H.H. Hudson (Harper & Row)

You may use other translations if you wish. For example, instead of 2., you
may use _Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals_ , tr. H.J. Paton (Harper &
Row). Or, instead of 2. and 5., you could use James Ellington, _Immanuel Kant:
Ethical Philosophy_ (Hackett), which contains the _Groundwork_ and certain
parts of _The Metaphysics of Morals_ (the other important parts of _The
Metaphysics of Morals_ are in Reiss, _Kant: Political Writings_ ).

Work assignments:

  1. An in-class report, to be scheduled. 
  2. A term paper (15-20 pages or so), due after Thanksgiving break. 
  3. A revised version of the same paper, due at the end of the semester. 

## **Reading: Works of Kant**

All English translations of Kant published since Norman Kemp Smith's 1929
translation of the _Critique of Pure Reason_ are tolerably accurate. None is
ideal. You may use whatever translation you want. (For Kant's practical
philosophy, the best would be the new volume in the Cambridge Edition of the
Works of Immanuel Kant, _Practical Philosophy_ , ed. Allen Wood, tr. Mary
Gregor (Cambridge University Press, 1996), if only it did not have quite so
many misprints.)

We will be paying at least some attention to all of the following main works
of Kant:

  * 1781: _Critique of Pure Reason_ , 1st (A) edition 
  * 1785: _Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals_
  * 1787: _Critique of Pure Reason_ , 2nd (B) edition 
  * 1788: _Critique of Practical Reason_
  * 1790: _Critique of Judgment_
  * 1793: _Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone_
  * 1797: _Metaphysics of Morals_ 

In addition, we will be looking at some of his useful shorter writings:

  * 1784: "Idea for a Universal History from a Cosmopolitan Point of View" 
  * 1784: "What is Enlightenment?" 
  * 1793: "On the common saying: That may be correct in theory, but it is of no use in practice" 
  * 1795: "Towards Perpetual Peace" 

These shorter writings are collected together in a couple of volumes: both in
Lewis White Beck, ed., _Kant On History_ (Library of Liberal Arts, 1956), and
in Hans Reiss, ed., _Kant: Political Writings_ (2nd edition, Cambridge
University Press, 1991). There are also some useful points in Kant's _Lectures
on Ethics_ of 1775-80, which are translated by Louis Infield (Hackett, 1980).

We will also be looking briefly at Kant's most famous target:

  * 1748: David Hume, _Treatise of Human Nature_

Other important works that influenced Kant include Jean-Jacques Rousseau, _The
Social Contract_ and _Discourse on the Origins of Inequality_ , and the works
of other British moralists besides Hume, especially Hobbes, Shaftesbury,
Hutcheson, and Adam Smith (Kant reveals no knowledge of the works of Butler or
Price).

Useful volumes here are: D.D. Raphael, _The British Moralists: 1650-1800_ ,
two volumes (Oxford University Press, 1969; reprinted Hackett, 1991); J.J.
Rouseau, _The Basic Political Writings_ , trans. Donald Cress (Hackett, 1987);
and Jerome B. Schneewind, _Moral Philosophy from Montaigne to Kant_ , 2 vols.
(Cambridge University Press, 1990).

## **Schedule of Topics and Reading**

References to the _Lectures on Ethics_ are to the translation by Louis Infield
(Hackett).

All other references to Kant's works are to the page numbers of the original
German edition published in Kant's lifetime. Where there were two different
original editions, these are distinguished by the prefixes "A" and "B".

Except for the _Critique of Pure Reason_ , I also give references to the
volume and page numbers of the edition of Kant's collected works edited by the
Royal Prussian (later German) Academy of Sciences (Berlin: Georg Reimer, later
Walter de Gruyter & Co., 1900- ). This edition is generally known as the
_Akademie-Ausgabe_ ; these references are distinguished by the prefix "Ak".

Almost all editions and translations of Kant give the pagination of either the
_Akademie-Ausgabe_ or the original editions in the margins.

Readings marked with an asterisk (*) are especially important.

  1. The _Critique of Pure Reason_ : the idea of the critical philosophy; a priori reason and empirical understanding  

    * * _Critique of Pure Reason_ , Preface and Introduction, A vii-xxii/ B vii-xliv and A 1-16/ B 1-30 
    * _Critique of Pure Reason_ , "Metaphysical Deduction", A 50-83/ B 74-116 

  2. Kant's transcendental idealism: the metaphysics of the human person  

    * * _Critique of Pure Reason_ , Transcendental Aesthetic, A 19-49/ B 33-73 
    * _Critique of Pure Reason_ , Postulates of Empirical Thought, A 218-35/ B 265-94 
    * _Critique of Pure Reason_ , Phenomena and Noumena, A 235-60/ B 294-315 
    * _Critique of Pure Reason_ , Paralogisms, A 338-405/ B 406-32 

  3. Kant's theory of the will and of practical reason  

    * *Hume, _Treatise of Human Nature_ , II.ii.3 
    * * _Metaphysics of Morals_ , Preface and Introduction, iii-xii and 1-30 (Ak. 6: 206-221) 
    * _Theory and Practice_ , Section 1, 201-32 (Ak. 8: 275-289) 
    * _Critique of Practical Reason_ , Chapter 1, paragraphs 1-8, and Chapter 2, 3-71 (Ak. 5: 3-41) and 100-126 (Ak. 5: 57-71) 

  4. Kant on the motive of duty and moral feeling  

    * * _Groundwork_ , Preface and Section 1, iii-xvi and 1-24 (Ak. 4: 387-405) 
    * _Critique of Practical Reason_ , Chapter 3, 126-159 (Ak. 5: 71-89) 
    * _Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone_ , Book I (Ak. 6: 1-50)

  5. The derivation of the Categorical Imperative: Universal Law  

    * Hume, _Treatise of Human Nature_ , III.ii.1 
    * * _Groundwork_ , Section 2, 25-96 (Ak. 4: 405-445)

  6. The Categorical Imperative: Humanity, Autonomy, Kingdom of Ends  

    * * _Groundwork_ , Section 2 (continued) 
    * _Metaphysics of Morals_ , Introduction to the Doctrine of Virtue, iii-x and 1-59 (Ak. 6: 375-413)

  7. Applying the Categorical Imperative: perfect and imperfect duties; duties to the self and duties to others  

    * _Metaphysics of Morals_ , The Doctrine of Virtue, parts I and II, 63-160 (Ak. 6: 417-474) 
    * _Lectures on Ethics_ , pp.116-57, 185-212, 224-35, 252-253.

  8. Kant on political philosophy  

    * * _Theory and Practice_ , Section 2, 232-70 (Ak 8: 289-306) 
    * * _What is Enlightenment?_ (Ak. 8: 33-42) 
    * _Metaphysics of Morals_ , The Doctrine of Right, Introduction, and Part II: Public Right, 31-52 and 161-235 (Ak. 6: 229-242 and 311-356) 
    * _Towards Perpetual Peace_ (Ak. 8: 343-386)

  9. How is pure practical reason possible? Kant's doctrine of transcendental freedom  

    * * _Groundwork_ , Section 3, 97-128 (Ak. 4: 446-463) 
    * _Critique of Pure Reason_ , 2nd Analogy, A 189-211/ B 232-56 
    * _Critique of Pure Reason_ , 3rd Antinomy, and its Resolution, A 444-451/ B 472-479 and A 532-558/ B 560-586 
    * _Critique of Practical Reason_ , "Of the Deduction of Pure Practical Reason", 72-100 (Ak. 5: 42-57) 
    * _Critique of Practical Reason_ , "Critical Elucidation of the Analytic", 159-191 (Ak. 5: 89-106)

  10. Kant on God and immortality  

    * * _Critique of Practical Reason_ , Dialectic of Practical Reason, 192-266 (Ak. 5: 107-148) 
    * _Critique of Pure Reason_ , Ideal of Pure Reason, A 567-642/ B 595-670 
    * _Critique of Pure Reason_ , Canon of Pure Reason, A 804-31/ B 832-59 
    * _Critique of Judgment_ , paragraphs 86-91 (Ak. 5: 442-85)

  11. Kant's theory of religion  

    * _Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone_ , Books II-IV (Ak. 6: 51- 202)

  12. Kant on history and anthropology  

    * _Idea for a Universal History_ (Ak. 8: 15-32) 
    * _Theory and Practice_ , Section 3, 270-84 (Ak. 8: 307-313) 
[Back to Ralph Wedgwood's Home Page](../../home.html)

