  
|

#### [ _![Syllabus
Menu](../../h364/images/loc123_00.gif)_](../../h364/index.htm)_  
[Home Page](../../h364/fall_01/index_main.htm)_

#### _[![1 pm
Calendars](../../h364/images/endck_10.gif)](../../h364/calendar.htm)[  
]()__[Daily Calendar](../../h364/calendar.htm) _

#### [![](../../new/resource/books.gif)  
_Project Resources_ ](../../new/resource/index.htm)

#### _[![Student
Projects](../../h364/images/train.gif)](../../h364proj/index.htm)[  
](../../h364proj/index.htm)[ Student Projects](../../h364proj/index.htm)_

#### _[![](../../h364/images/verraz.gif)](../index.htm)  
[Supplementary Materials ](../index.htm)_

#### [_/~History_](../../index.htm)  
  
---  
  


![](../../h364/images/trans.gif) |

|  |

**a** |

**The History of American Technology**

****Government and the Small Arms Industry, 1776-1798** ** |

**a**  
---|---|---  
  
**[BACK](index.htm) || [MENU](index.htm) || [NEXT](rev_gun2.htm)**  
  
---  
  
At the outbreak of the American Revolution the colonies possessed almost no
capacity to manufacture small arms suitable for military use (muskets). As was
the case with virtually all manufactured goods, especially those requiring
either high levels of artisan skills or large volume production, the colonies
depended exclusively on imports from Britain.

Think about it:  That situation that quickly led to a crisis situation for the
army during the American Revolution, especially once Baron von Steuben began
training George Washington's Continental Army in European military tactics.

Despite the efforts of several state governments to organize armories, the
situation remained desperate until the Continental Congress managed to arrange
the purchase of muskets from France. The delivery of 80,000 French
**Charleville muskets** to the Continental Army did much more than eliminate
the immediate arms shortage in General Washington's army. When the fighting
finally ended in 1781, the young American republic found itself in possession
of a huge stockpile of surplus muskets -- more than enough to meet the army's
needs well into the 1790s (Purvis, pp. 88-89).

The fact that the American arsenals of the 1780s were fairly bursting with
Charleville muskets produced two consequences that rippled down through the
1790s and beyond. The first effect of the surplus was simply that the
Charleville, virtually identical to the British "Brown Bess," established
itself as the standard infantry weapon for the American military. It remained
the standard musket until 1814, and until that time the Charleville was the
musket the military specified in purchasing contracts - including the contract
for the 10,000 ordered from Eli Whitney in 1798.

The second impact of the musket surplus also affected Eli Whitney's fortunes.
The military was the only possible market for high volume production of small
arms. In a pre-industrial economy populated by 4-5 million people, the needs
of hunters, frontiersmen, and local militias could be met most efficiently by
local artisans and imports. As long as the military surplus lasted, economic
logic dictated the market for small arms remain too small to support
development of a significant arms industry in America. Indeed, even in the
absence of the surplus muskets, purchases from foreign suppliers was still the
cheapest way to procure muskets. Economic logic simply called for importing.
Through the 1790s, economic logic said that the best way for the American
government to procure muskets was to buy them from established armories in
France or England.

In the arms industry, however, political logic can override economic logic.
That happened in the early 1790s when the political situation in Europe led
the Congress to see a threat in the lack of an American small arms industry.
The conflicts boiling over from the French Revolution promised to shut off
seagoing trade, quite possibly leaving the army vulnerable to another shortage
of muskets if the U.S. were drawn into any conflict that called for
mobilization. Thus, in 1794, Congress authorized the opening of a federal
armory in Springfield, Massachusetts. This new arsenal, with 70 workmen and 30
apprentices, was expected to produce 4,200 muskets annually. The Springfield
Armory began meeting its quota in 1799, just as Whitney was getting started on
his production.

Springfield **,** was chosen as the site for the first government armory in
1794 for political and strategic reasons rather than for its economic
feasibility. Strategic thinking led the planners to bypass the economically
more logical choice of Eastern Pennsylvania. That area, which contained the
young republic's largest concentration of gunsmiths, was considered too
vulnerable to occupation by an invading European power. Springfield,
Massachusetts, on the other hand, was thought sufficiently far inland and
remote to furnish a b measure of protection. Sited on the frontier for
defensive purposes, it took the Springfield Armory several years to begin
meeting its annual quota of 4,200 muskets, but by 1800 production was in full
swing.

**Annual Production of Muskets - Springfield Armory**  
---  
**Year** |

**1795** |

**1796** |

**1797** |

**1798** |

**1799** |

**1800**  
**Production** |

**245** |

**838** |

**1,028** |

**1,044** |

**4,595** |

**4,862**  
  
Data Source: Purvis, Table 4.160  
  
Two years later (1796) the government opened a second federal armory at
Harpers Ferry, Virginia, a location with much greater economic logic. Then, as
the possibility of war with France loomed in 1798, the Congress addressed the
issue of small arms production once again by authorizing the **expenditure of
$800,000** for the purchase of 40,200 stands of arms. That $800,000
represented a little more than 10% of the expenditures for the Army and Navy
in 1798 ( Historical Statistics, Series Y 457). Based on this appropriation,
the government's armory capacity was woefully inadequate. Given the political
situation, the only way to acquire the small arms called for was to solicit
bids from private contractors. In all, the government awarded 26 contracts for
small arms production during 1798. Eli Whitney's contract for $134,000 was one
of those 26 contracts. Thus, Whitney contracted for nearly 25% of the arms
production, and his contract price represented just under 17% of the money
allocated for new weapons (Purvis, p. 80).

**[BACK](index.htm) || [MENU](index.htm) || [NEXT](rev_gun2.htm)**  
  
---  
  
__  
  
_  
_  

