## Introduction to Qualitative Research Methods 151

## Monday & Wednesday 11:00 to 12:30 Room: Ed 210



> Professor:

>

> |

>

> David Fetterman

>

> |

>

> |

>

> |  
>  
> ---|---|---|---|---  
>  
> Office:

>

> |

>

> Rm. 333

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Office Hrs

>

> |

>

> By appointment  
>  
> Office No:

>

> |

>

> 723-1990

>

> |

>

> |

>

> Email:

>

> |

>

> davidf@stanford.edu  
>  
> |

>

> |

>

> |

>

> |  
>  
> **Class Home Page: http://www.stanford.edu/~davidf/qualitative151/**

>

> (If you lose your syllabus and need to find the virtual classroom, just go
to the Fetterman Home Page at: http://www.stanford.edu/~davidf (select globe
and then find current virtual classroom)

>

> * * *

>

> ### Purpose:

>

> The purpose of this course is to introduce you to qualitative inquiry. This
will involve reading about and doing qualitative research. You will be
introduced to the basics of research design, including identifying a problem,
conducting a literature search, data collection, analysis, writing, and
ethics. Specific methods will be drawn from ethnography, includeing:
observation, interviewing, and surveying where appropriate. A mini-case study
will be required.

>

> ### Assignments:

>

> Percent of Grade, Assignment, Due Date

>

> 5% One observation. (Due Oct. 17)

>

> 5% One interview. (Due Nov 1)

>

> 1% Site selection (Due Nov. 5)

>

> 14% Draft mini-case study (Due Nov. 28)

>

> 75% Final mini-case study (Due Dec. 10)

>

> * * *

>

> ### Required Reading:

>

> Becker, H. (1996). The Epistomology of Qualitative Research. In Jessor, R. ,
Colby, A., and Shweder (eds.). Ethnography and Human Development. Chicago:
University of Chicago, pp. 53-71.

>

> Fetterman, D.M. (1998). Ethnography: Step by Step. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

>

> Geertz, C. (1973). "Thick Description," The Interpretation of Cultures. New
York: Basic Books, p. 3-30.

>

> Krathwohl, D.R. (1998). Methods in Educational and Social Science Research:
An Integrated Approach (2nd edition). New York: AddisonWesley.

>

> Peshkin, A. (1991). Appendix: In search of subjectivity - one's own. The
Color of Strangers, the /color of Friends. Chicago: University of Chicago, pp.
285-295.

>

> * * *

>

> ### Recommended Readings (case study examples and instructions):

>

> Bowes - Kibbutz Goshen

>

> Fink & Kosecoff, (1998) How to Conduct Surveys. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.

>

> Hostetler - Huterites in North America.

>

> Peshkin - Growing up American

>

> Spindler - cultural knowledge interview and expressive autobiographical
interview

>

> ###

>

> * * *

>

> Recommended Readings (visual anthropology, surveys, and ethnography)

>

> Collier - Visual Anthropology: Photography as a research method

>

> Fink & Kosecoff, (1998) How to Conduct Surveys. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE

>

> Heider - Ethnographic Film

>

> Spindler - cultural knowledge interview and expressive autobiographical
interview

>

> Spradley - Ethnographic Interview

>

> Spradley and McCurdy - The cultural experience: ethnography in complex
societies

>

>  
>

> * * *

>

> ### Required Activities:

>

> Attend classes, complete readings, participate in discussions, and complete
assignments, e.g. observation, interview, site selection, and draft and final
mini-case study.

>

> * * *

>

> ### Web Resources:

>

> http://www.stanford.edu/~davidf/qualitative151/

>

> http://www.stanford.edu/~davidf/ethnography.html

>

> ###

>

> * * *

>

> ### Schedule

>

> ## Sept 26 (W)

>

> **In class**

>

> o Discussion: Introduction (first class overview of course)

>

> * * *

>

> ## Oct 1 (M)

>

> **In class**

>

> o Discussion: What is research? What is qualitative inquiry? How is it
different from quantitative inquiry?

>

> What do you want to know and how will you figure out what you want to know?

>

> **Due**

>

> o Read: Krathwohl - chapter 1, 2, 3, and 4 (intro to contrasting styles;
variety of research methods; findings into knowledge; and chain of reasoning)

>

> * * *

>

> ## Oct 3 (W)

>

> **In class**

>

> o Discussion: Fetterman chapter 1 - an overview

>

> Finding an issue or problem. The role of the literature.

>

> What are the basic steps of qualitative inquiry?

>

> **Due**

>

> o Read: Fetterman chapter 1

>

> o Read: Krathwohl - chapter 5 and 6

>

> o Read: Becker, H. (1996). The Epistomology of Qualitative Research. In
Jessor, R. Colby, A., and Shweder (eds.). Ethnography and Human Development.
Chicago: University of Chicago, pp. 53-71.

>

> * * *

>

> ## Oct 8 (M)

>

> **In class**

>

> o Discussion: Fetterman chapter 2 - concepts

>

> Highlight - emic, nonjudgmental, triangulation, and contextual \- wink and
blink (cultural interpretation)

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Artifacts Exchange (Part I) - assumptions and inferences (chain of
reasoning)

>

> Bring 10-12 things to class that say something about you

>

> **Due**

>

> o Read: Fetterman chapter 2

>

> o Read: Krathwohl - chapter 7 - causal inference and internal validity

>

> o Read: Peshkin, A. (1991). Appendix: In search of subjectivity \- one's
own. The Color of Strangers, the /color of Friends. Chicago: University of
Chicago, pp. 285-295.

>

> * * *

>

> ## Oct 10 (W)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Artifacts Exchange (Part II) - analysis

>

> **Due**

>

> o Reminder to be exploring case study options, informational interviews,
access issues, schedule time for mini-case study.

>

> * * *

>

> ## Oct 15 (M)

>

> **In clas**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Slides Case Study Example of Concepts and Methods (Part I)

>

> **Due**

>

> o Read: Fetterman chapter 3 - methods

>

> o Read: Geertz, C. (1973). "Thick Description," The Interpretation of
Cultures. New York: Basic Books, p. 3-30.

>

>  
>

> o **Post Observation assignment due (Oct 17) - post**

>

> * * *

>

> ## Oct 17 (W)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Slides Case Study Example of Concepts and Methods (Part II)

>

> **Due**

>

> o Complete reading of Fetterman chapter 3 - methods

>

> * * *

>

> ## Oct 22 (M)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Observations - critique observations

>

> **Due**

>

> o Reminder to be exploring case study options, informational interviews,
access issues, schedule time for mini-case study.

>

> * * *

>

> ## Oct 24 (W)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Discussion: Fetterman chapter 4 - equipment

>

> o 1st Interview Demonstration with pen and paper; tape recorder; camera
(digital)

>

> **Due**

>

> o Read: Fetterman chapter 4

>

> o Read (optional): Spindler's cultural knowledge interview and expressive
autobiographical interview

>

> * * *

>

> ## Oct 29 (M)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o 2nd Interviews Demonstration

>

> **Due**

>

> o **Post Interview assignment due (Nov 1) - post**

>

> * * *

>

> ## Oct 31 (W)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity Coding and Chunking**

>

> o Discussion: Fetterman chapter 5 - analysis - patterns (with software and
Internet focus)

>

> o Pattern identification: Putting the pieces together to make meaning

>

> **Due**

>

> o Read: Fetterman chapter 5

>

> **Due**

>

> o **Post case study site** (and comment on each others' ideas and sites) -
**Due Nov 5 - post**

>

> * * *

>

> ## Nov 5 (M)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Survey Design Discussion & Demonstration - online

>

> **Due**

>

> o Read (optional): Fink & Kosecoff: How to Conduct Surveys (1, 2, 6 & 7)

>

> * * *

>

> ## Nov 7 (W)

>

> **In (virtual) class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Virtual Class - no physical presence required, however, virtual presence
and posting is required

>

>  
>

> * * *

>

> ## Nov 12 (M)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Discussion: Fetterman chapter 6 - writing (as part of analysis &
dissemination)

>

> **Due**

>

> o Read: Fetterman chapter 6

>

> o Read: Krathwohl - chapter 15 - drawing conclusions and reporting

>

> * * *

>

> ## Nov 14 (W)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Discuss Fetterman chapter 7 - ethics - permission, honesty, trust,
pseudonyms, reciprocity, guilty knowledge and dirty hands, and rigorous work

>

> **Due**

>

> o Read: Fetterman chapter 7

>

> o Read: Krathwohl - chapter 10 - ethics

>

> * * *

>

> ## Nov 19 (M)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Discussion: draft case study - elements, tell the story, subjectivity

>

>  
>

> * * *

>

> ## Nov 21 (W) No Class - Thanksgiving

>

> * * *

>

> ## Nov 26 (M)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Role of Video (digital) - taping as data collection, editing as analysis,
and film as storytelling

>

> **Due**

>

> o **Draft Mini-Case Study Due (Nov 28) - post**

>

> * * *

>

> ## Nov 28 (W)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Presentations and Feedback on draft case study

>

> **Due**

>

> o Read: Krathwohl - chapter 25 - macrosystem

>

> * * *

>

> ## Dec 3 (M)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Presentations and Feedback on draft case study

>

> * * *

>

> ## Dec 5 (W)

>

> **In class**

>

> **Activity**

>

> o Closure

>

> **Due**

>

> o **Final Mini-Case study due (Dec 10)**

