# Syllabus for Science, Technology, and Values  
IAH 231 B, Sections 14 - 21

Fall, 1998 4 cr.

##  SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND VALUES

Lecture: MW 4:10-5:30, 105 S. Kedzie  
Recitations: Th 4:10-5:00, Th 5:30-6:20, F 9:10-10:00, or F 10:20-11:10  

_Instructor_ :  
Prof. Fred Gifford, Philosophy Department  
536 S. Kedzie Hall (353-1993),  
Office hours: Mon. 5:30-6:30 and Tues. 1:30 - 2:30 and by appt.  
Philosophy Dept.: 355-4490 (503 S. Kedzie Hall)  
email: [gifford@pilot.msu.edu](mailto:gifford@pilot.msu.edu)  

_Teaching Assistants_ :  
Barry DeCoster; 535 S. Kedzie; 353-9380;  
Office Hours: Monday and Wednesday, 1-2 pm, or by appointment.  
email: [decoste4@pilot.msu.edu](mailto:decoste4@pilot.msu.edu)

Heather Johnson; 535 S. Kedzie; 353-9380;  
Office Hours: Monday and Wednesday, 2-3 pm, or by appointment.  
email: [johns582@pilot.msu.edu](mailto:johns582@pilot.msu.edu)  

## DESCRIPTION OF THE SUBJECT MATTER OF THE COURSE

In this course, we examine science and its relation to social and value
issues. We do this by exploring a number of different episodes and
controversies where values and facts come together in important and
interesting ways (e.g., genetic engineering, medical experimentation on human
subjects, "Scientific Creationism"), and we do this from a number of different
perspectives (the writings of historians, philosophers, playwrights, and
social and natural scientists).

One way of seeing a unifying theme of the course is to see it as posing the
general question: How should we make reasonable decisions (both personal and
policy ones) in light of scientific findings and important considerations of
value? There will be two general sorts of cases, forming two subsections of
the course:

One set of issues concerns decision making and the scientific assessment of
risk and benefit of various actions and technological innovations. Here the
contexts include those such as genetic engineering, nuclear weapons,
pollutants, food additives, and the testing of medical innovations, drugs and
other products.

Another set of issues concerns social and political controversies arising from
scientific findings which are said to have implications for value questions
about human nature, or which in some way appear to threaten or have relevance
for our view of ourselves and our world. This will include both present-day
and historical controversies: Galileo's views about the solar system,
evolutionary theory and "Scientific Creationism", sociobiology, claims about a
biological basis of IQ or sex roles.

The course will serve as an introduction to science as a methodology, a source
of knowledge, and a mode of rational decision-making. It will also explore
science as a social institution that is affected by society and has an effect
on our social world through both technological innovation and changes in our
understanding of the world and our place in it. Some general themes concerning
the nature of science will include: scientific judgment and expertise (which
experts should we trust and why should we rely on them?), whether and in what
senses science can be said to be value-neutral or objective, and what the role
should be of the scientist in society.

## Books:

Brecht, "Galileo", translated by Laughton (1966)  
Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo (DOG), translated with introduction and
notes by Stillman Drake (1957)  
Gould, The Mismeasure of Man (MOM) (1981/1996)  

Reading Packet: Available at College Store (in Hannah Plaza).  
Paper Image (also Hannah Plaza) will make more when these run out, and can
also bind them for you.  
Call College Store for shuttle bus info: 333-0505.  

Note that the packet includes two long items placed at the beginning:  
Kipphardt, In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer (1964)  
Barnes, About Science (1985), pp. 1-98.  

Attendance at both lecture and discussion sections is required.

## BASIS FOR GRADE:

### \--2 short papers: (25% EACH)

  
There will be 3 short papers (5-6 pp., typed) assigned. Each student will
choose 2 of these. If he or she wishes, a student may write all three papers,
in which case the lowest paper grade will be dropped.

A sheet with the specific assignment will be distributed in class at least 12
days before the date the paper is due.

### \--Final exam (Tues., Dec. 15, 5:45-7:45 p.m.): (25%)

  
Students will receive a list of about 10 essay questions on or by Wed., Dec.
2. At the time of the exam, the instructor will choose a smaller number
(perhaps 5) of these and students will be instructed to write on a smaller
number (perhaps 3) of these.

### \--Some short written assignments. (15%)

  
There will be 3 or 4 of these. They will focus on some specific writing
skills, and they will be on the order of a paragraph or two. Assignment will
be given at least a week in advance.

### \--Some very short in-class written assignments, both in lecture and in
sections. (10%)

Papers/assignments are due in class, at the beginning of class. Late papers
will not be accepted without penalty except in case of a documentable
emergency. Otherwise they will have their grade lowered by 0.5 for each 24
hour period for which the paper is late. The first such period starts at the
beginning of class on the day that the paper is due.

## SCHEDULE AND READINGS

Note: This schedule is subject to revision. Any changes will be announced in
lectures and/or discussion sections, and you are responsible for knowing about
any changes which have been announced. It will also be announced which parts
of the readings you should focus on.

WEEK 1:

MON, Aug. 31 INTRO AND OVERVIEW OF SCIENCE-VALUE INTERACTIONS:  
Graham, Loren, "Concerns about Science and Attempts to Regulate Inquiry"
(1-21) (1978)  
[Read this sometime in the first couple of weeks.]  

WED, Sept. 2 GENETIC ENGINEERING: A CASE STUDY IN RISK ANALYSIS AND CONCERNS
ABOUT SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (I)  
Russell, D., "Genetic Engineering is Dangerous", 25-31.  
Nossal, "Research in Genetic Engineering Must Proceed", 46-52.  
Bullard, "Research on Genetic Engineering Should Be Halted" (53-59) (1987)  
Stich, "Genetic Engineering: How Should Science Be Controlled?" (PART 1:
86-97) (1982)  
Mills and MacLean, "Faith in Science" (103-110) (1985)  

DISC: Mills and MacLean; Genetic Engineering  

WEEK 2:

Mon., Sept. 7 LABOR DAY NO CLASS

Wed., Sept. 9 GENETIC ENGINEERING (II)  
Stich, "Genetic Engineering: How Should Science Be Controlled?" (PART 2:
97-115) (1982)  
Sagoff, "The Biotechnology Controversy" (43-47) (1985)  

DISC: Genetic Engineering  

WEEK 3:

Mon., Sept. 14 THE OPPENHEIMER CASE: THE BOMB, VALUE JUDGMENTS IN SCIENCE, AND
POLITICAL LOYALTY OF SCIENTISTS (I)  
Movie: "The Day After Trinity"  
Kipphardt, In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer (9-107) (1964)  

Wed., Sept. 16 THE OPPENHEIMER CASE (II)  
Snow, "The Moral Un-Neutrality of Science" (255-262) (1961)  

DISC: Oppenheimer  

WEEK 4: A BROADER LOOK AT SCIENCE: AS METHOD AND AS INSTITUTION  

MON, Sept. 21  
THE NATURE OF SCIENCE  
Barnes, About Science, ch 1: "The Rise of Science" (1-36)  
Barnes, About Science, ch 2: "Science for its Own Sake" (37-71)  
Hempel, "Scientific Inquiry: Innovation and Test" (3-18) (1966)  
Giere, "Justifying Scientific Theories" (96-105) (1984)  

WED, Sept. 23  
VALUE JUDGMENTS AND SCIENCE  
Rudner, "The Scientist Qua Scientist Makes Value Judgments" (540-43, 545-46)
(1953)  
Bronowski, "The Creative Process" (5-11) (1958)  

Disc: Science and Value Judgments  

WEEK 5: [More on] THE ASSESSMENT OF RISKS  

MON, Sept. 28  
Ross, "Risk: Where Do the Real Dangers Lie?" (43-53) (1995)  
Acceptable Risks, Imperato and Mitchell (1985): "Chosen Risks" (1-9), "The
'Informed' Public" (52-62), "Imposed Risks" (81-95), "Defining Risks (119-129)  
ALAR CASE STUDY  
Roberts, "Alar: The Numbers Game", Science (1430) (1989)  
"Bad Apples", Consumer Reports (288-291) (1989)  
"Rosen, "Much Ado About Alar" (85-90) (1990)  

WED, Sept. 30  
SMOKING  
Kessler, "Regulating Nicotine as a Drug May be Necessary" (32-50)  
Campbell, "Regulating Nicotine as a Drug is Unnecessary" (66-69)  
Nelkin, "The High Cost of Hype" (270-277)  

DISC: Science and Risk assessment  

WEEK 6  

MON, Oct. 5 MEDICAL  
Veatch, "Consensus of Expertise: The Role of Consensus of Experts in
Formulating Public Policy and Estimating Facts" (427-445)  

WED, Oct. 7 - RESEARCH ON HUMAN SUBJECTS: PSYCHOLOGICAL RESEARCH ON OBEDIENCE  
VIDEO: "Obedience to Authority"  
Barnes, ch. 3: "Authority" (72-89)  

DISC: Discussion of video,  
WEEK 7: RESEARCH ON HUMAN SUBJECTS: MEDICAL EXPERIMENTATION

  
MON, Oct. 12  
Miller, "Experimentation on Human Subjects" (127-159) (1987)  
"Last Patient in a Drug Trial" (1 page) (1981)  

WED, Oct. 14  
Hellman, "Of Mice But Not Men" (1585-89) (1991)  
Passamani, "Clinical Trials: Are They Ethical?" (1589-91) (1991)  

DISC: Research on Human Subjects

****************************************************************************

WEEK 8-9: GALILEO AND THE CHURCH  

MON, Oct. 19  
S. Shapin, The Scientific Revolution (1-19) (1996)  
Drake, DOG, Intro to "The Starry Messenger" (1-19)  
Drake, DOG, Intro to "Letters on Sunspots" (59-85)  

WED, Oct. 21  
Brecht, "Galileo" (43-129)(1938*)  

DISC: Galileo  

MON, Oct. 26  
Drake, DOG, Intro to "Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina" (145-171)  
Galileo, DOG, "Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina" (175-216) (1614)  

WED, Oct. 28  
Bentley, "Introduction" (in Brecht, pp. 9-42) (1966)  
Drake, DOG, Intro to "The Assayer" (217-227)  

DISC: Galileo  

WEEK 10:  

MON, Nov. 2 "SCIENTIFIC CREATIONISM" (I)  
Kitcher, Abusing Science: The Case Against Creationism (1982)  
ch. 2: "Believing Where We Cannot Prove" (30-54)  
part of ch. 5: "What Price Creationism?" (124-134)  

WED, Nov. 4 "SCIENTIFIC CREATIONISM" (II)  
Darrow, "Evolution Should be Taught in Public Schools" (40-44) (1925)  
Bryan, Evolution Should Not be Taught in Public Schools" (45-50) (1925)  
Barnes, ch 4: Expertise in Society ("Scientism") (90-98)  
Feyerabend, "How to Defend Society Against Science" (156-167)  

DISC: Creationism; Feyerabend  

WEEK 11:  

MON, Nov. 9 MORE ON SCIENCE AND RELIGION  
Russell, "Science Improves Religion" (78-83) (1935)  
Einstein, "Science and Religion are Independent" (91-96) (1941)  
Smith, "Science Has Corrupted Religious Values" (209-213) (1976)  

BIOLOGICAL DETERMINISM

WED, Nov. 11  
BIOLOGICAL DETERMINISM: INTRODUCTION  
Gould, MOM, Introduction (51-61)  
THE MISMEASURE OF HEADS (I)  
MOM (62-104)  

DISC: Science and Religion; biological determinism.  

WEEK 12:  

MON, Nov. 16 THE MISMEASURE OF HEADS (II)  
MOM (105-175)  

WED, Nov. 18 THE HEREDITARIAN THEORY OF IQ (I)  
MOM (176-263)  
Marks, "Black/White/Other", (32-35) (1994)  

DISC: Gould  

WEEK 13:  

MON, Nov. 23 THE HEREDITARIAN THEORY OF IQ (II)  
MOM (351-424)  
[optional: "Introduction to the Revised Edition": 19-50]  

WED, Nov. 25 BIOLOGY OF SEX ROLES  
Lewontin, Kamin and Rose, "The Determined Hierarchy", 131-163  

[NO SECTIONS THIS WEEK - THANKSGIVING]

WEEK 14  

MON, Nov. 30  
HUMAN GENETICS AND SELF-KNOWLEDGE  
Kitcher, "Self-Dissection" (271-283) (1996)  
THE XYY CONTROVERSY  
Roblin, "The Boston XYY Case" (432-437) (1975)  
CLONING AND THE MEDIA  
Hopkins, "Bad Copies: How Popular Media Represent Cloning as an Ethical
Problem" (6-13) (1998)  

WED, Dec. 2 SOCIOBIOLOGY  
"From Ants to Anthropology: E.O. Wilson" (147-150, 152-161)  
"Introducing a New Science" (163-175)  
Lewontin, Kamin and Rose, "Sociobiology: The Total Synthesis" (233-264)  

DISC: Biology of sex roles, sociobiology  

WEEK 15:  

MON, Dec. 7 OTHER IMPLICATIONS FROM EVOLUTIONARY THEORY: PROGRESS  
Gould, S., Full House: The Spread of Excellence from Plato to Darwin (7-29)
(1996)  

WED, Dec. 9 SUMMING UP AND CATCHING UP  

Disc: Summing Up and Catching Up  

Final exam: Tues., Dec. 15, 5:45-7:45 p.m., in the regular classroom.

* * *

  
[[Home](index.htm)] [[Assignments](assignments.htm)]  
  

* * *

  

