  
![Brunelleschi, interior of San Lorenzo, Florence](rinslor.jpg) **Culture and
Society** **in Early Modern Italy**

# ****Art History 173****

****Allan Langdale**** ****U. C. Santa Cruz****

****Fall 1999****

* * *

Current Information

**Announcements:** Some final paper topics are now up! See below for link.
Also, updated syllabus materials, including new readings for the coming weeks.
Also, I have posted at the bottom of the Take Home Midterm page example of
good answers to the Midterm exam questions. FINAL TAKE HOME EXAM QUESTIONS!
[Click here!](Final.htm)

**Important Dates at UCSC:** [Click here](http://reg.ucsc.edu) for important
dates for dropping or adding classes, petitions, filing deadlines and so on.
The Registrar's Webpage has all the general information that you need.

* * *

  
Essentials

**Course Description:** This one quarter course concentrates on Italian
culture, art, and society from the 14th through the 17th centuries. Aspects of
the functions, production and consumption of art and architecture will be
examined in detail. Readings in course reader will include primary texts from
the period.

**Course Schedule:** Mondays and Wednesdays 3:30 to 5:15. First day of classes
is Monday, Sept. 27th. Last day of classes is Wed. Dec. 1st. Click on 'Course
Schedule' below to see syllabus.

**Place:** College 8-250.

**Course Textbook:** _Art of the Italian Renaissance_ , by John Paoletti and
Gary Radke, 1997. Available at University Bookstore. Used copies are available
there (1996 edition OK). Or [click
here](http://www.vivasmart.com/scripts/textbooks) for Vivasmart to find the
best textbook prices (be sure to factor in shipping costs and time before your
order).

There is also a course reader. This will be available in the second full week
of classes.

**Office Hours:** Mondays and Wednesdays 1-2 pm in D204 Porter College Office.

* * *

****Course Information & Assignments****

  
[Course Schedule.](Syll.htm)

| [General Remarks on Grading.](Assignments.htm)  
  
---|---  
[Paper Stylesheet and Expectations.](Style.htm)

| [Books on Reserve.](Reserve.htm)  
  
[First Paper Assignment & Topics.](Firstpaper.htm)

| [Take Home Midterm Exam.](Midexam.htm)  
  
[Final Paper Assignment & Topics.](Finalpaper.htm)

| [E-mail the Professor.](mailto:langdale@cats.ucsc.edu)  
  
  

* * *

  
****Links to Other Websites****  
  
The Getty Center runs a reference page that includes the **Getty's Vocabulary
Page**. Find out the meanings of some of art history's terminology. [Click
here](http://www.getty.edu/gri/vocabularies/index.htm).

**What can you do with a degree in art history?** If you like art history but
are unsure about the professional opportunities open to art history majors,
visit this web site. [Click here](http://www.nd.edu/~crosenbe/jobs.html).

**Some General Art Sites:** (click on the address)

If you have a particular artist you are seaching for, here is a good place to
start: <http://artcyclopedia.com/A.html>

This is a great site for the iconography of Christian Art. If you don't know
much about it, you can look at representations of various themes in christian
Art: <http://www.uic.edu/classes/ah/ah441/slides.html>

Prentice Hall, the textbook publisher, has some links for finding images:
<http://www.prenhallart.com/html/search/srch_img.htm>

Art History Network:<http://www.arthistory.net/>

Art on the Web: <http://www.bc.edu/bc_org/avp/cas/fnart/Artweb.html>

WebMuseum, Paris: <http://www.oir.ucf.edu/wm/>

Louvre Museum, Paris Webpage: <http://mistral.culture.fr/louvre/louvrea.htm>

World Wide Art Resources: <http://wwar.com>

**Renaissance Art:**

This site links you to Florentine artists on the Web Gallery of art.
<http://gallery.euroweb.hu/tours/firenze.html>

Lots of access to sites with images. Click on the artist's name:
<http://dir.yahoo.com/Arts/Art_History/Periods_and_Movements/Renaissance/Artists/>

The Florence Art Guide-The Renaissance:
<http://www.mega.it/eng/egui/epo/rina.htm>

Renaissance Art: <http://www-lib.haifa.ac.il/www/art/re_menu.html>

Uffizi Art Index: The images are very small (viewing large ones requires
registration) but there is some basic information on well-known paintings and
artists. <http://www.televisual.net/uffizi/index_w.html>

All sorts of topics on Renaissance culture. Explore by [clicking
here](http://dir.yahoo.com/Regional/Regions/Europe/Arts_and_Humanities/Humanities/History/By_Time_Period/Renaissance/).

**Saints & Theology Links:**

In our course, there are lots of images of saints, and it helps to have some
information about them. This web page provides links to several web resources
on Christian saints. <http://www.pitt.edu/~eflst4/saint_bios.html>

Your research might also require you to find something out about theology,
since many of the images that we study in the course are bound up with
theological ideas. There are a few good sites, including this one:
<http://www.csbsju.edu/library/internet/theochht.html>

As well as this site maintained by the same institution:
<http://www.csbsju.edu/library/internet/theosyst.html> Both sites give access
to primary theological texts. A very good resource.

You might also find this theological glossary of some help:
<http://www.blackwellpublishers.co.uk/religion/relgloss.htm>

* * *

****City Tours****

The following link provides access to a number of images of architecture and
sculpture from the 15th and 16th centuries in Italy. Click on the city and
take the tour! [Click here](CityTours.htm)!

  
Number of visitors to our site since Sept., 1999.

  

![](/cgi-bin/Count.cgi?dd=B&comma=T&df=arth173.dat)

  

* * *

  
**For other websites by Allan Langdale, click on the following.**

[Seminar on the History of the Social History of Art. U. C. Santa Cruz, Fall,
1999.](http://wwwcatsic.ucsc.edu/~arth190w/) | [Film Studies course on the
films of Alfred Hitchcock, U. C. Santa Barbara, Spring,
1999.](http://humanitas.ucsb.edu/~langdale/courses/Hitchhome.htm)  
---|---  
[Curriculum Vitae](cv.htm) |  Venetian Art & Architecture. Under construction
for Spring, 2000, U. C. Santa Cruz  
  
  
  
![](goes1.jpg)  
END

