

         [link to Prof. Stein's home page](http://www.msu.edu/user/stein)

COURSES:  
[link to ISS 325 War and Revolution
syllabus](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/iss325.htm)  
[link to PLS 364 International Organization
syllabus](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/364/stein/pls364.htm)  
[link to PLS 461 Refugees
syllabus](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/461/stein/pls461.htm) **_REFUGEES,
DISPLACED PERSONS, EXILES page_**

ISS 325 War & Revolution pages:
ISS 325 War & Revolution lecture pages:  
[link to CYBER-READINGS-1
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/read-325-1.htm)
[Table of Contents i](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/325lecture.htm)  
[link to CYBER-READINGS-2
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/read-325-2.htm)
[Introduction:  States/Sovereignty/Blood/Weak States
1-24](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/325lecture-intro.htm)  
[link to CYBER-READINGS-3
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/read-325-3.htm)
[Just War/War Crimes/Genocide
25-50](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/325lecture-justwar.htm)  
[link to CYBER-READINGS-4
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/read-325-4.htm)
[Human Aggression 51-81](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/325lecture-
aggress.htm)  
[link to War & Revolution photo
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/photos.htm)
[Conquest/Authority
82-102](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/325lecture-conquest.htm)  
[link to AGGRESSION
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/aggression.htm)
[Ethnic Conflict/Nationalism
103-130](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/325lecture-nationalism.htm)  
[link to ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/disarm.htm)
[Revolution/Internal Conflict
131-172](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/325lecture-revolt.htm)  
[link to IRAQ-BOMB-98 page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/IRAQ-
BOMB-98.htm)
[War/Threat/Aggression
173-192](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/325lecture-war.htm)  
[link to NATIONALISM and ETHNIC CONFLICT
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/nationalism.htm)
[U.N./Peacekeeping/Humanitarian Intervention
193-207](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/325lecture-un.htm)  
[link to PROTRACTED INTERNAL WAR
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/protractedwar.htm)
[Nuclear Weapons/Weapons of Mass Destruction
208-219](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/325lecture-nukes.htm)  
[link to REVOLUTION & INTERNAL CONFLICT
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/revolt.htm)
[Old Tests 1998/1, 1998/3
220-228](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/325lecture-oldtests.htm)  
[link to WAR page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/war.htm)
[Syllabus and Course Information
229-234](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/iss325.htm)  
[link to Terrorism and Counter-Terrorism
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/terror.htm)  
[link to AFRICA: GREAT LAKES
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/iss/325/stein/great-lakes.htm)  
    
PLS 364 International Organizations & Cooperation pages:  
[link to UNITED NATIONS & International Organizations
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/364/stein/io.htm) ![](hcr-rw1.jpg)  
[link to War Crimes
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/364/stein/warcrimes.htm)  
[link to European Institutions
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/364/stein/europe.htm)  
[link to PLS364 readings on International
Law](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/364/stein/364Read-International-Law.htm)  
[link to PLS364 readings on UN Reform and
Budget](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/364/stein/364-UNreform-budget.htm)  
[link to PLS364 readings on International Law and the Use of
Force](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/364/stein/364-IntLaw-and-Force.htm)

PLS 461 Refugees, Displaced Persons, Exiles pages:  
[link to Refugees, DPs, Exiles photo
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/461/stein/refugees.htm)  
[link to KOSOVO: Ethnic Cleansing redux
page](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/461/stein/kosovo.htm)  
[link to paper: The Refugee
Experience](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/461/stein/MNREXP1.htm)  
[link to paper: Older Refugee Settlements in
Africa](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/461/stein/FINAL.htm)  
[link to paper: Repatriation Under
Conflict](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/461/stein/uscr91-98.htm)  
[link to 1996 paper: Regional Efforts to Address Refugee Problems in the
Developing World](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/461/stein/region-1996.htm)  
[link to 1997 paper: Regional Efforts to Address Refugee
Problems](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/461/stein/isa-regional.htm)  
[link to paper: Refugee Repatriation, Return and _Refoulement_ During Conflict
1997](http://www.msu.edu/course/pls/461/stein/repat97.htm)  


![](Consbar.gif) **_REFUGEES, DISPLACED PERSONS, EXILES_**  #exile
#western sahara      #sudan      #weak statees - sierra leone     #guinea-
bissau     #kurds        #cambodia ![](_123740_150_Copy_of_UNHCR_logo_ap.jpg)  


* * *

 February 2, 1999           **IMAGINE YOURSELF A REFUGEE**
![](_270044_street300.jpg) Could this happen in your street?

                   A new hard-hitting campaign launched by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees aims to change opinions across Europe towards people displaced by war and persecution.   
  A series of television adverts in 11 languages are to be broadcast in 15
countries across Europe.  
 ![](_270044_rwanda150.jpg)It will run alongside programmes in schools and on
the web to educate people on what it is like to be a refugee.  
  Fair start  
  One film shows daily life in an apparently average European street suddenly
shattered by explosions, machine gun fire and the arrival of hundreds of
troops.  
  Its uncomprimising message is aimed at members of the public, governments
and the media.  
  Worldwide the UN agency cares for over 12 million refugees and says its
latest campaign is designed to make sure that more of them get a fair start in
life.  
  Lyndall Sachs, spokeswoman for the UNHCR in the UK says that people have
become immune to the plight of refugees.  
    
                                         She says many people need to be reminded that as well as so-called economic migrants there are those who really are     "fleeing for their lives."   
                         These people, the organisation says, live in such fear that they have no choice but to leave their countries.   
                         The UNHCR says its campaign is partly intended to break through the concentration of reporting in popular media ![](_270044_kosovo150.jpg)across Europe that point to "tidal waves" of economic migrants threatening to overwhelm a country's social ![](_270044_bosnia150.jpg)services.   
  The organisation says this has led to an increased hardening of attitudes
toward refugees and asylum seekers.  
  Many refugees now find themselves facing growing threats of persecution and
official intimidation in the countries to which they have turned for shelter.  
  "People are confusing the immigration message with the refugee message," Ms
Sachs says.  
  "And when we're dealing with something as life threatening as refugee issues
we have to make sure the two messages are separated out."  
    

* * *

  
#top EXILE

 September 25, 1998   **BANGLADESH POLICE HUNT FEMINIST WRITER**   Taslima
Nasreen fled her country four years ago after blasphemy allegations  
  Police in Bangladesh are searching for the controversial feminist writer,
Taslima Nasreen, after a court in the capital, Dhaka, issued a warrant for her
arrest on charges of blasphemy.  
  The move follows Miss Nasreen's surprise return to Bangladesh last week
after four years of self-imposed exile.  
  She has not been seen in public since her arrival.  
  Religious feelings hurt  
  The court also ordered her property to be seized as part of the revival of
the case that was originally filed four years ago.  
  The petition was first filed in 1994 by Zainal Abedin Babul, a devout
Moslem, who claimed her book "Nirbachito Kolum" (Selected
![](_179998_Nasreen.jpg)Columns) had insulted Islam and hurt his religious
feelings.  
  Offending remarks  
  Miss Nasreen was charged with offending religious sentiment in a newspaper
interview she gave after the publication of her novel "Lajja" (Shame), which
dealt with communal tensions between Hindus and Muslims - and has been banned
in Bangladesh.  
  An Indian newspaper quoted her as having said that the Koran should be
revised to take into account women's' rights.  
  But Miss Nasreen has denied making such remarks.  
  Muslim protests  
  Several Muslim fundamentalist groups are planning anti-Nasreen protests in
the capital, Dhaka, on Friday.  
  On Tuesday Muslim groups had again staged protests demanding Taslima Nasreen
be tried for blasphemy and hanged.  
  An non-issued fatwa  
  Taslima Nasreen, a doctor, writer and women's' rights activist, left
Bangladesh secretly in 1994 for Sweden.  
  She later visited France, Germany and Britain before moving to the United
States.  
  Her sympathisers in the West compare her position with that of the British
novelist, Salman Rushdie, against whom Iran issued a fatwa.  

* * *

  
#top  December 8, 1998   **HOPE IN WESTERN SAHARA**   Saharawi refugees see UN
chief's visit as a sign of salvation  
  By Tim Judah in Tindouf  
  Everyone looked skywards - nervously. A sandstorm had blown up. Kofi Annan's
visit had already been postponed once thanks to the crisis in Iraq - it would
be a crushing blow if he was to be defeated by the elements now.  
  Then suddenly he was here. His white UN helicopter hovering nervously above
the neat white landing circle drawn for him on the
![](_229018_western_sahara_new.gif)sand \- in the bleakest place on earth.  
  Cannons boomed in welcome, the band struck up and the UN Secretary General
stepped from his helicopter followed, like a medieval prince, by a standard
bearer carrying the UN flag.  
  Faith in the Secretary-General  
  The Smara refugee camp, 1,500km south west of Algiers and close to the tiny
Algerian frontier town of Tindouf, lies deep in the Sahara. Yet 150,000
Saharawi refugees, who fled the Moroccan invasion of the former Spanish colony
of Western Sahara in 1975, survive here. They believe that Mr Annan's visit on
30 November signals the beginning of the end of their exile.  
![](_228703_SAHARAWI300.jpg)  On 11 December Mr Annan will submit a report to
the Security Council and it is widely expected that he will criticise Morocco
for dragging its heels on the issue. Mr Annan is also expected to make a
private appeal to western countries to apply discreet but heavy pressure on
Morocco's King Hassan in a bid not to let another chance to settle one of
Africa's longest conflicts disputes slip through his fingers.  
  Morocco claims the Western Sahara belongs to it by virtue of historical
right but says it too would like to see an end to the conflict via the ballot
box.  
  The UN's peacekeeping mandate for Western Sahara runs out on 17 December.
Such is the UN's frustration with the issue that it will then probably only be
renewed for another eight weeks. After that, if Morocco is still deemed to be
obstructing the UN's plans to hold a referendum in the territory and
repatriate the refugees Mr Annan will have to consider ending its peacekeeping
mission there - thus risking a return to war in an already unstable corner of
Africa.  
  Songs of welcome  
  As Mr Annan made his stately progress from the helicopter landing point to
the Smara camp thousands of Saharawi women, many with faces tinted blue from
the indigo dye they use to protect their faces from the harsh Saharan sun
ululated in unison. At the gates ![](_228703_sahara_text_new_150.gif)of the
camp he was greeted with a song from Umm Deleila, the most famous Saharawi
singer.  
  Later, as Mr Annan presided in a great white tent over a gathering of tribal
sheikhs Umm Daleila said: "We have given blood, the dearest thing that every
human has - so we are sure that we will receive something in return."  
  Like tens of thousands of others Umm Deleila fled her native land in 1975.
She was just a child then but believed, as did everyone
![](_228703_handshake150.jpg)else, that it would only be a matter of weeks
before they returned home.  
  Today those Saharawis who remain under Moroccan occupation are said to tune
their radios by night to snatch her voice from out of the clear cold desert
night. One day soon, if Mr Annan has his way, then these people, like her
fellow exiles, will be able to see her deep, kohl-lined eyes too.  
  Every since their flight the refugees have lived in four camps around
Tindouf. The bleak sand and rock landscape where they have pitched their
tents, resembles the surface of Mars.  
  A long and costly struggle  
  Until 1991 their guerrilla army, the Polisario Front, fought for
independence, to make real their phantom and self-proclaimed Saharawi Arab
Democratic Republic. During the Cold War it was associated with Cuba, Algeria
and other revolutionary states - and so the west supported Morocco.  
  At the first Polisario was strikingly successful but eventually the
Moroccans pushed them back and, in an extraordinary feat of military
engineering, built a 2,000 km wall of earthwork embankments to keep the
guerrillas out. But the war was expensive. Seven years ago Morocco and
Polisario agreed to a peace plan and a referendum. Did the Saharawis want to
be integrated into Morocco or to have an independent state of their own?  
  The process has unrolled fitfully ever since. The referendum was supposed to
have taken place in 1992 but the date has been constantly postponed since
then. Last year the vote was scheduled for 7 December. Now Mr Annan suggests
holding the vote in December 1999.  
  At the heart of the matter lies the question of who will vote. The Saharawis
say the Moroccans are trying to infiltrate tens of thousands of their own
citizens on to the lists in order to tip the ballot their way. Privately UN
officials agree. The Moroccans claim many of these people are Saharawis who
live in Morocco.  
  New hiccoughs  
  During his visit to the Smara Camp, Kofi Annan had hoped that he could
announce that everything was back on track again. But it wasn't. Mr Annan said
the Moroccans had "raised some concerns" - coded diplomatic language meaning
they had come up with more excuses to drag the process out again.  
  Mr Annan has staked his personal prestige in these Saharan sands. And
hopefully the world will begin to notice. The UN, said the suave Ghanaian,
"could not impose a settlement" on the parties. Which is odd, since if the
Moroccans were Serbs or Iraqis, things might look rather different. Mr Annan
says the difference from other, more recent conflicts, is that the UN Security
Council has never passed an "enforcement resolution". But, perhaps by mistake
then, he later referred to the "reality of the world we live in".  
  The reality is there are 27 million Moroccans but barely a quarter of a
million Saharawis. Their land is almost entirely desert, has little if any
strategic importance and, despite phosphate deposits, has not much to
recommend it.  
  The Moroccans have powerful friends in France, which has extensive economic
interests in the kingdom. Spain dare not raise the question of its former
colony lest the Moroccans open the question of Ceuta and Melilla, its two
enclaves on Morocco's north coast. Spanish fishermen have also bought rights
to fish the teeming seas off the Western Sahara.  
  'The wind is blowing our way'  
  As Mr Annan tried to hide his disappointment in Smara, fearing delays which
add to his peacekeeping bill - $400m in Western Sahara to date - Polisario
officials could barely disguise their glee.  
  In September, Mr Annan made pointed criticisms of Morocco and since last
year his personal envoy to region has been James Baker, the former US
Secretary of State. As far as the Saharawis are concerned their diplomatic
coup has been to shrug off the old Marxist image and gradually outflank
Morocco diplomatically.  
  Over the last year, the UN has weeded out tens of thousands of potential
referendum voters sponsored by Morocco which observers believe makes a vote
for independence virtually assured. King Hassan can certainly delay the vote,
but with every passing year his room for diplomatic manoeuvre becomes more and
more limited and his western friends impatient that the matter should be
settled once and for all. They fear that any delay could result in the UN
deciding to end its peacekeeping mission which would mean a return to war.  
  As the day drew to a close Mr Annan's helicopter took to the sky again, a
man in traditional finery trotted off on his camel and Umm Deleila's special
tent sagged as the pegs came up and she headed for home. Radhi Bachir, a top
Polisario official adjusted the cuffs of his elegant check jacket as he took
stock of the day. His glasses reflected the orange glow of the setting sun.
"The wind," he said, enunciating his words with care, "is blowing our way".
Chronology of the Saharawi struggle   The Saharawi refugees are locked out of
Western Sahara  
  1884 Beginning of Spanish colonial occupation of the Western Sahara.  
  1965 UN General Assembly calls for independence of the then Spanish Sahara.  
  1973 Foundation of Polisario independence movement which begins armed
struggle against Spain.  
  1975 International Court of Justice declares that the people of Western
Sahara have the right to self-determination. On 6 November King Hassan of
Morocco orders 350,000 volunteers to cross into the territory - the "Green
March". Spain agrees to hand over the colony to Morocco and Mauritania.  
  1976 Spain pulls out. Polisario declares the Saharawi Arab Democratic
Republic. War Begins.  
  1979 Morocco annexes south after Mauritanians pull out.  
  1981Morocco begins building fortified wall.  
  1988 Morocco and Polisario accept UN peace plan.  
  1991 Ceasefire begins, monitored by the UN.  
  1992 Referendum delayed following disputes about who is eligible.  
  1996 UN suspends registration of voters blaming both sides for problems.  
  1997 Deadlock broken following talks in Houston chaired by James Baker,
former US Secretary of State.  
  1998 Referendum set for 7 December. Suspended after further disagreements.  
  1999 December - referendum on independence or integration into Morocco?  
    

* * *

  
#top _SUDAN: FAMINE AMIDST WAR_       ![](_84927_Sudan_starving_man_150.jpg)
![](_107279_famineUSE300.jpg)           Friday, June 5, 1998  Sudanese still
die amid relief effort           Unicef says the number of starving people is
almost three times           as many as once thought
![](_107279_upsetUSE150.jpg)A group of aid workers in southern Sudan say the
area's devastating food shortages appear to be getting worse despite the
relief effort.  
  The medical charity, Medecins Sans Frontieres, says not enough food is being
delivered and as a result people are dying and children in feeding centres are
not gaining weight.  
    The food crisis, which was first predicted late last year, has been a result of both drought and civil war.   
  Although huge resources have been brought in, many emergency food supplies
have arrived too late for many people.  
FIGHTING CONTINUES  
Meanwhile, the Sudanese government has been condemned for hiring 2,000
convicted criminals for $1,000 a head from China to fight alongside its
forces, according to the opposition group, the National Democratic Alliance.  
  The secretary-general of the National Democratic Alliance, Mubarak al-Mahdi,
was quoted as saying the government's move was "a criminal act" and called on
the Chinese government to stop intervening in Sudan's internal affairs.  
  Last week, rebels of the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) said they had
killed or wounded 300 government solders.  
  Sudan has been hit by outbreaks of civil war for over 40 years, but the
current phase of the conflict began in 1983.  
  The black, mainly Christian or animist south is fighting for autonomy from
the Muslim north.

![](_110751_Sudanese_child_index_100.JPG)  
          6-11-98 Sudan crisis deepens: For the first time, the Sudanese crisis is officially described as "famine."  The United Nations says there has been a dramatic rise in the number of people facing starvation in southern Sudan, with 1.2 million people now in need of food aid.   
 ![](_86404_dinka_group.jpg)  
                                  Dinka ethnic group, southern Sudan

 Tuesday, July 7, 1998  
  Sudan's deadly hunger  
  This boy's parents have already died from hunger
![](_128020_sudan_child_whose_parents_dead_from_famine_300_grab_7-7-98.jpg)  
  The famine in Sudan is worsening amid warnings that the country is in the
grip of an overwhelming crisis.  
  According to aid agencies:  
  2.6 million are now in need of emergency aid.  
  Sixty per cent, in some areas, have malnutrition.  
  cash aid needs to be doubled.  
  The United Nations World Food Programme (WFP) has said it has only half the
money it needs to provide aid.  
  According to reports it is only able to deliver about half the 10,000 tonnes
of food needed each month.  
  Pledges have been made for $60m - but they calculate that $140m is needed.  
  Death everywhere  
  The hardest hit area is the Bahr el-Ghazal region in southern Sudan.  
![](_128020_Sudan_man_carried_to_aid_centre_150_grab_-7-7-98.jpg) child buried
in food aid bag ![](_128020_sudan_child_famine_victim_buried_grab_7-7-98.jpg)  


![](sudan-feed_5.jpg) ![](sudan-feed_1.jpg) The people who had not yet died
sat and lay in rows in a dirt courtyard, emaciated, weak and incoherent,
raising their empty hands and bleary eyes to visitors in a silent request for
sustenance. Many had walked for several days to reach Wau. Some had seen their
children and other loved ones starve to death on the road.  
![](sudan-feed_3.jpg) ![](sudan-feed_4.jpg)  
The food is prepared in a makeshift kitchen at the back of the Thiet feeding
center in the former primary school. The porridge is heated over an open fire
in huge tin cooking pots and then distributed in colourful basins and mugs to
the people. Boxes of high-energy biscuits are stacked up ready to be handed
out to the severely malnourished children.

![](sudan-feed_6.jpg)  
Adut Akok is measured in a wooden box that looks like a coffin with the end
sawn off. Although she is one year old, she weighs less than a newborn. Adut
died two days after this reporter was at the feeding center. She was 48
percent of her weight for height. It is very difficult to help children who
arrive at less than 55 percent of their weight for height.

![](sudan-children_2.jpg) ![](sudan-children_1.jpg)  
  Some of the children at World Vision's Thiet feeding center are so weak they
must be force-fed through a tube. Even those who survive such punishing
starvation are likely to be mentally retarded as a result of the malnutrition.  
 ![](sudan-children_3.jpg)

 [NY Times: "Famine in the
Sudan"](http://www.nytimes.com/library/world/africa/index-sudan.html) The
Elderly  ![](sudan-elderly_1.jpg) ![](sudan-elderly_4.jpg)![](sudan-
elderly_3.jpg)![](sudan-elderly_2.jpg)  
 With little to no hair, their features chiseled with hunger, the elderly are
encamped in the shade of an acacia tree off to one side of the Thiet feeding
center. They sit in silence waiting to receive one cup of porridge a day.
Hollow cheeked and sunken-eyed, many have walked for miles to flee fighting in
the government garrison town of Wau. They fled with only the clothes on their
back.

  Wednesday, July 15, 1998:  
  SUDAN REBELS DECLARE CEASEFIRE  
  Aid agencies have called for a ceasefire since the crisis deepened
![](_133048_aid300.jpg)  
  The rebel Sudan People's Liberation Army has declared a unilateral ceasefire
in its war with government troops to allow aid to reach large numbers of
people facing starvation.  
  A spokesman for the SPLA in Nairobi, Justin Yaac, said the ceasefire would
last three months and would apply to the two worst affected areas, Bahr el-
Ghazal province and parts of the Upper Nile region.  
 ![](072498sudan-famine_1.jpg) ![](sudan.jpg)  
24 July 1998--A starving Sudanese child was given nourishment last week at a
feeding center in Ajiep, in the southern Sudan. Famine is worsening in the
region, and more than a million people are said to face food shortages.  
![](072498sudan-famine_2.jpg) September 11, 1998   THE FRONT LINE OF FAMINE
More than a million have been affected by Sudan's famine  
  Aid agencies in Sudan say that food supplies are having some effect and
fewer people are now dying of hunger. The BBC's East Africa Correspondent,
Martin Dawes went to Bahr El Ghazal in the south of the country to see how
conditions have changed:  
  In no sense is the famine over - tens of thousands of lives are being
damaged and unknown numbers have died.  
  Some 40,000 children are now in feeding centres and the capacity is being
doubled. But there are![](_168791_children_300.jpg) indications that the death
rate is dropping.  
  "It's still a bad situation," says Roger Teck of Medecins Sans Frontiers.
"It continues to be out of control, but we have the impression that it's
getting a little better now."  
  More food aid was dropped in August than in the whole of last year. The
increase is the sole reason why fewer people are dying.  
  Emergency had to become a disaster  
  AGAIN AN EMERGENCY HAD TO BECOME A FULL-BLOWN DISASTER BEFORE THE WORLD'S
RESPONSE CAME NEAR TO MEETING THE NEED.  
  The UN World Food programme is facing huge demands across the world. And
here it knows that much of the population will have to be supported until the
harvests in October next year.  
  "We are far from a situation where we can consider the job done," says Jean-
Jacques Graisse of the World Food Programme.  
  Far from perfect  
  This is a relief effort that has been far from perfect.  
  Like one woman I spoke to in July, many of the displaced people in the camps
found they were ![](_168791_camp_150.jpg)excluded from access to the aid by
local officials because they were not from the area.  
  Food was sometimes taken by the rebel authorities.  
  In a joint statement with the United Nations they have promised that this
will stop.  
  No-one has enough  
  It is hardly surprising that there are such abuses where no-one has enough.  
  Let no-one say that a catastrophe was averted - it is actually still going
on.  
  The aid effort which came in late seems to be containing it. But this is a
desperately fragile situation.  
  The famine was born by war. This centre in Bahr El Ghazal saw the very worst
of it.  
  It is now less desperate, but still a place of awful reality.  
  Without peace there is no chance of a lasting solution.



* * *

  
#top WEAK STATES--GANGS, THUGS, ATROCITIES Sierra Leone  
 ![](sierra-leone-us_1.jpg)

Though a military junta in Sierra Leone was ousted this year, with the help of
a British mercenary group, fighting has continued in parts of the country.
About 150 supporters of the former junta were reportedly killed by Nigerian
intervention forces and militiamen on Monday. Junta supporters have been
terrorizing civilians, often cutting off their hands or feet, as with the
patients shown here at a hospital in Freetown.  
  AGONY WORDS CANNOT DESCRIBE  March 2, 1999  
  Moses, one of 300 children forced to fight for the rebels  
  Fergal Keane reports from Sierra Leone  
  As the rebel army swept into Freetown at the beginning of this year, it was
less a battle than a crime against humanity - the worst in recent times.
Thousands were killed, tens of thousands uprooted from their homes. Murder,
mutilation, rape, it all happened here.  
  One woman saw her husband and her son shot dead in front of her. She found
some of her husband's remains lying among the city's ruined buildings, his
head severed from his body. She buried the remains herself.  
  Massacre at mosque  
  At the local mosque the priests survived only by feigning death after the
rebels opened fire. One imam said the rebels shot and killed 11 people here.
His son was among the dead, buried in shallow graves behind the mosque.  
  As the battle escalated, terrified civilians fled from rebel areas. Snipers
picked off the stragglers. It was terrifying, but better than the horror that
lay behind them in rebel territory.  
  Burnt alive  
  A Sierra Leonean cameraman was secretly filming the rebels from inside his
house. They discovered him and forced him into the street to film their
supporters burning a family alive inside their home.  
  The rebel leaders want power and Sierra Leone's diamond wealth. Many of
their supporters are illiterate peasants, driven by bitter resentment of the
city elite.  
  But it is hard to explain what motivates a man to hack off the arm of an
18-month-old baby girl. Or what impulse drives somebody to push a man into a
burning house with his family.  
  Orphan  
  One child, a polio victim, was taken to hospital after he was found crawling
on the street after the battle.  
  Christiane Minah, a nurse at the hospital, said she had no idea who his
parents were.  
  "I think he doesn't have any," she said. "We have been calling him Junior.
We don't know anything about him, so we decided to name him that way.  
  Thousands homeless  
  At least 150,000 people lost their homes in the attack. Many fled to an old
factory. Aid agencies want to move them to better accommodation before the
rains come next month.  
  The people say they want food and medicine. Diseases like dysentery are
already threatening young lives. Amid the misery the struggle to maintain old
routines, to preserve human dignity, continues. Aid will alleviate their
discomfort, but only the soldiers and politicians can end their misery.  
![](_288722_shooting150.jpg)  'Dehumanised'  
  "I feel dehumanised, because we've lost our loved ones, lost our wives, our
mothers, our houses," said John Karim-Tarawalee. "We have worked for them for
the past 20 years, they have been burnt down. We have no hope of rebuilding
them."  
  The war in Sierra Leone is without a doubt the most brutal being waged
anywhere in the world.  
  In the space of a few weeks thousands have been killed, and tens of
thousands more driven from their homes. The fear now for these people is that
the rebels might return.  
  If they do, people expect little mercy for themselves or their children.
People are moving on the streets once again, but at the roadblocks the
atmosphere is tense.  
  Bloody reprisals  
  As Ecomog, the Nigerian-led intervention force, has regained control,
numerous suspected rebels have been executed. We found a suspect at the mercy
of troops, after a woman claimed he burned her house.  
  The soldiers kicked him as he lay semi-naked on the ground, protesting his
innocence. Then he was thrust into a vehicle, driven
![](_288722_boot150.jpg)away, and we do not know what happened to him.  
  Another captured rebel was shot as he begged for mercy.  
  Children forced to fight  
  The rebels captured more than 300 children during their attack, and forced
them to fight. One little boy, Moses, was recaptured by the Nigerian soldiers,
who slapped and kicked him until an officer and a Government minister
intervened to protect him.  
  Later we found him at a camp where children are kept in the care of the
United Nations. He is deeply traumatised and spends hours alone.  
  That trauma is repeated again and again in Sierra Leone, a country whose
agony words can no longer describe.  
 *International Herald Tribune, Paris, Thursday, July 30, 1998   A GHASTLY CAMPAIGN OF TERROR IN SIERRA LEONE In West Africa, a Grisly Extension of Rebel Terror   By Barbara Crossette New York Times Service   
  UNITED NATIONS, New York - A rebel movement dislodged early this year from a
brief period in power in Sierra Leone has been waging a bloody campaign of
terror against the country's civilian population that human rights groups and
the government said Wednesday is without precedent in its calculated violence.  
  By the hundreds, poor farmers and villagers - men, women and children - have
been shot, lacerated, mutilated by having limbs hacked off. Some have been
turned into grisly messengers of death, sent disfigured and bearing letters
warning the West African ![](073098leone-atrocities_1.jpg)country's president,
Ahmad Tejan Kabbah, and the African peacekeeping troops who restored him to
office in March that armed resistance will continue and no one is safe.  
  A refugee, who reached Guinea with only the stumps of his arms, told his
story to a representative of Refugees International, a Washington-based
advocacy group, which videotaped his testimony along with other accounts.
''You don't want a military government,'' the refugee said the rebels told
him. ''You say you want a civilian government. Then we will have to cut off
your hands. Then go to Tejan Kabbah and he will have to give you new hands.''  
  Another refugee without hands, shaking with fear, appeared so traumatized on
the tape that he repeated again and again his perplexity about how he could
not use a toilet without help, when there was so little help to be had.  
  ''What they are doing really is atrocious,'' said Fode Dabor, Sierra Leone's
representative at the United Nations. ''I've never seen it before. They've
been cutting limbs, gouging the eyes of innocent women and children. This is
one of the most vicious rebel organizations in the world.'' ![](073098leone-
atrocities_2.jpg)  
  Several hundred thousand people have fled their homes for government-
controlled areas or refugee camps in Liberia and Guinea, where hospitals are
treating a steady stream of victims left with feet, hands and eyes missing.  
  On Thursday, the United Nations will convene a special conference on Sierra
Leone to discuss how to begin rebuilding normal life in a country that has
endured decades of civil war and ruthless military leaders since its
independence in 1961.  
  Mr. Kabbah, Sierra Leone's first democratically elected president, served
for only a year before being overthrown in May 1997 by the Armed Forces
Revolutionary Council and the Revolutionary United Front, now operating as the
rebel force threatening to try to regain power even as Mr. Kabbah's government
tries to re-establish shaky institutions and repair a ravaged capital.  
  Human rights groups are in New York in force to lobby the conference for a
concerted international drive to ensure that fair trials be held and
punishments meted out to the rebels. Sierra Leone thinks it might need
international help. Mr. Dabor said in an interview that when he was in Rome
recently for the treaty conference establishing an international criminal
court, he spoke publicly about why such a body was important to Africa.  
  Mr. Dabor said that the rebels have been arming themselves by selling
diamonds from areas of eastern Sierra Leone.  
  ''Our problem has been the diamonds,'' Mr. Dabor said. ''We have a lot of
people who want to lay their hands on our diamonds. I know that the rebels
finance their operations by the diamonds they recover from this mining area.
That's why they don't want to give up these places.''  
  Scott Campbell of Human Rights Watch, who recently completed a report on the
last six months of violence in Sierra Leone, said that the rebels had been
using brutal tactics for a number of years, but that they now appeared to be
getting more desperate because of the presence of Nigerian soldiers, who make
up the majority of the West African peacekeeping force, known by its acronym
Ecomog.  
  The report, ''Sowing Terror,'' was published Wednesday. Written by Mr.
Campbell and Jane Lowicki, both consultants to the organization, it says that
children and women have also been singled out for sexual abuse. Accounts of
rapes and gang rapes, as well as kidnappings for purposes of sexual slavery,
are common.  
  Pregnant women appear to be targeted ''because of their status as pregnant
women,'' the report said. Fetuses are being ripped from wombs, witnesses have
reported. ![](073098leone-atrocities_3.jpg)  Since 1991, when the
Revolutionary United Front ''got going, in one of their first attacks they
allegedly decapitated administrators, put their heads on sticks,'' Mr.
Campbell said in an interview Wednesday. ''In order to make statements of
power, political statements, in 1996, they would mutilate people. They would
write things like 'no election' or ''don't vote' on people's backs - they
would burn it in.  
  ''The idea of chopping someone's hands off allegedly came from rebels saying
to people: We're going to cut your hands off so you can't vote,'' he said.  
  ''It has been going on for some time,'' Mr. Campbell said. ''What's changed
now is that the military balance has changed, with Ecomog there. Ecomog is
really powerful. They control the urban centers and the rebels have become
more desperate.  
  ''Their new strategy to put themselves back on the political chessboard is
to do these horrible things to civilians. That does two things. It makes the
civilian population subservient. And it makes them somebody you have to deal
with.''  


__A woman in Faranah Hospital, Guinea, was used as a porter, then had her left
hand cut off.__





* * *

  
#top **_GUINEA-BISSAU_** February 21, 1999 GUINEA-BISSAU GETS UNITY GOVERNMENT  
  At least 100 civilians died in renewed fighting last month  
  An interim government of national unity has been sworn into office in
Guinea-Bissau under the terms of a peace accord signed last November.  
  The new 10-member government - which includes representatives of President
Joao Vieira and rebel soldiers who mutinied last year - will lead the West
African nation until elections later this year.  
  The Prime Minister, Francisco Fadul, told French radio that the elections
would probably be delayed from March when they were scheduled under the peace
agreement, to allow time to conduct a new census of voters and for refugees to
return to Guinea-Bissau.![](_112148_map_guinea-bissau3_300.jpg)  
  The peace deal halted a five-month war between the rebels, who have broad
popular support, and the mostly Senegalese troops supporting President Vieira
who has ruled the former Portuguese colony since 1980.  
  Fighting flared again earlier this month, killing at least 100 people in
four days before Togolese mediators secured a truce.  
  About 600 peacekeepers from Ecomog, the defence arm of the Economic
Community of West African States, have arrived in the country. More than 1,000
troops from neighbouring Senegal are reported to be still in Guinea-Bissau.  
  Meanwhile, the World Food Programme says it has started distributing food
aid in Guinea-Bissau, to help alleviate food shortages.  
  The nation of 1.1 million people is among the world's 15 poorest nations.  
 November 2, 1998   DEAL ENDS GUINEA-BISSAU CONFLICT   Fighting has forced
thousands to flee their homes  
  The warring parties in the West African state of Guinea-Bissau have reached
agreement to end their five-month civil war.  
  The accord was signed by President Vieira and the rebel leader, Ansumane
Mane after three days of talks in the Nigerian capital, Abuja.  
![](_205237_rebels300.jpg)  Under the deal  a government of national unity
will be formed, including representatives of the rebels all foreign troops
will be withdrawn and replaced by a West African (ECOMOG) peacekeeping force.
air and sea ports will be opened to allow in humanitarian relief presidential
elections to be held by the end of March next year  
  The Gambian foreign minister, Sedat Jobe, who has been mediating between the
two sides, told the BBC he was confident that the agreement would hold,
despite the failure of previous cease-fire agreements.  
  The breakthrough came at negotiations at the mansion of Nigeria's military
leader, General Abdulsalami Abubakar, after a two-day summit of African
leaders in Abuja had failed to produce an accord.  
  There had been pessimism among some officials. One said it looked as if the
Bissau issue would ultimately be decided "on the battlefield".  
  President accused of corruption  
  The conflict in the former Portuguese colony began on 7 June when a
breakaway faction of disgruntled military veterans seized the main army
garrison and international airport in the capital, Bissau.  
  The rebels accused President Vieira of corruption and demanded that he step
down.  
  Although neighbouring Senegal and Republic of Guinea sent troops to his aid,
the insurgents have overrun most of the small country.  
  ABOUT HALF OF THE COUNTRY'S ONE MILLION PEOPLE HAVE BEEN DISPLACED BY THE
FIGHTING. There are no reliable figures for the numbers of people killed and
wounded.  
    
 ![](guinea_1.jpg)  
A Guinea-Bissau official's wife landing Sunday in Dakar. About 3,000 people
have fled there since Friday.  
October 22, 1998   BEHIND THE GUINEA-BISSAU CONFLICT  
  The recent fighting in the impoverished West African country of Guinea-
Bissau once again sees President Joao Bernardo Vieira confronted by his one-
time comrade-in-arms, Brigadier Ansumane Mane.  
  Guinea-Bissau gained independence in 1974, the first of Portugal's former
colonies to do so in the modern era.  
  It was achieved after a 13-year struggle, led by the African Independence
Party, the PAIGC, which has been in power ever since.  
  But its leaders have repeatedly fought with each other over how the country
should be governed.  
  During the war of independence, Mr Vieira fought alongside both Mr Mane and
Luiz Cabral, the man Mr Vieira was later to overthrow.  
  Mr Cabral was one of the founders of the PAIGC, and became the country's
president in 1974. He made Joao Vieira, who had previously been the commander
of the armed forces, his prime minister.  
  But Commander Vieira ousted his former ally from power in a near bloodless
coup in 1980.  
  He claimed that endemic corruption and economic mismanagement was preventing
the country from emerging from its extreme state of under-development.  
  But now the cycle of history has come full circle, and President Vieira is
accused of autocracy by fellow members of the PAIGC.  
  The current dispute was triggered when President Vieira fired the head of
the armed forces, Brigadier Ansumane Mane, on June 5, accusing him of allowing
arms to be smuggled to rebels in the southern Senegalese province of
Casamance.  
  General Mane, who also fought alongside President Vieira during the colonial
wars, attempted to seize control the following day. He declared himself the
head of a military government and called for free elections.  
  Relations with neighbours  
  Senegal and Guinea-Conakry both sent in troops to help crush General Mane's
revolt. But although Guinea-Bissau enjoys mostly good relations with its
neighbours, there have been some problems.  
  Relations with Senegal have been occasionally disturbed by border disputes,
which stem from an agreement made in 1960 between France and Portugal, the
former colonial powers. Senegal has also accused Guinea-Bissau in the past of
providing support for the Casamance rebels. President Vieira distanced himself
from this support by sacking Brigadier Mane. Now the leaders of the two
countries say they are committed to improving relations. The two governments
are united in their condemnation of both groups of rebels, who they believe
are helping each other.  
  There have also been border disputes with Guinea-Bissau's other neighbour,
Guinea-Conakry, particularly off-shore where they may be oil deposits.  
  The PAIGC had the original aim of securing the independence and unification
of Guinea-Bissau and the nearby Cape Verde islands. However, the idea of union
with Cape Verde was dropped after the 1980 coup.  
  Crippling debt  
  Although one of the world's poorest countries, Guinea-Bissau was once hailed
as a potential model for Third World development. After independence, the West
poured money into restructuring, but the country failed to meet any of its
economic targets.  
  The country, and its population of one million, still suffers from a
crippling external debt, with foreign financing still accounting for an
estimated 75% of budget revenue.  
  Gross Domestic Product: $253m - equivalent to $240 per head (according to a
World Bank estimate in 1994)  
  A key export is cashew nuts. Other cash crops are palm kernels and cotton.  
  The mining sector is under-developed, although the country has large
reserves of bauxite and phosphates  
  There may also be considerable oil reserves in off-shore areas. Drilling of
three offshore petroleum wells began in 1989.  
  Most of the population are subsistence farmers, whose staple food is rice.  
  June 15, 1998   200 Said to Drown While Fleeing African Fighting   Two
hundred people who were fleeing fighting between Government forces and
renegade soldiers in Guinea-Bissau drowned on Friday when they tried to reach
the coastal Bijagos Islands.  
![](_127795_soldiers_in_Guinea_Bissau_firing_rocket_300.jpg)  
    
 22 June 1998   Ogata warns of refugee crisis in Guinea Bissau   UN High
Commissioner for Refugees Sadako Ogata has appealed to regional heads of state
to find a peaceful solution to the conflict in Guinea Bissau, as fighting in
the West African nation stretched into its third week.  
  "Already, many tens of thousands of men, women and children have fled the
capital," Ogata said in a letter dated Friday 19 June to the presidents of
Guinea Bissau, Senegal, and Guinea. She warned that the confrontation "could
generate a major humanitarian crisis."  
  Ogata appealed to all parties to find "a peaceful and prompt settlement,"
addressing her call also to UN and OAU Secretaries-General Kofi Annan and
Salim Ahmed Salim, the Economic Community of West African States and the UN
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.  
  The last international UNHCR staff member left the capital of Bissau on 16
June with remaining UN personnel aboard a Portuguese naval vessel. The
majority of the city's residents have fled, and groups of civilians numbering
into the tens of thousands are without food, drinking water or health care in
the country's interior.  
  UNHCR has no news of the almost 5,000 refugees from Senegal who live in
villages in the Cacheu region of northern Guinea Bissau. Reports indicate that
fighting has also broken out in this region, where Jolmete refugee camp is
located.  
  "Immediate consequences could be famine, refugee outflow into neighboring
countries and threats to the safety of the 5,000 Senegalese refugees who have
been living in Guinea Bissau since 1992," the High Commissioner stated.  
  UNHCR staff in Dakar have registered several hundred refugees from Bissau
who arrived in Senegal by boat. A mission conducted to the border regions in
Senegal last week counted hundreds of people of other nationalities arriving
in the Casamance area, itself the scene of regular military action by a
separatist group, while Guinea (Conakry) already hosts over 500,000 refugees
from Sierra Leone and Liberia.  
  UNHCR emergency staff has deployed from Dakar to the border region of
Ziguinchor, and from Conakry to the remote areas of Koundara, Kamsar and
Gaoual.  


  Tuesday, July 7, 1998  
  FIGHTING INTENSIFIES IN GUINEA-BISSAU  
  Artillery exchanges in Bissau are said to be the fiercest yet  
  Reports from Guinea Bissau say there has been heavy shelling north of the
capital, where the rebel troops and the armed forces are vying for control of
the airport.  
  The artillery exchanges in the capital, Bissau, are reported to be the
fiercest for several days.  
  The BBC West Africa correspondent says the city is surrounded by rebel
troops, but both sides claim to be on the offensive.  
  The fighting began last month after the army chief, Brigadier Ansumane Mane
was sacked by the President Nino Vieira.  
  Some estimates say that up to 90% of the armed forces have joined his mutiny
against the president.  
  AROUND 250,000 PEOPLE, ALMOST A THIRD OF THE POPULATION OF GUINEA-BISSAU,
ARE BELIEVED TO HAVE BEEN DISPLACED BY THE CONFLICT. <IMG
SRC="_127795_Guinea_B

