hiroshima victim

[return to syllabus](hgp111.html)

**Account of a Bombing victim at Hiroshima**

> * * *

>

> Hachiya's Account of August 6 and 7, 1945

>

> * * *

>

> **6 AUGUST**  
>  What had happened?

>

>       All over the right side of my body I was cut and bleeding. A large
splinter was protruding from a mangled wound in my thigh, and something warm
trickled into my mouth. My cheek was torn, I discovered as I felt it gingerly,
with the lower lip laid wide open. Embedded in my neck was a sizable fragment
of glass which I matter-of-factly dislodged, and with the detachment of one
stunned and shocked I studied it and my blood-stained hand.

>

>       Where was my wife?

>

>       Suddenly thoroughly alarmed, I began to yell for her: "Yaeko-san!
Yaeko-san! Where are you?" Blood began to spurt. Had my carotid artery been
cut? Would I bleed to death? Frightened and irrational, I called out again:
"It's a five-hundred-ton bomb! Yaeko-san, where are you? A five-hundred-ton
bomb has fallen!"

>

>       Yaeko-san, pale and frightened, her clothes torn and blood-stained,
emerged from the ruins of our house holding her elbow. Seeing her, I was
reassured. My own panic assuaged, I tried to reassure her.

>

>       "We'll be all right," I exclaimed. "Only let's get out of here as fast
as we can."

>

>       She nodded, and I motioned for her to follow me.

>

>       The shortest path to the street lay through the house next door so
through the house we went-running, stumbling, falling, and then running again
until in headlong flight we tripped over something and fell sprawling into the
street. Getting to my feet, I discovered that I had tripped over a man's head.

>

>       "Excuse me! Excuse me, please!" I cried hysterically.

>

>       There was no answer. The man was dead. The head had belonged to a
young officer whose body was crushed beneath a massive gate.

>

>       We stood in the street, uncertain and afraid, until a house across
from us began to sway and then with a rending motion fell almost at our feet.
Our own house began to sway, and in a minute it, too, collapsed in a cloud of
dust. Other buildings caved in or toppled. Fires sprang up and whipped by a
vicious wind began to spread.

>

>       It finally dawned on us that we could not stay there in the street, so
we turned our steps towards the hospital. Our home was gone; we were wounded
and needed treatment; and after all, it was my duty to be with my staff. This
latter was an irrational thought-what good could I be to anyone, hurt as I
was.

>

>       We started out, but after twenty or thirty steps I had to stop. My
breath became short, my heart pounded, and my legs gave way under me. An
overpowering thirst seized me and I begged Yaeko-san to find me some water.
But there was no water to be found. After a little my strength somewhat
returned and we were able to go on.

>

>       I was still naked, and although I did not feel the least bit of shame,
I was disturbed to realize that modesty had deserted me. On rounding a corner
we came upon a soldier standing idly in the street. He had a towel draped
across his shoulder, and I asked if he would give it to me to cover my
nakedness. The soldier surrendered the towel quite willingly but said not a
word. A little later I lost the towel, and Yaeko-san took off her apron and
tied it around my loins.

>

>       Our progress towards the hospital was interminably slow, until
finally, my legs, stiff from drying blood, refused to carry me farther. The
strength, even the will, to go on deserted me, so I told my wife, who was
almost as badly hurt as I, to go on alone. This she objected to, but there was
no choice. She had to go ahead and try to find someone to come back for me.

>

>       Yaeko-san looked into my face for a moment. and then, without saying a
word, turned away and began running towards the hospital. Once, she looked
back and waved and in a moment she was swallowed up in the gloom. It was quite
dark now, and with my wife gone, a feeling of dreadful loneliness overcame me.

>

>       I must have gone out of my head lying there in the road because the
next thing I recall was discovering that the clot on my thigh had been
dislodged and blood was again spurting from the wound.

>

>       The sky became bright as flames from the hospital mounted. Soon the
Bureau was threatened and Mr. Sera gave the order to evacuate. My stretcher
was moved into a rear garden and placed beneath an old cherry tree. Other
patients limped into the garden or were carried until soon the entire area
became so crowded that only the very ill had room to lie down. No one talked,
and the ominous silence was relieved only by a subdued rustle among so many
people, restless, in pain, anxious, and afraid, waiting for something else to
happen.

>

>       The sky filled with black smoke and glowing sparks. Flames rose and
the heat set currents of air in motion. Updrafts became so violent that sheets
of zinc roofing were hurled aloft and released, humming and twirling, in
erratic fligh Pieces of flaming wood soared and fell like fiery swallows.
While I was trying to beat out the flames, a hot ember seared my ankle. It was
all I could do to keep from being burned alive.

>

>       The Bureau started to burn, and window after window became a square of
flame until the whole structure was converted into a crackling, hissing
inferno.

>

>       Scorching winds howled around us, whipping dust and ashes into our eye
and up our noses. Our mouths became dry, our throats raw and sore from the
biting smoke pulled into our lungs. Coughing was uncontrollable. We would have
moved back, but a group of wooden barracks behind us caught fire and began
burn like tinder.

>

> ![](7atomicbomb.gif)  
>  When the smoke cleared, there was total devastation.

>

>       The heat finally became too intense to endure, and we were left no
choice but to abandon the garden. Those who could fled; those who could not
perished. Had it not been for my devoted friends, I would have died, but
again, they came to the rescue and carried my stretcher to the main gate on
the other side of the Bureau.

>

>       Here a small group of people were already clustered, and here I found
wife. Dr. Sasada and Miss Kado joined us.

>

>       Fires sprang up on every side as violent winds fanned flames from orgy
building to another. Soon, we were surrounded. The ground we held in front the
Communications Bureau became an oasis in a desert of fire. As the flames came
closer the heat became more intense, and if someone in our group had not had
the presence of mind to drench us with water from a fire hose. I doubt anyone
could have survived.

>

>       Hot as it was, I began to shiver. The drenching was too much. My heart
pounded; things began to whirl until all before me blurred.

>

>       " _Kurushii_ ," I murmured weakly. "I am done."

>

>       The sound of voices reached my ears as though from a great distance
and finally became louder as if close at hand. I opened my eyes; Dr. Sasada
was feeling my pulse. What had happened? Miss Kado gave me an injection. My
strength gradually returned. I must have fainted.

>

>       Huge raindrops began to fall. Some thought a thunderstorm was
beginning and would extinguish the fires. But these drops were capricious. A
few fell and then a few more and that was all the rain we saw .

>

>       The first floor of the Bureau was now ablaze and flames were spreading
rapidly towards our little oasis by the gate. Right then, I could hardly
understand the situation, much less do anything about it.

>

>       An iron window frame, loosened by fire, crashed to the ground behind
us. A ball of fire whizzed by me, setting my clothes ablaze. They drenched me
with water again. From then on I am confused as to what happened.

>

>       I do remember Dr. Hinoi because of the pain, the pain I felt when he
jerked me to my feet. I remember being moved or rather dragged, and my whole
spirit rebelling against the torment I was made to endure.

>

>       My next memory is of an open area. The fires must have receded. I was
alive. My friends had somehow managed to rescue me again.

>

>       A head popped out of an air-raid dugout, and I heard the unmistakable
voice of old Mrs. Saeki: "Cheer up, doctor! Everything will be all right. The
north side is burnt out. We have nothing further to fear from the fire."

>

>       I might have been her son, the way the old lady calmed and reassured
me. And indeed, she was right. The entire northern side of the city was
completely burned. The sky was still dark, but whether it was evening or
midday I could not tell. It might even have been the next day. Time had no
meaning. What I had experienced might have been crowded into a moment or been
endured through the monotony of eternity.

>

>       Smoke was still rising from the second floor of the hospital, but the
fire had stopped. There was nothing left to burn, I thought; but later I
learned that the first floor of the hospital had escaped destruction largely
through the courageous efforts of Dr. Koyama and Dr. Hinoi.

>

>       The streets were deserted except for the dead. Some looked as if they
had been frozen by death while in the full action of flight; others lay
sprawled as though some giant had flung them to their death from a great
height.

>

>       Hiroshima was no longer a city, but a burnt-over prairie. To the east
and to the west everything was flattened. The distant mountains seemed nearer
than I could ever remember. The hills of Ushita and the woods of Nigitsu
loomed out of the haze and smoke like the nose and eyes on a face. How small
Hiroshima was with its houses gone.

>

>       The wind changed and the sky again darkened with smoke.

>

>       Suddenly, I heard someone shout: "Planes! Enemy planes!"

>

>       Could that be possible after what had already happened? What was there
left to bomb? My thoughts were interrupted by the sound of a familiar name.

>

>       A nurse calling Dr. Katsube.

>

>       "It is Dr. Katsube! It's him!" shouted old Mrs. Saeki, a happy ring to
her voice. "Dr. Katsube has come!"

>

>       It was Dr. Katsube, our head surgeon, but he seemed completely unaware
of us as he hurried past, making a straight line for the hospital. Enemy
planes were forgotten, so great was our happiness that Dr. Katsube had been
spared to return to us.

>

>       Before I could protest, my friends were carrying me into the hospital.
The distance was only a hundred meters, but it was enough to cause my heart to
pound and make me sick and faint.

>

>       I recall the hard table and the pain when my face and lip were
sutured, but I have no recollection of the forty or more other wounds Dr.
Katsube closed before night.

>

>       They removed me to an adjoining room, and I remember feeling relaxed
and sleepy. The sun had gone down, leaving a dark red sky. The red flames of
the burning city had scorched the heavens. I gazed at the sky until sleep
overtook me.

>

> **7 AUGUST**  
>  Dr. Tabuchi, an old friend from Ushita, came in. His face and hands had
been burned, though not badly, and after an exchange of greetings, I asked if
he knew what had happened.

>

>       "I was in the back yard pruning some trees when it exploded," he
answered. "The first thing I knew, there was a blinding white flash of light,
and a wave of intense heat struck my cheek. This was odd, I thought, when in
the next instance there was a tremendous blast.

>

>       "The force of it knocked me clean over," he continued, "but
fortunately, it didn't hurt me; and my wife wasn't hurt either. But you should
have seen our house! It didn't topple over, it just inclined. I have never
seen such a mess. Inside and out everything was simply ruined. Even so, we are
happy to be alive, and what's more Ryoji, our son, survived. I didn't tell you
that he had gone into the city on business that morning. About midnight, after
we had given up all hope that he could possibly survive in the dreadful fire
that followed the blast, he came home. Listen!" he continued, "why don't you
come on home with me? My house is certainly nothing to look at now, but it is
better than here."

>

>       It was impossible for me to accept his kind offer, and I tried to
decline in a way that would not hurt his feelings.

>

>       "Dr. Tabuchi," I replied, "we are all grateful for your kind offer,
but Dr. Katsube has just warned me that I must lie perfectly still until my
wounds are healed."

>

>       Dr. Tabuchi accepted my explanation with some reluctance, and after a
pause he made ready to go. "Don't go," I said, "Please tell us more of what
occurred yesterday."

>

>       "It was a horrible sight," said Dr. Tabuchi. "Hundreds of injured
people who were trying to escape to the hills passed our house. The sight of
them was almost unbearable. Their faces and hands were burnt and swollen; and
great sheets of skin had peeled away from their tissues to hang down like rags
on a scarecrow. They moved like a line of ants. All through the night, they
went past our house, but this morning they had stopped. I found them lying on
both sides of the road so thick that it was impossible to pass without
stepping on them."

>

>       I lay with my eyes shut while Dr. Tabuchi was talking, picturing in my
mind the horror he was describing. I neither saw nor heard Mr. Katsutani when
he came in. It was not until I heard someone sobbing that my attention was
attracted, and I recognized my old friend. 1 had known Mr. Katsutani for many
years and knew him to be an emotional person, but even so, to see him break
down made tears come to my eyes. He had come all the way from Jigozen to look
for me, and now that he had found me, emotion overcame him.

>

>       He turned to Dr. Sasada and said brokenly: "Yesterday, it was
impossible to enter Hiroshima, else I would have come. Even today fires are
still burning in some places. You should see how the city has changed. When I
reached the Misasa Bridge this morning, everything before me was gone, even
the castle. These buildings here are the only ones left anywhere around. The
Communications Bureau seemed to loom right in front of me long before I got
anywhere near here."

>

>       Mr. Katsutani paused for a moment to catch his breath and went on: "I
really walked along the railroad tracks to get here, but even they were
littered with electric wires and broken railway cars, and the dead and wounded
lay everywhere. When I reached the bridge, I saw a dreadful thing. It was
unbelievable, There was a man, stone dead, sitting on his bicycle as it leaned
against the bridge railing. It is hard to believe that such a thing could
happen!"

>

>       He repeated himself two or three times as if to convince himself that
what he said was true and then continued: "It seems that most of the dead
people were either on the bridge or beneath it. You could tell that many had
gone down to the river to get a drink of water and had died where they lay. I
saw a few live people still in the water, knocking against the dead as they
floated down the river. There must have been hundreds and thousands who fled
to the river to escape the fire and then drowned.

>

>       "The sight of the soldiers, though, was more dreadful than the dead
people floating down the river. I came onto I don't know how many, burned from
the hips up; and where the skin had peeled, their flesh was wet and mushy.
They must have been wearing their military caps because the black hair on top
of their heads was not burned. It made them look like they were wearing black
lacquer bowls.

>

>       "And they had no faces! Their eyes, noses and mouths had been burned
away, and it looked like their ears had melted off. It was hard to tell front
from back. One soldier, whose features had been destroyed and was left with
his white teeth sticking out, asked me for some water, but I didn't have any.
I clasped my hands and prayed for him. He didn't say anything more. His plea
for water must have been his last words. The way they were burned, I wonder if
they didn't have their coats off when the bomb exploded."

>

> ![](7atomicbomb1.gif)  
>  Young male burn victim in Hiroshima.

>

>       It seemed to give Mr. Katsutani some relief to pour out his terrifying
experiences on us; and there was no one who would have stopped him, so
fascinating was his tale of horror. While he was talking, several people came
in and stayed to listen. Somebody asked him what he was doing when the
explosion occurred.

>

>       "I had just finished breakfast," he replied, "and was getting ready to
light a cigarette, when all of a sudden I saw a white flash. In a moment there
was a tremendous blast. Not stopping to think, I let out a yell and jumped
into an air-raid dugout. In a moment there was such a blast as I have never
heard before. It was terrific! I jumped out of the dugout and pushed my wife
into it. Realizing something terrible must have happened in Hiroshima, I
climbed up onto the roof of my storehouse to have a look."

>

>       Mr. Katsutani became more intense and, gesticulating wildly, went on:
"Towards Hiroshima, I saw a big black cloud go billowing up, like a puffy
summer cloud. Knowing for sure then that something terrible had happened in
the city, I jumped down from my storehouse and ran as fast as I could to the
military post at Hatsukaichi. I ran up to the officer in charge and told him
what I had seen and begged him to send somebody to help in Hiroshima. But he
didn't even take me seriously. He looked at me for a moment with a threatening
expression, and then do you know what he said? He said, 'There isn't much to
worry about. One or two bombs won't hurt Hiroshima.' There was no use talking
to that fool!

>

>       "I was the ranking officer in the local branch of the Ex-officer's
Association, but even I didn't know what to do because that day the villagers
under my command had been sent off to Miyajima for labor service. I looked all
around to find someone to help me make a rescue squad, but I couldn't find
anybody. While I was still looking for help, wounded people began to stream
into the village. I asked them what had happened, but all they could tell me
was that Hiroshima had been destroyed and everybody was leaving the city. With
that I got on my bicycle and rode as fast as I could towards Itsukaichi. By
the time I got there, the road was jammed with people, and so was every path
and byway.

>

>       "Again I tried to find out what had happened, but nobody could give me
a clear answer. When I asked these people where they had come from, they would
point towards Hiroshima and say, 'This way.' And when I asked where they were
going, they would point toward Miyajima and say, 'That way.' Everybody said
the same thing.

>

>       "I saw no badly wounded or burned people around Itsukaichi, but when I
reached Kusatsu, nearly everybody was badly hurt. The nearer I got to
Hiroshima the more I saw until by the time I had reached Koi, they were all so
badly injured, I could not bear to look into their faces. They smelled like
burning hair."

>

>       Mr. Katsutani paused for a moment to take a deep breath and then
continued: "The area around Koi station was not burned, but the station and
the houses nearby were badly damaged. Every square inch of the station
platform was packed with wounded people. Some were standing; others lying
down. They were all pleading for water. Now and then you could hear a child
calling for its mother. It was a living hell, I tell you. It was a living
hell!

>

>       All day I had listened to visitors telling me about the destruction of
Hiroshima and the scenes of horror they had witnessed. I had seen my friends
wounded, their families separated, their homes destroyed. I was aware of the
problems our staff had to face, and I knew how bravely they struggled against
superhuman odds. I knew what the patients had to endure and the trust they put
in the doctors and nurses, who, could they know the truth, were as helpless as
themselves.

>

>       By degrees my capacity to comprehend the magnitude of their sorrow, to
share with them the pain, frustration, and horror became so dulled that I
found myself accepting whatever was told me with equanimity and a detachment I
would have never believed possible.

>

>       In two days I had become at home in this environment of chaos and
despair.

>

>       I felt lonely, but it was an animal loneliness. I became part of the
darkness of the night. There were no radios, no electric lights, not even a
candle. The only light that came to me was reflected in flickering shadows
made by the burning city. The only sounds were the groans and sobs of the
patients. Now and then a patient in delirium would call for his mother, or the
voice of one in pain would breathe out the word _eraiyo_ \- "the pain is
unbearable; I cannot endure it!"

[return to syllabus](hgp111.html)

