|  |  |  |  |  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
| [![To UCB Homepage](gifs/smbuff.jpg)](http://www.colorado.edu/) |

## HONORS 4000-882

## The Biology of Consciousness

|  
|  |

_(C)_ _1998_

|  |  
  
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
|  |

[Course HomePage](index.html)

|  |

[Student Projects](projects.html)

|  |

[Syllabus](syllabus.html)

|  
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  
|  |

[Course Bookmarks](bookm.html)

|  |

[Dubin Bookmarks](http://spot.colorado.edu/~dubin/Bookmarks.html)

|  |

[Instructor Info](instructor.html)

|  
  
* * *

**Buddhist Concept of Mindfulness

* * *

**

**Annotations/discussion questions are in this style text. Also some ideas in
the article itself that might be discussed are highlighted in bold text.**

**The numbering scheme simply is paragraph by paragraph, for the sake of
discussion and does not necessarily indicate a point-by-point argument.**

**

* * *

**

**SATI - excerpt from _Mindfulness in Plain English_**

**by Venerable Henepola Gunaratana Available at the URL**

<http://www/www.ncf.carleton.ca/dharma/introduction/instructions/sati.html>

  1. Mindfulness is the English translation of the Pali word 'Sati.' Sati is an activity. What exactly is that? Well, this is one of those questions without a precise answer, at least not in words. **Words are devised by the symbolic levels of the mind and they describe those realities with which symbolic thinking deals.**

**What do you understand this sentence to mean?**

  2. Mindfulness (Sati) is pre-symbolic. It is not shackled to logic. Nevertheless, Mindfulness can be experienced - rather easily - and it can be described, as long as you keep in mind that the **words are only fingers pointing at the moon. They are not the thing itself. The actual experience lies beyond the words and above the symbols.**

**Are you aware of any trends in Western philosophical thought that are
similar to this point?**

  3. Mindfulness could be described in completely different terms than will be used here and each description could still be correct. 

  4. Mindfulness (Sati) is a subtle process that you are using at this very moment. The fact that this process lies above and beyond words does not make it unreal - quite the reverse. **Mindfulness is the reality which gives rise to words - the words that follow are simply pale shadows of reality.** So, it is important to understand that everything that follows here is an analogy. It is not going to make perfect sense. Please don't sit around scratching your head and trying to figure it all out. In fact, the meditational technique called Vipassana (insight) that was introduced by the Buddha about twenty-five centuries ago is a set of mental activities specifically aimed at experiencing a state of uninterrupted Mindfulness or Sati.

  5. When you first become aware of something there is a **fleeting instant of pure awareness** just before you conceptualize he thing, before you identify it. That is a stage of Mindfulness (Sati). Ordinarily, this stage is very short. It is that flashing split second just before you focus your eyes on the thing, just before you focus your mind on the thing, just before you objectify it, clamp down on it mentally and segregate it from the rest of existence.

**We have discussed the concept that the brain is a pattern-seeking and
pattern-making device. In any case, it seems that neurons communicate a highly
filtered sensory input, not some "real reality" that is uncontaminated by
brain functioning. Given this point of view, does the "fleeting instant of
pure awareness" correspond to the object of that awareness?**

**Put another way, if as is said above "words . . . are not the thing itself,"
could we also say that "brain activity is not the thing itself."**

  6. It takes place just before you start thinking about it - before that little 'yak, yak' machine inside your skull says, "Oh, it's a dog." That flowing, soft-focused moment of pure awareness is Mindfulness (Sati). **In that brief flashing mind-moment you experience a thing as an un-thing. You experience a softly flowing moment of pure experience that is interlocked with the rest of reality, not separate from it.** Mindfulness is very much like what you see with your peripheral vision as opposed to the hard focus of normal or central vision. **Yet this moment of soft, unfocused, awareness contains a very deep sort of knowing that is lost as soon as you focus your mind and objectify the object into a thing.** In the process of ordinary perception, the Mindfulness (Sati) step is so fleeting as to be unobservable. We have developed the habit of squandering our attention on all the remaining steps, focusing on the perception, cognizing the perception, labeling it, and most of all, getting involved in a long string of symbolic thought about it. That original moment of Mindfulness just gets lost in the shuffle. It is the purpose of the above mentioned Vipassana (or insight) meditation to train us to prolong that moment of awareness.

**Perhaps we can soften the implications of my suggestion that even brain
activity is not the thing itself, by reading the previous paragraph to suggest
that Mindfulness is the moment prior to alteration brought about by conscious,
semantic processing.**

  7. When this Mindfulness (Sati) is prolonged by using proper techniques, you find that this experience is profound and it changes your whole view of the universe. This state of perception has to be learned, however, and it takes regular practice. Once you learn the technique, you will find that Mindfulness has a number of interesting characteristics. 

  8. THE CHARACTERISTICS OF MINDFULNESS (SATI) - Mindfulness (Sati) is mirror-thought. It reflects only what is presently happening and in exactly the way it is happening. There are no biases.

**Might we modify this to say there are no CONSCIOUS biases?**

  9. Mindfulness (Sati) is non-judgmental observation. It is that ability of the mind to observe without criticism. **With this ability, one sees things without condemnation or judgment.** One is surprised by nothing. One simply takes a balanced interest in things exactly as they are in their natural states. One does not decide and does not judge. One just observes. 

  10. It is psychologically impossible for us to objectively observe what is going on within us if we do not at the same time accept the occurrence of our various states of mind. This is especially true with unpleasant states of mind. In order to observe our own fear, we must accept the fact that we are afraid. We can't examine our own depression without accepting it fully. The same is true for irritation and agitation, frustration and all those other uncomfortable emotional states. You can't examine something fully if you are busy rejecting the existence of it. **Whatever experience we may be having, Mindfulness just accepts it.** It is simply another of life's occurrences, just another thing to be aware of. No pride, no shame, nothing personal at stake \- what is there, is there. 

  11. Mindfulness (Sati) is an impartial watchfulness. It does not take sides. It does not get hung up in what is perceived. It just perceives. Mindfulness does not get infatuated with the good stuff. It does not try to sidestep the bad stuff. There is no clinging to the pleasant, no fleeing from the unpleasant. Mindfulness sees all experiences as equal, all thoughts as equal, all feelings as equal. Nothing is suppressed. Nothing is repressed. Mindfulness does not play favorites. 

  12. **Mindfulness (Sati) is nonconceptual awareness. Another English term for Sati is 'bare attention.' It is not thinking. It does not get involved with thought or concepts.** It does not get hung up on ideas or opinions or memories. It just looks. Mindfulness registers experiences, but it does not compare them. It just observes everything as if they were occurring for the first time. **It is not analysis which is based on reflection and memory.**

**But, isn't memory built into the synapses that are doing the awareness
itself?**

  13. It is, rather, the direct and immediate experience of whatever is happening, without the medium of thought. It comes BEFORE thought in the perceptual process. 

  14. Mindfulness (Sati) is present-time awareness. It takes place in the here and now. It is the observance of what is happening right now, in the present moment. It stays forever in the present, surging perpetually on the crest of the ongoing wave of passing time. **If you are remembering your second-grade teacher, that is memory. When you then become aware that you are remembering your second-grade teacher, that is Mindfulness. If you then conceptualize the process and say to yourself, "Oh, I am remembering", that is thinking.**

  15. **Mindfulness (Sati) is non-egoistic alertness. It takes place without reference to self.** With Mindfulness one sees all phenomena without references to concepts like  "me", "my" or "mine". For example, suppose there is a pain in your left leg. Ordinary consciousness would say, "I have a pain." Using Mindfulness, one would simply note the sensation as a sensation. One would not tack on that extra concept "I". Mindfulness stops one from adding anything to perception, or subtracting anything from it. One does not enhance anything. One does not emphasize anything. One just observes what is there-- without distortion. 

  16. **Mindfulness (Sati) is goal-less awareness.** In Mindfulness, one does not strain for results. One does not try to accomplish anything. When one is mindful, one experiences reality in the present moment in whatever form it takes. There is nothing to be achieved. There is only observation. 

  17. Mindfulness (Sati) is awareness of change. It is observing the passing flow of experience. It is watching things as they are changing. It is seeing the birth, growth, and maturity of all phenomena. It is watching phenomena decay and die. Mindfulness is watching things moment by moment, continuously. It is observing all phenomena - physical, mental or emotional - whatever is presently taking place in the mind. One just sits back and watches the show. Mindfulness is the observance of the basic nature of each passing phenomena. It is watching the thing arising and passing away. It is seeing how the thing makes us feel and how we react to it. It is observing how it affects others **. In Mindfulness, one is an unbiased observer whose sole job is to keep track of the constantly passing show of the universe within. Please note that last point. In Mindfulness, one watches the universe within. The meditator who is developing Mindfulness (Sati) is not concerned with the external universe.** It is there, but in meditation, one's field of study is one's own experience, one's thoughts, one's feelings, and one's perceptions. In meditation, one is one's own laboratory. The universe within has an enormous fund of information containing the reflection of the external world and much more. An examination of this material leads to total freedom. 

  18. **Mindfulness (Sati) is participatory observation. The meditator is both participant and observer at one and the same time.** If one watches one's emotions or physical sensations, one is feeling them at that very same moment. **Mindfulness is not an intellectual awareness. It is just awareness.** The Mirror-thought metaphor breaks down here. Mindfulness is objective, but it is not cold or unfeeling. It is the wakeful experience of life, an alert participation in the ongoing process of living. 

  19. Mindfulness is an extremely difficult concept to define in words--not because it is complex, but because it is too simple and open. The same problem crops up in every area of human experience. The most basic concept is always the most difficult to pin down. Look at a dictionary and you will see a clear example. Long words generally have concise definitions, but for short basic words like "the", "is" or "but", definitions can be a page long. And in physics, the most difficult functions to describe are the most basic--those that deal with the most fundamental realities of quantum mechanics. Mindfulness is a pre- symbolic function. You can play with word symbols all day long and you will never pin it down completely. We can never fully express what it is.

**. . . (some material is deleted here and can be found in the full text at
the URL noted at the start of this article)**

  20. Fully developed Mindfulness (Sati) is a state of total non-attachment and utter absence of clinging to anything in the world. If we can maintain this state, no other means or device is needed to keep ourselves free of obstructions, to achieve liberation from our human weaknesses. Mindfulness is non-superficial awareness. It sees things deeply, down below the level of concepts and opinions. This sort of deep observation leads to total certainty, a complete absence of confusion. It manifests itself primarily as a constant and unwavering attention which never flags an which never turns away. 

  21. This pure and unstained investigative awareness not only holds the fetters at bay, it lays bare their very mechanism and destroys them. Mindfulness neutralizes defilements in the mind. The result is a mind which remains unstained and invulnerable, completely unaffected by the ups and downs of life.

* * *

**The following article treats the mind/matter distinction that is intrinsic
to mindfulness. It can be found at the URL:**

<http://www.ncf.carleton.ca/freenet/rootdir/menus/sigs/religion/buddhism/introduction/instructions/Burmese-
instructions.html>



**Satipatthana Vipassana Meditation - The following explanation of the
Buddhist practice of mindfulness has been drastically abridged from the
beginning of the text SATIPATTHANA VISPASSANA MEDITATION by The Venerable
Mahasi Sayadaw Agga Maha Pandita.**

  1. The method of developing Wisdom is to observe matter and mind which are the two sole elements existing in a body with a view to know them in their true form. At present times experiments in the analytical observation of matter are usually carried out in laboratories with the aid of various kinds of instruments; yet these methods cannot deal with mindstuff. The Buddhist method of does not, however, require any kind of instruments or outside aid. It can successfully deal with both matter and mind. **It makes use of one's own mind for analytical purpose by fixing bare attention on the activities of matter and mind as they occur in the body.** By continually repeating this form of exercise the necessary Concentration can be gained and when the Concentration is keen enough, the ceaseless course of arising and passing away of matter and mind will be vividly perceptible. 

  2. **The body consists solely of the two distinct groups of matter and mind.** The solid substance of body is a mass of matter. Matter changes its form under physical conditions of heat, cold, etc., and because of this fact of changeableness under contrary physical conditions it is called Form (rupa). It does not possess any faculty of knowing an object. In the Abhidhamma, the proper name for the third division of the Buddhist scriptures, dealing with the metaphysical and psychological, the elements of mind and matter are classified differently as Things Which Possess Consciousness and Things Which Lack Consciousness (sarammana dhamma and anarammana dhamma) respectively. **The element of mind has an object, or holds an object, or knows an object while that of matter does not have an object, nor holds an object, nor knows an object. There is no faculty of knowing an object in the element of matter.**

**Does this sound like Cartesian dualism? How might it differ from such
dualism? Keep these questions in mind as you read further.**

  3. A Yogi [meditator] also perceives in like manner, that is, "material element has no faculty of knowing." **Logs and pillars, bricks and stones and lumps of earth are a mass of matter; they do not possess any faculty of knowing.** It is the same case with material elements consisting in a living body; they have no faculty of knowing. The material elements in a dead body are like those, of a living body; they are without the faculty of knowing. 

  4. **Then what is that which knows the objects now? It is the element of mind which comes into being depending on matter.** It is called Mind (nama) because it inclines to an object. Mind is also spoken of as  "thought" or "consciousness." **Mind arises depending on matter as will be described hereafter.**

**How does this relate to the idea that mind is a result of brain, or a
property of brain?**

  5. Depending on the eyes, eye-consciousness (seeing) arises; depending on the ears, ear-consciousness (hearing) arises; depending on the nose, nose- consciousness (smelling) arises; depending on the tongue, tongue-consciousness (taste) arises; depending on the body, body-consciousness (sense of touch) arises. There are many kinds, either good or bad, of the sense of touch. 

  6. While it has a wide field of action by running throughout the whole length of body, inside and outside, the sense of sight, hearing, smell, or taste can on the other hand come into being respectively in its own particular sphere, such as eye, ear, nose, and tongue, which occupies a very small and limited space of the body. **These senses of touch, sight, etc., are nothing but the elements of mind.** **Also there comes into being the mind-consciousness (i.e., thoughts, ideas, imaginations, etc.) depending on mind-base.** All of these are elements of mind. **Mind as a rule knows an object while matter does not know.** People generally believe that, in the case of seeing, it is the eye which actually sees. They think that seeing and eye are one and the same thing. They also think,  "Seeing is I/I see things/eye and seeing and I/ are one and the same person." In actual fact this is not so. **Eye is one thing and seeing is another and there is no separate entity such as "I" or "Ego." **There is only the fact of "seeing" coming into being depending on eye.

**If we are looking for dualism, this doesn't sound like the classical concept
of an inner theatre that is at the heart of Descartes' thought.**

  7. People who are without the training and knowledge of the Meditational Development of Insight (vipassana bhavana) hold the view that seeing belongs to or is "self, or ego, or living entity, or person." They believe that "Seeing is I; or I am seeing; or I am knowing." **This kind of view or belief is called the Erroneous View That There is a Self (sakkaya-ditthi).** Sakkaya means the group of matter (rupa) and mind (nama) as they exist distinctively. Ditthi means to hold a wrong view of belief. The compound word of Sakkaya-ditthi means to hold a wrong view or belief on the dual set of Matter and Mind which are in real existence. For more clarity it will be explained further as to the manner of holding the wrong view or belief. At the moment of seeing, the things that are in actual existence are the eye and visual object of material group, and the seeing which belongs to mental group. These two kinds are in actual existence. Yet people hold the view that this group of elements is  "self, or ego, or living entity." They consider that "seeing is I; or what is seen is I; or I see my own body." Thus, this mistaken view is taken on the simple act of seeing as "self," which is Sakkaya-ditthi. 

  8. One should practice by constantly noting or observing every act of seeing, hearing, etc., which are the constituent physical and mental processes of the body, till one is freed from Sakkaya-ditthi. For these reasons advice is always given here to take up the practice of Vipassana Meditation. 

  9. In this respect the exercise is simply to note or observe the existing elements in every act of seeing. It should be noted as "seeing, seeing," on every act of seeing. (By the term note or observe or contemplate is meant the act of keeping the mind fixedly on the object with a view to knowing clearly.) Because of this fact of keeping the mind fixedly by noting as "seeing, seeing," at times a visual object is noticed, at times consciousness of seeing is noticed, or at times it is noticed as eye-base or as a place from which it sees. It will serve the purpose if one can notice distinctly any one of the three. If not, basing on this act of seeing there will arise the erroneous view of self which will view it in the form of a person or belonging to a person and in the sense of Permanence, Happiness and Selfhood (nicca, sukha and atta), which will arouse attachment and craving. The Defilements will in turn prompt deeds, and the deeds will bring forth rebirth of new existence. Thus the process of dependent origination operates and the vicious circle of Samsara revolves incessantly. In order to prevent this from the source of seeing, it is necessary to note as "seeing, seeing" on every occasion of seeing. 

  10. Similarly, in the case of hearing, there are only two distinct elements of matter and mind. The sense of hearing arises depending on ear. While ear and sound are two elements of matter, the sense of hearing is an element of mind. In order to know clearly any one of these two kinds of matter and mind it should be noted as "hearing, hearing" on every occasion of hearing. So also it should be noted as "smelling, smelling" on every occasion of smelling, and as "knowing, knowing" on every occasion of knowing the taste. 

  11. Similarly, in the case of knowing or feeling the sensation of touch in the body. **There is a kind of material element known as Nerve Tissue (kaya-pasada) throughout the body which receives every impression of touch. Every kind of touch, either agreeable or disagreeable, usually comes in collision with Nerve Tissue and there arises a Touch Consciousness (kaya-vinnana) which feels or knows the touch on each occasion.** It will now be seen that at every time of touching there are two elements of matter, viz., sense-organ and impression of touch, and one element of mind, viz., knowing of touch.

**This seems to posit a step that occurs between the activation of nerve
tissue and the consciousness of sensation. This seems to be a variant of
dualism again. An alternative view--such as Searle'--is that the activation of
certain nerve tissue IS COEXISTENT with the consciousness of touch.**

  12. In order to know these things distinctly at every time of touch the practice of noting as "touching, touching" has to be carried out. This merely refers to the common form of sensation of touch. There are special forms which accompany painful or disagreeable sensations, such as, to feel stiff or tired in the body or limbs, to feel hot, to feel pain, to feel numb, to feel ache, etc. Because Feeling (vedana) predominates in these cases, it should be noted as "feeling hot, feeling tired, painful, etc." as the case may be. 

  13. It may also be mentioned that there occur many sensations of touch in hands and legs, etc., on each occasion of bending, stretching, or moving. Because of mind wanting to move, stretch or bend, the material activities of moving, stretching, or bending, etc., occur in series. (It may not be possible to notice these incidents for the present. They can only be noticed after some time on gaining practice. It is mentioned here for the sake of Knowledge.) All activities in movements and in changing, etc., are done by these minds. When the mind wills to bend, there arises a series of inward movements of hand or leg; when the mind wills to stretch or move, there arises a series of outward movements or movements to and fro respectively. They disappear or are lost soon after they occur and at the very point of occurrence. (One will notice these incidents later on.) 

  14. **In every case of bending, stretching or other activities, there arises in the foremost a series of intending or willing minds, and on account of which there occur in the hands and legs a series of material activities, such as stiffening (or being hard), bending, stretching, or moving to and fro.** These activities come up against other material elements, nerve tissue, and on every occasion of collision between material activities and sensitive qualities, there arises Touch Consciousness, which feels or knows the sensation of touch. It is, therefore, clear that material activities are the predominating factors in these cases. It is necessary to notice these predominating factors. If not, there will surely arise the wrong view of holding these activities in the sense of  "I or I am bending, or I am stretching, or My hands, or My legs." This practice of noting as "bending, stretching, moving" is being carried out for the purpose of removing such a wrong view. 

  15. As regards "thoughts, imaginations, etc." it may be mentioned that depending on mind-base there arise a series of mental activities, such as thinking, imagining, etc., or to speak in a general sense, a series of mental activities arise depending on this body. In reality each case is a composition of matter and mind; **mind-base or body is matter, while thinking, imagining, etc. are mind.** In order to be able to notice matter and mind clearly, it should be noted as  "thinking, imagining, etc." in each case. After having carried out the practice in the manner indicated above for a time, there may be an improvement in Concentration. One will notice that the mind no longer wanders about but remains fixedly on the object to which it is directed. At the same time the power of noticing has considerably developed. On every occasion of noting he notices only two processes of matter and mind. A dual set of object and mind, which makes note of the object, is thus coming into existence. 

  16. Again on proceeding further with the practice of contemplation for some time, one notices that nothing remains permanent but everything is in a state of flux. New things arise each time: each of them is noted every time as it arises; it then vanishes. Immediately another arises, which is again noted and which then vanishes. Thus the process of arising and vanishing goes on, which clearly shows that nothing is permanent. One is therefore convinced that "things are not permanent" because it is noticed that they arise and vanish at every time of noting. **This is Insight into impermanence (aniccanupassana-nana).**

  17. Then one is also convinced that arising and vanishing are not desirable. This is Insight into Suffering (dukkhanupassana-nana). Besides, one usually experiences many painful sensations in the body, such as tiredness, feeling hot, painful, aching, and at the time of noting these sensations one generally feels that this body is a collection of sufferings. This is also Insight into Suffering. Then at every time of noting it is found that elements of matter and mind occur according to their respective nature and conditioning, and not according to one's wish. One is therefore convinced that they are elements: they are not governable, they are not person or living entity. **This is Insight into the Absence of a Self (anattanupassana-nana).**

**What is the relationship of "absence of self" to the concept of free will?**

  18. On having fully acquired these knowledges of Impermanence, Suffering, Absence of Self (anicca, dukkha, anatta), the maturity of Spiritual Knowledge of the Path and Spiritual Knowledge of its Fruition (magga nana and phala nana) takes place and realization of Nirvana is won. By winning the realization of Nirvana in the first stage, one is freed from the round of rebirth in the unhappy life of lower existence. Everyone should, therefore, endeavor to reach the first stage as a minimum measure. 

  19. It has already been explained that the actual method of practice in Vipassana Meditation is to note or to observe or to contemplate the successive occurrences of seeing, hearing, etc., at six points or sense doors. However, it will not be possible for a beginner to follow up all successive incidents as they occur because his Mindfulness, Concentration and Spiritual Knowledge (sati, samadhi and nana) are still very weak. The incidents of seeing, hearing, etc. occur very swiftly. Seeing seems to occur at the time of hearing; hearing seems to occur at the time of seeing; it seems that both seeing and healing occur simultaneously. It seems that three or four incidents of seeing, hearing, thinking, and imagining usually occur simultaneously. It is not possible to distinguish which occurs first and which follows next because they occur so swiftly. In actual fact, seeing does not occur at the time of hearing nor does hearing occur at the time of seeing. Such incidents can occur one only at a time. A Yogi who has just begun the practice and who has not sufficiently developed Mindfulness, Concentration and Spiritual Knowledge will not, however, be in a position to observe all these incidents singly as they occur in serial order. A beginner need not therefore follow up many things, but should instead start with a few things.

**(Material on actual practice of meditation is omitted here and available in
the text at the URL noted.)**



**

* * *

**

Another interesting paper by a student, entitled Buddhist Meditation and
Personal Construct Psychology is available at
<http://serendip.brynmawr.edu/bb/Pilou.html>

