BOSTON UNIVERSITY

DEPARTMENT OF AEROSPACE STUDIES

  

  

_The Evolution of USAF Air and Space Power_

  

COURSE SYLLABUS: AS 210 - FALL SEMESTER 2001

  

1\. GENERAL INFORMATION

  

A. Instructor: Captain Luc J.F. Lambert

118 Bay State Road --Room 206

B. Office Hours: Mon, Tues, 0900-1100 and 1400-1700

Thur, Fri 0900-1100

Schedule appointments in schedule book on Donna's desk

NOTE: Walk-ins welcome, but I may not be able to meet with you due to other
appointments.

  

C. Class Dates: 5 September - 6 December

D. Class Times: Wednesday, 1400-1500, SMG 228

Wednesday, 1830-1930, CAS 220

  

2\. COURSE DESCRIPTION

  

This course is designed to examine general aspects of air and space power
through a historical perspective. Utilizing this perspective, the course
covers a time period from the first balloons and dirigibles to the space-age
systems of today. Historical examples are provided to extrapolate the
development of Air Force capabilities (competencies), and missions (functions)
to demonstrate the evolution of what has become today's USAF air and space
power. Furthermore, the course examines several fundamental truths associated
with conflict and military power: e.g. the Principles of War and the Tenets of
Air and Space Power. As a whole, this course provides the students with a
knowledge level understanding for the general element and employment of air
and space power, from an institutional, doctrinal, and historical perspective.
In addition, the students will examine the Air Force Core Values with the use
of operational examples, and will conduct writing and briefing assignments to
meet Air Force communication skills requirements.

  

3\. COURSE GOALS

  

A. Know the key terms and definitions used to describe air and space power.

  

B. Know the milestones and historical events, leaders, and technological
advancements which surround the evolution and employment of USAF air and space
power.

  

C. Demonstrate basic military verbal and written communications skills.

  

D. Demonstrate an operational understanding of the Air Force Core Values.

  

  

4\. MEETING COURSE GOALS: Course goals are met through the MAIN POINTS /
SAMPLES OF BEHAVIOR (SOB) for each academic lesson. These will be listed on
handouts I give to you each class session. You are strongly encouraged to use
these samples of behavior for each lesson as you prepare for class and the
examinations.

  

5\. ASSIGNED TEXTS: During the first week of classes, you need to make an
appointment with TSgt Morris to pick-up your book for this class. At the end
of the semester, you will need to SAVE YOUR BOOK FOR SPRING SEMESTER. We will
continue to use the same book for the spring semester as well. At the end of
the year, the book is yours to keep as a short reference to USAF history.

The following is the textbook we will use in this class:

  

A. A Concise History of the U.S. Air Force, T-208.

  

6\. GRADING PROCEDURES

  

A. Grade Breakout

Mid-term 30%

Final 30%

Background Paper 17.5%

Briefing 17.5%

Class Participation 5%

  

B. Grade Table: Grades are determined on a fixed percentage using the table
below

(Score/Letter Grade/Honor Points):

  

95-100/ A / 4.0 77-79/ C+/2.3

90-94/ A-/ 3.7 73-76/ C /2.0

87-89/ B+/ 3.3 70-72/ C-/ 1.7

83-86/ B / 3.0 65-69/ D /1.0

80-82/ B-/ 2.7 0-64/ F / 0.0

  

7\. CLASS CONDUCT

  

A. Attendance: You must attend a minimum of 70 percent of this class to
successfully pass the course. The 70 percent rule means you must attend a
minimum of 10 out of 13 classes. Tardiness and Unexcused absences will not be
tolerated. You are considered tardy if you come into the lecture after it has
started and have not received permission PERSONALLY from me to be late. You
are considered unexcused when you have missed class without receiving
permission PERSONALLY from me to miss class. If you are late or unexcused from
this class, you will be counseled. In addition, an unexcused absence will
reduce your class participation grade by 50 points out of 100. (i.e. 2.5% off
your semester grade) Each unexcused tardiness will reduce your class
participation grade by 10 points. I understand emergencies do occur. I will
make a judgment decision for emergencies on a case by case basis. If you miss
this class for _any_ reason, you must complete an official memorandum stating
the reasons why you missed this class and submit the memorandum to me the
following class period.

  

B. Make-up Policy: You will not be allowed to make-up work for unexcused
absences. If you are excused from class, you should make arrangements with me
to make-up the class within 5 working days of the missed class. The make-up
will consist of a review of the material you missed with the instructor. If
you make-up the class material, you will receive credit for the class. If you
do not make arrangements with your instructor within the 5 day time period,
you forfeit your opportunity to make-up the material and will not receive
credit for the class.

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

C. Classroom Deportment

  

1) Uniform: For Wednesday class, you shall wear the Uniform of the Day,
according to that week's LeadLab OpOrder.

2) Refreshment Policy: No eating or drinking will be allowed during class.

3) Customs and Courtesies: This is a military formation, and you will adhere
to proper customs and courtesies. (e.g. call the room to attention when an
officer enters)

  

  

  

8\. REMINDERS

  

A. Form 48 Term Interview: You MUST schedule a Form 48 Term Interview. You
must complete your Term Interview prior to 1 October 2001. Use the schedule
book on Donna's desk to sign up. Those cadets not completing the term
interview by 1 October 2001 will be counseled.

  

B. Summer Courses: If you took any summer courses for college credit, you must
bring in an official transcript showing your grades for such courses, no
matter what college you took the courses at. Said grades will be factored into
your AFROTC-calculated GPA.

  

C. Add/Drop: You must notify me before dropping a course, withdrawing from a
course, or taking an "I" in a course. Remember, falling below full-time status
can affect your scholarship, monthly stipend, and/or eligibility for Field
Training.

  

D. 72-hour Rule: Remember the 72-hour rule for notifying me of any incident
(civil involvements, etc.). This is not meant to hassle you on everything in
your life, it just allows the Cadre an opportunity to fix a potential problem
before it is too late. Your commission could be at stake!! Remember, if
anything happens, let me know within 72 hours. When in doubt, CALL.

  

E. Grade Change Notification: Don't forget any grade changes must be reported
within 30 days of the start of the semester. You have until 1 October to
report any grade changes.

  

F. Air Force Drug Policy: Remember the Air Force has a ZERO TOLERANCE policy
for drug use.

  

G. Non-attribution: We are in an academic learning environment. Therefore, we
shall maintain an open, free discourse of ideas. This means in the classroom
you may, and in fact are encouraged to, express your own ideas and opinions
when they are relevant to the discussion. You can do this without fear of
being marked down or penalized for having the "wrong" opinions. (e.g. I won't
think, "I'll mark down Cadet Jones, because I don't agree with his opinion.")
Non-attribution is not an excuse to "flame" on some personal axe you have to
grind; your thoughts must pertain to the topic of the day. Our AS210 course is
mostly facts, and not opinions, but we will certainly get into some
discussions which take us a bit further into the material.

  

H. Participation: Remember, the more that you interact and ask questions, the
more that you, your classmates, and I will get out of this course. Don't be
afraid to speak up, just do so in polite manner. (i.e. raise your hand and
wait to be called on.) Once I recognize you, go ahead and ask your question or
make your statement. You don't need to say, "Sir, may I ask a question?" Such
approval is implicit in my recognition of your raised hand.

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

9\. COURSE OUTLINE

  

# WEEK LESSON # LESSON TITLE COURSE GOALS READ

  

05 Sep 01 1 Intro to AS200/ A&S Power Defined A,D

  

12 Sep 01 2 Air and Space Power Defined, cont A, D

  

19 Sep 01 3 Early Flight to World War I A, B Pg. 1-3

  

26 Sep 01 4 Advent of the Air Age: World War I A, B Pg. 4-11

  

03 Oct 01 5 Interwar Years A, B Pg. 11-19

  

10 Oct 01 6 World War II: The Beginning A, B Pg. 20

  

17 Oct 01 Mid-term Exam

  

24 Oct 01 7 World War II: Europe A, B Pg. 21-32

  

31 Oct 01 8 World War II: The Pacific A, B Pg. 33-39

  

07 Nov 01 9 An Independent AF and the Berlin Airlift A, B Pg. 40-44

  

14 Nov 01 10 Cadet Briefings C, D

  

21 Nov 01 No Class Meetings

  

28 Nov 01 11 Air and Space Power Revisited A, B, C, D

Written Assignment Due

  

05 Dec 01 Final Exam

  

  

  

  

  10. ASSIGNMENTS

  

A. Mid-Term Exam: In class on 17 October 2001 you will have an exam on all
material covered in class to date. There will be a total of 50 multiple choice
questions and up to five extra-credit questions. Failure to complete this exam
on the scheduled date will result in a zero unless prior arrangements are made
with me. This exam will count for 30% of your final grade.

  

B. Final Exam: In class on 5 December 2001 you will have an exam on all
material covered in class this semester. There will be a total of 50 multiple
choice questions and up to five extra-credit questions. Failure to complete
this exam on the scheduled date will result in a zero unless prior
arrangements are made with me. This exam will count for 30% of your final
grade.

  

C. Background Paper: At the beginning of your assigned class period for 28
November 2001 you must turn in your writing assignment. Your assignment this
term is to write a 2-3 page background paper on a historic military leader or
event. The topic must not be directly related to air and space power, however,
it must be a _military_ event or leader. You must okay your choice of topic
with me personally NLT your mid-term exam. In your paper, relate your topic
event or leader to our studies by showing how they reflected / demonstrated:

  

  1. The Principles of War or

  2. Tenets of Air and Space Power (if appropriate) or

  3. The Competencies, Functions, and Doctrine Model or

  4. Air Force Core Values

  

You _must_ write the paper in accordance with the AFH 33-337,  "Tongue and
Quill." Ensure that your paper has a clear introduction, body, and conclusion.
Plagiarism will NOT be tolerated and will result in automatic failure of this
class. This paper will be graded on format and content. Late assignments will
not be accepted and will result in a zero for the assignment. This paper
counts 17.5% towards your final grade.

  

D. Briefing: In class on 14 November 2001, each cadet will present a 5 minute
briefing on a historic military leader or event. Your briefing topic can be
the same, or different, from your paper topic. Like the paper topic, you must
clear your briefing topic with me NLT your mid-term exam. A "grace period" of
one minute over or under the 5 minute goal will be allowed. Each additional
minute over or under this time goal will result in 5 points (out of 100) being
deducted from your briefing score. You will be graded on your briefing
content, preparation, and presentation. Your briefing must include at least
one visual aid. This can consist of an overhead projector slide(s), poster(s),
map(s), etc. Your briefing should also follow the introduction-body-conclusion
model. Don't forget smooth transitions between main points. Your briefing
score will count 17.5% towards your semester grade.

  

E. Class Participation: Your class participation grade will be based on your
verbal and non-verbal participation in class discussions, preparation for
class, and military uniform appearance. There will be no inspections _per se_
in class. However, coming to class with a disheveled or improperly worn
uniform will result in a reduction in your class participation grade. The
majority of the points for class participation, however, will be determined by
your interaction in the classroom environment. Your class participation grade
will count for 5% of your semester grade.

  

  

  

