  |  ![Manatee Community College](../../Web/Graphic/jpg/Name.jpg) |  Dr.
Michael Todd Smallwood  
---|---  
[Instructor Information](SmallwM.htm#Sub1) | [AMH 1010 ](SmallwM.htm#Sub2) |
[EUH 1000 ](SmallwM.htm#Sub4) | [POS 1041](SmallwM.htm#Sub6)  
---|---|---|---  
 CRO2002 | [AMH1020 ](SmallwM.htm#Sub3) | [EUH1001](SmallwM.htm#Sub5) | [INR
2002](SmallwM.htm#Sub7)  
  
* * *

[![Web Site Map &
Search](../../Web/Graphic/MenuGif/WebSiteV.gif)](../../Web/SiteMap/SiteMap.htm)
| [![MCC Contact
Us](../../Web/Graphic/MenuGif/ContactUsV.gif)](../../Web/ContUs/ContUs.htm) |
[![MCC Events &
News](../../Web/Graphic/MenuGif/EventsV.gif)](../../Admin/PlanCom/EveNews.cfm)
| [![MCC Maps and
Directions](../../Web/Graphic/MenuGif/MapsV.gif)](../../Web/Maps/MapsDir.htm)
| [![MCC Home
Page](../../Web/Graphic/MenuGif/HomeV.gif)](http://www.mcc.cc.fl.us)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
* * *  
  
##  Instructor's Information

Since I teach primarily on the Venice campus, but sometimes also on the
Bradenton campus, there are several different ways to contact me.  At Venice,
students can meet me in my office (Room 610) during posted office hours or by
appointment, by telephoning me at 941-408-1478 (on campus the number is  
simply 61478), or by emailing me at
[smallwm@mccfl.edu](mailto:smallwm@mccfl.edu). which is the best way,
especially for leaving messages.  I usually leave campus by 1:30 PM and
therefore messages sent after 1:00 PM will not be "opened" and answered until
the next morning (Monday-Friday).  If  I am teaching at Bradenton, please
email me at the above web address, or telephone the department secretary at
941-752-5314 to leave a message. You can, however, also call the Venice office
number, especially during my class hours (8 AM to 1 PM).  Of course, students
may always contact me before and after classes.  Please do not hesitate
contacting me to discuss any concerns you might have.

[![Back to Top](../../Web/Graphic/GenGifs/Top.gif)](SmallwM.htm#Sub)  
  
##  American History l (AMH 1010)

This is the first of the two introductory courses in American History, and
covers the time period before pre-discovery (1492) and the end of the
Reconstruction period (1877).  The course is designed to emphasize basic
concepts and ideas, major events, and the development of our political,
constitutional, and economic structures.  Military battles and dates are held
to a minimum.  The course material is structured broadly to accommodate the
needs of both social science majors and other MCC students taking this course
to meet general education requirements.  There are no prerequisites for the
course and you do not need to take the two courses in sequence although it is
somewhat helpful.  It is recommended that you take both introductory courses
to obtain a full understanding of American History, but this is not required.
You may decide also to take the second course directly following the first, or
at a later date.  American History I meets the 3 hours history and General
Education requirement in Area III Social Sciences, Section a. For more
information and the current course syllabus, please click the link below.  


[AMH 1010](amh1010_web.htm)

[Publisher's Site](http://www.wwnorton.com/eamerica)

[![Back to Top](../../Web/Graphic/GenGifs/Top.gif)](SmallwM.htm#Sub)  
  
##  American History ll (AMH 1020)

This is the second of the two introductory courses in American History, and
covers the time period from Reconstruction (1877) to the present.  Like the
first course, it is designed to emphasize important ideas and concepts,
significant domestic events, major national leaders, and the growth of the
United States into a world superpower.  Major wars and international events
will be covered, but in a limited manner.  The general comments about course
material, the two course sequence, and scheduling  noted above in AMH 1010
apply equally to AMH 1020.  Again, there is no prerequisite for the course--
not even AMH 1010--and you may take the second course before the first
although this is not recommended.  American History II meets the same history
and General Education requirements as the earlier course. For more information
and the current course syllabus, please click the link below.  
    


[AMH 1020](amh1020_web.htm)

[Publisher's Site](http://www.wwnorton.com/eamerica)

[![Back to Top](../../Web/Graphic/GenGifs/Top.gif)](SmallwM.htm#Sub)  
  
##  Western Civilization l (EUH 1000)

There are two general survey (introductory) courses in Western Civilization,
of which the above is the first such course. Covering selected material from
the time period of 3500 BCE to about 1600 CE, this course concentrates on the
ancient Greek and Roman civilizations, the establishment and development of
Christianity, early political organization of Europe, and ends with the
Renaissance and Reformation eras. Thus, a broad overview of important
political, military, religious, social, and cultural aspects of early Western
Civilization is included.  Students can take the course out of sequence, but
it is highly recommended to take the two courses in sequential order for the
best understanding of all of the vast material.  There are no prerequisites
for either course, and both are designed to address the educational needs of
social science majors and those non-history students.  This particular course
is very helpful for students taking various art and/or humanity courses.
Western Civilization I meets the 3 hour history and General Education
requirements in Social Sciences Area III, Section a.  For more information and
the current course syllabus, please click on the link below.

[EUH 1000 ](euh1000_web.htm)

[Publisher's Site ](http://www.mhhe.com/sherman)



[![Back to Top](../../Web/Graphic/GenGifs/Top.gif)](SmallwM.htm#Sub)  
  
##  Western Civilization ll (EUH 1001)

The second of the two survey courses in Western Civilization covers the time
period from about 1600 CE to the present.  As such, it continues the
development of many of the same themes found in the first course, but
emphasizes the eras of Louis XIV, the French Revolution and Napoleon, the
political and military upheavals of the 19th and 20th centuries, and the
rise/fall of the Soviet Union and communism.  Although students can certainly
take this single course, Western Civilization II is best understood after
students have taken the earlier course, even though that course is not a
prerequisite.  The same comments above regarding course structure and student
appeal apply equally to both courses.  Western Civilization II meets the 3
hour history and General Education requirements in Social Science Area III,
Section a.  For more information and the current course syllabus, please click
on the link below.

[EUH 1001 ](euh1001_web.htm)

[Publisher's Site ](http://www.mhhe.com/sherman)

[![Back to Top](../../Web/Graphic/GenGifs/Top.gif)](SmallwM.htm#Sub)  
  
##  American Government (POS 1041)

  
Three basic introductory courses within the political science area are offered
by MCC.  These are American Government, International Relations, and
Comparative Governments.  The last course is presently offered only on the
Bradenton campus, but the other two may be taken on the Venice campus.
American Government emphasizes the importance of the US Constitution, the
three separate branches of the federal government, and the interaction of
these institutions with several other politically related institutions.  Thus,
students will learn what powers are in the Constitution, how the three
branches operate, and the wide influence of the federal government on American
society.  Specific topics would include: civil rights, US foreign and domestic
policies, political parties and elections, etc.  There is no prerequisite for
the course, but American Government does provide an excellent companion course
to those in history, education, business, and pre-law.  The course material is
structured to address the needs of all categories of MCC students.  American
Government meets 3 hours of the General Education requirements in Social
Sciences Area III, Section b.  For more information and the current course
syllabus, please click on the link below.

[POS 1041 ](pos1041_web.htm)

[Publisher's Site ](http://www.wadsworth.com/cgi-
wadsworth/course_products_wp.pl?fid=M2&topic_code=5F9E&discipline_number=20&product_isbn_issn=0534586538#)

[![Back to Top](../../Web/Graphic/GenGifs/Top.gif)](SmallwM.htm#Sub)  
  
##  International Relations (INR 2002)

This course may be considered an intermediate political science course, and is
usually taken during the second year at MCC.  Since INR is also designated as
a Gordon Rule class, a 6000 word written component is required and this is met
by a series of papers (3 or 4) on a wide selection of topics  relevant to the
course material.  Students are exposed to subject matter in the political,
social, military, economic, and environmental areas of international
relations, especially as these impact the United States.  Because INR is such
a Gordon Rule class, the required prerequisite is completion of ENC 1101, but
students are urged to complete ENC 1102 before taking this course.  The course
structure is designed for a broad, individual approach, while allowing social
science majors the opportunity for more detailed study.  The course is very
useful to those students majoring in social sciences, humanities, and
business.  International  Relations meets 3 hours of the General Education
requirements in Social Sciences Area III, Section b, as well as 3 hours of the
12 hours of Gordon Rule classes.  For more information and the current course
syllabus, please click on the link below.

[INR 2002 ](inr2002_web.htm)

[Publisher's Site ](http://www.dushkin.com/connectext/wp/)

[![Back to Top](../../Web/Graphic/GenGifs/Top.gif)](SmallwM.htm#Sub)  
  
##  Comparative Governments (CPO 2002)  
  
* * *

-Last Updated 3/20/02-  
![MCC Banner1](../../Web/Graphic/AniGifs/Banner.gif)  
![5840 26th St W,Bradenton, FL 34207 \(941\)752-5000 / 8000 Tamiami Trail,
Venice, FL 34293 \(941\)408-1300](../../Web/Graphic/jpg/address.jpg)  
Web Developing Team[ Web Site Feedback ](http://www.mccfl.edu/Feedback.cfm)
Copyright (C) 1999  
  
[ ![Web-Stat hit counter](http://www.web-
stat.com/fastcount.cgi?mcc2,NoJavaScript)](http://www.web-
stat.com/stats.shtml?mcc2)

