![](/Pictures/InforM/blank.gif)  
| [![University of Maryland](/Pictures/webglobe.gif)](http://www.umd.edu/) |
History602syllabus  
---|---  
![______________________________________________________](/Pictures/InforM/line1.gif)  
![](/Pictures/InforM/blank.gif) |  ![](/Pictures/InforM/line1.gif) |
![](/Pictures/InforM/blank.gif) |  ![](/Pictures/InforM/blank.gif)  

History 602:0101: GENERAL SEMINAR IN U.S. HISTORY

Spring 2001

Key Hall

Thursday 3:30-:6:00



Elsa Barkley Brown

Office: 2147 Key Hall

Office phone: 405-4290

Office hours: Tuesday 1:00-3:00 & by appointment

[mailto:EB136@umail.umd.edu](mailto:EB136@umail.umd.edu)





This course is designed to introduce students to a broad range of historical
literature in American history and to encourage analysis of key
historiographical issues and debates within several subfields of the
discipline. It also will introduce students to several members of the faculty
and their research interests.

Course assignments are designed to help students cultivate many of the skills
commonly practiced by professional historians. Although students will not be
conducting primary research, they are expected to devote considerable time and
effort to the analysis and synthesis of arguments presented by leading
historians of the U.S. across a broad chronological, topical, and
methodological spectrum. The assignments are as follows:



1) Participation in class discussions. Each class meeting is crucial--a rare
opportunity to meet with peers, the course instructor, and (in some weeks) a
visiting member of the faculty to discuss a carefully selected group of
readings. In preparation for each meeting, students should not only read all
of the assignments, but also formulate questions and observations for
discussion. The size of the seminar is small enough to allow everyone to
participate regularly. In these discussions students are expected to be
unendingly critical--not in the negative sense of the word, but in the sense
of being willing to evaluate, analyze, challenge, disagree, and argue a
position, while remaining respectful of others.



2) Participation in the course WebChat. Because it is difficult to discuss
each week's required readings with any degree of completeness during class
time, the WebChat is a valuable resource. It will enable the seminar to
conduct an ongoing dialogue beyond the walls of the classroom in time and
space. There are no rules governing participation in the WebChat other than
the expectation that participants sustain the same level of quality and
professionalism common to face-to-face communications.



3) Discussion initiators. Two students will serve as discussion initiators for
each seminar meeting in the semester. (Dates will be selected at the beginning
of the term). For their designated weeks, the discussion initiators will
circulate through the class reflector a 3-5 page report that provides the
class with some background information regarding the authors of the readings,
identifies the most important themes in the assigned readings and suggests
interesting and fruitful ways that the seminar might proceed in discussing the
readings. Approximately 1/2 to 1 page of your report should incorporate a
review of one book review of one of the week's readings. This report should be
circulated at least 24 hours prior to the course meeting. Evaluation of this
assignment will be based on the salience of the ideas expressed as well as
clarity and style of presentation.



4) Discussion observer. For one seminar meeting in the semester each student
will act as an observer/critic. In this case, the report will be written (500
words or fewer) and distributed via the course WebChat within forty-eight
hours following the seminar meeting. The observer's report should include: a
summary of the main lines of discussion; a critique of its strengths and
weaknesses; and a brief outline of unexplored lines of inquiry and alternative
approaches. The week in which a student serves as observer will be different
from the one in which he or she serves as a discussion initiator; assignments
will be made at the beginning

of the term.



5) Concept discussion. Each student will be asked to choose one concept or
theme to follow through the semester's readings, noting how various authors
define that concept, what assumptions authors make--consciously or
unconsciously--about this concept, how authors go about exploring this
concept, what methods or sources are used to investigate this idea. The
suggested themes are: politics, culture, class, and race, but we can as a
class discuss other possibilities. Separate WebChats will be set up for
discussion around each concept and students are invited to explore their ideas
via the WebChat throughout the semester. Each student will develop an essay,
approximately 3 pages in length, discussing their concept/theme for
distribution to all other students in the course. These papers will be our
course readings for April 26; all papers should be distributed at least 72
hours prior to this class.

6) Historiographical essay. By May 22, each student will submit an essay of no
more than fifteen pages (exclusive of notes) discussing recent trends in the
historiography of a subfield of U.S. history (e.g., early American history,
constitutional/legal history, social history, labor history, African American
history, women's history, economic history, Southern history, history of
foreign relations). Students should

consult with the instructor when selecting a topic and putting together a
reading list. The reading list should include major books and articles.
Students will be expected to submit the topic for the historiographical essay
and a preliminary list of readings by March 29 and to submit 5 pages from any
place in your historiographical essay by May 3.



The historiographical essay should be word-processed or typed, double-spaced,
and paginated, with one-inch margins all around. Do not use right-hand
justification. Type size should be 10 or 12 point. Staple papers at top left;
do not use paper clips or report covers. For the historiographical essay,
begin notes on a separate page, at the end of the paper. Notes should be
double-spaced, like the text. In all other respects, notes should conform to
the style prescribed in Kate L. Turabian, _A Manual for Writers of Term
Papers, Theses, and Dissertations_ , which is based upon _The Chicago Manual
of Style_.



Papers by the discussion initiators, 3-5 pages in length, should be posted to
the course reflector. They should be single-spaced, with double space between
paragraphs. The same format should be followed for discussion observers'
postings to the WebChat and for all other contributions to the WebChat.



Half of the course grade will be based on class participation; the discussion
papers and concept paper will

collectively constitute one-quarter of the grade; and the historiographical
essay will account for the remaining 25 percent.







SCHEDULE OF DISCUSSION TOPICS AND READING ASSIGNMENTS



All assigned readings are available in Reserves at McKeldin Library. Items
marked with an asterisk are also available at the Maryland Book Exchange.





**February 1** : Organization of Course



**February 8** : Introduction



*Peter Novick, _That Noble Dream: The "Objectivity Question" and the American Historical Profession_ (Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1988).



Richard White, "Frederick Jackson Turner and Buffalo Bill," in _The Frontier
in American Culture_ , ed. James R. Grossman (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1994), pp. 7-66





**February 15** : Colonial Cultures

Alison Olson



Jack P. Greene, _Pursuits of Happiness: The Social Development of Early Modern
British Colonies and the Formation of American Culture_ (Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 1988), 1-38.



David Hackett Fischer _,_ _Albion's Seed: Four British Folkways in America_
(New York:Oxford University Press, 1989), 3-11, 207-256



Martin H. Quitt, "Immigrant Origins of the Virginia Gentry: A Study of
Cultural Transmission and Innovation," _William and Mary Quarterly_ 3rd ser.,
45 (October1988): 629-655.



Aaron Fogleman, _Hopeful Journeys: German Immigrants, Settlement, and
Political Culture in Colonial_

_America, 1717-1775_ (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1996),
1-13, 69-99



Allan Kulikoff, "The Origins of Afro-American Society in Tidewater Maryland
and Virginia, 1700 to 1790," in _Colonial America: Essays in Politics and
Social Development_, ed. Stanley N. Katz, John M. Murrin, and Douglas
Greenberg, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993), 452-485



A. G. Roeber, "'The Origin of Whatever is Not English Among Us': The Dutch-
speaking and the German-speaking Peoples of Colonial British America," in
_Strangers within the Realm: Cultural Margins of the First British Empire_ ,
ed. Bernard Bailyn and Philip D. Morgan (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 1991), 220-237





**February 22** : African American Culture in Atlantic Context--Theoretical
and Historiographical Controversies

Stephan Palmie



Required:

*Sidney Mintz and Richard Price, _The Birth of African American Culture_ (Boston: Beacon., 1992)

Walter Jackson, "Melville J. Herskovits and the Search for Afro-American
Culture" in _Malinowski, Rivers,_

_Benedict, and Others_ , ed. George W. Stocking, ed. (Madison: U of Wisconsin
Press, 1986) , pp. 95-126.

Paul E. Lovejoy, "The African Diaspora: revisionist Interpretations of
Ethnicity, Culture and Religion under Slavery" _Studies in the World History
of Slavery, Abolition, and Emancipation_ 2 (1997):1-24 (electronic journal)

Philip D. Morgan, "The Cultural Implications of the Atlantic Slave Trade:
African regional origins, American Destinations and New World Developments,"
_Slavery and Abolition_ 18 (1997):122-145.

Peter Linebaugh, and Marcus Redicker, "The many-Headed Hydra: Sailors, Slaves,
and the Atlantic Working Class in the Eighteenth Century" _Journal of
Historical Sociology_ 3 (1990):225-252.



Ibrahim K. Sundiata, "All Brothers and All Sisters, All the Time"
(www2.h-net.msu.edu, Jan 14, 2000)

David Chioni Moore, "African Philosophy vs. Philosophy of Africa: Continental
identities and Travelling Names for Self" _Diaspora_ 7 (1998):321-350.



Strongly Recommended:

Dale Tomich, "Spaces of Slavery, Times of Freedom: Rethinking Caribbean
history in World Perspective,"

_Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East_ 17
(1997):67-80.

Herman L. Bennett, "The Subject in the Plot: National Boundaries and the
'History' of the Black Atlantic," _African Studies Review_ 43 (2000):101-124.













**March 1** : Politics in the New Nation

Whitman Ridgway



*Simon Newman, _Parades and the Politics of the Street: Festive Culture in the Early American Republic_ (University of Pennsylvania Press, 19 )



Michael Durey, "Tom Paine's Apostles: Radical Emigres and the Triumph of
Jeffersonian Republicanism," _William and Mary Quarterly_ , 3d ser., 64/4
(Oct. 1987): 661-88



Joseph Charles, _The Origins of the American Party System_ (1961)





**March 8** : Narratives of the Slave Trade



*Walter Johnson: _Soul by Soul: Life Inside the Antebellum Slave Trade_ (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2000)

Selections of slave narratives, TBA





**March 15** : Emancipation, Reconstruction, and the Meaning of Freedom

Leslie Rowland



*Eric Foner, _Nothing but Freedom: Emancipation and Its Legacy_ (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1983). 

Harold D. Woodman, "The Reconstruction of the Cotton Plantation in the New
South," in _Essays on the Postbellum Southern Economy_ , ed. Thavolia Glymph
and John J. Kushma (College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 1985), pp.
95-119.

Ira Berlin, Steven Hahn, Steven F. Miller, Joseph P. Reidy, and Leslie S.
Rowland, "The Terrain of Freedom: The Struggle over the Meaning of Free Labor
in the U.S. South," _History Workshop Journal_ , No. 22 (Autumn 1986):
108-130.



Ira Berlin, Steven F. Miller, and Leslie S. Rowland, "Afro-American Families
in the Transition from Slavery to Freedom," _Radical History Review_ 42
(1988): 88-121. [Be sure to read the illustration

opposite title page of article.]





**March 22** \-- Spring Break





**March 29** \--Film Narratives

TBA





**April 5** Women, Gender, and the State

Robyn Muncy



*Linda Gordon, _Pitied but not Entitled: Single Mothers and the History of Welfare_ (Cambridge: Harvard

University Press, 1995)





**week of April 12**

David Sicilia

(Our class this week will not meet at the regularly scheduled time but will be
rescheduled to a time convenient to Dr. Sicilia and the members of the class.)



**April 19** Identifying the Folk in Folk Culture



Benjamin Filene, _Romancing the Folk: All that is Native and Fine_ (Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2000)

articles TBA





**April 26** \--



Our reading for April 26 will be your papers on the concept or theme you have
been tracing through the course readings. These papers should be circulated at
least 48 priors to our class meeting.





**May 3** \-- Memory

Daryle Williams

TBA





**May 10** \-- Synthesizing Stories



Eric Foner, _The Story of American Freedom_ (N.Y.: W.W. Norton, 1998)





**Historiographical essays are due by 4 p.m. on May 22**.

  
  
---|---|---|---  
![_______________________________________________](/Pictures/InforM/line1.gif)  
  |  
|  |   |  [UM Home](http://www.umd.edu/) |
[Directories](http://www.umd.edu/whoswho.html) |
[Search](http://www.search.umd.edu/) |
[Admissions](http://www.umd.edu/prospective/) |
[Calendar](http://www.umd.edu/calendar/today/)  
Direct questions and comments to [Elsa Barkley
Brown](mailto:eb136@umail.umd.edu).  
Last modified Thursday, February 8, 2001           (C) 2002 University of
Maryland |  
---|---|---  


