> > **

>>

>> American Government Homepage ** Welcome to the Homepage of Political
Science 110--American Government. This web site contains information regarding
the class. Click on the links below to take you to the document.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> _**SYLLABUS INFORMATION**_

>> * [ Syllabus ](amgovsyllabus.htm)The syllabus handed out during class.

>> * [Supplement to Syllabus](amgovsyllsupp.html) This supplement adds several
policy sections to the syllabus.

>> * [Official U.S. Government Time](http://www.time.gov) Set your watch by
the atomic clock, and arrive to class on-time to receive attendance credit.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> _**EXAMS**_  
>

>> * I _STRONGLY_ urge you to form study groups and review the study guide
together in preparing for exams!

>> * You must bring a scantron sheet and No. 2 pencil to the exam when it is
announced to do so.

>> * You must bring a bluebook and permanent-ink pen to the exam when it is
announced to do so.

>> * [Study Guide](amgovguide.html)

>> ***Note: This is the material for the entire course. Be sure to note in
class specifically which of this material is covered on each individual
exam!!! Also, the cut-off for e-mail questions regarding an exam is 5:00 p.m.
the day before the exam. I make NO guarantee that I will respond to any
e-mails received after that time.  
>

>> * [ Grading Criteria Guide ](evaluation.html)

>> Descriptions of the general characteristics of exam essay answers of
various grades.

>> * [Essay Exam Mistakes](amgovmistakes.html) Typical mistakes made on essay
exam answers.

>> * [Sample Essay Exam Question](modelamgovanswer.html) Sample essay exam
question with examples of excellent and poor answers.

>> * [Sample Multiple Choice Questions](mcsample.htm) Sample multiple choice
questions with explanations of answers.

>> * [Habits for Effective Learning](learning.html) How to improve your
performance in this or any academic course.

>> * [Asking Questions in Class](questions.html) The fundamental importance of
asking questions.  
>

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> _**ASSIGNMENTS**_  
>  I _strongly_ urge you to work together on assignments on those assignments
where such an option is given!  
>  ***NOTE: You must follow assignment directions COMPLETELY or ZERO credit
will be given.  
>

>> * [Assignment 1](amgovassign1.html) National News Analysis. DUE DATE:
Monday, September 9

>> * [Assignment 2](amgovassign2.html) Individual Political Case-Study

>> * [Extra Credit Assignments](extracredit.html) Letter to Your
Representative, Letter to the Editor, Governmental Observation, Volunteer
Work, Cultural Experience  
>

>>

>> * * *

>>

>>  
>  _Non-required readings:_  
>  _NOTE: None of these are required readings for the course. These are
presented here only as helpful links which you might perhaps find useful
during the course._

>> * [Highly Recommended Books](books.html)

>> Books I highly recommend for becoming a better U.S. and global citizen.

>> * [ Primer on American National Government
](http://www.grolier.com/presidents/ea/ea_toc.html)

>> from Grolier On-Line

>> * [ Introduction to U.S. National and State Government ](http://www.vote-
smart.org/reference/primer/)

>> from Project Vote-Smart

>> * [ The Legislative Process ](http://thomas.loc.gov/home/lawsmade.toc.html)

>> from the Parliamentarian of the U.S. House of Representatives

>> * [ The Avalon Project ](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/avalon.htm)

>> From Yale Law School--Documents in Law, History, and Government (includes
the U.S. Constitution, the Federalist Papers, and Madison's notes of the
debates of the Constitutional Convention)

>>

>> * * *

>>

>> _**REQUIRED COURSE READINGS: (TENTATIVE schedule)**_ I strongly recommend
you review the readings together sometime prior to class discussion, as well
as develop answers to the questions listed by each reading. This will
_strongly_ help you understand class discussions and also _highly_ help you
prepare for exams.  
>

>>

>> **_Part One of the Course: The History, Principles and Institutions of the
U.S. Constitution (the U.S.'s social contract)_**

>>

>> **WEEK 1**

>>

>> **The Social Contract**

>> * [John Locke, Second Treatise on Government](locke.html) What is the State
of Nature? What rights (if any) do people inherently possess, even in a state
of nature? What is the Civil Society, and why is it formed? What purpose does
the government serve in a Civil Society? Where does that government get its
authority to rule? What are the limits of that authority? What may the people
rightfully do if the government exceeds those limits?

>> * [Mayflower Compact](mayflower.html)How is this a social contract?

>>

>> **American Independence**

>> * [Colonial History](independence.html)What major events led to the
decision by the colonies to declare independence? On what philosophical
principle did the colonies object to being repeatedly taxed by Britain? How
did this violate the social contract? How did America justify a right to
declare independence?

>> * [The Declaration of Independence](declaration.html) How does this
incorporate and apply social contract theory in support of the right of the
American colonies to declare independence from Britain?

>>

>> **WEEK 2**

>>

>> **The New American Government (First Attempt): The Articles of
Confederation**

>> * [The Articles of Confederation](confederation.html) How is this a social
contract? What power was the national legislature given to force the states to
pay taxes to the federal government, to force the states to obey laws
regulating commerce between the states, or to force the states to contribute
troops for a federal army? What sort of federal executive leader (such as a
President) was created? What sort of federal court system was created? How
could changes be made to the Articles of Confederation? (Hint: some of the
previous questions are "trick" questions . . .)

>> * [Problems with the Articles of
Confederation](artsofconfedproblems.html)What were the problems with the
Articles of Confederation, and how severe were they? What was Shay's Rebellion
and what warning did it send regarding the Articles of Confederation?

>>

>> **The New American Government (Second Attempt): The Constitution**

>> * [The U.S. Constitution](constitution.html) How is this a social contract?
In Article I, section 8, What power was the national legislature given to tax,
regulate commerce, and raise armies? What does article I, section 8 say about
other powers besides those specifically listed? Is there a federal executive?
Is there a federal court system? How can changes to the Constitution be made?

>> * [The Great Compromise](greatcompromise.html)What were the two competing
ideas for representation in the federal legislature, and what was the
compromise that was reached?

>> * [The 3/5 Compromise](slavery2.html)What were the two competing sides
regarding the counting of slaves as part of the population, and what was the
compromise that was reached? What were the two competing ideas about whether
Congress would be able to regulate slavery, and what was the compromise that
was reached?

>>

>> **WEEK 3**

>>

>> **The Framers' Inconsistencies** Considering the following documents, how
consistent were the framers when they declared "all men are created equal"?
What does this say about who was and was not considered part of the social
contract of America? Also, why do you suppose the Continental Congress deleted
Jefferson's paragraph referring to slavery from the Declaration of
Independence?  
>

>> * [Deleted Paragraph from the Declaration of
Independence](decslave.html)For what specifically did Jefferson criticize the
King?

>> * [Benjamin Banneker's Letter to Thomas Jefferson (with Jefferson's
Reply)](banneker.html)What did Banneker request, and how did Jefferson reply
to that request?

>> * [Frederick Douglas: What to a Slave is the Fourth of
July?](douglass.html)What does the 4th of July mean to Douglass and to slaves?

>> * [Abigail Adams' correspondence with her husband John
Adams](abigail.html)What was Abigail Adam's request, and how did her husband
reply to that request?

>> * [Seneca Falls Declaration](senecafalls.html)Who wrote this declaration,
and what does it declare?

>> * [Words of Chief Joseph](chiefjoseph.html) What is Chief Joseph's request
to the American leaders in Washington, D.C.?

>> * For further reading (not required, but highly recommended), see Howard
Zinn, A People's History of the United States  
>  
>

>>

>> **A Republic**

>> * [Thomas Paine, Common Sense](paine.html) What is representative
democracy, and why is it a necessary form of government?

>> * [Federalists and Anti-Federalists](federalists.html)What positions did
the "federalists" and "anti-federalists" represent regarding the new
Constitution and why? Who wrote the "Federalist Papers"? How did the
organization of the federalists compare to that of the anti-federalists?

>> * [Brutus No. 1 ](brutus.html) What are the several reasons a large
republic is "impossible"? To what degree has modern technology weakened some
of his arguments (or hasn't it)?

>> * [Federalist 10 ](fed10.html) What are "factions"? Why are they dangerous,
and how does one control the causes and effects of factions? How is a republic
better than a democracy? How is a large republic better than a small republic?  
>  
>  On what points do Madison and Brutus agree and disagree? How does their
debate fit into social contract theory? (Hint: what are supposed to be the
limits on power of a government in a Civil Society?)

>> * [CNN's All Politics](http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/) OR [Washington
Post's On Politics](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/politics/) OR
[MSNBC's Politics](http://www.msnbc.com/news/politics_front.asp) Find and read
a current political news story that in any way involves competing
groups/interests/parties ("factions"). How does this news story illustrate
group competition and inefficiency ("gridlock") in the U.S. government today?

>>

>> **WEEK 4** **Separation of Powers and Checks and Balances**

>> * [Montesquieu, On the Spirit of Laws ](montesq.html) What is the danger in
having government, and how is this danger minimized by a system of "separation
of powers"? What are the three branches of government and what are their
functions? What sort of "checks and balances" should the branches of
government have against each other, and what purpose do these checks and
balances serve?

>> * [Federalist 51 ](fed51.html) How does the system of separation of powers
relate to the system of checks and balances? What is their purpose? How do the
different levels of government (state and federal) serve the same purpose? How
do the different interests of citizens (ala factions) also serve the same
purpose?

>> * [Separation of Powers](sopcab.html) Again, what is "separation of powers"
and what are the three branches of the U.S. government? Also again, what are
"checks and balances," and what are some specific checks and balances in the
U.S. government? How efficient is this system of government? What is the
modern name for inefficiency in government?  
>  How does all this fit into the social contract? (Hint: what are supposed to
be the limits on power of a government in a Civil Society?)

>> * [CNN's All Politics](http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/) OR [Washington
Post's On Politics](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/politics/) OR
[MSNBC's Politics](http://www.msnbc.com/news/politics_front.asp) Find and read
a current political news story that in any way involves more than one branch
of government. How does this news story illustrate a concept from the
readings?  
>  
>  **Federalism: Original Understandings**

>> * [Brutus No. 1](antfed17.html) Under the new Constitution, how
specifically are the states threatened by the federal government?

>> * [An Old Whig, Where Then is the Restraint?](antfed46.html) How
specifically does the Constitution give unlimited power to the federal
government over the states? (Hint: Both Brutus and An Old Whig make basically
the same arguments.)

>> * [Publius, Federalist 45 ](fed45.html)

>> * [Publius, Federalist 46 ](fed46.html) Read Federalist 45 and 46 together.
How important might sacrificing state sovereignty be under the new
Constitution? Regardless, if the states don't want to sacrifice their
sovereignty, what are the numerous (basically 5) advantages the state
governments will have over the federal government that will prevent the
federal government from oppressing the states?  
>  How does all this fit into the social contract? (Hint: what are supposed to
be the limits on power of a government in a Civil Society?)

>>

>> **WEEK 5** **Federalism: Modern Developments**

>> * [American Federalism--Past, Present, and Future](federalism.html) What
was the general effect of the Civil War on American federalism? What general
effect did the Great Depression have on American federalism? What is dual
federalism? What is cooperative federalism? During what time periods did these
occur? What is a grant-in-aid and how has this affected relations between the
federal and state governments? What are some of the current issues facing
American federalism? Given these modern developments in federalism, how
accurate were the Federalists and Anti-federalists in their predictions about
federalism in America?

>> * [National Governor's Association](http://www.nga.org) OR [CNN's All
Politics](http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/) OR [Washington Post's On
Politics](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/politics/) OR [MSNBC's
Politics](http://www.msnbc.com/news/politics_front.asp) Find and read a
current political news story that in any way involves federal-state relations.
How does this story illustrate a concept from the readings?  
>  
>  **Civil Liberties: Original Understanding**  
>

>> * [Publius, Federalist 84 ](fed84.html) How could the U.S. Constitution
without a bill of rights already offer as much protection of rights as state
constitutions (such as New York)? Why is a separate bill of rights
unnecessary, and why is it even dangerous?

>> * [Brutus, On the Lack of a Bill of Rights](antfed84.html) How does Brutus
explain that all social contracts should include a bill of rights? How does
Brutus argue that the U.S. Constitution in particular needs a bill of rights?

>> * [The Bill of Rights](billofrights.html) What are the basic rights
protected by the Bill of Rights? What does the First Amendment do? How
necessary is it to protect the freedom of speech in a democracy? What do
Amendments 4 through 8 generally do? Why did the framers think it so important
to protect the rights of criminally accused individuals? What purposes do the
9th and 10th Amendments serve?

>>

>> **WEEK 6**

>>

>> **Civil Liberties: Freedom of Speech**

>> * [Texas v. Johnson](amgovtexas.html) Who brought the lawsuit and why? Why
is burning the American flag "speech"? How did Texas try to justify a ban on
flag burning, and why were neither of those justifications valid? Why can't a
state outlaw highly offensive speech? According to the dissent, why doesn't
the First Amendment protect flag burning? How do you believe social contract
theory would resolve the issue?

>> * [Freedom Forum's First Amendment
News](http://www.freedomforum.org/first/) OR [American Civil Liberties Union
(click on "Free Speech")](http://www.aclu.org)Find and read a current
political news story involving a free speech issue. Given this modern issue,
how accurate were Hamilton's and Brutus's predictions about the need for a
Bill of Rights? Also, how do you believe social contract theory would resolve
the issue?

>>

>> **Civil Rights: Race (Early Developments)**  
>

>> * [Sectional Conflict (Origins of the Civil War)](slavery.html) What were
the Missouri Compromise, the Compromise of 1850, and the Kansas-Nebraska Act,
and how did the Supreme Court's Dred Scott decision affect those efforts at
compromise?

>> * [Dred Scott v. Sanford](dred.html) According to the Supreme Court, were
current or former slaves part of the social contract of the United States? Why
or why not? What implication did this have for the rights current or former
slaves would have in the United States?

>> * [Declarations of Secession by Southern States](secession.html) Skimming
through these declarations, what is the overwhelmingly biggest single reason
the Southern states seceded? (the last 5 paragraphs of the Texas declaration
contain probably the most strongly-worded answer to the question).

>> * [Civil War Amendments](amendments.html) What does the 13th Amendment do?
What does section 1 of the 14th Amendment do, especially the last clause of
that section? What does the 15th Amendment do?

>> * [Plessy v. Ferguson (1896)](plessy.html) Who brought the lawsuit and why?
What was the intent of the 13th and 14th Amendments? Why doesn't the 14th
Amendment prohibit all racial classification? Why is segregation "reasonable"?
How does the Court explain that segregation does not treat one group as
inferior? According to the dissent, what was the intent of the 13th and 14th
Amendments, and how should they be applied to this case?

>> * [Brief History of "Jim Crow" Laws](jimcrow2.html) What were Jim Crow
laws? What were some examples?

>> * [Examples of Jim Crow Laws](jimcrow.html) This list is only a miniscule
sample of actual Jim Crow laws that existed.

>>

>> **WEEK 7** Catch-up, Review, and Mid-term Exam

>>

>> **WEEK 8**

>>

>> **Civil Rights: Race (Modern Developments)**  
>

>> * [Brown v. Board of Education (1954)](brown1.html) Who brought the lawsuit
and why? How were the schools here equal, and how were they unequal? Why is
"separate but unequal" actually unequal? How did the Court explain why the
result was different than the result in Plessy v. Ferguson?

>> * [Korematsu v. U.S. (1943)](korematsu.html) Who brought the lawsuit and
why? What justification did the military offer for putting Japanese-Americans
in "relocation centers"? Why didn't this violate the Equal Protection Clause
of the 14th Amendment? According to the dissents, why did this violate the
Equal Protection Clause of the 14th Amendment?

>> * [Civil Liberties Act of 1988](cla1988.html) The formal apology by the
United States government to persons of Japanese ancestry who were victims of
the imprisonment at issue in the Korematsu case.  
>  Does the social contract allow government to treat people of different
races or nationalities differently?

>> * [American Civil Liberties Union (click on "Racial
Equality")](http://www.aclu.org)Find and read a current political news story
involving racial equality. How do you believe social contract theory would
resolve this issue?  
>

>>

>> **Civil Rights: Sex and Sexual Orientation**

>> * [Bradwell v. Illinois (1872)](bradwell.html) Who brought the lawsuit and
why? Why do the concurring Justices believe a woman does not have a right to
be a lawyer?

>> * [U.S. v. Virginia (the VMI case) (1996)](vmi.html) who brought the
lawsuit and why? What standard must the government meet when it discriminates
on the basis of sex? What justifications did Virginia offer to meet that
standard, and why did those justifications fail? Why wasn't Virginia's
proposed all-women school enough to satisfy the requirements of the equal
protection clause? According to the dissent, why is an all-male state-run
college permissible? Does the social contract allow government to treat people
of different sexes differently?

>> * [Romer v. Evans (1996)](Romer.html) who brought the lawsuit and why? How
did the law prohibit gays and lesbians from having not only special rights,
but equal rights as well? What standard must the government meet when it
discriminates on the basis of sexual orientation? What reasons did Colorado
offer to meet that standard, and why did those justifications fail? Does the
social contract allow government to treat people of different sexual
orientations differently?

>> * [American Civil Liberties Union (click on "Women's Rights" or "Lesbian
and Gay Rights")](http://www.aclu.org)Find and read a current political news
story involving an issue of gender equality or sexual orientation equality.
How do you believe social contract theory would resolve the issue?

>>

>> **WEEK 9**

>>

>> **The Legislature: Original Understandings**  
>

>> * [Congress](congress.html) How many chambers does the U.S. Congress have,
and what are those two chambers called? On what is representation based in
each of the two chambers? How long is the term of office for each chamber?
What is the minimum number of Representatives each state gets? How many
Senators does each state get? How many representatives and Senators are there
today? How do the powers of the House and Senate differ (mostly regarding
their different roles in the system of checks and balances)? Who is the
official title of the presiding officer of each chamber? What happens in case
of a tie vote in the Senate? What are the investigative and oversight
functions of Congress?

>> * [Publius, Federalist 52 ](fed52.html) Why are terms in the U.S. House of
Representatives 2 years?

>> * [Publius, Federalist 62 ](fed62.html) What are the several reasons that
terms in the U.S. Senate are 6 years?

>> * [The Legislative Process](legprocess.html) How does a bill become a law?
Be able to explain the entire process in detail.

>> * [CNN's All Politics](http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/) OR [Washington
Post's On Politics](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/politics/) OR
[MSNBC's Politics](http://www.msnbc.com/news/politics_front.asp) Find and read
a current political news stories that involves Congress. How does this news
story illustrate a concept from the readings?

>> * Modern Evaluations of Congress will be discussed in class.

>>

>> **WEEK 10**

>>

>> **The Executive Branch: Original Understandings**  
>

>> * [The Executive Branch](presidency.html) How is the President chosen? What
are the primary powers of the President? What is the Cabinet? What are
"independent agencies?"

>> * [Publius, Federalist 70 ](fed70.html) What are the qualities the
executive should possess, and why are these qualities desirable--that is, what
specific benefits are derived by creating an executive with these qualities?

>> * [Cato, Various Fears Concerning the Executive Department ](antfed67.html)
What are the dangers in the new executive--that is, what specific
Constitutional powers would allow the President to abuse power?

>> * [Presidents' views of Presidential Power](presidents.html) What are the
two competing views of the extent a President's power is limited by the
Constitution, and which Presidents support each view?

>> * [CNN's All Politics](http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/) OR [Washington
Post's On Politics](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/politics/) OR
[MSNBC's Politics](http://www.msnbc.com/news/politics_front.asp) Find and read
a current political news stories that involves the President. How does this
news story illustrate a concept from the readings?

>> * [CNN's All Politics](http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/) OR [Washington
Post's On Politics](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/politics/) OR
[MSNBC's Politics](http://www.msnbc.com/news/politics_front.asp) Find and read
a current political news story that involves a federal agency or cabinet
department. How does this news story illustrate a concept from the readings?

>> * Modern Evaluations of the Executive Branch will be discussed in class.

>>

>> **WEEK 11**

>>

>> **The Judiciary: Original Understandings**  
>

>> * [The Judiciary](judiciary.html) What is the basic organizational
structure of the federal court system? Over what types of cases does the
federal judicial power extend? How are federal judges appointed and what is
their term of office? What is the power of judicial review?

>> * [Publius, Federalist 78 ](fed78.html) Why will the Supreme Court not have
a dangerous amount of power? Why should Supreme Court justices have life
terms? Will the Supreme Court have the power of judicial review? How does the
power of judicial review relate to social contract theory?

>> * [Publius, Federalist 81](fed81.html) Why won't the Supreme Court abuse
it's power of judicial review over the legislature?

>> * [Brutus Nos. 15 and 16 ](antfed7879.html) Why will the Supreme Court be
dangerous? Why won't the threat of impeachment prevent the Supreme Court from
abusing its power of judicial review?

>> * [Brutus No. 16](antfed80.html) What two factors will lead the Supreme
Court to dangerously increase the power of the federal government over the
states?

>> * [Law.com's Supreme Court Monitor](http://www.law.com/us_supreme_ct/) OR
[CNN's All Politics](http://www.cnn.com/ALLPOLITICS/) OR [Washington Post's On
Politics](http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/politics/) OR [MSNBC's
Politics](http://www.msnbc.com/news/politics_front.asp) Find and read a
current political news stories that involves the Supreme Court. How does this
news story illustrate a concept from the readings?

>> * Modern Evaluations of the Judicial Branch will be discussed in class.  
>

>>

>> **_Part Two of the Course: The Political Behavior Process  
>  (Socialization -->Opinionization-->Participation -->Representation)_**

>>

>> **WEEK 12**

>>

>> **Political Behavior: Agents of Socialization (The Media)**  
>

>> * [The Role of the Media in a Democracy](media.html) What is the "news
media"? Why is it important to a democracy? What are the several ways the
modern business aspects of media influence truth and objectivity in the news?
What are the several ways the press can be held accountable for abuses of its
power?

>> * [New York Times v. United States](nyt.html) What is the role of the news
media in a democracy? How are the New York Times and the Washington Post
fulfilling that role in this case?

>> * [IRE (Investigative Reporters and
Editors)](http://www.ire.org/datalibrary/online.html) Read a current
investigative journalism story. How does this story illustrate a concept from
the readings?

>>

>> **WEEK 13**

>>

>> **Political Behavior: Opinions and Ideology**

>> * [20 Questions You Should Ask About Poll Results](polling.html) From the
National Council on Public Polls

>> * [Public Agenda Online](http://www.publicagenda.org) OR
[PollingReport.com](http://www.pollingreport.com) OR [Gallup
Organization](http://www.gallup.com/poll/releases/) Read a recent public
opinion survey. Analyzing that poll using the Opinion Poll Evaluation
Checklist, how valid do you believe the results of the survey are?  
>

>> * [National Election Studies (NES) Guide to Public
Opinion](http://www.umich.edu/~nes/nesguide/gd-index.htm) Explore the
political attitudes of Americans. Look at "Party Identification 3-point
scale,""Liberal-Conservative Self-Identification," "Equal Role for Women,"
"Trust the Federal Government," "Attended Political Meeting," and "General
Interest in Public Affairs.

>> * [Political Attitudes Self-Survey](idquiz.doc) Download, print, and take
this survey to measure your political ideology. Bring it to class to discuss
the results. For more detail, see [The World's Smallest Political
Quiz](http://www.self-gov.org/quiz.html) or download and run a small program
on your computer: [idquiz.exe](idquiz.exe) What are the two different
dimensions of political ideology, and what are the several basic overall
ideologies? Which American political parties do you think represent the
different ideologies?

>>

>> **WEEK 14**

>>

>> **Political Behavior: Participation (Parties, Interest Groups, and
Elections)**  
>

>> * [Political Parties in the United States](parties.html)Why did political
parties first form? How extensively do the two major parties control our
political system? What are the several reasons the U.S. has a two-party
system? How sort of policy positions are usually adopted by two major parties
and why? What are the consequences of weak, decentralized parties in the U.S.?
What tends to happen to third parties and why don't citizens vote for them?

>> * [Party Matchmaker](http://www.3pc.net/matchmaker/quiz.html) from Third
Party Central. Take their quiz and find out which U.S. political party you
agree with the most. The answer may surprise you.

>> * [Citizens' Groups and Lobbies](interestgroups.html) What is the legal
basis for interest groups to exist? What is a "PAC"? What is the difference
between private and public interest groups?

>> * [Voting Rights Amendments](amendments.html) What is the effect of each of
the 15th, 19th, 24th and 26th Amendments?

>> * [Congressional Elections](congresselections.html) What is the difference
between party-centered and candidate-centered voting? What are the several
reasons candidate-centered voting has replaced party-centered voting?

>> * Modern evaluations of American political behavior will be discussed in
class.

>>

>> **WEEK 15**

>>

>> **Political Participation: Representation**

>> * [Edmund Burke's View of Representation](burke.html)What are the two
competing views of how an elected representative should represent the people
who elected him or her? According to Burke, which is the proper role and why?
Which role furthers the principle of checks and balances: delegate or trustee?

>> * [A Primer on Campaign Finance](campaignfinance.html)

>> * Modern evaluations of power in American will be discussed in class.

>>

>> * * *

>>

>>  
>

>>

>> [ Click here to go to the MENU of Rick A. Swanson's American Politics web
site ](http://www.lousiana.edu/~ras2777/menu.html)

>>

>> ![](tinyemailanim.gif) Questions or comments? I want your feedback! E-mail
me by clicking here: [ras2777@louisiana.edu](mailto:ras2777@louisiana.edu)

>>

>> Please allow at least one business day for me to respond.

>>

>> **

