![](nap2.jpg)  

## Professor Daniel W. Graf  
Fall Semester, 1997  

### Office: Humanities 205  
Office telephone: (757) 455-3237  
E-mail: [ dgraf@vwc.edu](mailto:dgraf@vwc.edu)  
  

# **History 321, The Era of the French Revolution and Napoleon**

* * *

## REQUIRED TEXTS

####      1\. Owen Connelly, _The French Revolution and Napoleonic Era_.
second edition.      2\. Anatole France, _The Gods Will Have Blood._

* * *

## MAPS

#### The following on-line maps should be used to supplement what you find in
the Connelly text.  

    [Europe in 1789 at the time of the outbreak of the French Revolution](emap1789.jpg)     [Europe in 1792 at the time of the War of the First Coalition](emap1792.jpg)     [Europe in 1795 after the Treaty of Basel between France and Prussia](emap1795.jpg)     [Europe in 1797 after Bonaparte's 1st Italian Campaign](emap1797.jpg)     [Europe in 1802 after the Treaty of Amiens between France and England](emap1802.jpg)     [Europe in 1804 as Napoleon assumed the throne as Emperor of the French](emap1804.jpg)     [Europe in 1807 after the Treaties of Tilsit (France, Russia, and Prussia)](emap1807.jpg)     [Europe in 1808 after the French invasion of Spain](emap1808.jpg)     [Europe in 1809 after the Treaty of Schonbrunn between France and Austria](emap1809.jpg)     [Europe in 1812 after Napoleon's Russian Campaign](emap1812.jpg)     [Europe in 1813 during the Wars of Liberation](emap1813.jpg)     [Europe in 1814 after the 1st Treaty of Paris](emap1814.jpg)     [Europe in 1815 after the Congress of Vienna](emap1815.jpg)

    [Central Europe in 1789 at the time of the outbreak of the French Revolution](hremap1789.jpg)     [Central Europe in 1799 after Allied failures in the War of the Second Coalition](hremap1799.jpg)     [Central Europe in 1806 after the creation of the Confederation of the Rhine](hremap1806.jpg)     [Central Europe in 1810 under the French hegemony](hremap1810.jpg)     [Central Europe in 1815 after the Congress of Vienna](hremap1816.jpg)

    [Northern Italy in 1789 at the time of the outbreak of the French Revolution](itmap1789.jpg)     [Northern Italy in 1797 during Bonaparte's 1st Italian Campaign](itmap1797.jpg)     [Northern Italy after the territorial changes of theTreaty of Campo Formio (October 1797) ](itmap1797.jpg)     [Northern Italy in 1806 after further extension of French control](itmap1806.jpg)     [Northern Italy in 1813 as Napoleon goes on the defensive](itmap1813.jpg)     [Northern Italy in 1815 after the Congress of Vienna](itmap1815.jpg)

* * *

## WEB SITES OF INTEREST

### The French Revolution

####      [Abb¨¦ Sieyes, _What is the Third Estate?_
(excerpts)](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/sieyes.html)     [The Age of
Enlightenment (French Ministry of
Culture)](http://www.culture.fr/files/imaginary_exhibition.html)     [An
Annotated Chronology of the French Revolution and Napoleonic
Period](http://www.txdirect.net/users/rrichard/napoleo1.htm)     [Burke,
Edmund, _Reflections on the Revolution in France_
(1790)](gopher://gopher.vt.edu:10010/02/55/1)     [Chronology of the French
Revolution](http://www.warwick.ac.uk/fac/arts/History/teaching/french-
rev/chron.html)     [Clark, Jenifer D., "Women in the French Revolution . . ."
(short paper)](http://www.tcr.org/advpl_6.html)     [Dave's French Revolution
Links Page](http://www.hs.port.ac.uk/Users/david.andress/frlinks.htm)
[Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (in
French)](http://www.cnam.fr/ABU/abu_server.html?pub/ABU/anteABU/decla89.txt)
[Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (English
translation)](http://www.wwnorton.com/lowi/docs/fr-decl-rightsofman.html)
[Diderot's _Encyclop¨¦die ou Dictionnaire raisonn¨¦ des sciences, des arts et
des m¨¦tiers, par une Soci¨¦t¨¦ de Gens de lettres_ (prototype of volume 1, in
French)](http://tuna.uchicago.edu/homes/mark/ENC_DEMO/)     [Franco-American
Diplomacy (Texts)](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/frtreaty.htm)     [The
French Revolution: Glossary of
Terms](http://www.warwick.ac.uk/fac/arts/History/teaching/french-
rev/glossary.html)     [The French Revolution: Texts and
Archives](http://history.hanover.edu/modern/frenchrv.htm)     [French
Revolutionary Pamphlets (in
French)](http://humanities.uchicago.edu/homes/mark/fr_rev.html)     [de Gouge,
Olympe _Declaration of the Rights of Women_ ,
1791](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1791degouge1.html)     [_La
Marseillaise_](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/marseill.html)     [Paine,
Thomas _The Rights of Man_
1792](http://odur.let.rug.nl/~usa/D/1776-1800/paine/ROM/rofmxx.htm)
[Robespierre, Maximilien _The Cult of the Supreme Being_
(1794)](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/robespierre-supreme.html)
[Robespierre, Maximilien _Terror and Virtue_
(1794)](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/robespierre-terror.html)     [_The
Tennis Court Oath_](http://www.clinch.edu/history/wciv2/civ2ref/tennis.html)
[Wollstonecraft, Mary, _Vindication of the Rights of
Woman_](gopher://gopher.vt.edu:10010/02/161/1)

### The Napoleonic Period

####      [Histoire Napoleonique (Despite the name, this site is in
English.)](http://www.eclipse.net/~pkarecki/index.html)     [The Napoleonic
Library](http://napoleonic-literature.simplenet.com/Library.html)
[_Napoleon's Account of the Internal Situation of France in
1804_](http://history.hanover.edu/TEXTS/NAPOLEON.HTM)     [Gen. Napoleon
Bonaparte, _Speech to the Troops_ , 1796 (1st Italian
Campaign)](http://www.clinch.edu/history/wciv2/civ2ref/nappy.htm)
[_Napoleon's Farewell to the Old Guard, April 29, 1814_
](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1814napoleon.html)     [The Napoleon
Series: Electronic Magazine dedicated to Napoleon and his
times](http://www.ping.be/napoleon.series/)     [_Napoleon's
Will_](http://napoleonic-literature.simplenet.com/Will.html)

* * *

## A NOTE ON THE SCOPE OF THE COURSE

#### The French revolutionary era continues to pose some of the most
controversial problems facing historians of modern Europe. The number of books
and articles published on the subject is staggering. The recent bicentennial
of the Revolution has, if anything, greatly increased the flow of ink spilled
over the subject. Moreover, even a superficial review of the literature
suggests how little historians agree on anything having to do with this
period. Imagine how difficult it is to clarify the history of a subject when
the events themselves--exactly what happened--remain in dispute. Equally
problematic is the fact that powerful myths, both official and unofficial,
cloud our vision of both events and actors, whether we are talking about the
revolutionaries or about Napoleon Bonaparte.

For example, take the case of Maximilien Robespierre. Contemporary French
radicals sing his praises. For them, he is the greatest hero of the
revolution. But at the same time, more moderate republicans hate him. They
have their own hero in Danton and have built a veritable cult around his name.
Some American historians of the revolution, meanwhile, would damn them both.
Who is right?

As if these battles over the reputations of long-dead revolutionaries were not
enough, we must face the fact that the events of the revolution, beginning
with the storming of the Bastille itself, have been subjected to consciously
self-serving myth-making virtually from 1789 on. For most non-specialists of
today, the result of all these sectarian political squabbles and sanctimonious
myths is a set of "facts" about the revolution that are beyond debate (but are
probably dead wrong). Don't we all know that the French people were starving
under the royal government, that Louis XVI was reactionary and cruel, that the
Bastille was full of innocent prisoners being eaten alive by rats, and that
the rising of the French people was a just act of vengeance against a corrupt,
backward, and despotic regime? Well, guess what: a good case can be made on
behalf of the view that France was the most prosperous country on the
Continent at the time, that the government, far from being reactionary, was
too reform-minded for its own good, and that on balance, its rule was far more
benevolent than that of the revolutionaries who succeeded it! (For a
persuasive presentation of this argument, see Simon Schama's 948-page best-
seller, _Citizens : a Chronicle of the French Revolution_ , which was
published by Knopf in 1989 to capitalize on the bicentennial trade.)

The myth-making process has surrounded Napoleon from the beginning as well.
For one thing, we know that he wrote (and re-wrote) his own military bulletins
to produce a desired effect, not to tell the truth about his battles. To make
matters worse, Napoleon has been the object of systematic (and very self-
serving) mythologizing by his partisans from his own time to the present. Such
efforts were furthered by Napoleon's own writings in exile and actually
received state sponsorship during the reign of his nephew, Napoleon III of
France. Unfortunately for students of history, these political passions have
crept into even the most academic studies of the revolutionary and Napoleonic
eras. In many cases, sorting truth from myth has become next to impossible.

Given this state of affairs, in a one-semester course we can hope to do little
more than catch a glimpse of some of the main actors and events in the
revolutionary drama. Beyond that, I hope that we will experience--vicariously,
of course--some of the emotion of that traumatic era. The assigned texts will
not make students instant experts on the age of the French revolution and
Napoleon. Moreover, they reveal little of the historiographic complexities
alluded to above. In fact, they was chosen primarily for their readability.
Read carefully, the Connelly volume will guide you through the chaotic events
of the period 1789- 1815. Anatole France's novel will give you a glimpse of
the passions of the Reign of Terror. For anyone hoping for more than this
rudimentary exploration of the age, I will be pleased to recommend further
reading.

* * *

## COURSE OBJECTIVES

####  1\. to acquire a basic familiarity with the major events, personalities,
and historical forces covered by the course

2\. to develop increased skill in analyzing historical forces and in
interpreting the interplay of social, economic, political, ideological, and
psychological factors in shaping events.

3\. to develop greater sophistication in oral and written discussion of
historical topics

4\. to achieve a greater appreciation for the role of the French revolution
and Napoleon in shaping modern institutions, attitudes, and ideologies.

* * *

## COURSE REQUIREMENTS

####  In order to pass the course, students must accomplish the following:

1\. Write the two hour exams and the cumulative final exam and achieve a
passing average. Make-up exams will be given only in the most unusual
circumstances and at my discretion. At the minimum, a student who misses a
scheduled exam must see that I am informed of the situation causing the
absence before the time the exam is given and, secondly, must provide a
documented excuse which I deem satisfactory as soon as possible thereafter.
Normally dental and medical appointments scheduled to conflict with class time
do not constitute an acceptable excuse.

2\. Take any unannounced reading quizzes which may be given during the course
of the semester. If necessary, reading quizzes will be administered
periodically to check student reading and comprehension. Students who are
absent on the day a quiz is given will receive a grade of zero for that quiz.
Reading quizzes may not be made up.

3\. Take an active part in class discussion. In order to satisfy this
requirement, students must read each assignment carefully before we discuss it
in class, ask questions on the reading when they need clarification, and
contribute to class discussion on a regular basis. The list of reading
assignments for each class can be found in the course calendar below.

4\. Maintain satisfactory attendance. In my view, you are assuming a
contractual obligation to attend the meetings of this class when you register
for the course. It is my belief that except in a genuine emergency, school
obligations supersede all other considerations for both teacher and student.
The attendance grade of chronic absentees will reflect their failure to
sustain their commitment to the course.

5\. Submit an acceptable reaction paper on the Anatole France novel. A sheet
of guidelines for this project will be provided separately. Note the due date:
November 20. Late papers will not be accepted.

* * *

## GRADING

![](marat1.jpg)

####

Your final grade in the course will normally be computed as follows:

hour exams (20% each)............................ 40% comprehensive final
exam........................ 30% attendance and participation in class  
    (this includes reading quizzes)........ 10% reaction paper (due November 20).......... 20%

I use the following grading scale in all my courses:

    92-100 ......A     90-91 ........A-     88-89 ........B+     82-87 ........B     80-81 ........B-     78-79 ........C+     72-77 ........C     70-71 ........C-     68-69 ........D+     62-67 ........D     60-61 ........D-     01-59 ........F 

* * *

## POLICY ON EXTRA WORK

#### For what I believe to be sound pedagogical reasons, I do not offer
individual students extra work for extra credit. However, as I indicated
above, I will be happy to recommend additional reading to students who want to
pursue their study of the period beyond the scope of the textbook. Moreover, I
am available to help students who wish to improve their performance in the
course. Check the notice of office hours posted on my office door or see me in
class to arrange an appointment.

* * *

## COURSE CALENDAR

### September

####      2 course introduction     4 Connelly, pp. 13-24     9 Connelly, pp.
25-35     11 Connelly, pp. 35-43     16 Connelly, pp. 43-54     18 Connelly,
pp. 56-72     23 Connelly, pp. 74-91     25 Connelly, pp. 91-107     30
Connelly, pp. 107-121

### October

![](alex1.jpg)

####      2 Connelly, pp. 122-137     7 Connelly, pp. 137-150     9 Connelly,
pp. 150-159 and review     14 1st hour exam     16 Connelly, pp. 160-173
21 Connelly, pp. 174-188     23 Connelly, pp. 189-201     28 Connelly, pp.
202-213     30 Connelly, pp. 214-227

### November

####      4 Connelly, pp. 228-244     6 Connelly, pp. 244-262     11 2nd hour
exam     13 Connelly, pp. 263-281     18 Connelly, pp. 281-294     20
Connelly, pp. 295-315, reaction paper due     25 Connelly, pp. 316-332

### December

####      2 Connelly, pp. 333-347     4 Connelly, pp. 347-351 and 1-9, course
evaluation

* * *

## POLICY ON PLAGIARISM AND ACADEMIC DISHONESTY

#### All students are urged to familiarize themselves with the College's Honor
Code and to read the statement on plagiarism and academic dishonesty in the
current edition of the Student Handbook and Calendar. Any violation of the
Honor Code related to this course will result in a grade of "F" for the
course.

* * *

#### You can send e-mail to Dr. Graf by clicking here:
[dgraf@vwc.edu](mailto:dgraf@vwc.edu)  

  

##### Revision of 8/12/97

