    
    


SYLLABUS

History 435: Colonial and Early National U.S. History

Fall 2002  


  

Instructor: Dr. Carol Sue Humphrey  
Owens Hall 312, Ext. 2221  
Office Hours: 2:00 - 4:00 M-F  
or by appointment

This course will study the beginnings of the United States, 1607-1801.
Emphasis will be placed on the developments of the 17th and 18th centuries
which helped shape the colonies into a nation. This growth culminated in the
revolt against British rule, the creation of a working government, and the
assurance that it worked with the peaceful transfer of power in 1801. This
course is a senior-level course and the course workload will be equivalent to
that level, with an emphasis on knowledge acquisition and comprehension
through reading and writing assignments.  


REQUIRED TEXTS: Karen O. Kupperman, _Major Problems in American Colonial
History_

                                    Richard D. Brown, _Major Problems in the Era of the American Revolution_

All of these textbooks are available in the OBU Bookstore.  


FORMAT: The class will meet from 12:00 to 12:50 on Mondays, Wednesdays, and
Fridays. The class will be approximately 50% lecture and 50% discussion.  


ATTENDANCE: You will need to be in class in order to comprehend the material.
Class attendance can affect your grade. You will be allowed to miss 3 times
(for any reason) without penalty. After that, 10 points will be deducted from
your final point total for each additional absence. I also expect you to be on
time for class. Therefore, 3 tardies will equal one absence. I will follow the
official University policy concerning absences which states that any person
missing 25% or more of the time FOR ANY REASON will receive a grade of FX.
This class meets 43 times -- 11 absences will result in a grade of FX.  


GRADING: Graded assignments will consist of 2 short-answer and essay exams
worth 100 points each, 1 short-answer and essay final exam (comprehensive)
worth 150 points, 25 short writing assignments worth 250 points (there are 28
assignments but only 25 will count), and 1 research paper worth 400 points.
Total possible points = 1000.

Grading Scale: 900-1000 = A  
                        800-899 = B   
                        700-799 = C   
                        600-699 = D   
                        000-599 = F   


SHORT WRITING ASSIGNMENTS: 28 chapters are assigned from Kupperman and Brown
throughout the semester. Each time you have such an assignment, you will need
to write a 2-3 page critique/discussion of the documents and essays presented
in that chapter. Each of these papers is due at the beginning of class on the
day the article is assigned and is worth 10 points. These assignments cannot
be turned in late. Total = 280 points -- 250 points will count for the grade,
so there are some extra ones.  


RESEARCH PAPER: The research paper will be a library research paper using both
primary and secondary sources. Topics will be chosen in consultation with the
professor (based on available published primary sources in the OBU library).
The topic will be due on Wednesday, September 25. The paper should be 20+
typed pages in length. The completed research papers are due at the BEGINNING
of class on Wednesday, December 2\. 25 POINTS WILL BE DEDUCTED FOR EVERY DAY
THE PAPER IS LATE!!!!!

The papers will be discussed and critiqued in class on December 4, 6, 9, 11,
and 13. It will be important that all attend the last five days of class in
order for ALL to participate in the discussion and critiquing of the papers.
Failure to do so can negatively impact one's final grade for the course.  


CHEATING: It is neither my intent nor my expectation to act as a moral
policeman, but I will not knowingly tolerate papers or exams dishonestly
completed nor allow them to go unquestioned. Cheating on an exam will result
in a grade of zero on the exam; it may lead to other, more severe
consequences.

Plagiarism, the act of presenting as your own the words or ideas of another
(whether a classmate or a professional scholar) is a form of cheating (an act
of theft, actually), and it will not knowingly be tolerated. You should be
sure that you understand how to avoid forms of accidental plagiarism before
you begin to write papers for the course. Any papers judged to be
intentionally plagiarized will receive a grade of zero; other, more severe
consequences may result. When plagiarism is judged to be present but
inadvertent, a grade is likely to be deferred until the paper is properly
rewritten; some penalty may be incurred for the delay of rewriting.

ANY STUDENT IN THIS CLASS WHO HAS A DISABILITY SHOULD CONTACT MR. BOBBY CANTY
IN THE STUDENT SERVICES CENTER, GC 101, BEFORE THE END OF THE FIRST WEEK OF
CLASSES TO DISCUSS POSSIBLE ACCOMMODATIONS.  
    


DAILY ASSIGNMENT SCHEDULE

August 28: Introduction to the Course

August 30: Responses to Early Contacts  
                    Reading: Kupperman, Chapters 1-2

September 2: **Labor Day Holiday**

September 4: Discovery and Early Settlement

September 6: The Settlement of Virginia

September 9: The Settlement of Virginia  
                    Reading: Kupperman, Chapter 3

September 11: The Settlement of Massachusetts

September 13: The Puritans of Massachusetts  
                        Reading: Kupperman, Chapters 4-5

September 16: Day Off to Work on your Paper Proposal

September 18: The Salem Witch Trials: What Happened?

September 20: Other Colonies -- Ethnic Diversity  
                        Reading: Kupperman, Chapters 6-7

September 23: Other Colonies -- The South  
                        Reading: Kupperman, Chapters 8-9

END OF MATERIAL FOR EXAM #1

September 25: The Issue of the Indians  
                        Research Paper Topic and Working Bibliography Due

September 27: The Issue of Slavery

September 30: The Issue of Slavery  
                        Reading: Kupperman, Chapter 10

October 2: **Exam #1**

October 4: Day Off to Work on Paper -- You really should be started on your
research by now!!!!!

October 7: Colonial Civilization

October 9: The Great Awakening  
                    Reading: Kupperman, Chapter 11

October 11: Provincial Politics, Part #1

October 14: Provincial Politics, Part #2

October 16: The Colonies in the Empire  
                    Reading: Kupperman, Chapters 12-14

October 18: **Fall Free Days**

October 21: The American Revolutionary Era  
                    Reading: Brown, Chapter 1

October 23: The Colonies on the Eve of the Revolution  
                    Reading: Brown, Chapters 2-3

October 25: The Coming of the Revolution

October 28: The Coming of the Revolution  
                    Reading: Brown, Chapters 4-5

October 30: The Revolution as a War

November 1: Fighting for Independence  
                    Reading: Brown, Chapter 6

November 4: Outsiders and Enemies  
                    Reading: Brown, Chapter 7

November 6: Challenges to the Dominant Group  
                    Reading: Brown, Chapters 8-9

November 8: Religion During the Revolution  
                    Reading: Brown, Chapter 10

November 11: The Revolution as a Revolution

November 13: The Impact of the Revolution  
                    Reading: Brown, Chapter 14

November 15: **Exam #2**

November 18: The 1780s  
                    Reading: Brown, Chapter 11

November 20: The Constitution

November 22: The Constitutional Debate  
                    Reading: Brown, Chapters 12-13

November 25: The Washington Years

November 27-29: **Thanksgiving**

December 2: Adams vs. Jefferson  
**                             RESEARCH PAPERS DUE ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !**

December 4: Paper Discussion

December 6: Paper Discussion

December 9: Paper Discussion

December 11: Paper Discussion

December 13: Paper Discussion

December 16: **FINAL EXAM -- 10:15 am -- 12:15 pm**  


\------------------------------------------------------------------------

History 435: Research Paper

The major writing assignment for History 435 will be a research paper over a
topic of your choosing which will use both primary and secondary sources. The
final paper is due December 4, but a working annotated bibliography will be
due on **_Friday, September 25_**. In doing this bibliography, include library
sources which you will probably use in your paper. You may also include any
possible materials in a computer file available in the computer lab: _American
Journey: The American Revolution_. The annotations for all materials do not
need to be long, but they should indicate what you expect to find in each
piece. This preliminary part of the assignment will simply be graded OK or Not
OK. If it is not OK, you will be given a chance to correct the problem(s) (the
repaired bibliography will be due on **Monday, October 7**. If you do not fix
the problems, or if you do not turn the bibliography in ON TIME, your final
paper grade will be reduced by **20 points**. If you fail to turn the
bibliography in at all prior to turning in the paper, your final paper grade
will be reduced by **30 points**.  
    


History 435: Possible Research Topics  
    


Colonial Relations with the Indians

The Role of the Church in the Colonial Period

The Impact of European Exploration on Native Americans

The Difficulties of European Exploration

Diplomacy During the American Revolution

The Role of the Navy During the American Revolution

The Role of the Army During the American Revolution

Reasons for the American Revolution

Results of the American Revolution

US Trade During the 18th Century

The Adoption of the Constitution

The Role of the Continental Congress

The Adoption of the Declaration of Independence

The Issue of Slavery

The Role of the Loyalists during the American Revolution

Prisoners of War During the American Revolution

The Treason of Benedict Arnold

The Role of Washington or Adams or Jefferson or . . .

The British Army During the American Revolution

The First Party System in the 1790s

These are only a few general possibilities for research paper topics. Each of
these, and many other ideas, could be broken down into smaller topics which
deal with a specific colony/state, person, issue, battle, etc. You should
choose a general area of interest and then do some background to ascertain how
you want to narrow your focus. Topical bibliographies of the primary resources
available in the Mabee Learning Center are on reserve in the Library. These
bibliographies are not totally exhaustive, but they do represent the large
majority of the resources available at OBU. If you have any questions, please
ask them. This is a tough assignment, but it will give you a chance to "do
history" as it is done by most professionals.

