|  |  |  ![](../images/spacer.gif)

![](../images/spacer.gif)![](../images/z050001.jpg)![](../images/spacer.gif)
![](../images/k010001.gif)![](../images/spacer.gif) ![](../images/z030000.gif)

|

![](../images/currently.gif)

  

PSU Currently is published on the Web every week during the academic year for
faculty and staff of Portland State University. News items should be sent to
the Office of Publications (mail code PUBS, email address
[currently@pdx.edu](mailto:currently@pdx.edu)) by the Wednesday noon before
publication. Editor: Kathryn Kirkland

* * *

October 8, 2001 |

`Notices`

|

`People`

|

`Presented`

|

`Published`

|

`Grants`  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
  


Prof. Mark Sytsma (right) joins Sen. Ron Wyden in announcing the proposed
federal funding of the Columbia River Aquatic Nuisance Species Initiative. |
![](../images/100801.jpg)  
---|---  
  
### Maintaining the biological integrity of the Columbia River

The designation of $500,000 in federal funding for Portland State and the
Columbia River Aquatic Nuisance Species Initiative was announced by Sen. Ron
Wyden in August. The funding is part of the proposed Senate transportation
appropriation bill.

Work on the initiative will be led by Mark Sytsma, associate professor of
environmental sciences and director of the Portland State Center for Lakes and
Reservoirs. Sytsma is nationally recognized for his work in aquatic nuisance
species.

The funding will support the formulation of a program to protect the Columbia
River from biological invasions associated with shipping activities and will
contribute to the development of national ballast water and invasive species
management efforts. The work will also advance understanding of biological
invasions at a larger scale through collaboration with the Smithsonian
Environmental Research Center Marine Invasion Research Laboratory.

### Hatfield School awards grants

The Hatfield School of Government recently awarded five grants under the
Hatfield Public Service and Constitutional Studies Grant Program. The
projects, which will benefit the Pacific Northwest, adhere to the values and
standards of former Sen. Mark O. Hatfield, according to Ronald Tammen,
director of the school.

The $37,000 in grants was funded from the Hatfield School of Government
endowment earnings and from the Hatfield Public Service and Constitutional
Studies Grants. The awards went to George Fox University, the Blumenauer-
Hatfield Gubernatorial Debate Committee, the PSU Public Affairs and Policy
Ph.D. program, Oregon Business Council, and the Center for Public
Participation.

### Garden symposium this Saturday

Horticulture Magazine's annual symposium, Garden Passions, is scheduled for
Saturday, Oct. 13, in Hoffmann Hall. The daylong event features guest speakers
from around the world, including Fergus Garrett, head gardener at Great Dixter
(England); Thomas Fischer, executive director of Horticulture Magazine
(Boston); Thomas Hobbs, nursery owner and author of Shocking Beauty
(Vancouver, B.C.); and Dennis Schrader, nurseryman and garden designer (New
York).

Cost of the program is $99 for Horticulture Magazine subscribers and $109 for
the general public. This includes lunch. For registration details call
800-395-1901, or for more information call Nancy Goldman at 503-282-1150.

##### Notice

**CONTRACTS WORKSHOP OCT. 17.** "Introduction to Preparing Personal Services
Contracts" is being offered through the free General Employee Development
Program Wednesday, Oct. 17, from 9 to 11 a.m. in 329 Smith Center. To
register, contact the Office of Human Resources by email at shellerc@pdx.edu
or by phone at 5-4926.

**CAE WORKSHOPS FOR FACULTY.** The Center for Academic Excellence organizes
free workshops, seminars, and discussion groups in support of faculty teaching
and learning. To register, call CAE at 5-5642. Next week's sessions are "Using
Chat Rooms," Oct. 15, 23 and 24, 9 to 11 a.m.; "Diversity Film Fest," Oct. 16,
17 and 18, 3 to 5 p.m.; "Digital Photographs," Oct. 17, noon to 12:30 p.m.;
"Utilization of Hi-Tech Classrooms," 1:30 to 2:30 p.m.; "Posting Your Course
Syllabus on Web CT," Oct. 18 and 19, 9 to 11 a.m.; "Your First Online Course,"
Oct. 18, 11 a.m. to 2 p.m.; "Introduction to Creating Dynamic Web Pages," Oct.
18, 1 to 3 p.m.

**FREE COMPUTER CLASSES.** The Office of Information Technologies holds free
computer classes for faculty and staff. Interested individuals must
preregister through the Office of Human Resources at email address
shellerc@pdx.edu or by phone at 5-4926. Class offerings in the next several
weeks include "Intermediate Access," Oct. 23, 9 a.m. to noon; "Cooking with
GQL II," Oct. 25, 9 a.m. to noon; "Introduction to Ex

cel," Oct. 29, 31 and Nov. 2, 9 to 11 a.m.

**NON-TEACHING FACULTY AND STAFF.** Are you a published poet or writer? Are
you serving on community boards or committees? You are welcome to submit your
achievements to Currently for the People, Presented, and Published columns on
the Web. Send a brief description of your accomplishments by email to
currently@pdx.edu.

![Top](../images/arrowbulletup.gif)

#####  People

**Jagdish Ahuja** , Mathematical Sciences faculty, has been invested as a
laureate of the International Biographical Centre Lifetime Achievement Award
for an outstanding contribution statistical distribution theory.

**Dawn White** , International Affairs faculty, has been appointed by Portland
Mayor Vera Katz to the Portland-Suzhou Sister City Association Board of
Directors.

![Top](../images/arrowbulletup.gif)

#####  Presented

**Teresa Bulman** , Geography faculty, gave the Sherrill Scholar lecture at
the University of Arizona on Sept. 19 on the topic "Western Water Law and
Climate Change."

**Mel Gurtov** , Political Science and International Studies faculty,
presented "China and U.S.-Korea Relations" at the conference Aspects of
U.S.-Korea Relations at Claremont McKenna College in Claremont, Calif. Aug.
17\.

**David Johns** , Political Science faculty, delivered two papers at the 15th
Annual Meeting of the Society for Conservation Biology in Hilo, Hawaii, July
29-Aug. 1\. The papers are "The Politics of Influence: Effective Targeting and
Mobilization of Constituencies in the Policy Process" and "Our Real Challenge;
Managing Ourselves Instead of Nature." Johns also moderated a panel discussion
of Carnivores in the Cascades and presented a paper, "The Need for Region-wide
Cooperative Planning in Large-Scale Restoration," at the Oregon Wilderness
Conference, April 27-20.

**Jong Sung Kim** , Mathematical Sciences faculty, presented the papers
"Efficient Estimation for the Proportional Hazards Model with Left-truncated"
and "Case 1: Interval-censored Data" at the Western North American Region of
the International Biometric Society and the Institute for Mathematical
Statistics in Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada, June 2001.

**Inger Olsen** , Foreign Languages and Literatures faculty, participated in
the Danish Ministry of Education's inservice course on teaching Danish abroad
at Hindsgavl Castle, Denmak, July 21-Aug. 4.

**Gary Perlstein** , Administration of Justice faculty, presented a talk on
"Terrorism and Public Safety" to the Executive Officers Club at the Multnomah
Club in Portland, Sept. 20.

![Top](../images/arrowbulletup.gif)

#####  Published

**Frank Cater** , Mathematical Sciences emeritus faculty, has written two
articles and a query published in the Real Analysis Exchange, Vol. 26, No. 2
(2000-2001). The articles are "Note on the outer measures of images of sets"
and "On the derivatives of functions of bounded variation." The query was "On
the derivatives of functions of bounded variation."

**Jack Corbett** , Public Administration faculty, has co-authored a book
chapter titled "Problematica social del manejo de recursos arqueologicos"
published in Patrimonio historico y cultural de Mexico.

**John Hall** , Economics and International Studies faculty, co-authored an
article, "Making the European Union Fit for Eastern Enlargement," published in
the journal International Politics and Society, No. 3/2001.

**David Horowitz** , History faculty, is co-author of On the Edge: The U.S.
Since 1945, published by Wadsworth Thomson Learning (2002).

**Michihiro Kosuge** , Art faculty, has an exhibit of his sculptures on
display at the Laura Russo Gallery through Oct. 27.

**Sandy Polishuk** , Women's Studies faculty, has her article "Interviewing
Radical Elders," published in The Journal of American History, Vol. 88, No. 2
(September 2001).

**Craig Pozzi** , Art faculty, had his photographs on exhibit during August
and September at the Chicago Cultural Center in Chicago, Illinois.

**Kenneth Ruoff** , history faculty, is the author of The People's Emperor:
Democracy and the Japanese Monarchy, 1945-1995, Harvard University Asia
Center, 2001.

**Tom Sanchez** , Urban Studies and Planning faculty, authored a paper, "Are
Planners Prepared to Address Social Justice and Distributional Equity?"
published in Critical Planning, Vol. 8, Summer 2001.

![Top](../images/arrowbulletup.gif)

##### Grants

**Steve Bleiler** , Mathematical Sciences faculty, received a $16,955, three-
year grant to support meetings of the Cascade Topology Seminar during 2001 to
2004 to be held at several sites including Portland State, University of
Oregon, University of Washington, University of Puget Sound, Boise State
University, and Oregon State University.

**Sharon Lee** , Sociology faculty, was awarded $80,000 by the Office of
Minority Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, for the
project, "Cultural Differences and Health Care: A Case Study of Asian
Immigrant Women." The project will run from Sept. 16, 2001, through September
15, 2002.

**Scott Wells** , Civil Engineering faculty, received a $90,000 contract from
the Waterways Experiment Station in Vicksburg, Mississippi, to work with the
Washington Department of Ecology in developing a water quality and
hydrodynamic model of the Spokane River and Long Lake in order to assess
compliance of point source dischargers to water quality standards.

![Top](../images/arrowbulletup.gif)

**[This week's Currently](index.html)**

**Recent Issues**

  * [September 24, 2001](092401a.htm)
  * [October 1, 2001](100101a.htm)
  * [October 8, 2001](100801a.htm)
  * [October 15, 2001](101501a.htm)
  * [October 22, 2001](102201a.htm)
  * [October 29, 2001](102901a.htm)
  * [November 5, 2001](110501a.htm)
  * [November 13, 2001](111301a.htm)
  * [December 3, 2001](120301a.htm)
  * [January 7, 2002](010702a.htm)
  * [January 14, 2002](011402a.htm)
  * [January 22, 2002](012202a.htm)
  * [January 28, 2002](012802a.htm)
  * [February 4, 2002](020402a.htm)
  * [February 11, 2002](021102a.htm)
  * [February 18, 2002](021802a.htm)
  * [February 25, 2002](022502a.htm)
  * [March 4, 2002](030402a.htm)
  * [March 11, 2002](031102a.htm)
  * [April 1, 2002](040102a.htm)
  * [April 8, 2002](040802a.htm)
  * [April 15, 2002](041502a.htm)
  * [April 22, 2002](042202a.htm)
  * [April 29, 2002](042902a.htm)
  * [May 6, 2002](050602a.htm)
  * [May 13, 2002](051302a.htm)
  * [May 20, 2002](052002a.htm)
  * [May 28, 2002](052802a.htm)
  * [June 3, 2002](060302a.htm)
  * [Summer 2002](072202a.htm)

**Currently Archives**

  * [2000-2001](00-01a/080101a.htm)
  * [1999-2000](99-00a/053000a.htm)

[**Office of Publications**](../index.html)

**[Current Events Calendar](http://www.pdx.edu/calendarmenu.phtml)**

**[PSU Vacancies](http://www.hrc.pdx.edu/jobsavail.htm)**  
  
Maintained by the [Office of Publications](mailto:nramsey@pdx.edu)

