**History Department Major Information and Course Offerings**

**Requirements for the History major:**  
Majors are required to take HIS 106, one course in non-Western history, and
seven other courses. Five of these courses must be in a [focus
cluster](http://www.lafayette.edu/~history/clusters.html), and two must be
300-level seminars (or one seminar and an honors thesis).

**Requirements for the minor:**  
A minor in history consists of five courses, chosen to focus on one of three
areas of concentration: United States History, European History, or non-
Western History.

**Requirements for the History and Government/Law Coordinate Major**

The Coordinate Major of History/Government/Law will consist of fourteen (14)
courses, seven (7) each in History and Government/Law.

In History, the seven courses will include two (2) introductory courses from
among the four offered by the Department (H 105, H 106, H 108, H 109), along
with five higher level courses to be taken from within one of the History
Department=s nine focus clusters. At least one of these five courses must be a
300-level seminar.

In Government/Law, the seven courses will include two introductory courses
from among the three offered by the Department, along with five higher level
courses. These five courses must be taken in at least three of the
Department=s four subfields, and at least one must be a seminar.

**INTRODUCTORY COURSES**

**105\. Development of the Modern World**

This course surveys the development of the modern world from the Renaissance
to the present. It stresses the cultivation of "historical thinking" by  
examining themes and events such as the scientific and industrial revolutions;
the formation of modern nations, economies and ideologies; Western and global  
hegemony; and the crisis of the twentieth century. 1 lecture and 2 discussions
per week. Films. Offered in fall semester.Staff

**106\. Introduction to History**.

This seminar introduces students to the ways in which historians work and
interpret historical events. Students learn how to read critically, to analyze  
information, and to process, organize, and report their findings accurately.
Through the study of such issues as historical causation and the role of the  
individual in history, students learn how to make use of the past, and achieve
practical research, writing, and speaking skills.

Students choose from several sections, each taught by an instructor who is a
specialist in that particular topic. Current topics include: Slavery and the  
American Civil War; Witchcraft and Evil Spirits in Europe 1100-1700; the
Holocaust; the Atomic Bomb/Atomic Diplomacy; "The Splendid Little War:" The  
Emergence of the U.S.A. as a World Power, The Fall of Communism. One meeting
per week. Films.  Offered in spring semester (usually one section in fall
semester.) Staff

**108\. Survey of American History from the Colonial Period through
Reconstruction.**

This course provides an introduction to American history from the settlement
of Jamestown by the English until the end of the Reconstruction period. The  
course covers the colonial period, the American Revolution, the drafting of
the Constitution, Jeffersonian and Jacksonian politics, nineteenth century
reform  
movements, early industrialization, westward expansion, the Civil War, and
Reconstruction. 3 hours lecture and discussion. Offered in fall  
semester. Ms. Rosen

**109\. Survey of American History from the Gilded Age through the 1980s.**

A survey of recent American history focusing on political, economic, and
social trends that have affected all aspects of society. The course examines
the  
capital/labor clashes of the Gilded Age, the impact of the Populist and the
Progressive movements, the social contradictions of the "Roaring '20s," the
Great  
Depression of the 1930s, World War II and its aftermath, Vietnam and the
1960s, and the nature of post-Watergate America. 3 hours lecture and
discussion.  
Offered in spring semester. Mr. Jackson

**INTERMEDIATE COURSES**

**Classical Civilization**

**211\. Ancient Greece (Hellenic and Hellenistic Periods).**

A history of Hellenic civilization from the Middle Bronze Age to the
Hellenistic Era, with a focus on its principal political achievement: the
polis  
(city-state). Special attention to the achievements and legacy of the
classical Athenian polis in government, politics, literature, philosophy, and
art. Study  
of other Aegean centers of Greek civilization. 3 hours lecture and discussion.
Offered in spring semester, odd numbered years. Mr. Marblestone

**212\. Ancient Rome.**

A history of Roman culture and society from the founding of the City of Rome
to the Christianization of the Empire. Emphasis on Romanitas, the  
Romans' unique character as expressed in government and administration, the
arts of war and peace, and in the interaction of the worlds of philosophy,  
literature, and art with the Republic and then with the imperial despotism. 3
hours lecture and discussion. Offered in spring semester, eve  
numbered years. Mr. Marblestone

**213\. Ancient Israel.**

This course explores Israel from its remotest beginnings among desert tribes
of the ancient near east and the fulfillment of its national destiny as a
religious  
commonwealth in Canaan, to its transfiguration into an exilic people under the
Romans. Emphasis is placed on cultural and religious factors that  
differentiated Israel from other near eastern kingdoms, especially the Temple
at Jerusalem, the national religious cult, and the role of the prophets. The  
legacy of its religious and moral experience to Western civilization is also
discussed. Mr. Marblestone

**Europe**

**219\. Modern European Society through Film.**

Treatment of specific historical issues (war and society, modernization)
through a combination of films and historical writings. The emphasis is on
historical  
method as a way in which to analyze a variety of sources covering the same
topic, Written sources include memoirs, literary works, and traditional
history  
texts. (Not open to first-year students.) Staff

**221\. The Medieval World.**

A study of European history from the fall of the Roman Empire to the fifteenth
century. The course focuses upon the interplay of political, economic, and  
ideological forces in the development and decline of medieval civilization,
and attempts to assess the relationship of the Middle Ages to the Italian  
Renaissance. 3 hours lecture and discussion. Mr. Fix.
[Syllabus](http://www.lafayette.edu/~history/221syllabus.html)

**222\. Emergence of Western Europe.**

Europe from the Renaissance to the early Enlightenment. The first half of the
course concentrates on the Renaissance, the second half on the foundations of  
modern Europe. The emphasis in the second is on the interrelationship of
socioeconomic change, the new European political order, and the intellectual  
revolution of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. 3 hours lecture and
discussion. Mr. Fix
[Syllabus](http://www.lafayette.edu/~history/222syllabus.html)

**223\. British History to 1715.**

Foundations of the English monarchy and its evolution into a model
constitutional system; 17th-century revolutionary tradition; expansion of
England in  
British Isles, North America, and East Indies; origins of an urban, industrial
society. 3 hours lecture and discussion. Staff

**224\. British History 1715 to the Present.**

Evolution of the constitution - from oligarchy to democracy; industrial
revolution; articulation of class; rise, zenith, and decline of Britain as a
world power;  
English culture and society. The readings emphasize primary documents,
including literature. The course should be of interest to pre-legal and  
English-literature students as well as to history majors. 3 hours lecture and
discussion. Staff

**225\. The Age of Revolution.**

The course centers on the French Revolution, beginning with an examination of
its 18th-century social, economic, and intellectual roots, continuing with the  
Revolution itself, and ending with an assessment of its aftermath up to 1848.
An underlying theme of the course is the connection between the Industrial  
Revolution and the political revolutions of 1789, 1830, and 1848. 3 hours
lecture and discussion. Mr. Fix
[Syllabus](http://www.lafayette.edu/~history/225syllabus.html)

**227\. Europe: 1850-1917.**

This course examines the operation of the European state system, the impact of
the Industrial Revolution, nationalism, and imperialism on European politics  
and culture, and the tensions and crises that culminated in the breakdown of
the European state system during World War I. 3 hours lecture and discussion.  
Offered in fall semester. Mr. Weiner

**228\. Europe: World War I to the Present.**

This course examines the development of European politics and culture since
World War I, with particular emphasis on the impact of the Great War and the  
Russian Revolution, the age of dictators, the origins and impact of World War
II, and the rebuilding of European society since 1945 under the shadow of  
Soviet-American hegemony. 3 hours lecture and discussion. Offered in spring
semester. Mr. Weiner

**253, 254. European Thought, Society, and Culture.**

European culture and society from the High Middle Ages to the present. The
courses offer a variety of texts from literature, philosophy, political
theory,  
and economics, thorough the perspective provided by works on social history. 3
hours lecture and discussion. Offered in fall semester. Mr. Fix  
[253 Syllabus](http://www.lafayette.edu/~history/253syllabus.html), [254
Syllabus](http://www.lafayette.edu/~history/254syllabus.html)

**The United States**

**231\. Early American Social and Economic History.**

This course examines important socioeconomic developments in early American
history. Topics covered include the origins and evolution of the institution  
of slavery, Puritanism and witchcraft, the changing experiences of artisans
and wage earners, and the transformation of social structure and community  
relationships. Prerequisite: History 108. 3 hours lecture and discussion.
Offered every other year in spring semester. Ms. Rosen

**232\. The American Revolution and the Framing of the Constitution.**

This course analyzes the colonial political environment leading up to the
American Revolution, the causes and character of the Revolution, the problems
of  
the Confederation Constitution, and the emergence of the new nation.
Prerequisite: History 108 or equivalent. 3 hours lecture and discussion.  
Offered every other year in spring semester. Ms. Rosen

**233\. Slavery, Civil War, and Reconstruction.**

This course examines the black/white experience in the United States from the
origins of slavery through the Civil War and Reconstruction. Special attention  
is paid to American slavery and to the origins and impacts of racism and
racial violence. This course examines the culture and world view of the white  
slaveholders as well as the world that the slaves made. 3 hours lecture and
discussion. Staff

**236\. Recent America: The Great Depression through the 1980s.**

American politics from the Age of Roosevelt to the Age of Reagan. Topics
include the New Deal; World War II and the home front; Truman and the Fair  
Deal; McCarthyism; corporate culture of the 1950s; the Civil Rights movement;
the Great Society; the politics of protest; the quest for equality; the rise
and  
decline of Reaganism. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing or higher. 3 hours
lecture and discussion. Offered in spring semester. Mr. Offner

**250\. Technology and the American Imagination: History of the Impact of
Industrial Technology on the American Mind.**

An investigation of the impact of industrial technology on American thought
from the beginnings of the Industrial Revolution to the present, examining in  
particular the variety of ways in which American social thinkers have
responded to the rise of modern industry, the linking of industry and
technology, and  
the consequent reorganization of society. 3 hours lecture and discussion. Mr.
Miller

**251\. The American City.**

A study of the growth of the city in the U.S. and its impact upon American
history with emphasis on social and ethnic developments, politics, city  
planning, and urban decay. 3 hours lecture and discussion. Offered in fall
semester. Mr. Miller

**252\. The Transformation of the American Environment**

3 hours lecture and discussion. Mr. Jackson

**255\. Vietnam and the American Experience: A Reconnaissance through the War
in Film, History and Fiction.**

This course examines the profound impact of the Vietnam War on American
society, Through the use of the 13-part PBS video series on the Vietnam War,  
historical readings, and novels, the complexity and multifaceted nature of the
tragedy that was Vietnam is explored. Prerequisites: Students must have  
upper-class standing. 3 hours lecture and discussion. Mr. Sharpless

**256\. Themes in American History.**

Themes and instructors to change in response to interests of departmental
members. Possible themes: Race and Ethnicity in America; Law and American  
History; the Civil Rights Movement; American Society in the 1920s; American
History through Film and Fiction; America at War. Prerequisites: History  
108 or 109 as appropriate. 3 hours lecture and discussion. Staff

**258\. U.S. Constitutional History.**

This course analyzes the history of the U.S. Constitution. The three main
topics of study are (1) property rights and economic regulation, (2) American  
pluralism and the Constitution (civil rights of African-Americans, women,
religious minorities and other groups in American society), and (3)
constitutional  
protection of individual rights (right of free speech and procedural rights of
criminal defendants). 3 hours lecture and discussion. Offered in fall  
semester. Ms. Rosen

**261\. History of American Foreign Policy (1776-1941).**

Study of American foreign policy from the Age of Revolution to World War II.
Major topics include Enlightenment origins of American policy; the Monroe  
Doctrine; imperial expansion; the Spanish-American War; progressivism and
power; world war and world revolution; quest for stability in Europe and Asia;  
the good neighbor in Latin America; appeasement, aggression, and the war
against the Axis Alliance. Prerequisite: Sophomore standing or higher. 3 hours  
lecture and discussion. Mr. Offner

**262\. History of American Foreign Policy (1941-1991)**

Study of American foreign policy from World War II to the present. Major
topics include the Grand Alliance and global politics; the Cold War and  
containment; China, Korea and anti-communism; European and Asian
reconstruction; Cuban and Berlin crises; the Vietnam quagmire; nuclear arms
races; the  
rise of a multi-polar world; the end of the Cold War. Prerequisite: Sophomore
standing or higher. 3 hours lecture and discussion. Mr. Offner

**264\. Women in American History.**

This course examines the female experience and women's rights in America from
the colonial period to the present. The course studies continuities and  
changes in a number of areas, such as women's family life, education, work
life, and participation in politics, and analyzes the different experiences of  
women in various socioeconomic, racial, and ethnic groups. 3 hours lecture and
discussion. Offered in spring semester. Ms. Rosen

**266\. American Jewish History.**

An analysis of the development of Jewish life in America, from the colonial
era to the present, with particular emphasis on the impact of the Eastern  
European migration, the Holocaust and the State of Israel, and suburban
America. Special attention is given to the use of literary sources as tools in
historical  
investigation. Offered as needed. Mr. Weiner

**East European, Russian, Asian, and South American History**

**243\. Imperial Russia**

This course surveys 1000 years of Russian history, from the founding of the
first state in Kiev in the 9th century to the end of the Great Reforms in the
19th century.  Students read primary documents, recent scholarship, and
Russian literature in an effort to understand Russia's old regime.  Topics
addressed include Russia's position in Asia and Europe, the nature of the
autocracy, the impact of serfdom, and attempts to create a public sphere.
Lecture/discussion.  
Mr. Sanborn
[Syllabus](http://www.lafayette.edu/~sanbornj/syllabus2_243_2000.htm)

**244\. 20th Century Russia**

This course surveys the massive cultural and political transformation in 20th
century Russia. The first unit addresses the major changes in the Russian
economy and society that occurred between 1891-1914 before moving to the years
of war, revolution, and retreat from 1914-1928.  The second unit covers the
Stalinist era from 1928-1953, while the third deals with the decay of the
Soviet Union, the Gorbachev Revolution, and the Boris Yeltsin era of the1990s.
Lecture/discussion. Mr. Sanborn
[Syllabus](http://www.lafayette.edu/~sanbornj/syllabus_244_2000.html)

**245\. Spanish and Portuguese America.**

A survey from the pre-conquest era to the period of national consolidation
following independence. Topics include the native American civilizations, the  
Iberian background, the European conquest, the colonial systems, the origins
and development of the independence movements, and the conflicts between  
Hispanic conservatism and nineteenth-century liberalism. 3 hours lecture and
discussion. Offered in fall semester. Mr. Sharpless

**246\. Modern Latin America.**

A survey from the mid-nineteenth century to the present. Topics include the
consolidation of the nation-states, the development of modern economies, the  
rise of nationalism, the emergence of of the middle sectors and working
classes, and, the impact of populism, reform, revolution, and the national
security  
state. 3 hours lecture and discussion. Mr. Sharpless

**247\. Traditional Chinese Civilization.**

An introduction to Chinese history beginning with some of the major roots of
Chinese values in the writings of Confucius and other early thinkers. This  
course emphasizes the way in which a different philosophical system has
affected history, politics, the economy and art. 3 hours lecture and
discussion. Mr. Barclay.
[Syllabus](http://www.lafayette.edu/~barclayp/247b/247bwelc.html)

**248\. The Rise of Modern China.**

A study of the modern history of China culminating with an examination of the
accomplishments and problems of the People's Republic. 3 hours lecture and  
discussion. Mr. Barclay
[Syllabus](http://www.lafayette.edu/~barclayp/248welc.html)

**249\. Modern Japan.**

A survey of the transformation of the feudal society of nineteenth-century
Japan into the modern state and "superpower" of the twentieth century.  
Materials from literature and social history will be used to illustrate
political and economic developments. 3 hours lecture and discussion. Mr.
Barclay  [Syllabus](http://www.lafayette.edu/~barclayp/249b/249bwelc.html)

**270\. Imperialism, Nationalism, and Communism in the Balkans**

This course addresses the ways that political ideologies have helped to shape
the social and cultural landscape of Eastern Europe and focuses on the Balkans
as the case study of this interaction.  We will examine the imperial
ideologies of the Habsburg and Ottoman empires, nationalism in the 19th and
20th centuries, and post-WWII communism.  The course concludes with a
discussion of the ways that these ideologies affected the most recent period
of turbulence in Yugoslavia.  Throughout the course, we will be concerned with
the relationship between ideas and behaviors and the way that ideology
mediates that relationship.  We will survey the basic ideologies of rule in
the Balkans in the modern period and see how they have shaped (and in some
cases failed to shape) politics, society, and culture in the region. Mr.
Sanborn

**Topical and Institutional History**

**215\. History of Technology.**

A study of technology from the irrigation cities of the ancient world through
militarily financed systems of the late twentieth century. The course stresses  
the important role played by cultural influences in determining the nature,
extent, and direction of technological development. Attention focuses on  
processes of invention and innovation and their impact on the growth of modern
Western civilization. Prerequisite: History 105, 106, 108, 109. Open to  
B.A. and B.S. engineering majors without prerequisites. 3 hours lecture and
discussion. Offered in fall semester. Mr. Jackson

**265\. Modern Jewish History.**

A survey of the Jewish experience in modern times which focuses primary
attention on developments in Europe, the United States, and the Middle East,  
and analyzes such issues as the process of Jewish emancipation, the rise of
political anti-semitism and the Holocaust, the Zionist movement and the  
emergence of the state of Israel. Readings include documents, memoirs, short
stories, and secondary sources. 3 hours lecture and discussion. Mr.  
Weiner

**HISTORY SEMINARS**

Registration for the following courses is subject to the approval of the
instructor. Enrollment preference is given to upperclassmen History majors.
Each  
major must take two seminars, one of them during his or her senior year.

**352\. Special Themes in the History of Early/Modern Europe.**

Topics may include revolts and revolutions in Western Europe; central
governments and local elites in early nation building; the rise of modern
capitalism.  
Prerequisite: History 225 or 254, or permission of instructor. Offered as
needed. Mr. Fix

**354\. Seminar in Russian History**

Each year, this course addresses a major theme in the history of modern
Russia.   Students will work with the latest scholarship in the field of
Russian history and will explore primary sources as well before writing a
substantive research paper.  The topic of the course in 2000 was Stalinism,
but future topics may include: imperialism in tsarist Russia, the Soviet
experience in World War II, or Tolstoy's Russia. Writing Course. Mr. Sanborn
[Syllabus](http://www.lafayette.edu/~sanbornj/syllabus_354_2000.html)

**355\. American Social and Intellectual History.**

Topics change annually and include: American cities; technology and social
change. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. Mr. Miller

**364\. History Colloquium.**

Discussions of consequential historical issues and major new monographs. The
topic of the colloquium varies according to the scholarly interests of the  
instructor. Offered as needed. Staff

**365\. American Technology Development.**

The growth of American technology is examined from the early years of the
Republic through the latter twentieth century. Topics include interchangeable  
parts and the implementation of mass production; the factory as system and
community; the transportation revolution; regional electric power systems;  
communication technologies; the process of corporate invention; and the role
of the military in developing "modern" technologies. Extensive readings from  
recent important books and articles in the history of technology are the basis
for class discussion. Prerequisite: History 215 or permission of instructor.
Offered every other year in spring semester. Mr. Jackson

**366\. The Rise of the American West (1800-1980).**

An examination of the development of the trans-Mississippi American West from
the time of the earliest Anglo explorations through the flourishing of  
major urban centers in the late twentieth century. A range of readings and
films focus class discussion on social, economic, and technological factors
shaping  
the West's culture. Prerequisites: History 108 or 109, or permission of
instructor. Offered in fall semester. Mr. Jackson

**367\. Studies in Early National America.**

A seminar on early United States national history, roughly the 1780s to the
1820s. Attention is given to the political, economic, and social developments
of  
this period - the formation of political parties, problems of economic growth,
sectionalism, the status of black people, and trends in literature and fine
arts. Ms. Rosen

**368\. Seminar in Latin American History and Culture.**

This seminar provides advanced students with an opportunity to develop an in-
depth investigation of a subject area of their interest. Students report the  
results of research to the seminar, and write a substantial paper. Students
are encouraged to use the methodology of their major discipline in the paper,
or  
skills in foreign languages. Prerequisite: one of the following: History 245,
246; Spanish 214, 314; Government and Law 224, 228, 229, 239, or permission of  
instructor. Offered in spring semester. Ms. Meyer

**370\. Diplomacy and Imperialism.**

Selected studies in European diplomatic history since the late nineteenth
century.  Readings will include documents, memoirs, literary works, and
secondary sources. Knowledge of a European language is desirable, but not
required. Prerequisite: History 227 or 228, or permission of instructor. Mr.
Weiner

**371\. Seminar on Foreign Policy.**

Readings and research on American foreign policy in the twentieth century.
Discussions and analyses of major historical literature; research paper based
on  
extensive use of primary as well as secondary sources. Prerequisite: History
261 or 262, or permission of instructor. Open to juniors and seniors only.
Mr. Offner

**372\. Studies in Asian History.**

This seminar will emphasize, in different years, one of the following topics:
the Chinese civil war; present-day society in the People's republic of China;
the  
relations of the PRC and other nations of eastern Asia; comparative revolution
in China, Japan, and Vietnam. Prerequisite: one of the following: History 248,  
249; Government and Law 224, 228, 229, 239, or permission of instructor. Mr.
Barclay  [Syllabus](http://www.lafayette.edu/~barclayp/372welc.html)

**373\. The Middle East and North Africa.**

An analysis of the major developments in the region from the late eighteenth
century to the present, with emphasis on the impact of European imperialism,  
the development of nationalism and independence movements, the conflict
between traditional Islamic society and modernization, the Arab-Israeli
conflict,  
and the changed place of the region in world affairs. Prerequisite: Government
and Law 230 or permission of instructor. Mr. Weiner

**374\. Politics and the Arts: France, 1919-1945.**

An analysis of the majot historical and artisitc developments during the late
Third Republic and World War II, with particular emphasis on the  
interconnection of history, literature, and the other arts. The course is
value-oriented, focusing on the individual's capacity to resist
totalitarianism, the role  
of artists and intellectuals in society, and modern alienation. Can count as a
history seminar and credit toward major.

**Honors and Individual Study**

**380, 381. Historical Internship.**

The department will arrange internships each semester for qualified juniors
and seniors with such agencies as Historic Easton, the Canal Museum, Main  
Street Program - Easton, PA, Historic Bethlehem, etc. Written reports and
conferences required. Enrollment limited by availability of acceptable
projects. 380 offered in fall semester; 381 offered in spring semester. Mr.
Miller

**390, 391. Independent Study.**

Qualified students may develop, in consultation with an instructor in the
department, a single-semester course directed to a particular theme or topic
of  
historical inquiry, providing practice in historical research and writing. 390
offered in fall semester; 391 offered in spring semester. Staff

**495, 496. Thesis.**

Guided by a member of the staff, the student writes a thesis in a specialized
field. If at the end of the first semester the student's project appears to
have  
honors potential, the student may apply to pursue graduation with honors. Upon
satisfactory completion of the essay, the student takes an oral  
examination on the thesis and its historical field. 495 offered in fall
semester; 496 offered in spring semester. Staff  
    


                                                                                                   [Return to History Home Pa](http://www.lafayette.edu/~history/)[ge](http://www.lafayette.edu/history/)

                                                                                           [Return to Lafayette College Home Page](http://www.lafayette.edu)   
    
    


