|  |

![](../actual/courses.jpg)  
  
---  
  
![](../actual/invasion.jpg)  
  
NAS 7 |  NAS 30 |  NAS 46  
---|---|---  
NAS 10 |  NAS 33 |  NAS 49  
NAS 11 |  NAS 34 |  NAS 50  
NAS 14 |  NAS 35 |  NAS 53  
NAS 15 |  NAS 36 |  NAS 81  
NAS 17 |  NAS 38 |  NAS 85  
NAS 25 |  NAS 40 |  NAS 86  
NAS 28 |  NAS 45 |  NAS 87  
  
|  
  
  
  
NAS 7  
**First-Year Seminars in Native American Studies**  
---  
Consult special listings.

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 10  
**Peoples and Cultures of Native North America**  
  

The course provides an introduction to the peoples and cultures of Native
North America. In each major region (culture area), one or two indigenous
ethnic groups (nations) are highlighted to emphasize the particular forms of
economy, social organization, and spirituality, as well as modes of their
integration. While the focus of the course is on the more traditional American
Indian cultures prior to intensive European contact and/or the establishment
of Western domination, some crucial aspects of the more recent American Indian
culture history and modern-day situation are also discussed. While many of the
readings are by anthropologists (Native and non-Native), works by American
Indian academic and tribal historians, and other spokespersons are also
included to provide a more balanced and sensitive portrayal of the indigenous
cultures of North America. Native American guest speakers will also offer
their own unique perspective on the subject matter of the course.  
  
Open to all classes. Dist: SOC; WCult: NW. [Kan](faculty/kan.html).

Refer to the first page of [NAS 10 Syllabus](firstpagenas10.html)

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 11  
**Ancient Native Americans**  
  

This course provides an introduction to the pre-Columbian societies of North
America. Discussion begins with a consideration of the wider social context of
archaeological views of Native Americans and how these have changed over time.
We briefly review the enormous diversity in language; economic, social, and
political organization; and religion of Native American societies at the time
of European contact. The course moves back in time to examine the populating
of the Americas and related controversies. We then concentrate on the
subsequent development of diverse pre-Columbian societies that included
hunter-gatherer bands in the Great Basin, the Arctic, and the sub-Arctic;
Northwest Coast chiefdoms; agricultural societies of the Southwest, such as
Chaco Canyon and the desert Hohokam; and the mound-building societies of the
Eastern Woodlands.  
  
Open to all classes. Dist: SOC; WCult: NW. [Nichols](faculty/nichols.html).

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 14  
**The Invasion of America: American Indian History: Pre-Contact to 1830
(Identical to History 14)**  
  

This course surveys the history of the American Indians from contact with
Europeans to c. 1830. It provides an overview of the major themes and trends
in Indian history, supplemented by case studies from a number of regions and
readings that illuminate particular issues. The overall context of the course
is the conflict generated by the colonial drive of European nations and the
U.S. and their citizens, but the primary focus is the historical experience of
Indian peoples and their struggles to retain their cultures and autonomy while
adapting to great changes in the conditions of their lives.  
  
Open to all classes. Dist: PHR; WCult: NA. [ Calloway
](faculty/calloway.html).

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 15  
**American Indian History: 1830 to Present (Identical to History 15)**  
  

This course surveys the history of the American Indians from the year 1830 to
the present day. It provides an overview of the major themes and trends in
Indian history, supplemented by case studies from a number of regions and
readings that illuminate particular issues. The overall context of the course
is the expansion of the U.S., the Indian policies adopted by the U.S.
government, but the primary focus is the historical experience of Indian
peoples and their struggles to retain their cultures and autonomy while
adapting to great changes in the conditions of their lives.  
  
Open to all classes. Dist: PHR; WCult: NA. [ Calloway
](faculty/calloway.html).

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 17  
**Introduction to American Indian Religious Systems (Identical to Religion
17)**  
  

Religious life in Native North America is extraordinarily diverse, both
historically and in the present. Therefore this course will be a
representative rather than a comprehensive survey of significant contexts,
methods, perspectives, and issues. We will use Native and non-Native sources
in relation to distinct American Indian cultures to address the questions: In
what sense is religion even a relevant term in these contexts? How do Native
and non-Native approaches to the study of religion compare? How are American
Indian religious communities constructed, understood and maintained; in other
words, how are human and non-human entities related? And finally, how have
these religious systems changed historically?  
  
Open to all classes. Dist: PHR; WCult: NW. [Jocks](faculty/jocks.html).

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 25  
**Indian Country Today**  
  

This course introduces students to Indian Country by way of exploring
contemporary issues of importance to American Indians. Students will begin by
examining briefly the concept of tribal sovereignty and the role it has, and
continues to have, in driving tribal politics. Students will then broaden
their understanding of Indian Country by exploring practical issues such as:
American Indian political activism, repatriation of sacred objects and
remains, American Indian water rights, hunting and fishing rights, gaming in
Indian Country, education, and contemporary American Indian arts.  
  
Open to all classes. Dist: SOC; WCult: NA. [Turner](faculty/turner.html).

Refer to the first page of [NAS 25 Syllabus](firstpagenas25.html)

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 28  
**Native Native Americans: Film and Television (Identical to Film Studies
42)**  
  

This course surveys the historical and contemporary imagining of American
Indian people and assesses the impact on the Native people of America.
Stereotyping of American Indians in Hollywood film and television programming
has created a symbolic view that has predominated American pop culture a view
that continues today. A lack of cultural understanding of Indian people has
perpetuated an unrealistic portrayal and only by reviewing the reality of
history rather than the myth can individual students have a correct view of
Native American societies and people. This course looks at how symbolic
imagining of American Indians in film and television has produced negative
consequences, and how important it is to overcome such stereotypes, to insure
a more realistic portrayal of Indian people in the future.  
  
**Prerequisite:** At least one of the following: NAS 10, 11, 14, 15, 17, or
25, or by permission of instructor. Dist: ART; WCult: NA. Staff .

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 30  
**Special Topics in Native American Studies Studies**  
  

In 00F  at 10, **History of the Nations of the Iroquois Confederacy.**
(Identical to History 6, Section 1)  
  
In  01S  at 2, **Native Technique and Worldview: The Writings of Leslie Marmon
Silko** (Identical to English 68, Section 1).  
  
Open to all classes. Dist: Lit; WCult: NA. [Jahner.](faculty/Jahner.html)  

In  01F  at 2A, **Contemporary Native American and Canadian First Nations
Poetry** (Identical to English 68, Section 1). This seminar will introduce
students to the development of lyrical poetry by Native authors from North
America. We will trace the development from cultural nationalist poetry of the
1970s to today's "postmodern" texts. Topics of concern include: influence of
oral traditions and rituals; de-colonization and postclonial texts; global
issues and "tribal" concerns; political and literary strategies; gendered
views and "Native" voice; essentialism v.s. universalism.  
  
Open to all classes. Dist: Lit; WCult: NA. Lutz

Refer to the first page of [NAS 30 Syllabus](firstpagenas30b.html)

In 02W  at 2: **Get Up and Dance: Plains PowWow Culture.** Course will be
taught by Visiting Professor Clyde Ellis.

[View course announcement](firstpagenas30.html).

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 33  
**Native American Revitalization Movements (Identical to Religion 54)**  
  

Revitalization theory focuses on movements that attempt to restructure,
reconstitute, or transform traditional practices, values, and ideas in the
face of drastically changing conditions that threaten a people's cultural or
physical survival. This course will explore the dynamics of these movements
through important case studies including the pre-invasion Iroquois
Confederacy; the movement led by the Shawnee Prophet; the Handsome Lake
Movement; the Ghost Dance; and the Peyote Movement. We will reexamine
established theoretical explanation by placing new emphasis on Native
experiences and perspectives. We will conclude with a look at recent
developments in Indian Country that might constitute new kinds of
revitalization.  
  
Open to sophomores, juniors and seniors, or by permission of instructor. Dist:
SOC; WCult: NA. [Jocks](faculty/jocks.html).

Refer to the first page of [NAS 33 Syllabus](firstpagenas33.html)

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 34  
**Native American Oral Traditional Literature**  
  

Native American oral literatures constitute a little-known but rich and
complex dimension of the American literary heritage. This course will examine
the range of oral genres in several tribes. Since scholars from around the
world are studying oral literatures as sources of information about the nature
of human creativity, the course will involve examining major theoretical
approaches to oral texts. (May be counted, with permission, toward the major
in English.)  
  
Limited to 17 students. Dist: LIT; WCult: NW. [Jahner](faculty/jahner.html).

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 35  
**Native American Literature (Identical to English 45)**  
  

Published Native American writing has always incorporated a cross-cultural
perspective that mediates among traditions. The novels, short stories, and
essays that constitute the Native American contribution to the American
literary tradition reveal the literary potential of diverse aesthetic
traditions. This course will study representative authors with particular
emphasis on contemporary writers. (May be counted toward the major in
English.)  
  
Open to all classes. Dist: LIT; WCult: NA. [Jahner](faculty/jahner.html) or [
Palmer](faculty/palmer.html).

Refer to the first page of [NAS 35 Syllabus](firstpagenas35.html)

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 36  
**Indigenous Nationalism: Native Rights and Sovereignty (Identical to
Government 60)**  
  

This course focuses on the legal and political relationship between the
indigenous peoples of Canada, the United States, Australia, and New Zealand
and their respective colonial governments. Students will examine contemporary
indigenous demands for self-government, especially territorial claims, within
the context of the legislative and political practices of their colonial
governments. The course will begin with an examination of the notion of
Aboriginal self-government in Canada and develop it in light of the policy
recommendations found in the recent report of the Royal Commission on
Aboriginal Peoples (1996). Using the Canadian experience as a benchmark,
students will then compare these developments to indigenous people's
experiences in the United States, Australia and New Zealand. An important
theme of the course will be to develop an international approach to the issue
of indigenous rights and to explore how colonial governments are responding to
indigenous demands for justice.  
  
**Not** open to first-year students without permission of instructor. Dist:
SOC or INT; WCult: NA. [Turner](faculty/turner.html).

Refer to the first page of [NAS 36 Syllabus](firstpagenas36.html)

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 38  
**38\. History of the Indians of New England (Identical to History 18)**  
  

The history of the Indian peoples in New England is usually neglected and
almost always distorted in our history books. Indians generally disappear from
the picture after King Philip's War in 1675-6. However, Indian people did not
disappear; they survived and adjusted to the new world in which they lived,
often at tremendous cost. Today, Indian people and Indian communities
throughout New England are asserting their rights, reviving their traditions
and communities, and demanding attention. Their endeavors make no sense unless
we understand their continuing presence in the area through the 18th, 19th and
20th centuries.  
Open to all classes. Dist: PHR; WCult: NA. [Calloway](faculty/calloway.html).  
  

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 40  
**Introductory Native American Language (Identical to Linguistics 40)**  
  

This language course is intended to introduce beginning students to the
fundamentals of the various families of Indian languages of North America.
This panoramic course may serve as an introduction to the study of a specific
Indian language, to the study of the relationship between language and
culture, or to the study of linguistics itself. In addition it will provide a
general description of the phonology, morphology, syntax, semantic domains,
and grammar of Indian languages. Each student will choose one out of twelve
grammatical sketches of particular Indian languages for closer analysis.
Furthermore, we shall examine the history of the study of Indian languages and
their classification by family, the dynamics of linguistic contact, discourse
analysis, linguistic anthropology, and the issues of language extinction and
preservation.  
  
Open to all students. Dist: SOC; WCult: NW. [Runnels](faculty/runnels.html).

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 45  
**American Indian Intellectuals**  
  

This course surveys some of the prominent voices in American Indian
intellectual culture from the 1960s to the present. The course will examine
four kinds of American Indian intellectuals in order to make better sense of
what an American Indian intellectual is, and more importantly, what does it
mean to be part of an American Indian intellectual culture? The course will
explore the work of tribal leaders, American Indian scholars, artists and
writers, and Native women.  
  
Open to sophomores, juniors and seniors. Dist: PHR; WCult: NA. [ Turner
](faculty/turner.html).  
  
Refer to the first page of [NAS 45 Syllabus](firstpagenas45.html)

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 46  
**Native Americans and Christianity (Identical to Anthropology 46)**  
  

As Europeans invaded the Native American world, Christian missionaries were
nearly always in the vanguard, and their work influenced the lives of the
Indian people in many profound ways. As committed agents of change,
missionaries were more likely than some of the other newcomers to require that
Indians forsake their indigenous religions and alter their way of life. At the
same time, many Christian denominations differed significantly from each other
in their approach to Christianizing American Indians. Specific Native
responses to missionization have varied from resistance to accommodation, and
in many cases Christian and indigenous beliefs and practices have been
syncretized and unique forms of Indian Christianity (e.g., the Shaker Church)
have developed. This course examines the work of various Christian missions
(Catholic, Protestant, Russian Orthodox) from the early colonial era to the
present. Particular attention is paid to Native interpretations of
Christianity and the various roles it has played in their lives. The readings
include works by anthropologists, ethno-historians, and scholars of religion
as well as statements by Native American Christians and critics of
Christianity.  
  
**Not** open to first-year students without permission of instructor. Dist:
SOC; WCult: NA. [ Kan ](faculty/kan.html).

Refer to the first page of [NAS 46 Syllabus](firstpagenas46.html)

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 49  
**The Land of the Totem Poles: Native Peoples of the NorthWest Coast.
(Identical to Anthropology 49).**  
  

With their complex social organization, elaborate ceremonies, fascinating
mythology, and flamboyant art, the indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest
Coast represent a truly unique culture area of Native North America. The
course surveys several cultures of this region (from the coast of Oregon to
southeastern Alaska), drawing upon early travel accounts, anthropological
works, native testimony, artifacts from the Hood Museum of Art, and films.
Lectures, class discussions, and student presentations will deal with the
classic Northwest Coast cultures of the eighteenth and the nineteenth
centuries as well as their modern versions.  
  
Open to all classes. Dist: SOC; WCult: NA [ Kan ](faculty/kan.html).

Refer to the first page of [NAS 49 Syllabus](firstpagenas49.html)

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 50  
**Native Americans and the Law (Identical to Government 69)**  
  

This course will focus on the constitutional, statutory and jurisprudential
rules of law that make up the field of Federal Indian Law. Attention will be
given to the historical framework from which the rules were derived. After
tracing the development of the underlying legal doctrines that are prominent
today, the course will turn to a consideration of subject-specified areas of
Indian law, including hunting and fishing rights, water rights, and
preservation of religious and cultural rights.  
  
Open to sophomores, juniors and seniors. Dist: PHR; WCult: NA.
[Duthu](faculty/duthu.html).

Refer to the first page of [NAS 50 Syllabus](firstpagenas59.html)

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 53  
**Religion and the Iroquois Longhouse (Identical to Religion 53)**  
  

The Longhouse tradition of the Rotinonhsionni (or Iroquois people), seeks to
build, maintain, and extend a network of relationship, the extended house,
between and among human and other-than-human communities. Thus it works to
integrate more obviously religious structures with such domains as economics,
ecology, gender relations, decision-making, language, and diplomacy. This
course will utilize Native and non-Native sources to enrich our understanding
of this intricate system, paying attention to both its historical development
and its present reality. The course is oriented toward the production of
student research papers.  
  
**Prerequisite:** It is highly recommended that students have taken either
Native American Studies 17/Religion 17, or Native American Studies
10/Anthropology 4, or have done other work in the study of Native American
cultures. Dist: PHR; WCult: NW. [Jocks](faculty/jocks.html).

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 81  
**Senior Seminars in Native American Studies**  
  

In  01W  and  02W  at 10A,  **Leadership Resources and Community Development
for Native America**. Students will use real problems and issues facing tribal
communities as a basis for researching and developing a grant proposal. Class
sessions will allow students to explore challenges facing Native America and
the real-life dilemmas and work of community leaders. Guest lectures will
include representatives of tribal communities, grantwriters and funders.
Students will learn to think creatively about tribal community needs and to
visaulize themsleves as problem- solvers within a Native community. They will
gain practical knowledge of the funding environment, how to identity and
establish relationships with funders, and how to write a compelling proposal.  
  
Open with written permission of the instructor to juniors and seniors. Dist:
SOC; WCult: NA. [Jocks. ](faculty/jocks.html)  
  

In  01S  and  02S  at 10A,  **American Encounters: Case Studies in Contact**
(Identical to History 96, Section 1). Students in this research seminar will
each examine a particular contact situation for which detailed and extensive
primary sources are available. By close reading and ethnohistorical
interpretation of the journlas of members of the DeSoto expedition, the
Coronado expedition, Champlain's Voyages, the Jesuit Relations, the La Salle
voyages, the Lewis and Clark expedition, and others, students will explore the
phenomenon of early contact between different groups of Indians and different
groups of Europeans in different areas of North America. They will consider
the circumstances of contact, the reliability of the source materials they are
using, how (and how not) to read the sources for insights into Native American
history and culture, and what we can learn about the perceptions and
experiences of the different peoples involved. Students will present their
findings in class reports and research papers, to provide for comparative
discussion, constructive criticism, and broader understanding of historical
encounters between people who, in addition to inhabiting different cultural
worlds, lived in a different age and saw things in different ways.  
  
Open with written permission of the instructor to juniors and seniors. Dist:
PHR; WCult: NA. [Calloway ](faculty/Calloway.html).

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 85  
**Independent Study in Native American Studies**  
  

Designed for students who wish to pursue in depth some subject in Native
American Studies not currently offered at the College. Students may not
register for independent study until they have discussed their topic with the
instructor. [ Please consult the rules for NAS 85.](rules.html)  
  
**Prerequisite:** at least two Native American Studies courses. [The
Chair](faculty/calloway.html).

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 86  
**Independent Research in Native American Studies**  
  

This course is designed for a student who wishes to research a particular
problem in greater depth than is possible in an Independent Study course (NAS
85). A faculty advisor will be assigned to each student to supervise the work
through regular class meetings. Usually a formal paper embodying the results
of the research is required. A student wishing to enroll in this course must
first discuss the topic with a faculty member, who will serve as research
advisor, and then submit a formal research proposal to the Program. [ Please
consult the rules for NAS 86.](rules.html)  
  
**Prerequisite:** at least two Native American Studies courses. [The
Chair](faculty/calloway.html).

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
NAS 87  
**Native American Studies Honors**  
  

Studies is open only to majors.Students must formally apply to be admitted to
the program. A candidate must satisfy the minimum College requirement of 3.0,
have a grade average of at least 3.33 in the Native American Studies courses
or other courses appplied to the major, and complete the sequence of courses
NAS [ 86 ](courses.html#86) and NAS [ 87 ](courses.html#87), in addition to
the Senior Seminar NAS [ 81 ](courses.html#81). Student who take both NAS [ 86
](courses.html#86) and Nas [ 87 ](courses.html#87) may count only one course
as credit towards the major requirement.

By the end of their junior year applicants will ordinarily have completed,
with a minimum grade of A-, a preparatory reading course (NAS 85) and will
have submitted an _**Honors thesis Proposal**_ for work to be supervised by a
primary faculty advisor. _**Admission to the Honors program is by vote of the
NAS faculty**_

Students admitted to the honors program must enroll in NAS [ 86
](courses.html#86) and NAS [ 87 ](courses.html#87) in their senior year. The
honors project which normally culminates in a substantial independent thesis,
will be _**submitted to the primary advisor four weeks prior to graduation.**_
Those students who complete the honors program with a grade of A- or higher in
their honors courses will receive honors recognition in the major. High honors
may be awarded by faculty vote for truly exceptional work. .  
  
Prerequisite: Native American Studies 85, 86, and permission of the faculty
member who will be advising the student. [The Chair](faculty/calloway.html).

![](../actual/upgreen.jpg)  
  
* * *

` Copyright (C) MCMXCVIII by the N.A.S. Department of Dartmouth College  
Please send your comments to`` `[` webmaster`](mailto:
linda.welch@dartmouth.edu)`.`` `



