**ECON 742**  
**Public Economics 2: Public Choice**  
(8:30-9:45am, Tuesday & Thursday, room 347 / 401 B&E Bldg.)

  
  
  

**Dr. Sobel - Spring 2002**  
Office Hours: 10:00am-11:00am, Tuesday & Thursday or by appointment  
Office Location: 410 Business and Economics Building  
Office Phone: 293-7864  
E-Mail: rsobel2@wvu.edu  
Homepage: <http://www.be.wvu.edu/divecon/econ/sobel/>

**Course Objectives:**  
This course will focus on the way in which individual preferences are
translated into public sector policies through the political process. The goal
of the course is to provide the student with a general framework within which
public sector policies and decisions can be evaluated. A second objective of
this course is to allow the student to become familiar enough with a body of
literature that it can be used as a foundation for original scholarly
research. The student will learn to work on effectively organizing and
developing original ideas, and presenting them in writing.

**Examinations and Grades:**  
Final grades will be based on seven short papers and a take-home final
examination. Each paper will be worth ten percent of the final grade and the
final examination will be worth thirty percent. The final exam will be due by
5:00 pm on the Monday of final exam week (Monday, May 6th). Papers are due at
the beginning of the class period on the dates given below. Papers handed in
after class on the due date will be counted as handed in the next day (late).
One letter grade will be deducted from your work for each day it is handed in
late.

**Papers:**  
Papers should be typed, double-spaced, and should be brief developments of
_original_ ideas on the literature we are covering. Papers are not meant to be
quizzes or overviews of an entire area, but rather original ideas, developing
a theme related to a narrow set of the readings covered just prior to the
paper due date. I do not want reviews or summaries of the readings. Ideally,
these ideas could be further developed into a research paper suitable for
publication in an academic journal. The purpose of the paper assignments is,
first, to provide an incentive to give thoughtful attention to the topic, and
second, to give you practice in developing and presenting your ideas in
written form. You should never quote directly from another source (a one line
quote is maybe OK under rare circumstances in the opening part to motivate an
idea). You must reference ideas properly, but the ideas should be in your own
words. I do not want on the papers (nor the final exam) words, phrases,
paragraphs or anything else directly copied from other sources.

**_Paper Due Dates:_**  
**     January 31**  
**     February 14**  
**     February 28**  
**     March 14**  
**     April 4**  
**     April 18**  
**     May 2**  


**Reading List:**  
The reading list is intended as a guide to some relevant literature. The
readings denoted with an asterisk (*) are required readings. The other
readings on the list that are not marked are classics in the area which are
covered or summarized in your text or in another article in the section. You
do not have to read these articles, but you should be aware that they are the
foundations for the work that we cover.

I have prepared a packet of copies of all of the required readings. I will
assign one person in the class to hold these readings for the semester. You
may borrow them to copy them (this way you can copy them anywhere you want.).
Please return them as soon as possible so that others may borrow them to make
copies. I would suggest making copies early, although don't get too far ahead
because we may skip or alter the reading list. Note that many of these
readings are available for free on the Internet at <http://www.jstor.org/> and
if you are looking for additional cites on a topic the best place to search
for references in the economics literature is on EconLit which can be found
linked alphabetically on the WVU library page
<http://www.libraries.wvu.edu/database/>

**Required Book:**  
Cullis, John and Philip Jones, _Public Finance and Public Choice_. Second
Edition. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.

**Other Useful Reference Books:**

Mueller, Dennis C., _Public Choice II: A Revised Edition of Public Choice_.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989.

William F. Shughart II and Laura Razzolini, eds., _The Elgar Companion to
Public Choice_. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2001.

Buchanan, James M. and Gordon Tullock, _The Calculus of Consent: Logical
Foundations of Constitutional Democracy._ Ann Arbor: University of Michigan
Press, 1962.

Hinich, Melvin J. and Michael C. Munger, _Analytical Politics_. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1997.

Holcombe, Randall G., _Public Finance: Government Revenues and Expenditures in
the United States Economy_. Minneapolis/St. Paul, MN: West Publishing, 1996.
This undergraduate level public economics book is out of print, but is
available **_free on the internet_** at Dr. Holcombe's homepage:
<http://garnet.acns.fsu.edu/~holcombe/>  
    
    
  

**ECON 742 Reading List**

* * *

  
***Introduction: Data Handout on Government Finance in the U.S.** (Provided in
class)  


**1\. The Invisible Hand and the Market Process**

*Smith, Adam, _The Wealth of Nations._ Two excerpts:

Book 1, Chapter 2 on the Principle giving occasion to the Division of Labor
(the frequently cited "butcher, brewer, and baker" quote is from this chapter)

Book 4 (IV), Chapter 2 on the restraints on the importation of goods
(especially look at the 4th paragraph starting with "every individual is
continually exerting himself . . " and the 9th paragraph where he introduces
the concept and term "invisible hand")

*Read, Leonard, "I, Pencil," Copyright from the Foundation for Economic Education.

*Hayek, F.A., "The Results of Human Action but not of Human Design," Chapter 6 in _Studies in Philosophy, Politics, and Economics_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1967.

*Hayek, F.A., "The Use of Knowledge in Society," _American Economic Review_ Vol 35, no. 4 (September 1945), pp. 519-530.

*Friedman, Milton and Rose Friedman, "The Power of the Market," Chapter 1 in _Free To Choose: A Personal Statement_. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1979.   


**2\. The Role, Functions, and Powers of Government**

*Hyman, David N., _Public Finance: A Contemporary Application of Theory to Policy_ (6th Edition). Fort Worth, TX: Dryden Press, 1999, pp. 66-68 (the section on market failure)

*Rand, Ayn, "Man's Rights," _The Virtue of Selfishness_. New York: Signet Books, 1964, pp. 92-100.

*Rand, Ayn, "The Nature of Government," _The Virtue of Selfishness_. New York: Signet Books, 1964, pp. 107-115.

*"Not Yours to Give" excerpted from _The Life and Times of Colonel David Crockett_.

*Holcombe, Randall G., "An Economic Theory of Rights," Chapter 2 in _The Economic Foundations of Government_. New York: New York University Press, 1994.

*Holcombe, Randall G., "The Distinction Between Clubs and Governments," Chapter 5 in _The Economic Foundations of Government_. New York: New York University Press, 1994.

*U.S. Constitution - please copy it (it's in the packet) and **_bring it with you to class_**.   


**3\. Public Choice and Government Failure**

*Buchanan, James M., "Public Finance and Public Choice," Chapter 10 in _What Should Economists Do?_ Indianapolis: Liberty Press, 1979.

*Cullis, John and Philip Jones, Chapter 18 from an old edition of the book (provided in your copy packet, this has been removed from the textbook in the new edition).

*Mitchell, William C., "The Old and New Public Choice: Chicago versus Virginia," Chapter 1 in William F. Shughart II and Laura Razzolini, eds., _The Elgar Companion to Public Choice_. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2001, pp. 3-32.

*De Alessi, Louis, "Property Rights: Private and Political Institutions," Chapter 2 in William F. Shughart II and Laura Razzolini, eds., _The Elgar Companion to Public Choice_. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2001, pp. 33-58.

*Holcombe, Randall G. and Russell S. Sobel, "Public Policy Toward Pecuniary Externalities," _Public Finance Review_ 29, No. 4 (July 2001), pp. 304-325.

**4\. The Social Contract: Constitutional Foundations of Government**

*Buchanan, James M., "The Domain of Constitutional Economics," _Constitutional Political Economy_ 1, no. 1 (Winter 1990), pp. 1-18.

*Gordon, Scott, "The New Contractarians," _Journal of Political Economy_ 84, no. 3 (June 1976), pp. 573-590.

*Voigt, Stefan, "Positive Constitutional Economics - A Survey," _Public Choice_ 90 (March 1997), pp. 11-53. Reprinted in: Charles K. Rowley (Ed.): _Constitutional Political Economy in a Public Choice Perspective_ , Dordrecht et al.: Kluwer, 1997.

*Holcombe, Randall G., "Constitutions as Constraints: A Case Study of Three American Constitutions," _Constitutional Political Economy_ 2, no. 3 (Fall 1991), pp. 303-328.

*Holcombe, Randall G., "The Distributive Model of Government: Evidence from the Confederate Constitution," _Southern Economic Journal_ 58, no. 3 (January 1992), pp. 762-769.

Sobel, Russell S., "The League of Nations Covenant and the United Nations
Charter: An Analysis of Two International Constitutions," _Constitutional
Political Economy_ 5, no. 2, (Spring/Summer 1994), pp. 173-192.

Buchanan, James M., _Explorations into Constitutional Economics._ College
Station: Texas A &M University Press, 2000.  


**5\. The Voting Mechanism**

**5A. Voters: How and Why do they Vote?**

*Cullis and Jones, Chapter 4, pp. 72-75 (Section 4.2)

*Tullock, Gordon, "The Charity of the Uncharitable," _Economic Inquiry_ 9 (December 1971), pp. 379-392.

*Sobel, Russell S. and Gary A. Wagner, "Expressive Voting and Government Redistribution," WVU Department of Economics Working Paper 00-06.

Brennan, Geoffrey, and Loran Lomasky, _Democracy and Decision: The Pure Theory
of Electoral Preference_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993.

Mueller, Dennis C., _Public Choice II: A Revised Edition of Public Choice_.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989 (Chapter 18).  


**5B. Optimal Voting Rules**

*Cullis and Jones, Chapter 4, pp. 75-77 (Section 4.3)

Buchanan, James M. and Gordon Tullock, _The Calculus of Consent_. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press, 1962 (Chapter 6).

Arrow, Kenneth J., _Social Choice and Individual Values_ (2nd Edition). New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1963.  


**5C. Voting Rules and Government Efficiency: The Role of Unanimity**

*Wicksell, Knut, "A New Principle of Just Taxation," in R.A. Musgrave and A.T. Peacock (eds.), _Classics in the Theory of Public Finance_ , 1958, pp. 73-118.

*Lindahl, Eric, "Just Taxation -- A Positive Solution," in R.A. Musgrave and A.T. Peacock (eds.), _Classics in the Theory of Public Finance_ , 1958, pp. 168-176.

*Sobel, Russell S. and Randall G. Holcombe, "The Unanimous Voting Rule is Not the Political Equivalent to Market Exchange," _Public Choice_ 106, no. 3/4 (March 2001), pp. 233-242.   


**5D. Majority Rule, The Median Voter, and Voting Cycles**

*Cullis and Jones, Chapter 4, pp. 78-91 (Sections 4.4 to 4.7)

*McKelvey, R.D., "Intransitivities in Multi Dimensional Voting Models and Some Implications for Agenda Control," _Journal of Economic Theory_ 12, no. 3 (June 1976), pp. 472-482.

*Romer, Thomas and Howard Rosenthal, "Political Resource Allocation, Controlled Agendas, and the Status Quo," _Public Choice_ 33, no. 4 (1978), pp. 27-43.

*Tullock, Gordon, "Why So Much Stability," _Public Choice_ 37, no. 2 (1982), pp. 189-202.

*Holcombe, Randall G. and Russell S. Sobel, "The Stability of International Coalitions in United Nations Voting from 1946 to 1973," _Public Choice_ 86, no. 1/2 (January 1996), pp. 17-34.

Bowen, Howard R., "The Interpretation of Voting in the Allocation of Economic
Resources," _Quarterly Journal of Economics_ 58 (November 1943), pp. 27-48.

Black, Duncan, _The Theory of Committees and Elections_. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1958.

Downs, Anthony, _An Economic Theory of Democracy_. New York: Harper  & Row,
1957.  


**5E. Empirical Median Voter Models**

*Holcombe, Randall G. and Russell S. Sobel, "Empirical Evidence on the Publicness of State Legislative Activities," _Public Choice_ 83, no. 1/2 (April 1995), pp. 47-58.

*Turnbull, Geoffrey K. and Peter M. Mitias, "Which Median Voter?" _Southern Economic Journal_ 62, no. 1 (July 1995), pp. 183-191.   


**6\. Congressional Voting & the Political Marketplace**

**6A. Congressional Voting & Ideology**

*Weingast, Barry R., Kenneth A. Shepsle, and Christopher Johnsen, "The Political Economy of Benefits and Costs: A Neoclassical Approach to Distributive Politics," _Journal of Political Economy_ 89, no. 4 (1981), pp. 642-664.

*Sobel, Russell S., "Political Incentives and Legislative Voting," _Journal of Public Finance and Public Choice_ 10, no. 2/3 (1992), pp. 171-182.

*Bender, Bruce and John R. Lott, Jr., "Legislator Voting and Shirking: A Critical Review of the Literature," _Public Choice_ 87, no. 1/2 (April 1996): 67-100.

*Rubin, Paul H., "Ideology," Chapter 15 in William F. Shughart II and Laura Razzolini, eds., _The Elgar Companion to Public Choice_. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2001, pp. 328-336.

Peltzman, Sam, "Constituent Interest and Congressional Voting," _Journal of
Law and Economics_ 27, No. 2 (April 1984), pp. 181-210.

Kalt, Joseph P., and Mark A. Zupan, "Capture and Ideology in the Economic
Theory of Politics," _American Economic Review_ 74, no. 3 (June 1984), pp.
279-300.

*Sobel, Russell S. and Gary A. Wagner. "On the Determinants of Congressional Bill Sponsorship and Voting Behavior with an Application to Government Growth Theories." _Journal of Public Finance and Public Choice_ 42, no. 2/3 (1998), pp. 87-115.   


**6B. Logrolling**

*Browning, Edgar K. and Jacquelene M. Browning, _Public Finance and the Price System_. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 4 th Edition, pp. 68-70.

*Stratmann, Thomas, "Logrolling in the U.S. Congress," _Economic Inquiry_ 33, no. 3 (July 1995), pp. 441-456.

*Gilligan, Thomas W. and John G. Matsusaka, "Deviations from Constituent Interests: The Role of Legislative Structure and Political Parties in the States," _Economic Inquiry_ 33, no. 3 (July 1995), pp. 383-401.

Koford, Kenneth J., "Centralized Vote Trading," _Public Choice_ 39, no. 2
(1982), pp. 245-268.  


**6C. The Political Marketplace**

Kau, James B., Donald Keenan, and Paul H. Rubin, "A General Equilibrium Model
of Congressional Voting," _Quarterly Journal of Economics_ 97 (May 1982), pp.
271-293.

*Crain, W. Mark, Donald R. Leavens, and Robert D. Tollison, "Final Voting in Legislatures," _American Economic Review_ 76, no. 4 (September 1986), pp. 833-841.

*Groseclose, Tim and James M. Snyder, Jr., "Buying Supermajorities," _American Political Science Review_ 90, no. 2 (June 1996), pp. 303-315.

*Handout on Minimum Winning Coalitions \- in copy packet - copy and **_bring to class_**   


**6D. Are Democracies Efficient? The Chicago View**

*Becker, Gary, "A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political Influence," _Quarterly Journal of Economics_ 98, no. 3 (August 1983), pp. 371-400.

*Wittman, Donald, "Why Democracies Produce Efficient Results," _Journal of Political Economy_ 97, no. 6 (December 1989), pp. 1395-1424.   


**7\. Interest Groups and the Political Process: Rent Seeking & Collective
Action**

*Cullis and Jones, pp. 93-99 (Section 5.2)

*Tullock, Gordon, "The Welfare Cost of Tariffs, Monopolies, and Theft," _Western Economic Journal_ 5, no. 3 (June 1967), pp. 224-232.

*Tullock, Gordon, "The Transitional Gains Trap," _Bell Journal of Economics_ 6 (Autumn 1975), pp. 671-678.

*Azfar, Omar, "The Logic of Collective Action," Chapter 3 in William F. Shughart II and Laura Razzolini, eds., _The Elgar Companion to Public Choice_. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2001, pp. 59-82.

*Ekelund, Robert B. and Robert D. Tollison, "The Interest-group Theory of Government," Chapter 17 in William F. Shughart II and Laura Razzolini, eds., _The Elgar Companion to Public Choice_. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2001, pp. 357-378.

*Sobel, Russell S. and Thomas A. Garrett, "On the Measurement of Rent Seeking and its Social Opportunity Cost," _Public Choice_ , forthcoming.

Kreuger, Anne O., "The Political Economy of a Rent-Seeking Society," _American
Economic Review_ 64 (June 1974), pp. 291-303.

Olsen, Mancur, _The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of
Groups_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965.  


**8\. The Size and Growth of Government**

**8A. Bureaucracy Theory**

*Cullis and Jones, pp. 354-355 (Section 14.5)

*Niskanen, William A., "Bureaucracy," Chapter 11 in William F. Shughart II and Laura Razzolini, eds., _The Elgar Companion to Public Choice_. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2001, pp. 258-270.

Niskanen, William A., "Nonmarket Decision Making: The Peculiar Economics of
Bureaucracy," _American Economic Review_ 58 (May 1968), pp. 293-305.

Niskanen, William A., "Bureaucrats and Politicians," _Journal of Law and
Economics_ 18 (December 1975), pp. 617-643.

Niskanen, William A., _Bureaucracy and Representative Government_. Chicago:
Aldine-Atherton, 1971.

Breton, Albert and Ronald Winetrobe, "The Equilibrium Size of a Budget
Maximizing Bureau," _Journal of Political Economy_ 83, no. 1 (February 1975),
pp. 195-207.  


**8B. Explanations of the Growth of Government**

*Cullis and Jones, pp. 357-369 (Sections 14.7-14.9)

*Husted, Thomas A. and Lawrence W. Kenny, "The Effect of the Expansion of the Voting Franchise on the Size of Government," _Journal of Political Economy_ 105, no. 1 (February 1997), pp. 54-82.

*Holcombe, Randall G., "Veterans Interests and the Transition to Government Growth: 1870-1915," _Public Choice_ 99, no. 3-4 (June 1999), pp. 311-326.

*Sobel, Russell S., "The Budget Surplus: A Public Choice Explanation," WVU Department of Economics Working Paper 01-05.

Higgs, Robert, _Crisis and Leviathan: Critical Episodes in the Growth of
American Government_. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.

Meltzer, Allan H. and Scott F. Richard, "A Rational Theory of the Size of
Government," _Journal of Political Economy_ 89, no. 5 (October 1981), pp.
914-927.

Peltzman, Sam, "The Growth of Government," _Journal of Law and Economics_ 23,
No. 2 (October 1980), pp. 209-287.

Holcombe, Randall G. and Donald J. Lacombe, "The Growth of Local Government in
the United States from 1820 to 1870," _Journal of Economic History_ 61, no. 1
(March 2001), pp. 184-189.  


**9\. The Public Choice Approach to Taxation**

**9A. Introduction to Politically Optimal Taxation**

*Buchanan, James M., "Taxation in Fiscal Exchange," _Journal of Public Economics_ 6 (July-August 1976), pp. 17-29.

*Holcombe, Randall G., "Public Choice and Public Finance," Chapter 19 in William F. Shughart II and Laura Razzolini, eds., _The Elgar Companion to Public Choice_. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2001, pp. 396-421.

*Poterba, James M., "Public Finance and Public Choice," _National Tax Journal_ 51, no. 2 (June 1998), pp. 391-396.

Holcombe, Randall G., "Tax Policy from a Public Choice Perspective," _National
Tax Journal_ 51, no. 2 (June 1998), pp. 359-371.

Winer, Stanley L. and Walter Hettich, "What is Missed if We Leave Out
Collective Choice in the Analysis of Taxation?" _National Tax Journal_ 51, no.
2 (June 1998), pp. 372-390.

Slemrod, Joel, "Optimal Taxation and Optimal Tax Systems," _Journal of
Economic Perspectives_ 4, no. 1 (Winter 1990), pp. 157-178.

Shughart, William F. II, ed., _Taxing Choice: The Predatory Politics of Fiscal
Discrimination_. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, 1997.  


**9B. Public Choice Models of Taxation**

*Cullis and Jones, Chapter 16 (pages 395-409)

*Buchanan, James M. and Dwight R. Lee, "Politics, Time, and the Laffer Curve," _Journal of Political Economy_ , Vol. 90, no. 4. (Aug., 1982), pp. 816-819.

*Data Handout on Income Tax Rates & Revenues (provided first day of class - **_bring it to class_** )

Buchanan, James M. and Dwight R. Lee, "Tax Rates and Tax Revenues in Political
Equilibrium," _Economic Inquiry_ 20, no. 3 (July 1982), pp. 344-354.

Brennan, Geoffrey and James M. Buchanan, _The Power to Tax: Analytical
Foundations of a Fiscal Constitution_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1980. (Chapters 2, 3,  & 4)

Brennan, Geoffrey and James M. Buchanan, _The Reason of Rules: Constitutional
Political Economy_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986.  


**9C. Applications of the Laffer Curve**

*Sobel, Russell S., "Theory and Evidence on the Political Economy of the Minimum Wage," _Journal of Political Economy_ 107, no. 4 (August 1999), pp. 761-785.

*Garrett, Thomas A., "The Leviathan Lottery? Testing the Revenue Maximization Objective of State Lotteries as Evidence for Leviathan," _Public Choice_ 109, no. 1-2 (October 2001), pp. 101-117.

Clark, J.R. and Dwight R. Lee, "Too Safe to Be Safe: Some Implications of
Short-Run and Long-Run Rescue Laffer Curves," _Eastern Economic Journal_ 23,
no. 2 (Spring 1997), pp. 127-137.

Sobel, Russell S., "Defending the Articles of Confederation: A Reply to
Dougherty," _Public Choice_ , forthcoming.  


**9D. Miscellaneous Tax Issues**

*Buchanan, James M., "The Economics of Earmarked Taxes," _Journal of Political Economy_ 71 (October 1963), pp. 457-469.

*Feenberg, Daniel R., William Gentry, David Gilroy, and Harvey S. Rosen, "Testing the Rationality of State Revenue Forecasts," _Review of Economics and Statistics_ 71, No. 2 (May 1989), pp. 300-308.

Gentry, William M., "Do State Revenue Forecasters Utilize Available
Information?" _National Tax Journal_ 42, no. 4 (December 1989), pp. 429-439.  


**10\. Citizen Constraints on Government Revenues & Expenditures**

*Matsusaka, John G., "Fiscal Effects of the Voter Initiative: Evidence from the Last 30 Years," _Journal of Political Economy_ , Vol. 103, No. 3. (Jun., 1995), pp. 587-623.

Wagner, Gary A. and Russell S. Sobel, "State Budget Stabilization Fund
Adoption: Preparing for the Next Recession or Circumventing Fiscal
Constraints?" Working Paper.  


**11\. Fiscal Federalism**

*Buchanan, James M., "An Economic Theory of Clubs," _Economica_ (February 1965), pp. 1-14.   
      *(Also shown in Cullis & Jones, section 3.5.4, pp. 57-59) 

*Tiebout, Charles, "A Pure Theory of Local Government Expenditures," _Journal of Political Economy_ 64, no. 5 (October 1956), pp. 416-24.   
      *(Also shown in Cullis & Jones, section 12.4, pp. 297-300) 

*Sobel, Russell S., "Optimal Taxation in A Federal System of Governments," _Southern Economic Journal_ 64, no. 2 (October 1997), pp 468-485.

Sobel, Russell S., "In Defense of the Articles of Confederation and the
Contribution Mechanism as a Means of Government Finance," _Public Choice_ 99,
no. 3/4 (June 1999), pp. 347-356.

*Sobel, Russell S., "Defending the Articles of Confederation: A Reply to Dougherty," _Public Choice_ , forthcoming.   


**12\. Law and Economics**

*Priest, George L., "The Common Law Process and the Selection of Efficient Rules," _Journal of Legal Studies_ 6, no. 1 (January 1977), pp. 65-82.

*Holcombe, Randall G., _Public Finance and the Political Process_. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1983. (Chapter 9)

*Benson, Bruce L., "Law and Economics," Chapter 26 in William F. Shughart II and Laura Razzolini, eds., _The Elgar Companion to Public Choice_. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2001, pp. 547-589.

Rubin, Paul H., "Why is the Common Law Efficient?" _Journal of Legal Studies_
6, no. 1 (January 1977), pp. 51-63.  
  ****

**13\. Regulation & Antitrust**

*Stigler, George J., "The Theory of Economic Regulation," _Bell Journal of Economics and Management Science_ 3 (1971), pp. 3-18.

*Posner, Richard A., "The Social Costs of Monopoly and Regulation," _Journal of Political Economy_ 83, No. 4 (1975), pp. 807-827.

*Benson, Bruce, M.L. Greenhut, and Randall Holcombe, "Interest Groups and the Antitrust Paradox," _Cato Journal_ 6, no. 3 (Winter 1987), pp. 801-817.

*Yandle, Bruce, "Public Choice and the Environment," Chapter 27 in William F. Shughart II and Laura Razzolini, eds., _The Elgar Companion to Public Choice_. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2001, pp. 590-610.

Peltzman, Sam, "Toward a More General Theory of Regulation," _Journal of Law
and Economics_ 19 (August 1976), pp. 211-240.

Kalt, Joseph P., and Mark A. Zupan, "Capture and Ideology in the Economic
Theory of Politics," _The American Economic Review_ 74, no. 3 (June 1984), pp.
279-300.

Pelzman, Sam, "An Evaluation of Consumer Protection Legislation: The 1962 Drug
Amendments," _Journal of Political Economy_ 81 (1973), pp. 1049-1091.  


**14\. The War on Drugs**

*Miron, Jeffrey A. and Jeffrey Zwiebel, "The Economic Case Against Drug Prohibition," _Journal of Economic Perspectives_ 9, no. 4 (Fall 1995), pp. 175-192.

*Holcombe, Randall G., "The Drug Problem," Chapter 10 in _Public Policy and the Quality of Life_. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1995.

Rasmussen, David W., and Bruce L. Benson, _The Economic Anatomy of a Drug War:
Criminal Justice in the Commons_. Lanham, M.D.: Rowman  & Littlefield
Publishers Inc., 1994.  


**15\. The Future of Public Economics**

The following articles are all part of the Symposium on the Future of Public
Economics, printed in _International Tax and Public Finance_ 1, no. 2
(November 1994), pp. 167-204.

*Bird, Richard M., "Symposium on the Future of Public Economics: Introduction," (pp. 167-168).

*Pestieau, Pierre, "The Current State and Future Directions of Public Finance," (pp. 169-174).

*Musgrave, Richard A., "The Longer View," (pp. 175-181).

*Brennan, Geoffrey, "Public Economics: Where Are We Now?" (pp. 183-188).

*Slemrod, Joel, "Three Challenges for Public Finance," (pp. 189-195).

*Besley, Timothy, "Three Approaches to Public Economics," (pp. 197-204).

*Rowley, Charles K., Friedrich Schneider, and Robert D. Tollison, "The Next Twenty-five Years of _Public Choice_ ," _Public Choice_ 77, (1993), pp. 1-7.

*Magee, Stephen P., "Bioeconomics and the Survivor Model: The Economic Lessons of Evolutionary Biology," _Public Choice_ 77, (1993), pp. 117-132.   


**16\. Current Topics in Public Economics and Rankings of the Journals**

[Each student will briefly discuss all articles in most recent issue (provide
copy of table of contents for everyone), and present one paper in more
detail]. Each person will have about 30 minutes. You may choose from the
following journals: _Public Choice_ , _Journal of Public Economics_ ,
_National Tax Journal_ , _Public Finance Review_ , _Constitutional Political
Economy_ , _Public Budgeting and Finance_.

In addition, prior to class you should read:

*Laband, David N. and Michael J. Piette, "The Relative Impacts of Economics Journals 1970-1990," _Journal of Economic Literature_ 32, no. 2 (June 1994), pp. 640-666.

