
    _The reviewers' majors are EEB and
    History/ Latin American Studies, so take the choices with a grain of salt._
    
    
    
     LIMITED ENROLLMENT: Some of these awesome courses are limited enrollment,
    and you need to apply for them.  So do it!  Here's a list of
    awesome limited enrollment classes.  See below for commentary on these.
    * AST 203 The Universe
    * CHV 310 Practical Ethics (Peter Singer)
    * ENG 365 The American Short Story
    * ROM 304 Dante's Purgatorio and Paradiso
    * WWS 301 Ethics and Public Policy
    
    FULL LIST OF AWESOME COURSES (in alphabetical order by department):
    
    AAS 202/SOC 202: Intro. Research Methods in African-American Studies 
    - Howard Taylor is one of the SOC department's superstars, and the reading
    list for this class is controversial (have you ever heard of the Bell
    Curve?) and interesting.  Also, it's a SOC class, which, almost by
    definition, means it won't be too difficult.  
    
    AMS 352/ECS 321: The Transatlantic '60s: ...
    - Hi.  This is the best course being offered next semester.  Hands down,
    no question.  Anson Rabinbach is a genius, and he's co-teaching this
    course on the 1960s with Sean Wilentz, who's not too shabby himself.
    There have been rumors that Wilentz is going to bring Bob Dylan to one of
    the seminars... ummm, yeah, really...  The only downside to this seminar
    is that most of us will never get into it, since American Studies and
    European Cultural Studies certificates get priority over everyone else.
    It's worth applying though.  
    
    MAT 199: Math Alive
    - They recently took the exclamation point off this course's title (it
    used to be Math Alive!).  However, it's still known by its unofficial
    moniker, "Math for Plants."  Basically, this course is for all of you
    looking to fulfill QR with a bare minimum of dignity.  OK, no.  Dignity
    gets thrown out the window with Math Alive -- but at least you've
    fulfilled QR painlessly.  Incidentally, the professor, Ingrid Daubechies,
    is a really famous mathematician, which is what you should tell your
    parents if you take this course.  
    
    AST 203: The Universe
    Limited enrollment!
    - Ahhh... Astrogut.  The Universe actually gets rave reviews as a good
    course, and not just because it's an easy QR.  Students of this course
    allegedly learn something.  And then feast your eyes on the
    "Reading/Writing Assignments" portion of the registrar's courseguide.  I
    quote: "Reading: Approximately 80 pages per week; Writing: 1 essay (less
    than 10 pages)."  It sounds like you could do all the work for this entire
    course over Thanksgiving Break if you put your mind to it.  
    
    PHI 385/CHV 310: Practical Ethics
    Limited enrollment!
    - Peter Singer's a pretty interesting dude.  And not all of his philosophy
    entails baby-killing.  Other elements include saving the whales and
    feeding impoverished Third World children.  Sound intriguing?  Then sign
    yourself up.  Or, if you need further motivation, keep in mind that by
    signing up for this course you will be pissing Steve Forbes off to no end.
    He may never give another dime to this University...
    
    CLA 208: Origins and Nature of English Vocabulary
    - Astronomically high ratings.  Who would have thunk it?  Student course
    guide calls it "rollickingly good fun."  If you can get someone to call
    English vocabulary "rollickingly good fun," then I think there's something
    special there.  
    
    CLA 214: The Other Side of Rome
    - "Other side" = sex, slavery, and drugs!
    
    COM 326: Tragedy
    - This class is a good one.  I know because I took it.  Robert Fagles is
    the famous translator of the Odyssey, the Iliad and other works you
    pretended to read in 11th grade.  He also has a very mesmerizing voice and
    infinite knowledge about things Tragic.  The plays you read in this class
    will also make you more knowledgeable about drama in general.  For
    instance, I just saw "Hedda Gabler" this weekend at Theater Intime, which
    was a play I first read in COM 326.  Good class, not very difficult
    either.
    
    COM 337: Really Fantastic Fiction
    - I can't tell you who E.A. Reeves is.  I can only say that people who
    take this course like it.  The reading list is interesting and quirky, and
    the numerical course evaluation statistics are astronomical.  Sorry I
    can't be more helpful.
    
    CWR 204: Creative Writing (Fiction)
    - If you can write a fiction story, now is the time to take CWR 204.
    Basically, if you submit a fiction writing sample, you are likely to get
    into one of the three seminars.  So, in that case, your professor might be
    Joyce Carol Oates.  Not bad.  Or it could be Edmund White.  Again, very
    good.  Or you might get A.J. Verdelle, who is less famous but more
    renowned at Princeton as a good teacher.  This is A.J.'s last year at
    Princeton too, so jump on this course if you can.  
    
    EAS 334: Twentieth-Century Chinese Literature
    Perry Link is the American professor of this Chinese Lit. course.
    Ordinarily, that might not be so cool, but Link is so famous and
    interesting that the Chinese government WILL NOT ALLOW HIM INTO CHINA.
    You know you're doing something right when a totalitarian government
    won't even allow you to visit. :)  Seriously, my sophomore year roommate
    used to rave on and on about Perry Link, and you'll probably never have
    another opportunity to expose yourself to modern Chinese literature.  
    
    ECO 101 and ECO 102: Macro- and Microeconomics
    I say this every semester, but for the love of God, take these econ.
    courses!  You can't go wrong with either of these professors, and it
    doesn't matter which order you take them in.  You will be noticeably
    smarter for having taken these courses.  Your friends and family will
    comment and compliment you on it.  Also, your mother and father will love
    you more if you take economics.  It's good for you.  Try it.  
    
    ECO 350/HIS 392: American Economic History
    This class, taught by Beth Bogan, is another reason to take the above
    courses.  ECO 101 and 102 are prerequisites for it.  Good thing I already
    took them, huh?  Beth Bogan has no other job at Princeton than to teach,
    and teach well.  She's part of an elite group of professors exempted from
    any research requirement so that she can simply teach.  I've heard she's
    pretty good at it.  I'm taking this course, so help me God.  
    
    ENG 334: Literature of the Fin de Siecle
    I've never seen Jeff Nunokawa lecture, but if you get an English major
    started on him, you'll have to gag her to make her stop.  I can't get
    psyched about Turn of the Century literature, but apparently Nunokawa
    makes it fun and exciting for all involved.  Folks, that's a miracle.  
    
    ENG 365: The American Short Story
    Elaine Showalter is the other English department superstar.  A couple of
    years back, Rolling Stone magazine listed her as the Number 1 most
    interesting professor in the US.  She's big on popular culture, and known
    to use movie clips to liven up her lectures (movies in class = good).
    Also, she's really well-connected, and will occasionally bring in the
    author of the book you're reading to talk to you about it.  Pretty cool.
    
    ENG 335: Children's Literature
    "Kiddie Lit", as this class is known, is a perennial fan-favorite.  I
    can't tell you too much about U.C. Knoepflmacher, except to say that he
    teaches a popular class and has a funny name.  People like it.  That's
    all.  
    
    *** Freshman Seminars Program:  
    
    Only take a FRS only if you are sure the professor is great. There are
    plenty of other amazing "real" courses out there!  Not sure if your prof
    is good?  Read reviews of other courses he/she has taught.
    
    In my opinion, the freshman seminars
    program is a wonderful thing.  Not everyone agrees with me though, so ask
    around.  My experience with a freshman seminar has been that I've remained
    close friends with the people in that class, and we even have class
    reunions with the professor every semester (our last reunion is coming up
    in February, but we plan to keep meeting at Reunions for years to come).  
    It's an opportunity for a small seminar environment (which I enjoy) with a
    professor who's teaching something s/he loves.  So in my opinion, it's
    hard to go too far wrong.  But, of the Freshman seminar professors that I
    recognize, here is the list of notably awesome seminars: FRS 140w: Walden
    in Our Time -- William Howarth is by all accounts a great prof. FRS 148:
    The American Dream and the Public Schools -- Nathan Scovronick supposedly
    has a grouchy exterior, but turns out to be very lovable in the end.  The
    only caution on this course is that it will be filled with mildly annoying
    pre-Woody-Woo majors, as Scovronick is the Wilson school Dean.  If you,
    dear reader, happen to be thinking about the Wilson School, take my advice
    and don't make it so obvious.  The rest of us find it very annoying.  FRS
    164w: The Clinton Impeachment: History, Law and Politics -- Sean Wilentz
    testified on Clinton's behalf at the impeachment trial, so don't believe
    for a minute that this will be an ideologically neutral class. But I'm
    confident that some conservative rabble-rousers will make this course
    interesting.  Maybe ol' Bill will come visit the seminar too.  You never
    can tell. ***
    
    HIS 304: Modern Latin American since 1810
    -Everybody raves about this course.  If you have even the most remote
    interest in learning about Latin American, Jeremy Adelman will make it
    interesting for you.  And everyone should care a little bit about Latin
    America -- please??  Reading list includes some great fiction works.  This
    course has transformed the way I think about the U.S.A.    
    
    HIS 343: The Civilization of the Early Middle Ages
    - Peter Brown is a God, folks.  I reserve that term for a very select few,
    trust me.  When I studied abroad in Argentina, my fellow Argentine history
    majors were blown away that not only did Peter Brown teach a class of
    mine, but that I had also *talked* to him.  This guy speaks more than 15
    languages (we once had a conversation that went from English to Spanish to
    very bad Portuguese -- I didn't bother testing him on how good his Old
    Norse is, but he's fluent in that too).  When I took this course, it was
    low-stress. Multiple choice midterm and final, two historical-fiction
    essays.  Brown has his preceptors act as Vandals and Visigoths when
    describing the fall of Rome.  He's hilarious and brilliant, 
    simultaneously.  Take this course.  It's the best HIS course being offered
    this semester, I think.  
    
    HIS 367: English Constitutional History
    - This is one of those cases where you have to assume that the professor
    will make the course interesting.  Certainly, the title makes this sound
    like a brutal course -- like taking it might be an obscure form of
    torture.  But William Jordan is an institution within the history
    department.  My thesis advisor's office is next door to Jordan's, and
    there is an endless line of people waiting to talk to Jordan, even when
    he's not having office hours.  He's supposedly one of the best lecturers
    at Princeton.  That's all I can say.
    
    HLS 363/VIS 344: The Idea of Greece in European Cinema
    - Professor Sitney is Princeton's superman film-studies prof.  I've never
    had the pleasure, but the film-studies crowd advises that every course
    Sitney teaches is worth taking.  So I'm just passing that advice along.
    I've never heard anybody speak ill of a Sitney course, so consider this
    one if you're looking for some academic exposure to movies.  
    
    HUM 206/COM 206: Masterworks of European Literature
    - John Fleming is hilarious.  Pick up the September issue of Maxim and
    you'll see him appearing in a Men's Fashion photo shoot with Princeton in
    the background.  He's a medievalist by training, but rumor has it that he
    can handle just about any genre of literature.  So this class gives you a
    chance to read the super-famous works of the Western Canon (Voltaire,
    Milton, Dante, Cervantes, etc.).  Similar to Economics courses, your
    parents would be pleased if you took this one.  
    
    LAS 370/ANT 370: Latin American Cinema and Society
    - OK, this is purely my bias.  Most of you don't give a shit about
    Latin America, let alone Latin American cinema.  But if I'm wrong about
    you, then you should know that this course is supposed to be kick-ass.
    Not too difficult, interesting material ... overall pleasant.
    
    MOL 214: Introduction to Cellular and Molecular Biology 
    You'll probably have to take this is you're pre-med or pre-Mol Bio or
    pre-EEB.  This is a hard core science class and is not for the faint of
    heart.  Lots of people bitch about it.  It's true-- the premeds create a
    competitive atmosphere.  This is too bad, because the stuff you learn in
    this course is amazing, and it's very well organized.  You learn how to
    clone people and cure their diseases with gene therapy.  Includes a
    chapter on cancer.  *********If you're thinking of doing Mol Bio or
    premed, you should definitely take this class.***********
    
    MUS 103: Introduction to Music
    - I'm recommending this course (also known as "Clapping for Credit") with
    a caveat.  The professor that everyone knew and loved, Simon Morrison, is
    no longer teaching the course.  Now he's being replaced by K.T. Rohrer, of
    which I know nothing.  What I do know is that most of the homework entails
    having the assigned music playing in your room while you do your other
    work.  I've heard grading is somewhat subjective though, so maybe you want
    to consider using one of your precious PDF options.  Either that, or you
    can be a senior with a job who no longer cares about his GPA.
    Take your pick.  
    
    POL 316: Civil Liberties
    - Robert (that's Robbie to his friends) George is legendary around here.
    His courses are notoriously hard, and only Attila the Hun could agree with
    his right-wing views, but people still pack his classes.  If you take
    Civil Liberties, you're in for a tough class. In fact, most Politics
    majors will tell you that freshmen and sophomores should not take this
    course.  Similar to "The Force" in StarWars, one needs to be academically
    ready to handle one of Prof. George's courses.  All the same, despite the
    difficulty, people LOVE this class.  I leave the choice up to you.
    
    PSY 101: Introduction to Psychology
    - By all accounts, springtime is when you should take PSY 101.  It's
    interesting material, not too challenging, and fulfills ST.  What's not to
    like?  
    
    REL 251: The New Testament and Christian Origins
    - Elaine Pagels and the controversial subject matter make this class
    worthwhile.  I had Pagels in seminar format for a similar class, so I
    can't vouch for her lecturing abilities, but I can say that she's one of
    the world's experts in the history of Christianity.  For all you
    unwavering believers out there, you should know that this class is also
    known as "Faithbusters 101."  Pagels and most of the authors you read will
    by no means take the Gospel version of Jesus Christ as accepted fact.
    She will force you to question and challenge accepted belief, which most
    people think is a good thing.
    
    REL 252: The History of Early Christianity
    - This seems to be the seminar format of REL 251.  I know that Pagels runs
    a seminar very well, which is an argument for this class, but I'd expect
    there to be more reading for this class, which may not be what you're
    looking for.  But I will say that Pagels chooses her readings very, very
    well.  Nothing is superfluous or particularly dull.  Consider this course
    as a more in-depth version of REL 251 if you're already interested in the
    material.
    
    REL 370: Re-Enchanting the World: Religion and Literature of Fantasy
    - Professor Raboteau is supposed to be an excellent seminar-leader, and
    also pretty famous.  The reading list caught my eye, but maybe I'm just
    strange.  Did anybody else really like reading The Hobbit (J.R.R.
    Tolkien), the Chronicles of Narnia (C.S. Lewis) and other books like it
    when they were kids?  Those authors and more are on the syllabus.  Pretty
    cool, I think. 
    
    ROM 304: Dante's Purgatorio and Paradiso
    Limited enrollment!  
    - Despite Hollander's less-than-stellar Frosh-week lecture last year, he
    was chosen to give the lecture because he is widely regarded as a great
    professor.  His students get so carried away by Dante that they come back
    to Reunions every year and recite (from memory!) passages from Dante's
    works.  That's strange... but pretty cool nonetheless. 
    
    SOC 210: Urban Sociology: The City and Social Change in the Americas
    Fernandez-Kelly is one of Princeton's all-star teachers.  She's
    passionate, and to boot, she's won an Emmy for a documentary she made.
    Work load called "a little hefty," but it's all interesting stuff.  Don't
    be intimidated on the first day of class.  You can hang in this class
    without a doubt, and it will be well worth the effort.  
    
    SOC 241: The Social Basis of Individual Behavior 
    Interesting gut (easy course). Topics include group conformity;
    interpersonal attraction; authority relations; attribution; dissonance;
    stereotyping; prejudice and racism; sexism; ethics of human
    experimentation.
    
    SPA 331: Modern Spanish-American Fiction
    - This is only good for those of you who are pretty decent in Spanish (a
    200-level SPA course is a pre-rec.), but if you are, then take this
    course.  Arcadio Diaz-Quinones is the finest professor in the Spanish
    dep't, I think.  Extremely friendly and open, he will not make you feel
    intimidated by your perceived weakness in Spanish.  He never forces
    anybody to speak when they're not comfortable with it, but he'll always be
    very encouraging when you do speak.  And despite being Puerto Rican, he
    actually talks slowly and understandably, which is a huge bonus.   
    
    VIS 342: The Cinema from World War II until the Present
    - Professor Sitney is again the reason to take this course.  From
    everything I've heard, the movies themselves will not grab your attention.
    We're talking bizarre, nearly-unwatchable modern art movies.  Don't go in
    expecting to critique Rambo, OK?  But Sitney is the messiah for
    film-studies majors, which is why I'm noting this course.  
    
    WWS 301: Ethics and Public Policy
    This is another recommendation with a caveat.  Everybody raves about this
    course because Amy Guttman taught it.  Now Oliver Avens is teaching it.
    I've taken another Avens class, and his lectures were not the most
    scintillating experiences.  But, then, neither was the reading.  The
    subject matter of WWS 301 is the most controversial issues of our time,
    and the precepts will be argumentative and interesting no matter who
    lectures the course.  And, who knows, Avens could be surprisingly
    coherent.  This class is also a good way to fulfill that pesky EM
    requirement.  
    
    Note from reviewer:
    So that's it.  I think these are the best of the humanities and social science
    courses for this semester.  Whatever you do, try not to waste any of your
    courses.  You've only got about 30, so there's no reason to be in a course
    you loathe because it fulfills a requirement.  
    That's all. Enjoy the rest of your years.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

