[![](../Images/Logos/main_logo_video.jpg)](../index.html) |
![](../Images/Banners/syllabus_banner.gif)  
---|---  
|

![](../Images/corner_course.GIF)  
  
---  
![](../Images/spacer.gif) |

[  Syllabus](sylsum2000.html)  
  
[ Schedule](schedulesum2k.html)  
  
[ Projects](projects.html)  
  
![](../Images/spacer.gif)  
  
![](../Images/corner_resources.GIF)  
  
![](../Images/spacer.gif) |

[ State of the Unions](../site/state.html)  
  
[ Inaugural Addresses](../site/inaugurals.html)  
  
[ FDR Fireside Chats](http://www.fdrlibrary.marist.edu/arch.htm)  
  
[ Timeline](../site/timeline.html)  
  
[Presidency Interactive:  
_The Data Archive_](../Interactive%20Pages/interactive.html)  
  
![](../Images/spacer.gif)  
  
![](../Images/corner_sights.gif)  
  
![](../Images/spacer.gif) |

[ Audio / Video](../site/media.html)  
  
[ Portrait Gallery](../Portrait%20Gallery/HTML/portrait_frame.html)  
  
![](../Images/spacer.gif)  
  
![](../Images/corner_links.GIF)  
  
![](../Images/spacer.gif) |

[ Presidential Libraries](../site/links_libraries.html)  
  
[ FDR
Photographs](http://www.fdrlibrary.marist.edu:8000/browse.cgi?db=3&pos=1)  
  
This Site  The Web  
---  
---  
  




|

|   | Political Science 157 | Prof. John Woolley  
---|---|---  
  | M-Th, 2:00-3:05pm | Ellison 3714  
  | North Hall 1105 | Office Hours: M 3:30-4:30, W: 11:00-12:00, and by appt.  
  | Summer  2000  | e-mail:
[woolley@sscf.ucsb.edu](mailto:woolley@sscf.ucsb.edu)  
  |   | phone: 893-7772  
  
>     Teaching Assistant:  
>  Michael Clark  [mc1@umail.ucsb.edu](mailto:mc1@umail.ucsb.edu)

>

>  
>

> **THE AMERICAN PRESIDENCY**

>

>  
>  _Technicalities_. This course is open only to sophomores, juniors and
seniors who have completed PS 12 or PS 100, or with permission of
instructor.It fulfills the American History and Institutions GE requirement.My
assumption is that you have completed at least one basic course in statistics
or data analysis such as Political Science 104 or the equivalent.

>

> _Content_. The course will examine the development of the presidency from
the origins of the office until the present day.Given that it is an election
year, we will pay some additional attention to issues linked to presidential
elections.Given as well that our current President is one of only two in US
history to be impeached, we will also spend some time looking at the
importance of prior scandals in the history of the presidency.

>

> There are several contemporary debates among scholars that will be examined
in this class.First, is a debate between "president-centered" and "presidency-
centered" views of presidential behavior.When we observe presidential
behavior, how much of the time do we need to worry about the individual and
his characteristics?In contrast, how much of presidential behavior is rooted
in the institutional structures that constrain individuals in office?The
second debate is between traditional approaches to the presidency that "look
over the shoulder of the president" and approaches that focus on interacting
institutions.The former (also sometimes called "presidency centered") tends to
give normative weight to the president's position, while the latter ("divided
government,""tandem institutions") is more often agnostic about whether the
president's position is preferred.

>

> Students are expected not just to read about the presidency but to do their
own independent analyses primarily using data available on the course web site
but also including some data gathered at the library.

_Requirements_. The course requirements include the following:

> 1. _Attending lectures and taking notes_. Material in lectures will often
supplement, not repeat or review, the material in the readings.Those lectures
will be based on the assumption that you have already completed the assigned
readings.In preparing exams, I will assume that you are familiar with material
from lectures **and** from assigned readings.

>

> 2. _Exam_. There is a final exam in the course.The exam will include a
combination of short answer and essay questions.The exam will be closed-book,
no-notes exams.The final, which is **cumulative** is worth 30 percent of the
course grade. The final is **Thursday, August 3.**

>

> 3. _Original analysis_ :Each student must complete an original analysis of
presidential leadership over time.The analysis is worth 30 percent of the
course grade and is **due in class on Monday, July 31.** A detailed
description will be distributed in class and posted on the course web site.

>

> You **will** be graded off for poor writing (including non-standard grammar,
disorganization, rambling sentences, and misspelling). Document your work
carefully, and include a bibliography.Good work will be well-researched with
good evidence supporting the claims you make.It will be clearly written.

>

> 4. _Readings/Quizzes_. The required readings are indicated below.I expect
you to complete the relevant readings prior to attending class.After you do
the readings, check your own comprehension by seeing if you can compose a
brief summary of the main points and supporting evidence in the assigned
material.If you do this regularly you will be well-equipped to earn an
excellent grade in the class; you will get more out of the class; and you will
be in a position to participate more effectively.At the start of _at least
half the classes_ there will be a short quiz on the readings assigned for that
class, for the prior class, or on the materials covered in the prior lecture.
The quizzes cumulatively will equal 30 percent of the course grade.

>

> 5. _Participation._ The remaining 10 percent of the grade will be based on
an evaluation of the quality of your participation in class.To participate you
must be present and prepared.

_Grades_. As indicated above, your course grade will be determined on the
basis of the following weights to be applied to each separate
performance:Essay assignment:.30;Final exam:.30;Quizzes .30 Participation,
.10.

_Late work_. Plan your schedule now so that you can submit your work on time
and be prepared for the final.Any assignment _turned in late will be penalized
1/3 of a grade for each 24 hour period it is late._ Anyone missing the exam
without a _prior_ excuse will not be permitted to make up the exam without
evidence of an emergency beyond his/her control. Students requesting
alternative exam times, for whatever reason, must expect exams that are more
difficult and that have a different format.  _Here are some of the many
excuses that I will not accept:_ Your parents are coming into town for a non-
emergency visit.There is a really cool concert in LA the night before.You have
decided to take two classes scheduled at the same time.You have agreed to take
a job that starts the day before the final exam.You have already purchased a
super-cheap non-refundable airline ticket for the day before the exam.

_Academic Integrity_. In all work, students are expected to maintain the
highest levels of academic integrity.The University General Catalog states:"It
is expected that students understand and subscribe to the ideal of academic
integrity and be willing to bear individual responsibility for their
work.Materials submitted to fulfill academic requirements must represent a
student's own efforts.Any act of academic dishonesty, such as plagiarism or
other forms of cheating, is unacceptable and will be met with disciplinary
action."

In the case of exams, this means that you must not cheat. In the case of
written assignments, it means that you must properly document your work.When
you copy from another work, enclose the copied information in quotation marks
and indicate the source of the copied information.When you closely paraphrase
the work of another person, indicate the source with a reference.When you draw
your ideas substantially from the work of another, indicate that with a
reference as well.When you report facts or statistics that are not common
knowledge, indicate with a reference the source of the fact or statistic.If
you neglect to follow these conventions, your work July be failed, and in
flagrant cases you will be failed in the course.

**_Required books_** for sale at the University Center include all of the
required reading for the course except for items collected in a reader which
is for sale at **Grafikart** in Isla Vista on Pardall Road.

> Pious, Richard, _The Presidency_

>

> Pfiffner, James, and Roger Davidson, _Understanding the Presidency_   2nd.
(P&D)

**ONLINE** :  A website with many resources for this course is available at:

>
[http://www.polsci.ucsb.edu/projects/presidency](http://www.polsci.ucsb.edu/projects/presidency/woolley.html)

or alternatively, you can (usually) reach it simply by typing:

> [www.americanpresidency.org](http://www.americanpresidency.org)

In order to participate fully in the assignments for this class, it is
extremely important that you have access to this web site.Please let me know
immediately if for any reason you are unable to access this resource.

  
  
![](../Images/corner_bottom.jpg) |

