**Equine Exercise Physiology**

**Steve Wickler, Ph.D., DVM**

**Robert E. Bray, PhD; Donald F. Hoyt, PhD; Deryck Read, DVSc, PhD, Dipl.
ACVPath; Calvin Kobluk, MS, DVM, Dipl. ACVS**

Credit: 3 quarter units; Classes begin until Tuesday, January 6th. This works
out to 20 class meetings per quarter (classes meet for 75 minutes). Classes
held 6:00 pm (sharp) until 7:15.  

Text: The best text now available is by Hodgson and Rose, _The Athletic Horse_
, Saunders, 1994. However, its cost leads me to make it a recommended, rather
than required. I will certainly give it high recommendation marks to any
student with a serious interest in equine exercise physiology.

Required: Class notes  

Evaluations: One midterm exam will be given (100 points each) and a
comprehensive final (200 points). In addition, a writing assignment is
required. You must choose an article published in a referred journal (The
Horse Auctioneer doesn't count) relating to the performance horse (or other
equid). Likely choices would be the _Equine Veterinary Journal_ , the
_American Journal of Physiology_ , the _Journal of Animal Science_ or the
_Journal of Applied Physiology_. Read the article and provide a 2 page,
double-spaced typewritten review. Attach a copy of the article to your paper.
Sign up with your site coordinator so that no two people do the same article
at any one university. The paper is worth 25 points. Total grade will be based
on cumulative score for two midterms, a final and the paper (425 points).
Grades of 90% and above will be in the A's, 80-89 (B's), 70-79 (C's), etc.
Actual delineations of  "+" and "-" will be made by the instructors. If you
achieve those scores you will be guaranteed that grade. The decision to curve
downwards will be made by the instructors.  

**Introduction** :

Definition of exercise physiology, sports medicine. I use Jeffcott's reference
which gives statistics on the percentage of horses reaching the track.
Presentation of current sources for information on equine exercise physiology,
including ICEEP publications, _AESM Quarterly_ , _J of Eq. Vet Sci,_ Hodgson
and Rose's text, Bill Jones text ( _Equine Sports Medicine_ ), A _dam's
Lameness of the Horse_ and Hilary Clayton's _Conditioning Sport Horses_ . I
take my lectures primarily from these sources.  

**Energetics** (1 lecture)

The basic mechanisms of glycolysis, TCA and electron transport are reviewed,
particularly in the context of working muscle. Anaerobic vs. aerobic
metabolism and activities. I give students the basic methodology of measuring
oxygen consumption and talk about VO2max comparing values for horses as well
as other elite athletes (humans, pronghorn antelopes). Glycogen storage
limitations and lactate build up as indications of fatigue. Curve of lactate
vs. exercise intensity.  

**Muscle** (1 lecture)

Basic anatomy of the hindlimb musculature is covered (gluteus, semitendinosus,
semimembranosus, gastrocnemius). Mammalian fiber types are discussed with
comments on biopsy techniques, staining techniques (standard vs.
immunohistochemical). Breed differences. The value/or pitfall of fiber type as
a predictor of performance. I will use David Snow's excellent chapter in the
new _Athletic Horse_. Fibrotic myopathies, exertional rhabdomyolysis, and
hyperkalemic paralysis will be discussed. I do not review the biochemistry or
events of excitation-contraction coupling.  

**Nutrition** (2 lectures)

Dr. Robert Bray, Ph.D., our equine nutritionist, will give 2 lectures and
review the basics of ration formulation for the working horse using computer-
based information from the NRC. He will discuss feeding for high performance
and the use of ergonomic aids, bicarbonate loading, etc.. He talks about
problems associated with feeding excess nitrogen. His sources include the
American Youth Horse Council's 1993 _Horse Industry Handbook_.  

**Cardiovascular** (2 lectures)

Basic anatomy of the heart, blood supply and spleen. Hematocrit and its change
with exercise and training (Persson, 1967). Blood biochemistries and their
change with exercise and training are discussed. Normal ECG and heart score
are discussed, but the emphasis on ECG is for identification of abnormal
conditions rather than as a performance predictor. I do not discuss any
biophysics other than concerns of viscosity due to elevated hematocrits. I
talk about heart rate monitors and the normal and maximal heart rates of
horses as well as other elite athletes.  

**Respiratory** (2 lectures)

Normal anatomy of the equine upper and lower respiratory tract. Animal will be
video-endoscoped to emphasize the anatomy. Upper respiratory tract limitations
to performance: laryngeal hemiplagia, sinusitis, pharyngitis.

Lower respiratory tract limitations to performance will center on pulmonary
hemorrhage: One lecture on EIPH may be given by Dr. Ron Dietrick and human
sports physiologist with an interest in sports anemia. His lecture starts by
reviewing normal and maximal values for respiratory parameters in the horse
and human athlete. He covers the history of bleeder identification,
prevalence, and diagnosis. He also discusses the controversy regarding the use
of furosemide. I do not discuss the biophysics of airflow other than to talk
about turbulence.  

**Temperature Regulation/Osmoregulation** (1 lecture)

Changes in body temperature with exercise and the attendant mechanisms of
sweating. Ion and protein loss. Technique of sampling will also be covered.
Most of this information comes from Carlson's chapter in _Equine Exercise
Physiology_ (older but still the best synthesis around).  

**Biomechanics** (2 lectures)

I will present basic review of gait and the different phases of a stride. I
talk about the different modalities for measuring gait, their limitations and
their costs. One lecture on the energetics of gait will be given by Dr. Don
Hoyt, Ph.D., Professor of Biology who pioneered this field with C.R. Taylor.  

**High Speed Treadmill and Performance Evaluation** (1 lecture)

I talk about the uses of the treadmill including how to adapt a horse to the
treadmill. We will utilize our treadmill in a demonstration. We discuss
performance evaluation using the treadmill including use of heart rate
monitors, oxygen consumption, and lactates; and re-emphasize how heart rate,
oxygen consumption and lactates change with conditioning. I will talk about
Persson's standardized exercise test and also about current SET used in Rose's
laboratory.  

**Lameness** (1.5 lecture)

We spend a lecture talking about the identification of lameness and the
different modalities for diagnosing and treating lameness. I discuss a the
components of a basic lameness exam. I include radiology, ultrasound and
nuclear medicine as common diagnostic modalities (but not, obviously in the
massive detail provided by Smith and Webbon in _The Athletic Horse_ ). I
discuss the different types of drugs used in treating soft tissue injuries
including artificial PSGAG.  

**Breakdowns** (2 lectures)

These lectures are provided by Dr. Deryck Read and Dr. Calvin Kobluk. Dr.
Read, ACVP, is the Director of the Calif. Vet. Diag. Lab. in San Bernardino
and oversees all of the necropsies performed on race horses in southern
California. Dr. Kobluk, ACVS, is Director of Equine Sciences at Cal Poly and
headed the investigative studies at the Univ. of Minnesota.  

**Drugs and Performance** (1 lecture)

I discuss some of the abused substances and drugs used to mask them. I've
taken most of this from the chapter in _The Athletic Horse_ and also the
material provided by Dr. John Lengel, AHSA.  

**Conditioning** (1 lecture)

For this, I've taken information primarily from Clayton's text and compare and
contrast the techniques used for endurance, jumping and fast-track events.

**Date** |

**Tuesday** |

**Thur**  
---|---|---  
  
**Jan** |

6

No Class  |

8

No Class  
  
|

13

Introduction  |

15

Muscle  
  
|

20

Nutrition (Bray)  |

22

Nutrition (Bray)  
  
|

27

Cardiovascular  |

29

Cardiovascular  
  
**Feb** |

3

Respiration  |

5

Temp/Osmoregulation  
  
|

10

Exam  |

12

Biomechanics  
  
|

17

Biomechanics (Hoyt)  |

19

Performance eval  
  
|

24

Lameness  |

26

Breakdowns (Read)  
  
**March** |

3

Breakdowns (Kobluk)  |

5

AESM- no class  
  
|

10

Conditioning  |

12

Drugs/Performance  
  
|

17  |

19

Final Exam  
  
** **

**How do you get in touch with me?** The best thing is for me to stay around
in the studio and answer questions immediately after class--but there is a
class in the studio starting at 7:30. You can also contact me directly. My
office phone is 909-869-2155. I have voice mail. My fax is 909-869-6788. My
email is  "sjwickler@csupomona.edu". Email is an excellent medium and you
should all get accounts.

[back](index.html)

