  **MBA 652 - SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND**  
**ETHICAL DIMENSIONS OF MANAGEMENT**  
**Summer, 2002**  
---  
**Lawrence P. Ulrich, Ph.D.**  
**[Lawrence.Ulrich@notes.udayton.edu](mailto:Lawrence.Ulrich@notes.udaytone.edu)**  
**COURSE OUTLINE AND SCHEDULE  **  
  
* * *

  
  [General Homepage](file:///c:/documents and settings/faculty/my
documents/Faculty/Desktop/) |  [Course Homepage](652s02.html) |  [Course
Description for Registration](652s02cd.html) |  [Syllabus &
Requirements](652s02syllb.html) |  [Objectives](652s02objectives.html) |
[Course Outline & Schedule](652s02CourseOutlineSchedule.html) |  [Reading
Assisnments & Schedule](652s02ReadingAssgn.html) |  [Exam 1: 3
Essays](652s02exam1.html)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
[Exam 2: 3 Essays](652s02exam2.html) |  [Exam 3: 3 Essays](652s02exam3.html) |
[Collaborative Writing Project](652s02CWA.html) |  [Threaded
Discussions](652s02td.html) |  [Chat Rooms](652s02ChatRooms.html) |
[Readings](652s02readings.html) |  [Links](652s02links.html) |  [Q &
A](652s02q&a.html)  
**[DATES TO REMEMBER](652s02dates.html)**  
---  
  
* * *

**There will be a total of 442 pages of readings for the 12 week course.**

**Week 1 (May 13):** Ethical Theory and Systems. **[42 pages of reading]**  
   _MM._ Pages 194-201 ["Ethical Theory"].  
    _MM._ Pages 209-239 ["Nichomachean Ethics: Book II," "Fundamental Principles of the Metaphysics of Morals," "What Utilitarianism Is."].   
    Ulrich, LP. "[Ethical Systems in Business Ethics."](313systems.htm)

**Week 2 (May 20):** Ethical Principles. **[32 pages of reading]**  
    Ulrich, LP. ["Ethical Principles in Business  Ethics."](313principles2.htm)   
_     WUC. _Pages 3-19 ["The Discipline of Ethics"].  
_     MM. _Pages 49-60 ["The Nature of Business"] .  
  _[Chat Room 1](652s02ChatRooms.html)_ : **Friday, May 24, 7:30 pm EDT**  
---  
  
**Week 3 (May 27):** The Possibility of   Doing Business Ethically. **[46
pages of reading]**  
_     MM. _Pages 2-48 ["Introduction: Markets and Business," "How the West
Grew Rich," "The Market," "The Ethical Limitations of the Market."]  
  _[Three (3) Short Essays 1](652s02exam1.html)_ : **Due Date --- Saturday,
June 1**  
---  
  
**Week 4 (June 3):** Virtues, Character, and Classifications. **[33 pages of
new reading]**  
_     MM. _Pages 242-247 ["Commerce and Character"].  
_     MM_. Pages 209-221 ["Nichomachean Ethics: Book II" (Review this reading.
It is the same Reading as Week 1)].  
    _MM._ Pages 254-267 ["An Aristotelian Approach to Business Ethics," "Bourgeois Virtue."].   
    [ERESERVE](http://ereserve.udayton.edu/coursepage.asp?cid=108). [Werhane, PH. "The Ethics of Insider Trading." (5 pages)].   
   [ERESERVE](http://ereserve.udayton.edu/coursepage.asp?cid=108). [Lippke,
RL. "Justice and Insider Trading." (10 pages)].  
  _[Chat Room 2](652s02ChatRooms.html)_ : **Tuesday, June 4, 7:30 pm EDT**  
---  
  
**Week 5 (June 10):** Building Character Through Commerce. **[30 pages of
reading]**  
_     MM._ Pages 268-281 ["Selfishness," "Atlas Shrugged," "Business and the
Economic Nexis."].  
    _MM._ Pages 282-290 ["Prudence," "Of Prudence," "Prudence."].   
    _MM._ Pages 303-304 ["Manners"].   
    _MM._ Pages 311-318 ["Why Do it? Because That's What We Do: Manners in the Ruins of Community"].   
  _[Threaded Discussion 1](652s02td.html)_ : **Monday, June 10 - Sunday, June
16**  
---  
  
**Week 6 (June 17):** Honesty,  in Commerce: Truth-telling, Advertising, and
Whistleblowing. **[39 pages of reading]**  
    _MM._ Pages 320-322 ["Honesty and Integrity in Business: Honesty"].   
    _MM._ Pages 326-335 ["Truthfulness, Deceit, and Trust," "Is Business Bluffing Ethical?"]   
    _MM._ Pages 336-364 ["Sales and Advertising," "Character and Caliber in Salesmanship," "A Moral Evaluation of Sales Practices,"   
        "Advertising," "Advertising and Behavior Control."].   
  _[Chat Room 3](652s02ChatRooms.html)_ : **Thursday, June 20, 7:30 pm EDT**  
---  
_[Collaborative Writing Project 1](652s02CWA.html)_ : **Due Date: Saturday,
June 22**  
---  
  
**Week 7 (June 24):** Individual Responsibility: Integrity and Loyalty \--- a
Case of Whistleblowing. **[32 pages of reading]**  
                                Corporate Responsibility: The Contributions of the Stakeholder Theory. **[13 pages of reading]**   
   _MM._ Pages 365-367 ["Integrity, Loyalty, and Whistleblowing"].  
    _MM._ Pages 388-390 ["Responsibility, Action and the Conduct of Business: Individuality"].   
    _MM._ Pages 368-377 ["Integrity," "Loyalty," "Whistleblowing."].   
    _MM._ Pages 379-386 ["Whistleblowing: Professionalism, Personal Life, and Shared Responsibility"].   
    [ERESERVE](http://ereserve.udayton.edu/coursepage.asp?cid=108). ["The Aircraft Brake Scandal"].   
    _MM._ Pages 402-404 ["Corporate Responsibility"]   
    _MM._ Pages 405-416 ["The Social Responsibility of Business Is to Increase Its Profits," "A Stakeholder Theory of the Modern Corporation."].   
  _[Threaded Discussion 2](652s02td.html)_ : **Monday, June 24 - Sunday, June
30**  
---  
_[Three (3) Short Essays 2](652s02exam2.html)_ : **Due Date --- Saturday, June
29**  
---  
  
**Week 8 (July 1):** Dignity, Respect for Persons, Affirmative Action, and
Sexual Harassment. **[50 pages of reading]**  
   Ulrich, LP. ["Dignity as a Foundational Element in the Workplace"].  
    _MM._ Pages 467-470 ["Freedom of Contract and Affirmative Action"].   
    _MM._ Pages 485-504 ["Moral Perspectives on Affirmative Action," "The Moral Status of Affirmative Action."]   
    [ERESERVE](http://ereserve.udayton.edu/coursepage.asp?cid=108). [Dodds, SM et al. "Sexual Harassment." (12 pages)].   
    _WUC._ Pages 119-130 ["How to Deal with Hostility? The Right to Equal Respect: Sexual Harassment in the Workplace"]   
  _[Chat Room 4](652s02ChatRooms.html)_ : **Wednesday, July 3, 7:30 pm EDT**  
---  
  
**Week 9 (July 8):** Business Practices and Technology. **[15 pages of
reading]**  
_     MM. _Pages 646-648 ["Modern Science and Technology."]  
    _MM._ Pages 654-667 ["Technology and Wisdom," "What Use? The World of Gadgets."].   
  _[Threaded Discussion 3](652s02td.html)_ : **Monday, July 8 - Sunday, July
14**  
---  
  
**Week 10 (July 15):** Business Practices and the Environment. **[43 pages of
reading]**  
_     MM. _Pages 644-646 ["Business, Technology, and Environmental Ethics:
Western Attitudes to Nature."]  
_     MM. _Pages 648-653 ["Kinds of Environmentalism," "Markets and the
Environment," "Protecting the Environment."].  
    _MM._ Pages 667-681 ["Business and Environmental Ethics," "The Economic Common Sense of Pollution."].   
    Ulrich, LP. "We Are Late Arrivals."   
    _WUC._ Pages 133-150 ["How Clean? Obligations to a Great Lake: Reserve Mining at Silver Bay"].   
  _[Three (3) Short Essays 3](652s02exam3.html)_ : **Due Date --- Saturday,
July 20**  
---  
  
**Week 11 (July 22):** Applying Course Concepts to the Global Marketplace;
Human Rights as a Foundation. **[31 pages of reading]**  
   [ERESERVE](http://ereserve.udayton.edu/coursepage.asp?cid=108). [Facione,
PA "Rights and Duties." (22 pages)].  
   [UN Declaration of Human Rights
(1948)](http://www.un.org/rights/50/decla.htm)  
   [Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen (French Revolution)
(1789).](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/rightsof.htm)  
   [Rights of Women (1791)](http://www.pinn.net/~sunshine/book-
sum/gouges.html)  
   [Constitution of Virginia
(1776)](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/states/va05.htm)  
   [US Bill of  Rights (1789)](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/rights1.htm)  
   [English Bill of Rights
(1689)](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/england.htm)  
   [Magna Carta
(1215)](http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/medieval/magframe.htm)  
   [Aboriginal Charter of Rights (2000)](AboriginalCharterofRights.html).  
  _[Chat Room 5](652s02ChatRooms.html)_ : **Monday, July 22, 7:30 pm EDT**  
---  
_[Collaborative Writing Project 2](652s02CWA.html)_ : **Due Date --- Saturday,
July 27**  
---  
  
**Week 12 (July 29):** The Moral Effects of Commerce: Capitalism and Theories
of Profit. **[37 pages of reading]**  
    _MM._ Pages 510-519 ["The Moral Effects of Commerce"].   
    _WUC._ Pages 19-24 ["Capitalism and the Business System"].   
    _MM._ Pages 527-543 ["Manifesto of the Communist Party," "The Cultural Contradictions of Capitalism,"]   
    _MM._ Pages 453-460 ["Why Profits are Deserved"].   
  _[Chat Room 6](652s02ChatRooms.html)_ : **Wednesday, July 31, 7:30 pm EDT**  
---  
  
* * *

EVALUATION DEMONSTRATION  
---  
  
<http://applications.udayton.edu/as/phl/ulrich/mba652eval.nsf>  
  
* * *

