**Civil Liberties Syllabus**

PS 3073

Dr. Diane E. Wall

Spring 2001

Office: 110B Bowen

Phone: 325-7864, 323-8379 (home)

E-Mail: dew1@PS.MsState.Edu

Time: T 10:30 - 11:30, 1:30 - 1:50

W 8:50 - 11:00

TH 8:50 -11:50, 3:15 - 4:00

and by appointment/call at home

**General Purpose**

This three credit course will focus on selected aspects of civil liberties and
civil rights in the United States. Since PS 3073 addresses the limitations of
power, the constitutional law questions about "who" should decide the content
of liberty are downplayed as well as the issues of judicial activism and
restraint. The primary purpose is to discuss our rights - not who defines
them. Therefore, emphasis is on the Constitution and US Supreme Court cases
which delineate the legal doctrines relevant to defining the Constitution's
guarantees of liberty. You will learn about: freedom of speech and press,
freedom of religion, privacy, discrimination, capital punishment, and future
directions. It is recognized that not all of you are pre-law students. This
course will help you to grow as a citizen and enable you to critically analyze
the events around you.

Court case excerpts and articles from the text, assigned readings, and audio-
visual material will provide background to enable **you to discuss these
issues in class**. It is assumed that you have read the assignment before
class and are ready to contribute to the total learning process. It is
assumed, also, that you too have various areas of expertise to share with the
class. The quality of class discussion (quality is encouraged, not mere
quantity) is dependent upon the quality of your preparation.

**Course Evaluation**

Your grade will be based on a straight percentage scale with **200 points
possible**. 90% = A, 80% = B, 70% = C, 60% = D, and below = F. Regular
attendance and participation is strongly encouraged. Students are to discuss
the court cases in class, therefore the course grade will be **_lowered one
grade level_** __for any student who has ** _more than three unexcused_**
__absences. Documentation will be required. I reserve the right to use a more
lenient straight percentage scale which will be determined after the final
exam. However, you are guaranteed the percentage scale will be no higher than
the one above. I encourage group studying and cooperation. The assignments,
however, will be your own work.

The points will accumulate from a legal research assignment (20 pts.), an
article presentation (10 pts), one quiz (10 pts.), two hourly essay exams (30
pts. each), a comprehensive final exam (60 pts.), a proposal of your project
topic (10 pts.), and the oral project presentation (30 pts). You want to earn
as many points as possible; missing any of the assignments will hurt your
grade! The quiz will be given to help you to prepare for my kind of exams. If
you do poorly on it, all is not lost - unless you don't change your ways. The
combination of exams and presentation is intended to avoid disadvantaging
those who may be poor in tests but good in speaking or vice versa.

Permission for make-ups for missed assignments for full credit will be given
for serious illness or reasons beyond the student's control. Those with
inadequate reasons (great party the night before) will be **_penalized 5%_ **
of the points possible. Because additional time is available to the student
doing a make-up, more will be expected from the assignment. It is expected,
except under extreme circumstances, your absence for an exam or presentation
will be indicated to me in advance (5-7864) or e-mail dew1@ps.msstate.edu. You
may leave messages by placing them in my mailbox in room 121 Bowen Hall.

  
  

ACADEMIC DISHONESTY, INCLUDING PLAGIARISM, WILL BE SEVERELY PUNISHED--POSSIBLE
"F" FOR THE COURSE. SEE "Policies and Procedures for Handing Academic
Dishonesty", Section I. Definition of Academic Dishonesty of the "University
Policies and Regulations Regarding Individual and Organizational Behavior" in
_MSU: The BULLDOG HANDBOOK_. Plagiarism includes a person using (in oral or
written form) another's sentence(s) (even if a word or two are changed)
without giving the specific source of that content. You must indicate the
source of persons you are paraphrasing.

  
  

Since your grade is based on the total points earned you are encouraged to see
me for help when you don't understand material, before it is too late. You do
not need to be in academic trouble to see me during my office hours -- feel
free to drop in to chat about the course or otherwise. (I'll let you know if I
am short on time that day.)

NO INDIVIDUAL EXTRA CREDIT AVAILABLE. When a course grade is **borderline** ,
I will take responsible attendance along with worthwhile class participation
into consideration in determining your grade. Bonus points may be allowed
during the semester for attending and evaluating campus programs or other
events which I indicate are relevant to our course.

**Requirements**

The TWO required texts for purchase are:

Epstein and Walker (2001) _Constitutional Law for a Changing America: Rights,
Liberties, and_ _Justice,_ 4th. Ed.

Oran (2000) _Oran's Dictionary of the Law_ , 3rd ed. __

Recommended reading:

Westin, _The Anatomy of a Constitutional Law Case_ or any other material which
explains a Supreme Court case. (I will attempting to have this up on my web
page: http://www2.msstate.edu~dew1)

Other reading will be assigned during the semester to elaborate points and/or
facilitate discussion. Do not be reluctant to suggest readings for the class.

**Class Meeting**

T TH 2:00 - 3:15 115 BE (room 17 Allen hall when 115 BE is not available)

  
  
  
  

**Due Dates**

Leg. Res. Jan 26 by 5 pm

Quiz Feb 1

Article Presentation Feb 13

Test I Feb 15

Project Proposal Feb 20

Test II April 3

Oral Project Presentation April 19  & 24

Deadline for make-ups FRIDAY, APRIL 27, 5 PM

  
  

**FINAL TUESDAY, MAY 8, 12 - 3 PM**

****

  
  

**Assignments** : You will need to read these more than once. Pay attention to
historical development of issues, court doctrine, relevant portions of the
_Constitution_ , and scholars' positions. It is strongly recommended that you
brief the court cases included in your readings. This will aid you in class
discussions and preparation for exams.

Introduction

Jan 9

Understand the syllabus and nature of the course

Familiarize yourself with our text

Introduction of class members - exchange some phone numbers & e-mails

Why bother with constitutional law?

  
  
  
  

1\. Introduction to Constitutional Law & Area of Civil Liberties, U.S.
Government, Supreme Court Decision Making, and Reading/Briefing an appellate
court case.

Jan 11 & 16

_Preface, Constitution of U.S._ in Appendix 1, Briefing a Case in Appendix 8,
& Ch. 1

Skim Westin's or similar book if you do not have background on appellate cases

Be able to outline the _Constitution of the United States_

Describe the levels of government and the powers in each branch of national
level of government

State the differences between an original jurisdiction case and an appellate
case

Describe how the U.S. Supreme Court processes a case

Learn the difference between constitutional adjudication and statutory
interpretation

Learn how to read and brief an appellate court case

What is the relationship between the Bill of Rights and civil liberties?

State what is included in the Bill of Rights according to different scholars,
such as Justice Black

Know the general content of each of the amendments to the _Constitution_.

  
  

2\. Legal Research Skills

Jan 18 & 23

Review end of Ch. 1 and xeroxed reading

Jan 18 meet in Bowen for us to go on a tour of library materials

Jan **23 meet in Bowen before** going to library to work on legal research
exercise

Know the names of the legal resources, how to provide a correct citation, and
their use in order to be able to

understand the law

  
  

******LEGAL RESEARCH EXERCISE DUE FRIDAY, JAN. 26 by 5 PM**

  
  

******LIST OF ARTICLE CHOICES DUE JAN. 30**

(provide on a sheet of paper the **full citation** (author, title, journal,
volume number, date,  & pages) for your choice of 3 eligible articles for your
article presentation (see end of syllabus for description of assignment).
_CHECK TO SEE IF THEY ARE AVAILABLE IN THIS LIBRARY. If they are not available
in our library you are to have looked over the article(s) and provide a copy
of them to me at this time._

  
  

****3\. Power and Limitations & Bill of Rights

Jan 25 & 30

Ch. 2 & 3

Understand the "incorporation" approach to the Bill of Rights

  
  

**FEB 1 QUIZ** at end of class over Topics 1 - 3

  
  

4\. Religion

Feb 1, 6 & 8 **JOURNAL ARTICLE PRESENTATIONS FEB 13**

Ch. 4

These two clauses are fueling a dispute

Notice the importance of the Lemon Test and what may be happening to it

What is and isn't religious and why does that matter?

  
  

**TEST I FEB 15: Topics 1 through 4**

  
  
  
  

**PRESENTATION PROPOSAL DUE ON FEB. 20**

5\. Freedom of Speech

Feb 20, 22 & 27

Ch. 5

Contrast the two approaches to understanding "speech"

Notice that the Court establishes different categories for speech (for
example: "advocacy to overthrow," "time, place and manner," "symbolic,"
"commercial speech"), and treats them differently

Follow the trail to the victory of "Clear and Present Danger" test

6\. Freedom of Press

March 1 & half of 6th

Ch. 6

Censorship and prior restraint issues even bring in the question of access.

What has been the problem in the area of obscenity since the _Roth_ case?

Do you "know it when you see it?"

What is defamation and does it matter who you are?

What is the Court's answer in clashes between freedom of press and Sixth
Amendment

7\. Boundaries of Expression: obscenity and libel ****

March 6 half  & 8

Ch. 7

What is obscene? How is obscenity and libel treated differently by the Court
than other First Amendment issues?

  
  

8\. Privacy

March 22 & 29 ****

**MARCH 20: DISTINGUISHED JURIST (MAYBE ANOTHER CLASS SESSION)?**

**MARCH 27: WORKING ON YOUR PRESENTATION**

Ch. 8

Know major Supreme Court cases involving the different privacy issues

Know Trimester and Undue Burden standards and their sources

We have other lifestyle issues, too

  
  
  
  

******TEST II APRIL 3: Topics 5 - 8**

  
  

(On APRIL 3, in writing indicate your preference for the due date for your
presentation-- provide reasons why you should have that date, if needed)

  
  

****9\. Criminal Rights: Obtaining Evidence

Apr 5

Ch. 9  & pp. 481-286

Search and seizure clause in the 4th Amendment is very important but not
automatically known

Know the Exclusionary Rule and its modification by subsequent Courts

Again, should the Constitution be updated by the justices?

  
  

10\. Attorneys, Trials, & Punishments

Apr 10 & 12

Ch. 10

Know major Supreme Court cases for each criminal right protection

  
  

**ORAL PRESENTATIONS: APRIL 19 & 24** (see posted schedule)

  
  

11\. Discrimination in Many Forms

Apr 26

Ch. 11

Notice that what is of concern is invidious discrimination - not
discrimination

Know the content of the 14th amendment and the three tier test developed

to identify equal protection of the law violations

Think about the difference between discrimination and segregation.

Think about the difference between segregation and integration.

How is _de facto_ segregation different from _de jure_?

Notice that the 14th Amendment isn't the only amendment utilized regarding
private discrimination

There certainly are many social and economic issues!

Know the ERA and other laws which are directed toward sexual equality

Note that sexual harassment is a form of sexual discrimination

As you review, try to bring the separate topics together.

  
  

**DEADLINE FOR MAKE-UPS FRIDAY, APRIL 27, 5 pm**

  
  
  
  

****May 1: Review for Final Exam

  
  
  
  

**COMPREHENSIVE FINAL EXAM TUESDAY, MAY 8 12 - 3 PM**

  
  

Scale for Total Course (200 points) 180-200 = A, 160-179 = B, 140-159 = C,
120-139 = D

  
  
  
  

**ACADEMIC JOURNAL ARTICLE PRESENTATIONS**

FEB 13 - 10 PTS

  
  

For **TUESDAY, JANUARY 30** provide me with the full citation for your
prioritized list of three academic journal articles for your presentation. _I
will assign one_ of those articles to you. Your articles may be used in your
project if appropriate. If the articles are not available in the library, hand
in a copy of them which I may keep. For a full citation, provide the following
information on your list and during your presentation: author, title, journal
name, journal volume, date and pages.

Guidelines for article presentation: You will have **2 minutes**.

1\. Articles are to be from professional journals. _Newsweek_ , etc., are
**not** acceptable. I want you exposed to

academic journals.

2\. Subject of article is related to one of the topics we will study.

3\. Grading - quality of _your_ choice of three articles

\- _synopsis_ of contents to class

\- _your analysis_ of the article

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**ORAL PROJECT PRESENTATION** (30 PTS)

APRIL 19 & 24

Topics will not be assigned. Therefore, just what your presentation will be, I
am not sure. The purpose of this presentation assignment is to allow you the
freedom to work on something interesting to you, relevant to the course, and
in a form of your choosing. Creative ones go to it! It is expected the final
product will be presented orally to the class so that they may also learn from
your experience. There will be **_6 minutes_** _available_ (unless class size
increases) so practice your presentation in order for you to organize your
material accordingly. Your product needs to be worked and reworked to insure
that it is comprehensible. YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE TO _PROVIDE ME AND EACH MEMBER
OF THE CLASS A COPY OF AN ABSTRACT AND FULL CITATION_ OF YOUR RESOURCES. Your
grade will not be as high as possible if one is not handed in.

It is my expectation that you will gain from this assignment greater
constitutional law knowledge and/or skills. For some a topic may be "wrestled
with" through criticizing legal and/or political science journal articles.
This topic may be geared toward your major, e.g., the media and the First
Amendment for students in journalism or telecommunications. On the other hand,
you may wish to continue learning about an aspect of one of our class topics.
Be sure to avoid merely regurgitating class material or providing content the
class can not grasp within the time allotted. There may be some adventuresome
ones who conduct their own research project. This may be accomplished through
the use of existing data or developing your own data.

Grading will be on the basis of: evidence that you meaningfully learned
content outside of the texts (provide your input on the topic) from doing the
project, appropriateness to the course, and organization of material and
accuracy. If you have doubts about what you plan to prepare, please talk to me
about it before you invest a great deal of time. I will not assign or think up
topics.

START THINKING EARLY SO THAT YOU HAVE GREATER FLEXIBILITY FOR YOUR PROJECT.

  
  

  
  
  
  

**PROJECT PROPOSAL** (10 PTS)

FEB. 20

In a few paragraphs describe the framework of the topic you will study for
your oral presentation. What questions will you be attempting to answer? Be
sure to include a complete **citation of resources** that you are aware of at
this point which you will use (you have checked and found out that they will
be available). Remember that your presentation has _to go beyond what you are
learning in the class assignments_. Your proposal should be _typed and proof-
read_.

Basis for grading will be: that it is complete with sufficient detail that I
know what you plan to do (includes a list of resources), handed in on time,
and you have demonstrated that you have thoughtfully begun the oral project
assignment. You may later change your topic, but this should be as an
exception and justifiable. IF YOU DO CHANGE TOPICS, IT IS ADVISABLE THAT YOU
PROVIDE ME ANOTHER PROPOSAL ALTHOUGH IT WILL NOT RECEIVE A GRADE.

