**SLS 3204 - Organizational Dynamics of Sport & Leisure Services **

**Course Syllabus - Fall, 2001**

** **

**Professor:** Dr. Stan Walls **  
Office & Phone #'s: **FH 106A / 678-3477 **  
Office Hours:** MWF-9-10, TR-9-11; & MWTR-2-4 **  
Email Address:** snwalls@memphis.edu

**_ _**

**_Catalog Description:_** An in-depth analysis of the organization and
administration of sport and leisure service organizations. Students will study
and discuss empowering organizations and organizational members while
examining structure; goals, objectives, and policy development; personnel
development; and conflict resolution as applied to sport and leisure services.
Topics build upon theories of organization covered in the course's
prerequisite (Mgmt 3110).

**_ _**

**_Course Objectives:_**

> 1\. To demonstrate knowledge of contemporary and classical theories of
organization and management as they relate to sport and leisure services.

>

> 2\. To demonstrate ability to determine and evaluate the appropriateness of
an organization's structure, strategy, and policies.

>

> 3\. To understand principles and procedures for managing and directing
organizations concerned with the delivery of sport and leisure services.

**_ _**

**_Course Content & Tentative Calendar_**

**_Date Topics_**

> 9/10 - Course introduction & orientation

>

> 9/17 - [The economic impact of sport & leisure in contemporary American
society](Lesson%202.html)

>

> 9/24 - [Social factors influencing sport & leisure](Lesson%204.html)

>

> 10/1 - [Concepts of Sport & Leisure Management](Lesson%203.html)

>

> 10/8 **\- Fall Break**

>

> 10/15 - [Principles, structure, and challenges leading to human
relations](Lesson%206.html)

>

> 10/22 - [Deming's management theory Z](Lesson%208.html)

>

> 10/29 - Mid-Term Exam

>

> 11/5 - [Tenets of contemporary theories of management](lesson%207.html)

>

> 11/12 - [Contemporary theories of management](lesson%209.html)

>

> 11/19 - [Structure and governance in sport & leisure
organizations](Lesson%2011.html)

>

> 11/26 - [Human resource management](Lesson%2012.html)

>

> 12/3 - In Class Reports Due

>

> 12/10 - Final Exam

**_ _**

**_Required Course Text:_**

No text, notes available on line

**_ _**

**_Course Requirements:_**

> 1\. Mid-term Examination 30%

>

> 2\. Term project - An Organizational Analysis 40%

>

> 3\. Fianl Examination 30%

**_ _**

**_Grading Scale:_**

> A+= 98-100% B+= 88-90% C+= 78-80% D+= 68-70%

>

> A= 94-97% B= 84-87% C= 74-77% D= 61-67%

>

> A-= 91-93% B-= 81-83% C-= 71-73% F=60 & below

**_ _**

**_Late Policy:_** No course assignment will be accepted after its scheduled
due date unless prior arrangements have been made.

**_ _**

**_

* * *

_**

**Term Project - An Organizational Analysis**

**_ _**

**_General Instructions:_** You are to locate an existing sport and/or leisure
service organization or a department within a comprehensive agency, i.e., the
sport marketing department of FedEx or a recreation department within a
church, and obtain permission to analyze its organizational structure.

**_Content of the Analysis:_** You are to analyze the following structural
elements of your organization.

> **1\. Biographical information** \- To include, name of the agency; a brief
historical sketch; a brief description of its mission and facilities; and a
thorough description of breath  & depth of its program(s).

>

> **2\. Brief description of administrative structure** \- If your
organization is public in nature, under which level of government (local,
state, or federal) does it fall? If your organization is private and non
profit, is it quasi-public or closed-private? If your organization is
commercial and for profit, is it a corporation, partnership, and/or a private
ownership?

>

> **3\. Organizational structure** \- Provide a chart depicting the
organizational structure and span of control within the organization.

>

> **4\. Clientele** \- Whom does your organization serve? Is there a set of
qualifying criteria clientele must meet or are the organization's services
available to the general public?

>

> **5\. Management theory adopted by the organization** \- What is the
management theory/style predominately used by the organization? Do they align
themselves with the traditional views of Taylor, Weber, Fayol, Gulick, and/or
Urwick; the contemporary views of McGregor, Maslow, McClelland, Herzberg,
Vroom, Locke, and/or Deming; operations views utilizing systems theory; or an
eclectic approach utilizing a combination of theoretical views. If eclectic,
from which theoretical views has the organization adopted its management
style? Give examples from within the organization to substantiate your view.

>

> **6\. Human resource management** \- Which method of human resource
management is used by the organization? Has their HRM been drawn from the
traditional, interpretive, or critical paradigm; or is it an eclectic approach
to HRM? (If eclectic, from which paradigms has it been developed?)

>

> Additionally, you are to answer the following questions concerning HRM:

>

>> a. What methods are used to recruit and retain employees?

>>

>> b. How are employees evaluated?

>>

>> c. What comprises the organization's total benefit package for employees?

>

> **7\. Sources of empowerment** \- What sources of empowerment are evident
within the organization; consider legitimate as well as non legitimate
authority. Is governance a shared (democratic) process within the
organization, or is it a stringent line-of-command (autocratic) process? Give
examples of empowerment within the organization to substantiate your view.

>

> **8\. Decision making and problem solving** \- Identify the various methods
utilized within the organization to make strategic primary decision, problem-
oriented decisions, and task-oriented decisions. Has the organization
established policies and procedures which deal directly with decisions making
processes? Does the organization provide training to its management and/or
other employees to equip them with decision making skills? Give examples from
within the organization to substantiate your view.

>

> **9\. Conflict and resolution** \- How is conflict within the organization
resolved? Has the organization established policies and procedures which deal
directly with conflict resolution? Does the organization provide training to
its management and/or other employees to equip them with conflict resolution
skills? Give examples from within the organization to substantiate your view.

>

> **10\. Grievance procedures** \- Is the work force within your organization
unionized? If so, is the organization fully unionized or only partially
unionized? In relationship to the foregoing, what procedures are in place to
deal with employee grievances?

>

> **11\. Public and community relations** \- Identify the audience which the
organization's public relations efforts aim to reach? To contact their
audience, does the organization use the shotgun or rifle approach? Identify
the various media resources utilized by the organization as public relations
channels.

>

> **12\. Evaluation and change** \- How are the operational functions of the
organization evaluated? Identify the various evaluative tools utilized by the
organization. How does the evaluation process relate to operational changes
within the organization?

>

> **13\. Marketing strategies** \- Identify and briefly describe the various
marketing strategies used by the organization.

>

> **14\. Fiscal management/budgetary plans** \- Provide a brief summary of the
organization's fiscal budget.

* * *

**_Writing Instructions:_**

> **1\. Introduction** \- Papers should have an introduction which leads into
the body of the paper. This provides opportunity to capture the attention of
readers and allow them to preview the major theme.

>

> **2\. Main text** \- The second section of your paper researches the
assigned topic. Research efforts should make use of class notes, professional
journals, academic texts, and agency documents.

>

> **3\. Summary** \- The last section of your paper will summarize what was
presented in the body of the main text. This will serve to reinforce the
information presented and provide a smooth ending. Care should be taken not to
introduce new information in this section of the paper.

>

> **4\. Writing style** \- Use clear and concise wording. Concentrate on
quality rather than volume. The length of your paper is to range between 7 -10
pages.

>

> **5\. Word processing** \- All papers must be word processed (or typed) and
double-spaced.

>

> **6\. Referencing** \- Papers must be referenced according to the APA Style
Manual. Give credit where credit is due. When making use of a reference,
whether quoting directly or paraphrasing, the source must be cited. Do not be
guilty of plagiarism

**_

* * *

Packaging your project and oral presentation:_**

> 1\. Put it in a three ring binder.

>

> 2\. Include a table of contents.

>

> 3\. Divide it into sections - previously identified.

>

> 4\. Have it word processed - same printer!

>

> 5\. Oral presentations of the project should be approximately 10-15 minutes
in length.

>

> 6\. Audio visuals are encouraged. If you need AV equipment, please make
arrangements with Dr. Walls in advance.





