![Summer Online](../../winteronline/graphics/flag.gif)

  
  

* * *

### History and Principles of Physical Education

  
PESS 204--Four Quarter hours

Dr. Tiff Cook  
Ohio University  
Grover Center  
Athens, OH 45701  
(740) 593-4650  
E-mail: [cooke@ohiou.edu](mailto:cooke@oak.cats.ohiou.edu)  
|  ![](../../winteronline/graphics/planetearth.gif)

  
  

* * *

|

### Course Description

| This course deals with the essential concepts and principles that underlie
modern practices in sport, physical education, fitness, intramurals, and
athletics. In an effort to promote a better understanding of these modern
programs, we will consider the origins of various physical and sport
activities by studying the activities of selected peoples and cultures.
Emphasis is given to the growth and development of physical education and
sport in America from the colonial period to the modern era. |
**Prerequisites** |  Professional standing in sport sciences.

* * *

| **Methods of Course Instruction** |  All course content is presented on the
World Wide Web; e-mail is used for submission of assignments, as well as for
the instructor's evaluation and comments.

* * *

|

### Materials

|  | **Required** |  Mechikoff, R. _A History and Philosophy of Sport and
Physical Education_ , 3rd ed., McGraw-Hill, New York: NY, 2002.  

**Note:** The book for the course are in stock at Specialty Books, (740)
594-4002. [**Click here**](http://www.specialtybookstore.com) for online
ordering.

* * *

|

### **Course Calendar**

**|  **

  | Assignment  | Topic | Chapter 1 |

Orientation  
Terms  
Definitions  
Interpretations

| Chapter 2 | Ancient Civilizations: Games and Sports | Chapter 3 | What the
Athenians and Spartans taught us | Chapters 3, 14, 15, & 16 | From the Pan-
Hellenic Festivals through the Modern Games | Chapter 4  
**Midcourse examination** |

The Games of Rome  
schedule between July 15 and July 19

| Chapters 5, 6, and 7 |

Middle Ages  
Renaissance  
Age of Science: Body, Mind and Spirit

| Chapters 8, 9 & 10 | German, Danish and Swedish Contributions  | Chapter 11
| Origins of American Sport and Sport in Colonial America | Chapters 12 and 13
| 19th and 20th Century Sport in America | Chapter 13 | Contributions from
Naismith, Morgan & Berensen | Chapter 13 | College Sport & The founding of The
NCAA | Chapter 13 | Women and Sport | **Final examination** |  schedule
between August 19 and August 23

The course calendar above will help you pace your lesson submission so that
you can complete the course within the 10-week schedule. You are expected to
submit your assignments according to the calendar. You may submit an
assignment early in the week in which it is due, but not before that week. If
you are unable to meet the deadline for a particular week, you must notify
your instructor by e-mail _in advance._ Under normal circumstances, you must
submit all assignments prior to an examination before you take that
examination.  

All course requirements must be completed by Friday, August 23, 2000. The
instructor will permit an extension only under extreme circumstances.

  

* * *

| **Grading Policy & Standards** | Each lesson contains supplementary notes,
objectives, reading assignments and a writing assignment. Color prints are
provided for two of the lessons. Your final course grade will be based on the
following factors:  

|  |  Lessons  
Midterm Examination  
Final Examination |  =  
=  
= | 20%  
40%  
40%

|  | Your letter grades will be based upon percentage of points earned:

|  |  92 -100%  
90 - 91%  
88 - 89%  
82 - 87%  
80 - 81%  
78 - 79% |  =  
=  
=  
=  
=  
= |  A  
A-  
B+  
B  
B-  
C+ |  72 - 77%  
70 - 71%  
68 - 69%  
62 - 67%  
60 - 61%  
below 60 |  =  
=  
=  
=  
=  
= |  C  
C-  
D+  
D  
D-  
F

  
| **Academic Honesty** |  Includes cases of cheating and plagiarism. Cheating
implies dishonesty and deception in fulfilling academic requirements. A
student who engages in academic misconduct will receive a zero on the exam or
on the project in question. **There are no warnings!**

* * *

| **Suggested Method of Study** |  Before you answer the questions in the
writing assignments, read the lesson objectives first! You should be aware of
the _expected outcomes_ at the very beginning of each lesson. In many of the
lessons, supplementary notes have been provided to improve your understanding
of the concepts. The color prints are intended to support the discussion
notes, glossaries and textbook chapters by providing a visual image of the
concepts pertaining to the Greeks, the Olympic Games, and the Romans. In
addition several lessons include graphics, figures, and appendices to assist
you in understanding the ideas presented in the textbook and web guide. As you
read the text and discussion notes, write concise but complete answers to the
writing assignments. The answers you write are your "class notes" and should
be valuable to you in studying for the midcourse and final examinations. Write
answers in your _own words_ \--avoid writing long direct quotations and
passages from the text. In some instances it is not necessary to send all the
writing assignments. Be sure to check the instructions in each of the lessons
for further information on what items must be e-mailed for grading.

  

* * *

| **Examinations** |  The course has two supervised examinations, each
covering approximately half the content in the course. The examinations will
consist of identification and essay questions, similar to those on the lesson
writing assignments.  

The final examination is **not** comprehensive.

  

* * *

| **Technical  
Requirements** | **Hardware**  
Windows PC (486 or better processor, minimum 8MB RAM, DOS 5.0 or higher,
Windows 3.x or Windows 95/98)

Macintosh (68030 or better processor, minimum 8 MB real RAM, system 6.07 or
higher)

SLIPP/PPP Internet connection (if using modem connection, at least 14,400
kbps); connection must not have firewalls preventing access.

**Software**  
Graphical browser (level of Netscape 3.1 or higher)

Standard e-mail communication software

* * *

| **Enrollment  
Information** | **Active Terms:** Term-based; 10 week quarter system

**Registration Dates:** April 1-June 20, 2002

Call the [**Ohio University Online
Staff**](http://www.ohiou.edu/ouonline/index.html) at 1-888-551-6446 if you
have questions about this course or the enrollment process.

Call the education counselors in the Division of Lifelong Learning at (740)
593-2150 if you have questions about Ohio University Degree Opportunities.

