![](http://www.clarku.edu/~rross/calsyl_files/image003.gif)![](http://www.clarku.edu/~rross/calsyl_files/image005.gif)

![](http://www.clarku.edu/~rross/calsyl_files/image007.jpg)



![](http://www.clarku.edu/~rross/calsyl_files/image009.gif)![](http://www.clarku.edu/~rross/calsyl_files/queenssweatshopimage.gif)

  
From:Jacob Riis _How the Other Half Lives   From: Queens, NYC, 1994, National
Museum of American History_

**_Sweatshop:_**

_workplace in which workers are employed for long hours at low wages and under
unhealthy or oppressive conditions. In England, the word "sweater" was used as
early as 1850 to describe an employer or middleman who exacted monotonous work
at very low wages. Sweating first became widespread in the United States
during the 1880s, when immigrants from eastern and southern Europe provided a
large source of cheap labour. In continental Europe the same conditions were
present, and with the industrialization of parts of Latin America and Asia in
the 20th century, the problem emerged there as well. _**\--Encyclopedia
Britannica**

**Sociology 090**  
**NO SWEAT!**  
**A FIRST YEAR SEMINAR ON SWEATSHOPS IN AMERICA IN GLOBAL CONTEXT**  
**Fall 2000**  
**THURSDAYS 2:40-5:40 PM**

**Prof. Robert J.S. ( "Bob")Ross**  
**Office: 405 Jeff**  
**Phone: 793 7243, 7376**  
**[mailto: rjsross@clarku.edu](mailto:%20rross@clarku.edu)**

**Office Hours: Wed. 2-5**  
**and by appointment**

**_NOTE: This syllabus is available on the World Wide Web
at[http:www.clarku.edu/~rross](http://www.clarku.edu/~rross).Wherever you see
text which is blue on your monitor or oddly faded in print, it means that it
is linked to a world wide web resource, or some file I have put on computer.
You may access it by "clicking" your "mouse" on it; it's called hypertext._**  
  

**COURSE MISSION:**

**Low wages, long hours, and dangerous conditions characterized work in turn
of the century sweatshops - especially the garment industry. These conditions
are back, characterizing more than half the U.S. apparel industry. The seminar
will explore the rise and decline and then the rise of the new sweatshops,
with special attention to the ways in which child labor and super-exploitation
in developing countries effects conditions here in the U.S., and what we can
do about the problem. The course will develop student skills in using the
Internet as a serious research tool to supplement but not replace libraries.**

**WORK**

**There will be two brief essay exams and a research paper for the course.**  

**RESEARCH PAPERS: Students will choose projects from a short list, appended
below, and work in teams.You will put together your projects together and all
team members earn the same grade.You must choose your project by week 2;and
write and an outline by week four. Students will also present their work and
papers in class. Very good drafts of the research papers will be due
approximately November 30; final versions will be due December 14 th.**

**Grade Distribution:**  
  
---  
  
**Class participation, including reading notes**

|

**20%**  
  
**Essay I**

|

**20%**  
  
**Essay II**

|

**20%**  
  
**Draft research paper**

|

**15%**  
  
**Research Paper**

|

**25%**  
  
**Total**

|

**100%**  
  
**CLASS EXPECTATIONS: Students are expected to master, understand, and to be
aware of ALL deadlines and products. See the[Table of Significant Dates and
Assignments](http://www.clarku.edu/~rross/datetable.htm) If you are in doubt:
call; email; come to office hours. Students are expected to have read the
assigned reading by the time class meets and to actively engage in discussion
and explanation of the readings. Lack of preparation will show in your
participation and will effect your grade accordingly. If readings are
difficult for you, come to class with your questions - answering questions is
what I get paid for and what I am supposed to teach you to do. If readings
annoy you come to class with your disagreements and your arguments. Outside of
meditation sessions, silence enlightens no one.**

**RESEARCH PAPERS** : **Since the project is a collaborative effort, a great
deal of your work this term involves the organizing and use of individuals'
efforts in relation to a team goal. For instance, you will need to establish
some rules regarding meeting times, responsibilities, division of labor, and
equity in contribution. Group expectations should be consensually defined and
clearly articulated. Failure to meet these expectations, (i.e., persistently
"forgetting" meetings, not completing drafts, uncooperativeness and so forth),
must be responded to immediately.**  
**However, as in life, each team member must take group responsibility for the
product. Each team member will receive for the project the same grade. Choose
partners with care and then learn to get the most from each other's work!
Since the success of your paper is tied to your ability to work effectively as
a team, you must master the principles of group work.**  


**ESSAYS: These will be take home essays requiring about four pages, double-
spaced typed (word-processed) answers. The first will be distributed on
October 5 thand due on Oct. 19th. The second will be distributed on November
16th and due on Dec. 7.**  


**Books Available for Purchase and on Reserve at the Library:**  


**Mc=John McClymer, _The Triangle Strike and Fire_**

**NS= Andrew Ross, A.,ed., (no relation), _No Sweat: fashion, free trade and
the rights of garment workers.        _**Note:This book is on reserve, but not
in store - it is being reprinted.Portions are in the packet.

**GAO= General Accounting Office, _Sweatshops in New York: A local example of
a national problem._**

**NLC= _Made In China_ , National Labor Committee.**  


**Available for Purchase will be a Packet of Readings ( "Packet"), each of
which Should be available at the Reserve desk of Library. It includes (in
order of assignment):**  


**1)      ****From Ross, A.,ed., Howard: "Labor History and sweatshops in the
new global economy."** ****

**2)      ****From Varley, "In Defense of Sweatshops **

**3)      ****Ross, Robert. The New Sweatshops in the United States: How New,
How Real, How Many, and Why?with the Assistance ofLisa Grandmaison.To be
published in:Global Production, Regional Response and Local Jobs:Challenges
and Opportunities in the North American Apparel Industry.Edited by Gary
Gereffi, David Spener and Jennifer Bair.**

**4)      ****Ross, A.,ed., Meza, "Testimony." Su, "El Monte Thai Garment
Workers: Slave Sweatshops". **

**5)      ****Appelbaum and Gereffi: "Power and Profits in the Apparel
Commodity Chain." From Bonacich et al, _Global Production: The Apparel
Industry in the Pacific Rim_. **

**6)      ****Jones, Jackie. 1995. "Forces Behind Restructuring in U.S.
Apparel Retailing and its Effect on the U.S. Apparel Industry." _Industry
Trade and Technology Review_. March.. p. 23 U.S. International Trade
Commission. **

**7)      ****In Ross, A.,ed., Kernaghan, "Paying to Lose Our Jobs." **

**8)      ****Krupat, "From War Zone to Free Trade Zone." **

**9)      ****National Labor Committee: Miscellaneous Nicaragua Material
from<http://www.nlcnet.org/press.htm> **

**10) ****Ross, Robert, "Countdown in Managua," The Nation, about August 23,
2000 **

**11) ****Anita Chan: "Boot camp at the Shoe Factory" _Washington Post_ **

**12) ****Ross (Robert): "NAFTA and the New Sweatshops", prepared for edited
collection on liberation theology and global capitalism. **

**13) ****Guess Packet, including, Behar: "Guess What's Behind This IPO?"
_Fortune_ , Oct. 14, 1996. **

**14) ****Nike Packet: including Glass, "The Young and feckless," _New
Republic_ , Chan letter, and Vietnam Labor Watch report on Nike in Vietnam. **

**15) ****Ross, Robert: "Restricting Immigration: A sweatshop nonsolution" In
Janice McCoart , editor, _An Academic Search for Sweatshop Solutions:
Conference proceedings._ Pages 32-45. Marymount University. Arlington, VA. **

**16) ****Material from the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS).**

**17) ****In Ross, A.,ed., Cavanagh, "The Global Resistance to Sweatshops." **

**18) ****|Shaw: "The Labor Behind The Label: Clean Clothes Campaigns in
Europe." **

**19) ****_The Sweatshop Quandary_ , ed. by Pamela Varley, Chapter One:
"Corporate America on the Hot Seat." **

**20) ****Rothstein- Amsden Debate on Labor Standards (Boston Review).**

**21) ****Appelbaum, Richard and Katie Quan: Fighting Sweatshops: Problems of
Enforcing Global Labor Standards.Paper given at ASA Annual Meeting, 2000.**

* * *

  
**In the Table of Assignments below, "Read" indicates material on Reserve or
available for purchase at the Bookstore. "Packet" indicates material
distributed at the Sociology Office. Most of it is also on Reserve. Please
Note: "Browse" does not mean walk through casually, it means, strictly, "read
material lodged on the Internet."**

* * *

  
    


**Table of Topics and Assignments**  
  
---  
  
**Date**

|

**Class #**

|

**Topic/Reading**

|

**Skill or Special Session**  
  
**Part One: Sweated Labor in the United States, 1911-1942**  
  
**31AUG**

|

**1**

|

**Sweated Labor: 1911**

  
**The Triangle Strike and Fire**  

**Read: Mc: Chapters 1 and 2.**  

**Browse:[Cornell's Triangle Page](http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/trianglefire/):
The Kheel Documentation Center Archive. **  

**3) The[Wreck of the Home](http://tenant.net/Community/LES/wreck7.html):
Homework in tenements. **   **Select from other descriptions of life in the
tenements of the time, at the[Lower East
Side](http://tenant.net/Community/LES/contents.html) site.**

**4) Jacob Riis' famous pictures from How the Other Half Lives: among
them,[Sewing and Starving in an Elizabeth Street Attic
](http://www.cis.yale.edu/amstud/inforev/riis/riis41.gif)and "[Knee-
Pants](http://www.cis.yale.edu/amstud/inforev/riis/riis24.gif)" at Forty-Five
Cents a Dozen-- A Ludlow Street Sweater's Shop".**

|

**email**

**Opening a web page; navigating URLs**  
  
**07Sep**

|

**2**

|

**1\. After the Fire: The Factory Investigating Commission and Reform**

**2\. Reform and the New Deal**

  


**Read: Mc: Chapter 3**  

**From Packet:** # **Ross, A.,ed., Howard: "Labor History and sweatshops in
the new global economy." **

**Browse:[Smithsonian](http://americanhistory.si.edu/sweatshops/) Institution
Exhibit, Between a Rock And a Hard Place **

|

**web search/ library search/ Nexis2:30-3:30 at Ref. Desk, Goddard**  
  
**14Sep**

|

**3**

|

**The Rise of the New Sweatshops**

**Read:**

**From Packet:** **# U.S. General Accounting Office: _" Sweatshops" in New
York City: A Local Example of a Nationwide Problem._**#From **Varley, ed.,
_The Sweatshop Quandary_ "In Defense of Sweatshops." ****# In Ross, A. ed.,
Meza, "Testimony." Also:** **# Su, "El Monte Thai Garment Workers: Slave
Sweatshops". ****# Ross(Robert):  " The New Sweatshops in the United States:
How New, How Real, How Many, Why?" **

**Browse: The El Monte portion of the Smithsonian Exhibit:**  
![](http://www.clarku.edu/~rross/calsyl_files/image010.gif)  
**The El Monte Condo where workers were held as slaves in a garment factory
(1995)**  

**[El Monte](http://americanhistory.si.edu/sweatshops/elmonte/elmonte.htm) ;
Given:[ " Inside a Sweatshop: An Eyewitness
Account."](http://www.feminist.org/other/sweatnyc.html)**

|

**Sending and saving web material**  
  
**Part Two**

**The Structure of the Apparel Industry in Global Context**  
  
**21Sep**

|

**4**

|

**The structure of industry: Retail concentration in context**

**Read: Bonacich and Appelbaum:Chapters 1-3 (1 and 3 discussed this week)**

**From Packet:** **# Appelbaum and Gereffi:  "Power and Profits in the Apparel
Commodity Chain." From Bonacich et al, _Global Production: The Apparel
Industry in the Pacific Rim_.**

**# Jones, Jackie. 1995. "Forces Behind Restructuring in U.S. Apparel
Retailing and its Effect on the U.S. Apparel Industry." _Industry Trade and
Technology Review_. March.. p. 23 U.S. International Trade Commission.**

|

  
  
**28 Sep**

  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    




|

**5**

  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    




|

**Conditions in Central America**

**Read:**

**Bonacich and Appelbaum:Chapter Two.**

**From Packet:**  

**# In Ross, A.,ed., Kernaghan, "Paying to Lose Our Jobs." ****# Krupat, "From
War Zone to Free Trade Zone." **

**# Ross, Robert,  "Countdown in Managua," The Nation, about August 23, 2000**

**Browse**

**National Labor Committee: Nicaragua Material (see
online:<http://www.nlcnet.org/nicaragua/>
and<http://www.nlcnet.org/Press/Newsclip/jcp11_11.htm>**

**Video about Walt Disney in Haiti from the National Labor Committee**

|

Walt Disney Video  
  
**05Oct**

|

**6**

|

**China and Pakistan conditions**

**Read: National Labor Committee: _Made in China_ : _The Role of U.S.
Companies in Denying Human and Worker Rights_**

**Browse: Silver: "[Child Labor In
Pakistan](http://www.theatlantic.com/atlantic/issues/96feb/pakistan/pakistan.htm)."
The Atlantic Monthly, February 1996. **

|

**Mid term distributed**  
  
**12Oct**

|

**7**

|

**No class on Thursday:Field Trip to[Lowell National Historical
Park](http://www.nps.gov/lowe/) on Friday 10/13**

|

  
  
**19Oct**

|

**8**

|

**Two Case Studies: Nike and Guess Jeans**

**Guess and the North American Free Trade Agreement:**

**From Packet:** **# Ross (Robert): "NAFTA and the New Sweatshops"; ****#
Guess Packet, including, ****# Behar: "Guess **  **What's Behind This IPO? "
_Fortune_ , Oct. 14, 1996. **

**Nike:**  

**From Packet:** **# Nike Packet:** **# Glass, ****# Chan, and ****# Vietnam
Labor Watch**

**Browse:[Cross-Border Blues](http://forum.ra.utk.edu/spring99/Border.htm)**

|

# Mid term due  
  
**Part Three: Explaining the New Sweatshops**  
  
**26Oct**

|

**9**

|

**Overview and   The Decline of Unions and Deregulation **

  
Bonacich and Appelbaum:Chapters 5-7.

**Browse:**  

**<http://www.dol.gov/dol/esa/public/nosweat/nosweat.htm>**

|

**_Speaker tba_**  
  
**02Nov**

|

**10**

|

**IMMIGRATION and IMPORTS**

**From Packet:** **#** **Ross, Robert: "Restricting Immigration: A sweatshop
nonsolution" In Janice McCoart , editor, _An Academic Search for Sweatshop
Solutions: Conference proceedings._ Pages 32-45. Marymount University.
Arlington, VA. **

**Browse: Material from the Immigration and Naturalization Service
(INS).[Country of
Origin](http://www.ins.usdoj.gov/graphics/aboutins/statistics/299.htm) ;
[Immigration and Emigration by Decade
1900-1990](http://www.ins.usdoj.gov/graphics/aboutins/statistics/300.htm);
[State and Metropolitan Area of
Residence](http://www.ins.usdoj.gov/graphics/aboutins/statistics/310.htm)**

|

Video: _La Ciudad_  
  
**09Nov**

|

**11**

|

# The anti-Sweat Shop Campaigners

**Read: Bonacich and Appelbaum:Chapters 8,9,10**

**from Packet:** **# Ross, A.,ed., Cavanagh, "The Global Resistance to
Sweatshops." ****# Shaw: "The Labor Behind The Label: Clean Clothes Campaigns
in Europe."** **# Ross, Robert: "The new New Left from the 60's to the 21st
Century." Paper presented at the American Sociological Association Annual
Meeting, August 2000.**

|

  
  
**16Nov**

|

**12**

|

**Codes of conduct and Labor Rights in Trade:**

**Read: From Packet:**

**# Rothstein-Amsden Debate ****# From Varley, ed. "The Quest for a Universal
Code and Compliance Scheme." ****# Appelbaum, Richard and Katie Quan: Fighting
Sweatshops: Problems of Enforcing Global Labor Standards.Paper given at ASA
Annual Meeting, 2000**

|

**2 nd Essay questions distributed**  
  
**23Nov**

|



|

# Thanksgiving

|

  
  
**30 Nov**

|

**13**

|

**Reports**

|

# Research Drafts due  
  
**07Dec**

|

**14**

|

**Reports and demonstrations/Party**

|

**2 nd Essay due**  
  
**15 Dec**

|



|

**Research Papers Due**

|

  
  


|



|



|

  
  
  


**Research Papers**  


**Each seminar participant will be part of a Research Paper team.The maximum
size of a team is four.**

**Each team will choose a topic from this list:**

1.     Guess Jeans

a.      Corporate portrait  

b.     History of the union's(UNITE) campaign

                                                    i.     Why did it fail?

c.      Current situation

2.     Nike

a.      What are the typical conditions of workers who work for Nike
contractors in:

                                                    i.     Indonesia

                                                  ii.     Vietnam

                                                iii.     China

b.     How have activists changed Nike behavior

c.      Is Nike different from other shoe companies?

3.     Gear For Sports

a.      Corporate description

b.     Board of Directors:

                                                    i.     Social characteristics

c.      Response to sweat free campus campaign

4.     The new (Student) movements

a.      Who is involved in new (post-Seattle) anti-corporate, anti-global
capitalism campaigns?

<![if !supportL

