
    ![
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHH    HHHHHH
    HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH
    HHHHHHHHHHH HH H EEEE TTTTT     Humanities
    HHHHHH    H  H H E      T       OnLine
    HHHHHH    H H  H EEE    T       Web Site
    HHHHHH    H HH H E      T       
    HHHHHH    H HH H EEEE   T       H-SURVEY](/graphics/Logo.H-NetBare.GIF)
    
    
                          HISTORY 111 B (FALL, 1995)
                        HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES I
                             BILL CECIL-FRONSMAN
    
    Office: Henderson 311c                            Class Hours:
    Office Phone:  1317                                  MWF 11:00-11:50
    Office Hours:  MWF 10:00-10:50                Room:  HC 100
                   and by appointment
    

E-Mail: zzceci

**SYLLABUS** PURPOSE: To acquaint students with an understanding of the basic

    
    
                forces that have shaped American life up through
                Reconstruction.
                     To introduce students to the sources of American History and
                the means by which they can be interpreted.
                     To develop skills in writing, reading, and reasoning.
    

REQUIRED TEXTS: Mary Beth Norton et al., A People  & A Nation (Volume

    
    
                       I, 4th Edition)
                            William Bruce Wheeler and Susan D. Becker,
                       Discovering the America Past:  A Look at the
                       Evidence (Volume I, 3ed Edition)
    
    EVALUATION:         Quizzes             10
                        1st Exam            20
                        2nd Exam            20
                        Final Exam          30
                        Short Essays        20
    

QUIZZES: (10 Points) There will be sixteen quizzes, one per chapter in

the Norton text. Each quiz will consist of two multiple choice questions. Each
correct answer is worth .38 points. If you were to take every quiz and answer
every question correctly you would get a total of 12.16 points. There will be
no make-up quizzes for any reason. If you know in advance that you will be
missing class you may take a quiz ahead of time. If you are too sick to come
to class you may take a quiz over the phone by calling my office immediately
before class. This must be done before the quiz has been given.

MID-TERM EXAMS: (20 Points Each) All exams will be drawn primarily

from material discussed in class. Students will have a choice of mid-term exam
formats. You may select a 50 question multiplechoice exam or you may select a
one out of two essay question exam. The choice is to be made on the day of the
exam.

Students may bring to the exam one 8 1/2 x 11 inch study sheet with whatever
information you wish on it. These study sheets may be prepared in conjunction
with other students. They will be collected and must be in your own
handwriting. They may not be typewritten or word processed. They may not be
photocopies. Violators will not be allowed to use the sheets on the exam.

Make-up exams are permitted and arrangements for them must be made on the
first day you are back. Failure to do so will result in a loss of one letter
grade on the exam. Make-up exams are always more difficult than the originals.

FINAL EXAM: (30 Points) The final exam will not be cumulative and

will use the same format as the mid-term with one exception. Everyone will
have a 50 question multiple-choice section and a one out of two essay question
section. Students have two hours to complete the exam. All other ground rules
are the same.

SHORT ESSAYS: (20 Points) You are assigned seven chapters in the

Wheeler/Becker volume, Discovering the American Past. You are responsible for
reading and analyzing the material in each. You will write a short essay
(500-750 words) on the topics listed below. Your essays do not have to be
typed but they do need to be neat. The essays are due in class on the day that
a given chapter is assigned.

    
    
            Chapter 1:  What images do the written and artistic accounts
          create of Native Americans?
            Chapter 3:  Drawing upon the tables, what were the major social
          and economic trends affecting Americans in the century before
          the American Revolution?
            Chapter 4:  Should Captain Thomas Preston have been found guilty
          of murder for his actions during the Boston Massacre?
            Chapter 5:  Using the data on wards of Philadelphia, who voted for
          the Democratic-Republicans, who voted for the Federalists?  Can
          you explain why each group voted as they did?
            Chapter 7:  What were the conventional ideals of womanhood in the
          first half of the nineteenth century?  Drawing upon the girls'
          own statements, how did the Lowell mill girls deal with the
          conflict between those ideals and their own roles?
            Chapter 8:  How did the slaves view slavery and slaveowners?
            Chapter 10:  Why did the Union ultimately use black troops and the
          Confederacy ultimately not use them?
    
            Writing a good essay requires several things.  First and foremost,
    

it requires that you carefully read through the relevant material. Your essay
is to be drawn primarily from the "Evidence" section in the book. You need to
make explicit references to the evidence in your essay. Second, a good essay
must be more than a re-hash or summary of the evidence. Your task is to
interpret the evidence and to incorporate it into an essay that addresses the
question. That means that you must make general statements -- but that you
must support them with evidence. You must draw conclusions from your evidence
and present your interpretation in a clear manner.

    
    
            Your essays will be graded as follows.
                    5 = excellent
                    4 = satisfactory
                    3 = marginal
                    2 = weak
                    1 = poor
                    0 = no submission
    
            I will multiply your best five scores by 4 to get the total number
    

of points out of 100 for this part of the course. Your three lowest scores
will be dropped. You may re-write papers or submit late papers up to the final
exam. Late papers or re-submitted papers will lose one point of credit.

Evaluating the essays is necessarily subjective, but these are the rough
guidelines I use. An excellent essay should both address the key questions in
a comprehensive way and should build its answer on the basis of the source
material presented in the book. A satisfactory essay often does one of the
above well, but generally does not make sufficient use of the source material
or does not address the question in a comprehensive way. A marginal essay
generally addresses the question in a haphazard way or misses key points which
should have been obvious if the material were read with care. It may also only
make limited use of the source material or else miss the question completely.

ATTENDANCE POLICY: Students are expected to attend every class.

Attendance will be taken in every class. I recognize that legitimate reasons
may force students to miss an occasional class. The first six classes missed
will not negatively affect your final average. The seventh, eighth, and ninth
classes missed will cost 1 point each. The tenth, eleventh, and twelfth
classes will cost 2 points each. The thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth
classes missed will cost 3 points each, and so on. There are no exceptions;
there are no excused absences. Absences are counted from the first day of
class, not when the student began attending. Students are advised not to miss
classes in the beginning of the semester to avoid losing credit because of
emergencies towards the end. I reserve the right to drop students from the
course who miss nine consecutive classes without discussing their situation.

Students who have missed too many classes may "make up" a class they have
missed by doing some extra reading and writing a report which will cover the
material missed. See me for these assignments, should they become necessary.

A WORD TO THE WISE: Students who wish to win favor with professors

are urged to learn their names and to use them correctly. This is particularly
true with those of us who have unusual last names. Mine is Cecil-Fronsman. It
is not Cecil; it is not Fronsman.

A FINAL NOTE: I reserve the right to raise final averages by as much

as two points on the basis of interest shown in the course. Interest will be
judged by attendance, participation in discussions, and in questions asked.

A FINAL FINAL NOTE: Part of my job is to help you learn. I am happy

to stop class and answer questions. I am happy to have you come in and see me
in my office to help you in any way I can. I am genuinely interested in
helping you understand as much as possible. But I cannot help you if you do
not take the initiative. It is your responsibility to do this.

**READING ASSIGNMENTS**

    
    
    DATE            TOPIC   ASSIGNMENT
    Wed     Jan     18      The First North Americans                 ---
    Fri     Jan     20      Origins of European Conquest            Norton 1
    Mon     Jan     23      The Spanish Empire                      W/B 1
    Wed     Jan     25      Planting Colonies in Virginia           Norton 2
    Fri     Jan     27      Establishing the Puritan Colonies         ---
    Mon     Jan     30      Slavery Comes to Virginia               Norton 3
    Wed     Feb      1      Growth and Conflict in New England        ---
    Fri     Feb      3      Growth of Colonial America              Norton 4
    Mon     Feb      6      Economic Trends in Colonial America     W/B 4
    Wed     Feb      8      Conflict in Colonial America             ---
    Fri     Feb     10      Origins of the American Revolution      Norton 5
    Mon     Feb     13      The Conflict Explodes                   W/B 4
    Wed     Feb     15      Towards Independence                    Dec of Independ
    Fri     Feb     17      First Exam                              Good Luck
    
    Mon     Feb     20      The Revolutionary War                   Norton 6
    Wed     Feb     22      The American People and the Revolution    ---
    Fri     Feb     24      The New Republic                        Norton 7
    Mon     Feb     27      Constitution of 1787                    Read Const.
    Wed     March    1      Establishing a New Government           Norton 8
    Fri     March    3      The First Party System                  W/B 5
    Mon     March    6      Jeffersonians in Command                Norton 9
    Wed     March    8      War of 1812                              ---
    Fri     March   10      The West and Economic Expansion         Norton 10
                                (SRPING BREAK)
    Mon     March   20      The Limits of a Democratic Society      W/B 7
    Wed     March   22      Antebellum Reform                        ---
    Fri     March   24      Origins of Jacksonian Politics          Norton 13
    Mon     March   27      Second Party System                       ---
    Wed     March   29      Second Exam                             Better Luck
    
    Fri     March   31      No Class                                 ---
    Mon     April    3      Southern Economy                        Norton 11
    Wed     April    5      Defense of Slavery                        ---
    Fri     April    7      Slavery                                 W/B 8
    Mon     April   10      Northern Society & Economy              Norton 12
    Wed     April   12      Abolitionism/Women's Rights               ---
    Fri     April   14      Mexican War                               ---
    Mon     April   17      Collapse of the Party System            Norton 14
    Wed     April   19      Birth of a New Party System              ---
    Fri     April   21      Secession                                 ---
    Mon     April   24      The Nature of the Civil War             Norton 15
    Wed     April   26      Why Did the Union Win?                  W/B 10
    Fri     April   28      Ordeal By Fire                            ---
    Mon     May      1      Presidential Reconstruction             Norton 16
    Wed     May      3      Radical Reconstruction                    ---
    Fri     May      5      Black Reconstruction                     ---
    Wed     May     10      (1:30 PM) Final Exam                    Best Luck
    
    
    
                          HISTORY 112 (SPRING, 1995)
                       HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES II
                           DR. BILL CECIL-FRONSMAN
    
    Office: Henderson 311c                            Class Hours:
    Office Phone:  1317                                 M,W 1:00-2:15
    Office Hours:  MWF 10:00-10:50                     Room:  HC 207
                          and by appointment        
    E-Mail:  zzceci
                                   SYLLABUS
    
    PURPOSE:         To acquaint students with an understanding of the basic
                            forces that have shaped American life since the end
                            of Reconstruction.
                     To introduce students to the sources of American History and
                        the means by which they can be interpreted.
                     To develop skills in writing, reading, and reasoning.
    

REQUIRED TEXTS: Mary Beth Norton et al., A People  & A Nation (Volume

    
    
                       II, 4th Edition)
                            William Bruce Wheeler and Susan D. Becker,
                       Discovering the America Past:  A Look at the
                       Evidence (Volume II, 3ed Edition)
    
    EVALUATION:         Quizzes             10
                        Short Essays        20
                        1st Exam            20
                        2nd Exam            20
                        Final Exam          30
    

QUIZZES: (10 Points) There will be eighteen quizzes, one per chapter

in the Norton text. Each quiz will consist of two multiple choice questions.
Each correct answer is worth .34 points. If you were to take every quiz and
answer every question correctly you would get a total of 12.24 points. Because
of these possibilities there will be no make-up quizzes for any reason. If you
know in advance that you will be missing class you may take a quiz ahead of
time. If you are too sick to come to class you may take a quiz over the phone
by calling during office hours. This must be done before the quiz has been
given.

SHORT ESSAYS: (20 Points) You are assigned eight chapters in the

Wheeler/Becker volume, Discovering the American Past. You are responsible for
reading and analyzing the material and writing a short essay (500-750 words)
on the topics listed below. Your essays do not have to be typed but they do
need to be neat. They are due in class on the day that a given chapter is
assigned.

    
    
            Chapter 3:  Based on the advertisements, what were middle-class
          Americans' hopes and fears around the turn of the century?
            Chapter 2:  What were the strategies proposed by Booker T.
          Washington and W.E.B. DuBois?  Which was more appropriate for
          African-Americans in the late 19th and early 20th centuries?
            Chapter 4:  How do the exhibits at the 1904 St. Louis Exposition
          attempt to justify America's rise as an imperialist power?
            Chapter 5:  How did the United State mobilize public opinion in
          support of the nation's participation in World War I?  What were
          the consequences of this mobilization?
            Chapter 6:  What was the image of the "new woman" and how did that
          image fit with reality?
            Chapter 9:  Did the members of the House Committee on Un-American
          Activities act responsibly in their investigations of communist
          infiltration of the film industry?
            Chapter 10:  How and Why did public opinion become so divided
          about the Vietnam War?
            Chapter 11:  What is the connection between the ways that writers
          have discussed the American Revolution and the times in which
          they wrote?
    
            Writing a good essay requires several things.  First and foremost,
    

it requires that you carefully read through the relevant material. Your essay
is to be drawn primarily from the "Evidence" section in the book. You need to
make explicit references to the evidence in your essay. Second, a good essay
must be more than a re-hash or summary of the evidence. Your task is to
interpret the evidence and to incorporate it into an essay that addresses the
question. That means that you must make general statements -- but that you
must support them with evidence. You must draw conclusions from your evidence
and present your interpretation in a clear manner.

    
    
            Your essays will be graded as follows.
                    5 = excellent
                    4 = satisfactory
                    3 = marginal
                    2 = weak
                    1 = poor
                    0 = no submission
    
            I will multiply your best five scores by 4 to get the total number
    

of points out of 100 for this part of the course. Your three lowest scores
will be dropped. You may re-write papers or submit late papers up to the final
exam. Late papers or re-submitted papers will lose one point of credit.

Evaluating the essays is necessarily subjective, but these are the rough
guidelines I use. An excellent essay should both address the key questions in
a comprehensive way and should build its answer on the basis of the source
material presented in the book. A satisfactory essay often does one of the
above well, but generally does not make sufficient use of the source material
or does not address the question in a comprehensive way. A marginal essay
generally addresses the question in a haphazard way or misses key points which
should have been obvious if the material were read with care. It may also only
make limited use of the source material or else miss the question completely.

MID-TERM EXAMS: (20 Points Each) Students will have a choice of midterm

exam formats. You may select a 50 question multiple-choice exam or you may
select a one out of two essay question exam. The choice is to be made on the
day of the exam. Students may bring to the exam one 8 1/2 x 11 inch study
sheet with whatever information you wish on it. These study sheets may be
prepared in conjunction with other students. They will be collected and must
be in your own handwriting. They may not be typewritten or word processed.
They may not be photocopies. Violators will not be allowed to use the sheets
on the exam. Make-up exams are permitted and arrangements for them must be
made on the first day you are back. Failure to do so will result in a loss of
one letter grade on the exam. Make-up exams are always more difficult than the
originals. Failure to take an exam will result in a grade of 0.

FINAL EXAM: (30 Points) The final exam will use the same format as

the mid-term with one exception. Everyone will have a 50 question multiple-
choice section and a one out of two essay question section. The final exam
will not be cumulative. Students will have two hours to complete the exam. All
other ground rules will remain the same.

ATTENDANCE POLICY: Students are expected to attend every class.

Attendance will be taken in every class. I recognize that legitimate reasons
may force students to miss an occasional class. The first four classes missed
will not negatively affect your final average. The fifth and sixth classes
missed will cost 1.5 points each. The seventh and eighth classes missed will
cost 3.0 points each. The ninth and tenth classes missed will cost 4.5 points
each, and so on. There are no exceptions; there are no excused absences.
Absences are counted from the first day of class, not the first day a student
began to attend the class. Students are advised not to miss classes in the
beginning of the semester to avoid losing credit because of emergencies
towards the end. Students who have missed too many classes may "make up" a
class they have missed by doing some extra reading and writing a report which
will cover the material missed. You must discuss this with me. You may attend
either section of the class, but it is your responsibility to keep your
attendance sheet up to date.

A WORD TO THE WISE: Students who wish to win favor with professors

are urged to learn their names and to use them correctly. This is particularly
true with those of us who have unusual last names. Mine is Cecil-Fronsman. It
is not Cecil; it is not Fronsman.

A FINAL NOTE: I reserve the right to raise final averages by as much

as two points on the basis of interest shown in the course. Interest will be
judged by attendance, participation in discussions, and in questions asked.

A FINAL FINAL NOTE: Part of my job is to help you learn. I am happy

to stop class and answer questions. I am happy to have you come in and see me
in my office to help you in any way I can. I am genuinely interested in
helping you understand as much as possible. But I cannot help you if you do
not take the initiative. It is your responsibility to do this.

**READING ASSIGNMENTS**

    
    
    Wed     Jan     18      Industrial America                ---
    Mon     Jan     23      The New Industrial Order        Norton 18
    Wed     Jan     25      Urban America                   Norton 19
    Mon     Jan     30      Middle-Class America            W/B 3
    Wed     Feb      1      The New West                    Norton 17
    Mon     Feb      6      The New South                   W/B 2
    Wed     Feb      8      Gilded Age Politics             Norton 20
    Mon     Feb     13      Progressivism                   Norton 21
    Wed     Feb     15      First Exam                      Good Luck
    
    Mon     Feb     20      Quest For Empire                Norton 22; W/B 4
    Wed     Feb     22      World War I                     Norton 23
    Mon     Feb     27      World War I at Home             W/B 5
    Wed     March    1      The 1920s                       Norton 24
    Mon     March  6        The Great Depression            W/B 6
    Wed     March    8      The New Deal                    Norton 25
                                 SPRING BREAK
    Mon     March   20      Coming of World War II          Norton 26
    Wed     March   22      World War II                    Norton 27
    Mon     March   27      Second Exam                     Better Luck
    
    Wed     March 29        Post-War Politics               Norton 28; W/B 9
    Mon     April    3      The World of Leave it to Beaver Norton 30
    Wed     April    5      The Cold War                    Norton 29
    Mon     April   10      Peaceful Coexistence?            ---
    Wed     April   12      Vietnam                         Norton 31
    Mon     April   14      A Great Society?                Norton 32
    Wed     April   19      1960s Youth Rebellion           W/B 10
    Mon     April   24      1970s Fiasco                    Norton 33
    Wed     April   26      1970s Culture                     ---
    Mon     May      1      Reagan Years                    W/B 11
    Wed     May      3      Bush/Clinton Years              Norton 34
    Mon     May      8      Final Exam (1:30 PM)    Best Luck
    

[![](/graphics/listhome.gif)](/~survey/) [ Return](/~survey/) to H-SURVEY Home
Page.  

* * *

  
[![H-Net Humanities & Social Sciences
OnLine](/footers/graphics/logosmall.gif)](/)  
[Contact Us](/contact/)  
Copyright  (C) 1995-2002, H-Net, Humanities & Social Sciences OnLine  
Click Here for an [Internet Citation Guide](/about/citation).  
---

