**_

HISTORY (HST)

_** **

HST 101 HISTORY OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION TO 1750      4 (4-0)

**

This course covers the history, cultures and values of western society from
the prehistoric period to the Enlightenment. It examines the development of
early civilizations in the ancient Near East; the rise of classical
civilization in Greece and Rome; the influence of early Christianity and Islam
on Europe; the development of European society, religion and politics during
the Middle Ages; the Renaissance, the Reformation, the Scientific Revolution
and the Enlightenment; and western contacts with the Americas and Asia in the
15th through 18th centuries.

     Prerequisite:     None

[Course Syllabus](syllabus/generic_syllabus.htm)



**

HST 102 HISTORY OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION 1750 TO PRESENT      4 (4-0)

**

This course covers Western Civilization from 1750 to the present. Topics
include the Enlightenment and changes which led to the French Revolution; the
French Revolution and how it influenced the western world; the intellectual,
cultural, social, and political changes in the 19th century as Europe came to
dominate much of the world; the crises of the first half of the twentieth
century, such as the world wars and the depression; the rise of the Soviet
Union; and the post-World War II period with the rise of the welfare state,
the Cold War, decolonization, and the collapse of the communist world.

     Prerequisite:     None

[Course Syllabus](syllabus/generic_syllabus.htm)



**

HST 103 HISTORY OF WORLD CIVILIZATION TO 1650

**

This course covers the emergence of world history from ancient times to the
beginnings of the modern period in the 17th century. It examines the rise of
civilization in the Middle East and China; classical civilizations in Greece,
Rome, India, and the Americas; the early development of African civilization;
the rise and spread of Islamic civilization; the spread of Chinese
civilization; and the rise of the western world discussed in the context of
principal political, religious, economic and cultural forces molding these
societies.

     Prerequisite:

[Course Syllabus](syllabus/generic_syllabus.htm)



**

HST 104 HISTORY OF WORLD CIVILIZATION FROM 1450

**

This course covers the evolution of leading civilizations and the interaction
among different peoples and societies around the globe. It examines the rise
of the west as a dominant influence on the world; global change in Africa and
Asia; industrialization and imperialism throughout the 19th century; major
developments in the history of Latin America from its colonial period; the
crises in the west during the 20th century; the rise and fall of the Soviet
Union; decolonization; and major developments in Asia, especially Japan,
during the 20th century.

     Prerequisite: **                

[Course Syllabus](syllabus/generic_syllabus.htm)



HST 150 HISTORY OF THE GOGEBIC RANGE     3 (3-0)

**

A general but systematic study of the history of the Gogebic Iron Range and
what its role was in state, national, and world history. The course also
discusses methods of compiling and preserving what remains of this history and
the useful applications that could result from preservation.

      Prerequisite:     None

[Course Syllabus](syllabus/generic_syllabus.htm)



**

HST 160 PACIFIC CENTURY      3 (3-0)

**

An introductory, college-level survey of the modern history, economics,
politics, and cultures of the Pacific Basin region.

     Prerequisite:     None

[Course Syllabus](syllabus/generic_syllabus.htm)



**

HST 170 AMERICAS      3 (3-0)

**

A study of the 20th century political, economic, social, and cultural history
of Latin American and the Caribbean. Focuses on the key issues and events
crucial to understanding the development of the modern-day Americas.

     Prerequisite:     None

[Course Syllabus](syllabus/generic_syllabus.htm)



**

HST 201 UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1877      3 (3-0)

**

This course covers the political, social, and cultural history of the United
States from its colonial founding through the Reconstruction period. It
examines the clash of European and native civilizations; development of
colonies; growing independence of the colonies; revolution and the formation
of a national government; nation building; sectional conflict; the Civil War;
and rebuilding the nation after the war.

     Prerequisite:     None

[Course Syllabus](syllabus/generic_syllabus.htm)



**

HST 202 UNITED STATES HISTORY FROM 1865                 3 (3-0)

**

This course covers the political, social, and cultural history of the United
States from the Reconstruction period to the present. It examines the
rebuilding of the nation after the Civil War; settlement in the Midwest and
industrialization; the Progressive Era; World War I; the 1920s and the Great
Depression; World War II; the cold War at home and abroad; the political and
cultural transformation of the 1960s and 1970s; and the resurgence of
conservatism.

     Prerequisite:     None

[Course Syllabus](syllabus/generic_syllabus.htm)



**

HST 212 MICHIGAN HISTORY      3 (3-0)

**

A survey of Michigan history from the coming of the white man; the history of
the state in its regional and national context.

     Prerequisite:     None

[Course Syllabus](syllabus/generic_syllabus.htm)



**

HST 225 THE NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS (A Survey)      3 (3-0)

**

An introductory survey of the American Indians, from earliest times to the
present, this course is confined to the Indians north of Mexico with
illustrations drawn from all areas. The major emphasis is on the Indians of
the Northwest and the Plains, with some examples of Eastern Indians.

     Prerequisite:     None

[Course Syllabus](syllabus/generic_syllabus.htm)







