=========================================================================
Date: Sat, 1 Jun 91 01:52:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: trish  Subject: RE: ASK's posting >When >you state
that 'white males are fighting back' because they 'can't feel >superior', I
really feel like you're dismissing the internal struggle that >white males
face when they try to throw off the hold patriarchal thought has >on them.
'finagle' has a point, here ... men are as much products of their
socialization as women are ... retaliation against 'patriarchal hierarchies'
which assumes ALL men are the same is simply a replication of traditional male
behaviour towards women ... >I'm not denying that most of the 'pc-bashers' are
white males, but >not all white males are pc-bashers. okay? > --Finagle ASK's
initial point had merit -- thpc backlash is embedded in the struggle over
power, and, therefore, in the ownership of definitions. since power has been
the milieu oWestern, white, middle-to- upperclass males, they are the ones who
are defending their positions as power-brokers against those who would dare to
challenge their ownership ... i.e.; women, ethnic minorities, third-world
immigrants, etc. trish/witchy
><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><
trish wilson mc master university wilsont@sscvax.cis.mcmaster.ca
hamilton,ontario,canada <<<<>>>>
><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><
=========================================================================
Date: Sat, 1 Jun 91 13:49:49 PDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: Barb Moose  Subject: remove subscription
unsubscribe bjm@ceti.csustan.edu
=========================================================================
Date: Sat, 1 Jun 91 16:49:14 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: FLANNAGA@OUACCVMB.BITNET I was just wondering if a
posting of mine made it through yesterday. Please acknowledge, if you will,
and I will re-send, if necessary. Roy Flannagan
=========================================================================
Date: Sat, 1 Jun 91 23:12:02 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: JODONNEL@PENNSAS.BITNET Subject: Paglia in NYTimes
The Sunday, 2 June, edition of the NYTimes Book Review contains a full page of
letters attacking the front-page column by Camille Paglia that ran a few weeks
ago. A learned colleague points to the tone of the letters, as well as the
Times's decision to print a full page of them, as a sign that the `politically
correct' party is determined to live up to the image created for them by the
right in what might be termed a self-fulfilling parody. He has a point.
=========================================================================
Date: Sun, 2 Jun 91 08:50:36 PDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: Barb Moose  Subject: unsubscribe unsub wmst-l
bjm@ceti.csustan.edu
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 09:17:00 EDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: ANTLER@BRANDEIS.BITNET Subject: Roy Flanagan
Inquiry no message received from you
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 09:20:25 -0400 Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: MIKE  Subject: RE: Roy Flanagan Inquiry I don't
understand this message ... I just subscribed to WMST-L this morning and don't
know Roy Flanagan. Mike Keenan
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 10:04:00 CDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: Zenuba  Subject: RE: >RE: ASK's posting >
'finagle' has a point here...men are as much products of their > socialization
as are women... "Socialization" is not a neutral term, and using it this way
is agent deletion. Two good questions to ask regarding this are: socialized by
whom? and for whose purposes? But the main point is the patriarchial nature of
the institutions of society. For example, to look at who runs the Univ of
Okla. --who is president, plus the overwhelming majority of professors,
administrators (deans, registrar, bursar), etc., etc., the vast majority are
white males. Of course those men don't think alike--that's not the point,
anyway. The point is that they are entitled to power merely because of the
characteristics The backlash against women's studies goes deeper than a fear
of sharing power, it is a deep-seated dislike of women themselves and of the
basic core questions that women's studies asks. And its scary because of the
erasure of women's contributions in the past, and by the erasure of the women
themselves. And in addition, the grouping of: > i.e.; women, ethnic
minorities, third-world immigrants by it's very nature excludes women in the
categories of ethnic minorities and third-world immigrants. Words DO matter.
Peace... Pamela Doty WA0483@uokmvsa.bitnet
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 11:02:41 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: FLANNAGA@OUACCVMB.BITNET Subject: the missing note
(which went astray because it was sent as a "file" rather than as "mail") I am
another person who is so unfortunate at the moment to be a white-AS male
Protestant and all those other ugly things, so I am supposed to feel guilty
for being, much less being a man. I have had my consciousness raised so many
times it has been exalted, but the believer in free speech in me wants to find
the "guy" who was worried about putting his arm around a "girl" innocent until
he is proven guilty of being a masher, a brute, a harrasser and an all-round
pig. I don't call the young women in my classes "girls," and at the moment it
is not all right to call women under the age of puberty "girls," but must we
censor "girlfriend" or "boyfriend" because both terms suggest that someone may
be younger than she is or he is? And if even a college-age male says something
like "I can't get girls to like me," is his phrasing reprehensible? I feel
great embarrassment, if not disgust, for terms of the Fifties such as "the
little woman," or even the affectionately-meant "my old lady" (in the Sixties
hip women called what would now be their "main squeeze" "my old man" and got
away with that). I am far from one and twenty, but I feel some sympathy for a
twenty-year-old who goes out with a woman of his age and feels apprehensive
putting his arm around the back of the movie seat for having "Chauvinist" or
"Harrasser" (is that a word?) yelled at him. In the Fifties the worst blow to
manhood imaginable would be for the woman to *remove* that arm around the
seat, so the fear of verbal or physical rejection carries from generation to
generation, but now the man must worry about being verbally abused, accused,
or even prosecuted, for extending that arm, or extending the word "girl." The
generations are also different. My next door neighbor, in her fifties, would
talk about "going out with the girls." My wife, in her forties, really
dislikes the term "girl" being applied to any woman past puberty. My daughter,
fifteen, doesn't know whether to feel flattered by junior males in high school
saying, as a compliment mind you, that she has "fuck me eyes" (I should add
that she is not promiscuous). My daughter, four, wants very much to wear
dresses and steal her sister's make-up, though her mother wears none. Society
is still in flux, and one generation still reacts against the last one before
it. It is good that men are more sensitive about choice of words and that they
cannot use terms like "the little woman" any more, but thought police ready to
jump on each word like "girl" may abuse the wrong man or woman, and send the
wrong person to jail for harrassment. Roy Flannagan
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 10:23:00 CDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: TI0LFM1@NIU.BITNET Subject: RE: Paglia/NYt's
comments  Received: (from UICVM for  via BSMTP) Received: (from MAILER@UICVM
for MAILER@NIU via NJE) (UCLA/Mail V1.410 M-RSCS6781-6781-37); Sun, 02 Jun 91
15:37:29 CDT Received: by UICVM (Mailer R2.07) id 6819; Sun, 02 Jun 91
15:38:09 CDT Date: Sun, 2 Jun 91 15:34:41 CDT Reply-To: History  Sender:
HISTORY+@FINHUTC.HUT.FI From: Don Mabry  Subject: ENOUGH! Comments: To:
history@finhutc.hut.fi To: Loomis Mayfield , Harvey Smith  Enough is enough!
Will those of you who want to engage in calling each other names and in
launching personal attacks on one another please do so directly to each other
and not to the entire list? A discussion and debate over "studies" programs
could be useful. Fields such as American Studies, Asian Studies, African
Studies, Black Studies, Latin American Studies, Medieval Studies, Southern
Studies, and Womens Studies (and let's not quibble at this point as to where
the apostrophe goes, if one is needed) and the like have existed for many
years. As far as I know, these tend to be interdisciplinary approaches. It is
not surprising, in my view, that one would argue that a single discipline
(such as history or political science) insufficiently prepares one to
understand a complex subject. Nor is it surprising that some specialists look
with disdain upon the approaches or disciplines of others. Can historians gain
much additional knowledge and insight by learning the literature, music, and
sociology of the people they are studying? In other words, is an
interdisciplinary approach valuable? Don Mabry Professor, History, Mississippi
State University djm1@Ra.MsState.Edu (Internet); djm1@msstate (Bitnet)
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 10:26:00 CDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: TI0LFM1@NIU.BITNET Subject: RE: Last message on
Paglia/NYT Sorry. I inadvertently put a message from Don Mabry at the end of
my own message. ******************************************** Loomis Mayfield,
TI0LFM1@NIU (BITNET ADDRESS) (815) 753-2301 Social Science Research Institute
Northern Illinois University DeKalb, IL 60115
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 18:18:00 IST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: SOUTS@HUJIVM1.BITNET Subject: Roy flanagan I just
joined WMST-L and have gotten several messages about Roy Flanagan. I don't
know what this is about. Cheryl Tallan
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 10:28:00 CDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: TI0LFM1@NIU.BITNET Subject: RE: Women's
studies/potatoes  as it is now?" ********************************************
Loomis Mayfield, TI0LFM1@NIU (BITNET ADDRESS) (815) 753-2301 Social Science
Research Institute Northern Illinois University DeKalb, IL 60115
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 10:30:00 CDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: Zenuba  Subject: re: re: ask's posting > 'finagle'
has a point here...men are as much products of their > socialization...
"Socialization" is not a neutral term, and using it this way is agent
deletion. Two good questions to ask regarding this are: socialized by whom?
and for whose purposes? But the main point is the patriarchial nature of the
institutions of society. For example, to look at who runs the Univ of Okla.
--who is president, the overwhelming majority of professors, administrators
(deans, registrar, bursar), etc., etc., they vast majority are white males. Of
course those men don't all "think alike"--that's not the point anyway. The
backlash against women's studies goes deeper than a fear of sharing power, it
is a deep-seated dislike of women themselves and of the basic core questions
that women's studies asks. And its scary because of the erasure of women's
contributions in the past, and by the erasure of women themselves. And in
addition, the grouping of: > i.e.; women, ethnic minorities, third-world
immigrants by it's very nature excludes women in the categories of ethnic
minorities and third-world immigrants. Words DO matter. Peace... Pamela Doty
WA0483@uokmvsa.bitnet
=========================================================================
Date: MON, 3 JUN 91 12:31:57 EDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: Linda Johnson  Subject: RE: Roy Flanagan Inquiry
I'm Linda Johnson and I don't understand this Roy Flanagan either! What gives?
neither Pemberton or I am owners of this list! .s
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 11:09:46 CDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: cliff staples  Subject: observation An observation
or two. I just signed on to this list a week or so ago. I saw an "ad" for it
on another list (Postmodern Culture), hadn't heard of it before, and was eager
to find out what was going on. From all the traffic lately, it looks like a
lot of other people have also recently signed on. I also note that a number of
those who recently signed up are, like myself, male. This morning when I
checked my mail I found nine postings, all from this list. Three involved
funny Abbott and Costello- like (Who's on First?) postings. The other six were
all in the attack-defense, men vs. women mode. Very interesting. These sorts
of messages weren't here when I first logged on. When people sign on to these
lists there seems to be a sort of "identity establishing" phenomenon that
occurs, much the same as in face to face interaction. I would be interested to
find out if most of the new folks who recently signed on are men. My guess is
that the recent flurry of postings reflects this change in the gender
composition of the board. It's as if the men signed on for the purpose of
provoking the people who were "already here" if you will-- women mostly I
would imagine-- into an argument that's really about justifying the existence
of this board. My guess is also that these men would say things on this board
that they might not say to their colleagues, deans, or students. I just
finished working on a paper entitled "The Moral Challenge of Feminism." In it
I try to acknowledge the tremendous impact that feminism is having on men (by
saying to men, individually and collectively:"You're hurting us. Stop.") and
make a case for why it is important for men to begin to speak honestly about
the way feminism is affecting us. Feminism sends men into a moral and personal
crisis because, by speaking out about male violence, it uncovers and exposes
the pain that most men have experienced FROM OTHER MEN. A pain that we carry
with us, but do not and cannot speak about (to do so would express
vulnerability, feelings other than anger, humanity--- all things that are
opposite conventional, hegemonic, notions of hetero-masculinity). Crises
represent both opportunity and danger. The danger is that men confronted with
the moral challenge of feminism will, out of their own pain, act defensively
and in reactionary ways that increase violence against women, a violence that
embodies and reproduces patriarchy. But the crisis men experience is also an
opportunity. The delegitimation of patriarchy begins with an honest accounting
of male experience. This accounting must recognize that only a very few men
(usually white males) benefit from patriarchy. Most of the rest of us pay
dearly for our so-called privileges-- even us white ones. In my experience
working with men, the most revolutionary moment occurs when men are able,
usually in all male support groups (but it takes a long while), to begin to
talk about the problematic nature of their relationships with other men. It is
at this point that the opportunity to subvert patriarchy occurs. It is at this
point that we can begin to show men thatit is patriarchy, not feminism or
women, against which our anger should be directed. I can understand how
women/feminists will have little patience listening to men talk about "their
pain." No argument. This is "men's work." What I would say is this: if men
have ever given you the impression that "being a man" is nothing but a great
time, don't believe it. Don't believe the lies that men continue to tell about
themselves. Feminist analyses that presume all men benefit equally from
patriarchy accept this lie-- probably because it is convenient. It isn't your
job to write the truth about male experience. That's our job. All I would ask
is that as men begin (finally) to speak about the problematic and conflicted
nature of male experience that feminist analyses take this truth into account.
This will in no way weaken the power of feminist critique. Indeed, it will
make it that much more powerful. Feminism brings to men the bad news about
patriarchy. To men I would say: don't kill the messenger. peace, Cliff Staples
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 14:54:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: LAURA KRAMER  Subject: RE: Paglia in NYTimes n.b.
the letters published were selected by editors of the New York Times Book
Review. I wouldnt presume that they are representative of those received (nor
that they are unrepresentative).
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 15:42:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: RHODA UNGER  Subject: RE: observation I am one of
the people who has just subscribed to the list and I am concerned that the
level appears to have dropped within the week or so that I have been reading
it. I would prefer that we discuss aspects of scholarship (both within
journals and the popular culture) rather than engaging in still another debate
about sexual politics. For example, one of the questions in which I am
interested in how we define feminist scholarship. It is certainly not about
sex differences, but must it be about gender?
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 15:13:52 cdt Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: "Finagle, etc. (Durflinger,Edward M)"  Stating
that all white males are participating in this "deep-seated dislike" of women
and that we all have a "fear of sharing power" is also subject deletion--it
deletes _me_, as an individual subject, and my capability to be something
other than a 'white male.' Please, please, do not use a monolithic subject
when describing women's oppression. That also overlooks, as Sara Hoagland
points out in her book _Lesbian Ethics_, the possibility that women have been
participiating in their oppression, and that men are also oppressed by the
patriarchal system. Do you really beleive that men could have set up
patriarchy all by themselves? Nancy Chodorow goes a long way towards
dispelling this idea in the introduction to _The Reproduction of Mothering_,
pointing out that patriarchy quite possible grew out of what could have been a
quite equitable division of labour in gatherer/hunter societies, which became
self- reinforcing and imbalanced in agricultural and industrial societies.
Comments? \--Finagle
\-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Finagle's Creed:| The IrReverend Finagle the Polymorphously Perverse Science
is true,| High Epopt of Greater Pangea Don't be misled | Edward Durflinger
[DURFLING@GRIN1.BITNET] by facts! | Box 4-66, Grinnell College Grinnell, Iowa
50112
\-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
"Don't just eat that hamburger--eat the HELL out of it!--J.R. "Bob" Dobbs
\-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 16:09:14 -0400 Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: MIKE  Subject: RE: observation Help!!! I have
somehow become a "target" ... I have done nothing more than subscribe to
WMST-L on the morning of June 3 ... this is the first message I have sent and
I certainly don't want to be considered in any way responsible for ANY of the
transmissions that have come across my screen today. It seems obvious that the
"switching" system has mixed up addresses. Mike Keenan (keenan@gw.wmich.edu)
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 15:28:16 cdt Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: "Finagle, etc. (Durflinger,Edward M)"  Is anyone
out there interested in French feminism? I just got done doing a paper on
Cixous, tracing the development of her feminism through Derrida and Nietzsche
(yes, Nietszsche. :) If anyone is interested, or has papers on Cixous that
they would like to swap, drop me a line... \--Finagle durfling@grin1.bitnet
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 15:28:16 cdt Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: "Finagle, etc. (Durflinger,Edward M)"  Is anyone
out there interested in French feminism? I just got done doing a paper on
Cixous, tracing the development of her feminism through Derrida and Nietzsche
(yes, Nietszsche. :) If anyone is interested, or has papers on Cixous that
they would like to swap, drop me a line... \--Finagle durfling@grin1.bitnet
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 17:53:22 EDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: "Jaber F. Gubrium"  Subject: Unsubscribe
Unsubscribe jaber f. gubrium from the list
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 15:01:55 PDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: Barb Moose  Subject: unsubscribe unsubscribe
bjm@ceti.csustan.edu
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 18:52:00 EDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: BCJ@PSUVM.BITNET Subject: Calls for papers: 18th-
Century Studies AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY STUDIES Annual
Meeting, March 25-29 Seattle, Washington SELECTED CALL FOR PAPERS Send
proposals and inquiries directly to the session chairs listed here by
September 1, 1991. For a complete listing, send a request to BCJ@PSUVM.BITNET
or BCJ@PSUVM.PSU.EDU "'Doing What Comes Naturally': Conceptions of Sexual
Relations in and 18th-Century Literature." Edna L. Steeves, Department of
English, University of Rhode Island, Kingston, R.I. 02881 Seminar.) "Theory
and the Age of Criticism: Psychoanalysis and 18th-Century Literature."
"Working Women's Voices and Representations in 18th-Century Literature"
(Women's Caucus Seminar) Irma S. Lustig, Department of English, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104 "Embodiment -- Medically,
Philosophically, and Aesthetically Conceived." Joel Weinsheimer, Department of
English, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 "Rereading Aphra Behn:
History, Theory and Criticism." Heidi Hutner, 201 E. 7th St. #31D, New York,
NY 10002 "Gender and Enlightenment Theology." Elizabeth Hedrick, Department of
English, University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712-1164 "`Orality' and `Literacy':
Styles and Forms in the 18th Century." Carey McIntosh (Hofstra University), 44
Riverside Dr. (91), New York, NY 10027 "Mothering and Fathering in 18th-
century France." Jeffery Merrick, Department of History, University of
Wisconsin - Milwaukee, P.O. Box 413, Milwaukee, WI 53201 "Perspectives in
Cultural Studies." Richard Braverman, Department of English, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10027 "Passion, Anxiety, and Madness in the English
Novel, 1680-1750." Maximilian E. Novak, Department of English, University of
California - Los Angeles, 405 Milgard Ave., Los Angeles, CA 90024 "Theorizing
Patriarchy." William Ray, Reed College, Portland, OR 97202 "The Jesuit
Presence in Ibero-American Culture." Gregory Ludlow, Department of Romance
Languages, Academic Center T516, George Washington University, Washington, DC
20052 "The Irish Stage, 1662-1800." Christopher J. Wheatley, Department of
English, The Catholic University of America, Washington, DC 20064 "Growing Up
In the Fifties: Gender and the Mid-Century Novel of Development." Christine
Blouch, 2180 Medford Rd. #35, Ann Arbor, MI 48104\. Inquiries by E-mail:
USERHHCW@UMICHUB.BITNET "Economics and Aesthetics: Representation and
Commodification." Grant I. Holly, Hobart and William Smith Colleges, Geneva,
NY 14456 "Let's Get Serious About Educating the Young." Charlotte M. Craig,
Department of Foreign Languages, Kutztown University, Kutztown, PA 19530 "The
Female Figure in 18th-Century Pornography: An Oppressive or Liberating
Discourse?" Mary Trouille (Humanities Division, University of Chicago), 1215
Elmwood Ave., Evanston, IL 60202 "Libraries of the Enlightenment: Private,
Public, and Commercial." Paul Benhamou, Department of Foreign Languages and
Literatures, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47906 "Paternity in the
18th Century: Inheritance, Authority, and Legitimacy." Catherine Cusset-
Jenkins, 45 Coolidge Hill Rd., Cambridge, MA 02138; after July 31, 1991:
Department of French, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520 "Eighteenth-Century
Women Critics." Tara Ghosh Wallace, Department of English, George Washington
University, Washington, DC 20052 "Eighteenth Century Representations of
Elizabeth I and Elizabethans." Michael Dobson, Department of English,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 "Emotional Encounters:
Representations of Feeling in 18th-Century English Culture." Adela Pinch,
Department of English, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1045. "De-
Marginalizing the Canon: Major Texts." Kevin L. Cope, Department of English,
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803-5001; inquiries and
abstracts by Email to ENCOPE@LSUVM.BITNET. AND Mona Scheuermann, Division of
Communications, Oakton Community College, 1600 East Golf Road, Des Plaines, IL
60016 "Novelistic Technique in Cultural Formation, 1760-1820." John Bender,
Department of English, Stanford, CA 94305 "Conduct, Ideology & Identity:
Educational Discourse in 18th- Century Britain." Richard Barney, Department of
English, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019 "Interpreting Forms of
Lifewriting in the 18th Century (Autobio- graphy, Autobiographical Novel,
Diaries, Memoires, Letters)" Diane Fourny, Department of French, University of
Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045-2120 "Domesticity Before, During, and After the
American Revolution" (SE/ASECS Seminar). Dennis Moore, Department of English,
University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX 79968-0526 "Sex and Political
Economy in 18th-Century England and its Empire." Henry Abelove, Department of
English, Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT 06457-6063 "Female Theatre: Women
as Patrons, Producers, Players and Playwrights." Jean I. Marsden, Department
of English U-25, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269 "Pope, Swift, and
Women Writers (Part II)." Donald C. Mell, Department of English, University of
Delaware, Newark, DE 19716-2537 "Pornography and Narrative in England:
1660-1800." William B. Warner, Department of English, SUNY-Buffalo, Buffalo,
NY 14260 "Concepts of Virtue and Vice in the Hispanic Enlightenment." Karen
Stolley, Box 217, Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, NY 12601. "Gendering Genre in
Literature and the Arts." Julie C. Hayes, Department of Modern Foreign
Languages, University of Richmond, Richmond, VA 23173 "The Literary
Marketplace: Gender, Class, Ethnicity" (The Aphra Behn Society Seminar). Laura
Mandell, Department of English, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14852
************************************************************************* * *
* CCCC 1 88888 LL This Announcement has * * CC CC 111 88 88 LL been
crossposted courtesy * * CC C 1111 88 88 LL of C18-L, the Eighteenth * * CC 11
88 88 LL Century Interdisciplinary * * CC 11 88888 ==== LL Discussion List and
by * * CC 11 88 88 LL editor-"owner" Kevin * * CC C 11 88 88 LL Berland
(BCJ@PSUVM). To * * CC CC 11 88 88 LL L subscribe, send message * * CCCC
111111 88888 LLLLLL to LISTSERV@PSUVM. * * *
*************************************************************************
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 22:42:00 EDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: ANTLER@BRANDEIS.BITNET Subject: RE: unsubscribe
UNSUBSCRIBE ANTLER@BRANDEIS Z
=========================================================================
Date: Mon, 3 Jun 91 21:33:35 CDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: "James R. Layton"  Subject: Message Dear Group
Members: I have neither the time, patience, energy, nor desire to clear my
screen of all the nonsense I read tonight (35 messages). I agree with another
person who wrote that messages should be personal once an iquiry or state-
ment is made. Could we agree to that? Perhaps I am wrong and should with- draw
from participation. Jim
==========================================================================
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 05:24:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: DON'T PANIC HITCHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY
Subject: Re: the missing note (which went astray because it was RE: Mr
Flannagan's close... the resonance of "thought police" is telling. A little
reading on language and cognition as well as the processes of social
construction may be of use. I am sorry to say I thought we were well beyond
all this.... howza bout a little chit-chat on the radical (i.e. root) changes
in methodolotry necessitated by the rad. epist. of rad fems... WHADDYA SAY
GIRLS!!! Loie
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 05:46:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: DON'T PANIC HITCHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY
Subject: Re: observation In response to Rhoda Ungar's message... That is a
VERY interesting question: "... For example, one of the questions in which I
am interested in how we define feminist scholarship. It is certainly not about
sex differences, but must it be about gender?" I think, for example, that
there are people who use gender as a category of analysis but certainly not
from any of the myriad of femoinist perspectives... I also think--tho this one
is a tad more slippery-- that feminist anaylsis need not be applicable only to
gender issues. NOT to vitiate the importance of gender issues in any way, one
of the really exciting things about some fem. analysis is that it critiques
modes and methods of analysis it/them self... I tho I certianly do NOT relish
many of the outcomes, I would suggest that much of post-mod (socalled) and
more importantly, the adoption, adaptaion (cooption???) of the metaphors into
the "social" and "natural" sciences from the "humanities" is due to fem.
critiques of epistemological assumptions. The entire notion of contemporary
disciplines is acrumble--it does, by the way have a "history", remeber the
Trivium-- so fem studies is broader/deeper than gender...and well beyond
interdisciplinary. (I once loved that term, but now it sometimes makes me
think of Mary Daly's opening of Gyn/Ecology where she defines the resonance of
androgeny as "Farah Fawcet and John Travolta scotch-taoed together") Was that
at all clear???? Loie
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 05:50:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: DON'T PANIC HITCHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY
Subject: Response to Finagle and the boys... Sorry, just overtired and moved
from smiling to pissed about the level of discourse here. metaphorically...
I'll worry about raising the consciousness of the SS and the sad processes of
their social-construction once I'm out from behind the barbed wire.
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 07:04:33 EDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: Gail Hornstein  Subject: New Research Center We
are pleased to announce the creation of the Five College Women's Studies
Research Center, a joint project of Amherst, Hampshire, Mount Holyoke, and
Smith Colleges, and the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. The Center has
five main goals: 1\. To create an organized structure within which faculty
with research interests in women's studies can discuss, critique, and
facilitate one another's research. 2\. To provide a rubric for a series of
faculty seminars on topics of current importance in feminist scholarship. 3\.
To provide an institutional home for visiting scholars from other campuses and
especially for international visitors in women's studies. 4\. To serve as the
organizing agent for national and international conferences that would create,
support, and maintain networks of collaboration among feminist scholars. 5\.
To allow important archival collections on women (especially the Sophia Smith
collection, but also the Mount Holyoke archives, the Stanton-Anthony papers,
the Dickinson papers, etc.) to gain greater visibility and use as scholarly
resources. The Center is located on the Mount Holyoke campus, and will welcome
its first research associates in September. Although we cannot offer funding
to associates, we can offer a comfortable office, library privileges at the
five institutions, and the opportunity to be part of a community of feminist
scholars. The core of the Center's program will be a weekly seminar where
research associates provide ongoing critique and response to each other's
work. Normally, scholars will be affiliated with the Center for one or two
semesters; other arrangements are possible, as appropriate. If you are
interested in applying to be one of the Center's first group of associates
(for 1991-92, or some part of it), please write by June 14 to Gail Hornstein,
Dept. of Psychology, Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, MA 01075. In your
letter, describe briefly your project and its women's studies focus. Indicate
why it would make sense to conduct this work within the context of the Center
and the time period for which you would want to be an Associate. Include as
well a current vita. If you have questions, please contact any of the
following: Gail Hornstein (ghornste@mhc.bitnet); (413) 538-2339 Lee Edwards,
UMass (413) 545-1922 Margaret Hunt, Amherst (mrhunt@AMHERST.bitnet); (413)
542-2287 Ruth Solie, Smith (rsolie@smith.bitnet); (413) 585-3176 Joan Landes,
Hampshire (jlandes@HAMPVMS.bitnet); (413) 549-4600, ext.507
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 08:54:13 EDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: Farzaneh Nour  Farah Fawcet and John Travolta
scotch-taped together??????
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 09:05:42 -0400 Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: MIKE  Subject: Thoughts on "Iron John" I would
appreciate reactions to the possible use of "Iron John" by Robert Bly in a
course titled "Women in Management." The course is in the College of Business
at Western Michigan University. While an elective in the Women's Studies
program (undergraduate minor) it is taken, for the most part, by undergraduate
business students (80% female, 10% male with the other 10% MBA's split
evenly.) The book would be included on a "skimming" list of 15 books ranging
from Stead, and Harragan, to "Mayflower Madam." I'm interested in both what
you might think about the point of view of the book, whether appropriate for a
women's studies course, and thoughts about whether the concepts/language are
just too sophisticated for the clientele. This item will be on both
GENDER@RPIECES. BITNET and WMST-L@UMDD.UMD.EDU; if you wish to respond
directly I can be reached at: keenan@gw.wmich.edu Thanks, Mike Keenan
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 10:38:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: "A.S.K."  Subject: some replies Pamela Doty says:
>The backlash against women's studies goes deeper than a fear of sharing
>power, it is a deep-seated dislike of women themselves and of the basic >core
questions that women's studies asks. And its scary because of the >erasure of
women's contributions in the past, and by the erasure of the women
>themselves. I can understand a deep-seated dislike of the core questions of
women's studies, but of women, themselves? That is scary. Loomis Mayfield
says: >I think the entire debate over PC comes from a blind acceptance >of the
right's depiction of the term. PC is used to denounce >those that are trying
to speak out against racism, sexism, and >open up academic studies to
perspectives beyond a study of 'great >white men.' It is the users of the PC
label who are trying to >censor academic discourse. The PC buzzword allows
critics >to simply dismiss arguments out of hand, without dealing with any >of
the substantive issues raised. Well said. I agree. Cliff Staples writes:
>Feminism sends men into a moral and >personal crisis because, by speaking out
about male violence, it uncovers and >exposes the pain that most men have
experienced FROM OTHER MEN. A pain that we >carry with us, but do not and
cannot speak about (to do so would express >vulnerability, feelings other than
anger, humanity--- all things that are >opposite conventional, hegemonic,
notions of hetero-masculinity). Well, I don't buy this, but I'd be willing to
listen or read. Is there a way we could get your paper, either via email or
U.S. mail? I think men are scared of losing control. Yes many men do
experience pain from other men, but many men inflict pain on women. ASK
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 11:11:10 CDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: cliff staples  Subject: Re: some replies In-Reply-
To: Message of Tue, 4 Jun 91 10:38:00 EST from  For ASK: What don't you "buy?"
I never suggested that men don't do violence to women. Indeed, my whole point
is to try to understand reactionary responses to feminism-- one kind of male
violence, of which there are many more. But as I see it, one cannot understand
male violence against women without taking into account the violence that men
do to each other. My point is NOT to diminish the significance of male
violence against women by recognizing that men hurt each other. I think it is
important to remember that in a patriarchal society men are more important to
everyone-- including other men. Yes, men are scared of losing control. But
this begs the question, I think. What, exactly, are we scared of? We're scared
of other, more powerful, and dangerous men. Men who are unable to project a
self that is powerful and intimidating (in part by controlling women) run the
risk of being victimized by other men. In order to understand the importance
of "control" to men we must understand its meaning within masculinist culture.
Men are "male- identified" or homosocial. Despite appearances, women aren't
really the point. What most men are "concerned with," above all else, is their
status within the world of men. Isn't this why men have traditionally cared
far more about work than family? As the percentage of women in male work
places increases, the workplace will become less important to men because it
will no longer be a site within which men can prove themselves to other men.
I'd be happy to send a copy of the paper to you as soon as I can. I'd prefer
not to do it e-mail at this point. Send me your "real" (as opposed to
"virtual" I guess?? But I suppose that distinction no longer holds.... I'm
thinking of Max Headroom.... maybe I AM Max headroom!) address via private
e-mail and I'll post ASAP. regards, Cliff Staples
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 12:49:30 EDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: Bronwyn  In-Reply-To: Message of Mon, 03 Jun 91
16:38:02 EDT from  Wow! Is that Nietzsche as in Fred?!? Yes, I too am
interested in Cixous, though I obviously haven't gone as far with her as you.
I'd love to see your paper. Who are you? I more or less stumbled onto this
Women's Studies List by accident (a friendly co-worker at a university
library...) Please reply. bb
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 11:51:56 CDT Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: eric crump  Subject: according to whom? When I see
comments such as those recently made by Pamela Doty, my reaction is a mixture
of sadness and anger. I am saddened by the paranoia some people seem to suffer
from and I assume they have suffered some emotional or psychological trauma
which has produced that fear. At the same time, however, I am angered not at
whoever was responsible for causing the pain that twisted the person's view,
but with the propagation and dissemination of the view. In this case, Pamela
is portraying as a truth her assertion that both the patriarchal social system
and the white males she assumes are in the driver's seat hate women and want
to eliminate them. I believe that assertion is almost completely without
foundation as long as it is stated in the form of a blanket generalization. At
this point, it is not productive for me to say, "You're wrong" and leave it at
that. But I would like to learn more about Pamela's argument (from her or from
others). Quite often in discussions of this sort I see people throw out
epistemological- type questions, such as "But who decides? Who makes the
rules? Who says?" And the implied meaning usually is, "Patriarchal white made
this up, so of course it is oppressing us (meaning everybody else)." But those
questions can and should be turned upon any system of thought or belief. For
instance, who decided that patriarchal society is misogynist? how do we know
that? What I'm suggesting is that someone provide some evidence, some
examples, that support that assertion. I would be happy to respond in kind,
providing the best examples I can think of support my argument, which is that
patriarchy is not misogynist, and to the extent that it is oppressive (as I
believe social systems almost inevitably are) it oppresses men and women, in
different ways and to different degrees. Integral to my thesis is the notion
that the system is not operated by one sex or the other. Pamela said,
"Socialization is not a neutral term, and using it this way is agent
deletion." In context, I assume she meant that someone, some sex (men) were
the agents who manipulate the system according to their own desires. Finagle's
response was good, I thought, when he noted (citing Chodorow and Hoagland)
that women participate in the system, and therefore share some responsibility
for it, and that the system was not initially imbalanced in favor of one sex
or the other. I like to think of the social system as an organism, alive. And
we as individuals are to the system what cells are to us. The system is a
collective, it is in some ways more (and in some ways lesss) than the sum of
its parts. It is not _equal_ to its parts, in other words. If all this doesn't
make sense yet it is because I haven't yet held up my end of the bargain I am
proposing: that we all contribute some particularity to the debate. As Kant
said, generalizations without particulars are empty; particulars without
generalizations are blind." (paraphrased by John Bean and John Ramage in _Form
and Surprise_). I think the discussion would benefit from the effort. Eric
Crump lceric@umcvmb
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 10:45:22 -0700 Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: 71110000  Subject: Re: observation Interesting
points made by Cliff Staples. I find many things within this peice that seem
to ring a few bells inside of me. For us, we perhaps seek a discourse on
Gender Studies. This could include our perceptions within a more legitimate
environ, legitimate for our perceptions that is. I seem to be enjoying the
discussions here, but would also prefer to avoid arguments of validity of
Feminist Studies, Women's Studies, or even Gender Studies. Validity seem
apparent, here we must forge our understandings so as to be able to better
discuss them out there. No? All the best, Christopher K. Gerteis University of
California at Santa Cruz
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 14:12:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: ASK  Subject: Feminist scholarship >For example,
one of the questions in which I >am interested in how we define feminist
scholarship. It is certainly not >about sex differences, but must it be about
gender? Rhoda, I guess the answer lies in how we define "feminist," since I
think we know what scholarship means. Are you asking whether one could do
feminist scholarship on some topic where the words "male, " "female," "woman,"
"man," "feminine," and "masculine" were never used? I also wonder how almost
any research with humand cannot also be about gender since we live in such a
gendered world. Everything from underpants to devices to color one's hair to
wristwatches seems to be gendered. ASK
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 14:20:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: RHODA UNGER  Subject: RE: Feminist scholarship I
am trying to get the definitions of feminist and gender differentiated. For
example, sometimes ideology predicts more about how people will respond than
does their gender identity. But if I study ideology without taking sex dif-
ferences (God forbid!) or gender identity into account, am I still doing
feminist research? I am asking the question because it has come up several
times recently in response to some papers I am trying to publish. Rhoda Unger
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 14:42:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: ASK  Subject: ideology and gender >But if I study
ideology without taking sex dif- >ferences (God forbid!) or gender identity
into account, am I still doing >feminist research? I am asking the question
because it has come up several >times recently in response to some papers I am
trying to publish. Rhoda Unger It's difficult to answer, Rhoda, without more
information about the research. By ideology do you mean feminist ideology?
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 11:47:23 -0700 Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: Dan Tsang  Subject: surveillance files The Lesbian
and Gay Declassified Documentation Project is interested in hearing from
individuals and groups who have received or are interested in receiving their
surveillance or investigatory files from federal, state or local governments
under the Freedom of Information, Privacy or other similar Acts. I am a
librarian at University of California, Irvine, and hope to inventory, compile
and eventually index and microfilm such files. Please respond via private
e-mail to: dtsang@uci.edu or dtsang@uci.bitnet Thanks much. Dan Tsang.
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 14:59:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: trish  Subject: feminist scholarship >For example,
one of the questions in which I >am interested in how we define feminist
scholarship. It is certainly not >about sex differences, but must it be about
gender? feminist scholarship is restricted, of course, to neither sex nor
gender. its origin, however, is embedded in a reaction to male-dominated,
male-centered scholarship ... therefore, gender issues are of concern to
feminist scholars, and (IMHO) an understanding of each others' opinions can be
considered a valid basis for discussion ... trish
><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><
trish wilson mc master university wilsont@sscvax.cis.mcmaster.ca
hamilton,ontario,canada <<<<>>>>
><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 15:00:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: RHODA UNGER  Subject: RE: ideology and gender I'm
not sure I mean feminist ideology which is what the problem is all about. I
would argue that there are underlying connections between feminist ideology
and other beliefs involving legitimacy and authority including attitudes about
the societal status quo, the validity of science, etc. I am not sure whether
one can question various sources of current authority without also questioning
gender arrangements, but I see this as an empirical question.
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 15:09:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: trish  Subject: RE: >RE: ASK's posting >>
'finagle' has a point here...men are as much products of their >>
socialization as are women... pamela argues that: >"Socialization" is not a
neutral term, and using it this way is agent deletion. >Two good questions to
ask regarding this are: socialized by whom? and for whose >purposes? >But the
main point is the patriarchial nature of the institutions of society. i would
submit that 'the patriarchal nature of the institutions of society' are those
socialization processes which i mentioned in the first statement. >And in
addition, the grouping of: >> i.e.; women, ethnic minorities, third-world
immigrants >by it's very nature excludes women in the categories of ethnic
minorities and >third-world immigrants. >Words DO matter. i would agree ...
but how else can this be said? ... 'women' are conceived of as 'the other', a
category unto themselv, by feminist scholars, as well ... trish
><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><
trish wilson mc master university wilsont@sscvax.cis.mcmaster.ca
hamilton,ontario,canada <<<<>>>>
><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><><
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 12:59:53 PST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: "ALAN C. ACOCK"  Subject: Names of senders
Different operating systems do different things to headers. The result is that
some of us wonder who is sending what. It is nice to put your name and e-mail
address at the bottom of your note so that those with nasty operating systems
don't miss who is sending the message. Alan C. Acock ACOCK@ORSTVM Oregon State
University
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 19:31:01 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: Claire Pedretti  Subject: Re: Roy Flanagan Inquiry
In-Reply-To: <9106031320.AA05270@mace.cc.purdue.edu>; from "*" at Jun 3, 91
9:17 am I am puzzled. I only sent a message to subscribe. And I am geting
postings, so that one must have gotten through. Do you require a minimum
number of postings of your members? > >no message received from you > I prefer
to listen a bit before posting. Claire Pedretti vva@mace.cc.purdue.edu
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 19:54:55 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: Claire Pedretti  Subject: Re: observation In-
Reply-To: <9106031705.AA23111@mace.cc.purdue.edu>; from "cliff staples" at Jun
3, 91 11:09 am >interaction. I would be interested to find out if most of the
new folks >who recently signed on are men. My guess is that the recent flurry
of This new folk is female (name would be without 'e' for male. > >I just
finished working on a paper entitled "The Moral Challenge of Feminism." >In it
I try to acknowledge the tremendous impact that feminism is having on men >(by
saying to men, individually and collectively:"You're hurting us. Stop.") >and
make a case for why it is important for men to begin to speak honestly >about
the way feminism is affecting us. Feminism sends men into a moral and
>personal crisis because, by speaking out about male violence, it uncovers and
>exposes the pain that most men have experienced FROM OTHER MEN. A pain that
we >carry with us, but do not and cannot speak about (to do so would express
>vulnerability, feelings other than anger, humanity--- all things that are
>opposite conventional, hegemonic, notions of hetero-masculinity). I
appreciated and agree with your observations. I used to hear with scepticism
that men are role bound too. The scepticism was not for the fact, but because
it was spoken by one who was benefitted by the position. But you answered that
convincingly. Claire Pedretti vva@mace.cc.purdue.edu
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 22:32:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: THOMAS BRIDGES  Subject: Feminist
Scholarship/Gender Issues I would like to hear more on the nature of feminist
scholarship that does not focus on gender issues. What would be the standpoint
of such scholarship that would qualify it as feminist? Wouldn't it be feminist
in the same sense that the free-floating critical theory of "cultural"
Marxists like Jameson (theory that has lost any connection to or basis in the
perspectives of the working class) is Marxist? And in what sense could such
free-floating (i.e., not tied to gender issues) feminist scholarship be
responsible for the postmodernist critique epistemological assumptions
(usually identified with writers like Foucault and Rorty), as Loie suggested?
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 18:45:10 -0900 Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: JANIS _ LULL  unsub wmst-1 ffjl@alaska.bitnet
=========================================================================
Date: Tue, 4 Jun 91 23:59:00 -0400 Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: BERLAND@VAX2.CONCORDIA.CA Subject: Re: feminist
scholarship unsubscribe Jody Berland
=========================================================================
Date: Wed, 5 Jun 91 07:35:00 EST Reply-To: Women's Studies List  Sender:
Women's Studies List  From: DON'T PANIC HITCHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY
Subject: Re: Feminist Scholarship/Gender Issues This IS a terrific
question...I am off to school...but wanted to note to Thomas that that this is
one well worth conundrum cuddling. I feel I need quite a contextual
descritption to try and sort out my thoughts on this and WILL resapond soon!!!
I do not mean AT ALL to be coy and SOOO self-reflexive that acrobatics are
necessary to even enter the "con-text" but will just suggest that Foucault's
discourse can also be approached through his own methodology. (And actually if
I were to "argue" (((ugh!))) other fruits and roots I'd probably go to the US
thinker still far from appropriately appreciated Kenneth Burke. On another
note, I too am new to this bulletin board. It is disconcernting that they are
so many unsubscibes....I almost was/am one due to the appearance, at least,
that we were assigned the role of giving the boys a course in intro. to fem.
studies. However, feeling a tad more compas

