THE WORLD'S CITIES

AN URBAN GEOGRAPHY

GEOGRAPHY 370  
  

_Course Syllabus_  
  
  
  

RULE NO. 1: _READ THIS SYLLABUS CAREFULLY; IT IS YOUR FIRST READING
ASSIGNMENT; LEARN ITS CONTENTS_!

RULE NO. 2: _THE ADORNMENT OF ONE'S HEAD WITH A HAT DURING CLASS TIME IS NOT
PERMITTED, REGARDLESS OF GENDER_  
  

CLASS MEETING: 6-7:30pm, Tuesday and Thursday, Hamilton-williams 304

INSTRUCTOR: Dr. Fusch (e-mail: rdfusch)

OFFICE: Stewart 241

PHONE: To make an appointment: Ext: 3113-Secretary, Dean's Office. To just
talk,

Ext: 3616.  
  

OFFICE HOURS: 3-5:00pm Tuesday/Thursday; or by appointment.  
  

TEXTS: Rybczynski: _City Life: Urban Expectations in a New World_

__ Ford: _Cities and Buildings: Skyscrapers, Skid Rows and Suburbs_

Gugler: _The Urban Transformation of the Third World_

Reading material on reserve in the library

In-class handouts; material on the web page: cc.owu.edu/~rdfusch  
  

_**Introduction**_

This course is about _cities_ , those small and large scale settlements in
which the majority of people are engaged in non-agricultural work. In the
United States approximately 78% (2000) of the population lives in such
settlements. In Western Europe about 65-70% of the population lives in cities
(although this varies from country to country) while about 70% do so in Japan.
Approximately 50% of the remainder of the world's population lives in these
settlements, and the rate of growth is increasing more rapidly there than in
Europe, the U.S. or Japan (for a good discussion of this see Smith, Chap. 2
[on reserve]; Rybczynski, _City Life_ , Chap 2; Hartshorn, Chaps. 1-3 [on
reserve]) Today about 3,000,000,000 people live in cities in a world of about
6,000,000,000 people. Most importantly, the complex city life and the
interactions among cities themselves control and direct cultural and
political/economic change at the national and world level (see Sassen, _Cities
in a World Economy_ and/or _The Global City_ [on reserve]).  
  

Cities did not just "spring up" sometime in the deep past. They developed as
society developed and are products of an increasingly complex and changing
world (see Mumford; Benevolo; Kostof [all, esp _History of Architecture_ ];
Vance; Hartshorn [all on reserve]) . Individual cities require the
mobilization and use of tremendous amounts of natural and human resources to
sustain themselves. Furthermore, individual towns and cities do not operate as
isolated units, but, rather are linked together (in very complex ways) in what
geographers call a city system (see Sassen; Smith, Intro.-Chap. 2; Gugler,
_The Urban Transformation..._ ). T _he city system is basically the geographic
(spatial) distribution of cities and their geographic linkages among
themselves and with other regions and areas of the world._. Today the city
system of most nations and regions is the control point which directs cultural
change and acts as the seat of political, social and economic control. In fact
_there is an emerging world system of cities_ (see Smith and Sassen, among
others) which is directing and controlling all cultural, social, political and
economic change at the surface of the earth. The city system of nations
imparts the development and organization of rural areas and the development
and mobilization of resources; they use large quantities of space and they
exert powerful influences on the people living in them. To picture this
process, think about your own experience and that of your society: in order
for you and your society to survive and to function at the high level it does
requires a tremendous volume of natural resources and integrated human socio-
economic-political interactions. For the most part, the resources are modified
to be useful in and distributed from cities and/or urban regions and the
integrated socio-economic-political activities take place within cities and/or
complex urban regions. Thus the city and/or city systems become the control
points for socio-economic development and change.  
  

Furthermore, cities are organized into complex morphological units--urban
landscapes (inner city, outer city, edge city, suburb, neighborhoods,
commercial areas, industrial landscapes, and the like (see Ford, and
Rybczynski [the texts] and Benevolo, Vance, Hartshorn, Knox, Kostof [ _America
by Design_ ], Carter, Bourne, Stilgoe, Hacker, Leaman, Garreau, Girouard [all
on reserve], among others). Cities are therefore the repositories of a
society's past, its present and its future goals. The city is a built
environment, created by human cultural forces over time (therefore, the city
has a morphology--a structure). Thus, this built environment (the urban
landscape) sticks around significantly longer than the people who built it
(e.g., my house is 100 years old--the people who bought the lot, designed the
house and built it are long since gone). Because of their morphological
history, **cities are as reflective of the past as they are reflective of the
present and the future.** **Importantly, past decisions constrain and direct
present and future action** ( see Kostof, among others). In addition, to alter
this infrastructure to reflect current needs is extremely expensive; and
seldom do the alterations perfectly "fit" the future, just as the past
environment did not fit the future. For example, my house was built and
designed to reflect family needs, values or attitudes at the time it was built
(about a century ago); it was not designed to accommodate the future when it
was built, hence like many houses, both the exterior design and the interior
design of my house has been altered, as have my neighbor's houses. The
character/nature of the neighborhood in which I now live is very much
different now than it was 100 years ago. **It is important to recognize that
cities and city systems are dynamic phenomena--they seldom remain static for
very long**. In addition, and equally important, cities are not simply two
dimensional landscapes (horizontal space users); they are also three
dimensional landscapes (they are vertical). Each building in a city has both
horizontal elements to it (it takes up space), but it also has vertical
elements to it (one, two, ten, fifty or more stories in height). Each building
has both a horizontal form and a vertical form-- ** _an architecture_**
\--which imparts character to place and often is designed to _**send a message
to others about who built it, why it was built and what it represents
politically, socially or otherwise**_ (see Kostof, Girouard, Mumford,
Rybczynski, Norberg-Schulz, McAlester, Lynch, Marsh, among others).
Furthermore, this horizontal-vertical space is intimately related to the
horizontal-vertical spaces around it.  
  

Thus, the city, its morphology, its architecture and its organization into a
system of cities can be studied to better understand one's own culture, to
provide a basic understanding of the influence of the past on one's culture
and to provide and understanding of the way in which futures will be directed
and controlled--ours, our friends and peers and other cultural groups.  
  

**_Objectives of the Course_**  
  

This course is called World Cities: An Urban Geography. What does that mean?
Urban, of course, refers to city. It is derived from the Latin word _urbs_
which meant city or town to distinguish the place from _rus_ or rural places.
But, what of geography. In a general context it refers to location. The word
geography in Greek, means earth description. Thus, we would say that geography
deals with the location of things on the earth and their description. But, we
must transcend this rather straight-forward definition. To only ask where
(location--geography) or (when-history) or how much (cost--economics), etc. is
not enough. We must ask why. Why is location important? Does location affect
anything else? Will a change in location alter the world? How or why does
_place_ effect people, society or other _places_? Thus, geography is the study
of place. In geography we want to discover the forces which have shaped the
character of place and we want to understand how the character of place has
shaped the forces of human cultural change, the use of resources and the
character of people over time.

The purpose of this course then is to ask basic place questions about cities
generally, cities specifically and people and things within cities. Then we
will ask how their locations came about, why these locations are important and
what the impacts of these locations are on other things (e.g., people, money,
politics, etc.). You will come to realize as we go through this course that _
_location matters__! The course will emphasize _the location and growth of
cities_ generally, _the internal organization of cities and city-systems_ ,
the _morphology of cities_ and the _complex relationships between the
horizontal and vertical dimensions of cities._  
  

The most general objective of this course is to help you understand the growth
of cities, the nature/character of cities world-wide, and the basic internal
structure of cities (their morphology). Another major objective is to increase
your knowledge of the impact of cities on the cultural life and organization
of society and on you specifically. We want to examine how the growth and
organization of cities and city-systems influence the allocation of resources;
how cities act and impact economic development; and how and in what ways
locations of cities and locations within cities influence all aspects of urban
existence. Finally, another objective is to impart to you some expertise about
how cities work.  
  

**_Conduct of the Course_**  
  

This course will examine the world's cities. It will examine the actual
locations of cities; it will examine the relative locations (relationship of
one location to another) of cities and it will examine the internal locations
(urban cultural landscapes) of cities. The course will begin by examining the
concept of the city _AS PLACE_ and will then examine a large variety of
themes, often in historical context. Some of these topics include, but are not
limited to: the organization of the urban-space economy; the development of
commercial areas; the organization of the residential landscape; the
revitalization and preservation of "old" urban spaces; architecture and the
geography of the city; the "problems" of ethnic discrimination and
ghettoization; the regional disparities between "frostbelt" and "sunbelt"
cities; the emergence of a world system of cities; the development of cities
in non-western cultures. We shall discuss the massive migration of people to,
and growth of, Third World cities and the tremendous impact of cities on the
character of culture and societies world-wide.  
  

Throughout the course world cities and cultural landscapes of the world's
cities will be examined with much consideration of the European experience,
the American experience, and cities of the Third World. Particular cities will
be used throughout including such places as Delaware, Ohio, Rome and Florence,
Italy, Cairo, Egypt, San Diego, California, Cleveland, Ohio, Athens, Greece,
Nairobi, Kenya, Kampala, Uganda, Cape Town, South Africa, Lima, Peru, Quito,
Ecuador, Tokyo, Japan etc., etc. You will find that most of these places have
much in common, while also being unique one to the other.  
  

Since World War II most Americans have been born and raised in cities and/or
large urban regions. We all, therefore, have "urban" experiences. Probably 60%
or more of the people born in cities since World War II were born in and/or
raised in an important place--the American suburb--a unique morphological
characteristic of American cities. Most of the students in this class are
probably from a suburb of a large urban region. Thus an important theme in
this course is the suburbanization of the population of the United States.  
  

The world's cities, indeed much of Western culture, has been shaped by the
urban history and morphology of Europe. Therefore an important early theme in
this course will be the development and form of the city in Western Europe.  
  

At the present time much of the non-western world is undergoing massive
urbanization, dramatically altering the character of those societies.
Therefore, the urbanization of the so-called Third World will also be a major
theme in this course.  
  

As much as possible, the course will be a mixture of lecture and discussion.
Throughout the course I will continually pose questions to the class. Getting
you to answer them is not a test of how "bright" any of you are, but is an
attempt to get you to think about some complex ideas. I expect everyone to
participate in these discussions.  
  

The lecture/discussions will be copiously illustrated. Close attention to the
illustrations is important. Sometimes the entire lecture or series of lectures
will revolve around data sets, illustrations, slides, maps, etc. To miss that
discussion will hinder success in this class. Furthermore, this material will
be important to you in successfully answering questions on the exams. In
addition, it is imperative to keep up with the reading assignments and pay
close attention to the reading material assigned. There is also a great deal
of material on reserve in the library for your use; do not disregard this
material.

Attendance, Exams, Papers and Grading Policy  
  

_Attendance:_ Attendance is required and expected. Since much of this course
revolves around the exploration of data, maps, other visual material, etc., it
is imperative that you be present to see, discuss and evaluate that
information. As far as I am concerned a verifiable illness or personal or
family emergency or attendance at another _required_ university event
constitutes the only acceptable excuses for missing class. Failure to attend
and participate in the class on a regular basis will be noted and taken into
consideration at exam time and in grade determination.  
  

_Exams:_ There will be three term take-home exams. Each term take-home exam
will count approximately 100-120 points. The exams will consist of short
answer questions, data/information analysis questions and essays. Prior to
each exam you will be provided with the questions in a timely manner. The
third exam will count no more than the first two, **but it will be due at the
regularly scheduled time for final exams which will be published by the
registrar later this semester. Under _NO_ circumstances will any exam be given
early (it may be turned in prior to the due date) nor will its due date be
extended! Please note:** **Your exams will be graded both on the content of
their ideas and the quality of the writing.**  
  

_Papers:_ There will be two short papers (7-10 pages). Each paper will count
approximately 70 points. Each paper will focus on the theme of urban
morphology. The field work for the paper will be conducted in Delaware. The
papers are designed to get you to interact with the city on a first-hand basis
and to develop skills which will help you understand and analyze the character
of the American urban experience in particular and the ways in which cities
function in general. Hence we will use Delaware as the laboratory within which
you will gain first-hand experience in the analysis and interpretation of the
character of American urban places. The first paper will be due on the last
day of class prior to spring break and the second paper at the end of the next
to last week of the class. You will be provided with the assignment and hints
as to how to complete the assignments at the appropriate time.  
  

_Writing Option:_ This course is a writing option course. You may use this
course to fulfill a W requirement. To fulfill the W requirement you must do
the following: (1) see me within the first two weeks of class to explore with
me the requirements; (2) complete the W requirements to my satisfaction. That
is, your writing must demonstrate clear improvement over the course of the
term. Basically the W requirement for this course requires of you for paper
one: (a) a **detailed** outline; (b) a rough draft submitted ten days before
the due date for the entire class; (c) a revised draft (due at the time
everyone else's paper is due); (d) a finished draft (to be completed after the
paper is returned). For paper two: (a) a detailed outline; (b) a rough draft
submitted ten days prior to the due date for the entire class; (c) a finished
draft (due at the time everyone else's is due). See me soon if you are
interested.  
  

_Grading Policy_ : Your grade in this course is determined on a cumulative
point basis, drawn on a curve. While your final grade will be a result of the
analysis of your cumulative point total (and attendance) compared with others
in this class, you may draw a rough approximation of your grade at _any one_
time by using the following table.  
  

% of total points _(at any one time) Approx. Grade_  
  

85 or more A

75 - 84 B

65 - 74 C

55 - 64 D

54 or less F  
  

I tend to grade on improvement. For example, if at the end of the term your
work has shown steady improvement and you are only a few points from the next
highest grade, I may award the next highest grade (lack of attendance will
penalize you here). I also tend to view class participation and discussion in
a favorable light. _**In short, you will help your final grade by: a pattern
of regular attendance; class preparation; class participation; careful
reading; careful writing; and when necessary, frequent conferences.**_  
  

_Due Dates For Assignments:_ Failure to turn in an assignment (take-home exam
or paper) on the day and the time it is due will result in an **automatic F
(zero score)** on the assignment. No permission to turn in an assignment late
will be granted unless you contact me **48 HOURS** in advance of its due date
and time, **AND** receive permission from me to turn in the exam or paper
late. Permission to turn in an assignment late rests primarily on only **two
acceptable excuses** : (1) a verifiable illness; or (2) a verifiable personal
or family emergency. Requirements for other courses such as papers or exams,
etc. or university events both public (e.g. sports events) or private
(sorority or fraternity, clubs, etc.) will under no circumstances take
priority over assignments in this course. Neither shall your private extra-
curricular activities (e.g. weddings, graduation parties, spring vacation
plans, weekend trips home, etc.) take precedent over assignments in this
class. Therefore, it is imperative that you budget your time carefully and
wisely so that you may succeed in this class, succeed in your other classes
and still have adequate time for non-academic events/programs at the college.  
  

