{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1
\deff0\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\\*\panose
02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f6\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\\*\panose
00000000000000000000}Courier;} {\f16\froman\fcharset0\fprq0{\\*\panose
00000000000000000000}CG Times
(WN);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright \f16\fs26\cgrid \snext0
Normal;}{\s1\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tqc\tx4680\adjustright \fs36\cgrid
\sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph
Font;}{\s15\nowidctlpar\widctlpar \tqr\tx9360\adjustright \ul\cgrid \sbasedon0
\snext15 header;}{\s16\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tqc\tx4320\tqr\tx8640\adjustright
\f16\fs26\cgrid \sbasedon0 \snext16 footer;}{\\*\cs17 \additive \sbasedon10
page number;}}{\info{\title Syllabus for English 309} {\subject
Syllabus}{\author Gordon P. Thomas}{\operator Gordon P.
Thomas}{\creatim\yr1999\mo3\dy2\hr15\min15}{\revtim\yr1999\mo3\dy2\hr15\min15}{\version2}{\edmins0}{\nofpages3}{\nofwords1682}{\nofchars9593}{\\*\company
Univ. of Idaho, Dept. of English}
{\nofcharsws11780}{\vern71}}\margl720\margr720\margt576\margb317
\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noextrasprl\prcolbl\cvmme\sprsspbf\brkfrm\swpbdr\lytprtmet\hyphcaps0\fracwidth\viewkind1\viewscale90\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot
\fet0{\\*\ftnsep \pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\adjustright
\f16\fs26\cgrid {\f6\fs24 \chftnsep }{ \par }}\sectd
\sbknone\linex0\headery317\footery1152\titlepg\sectdefaultcl {\header
\pard\plain \s15\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tqr\tx10800\adjustright \ul\cgrid
{Syllabus for English 309-01, Fall 1994\tab Page }{\field{\\*\fldinst {\cs17
PAGE }}{\fldrslt { \cs17\lang1024 2}}}{\cs17 \par }\pard
\s15\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tqr\tx9360\adjustright { \par
}}{\\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta
.}}{\\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}
{\\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl8 \pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}{\\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta
)}}\pard\plain
\s1\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tqc\tx4680\outlinelevel0\adjustright
\fs36\cgrid {\tab Syllabus for English 309: Advanced Prose Writing \par
}\pard\plain \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tqr\tx9360\adjustright \f16\fs26\cgrid
{\f0\fs24 \par English 309\tab 10:30 am - 11:20 pm \par Fall, 1994, Section 01
\tab Mon., Wed., and Fri. \par FWR 209\tab Aug. 29 - Dec. 21, 1994 \par }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx-1440\tx-720\tx0\tqdec\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright {\f0
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tqr\tx9360\adjustright {\f0\fs24
Instructors: Gordon Thomas, assisted by Marcia Cupery \par \par Information on
Thomas: \tab Information on Cupery: \par Office: 224 Brink Hall \tab Office:
108 Brink Hall \par E-Mail: thomas@uidaho.edu \tab E-Mail: cuper933@uidaho.edu
\par Office Hours: 2:30-3:30 pm MF, \tab Office hours: 1:00- 3:00 pm, TTh \par
2:30-3:50 pm W, and by appt. \par Phone: 885-6384 (office), 882-4321 (home)
\par \par \par }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx-1440\tx-720\tx0\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright
{\f0\fs24\ul Course goals}{\f0\fs24 : English 309 is an advanced writing
course, designed to improve your skills in persuasive and expository writing
and to extend the range and length of the type of essays you can write
comfortably. The assignments include some personal writing, but the course
will concentrate on expository prose that analyzes, summariz\\- es, and
paraphrases other readings and even films. Your audience for these papers will
be intelligent, well-educated adults who may not know as much or thought as
deeply as you h ave about the issues raised in your paper. Your task is to
inform and persuade them to understand the issues as well as you do. \par \par
Two of the assignments will be centered on two persons who had different views
on America should cope with the problem of racism\emdash Martin Luther King
and Malcolm X. Our first assignment will be based on King\rquote s \ldblquote
Letter From Birmingham Jail\rdblquote \emdash the events that precipitated it
and the influence it has had on the Civil Rights Movement. We will also read
}{\i\f0\fs24 The Autobiography of Malcolm X}{\f0\fs24 , no t just because it
is one of the great American autobiographies (which it is), but because the
way it was written and its subsequent cultural status raise complex questions
about the nature of authorship, the evolution of cultural figures, and the
relation ship of recent films to actual historical events. \par \par Two other
assignments will be based in some way on the Holocaust, the attempt by Nazi
Germany to eliminate Jews and other groups that Hitler's regime considered
undesirable (such as Gypsies, homosexuals, me ntally retarded persons, and
others) from Europe during World War II. Specifically, we will study two
unusual reactions to this catastrophe: cartoonist Art Spiegelman's
}{\i\f0\fs24 Maus: A Survivor's Tale}{\f0\fs24 , a two-part graphic-art memoir
of the his father's experience s as a survivor of Auschwitz and other horrors
as well as an exploration of the author's difficulty in dealing with his
parents and the act of representing their experiences in cartoon form, and
}{\i\f0\fs24 Schindler\rquote s List}{\f0\fs24 , the book on which the film by
Steven Speilb erg was based. Both of these works should give us an opportunity
to analyze the techniques by which two very different artists succeed in their
chosen medium, as well as a chance to examine in some detail one of the most
significant events of the 20th cen tury, which still has repercussions in
places as diverse as Cambodia during the 1970's and Bosnia and Ruwanda today.
\par \par We will also read Mary Clearman Blew\rquote s }{\i\f0\fs24 All But
the Waltz}{\f0\fs24 for an unusual view of life in the West and a good example
of some unusual essay w riting techniques. Besides analyzing some parts of
this book, I also hope to give you a chance to do some personal writing of
your own. \par \par Our investigation of the large and complex topics is not
designed simply to teach you some "history" (although I do ho pe that you will
broaden your knowledge of these extremely significant events); rather, I hope
that by studying these complex examples of rhetoric\emdash the attempt to
change the thinking and attitudes of a large and complex group of
people\emdash you will find yoursel f in a position to write in some depth
about complex matters and to apply at least some of what you are learning from
these examples to your own life and writing. In addition all of the material
we will read in this course can be used with some adaptatio ns with high
school students. Some of you may find this useful in your future teaching
career. \par \par }{\f0\fs22\ul Computer Requirement}{\f0\fs22 : You are
required to use a word processor to produce your papers. If you have never
used a word processing program, you must learn to do s o in this course. The
English Computer Writing Lab in the basement of the Psychology Building will
offer one-hour introductory sessions to Microsoft Word for Windows, 2.0, which
is probably the best word processor available to you on campus now. If you are
not familiar with any word processing program, you should attend one of these
sessions, which take place January 18-21. \par \par We will spend the second
day of class in a computer orientation so that you know how to participate in
the news group that has been set up for our class (this session will not cover
word processing software except very briefly). If you do not have an e-mail
account, you need to get one by applying at the Computer Services Help Desk in
Admin. 22. \par }{\f0\fs24 \par }{\f0\fs22\ul Course Requirements}{\f0\fs22 :
There will be almost daily reading assignments, a few shorter exercises, and
six major writing assign\\- ments. For each of the major assignments, you must
hand in a rough draft and a final version of the paper. You will also be
expected to read and comment on the papers o f the other students. There may
be short quizzes over some of this material that will count toward your
attendance and participation grade. In addition, there may also be short
reading quizzes over the material in the other books. \par }{\f0\fs24 \par
}{\f0\fs22 Your final grade will be determined as follows: \par \par }\trowd
\trgaph108\trleft-108\trkeep \clvertalt\cltxlrtb \cellx4212\clvertalt\cltxlrtb
\cellx8532\pard
\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\tx-1440\tx-720\tx0\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright
{\f0\fs22 Writing Assignment 1: 12%\cell }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\tx-1440\tx-720\tx0\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright
{\f0\fs22 Writing Assignment 4: 18%\cell }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\f0\fs22 \row }\trowd
\trgaph108\trleft-108\trkeep \clvertalt\cltxlrtb \cellx4212
\clvertalt\cltxlrtb \cellx8532\pard
\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\tx-1440\tx-720\tx0\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright
{\f0\fs22 Writing Assignment 2: 16%\cell }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\tx-1440\tx-720\tx0\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright
{\f0\fs22 Writing Assignment 5: 11%\cell }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\f0\fs22 \row }\pard
\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\tx-1440\tx-720\tx0\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright
{\f0\fs22 Writing Assignment 3: 18%\cell }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\tx-1440\tx-720\tx0\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright
{\f0\fs22 Writing Assignment 6: 10%\cell }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\f0\fs22 \row }\trowd
\trgaph108\trleft-108\trkeep \clvertalt\cltxlrtb \cellx4212
\clvertalt\cltxlrtb \cellx8532\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\tx-1440\tx-720\tx0\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright
{\f0\fs22 \cell Participation & Attendance: 15%\cell }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\intbl\adjustright {\f0\fs22 \row }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar \tx-1440\tx-720\tx0\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright {\f0\fs22
\par }{\f0\fs22\ul Attendance}{\f0\fs22 : You should do yo ur best to come to
all classes. Missing up to three classes over the course of the semester is
not serious, but more than six classes may very well prevent you from earning
more than a C in the course. Missing more than nine classes can jeopardize
your chances of passing, but if you have some special difficulty
be}{\i\f0\fs22 sure}{\f0\fs22 to talk to me as soon as possible, and we can
probably work something out. Missing more than twelve classes (that\rquote s
four weeks\rquote worth) }{ \i\f0\fs22 usually}{\f0\fs22 makes it hard for you
to complete the course , no matter what your excuse is. If you must miss class
because of an official university excuse (such as participation in varsity
athletics), these times do not count in the numbers I mention here. When you
do miss class, you are responsible for findin g out from the other students
what transpired there. Marcia and I are certainly available to help you
individually at any time during the semester, but individual meetings with
either of us are not a substitute for coming to class. \par }{\f0\fs24 \par
}{\f0\fs22\ul Revision Policy}{\f0\fs22 : The grade you receive on the final
version of a paper will be based on both your first and final versions of the
paper. You may revise the final version of a paper if you hand in the revision
within one week of receiving the graded version back. After a pa per has been
graded once, you may revise only once more. The new grade will be based on the
}{\i\f0\fs22 first}{\f0\fs22 and }{\i\f0\fs22 most recent}{\f0\fs22 version of
the paper; it }{\i\f0\fs22 replaces}{\f0\fs22 the earlier grade you received.
\par }{\f0\fs24\ul \par }\pard
\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx-1440\tx-720\tx0\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright
{\f0\fs24\ul Textbooks}{\f0\fs24 : \par }\pard
\fi-720\li720\sb240\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx-1440\tx-720\tx0\adjustright
{\f0\fs22 Blew, Mary Clearman. }{\i\f0\fs22 All But the Waltz: A Memoir of
Five Generations in the Life of a Montana Family}{\f0\fs22 . New York:
Penguin, 1991. 223 pages. \par }{\i\f0\fs22 Coursepack for English 309, Fall
1994}{\f0\fs22 . The coursepack contains copyrighted materials essential to
the assignments as well as a bibliography of books on the Holocaust. \par
Keneally, Thomas. }{\i\f0\fs22 Schindler\rquote s List}{\f0\fs22 . \par
Malcolm X. }{\i\f0\fs22 The Autobiography of Malcolm X}{\f0\fs22 as told to
Alex Haley. Ballantine, 1965. 460 pages. \par Spiegelman, Art. }{\i\f0\fs22
Maus: A Survivor's Tale}{\f0\fs22 , Parts I (}{\i\f0\fs22 My Father Bleeds
History) }{\f0\fs22 and II (}{\i\f0\fs22 And Here My Troubles Began}{\f0\fs22
). Pantheon Books, 1986 and 991. 159 and 136 pages. \par }{\f0\fs24\ul Other
Required Materials}{\f0\fs22 : \par Spielberg, Stephen. }{\i\f0\fs22
Schindler\rquote s List}{\f0\fs22 . Motion Picture. You don\rquote t have to
buy the film, of course, but you should plan on renting and watching it some
time between October 7 and 31. \par An e-mail account with Computer Services,
if you don\rquote t have one. Apply for one at the Computer Services Help
Desk, Admin. 22, if you don\rquote t have one. There is no extra charge for UI
students to have such accounts. They give you access to the Internet. The
e-mail address of your account will allow anyone else on the Internet
(anywhere else in the world) to write to you directly. \par A couple of 3\'bd-
inch, high-density disks to save your written work. You should always have a
back-up copy of all your files on a separate disk. \par A box of paperclips.
(Cheap and useful throughout the semester. Buy yours now and save a hassle.)
\par }\pard \nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx-1440\tx-720\adjustright {\f0\fs24 \par
}{\f0\fs24\ul Plagiarism}{\f0\fs24 : This is representing as your own someone
else's }{\i\f0\fs24 ideas, words, or phrase\\-ology}{\f0\fs24 . Please note
that it involves not just copying someone else's words, but also their ideas,
}{\i\f0\fs24 without giving proper credit.}{\f0\fs24 This is a serious
academic offense; the penalty for it is receiving a failing grade on the work
in question. You must then do the work over again on a different subject. In
other words, don't plagiarize. \par \par }{\f0\fs24\ul Schedule}{\f0\fs24 : We
will try to follow the schedule on the next two pages. Any changes will be
announced in class; you are responsible for knowing what those changes are.
\par \par }\pard
\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx-1440\tx-720\tldot\tx0\tx2520\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright
{\f0\fs24 \sect }\sectd
\marglsxn1440\margrsxn1440\psz1\sbknone\linex0\headery317\footery1152\titlepg\sectdefaultcl
{\header \pard\plain \s15\nowidctlpar\widctlpar \tqr\tx9360\adjustright
\ul\cgrid {Syllabus for English 309-01, Fall 1994\tab Page
}{\field{\\*\fldinst {\cs17 PAGE }}{\fldrslt {\cs17\lang1024 4}}}{\cs17 \par
\par }\pard \s15\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx1584\tqr\tx9360\adjustright
{\cs17\fs20\ulnone Date\tab Material Covered, Major Assignments Due,
Etc.}{\cs17\fs20 \par }}\pard\plain
\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx-1440\tx-720\tldot\tx0\tx1584\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright
\f16\fs26\cgrid {\f0\fs20 Date\tab Material Covered, Major Assignments Due,
etc. \par }\pard
\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx-1440\tx-720\tldot\tx0\tx2520\tx7121\tx7430\adjustright
{\f0\fs20 \par }\pard
\fi-1584\li1584\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx0\tx1080\tx1584\adjustright {\f0\fs20
August\tab 29\tab Introduction to course. Start reading the }{\i\f0\fs20
Autobiography}{\f0\fs20 . \par \tab 31\tab Computer orientation. Meet in the
English Computer Writing Lab in the basement of the Psychology Building. Go to
the East Lab (right-hand door). \par September\tab 2\tab Try to have read to
page 107 of }{\i\f0\fs20 The Autobiography of Malcolm X}{\f0\fs20 by this day.
Reading quiz possible. \par \par \tab 5\tab Labor Day Holiday. No class. Read
MLK\rquote s \ldblquote Letter from Birmingham Jail.\rdblquote \par \tab 7\tab
Showing of documentary about the demonstrations in Birmingham in Easter 1963
that were to spur the writing of \ldblquote Letter.\rdblquote \par \tab 9\tab
Read to page 210 of the }{\i\f0\fs20 Autobiography}{\f0\fs20 by today. Reading
quiz possible. \par \par \tab 12\tab First draft for WA 1 due. Conferences on
WA 1. \par \tab 14\tab Editing of WA 1. \par \tab 16\tab Final version of WA 1
due. Read to page 317 of the }{\i\f0\fs20 Autobiography}{\f0\fs20 . Reading
quiz possible.\tab \par }\pard
\fi-1584\li1584\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx0\tx1080\tx1584\adjustright
{\f0\fs20 \par \tab 19\tab Showing of documentary about Malcolm X. \par \tab
21\tab \par }\pard
\fi-1584\li1584\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx0\tx1080\tx1584\adjustright {\f0\fs20
\tab 23\tab Finish reading the }{\i\f0\fs20 Autobiography}{\f0\fs20 by this
date. \par \par \tab 26\tab \par \tab 28\tab \par \tab 30\tab First draft of
WA 2 due. \par \par October\tab 3\tab \par \tab 5\tab \par \tab 7\tab Final
version of WA 2 due. Viewing of film }{\i\f0\fs20 The Longest Hatred
}{\f0\fs20 about the origins of antisemitism. Make arrangements to watch the
film }{\i\f0\fs20 Schindler\rquote s List}{\f0\fs20 sometime between now and
October 28. \par \par }\pard
\fi-1584\li1584\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx0\tx1080\tx1584\adjustright
{\f0\fs20 October\tab 10\tab Have read Part I of Maus by today. Start reading
}{\i\f0\fs20 Schindler\rquote s List}{\f0\fs20 . \par }\pard
\fi-1584\li1584\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx0\tx1080\tx1584\adjustright {\f0\fs20
\tab 12\tab Read Part II of }{\i\f0\fs20 Maus}{\f0\fs20 by today. \par \tab
14\tab \par }\pard
\fi-1440\li1440\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx0\tx864\tx1440\tx2160\adjustright
{\f0\fs20 \par }\pard
\fi-1584\li1584\keepn\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx0\tx1080\tx1584\tx2160\adjustright
{\f0\fs20 \tab 17\tab \par \tab 19\tab First draft of WA 3 due. \par }\pard
\fi-1584\li1584\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx0\tx1080\tx1584\tx2160\adjustright
{\f0\fs20 \tab 21\tab Midterm point (there will be no midterm exam). \par \par
\tab 24\tab Try to be about halfway through }{\i\f0\fs20 Schindler\rquote s
List}{\f0\fs20 by this point. \par \tab 26\tab \par \tab 28\tab Final version
of WA 3 due. Viewing of documentary about Schindler (more factual than either
the book or the movie). \par \par \tab 31\tab View excerpts of }{\i\f0\fs20
Schinder\rquote s List}{\f0\fs20 in class (not a substitute for watching the
whole thing). \par November\tab 2\tab View excerpts of }{\i\f0\fs20
Schinder\rquote s List}{\f0\fs20 in class. \par \tab 4\tab View excerpts of
}{\i\f0\fs20 Schinder\rquote s List}{\f0\fs20 in class. \par \par \tab 7\tab
View excerpts of }{\i\f0\fs20 Schinder\rquote s List}{\f0\fs20 in class. \par
\tab 9\tab View excerpts of }{\i\f0\fs20 Schinder\rquote s List}{\f0\fs20 in
class. \par \tab 11\tab 1st version of WA 4 due. \par \par \tab 14\tab \par
\tab 16\tab \par \tab 18\tab Final version of WA 4 due. Start reading
}{\i\f0\fs20 All But the Waltz}{\f0\fs20 (or possibly a little earlier). \par
\par THANKSGIVING BREAK (Fall Recess) \par \par \tab 28\tab Have read
}{\i\f0\fs20 All But the Waltz}{\b\f0\fs20 }{\f0\fs20 by today. \par \tab
30\tab \par December\tab 2\tab 1st version of WA 5 due. \par \par \tab 5\tab
\par \tab 7\tab Final version of WA 5 due. \par \tab 9\tab Individual
conferences scheduled for Mon.-Wed. of next week. \par \par \tab 12\tab 1st
version of WA 6 due. Class cancelled for individual conferences. \par \tab
14\tab Class cancelled for individual conferences. \par \tab 16\tab Final
version of WA 6 due (may, with permission, be handed in as late as December
21). \par \par }\pard
\fi-1584\li1584\nowidctlpar\widctlpar\tx-1440\tx-720\tx0\tx1080\tx1584\tx2160\adjustright
{\f0\fs20 \tab 21\tab 7:30 am - 9:30. Last class of the semester. \par }}

