HISTORY 481

  **M ODERN JAPAN**

**Note: Be sure to check your PSU e-mail regularly. Most course information
and announcements will be distributed via e-mail. For PSU computer access
account information,[click here.](http://cac.psu.edu/accounts/) To modify your
e-mail settings (e.g. have PSU mail forwarded to a different address or to
select a different address for PSU's directory) [click
here](https://www.work.psu.edu/).**

* * *

Navigation Bar

** Basic Information <> Course Description <> Exams & Grading <> Exam
Mechanics <> Class Mechanics <> Instructions for Review Paper <> Disabilities
<> Academic Honesty**

* * *

Basic Information:

Term: Spring, 2002

Time/Place: Tuesday & Thursday 6:30 - 7:45pm, 271 Willard ([PSU main campus
map](http://www.gouldcenter.psu.edu/visguide/maps/main_campus_with.pdf))

Instructor: [Gregory Smits](http://www.personal.psu.edu/faculty/g/j/gjs4/)

Office: Weaver 211 ([PSU main campus
map](http://www.gouldcenter.psu.edu/visguide/maps/main_campus_with.pdf))  

E-mail: [gjs4@psu.edu](mailto:gjs4@psu.edu)

Office Phone: 863-0172

Department of History Office Phone: 865-1367

Office Hours: T & Th 2-3:45; W 3-5:30

Dates to Remember:

  * Exam #1: Tuesday, February 5
  * Exam #2: Tuesday, March 12
  * No Class: Tuesday, March 26 & Thursday, March 28 (out of country for a conference)
  * Exam #3: Thursday, April 18
  * Book Review Paper Due: Monday, April 29 (first day of finals week)

Required Books (total of three):

  * The main textbook for this course, _**[Making Japanese](http://www.personal.psu.edu/faculty/g/j/gjs4/mj/contents.htm)** , _is available on the web at the [Textbook Site](http://www.personal.psu.edu/faculty/g/j/gjs4/txtbooks.htm). Read it as we go through the course at approximately the same pace as the in-class topics.

  * There is one book to buy in the bookstore (or anywhere else): Anne Walthall, ed., **_[The Human Tradition in Modern Japan](http://www.scholarly.com/bkdetail.asp?0-8420-2912-5). _** Reading assignments from this book will be specified at the start of each chapter of _Making Japanese._

  * And you will need to choose one of the following four books to review:

    * ** Norma Field, _[ In the Realm of a Dying Emperor: Japan at Century's End](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0679741895/sr=1-3/ref=sc_b_3/105-2311267-9012766)_**
    * ** Takashi Fujitani,  _[Splendid Monarchy: Power and Pageantry in Modern Japan](http://www.ucpress.edu/books/pages/6689.html)_**
    * ** Tessa Morris-Suzuki,  __[Re-Inventing Japan: Time, Space, Nation](http://www.mesharpe.com/65600811.htm)__**
    * ** John W. Dower,  __[Embracing Defeat: Japan in the Wake of World War II](http://www.wwnorton.com/catalog/spring00/32027.htm)__**

Select one of these three books and write a thorough review of it
(instructions for the review are given below). Click on the links to get a
better idea of what each book is about. After selecting a book, obtain it on
your own, which, for most of you will mean buying it. Any local bookstore can
order them, but doing it that way often takes much time and the price
sometimes reflects an added shipping charge. On-line book vendors are probably
a quicker way to go, and, because most on-line sites discount the books, even
with shipping, you might save some money (especially if you buy multiple books
in a single order). The two largest vendors are [amazon.
com](http://www.amazon.com) and [barnesand
noble.com](http://barnesandnoble.com), and [powells.com](http://powells.com)
is, to my knowledge, the largest used book merchant. There are also book
search/sale services like [texbookhound.com](http://www.textbookhound.com)
that will search multiple vendors--and these are only a few of the many
possibilities. If one of them cannot get your book in a timely manner, try a
different site. Please secure your book early--before spring break. If you
have any difficulty doing so, contact me--again, no later than spring break.
All three of these books require much effort from the reader, and many of you
will need to read the book more than once to understand it fully. Therefore,
it is essential that you read the book in early March at the latest. Writing
the review paper will also be a major undertaking and will likely require more
than one draft. In short, get going on this project early in the semester.

For any of you who want a comprehensive textbook of modern Japan, most of
which feature much detail about political parties, government institutions,
and diplomacy, feel free to buy one or check one out from the library. There
are about 20-25 textbooks on modern Japan in print, and they are all just
about the same in terms of coverage, approach, and readability. There are two
that stand out above the rest for being different in a good sense. One is John
Hunter Boyle, [ _Modern Japan: The American
Nexus_.](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0155003240/o/qid=979003779/sr=8-1/ref=aps_sr_b_1_1/105-2311267-9012766)
This highly readable book is not a comprehensive survey of Japanese history,
but, as the title indicates, it focuses on the relationships between Japan and
the United States. Perhaps the best of the whole bunch is J. E. Thomas, _[
Modern Japan: A Social History since
1868,](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0582259614/sr=1-11/ref=sc_b_11/105-2311267-9012766)_
which is willing to go into many areas that most textbook authors fear to
tread. Of the many conventional textbooks, the best of the bunch is probably
Peter Duus, _[ Modern Japan](http://college.hmco.com/cgi-
bin/catalog/college.cgi?FNC=GetTitles__Aauthorproducts_html___876.0)_ (second
edition). Textbooks such as these are entirely optional. Some of you may want
to read one ore more of them simply because of a strong interest in the
subject matter, and a few of you might feel more comfortable with a
conventional, comprehensive textbook at hand for background and as a
reference. But _Making Japanese_ is all you will need for exam purposes.

** <<Return to the Top>>**

* * *

Course Description:

HIST 481 examines Japan during the 19th and 20th centuries. The organization
of the course is more thematic than chronological. The goal is not to provide
a comprehensive overview of modern Japanese history because there is simply
too much material to cover in a single semester. Instead, I will focus on
topics and themes that are not only essential for understanding Japan today,
but which also shed light on broader human problems in the modern world. As
far as I can tell, there is nothing radically different about Japan's modern
development compared with that of, say, for example, France, Germany, or
Russia. The details of each country's modern history, are, of course,
different, but the basic processes are often quite similar. One goal of this
course is to banish the notion that Japan's historical development is in any
important way unique, mysterious, bizarre, or otherwise peculiar. There is a
strong tendency to tell Japan's story only from the standpoint of leading
members of society, and, while we too will encounter many of these important
historical figures, we will also pay attention to what ordinary Japanese of
different walks of life were thinking and doing.

In this spirit, then, the course most broadly examines the question of group
and individual identities in modern Japan and their implications for cultural
politics. The textbook title _Making Japanese_ is about this very matter. It
is from this vantage point that we examine certain aspects of politics, social
life, economic development, diplomacy, and military affairs. Because Japan's
modern history took place amidst a world dominated by several powerful
imperialist countries, we shall often need to pay attention to Japan's
relationships with foreign countries. Three other topics to which we will pay
close attention are: 1) the role of the state in  "making Japanese," that is,
in promoting national consciousness,  2) the creation of "tradition" in modern
times, and 3) rhetoric (the art of persuasion). How, for example, might
someone criticize government policy when doing so explicitly was prohibited by
the state and vigorously enforce by its police?

HIST 172, 174, or 175 are listed as prerequisites for this course. Students
without these courses may still take HIST 481 _but_ will almost certainly have
to work harder, especially in background reading. HIST 481 is mainly a
traditional lecture-style course, but there will be times for class
discussion, especially after viewing videos. Being an upper-division course,
_a high level of academic rigor is expected_. The ability to handle abstract
concepts and deal with multiple, overlapping cause and effect relationships is
essential. Also, some of the material we deal with may be disturbing or
unsettling. Perhaps most important is the time, energy, and will to study and
attend class on a regular basis and to work on major projects well in advance
of their due dates. Like many university courses, HIST 481 is designed not
only to impart information, but also to question the  "common sense" notions
that typically inform our ways of thinking about past and present issues.

** <<Return to the Top>>**

* * *

Exams and Grading:

This section explains exams and grading in detail, and thus I will spend
little time talking about these matters in class after the first day. It is
important to understand the basis on which grades are assigned in this course.
Grades are based on degree of mastery of the course content as measured by
three exams and a major book review paper. This is the _only_ basis on which
grades are assigned. It is important to know that personal circumstances
(e.g., getting married/divorced, having two jobs, _the "need" for a certain
level of grade to graduate,_ etc.) are not factors that influence the
assignment of grades. Note especially well that the need for a "C" or better
in order for the course to count toward graduation in no way ensures that you
will receive a "C" or better. There is no "extra credit." Class attendance is
not a direct part of the grade, but regular attendance should be considered
essential for learning the material and is expected.

The exams cover whatever we have done prior to the day of the exam and consist
of short and long essay questions. The third exam is not a "final" exam in the
official sense and is not comprehensive. In studying for the exams, emphasize
class lectures, discussions of videos, and the _Making Japanese_ textbook.
The three exams and the review paper all count equally (i.e., 25%) toward the
final grade. The final grade is determined by averaging the scores for each
exam and the review paper to get a final percentage. This final percentage is
then converted to PSU=s grading system as follows:

A = 92-100%

A- = 90-91%

B+ = 87-89% |

B = 82-86%

B- = 80-81%

C+ = 77-79% |

C = 68-76%

D = 50-67%

F = below 50%  
---|---|---  
  
The paper is (or should be) an exercise in formal, sophisticated writing. It
is not a research paper, but an in-depth review of one of the books listed
above. It should demonstrate a solid grasp of the author's arguments and how
these arguments and the book's content in general relate to the main themes
and topics in the course. A later section of this syllabus explains the paper
requirements in detail.

The dates and times of the exams and the due date for the paper are listed
above. Be sure to be here at those times because missed exams may not normally
be made up. Oversleeping, being too tired or busy, weather, etc. are not
excuses for missing an exam or turning in the paper late. So plan ahead. The
only legitimate reason for missing an exam is severe illness on the exam day
itself or a sudden emergency such as a traffic accident on your way to the
exam. In these instances, appropriate written documentation (hospital
admission document, police report, etc.) may be required before any makeup
exam is given. In the rare event that an exam conflicts with an official
university function, you may arrange to take it early. See the instructor
_well in advance_.

You are encouraged to examine and study previous exams form this course. They
are available online at the [Practice Exam
Center](http://www.personal.psu.edu/faculty/g/j/gjs4/p-ex-ctr/practice.htm).
These practice exams were the real exams for the previous term(s) the course
was offered. Putting some effort into studying them will give you a very good
idea of what to expect on the exams you will take. Between the textbooks,
classes, and practice exams, serious students are unlikely to encounter any
major surprises on exam day.

** <<Return to the Top>>**

* * *

Exam Mechanics:

Exams are give at the start of class on the scheduled day. They are intended
to take about 50 minutes, but you will be able to use the entire period. Bring
an examination book (commonly called a "blue book") with you on exam day, as
well as both a pen and a pencil. Write both your name and student number on
the multiple choice answer sheet. Do not write your name on the examination
book. Instead, clearly write your student number on the front cover. Grading
the exams usually requires two class days.

** <<Return to the Top>>**

* * *

Class Mechanics:

The typical class session takes the form of an illustrated lecture. Questions
are encouraged at any time, with the only request being that if your question
is not relevant to the matter at hand, please wait until after class to ask it
--out of courtesy for everyone else. In the same spirit, please do not disturb
others during class. Other than that, however, there are no rules for what to
do or not do. Occasionally we will view particularly important videos and
discuss them in class the next day. Because these videos will illustrate key
themes of the course, they are worthy of serious attention and thought.

It is expected that you will keep up with the readings. These is no set
schedule or required pace. We will start at chapter one and keep going until
the course ends. Ideally, you will want to read a little ahead of class in
_Making Japanese._ Also, most chapters of Making Japanese also list one or two
chapters from _The Human Tradition in Modern Japan,_ which you should read at
approximately the same time. You are urged **never** to put the reading aside
until just before an exam.

Very Important: Be sure to check your e-mail regularly, for I will make
extensive use of mass e-mailings for announcements. If the e-mail address on
file for you at PSU is not the one you use, either let me know, or, better
yet, notify the university of your correct address, or, even better, set your
PSU address to automatically forward mail to whichever address you actually
use. Is this setup a complex or mysterious process? No. Just click here and
follow the simple instructions: <https://www.work.psu.edu/>.

** <<Return to the Top>>**

* * *

Instructions and Guidelines for the Review Paper

Your paper should be critical review (not a book report or a simple summary of
the book's contents) similar to what would be found in an academic journal
(for example: [click
here](http://www.historycooperative.org/journals/ahr/105.1/br_30.html) to read
a typical short review and [click here](http://www.cbs.ntu.edu.tw/FULLTEXT/JR-
PHIL/ew92863.htm) to read a typical medium-length review). While an academic
book review certainly does discuss the book's content (or at least is should),
instead of simply summarizing that content, a critical review focuses on the
author's main argument(s), and, if possible, evaluates it/them. A good review
also should contextualize the argument(s) by explaining how it/they shed light
--or fail to shed light--on important issues and problems. Your review should
do these things. You need not worry about the presence of severe problems in
any of the books, and a "critical" review does not necessarily end up
criticizing the book. What it must do, however, is to explain and examine the
author's main argument(s). To criticize the book but not explain the author's
arguement(s) is a cop-out, which is strongly discouraged.

My evaluation of your papers is based on three interrelated criteria: 1) the
degree to which it reflects a thorough understanding of the book as described
in the previous paragraph; 2) the degree to which it conforms to the general
directions provided here; 3) the quality of its writing, including strength of
its thesis, organization, grammar, usage, diction, spelling, & mechanics. For
a guide to formal writing, refer to any standard reference work on grammar
usage and style. There is no need to go out and buy one. Just [click
here](http://dir.yahoo.com/Social_Science/Linguistics_and_Human_Languages/Languages/Specific_Languages/English/Grammar__Usage__and_Style/Style_Guides/)
for on-line versions of all the major guides, many of which are excellent. You
may also ask me about anything from software and computer issues to matters of
grammar, usage and style. And for something short, here is a [list of common
problems](http://www.personal.psu.edu/faculty/g/j/gjs4/writing.htm) that I
have encountered while reading student papers for the past decade or so. I
would highly recommend your reading through it.

In terms of length, the essay is _not to exceed ten pages_ with normal fonts
(12-14 point) and margins (one inch), double spaced. There is significant
flexibility in the way you may put the review together, but it must address
the following points:

> 1\. Near the start of your review, there should be a clear, explicit
statement of the author's overall thesis. The rest of your essay should
support your assertion of the author=s thesis (remember: a thesis is an
_argument_ and is not the same thing as a topic or theme).

>

> 2\. In so far as any of these books are a critique of contemporary or past
Japanese society, be sure that your paper reveals the major points of that
critique.

>

> 3\. What does the book reveal about the diversity of Japanese society,
official attitudes towards that diversity, and the role of "common sense?"
(This question is more directly relevant to some of the books than to others,
but pondering it will be of help in all cases.)

>

> 4\. What light does the book shed on nationalism and the construction of
identity, and how is/was Japan similar to other modern societies with respect
to these matters?

The book review is a major reading/writing assignment, and I expect that you
will be working on it throughout the semester. The final product, in other
words, should reflect at least half a semester's worth of steady work. Read
the book several times and write several drafts of the paper. You may (and
should) show me a rough draft, which I will return with comments, but I will
not read rough drafts within 5 days of the due date. Ideally, you should
produce a full first draft several weeks prior to the due date. If you cannot
produce a complete draft, at a minimum, you should e-mail me your first
paragraph as soon as possible.

Very important point: AVOID EXTENSIVE AND LENGTHY QUOTING FROM THE BOOK UNDER
REVIEW. It should be 90% or more your own words. When quoting or closely
paraphrasing, refer to the appropriate page number(s) from the book simply by
using parentheses (not foot or end notes). Again, be sure that your book
review consists of your own words, not those of someone else.

** <<Return to the Top>>**

* * *

Disabilities:

If you require accommodation for a disability, you must first identify
yourself as disabled to the appropriate university office ([click here for
details](http://www.lions.psu.edu/ODS/ods/newfiles/Students/studinfo.htm)).
This office will make a determination of your disability and accommodation(s)
based on medical information. The instructor for this course will not (and
cannot) make such determinations, but he will be happy to help you contact the
appropriate people for assistance.

** <<Return to the Top>>**

* * *

Academic Honesty:

Basic fairness to all requires reasonable standards of academic honesty.
Specifically, plagiarism (use of another's ideas and/or words as your own
without proper acknowledgment) and other forms of cheating will not be
tolerated. Although circumstances may vary, ordinarily, clear cases of
academic dishonesty will result in a grade of zero for the assignment in
question and referral of the case to the appropriate university disciplinary
unit.

For reference, the official policy of PSU regarding academic integrity is as
follows:

> ## 49-20 Academic Integrity

>

> Definition and expectations: Academic integrity is the pursuit of scholarly
activity in an open, honest and responsible manner. Academic integrity is a
basic guiding principle for all academic activity at The Pennsylvania State
University, and all members of the University community are expected to act in
accordance with this principle. Consistent with this expectation, the
University's Code of Conduct states that all students should act with personal
integrity, respect other students' dignity, rights and property, and help
create and maintain an environment in which all can succeed through the fruits
of their efforts.

>

> Academic integrity includes a commitment not to engage in or tolerate acts
of falsification, misrepresentation or deception. Such acts of dishonesty
violate the fundamental ethical principles of the University community and
compromise the worth of work completed by others.

>

> To protect the rights and maintain the trust of honest students and support
appropriate behavior, faculty and administrators should regularly communicate
high standards of integrity and reinforce them by taking reasonable steps to
anticipate and deter acts of dishonesty in all assignments (Senate Policy
44-40: Proctoring of Examinations). At the beginning of each course, it is the
responsibility of the instructor to provide students with a statement
clarifying the application of University and College academic integrity
policies to that course.

* * *

** <<Return to the Top>>**

