**University of Hawai'i at Manoa Department of Anthropology**

**

* * *

** |

[**Site Map**](../../sitemap.htm)  
  
---  
  
[**Home Page**](../../default.html)  
  
[**Archaeology**](../../subfields/archpage.html)  
  
[**Cultural Anthropology**](../../subfields/cultpage.html)  
  
[**Discursive Practices**](../../subfields/discpage.html)  
  
[**Ecological Anthropology**](../../subfields/ecopage.html)  
  
[**Medical Anthropology**](../../subfields/medpage.html)  
  
[**Physical Anthropology**](../../subfields/phypage.html)  
  
[**Degree Programs**](../../degrees.htm)  
  
[**Majoring in Anthropology**](../../degrees.htm#major)  
  
[**Faculty and Staff**](../faculty.htm)  
  
[**Faculty Honors and Awards**](../../awards.htm)  
  
[**Special Projects**](../../projects/projects.htm)  
  
[**Classes**](../../classes/coursepage.htm)  
  
[**Colloquia**](../../colloquia.htm)  
  
[**Graduate Students**](../../gradstudents/gradstudents.htm)  
  
[**MA and PhD alumni**](../../alumni/phds.htm)  
  
[**Openings and Financial Aid**](../../openings/openings.htm)  
  
[**Living in Hawai'i**](../../livinghawaii.htm)  
  
[**Frequently Asked Questions**](../../questions.htm)  
  
* * *

[**Faculty**](../faculty.htm)

  * [**Andrew Arno**](../Arno/arno.htm)
  * [**James Bayman**](../bayman/bayman.htm)
  * [**Jack Bilmes**](../bilmes/bilmes.htm)
  * [**Fred Blake**](../blake/blake.htm)
  * [**Alice Dewey**](../dewey/dewey.htm)
  * [**Nina Etkin**](../etkin/etkin.htm)
  * [**Michael Graves**](../graves/graves.htm)
  * [**Bion Griffin**](../griffin/griffin.htm)
  * [**Terry Hunt**](../hunt/hunt.htm)
  * [**Gregory Maskarinec**](../maskarinec/maskarinec.htm)
  * [**Michael Pietrusewsky**](../pietrusewsky/pietrusewsky.htm)
  * [**Barry Rolett**](../rolett/rolett.htm)
  * [**Leslie Sponsel**](../sponsel/sponsel.htm)
  * [**Miriam Stark**](../stark/stark.htm)
  * **Geoffrey White**
  * [**Christine Yano**](../yano/yano.htm)
  * [**Heather Young Leslie**](../youngleslie/youngleslie.htm)

**Emeritus Faculty**

  * [**Ben Finney**](../finney/finney.htm)
  * [**Alan Howard**](../howard/Howard.html)
  * [**Takie Lebra**](../lebra/lebra.htm)

**Adjunct Faculty**

  * [**Jan Rensel**](../rensel/rensel.html)

**Secretary:**[ **Elaine Nakahashi**](../nakahashi/nakahashi.htm)

**Student Services:**[ **Mary Ambrose**](../tugaoen/tugaoen.htm)

####  |

##  Geoffrey White  
Adjunct Professor  
  
  
---  
  
![](white.jpg)

|

**Background:** I received my B.A. from Princeton University in 1971 and PhD
from the University of California, San Diego in 1978. At San Diego I
discovered the Pacific and began research in the Solomon Islands where I have
been working off and on ever since.  
   After graduation, I took a position on the research staff of the East-West
Center where I am currently a Senior Fellow. Upon arriving in Hawai'i, I also
joined the Department of Anthropology and the Center for Pacific Islands
Studies as affiliate faculty. From 1992 to 1995 I directed the East-West
Center's Program for Cultural Studies and currently co-direct a new
certificate program in [International Cultural
Studies](http://www2.hawaii.edu/~culture/). I have served on the Editorial
Board of [The Contemporary
Pacific](http://www2.hawaii.edu/uhpress/journals/cp/%20%5BContemp%20Pacific)
since its inception and in 1997 was appointed journal Editor.  
  
My work at the East-West Center is concerned with the organization of
international, collaborative projects in the Asia-Pacific region. Center
projects are often concerned simultaneously with research, education, and
intercultural dialogue. In my case, these have included projects on cultural
pluralism, cultural policy, representations of the Pacific War, and the
development of Pacific studies in college teaching.

* * *

**General interests:** the politics and ideology of culture; the role of
history and memory in the formation of collective identities; war and
nationalism; culture, self, and emotion; ethnographic methods; Pacific Island
societies; America

**Current research:** For more than two decades I have been working in the
Solomon Islands on a variety of topics related to transformations of identity
under conditions of colonial and postcolonial history. Having written on
islander memories of the Pacific war, I turned my attention to American war
memory during the period of fiftieth anniversaries, from 1991 to 1995. In that
work I am focusing especially on Pearl Harbor as a site of historical
imagination and national identity. With initial support from the Wenner-Gren
Foundation I have been doing ethnographic research at the USS Arizona
Memorial, carried out in cooperation with the National Park Service who
operate the Memorial.

Current projects at the East-West Center include the development of the
[Pacific Studies Initiative](http://library.kcc.hawaii.edu/psiweb/), a
collaborative enterprise with the University Center for Pacific Islands
Studies aimed at expanding teaching about the Pacific region in college
curricula. This work is supported by the National Endowment for the Humanities
and builds on previous NEH seminars conducted with Lamont Lindstrom in 1991,
1993 and 1995 ("[The Politics of Culture and Identity: Pacific Islands
Perspectives](http://library.kcc.hawaii.edu/psiweb/pacific/1995_NEH_readings.html)"
) and with Vilsoni Hereniko in 1997 ("[The Politics of Representation:
Ethnography, Literature and Film in the Pacific
Islands](http://library.kcc.hawaii.edu/psiweb/cultural/polit_of_represent.htm)."

* * *

**Selected publications:**

     n.d. _Perilous Memories: The Asia-Pacific War(s)_. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. (edited with T. Fujitani and L. Yoneyama, in press)
      
    1998 Moving History: The Pearl Harbor Film(s). _Positions: East Asia Culture Critique_ 5(3). 709-744.
      
    1997 _Chiefs Today: Traditional Pacific Leadership and the Postcolonial State_. Stanford: Stanford University Press. (edited with L. Lindstrom)
      
    1997 Museum/Memorial/Shrine: National Narrative in National Spaces. _Museum Anthropology_ 21 (1):8-26.
      
    1995 Anthropology's New Cargo: Future Horizons. _Ethnology_ 34:201-210 (with L. Lindstrom).
      
    1995 Remembering Guadalcanal: National Identity and Transnational Memory-Making. _Public Culture_ 7(2): 529-555.
      
    1994 _Culture, Kastom, Tradition: Cultural Policy in Melanesia_. Suva, Fiji: University of the South Pacific (edited with L. Lindstrom).
      
    1992 _New Directions in Psychological Anthropology_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (edited with T. Schwartz  & C. Lutz).
     
    1991 _Identity Through History: Living Stories in a Solomon Islands Society_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
      
    1990 _Island Encounters: Black and White Memories of the Pacific War_. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press. (co-authored with L. Lindstrom).
      
    1990 _Disentangling: Conflict Discourse in Pacific Societies_. Stanford: Stanford University Press. (edited with K. Watson-Gegeo).
      
    1989 _The Pacific Theater: Island Representations of World War II_. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, and Melbourne: University of Melbourne Press (edited with L. Lindstrom; recipient of the 1992 Masayoshi Ohira Prize).
      
    1985) _Person, Self and Experience: Exploring Pacific Ethnopsychologies_. Berkeley: University of California Press (edited with J. Kirkpatrick).

* * *

**Courses taught:**

_Anth 710 (Seminar in Research Methods: Ethnography)_

> This seminar provides an introduction to ethnographic methods, concentrating
on practices of interviewing and recording most used in participatory
research. The seminar emphasizes interpretive methods, but also includes
selected quantitative techniques for social and cultural analysis. Much of the
learning is through doing. Readings and discussion are combined with a limited
amount of ethnographic practice, primarily in the form of various styles of
interviewing, from non-directive interviewing to formal elicitation
techniques. Approaches to the study of discourse are emphasized, including the
analysis of texts, conversation, interview protocols, and life histories. We
also examine several techniques for cultural domain analysis, bundled together
in the software package "Anthropac." On the assumption that community-based
research requires flexibility and adaptation to local circumstances, the
seminar critically examines the strengths and weaknesses of a variety of
methods for diverse kinds of research question. Discussion of the politics and
ethics of fieldwork inform the seminar's work throughout. [Fall 1998
syllabus.](710.htm)

_Socs 610 (International Cultural Studies: History and Theory)_

> This is the core course for a proposed interdisciplinary certificate in
International Cultural Studies. Co-taught by the co-directors of the
certificate program, it introduces the history and theory of interdisciplinary
cultural studies. The course provides a forum for discussion of the range of
disciplinary approaches that make up this diverse field. It emphasizes issues
and approaches relevant to the study of international and intercultural
relations, especially in the context of Hawai'i's unique relationship to Asia,
the Pacific Islands, and the United States mainland. In this way, the seminar
will take up the general problem of globalization in terms of specific issues
that arise in the interface of local cultures and wider forces of change in
Hawai'i, Asia, and the Pacific. Situated at the boundaries of the humanities
and social sciences, work in cultural studies brings interpretive perspectives
to bear on contemporary social issues, especially in regard to identity
politics that are frequently matters of public interest and debate.

>

> Other program faculty are invited to guest lecture so as to make available a
variety of disciplinary and cultural specializations relevant to students
developing their own projects. Readings, weekly discussion topics, and guest
lectures are organized in such as way as to familiarize students with the
diversity of approaches pursued by University and East-West Center faculty.
[Fall 1999 Syllabus](610.htm)

_Anth 620i (Anthropology and Cultural Studies)_

> This course examines issues that arise at the intersection of anthropology
and interdisciplinary cultural studies. "Cultural studies" has emerged as a
highly visible yet ambiguous range of work situated at the borders of social
science and the humanities. Resisting definition as a discipline or unified
field, cultural studies nonetheless reflects a convergence of interests around
issues of identity, representation, and power. This seminar examines a variety
of approaches to this triumvirate, focusing particularly on issues of
longstanding interest in anthropology. These include the representation of
cultural "others"; the politics of identity in colonial and postcolonial
societies; nationalism; and, increasingly, the role of visual and electronic
media in shaping social realities. A continuing theme throughout will be the
role of fieldwork and ethnography in cultural study, past and present. [Spring
1998 Syllabus](620i.htm).

_Pacs 693 (Cultural Identities: American and Pacific Perspectives)_

> This one-semester course offers a comparative approach to the study of
cultural identities--as they are conceived and debated in the United States
and Pacific Island societies. The course explores constructions of culture and
identity in a variety of contexts, including literature, film, and public
performance. The strategy of the course is to work from the particular to the
general, scrutinizing specific forms of identity to understand their meaning
and power in contemporary society. The course begins with discussion of
relevant theoretical terms such as 'identity', 'ethnicity', 'gender', and
'nation' and then proceeds to examine their significance in particular social,
historical, and political contexts in the Pacific Islands region, in America,
and in Hawai'i. [Spring 1999
Syllabus](http://www.maile.hawaii.edu/SP-1999-PACS-693-1/).

_Anth 750D - Research Seminar: Ethnography (Anthropology of Tourism: Global
Tourism/Local Perspectives) Co-taught with Christine R. Yano_

> Tourism--that is, temporary and continuing flows of people from one part of
the world to another for purposes of pleasure and travel--has come to play an
increasingly critical part of the global economy. This course examines a
variety of social theories which have been brought to bear on tourism,
including its cultural forms, arrangements, and encounters. We see tourism as
inextricably linked to consumer culture, transnational movements of people and
goods, post-colonial settings, and global capitalism. Tourism becomes a
template for cultural oppositions: primitive/modern, authentic/inauthentic,
Other/Self. The goal of the course is to explore social theories which have
been used to examine these phenomena, as well as synthesize them within a
field project. Students will be expected to design and conduct a brief
fieldwork project on tourism and present their findings.

>

> The course involves not only readings, but on-site visits, activities,
films, guest lectures, and discussions. We feel strongly that the opportunity
to interact within the rich conditions which Hawai`i provides should not be
neglected. Therefore we look forward to taking the seminar out of the
classroom and into the local laboratory.

>

> It is our hope that these various activities, in and out of the armchair,
will stimulate continuing research, thoughts, and debates on the forms,
processes, meanings, and ramifications of tourism globally. [Spring 1999
Syllabus](http://www.maile.hawaii.edu/SP-1999-ANTH-750D-1).

_Anth750e (History and Memory)_

> The recognition that histories--stories about the past--play a central role
in social movements, national politics, and personal lives has evoked an
explosion of interest in the study of collective "memory." This seminar
reviews disciplinary paradigms that have been brought to bear on problems of
history and memory as culturally formed and politically contested realities.
Anthropology, with its orientation toward small scale communities and oral
discourse, has focused especially on the role of narrative and ritual practice
in shaping representations of the past. Other disciplines have been more
concerned with textual and mass-mediated representations of history
in(post)industrialized societies. This course considers work across this
spectrum of approaches by considering a number of case studies of memory
politics in diverse institutional locations. Specifically, how may the tools
of ethnography may be used to analyze symbolic and political forces that shape
cultural histories and underwrite their power. How and where is collective
memory created in today's globalizing societies? In answering this the course
examines historical representation in specific media, asking how different
modes of representation create distinctive forms of historical understanding,
including oral narrative, textbooks, film, photographs, architecture, and
electronic media. The course also considers a range of institutional sites in
which collective histories are made public and authoritative, including
commemorative practices, memorials, museums, tourist sites, malls, and popular
culture.[ Fall 1999 Syllabus](750E.htm).  
  
[Site Map](../../sitemap.htm) | [Home](../../default.html) | [Cultural
Anthropology](../../subfields/cultpage.html) |
[Archaeology](../../subfields/archpage.html) | [Physical
Anthropology](../../subfields/phypage.html) | [Discursive
Practices](../../subfields/discpage.html) | [Medical
Anthropology](../../subfields/medpage.html) | [Ecological
Anthropology](../../subfields/ecopage.html) | [Degree
Programs](../../degrees.htm) | [Faculty and Staff](../faculty.htm) |
[Projects](../../projects/projects.htm) |
[Classes](../../classes/coursepage.htm) | [Graduate
Students](../../gradstudents/gradstudents.htm) | [Past MAs &
PhDs](../../alumni/phds.htm) | [Openings & Financial
Aid](../../openings/openings.htm) | [Faculty Honors and
Awards](../../awards.htm) |  
[Living in Hawai'i](../../livinghawaii.htm) | [FAQ](../../questions.htm)  
---

