Columbia University

**TOKYO: History, Form, and Spirit**  
(History-Japan W4850)

**FALL 1998**

Instructor: Henry Smith (email: hds2; off: 412 Kent, x4-5033; msg: 854-5027)  
Time and place: Friday, 9-12 am, 607 Hamilton Hall

_Description_ : An exploration of the built form of the city of Edo-Tokyo over
the past 400 years, looking at buildings, landscape, urban form, networks and
circuits, and symbols and meaning. We will proceed within a rough historical
framework, but always trying to place Edo-Tokyo within larger patterns both
within Japan and in comparison with other cities in the world. Given the
paucity of good secondary materials in English on the history and culture of
Edo-Tokyo, we will use as much as possible various forms of representation of
the city, including maps, screen paintings, prints, photographs, film, novels,
and essays. The exact themes and readings will be tailored to the interests
and language abilities of those in the seminar. Like Tokyo itself, the course
will be a work in progress . . .

**Course requirements:**

> 1) Regular attendance and participation in class discussion, with periodic
individual reports on specific issues;

>

> 2) Occasional short papers and class presentations (probably about 3-4 per
member of the class, depending on logistics), plus one final project dealing
with any aspect of Edo-Tokyo in historical context.

**Books available for purchase:**

The following are available for purchase at Labyrinth Books; only the first
two are listed as required, and the rest are recommended only if you are
interested.

> Seidensticker, Edward, _Low City, High City: Tokyo from Edo to the
Earthquake_ (Knopf, 1983).

>

> Seidensticker, Edward, _Tokyo Rising: The City Since the Great Earthquake_
(Knopf, 1990).

>

> McClain, James, et al., eds., _Edo and Paris: Urban Life and the State in
the Early Modern Era_ (Cornell University Press, 1994).

>

> Theodore Bestor, _Neighborhood Tokyo_ (Stanford University Press, 1989).

>

> Roman Cybriwsky, _Tokyo--The Shogun's City at the Twenty-First Century_.
John Wiley  & Sons, 1998.

In addition, there are four very interesting books that I felt were simply too
expensive or non-historical to place on order at the bookstore, but which I
would urge for the consideration of those with a special interest, namely:

> Berque, Augustin, _Cities and Social Bonds_ (Pilkington Press, 1997).
Published in England, and hard to get in this country, although it can be
ordered for $60. A very French sort of approach to the Japanese city,
certainly the most interesting theoretical writing on the issue, and closely
geared to architectural issues, by a leading scholar of Japanese geography.

>

> Bognar, Botund, _Tokyo_. (John Wiley  & Sons, 1997). $85.50 from amazon.com.
A lavish picture book focusing on recent architecture in Tokyo, includes some
useful short articles.

>

> Jinnai, Hidenobu, _Tokyo: A Spatial Anthropology_ , trans. Kimiko Nakamura
(Univ. of California Press, 1995). An important and provocative book on
historical aspects of urban space in Tokyo, particularly on survivals from
Edo; it is a translation from the Japanese original, _Tky no kkan jinruigaku_.
Unfortunately, it is available only in hardback at $45, but it is worth it to
those interested. (Not even listed by amazon.com.)

>

> Popham, Peter, _Tokyo: The City at the End of the World_ (Kodansha, 1985).
$16 from amazon.com. A readable and perceptive critique of contemporary Tokyo
by an English architecture critic.

  
**SYLLABUS**

**1\. Sept. 11: INTRODUCTIONS**  


**2\. Sept. 18: GENERAL THEMES; IMPERIAL CAPITALS AND CASTLE CITIES**

WEDNESDAY FILM SERIES: Sept. 16: Eijanaika (Imamura, 1981)

Background reading for those with no preparation in Japanese history:

> Edwin Reischauer and Albert Craig, _Japan: Tradition and Transformation_
(Houghton Mifflin, 1989), ch. 3: "Tokugawa Japan: A Centralized Feudal State"
(pp. 73-115) [East Asia: ch. 15, pp. 392-434].

Exercise: Explore the Web for sites that might be useful to this course, and
come up with at least one that you can pass on to others.

Some general reading on conceptual matters:

> Nitschke, Gunter, "Ma: Place, Space, and Void," _Kyoto Journal_ , no. 8
(Fall 1988), pp. 33-39. [FOLDER]

>

> Augustin Berque, _Cities and Social Bonds_ (Pilkington Press, 1997), chs.
1-2 (pp. 13-70).

>

> Henry D. Smith II, "Tokyo and London: Comparative Conceptions of the City,"
in Albert Craig, ed., _Japan: A Comparative View_ (Princeton University Press,
1979), pp. 45-99.

>

> Henry Smith, "Sky and Water: The Deep Structures of Tokyo," in Mildred
Friedman, ed., _Tokyo: Form and Spirit_ , pp. 21-35.

>

> Maki, Fumihiko, "The City and Inner Space," _Japan Echo_ 6/1 (1979), pp.
91-103.

On the history of traditional cities and the planning of Edo:

> John W. Hall, "Kyoto as Historical Background,"in John W. Hall and Jeffrey
P. Mass, eds., _Medieval Japan: Essays in Institutional History_ (Yale Univ.
Press, 1974), pp. 3-27.

>

> John W. Hall, "The Castle Town and Japan's Modern Urbanization," in John W.
Hall and Marius Jansen, eds., _Studies in the Institutional History of Early
Modern Japan_ (Princeton UP, 1968), pp. 169-188.

  
**3\. Sept. 25: THE CITY OF EDO: PLANNING AND STRUCTURE**

WEDNESDAY FILM SERIES: Sept. 23: The Mistress ( _Gan_ ) [Toyoda, 1953]

Primary materials:

> Traditional maps of Edo ( _-ezu_ "large maps" and _kiri-ezu_ "section
maps"). [To be posted in Rare Book Room.]

Secondary readings:

> William H. Coaldrake, "Edo Architecture and Tokugawa Law," _Monumenta
Nipponica_ 36/3 (Autumn 1981), pp. 239-253. [REGULAR RESERVE FOLDER]

>

> Naito, Akira, "Planning and Development of Early Edo," _Japan Echo_ , vol.
14 (1987). [ORIGINAL ON REGULAR RESERVE: DS801 .j263 COL. 14]

>

> Henry D. Smith II, "The Floating World in Its Edo Locale, 1750-1850." In
Donald Jenkins, ed., _The Floating World Revisited_ (Portland Art Museum,
1993), pp. 25-45. [FOLDER ON SMITH SHELF]

>

> James McClain et al., eds., _Edo and Paris: Urban Life and the State in the
Early Modern Era_ (Cornell University Press, 1994): Kat o, Takashi, "Governing
Edo," 41-67; Hatano, Jun. "Edo's Water Supply," 234-50; Takeuchi, Makoto,
"Festivals and Fights: The Law and the People of Edo," 384-406; Anne Walthall,
"Edo Riots," 407-28. [3 COPIES ON REGULAR RESERVE: DS896.62 .E34 1994]

>

> Gilbert Rozman, "Edo's Importance in [the] Changing Tokugawa Society,"
_Journal of Japanese Studies_ 1/1 (Autumn 1974), pp. 91-112. [FOLDER ON SMITH
SHELF]

  
**4\. Oct. 2: EDO LANDSCAPES: FAMOUS PLACES AND SPACES OF PLAY**

Readings:

> Hidenobu Jinnai, "The Spatial Structure of Edo," in Nakane and Oishi, eds.,
_Tokugawa Japan_ (Univ. of Tokyo Press, 1990), pp. 124-146. REG. RESERVE:
DS871 .T527 1990

>

> Henry D. Smith II, _Hiroshige, One Hundred Famous Views of Edo_ (Braziller,
1986). REG. RESERVE: NE1325 .A5 A4 1986; another copy will be placed on the
Smith reserve shelf. Read: Introduction (pp. 9-16), pls. 1-4, 7-8. 10-11,
17-19, 21-28, 37-38, 43-48, 55-62, 64-66, 73-77, 80-82, 86-87, 90, 98-101,
106-107, 111-115, 118.

>

> Henry Smith, "Hiroshige in History." In Matthi Forrer, ed., _Hiroshige:
Prints and Drawings_ (London: Royal Academy of the Arts, and Munich and New
York: Prestel, 1997), pp. 33-45. XEROX ON SMITH SHELF

_Exercise for everyone:_ 1) Make your own tourist map of Edo, to hand in at
class time, using the data on the "famous places" ( _meisho_ ) provided in
Hiroshige's _One Hundred Famous Views of Edo_. The map on p. 8 will give you
something to start working with. Use your imagination. For those who can read
Japanese, a copy of Henry Smith, _Ukiyo-e ni miru Edo no meisho_ (Iwanami
shoten, 1993) will be placed on the shelf. 2) Attach to your map a one-page
answer to the question, "What is an Edo meisho?"

Background reading on the style and structure of Edo landscape prints:

> In The Society for the Study of Japonisme, ed., _Japonisme in Art--An
International Symposium_ (Committee for the Year 2001, 1980): Narazaki,
Muneshige, "Western Influence and the Revival of Tradition in Ukiyoe-e," pp.
313-322, and Sakamoto Mitsuru, "The Westernization of Ukiyo-e at the End of
the Tokugawa Period," pp. 19-25. XEROX ON SMITH SHELF.

>

> Screech, Timothy. "The Meaning of Western Perspective in Edo Popular
Culture," _Archives of Asian Art_ , vol. 47 (1994), pp. 58-69. XEROX ON SMITH
SHELF.

>

> Henry D. Smith II, "World Without Walls: Kuwagata Keisai's Panoramic Vision
of Japan." In Gail Bernstein and Haruhiro Fukui, eds., _Japan and the World--
Essays on Japanese History and Politics in Honour of Ishida Takeshi_ (The
Macmillan Press, London, 1988), pp. 3-19. XEROX ON SMITH SHELF

The Architecture and Plan of the Theater and Pleasure Districts

> Kazuo Nishi and Kazuo Hozumi, _What is Japanese Architecture?_ , ppp.
124-127 (on the architecture of the). STARR REGULAR RESERVE: NA1553 .N5713
.1985g

_Special reports:_ 1) Kabuki theater architecture; 2) the plan and
architecture of the Shin-Yoshiwara. This will require some ability in
Japanese, but not too much; the basic materials are the sections in Smith,
_Ukiyo-e ni miru Edo no meisho_ , on the theater district (pp. 80-83), and the
Shin-Yoshiwara (pp. 84-87), as well as the relevant prints in the Hiroshige
series. For the Yoshiwara, see also de Becker, _The Nightless City_ , on Smith
reserve shelf.  


**5\. Oct. 9: EDO LIVING SPACE: CASTLES, MANSIONS, MACHIYA**

WEDNESDAY FILM SERIES: Oct. 7: I Was Born But . . . [Ozu, 1932]

Readings:

> For background on Shoin "style": Ito Teiji, "The Development of Shoin-Style
Architecture," in John Hall and Toyoda Takeshi, eds., Japan in the Muromachi
Age (Univ. of California Press, 1977), pp. 227-39. REGULAR RESERVE FOLDER.
(You also might find useful: Kazuo Nishi and Kazuo Hozumi, _What is Japanese
Architecture?_ , pp. 70-77. REGULAR RESERVE: NA1553 .N5713 1985g)

>

> William Coaldrake, _Architecture and Authority in Japan_ (Routledge, 1996),
chs. 5-8, especially pp. 129-37 (on early Edo Castle), pp. 163-80 (on the
Taitokuin Mausoleum), and 193-207 (on gates).

>

> Jinnai, Hidenobu, _Tokyo: A Spatial Anthropology_ , trans. Kimiko Nakamura
(Univ. of California Press, 1995), pp. Ix-65 (Preface, Introduction, and Ch.
1: "The High City: Surface and Depths"). REGULAR RESERVE: HT395 .J33 T62513
1995

>

> Constantine Vaporis, "A Tour of Duty: _Kurume hanshi Edo kinban nagaya
emaki_ ," _Monumenta Nipponica_ , 51:3 (Autumn 1996), pp. 279-307. COPY ON
RESERVE SHELF.

>

> Constantine Vaporis, "Digging for Edo: Archaeology and Japan's Premodern
Urban Past," _Monumenta Nipponica_ , 53:1 (Spring 1998), pp. 73-104. COPY ON
RESERVE SHELF.

>

> Catalog of Fukagawa Edo Museum: both English and Japanese versions will be
on the SMITH SHELF, together with other visualizations of Edo _ura-nagaya_.

WRITING ASSIGNMENT: Bring to class to hand in a short essay (500-1000 words,
1-2 pp single-spaced) comparing the approaches to the analysis of Edo urban
and architectural space of any two (or more, if you wish) of the following:
Coaldrake, Jinnai, Vaporis, and Fukagawa Edo Museum.

SPECIAL REPORTS (replaces writing assignment):

> Edo Castle: IAN  
> Machiya: NICOLE  
> Nagaya tenements: CORRIE  
>  

**6\. Oct. 16: THE EDO-TOKYO TRANSITION**

Readings:

> Henry D. Smith II, "The Edo-Tokyo Transition: In Search of Common Ground."
In Marius Jansen and Gilbert Rozman, eds., _Japan in Transition: From Tokugawa
to Meiji_ (Princeton University Press, 1986), pp. 347-374. Book on regular
reserve (DS881.4 .J36 1986).

>

> Edward Seidensticker, _Low City, High City: Tokyo from Edo to the
Earthquake_ (Alfred A. Knopf, 1983), chs. 1-5 (pp. 3-251). Available for
purchase at Labyrinth, and also on regular reserve (DS896.64 .S44 1983).

WRITING ASSIGNMENT: Write a review of about 1000 words in length of the
assigned chapters from Seidensticker's _Low City, High City._  


**7\. Oct. 23: VISUALIZING MEIJI TOKYO**

Visual Documents:

> Photographs of Meiji Tokyo: ALL ON SMITH RESERVE SHELF.

>

>> 1) _Hyakunen mae no Nihon_. Photos from the Peabody Museum of Salem, pp.
22-37. These have English captions for the photos.

>>

>> 2) _Meiji no Yokohama-Tokyo_. Book with a photo of the Grand Hotel
(Yokohama) on the cover, pp. 33-64. English captions will be pencilled in.

>>

>> 3) _T okyo sono mukashi. _Small book with red cover and photo of boat. Will
try to provide post-it captions for some of the most important photos.

>

> Henry Smith, _Kiyochika: Artist of Meiji Japan (_ Santa Barbara Museum of
Art, 1988), pp. 22-25, 32-51, 68-73, 102-3. You are also encouraged to take a
look at the introduction (pp. 6-15) for general background on Kiyochika. COPY
OF BOOK ON RESERVE SHELF.

>

> _Meiji T okyo meisho zue_. Illustrations of Meiji Tokyo from _F uzoku gaho._
Oblong book, with picture of pagoda on the cover. Will try to provide
pencilled captions.

Secondary Readings:

> Takashi Fujitani, _Splendid Monarchy: Power and Pageantry in Meiji Japan_
(University of California Press, 1996), chs. 2-3 [pp. 31-154] ("From Court in
Motion to Imperial Capitals" and "Modern Imperial Pageantry"). ON REGULAR
RESERVE: DS881.9 .J847 1996

>

> Henry D. Smith II, "Tokyo as an Idea: An Exploration of Japanese Urban
Thought Until 1945." _Journal of Japanese Studies_ , IV, 1 (Winter 1978). pp.
45-80. XEROX COPY ON RESERVE SHELF. For today, you need only read pp. 45-57,
esp. pp. 53-57 (on Meiji until 1900).

WRITING ASSIGNMENT: Choose a limited number of images--two or three should be
enough--from the above prints and photographs (or from any other visual
material on Meiji Tokyo that you may have access to) and discuss them to
illuminate issues that emerge from the secondary reading assignment. The
assignment, in other words, is to try to bring pictures and ideas together.
You may also want to refer to last week's reading from Seidensticker and
Smith.  


**8\. Oct. 30: MEIJI TOKYO IN LITERATURE**

WEDNESDAY FILM SERIES: Oct. 28: Stray Dog ( _Nora-inu_ ) [Kurosawa, 1949]

Short Stories:

> Higuchi Ichiyo, _Takekurabe_ (Growing Up), 1895-6. XEROX COPY ON SMITH
SHELF.

>

> Nagai Kafu, _Sumidagawa_ (The River Sumida), 1909. In Edward Seidensticker,
_Kaf u the Scribbler: The Life and Writings of Nagai Kafu, 1879-1959_
(Stanford Univ. Press, 1969), pp. 181-218. Also try to read chs. 1-3 (pp.
3-52), an account of Kafu's life until the writing of _Sumidagawa_. ON REGULAR
RESERVE (also check for xerox copy on Smith shelf).

Secondary reading:

> Paul Anderer, "Tokyo and the Borders of Modern Japanese Fiction," in
_Visions of the Modern City_ , eds.Wiliam Sharpe and Leonard Wallock (The
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1987), pp. 220-231. XEROX COPY ON SMITH SHELF.

>

> Maeda Ai, "The Spirits of Abandoned Gardens," translated by William F.
Sibley, in _Studies in Modern Japanese Literature: Essays and Translations in
Honor of Edwin McClellan_ , eds. Dennis Washburn and Alan Tansman (Center for
Japanese Studies, The University of Michigan, 1997), pp. 397-410. XEROX COPY
ON SMITH SHELF.

>

> Optional: Maeda Ai, "The Panorama of Enlightenment." DRAFT translation by
Henry Smith. XEROX COPY ON SMITH SHELF.

**NOTE** : Maeda Ai (1932-87) was a scholar of Japanese literature at Waseda
University who wrote pioneering essays in the 1970s on urban space in modern
Japanese literature, most of which were collected in his _Toshi k ukan no naka
no bungaku _(Literature Within Urban Space, 1982). The above are translations
of two of these essays. Note also that on Saturday, November 7, a conference
will be held at Cornell University in honor of the work of Maeda Ai; see below
for further information.

WRITTEN ASSIGNMENT: Prepare a one-page proposal for your final project for the
course, to be presented orally in class. Be sure to include relevant
bibliography and/or source material.  


**9\. Nov. 6: TAISHO TOKYO**

WEDNESDAY FILM SERIES: Nov. 4: Tokyo Story ( _T okyo monogatari) _[Ozu, 1953]

General background:

> Seidensticker, _Low City, High City_ , ch. 5: "The Taisho Look" (pp.
252-286). ON REGULAR RESERVE: DS896.64 .S44 1983.

>

> Edward Seidensticker, _Tokyo Rising: The City Since the Great Earthquake,_
chapters 1 ("The Days After") and 2 ("Happy Reconstruction Days"), pp. 3-87.
Available at Labyrinth bookstore, also copy on regular reserve.

Novels:  Read _one_ of the following two novels, and write a short paper
comparing it with one of the two short stories read last week; it would
probably make most sense to compare _Sanshiro_ with "The River Sumida" and
_Naomi_ with "Growing Up," but the choice is yours.

> Natsume Soseki, _Sanshir o_ (1908). Trans. Jay Rubin (Univ. of Tokyo Press,
1977). ONE COPY ON RESERVE SHELF: PL812 .A8 S313 (for library use; HS also has
a personal copy available for loan; unfortunately, this book is now out of
print.) For background, see William Burton, "The Image of Tokyo in Soseki's
Fiction," in _The Japanese City_ , eds. P. P. Karan and Kristin Stapleton (The
University Press of Kentucky, 1997), pp. 221-241. XEROX ON SMITH SHELF.

>

> Tanizaki Jun'ichiro, _Naomi_ (Chijin no ai, 1924-25). Trans. Anthony
Chambers (North Point Press, 1990). Available from Amazon.com for $9.60, ships
within 24 hours. Also one copy on regular reserve: PL839 .A7 C513 1985

Optional secondary reading:

> Miriam Silverberg, "Constructing the Japanese Ethnography of Modernity,"
_Journal of Asian Studies_ , 51/1 (February 1992), pp. 30-54. XEROX ON SMITH
SHELF.

>

> Miriam Silverberg, "Constructing a New Cultural History of Prewar Japan," in
_Japan and the World_ , eds., Masao Miyoshi and H. D. Harootunian (Duke
University Press, 1993), pp. 115-144 (esp. section on "Tokyo Learning," pp.
131-37). XEROX ON SMITH SHELF.

  
**10\. Nov. 13: POSTWAR TOKYO IN FILM**

WEDNESDAY FILM SERIES: Nov. 11: Street of Shame ( _Akasen chitai_ )
[Mizoguchi, 1956]

General background:

> Edward Seidensticker, _Tokyo Rising: The City Since the Great Earthquake,_
chapters 3 ("Darker Days") and 4 ("The Day of Cod and the Sweet Potato"), pp.
88-225. Available at Labyrinth bookstore, also copy on regular reserve.

Films:

Please make an effort to see _all_ of the following four films; two have
already been shown in the Wednesday night series, another will be shown the
Wednesday before the class, and the last will be on Nov. 23, so you will have
to watch it on videotape. Videotape copies of _all_ of these films are
available from Ria at the Starr Library; if you wish to reserve a film for a
particular time, you can contact her by email at  <rkb7>. If you take a film
out overnight, please return it promptly the next morning.

> Stray Dog ( _Nora-inu_ ) [Kurosawa, 1949] (Shown Oct. 28)

>

> Tokyo Story ( _T okyo monogatari) _[Ozu, 1953] (Shown Nov. 4)

>

> Street of Shame ( _Akasen chitai_ ) [Mizoguchi, 1956] (To be shown Nov. 11)

>

> When a Woman Ascends the Stairs ( _Onna ga kaidan o agaru toki_ ) [Naruse,
1960] (To be shown Monday, Nov. 23)

Written assignment:  Write a short paper discussing the urban dimension of at
least _two_ of the films above, within the context of the history of postwar
Tokyo.  


**11\. Nov. 20: NEIGHBORHOOD TOKYO**

Common readings:

> Sally Ann Hastings, _Neighborhood and Nation in Tokyo, 1905-37_ (University
of Pittsburgh Press, 1995), ch. 3: "Residents Leading Residents," pp. 69-96.
XEROX COPY ON RESERVE SHELF.

>

> R. P. Dore, _City Life in Japan--A Study of a Tokyo Ward_ (University of
California Press, 1958), pp. 1-53, 253-87, 295-311. STARR REGULAR RESERVE:
HT147 .J3 D6.

>

> Theodore Bestor, "Traditionalism and Identity in a Tokyo Neighborhood," in
George Gmelch and Walter Zenner, eds. Urban Life: Readings in Urban
Anthropology (Waveland Press, 198?), pp. 424-434. XEROX COPY ON RESERVE SHELF.

DISCUSSION LEADERS: __ Each member of the class should select _one_ of the
following three books, and go beyond the common readings that have been
assigned above in order to think about the study as a whole, and what it tells
us about the history of Tokyo.

> Hastings, _Neighborhood and Nation in Tokyo._

>

> Dore, _City Life in Japan._

>

> Bestor, _Neighborhood Tokyo_ (Stanford University Press, 1989; on regular
reserve, HT147 .J3 B45 1989).

PROGRESS REPORTS: Be prepare to give a very _brief_ progress report on your
final project.  


[Nov. 27: No Class: THANKSGIVING]  


**12\. December 4: THE PHENOMENAL CITY: APPRECIATIONS OF TOKYO IN THE '70s &
80s.**

Visual materials:

> Morita, dir., _Family Game_ [ _Kazoku gemu_ ], 1983. In Wednesday night film
series, on December 2, 6:30 pm, Altschul Auditorium.

>

> Wim Wenders, _Tokyo Ga_ (Germany, 1986). 90 minutes, filmed in spring 1983.
Videotape available through Ria.

Written materials:

> Roland Barthes, _Empire of Signs_ [ _L'Empire des signes_ , 1970] _,_ trans.
Richard Howard (New York: Hill and Wang, 1982), pp. 30-42. XEROX COPY ON
SHELF. Copy of book will also be left on shelf.

>

> Richards. J. M., "Lessons from the Japanese Jungle," in Gwen Bell and
Jaqueline Tyrwhitt, _Human Identity in the Urban Environment_ (Penguin Books,
1972), pp. 590-594. XEROX COPY ON SHELF.

>

> Peter Gluck and Henry Smith, "Shinjuku," _A+U: Kenchiku to toshi_
[Architecture and Urbanism], August, 1973. pp. 132-156. XEROX COPY ON SHELF.

>

> Peter Popham, _Tokyo: The City at the End of the World_ (Kodansha, 1985),
pp. 35-49. XEROX COPY ON SHELF. Copy of book will also be left on shelf.

ASSIGNMENT: Please read _at least_ TWO of the four written items listed above
(taking at least a glance at the whole book in the case of Barthes and
Popham), and see at least ONE of the visual items (the Wednesday night film or
the Wim Wenders film). Be prepared to lead a discussion about any of the items
you selected.  
  ****

**13\. Dec. 11: GLOBAL TOKYO, BUBBLE TOKYO, MEGATOKYO**

**I. THE BUBBLE ERA**

A: Tokyo Renaissance and the Edo-Tokyo Museum

> Jordan Sand, "Monuments to the Everyday at the Edo-Tokyo Museum: A Critical
Walk" (unpublished essay)

>

> Mikako Iwatake, "The Tokyo Renaissance: Constructing a Postmodern Identity
in Contemporary Japan," (PhD dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, 1993).

B: Bubble Architecture: Edo-Tokyo Museum and New City Hall

**II. TOKYO IN _ANIME_ AND SCIENCE FICTION**

A: Tokyo in Western Film and Science Fiction

> William Gibson's _Neuromancer_ ; the film _Blade Runner_ ; etc.

B: Tokyo in Anime

> The following films are really just some examples that come to mind, from
among the limited archive that is available at normal American video rental
stores; many others could have been used, and if you know of any, please
report. The following are not specifically about Tokyo in any particular way,
but Tokyo is an implicit or explicit condition and/or metaphor in most of
them.

>

>> _Bubblegum Crisis_ (1987 ff) __

>>

>> _Akira_ (1988)

>>

>> _Patlabor_ (1989 ff)

