**JOURNALISM 4040 / History of News Media**

**Fall 2001: _1:30 to 2:45 p.m. Mon/Wed Room 527-G Comp.#3178_ **  

**Instructor:** Leonard Ray Teel, Ph.D., Professor

Department of Communication, 1 Park Place South, Room 1043

Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30303

Office Phone: (404) 651-2697, (404) 651-3200;

Office FAX: (404) 651-1409

E-mail: [joulrt@langate.gsu.edu](mailto:joulrt@langate.gsu.edu)



_**Why Study History?**_  

_**'** An exact knowledge of the past is an aid to the interpretation of the
future, _

_which in the course of human things must resemble it if it does not reflect
it. **'**_

\-- Thucydides [Greek, died 401 B.C.]

_**'** Most men "learn wisdom from the fortunes of others. **'**_

\-- Cornelius Tacitus [Roman, circa 50-120]

_' The experience of history exalts and enlarges the horizon of our
intellectual view. **'**_

**\--** Edward Gibbon [English, 1737-1794]

_**'** What experience and history teach is that peoples and governments never
have_

_learned anything from history, or acted on principles deduced from it. **'**_

**\--** Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel [German, 1770-1831]

_**'** The opportunity, I think, is plain for the historian to become the
major interpreter_

_in literary experience of man's role in society. The task is ...to provide_

_both the matter to satisfy the public interest and those insights into the_

_human condition without which any reading matter is vapid_. _ **'_**

\-- **** Barbara Tuchman [American, 1912-1989]  
  

**_Why study history?_ ** Historians and philosophers from Thucydides to
Barbara Tuchman have reflected on this question. In fact there are many
reasons and this semester we will come up with our own. Assuming that you are
all interested in the mass media, history will help you understand the origins
of media, and the people who contributed their development in the nation with
the greatest freedom of expression.

This is an upper-level interactive and interdisciplinary course. In the next
15 weeks we will study American media history on two levels -- (1) macro: a
**_wide survey_** of all 311 years since the first American newspaper to see
the sweep of movements and (2) micro: an _ **in-depth research**_ to examine
in detail the reality of one small time period in our history.

**Methods.** We will use traditional and nontraditional research methods. The
traditional methods include (1) computer searching, (2) detection, and (3)
analysis. To expand understanding, we use imaginative innovative,
nontraditional techniques including (1) time travel, (2) role playing, and (3)
improvisational role-playing. _(The cover art highlights the improvisational
final exam presentation by the Fall-2001 class.)_

**Syllabus**. This Syllabus will be our contract for course objectives and
requirements, and our guide for pacing our study and assignments. Please read
it carefully and ask questions about it **_during the first week of class_**.
If you see any mistake or something you do not understand, please mention it
during the second class. During the semester, some minor adjustments to the
Syllabus may be necessary.

**Keep in touch.** During the semester, please keep in touch--especially if
something unforseen happens or you have problems with the assignments. If your
telephone, e-mail, or home address changes, notify the professor.  

**Guest Speakers _**:_ **Tracy Hull** , Pullen Library research specialist;
****

**** **Robert Lowe,** author, **_**Improvisation, Inc. **_**

**Journalism History Society** graduates, mentors ****  
  

**Office Hours:** 11:30 to 12:45 p.m. and 2:30-430 p.m. Mondays. Other times
by appointment. For unexpected questions and problems, e-mail or phone.  
  

**Textbooks:**

Wm. David Sloan, James G. Stovall, and James D. Startt, _The Media in America_
(Scottsdale, Ariz.: Publishing Horizons, Inc., 1993).

Barbara Tuchman, _Practicing History: Selected Essays_ (New York: Ballantine
Books, 1982).

_The Atlanta Review of Journalism History_ (Spring 2001) _ ****_  
  

**_Other Required Readings:**_

*Harold E. Davis, "Henry W. Grady, Master of the Atlanta Ring, 1880-1886," _The Georgia Historical Quarterly_ , LXIX, No. 1 (Spring 1985). * _To be distributed and returned to the instructor. ****_  
  

**_Library Reference Books:**_

Jean Hoornstra and Trudy Heath, eds., _American Periodicals, 1741-1900: An
Index to the Microfilm Collections_ (Ann Arbor, MI: University Microfilms,
International, 1979). Ref: Z6971 .H65 [At least two copies are located at the
Reference Desk in the Pullen Library.] _ ****_

Winifred Gregory, ed., _Union List of Newspapers, 1821-1936_. Ref.: Z6945.
.A53 [Located on a shelf near the Reference Desk in Pullen Library.]

_**Important_ :** Our library probably will not have all the primary sources
you require. As soon as you discover you need newspapers on microfilm, books,
magazines or other primary sources, please check and order through Inter-
Library Loan Office, second floor, Pullen Library. Allow two to four weeks for
delivery.  
  

**_Recommended Reading:_**

Jacques Barzun, _The Modern Researcher._ A classic guide, practical and
philosophical.

Robin W. Winks, ed., _The Historian as Detective._ Solid advice for the
historical sleuth.

James West Davidson and Mark Hamilton Lytle, _After the Fact: The Art of
Historical Detection._ Sherlock Holmes with a history degree.

Edwin and Michael Emery, _The Press and America_. Encylopedic in nature.

Will and Ariel Durant, _The Lessons of History_ (New York: Simon and Schuster,
1968).  
  

**Course Techniques:**

_**Chronological Reverse**_ In our survey of 312 years of American news media
history, we will proceed in "chronological reverse"--beginning with today's
media in the Spring of 2002 and traveling back in time toward the Fall of 1690
when the first American newspaper was published in Boston.

**_Archaeology.** _ As we go back in time from present to past, think of this
approach as similar to the digging down of an **_archaeologist_** , exposing
the past layer by layer.

_**Historical Detection**_. Another way to think of research on your chosen
topic is how it resembles the efforts of a _**detective**_ , searching old
newspapers, magazines, letters and such to detect clues in published stories,
advertisements, editorials.

_**Time Travel.**_ Numerous movies and novels based on the idea of _time
travel_ attest to our interest in going back into the past -- movies such as
"Time Machine," "Back to the Future" and "Time Cops" and novels such as H.G.
Wells' _The Time Machine_ (1895) and Jack Finney's _Time and Again (1970)._ In
this course, reading of _**primary sources**_ \-- _as they were read by the
people of some past time_ \-- provides an opening to "travel" into the
mentality of the past and put yourself there mentally and, in some instances,
emotionally.  
  

**Course Objectives** :

Applying all the techniques mentioned above, we will work together to
accomplish the following objectives:

(1) Survey. In the process of surveying American media history we will give
special attention to two features which distinguish American media -- a
commitment (in the First Amendment) to freedom of expression and the evolution
as a free-market industry.

(2) Research and analyze the writing, contributions and ideologies of famous
and not-so-famous _individuals_ involved in the development of the news media
in America.

(3) Study basic _developments in technology and society_ which influenced news
media in America.

(4) Evaluate the impact of _ideologies and movements_ upon the news media, and
analyze the historic interaction between the media and American society. ****

(5) Find and research diverse _primary and secondary sources_ and write a
narrowly focused historical research paper using the essay format --
paragraphs containing a topic sentence (TS) supported by

evidence (E). ****  
  

**Course Requirements:**

1\. **_Read, Question, and Discuss_**. No class is better than its students.
The professor leads, but your questions spark the discussion. The course
requirements are intended to stimulate your involvement and lift you to a new
level of understanding and expression--in _written_ expression and _oral_
competency.  
  

**2.** **_Keep up with Readings, please.***_** To be a _contributing_ member
of the class, you need to read the textbooks -- a starting point for class
discussions. "Reading maketh a full person, and conference a ready one," said
the English philosopher-scientist Francis Bacon who lived in Shakespeare's
age. For some, reading is a "lost pleasure." True, reading requires an
_effort_ of mind, but it confirms and builds your intellectual power and
readies you for discussion. The class schedule attached helps you pace your
reading, as do the _**Focus Groups**_. *****NOTE:** _If you have a reading
problem, please advise the instructor._  
  

**3.** **_An internet address_. ** An internet address is **_required._** We
will create a class e-mail list and use this and the internet for various
purposes: (1) to receive important information, (2) to send messages to each
other, and (3) to link to research networks such as "Journalism History." You
are entitled to a _free internet account_ as part of your tuition. GSU has
simplified the procedure for getting your internet account at the Computer
Center on the first floor of Library South. It takes an average of five
minutes. IF YOU DO NOT HAVE AN EMAIL ADDRESS, please go there and apply for an
account _after the first class_ and immediately email me your address for the
class list being prepared before the second meeting.  
  

**4. _Focus Groups_.** Through the chapter **focus groups** , you add diverse
voices to our discussion -- a stimulating educational alternative to listening
all semester to the "single voice" of the teacher. _On the first_ _day,_
please choose focus group chapters for the text readings and discussions.
During the semester, as we arrive at your group's chapters, your focus groups
will join me in stimulating class discussion. This will be counted toward
class participation. **_Before class_** , that day's focus group members will
give the professor their individual lists of key points discovered and
questions raised in reading and writing essays on the assigned chapter. These
points will be used to stimulate class discussion. Please type these lists,
same as for other assignments.  
  

**5. _Reading Essays/Focus Groups._** Focus Group members will write a two- to
three-page double-spaced essay on the Focus Group chapters. _TURN THESE IN AT
THE BEGINNING OF CLASS_. These essays will be graded. (See Grading Scale.)  
  

**6. _Midterm examination_.** The midterm exam will be based on cumulative
readings, lectures and class presentations through the week of the midterm.  
  

**7. _Makeups tests?** No makeup tests_. Exams are part of a learning
_sequence,_ to be taken at the time indicated in the Schedule.  
  

**8. _Six-Page Sample and In-Class Oral Presentation_.**

(1) _Six-Page Written Report_. This should be a six-page sample of your
research paper.

(2) _Oral Improvisation/Role-Playing._ Based on your early research, you
present your findings in-class by improvising in the role of the media
personality who emerged in your research. We will discuss this improvisation
role-playing during class.  
  

**9. _Research Paper_. ** This is your masterpiece, and we have a process
(below) to make it manageable and enjoyable, even fascinating. Some students
say it became the most interesting project in all their undergraduate classes.
Much of the enjoyment depends on your choice of subject and commitment to
discovery. The research paper demonstrates your semester's progress in doing
in-depth research, and your development as a writer. You will have help with
it all the way through the semester from the instructor's feedback and from
student and graduated mentors who are members of the Journalism History
Society.

_The Research Paper Process_. The process of historical discovery begins the
first day of class and continues until the last. We give _continuous_
attention to the Research Paper from the _first day_ _onward._ This process
**prevents anxiety** which occurs when a major project is delayed. "I learned
a great deal from my research paper," said one student who followed this
process, "and I didn't feel the anxiety right before the due date, thanks to
the plan of doing a little along the way." _Please trust the process **_.**
You will have time to...

(1) gather the necessary **_primary_** research materials and documents
concerning the news media in your chosen time period -- newspapers and
magazines on microfilm, diaries, letters, etc., as well as secondary sources
-- books and articles concerning your subject but published after your time
period.

(2) report on your research findings in our class meetings, getting feedback
from your classmates and professor.

(3) analyze your research so you can draw your own conclusions from the
evidence, and

(4) write a rough draft, and then a final version -- a documented research
paper which contributes something new to scholarship on your subject. The
paper should be 15 to 20 pages in length, double-spaced.

STEP BY STEP. _During the first week,_ please choose the **theme and subject**
for your research paper. These will be approved by the end of the second week.
We have no time to change subjects after the second week. By then, we are
already developing a bibliography of primary sources and secondary sources
available in the Pullen Library -- and also ordering other materials through
Interlibrary Loan.

**Four Time Periods under Study.** In choosing your research topics please go
back in time to one of four periods in the development of American news media.
(1) **1800-1865** , (2) **1900-1928,** (3) **1953-1956** or (4) **1957-1969.**
*

*This period is part of an ongoing book project. 

_Research methods and bibliographies_ will be discussed in class and during a
specially arranged **research strategies** lesson in the Pullen library.

Students will be **coached** in the difference between _primary_ and
_secondary_ sources. Use of primary sources almost always results in
_original_ work--a valuable contribution to the study of journalism history.

NOTE: Students will also be coached in how to analyze these research
materials, and how to formulate your own ideas and express these _without
plagiarizing._  
  

**_Aim beyond this class, target a competition.**_ In this upper level class,
your research paper should have a quality of evidence and writing that can be
presented at a conference.

\-- Students will be encouraged to _submit papers to competitions_ sponsored
by--(1) the History Division of the _Association for Education in Journalism
and Mass Communication_ (AEJMC), (2) the Southeast Colloquium of AEJMC, (3)
the _American Journalism Historians Association_ (AJHA), (4) the Southeast
Colloquium of AJHA, (5) the _Southeast Journalism Conference_ (SEJC), and (6)
_Symposium on the 19 th Century Press, the Civil War and Free Expression._

\-- After your paper is selected to be presented at one of these conferences,
your paper is eligible SYLLABUS/COURSE OUTLINE, p. 5.  
  

to be considered for publication in the _Atlanta Review of Journalism History_
, to be required reading for future classes of media history. This is
precisely how the authors in the current _Reviews_ got published there.  
  

**10. _Final Examination._** The Final Exam will be in the form of an
improvised theatre performance, in group skits. Each student will improvise in
the role of a media personality who emerged from your his/her research for the
research paper. .The performance will be a collaborative effort. Students will
form groups of related historical persons and present on stage a series of
skits, _**improvised**_ in dialogue, staging, lighting,

etc. The class will be coached in improvisation -- exploring and expressing
your historical character. You will be assisted during rehearsals. . The
presentations are scheduled for the last sessions of class and during your
two-hour Final Exam. _Time adjustments may be needed because of theatre
limitations._  
  

**_Attendance/Absences and Lateness_ :**

_Attendance is Required._ Please come to class and be present on time and
ready to start the discussion. As you probably already know, employers seldom
forget or forgive _excessive_ absences or lateness. On the job, excessive
absences often cause you to be considered "unreliable" and be reassigned to
less important tasks, to be demoted, or dismissed. In line with professional
standards you will be expected to _be in class, on time._

_**Attendance/Absence Policy**_.

Attendance is required in part because this is a participatory class. In
consideration of emergencies, each student is permitted _**three absences**_
of **_any sort,** whether **excused or unexcused._** If a student exceeds
three absences for the semester, he or she _**will lose a full letter grade
for the course**_. (This means that if you miss four classes -- five hours of
class time -- subtract one letter grade.) For example, a student who earns a B
in course work will receive the grade of C if he/she misses ** _four (4)_**
classes. IMPORTANT: This attendance is applicable to everyone in class, and is
not appealable.

IMPORTANT: _If for any reason you think you will be absent **more than three
times** during this semester --spring sports, a wedding overseas, surgery, a
lengthy out-of-town responsibility, etc. \-- please see me immediately. _ You
may want to take this course during a semester when you will be able to attend
more often.

**_Lateness.**_

_Please aim to be on time, or a couple minutes early. Missing **more than half
a class period** counts as an absence._ ****

**If you are late or miss class....** It is reasonable to assume that anytime
you miss _any class time_ you missed something important. If you miss a class
or are late, please have a friend who takes notes and can help you catch up
with lecture material and class business, such as exams and assignments. If
you miss class on a day when your **Focus Group** was scheduled, see the
professor about signing up for a substitute Focus Group. ****  
  

**Grading Scale:** Grading is numerical, logical, and easy to understand. Each
student is graded on the points scale below. The _maximum number_ of points
possible for the basic requirements is _1000_. The final course grade will be
computed by averaging the grades on all assignments:  
  

**Two Time Travel Warmup Exercises** (2 x 25 points
each)........................................... 50 points

**Class Participation** \-- **Focus Group Essays** (3 x 50
points)................................... .... 150 points

**Six-Page Sample and in-class Oral Improvisation**

(80 points for the written report, 20 for the
presentation).................................... 100 points

**Midterm
exam**...............................................................................................................
200 points

**Research
paper**..............................................................................................................
300 points

**Final Exam**
:..................................................................................................................
200 points ****

**_TOTAL...........................................................................................................................
1000 points_**  
  

Based on this scale of 1,000 points --

A is at least 90 per cent of 1000, or 900,

B is at least 80 per cent of 1000, or 800

C is at least 70 per cent of 1000, or 700

D is at least 60 per cent of 1000, or 600.

_Rounding off._ A grade of 79.5 to 79.9, for example, will be rounded off to
80.

_Incompletes. (Note: An "Incomplete" may be given only under circumstances
cited in the General Catalog.)_

_**Extra credit_.** Varied extra credit opportunities relevant to our studies
will be offered to the entire class. Depending on opportunities, we try to
make opportunities available at various hours so many can participate.  
  

**Use the latest computer tools and assistance.**

(1) _**Internet**_. The ability to send and receive e-mail in a minimum
_required_ for this class. Please get "on line" after the first class. You may
apply immediately for a free internet address from Georgia State's computer
lab. This service is paid for through your GSU student tuition.

(2) **Our Website**. The Media History class has its own website for locating
sources. You will learn more about this at the Library Session.

(3) _**Join jhistory**_. You are encouraged to join the journalism history
network during the first week.

(4) _**Data searches**_. You will be advised how to use the Pullen Library's
computer searches for your historical research.

(5) _**Computers.**_ You are also encouraged to use computer software to write
your Research Paper.

(6) _ **Computer Center**_. You can write your paper in the Computer Center.
Software simplifies the once-devilish task of footnoting by automatically
figuring how much space to leave for footnotes -- and automatically
renumbering footnotes if you insert a new footnote ahead of others. The Center
is open _24 hours a day_ in the ground floor of Library South.

(7 _) **Machine Problems**_. If you use the Computer Center for printing your
papers, please allow enough time for machine problems. DO NOT MISS CLASS IF
YOUR PAPER IS NOT YET PRINTED.

(8) _ **SpellCheck_**. Use _**SpellCheck_** software to catch spelling errors
in your work.

(9) **_Journalism History Society_**. As members of this class, you are each
automatically paid-up members of GSU's _Journalism History Society_. You will
be invited to serve as officers and to participate on various committees:
Mentoring, Awards, Banquet, etc. Officers of the Society will elaborate. ****  
  

JOURNALISM 4040 / History of News Media

Spring 2002: _ **1:30 to 2:45 p.m.** Mondays and Wednesdays **Room 527-G**
Comp.#3178_  
  

WEEKLY CLASS SCHEDULE, page 1 ** _**_  
  

**_Monday Jan. 7_**

\-------------------------

**First week's reading:**

_The Media in America_ : The Contemporary Media 1974-present

(Handout): Wm. David Sloan, "Why Study Journalism History?" __

_Practicing History:_ Preface __

\------------------------ __

Time Travel: "The Kugelmas Episode" __

Archaeology, Detectives in History, Time Travel __

The nature of American journalism

TIME PERIODS (2) for this semester's research paper:

1832-1865 (or) -1900-1928

Overview of Syllabus and Class Schedule. Read by ** _Wednesday (Jan. 9)**_  
  

**_Assignments** :_

(1) _Select chapter Focus Groups_. Please cite your priorities 1 st through
6th . You will be assigned to your top priorities, unless too many classmates
choose the same period. **\--Due: Today**

_**_Note**__ : Be ready for your focus groups as we progress in reverse time
from present to past. Timing of focus groups will depend on the "flow" of the
class discussions.  
  

(2a) The Time Machine/Test run: Travel back in time back _to **the year of
your birthday and to the day after your birthday**_. Choose **any newspaper on
microfilm** in the library and travel back in time via the microfilm reader to
discover what was happening on your birthday in that year by reading the
newspaper of _the day after your birthday_. Look especially for CLUES about
what was happening in these **six general areas** of civilization easily
remembered by the acronym **PERSIA** : **P** olitics, **E** conomics, **R**
eligion, **S** ociety (includes sports), **I** ntellectual activity (schools,
colleges, science), and the **A** rts.

IMPORTANT: For this report, you need to WRITE the **first paragraphs** (the
"leads,"). And for documentation, WRITE the **exact reference** : "Headline,"
_Name of Newspaper_ , date, page number, for example: "Nixon Refuses to
Release White House Tapes," _New York Times_ , April 1973, p. 1.

**_**Type double-spaced (on all assignments_ ). _**_  
  

(2b) Repeat the same Time Machine exercise. But now go back in time **to any
date in the time period** you wish you focus on **(one of the four time
periods--** (1) **1800-1865** , (2) **1900-1928,** (3) **1953-1956** or (4)
**1957-1969.** **)**. Make the same notes on the same six **PERSIA** topics.
And provide the same documentation-- headline, name of newspaper, date, page
number (as above).

**_**Type double-spaced (as with all assignments**_ ).

\-- **Due date** for both (1) and (2) is **Wednesday (Jan. 9)**  
  

**JOURNALISM 4040 CLASS SCHEDULE, p. 2**  
  

(3): Historical Research Paper/Five-Step Method for Excellence ****

* First step: Choose your topic-- **Due Monday Jan. 14**

* Second step: Prepare a _**working bibliography**_ of **_secondary sources_** \-- books, scholarly journal articles, magazine articles and other secondary sources, PLUS **_primary sources**_ \-- newspapers on microfilm, letters, manuscripts, interviews, and other _primary_ sources. **-Due Monday Jan. 28**

* Third step: Six sample pages **** and in-class oral presentation **\--Due Monday Feb. 11**

**** * Fourth step: Full Rough draft (15-20 pages)-- **Due Monday March 18**

* Fifth step: Final paper -- **Due Wednesday April 24**   
  

Four focus time periods for research papers and presentations: (1)
**1800-1865** , (2) **1900-1928,** (3) **1953-1956** or (4) **1957-1969.)**.  
  

**_Journalism History Society.**_ As paying members of the media history
class, you are each automatically paid-up members of GSU's Journalism History
Society. You will be invited to participate on various committees: Mentoring,
Awards, Banquet, etc. Officers of the Society will meet here to elaborate.  
  

**_Wednesday Jan. 9_**  
  

_**Due**_ \--Time Machine/test run (1) AND (2)

The nature of American journalism / An overview of 311 years  
  

**_Monday Jan. 14 --_**

\-------------------------------------------

**Second week's reading:**

_Media in America_ : The Media in Transition 1945-1974

_Practicing History_ : "In Search of History"

(Handout): __ Thomas William McCaskey, "Pikadon (The Flash-Boom): A Study of
Press Coverage of the Atomic Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki."

* * *

**Due** \--Research Paper Topic

Lessons of American Media History -- Politics & Economics

**FIRST FOCUS GROUP** The Media in Transition 1945-1974

__**Note**__ : _**Turn in your focus group essays at the start of the class
discussion of your assigned chapters._ _**_

**_Keep your lists of questions to stimulate discussions_**  
  

_**Wednesday Jan. 16**_ _**Meet in Pullen Library-North Seminar Room_**

**Guest lecturer: Research librarian: Ms. Tracy Hull**

MEET IN THE LIBRARY SEMINAR ROOM in PULLEN LIBRARY, North, 2nd floor. Take the
**elevator** to the 2nd floor, turn LEFT from the elevator for a few steps,
then RIGHT, and walk straight back the aisle to the seminar room, on your
left, midway back. If you take the **stairs** to the 2 nd floor, go straight
back the aisle ahead of you after entering the second floor. _Note: Ms. Hull
has targeted this session specifically for our class and historical period.
She will demonstrate how best to use **our media history class web page**
specially designed to facilitate research in media history._

_**+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++**_  
  

**JOURNALISM 4040 CLASS SCHEDULE, p. 3**  

_**Monday Jan. 21_ \-- No class /University closed-- Martin Luther King Jr.
Birthday / Holiday **

\--------------------------------------------------

**Third week's reading:**

_Media_ : Public Relations 1900-present, Modern Advertising 1900-present, The
Age of Mass Magazines 1900-present.

_Practicing History:_ "When Does History Happen?"

(Handout): Michael J. Baxter, "Harold Ross and the Founding of _The New
Yorker_."

\------------------------------------------------------------  
  

**FOCUS GROUPS, CONTINUED** _ _ ****__

Return of Research Paper Topics

**_Wednesday Jan. 23**_

Writing the Research Paper, Essay Style: Make your point, elaborate, prove
your point.

Further Discussion of (1) Methods and techniques for developing your research
paper, (2) the Time Travel oral presentations, and the (3) final exam on
stage. __  

Journalism History Society -- Semester Activities -- Appointment of Committees
__  

**_Monday Jan. 28_**

\-------------------------------------------------------------------- ****

**Fourth week's reading:**

_Media **_:** The Entertainment Media 1900-present, Radio Comes of Age
1900-1945, The Media and National Crises.

_Atlanta Review of Journalism History_ (Spring 2001): Eric Noe, "Power of the
Press: When Gangland Killings Triggered the _Chicago Tribune_ , 1931."

_Practicing History:_ "History by the Ounce"

\------------------------------------------------------------------------  

**Due:** Working Bibliography for Research Papers

Focus Groups  

**_Wednesday Jan. 30**_

Focus Groups ** _**_  

**JOURNALISM 4040 CLASS SCHEDULE, p. 4 _**_  

**_Monday Feb. 4_**

\---------------------------------------------------------

**Fifth week's reading:**

_Media_ : The Media and Reform, The Emergence of Modern Media.

_Atlanta Review of Journalism History_ : Jessica Walden, Prelude to Lynching:
Atlanta Newspapers' Coverage of the Leo Frank Trial, 1913."

_Practicing History:_ "The Historian as Artist"

\---------------------------------------------------------

Focus Groups  

_**Wednesday Feb. 6**_  

_"Writing and Citing"_ **\--** Correct form for full first references and
abbreviated later references for books, articles in newspapers, journals and
magazines, interviews, internet citations, diaries, documents, etc. ****

**Improvisational Technique--** _-Preparation for Time Travel presentations_

Guest speaker: Mr. **Robert Lowe** , author of _Improvisation Inc._  

**_Monday Feb. 11_**

\-------------------------------------------------

**Sixth week's reading:**

_Media_ : Development of Advertising 1700-1900, American Magazines 1740-1900 ,
The Age of New Journalism, 1883-1900.

_Practicing History:_ "The Historian's Opportunity"

_Georgia Historical Quarterly_ : Harold Davis, "Henry W. Grady, Master of the
Atlanta Ring _" Atlanta Review of Journalism History:_ Mindy Duncan, "Before
the Half-Tone: Native Americans in the Illustrated Press, 1860-1890."

\--------------------------------------------------

_**Due-_ -Six sample pages** of Research Paper and **Role-playing
Presentations in Class.**

**** Students make presentations -- in character, on panels. The class will be
divided into several panels.  

**_Wednesday Feb. 13_**

Focus Groups & Review for the Midterm ****  

**_Monday Feb. 18_**

\-----------------------------------------

**Seventh week's readings:**

_Media_ : The Press and Industrial America, The Frontier Press, The Antebellum
Press.

_Practicing History:_ "Biography as a Prism of History"

_Atlanta Review_ : Gregg MacDonald, "William Cullen Bryant's Crusade Against
Slavery."

\------------------------------------------ _ ****_

**MIDTERM EXAM _\-- 75 minutes**_

**_Choose one of two subjects and write one essay_**

**JOURNALISM 4040 CLASS SCHEDULE, p. 5**  

**_Wednesday Feb. 20 _\-- No Class --_ Release time to work on Research Paper
Drafts**_  

**_Monday Feb. 25 -- No Class -- Release time to work on Research Paper
Drafts_**

\------------------------------------- ** _**_

**Eighth week's reading:**

_Media:_ The Press and the Civil War, The Penny Press, Freedom of the Press,
The Party Press.

_Practicing History:_ "The Houses of Research" and "How We Entered World War
I"

_Atlanta Review_ : Lisa Varisco, "Samuel Chester Reid, Jr., Confederate
Correspondent." __

\---------------------------------------  

**_Wednesday Feb. 27**_

Focus groups __  

_**Monday March 4 & Wednesday March 6** _ **\-- No Classes -- Spring Break**

**__^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^**

**Housekeeping matters:**

**_Monday March 11_**

*Last day to withdraw from class with a possible grade of "W," except for hardship withdrawal. 

(A "W" is awarded only to a student who is doing passing work.) Last day to
withdraw and receive a grade of WF is Nov. 21.

**^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^**

**_Monday March 11_**

\-----------------------------------------------

**Ninth week's reading:**

_Media:_ The Revolutionary Press, The Colonial Press.

_Practicing History:_ "Problems in Writing the Biography of General Stilwell"
_and_ "Israel: Land of Unlimited Possibilities"

_Atlanta Review:_ Gregory Newsome, "Duff Green's Political Crusade Through the
Press."

* * *

Focus Groups

Discussion of Final Exam presentations ****  

**_Wednesday March 13_**  

Focus Groups ****  

**JOURNALISM 4040 CLASS SCHEDULE, p.** 6  

_**Monday March 18_**

\---------------------------------------------

**Tenth week's reading:**

_Media:_ Printing in America 1600-1690, Communication before America.

**_\-----------------------------------------------_**

Focus Groups ****

**Due -- Rough draft of Research Paper**

**_Wednesday March 20_**

Focus Groups

**_Monday March 25_**

\-----------------------------------------------

**Eleventh week's reading:** Final research for research paper

\----------------------------------------------

Return of rough drafts / Mentoring session **.** __  

**Research Mentoring Forum --** 75 minutes ****

Students of the _**Journalism History Society**_ who have received top scores
on research papers in past classes will advise current students one-on-one
with research paper questions and problems. ****  

**NOTE: DO NOT DISCARD YOUR ROUGH DRAFTS. YOU MUST _KEEP YOUR ROUGH DRAFT_ **
AND PRESENT IT **_TOGETHER WITH YOUR FINAL VERSION_ ** SO THAT YOUR PROGRESS
CAN BE MEASURED FROM ROUGH DRAFT TO FINAL PAPER **.** _In the past, some have
trashed the rough draft, but retrieved it before the arrival of the trashman._
****  

**_Wednesday March 27_ \-- No Class -- release time to work on final paper.**  

**_Monday April 1_**

\-----------------------------------------------

**Twelfth week's reading:** Readings for final research paper __**

* * *

** Focus groups ****  

**_Wednesday April 3_**  

Focus Groups ****  

**JOURNALISM 4040 CLASS SCHEDULE, p. 7**  
  

**_Monday April 8_ \-- No Classes -- release time to work on final paper**

\----------------------------------------------

**Thirteenth week's readings:** Readings for research paper

**\-----------------------------------------**

**Wednesday April 10**

Overview: "311 years of American Media History **"**

All Focus Groups Join In the Lecture and Discussion ****  
  

**_Monday April 15_**

\----------------------------------------------- ****

**Fourteenth week's readings:** Readings for research paper

\----------------------------------------------- ****

First in-class rehearsal for final theatre presentations **.** _(Please be
present. Absence affects the rehearsal and performance of your skit group and
may cause you to be dropped from that group. Thank you.) **_**  
  

**_Wednesday April 17 --_**

Second in-class rehearsal for final theatre presentations **.** _(Please be
present. Absence affects the rehearsal and performance of your skit group and
may cause you to be dropped from that group. Thank you.) **_**  
  

**_Monday April 22 --_ No Class --** **Time to complete Research Papers**  
  

**_Wednesday April 24 --_**

**Due: Final Research Paper _(must have Rough Draft attached)_.**

Discussion of the Research and Writing Process ****

Entering Research Competitions in 2001 ****

****

**_Monday April 29_ \-- Final Class Meeting**

**** Third in-class rehearsal for final theatre presentations **.** _(Please
be present. Absence affects the rehearsal and performance of your skit group
and may cause you to be dropped from that group. Thank you.) **_**

Course Evaluations ****  
  

**Wednesday May 8 -- 12:30 to 2:30 p.m. Final Exam Session**

**Skit groups meet in designated Theatre a half-hour before curtain.**  
  

***** ****

**$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$$**  
  

**_FOCUS GROUPS_**  
  

**American Journalism History**  
  

_**American journalism history**_ becomes more interesting as the class
engages in discussion with the teacher. To stimulate discussion, each student
joins one of five focus groups, focusing on particular chapters, and the
personalities and developments in those chapters.

Each student will be a member of **three focus groups**. In choosing Focus
Groups, follow your interests in one of two ways by choosing (1) areas in
which you know a good deal, or (2) areas about which you would like to know
more, or a mix of (1) and (2).

_During the first day_ , please _**list six choices--** 1st choice through
6th, to indicate your preferences. _Your top three preferences will be honored
as much as possible, but we need students in all areas so the assignments must
be spread evenly among the chapters.

QUESTIONS. Each member of a Focus Group will write a **two- to three-page
double-spaced, typed essay** on assigned Focus Group chapters. These will be
graded. Members will also come to class with a list of **QUESTIONS TO RAISE IN
THE CLASS DISCUSSION.** Turn in the Essays at the start of the Class
Discussion. Hold onto the questions to stimulate class discussion. When the
groupings are announced, note who else is in your groups. You may want to
consult each other as the course progresses.  
  

**Grading** : The three Focus Groups essays (50 points each) count for

150 points, or 15 percent of the course grade.  
  

**_What does a focus group do?** _

![](sp02syl-revised.4040.htg/wp}00001.gif)![](sp02syl-
revised.4040.htg/img.gif) First, read the assigned readings for the coming
week, as everyone else does, but with the idea of _leading or stimulating the
discussion_ when your Focus Group is in charge of discussion.. As you read,
take notes, jotting down what interests you most and raising questions to ask
in class.

Second, after reading the Focus Group chapters, write an essay of two to three
pages double spaced, typed.

Third, during class, you join your Focus Group and help the teacher raise
questions, some of which may not easily be answered. As class leaders, you
help break down the artificial barriers between teacher and class. You also
create new ways of looking at the record of the past 311 years.

_Thanks in advance for your participation in enlivening the classroom
experience._

__*** * ***  
  

**FOCUS GROUPS**  

**Sign-up Sheet**

**Each student will have three Focus Groups:** Please enter your name _**six
times**_ \--prioritize (with a 1,2,3,4,5,6) your choices 1st (favorite) to 6th
Your preferences will be honored wherever possible, unless too many classmates
sign up for the same chapters. Note that we will start NEXT MONDAY with No. 23
and move in _chronological reverse_ back into time.  
  

___________Focus Group No. 23/The Media in Transition, 1945-1974

___________Focus Group No. 22/Public Relations, 1900-Present

___________Focus Group No. 21/Modern Advertising 1900-Present

___________Focus Group No. 20/Age of Mass Magazines 1900-Present

___________Focus Group No. 19/The Entertainment Media, 1900-Present  
  

___________Focus Group No. 18/Radio Comes of Age 1900-1945

___________Focus Group No. 17/Media and National Crises 1917-1945

___________Focus Group No. 16/Media and Reform 1900-1917  
  

___________Focus Group No. 15/Emergence of Modern Media 1900-1945

___________Focus Group No. 14/Development of Advertising 1700-1900

___________Focus Group No. 13/American Magazines 1740-1900  
  

___________Focus Group No. 12/Age of New Journalism 1883-1900

___________Focus Group No. 12-A/Henry Grady and the "Atlanta Ring"

___________Focus Group No. 11/Press and Industrial America 1865-1883  
  

___________Focus Group No. 10/The Frontier Press 1800-1900

___________Focus Group No. 9/The Press and the Civil War 1861-1865

___________Focus Group No. 8/The Antebellum Press, 1820-1861  
  

___________Focus Group No. 7/Penny Press 1833-1861

___________Focus Group No. 6/Freedom of the Press 1690-1804

___________Focus Group No. 5/Party Press 1783-1833  
  

___________Focus Group No. 4/Revolutionary Press 1765-1783

___________Focus Group No. 3/Colonial Press **** 1690-1765

___________Focus Group No. 2/Printing in America 1600-1690

___________Focus Group No. 1/Communication Before America  

%%%%%%

****First lecture August 20, 2001

Time Travel

Incidence of Time Travel themes in literature, television, movies

Why?  

Fascination with the theme?

Travel itself

Why?

It alters our perceptions

We see things differently

We notice things we had no seen

We become aware of our own existence

When we come back, we appreciate our own situation in a wider context

We are somehow "smarter"

Why not in time

20th century: the fourth dimension

Einstein showed that under certain circumstances we can alter our relationship
to time

Listen to these lines from:

Time Machine

Woody Allen's The Kugelmass Affair

Back in Time

