**History 256: THE VIETNAM WAR**

Professor Richard H. Immerman MWF 012:40-1:30

Fall 1997 AC 26

The War in Vietnam was a defining moment for both Americans and Vietnamese,
although the peoples of neither nation can agree on what precisely it defined.
For the United States, the loss of the war produced a crisis of national
identity. For Vietnam, the victory meant the culmination of thirty years of
revolutionary struggle to establish a national identity. To the present day
both suffer from the failure to resolve problems inherent in these outcomes.

If anything, the urgency to resolve these problems is greater now that, more
than three decades after the last American helicopter ignominiously escaped
from the rooftop of its Saigon embassy, the United States has finally formally
recognized the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. The objective of this course is
to contribute to that goal. At the most fundamental level, it is designed to
address the question of why almost complete strangers prior to World War II
became such bitter enemies so soon thereafter, and as a consequence, engaged
in mortal combat for longer than any other U.S. war. Finding an answer will
require that we explore the war's social, political, economic, military, and
diplomatic dimensions and ramifications.

The Vietnam War is a microcosm of the forces that have shaped the twentieth
century world: colonialism, imperialism, nationalism, revolution,
modernization, nation-building, Third World development, the clash of
cultures, capitalism, communism, the cold war, and more. This course's agenda
is accordingly ambitious. Your enrollment serves as your pledge to make a
serious effort to fulfill it. I pledge, in return, that the rewards will be
worth the investment.

**Requirements:** Course work will include readings, **discussions** , one
comparative book review, one mid-term, and one final examination.

**Texts:** All available at the Temple Bookstore: Herring, _America's Longest
War (3rd edition)_ ; Katsiaficas, _Vietnam Documents: American and Vietnamese
Views of the War_ ; Bergerud, _Red Thunder, Tropic Lightning_ ; Bao Ninh,
_Sorrow of War_.

**Grading:** Grading will be based primarily on a system that awards a
possible 300 points, which will be divided by three for determining final
grades according to the following standard: 90-100= from A- to A; 80-89= from
B- to B+; 70-79= from C- to C+; 60-69= from D- to D+; 0-59=F. _Active_ and
_regular_ participation in class discussions will also influence the final
grade.

****

****

****

**Book Review:** There will be **one** book review comparing **two** books,
five-to-seven **typed** **double-spaced** pages in length. To make your
selections easier, I have appended a list of  "additional readings" to the
syllabus for this course that is available on the internet. The url is
http://www.temple.edu/histdept/his256.html. An exponentially more
comprehensive bibliography is available at
http://hubcap.clemson.edu/~eemoise/bibliography.html. If you lose these
addresses, simply go to the Home Page for Temple University's History
Department and you'll easily find both.

Once you have decided on the two books you want to compare, see me. I **must**
**approve** your selections. The review will be due by the end of class (2:30)
on ****Monday, December 1****. **No late papers will be accepted**.

It goes without saying that the review will be original to the student.
Paraphrasing reviews that have been published in journals or newspapers is not
acceptable (even if footnoted). The review will be graded on substance,
critical analysis, and presentation (I expect correct grammar, spelling,
etc.). The medium counts as well as the message. You should consult the hand-
out distributed in class that explains the distinction between a book "review"
and a book "report." You should also me _as_ questions arise--not _after_ the
review's due date. You can earn up to _100_ points toward the final grade.

**Mid-term Examination:** You will be expected to write _in class_ one
informed, sophisticated, and coherent essay responding to _one question_
selected by _me_ from a list of _up to four questions_ that I will distribute
at least a week prior to the exam. The examination will take place on
**Wednesday, October 22, 1997**. **** You can earn up to _100_ points toward
the final grade.

**Final Examination:** You will be expected to write _in class_ two informed,
sophisticated, and coherent essays responding to _two questions_ selected by
_me_ from a list of _up to five questions_ that I will distribute at least a
week prior to the exam. The examination will take place on **Friday, December
12, 1997, 11:00 A.M.-1:00 P.M.** Each essay will count for half of the total
_100_ points you can earn toward the final grade.

**Attendance** : Everyone is expected to attend class regularly. Too many
absences will affect my evaluation of your performance and progress (or lack
thereof).

**Consultations** : I encourage students to discuss the course material, book
reviews, and any related academic matters with me as often as each's heart
(and mind) desires. I will hold regular office hours every **MWF** from
10:45-11:45 in Gladfelter Hall 923 (204-7466). Meetings may also be arranged
for any mutually convenient time. The same invitation applies for the teaching
assistant.

**Syllabus and Weekly Assignments**

_Week_ _Topic and Reading_

Sept. 3 Introduction

Sept. 5 Photojournalistic Tour of Vietnam

Sept. 8-12 The "Other" (Indochina)

Bao Ninh, first half

Sept. 15-19 Roots of the American Empire

Bao Ninh, remainder

Sept. 22-26 Nationalism/Communism in Indochina

Herring, chapter 1

Sept. 29-Oct.3 FDR, WWII, and Revolution

Herring, chapter 2

Oct. 6-10 The French War/The Cold War

Katsiaficas, chapter 1

Oct. 13-15 From Dienbienphu to Geneva

Katsiaficas, chapter 2

Oct.17 Film: _The Battle for Dien Bien Phu._

Oct. 20 **Review**

Oct. 22 **Mid-term Examination**

Oct. 24 Trapped By Success

Herring, chapter 3

Oct. 27-31 Ngo + Ho = NLF

Herring, chapter 4

Nov. 3-7 Into the Quagmire

Herring, chapter 5

Kastiaficas, chapter 3

Nov. 10-14 No Fronts

Herring, chapter 6

Kastiaficas, chapters 4-5

Nov. 17-21 Home Fronts

Kastiaficas, chapter 6

Bergerud, chapter 1-3

Nov. 24 Light at the End of the Tunnel

Bergerud, chapters 4-epilogue

Nov. 26 Film: _Homefront USA_

__

__Nov. 28 **Thanksgiving Recess**

Dec. 1 **Due Date for Book Review**

Dec. 1-5 Creating the Vietnam Syndrome

Herring, chapter 7

Dec. 8 Winners and Losers

Herring, chapter 8

Kastiaficas, chapter 8

Dec. 10 **Review**

**Final Examination:** **Friday, December 12, 1997: 11:00-1:00 P.M.**

