## Native American Social Systems

Sociology/NAST 320 Augustana College, Sioux Falls, South Dakota  
![](bluemarb.gif)  
**William J. Swart**  
Office Phone: 605.336.5329  
Email: swart@inst.augie.edu  

**DESCRIPTION:**  
This course presents an "institutional" approach to Native American
(specifically Lakota) society from pre-European contact to the present.
Specifically, it explores Native American social institutions including
political, economic, family, religious, and educational systems, as well as
the impact of European culture on the historical development of tribal social
institutions. This course fulfills the State of South Dakota's teacher
certification requirement.

**OBJECTIVES:**  
  
1\. To study the historic development of Lakota society prior to contact with
Europeans.  
  
2\. To understand political, economic, family, religious, and educational
institutions in their original Native American form.  
  
3\. To explore the effect of acculturation and assimilation of Lakota social
institutions.  
  
4\. To understand the individual Lakota within the structure of Lakota
society.  
  
5\. To comprehend the value system of contemporary Lakota individuals.  
  
6\. To gain an increasing awareness of the dominant culture in America through
in-depth study of the first Americans.

**REQUIREMENTS FOR THE COURSE:**  
  
**_Required Books:_ (SUBJECT TO CHANGE FOR FUTURE SEMESTERS)**  

  * Hassrick, Royal. 1964. _The Sioux: Life and Customs of a Warrior Society._ Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
  * Grobsmith, Elizabeth S. 1981. _Lakota of the Rosebud: A Contemporary Ethnography._ Orlando: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich Publishers.

In addition to these books, chapters of the following books will be on reserve
in Mickelson Library. They may be checked out under their respective titles
(i.e. Deloria: Speaking of Indians; or Ebbott: Indians in Minnesota).

  * Deloria, Ella. 1978. _Speaking of Indians._ Vermillion: University of South Dakota Press.
  * Ebbott, Elizabeth. 1985. _Indians in Minnesota._ Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

**_Student Responsibilities:_**  
Students are not potted plants, and I expect full student commitment and
participation in this learning experience. In addition to lectures, class
discussion will be an important component of this course. For this reason, I
expect you to come to class having read and prepared the readings for
discussion. I dislike "free riders," and thus reserve the right to resort to
pop quizzes if it becomes apparent that people are not doing the reading
before class. Ultimately, how much you get out of this course largely depends
on how much you put into it.

**_Exams:_**  
We will have three unit exams for this course. Each exam is listed on the
course schedule, and will be worth 100 points. You can expect that the exams
will be a combination of multiple choice, matching, fill-in-the-blank, and
essay questions. I am not a proponent of making exams a guessing game, so I
will distribute a study guide not less than one week prior to each scheduled
exam. Exam questions will be drawn directly from this study guide. THE FINAL
EXAM IS NOT COMPREHENSIVE.

**_Group Project:_**  
Early in the semester, students will be divided into groups in order to embark
on a more in-depth exploration of issues pertinent to Native American social
systems. In doing so, students will select and report on an historical or
contemporary aspect of one of the following areas: tribal government, tribal
economic, family, educational, or religious systems, or tribal health care.
This research may focus on either a specific tribe or pan-Indian issues. For
instance, if one is interested in tribal health care, one could examine
contemporary trends or programs in health care on a specific reservation.
Another possible project might explore the influence of gambling or the
development of casinos on tribal economies.  

Each group should select a topic for research by February 27 and submit a
brief (one page) proposal outlining the major research question the group
would like to explore. During the last three class periods each group will
present its project to the entire class (15 minutes maximum per group). A
written paper, or whatever form of documentation used, is due at the time of
your oral presentation.

Your group project will be evaluated along two fronts. First, you will have an
opportunity to evaluate and be evaluated by the other members of your project
group. Second, I will evaluate the group project as it is presented to the
class. Each student can receive up to a maximum of 100 points for their group
project.

**_Grading:_**  
Final grades will be based on the cumulative points from the five exams and
mini-lab assignments, and will be assigned, as noted below, on a straight 10
percent scale, with 60 percent passing. There is no extra credit available for
this course.

90% and above.............A 80-89%.........................B
70-79%.........................C 60-69%.........................D 59% and
below.............F  
**OTHER INFORMATION ABOUT THE COURSE:**  

**_Availability:_**  
My scheduled office hours are for you, and I hate sitting alone during my
office hours. I look forward to and encourage meeting with students during
these times. If my office hours do not meet your schedule, however, please
feel free to make an appointment with me at another time. I am also available
via the Internet (swart@inst.augie.edu). If you need to get in touch with me
outside of my office hours and do not have access to the Internet, feel free
to call my office (336-5329) and leave a message if I'm not available.

**_Persons with Disabilities:_**  
If you have any sort of disability or personal problem which prevents the
fullest expression of your abilities, please let me know as soon as possible
during the semester - _before_ it interferes with your work - so that I can
make a reasonable accommodation to your needs.

**_A Note About Due Dates:_**  
Due dates for this course are FIRM, and I expect you to turn in assignments
and take the exams during the scheduled class period. This policy will be
strictly enforced throughout the semester. Excuses for turning in late
assignments or taking a make-up exams will be considered on an individual
basis, and only when supported with the appropriate documentation. You bear
the sole responsibility for turning your work in on time.

**_Academic Misconduct:_**  
Students should abide by all student regulations as stated in the Augustana
College Catalog and the Student Handbook, especially those rules pertaining to
**_cheating_** and **_plagiarism_**. Plagiarism, cheating, or any other form
of academic dishonesty will not be tolerated in this course. Any student
engaging in academic dishonesty in this course can expect a failing grade for
the course _and_ formal charges to be brought before the Dean.

**COURSE SCHEDULE:** **(Topic Schedule Only)**  
  
**Unit I. Early Lakota Social Structure**  

  * Introduction to Native American Social Systems
  * Introduction to the Sociology of Social Systems
  * Tribal and Divisional Politics (Hassrick, Chapter 1)
  * Lakota Values and Morals (Hassrick, Chapters 2 and 3)
  * War and Conquest (Hassrick, Chapter 4)
  * Gender, Marriage and Family (Hassrick Chapters 5 and 6)
  * Tribal Economy (Hassrick, Chapters 8, 9, and 10)
  * Religion (Hassrick, Chapters 11 and 12)
  * Social Status and Integration (Hassrick, Chapters 13 and 14)

**Unit II. The Lakota and the Reservation**  

  * American Politics and the Reservation Movement (Hassrick Chapter 15)
  * The Rosebud Reservation (Grobsmith, Chapters 1, 2, and 4)
  * Family (Deloria Chapters 5 and 10)
  * Politics (Grobsmith, Chapter 3)
  * Community Life (Grobsmith, Chapter 5)
  * Religion (Grobsmith, Chapter 6; Deloria Chapters 6 and 11)
  * Language (Grobsmith, Chapter 7)
  * Education (Grobsmith, Chapter 8; Deloria Chapters 7 and 12)
  * Economy (Deloria, Chapters 8 and 13)

**Unit III. Contemporary Issues in Native American Social Systems**  

  * American Indian Ethnic Renewal: From Termination to Self-Determination (Ebbott, Chapter 1; Nagel)
  * Political Issues (Ebbott, Chapters 4 and 5)
  * Film: In Whose Honor?
  * Urbanization (Ebbott, Chapter 6)
  * Economic Issues (Ebbott, Chapters 7, 8, and 10)
  * Education (Ebbott, Chapter 9)
  * Housing (Ebbott, Chapter 11)
  * Health and Chemical Dependency (Ebbott, Chapter12 and 13)
  * Group Presentations (15 Minutes per Group)

_Last revised: August 1, 1998_  

