ramirez-syllabus **

## **Todorov, Tzvetan. "The Reasons For Victory."

 _The Conquest of America_. Translated by Richard Howard. New York: Harper and
Row, 1982**

#### Bryan Zea Rubio, Claudia Castro, Gabriel Herrera, Christine Ross, Macey
Loones

** Tzvetan Todorov is a French historian who helped champion the idea that
history is a narrative of multiple truths rather than a single account of
concrete facts. In his work, Todorov targets the invasion and subsequent
conquest of Mexico by the Spanish conquistador Cortes and attempts to explain
the events leading to the remarkable Spanish victory. As a subscriber to the
deconstructionist theory of historical thought in which history cannot be
taken at face value and must be examined more closely, Todorov is quick to
illustrate the lack of an objective account in the Spanish conquest of Mexico.
Speaking on behalf of historical text, Todorov describes: "The case of the
texts expressing the Indians' point of view is especially problematic; as it
happens, given the absence of native writings, they are all subsequent to the
conquest and therefore influenced by the conquerors" (54). Left with only
documents written or influenced by the Spanish, Todorov chooses to view them
not as infallible truths, but rather simply as texts giving insight to the
events which took place. He explains that "the documents analyzed are no
longer of concern solely (or chiefly) as actions, but as sources of
information about a reality of which they do not constitute a part" (54). In
an effort to produce a more complete account of history with the given
documents, Todorov presents three main ideas which he believes aided the
Spanish victory over Mexico; the ambiguity of Montezuma actions, Cortes'
exploitation of differing populations, and the advanced technology employed by
the Spaniards.

According to Todorov, one decisive factor in the conquest was the fact that
Montezuma offered no resistance to Cortes. From a tactical standpoint,
Montezuma's lack of resistance is illogical, yet there is no evidence to his
true intentions. Various documents depict Montezuma in a contrasting manner.
For example, Gomara wrote: "Montezuma must have been a weak man of little
courage, to let himself be seized and then, while a prisoner, never attempt to
flight, even when Cortes offered him his freedom, and his own men begged him
to take it" (57). Matyr, however, describes him in a more heroic fashion,
sacrificing his own humility in order to avoid bloodshed of his people (56).
Perhaps Montezuma did not resist his captors due to a guilty conscience,
nursing the idea that the Spaniards were the rightful heirs to the Toltec
empire. This guilt may have laid in the fact that the Aztecs were usurpers
themselves, having stolen the lands from the natives before them. Perhaps the
events described by Cortes and his companions are entirely fictitious, simply
a grandiose myth used to glorify the "superiority" of the Spanish. The
documents we have now, however, allow us to adopt many sorts of ideas as to
what might have happened as long as we see them merely as historical
narratives, not as fact. Todorov explains, " unfortunately we lack the
documents that might have permitted us to penetrate the mental world of this
strange emperor" (56).

In addition to the ambiguity of Montezuma, the internal differences between
the Mexican population could have also contributed to the Spanish victory. The
Indian population was not a homogenous one and Cortes used this to his
advantage. Todorov uses parallels between the Aztecs brutality towards the
Tlaxcaltecs and the Spaniards brutality towards the Aztecs to show history's
theory of continuity. The Aztecs, themselves, were historically perceived as
usurpers and conquerors by neighboring tribes. Todorov states that "Cortes
often appears to them [neighboring tribes] as a lesser evil, as a liberator,
so to speak, who permits them to throw off the yoke of a tyranny especially
detestable because so close at hand" (58). Many of the inhabitants felt
hostility towards the Aztecs and allied with Cortes. This may have been the
turning point of the battle in that Cortes, with only a handful of men, would
most likely have lost without the aid of the other indigenous population.

Finally, one of the deciding factors in the battle between Cortes' company and
the Aztecs may have been the technological gap between them. For example, with
their introduction of the horse, the Spanish enjoyed greater mobility and
speed over their adversaries. Furthermore, the Spanish were able to utilize
the local waterways for their own supply lines and troop transport with their
brigantines, an improved version of the Indian canoe. Not only did the
Spaniards increased technology bring with them advanced weaponry and tactics,
the Spanish also found aid from an old enemy of their own; smallpox. With
their advanced weaponry and their unintentional use of biological warfare, the
Spanish managed to subdue the entire Aztec population. Yet, present day
historians still cannot explain with absolute certainty the subjugation of the
Mexican population. Even Todorov states that "yet these superiorities, in
themselves incontestable, do not suffice to explain everything..." (61).

Overall, Todorov's essay is one of many works designed to deconstruct history
and question the dominant historical paradigm. With all the facts and
speculations aside, the implied message that Todorov writes is this: There is
no single historical truth. We, in the present day, cannot say exactly how or
why the Spanish conquered the Mexicans or much less anything else in the
distant past. Historians must take notice that any information concerning the
Spanish conquest is passed down from generation to generation and is subject
to revision and the political whims of previous readers and storytellers. The
only reliable truth that we can salvage from any historical document is that
the documents themselves are not fully reliable. The most fascinating and
befuddling characteristic of the conquest is its mysteriousness. Yet mysteries
were meant to be solved. We may never know of the actual events which
transpired between Cortes and the Aztecs. But is it more important to know
what actually occurred, or to make your own observations and find for yourself
your own truth? In this world there is no single truth, there is only what we
believe and have faith in. Todorov may have agreed with Paul, author of
thirteen books of the Bible, when Paul said, "We walk by faith, not by sight"
(2 Corinthians 5:7). It is our own belief which molds the "truth".

## **Todorov, Tzvetan. "Columbus and the Indians."

The Conquest of America Trans. Richard Howard. New York.

### Cynthia Dacarett and Alejandro Meza

**

In our early years of primary school, history was nothing but a collection of
romanticized facts about Pilgrims and heroes as seen from the historians'
perspectives. Now in institutions of higher learning, we learn to connote one
word with history: bias. We now realize that the history we were taught was
only one small part of the whole written in a way that would fit into
mainstream standards or ideals of these times. Even if there are historians
whose sole intentions are to interpret the "whole truth," they like Columbus
were also influenced by the times they lived in. We must realize that this
history was selective and biased; therefore, the number of credible historical
texts is questionable. Should today's younger generation of students have to
endure the same deceiving and romanticized history that we were once exposed
to and forced to learn?

In "Columbus and the Indians," it is clear that Todorov is careful to
distinguish himself from typical historians. Todorov presents works cited from
Columbus' journal entries and other Spanish conquistadors. None of the
Indians' records were accounted for since none were available. By the time the
indigenous people had the knowledge to record events in Spanish, they had
already been influenced by the Spanish culture. Rather than presenting the
accounts as the "real truth," Todorov includes accounts of Columbus's brother,
Bartolome, in addition to those of Columbus. As a French historian and critic,
Todorov is able to provide a more objective view on these accounts; he offers
a history that unfolds "new truths" not only those generally recorded. By
digging deep into Columbus' entries, Todorov lays out several criticisms of
the European explorer. Todorov reveals Columbus's inability to accept a
culture with different standards than his own. For example, Columbus denies
the existence of the Indians' socioeconomic structure, because he doesn't
understand their practice of interchanged communal ownership of their
property. Columbus was astonished to see that the Indians valued a piece of
glass more than a gold piece. In an entry Columbus writes, "I have given many
other things of slight value from which they took with great pleasure"
(Todorov, 34). He cannot perceive that people would have different cultural
values from his own, therefore the Indians socioeconomic structure is non-
existent or unacceptable in his world. According to Todorov, with this event
we we learn more about Columbus' than about the Indians. This is a perfect
example of Columbus's narrow-mindedness in judging an unknown ethnic group by
his own cultural standards. Todorov claims that Columbus's main intentions
were to profit from the Indians, rather than to simply convert them to
Catholicism. When Columbus came to America all he saw was what he could gain
from the land; he saw precious metal, different kinds of plants and animal,
but he only speaks about natives because they "constitute a part of the
landscape." (Todorov 34) The first thing to grasp Columbus' eye was the
Indians' absence of clothes, which led him to envision the indigenous in a
state of "spiritual nudity," or in more simple terms, vulnerable uncorrupted
innocence. Columbus saw this as an opportunity to exploit these uncorrupted
people from their riches. The profit made by these crusades was takes as
"Divine Will". Todorov describes the Spaniards as giving the Indians a
religion and faith in exchange for an incessant supply of gold. Is God for
sale? Converting the Indians meant in some way accepting natives as equals,
but if they refused to convert they were subdued by force and this made them
unequal and inferior. By gradual changes, Columbus shifted from assimilation
to an ideology of enslavement, if they were not Christians the could only be
slaves.

The last claim Todorov makes in the article, is how Columbus has hypocritical
changes, were he shifts from admiration toward the Indians to calling them at
the end "dirty dogs" just because they had revolted against them. First,
Columbus sees the Indians as "gentle, fearful and very handsome people, ...
the best people in the world." (Todorov, 36) Todorov makes it clear that
Columbus does not really admire the peoples features because he also describes
them as having "the same natures and the same customs;" in short, they all
looked the same to him. How can one admire an ethnic groups' features if they
all seem to look the same, and all he wanted was to change them all to fit his
standards? Attitudes towards the Indians shifted quickly after the Indians
killed some Spaniards left behind in the Hispaniola by Columbus. The
descriptions were now "cowardly and wicked..." because they did not fight face
to face with the entire Spanish Armada, instead the Indians attacked when the
Spanish were separated. Analytical historical accounts are essential in order
to enrich one's own critical opinion about history. It is critical that
historians provide more openness towards historical events as opposed to
writing history in a narrow perspective that limits the reader's perception of
the whole picture. Todorov's historical analysis unlocks facts that for many
years have been hidden from those that care to know more than merely trivial
information. Todorov represents the new wave of historians in the 20th
century, who are devoted to communicating a more accurate truth.

Return to [Syllabus](../infra/syllabus.html)

