**HS 390 02 American Slavery  
TR 2:30-3:45  
Jordan Hall 336C**

**Andrew Denson**

**940-9681  
adenson@butler.edu  
blue.butler.edu/~adenson**



**Office hours:  
TR 1-2 (or by appointment)  
JH 349E**



****READ THIS DOCUMENT IN ITS ENTIRETY. YOU WILL BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE FOR ALL
OF THE INFORMATION IT CONTAINS****



**Books**

**Peter Kolchin, _American Slavery_.**

**Marie Jenkins Schwartz, _Born in Bondage_.**

**John Hope Franklin and Loren Schweninger, _Runaway Slaves_.**



**Course Schedule**



**Aug 23 - Introduction**



**Colonial Slavery**



**Aug 28 - Kolchin, 3-27. **Intro essay due****

**Aug 30 - Ira Berlin, "From Creole to African," _William and Mary Quarterly_
53 (April 1996), 251-88 (handout).**



**Sep 4 - Kolchin, 28-62.**

**Sep 6 - Ira Berlin, _Many Thousands Gone_ , 95-141 (handout).**



**Sep 11 - John C. Inscoe, "Carolina Slave Names," _Journal of Southern
History_ , 49 (Nov 1983), 527-554 - JSTOR. **Conferences this week to discuss
research ideas****



**The Revolution and Slavery**



**Sep 13 - Kolchin, 63-92.**



**Sep 18 - F. Nwabueze Okoye, "Chattel Slavery as the Nightmare of the
American Revolutionaries," _William and Mary Quarterly_ 37 (Jan 1980), 3-28 -
JSTOR.**

**Sep 20 - Albert J. Raboteau, "The Slave Church in the Era of the American
Revolution" in Ira Berlin and Ronald Hoffman, eds., _Slavery and Freedom in
the Age of the American Revolution_ , 193-213 (reserve).**



**Antebellum Slavery - Trade and Organization**



**Sep 25 - Kolchin, 93-132.**

**Sep 27 - Drew Gilpin Faust, _James Henry Hammond and the Old South_ , ch. 5
(handout).**

****Research proposals / bibliographies due by today-conferences next week****



**Oct 2 - Walter Johnson, _Soul By Soul_ , ch. 5, and excerpts of Frederick
Law Olmsted and Solomon Northup on the slave trade (handout).**

****Midterm distributed****

**Oct 4 - No class**



**Oct 9 - **Midterm due****



**Antebellum Slavery - Slave Life and Culture**



**Oct 11 - Kolchin, 133-68.**

**Start reading Schwartz, _Born in Bondage_.**



**Oct 16 - Discussion of WPA narratives. **Essay due****

**Oct 18 - No class**



**Oct 23 - Schwarz, _Born in Bondage_.**

**Oct 25**



**Oct 30 - Lawrence Levine, "The Sacred World of Black Slaves," in _Black
Culture and Black Consciousness_ , 1-80 (handout).**

**Nov 1 Lawrence Levine, "'Some Go Up, Some Go Down': The Meaning of the Slave
Trickster," in _The Unpredictable Past_ , 59-77 (reserve).**



**Resistance**



**Nov 6 Discussion of escaped slave narratives. **Essay due****

**Nov 8 Franklin and Schweninger, _Runaway Slaves,_ 1-97.**



**Nov 13 Franklin and Schweninger, _Runaway Slaves_ , 98-294.**

**Nov 15 **Research paper drafts due by today****



**Nov 20 Thanksgiving**

**Nov 22**



**The White South and the Slavery Debate**



**Nov 27 - Kolchin, 169-99.**

**Nov 29 - Kenneth Greenberg, "The Nose, the Lie, and the Duel in the
Antebellum South," _American Historical Review_ 95 (Feb 1990), 57-74 -
JSTOR.**



**Dec 4 - George Frederickson, _The Arrogance of Race_ , 15-53 (reserve). **

**Dec 6 - Kolchin, 200-37. **Research paper final drafts due** **Final exam
distributed****



**Dec 14 - **Final exam due****



**Attendance**



**You are required to attend every class meeting. If you miss a meeting you
must have it excused to avoid damaging your course grade. When possible, you
should inform me ahead of time when you are going to miss a meeting. When that
is not possible, you must contact me within twenty-four hours of missing a
meeting to have the absence excused. Once you have two unexcused absences, I
will take 2% off of your final course grade for each additional unexcused
absence (so three unexcused absences equal 2% off, four equal 4% off, and so
on).**





**Reading**



**Reading assignments must be completed before the class period for which they
are assigned. Some weeks have heavier assignments than others, so be sure to
look ahead and leave yourself adequate time.**



**Participation**



**Your active participation during class time is essential and will be graded.
You must demonstrate that you have done the assigned reading and that you
understand it. In addition to holding discussion most class periods, I will
occasionally have you perform brief in-class or overnight writing assignments.
These will not receive formal grades, but I will examine them to see if you
are keeping up and thinking about the material. For each class period I will
write notes on the nature and degree of each student's participation.**



**Assignments**



**You will take two exams, write three essays, and complete a research paper
on a topic of your own choosing. The exams will be take-home format and will
ask you to answer essay questions based on the course readings and discussion.
I will give you an exam sheet on the days indicated in the course schedule.
The sheet will contain four questions; you will answer three of these. Each
answer should be 2 to 3 pages long, word processed. You will have one week to
complete the exam-no extensions will be given unless extraordinary and
unavoidable circumstances make it impossible for you to complete the exam.**



**The first essay will be a warm-up exercise and will not be graded. The other
two will require you to do some outside reading in primary documents (WPA ex-
slave narratives for the first; escaped slave narratives for the second) and
evaluate the documents as sources of information about slavery and slave life.
Each of these essays will be 3 to 4 pages long. You will receive a detailed
assignment sheet for each later in the semester.**



**Your main writing assignment for the semester will be a research paper on a
topic you will select. I retain veto power over paper topics, but for the most
part you will be free to examine whatever aspect of American slavery you
desire. The final drafts of the paper will be seven to ten pages long. You
will receive a detailed assignment sheet in the second week of the semester.**



**I will be scheduling individual conferences with students in connection with
the research projects during the weeks indicated in the schedule. These
meetings are required. If you do not schedule a conference or fail to show up
you will receive a grade no higher than a 'C' on the paper. In addition, I
will be asking you to turn in a proposal / preliminary bibliography for the
research project and later a rough draft of the paper. These also are
required. If you do not turn them in, you will receive a grade no higher than
a 'C' on the paper.**



**Writing advice and guidelines, along with an explanation of the criteria I
will use in grading, are available on my web site. Be sure to read these
pages.**



**Late Papers**



**Except in cases involving some kind of extreme emergency, turning in writing
assignments late will result in the loss of one grade per day. If you know you
will not be present on the day an assignment is due, you must contact me ahead
of time. In most cases I will require you to turn in the assignment early.**





**Breakdown of Final Grade**



**Midterm - 20%**

**Final - 20%**

**Essays - 20% total**

**Research paper - 20%**

**Participation - 20%**



**Reserve Reading and JSTOR**



**Some of the reading assignments for this class will be on closed (library
only) reserve or available on JSTOR, the online archive of back issues of
scholarly journals. Be sure to obtain the reserve readings well before the
class periods for which they are assigned, especially if you are planning to
read the assignments in the library rather than photocopy them. To use JSTOR,
you need to be on a Butler computer. You can get to JSTOR from the links
section of my web page or by going directly to www.jstor.org. Use the browse
screens to get to the journal and issue in question. Find the assigned article
and print it out-it's free (except for the university).**



**If Things Go Badly**



**If you feel that you are having trouble keeping up with the class or that
your performance is not what you would like it to be, talk with me and do so
as early as possible. Many times, students delay seeking help until it is too
late to do much about their final grade.**



**Academic Dishonesty**



**Definitions of and rules regarding cheating, plagiarism, and other forms of
academic dishonesty are described in the Butler student handbook. Students
should familiarize themselves with these university policies. Penalties for
academic dishonesty can range from the lowering of an assignment grade to
failure of the course.**



**Student Disability Services**



**The Office of Student Disability Services asks that faculty pass along the
following statement: "It is the policy and practice of Butler University to
make reasonable accommodations for students with properly documented
disabilities. Written notification from Student Disability Services is
required. If you are eligible to receive an accommodation and would like to
request it for this course, please discuss it with me and allow two weeks
notice. Otherwise, it is not guaranteed that the accommodation can be received
on a timely basis. If you have questions about Student Disability Services,
you may wish to contact Michele Atterson, JH 136, ext. 9308."**

