![](../../../graphics/banners/reg_temp2.gif)![](../page-banner-aci.gif)

**FALL 2001**

This information effective for Fall 2001.  
Check with instructor the first day of class for any changes.

* * *

# History

#### [HIS-008] [HIS-010] [HIS-026] [HIS-080F] [HIS-124] [HIS-150B] [HIS-194U]
[HIS-196W] [HIS-208B]

##

* * *

8\. U.S. and Japanese Films of World War II

Fall 2001  
Instructors: Alice Yang Murray, Alan Christy

Go to:[
](http://humwww.ucsc.edu/history/history26)<http://humwww.ucsc.edu/history/history8>

[top of page]

##

* * *

10\. Theories of History / Theories of Society

Fall 2001  
Instructor: Mark Traugott

Go to: <http://ic.ucsc.edu/~traugott/hist10/>

[top of page]

##

* * *

26\. Memories of World War II in the U.S. and Japan

Fall 2001  
Instructors: Alice Yang Murray, Alan Christy

Go to: <http://humwww.ucsc.edu/history/history26>

[top of page]

##

* * *

80F. Cinema and History in Europe: The First One Hundred Years

Instructor: Bruce Thompson

### Course Description:

This course will survey the history of cinema in Europe from its invention in
the 1890s to the present. Each week will highlight one of the major moments or
movements in the history of cinema as well as one or more outstanding
directors. Emphasis will be placed on the historical context of selected films
and of the national film industries that produced them, as well as on
innovations of style and technique. The course has no prerequisites and is
open to everyone.

**Course requirements:** participation in discussion sections, two five-page
papers, and a final examination.

The syllabus below will undergo some revision, and, of course, we will not
attempt to view in class all of the films listed (though we will see clips
from almost all of them). We'll see one complete film each week, and we may
supplement the regular lectures with some special night screenings to
accommodate longer films.

#### 1\. The Birth of Cinema: France And Italy, 1895-1905

Films:

    _Exiting the Factory, Arrival of a Train at La Ciotat,_ and _Demolition of a Wall_ (c.1895) by the Lumi ere brothers
    _A Trip to the Moon_ (1902) and _An Impossible Voyage_ (1904) by Georges Melies
    _Cabiria_ (1915) by Giovanni Pastrone

Reading:

    Kristin Thompson and David Bordwell, _Film History, an Introduction,_ pp. 1-28
     Alan Williams, _Republic of Images: a History of French Filmmaking,_ pp. 1-47
     Geoffrey O'Brien, "First Takes: A Hundred Years Ago at the Movies," _The New Republic_ (June 12, 1995)
     Erwin Panofsky, "Style and Medium in Motion Pictures," in _Film: An Anthology,_ ed. Daniel Talbot

#### 2\. The Haunted Screen: Germany and Scandinavia, 1919-1932

Films:

    _The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari_ (1919) by Robert Wiene
    _Nosferatu_ (1922) and _The Last Laugh_ (1924) by F. W. Murnau
    _Metropolis_ (1925) and _M_ (1931) by Fritz Lang
    _The Joyless Street_ (1925) and _Pandora's Box_ (1928) by G. W. Pabst
    _Berlin, Symphony of a Great City_ (1928) by Walter Ruttmann
    _The Outlaw and His Wife_ (1917) by Victor Sjostrom
    _The Passion of Joan of Arc_ (1928) and _Vampyr_ (1932)

Reading:

    Thompson & Bordwell, pp. 56-58, 63-69, 105-127
    Gilberto Perez, "Nosferatu," in _Raritan_ (1990)
     Siegfried Kracauer, "Caligari," in _Film: An Anthology_
     David Robinson, _The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari_

#### 3\. Cinema and Revolution: The Soviet Union, 1924-1934

Films:

    _Aelita, Queen of Mars_ (1924) by Yakov Protazanov
    _Potemkin_ (1926) and _October_ (1927) by Sergei Eisenstein
    _The End of St. Petersburg_ (1927) by Vsevolod Pudovkin
    _Earth_ (1930) by Alexander Dovzhenko
    _The Man With the Movie Camera_ (1929) by Dziga Vertov

Reading:

    Thompson and Bordwell, pp. 128-154
    Stanley Kaufmann, "Potemkin," in _Great Directors,_ ed. Leo Braudy


#### 4\. Poetic Realism and Heroic Paganism: France and Germany, 1929-1944

Films:

    _Zero for Conduct_ (1933) and _L'Atalante_ (1934) by Jean Vigo
    _A Day in the Country_ (1936) and _The Rules of the Game_ (1939) by Jean Renoir
    _Le Quatorze Juillet_ (1934) by Ren e Clair
    _Quai des brumes_ (1938), _Le Jour se l eve_ (1939), and _The Children of Paradise_ (1944) by Marcel Carn e
    _Triumph of the Will_ (1936) and _Olympia_ (1938) by Leni Riefenstahl

Reading:

    Thompson & Bordwell, pp. 322-343, 304-313, 320
    Alan Williams, _Republic of Images,_ pp.214-242
     Guy de Maupassant, "A Day in the Country"
    Richard Cobb, "The Period Paris of Rene Clair," _TLS_ (May 6, 1977)
     Susan Sontag, "Fascinating Fascism," in _Movies and Methods,_ ed. Bill Nichols
     Eric Rentschler, "The Ministry of Illusion," _Film Comment_

#### 5\. Neorealism: Italy, 1944-1960

Films:

    _Rome, Open City_ (1944), _Paisan_ (1946), and _L'Amore_ (1948) by Roberto Rossellini
    _Bicycle Thieves_ (1948) and _Umberto D_ (1951) by Vittorio de Sica
    _I Vitelloni_ (1958) by Federico Fellini
    _Il Grido_ (1957) by Michelangelo Antonioni
    _Rocco and His Brothers_ (1960) by Luchino Visconti

Reading:

    Thompson & Bordwell, pp. 313-320, 415-420, 502-504
    Donald Chase, "Anna Magnani: Miracle Worker," _Film Comment_ (November-December 1993), pp.42-47

#### 6\. A Mirror for England: British Cinema, 1930-1960

Films: __

    _The 39 Steps_ (1935) and _The Lady Vanishes_ (1938) by Alfred Hitchcock
    _Fires Were Started_ (1943) by Humphrey Jennings
    _I Know Where I'm Going_ (1944) by Michael Powell
    _Great Expectations_ (1948) by David Lean
    _Odd Man Out_ (1949) by Carol Reed
    _Kind Hearts and Coronets_ (1949) by Robert Hamer
    _Time Without Pity_ (1958) by Joseph Losey
    _Look Back in Anger_ (1958) by Tony Richardson

Reading:

    Bordwell & Thomson, 265-273, 553-556
    David Thomson, "Reeds and Trees," _Film Comment_ (July-August, 1994), pp.14-23.

#### 7\. New Wave: France, 1955-1970

Films:

    _The Earrings of Madame de..._ (1954) by Max Ophuls
    _Lola_ (1961) by Jacques Demy
    _Breathless_ (1960) by Jean-Luc Godard
    _The 400 Blows_ (1960) and _Jules and Jim_ (1961) by Francois Truffaut
    _Elevator to the Gallows_ (1959) by Louis Malle
    _My Night at Maud's_ (1969) by Eric Rohmer
    _Les Biches_ (1969) by Claude Chabrol

Reading:

    Alan Williams, _Republic of Images,_ pp.327-353
     Thompson & Bordwell, pp. 522-531
    Brian Stonehill, "Les Auteurs Terribles," interview with Jean Gruault, in _Film Comment_ (November-December 1992), pp. 24-35
     Kathleen Murphy, "La Belle Dame Sans Merci," in _Film Comment_

#### 8\. Cinematic Modernism, 1950-1980

Films:

    _The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie_ (1972) by Luis Bunuel
    _Blow-Up_ (1966) by Michelangelo Antonioni
    _Persona_ (1968) by Ingmar Bergman
    _The Spirit of the Beehive_ (1980) by Victor Erice

Reading:

    Thompson & Bordwell, pp. 495-500, 504-506, 514-515
    Stanley Kauffmann, _"Persona,"_ and Susan Sontag, _"Persona:_ The Film in Depth," in _Great Directors_
     John Freccero, _"Blow-Up:_ From the Word to the Image," in _Great Directors_

#### 9\. Cinema Paradiso?

Films:

    _The Double Life of Veronique_ (1990) and _Red_ (1994) by Krzysztof Kieslowski
    _Cinema Paradiso_ (1989) by Giuseppe Tornatore

Reading:

    Dave Kehr, "To Save the World: Kieslowski's THREE COLORS Trilogy," _Film Comment_ (November-December, 1994), pp. 10-20
     Susan Sontag, "The Decay of Cinema," _The New York Times Magazine_ (February 25, 1996), pp. 60-61
[top of page]

##

* * *

124\. Revolution in France

Fall 2001  
Instructor: Mark Traugott

Go to: <http://ic.ucsc.edu/~traugott/hist124/>

[top of page]

##

* * *

150B. History of China: Qing China 1644 - 1911

Instructor: Gail Hershatter  
Office: Merrill 111  
Phone: 459-4041  
E-mail: [gbhers@cats.ucsc.edu](mailto:gbhers@cats.ucsc.edu)

### Course Description:

This course will examine the history of late imperial China in the Qing
dynasty (1644-1911). Whenever possible, we will look at what Chinese people
have said about themselves in fiction, poetry, philosophical discourse, and
memoir. Using visual images and artifacts as well as written documents, we
will explore Chinese society as it was understood by inhabitants of the
Chinese empire and by outsiders, and trace its transformation over time. We
will pay particular attention to the daily life of ordinary people, but will
not neglect the forces that helped to shape that life: intellectual and
religious beliefs, the imperial state, village and urban economic activity,
ethnic conflict, gender relations, family and kinship practices, and
millenarianism and rebellion. The final section of the course will focus on
the crisis of social and political arrangements in the late imperial state,
the effects of foreign imperialism and peasant rebellion in the nineteenth
century, and the collapse of China's dynastic system in 1911.

In addition to attending class and discussion sections, students will write
two five-page essays on assigned topics and complete a map quiz, a midterm,
and a final.

#### Readings include:

  * Spence, _The Search for Modern China_
  * Cheng and Lestz, _The Search for Modern China: A Documentary Collection_
  * Kuhn, _Soulstealers: The Chinese Sorcery Scare of 1768_
  * Mann, _Precious Records: Women in China's Long Eighteenth Century_
  * Cohen, _History in Three Keys: The Boxers as Event, Experience, and Myth_

A required course reader also will be provided.

[top of page]

##

* * *

194U. China Since the Cultural Revolution: Histories of the Present

Instructor: Gail Hershatter  
Office: Merrill 111  
Phone: 459-4041  
E-mail: [gbhers@cats.ucsc.edu](mailto:gbhers@cats.ucsc.edu)

### Course Description:

This seminar will explore histories of the present in China, focusing on
several intervals of intense political upheaval (the Cultural Revolution of
1966-76 and the popular movement of 1989) and more extended intervals of rapid
change (the economic reforms of the past two decades). We will analyze the
tensions that led to the Cultural Revolution and trace its tumultuous
development. Then we will examine the construction of collective historical
memory of the Cultural Revolution, drawing upon the writings of Chinese
novelists, essayists, and historians. We will look at Chinese society during
the post-Mao reforms, exploring the social, economic, and political factors in
the appearance and suppression of the 1989 popular demonstrations. Finally, we
will trace the development of new class, gender, and ethnic relations over the
past decade.

We will meet twice a week. Since discussion is the heart of this course, you
should complete the assigned readings before each class session and come
prepared to share your opinions, observations, and questions. Prior to each
class meeting, you will be expected to turn in a 1-2 page typed summary of the
readings and your reactions to them. You will also research and write a brief
bibliographic essay and a paper of 20-25 pages on a topic of your choice
related to the course. At various points during the quarter, each student will
present her or his research and serve as critic for another student's
research. Your final grade will be based upon participation in class
discussion, the informal written summaries, your class presentations, and your
research paper. Several films will be shown in conjunction with this course.
Since the class size is limited and everyone's participation is important, I
ask that you notify me in advance if you must miss any class session.

**Readings** will be drawn from (but not be limited to) the following:

  * MacFarquahar, _The Origins of the Cultural Revolution_ (excerpts)
  * Schram, _Chairman Mao Talks to the People_ (excerpts)
  * Gao, _Born Red_
  * Chen, _Colors of the Mountain_
  * Rofel, _Other Modernities_
  * Chan et al., _Chen Village Under Mao and Deng_
  * Calhoun, _Neither Gods Nor Emperors_
  * Weston and Jensen, _China Beyond the Headlines_
  * Schein, _Minority Rules_ (excerpts)
  * Litzinger, _Other Chinas_ (excerpts)

A course reader will also be provided.

[top of page]

##

* * *

196W. Studies in World History: Settler Colonial Nationalisms

Instructor: Terry Burke  
Office: Merrill 112  
Phone: 459-2287 (messages: 459-2855)  
e-mail: [eburke@cats.ucsc.edu](mailto:eburke@cats.ucsc.edu)

### Course Description:

In this seminar in world history, we will examine settler colonial
nationalisms. European colonial rule took a variety of different forms:
exploitation colonies, settler colonies, and plural societies. For our
purposes, we can divide settler colonies into two types: contested and
uncontested. Unlike the New World and Oceania, where indigenous populations
suffered devastating decline soon after contact, the relative demographic
balance between indigenous and Euro-American societies in the contested
settler colonies of Ireland, temperate Africa, and Palestine tended to favor
indigenes. It is these societies that are the object of concern in this
seminar.

In an effort to get beyond the manichaean formulations that otherwise inhibit
their study - colonizer and colonized, white and black, modern and traditional
- this course explores the social roots of politics in settler colonies in
comparative historical perspective. Common readings will focus on the cases of
Ireland, Algeria, South Africa, and Israel/Palestine.

**Readings:** For the first six weeks, we will read materials in common in an
effort to develop a common language of inquiry and shared framework of
analysis. Students are encouraged to consider the parallel and shared
histories of both settlers and natives using the tools of social and cultural
analysis, through an examination of the following topics: the land question,
metropolitan/settler relations, strategies of control, popular culture, and
nationalisms.

**Written work:** For the first six weeks, students will do the assigned
worksheet each week. In addition, they will do one short paper on a topic to
be assigned.

In the final four weeks, students will select a term paper topic with the
consent of the instructor, present a oral report on their research, submit the
first draft for criticism, then revise the paper and submit the final draft.

[top of page]

##

* * *

208B. Graduate Seminar: Readings in American History, 1800 to 1900

Instructor: Bruce Levine
([blevine@cats.ucsc.edu](mailto:blevine@cats.ucsc.edu))

### Course Description

This course has two interconnected purposes. It aims to introduce the student
to ways that scholars have identified and analyzed some salient issues and
trends in the history of the nineteenth-century United States. Simultaneously,
it showcases disputes among historians and changes that have taken place over
time in the ways that historians have grappled with such historical topics.

### Course Requirements

All students are expected to attend all meetings of the seminar and to
complete all verbal, reading, and written assignments on time. During the
course of the quarter, each student will write five brief essays (each
approximately 5 pages in length) discussing the readings assigned in a given
week. Students who write for a given week will also be expected to take a
leading role in that week's seminar discussion.

#### Assigned Texts (all paperback)

  * Richard J. Carwardine, _Evangelicals and Politics in Antebellum America_ (Tennessee, 1997)
  * Lori D. Ginzberg, _Women and the Work of Benevolence: Morality, Politics, and Class in the Nineteenth Century United States_ (Yale, 1992)
  * Tera Hunter, _To 'Joy My Freedom: Southern Black Women's Lives and Labors after the Civil War_ (Harvard, 1997)
  * Paul Johnson, _A Shopkeeper's Millennium: Society and Revivals in Rochester, New York,_ 1815-1837 (Hill & Wang, 1978)
  * Daniel Letwin, _The Challenge of Interracial Unionism, 1878-1921_ (North Carolina, 1999)
  * Stephanie McCurry, _Masters of Small Worlds: Yeoman Households, Gender Relations, and the Political Culture of the Antebellum South Carolina Low Country_ (Oxford, 1995)
  * Peter Novick, _That Noble Dream: The "Objectivity Question" and the American Historical Profession_ (Cambridge, 1988)
  * William G. Robbins, _Colony and Empire: The Capitalist Transformation of the American West_ (Kansas, 1994)
  * Julie Saville, _The Work of Reconstruction: From Slave to Wage Laborer in South Carolina, 1860-1870_ (Cambridge, 1994)
  * Melvin Stokes and Stephen Conway, eds., _The Market Revolution in America: Social, Political, and Religious Expressions, 1800-1880_ (Virginia, 1996) 

In addition, a course packet will be available in class during the first week
of the quarter.



### Class Schedule

#### Week 1: Introduction

Peter Novick, _That Noble Dream: The 'Objectivity Question' and the American
Historical Profession_ (Cambridge, 1988), entire.

Alice Kessler-Harris, "Social History," in Eric Foner, ed., _The New American
History Temple,_ 1997), pp. 231-56.

#### Week 2: Slavery and the Antebellum South

Charles B. Dew, "The Slavery Experience," in _Interpreting Southern History_
(Louisiana, 1987), ed. John B. Boles and Evelyn Thomas Nolen, pp. 121-161.

Harry L. Watson, "Slavery and Development in a Dual Economy: The South and the
Market Economy," in _The Market Revolution in America,_ pp. 43-73.

Eugene D. Genovese, _Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made_ (Pantheon,
1974), pp. 3-7.

Herbert G. Gutman, _The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom_ (Pantheon, 1976),
pp. 3-37, 303-320.

Stephanie McCurry, _Masters of Small Worlds: Yeoman Households, Gender
Relations, and the Political Culture of the Antebellum South Carolina Low
Country_ (Oxford, 1995)

#### Week 3: Economic Change in the Antebellum North

"Introduction," in _The Market Revolution in America,_ pp. 1-20.

Christopher Clark, "The Consequences of the Market Revolution in the American
North," in _The Market Revolution in America,_ pp. 23-42.

Paul E. Johnson, _A Shopkeeper's Millennium: Society and Revivals in
Rochester, New York, 1815-1837_ (Hill & Wang, 1978).

#### Week 4: Women's History

Linda Gordon, "U. S. Women's History," in Foner, ed., _The New American
History_ (1997), pp. 257-84.

Nancy Hewitt, "Beyond the Search for Sisterhood: American Women's History in
the 1980s," _Social History,_ 10 (1985): 299-321.

Linda K. Kerber, "Separate Spheres, Female Worlds, Woman's Place: The Rhetoric
of Women's History," _Journal of American History,_ 75 (1988): 9-39.

Joan M. Jensen, "Native American Women and Agriculture: A Seneca Case Study,"
originally published in _Sex Roles: A Journal of Research,_ 3 (1977).

Lori D. Ginzberg, _Women and the Work of Benevolence: Morality, Politics, and
Class in the Nineteenth Century United States_ (Yale, 1992).

#### Week 5: Labor History

John Patrick Diggins, "Comrades and Citizens: New Mythologies in American
Historiography," _American Historical Review,_ 90 (1985): 614-38.

Leon Fink, "The New Labor History and the Powers of Historical Pessimism,"
originally published in the _Journal of American History,_ 75 (1988): 115-36.

Alice Kessler-Harris, "A New Agenda for American Labor History: Gendered
Analysis and the Question of Class," _Perspectives on American Labor History:
The Problems of Synthesis_ (Northern Illinois, 1989), pp. 217-34.

David Roediger, "White Slaves, Wage Slaves, and Free White Labor," in _The
Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the American Working Class_ (Verso,
1991), pp. 65-95.

Daniel Letwin, _The Challenge of Interracial Unionism, 1878-1921_ (North
Carolina, 1999)

#### Week 6: The Crucible of Culture

James P. Shenton and Kevin Kenny, "Ethnicity and Immigration," in Foner, ed.,
_The New American History_ (1997), pp. 353-74.

Rudolph Vecoli, "From _The Uprooted_ to _The Transplanted:_ The Writing of
American Immigration History, 1951-1989," in Valeria Gennaro Lerda, ed., _From
'Melting Pot' to Multiculturalism: The Evolution of Ethnic Relations in the
United States and Canada_ (Bulzoni, 1990), pp. 25-54.

Werner Sollors, "Introduction: The Invention of Ethnicity," in Sollors, ed.,
_The Invention of Ethnicity_ (Oxford, 1989), pp. ix-xx.

Kerby A. Miller, "Class, Culture, and Immigrant Group Identity in the United
States: The Case of Irish-American Ethnicity," in _Immigration Reconsidered:
History, Sociology, and Politics,_ ed. Virginia Yans-McLaughlin (Oxford,
1990), pp. 96-129.

#### Week 7: The Meaning of Politics

Sean Wilentz, "On Class and Politics in Jacksonian America," in _Reviews in
American History,_ 10 (1982): 45-63.

Joel H. Silbey, "The Civil War Synthesis in American Political History"
(1964), in _The Partisan Imperative: The Dynamics of American Politics Before
the Civil War_ (Oxford, 1985), pp. 3-12.

Eric Foner, "The Causes of the American Civil War: Recent Interpretations and
New Directions," in Foner, _Politics and Ideology in the Age of the Civil War_
(Oxford, 1980), pp. 15-33.

Anne M. Boylan, "Women and Politics in the Era before Seneca Falls," _Journal
of the Early Republic,_ 10 (1990): 368-82.

Richard J. Carwardine, _Evangelicals and Politics in Antebellum America_
(Tennessee, 1997)

#### Week 8: The Destruction of Slavery and Reconstruction

Eric Foner, "Reconstruction Revisited," in _Reviews in American History,_ 10
(1982): 82-100.

LaWanda Cox, "From Emancipation to Segregation: National Policy and Southern
Blacks," in John B. Boles and Evelyn Thomas Nolen, _Interpreting Southern
History_ (1987), pp. 199-253.

Steven Hahn, "Class and State in Postemancipation Societies: Southern Planters
in Comparative Perspective," _American Historical Review,_ 95 (1990): 75-98.

Julie Saville, _The Work of Reconstruction: From Slave to Wage Laborer in
South Carolina, 1860-1870_ (Cambridge, 1996)

#### Week 9: The South after Reconstruction

Harold Woodman, "Economic Reconstruction and the Rise of the New South,
1865-1900," in John B. Boles and Evelyn Thomas Nolen, eds., _Interpreting
Southern History (_ 1987), pp. 254-307.

Tera Hunter, _To 'Joy My Freedom: Southern Black Women's Lives and Labors
after the Civil War_ (Harvard, 1997)

#### Week 10: Western History

Richard White, "Western History," in Foner, ed., _The New American History_
(1997), pp. 203-30.

Michael P. Malone, "Beyond the Last Frontier: Toward a New Approach to Western
American History," _Western Historical Quarterly,_ 20 (1989): 409-27.

David G. Gutierrez, "Significant to Whom? Mexican Americans and the History of
the American West," _Western Historical Quarterly,_ 24 (1993): 519-39.

Deena J. Gonzales, "La Tules of Image and Reality: Euro-American Attitudes and
Legend Formation on a Spanish-Mexican Frontier," from Beatriz M. Pesquera and
Adela de la Torre, eds., _Building with our Hands: Directions in Chicana
Scholarship_ (California, 1993).

William G. Robbins, _Colony and Empire: The Capitalist Transformation of the
American West_ (Kansas, 1994).

[top of page]





