## Anthropology 260  
Cultural Ecology Classics and Their Consequences

Description  
Reading materials  
Office hours | Course organization  
Written assignments  
Oral assignments | Attendence  
Grades  
Class schedule  
---|---|---  
  
Fall Semester 1997  
Professor Bruce Winterhalder Anthropology & Curriculum in Ecology 209 Alumni
Building -- 962-1243 [winterhalder@unc.edu](mailto: winterhalder@unc.edu)

  

### DESCRIPTION

The focal reading materials for this class are a series of classic, monograph-
length studies in the cultural ecology of non-western peoples. In each case we
will attend to the work itself (the problems addressed and their historical
context, methodologies used, results and interpretation), and to its
consequences for subsequent research in the sub-field of cultural ecology.
Using various bibliographic tools, we will track the impact of these
publications via study of reviews, the debates they provoked and especially
the follow-up research they stimulated. Our goal is a broad understanding of
the intellectual history of this sub-discipline, as seen through the lens of
some of its most venerated, ethnographic scholarship.

The seminar is open to graduate students. Advanced undergraduates may register
by permission. It does not presume previous courses in Ecological Anthropology
(Environmental Anthropology or Cultural Ecology) although that would be
useful. It should be of interest to any student in the field of human ecology,
broadly speaking, or to anthropology majors with an interest in this
particular sub-disciplinary field.

### READING MATERIALS

There are six required books, which we will read and discuss as a group in the
first part of the semester. In addition, later in the semester you will be
responsible for reading several packets of material selected and organized by
a classmate (see below). The books are available at Student Stores; they
include:

_Hanun oo Agriculture: A Report on an Integral System of Shifting Cultivation
in the Philippines _(Conklin, 1957)

_Agricultural Involution: the Processes of Ecological Change in Indonesia_
(Geertz, 1963)

_Hill Farmers of Nigeria: Cultural Ecology of the Kofyar of the Jos Plateau_
(Netting, 1968)

_Pigs for the Ancestors: Ritual in the Ecology of a New Guinea People_
(Rappaport, 1968)

_Basin-Plateau Aboriginal Sociopolitical Groups_ (Steward, 1938)

_Human Adaptation to High Andean Energy Flow System_ (Thomas, 1973)

### OFFICE HOURS

I will have office hours 12 noon to 1 PM, Monday through Thursday. Times
besides these can be arranged by appointment any day but Friday. Please come
by if you have questions or suggestions, or just want to discuss the course or
related materials. I use email regularly and can always be reached at:
[winterhalder@unc.edu](mailto: winterhalder@unc.edu).

### COURSE ORGANIZATION AND EXPECTATIONS

We will meet once a week for approximately 3 hours, with a short break midway
through the period. Following the introductory meeting, the semester will be
divided into two parts. In Part I, we will read six monographs as a group, at
the rate of one per week. In Part II, we will revisit each monograph, in
sequence, looking at its intellectual impact and consequences for research
(e.g., reviews, debates and follow-up studies). One or more (depending on
enrollment) of you will be responsible for leading a  discussion in each of
the two matched classes (Parts I and II) which make up our analysis of each
book.

In Part I the Discussion Leader  for each book will present a brief (5 minute)
introduction to the volume, focusing on the biographical and educational
background of the author and the intellectual or analytical context for the
research. He or she will then lead a discussion of the monograph, drawing on
questions formulated in advance by all members of the class. The last hour of
the class will consist of a series of mini-proposals for follow-up research.
You will write your proposal on the assumption that the ethnographic setting
of the monograph can be revisited (see  [ "Preparation of a Concise Research
Proposal"](prepro.html)).

In Part II the Discussion Leader will choose and distribute a small set of
readings (two weeks before they are the subject of a class meeting). These 2-4
readings are to be selected from among the materials found during research on
the impact of the volume. He or she will then present results of that
research, focusing on the reception of the monograph (reviews and
commentaries), debates it provoked, and subsequent fieldwork or study it
stimulated. This assignment can be characterized as intellectual history on a
small scale. It will require you learn to use citation indexes, traces
bibliographic strings through journals, and read in the recent history of
anthropology. Class discussion will focus on the presentation, and on the
written materials that everyone has read.

### WRITTEN ASSIGNMENTS

In summary your obligations for written work include:

  1. For each class, Part I: 

[  ]  Three to five discussion questions, circulated at the beginning of class

[  ]  A one page, single-space, follow-up research proposal

  2. For each class, Part II: 

[  ]  A pr¨¦cis (see [ "Outline of a Pr¨¦cis"](precis.html)) for each of the
articles assigned by the discussion leader for this monograph

  3. For the class as a whole: 

[  ]  A written essay, 20-25 pages in length, on the monograph you
investigated, its reception and its consequences.

### ORAL ASSIGNMENTS

Your oral responsibilities encompass:

  1. For each class, Part I: 

[  ]  The Discussion Leader should be prepared to make a brief presentation
and then lead a discussion on the volume being considered. Everyone else
should be prepared to participate. This means being familiar enough with the
work that you can readily locate passages that provoke questions or possibly
supply answers.

[  ]  Everyone should be ready to make a brief, oral presentation (5-8
minutes) on their research proposal.

  2. For each class, Part II: 

[  ]  The Discussion Leader should be prepared to present his or her research
on the consequences of the volume and to lead a discussion on the assigned
readings. As above, everyone should be prepared to participate.

### ATTENDENCE

Your main responsibility is to come to class prepared to discuss the readings.
You may wish to raise questions of interpretation or to offer observations
from your own knowledge and experience. It is equally appropriate (and
potentially enlightening to all of us) to express bafflement, offer an
insight, or to comment on what you found striking or especially interesting
about the materials.

### GRADES

I will weight assignments as follows: class presentations and participation
(45%), long essay (30%), research proposals (15%), discussion questions and
precis (10%). I grade graduate courses on the presumption that everyone should
get a "P" (for pass), and that deviation to an "H" (high pass) or an "L" (low
pass) requires a high degree of effort.

### CLASS SCHEDULE

Week| Class Date| Activity| Discussion Leaders  
---|---|---|---  
  
1| 20 August| Introduction|  
  
2| 27 August| No class; pursue readings|  
  
3| 3 September| Steward| DL Name(s):  
  
4| 10 September| Conklin| DL Names(s):  
  
5| 17 September| Netting| DL Name(s):  
  
6| 24 September| Rappaport| DL Name(s):  
  
7| 1 October| Geertz| DL Name(s):  
  
8| 8 October| Thomas| DL Name(s):  
  
9| 15 October| Open (reading packet for 29 October class due)|  
  
10| 22 October| Steward revisited (reading packet for 5 November due)| DL
Name(s):  
  
11| 29 October| Conklin revisited (reading packet for 12 November due)| DL
Name(s):  
  
12| 5 November| Netting revisited (reading packet for 19 November due)| DL
Name(s):  
  
13| 12 November| Rappaport revisited (reading packet for 26 November due)| DL
Name(s):  
  
14| 19 November| Geertz revisited| DL Name(s):  
  
15| 26 November| Thomas revisited| DL Name(s):  
  
16| 3 December| Summary Discussion ( **Essay Due** )|  
  
* * *

_ (C): University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill  
  
Document: Bruce Winterhalder -- Anthropology 260 - Syllabus  
Last modified: 2000 20 September  
Maintained by: [ winterhalder@unc.edu](mailto: winterhalder@unc.edu) _

