**Allan F. Burns, Ph.D.**  
[![](chair.JPG)](mailto:afburns@anthro.ufl.edu)  
_A Slashnburns home page production_

**_Chair of the Department of Anthropology_**  
**_and an Applied Anthropologist at the University of Florida_**

**Contents**

![](image6.gif)**[Visual Anthropology Course, Fall 2002](Visual/index.html)**

![](image6.gif)**[Lombardi Scholars Program in the
Yucatan](lombardi/index.htm)**

![](image6.gif)   [People of Mexico and Central America
2002](Mexico2002/index.htm)

![](image6.gif)[Yucatan 2000 Cyberethnographies](merida2000/index.htm)

![](image6.gif)[Cyberethnography project in Yucatan, summer, 1999](cyber.htm)

![](image6.gif)_[Here it is: Afro tropical from Peoples of Mexico Course,
1998](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/afburns/afrotrop/afro.htm)_

![](image6.gif)**[Fulbright Scholarships?  Honors Awards?  Visit the honors
prestigious awards
page](http://www.honors.ufl.edu/scholarships/prestigious.html)**

![](image6.gif)**A Resume of my work**

![](image6.gif)**A few links that I visit often**

![](image6.gif)**Contact Information**

![](image6.gif)**[Visit the Yucatan Summer and Academic Year program home page
NOW!](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/afburns/merida/merida.htm)**

![](image6.gif)**[University of Florida Anthropology
Department](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/anthro)**

![](image7.gif)

  
I am a professor and chair of the Department of Anthropology at the University
of Florida.  I am also an affiliate with the Latin American Studies program
and director of the Florida/Yucatan program at the University of Florida. I
received a Bachelor of Science in sociology from Iowa State University in
1968, then went on to do graduate work at the University of Washington. I
received an MA in 1970 and a Ph.D. in 1973 in anthropology. Before coming to
Florida I worked for a private research company in Cambridge, MA, Abt
Associates, doing evaluation of bilingual education programs in the southwest.
Throughout my career, my research has focused on the Mayan language and
culture in the Yucatan of Mexico, Chiapas, Guatemala, and among Guatemalan
refugees in Florida. I've also done research on migration between the U.S. and
Mexico city and within Europe. Some of the grants and contracts I have
received are from organizations such as the National Science Foundation, the
Department of Labor, various governments of Micronesia, the National Park
Service, the Florida Humanities Council, and the North South Center. I have
also consulted for the National Geographic Society, Info-Tech, Incorporated,
Abt Associates, Inc., several states, and several Native American tribes. I
have published over seventy articles and book chapters, two books, and quite a
few applied anthropology reports. ![](market.JPG)

I am a visual anthropologist, or maybe better put a "digital video
anthropologist," and have produced several ethnographic videos, two of which
have been shown on public television stations. My videos are on things like
Mayan culture, immigrant health, historic preservation in Micronesia, and
Native American cultural resistance. I was one of the original members of the
board of directors of "Corn Maya," an association of Guatemala Maya people in
the United States, as well as on the board of View our Voices, Inc., a
community-based photography and video project in Gainesville, Florida for at-
risk teenagers. I have also chaired the international meetings of the Society
for Applied Anthropology in Cancun, Mexico, and organized the 43rd annual
conference of the Center for Latin American Studies on "The Wisdom of the
Maya." I have been recognized by the Kanjobal Maya refugees in Florida for
research and humanitarian aid, and have won five teaching awards at the
University of Florida. I am a minority mentor and administrator of graduate
scholarships for minority students. I work in the Honors program of the
University of Florida as an awards advisor, and I am in charge of Fulbright
scholarships. I am also an affiliate in the Latin American Studies Center, the
Program in Linguistics, the Vision center of the University of Florida Medical
School, the Center for Neuropsychology (also of the Medical School). I was a
Fulbright scholar at the Copenhagen University's Institute for Anthropology
(1991-92) and a visiting exchange scholar at the Universidad Complutense in
Madrid, Spain (1985-86). I have also lectured and taught in Austria,
Lithuania, Sweden, Norway, Mexico, and Guatemala. I speak Spanish and Yucatec
Maya in addition to English, and have at times made great attempts to speak
other European languages, including Lithuanian, Danish, German, and
Portuguese.

[![](image7.gif)](http://les.man.ac.uk/sa/index.html#visual)

My interests focus on the use of video and computers in anthropology,
indigenous rights, and applied anthropology -- medical, educational, and
political.  Recent projects that students and I have been working on
(2001-2002) include a study of teenage tobacco initiation and use (with Brian
Page, University of Miami Department of Anthropology and  School of Medicine
subcontract);  the Ethnohistory of the Kingsley Plantation (with Antoinette
Jackson), National Park Service funding;  Migrant Housing Policy in Florida,
funded through the State of Florida Department of Community Affairs).  I have
also given workshops on visual anthropology and human rights for CIESAS-
Chiapas, on visual anthropology for INAH-Mexico City, and for cultural
heritage programs for many Native American groups.

I  chair about 28 MA and Ph.D. committees and direct several senior honors
theses each year. Some Ph.D. projects that students are working on under my
direction include religious festivals and social change in Yucatan (Alicia
Peon), Music and identity among the Maya of Yucatan (Emilio Benites), Garifuna
language (Santiag Ruiz), Hip Hop Nation (Dawn Elissa Banks), Effects of
Hurricane Mitch in Honduras (Roberto Barrios), Sea Island culture and history
(Tracey Graham ), Women dyers in Mali (Maxine Downs), Blacksmiths and the
African Diaspora (Ade Offunian), Health in Guanajuato and Florida among
migrants (Alayne Unterberger), among others.  
**Back to the beginning**

![](image7.gif)![](image7.gif)  
  **Some internet sites I like to check out**

  
![](image6.gif)**[Yucatan Summer and Academic Year program home
page](http://www.clas.ufl.edu/users/afburns/merida/merida.htm)**

![](ekbalam.jpg) ![](image6.gif)[T he Diario de
Yucatan](http://www.sureste.com/diariox.htm) The best newspaper for reading
about the Yucatan. In English and Spanish

![](image6.gif)[La Jornada](http://serpiente.dgsca.unam.mx/jornada/) This is
an excellent newspaper from Mexico City. In Spanish

![](image6.gif)[Society for Applied Anthropology](http://www.sfaa.net/)  


**Back to where we started**

![](image7.gif)

**Contact Information** [Afburns@anthro.ufl.ed](mailto:
Afburns@anthro.ufl.edu) [
](file:///D|/OFFICE/WINWORD/DOCS/Afburns@anthro.ufl.edu)  
Department of Anthropology  P.O. Box 117305 University of Florida Gainesville,
FL 32611-7305   Phone: (352) 392 2031 ext. 205 Fax: (352) 392 6929  


    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


![](image7.gif)

Last Revised: July 17, 2002  
    
  

