    
    
    
  **Summer 2002**  
---  
  
  **SHAPING AMERICA--UNITED STATES HISTORY TO 1877**  
---  
  
**Course Information and Syllabus for History 1301.085 (Telecourse)**

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**Professor: Kenneth D. Hairgrove, Ph.D.**

**Office:** Chance Academic Center 112

Office hours are 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon, Monday through Thursday.  I am
available at other times, by appointment. My telephone number is **(210)
733-2563**. I have an answering machine, and I will return your calls
promptly.

**Mailing Address:** History Department, San Antonio College, 1300 San Pedro,
San Antonio, TX 78212-4299

**E-mail :** _khairgro@accd.edu_

**Web site:** _www.accd.edu/sac/history/hairgrove/homepage.html_

**This course:** SHAPING AMERICA (History 1301.085) presents the history of
the United States from the European discovery of America through the Civil War
era. Included are factual information, concepts, analyses, and
interpretations. The video lessons feature historical locations and prominent
scholars and leaders.

**Course Goals**

_Shaping America_ was organized to accomplish these broad objectives, which
will be achieved through the use of a student telecourse study guide, reading
assignments, video programs, instructor/student interaction, and examinations.
Upon successful completion of this telecourse, students should be able to  


  * Describe the major Indian cultures in North America prior to European settlement and analyze the effects of that settlement on the indigenous peoples of America.
  * Discuss the motivations for European colonization of North America and identify differences between the British and Spanish experiences of colonization.
  * Compare and contrast the social, economic, and political development of the British colonies in the area that became the United States.
  * Describe and explain the origins of racism and slavery in America and analyze the long term effects of slavery on American society.
  * Describe the social and political implications of religion in America to 1877.
  * Analyze the causes, consequences, and meaning of the American Revolution.
  * Discuss the significant military and diplomatic operations of the Revolutionary War.
  * Analyze the immediate and long term effects of the Declaration of Independence.
  * Describe and explain the development and meaning of the Constitution and the Bill of Rights.
  * Discuss the development of the American economic, political, and diplomatic systems during the Federalist Era.
  * Discuss the factors shaping America during the early national period.
  * Analyze the meaning of Jacksonian democracy and social reform in America during the 1830s and 1840s.
  * Discuss the concept of manifest destiny and describe the expansion of the United States from 1800 to 1848.
  * Analyze the causes, consequences, and meaning of the Civil War.
  * Discuss the social, political, economic, diplomatic, and military aspects of the Civil War.
  * Assess the significance of geography in the process of shaping America.
  * Analyze the meaning of freedom, equality, and identity in America to 1877.

More specific learning objectives for each lesson are listed in the telecourse
guide for _Shaping America._

**Course Elements: ** You will be expected to watch twenty-six telelessons,
study the textbook, and take four exams. A study guide is necessary to
coordinate lesson materials. The two required books are:

**_The American Promise: A History of the United States to 1877_** , Volume I,
2nd ed., by Roark, Johnson, Cohen, Stage, Lawson, and Hartmann.

**_Telecourse Guide to Shaping America_** , by Kenneth G. Alfers.

**Watching lessons:** _Broadcasts begin the week of June 3, 2002._ Three
telelessons are shown each week. Each lesson is thirty (30) minutes long. On
KLRN (Channel 9, or Cable Channel 10), the lessons are broadcast each
Wednesday from **6:00** to **7:30a.m.**

The same program (same three lessons) will be shown during the week on Time
Warner Cable Channel 19 at the following times: Wednesdays from **5:30** to 7
**:00** **p.m.** and Thursdays from **8:30** to **10:00 p.m.**

**Watching lessons on campus: ** You may watch any video lesson on the fourth
floor of the Moody Learning Center (Audio-Visual Center). You will need your
student ID card in order to watch a lesson. The A-V Department will be open at
these times:

                Monday through Thursday         7:30 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. 

                Friday                                       7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 

                Saturday                                   1:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. 

                Sunday                                      Closed 

**Checking out lesson videotapes: ** A limited number of videotapes are
available in the Audio-Visual Center for check-out. **You will need your
student ID card in order to check them out**.

**Purchasing videos:** The San Antonio College Bookstore offers sets of the 26
videos for sale. Check with the bookstore if you are interested in buying a
set.

**Recording Programs:** You may tape the video lessons on your VCR. I urge you
to check your tapes as soon as you can after recording. If there is a problem
with a program and you fail to check the recording, you might miss the
opportunity to tape the lesson at the next scheduled broadcast.

**Newsletters:** You will receive a newsletter in the envelope in which your
exam is returned. Please attach newsletters to this information sheet for easy
reference.

**Parking:** To park on the SAC campus, you are required to have a vehicle
registration tag.

**Broadcast Schedule:**

On **KLRN (PBS), Channel 9 (Time Warner Cable 10)** , beginning Wednesday,
June 5, three lessons will be broadcast each Monday from **6:00** to
**7:30a.m.Lessons 1 and 2 will be repeated the second week.**

                        June 5: Lessons l, 2,3.   
                        June 12: Lessons 4, 5, 6.   
                        June 19: Lessons 7, 8, 9.   
                        June 26:  Lessons 10, 11, 12.   
                        July 3:  Lessons 13, 14, 15.   
                        July 10:  Lessons 16, 17, 18.   
                        July 17:  Lessons 19, 20, 21.   
                        July 24:  Lessons 22, 23, 24.   
                        July 31:  Lessons 25, 26. 

On **Time Warner Cable 19** , the same tthree lessons will be broadcast each
week at the following times: Wednesdays from 5 **:30** to **7:00   p.m.** and
Thursdays from **8:30** to **10:00** **p.m.**

                        June 5 and 6:  Lessons 1, 2, 3.   
                        June 12 and 13:  Lessons 4, 5, 6.   
                        June 19 and 20:  Lessons 7, 8, 9.   
                        June 26 and 27:  Lessons 10, 11, 12.                      .   
                        July 3:  Lessons 13, 14, 15.   
                        July 10 and 11:  Lessons 16, 17, 18.   
                        July 17 and 18:  Lessons 19, 20, 21.   
                        July 24 and 25:  Lessons 22, 23, 24.   
                        July 31 and August 1:  Lessons 25, 26. 

(Problems concerning the Cable 19 broadcasts should be reported to SAC
personnel at **(210) 733-2501** immediately.)  
    
  **COURSE ORGANIZATION**  
---  
  
  **Week Beginning  ** | **Video Lesson  ** | **Pages in _The American
Promise_ (2nd ed.)**  
---|---|---  
June 3

  | 1\. A World Apart  
2\. Worlds Transformed  
3\. Settling the Southern Colonies | P1-P27  
2-35  
31, 36-69  
June 10

  | 4\. Settling in New England  
5\. Diversifying America  
6\. A Distinctive Society | 70-103  
88-89, 92-100, 104-118  
118-140  
June 17

  *****    ***   *****

  | 7.  Making a Revolution

**End of Part I.   Exam 1 will cover Lessons 1-7.**

8.  Declaring Independence   
9\. Winning Independence | 142-181

  *****      ***     *****

171-177, 183-192, A1-A3  
192-21  
June 24 | 10\. Inventing a Nation  
11\. Searching for Stability  
12\. A Peaceful Transfer of Power | 220-253, 258  
254-269  
269-285, 289-290  
July 1  


  ***     ***     ***

  | 13\. Jefferson's Vision of America  
14\. The Market Revolution

**End of Part II.   Exam 2 will cover Lessons 8-14.**

15\. A White Man's Democracy | 286-312, 315, 318  
316-317, 324-334, 341-343, 365-377

     ***     ***     *** 

312-315, 322-324, 334-338, 349-363  
July 8

  | 16\. The Slave South  
17\. Perfecting America  
18\. Moving Westward | 408-447  
338-349, 377-82, 387-89  
364, 382-406  
July 15

   ***     ***    ***

  | 19\. Crisis and Compromise

**End of Part III.   Exam 3 will cover Lessons 15-19.**

20\. Irrepressible Conflicts  
21\. The Union Collapses | 400-401, 448-457

    ***       ***     *** 

456-476  
365-366, 448-450, 458- 459, 476-490  
July 22 | 22\. And the War Came  
23\. Home Fronts  
24\. Union Preserved, Freedom Secured | 492-507  
507-522  
522-535  
July 29  


    ***     ***     ***   
  | 25\. Reconstructing the Nation  
26\. Looking Backward, Looking Forward

**End of Part IV.   Exam 4 will cover Lessons 20-26, plus**  
**comprehensive questions from Parts I, II, and III.** |  536-573  


    ***     ***    ***   
/  
  
    
  **Please note that the unit organization of the course is different from the
organization in the _Study Guide_ by K. Alfers. Your exams will be based on
the lessons in the four parts as listed in this syllabus.**  
---  
  
**Tutorial (or Review) Sessions:   Before** each exam, an optional review
lecture is offered. Each review session will last about l hour and 30 minutes.  
    
  **Review** | **Date** | **Time** | **Location**  
---|---|---|---  
Part I (Lessons 1-7) | Wednesday, June 19 | 5:00-6:30 p.m. | CG 201  
Part II (Lessons 8-14) | Wednesday, July 3 | 5:00-6:30 p.m. | CG 201  
Part III (Lessons 15-19) | Wednesday, July 17 | 5:00-6:30 p.m. | CG 201  
Part IV (Lessons 20-26) | Wednesday, July 31 | 5:00-6:30 p.m. | CG 201  
  
**Transcripts of Review Lectures:** Printed copies of the review lectures will
be on reserve at the Reserve Desk in the Moody Learning Center (3rd floor).
You may use them in the library, and you may make copies of them if you wish.
**You will need a SAC ID card to use the reserve materials.**

**E-mail copies of Review Lectures:** If you request, by e-mail, a copy of the
review notes, I will send you a copy by return e-mail.

**Review Lectures available on my web site:** I will have the review notes
posted to my Web site (URL listed on front page of this syllabus) as least one
week before the scheduled review.

**EXAMINATIONS AND GRADES:**

An examination will be given for each unit. Examination questions will be
objective (70 to 80%) and essay (20 to 30%). Students are expected to use
correct grammar, sentence structure, and paragraphing in answering essay
questions.

 I will grade your exams and mail the results to you if you have provided me
with a stamped, self-addressed envelope. You may also pick up your exam papers
by coming to my office, and I will e-mail grades on request. The letter grade
values are as follows: A = 90-100; B = 80-89; C = 70-79; D = 60-69; F = below
60.

The fourth, or final, exam will be made up of two parts, and will count as two
grades.  The first part of Exam 4 will be over the material in the lessons in
Unit IV; the second part of Exam 4 will be comprehensive (questions from the
first three units).  All questions on both parts of the final will be
objective; there will be no essays on the final.  I will provide additional
information regarding the final exam in newsletters during the semester.

The course grade will be the average of your five (5) grades (grades on the
first three exams plus the two grades on the fourth exam.)  
    
    
  **Please bring to each exam the following:**

  * **a picture ID (such as a driver's license or SAC ID).**
  * **a Scantron Mini-Essay Book (Form 886-E).**
  * **several No. 2 pencils.**
  * **a No. 10 envelope (9 1/2 inches by 4 1/8 inches), stamped and addressed to yourself.  **

  
---  
  
**No "extra credit" will be given in this course.**

**Telephones, beepers, and pagers are prohibited in the exam room.   If you
have one, be sure it is turned off during testing times.**  
    
  **Examination Schedule**  
---  
  
This schedule indicates the time period during which students may _begin_
examinations; no exam papers will be issued after 6:30 p.m.   Exams must be
completed and turned in by one hour following the latest start time.
Therefore, all exams must be completed by 7:30 p.m.  
    
  **Exam** | **Date** | **Time** | **Location**  
---|---|---|---  
I (Lessons 1-7) | Tuesday, June 25, 2002 | 3:00-6:30 p.m. | CG 201  
II (Lessons 8-14) | Tuesday, July 9, 2002 | 3:00-6:30 p.m. | CG 201  
III (Lessons 15-19) | Tuesday, July 23, 2002 | 3:00-6:30 p.m. | CG 201  
IV (Lessons 20-26), plus comprehensive  
questions over the first three parts. | Tuesday, August 6, 2002 | 3:00-6:30
p.m. | CG 201  
  
**MAKE-UP EXAMINATIONS:**

Make-up exams will be given **only in exceptional circumstances and with
permission from the instructor**. **No more** than **one** make-up exam will
be permitted during the semester. If the drop date has not passed, a student
who misses a second exam will be dropped from the course; otherwise, a grade
of 0 will be recorded for that exam. **Any student missing the final exam
without prior approval from the instructor will receive an F in the course.**

In order to qualify to take a make-up exam, you must request the make-up exam
**in writing**. This request (regular mail, e-mail, or delivered personally)
must be in the history telecourse office **within a week** (seven days) after
the scheduled exam which you missed. If I do not hear from you within that
time, you will be dropped from the course, provided the deadline for drops has
not passed. **Make-up exams will be different from the scheduled exams**.
While scheduled exams will have objective and essay questions, **the make-up
exams will have only essay-type questions**.

The scheduled make-up date for **all** missed exams is **Tuesday, July 30,
2002.** The make-ups will be given in **Chance Academic Center, Room 102.
**The make-up testing session will begin at **2:00 p.m.** and all papers must
be completed by **4:00 p.m.**

**Procedure to drop a telecourse:**

In order to drop a telecourse, you should obtain a withdrawal form from the
instructor and submit the completed form to the Office of Admissions and
Records. The Admissions and Records Office is located on the second floor of
the Fletcher Administrative Center.

If you wish to withdraw from the telecourse and you cannot come to campus, you
must submit to me a request for withdrawal in writing (regular mail, e-mail,
or fax). The request must include the course you wish to drop, your name and
social security number, and the reason for the drop request.  Since dropping a
course by mail is for your convenience, the instructor will not be held
responsible should your drop request fail to reach the History Telecourse
Office. It is always a good idea to follow up a written request for withdrawal
with a telephone call to the History Telecourse Office or to the Admissions
and Records Office.

**Note:**   If you know that you will be unable to attend an exam at the
scheduled time, and you would like to come to my office and take a regular
exam **early** , that usually can be arranged if you contact me and make
arrangements to come in.  Once the exam has passed, however, your only option
will be to request a make-up exam scheduled for July 30.  
    
  **Calendar for Summer 2002 Semester**  
---  
  
                Tuesday, June 4:  Last day for class changes. 

                Thursday, June 6: Last day to drop without a recorded grade of "W." 

                Thursday, July 4:  Independence Day holiday.  College closed. 

                Friday, July 5: Last day to withdraw from a course and receive a "W." 

                Tuesday, August 6: **Final Exam for History 1301.085.**   
                ____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 

**Academic Dishonesty Policy:** Students are not to talk with other students
in the exam room. Any student guilty of cheating on an exam will receive a
zero on the exam and a failing grade in the course. Students may be subject to
disciplinary proceedings for academic dishonesty. Academic dishonesty
includes, but is not limited to, cheating on a test, plagiarism, and
collusion. For additional information, refer to the "Student Code of Conduct"
in the _San Antonio College Bulletin._

**Children on Campus Policy:** Students may not bring children or guests to
the testing sessions. Minors under the age of 12 must not be left unattended
on campus.

**ADA Statement for Students Requiring Special Accommodations:** As per
Section 504 of the Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans
Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990, if accommodation is needed, students must make
the request through the Office of Disabled Student Services, Chance Academic
Center 124-C (Phone: 733-2347).

            **_End of History 1301.085 (Telecourse) Syllabus and Course Information for Summer 2002               (Posted on June 11, 20002.)_**

