**APPLIED ECONOMICS 436  
NATURAL RESOURCE USE IN NATIVE AMERICAN ECONOMIES**

**Fall 1998**

Dr. Molly Espey | Office: FA 220B  
---|---  
MWF 9:00-9:50 | Phone: 784-1679  
  
  

**COURSE DESCRIPTION:**  
  
Along with an historical overview of Native American economies, this course
will provide detailed economic analysis of the use of natural resources by
Native Americans. The role of customs and the development of property rights,
contracts, and market exchanges in American Indian societies will be studied,
with an emphasis on agriculture, fishing, and hunting. The impact of the
General Allotment Act of 1887 and the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 on
Native American economies will also be discussed.

While the basic economic concepts of supply, demand, and economic efficiency
will be reviewed in this course, students with little or no economics
background are advised to read the basic microeconomic theory of an
introductory text such as D. Hyman, _Microeconomics_ , P. Samuelson and W.
Nordhaus, _Microeconomics_ , or P. Heyne, _Microeconomics_. These texts are on
reserve in the Life and Health Sciences library.



**TEXT:**

Terry L. Anderson (1995). _Sovereign Nations or Reservations? An Economic
History of American Indians_. Pacific Research Institute for Public Policy.

Supplemental readings will also be provided throughout the course.



**OFFICE HOURS:**

MWF 11:00-12:00  
  
Students are free to see me any time I am in the office, but I will make a
point of being available during the above hours. If the above hours are not
convenient, students may also make an appointment with me.



**EVALUATION:**

Homework Problems | 20%  
---|---  
[Essays](apec436%20essays.htm) | 33%  
Midterm Exam | 15%  
Presentations | 12%  
Final Exam | 20%  
  
There will be five homework assignments involving economic analysis of topics
discussed in class. The midterm and final will involve economic analysis
similar to the homework problems. There will be three essays on resource use
by Native Americans, the impact of the westward expansion of white men on
Native American economies, and the impact of the Dawes Act and the Indian
Reorganization Act on Native American economies. Students are free to select
any Indian group of interest for these analyses. Finally, each student will
make two presentations to the class about his or her essay topics. More detail
will be given later regarding the essays and presentations.

**Late assignments will be marked down one grade for each class period they
are late.** Exceptions may be made if the student discusses the problem with
me prior to the due date.



  
**CAPSTONE COURSES:**

According to university guidelines, capstone courses are "intensive
experiences in critical analysis, designed to broaden students' perspectives
beyond their culture or discipline and provide an opportunity for integration
of previous courses in the major and in the core curriculum. They require
students to examine complex issues in substantial pieces of writing." Capstone
courses "should...build upon the core curriculum, promote critical thinking,
and include a rigorous writing component and a computational component."

This course is a general capstone course, open to all students with no
prerequisites beyond the lower division core curriculum requirements.



**DIVERSITY:**

The course satisfies the diversity requirement of the core curriculum.



**COURSE SCHEDULE:**

8/24-8/28 | Introduction  
| Anderson, Ch. 1  
---|---|---  
  
8/31-9/4 |  
Economic principles  
|  
*Field, Ch. 3, 4 (p. 64-69)   
*Hyman Ch. 3  
  
9/7-9/11 |  
NO CLASS Monday 9/7 (Labor Day)  
Economic principles (continued)  
**_Homework 1 due Friday  
_** |  
  
9/14-9/18  |  
Tragedy of the commons  
Property rights  
**_Homework 2 due Friday  
_** |  
Hardin (handout in class)  
Dales (handout in class)  
  
9/21-9/25 |  
Governing the Commons: Customs and culture  
|  
*Ostrum, Ch. 1  
  
9/28-10/2  |  
Governing the Commons: Customs and culture  
**_Homework 3 due Wednesday  
_** |  
Anderson, Ch. 2-3  
  
10/5-10/9 |  
Review for midterm  
**_Midterm Exam Wednesday, 10/7_** |  
  
10/12-10/16 | **_  
Essay 1 due Monday  
_** Early contact with white men  
|  
Anderson, Ch. 4  
  
10/19-10/23 | **_  
Presentations of essay 1  
_** |  
  
10/26-10/30  | **_  
Presentations continued  
_** Early contact with white men continued  
NO CLASS Friday 10/30 (Nevada Day observed)  
|  
  
11/2-11/6 |  
**_Homework 4 due Monday_**  
The General Allotment Act of 1887 (The Dawes Act)  
|  
Anderson, Ch. 5-6  
  
11/9-11/13 |  
**_Essay 2 due Monday_**  
NO CLASS Wednesday 11/11 (Veteran's Day)  
The Indian Reorganization Act of 1934  
|  
Anderson, Ch. 7  
  
11/16-11/20 |  
The Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 (continued)  
**_  
_** |  
  
11/23-11/27  |  
**_Essay 3 due Friday_**  
NO CLASS Friday 11/27 (Thanksgiving holiday)  
|  
Anderson, Ch. 8  
  
11/30-12/4 | **_  
Presentations of essays 2 and 3  
Homework 5 due Wednesday  
_** |  
12/7-12/11 |  
Conclusions  
|  
| **_  
Final Exam: Thursday 12/10, 9:45-11:45_** |  
  
  
**References**

Anderson, Terry. _The Political Economy of Customs and Culture_ , 1993.

Anderson, Terry. _The Political Economy of the American West_ , 1994.

* Anderson, Terry, ed. _Property Rights and Indian Economies_ , 1992.

** Anderson, Terry and Dean Lueck. "Land Tenure and Agricultural Productivity
on Indian Reservations", _Journal of Law and Economics_ , **35** (October):
427-453, 1992.

** Baden, John and Richard Stroup. "Myths, Admonitions, and Rationality: The
American Indian as a Resource Manager", _Economic Inquiry_ **19(1)** :
132-143, 1981.

Basso, Keith H. _The Cibecue Apache_. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston,
1989.

Barsh, Russell L. and James Y. Henderson. T _he Road: Indian Tribes and
Political Liberty_. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980.

Bordwich, Fergus. _Killing the White Man's Indian_ , 1996.

Branch, E. Douglas. _The Hunting of the Buffalo_ , Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press, 1962.

Calloway, Colin G. ed. _New Directions in American Indian History_ , Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press, 1988.

* Carlson, Leonard. _Indians, Bureaucrats, and Land: The Dawes Act and Decline of Indian Farming_ , 1981.

** Carlson, Leonard. "Land Allotment and the Decline of American Indian
Farming", _Explorations in Economic History_ , **18 (April)** : 128-154, 1981.

Debo, Angie. _A History of Indians in the United States_ , University of
Oklahoma Press, 1970.

** Demsetz, Harold. "Toward a Theory of Property Rights", _American Economic
Review_ **57(2)** : 347-359, 1967.

DeRosier, Arthur H. _The Removal of the Choctaw Indians_. New York: Harper
Torchbooks, 1972.

Ewers, John C. _The Horse in Blackfoot Indian Culture_. Washinton D.C.:
Smithsonian Institution Press, 1955

Ewers, John C. _The Blackfeet: Raiders of the Northwestern Plains_. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press, 1976.

Hoebel, E. Adamson. _The Law of Primitive Man_. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1954.

Hoxie, Frederick E. _A Final Promise: The Campaign to Assimilate the Indians,
1880-1920_. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1984.

** Hurt, R. Douglas. _Indian Agriculture in America: Prehistory to the
Present_. Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1984.

Josephy, Alvin M. _The Indian Heritage of America_. New York: Bantam Books,
1988.

** Juergensmeyer, Julian C. and James B. Wadley. "The Common Lands Concept: A
'Commons' Solution to a Common Environmental Problem", _Natural Resources
Journal_ , **14** (July): 361-381, 1974.

LaFarge, Oliver, ed. _The Changing Indian_. Norman: University of Oklahoma
Press, 1942.

** Lewis, David Rich. _Neither Wolf Nor Dog: American Indians, Environment and
Agrarian Change_ , Oxford University Press, 1994.

** Lewis, David Rich. "Native Americans and the Environment: A Survey of
Twentieth Century Issues", _American Indian Quarterly_ , 19(3): 423-450.

** Libecap, Gary D. and Ronald N. Johnson. "Legislating Commons: The Navajo
Tribal Coucil and the Navajo Range", _Economic Inquiry_ , **18** (January):
69-86, 1980.

Martin, P. "Prehistoric Overkill: The Global Model." Quanternary Extinctions:
A Prehistorical Revolution. Edited by P.S. Martin and R.G. Klein. Tuscon,
Ariz: University of Arizona Press, 1984.

McCool, D. _Command of the Waters: Iron Triangles, Federal Water Development,
and Indian Waters_. Berkeley: University of California, 1988.

McGinnies, William G., Bram J. Goldman, and Patricia Paylore, eds. _Food,
Fiber, and the Arid Lands_. Tuscon: University of Arizona Press, 1971.

** North, Douglas and R. Thomas. "The First Economic Revolution", _Economic
History Review_ **30** : 229-241, 1977.

* Ostrom, Elinor. _Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.

Otis, D.S. _The Dawes Act and the Allotment of Indian Lands_. Norman:
University of Oklahoma Press, 1973.

Philip, Kenneth R. _John Collier's Crusade for Indian Reform 1920-1954_.
Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1977.

** Posner, Richard A. "A Theory of Primitive Society, with Special Reference
to Law", _The Journal of Law and Economics_

Satz, Ronald N. _American Indian Policy in the Jacksonian Era_. Lincoln:
Unviersity of Nebraska Press, 1975.

Smithsonian Institute, _Handbook of North American Indians_ , multiple
volumes.

Steward, Julian H. _Basin-Plateau Aboriginal Sociopolitical Groups_.
Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 120.
Washington: US Government Printing Office, 1938.

Sutton, I. _Indian Land Tenure_. New York: Clearwater, 1980.

** Trosper, Ronald L. "American Indian Relative Ranching Efficiency",
_American Economic Review_ , **68(4)** : 503-515, 1978.

Wallace, Anthony C. _The Death and Rebirth of the Seneca_. New York: Knopf,
1970.

Western States Water Council. _Indian Water Rights in the West_. Salt Lake
City, UT: Western Water Council, 1984.



* On 2-hour reserve in the Life and Health Sciences Library  
** Dr. Espey has a copy.

