The University of Texas at Austin |

Fall semester 2002  
---|---  
  
Government 320L/MES 323K.1 |

Prof. Clement M. Henry  
  
Extension course #63165/63335 |

Office: Burdine 422  
  
Burdine 224: M 6-9 |

Office hrs: Tu , Th 10-11, 2-3  
  
grader: |

or by [email](mailto:chenry@mail.la.utexas.edu)  
  
# Arab-Israeli Politics

>   * Course Content

>   * Class discussions over the Internet

>   * Simulation game

>   * Required texts:

>   * Course requirements:

>   * Role profiles (500 words)

>   * Annotated bibliogaphies

>   * Simulation game participation

>   * Debriefing Paper (500 words)

>   * Schedule of Topics and Readings

[Back to Arab-Israeli Politics home page](./)

* * *

### Course Content

This is a course about politics and clashing value systems, not history, but
first you will need to learn the history and learn why you are learning the
historical facts that are presented. You will also discover that "Arab-
Israeli" politics really involves several levels: 1) conflicts between Arabs
and Israelis in Palestine/Israel, 2) conflicts between the state of Israel and
various Arab states in the region, 3) conflicts, muted since the end of the
Cold War but still present, between powerful states outside the region who are
sucked into the first two sets of conflicts, 4) conflicts within the American
community over the nature of our commitment to Israel and how to reconcile it
with other national interests, 5) conflicts within the Israeli body politic
over relationships with their Arab neighbors, and 6) conflicts between Arab
states and within the various Palestinian communities over their relationships
with Israel. This course is designed to enhance your understanding of these
domestic, regional, and international factors in the "Arab-Israeli" conflict.

Some of these conflicts may divide you as well as the protagonists in the
Middle East. You will be expected to develop an understanding and empathy with
the protagonists, whatever your own views on the subject may be. You will
learn to appreciate the clashes in values that may accompany conflicting
political perspectives. You may deepen your own appreciation of some of the
moral dilemmas underlying political choices.

Irrespective of your own convictions, you will be expected to develop your
critical faculties, in order to be able to detect "bias" or "spins" in
narratives of the Arab-Israeli conflict and in the daily press, whether in the
form of "news" reports or editorial opinion. In the guise of "objective"
narrative and "scientific" analysis crucial facts may be omitted, or others
emphasized that reinforce the views of some protagonists against others. To
detect the omissions or get a feel for the balance or lack of balance in a
supposedly objective report, you will need to acquire a good command of the
history of conflict between Arabs and Jews over territories named "Palestine"
and "Israel." How far back? In one of your required readings, Charles Smith
starts off with Biblical times (circa 1400 BC). Smith's book was attacked by
some reviewers on the ground that Zionism emerged as a cultural and political
movement only in the late nineteenth century.

Table of contents | [Back to Arab-Israeli Politics home page](./)

* * *

### Class discussions over the Internet

While we will try to discuss various points of view in class, you are also
expected to express some of your views and perceptions in "chat," our
electronic discussion forum. This forum is protected by a password, so that it
is very much like our classroom. Make a [comment](mailto:aipol-
chat@mail.la.utexas.edu) and [it will be seen](fall01/chat01) only by other
members of the class, your TA, and your professor. Your contributions will
count toward your class participation grade. You should get practice using the
Internet in plenty of time for our electronic simulation game, which begins in
early October.

Table of contents | [Back to Arab-Israeli Politics home page](./)

* * *

### Simulation game

The best way to develop your empathy and critical understanding of the various
protagonists is through hands-on experience. You will therefore all be
involved in a simulation game of diplomatic interaction among the major
players of the Arab-Israeli conflict. We will be joining classes of students
from Macquarie University in Sydney, Australia. We willl be sending computer
messages back and forth among ourselves and between our players and theirs.
Each of you will represent a particular actor in the conflict. The instructor
will try to take account of your personal preferences in selecting the role.
The richest experience, for those of you who already have strong convictions
and seek to develop empathy for conflicting perspectives, may be to play the
role of one of your "enemies." But most of you probably just want to learn
something about the Middle East and have no particularly entrenched views. No
prior experience or course work is required, and you should not feel
intimidated by students who are really seem to know a great deal about the
Middle East. Whatever your previous knowledge of the Middle East, expect to
spend a fair amount of time on this course crritically evaluating what you
think you already know, preparing position papers and exchanging messages
through our computer-conferencing system. No prior experience with computers
is needed to complete your work satisfactorily, but you will need to type. You
will enhance your computer literacy and learn how to use the Internet as a
research tool.

Table of contents | [Back to Arab-Israeli Politics home page](./)

* * *

### Required texts:

**You will be expected to purchase (or share):**

     Charles D. Smith, _Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict_ ,4th edition (St. Martin's Press, 2000)     Baylis Thomas, _How Israel Was Won_ (NY: Lexington, 1999) 

**Recommended:**

     Asher Arian, _The Second Republic: Politics in Israel_ (Chatham House, 1997)      Donna E. Arzt, _Refugees into Citizens_ (NY: Council on Foreign Relations, 1997)      Seymour M. Hersh, _The Sampson Option_ , New York: Vintage, 1991     Rashid Khalidi, _Palestinian Identity_ (Columbia UP, 1997)      Walter Laqueur and Barry Rubin eds, _The Israel-Arab Reade_ r, Penguin1995 

    \- strongly recommended for in-depth documentation.      Miriam Lowi, _Water and Power_ (Cambridge UP, 1995)      Glenn E. Robinson, _Building a Palestinian State_ (Indiana UP, 1997)      Mark Tessler, _A History of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict_ (U of Indiana Press, 1994) 

All of the above have been put on reserve in the Undergraduate Library. You
should also be reading either [The New York Times](http://www.nytimes.com),
[The Washington Post](http://www.washingtonpost.com/), or the [Christian
Science Monitor](http://www.csmonitor.com/) regularly, and/or use our UT
resources. [The Jerusalem Post](http://www.jpost.com/),
[Haaretz](http://www3.haaretz.co.il), and the Jerusalem Dawn (Al-Fajr),
available in PCL, or [Palestine
Report](http://mail.jmcc.org/media/reportonline/report.html), online only,
also provide useful and timely insights, respectively from conservative and
progressive Israeli and from Palestinian perspectives. You may also subscribe
in class to _[Middle East International](http://meionline.com/frames.html)_
($10 for 6 or 7 issues to be received in the course of the semester) if you
get your order to the instructor by September 6. You also have free access,
with the class password, to some [new resources](fall02/resources02) that I
will be mailing you, and also to [summer 2002
resources](../usme/sum2002/resources/index.html) that I have collected for you
and other classes.

Table of contents | [Back to Arab-Israeli Politics home page](./)

* * *

### Course requirements

Grading

    Midterm 25%  
Role Profile Paper 10%  
Annotated bibliography 10%  
Game participation 10% (includes game plan)  
Debriefing paper 10%  
Class Participation 10% (includes computer "chat" participation)  
Identifications Test 25%

Important Dates

> 1) teams (3 students) to be constituted by Monday, Sept. 16. 2) teams
present bibliographies, annotated with summaries of relevant information, by
Monday, Sept. 23 3) game role profile due Monday, Sept. 30. 4) MID-TERM EXAM:
Monday, October 7 5) game playing, Oct. 14 to Nov. 1 with Australia, then
finalize Israeli-Palestinian negotiations Nov. 4-18. 6) debriefing report due
Monday, Nov. 25. 7) IDENTIFICATIONS TEST: Monday, Dec. 2.  

Table of contents | [Back to Arab-Israeli Politics home page](./)

* * *

**Role profiles (500 words)**

You will be expected, in teams of three students each, to do some research on
the character you are representing in the game and to write a role profile of
about 500 words. You will present one copy in class on Sept 30, and you will
also [transmit](mailto:aipol-roles@mail.la.utexas.edu) it to our collection of
[role profiles](http://www.la.utexas.edu/chenry/aip/fall02/roles02/) on the
Internet. (We will explain in class to you the mechanics of signing into our
computer system and sending messages).

You will pay special attention to his or her statements and positions with
respect to Middle East foreign policies and strategies in general, and the
Arab-Israeli conflict in particular.

Here are the sorts of information to look for:

TITLE: Check to make sure your assigned title is correct, if you were given a
name.

ROLE NAME: given in handout or to be researched in light of your title.

PHYSICAL DESCRIPTION: Optional and please be very brief if you happen to come
up with something.

BACKGROUND BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION (do the best you can):

Place of birth:

Date of birth:

Schooling:

Career pattern:

Present post:

*DISCUSSION OF POLITICAL GOALS AND STRATEGIES: (Very important, and you can do it for the country even if you don't have much personal information). How they developed and how they relate to your topic at hand, the Arab-Israeli conflict and peace process.

*ROLE DESCRIPTION: your duties and responsibilities, political position and power should be analyzed.

*POLITICAL ALLIES AND OPPONENTS: Specify your principal allies and adversaries within the simulation.

GREATEST CONTRIBUTIONS (optional): Major past accomplishments of which the
other players should be made aware.

ROLE PLAYING NOTES (optional): Character-related information that is
significant for the simulation, eg. foibles and desires, reputation.

MEANINGFUL QUOTATIONS (optional): These might indicate some of the actor's
views relevant to the simulation.

**SOURCES (very important for grading purposes): give sources in your
annotated bibliographies, and pay attention to the quality of the evidence.
(See your syllabus for suggestions on electronic sources; you may also try the
PCL reference room)

Table of contents | [Back to Arab-Israeli Politics home page](./)

* * *

### Annotated bibliogaphies

You will also present annotated bibliographies of the sources you used to
prepare the role profile. You will present one copy in class on Monday, Sept
22, and you will also [transmit](mailto:aipol-bibs@mail.la.utexas.edu) it to
our archive of [annotated bibliographies](fall02/bibs02/) on the Internet. The
bibliography should consist of at least 10 useful sources about your character
and his/her policy concerns (on issues such as Jersualem, water, settlements,
compensation for refugees, the future political status of Palestine, etc.).
You may be able to locate samples of your character's speeches. The sources
may be articles, books, or electronic files. Electronic sources can be
documented with their URL (http://......). You should make a brief critical
summary of each source. Make sure that the electronic verson of your annotated
bibliography has an informative subject header, such as the name of your
character or a substantive subject heading. You may break your bibliography
down into separate items corresponding to your sources.

For your bibliography and general information, you may access many useful
materials, including translations of the foreign press, over the Internet. You
may not even need to go to the library, just use our course home page internet
resources and surf the net for a tremendous amount of information! Or look at
the supplementary bibliographies in [mena-
politics](http://www.la.utexas.edu/chenry/mena), or, better still, try to find
relevant resources in [www.assr.org](http://www.assr.org). If you go to the
periodical room of the PCL, you may consult translations of various Middle
Eastern newspapers and speeches of political leaders on microfiche. Ask the
periodical librarian for suggestions and instructions on how to use the
microfiches (JPR series of translations of speeches and newspaper articles by
Foreign Broadcasting Information Service, FBIS--now also available online for
UT students via the WWW from the UT Libraries home page). For briefings on the
military strengths and weaknesses of the various protagonists, consult the
annual reports of the Institute of Strategic Studies (London) and other
materials ([SIPRI](http://www.sipri.se/), for example) available in the
reference room of PCL.

You may find lots of up-to-date material, including Middle East International,
in the Middle East Center's library. The Center is on the 6th floor of the
West Mall Bldg.

Table of contents | [Back to Arab-Israeli Politics home page](./)

* * *

### Simulation game participation

You will each be expected to sign on and participate in the simulation game at
least once every other day (including weeekends) from October 14 to November
8. Each role team will be expected by October 11 to mail to Control a game
plan outlining your strategy in response to the game scenario you receive on
October 7.

* * *

### Debriefing Paper (500-700 words)

You will then be expected to write a second paper of no more than 700 words,
due Monday, Nov. 25, (hard copy in class, electronic version [to the
"debriefings" file](mailto:aipol-debriefings@mail.la.utexas.edu)) presenting
your impressions of the game, what you learned from it, and how
"realistically" you thought other characters performed in the game. Try to
avoid play-by-play descriptions and summaries of what happened. You will be
graded for your originality and perceptiveness and also for your ability to
document your insights. You should footnote required readings and research you
did in connection with the course when comparing "real life" with what went on
in the game. A good paper will have a lead idea and develop a well documented
argument.

Table of contents | [Back to Arab-Israeli Politics home page](./)

* * *

### Schedule of Topics and Readings (on Reserve, UGL):

**Sept. 9** : Getting started: discussion of simulation game procedures and
requirements.

Readings:

    1) Get familiar with our WWW home page for Gov 320L/MES 323K/TLC 331 at www.la.utexas.edu/chenry/aip.     2) Start reading Thomas, pp. xiii-xviii, 303-312 (for our class discussion), pp. 1-35. 

**Sept. 16** : Teams to be formed, Subscriptions ($10 for 6 or 7 issues) to
_Middle East International_?

1) Conceptual themes: issues of national self-determination, dialogue, and
perspective ("bias"). The importance to the United States of resolving the
Arab-Israel conflict. Impact of the Second Gulf War (1990-91).

Readings:

    Thomas, pp. 1-35, 289-302 (Appendix on Government and Democracy in Israel)     Smith, pp. 1-11 

2) The Middle East context: a strategic area, unstable and "penetrated"
political systems, diplomatic paralysis, and local arms races.

Readings:

    Smith, pp. 11-22 

3) Arab and Jewish nationalisms: an overview.

Readings:

    Charles Smith, _Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict_ , pp. 23-57  
Laqueur and Rubin, _The Israel-Arab Reader_ , pp. 16, 599-611, or Smith, pp.
75, 506-510, for the Balfour Declaration of 1917 and the Israeli-PLO
Declaration of Principles of Sept. 13, 1993. Visit the Israeli Ministry of
Foreign Affairs [website](http://www.mfa.gov.il/mfa/home.asp) for a detailed
list of accords and agreements concerning the peace process since 1993. Go to
the bottom of the home page to click on "Peace process" and then to the left
you can click on their "Reference Documents" archive.

**Sept. 23** : Annotated bibliographies due

1)The Status of Palestine: Thrice-Promised Land 1915-1922.

Readings:

    Smith, 58-108 

2) The Issue of Autonomy: British dilemmas over Palestine: conflicting
commitments concerning political representation, land, and people.

Readings:

    Smith, pp. 109-166, 511-516 ("Oslo 2" of September 28, 1995).     You may also want to read more recent documents from the Israeli foreign ministry's [home page](http://www.mfa.gov.il/mfa/home.asp), such as the Hebron accords of January 17, 1997, including attached notes. Also you may study Smith, p. 473, outlining the areas A and B from which the Israeli army is redeployed. under Oslo 2. You may view l[ots of maps at our PCL](http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/israel.html) and also at the [Foundation for Middle East Peace](http://www.fmep.org/maps/). And here is how one Palestinian research center views the situation on the ground : [Recent Israeli Plan for Cantonizing the Palestinian Territories](http://www.poica.org/casestudies/seige/index.htm) (Oct. 21, 2000). 

3) Issues of Internal Security and Terrorism--"Gun Zionism" and the Emergence
of Israel

Readings:

    Thomas, 37-94     [Deir Yassin Remembered](http://www.deiryassin.org/)     Smith, pp. 167-222     also recommended: Mark Tessler, _A History_ , pp. 273-335     and, to get a sense of political parties and elections in Israel,     Arian, The Second Republic, pp. 103-140 (about Israeli political parties and elections) **or** search from the Israeli foreign ministry's [home page](http://www.mfa.gov.il/mfa/home.asp)     ** **

**Sept. 30** : Game role profiles due.

1) The Issue of Regional Security: Recalling the Arab-Israeli Conflict,
1949-56.

Reading:

    Thomas, 95-131     Smith, 223-260 

2) From War to War, 1956-1967

Readings:

    Thomas, 133-188     Smith, pp. 261-300     Smith, pp 341-42, or Laqueur and Rubin, The Israel-Arab Reader, pp. 217-218: [UN Security Council Resolution 242](http://www.mfa.gov.il/mfa/home.asp).  
Optional: browse through the home page of the [USS
Liberty](http://www.halcyon.com/jim/ussliberty/liberty.htm)

**Oct. 7** : Start playing Sim game

1) review session

2) Midterm exam: to consist of two parts:

    1) 10 identification questions (eg. what/when was the Madrid Conference and what was its significance? ....Golan Heights?..(you would also need to put this one on a blank map we will give you) for 50% of the grade, and     2) an essay question (chosing 1 out of 2 or 3). 

3) Costs of Diplomatic Paralysis: the 1973 War. Step by step vs. comprehensive
solutions?

Readings:

    Thomas, 189-208     Smith, pp. 301-350     **Role profiles and annotated bibliographies due: hard copies in class**. Please also post them in the computer system as instructed. You may use our WWW home page form or e-mail to aipol-roles@mail.la.utexas and aipol-bibs@mail.la.utexas.edu.    Read game [scenario](http://www.la.utexas.edu/chenry/aip/fall02/media02) and begin playing: consult with your team and send a message to Control briefly (300 words) indicating your strategy in the game. Save a copy to yourself as this will help you later when you debrief at the end of the game. Hard copy due in class Oct. 14. 

**Oct. 14**

1) Regional Insecurity and Lebanon: the American expeditions of 1958 and 1982.

Readings:

    Thomas, 209-242     Smith, pp. 351-405 

2) The Intifada, the Transformation of the PLO, and the Gulf Crisis: Pressures
for Peace.

Readings:

    Thomas, 243-262     Smith, pp. 406-456     [Palestinian Declaration of Independence](http://www.palestine-net.com/politics/indep.html)

**Oct. 21** : The Israeli-Palestinian Peace Process. Continuing Peace with
Jordan?

Readings:

    Thomas, 263-268     Smith, pp. 457-524     optional: [Israel-Jordan Treaty](http://www.mfa.gov.il/mfa/home.asp) (Oct. 26, 1994). 

**Oct. 21** : Syria and the Golan

Readings:

    Compare the Israeli settlers' [history](http://www.golan.org.il/history.html) of the Golan Heights with the references listed in Smith's index on p. 534\.     Reread Smith, pp. 270-271, 516-524 

**Oct. 28** :

1) Collapse of the Peace Process since Camp David II?

Readings:

    Robert Malley, [Fictions About the Failure at Camp David,](Class%20materials/070801MALLeyReCampDavid.html) New York Times, July 8, 2001.     Deborah Sonntag, [Quest for Mideast Peace: How and Why It Failed](Class%20materials/072601Sonntag.html), New York Times, July 26, 2001 

Dennis Ross, [FROM OSLO TO CAMP DAVID TO
TABA](http://www.washingtoninstitute.org/watch/Peacewatch/peacewatch2001/340.htm):
Setting the Record Straight (Wash Institute of Near East Policy).      Nigel
Parry, [Misrepresentation of Barak's
offer](http://electronicIntifada.net/coveragetrends/generous.html) at Camp
David as "generous" and "unprecedented"     ARIJ, [The withdrawal percentages:
what do they really mean?](http://www.poica.org/casestudies/Withdrawal-
Percentages1-1-2001/index.htm)     David Newman, "[Is reconciliation still
possible?](press2001/061301JPostprofNewmanReconcilOpin.28051.html)" Jersualem
Post, June 13, 2001     [The Mitchell
Plan](../usme/sp2001/resources/msg00199.html) (February 2001)    Background:
Noam Chomsky, [A Painful
Peace](http://www.lbbs.org/zmag/articles/jan96chomsky.htm) (1996) or [The
Israel-Arafat A
greement](http://www.worldmedia.com/archive/articles/z9310-israel-arafat.html)
(1993)     Joseph Farah, [Israel Today &
Always](http://www.jdl.org/israel/whats_a_palestinian.html): Between the Lines
- What is a Palestinian? (Jewish Defense League website)

2) The refugee and settlement issues

Readings:

    Arzt, pp. 101-123 (UGL reserve)     Applied Research Institute, Jerusalem, [Recent Israeli Settlement Activity](http://www.arij.org/paleye/), read one of the case studies, including maps     Smith, pp. 472-473 map of Israeli settlements 

**Nov. 4** :

1) The issue of Water

Reading:

    Stephan Libiszewski, [Water Disputes in the Jordan Basin Region](http://www.fsk.ethz.ch/encop/13/en13.htm)     optional: Miriam R. Lowi, Water and power (Cambridge University Press, 1995) 

2) The issue of Jerusalem

Readings:

    [The Debate at Camp David over Jerusalem's Holy Places](Class%20materials/israel_state_of_israel_part_3-8.29.2000.html) (July 2000) \- (Middle East Media Research Institute)     An official Israeli view: [Basic Law](http://www.israel-mfa.gov.il/peace/jeruslaw.html) and links to legal background paper.  
A Palestinian view: [The Status of Jerusalem
Reconstructed](http://www.arij.org/paleye/jerusal/index.htm)  
Maps of [Jerusalem](http://www.arij.org/paleye/jerusal/figa.gif) and Har
Homa=[Abu Ghnaim](http://www.arij.org/paleye/abughnam/map1.gif), also in
Thomas, p 273.

Game ends Friday, Nov. 8 with plenty of
[news](http://www.la.utexas.edu/chenry/oil/fall02/media02)!

**Nov. 11** :

1) Game negotiations: **inclass?**

2) U.S. foreign policy: oil and domestic constraints

Readings:

    optional: Paul Findley, They Dare to Speak Out, 25-49     visit [AIPAC](http://www.aipac.org/) and [Washington Report](http://www.washington-report.org/), April/May 1997, pp. 43-44. 

**Nov. 18** :

Arms control, the War Against Terrorism, and nuclear proliferation

Readings: optional: Seymour Hersh, _The Sampson Option_

**Nov. 25** : Debriefing papers due

Discussion of the sim game outcome...

Summing up the peace process in the real world: prospects for Palestinian
self-determination and Israeli security?

Readings:

    Review Thomas, pp. 263-288; Smith, 457-503     Examine our in-class [New Resources](fall01/resources01) \- especially TBA 

**Dec. 2:** Review session and Identifications Test

Table of contents | [Back to Arab-Israeli Politics home page](./)

* * *

August 21, 2002  
[Department of Government](/depts/gov/home.htm), [College of Liberal
Arts](http://www.dla.utexas.edu/), [University of Texas at Austin.  
](http://www.utexas.edu/)Questions, Comments, and Suggestions to
[chenry@mail.la.utexas.edu](MAILTO:chenry@jeeves.la.utexas.edu)

