

**POL 441: Arab-Israeli Conflict  
Spring 2001**

Instructor: Laura K. Landolt  
e-mail: landolt@u.arizona.edu  
Messages: 621-7600  
Office: Social Sciences 134  
Office Hours: Weds. 10-12:00

[The course website, containing a copy of this syllabus and any class updates
is:  
http://www.u.arizona.edu/ic/polis/spring01/Course-Homesite.cgi?POL_441-791  
The student password is: getana]

**Course Description**  
This class will examine the macro-historical/political evolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It will also draw from supplementary academic
articles and works of fiction to illustrate a variety of perspectives on the
conflict, including those drawn from individual- and group-level experiences.
The reading load will average approximately 100 pages per week. Students will
be expected to _complete the readings before class time._  
  
---  
  
**Evaluation**  
Your instructor is required by University policy to evaluate each student's
performance at semester's end. In order to make this evaluation as fair as
possible, it is essential that students have multiple opportunities to
demonstrate their mastery of the material. Accordingly there will be three
response pieces and two examinations. Response pieces each contribute 10% to
the final course grade. The first examination contributes 15%, and the second
30%. Finally, attendance and participation each contribute 9% and 16%,
respectively. Final grades are assigned according to the following scale:
90-100, A; 80-89, B; 70-79, C; 60-69, D; and below 60% an E. No extra credit
or other compensatory work will be applied to the compilation of final course
grades.

Response pieces (3x10)=30  
Attendance=9  
Participation=16  
Midterm Exam=15  
Final Exam= _30  
_ 100

Both examinations are required for all students. The scheduled exam dates are
firm (February 28 and Friday, May 11) so please plan your semester
accordingly. In the case of some prior commitment known in advance (e.g.,
planned travel, authorized sports engagement, weddings, etc.) you must inform
the instructor of the conflict in writing and supply supportive documentation
_at least one week in advance of the scheduled exam._ In the case of an
emergency situation (e.g., illness, death, etc.) you should inform the
instructor by telephone or e-mail _as early as possible in advance of the
scheduled exam._ (Messages can be left at 621-7600 during regular business
hours.) _All such excuses must be documented._

Missed exams ruled legitimate by the instructor based on appropriate
documentation will offer students a choice of (a) making up the missed exam
after the scheduled date or (b) dropping the missed exam and reweighting the
remaining exam to count for the full 45% of the final grade. A missed exam
lacking documentation or one ruled not legitimate by the instructor will count
as 0 points in the final grade.  
  
**Write Your Own Exams!**  
The _ **three response**_ pieces will prepare the student for both the weekly
classes and the three exams. Students will sign up for one of each two
consecutive response piece days (three out of six). In each response piece the
student will briefly summarize the week's readings (3-5 sentences), analyze
and discuss those readings, present any personal questions regarding the
reading, and formulate three good exam/discussion essay questions or two essay
questions and two identifications [see sample response piece on p. 7]. Each
response piece will be no more than 600 words (roughly, the equivalent of two
double-spaced, typewritten pages). Response pieces will be graded according to
these criteria:  
\--Writing style and clarity (including grammar, spelling, etc.).  
\--Quality of analysis of readings.  
\--Quality of potential exam questions/identifications.

Each _**class section**_ will include a lecture and class/small group
discussions of the questions generated by the week's response pieces, and of
the reading in general. Exam questions will be selected from among the good
response piece questions (if necessary, in slightly modified form). Response
pieces are to be placed in my mailbox or sent via e-mail by 10:00 am each
Monday. Late submissions will be penalized two points if they are submitted by
10 am on Tuesday. Response pieces not submitted by Tuesday at 10:00 am will
not be accepted, and will count as a grade of 0.  
  
The _**exam format**_ will be 40% short identification (eight identifications
worth five points each) and 60% essay (two out of three questions, worth
twenty points each). Exams will cover lectures, readings and discussion.
Unless otherwise indicated, exams will take place during the first half of the
class session. The final exam will be comprehensive, so it is imperative that
you keep up with the readings and attend all classes.

**Attend and Participate!**  
In lecture, class and small-group discussion, students will have the
opportunity not only to prepare themselves for exams, but to collect a maximum
of sixteen **_participation points_** by demonstrating that they have read and
given some thought to the readings before class, and by scoring well on
unscheduled one-point pop quizzes. During normal class times, the second half
of the class will involve class and/or small group discussions. During
discussion, those who contribute very good points on the readings, answer a
difficult question, or otherwise demonstrate thoughtfulness and probity will
also receive participation points.

After the first day of class, one absence will not affect your grade. After
this single absence, _each hour of class missed will mean the loss of one
attendance point, for a maximum of nine points._ According to University
policy,  "excessive or extended absence from class is sufficient reason for
the instructor to recommend that the student be administratively dropped from
the course." Ten hours are considered to be "excessive absence" in this
course. Attendance will be formally recorded on the second day of class
(January 17), and I will automatically drop a student who has had ten hours
(four full class meetings) of absences. If you leave class early, or fail to
return after the break, the hours missed will count towards recorded absences.

If your absence from class is unavoidable then you are advised to obtain
lecture and discussion notes from another student. The instructor will not
provide you notes for missed classes. Also be aware that lectures are given
only once--they will not be repeated or summarized during office hours. As a
courtesy to the instructor and other students, please avoid disrupting the
class by arriving late or leaving early. In cases where such disruptions
cannot be avoided you should alert the instructor beforehand  
  
**Required Reading**  
The primary text available in the university bookstore:

Tessler, Mark. _A History of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict._ Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1994.

In addition to the primary text, we will also examine additional material each
week. This material will be available through reserve and polis (as indicated
below). Reserve material is available for only two hours at a time from the UA
library reserve desk (in the basement of the library).

Polis material is available online (at the course website):  
http://www.u.arizona.edu/ic/polis/spring01/Course-Homesite.cgi?POL_441-791  
The student password is: getanA

**For readings on reserve, you must copy/order these works far ahead  
of time, as you will probably NOT be able to access them during the  
week/days before class! Failure to access these readings will  
not be an excuse for failure to read them!**

**We will read this book by the week after Spring Break:**

Khalifeh, Sahar. _Wild Thorns._ New York: Olive Branch Press, 1994. (all)

This book is on reserve, but if you want your own copy and you don't want to
copy it yourself at the library, _you will need to order it ASAP through an
internet bookstore in order to have it when you are required to read it._ I
did not order this book through the university bookstore because you can get
it much cheaper by ordering it used on the internet.  
  
---  
  
**Other Required Readings on Reserve and Polis:**

Badr, Liyana. _A Balcony Over the Fakihani._ New York: Interlink Books, 1993.  
\-- "A Land of Rock and Thyme" 3-29

Friedman, Thomas L. _From Beirut to Jerusalem._ New York: Anchor Books, 1990.  
\-- "The Fault Line" 322-365  
\--"The Earthquake" 366-424

Gocek, Fatma Muge and Shiva Balaghi, eds. _Reconstructing Gender in the Middle
East: Tradition, Identity, and Power._ New York: Columbia University Press,
1994.  
\--Rachel Persico,  "Growing up in Israel: A Personal Perspective" 113-122

Grossman, David. _The Yellow Wind._ Translated by Haim Watzman. New York:
Delta, 1989.  
\--pp. 1-97

Hirst, David. _The Gun and the Olive Branch: The Roots of Violence in the
Middle East._ New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1977.  
\--"The Arab Fighters" 172-202  
\--"Gun Zionism" 108-143

Holliday, Laurel. _Children of Israel, Children of Palestine: Our Own True
Stories._ New York: Washington Square Press, 1998.  
\--Wadad Saba,  "A Christian Palestinian's Story" 73-81  
\--Yael Medini, "Paradise on the Border" 98-124  
\--David Gunter, "Going to Jerusalem" 60-71

Kanafani, Ghassan. _Men in the Sun._ Translated by Hilary Kilpatrick.
Washington D.C.: Three Continents Press, 1988.  
\-- "Men in the Sun" 9-56  
\--"The Land of Sad Oranges" 57-62

Kandiyoti, Deniz, ed. _Gendering the Middle East: Emerging Perspectives._
Syracuse, New York: Syracuse University Press, 1996.  
\--Sheila H. Katz  "Adam and Adama, 'Ird and Ard: En-gendering Political
Conflict and Identity in Early Jewish and Palestinian Nationalisms" 85-105  
\--Simona Sharoni "Gender and the Israeli-Palestinian Accord: Feminist
Approaches to International Politics" 107-126

Turki, Fawaz. _Soul in Exile: Lives of a Palestinian Revolutionary._ New York:
Monthly Review Press, 1988.  
\-- Ch. 6: 117-173

Wiesel, Elie. _The Night Trilogy._ Translated by Frances Frenaye. New York:
Hill and Wang, 1987.  
\-- "Dawn" 123-204  
  
**Schedule of Readings and Lecture/Discussion Topics**

  
**January 10:  
Background: Modern Zionism and Arab Nationalism**  
[Understanding the syllabus and class policies. Sign up for response pieces.
Fill out short personal statement.]  
_Readings_ : Tessler, 1-122 (122)

**January 17:  
The Conflict to 1948**  
_[Must sign waiver form and turn it in by this date to attend class. Begin
recording formal attendance. Sign up for response pieces.]_  
_Readings_ : Tessler 123-84 (61)  
Wadad Saba, "A Christian Palestinian's Story." In Holliday, 73-81. (9)  
Yael Medini, "Paradise on the Border." In Holliday, 98-124. (26)

**January 24:  
From British Mandate to the State of Israel**  
_Readings_ : Tessler 185-268 (83)  
David Gunter, "Going to Jerusalem." In Holliday, 60-71. (12)

**January 31:**  
__[response pieces covering Jan. 24-31 due Monday, Jan. 29th]__ _  
Readings_ : Wiesel, "Dawn" 123-204 (81)

**February 7:** _  
The Palestinian Disaster and Basic Issues after 1948_  
_Readings_ : Tessler 269-335 (66)  
Kanafani, "The Land of Sad Oranges" 57-62 (6)  
Badr, "A Land of Rock and Thyme" 3-29 (26)

**February 14:**  
__[response pieces covering Feb. 7-14 due Monday, Feb. 12th]__  
_Readings_ : Hirst, "Gun Zionism" 108-143 (35)  
Hirst, "The Arab Fighters" 172-202 (30)

**February 21:  
Israel and the Arab States through June 1967**  
_Readings_ : Tessler 336-405 (69)  
Kanafani, "Men in the Sun" 9-56 (47)

**February 28: Exam I**

**The PLO**  
_Readings_ : Tessler 407-464 (57)  
Turki 117-173 (56)

  
**March 6: last day to drop classes with grade of "W".  
E-mail me if you'd like to know your exam grade by this date.**

**March 7:  
Israel, the Palestinians, and the Occupied Territories in the 1970s**  
_Readings_ : Tessler 465-534 (69)

**March 14: Spring Break! [March 10-18]**

**March 21:**  
__[response pieces covering March 7-21 due Monday, March 19th]__ _  
Readings_ : Khalifeh, Wild Thorns (207)

**March 28:  
Violent Confrontations in the Early 1980s**  
_Readings_ : Tessler 535-599 (64)

**April 4:**  
__[response pieces covering March 28-April 4 due Monday, April 2nd]__ _  
Readings_ : Grossman 1-97 (97)

**April 11:  
Futile Diplomacy in the Mid-1980s**  
_Readings_ : Tessler 600-676 (76)  
Friedman 322-365 (43)

**April 18:  
The Intifada and Beyond**  
__[response pieces covering April 11-18 due Monday, April 16th]__  
_Readings_ : Tessler 677-752 (75)  
Friedman 366-424 (58)

**April 25:  
Some Critical Feminist Responses**  
_Readings_ : Katz 85-106 (21)  
Persico 113-122 (10)  
Sharoni 106-126 (20)

**May 2:  
To the Present**  
[response pieces covering April 25-May 2 due Monday, April 30th]  
_Readings_ : TBA

**  
Friday May 11, 5-7pm: Final Examination**  
  
**Mandatory Waiver Form  
[must be signed and submitted by January 17] **

I have read the syllabus and understand the course/assignment requirements,
due dates, and responsibility for readings as they are presented. I accept the
terms of this syllabus and am aware that parts of the course may address
"alternative" issues or values. I do not have to agree with the perspectives
presented in all of the materials, but I do agree to make a conscious
decision/effort to understand and articulate them as they arise in the course.
I also understand that personal attacks and intentionally offensive remarks/
behavior are not permitted and may result in grade penalties or dismissal from
the course.

Printed Name:______________________________________________

Signature:_________________________________________________  
  
  
|

**[HOME](index.htm)**  
---

