COURSE SYLLABUS FOR: WILLIAM R VAN CLEAVE

**DSS 502, SEC 1**  
    


Course Syllabus: **DSS 502 Seminar on International Security Affairs**  
    


This seminar will examine international and regional strategic problems and
policies from both a regional and global perspective. It treats strategies and
security problems from a broader international viewpoint than the spring
semester Seminar on Strategy and Arms Control, covering alliance relationships
and the security policies of other states. While international security
problems are studied on a regional basis, patterns of continuing global
strategic competition will be explored.

A central part of the seminar will be to study and discuss the U.S. security
role in the world. We will attempt to understand and critique that role during
the Cold War, assess the current U.S. role, and project alternative future
roles.

The first one-third of the seminar will review and study U.S. containment and
extended deterrence policies since World War II, both conceptually and as
practiced. This will include discussion of the basic strategic interests and
principles underlying U.S. international policies and the U.S. role in the
world. The seminar will then turn to an examination of selected recent and
contemporary regional and international security problems, and the formulation
and nature of current U.S. policies and strategies. Since NATO is addressed
this semester in DSS 605, this seminar will not deal with European NATO issues
(except perhaps for the Balkan conflict and Turkey).

The selection of specific topics will depend largely upon the seminar
students' choices of topics for research. Seminar discussions of these topics
will begin with student presentations of their research. If certain topics I
deem of particular contemporary importance are not chosen by students \-- _e_.
_g_., the Middle East "peace process" and the security of Israel, the Caspian
Sea, China, and weapons proliferation -- I will add and lead seminars on them.
Finally, we will examine the foreign and military policies and views of the
Clinton Administration and their implications for the U.S. security role in
the world, compare them with alternatives, and project the future U.S. role.

Students will be expected to prepare themselves thoroughly for each seminar,
with adequate reading and research even when the subject is not part of the
student's own selected research topic. Students are expected to participate
actively in the seminars, and to attend faithfully. Missed seminars will
require a valid and acceptable excuse and, if at all possible, prior
notification.

A list of required and recommended readings is attached for background and an
extended bibliography will be distributed. Students should become acquainted
with relevant official documents, such as annual Secretary of Defense and
Joint Chiefs of Staff Reports to Congress, Congressional hearings, and special
official publications, and with journals that specialize in international
security, foreign policy, military affairs, strategy, and weapons systems.
These journals are in the DSS library.

Early in the semester there will be one or two short written commentaries
assigned for seminar discussion and there may be a couple of short surprise
in-class written exams. One major seminar paper, based upon an approved
research topic and project, will be required by the end of the semester, and
will constitute approximately 75 percent of the seminar grade. The remainder
of the grade will be based upon all other written assignments, the oral
presentations, and seminar participation. The proposed research project should
be agreed, via an acceptable written proposal of 3-4 pages, by the fourth week
of the semester. Students who have not selected a topic by then will be
assigned topics. Students will be expected to present oral reports of their
research papers in the seminar, according to the seminar schedule finally
established.  
    


_Seminar Topics_ : The following are suggested topics to be discussed and
refined into a final schedule, with dates, upon determination of student
interests and research projects. To some extent, all of these topics will be
touched upon; some may be examined more thoroughly than a single seminar.  
    


I. Background: Review and Overview (1st one-third to one-half of semester)

A. Seminar Introduction: Studying International Security Affairs and the U.S.
role.

B. Strategy and strategic principles

C. The genesis and evolution of containment and extended deterrence:

1945-1980

D. U.S., Allied, and Soviet military force planning

E. The Reagan Doctrine and the Demise of the USSR  
    


II. Contemporary International Security Problems (2nd half of semester).
_Example_ :

A. U.S.-Russian Relations

B. Russia and the Former Soviet Republics

C. Competition for energy and mineral resources

D. The Middle East: Arab-Israeli Conflict, Israel and the "peace process,"
Arms Problems

E. The Islamic World: Inter-Arab, Inter-Islamic, and Islamic-non Islamic
Conflicts

F. Far East and the Pacific: The PRC Challenge

G. Proliferation of WMD and Ballistic Missiles

H. "Peacemaking" and "Peacekeeping"

I. Lessons from the War with Iraq: Decision-Making, Strategy, Military Forces

J. Central Asia

K. India and Pakistan

L. Turkey as a Strategic Ally

M. Regional and Multilateral "Arms Control"

N. The U.S. Role in the World (Isolationism or Pax Americana?)

O. Changes in the future security environment  
    


The final schedule of topics and seminars will be prepared after determination
of student interests.

Click here for a [Book List.](Books502.htm)

[Other Important Information](equal.htm)

