     

**The United States and the Middle East**

First Summer Session, 2002



Government 312L (unique no. 85605)  |

Instructor: Clement M. Henry  
---|---  
  
Department of Government |

Burdine 422 (471-5121)  
  
UT at Austin |

[chenry@gov.utexas.edu](mailto:chenry@gov.utexas.edu%0D)  
  
Class: WLM 4.102, MTWThF 8:30-9:45 a.m. |

Office hrs: MWTh 10-11:15 or by appointment  
  
TAs: [Sultan Tepe](mailto:Sultan%20Tepe%20<tepesu@mail.la.utexas.edu>),
Burdine 452 [Nihan
Yamacoguz](mailto:Nihan%20Yamacoguz%20<nyamacoguz@mail.utexas.edu>) Burdine
470 |

TA office hrs. Nihan: Thursday 1-4; Sultan: Friday 10-1  
  
**_Course Content_ | _"Virtual" Class Discussions_ | _Policy Research
Activities_ | _Grading criteria_ | _Textbooks_ | Schedule of lectures and
required readings | **[Main page](index.html)

We will focus upon U.S. foreign policy toward the Middle East since World War
II and examine our traditional policies of containing communism, protecting
oil and other U.S. interests, promoting Israel, and trying to reconcile
conflicts among these goals -- always in the full glare of domestic American
politics. Camp David, Irangate, U.S. interventions in Lebanon, Libya, and in
two Gulf Wars will be reviewed. Aerial diplomacy to contain Iraq, economic
sanctions to contain Iran and Libya, and support for the peace process between
Israel and the Palestinians will be analyzed in light of U.S. national
interests and foreign policy decision-making processes. Students will learn
about these problems and processes in class and through computer conferencing
with each other as well as with the instructor and the teaching assistant.
They have taken on new urgency post 911 but you will also be able to see the
policy discussions of previous classes.

**_"Virtual" Class Discussions_**

You will learn to do research on the United States and the Middle East by
using the Internet from the home page of our course. You should access it by
using Netscape or some other web browser. Go to the final menu and open the
location button (control-O on PC, command-L on Mac) and write:

**www.la.utexas.edu/chenry/usme**

Then save it as a bookmark so that you don't have to retype it next time. Or
else try **www.la.utexas.edu/chenry** and click "The United States and the
Middle East."

**_Policy Research Activities_**

In addition to important resources on U.S. foreign policy, you will find a
general class discussion ("Chat") bulletin board and eight other bulletin
boards related to specific issue areas of US foreign policy (you may open them
with the class id policy and password pol2222). You will be expected to
contribute to two bulletin boards, the general class discussion ("Chat" at the
email address: usfpme-chat@gov.utexas.edu) and a specific policy area. You
write your comments as electronic mail and send them to the appropriate
bulletin board. You are especially encouraged to respond to other students,
and to share your perceptions of how the media and your course readings treat
controversial material. You will be expected to discover useful internet
resources concerning your policy area and to evaluate them for the benefit of
our class. You should try to get familiar with the relations of at least two
countries with the United States discussed in Fawaz Gerges, _America and
Political Islam_ , in the parts not assigned below, pp. 115-223 (Iran,
Algeria, Egypt, Turkey).

Here are the policy issues (with their respective e-mail addresses i.e.
usfpme-nukes@la.utexas.edu) from which you are expected to choose one:



Nuclear nonproliferation and arms control policies |

[usfpme-nukes](mailto:usfpme-nukes@mail.la.utexas.edu)  
---|---  
  
Regional Security in the Persian Gulf: dual containment? |

[usfpme-security](mailto:usfpme-security@mail.la.utexas.edu)  
  
Advancing the Arab-Israeli peace process in the Middle East |

[usfpme-peace](mailto:usfpme-peace@mail.la.utexas.edu)  
  
Fighting terrrorism, narcotics, and international crime |

[usfpme-crime](mailto:usfpme-crime@mail.la.utexas.edu)  
  
Relations with the United Nations and peace-keeping |

[usfpme-un](mailto:usfpme-un@mail.la.utexas.edu)  
  
Promoting democracy and human rights |

[usfpme-democracy](mailto:usfpme-democracy@mail.la.utexas.edu)  
  
Trade issues and economic sanctions |

[usfpme-trade](mailto:usfpme-trade@mail.la.utexas.edu)  
  
US technology and arms sales |

[usfpme-arms](mailto:usfpme-arms@mail.la.utexas.edu)  
  
You will be expected to help other students who have selected your policy area
as well as yourself. You can do so in a number of ways. You may take notes on
some of your required and recommended readings, type them on a computer,
upload them, and send them by electronic mail to the bulletin board you will
share with others working in your policy area. You may find a page on the WWW
which Netscape (configured properly) will allow you to mail to your policy
group or to our general class discussion. Whenever you post a source, please
summarize and evaluate it. Good starting points for your research would be
**[www.la.utexas.edu/chenry/mena](http://www.la.utexas.edu/chenry/mena) ** and
**[www.assr.org](http://www.assr.org/)**. You may also look at past policy
bulletin boards archived in <http://www.la.utexas.edu/course-
materials/government/chenry/mena/student.htm> \--not to plagiarize but to
improve and update with your critical analysis of the web site! You will also
be receiving an introduction to online materials available through the
Undergraduate Library, accompanied by a [Pathfinder
online](http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/pathfinders/clement.html)
developed specially for our class by Adrian Johnson and Michele.

**Computer Accounts:** To get credit for your research and class participation
you need to make sure that your name is registered as the sender of your
messages. If you already have a computer account, please make sure that it is
properly configured so that your name shows up as the sender on our chat and
policy pages. If you need an account, we can provide you with one for the
duration of the course. Please see me after class and give your name and
student number.

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

  ** _Grading criteria_**

>      Midterm 20%     Attendance and pop quizes 10%     Virtual class
participation (chat) 10%

>

> Policy research 15%     Final identifications exercise 20%     Final take-
home essay 25%

  **Very important:** You are encouraged in class discussion over the Internet
to critique the news as it is presented in the various media you study as well
as the required readings in your course. Your input (quality as well as
quantity of messages!) into your policy group and into general class
discussion will largely determine your research activities and virtual class
participation grades. The other element of class participation will be pop
quizzes and attendance in class.        [Table of contents](syllabus.html) |
[Main page](index.html) **_

* * *

Texts_ ** (*=required reading)

*Fawaz A. Gerges, _America and Political Islam_ , Cambridge UP, 1999 *Samuel P. Huntington, _Clash of Civilizations Debate_ , Foreign Affairs reprints. *George Lenczowski, _American Presidents and the Middle East_ (Duke U. Press, 1990) *John W. Spanier and Eric M. Uslaner, _American Foreign Policy Making and the Democratic Dilemmas_ , 6th edition (Macmillan, 1994)   Donald Neff, Fallen Pillars: US Policy towards Palestine and Israel since 1945 (Washington, DC: Institute for Palestinian Studies, 1995). Steven L. Spiegel, _The Other Arab-Israeli Conflict_ (U of Chicago Press, 1985)

**_Note_ : **You should also be reading the _New York Times_ (available on the
WWW at **<http://www.nytimes.com>** ) or _Christian Science Monitor_ (
**[www.csmonitor.com](http://www.csmonitor.com/)** ) and other sources of
international news on a regular basis to keep up with current events. The BBC
( **<http://news.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/world/>** ) is also useful, with
pointers to the Middle East. You will find many other sources free of charge
on the Internet, but you may wish to compare them with "conventional" media
coverage of the Middle East.

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html) ** _

* * *

Schedule of Topics and Required Readings_**

  ** _Week 1_ (June 5-7): Introduction: The American Foreign Policy Process
and the Challenges of World Affairs.**  

> > Spanier and Uslaner, pp. 1-31 Samuel P. Huntington, "The Clash of
Civilizations?" _Foreign Affairs_ 72:3 (Summer 1993), 22-49, and various
responses in reprint pack: read everything

>

>      Fawaz Gerges, pp. 1-36   **Other Required Activities**     **Computer
orientation** : Friday in class.

>

>> **<http://www.state.gov/www/regions/nea/index.html>** \- read some official
statements to get a sense of current US policy objectives in the Middle East
to be discussed in class next week.

>

> **Undergraduate Library orientation** : Please sign up in class Thursday for
a group to meet in FAC 227 either on     Friday, June 7, 1-2, or

>

> Monday, June 10, 11-12, or 3-4, or

>

> Tuesday, June 11, 2-3

>

> There is absolutely no way you can have a conflict with another class!

>

>  

**_Week 2_ (June 10-14): The Presidency, the Bureaucrats, and Domestic Roots
of Foreign Policy; Case studies: **     **Truman's recognition of Israel
(1947-48); Eisenhower and the Suez War of 1956** ** **      Spanier and
Uslaner, pp. 32-103     Lenczowski, pp. 1-66     Recommended: Spiegel, pp.
1-93; Neff, pp. 1-79.

**Other Required Activities:**

> > > **Map exercise due in class:** Monday, June 10. **Undergraduate Library
orientation (see above)**

>>

>>     **In-class video Friday** : The Power Game, part I: Congress (you
should be taking notes as this video series is an integral part of the course)  

**_Week 3_ (June 17-21): Congress: advice and consent? Cracks in bipartisan
consensus? Case studies: **

**Yemen, Saudi Arabia, and Nasser; the Cyprus Crisis.** **June 1967 War
between Israel, Egypt, Syria, and Jordan**        Spanier and Uslaner, pp.
104-207     Lenczowski, pp. 67-127

> recommended: Spiegel, pp. 94-117; Neff, pp. 80-105.      brrowse through the
home page of the _USS Liberty_ at <http://www.ussliberty.org>

**Other Required Activities**

> > > **In-class videos:** Tuesday, June 18: The Power Game, part II:
Pentagon; Friday, June 21: The Power Game, part III: Lobbies  

**_Week 4_ (June 24-28): Public Opinion, Pressure Groups, and Foreign Policy.
Case Studies of the Peace Process in the Middle East 1969-1978 under Nixon,
Ford, and Carter.**     ** **

Spanier and Uslaner, pp. 208-302 Lenczowski, pp. 127-211

>       recommended: Spiegel, pp. 118-380; Neff, pp. 107-149.

    Try AIPAC's home page at <http://www.aipac.org/> and the Council on the National Interest ([www.cni.mynet.net/](www.cni.mynet.net/))

**Midterm exam: Friday, June 28**

**Other Required Activities**

> > > **In-class videos:** Tuesday, June 25: The Power Game, part IV: The
Presidency

      **_Week 5_ (July 1-5): Models of the Foreign Policy Decision-Making Process: can the US be a rational actor in world affairs? Case studies: Ronald Reagan and Lebanon, Libya, Irangate; Bush and Desert Storm: Clinton and Desert Fox. **     ** **

> Spanier and Uslaner, pp. 303-414 Lenczowski, pp. 212-284

    Gerges, pp. 37-114, 227-242  

> recommended: Spiegel, pp. 395-429; Neff, pp. 151-187.      ** **

**Other Required Activities**

> > **In-class video:** Friday, July 5: The Secret Government (Iran Contra)  

**_Week 6_ (July 8-10): Conclusion: Prospects for Peace in the Middle East?
Issues of Nuclear Proliferation, Gulf security, and Israeli-Palestinian
politics: from Clinton to Bush to Gore/Bush (?).**

> > **Identifications exercise in class: Wednesday, July 10.** **Essay due
July 10, in class.**     ** **

**HAPPY HOLIDAYS**

* * *

[Table of contents](syllabus.html) | [Main page](index.html)

* * *

18 June 2002  
[Department of Government](/depts/gov/home.htm) , [College of Liberal
Arts](http://www.utexas.edu/cola/), [ University of Texas at
Austin.](http://www.utexas.edu/)  
Questions, Comments, and Suggestions to
[chenry@gov.utexas.edu](MAILTO:chenry@gov.utexas.edu)

