  **Fall 2000**  
**UIUC** |

> > Prof. O.Soffer  
> office: 309 H Davenport Hall  
> phone: 3-2100  
> e-mail:  o-soffer@uiuc.edu  
> office hours: MW  2:00-3:30 pm &  by appointment  
  
---|---  
  
**PEOPLE OF THE ICE AGE** \- Anthropology 258  
MW F 1 p.m. - Davenport Hall 132

__REVISED   SEPTEMBER 10, 2000__

**Texts** :  1.  Bogucki, P.  1999.  _The Origins of Human Society_.
Blackwell Publishers, Malden, Mass.  
             2.  Additional readings on reserve in Department Library, Davenport Hall #193 

**Description** :  This course explores a vast period of human prehistory in
the Old and New Worlds, some 4 million to 10,000 years ago,  before people
domesticated plants and animals and first cities arose.  Archaeological,
paleoanthropological, and ethnographic data will be used to understand past
lifeways in Africa, Europe, Asia, Australia, and the Americas.  The course
emphasizes an integration of both theory and data for understanding both
specific adaptations as well as for understanding changes in cultures during
the Pleistocene.

**Requirements** : In this course there will be two exams - a midterm and a
final.  In addition, to encourage active student participation in the learning
process,  the class will be divided into five  learning groups each of whom
will be responsible for one of the following topics as they pertain to the
time period we are covering in class:  
    
    
  I.  Climate & Environment | II.  Hominid Remains  
---|---  
III.  Sites & Finds  | IV.  Technology & Subsistence  
V.  Lifeways & Socio-Political Relationships |  
  
The groups will present their  reports in class during the weeks starred   in
the syllabus - *.  Each time a different group member will act as the team
leader, orally present their groups' information, and hand in a written copy
of the groups report - ~ 5 double-spaced typed pages in length,with
references.   Late submissions will not be accepted.  Unsuitable ones may be
redone. Your course grade will depend on your performance on the exams as well
as on   your  reports,  your preparedness and participation in  discussions in
class.  Each exam will count for 35% of the grade while  your group  reports,
and class participation will be jointly worth  30%.  
  **DATE** (week of) | **TOPIC** | **ASSIGNMENTS**  
---|---|---  
August 21 | Introduction | Fedder & Marks handouts  
August 28 | Theoretical issue in prehistoric archaeology, evolution | Bogucki
p. XVI,  ch. 1  
September 4 | **MONDAY - LABOR DAY - NO CLASS**  
Reconstructing the Past in the Present |  
September 11 | The early hominines | Bogucki  pp. 29-47;Klein 2000 pp.17-24  
September 18 | Beyond Africa  | Bogucki pp. 48-54; Olsen l999; Turner l999  
September 25 | The Archaics  
***first group report   due** | Bar Yosef l999;  Wolpoff l999; Review Klein
2000 pp.17-24  
October 2  | **MIDTERM MONDAY 10/2**  
Late Archaics | Bogucki  pp. 54-68  
  
October 9 | The Neanderthals  
***second group report due** |  Gamble&Roebroeks 1999;  Feblot-Augustins 1999;
Gaudzinski 1999; Kolen 1999.  
  
October 16  |  
The Transition to  Modernity  | Bogucki  pp. 68-78; Foley & Lahr 1994; Klein
2000 pp. 24-36;  
[http//www.ipa.min-cultura.pt/news/noticias/lapedo](Bogucki  pp. 68-78; Foley
& Lahr 1994; Klein 2000 pp. 24-  36;  http//www.ipa.min-
cultura.pt/news/noticias/lapedoBogucki pp. 68-78; Foley & Lahr 1994; Klein
2000 pp. 24-  36; http//www.ipa.min- http//www.ipa.min-
cultura.pt/news/noticias/lapedo)  
October  23 | Hunter-Gatherer Lifeways  | Gamble  l986 ch. 2, 1999 ch. 2;
Hawkes et al. l997; Pfeiffer  ch.15,16  
October 30  | Late Pleistocene H&G in the Old World  
***third   group report due** | Bogucki pp. 79-84, 88-101; Goebel l999;
Gribchenko and Kurenkova l999  
November  6  | Upper Paleolithic Societies  | Bar-Yosef 1998;  Straus l995;
Soffer l989; Soffer et al. 2000  
Novermber   13 | Symbols of Modernity |  
  Bogucki pp. 118 - 125; Lewin ch. 32,33;  Soffer l995;  Soffer and Conkey
1997 ch. 1.  
November 20  | **THANKSGIVING    BREAK** |  
November  27 | Peopling other continents  
***fourth group reports due** |  Bogucki pp. 84-88, 101-102;  Discovering
Archaeology 2000; O'Connell and Allen 1998.  
December  4 |  The end  of the Pleistocene | Bogucki pp. 102-104;  ch. 4  
  
  **FINAL EXAM: WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 13, 1:30-4:30 p.m.**

...........................

**ADDITIONAL   READINGS**:  Located in Anthropology  Reading  Room, 193
Davenport Hall

Bar-Yosef, O.  
  1998  The Natufian Culture in the Levant, Threshold to the Origins of
Agriculture.  _Evolutionary Anthropology_   6: 159-177.

  1999  Lower Paleolithic Sites in South-Western Asia - Evidence for "Out of
Africa" Movements. _Anthropologie_ XXXVII:33-44.

_Discovering Archaeology_  
     2000  The Changing Face of the First Americans Special Report, pp. 30- 77.  January-February. 

 Feblot-Augustins,  J.  
    1999  Raw material transport patterns and settlement systems in the European Lower and Middle Palaeolithic: continuity, change and variability.  In  _The Middle Palaeolithic_   
        _Occupation of Europe_ , edited by W. Roebroeks and C. Gamble, pp.193-214.  University of Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands. 

Foley, R. and M. M.Lahr  
   1994  Multiple dispersals and Modern Human Origins. _Evolutionary
Anthropology_   3:48-60.

Gamble, C.  
     l986  _The Paleolithic Settlement of Europe_.   Cambridge, London. Ch. 2. 

     l999  _The Palaeolithic Societies of Europe_.   Cambridge, London.  Ch. 2 

Gamble, C. and W. Roebroeks  
     l999  The Middle Palaeolithic: a point of inflection. In  _The Middle Palaeolithic Occupation of Europe_ , edited by W. Roebroeks and C. Gamble, pp. 3-22.  University of Leiden,   
        Leiden,  The Netherlands. 

Gaudzinski, S.  
     1999  The faunal record of the Lower and Middle Palaeolithic of Europe:  remarks on human interference. In  _The Middle Palaeolithic Occupation of Europe_ , edited by   
        W. Roebroeks and C. Gamble, pp.215-234.  University of Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands. 

Goebel, T.  
 1999  Pleistocene Human Colonization and Peopli9ng of the Americas:  An
Ecological Perspective.  _Evolutionary Anthropology_   8: 208-226.

 Gribchenko, Yu.N. and E. I. Kurenkova  
     l999  Pleistocene Environments and the Dispersal of Paleolithic Groups in Eastern Europe. _Anthropologie_ XXXVII:   79-87. 

Hawkes,K., J. F. O'Connell, and L. Rogers  
  l997  The behavioral ecology of modern hunter-gatherers,and human evolution.
_Tree_ 12:   29-32

Klein, R.G.  
    2000  Archaeology and the Evolution of Human Behavior. _Evolutionary Anthropology_ 9: 17-36. 

Kolen,  J.  
 1999  Hominids without homes: on the nature of Middle Palaeolithic settlement
in Europe. In  _The Middle Palaeolithic Occupation Europe_ , edited by W.
Roebroeks and C. Gamble,  
     pp. 139-176.  University of Leiden, Leiden, The Netherlands. 

Lewin, R.  
    l998  _Human Evolution_ . Blackwell Science, Malden, Mass.    Ch. 32,33 

O'Connell, J. F.   and J. Allen  
   1998  When Did Humans First Arrive in Australia and Why Is it Important to
Know?  _Evolutionary Anthropology_   6:132-146.

Olsen, J.  
    1999  New Light on the Earliest Occupation of East Asia.    _Anthropologie_ XXXVII:   89-97. 

 Pfeiffer, J.  
 1985  _The Emergence of Humankind_ , 4th edition. Harper & Row , New York.
Ch.15, 16.

Soffer, O.  
   1989.  Storage, Sedentism, and the Eurasian Paleolithic Record.  _Antiquity_ 63:. 719-732. 

  1995   Artistic Apogees and Biological Nadirs : Upper Paleolithic Cultural
Complexity  Reconsidered.  In  Nature et Culture, edited by  M. Otte, pp.
617-627.  ERAUL. 68:  Liege,  
      Belgium. 

Soffer, O. and M. Conkey  
    l997  Studying Ancient Visual Cultures.   In  _Beyond Art_ , edited by M.W. Conkey, O. Soffer, D. Stratmann, and N.G.Jablonski, pp. 1-16.  Memoirs  of the California Academy of   
       Science #23, Berkeley, Ca. 

Soffer, O.,  J.M. Adovasio, and D.C. Hyland  
    2000  The "Venus" Figurines: Textiles, Basketry, Gender, and Status in the Upper  Paleolithic".Current Anthropology 41: in press 

Straus, L. G.  
   1995  The Upper Paleolithic of Europe:  An Overview. _Evolutionary
Anthropology_ 4: 4-16.

Turner, A.  
    1999  Global Dispersal of Hominids - A Feature of Their Coevolution with the Environment. _Anthropologie_ XXXVII:19-26.. 

Wolpoff, M. F.  
     1999  Out of Africa.  _Anthropologie_ XXXVII:33-44. 

\-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ADDITIONAL REFERENCE WORKS FOR GROUP REPORTS

_On Reserve in Anthro Library -Davenport Hall #193: and in the Undergraduate
Library_

Burenhult, G.  ed.  
    1993.   _The First Humans: The Illustrated History of Humankind_. American Museum of Natural History.   Harper San Francisco. 

Klein, R. G.  
   1999. _The Human Career_. 2nd ed.. U. of Chicago Press, Chicago. 

Lewin, R.  
   1998  _Principles of   Human Evolution._Blackwell Science, Malden, Mass.

Tattersall, I., E. Delson,  J.Van Couvering, and A. Brooks  
    2000  _Encyclopedia of Human   Evolution  and Prehistory_.  2nd ed. Garland Publishing, New  York. 

Plus  "Official" Sites on the WEB -  belonging   to Journals,  Societies (e.g.
American Anthropological   Association, Society  for American  Archaeology,
etc..,  Ministry of Culture ,  
France; etc..), Museums, etc.. -  


_Some Useful   Journals and Magazines You May Wish to Consult: \- in the Main
Library_  
  _Antiquity  _ | _Journal of World Prehistory_  
---|---  
_Current Anthropology_ | _National Geographic_  
_Discovering Archaeology_ | _Natural History_  
_Journal of Human Evolution_ | _Scientific American_  
  


