![](topper.jpg)  
---  
**_

    

[Desert Hermits](desert.html)

[Eastern Monasticism](eastmon.html)

[Benedictine Monasticism](benmon.html)

[Irish Monasticism](irimon.html)

[Anglo-Saxon Monasticism](angmon.html)

[Merovingian and Carolingian Monasticism and Mixed Rules](mermon.html)

[Medieval Monastic Women](medwomen.html)

[Cluny and other reforms of the Central Middle Ages](medref.html)

[The Cistercians](cist.html)

[The Military Orders](milord.html)

[The Franciscans](franciscan.html)

[The Dominicans](dominican.html)

[Later Middle Ages through the Dissolution of the Monasteries](dssolut.html)

[Monasteries Online](mononline.html)

[General Resources](gensource.html)

[Virtual Tours](tours.html)

[Syllabus](4950s.html)

[Web Crossing Discussions](http://jasmine.gcsu.edu/webx?gcsu)

[Medieval Monasticism Main Page](4950.shtml)

[Georgia College & State University](http://www.gcsu.edu) _** |

> > **HIST 4950/5950  
>  Fall 1999  
>  A &S 2-72T/TH 12:30-1:45  
>  **

>

> ![](button2.jpg)   ![](button2.jpg)   ![](button2.jpg) **This course is
dedicated to the Benedictine Sisters of Mt. St. Scholastica, who taught and
continue to teach me the meaning of life, love, and the Benedictine life in a
way books could never capture; and to the memory of Dr. Victoria Chandler,
whose wit carried me through many hard times, and whose strength in adversity
will not be forgotten.** ![](button2.jpg)   ![](button2.jpg)
![](button2.jpg)

>

> **OFFICE HOURS** : My office is in the Arts and Sciences building, room
2-50A (Dean's Suite). My office hours for the fall will be from 9:30-10:45 on
Tuesdays and Thursdays, and from 10:00-11:00 on Mondays, Wednesdays, and
Fridays. If it is not possible for you to see me during these times, you may
make an appointment. If you must see me outside of office hours, please try to
make an appointment first, as I am frequently tied up in meetings and other
duties. My phone number is x4441. I look forward to teaching you; please stop
by my office to personally introduce yourself.

>

>  
>

> **PERSONAL SAFETY : **In the event of a fire alarm signal students should
exit the building in a quick and orderly manner through the nearest hallway
exit. First and Second floor classes should exit through ground level exits.
Do not use elevator. Third floor stairwells are areas where disabled people
may communicate with rescue workers. Be familiar with the floor plan and exits
of this building.

>

>  
>

> **REQUIRED READINGS** : C. H. Lawrence, _Medieval Monasticism: Forms of
Religious Life in Western Europe in the Middle Ages_ ; Jo Ann McNamara,
transl., _Sainted Women of the Dark Ages;_ Adalbert de Vogue _, The Life of
Saint Benedict;_ _The Rule of Saint Benedict(_ in English). In addition, you
will be asked to read various assignments either on reserve at the library or
handed out to you in your class packet.

>

> **COURSE DESCRIPTION** : _HIST 4950/5950: Medieval Monasticism_ is a survey
of the forms of religious life in the medieval west, the major contributions
of medieval monasticism to medieval and to modern culture, and of the major
texts which governed medieval monastic life, expressed its fundamental values,
and which inform us about patronage and the relationship of the monasteries to
the secular world. We will take a journey together into the desert, and
through the lives and sayings of the desert hermits explore the origins of
monasticism; from there, we shall travel together through the cenobitic
tradition, and explore the legacy of Benedictine, Cluniac, and Cistercian
monasticism, as well as the new orders of the Central Middle Ages. We shall
see how European culture was formed and developed out of the peregrinations of
such monastics as St. Boniface, St. Columba, and St. Columbanus. The great
medievalist Jean Leclerq described monastic culture as "as the love of
learning and the desire for God," as we shall explore the legacy of learning
which grew out of the monasteries, as well as the impact of the Benedictine
motto "Ora et Labora" on the economy, social, and political life of Europe.
Finally, we shall trace the continuity of these medieval traditions through to
our own times, and explore some of the great modern houses and their lived
experience of the monastic tradition. It is my hope that in the course of our
studies of the major texts of the monastic tradition and how historians
interpret them, students will also embark with the great monastics of past and
present on a journey of self-discovery, as that journey is at the heart of the
major Rules and texts we shall study. It will be my great pleasure to take
this journey with you!

>

> **GRADING POLICIES** : There will be two midterm exams and a final in the
course, several short written/or computer-related assignments, and a term
paper. There will also be several class discussion days in which students will
be responsible for leading a portion of the class discussion. The midterm
exams, the term paper, the final, the short written and discussion assignments
will each be worth 20 percent each of your grade.

>

> **GRADUATE STUDENTS** : Graduate students will complete a major research
project in addition to the requirements above; the required term paper should
be from 25-30 pages long. See the instructor for topics.

>

> **COURSE STRUCTURE** : This course will consist of guided lectures and
**intensive discussion** and **analysis** of primary sources. There will be
days specifically devoted to discussion and analysis of sources, and the
instructor will provide study questions for these sources. Your study
questions for the _Sayings of the Desert Fathers_ , the _Life of St. Antony_ ,
_The Life of St. Benedict_ , and _The Rule of St. Benedict_ are included in
this packet. The instructor will designate particular students to present an
interpretation and take a position on selected questions, after which the
discussion will be opened to the entire class. There will also be questions
which you should come prepared to discuss for each and every class session;
please look on your syllabus for these topics, as well as expect the
instructor to provide other sets of questions to address. These questions and
our discussion days will be crucial to our progress in the course, and they
will take the form of a seminar in which all students are expected to
participate. In essence, we will make an attempt to model our approach on
Benedictine **_lectio_** , a style of learning which dominated medieval
monastic life. We will also be learning how to read/interpret a medieval
hagiography and exploring many problems associated with medieval texts. Please
come prepared to immerse yourselves in these texts, and not to expect the
instructor to dictate to you a particular interpretation or approach. Remember
that we are taking this course together, and you must take an active role in
our study! Together we shall come to a greater understanding of these sources
in a way which I fervently hope will enrich not only your historical
understanding of the medieval period, but also your life in general.

>

>  

**COURSE OUTLINE**

>  
>

> **August 19** : Course introduction

>

> A brief overview of major trends and developments in western medieval
monasticism,  from its origins in the desert along the Nile to the Dissolution
of the Monasteries during  the Protestant Reformation in the sixteenth
century.

>

> **August 24** : The Desert Hermits

>

> "...there were monasteries in the mountains and the desert was made a city
by monks,  who left their own people and registered themselves for the
citizenship in the heavens."  Athanasius, _The Life of Antony_.

>

> Why did the desert have such a powerful attraction to early Christians? In
what ways can  one interpret the "desert" as an experience?

>

> "[Antony] remained truly the Father of all monks ... St. Antony's life,
then, for the  medieval monks is not simply an historical text, a source of
information about a definitely  dead past. It is a living text, a means of
formation of monastic life." Jean Leclerq, _The Love of Learning and the
Desire for God._

>

> What are the elements of Antony's life that served as a pattern for monastic
life? Please  also consult the study questions for the _Life of St. Antony_
included in this packet.

>

> **Assigned reading** : Lawrence, Chapter 1 through the section on St.
Pachomius (non- inclusive); Athanasius, The _Life of St. Antony ( on reserve_
and, yes, it is already there.)  There will be intensive **discussion** of the
_Life of Antony_ ; come prepared to discuss  your study questions!

>

> **August 26** : Into the Inner Mountain

>

> From the _Sayings of the Desert Fathers_ :

>

> While still living in the palace, Abba Arsenius prayed To God in these
words, "Lord, lead me in the way of salvation." And a voice came saying to
him, "Arsenius, flee from men and you will be saved." ....

>

> Having withdrawn to the solitary life he made the same prayer again and he
heard a voice saying to him, "Arsenius, flee, be silent, pray always, for
these are the source of sinlessness."

>

> The Abba Antony also said, "Just as fish die if hey stay too long out of
water, so the monks who loiter outside their cells or pass their time with men
of the world lose the intensity of inner peace. So like fish going towards the
sea, we must hurry to reach our cell, for fear that if we delay outside we
will lose our interior watchfulness."

>

> A certain brother went to Abbot Moses in Scete, and asked him for a good
word. And the elder said to him, "Go, it in your cell, and your cell will
teach you everything."

>

>  
>

> ****************** **Discussion Day*******************

>

>  
>

> How are the monastic virtues of stability and obedience exemplified in the
desert  literature? What is the attitude towards individuality expressed in
the desert literature?  Please also see the study questions included with your
syllabus. **Please post your response to at least one of the study questions
to your discussion board in Web  Crossing. **

>

> **Assigned reading** : _Sayings of the Desert Fathers; Life of Mary the
Egyptian_ (on  reserve)

>

> **August 31** : The Desert goes to Western Europe: Cassian

>

> Guest presentation by Dr. Dee Russell. Dr. Russell is a former Benedictine
monk on our faculty, who has a special interest in Cassian.

>

> **Reading assignment** : Lawrence, chapter 1, from "The Desert Tradition
Transmitted to  the West" through the end of the chapter; materials listed on
Dr. Russell's WWW site,  the link to which can be found on our course homepage
under the Desert Hermits.

>

> **September 2** : St. Basil and St. Pachomius

>

> ***students should have their term paper topics selected.**

>

> In what way does the Basilian Rule challenge the lifestyle and ideology of
the Desert Hermits? What stance does the Basilian Rule take on individual
asceticism? How does the Basilian text compare to the sayings of the Desert
Fathers on the need for individual asceticism? To what extent does the
organization of a Pachomian monastery reflect the organization and values of
Roman society?

>

> **Reading assignment** : Lawrence, chapter 1, sections on St. Basil and St.
Pachomius; Short Rule of St. Basil available on the Internet through our
course home  page (see eastern monasticism).

>

> **September 7** : St. Benedict of Nursia

>

> To what extent is Gregory's Life of St. Benedict a biography? To what extent
is  Gregory's portrait an idealized portrait? What purposes might Gregory's
portrait of St.  Benedict have been meant to accomplish?

>

> **Reading assignment** : Lawrence, chapter 2, "St. Benedict and his
Biographer;" de  Vogue, ed., _Life of St. Benedict_.

>

> **September 9** : The Rule of St. Benedict and its Sources

>

> From the _Rule of St. Benedict_ :

>

> "Listen, my sons, to the words of a father who loves you...."

>

> "Therefore, we intend to establish a school for the lord's service. In
drawing up its regulations, we hope to set down nothing harsh, nothing
burdensome."

>

> How would you describe the personality of St. Benedict as compared to that
of the Master? What is the relationship between the Benedictine values of
stability, obedience, and _conversatio_?

>

>  
>

> ****************** **Discussion Day** ****************

>

>  
>

> **Reading assignment** : Lawrence, chapter 2, "the Rule and its Sources;"
_The Rule of St. Benedict_; excerpts from _The Rule of the Master_ , on
reserve at the library.

>

> **September 14th/16th:** Special video on the life of St. Benedict **.**
Please complete study questions **** and post to your Web Crossing forum.

>

> **September 21:** Session in the computer lab. Please respond to Web
Crossing Discussion questions on the Rule of St. Benedict. What is the role of
the abbot in the community and how would you describe the model of leadership
in the Benedictine Rule? What do you think is the ultimate lesson the monk is
to learn through the steps of humility?

>

> **September 23** : no class today. Work on your term paper bibliography.

>

> **September 28** : The Rule of St. Benedict continued: From Profession to
Life Everlasting

>

> **Reading assignment** : Lawrence, chapter 2, "The Monk's Profession" and
"the Monk's  life according to the Rule."

>

> **September 30** : The Rule of Caesarius and Women's Communities

>

> ***students should turn in their term paper bibliographies.**

>

> What attitudes toward women do the _Life of St. Radegund_ and other assigned
readings depict? What obstacles did a woman have to overcome to pursue a
religious life?

>

> *************** **Discussion Day** *******************

>

>  
>

> **Reading assignment** : Lawrence, chapter 3, first section; _Life of St.
Radegund_ in _Sainted Women, _along with the introduction by Professor
McNamara; _Life of Genovefa,_ in _Sainted Women; Life of Monegund, _in
_Sainted Women; Rule of Caesarius_ (on reserve).

>

> **October 5: EXAM I**

>

> **October 7** : Irish Monasticism

>

> "We are exiles in the far end of solitude,

>

> living as listeners,

>

> with hearts attending to the skies we cannot understand...."

>

> St. Columba

>

> What is the role of peregrination (journeying) in Irish monasticism? How is
place itself indicative of journey, and how is a journey indicative of a
place?

>

> **Reading assignment** : Lawrence, chapter 3; _Life of Columba, Voyage of
St. Brendan_ (all  on reserve). Please explore Dr. Vess's virtual tour of
Glendalough and Iona on the course  home page, as well as _The Book of Kells_
(on reserve). Study questions to be distributed.

>

> **October 12** : Merovingian Monasticism

>

> What do the sources reveal about royal and noble patronage of monasteries,
and the role of women in Merovingian monasticism?

>

> **************** **Discussion Day** *************

>

> **Reading assignment** : _Life of Clothild, Life of Burgundofara, Life of
Sadalberga_ , in _ Sainted Women; _Vess and Sutera, eds _. Merovingian Women_
(on reserve __ and on course  home page in password protected file _)._ Study
questions will be distributed; **please post your response to at least two of
the questions on your discussion board in Web  Crossing. **

>

> **October 14** : Anglo-Saxon Monasticism

>

> There is an urgency to Bede's introduction to his _Ecclesiastical History_.
What are the problems to which Bede points in his _Ecclesiastical History,_
and how is his history indicative of a solution to those problems? What is the
role of women in his history and in Anglo-Saxon monasticism in general?

>

> **Reading Assignment** : Vess and Sutera, eds. _Anglo-Saxon Monastic Women_
(on reserve  and on course home page in password protected file);excerpts from
the Venerable Bede, _ Ecclesiastical History_ (on reserve); Knowles, "Bede,"
on reserve; Lawrence, chapters 4  and 5\.

>

> **October 15: Last day to drop with a "W"**

>

> **October 19** : Reforms of the tenth and eleventh centuries: The Cluniacs,
Dunstan, and the monastic school at Bec

>

> **Reading Assignment** : Lawrence, chapters 6 and 7; Knowles, "Anselm" (on
reserve);  Knowles, "Lanfranc" (on reserve); Anselm, excerpts from the
_Proslogion_ (distributed in  class; accessible through the course home page
as well).

>

> **October 21** : The Religious Zeal of the Late Eleventh and Twelfth
Centuries: The Growth of New Orders: The Cistercians and the Hermit Orders

>

> Possible field trip to the monastery of the Holy Spirit in Conyers.

>

> What were the reforms of the Cistercians? What conditions and practices were
people like Robert of Molesme reacting to when they went into "the howling
wilderness"?

>

> **Reading Assignment** : _Carta Caritatis_ (access this online through your
course home  page); selections from Lekai, _The White Monks_ and _The Eleventh
Century Background of Citeaux_ (on reserve); Lawrence, chapters 8 and 9.

>

> **October 26** : Bernard of Clairvaux

>

> "You will find something more in the woods than in books. Trees and stones
will teach you that which you can never learn from masters."

>

> St. Bernard, Epistola 106.

>

> Why is Bernard of Clairvaulx known as "the difficult saint"? Why did he
challenge the works of Abelard?

>

> ***************** **Discussion Day** *************

>

> **Reading Assignment** : The Ladder of Humility (on reserve); brief
biographical entry of  Bernard from the Catholic Encyclopedia (online through
our course home page); Basil  Pennington's overview of the life of Bernard
(online through your course home page).

>

> **October 28** : Case Studies: Fountains Abbey, Rievaulx Abbey, and Aelred
of Rievaulx

>

> What does the history and growth of Fountains Abbey reveal about the
relationship and patronage of laymen to monastic settlements? What does the
life of Aelred reveal about relationships within monastic communities?

>

> **Reading Assignment** : excerpts from Dom David Knowles _Saints and
Scholars: Aelred of Rievaulx_ (on reserve); Dr. Vess's Virtual Tours of
Fountains and Rievaulx Abbeys on  the Internet (consult the class home page
for links); excerpts from Brian Patrick  McGuire, _Friendship and Community_
on reserve; excerpts from Walter Daniel's _Life of Aelred_ on reserve; excepts
from Aelred's _Spiritual Friendship_.

>

> **November 2** : **EXAM II**

>

> **November 4** : Monastic Women in the Central Middle Ages: Reform and
Protest in the lives and writings of Heloise and the Beguines

>

> What are Heloise's difficulties with the Rule of St. Benedict as a Rule for
women? Are these objections historically valid in terms of the ways in which
the Rule was lived? In what ways does Abelard's response to her address or
fail to address her contentions?

>

> **Reading Assignment** : Letters of Abelard and Heloise: Heloise's request
for Direction,  Abelard's History of Women Religious, and his Rule for women
monastics (on reserve); _ Life of Marie D'Oignies_ (on reserve); Lawrence,
chapter 11.

>

>  
>

> **November 9** : Monastic Women in the Central Middle Ages: Hildegard of
Bingen

>

> In what ways was Hildegard of Bingen a woman of her times, and in what ways
was she not? What concept of the Divine did her visions and her
interpretations of them express?

>

> **Reading Assignment** : excerpts from _Scivias_ on reserve; Barbara Newman,
"Divine  Power Made Perfect in Weakness: St. Hildegard on the Frail Sex," on
reserve.

>

> **November 11** : The Military Orders

>

> What events prompted the formation of the military orders? In what ways were
these orders monastic, and in what ways did their structure and practices
depart from earlier examples of monasticism?

>

> **Reading Assignment** : Lawrence, chapter 10.

>

> **November 16/18** : The Franciscans

>

> attributed to St. Francis:

>

> "Lord,

>

> Make me an instrument of Your peace.

>

> Where there is hatred let me sow love;

>

> Where there is injury, pardon;

>

> Where there is doubt, faith;

>

> Where there is despair, hope;

>

> Where there is darkness, light; and

>

> Where there is sadness, joy...."

>

> In what ways was the lifestyle and ethos of St. Francis a departure from
traditional monasticism? Why was Clare's attempt to follow this lifestyle
problematic for the position of women in the Church?

>

> **Reading Assignment** : Lawrence, chapter 12; Thomas of Celano, Two Lives
of St.  Francis (online through your course home page) ; excerpts from the
_Little Flowers of St. Francis_ on reserve. **Please post your responses to
the questions on your discussion board prior to class today. **

>

> **November 23:** Dominicans and Thomas Aquinas

>

> "Reason in men is like God in the world."

>

> St. Thomas Aquinas, Opuscule 11, _de Regno_

>

> What is Aquinas's view of the relationship between reason and faith as
expressed in the _Summa Theologiae?_ **Please post your responses to your web
crossing discussion forum prior to the class today!**

>

> **Reading Assignment** : Lawrence, chapter 12 (section on the Order of
Preachers);  excepts from St. Thomas Aquinas, _Summa Theologiae_ on reserve.

>

> **November 30** : Medieval Monastic Women in the later Middle Ages: The nuns
of Helfta, the fourteenth century English Mystics, St. Catherine of Sienna,
and St. Theresa of Avila

>

> **Reading Assignment** : excerpts from Julian of Norwich, _Showings_ ; _The
Cloud of Unknowing_.

>

> **December 2** : Renaissance critique of monasticism

>

> In what ways was _Utopia_ a product of Renaissance Humanism and a critique
of medieval culture? In what ways does the society of Book II of Utopia
resemble a monastery and in what ways does it not?

>

> **************** **Discussion Day** ******************

>

>  
>

> **Reading Assignment** : Thomas More, _Utopia_ on reserve; electronic
version accessible  through the course home page as well. **Please post your
responses to the questions on your discussion board prior to class today.**

>

>  
>

> **December 7** : The Dissolution of the Monasteries

>

> ***term papers due**

>

> Were the monasteries corrupt in the sixteenth century?

>

> **Reading Assignment** : excerpts from Gasquet, _Henry VIII and the English
Monasteries_ on reserve; excerpts from Martin Luther, _On the Babylonian
Captivity of the Church_ , on  reserve.

>

>  
>

> **December 9** : Epilogue: Monasticism in the Modern World

>

>  
>

> How is monasticism expressed in the modern world? How and why has
monasticism survived until the present day?

>

>  
>

> **Reading Assignment** : explore Dr. Vess's Virtual Tour of Mt. St.
Scholastica monastery,  accessible through your course home page.

>

>  
>

> **FINAL EXAM** : **11:00-1:45, Tuesday, December 14th**

>

>  
>

>  
  
|  ** Below: The bell tower at Glendalough, Ireland.  
Photo by Dr. Vess. ** |  ![](bottomphatred.jpg)

