# Research Methods In History

### Gallaudet University, Department of History and Government

## Syllabus

* * *

[[Home](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/)]
[[Announcements](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/announcements.html)]
[[Syllabus](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/syllabus.html)]
[[Class
Schedule](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/schedule.html)]
[[Assignments](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/assignments.html)]
[[Readings](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/readings.html)]
[[Resources](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/resources.html)]
[[Student
Links](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/students.html)]

* * *

> > **`" The problem of the Twentieth Century is the problem of the color
line."`**

>

> W.E.B. DuBois, (The Souls of Black Folk, 1903)

>

>

>

>    ** Course Description**

>

> Research Methods in History (History 387) is a three credit course and
involves a commitment of more time than a regular three credit course.  It is
an essential course for the History major.The main emphasis in the course is
to provide an introduction to historical methodology and research methods, as
well as a practical experience in writing a formal paper which demonstrates
facility in the above and an appreciation of the nature and limits of the
discipline.

>

>

>

>   **Course Objectives**

>

>   * To become familiar with the techniques of research, information
retrieval, and scholarly documentation.

>   * To formulate questions from encounters with historical documents,
eyewitness accounts, letters, diaries, artifacts, photos, historical sites,
art, architecture, and other records from the past.

>   * To introduce you to the research process, including how to interrogate
and evaluate sources, skimming, note-taking, summarizing and setting up a
research file.

>   * To obtain historical data from a variety of sources, including library
and museum collections, historic sites, historical photos, journals, diaries,
eyewitness accounts, newspapers, and the like; documentary films, oral
testimony from living witnesses, censuses, statistical compilations, and
economic indicators--as well as with working with the Internet to find online
research resources, and to help you construct your Home page.

>   * To develop a sense of how to use research to support written arguments
in a research paper and to become familiar with the different parts of a
research paper.

>   * To develop your own Home page

>

>

> **Course Theme**

>

> To help you focus the class sessions and foster a collaborative working
environment in Research Methods, this course will be structured around
exploring the theme of racism and diversity in the Twentieth century. Thus,
early in the semester you will need to choose a research topic that is focused
on an aspect of this theme that is of interest to you or that you are curious
about (for example, you might be curious about segregated schools for deaf
students; or you might want to focus on black civil rights; or you might want
to explore this theme in another geographical area of the world, in South
Africa, for example. Throughout the semester, using a variety of information
sources from newspaper articles, books, interviews to on-line sources--indeed
from a variety of sources as mentioned above--we will consider the historical
development of racism and the impact of diversity from several different
perspectives. These perspectives will be examined in this class for how they
enrich our knowledge of racism and diversity. However, most importantly, we
will examine this theme and work with a variety of research materials in such
a way that they will also serve as both research models and models for
constructing written analysis and arguments.

>

>

>

> **In Class and in the Computer Lab:**

>

> You should expect to meet in class and in the computer lab three hours
weekly. I intend to lecture some of the time at the beginning of class on
Wednesdays, but there will also be time for class discussion as well.
Beginning November 12, each of you will make a 30 minute presentation of your
topic to the class. We will also be working in the Computer Lab during the
duration of the semester.

>

> **Attendance:** It is important that you attend each class period. As noted
above, I plan to lecture at least some of the time at the beginning of class
and to designate a significant portion of the remaining time for your
presentations and discussions. Work in the computer lab will also be essential
in terms of your research and for the development of your Home page. Absence
from class will deprive you of the topic for discussion, for the discussion
itself, and of the opportunity to work in the computer lab. Because of the
nature of this course and the tight scheduling, there will be no opportunity
to make up missed presentations. Obviously, if you intend to miss more than
three meetings, you should consider postponing this course until another
semester.

>

>

>

> **Required Texts:**

>

> Booth, Wayne C., ** _The Craft of Research_**

>

> Turabian, Kate. ** _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers. Theses. and
Dissertations. 6th edition._**

>

>

>

> **Grades:**

>

>  
>

> Computer-Aided Research Skills

>

>  Proposal

>

>  Outline

>

> Written Assignments

>

> Working Bibliography

>

> Rough Draft.

>

>  Final Draft of Research Paper

>

> | 15%

>

> 10%

>

> 10%

>

> 25%

>

> 10%

>

> 10%

>

> 20%  
>  
> ---|---  
>  
>  
>

>

>

> **Grading System** :

>

> Computer-aided research skills, the proposal, outline and working
bibliography will not receive letter grades, but will be marked as accepted on
the following basis. Computer skills will be awarded 15% of the final grade if
there has been measurable progress in becoming proficient in or adding to
computer-related research skills in addition to those a student started the
semester with. The proposal, outline and bibliography will be returned with
suggestions and comments and will receive the full 10% of the grade if they
are handed in on or before the day they are due and fulfill the minimum
requirements of the assignment in terms of page length and areas to be
covered. What this means is that there is a potential of 45% of the final
grade working out to an A, if there are no problems with attendance.

>

>> **`" The historian serves no one well by constructing a specious continuity
between the present world and that which preceded it.On the contrary, we
require a history that will educate us to discontinuity more than ever before;
for discontinuity, disruption, and chaos is out lot...Only a chaste historical
consciousness can truly challenge the world anew every second, for only
history mediates between what is and what men think ought to be with truly
humanizing effect.  But history can serve to humanize experience only if it
remains sensitive to the more general world of thought and action from which
it proceeds and to which it returns.  And as long as it refuses to use the
eyes which both modern art and modern science can give it, it must remain
blind--citizen of a world in which 'the pallid shades of memory struggle in
vain with the life and freedom of the present'."`**

>

> Hayden White, "The Burden of History" (Tropics of Discourse, 1978).

* * *

[[Home](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/)]
[[Announcements](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/announcements.html)]
[[Syllabus](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/syllabus.html)]
[[Class
Schedule](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/schedule.html)]
[[Assignments](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/assignments.html)]
[[Readings](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/readings.html)]
[[Resources](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/resources.html)]
[[Student
Links](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/joe.kinner/Hist387/students.html)]

* * *

[![Gallaudet Logo](../images/glogo.gif)](http://www.gallaudet.edu)  
This page last updated on October 13, 1997  
Dr. Joseph Kinner, Gallaudet University  
[joe.kinner@gallaudet.edu](mailto:joe.kinner@gallaudet.edu)

* * *

