**POL 336 MIDDLE EASTERN GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS**

**DR. CECILIA G. MANRIQUE**  

**FALL SEMESTER 1996 OFFICE: Room 418M North Hall**

**MW 1:10-2:35 PHONE: 785-6642 or 785-8434**

**Room 135 North Hall**  
  

* * *

  

**_COURSE DESCRIPTION_. This course introduces the student to the peoples,
governments and politics of what constitutes the geographic area called the
Middle East. It will stress a sincere effort at understanding the differences
in the existing cultures of people in the region with the hope of
counteracting whatever existing biases may prevail. Because a semester is not
long enough to study every country in the region, we will make an effort to
emphasize the role and importance of the major actors and place special
attention upon the major tensions in the region, specifically the Arab-Israeli
conflict.**  

**_COURSE OBJECTIVES_. It is hoped that through this course students will:**  

**1\. obtain a basic understanding of the historical, political, economic,
social and cultural structures of selected Middle Eastern countries;**  

**2\. gain an appreciation of how an international perspective is essential to
the broadening of one's outlook; and**  

**3\. obtain a better understanding and appreciation of their own historical,
political, social and cultural backgrounds.**  

**_TEXTBOOKS_. (available at Textbook Rental Service)**  

**Peter Sluglett and Marion Farouk-Sluglett (editors). _The Times Guide to the
Middle East: The Arab World and its Neighbors_ (Third Edition). London: Times
Books, 1996.**  

**Charles D. Smith. _Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict_ (Third Edition).
New York: St. Martin's Press, 1996.**  

**_SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL_. It will be very useful for the student to get into
the habit of reading a daily newspaper or a weekly magazine. Assignments,
quizzes, and class discussions will rely heavily on material obtained from
such sources. Subscription forms to the _Christian Science Monitor_ ,
_Newsweek_ , _The Wall Street Journal_ , etc. are available from the
instructor.**  

**_METHODOLOGY_. Discussions of various concepts will be conducted at each
meeting. Chapter readings for each class period will be assigned. Students are
expected to come to class prepared to discuss chapter contents. Students are
encouraged to participate in class discussions. **  

**_ATTENDANCE POLICY_. Students are expected to be present for each class
period during which attendance will be taken and which is considered by the
instructor in determining the final grade. Each student is responsible for any
material missed.**  

**_GRADING METHOD_. Student grades will be based on two (2) regular tests; a
comprehensive final which usually emphasizes material taken after the last
regular test supplemented by general questions that test cumulative learning;
and performance in assignments, quizzes, attendance, attitude and class
participation.**  

**To eliminate any requests for make-up tests for whatever reason, I will give
one COMPREHENSIVE make-up test on the last class day, Monday, December 16,
1996.**  

**Grades in the 2 tests will make up 40% of the final grade. The final exam
will be 20% of the final grade, and 40% of the final grade will be based on
performance in quizzes, assignments, discussions, attendance, attitude, and
class participation. Thus the final grade will be distributed as follows:**  

**40% regular tests**

**20% comprehensive final**

**40% assignments, quizzes, discussions, attendance, attitude, and class
participation**  

**_GRADING SYSTEM_. The following grading system in line with the seven step
grading scale will be used:**  

**LETTER GRADE** | **NUMERIC VALUE** | **GRADE POINT VALUE**  
---|---|---  
**A** |

**93-100**

| **4.0**  
**A/B** |

**88-92**

| **3.5**  
**B** |

**83-87**

| **3.0**  
**B/C** |

**78-82**

| **2.5**  
**C** |

**70-77**

| **2.0**  
**D** |

**60-69**

| **1.0**  
**F** |

**< 60**

| **0.0**  
  
**_TEST DATES_. In order for you to plan ahead please note the following test
dates:**  

**ACTIVITY** | **DATE**  
---|---  
**TEST 1** | **Friday, October 11**  
**TEST 2** | **Wednesday, November 13**  
**COMPREHENSIVE MAKE-UP** | **Monday, December 16**  
**COMPREHENSIVE FINAL** | **Wednesday, December 18**

**12:15-2:15 Room 335 North Hall**  
  
**_OFFICE HOURS_. For any questions and problems you might have in the course,
please feel free to come in and see me in my office or send me MAIL messages
at my electronic mail address MANRIQUE@UWLAX.EDU or through my home page
address which is http://uwlax.edu/LS/PoliSci/manrique/manrique.html. If you do
not catch me in my office, please leave a message on my door or in my mailbox
in the Political Science department office, Room 423 North Hall. I do not like
to miss anyone who may want to see me so please make an effort to find me or
get in touch with me.**  

**My regular office hours will be MWF 12:00-1:00 and anytime on TTH so long as
you make an appointment.**  

**My schedule and office hours are as follows:**  

**CLASS AND OFFICE SCHEDULE**

**FALL SEMESTER 1996**

**DR. CECILIA G. MANRIQUE**  
  

| **MONDAY** | **TUESDAY** | **WEDNESDAY** | **THURSDAY** | **FRIDAY**  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
**8:50-9:45** | **POL 101(1)**

**Room 335 NH**

|  | **POL 101(1)**

**Room 335 NH**

|  | **POL 101(1)**

**Room 335 NH**  
  
**9:55-10:50** | **POL 101(2)**

**Room 335 NH**

|  | **POL 101(2)**

**Room 335 NH**

|  | **POL 101(2)**

**Room 335 NH**  
  
**11:00-11:55** | **POL 234(1)**

**Room 335 NH**

|  | **POL 234(1)**

**Room 335 NH**

|  | **POL 234(1)**

**Room 335 NH**  
  
**12:00-1:00** | **OFFICE**

**Room 418M NH**

|  | **OFFICE**

**Room 418M NH**

|  | **OFFICE**

**Room 418M NH**  
  
**1:10-2:35** | **POL 336(1)**

**Room 335 NH**

|  | **POL 336(1)**

**Room 335 NH**

|  |  
  
**I look forward to working with you this semester!**  

**PS336F96.syl**  

