  
  

**ARAB-ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICT, PS 457 **

  
  

******Class Syllabus **

**Winter 2000**

**Professor: DAVID B. GALBRAITH**

  
  

**Office Hours: Mon 12-1 pm at 742 SWKT, Tel. 378-5029**

  
  

******Classes: MWF 1-2 pm at 280 SWKT**

  
  

**Required reading:**

**1\. Ian J. Bickerton and Carla L. Klausner, _A Concise History of the Arab-
Israeli Conflict_ , 3rd ed., 1998.**

**2\. Tomis Kapitan, _Philosophical Perspectives on the Israeli-Palestinian
Conflict_ , 1997.**

**3\. Internet and journal articles and other reading assignments as indicated
in the class outline below.**

**4\. Required readings not found in Kapitan or Bickerton/Klausner are on
reserve.**

  
  

**Reference books:**

1\. Mark Tessler, _A History of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict_ , 1994.

2\. David B. Galbraith, et. al. _Jerusalem, the Eternal City_ , 1996.

3\. Henry Cattan, _Palestine and International Law_ , 1976.

4\. John N. Moore, _The Arab-Israeli Conflict_ , 3 vols., 1974. ****

5\. Charles D. Smith, _Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict_ , 2nd ed.,
1992. ****

6\. Fred J. Khouri, _The Arab-Israeli Dilemma_ , 3rd ed., 1985. ****

  
  

**MUSLIM/ARAB WEB SITES** :

  
  

1\. MSANEWS Launch Pad (Links to the Muslim World)

**http://www.mynet.net/~msanews/Launchpad/index.html**

2\. Alquds Organization -- Palestine Information Center

**http://www.alquds.org/**

3\. Foundation for Middle East Peace

**http://www2.ari.net/fmep/**

4\. Birzeit University (West Bank)

**http://www.birzeit.edu**

5\. Arabia Online

**http://www.arab.com**

6\. Islamic Association for Palestine

**http://www.iap.org**

7\. The Jerusalem Times (English Palestine Weekly)

**http://amin.org/biladi.htm**

8\. Palestinians

http://www.palestine-info.net

9\. www.arabia.com

10\. www.arabianet.com

  
  

**ISRAELI/JEWISH WEB SITES:**

  
  

1\. Jerusalem Post

**http://www.jpost.co.il/**

2\. Jewish Right to the Land of Israel (articles)

**http://www.demon.co.uk/solbaram/articles/land.html**

  
  
  
  

3\. Likud USA

**http://www.likud.org.il**

4\. Jerusalem Report

**http://www.dc.enews.com/magazines/jr1**

5\. Israeli and Jewish Links

**http://ucsu.colorado.edu/~jsu/launcher.html**

6\. "Virtual Jerusalem"

**http://www.virtual.co.il/**

7\. "Maven" (More than 4,000 Jewish/Israel links)

**http://www.maven.co.il/subjects/**

8\. Israeli Foreign Ministry

**http://www.israel.org/**

9\. Hebrew University

**http://www.huji.ac.il**

  
  
  
  

******General Statement:**

This class will address various aspects of the Arab-Palestinian-Israeli
conflict with special attention being given to the plight of the Palestinians
and Israel's internal struggles. Additional emphasis will be given to the
historical background, the current situation, and possible peace alternatives
leading to a resolution of the conflict. Consideration will also be given to
the role played by third parties such as the United Nations, the Great powers
and the Third World. Periodic current events sessions will allow us to closely
monitor the on-going peace process with the Palestinians, Syria, and Lebanon.

  
  

**Class Requirements:**

A midterm exam (30% of the final grade) and a final exam (35%), will be
administered, plus a number of unannounced pop quizzes (10%) to verify
completion of reading assignments and to test comprehension. (Quizzes may
_not_ be made up although the lowest 2 scores will be dropped.)

  
  

The class will be divided into six groups representing six major players in
the Middle East peace process:

1\. Israeli right of center parties (represented by Likud, Religious, and
nationalist parties)

2\. Israeli left of center parties (represented by Labor, center, socialist
and Arab parties)

3\. Palestinian mainstream (represented by the PLO)

4\. Palestinian extremists (represented by HAMAS and other liberation
movements)

5\. Arab mainstream (represented by Egypt and Jordan)

6\. Arab extremists (represented by Iraq, Iran, Syria, Libya etc.)

  
  

The members of each group will collect data in the form of a
"journal/scrapbook," throughout the semester, pertinent to his or her group.
This information may be taken from books, journals, periodicals, the internet,
radio/TV and newspapers. Since the process is so current, much of the source
material will come from the media. The purpose of the journal will be to track
the negotiating position of the player in question, observing changes,
patterns and ultimate objectives. Class members will become an "authority" in
their area and will be called upon for both oral and written reports
throughout the semester. These reports will make up 10% of the final grade.

  
  

The journal will be the basis for a research paper due **April 3rd** (late
papers will be penalized up to a full grade) that will constitute 10% of the
final grade for the class. Attendance, participation and congeniality in class
with such highly sensitive and emotional topics will also affect the final
grade, (5%). ** __**

  
  

Please note that in keeping with a strict BYU policy, you must take the final
exam at the scheduled time. There will be no exceptions!

  
  
  
  

**__****_TOPICS_** : [Readings prefaced with " ****" are optional.]

  
  

1\. Jan. 5 INTRODUCTION TO THE COURSE

Lecture: Defining terms, class requirements, paper

  
  

2\. Jan. 7 OVERVIEW OF THE ARAB-ISRAELI CONFLICT

Video: Middlemen: The Pivotal Role of the Middle East (25 min)

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "Introduction," pp. 1-14.

****Mark Tessler, _Jews and Arabs before the Conflict_ , pp. 1-122.

  
  

3\. Jan. 10 PARTIES TO THE CONFLICT AND THE IMPACT OF RELIGION

Video: Holyland: Judaism, Christianity and Islam in the Middle East (25 min)

Readings: ***** Ehab Abunuwara, "Nothing Holy: A Different Perspective of
Israel," in _Dialogue_ , pp. 92-101. (On reserve)

***** David B. Galbraith, "The Arab-Israeli Conflict from a Religious
Perspective," in _This People_. (On reserve)

***** David B. Burrell in Kapitan, "Philosophical Reflections on Religious
Claims and Religious Intransigence in Relation to the Conflict," pp. 269-281.

  
  

4\. Jan. 12 CURRENT EVENTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST

Lecture: Middle East peace efforts

Readings: Bring current media and internet articles in your assigned area to
class and be prepared to discuss the latest developments.

  
  

5\. Jan. 14 THE ISSUE OF HISTORICAL RIGHTS: AN ISRAELI VS. AN ARAB/

PALESTINIAN PERSPECTIVE

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "Introduction," pp. 1-14.

***** Kapitan, "Historical Introduction to the Philosophical Issues," pp.
3-15.

****Yael Tamir in Kapitan, "The Right to National Self-Determination," pp.
47-70.

****Muhammad Ali Khalidi in Kapitan, "Formulating the Right of National Self-
Determination," pp. 71-94.

  
  

6\. Jan. 19 PALESTINE OF THE NINETEENTH CENTURY: RISE OF ZIONISM AND ARAB
NATIONALISM

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "Palestine in the Nineteenth Century," pp.
15-34.

7\. Jan. 21 THE MANDATE PERIOD, 1922-1947

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "Palestine During the Mandate," p. 35-66

Video: A Nation is Born (Part 1)

****Tessler, "Emergence and History of the Conflict to 1948," pp. 123-268.

  
  

8\. Jan. 24 CURRENT EVENTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST

Lecture: Middle East peace efforts

Readings: Bring current media and internet articles in your assigned area to
class and be prepared to discuss the latest developments

  
  

9\. Jan. 26 WORLD WAR II, THE HOLOCAUST, AND PALESTINE

Video: Memory of the Camps (15 min)

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "WWII, Jewish Displaced Persons, and
Palestine," pp. 67-86.

  
  

10\. Jan. 28 THE PARTITION PLAN AND ISRAEL'S PROCLAMATION OF INDEPENDENCE AND
THE 1948 WAR

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "The UN, Israel established, The First
Arab-Israeli War," pp. 87-114.

***** Kapitan, "Historical Introduction to the Philosophical Issues," Cont...
pp. 16-42.

****Tessler, "Routinzation of the Conflict, 1948-1967," pp. 269-397.

  
  

11\. Jan 31 THE ARAB AND JEWISH REFUGEE PROBLEMS

Video: People and the Land (A Palestinian Perspective)

Readings: ***** Khouri, "The Arab Refugees," pp. 123-181.

12\. Feb 2 CURRENT EVENTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST

Lecture: Middle East peace efforts

Readings: Bring current media and internet articles in your assigned area to
class and be prepared to discuss the latest developments.

  
  

13\. Feb. 4 JERUSALEM: CITY OF PEACE!

Video: Jerusalem: Within these Walls (60 min)

Readings: ***** Galbraith, et. al., "Jerusalem and International Law," pp.
399-415 **(On reserve)**

  
  

14\. Feb. 7 JERUSALEM (Continued)

Readings: ***** Galbraith, et. al., ""Political Solutions for Jerusalem," pp.
416-433 **(On reserve)**

  
  

15\. Feb. 9 JERUSALEM: An LDS Perspective

Readings: TBA

  
  

16\. Feb. 11 CURRENT EVENTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST

Readings: Read current internet and media reports

  
  

17\. Feb. 14 FROM ARMISTICE TO CONFLICT: 1949-1956

Video: A Nation is Born, (Part 2)

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "The Conflict Widens, Suez, 1956," pp.
115-137.

  
  

18\. Feb. 16 PRELUDE TO WAR, 1957-1967

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "The Turning Point: June 1967," pp.
138-161.

  
  

19\. Feb. 18 THE 1967 SIX-DAY WAR: A HISTORICAL WATERSHED

Video: Israel: A Nation is Born (Part 4)

  
  

20\. **Feb. 22** ******MID-TERM EXAM**

  
  

21\. Feb. 23 CURRENT EVENTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST

Lecture: Bring current media and internet articles in your assigned area to
class and be prepared to discuss the latest developments.

22\. Feb. 25 THE ROLE OF THE UNITED NATIONS: RESOLUTIONS 242 AND THE QUESTION
OF AGGRESSION

Readings: ***** Erin McKenna in Kapitan, "Land, Property, and Occupation," pp.
185-204.

  
  

23\. Feb. 28 THE AFTERMATH OF WAR, 1967-1973

Video: Six Days Plus Twenty Years (50 min)

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "Diplomacy, Attrition, and the Rogers
Plan," pp. 170-184.

  
  

24\. Mar. 1 THE GROWTH OF THE PLO TO INTERNATIONAL STATUS

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "Palestinians and the PLO," pp. 161-169.

***** Anabtawi, Samir N., "The Palestinian as a Political Entity," pp.
506-517. **(On reserve)**

  
  

25\. Mar. 3 THE OCCUPATION: A PALESTINIAN PERSPECTIVE

Video: The Arab/Israeli Struggle for Peace (55 min)

Readings: ***** Shehadeh, R., _The Third Way_ , pp. 61-98. **(On reserve)**

****Tessler, "The Palestinian Dimension Reemerges," pp. 399-531

  
  

26\. Mar. 6 CURRENT EVENTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST

Readings: Current network, media readings

  
  

27\. Mar. 8 THE "OIL AND WATER FACTORS" IN THE MIDDLE EAST CONFLICT

Lecture: Water, more precious than oil!

Video: Water Wars: Struggle in the Holy Land (new)

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "The Arab Embargo and the Oil Weapon," pp.
179-180 and "Water and the Arab-Israeli Conflict," 196-197.

  
  

28\. Mar. 10 THE 1969-70 WAR OF ATTRITION AND THE 1973 OCTOBER WAR

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "Egypt Prepares for War," pp. 173-181.

  
  

29\. Mar. 13 ISRAEL'S INTERNAL POLITICS: A SHIFT TO THE RIGHT

Video: Israel: The Price of Victory (58 min)

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "The Search for Peace," pp. 185-196.

  
  

30\. Mar. 15 CURRENT EVENTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST

Lecture: Bring current media and internet articles in your assigned area to
class and be prepared to discuss the latest developments.

  
  

31\. Mar. 17 LEBANESE CIVIL WARS AND ISRAEL

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "Lebanon," pp. 213-223.

  
  

32\. Mar. 20 SADAT'S VISIT TO JERUSALEM, CAMP DAVID AND THE EGYPTIAN-ISRAEL
PEACE TREATY OF 1979

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "The Camp David Accords," pp. 197-203.

***** Daniel Statman in Kapitan, "Jus in Bello and the Intifada," pp. 133-156.

  
  
  
  

33\. Mar. 22 THE "INTIFADA" AND THE DECLARATION OF A PALESTINIAN STATE

Video: The Intifada: Days of Rage (60 min)

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "The Intifada," pp. 228-247.

***** James A. Graff in Kapitan, "Targeting Children," pp. 157-184.

  
  

34\. Mar. 24 CURRENT EVENTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST

Lecture: Bring current media and internet articles in your assigned area to
class and be prepared to discuss the latest developments.

****Tessler, "The High Price of Stalemate," pp. 533-761.

  
  

35\. Mar. 27 POLITICAL POLARIZATION IN ISRAEL

Lecture: The Great Territorial Debate in Israel

Readings: ***** Jerome M. Segal in Kapitan, "The State of Palestine: The
Question of Existence," pp. 221-243.

***** Milton Fisk in Kapitan, "Zionism, Liberalism, and the State," pp.
309-330.

  
  

36\. Mar. 29 THE ISRAELI TERRITORIAL DILEMMA

Video: This Is Our Land (58 min)

Readings: ***** Hugh R. Harcourt in Kapitan, "In Search of the Emperor's New
Clothes: Reflections on Rights in the Palestinian Conflict," pp. 282-296.

  
  

37\. Mar. 31 TOWARDS A SETTLEMENT: Class discussion

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "The Peace of the Brave," pp. 248-282.

  
  
  
  

38\. Apr. 3 Discussion of research papers ****

  
  

*****ABSOLUTE DEADLINE FOR HANDING IN PAPER*****

  
  

39\. Apr. 5 TOWARDS A SETTLEMENT: Class discussion

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "The Peace Progresses," pp. 283-314.

****

40\. Apr. 7 OUTSTANDING ISSUES IN THE PEACE PROCESS: Where do we go from here?

Video: Arab/Israeli Struggle for Peace (Last half: Yom Kippur to Lebanon)

Readings: ***** Bickerton/Klausner, "Conclusion," pp. 315-320.

****Lynne Belaief in Kapitan, "Tragic Justice," pp. 331-342.

  
  

41\. Apr. 10 THINKING THE UNTHINKABLE: THE NUCLEAR THREAT IN THE MIDDLE EAST
CONFLICT AND ARMAGEDDON

Lecture: A scriptural solution?

Videos: Booom (11 min)

  
  

42\. Apr. 12 Review for final exam

  
  
  
  

**Apr. 18 (Tuesday)** **FINAL EXAM** **Exam time: 11-2 pm** **Good Luck!**

