![Middle East Politics](pix/headermain337.gif)  
![POL 337-800/Fall 2002/SUNY Oswego](pix/headerpol337.gif)

[![Assignments](pix/btnassignments.gif)](assignments.html)![divider](pix/headerdivider.gif)[![Contact](pix/btncontact.gif)](contact.html)![divider](pix/headerdivider.gif)[![Handouts](pix/btnhandouts.gif)](handouts.html)![divider](pix/headerdivider.gif)[![Home](pix/btnhome.gif)](index.html)![divider](pix/headerdivider.gif)[![Links](pix/btnlinks.gif)](links.html)![divider](pix/headerdivider.gif)[![Readings](pix/btnreadings.gif)](readings.html)![divider](pix/headerdivider.gif)[![Syllabus](pix/btnsyllabus.gif)](syllabus.html)

* * *

![Syllabus](pix/logosyllabus.gif)

**Course Overview**

This course surveys the primary issues, actors, and dynamics that shape
contemporary Middle Eastern politics. During the first part of the course
we'll examine a range of topics, including geography, religion, culture,
colonialism, nationalism, leadership, foreign policy, terrorism, natural
resources, the Arab-Israeli conflict, and the role of women. The second part
of the course will focus, in greater depth, on politics and society in the
various countries of the Middle East.

I hope this class helps you acquire a good amount of knowledge about our
subject, but my primary goal is to equip you with the tools you need to make
sense of Middle East politics for yourself. So, as we progress through the
semester, you'll be encouraged to think critically about the course material,
develop informed opinions on a range of issues, and connect what we're
studying to your own daily life.

The class will be conducted seminar-style; that is, centered around classroom
discussion rather than lecture presentations. As such, your active
participation is expected and will help determine a substantial part of your
course grade.

**Required Texts**

There are three textbooks for this class -- two required and one optional. All
are available for purchase from the [Campus
Store](http://www.oswego.edu/other_campus/store/),
[Kraftees](http://www.kraftees.com/), and various online merchants. (Click on
a title to compare prices at more than 40 online bookstores.) Note that many
online distributors (e.g., [Amazon.com](http://www.amazon.com/) and [Barnes &
Noble](http://www.barnesandnoble.com/)) buy and sell used textbooks in
addition to selling new copies.

![book cover](pix/coverweatherby.jpg)

|

Weatherby, Joseph N. 2002. [The Middle East and North Africa: A Political
Primer](http://www.addall.com/New/BestSeller.cgi?isbn=0321081064), by Joseph
N. Weatherby (Longman, 2002). ISBN 0-321-08106-4 (required)

|

![book cover](pix/coverspencer.jpg)

|

[Global Studies: The Middle
East](http://www.addall.com/New/BestSeller.cgi?isbn=0072505753), 9th ed., by
William Spencer (McGraw-Hill/Dushkin, 2003). ISBN 0-07-250575-3 (required)

| ![book cover](pix/coverhacker.jpg) | [A Pocket Style
Manual](http://www.addall.com/New/BestSeller.cgi?isbn=0312204884), 3rd ed., by
Diana Hacker (Bedford/St. Martin's, 2000). ISBN 0-312-20488-4 (optional)  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
These are the only "official" textbooks for the class, but you might also be
assigned readings from other sources and you may need to use the Internet to
complete some of your course work. If you don't have Internet access, are
short on cash, or don't require broadband access, I recommend [Blue
Frog](http://www.bluefrognet.net/). (I've been a satisfied user for more than
a year, now.) Available throughout Central New York, Blue Frog offers
reliable, unlimited Internet access and e-mail for less than $5/month. (If
you're currently lining the pockets of some corporate giant like AOL or
Microsoft, switching to Blue Frog could save you a couple hundred bucks a
year.)

**Grading Scheme**

Your course grade will be determined as follows: response papers (3) - 30%;
classroom participation - 25%; current events analyses (10) - 20%; policy
paper \- 20%; floating component - 5%. (See the
[assignments](assignments.html) page for further details.)

The grading scale for all work this class is: 94-100 = A, 90-93 = A-, 87-89 =
B+, 84-86 = B, 80-83 = B-, 77-79 = C+, 74-76 = C, 70-73 = C-, 67-69 = D+,
64-66 = D, 60-63 = D-, 0-59 = E

Late Assignments: Late assignments will not be accepted and will receive a
grade of zero.

Attendance: Your attendance and active participation in classroom activities
is expected. If you fail to attend a class session, I expect you to provide me
with a legitimate excuse and make the necessary arrangements for anything you
miss. For every 5 unexcused absences during the semester, your final course
grade may be lowered as much as one full letter grade.

Exceptions: I reserve the right to bend the rules in your favor, but you
shouldn't assume this will happen. Any such decisions will be made solely at
my discretion, on a case-by-case basis, and require no formal justification on
my part.

**Academic Integrity**

You'll be held responsible for all course-related information disseminated in
class, whether or not you attend. You'll also be held responsible for all
course-related information posted on this class Web site, whether or not you
choose to familiarize yourself with the site contents. Note that the site may
undergo minor changes during the semester, most or all of which will be
announced in class.

Consistent with SUNY Oswego's College Policy on Cheating and Plagiarism,
academic dishonesty will not be tolerated in this class. (Read the policy
[online](http://www.oswego.edu/Catalog/Academic_Info.html#CP) or on pages
54-55 of the _2002-2003 Student Handbook_.) If you do cheat or plagiarize, I
reserve the right to take any punitive action allowed by the university.
You're expected to be(come) familiar with the official college policy, and
your submission of assigned course work (including exams) will be taken as an
indication that you fully understand this policy.

**Writing Standards**

Although this course is not formally designated as a "writing course," it is
an upper-division class with a strong writing component. As such, any written
work you submit should be gender inclusive and employ correct spelling,
punctuation, and grammar. Adhering to these standards will make your work
easier to read and your arguments more compelling, while helping to insure
that your assignments are not subjected to a score reduction or other
sanction. Hacker's _Pocket Style Manual_ (or another such handbook) should
provide all you need to know about good writing, but feel free to consult me
for additional help if necessary.

**Further Assistance**

I'll do my best to address any course-related questions or concerns you might
have, including questions about writing standards or academic integrity.
However, since my tendency is to assume that everything's going fine for you
unless you tell me otherwise, you'll need to take the initiative and let me
know if you need extra help. You can talk to me after class, use the
[contact](contact.html) page to send me a message, call me (312-4080), or stop
by my office (439 Mahar Hall). If my office hours don't fit your schedule,
I'll be glad to make an appointment to meet with you at another time.

Note: If you have a disabling condition that might interfere with your ability
to successfully complete this course, please speak (confidentially) to me or
contact the Office of Disability Services (312-3358, 210 Swetman).

* * *

[Assignments](assignments.html) | [Contact](contact.html) |
[Handouts](handouts.html) | [Home](index.html) | [Links](links.html) |
[Readings](readings.html) | [Syllabus](syllabus.html) | [Dr.
Warkentin](http://www.oswego.edu/polisci/warkentin/index.html) | [Political
Science](http://www.oswego.edu/polisci/index.html) | [SUNY
Oswego](http://www.oswego.edu/)  
You Are Here: www.oswego.edu/polisci/warkentin/classes/337/syllabus.html (Last
Modified: September 4, 2002)  
This site is [Bobby approved](http://www.cast.org/bobby/), uses [valid
CSS](http://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/check/referer) and [valid
HTML](http://validator.w3.org/check/referer), and looks best in a browser that
supports [Web standards](http://www.webstandards.org/upgrade/).  
[![Copyright 2002 Craig Warkentin. All rights
reserved.](pix/copyrightfooter.gif)](copyright.html)

