![](logo.jpg)

A newsletter from [ATTIC](http://www.temple.edu/attic)

February, 2001

##  Letter from the Editors

This issue features several discussions of classroom policies, designed to
help you design the rules that will guide your classes. In our [Faculty
Interview](feb-schneider.html), Dr. Robert Schneider of the Religion
Department discusses the relationship between University policies and those
that are left to your discretion. Below, ATTIC Director Dr. William Cutler
asks the questions you might ask yourself when developing your syllabus and
classroom policies. In addition, History Department TA Jennifer Speelman and
Philosophy Department TA Dave Thomer discuss their [approaches to attendance
and participation policies](feb-speelman.html), two particularly vexing
issues. We hope you find the articles useful, and as always, please contact us
with your feedback.  
Dave Thomer ([davethomer@excite.com](mailto:davethomer@excite.com))  
Rujuta Chincholkar-Mandelia
([rchincho@nimbus.temple.edu](mailto:rchincho@nimbus.temple.edu))

##  Introduction by Dr. William Cutler III, ATTIC Director

Every college teacher has a set of classroom policies. Whether made explicit
or not, these policies shape many decisions that instructors make. In turn,
these decisions affect, for better or worse, the teaching and learning
experience. The climate of the classroom is at stake.

There are many important issues to consider when developing a set of classroom
policies. They include:  


  *  Attendance
  *  Grading
  *  Student conduct in class

  
When or even whether students come to class is a real issue for any
instructor. In almost every course, there will be some students who will come
every time, and others who will miss frequently. Most will exhibit an
attendance pattern that falls somewhere in between these extremes. Because
Temple students lead complex lives, they may have a legitimate reason for
sometimes being somewhere else when their schedule says they should be in your
class. What will your attendance policy be? Will you forgive absences caused
by emergencies? Will you penalize those who miss more than a certain number of
times? What will you do when students don't arrive on time? Late comers can be
a disruption, but just what does late arrival mean? These are important matter
that deserve careful consideration before the semester begins.

Much as we might like to think that students want to learn for the sake of
learning, the fact is that grades are extremely important to almost every
undergraduate you are likely to meet. Students deserve to know exactly how you
will compute their grades. Your grading policy should make clear just what
knowledge and/or skills they will need to demonstrate, and how you will weight
the different assessments (e.g. tests, papers, classroom participation) that
you will use to compute their final grades. On any given assessment, you may
want to explain your standards for assigning a particular grade.

You will also need to think through your policy on work that is submitted
late. Will you accept it? Will you deduct points for lateness, and if so, how
many? Will there be a deadline beyond which you will not accept a particular
assignment at all? Sooner or later you will encounter a student who does not
complete all the requirements for your course. The university allows
instructors to assign an "Incomplete" to such students. Making this decision
may appear to be a straightforward call, but is it? Just how much work should
a student have done to qualify for an Incomplete? If you have not thought
through your policy on this question, you may end up treating students
inconsistently.

Student conduct is another matter for which instructors should have some
established policies. It is important to consider in advance how you expect
students to behave in class. Will you permit them to eat or drink? Must they
remove their hats? What will you do if a student dozes off in class? How will
you respond to the couple that engages in a sidebar conversation, thereby
showing disrespect for the rest of the class?

Plagiarism is not something to be taken lightly, but many undergraduates,
especially freshmen and sophomores, may not know what it is. Every instructor
needs to have a policy on academic honesty that should be consistent with
departmental, college, and/or university rules on academic dishonesty. What's
more, individual instructors should think though in advance what they will do
it they encounter students who have plagiarized. Will you handle the matter
yourself or turn it over the department chair, the dean, or the University
Disciplinary Committee? Keeping the offense between you and your student may
be simpler but this response may also allow a chronic offender to be treated
inappropriately.

Having an explicit set of classroom policies will save you time and spare you
trouble in the long run. But are there not better reasons to pay this matter
any heed? Respect for others, it seems to me, justifies the effort because a
thoughtful set of classroom policies demonstrates commitment to your students
and to their education at Temple University.  
    


