| [Home Page](http://novaonline.nvcc.edu/eli/evans/default.htm) | [101
Syllabus](../Index.html) | [Schedule](../Aids/schedule.html) | [Study
Aids](../Aids/aids.html) |  [Online Gradebook and
Discussion](javascript:Start\('../../Forums.htm'\)) |
[Regulations](http://eli.nvcc.edu/elipps.htm) |
[Help](../../Resources/Help.html)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  ![Blue Separator Bar](../photos/bluebar.jpg)   ![Brown Standing
Stones](../photos/Stones.gif)   HIS 101 WEEK 2:  ANCIENT NEAR EAST **TABLE OF
CONTENTS**   Objectives | Assignment | Questions to consider | Key terms |
Suggested web sites  
---|---|---|---|---  
Submit | Directions | Grading | Notes | Confused?  
  **Summary** :  
The ancient Near East was one of five locations in the world where
civilization first emerged about five thousand years ago.  (China, India,
Meso-America and Egypt were the other areas.)  In the Near East, the basic
religious forms of the Western world evolved.  
Back to Table of Contents   ![This bar separates unit
sections.](../Photos/Brownbar101.GIF)   **Objectives** :

  * Describe the foundation and growth of Egyptian and Mesopotamian societies.
  * Analyze a historical primary source.
  * Back to Table of Contents

  ![This bar separates unit sections.](../Photos/Brownbar101.GIF)
**Assignment** :

  * Read the appropriate chapters in the textbook (chapter 1 in the sixth ed. of Perry).
  * Read **Gilgamesh** (You may wish to participate in an [Online Discussion](javascript:Start\('http://novaonline.nvcc.edu/eli/evans/Forums.htm'\)) of this reading.).
  * Listen to some further information about the Ancient Near East as a [Realaudio file](Week2.ram) or as a [wav file](http://eli.nvcc.edu/real/cte/his101/week2.wav).  You can also read the information as a [txt file](http://eli.nvcc.edu/real/cte/his101/week2.txt).
  * Back to Table of Contents

  ![This bar separates unit sections.](../Photos/Brownbar101.GIF)
**Questions to consider while reading the textbook** :

  * Why did cities first form in Mesopotamia?
  * What enabled ancient Egypt to exist for so long a period of time as a cultural unit?
  * Back to Table of Contents

  ![This bar separates unit sections.](../Photos/Brownbar101.GIF)   **Key
terms to study while reading the textbook** :

  * Mesopotamia
  * Hammurabi
  * Phoenicians
  * Pharaoh
  * Old Kingdom
  * Back to Table of Contents

  ![This bar separates unit sections.](../Photos/Brownbar101.GIF)
**Suggested web sites for further study** :

  * Please use the [History Web Sites Search Page](../../resources/search.html) to find relevant web sites for this unit of the course.
  * Back to Table of Contents

  ![This bar separates unit sections.](../Photos/Brownbar101.GIF)   **Submit**
:

  * Gilgamesh one-page paper
  * Back to Table of Contents

  ![This bar separates unit sections.](../Photos/Brownbar101.GIF)
**Directions** :  
**Citing specific evidence from Gilgamesh, explain the role of kingship in
ancient Sumerian society**.  This exercise will be your first as historians in
this course.  The paper requires that you gather evidence from a textual
source (Gilgamesh) to reconstruct the past (task 1), and that you then
interpret that past by analyzing the evidence (task 2).  As you read the epic
and take notes, you should look for any information that sheds light on
Sumerian politics, for example, mention of the "Council of Elders" is
certainly an important piece of evidence.  Your paper must follow the
following format:

  * typed using a word processor (font size 10 or 12 only)
  * one-inch margins
  * double-spaced
  * page number citations for your quoted evidence
  * not to exceed one (1) page--I will not read beyond one page.
  * name, date and HIS 101 at the top left
  * must have a brief introduction and conclusion
  * must follow the [Writing Style Rules](../../resources/style.html) and the [History Paper Guidelines](../../resources/guidelines.html).  Please also check the [Sample Writing Style Mistakes](../../resources/mistakes.html).  After receiving your graded paper, you can check the [Explanation of Comments on Assignments](../../resources/comments.html).
  * At times, you may be asked to rewrite your essay before it is graded.  This is done for your own benefit and will result in an improved grade.
  * You may also choose to resubmit your paper--along with the original--after making the corrections and taking into consideration the comments noted on the original.  This will result in an additional two (2) points being added to your paper grade.
Before proceeding, you might wish to read the short [background
information](../Aids/Background.html#Gilgamesh) and review the [study
questions](../Aids/Questions.html#Gilgamesh) on Gilgamesh.  You may also wish
to participate in an [Online
Discussion](javascript:Start\('http://novaonline.nvcc.edu/eli/evans/Forums.htm'\))
of this week's assignment.  If you have any questions or comments about the
reading, you should post them to the discussion.   This assignment should be
sent by e-mail according to the [Electronic Submission
Information](../../resources/submission.html) instructions.   Back to Table of
Contents   ![This bar separates unit sections.](../Photos/Brownbar101.GIF)
**Grading** :

  * 50 points
  * Back to Table of Contents

  ![This bar separates unit sections.](../Photos/Brownbar101.GIF)   **Notes**
:  
The West has always had a rather peculiar view of its Near Eastern origins.
Most history texts begin with the first chapter devoted to the ancient Near
East, come back to the region in chapter 19 on nineteenth-century British
imperialism and then return to the area in chapter 26 for a discussion of the
Arab-Israeli conflict.  It seems strange to credit the area as being the
origin of Western civilization, especially in regard to religious experience,
but then pay little attention to what happens in the region for long sweeps of
time; and, it is even stranger that many people today do not even view Islam,
the dominant religion of that area, as being part of Western civilization.  
Back to Table of Contents   ![This bar separates unit
sections.](../Photos/Brownbar101.GIF)   **Questions** :  
Please note that if you have questions at any time about the course
assignments or about the material you are reading, you may contact me:

  * during my [office hours](../../office.html) at ELI, 703.323.3347
  * during my office hours at the Loudoun campus, 703.450.2520
  * by e-mail, [cevans@nvcc.edu](mailto:cevans@nvcc.edu)
  * by voice mail, 703.323.3713, box 0846
  * at my Loudoun division office, 703.450.2505
  * Back to Table of Contents
  
  [![RealPlayer download
link](../photos/freerealplayer7.gif)](http://www.real.com/products/player)  

This page is copyright (C) 2002, C.T. Evans  
For information contact [cevans@nvcc.edu](mailto:cevans@nvcc.edu)  

