**Special Topics in International Law POLS 5/472** : **International Law in
the Middle East**

Fall 2000

Time: M 4:30-6:55 (322SS)

**Dr. Jean Allain**

**email** : allain@aucegypt.edu

Office Hours: T 3-4 and W 1:15-2:30

**Introduction** : This Special Topics Course is meant to build on the
precepts established by POLS 412 and to localize them in the Middle East.
Thus, most of the themes examined in POLS 412 are reconsidered in more depth
and applied in situations in this part of the world. The outcome is to move
out of the theoretical and into the application of international law. For
instance, the concept of the use of force as a legal regime will be considered
in light of the continued US & UK bombings of Iraq. Thus, the orientation of
this course will be from the perspective of those who feel the brunt of
international law and its violations, as opposed to those who formulate it and
consider it in the abstract. Any examination of international law in the
Middle East must concern itself with the actions of the State of Israel vis-¨¤-
vis its Arab neighbors. Consideration will be given, inter alia, as to the
legality of the creation of the State of Israel, to the 1948 Refugees, to its
various occupations and how this relates to the legality of the use of force,
humanitarian, and human rights law. While much of the course examines issue
related to the Arab/Israeli conflict, a number of items are considered which
touch upon other actors within the region. The recent Eritrea/Yemen
arbitration is considered to demonstrate the use of the legal means of the
peaceful settlement of disputes, while the Gulf Wars give examples of the
violent settlement of disputes. New themes are also introduced which, while
not being geographically specific to the Middle East, appear to be more acute
when played out in the region. The regime of diplomatic and consular relations
appears to be more relevant in light of the Teheran Hostages case, and thus
worthy of studying. Finally, the scarcity of water and the international
machinations over its possession appear to be reason enough to consider this
issue to determine the legal norms which exist. The eventual outcome of the
course will be a strengthen the student understanding of the basic tenets of
international law on the one hand, while on the other, to provide a context in
which the student can see its application in the Middle East and it's effect.

**Requirements:**

Readings: Readings are mandatory (see class participation). Readings will be
made available in a number booklets entitled: Readings for Special Topics:
International Law in the Middle East.

Class Participation: The class will be held as a seminar. The course is
heavily orientated towards class participation. In fact, 20% of a student's
grade will be based on participation. The instructor will ask students pointed
questions about various articles, students failing to demonstrate an clear
knowledge of the readings, in any given week, will be penalized at a rate of
4% of their over all mark. Student should prepare one-page outlines of every
article that is assigned, summarizing its content, and noting questions which
they wish to raise in class. Essay Progress Report The Essay Progress Report
is a 6-8 page outline of the issues which students proposes to write about in
their essay. The Report will include the thesis of essay, the main
intellectual problems which the student expects to encounter, and what
conclusions the student expects to draw. Further, students will include an
annotated bibliography of sources that have been consulted or expect to
consult and explain how these sources will assist them in the final product.
The Essay Progress Report is due on 23 October, 2000.

Essay: Students are required to provide a written essay (minimum 20 pages) on
a topic of their choice within the domain of international law. The essay must
be original and examine issues from an international law perspective, the
failure to write an essay specifically examining an issue from the
international law perspective will result in a mark of "F" on the course. The
essay is due on December 4, 2000 Written assignments are to be handed in at
the start of class on the day prescribed in this course outline (or at anytime
before).

Late assignments will be penalized a full grade point (i.e. a paper marked B+
will be reduced to C+) if handed in during the week following the due date. No
written assignment will be accepted if handed in seven day after the day noted
in this syllabus as its due date. I reserve the right to have students rewrite
assignments which do not meet an appropriate standard. All written assignments
are to be typed, doubled spaced and have a 12 point font; students delivering
a hand-written assignment will automatically lose a full grade point and will
be required to type the assignment before it is graded.

Students are responsible for the content of their papers. I direct you to the
University's Academic Honesty Policy, which I take seriously - any violation
of this policy will result in a failure of the course. Tests: There will be an
in-class mid-term exam on Monday 30 October. The final exam will be held on
Wednesday, December 20th from 11:00 to 1:00 pm and will cover all materials
discussed in class. The exams will be comprised of short answer and essay
questions.

**Grading Scheme** : Class participation 10% Essay Progress Reports 10% Essay
30% Mid-Term Test 20% Final Exam 30%

**Course Schedule**

**Week 1** \- Introductory Lecture (September 11)

**Week 2** \- International Law in the Middle East (September 18) Readings: 1)
Majid Khadduri, "International Law, Islamic", Encyclopedia of Public
International Law, Vol. 2, pp. 1236-1424; and 2)"The Israeli-Occupied
Territories, International Law, and the Boundaries of Scholarly Discourse: A
Reply to Michael Curtis";

**Week 3** -the State and Territorial Sovereignty (September 25) Readings: 1)
Henry Cattan, "Sovereignty over Palestian", J. N. Moore (ed), The Arab-
Israeli Conflict: Readings and Documents, 1977, pp. 11-44; 2) Nathan Feinberg,
"The Question over Palestine", Ibid. pp. 45-72; and 3) Frank Van de Craen,
"The Territorial Title of the State of Israel to 'Palestine': an Appraisal in
International Law", Revue belge de droit international, Vol. 14, 1978-79, pp.
501-538.

**Week 4** \- Statutes of other Subjects of International Law (October 2)
Readings: 1) "Declaration of Independence of the Palestinian State", German
Yeabook of International Law, Vol. 31, 1988, pp. 681-683; 2) James D. Howley,
"Measuring Up: Do the Palestinian Homelands Constitute a Valid State under
International Law?", Dickinson Journal of International Law, Vol. 8, 1990; and
3) Richard Falk, "Problems and Prospects for the Kurdish Struggle for Self-
Determination after the End of the Gulf and Cold Wars", Michigan Journal of
International Law, Vol. 15, 1994, 591-603.

**Week 5** \- Sources: Treaties Interpretation and the Peace Process (October
9) Readings: 1) Leo Gross, "States as Organs of International Law and the
Problem of Autointerpretation", Essays on International Law and Organizations,
Vol 1, 1984, pp. 367-397; 2) Louis Ren¨¦ Beres, "Why the Oslo Accords should be
Abrogated by Israel", American University Journal of International Law and
Policy, Vol. 12, 1997, pp. 267-284; 3) John Quigley, "The Oslo Accords: More
than Israel Deserves", Ibid., pp. 285-298; and 4) Richard Falk, "Some
International Law Implications of the Oslo/Cairo Framework for the PLO/
Israeli Peace Process", Palestine Yearbook of International Law, Vol. 8,
1994/5, pp. 19-34.

**Week 6** \- Sources: Peace Treaties and the Final Status Talks (October 16)
Readings: 1) Michael Akehurst, "The Peace Treaty between Egypt and Israel",
International Relations, Vol. 7, 1981, pp. 1035-1052; 2) John Quigley "The
Future of Jerusalem: A Symposium: Sovereignty in Jerusalem", Catholic
University Law Review,1996, Vol. 45, p. 756;and John Quigley. "The Legal
Foundations of Peace and Prosperity in the Middle East: The Role of Law in a
Palestinian-Israeli Accommodation", Case Western Reserve Journal of
International Law, 1999, Vol. 31 p. 351.

**Week 7** \- State Responsibility (October 23) Readings: 1) Ige Dekker,
"Criminal Responsibility and the Gulf War of 1980-1988: The Crime of
Aggression", Dekker and Post (eds.), The Gulf War of 1980-1988: The Iran-Iraq
War in International Legal Perspective, pp. 249-276; 2) Koorosh Ameli, "The
Iran-United States Claims Tribunal", Hamilton et als. (eds.), Permanent Court
of Arbitration: International Arbitration and Dispute Resolution, 1999, pp.
246-281.

**Week 8** \- Mid-Term Exam (October 30)

**Week 9** \- The Legality of the Use of Force (November 6) Readings: 1) Marc
Weller, "The United Nations and the jus ad bellum", Rowe (ed.), The Gulf War
1990-91 in International and English Law, 1992, pp. 29-54; 2) Max Hilaire,
"Use of Force against Iraq: Collective Security or Collective Self-Defense
under the UN Charter and Customary International Law" Revue de Droit
International, Vol. 71, 1993, pp. 71-97; 3) Report of the International
Commission of enquire into reported violations of International Law by Israel
during its invasion of Lebanon, Se?n MacBride (Chair) Israel in Lebanon,
"General Introduction" and "Conclusions"; and 4) Stuart Baker, "Comparing the
1993 U.S. Airstrikes on Iraq to the 1986 Bombing of Libya: The New
Interpretation of Article 51", Georgia Journal of International and
Comparative Law, Vol. 24, 1999, pp. 99-116.

**Week 10** \- Humanitarian Law (November 13) Readings: 1) Hans-Peter Gasser,
"The Geneva conventions and the Autonomous Territories in the Middle East",
Bowen (ed.), Human Rights, Self-Determination and Political Change in the
Occupied Palestinian Territories, 1997, pp. 291-300; 2) Richard Falk, "Some
Legal Reflections on the Prolonged Occupation of Gaza and the West Bank",
Journal of Refugee Studies, Vol. 2, 1989, pp. 41-51; and 3) Hilaire McCoubrey,
"Civilians in Occupied Territory", Rowe (ed.), The Gulf War 1990-91 in
International and English Law, 1992, pp. 205-223.

**Week 11** \- The Pacific Settlement of International Disputes (November 20)
Readings: 1) Barbara Kwiatkowska, "Award of the Arbitral Tribunal in the First
Stage of the Eritrea/Yemen Proceedings", International Journal of Marine and
Coastal Law, Vol. 14, 1999, pp. 125-136; 2) Permanent Court of Arbitration,
Phase II: Maritime Delimitation, December 1999; 3) Gunnar Legergren, "The Taba
Tribunal 1986-89", African Journal of International and Comparative Law, Vol
1, 1989, pp. 525-532; and 4) Prosper Weil, "Some Observations on the Arbitral
Award in the Taba case", Israel Law Review, Vol. 23, 1989, pp. 1-25.

**Week 12** \- Diplomatic Relations (November 27) Readings: 1) Jonathan Brown,
"Diplomatic Immunity: State practice under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations", International and Comparative Law Quarterly, Vol. 37, 1988, pp.
53-88; 2) Kazimierz Grzybowski, "The Regime of Diplomacy and the Tehran
Hostages", International and Comparative Law Quarterly, Vol. 30, 1981, pp.
42-58; and 3) International Court of Justice, Case concerning United States
Diplomatic and Consular Staff in Tehran, 1980.

**Week 13** \- International Human Rights Law - Torture (December 4) Readings:
1) Walter K?lin, "The Struggle against Torture", International Review of the
Red Cross, No. 324, 1998, pp. 433-444; 2) Amnesty International Report, "Human
Rights in the Autonomous Areas", Palestine Yearbook of International Law, Vol.
9, 1996/97, pp. 327-354; and 3) The High Court of Justice of Israel, The
Interrogation techniques of the GSS Case, 1999.

**Week 14** \- Shared Rivers and Water in the Middle East (December 11)
Readings: 1) Aaron Wolf, "A Hydropolitical History of the Nile, Jordan and
Euphrates Rivers Basins", Biswas (ed.), International Waters of the Middle
East, 1994, pp. 5-43; 2) Niva Telrant, "Riparian Rights under International
Law: A Study of the Israeli-Jordanian Peace Treaty", Loyola International and
Comparative Law Journal, Vol. 18, 1995, pp. 175-205; and 3) Alwyn Rouyer, "The
Water Issue in the Palestinian - Israeli Peace Process", Survival, Vol. 39,
19976, pp. 57-81.

Final Exam on December 20th from 11:00 am to 1:00 pm.

