[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](soc265a1999f/New.htm)

[Tabs](soc265a1999f/New.htm)

[CLASS UPDATES](soc265a1999f/New.htm) |

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](soc265disca1999f/discussit.htm)

[Talk](soc265disca1999f/discussit.htm)

[DISCUSSIONS](soc265disca1999f/discussit.htm) |

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](soc265a1999f/Topics.htm)

[Topics](soc265a1999f/Topics.htm)

[GUIDES/READINGS](soc265a1999f/Topics.htm) |

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](soc265a1999f/Glossary.htm)

[Terms](soc265a1999f/Glossary.htm)

[GLOSSARY](soc265a1999f/Glossary.htm) |

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](Default.htm)

[Tank](Default.htm)

[THIS HOME PAGE](Default.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
# [![Plattsburgh State University of New
York](http://www.plattsburgh.edu/friesep/classdemo/images/home.gif)](http://www.plattsburgh.edu/)

# SELF IN SOCIETY

[**Robert A. Harsh**](mybio.htm)

[ Robert.Harsh@Plattsburgh.edu](mybio.htm)

103 Algonquin Hall - 518-564-2293

[**PLATTSBURGH STATE UNIVERSITY**](http://www.plattsburgh.edu/)

[ SOCIOLOGY DEPARTMENT](http://www.plattsburgh.edu/acadvp/artsci/sociology/)

**Fall 2000**

![wpe2.jpg \(9365 bytes\)](SiSShark)

**Cruise the Self-in-Society Web Site with TeeShark by Clicking on the Buttons
at the Top, Middle, or Bottom of this Home Page/Introduction ([Click
here](http://seaworld.org/sharks/pageone.html) for more on the TeeShark and
his relatives.)**

**INTRODUCTION**

**     Welcome to the fall semester at Plattsburgh State, to Self in Society,
and to this web site, which I hope will complement and enrich our readings and
class sessions. I've asked the TeeShark - a former criminal justice major who
never really caught on to the whole idea of higher education as "schooling" \-
to help you navigate among the class updates, discussions, course unit guides,
readings, and glossary on the web site. I hope you will visit the site
regularly through the semester and will feel free to share your opinions,
perspectives, concerns, and suggestions for improvements in the course format
and materials, including this web site. For now, _please take the time to read
through this home page_ as an introduction to the class and to our overall
approach to the course topics.**

**      I first taught this course in the fall of 1997 after previously
teaching sections of Introduction to Sociology, Sociology of Religion, and a
junior/senior seminar on religion and social change as an adjunct instructor
for the PSU Sociology Department. Each spring I also teach a topical seminar
for the Honors Program. I've greatly enjoyed the opportunity to develop this
course through several semesters and to now try my hand at web pages as a new
course component.**

**[![wpeD.jpg \(1987 bytes\)](myphoto.jpg)](mybio.htm)  [Click
here](mybio.htm) for a brief summary of my teaching and professional
experience and a brief biography from the Sociology Department web site.**

**CONSTRUCTING THE SELF FROM THE "OUTSIDE IN"**

**    I believe this class was originally titled Social Psychology but then
changed to Self in Society to distinguish it from the Social Psychology course
offered by the Psychology Department. That's a good thing, I think, since it
encourages us to take a more distinctly _sociological_ approach to the subject
grounded in _social construction_ and _symbolic interaction_. **

**    Initially sticking with this _symbolic interactionist_ approach, we'll
begin with readings in George Herbert Mead's _Mind, Self, and Society_ for a
theoretical foundation in the construction of the self through social
interaction and then move to Erving Goffman's _The Presentation of Self in
Everyday Life_ for a more detailed description of symbolic interaction from
the perspective of individual identity and social life as a _performance_ with
shared rules and strategies (Goffman's _dramaturgical_ perspective) . ([Click
here](http://www.biography.com) for brief biographies of [Mead and
Goffman](http://www.biography.com).)**

**     Here at the beginning of the course it's important to note that from
this perspective the self is constructed _from the outside in_ through
interaction with our social and physical environments.**

** **![wpe2.jpg \(18053 bytes\)](Front%201.jpg)

       **This more uniquely sociological perspective differs greatly from _depth-psychology perspectives_ that instead construct the self _from the inside out,_ with the individual "acting out" in behavior and relationships a deeper, inner self-consciousness. (Consider, for example, [Sigmund Freud](http://www.biography.com)'s three-part self in which an individual develops an _ego identity_ [compare personality, self] that mediates between the _id_ [compare animal instinct, drives] and the _super ego_ [compare conscience, morality]. Mead, on the other hand, grounds his work in _behavioral_ psychology and therefore terms himself a _behaviorist_ , viewing the self as instead contructed in the process of our interactions [behavior] with others.)**

**     The contrast between these perspectives is fertile ground for very
interesting discussion. Are we "social animals" whose identities are
determined by our interactions with others and our environment ("socialized"
from the "outside in")? Or are we instead isolated souls with inner
consciousnesses essentially abstracted (looking "inside out") from the world
around us? And while the sociological /interactionist perspective seems to
leave less room for individual freedom in the determination of personal
identity, the depth-psychological perspective seems in turn to envision human
identity as essentially an alienated, conflicted ("neurotic" for Freud)
tension of thought and feeling "acted out" in our behavior. ([Click here or on
the Talk button below](soc265disca1999f/discussit.htm) for a discussion
question and forum on this topic.)**

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](soc265a1999f/New.htm)

[Tabs](soc265a1999f/New.htm)

[CLASS UPDATES](soc265a1999f/New.htm) |

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](soc265disca1999f/discussit.htm)

[Talk](soc265disca1999f/discussit.htm)

[DISCUSSIONS](soc265disca1999f/discussit.htm) |

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](soc265a1999f/Topics.htm)

[Topics](soc265a1999f/Topics.htm)

[GUIDES/READINGS](soc265a1999f/Topics.htm) |

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](soc265a1999f/Glossary.htm)

[Terms](soc265a1999f/Glossary.htm)

[GLOSSARY](soc265a1999f/Glossary.htm) |

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](Default.htm)

[Tank](Default.htm)

[THIS HOME PAGE](Default.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
**THREE DYNAMICS OF INDIVIDUAL SELF-DEVELOPMENT      **

   **Again working from the social interactionist perspective, we can identify
three dynamics - and corresponding course units - in the development of a
personal identity (self) as follows:**

[**Socialization**](socializa.htm)

   **Hopefully you will remember this concept from your SOC 101 class as the
process by which an individual learns how to live and function in a society.
This could be the _primary socialization_ provided by parents and schools as
you grow up or the _developmental socialization_ provided by new experiences
and relationships. In class we'll also discuss orientation to college as a
process of _re-socialization_ in a _total institution_. ([Click here
](socializa.htm)for a listing of the types of socialization in the
Socialization unit guide.)**

**     While socialization is typically viewed as at least in part a process
of _social control_ that teaches individuals to conform to the _norms_ (rules)
of social interaction, in fact it can include considerable deviation from
expected behavior. Thus, the following two dynamics highlight ways in which
our choices of behaviors, relationships, and living environments construct our
unique individualities ([Click here](individ.htm) for a discussion of
[personality](individ.htm) in the Individuation course unit guide.)**

[**Individuation**](individ.htm)

**    This term describes the deliberate, "self-conscious" choices you make
that in part determine who you are and will become. (Mead seems to include
this dynamic as _active intelligence_ in social interactions _._ ) For
instance, instead of coming to Plattsburgh State you could have joined, say,
The Spice Girls, The Backstreet Boys, a religious cult, or the Mormon
Tabernacle Choir, and these choices would probably have "made you a different
person." In fact, choosing to pursue a college education can itself have a
profound effect on your individual identity, since both academic and campus
life include degrees of freedom that, in turn, allow a broad range of
additional learning and behavior choices. (In class we'll discuss two models
of emotional and intellectual development in college and how they might
resonate with your own college experience. Also, [click
here](soc265a1999f/Syllabus.htm) for a description of the reflective paper
assignment in the course syllabus as it relates to these dynamics of self-
development.)**

**     This concept begs other questions about the nature and limits of human
freedom and the psychological dynamics of choice. It also implies that some
choices may be more restricting than others, perhaps on a continuum from
addictions to transcendence.**

[**Transformation**](trans_outlinehtm.htm)

**     Which brings us to the third dynamic of self-development -
_transformation._ You probably won't find this one in most social psychology
texts or even on the ever-expanding New Age or self-improvement shelves at
Barnes and Noble or the Book Nook. This dynamic should not be limited to more
routinized, individuated (see above) "born again" religious conversions or
self-help regimens, but instead refers more broadly to those experiences or
behavior choices that 1) _significantly reshape_ our personal identity and 2)
are _self-consciously discontinuous_ with our previous life experience. The
course readings include several books that discuss such experiences, including
Susanna Kaysen's _Girl, Interrupted_ (mental illness and identity) _,_ Jon
Krakauer's _Into the Wild_ (wilderness and identity) _,_ and Neil Postman's
_Amusing Ourselves to Death_ (television culture and identity) _,_ and I look
forward to our discussions of these readings in this context. **

**THE SELF IN HUMANISTIC AND CULTURAL PERSPECTIVES**

**    The interactionist perspective on the social construction of the self
will also allow us to include discussion of self-development and personality
from a _humanistic_ perspective. For instance, in focusing on individuation
and transformation we can also examine personal characteristics ( "personality
traits") and behaviors - temperament, integrity, congruence, tolerance,
control/letting go, etc. - as these relate to socialization and cultural
differences. Likewise, I will often relate topics, concepts, and issues to
college academic and campus life to add relevance and individual perspective,
and some course units will include fictional or real-life narratives of
"representative lives" as these reflect course concepts and themes. Also, our
discussion of individuation and transformation in the fourth course unit will
include an examination of how cultural change affects individual identities,
using Neil Postman's _Amusing Ourselves to Death_ as a text for this final
course section.**

**The Social Construction of Self and Personality**

**     " _The condition of the human organism in the world is thus
characterized by a built-in instability. Man does not have a given
relationship to the world. He must ongoingly establish a relationship with it.
The same instability mark's man's relationship with his own body.... In a
curious way, man [woman] is 'out of balance' with himself [herself], but must
continuously come to terms with himself by expressing himself in activity.
Human existence is an ongoing 'balancing act' between man and his body, man
and his world. One may put this differently by saying that man is constantly
in the process of 'catching up with himself.' It is in this process that man
produces a world. Only in such a world produced by himself can he locate
himself and realize his life. But the same process that builds his world also
'finishes' his own being. In other words, man not only produces a world, but
he [she] also produces himself [herself]. More precisely, he produces himself
in_ _a world. " _**

**_        _Peter Berger, _The Sacred Canopy: Elements of a Sociological
Theory of Religion_**

![wpe2.jpg \(9365 bytes\)](SiSShark)**AND AWAY WE GO...through what I hope
will be a lively, engaging, and informative semester. _Now that you've read
through this introductory[home page](Default.htm)_ , the foci of the web site
information will shift to the other web pages as follows:**

**     The [TABS button](soc265a1999f/New.htm) will provide course updates,
assignments, and announcements. _Check this page regularly_.**

**     Clicking on the [TALK button](soc265disca1999f/discussit.htm) will
access discussion questions and the discussion forum. Regular participation in
this forum can improve your course grade and will enrich our related class
discussions.**

**     Supplementary course readings and course unit guides are available by
clicking on the [TOPICS button](soc265a1999f/Topics.htm). I've also included a
copy of the course syllabus in the Topics pages as well as my own
text/writings on course topics.**

**     Definitions of course terms and concepts are in the glossary accessed
by clicking on the [TERMS button](soc265a1999f/Glossary.htm).**

**     And, fin-ally, the TeeShark can always lead you back to this home page
by clicking on the [TANK button](Default.htm).**

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](soc265a1999f/New.htm)

[Tabs](soc265a1999f/New.htm)

[CLASS UPDATES](soc265a1999f/New.htm) |

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](soc265disca1999f/discussit.htm)

[Talk](soc265disca1999f/discussit.htm)

[DISCUSSIONS](soc265disca1999f/discussit.htm) |

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](soc265a1999f/Topics.htm)

[Topics](soc265a1999f/Topics.htm)

[GUIDES/READINGS](soc265a1999f/Topics.htm) |

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](soc265a1999f/Glossary.htm)

[Terms](soc265a1999f/Glossary.htm)

[GLOSSARY](soc265a1999f/Glossary.htm) |

[![shark.wmf \(4662 bytes\)](shark.jpg)](Default.htm)

[Tank](Default.htm)

[THIS HOME PAGE](Default.htm)  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
![AN00020A.gif \(1492 bytes\)](AN00020A.gif)

Copyright 2000 Robert Harsh  
Address e-mail to
[Robert.Harsh@Plattsburgh.edu](mailto:Robert.Harsh@Plattsburgh.Edu)

This page last modified July 05, 2002



