**THE UNIVERSITY OF TENNESSEE AT MARTIN **

**Department of History and Political Science **

**Spring, 2001 **

  
  

**_Basic Course Information_ ** This syllabus is available on the departmental
web page[](<www.utm.edu/Academics/College/Department>)

HIS 343: Contemporary Europe, 1945 to Present (3 cr. hrs) Instructor: Dr.
Alice-Catherine Carls

POL 341: Comparative European Government (3 cr. hrs) Office: H 322F. Tel: 587
7472

FRE 370: Topics in French Civilization (3 cr. hrs) Office Hours: MWF 10-10:50
am or by appt

MWF 11:00-11:50 am; H210 e-mail: accarls@utm.edu __[](mailto:accarls@utm.edu)

  
  

**_Basic Course Description_** : Europe and the Cold War Since 1945 is an
upper-level course designed to acquaint you closely with the historical,
political, social, economic, intellectual, artistic, and diplomatic changes
which have taken Europe from rebirth in 1945 to success in the 1990s. We will
examine issues such as the Cold War, the nature of communist regimes in
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, the demise of European empires and the
birth of the European Community, the changing cultural scene, defiance and
dissent, the fall of the Berlin Wall, the war in Yugoslavia, the expansion of
the European Union. In this course, I will challenge you to acquire a thorough
knowledge of current European developments and challenges.

  
  

**_Course Objectives_** : Upon completion of this course, you should be able
to:

1\. Demonstrate an awareness of the wealth of European culture and of its
multi-cultural, multi-ethnic identity and heritage;

2\. Understand the dynamics of the US-European relationship since 1945;

3\. Understand and compare the political, systemic, economic, and social
structures of today's European nations;

4\. Cite and discuss major current European culture, events, personalities,
issues, trends, and challenges;

5\. Demonstrate an understanding of and have formed meaningful conclusions
about global social responsibility;

6\. Demonstrate a knowledge of the physical, human, economic, and social
geography of Europe;

7\. Master essay-writing and basic research and writing skills;

8\. Know major historical interpretations about postwar Europe.

  
  

**_Methods of Instruction_** : Lectures highlight, explain, reinforce, and
interpret. They will not always cover all the text material. The textbooks and
other reading materials will give you the context necessary to understand the
larger picture of postwar Europe. Discussions and oral presentations will be
encouraged.

  
  

**__****_Required Readings_**

Roderick Phillips. _Society, State, and Nation in Twentieth-Century Europe_
(Prentice Hall, 1996). **OR:**

Frank L. Wilson. _European Politics Today. The Democratic Experience_. 3 rd
ed. (Prentice Hall, 1999).

Additional reading and research material:

Selective Bibliography (Department of History and Philosophy's Web Page --
Resources)

Web sites of interest (Department of History and Philosophy's Web Page --
Resources)

  
  

**_Requirements_**

ONE mid-term examination and ONE final worth 100 points each.

ONE research paper worth 100 points. Or FOUR book reviews worth 25 points
each.

ONE current event project worth 100 points.

**Note:** Students going on the "Heart of Europe" trip in May are exempt from
the mid-term and the final, but will have to turn in a diary of their travel
experience at the end of the trip.

  
  

**_Testing_** __

(1) The **mid-term examination** and the **final** will consist of
identification and essay questions. The final examination is not
comprehensive. I will give you a study guide before each examination. Testing
materials include the textbook, class notes, and audio-visual materials
presented during class. **Make-up Examination** : If you have to miss the mid-
term examination, a make-up test will be administered.

(2) The **research paper** needs to be 10 pages long (3000 words) typed, with
a bibliography that will be placed after the endnotes. Endnotes start on p. 11
and follow the Turabian guidelines. Please submit two copies and keep the
original text on disc. Minimum six (6) book sources, of which two (2) must be
primary sources such as published documents. Encyclopedias are not legitimate
sources. Direct quotes must be limited to a strict minimum. The book reviews
must be 3 pages (1000 words) each and follow the Turabian format for
bibliographic citation.

  
  

(3) For the **current events project** , you will write about one of the
current developments indicated below. You may draw information from newspapers
and weekly magazines, electronic news sources and documents, and discussion
lists. You will briefly report on your assignment in class at the beginning of
the semester, indicating the scope of your research and what preliminary
research has yielded. Your finished project should be approximately 10 p.
long. You will be asked to contribute in class as we will discuss these issues
on a regular basis. At the end of the semester, you will present your
conclusions (5 minutes presentation). **NOTE:** In lieu of this assignment,
you may design a European web page or evaluate European history web sites
(check with me if you are interested).

  
  

Since our emphasis is the European Union, I would like for you to choose from
the following topics:

Elections to the European Parliament The Enlargement of the European Union

The European Union's relationship with the US The European Union's African and
Asian Partners

The European Union and the Mediterranean world The European Union and Russia

The European Union and the Silk Road of the 21st C. The Euro and European
Monetary Policy

The European Union's Drug Policy European Community Citizens: Naturalization
policy

Drug policy and Drug Fighting in Europe A New European Cultural and Artistic
Scene?

The Hague War Criminals Trials European Security Systems: Defense, CSCE

The European Community and NATO Population Migrations inside and into the
European Community

The European Union and World Trade Toward a European Education System

European Political Parties The Institutions of the European Community

Europe's Financial Muscle: PHARE, EBRD, OEDC Industrial Reorganization and
Development in Europe

The new European Labor Force The European Unions Labor Laws and Welfare
Policies

The European Union's Environmental Laws Britain: the Reluctant Partner

A Common European Foreign Policy? Employment and Jobs Policies

  
  

**_Course Evaluation:_** Your final grade will be determined by your grades on
the two examinations (100 points each), the current events project (100
points), the research paper (100 points), and attendance and participation
(see the section below). Grading Scale __ A (90-100) B (80-89) C (70-79) D
(60-69) F (59+below)

  
  

__**_Class Attendance and Participation_** : This course has been designed
especially for your participation in it, and class attendance is mandatory. By
the way, it also happens to be the key factor in good grades. I count
tardiness as an absence. Legitimate absences (school activities, severe and
prolonged illness, and tragedy) are excused. Perfect attendance insures you a
two-points bonus on the final average. Your oral presentations will be a part
of your grade. ****

  
  

**_Students with Special Needs_** __: I will authorize you to tape class
lectures if you have a physical disability or a learning impairment. But you
will need to talk to me about it. If you are a foreign student, I encourage
you to use a bilingual dictionary during the examinations. If you belong to
one of those groups, please talk to me about your needs.

  
  

**_Course Ethics_** : Cheating which includes, but is not limited to, having
unauthorized notes during an examination, obtaining information from another
student during a test, or plagiarizing, will result in a zero on that project.
Students may not use writing done in this course toward another assignment
without the instructor's consent.

  
  

**CLASS SCHEDULE **

**DATE TOPIC Phillips Wilson**

January 8 First Day of Class

Jan 10, 12, 17 Current Events -- Surfing the Web - Library Resources

**Jan 19, 22, 24 Oral Reports about Current Events Projects**

Jan 26 Introduction: World War II and the Postwar order Ch. 8 Part I

Jan 29, 31, Feb 2, 5 The First Postwar Decade, 1945-1955 Ch. 9 Chs. 1, 6, 11,
16

Feb 7, 9, 12 The Cold War Ch. 9 Chs. 2, 7, 12, 17

Feb 14, 16, 19 The Creation of Europe in the 1950s Ch. 10 Ch. 21

Feb 21, 23, 26, 28 Prosperity and Change, 1953-1970 Ch. 10 Chs. 3, 8, 13, 18

**Mar 2 MID-TERM EXAM**

Mar 5, 7, 9 Challenge and Decline, 1970-1985 Ch. 11

Mar 19, 21, 23 Dissent and Decline in the Eastern Bloc, 1970-1985 Ch. 11 Chs.
4, 9, 14, 19

Mar 26, 28, 30 The European Community's Ups and Downs **** Ch. 11 **** Ch. 22
****

Apr 2, 4, 6 Communism falls, German reunifies,1985-1991 Ch. 12 Chs. 5, 10, 15,
20

Apr 9, 11, 16, 18 Europe in the Post-Communist Era, 1991-2000 Ch. 12 Ch. 23

**Apr 20** **PAPERS DUE -- CURRENT EVENTS REPORTS DUE**

Apr 20, 23, 25, 27, 30 **Oral Reports -- Towards a new Europe**

  
  

******May 8, 7:45 am FINAL EXAMINATION**

