A Babel of Standards: Students face a confusing array of tests and assessments

By Michael W. Kirst  
Stanford University

* * *

Fall 1999  
[Crosstalk](http://www.highereducation.org/crosstalk/index.html)

EDUCATION STANDARDS have swept across the U.S., engulfing almost every state.
Forty-six states have created K-12 academic content standards in most academic
subjects, and all but Iowa and Nebraska have statewide K-12 student
achievement tests.

At the state level, there is progress toward focusing on, and clarifying: 1)
what students must be able to know and to do in the K-12 grades, and 2) how to
align standards, assessments, textbook selection, and accountability measures
at the K-12 level. A gaping hole in this reform strategy, however, is the lack
of coherence in content and assessment standards between higher education
institutions and systems and K-12 systems.

Unless we close this standards gap and align K-16 policies, students and
secondary schools will continue to receive a confusing array of signals and
will not be able to prepare adequately for higher education. The current scene
is a Babel of standards, rather than a coherent strategy.

The roots of this problem go very deep in the history of American education
standards policy. The U.S. created two separate mass education systems (K-12
and universities and colleges) that rarely collaborated to establish
consistent standards. Often, economically disadvantaged students are
overrepresented in non-honors courses and do not receive college admissions-
related information from either school or non-school sources. Improving the
policy signaling process, and the alignment of K-16 policies, will benefit all
students.

Not all countries have a history of such a disconnect between education
systems. In England, for example, senior secondary education exams and
standards were designed solely to prepare and sort out students for university
entrance. Now that England sends about the same percentage to universities as
the U.S., this system uses two exams that are designed to align K-16
standards.

We rely on the SAT (Scholastic Assessment Test) and ACT (American College
Testing) to provide some uniformity, but neither of these assessments is
aligned with the recent up-surge in K-12 standards. The situation is even more
disjointed concerning higher education placement tests. In the southeast
United States, for example, there are nearly 125 combinations of 75 different
placement tests devised by universities with scant regard to secondary school
standards. The only nationally aligned K-16 standards effort is the Advanced
Placement program--a stalactite that extends from universities, utilizing a
common content syllabus and exam.

The result of this confusion is that K-12 and university entrance and
placement assessments usually utilize different formats, emphasize different
content, and take different amounts of time to complete.

For example, Kentucky's K-12 assessment relies heavily on writing examples,
but the SAT and ACT assess writing through multiple choice.

Massachusetts' state K-12 assessment contains performance items that are
dissimilar to the closed-end multiple choice format of SAT and ACT.
California's newly-augmented STAR test includes math that is considerably more
advanced and difficult than SAT and ACT. Texas' K-12 assessment (TAAS),
however, does not include sufficient algebra or geometry so it is not as
challenging as the SAT.

Some state K-12 assessments permit students to use calculators, but the
university placement exams do not. Texas has a statewide postsecondary
placement test (TASP), but many Texas universities also use their own
placement exams. Interviews with students demonstrate that they have no idea
about placement standards. Many state assessments do not go beyond tenth grade
and do not test every pupil (they use a matrix sample). Consequently, they do
not provide individual scores for use in admissions or placement. Illinois is
implementing an expensive new state test to be given in the 11th and 12th
grades, but there are no plans to use it for college admission and placement.

Universities provide some good reasons why they pay little attention to K-12
standards or assessments. Universities emphasize that they were not involved
in the process of creating or refining K-12 standards. Moreover, state K-12
standards keep changing because of political or technical problems. The K-12
assessments are not evaluated to see how well they predict freshman grades
(although this is not difficult to do). Universities hope that the SAT and ACT
will make adjustments to accommodate these new K-12 standards, and feel more
comfortable with the two assessments they know and can influence.

These disjunctures will be hard to fix unless there is an institutional center
for K-16 reform. Very few states have any policy mechanism that can deal with
K-16 standards alignment. As president of the California State Board of
Education for several years, I never met with my higher education
counterparts.

Higher education coordinating bodies do not include K-16 standards alignment
within their purview. In short, there are few regular opportunities for K-12
educators to discuss standards issues with college and university faculty or
policymakers. The professional lives of K-12 and higher education proceed in
separate orbits.

In some states, the governor's office is the most logical place to put these
fractured standards systems together, but higher education leaders want to
guard their political independence from gubernatorial and legislative
specification of admissions criteria. Because each state has a distinctive
K-12 standards and assessment system, it is not clear what can be done
nationally. President Clinton's advocacy of a national voluntary test has died
after protests about states' rights in education. Perhaps the College Board
could assume a leadership role.

Some states provide examples of a possible resolution. California tests each
11th grader for 400 minutes on math and language arts, and has additional
state tests for science and social studies. Unlike Texas' TAAS test, the
California state assessment is geared to university preparation needs. Indeed,
California 11th grade math is considerably more advanced than the SAT or ACT.

Consequently, California universities could use the end-of-11th grade test for
university admission, and restrict the SAT and ACT to out-of-state applicants.
Also, the California K-12 assessment could be used instead of separate
university placement tests, like the entry-level math and English tests
required of all first-year students in the 22-campus California State
University system.

Other states like North Carolina and Texas have implemented end-of-course
statewide tests for college preparation courses. These tests could be reviewed
by universities, and then incorporated within admission criteria.

Something should be done to assist students, who increasingly are asked to
pass a bewildering array of K-12 and higher education tests and assessments
that might make sense individually, but that do not add up to a coherent
whole.  
  

* * *

[**Home**](http://www.stanford.edu/group/bridgeproject/index.html)

