**Syllabus**  
[ [Home](./) ] [ [Up](african_history.htm) ] [ Syllabus ] [ [Paper
Guidelines](paper_guidlines.htm) ] [ [Exam review](exam_review.htm) ] [
[Midterm Study Guide](midterm_study_guide.htm) ] [ [Country Overview
Guidlines](country_overview_guidlines.htm) ] [ [Timeline](timeline.htm) ]

  
  
---  
| |

**Civilizations of Africa

History 3183

Arkansas State University

Spring 2002

**



Instructor: Erik Gilbert

Phone: 972-3046

Email: egilbert@astate.edu

Office hours: 10-12 Monday and Wednesday

9-11 Tuesday

Office: 116 Wilson

Texts:

> > Kevin Shillington, _History of Africa_ , revised edition

>>

>> Chinua Achebe, _Things Fall Apart_ and _Arrow of God

>>

>> _

>>

>> Olaudah Equiano, _Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano or
Gustavus Vassa the African_

>>

>> Various reserve readings.

>>

>>  

**_

The Course

_**

History 3183 is an introduction the major themes of African History. By the
end of the course you should understand Africa's place in the broad sweep of
world history, know the historical characteristics of the major regions of the
continent, and understand the changing nature of the relationship between
Africa and Europe.

**_

Requirements

_**

Attendance:

You need to attend all classes unless you have a medical excuse.

Readings:

Please do the readings before the class for which they are assigned. Often,
especially in the case of the supplementary books, class meetings will involve
discussions of the readings.

Exams:

There will be a mid-term and a final exam. There will also be a map quiz at
the beginning of the semester.

Papers:

You will write one paper of 6 to 10 pages which compares the Igbo land
portrayed in Equiano's _Interesting Narrative_ to that in Chinua Achebe's
_Things Fall Apart_. I will provide you with more information about the paper
on a separate sheet. You may, if you prefer, write a research paper. If you
wish to pursue this option please let me know early in the semester. You may
not do the research paper without prior approval.

Country Overview: I would like each of you to become the class expert on a
modern African nation. I will hand out a list of nations from which to choose.
After a few trips to the library you will prepare a three to five page
overview of your country. I will provide a separate handout with some
suggestions as to what ought to be included and where you might find the
relevant information. I will block out a day or two of class time for each of
you to give a brief presentation of your findings. I will then have a copy of
each of your reports distributed to every member of the class for them to use
as a source of background information. Your Country Overview should be
completed and ready to hand in by Feb. 6.

Grading:

Map Quiz 10%

Country Overview 15%

Mid-term exam 20%

Final Exam 20%

Paper 35%

I reserve the right to reward improvement and participation.

Academic honesty:

Any written work you turn in must be your own. Any time you use another
person's words or ideas you must give proper credit to that person by citing
their work. If you do not know how to cite another person's work, or are not
sure when it is necessary to do so, please ask me. I assume that each of you
is honest and I will not be looking over your shoulders, but any violation of
the University's policy on academic honesty will be dealt with harshly.

**

_Schedule

_**

Jan. 7-11: Course Introduction: Basic Geography of the African Continent

Readings: Gilbert and Reynolds, "Geography and Environment," on reserve.



Jan. 14-18: Peopling a Continent;

Readings: Shillington, Chapter 1

> > > > > > >  

Map Quiz: Jan. 18

Jan. 23-25: Cows, Crops, and Iron; Video: "Mastering a Continent"

Readings: Shillington, Chapters 2, 3, and 4.



Jan. 28- Feb. 1: Religions of Africa

Readings: Curtin and Bohannen, Chapter 9, on reserve.



Feb. 4-8: Major States of Pre-colonial Africa - The Sahel and the Swahili
Coast

Reading, Gilbert and Renolds, "Islam in North and West Africa," and "East
Africa and the Advent of Islam."



Feb. 6: Country Overviews due in class.



Feb. 11-15: Major States of Pre-colonial Africa - Forest States of West
Africa; Video: "Caravans of Gold"

Readings: Shillington, Chapter 13.



Feb. 18-22: Slavery in Africa

Readings: Equiano, Chapters, 1-7.



Feb. 25- March 1: Africa, the slave trade, and the Atlantic World

Readings: Gilbert and Reynolds, "The Atlantic World."



March 4: Midterm Exam



March 6 - 8: Abolition and the origins of Colonialism

Readings: Achebe, _Things Fall Apart,_ all.



March 11-15: Spring Break.



March 18-22: Colonial Period to 1945

Readings: Shillington, Chapters 23 and 24 and Achebe, _Arrow of_ _God_ ,
Chaps1-10.



March 25-29: Birth of African Nationalism; Video: "Afrique, Je te Plumerai"

Readings: Shillington, Chapter 25and Achebe, _Arrow of God_ , Chaps. 10-19.



April 1-5: The Road to Independence

Readings: Shillington, Chapters 26 and 27.



April 8-12: The Post-Colonial State

Readings: Shillington, Chapters 28 and 29.



April 15-19: Rise and Fall of Apartheid

Readings: Fredrickson, Chapters 4 and 5 (selections), on reserve.



April 22-26: The State of Contemporary Africa



April 29: Paper due in class. Voluntary exam review.

> > > > > > > >  

  
---|---|---

