Outline for Lecture #10, October 9  
McCarthy and the Peril Within  
---  
  
_Chronology_  
  
1948         August :  Bentley revelations; Chambers confession  
  
1949           Sept.:  Soviets detonate a-bomb  
                     Oct.:  Nationalist China falls to Mao Zedong  
  
1950           Jan.9:  Conviction of Alger Hiss for perjury  
                 Jan. 21:  Arrest of Klaus Fuchs, Manhattan Project physicist; confesses  
                               shortly thereafter  
                   Feb.9:  McCarthy's Wheeling, W. Va., speech  
          March-July:  Tydings Committee investigations, with McCarthy as major  
                               force  
                     June:  N. Korea attacks South Korea; US intervenes  
                      July:  Julius Rosenberg arrested for espionage  
                     Oct.:  McCarran Act passed  
  
1951          April.:  Julius and Ethel Rosenberg sentenced to death for
conspiracy  
                              to commit espionage  
  
1953                      Soviets detonate H-Bomb  
                             Rosenbergs executed at Sing Sing  
  
1954   April-June:  Army-McCarthy Hearings  
                    Dec.:  McCarthy censured

* * *

_Outline_  
  
On the Relation of Domestic and Foreign Relations  
  
Proximal Origins of McCarthyism  
    Anatomy of a conspiracy theory  
        Betrayal at Yalta: Acheson & Hiss  
        Spies and the Soviet a-bomb: Fuchs & the Rosenbergs  
        The fall of China: Lattimore & Marshall  
    Enter Joseph McCarthy  
  
Beyond McCarthy: The Machinery of Repression  
    Political persecution  
    Bureaucratic persecution  
    Purge of the civil services  
    Purge of the armed forces   
    Purge of the unions  
    Purge of the professions  
    Purge of the "reducators"  
    State and municipal legislation  
  
IV. Why McCarthyism?  
    Dramatis Personae

* * *

_Dramatis Personae_  
  
JOSEPH MCCARTHY (1908-57), served with Marines in Pacific during World War II;
elected as Republican to U.S. Senate from Wisconsin in 1946, defeating Robert
M. La Follette, Jr., for Republican nomination. Undistinguished career until
he fashioned a movement to ferret out Communists in schools, the State
Department, and the Army. Main forum, until 1953, was Tydings Committee
investigation of subversives in government. In 1953, McCarthy chaired Senate
Committee on Government Operations and launched investigation of Communist
subversion in the Army. Republican support for McCarthy eroded and Sen.
Flanders (R-Vermont) introduced motion to censure McCarthy for behavior that
was  "contemptuous, contumacious, and denunciatory". Motion passed, 67-22.

ELIZABETH BENTLEY. Soviet agent and FBI informer. In mid-1930s became lover to
Jacob Golos ("Colonol Bykov"), Communist Party officer and Soviet secret-
police agent. Joined Communist Party underground. After Golos died in 1943,
Bentley turned informer to FBI. Testified in August, 1948 before HUAC.
Converted to Catholicism in November.  
  
WHITTAKER CHAMBERS (1901-1961), joined Communist Party USA in 1925 and wrote
for its newspaper; from 1935 through 1938 he helped organize Soviet military
intelligence in United States. Secretly decorated as officer in Red Army.  
After Stalin's purges in 1937, Chambers became disillusioned and broke with
Communists. Became senior editor Time, heading its foreign news section in
1944. Became ardent anti-Communist. When subpoened by HUAC Committee in 1948,
he named Alger Hiss as Communist sympathizer. See autobiography, Witness
(1952).  
  
ALGER HISS (1904- ), Harvard law graduate, clerk to Oliver Wendell Holmes. New
Deal official; rose high in State Department, and advised on several high-
level conferences during World War II. In 1947 became Pres. of Carnegie  
Endowment for World Peace. Hiss was indicted for espionage after Chambers'
"pumpkin-patch" reference. First jury failed to reach a verdict; second
convicted Hiss of perjury for denying contact with Chambers. Served four years
in prison.  
  
JULIUS ROSENBERG (1918-1953), worked for Army Signal Corps until 1945, when he
was fired for lying about his membership in Communist Party. Organized machine
shop (brother-in-law, David Greenglass, worked as employee). FBI  
Director Hoover arrested Rosenberg and Greenglass in July, 1950 on charges of
conspiracy to commit espionage. Rosenberg's wife, ETHEL, indicted later.
Greenglass pled guilty, and confessed that Julius had provided diagrams on
implosion and lens mechanism for plutonium bomb in 1945. Rosenbergs executed
in 1953.  
  
OWEN LATTIMORE (1900- ), scholar and journalist who traveled in China during
1920s. From 1938-50, directed the Page School of International Relations at
Johns Hopkins. Accused by McCarthy in 1950 of being a top Soviet agent, but
was cleared of charges. In 1952, indicted on charges of perjury for saying he
had not promoted Communism; charges dismissed in 1955. Lecturer in history at
Johns Hopkins until 1963, and Professor of Chinese studies in England from
1963-70.  
  
For further reading: On McCarthy, David M. Oshinsky, _A Conspiracy So Immense_
, on McCarthyism, David Caute, _The Great Fear_. On the Rosenbergs, Ronald
Radosh and Joyce Milton, _The Rosenberg File_. On legal aspects of
McCarthyism, Stanley Kutler, _The American Inquisition_. On Chambers and Hiss
see Samuel Tanenhaus, _Whitaker Chambers_ * (1998) and Allen Weinstein,
_Perjury: The Hiss-Chambers Case_ (1978).

[back to America Since 1945 syllabus](../3067.html)

