# SPRING 1998

History 102.004 World Civilization II HONORS  MWF 2-2.50  Jenkins 206

History 102.010 World Civilization II  MWF 12-12.50  Jenkins 206

History 102.017 World Civilization II MWF 8-8..50  Holmes 112



* * *

Instructor:  Fred (Bud) Burkhard, Ph.D.

Holmes 326A  Office Hours: MWF 11-1.50 and 1-1.50 and by appointment

Dr. Burkhard may be contacted via e-mail at
**[bud@morgan.edu](mailto:bud@morgan.edu)  
[ bud@qis.net ](mailto:bud@qis.net)

Dr. Burkhard's webpage contains materials on all courses, and links for
research.

[Dr. Burkhard's Homepage](http://jewel.morgan.edu/~bud/index.html)

* * *

Required Course Materials  
Course Requirements  
Important Dates  
Honors Assignment Spring 1998  
Map Quiz Study Guide  

* * *

  
  
  
  

## Required Course Materials:

McKay, Hill and Buckler, _History of World Societies_ , Volume 2. Fourth
edition.

Rand McNally maps for World, Asia, Africa, Latin America, Europe & Russia.

E-MAIL ACCOUNT.



* * *

## Course Requirements:

Two 50 question multiple choice exams

Two typed five page essays based on instructor=s assigned questions.

Final exit examination, MAY 12 from 8-10am, consisting of:

The Departmental examination

The Instructor=s examination

Web-based exercise

Five of the six historical geography map quizzes

Attendance and participation

At least one appointment with the instructor



Standardized multiple choice examinations: two fifty question examinations
will be given during the semester, the first covering chapters 16 through 26,
the second chapters 27 through 36. Each exam will be worth 100 points.

Short essays: five page typed essays on a topic assigned by the instructor.
Students will have one week from the assigning of the topics to the due-date.
The typing instructions will be provided to students via e-mail. Each essay
will be worth 100 points.

Final exit examination: two portions will be administered, a Departmental
examination and the Instructor=s examination. Exact details of these
examinations will be provided. In order to pass the course, each student MUST
pass BOTH halves of the exit examination. Each half of the exit exam will be
worth 100 points of the final course grade.

Map quizzes: six map quizzes will be given during the course of the semester,
each student is responsible for taking five. No make up quizzes will be given.
If you take all six quizzes, you can earn extra credit up to 20 points. Bring
a blank copy of the maps from the study list, 10 place names will be selected
by the instructor, students will correctly identify those places by marking
them on the map (cities will be indicated by a dot A*@, rivers or mountains
clearly identified). Study guides for the map quizzes are attached. Each quiz
will be worth 20 points.

Attendance and participation are required, period. Attendance will be taken,
and excessive absenteeism result in a lowered grade.

Office visit: every student must visit my office at least once during the
semester. Appointment sheets are attached to my office door. E-mail provides a
rapid method of contacting me in emergencies or with simple questions, but can
never replace a face-to-face conversation.

All quizzes and exams during the semester will be held on Mondays.

Failure to follow the Instructor=s directions for any assignment will result
in a lower grade or even an F for the assignment.

The assigned sections of the textbook should be read PRIOR to class lectures
and discussions, and reviewed afterwards.

GRADUATING SENIORS: identify yourself in writing to the instructor during the
first week of classes. The final examination for graduating seniors will be on
May 1, during the class hour.

HISTORY MAJORS: declared or potential History (and Social Science Education)
majors should introduce themselves at the beginning of the semester.

HONORS STUDENTS: all honors students must identify themselves to the
instructor, and should all be enrolled in section 004. Students in this
section will be given at least one extra assignment consistent with the
expectations of the Honors program. Students enrolled in section 004 who are
not in the Honors Program will be asked to transfer to another section.

FRESHMAN STUDIES STUDENTS: should enroll only in the sections reserved for
this program. Please consult the University Spring 1998 course catalogue.



E-MAIL ACCOUNTS: As directed by President Richardson, this course incorporates
educational technology into the course design. ALL students MUST have an
e-mail account.

To obtain an e-mail account, students may 1. Go to Academic Computing on the
third floor of Callaway Hall, or to the School of Engineering if appropriate,
2. Have a private provider for an in-home computer, or 3. Enroll in any of the
free, on-line internet services. For those selecting option three, a variety
of services are available, including Yahoo, Rocketmail and Hotmail. The
addresses for YAHOO is http://www.yahoo.com and for HOTMAIL:
http://www.hotmail.com.

Follow the directions provided at these sites and obtain an account.

NO LATER THAN JANUARY 30, each student will send an e-mail message to the
instructor at bud@qis.net. The subject line will read Ae-mail account now
available@. The student=s message will read simply AI have obtained my e-mail
account. I am enrolled in History 102 section XXX@ ...make sure the CORRECT
section number is indicated! Sign the message with your full name and student
id number.

IF YOU NEED ASSISTANCE, ASK!

The WEB-BASED exercise will explained more fully on January 30. Students will
be sent directions via e-mail, follow those directions, and submit their
reports by e-mail to the instructor.

100 points.

* * *

## Important Dates:

January 26:  first map quiz

February 2:  second map quiz

February 9:  third map quiz

February 16: web based assignment due

February 23:  first short essay due

March 2:  first in-class multiple choice examination

March 9:  submission of mid-term grades

March 11:  last day to withdraw from class

March 30:  fourth map quiz

April 8:  fifth map quiz

April 15:  sixth map quiz

April 22:  second short essay due

April 29:  second in-class multiple choice examination

May 1:  final examination for graduating seniors

May 12:  Administration of final exit examination, 8am until 10 am.



* * *

## Grading scale:



five map quizzes 20 points each 100 points

web based exercise 100 points

2 typed essays 100 points each 200 points

2 in-class exams 100 points each 200 points

final exit exam 200 points



total for semester: 800 points



to calculate mid-term grade, assignments totaling 360 points will be
considered; add up all the  points earned on the assignments to that point,
and divide by 3.6.



to calculate final grade, add up all the points earned on assignments, and
divide by 8.



Consult the grading scale in the standardized Departmental course syllabus to
determine grade.



Students in section 004 will have an additional assignment worth 200 points.
Therefore add 100 points to the calculation of the midterm grade, and 200 to
the calculation of the final grade.



In accordance with University policy, mid-term and final grades cannot be
posted. If students wish to receive their grades, they will send an e-mail
message to the instructor, or make an appointment and visit the instructor in
his office for a consultation.

* * *

## History 102.004 Honors Assignment Spring 1998



As part of the course work for this section, students will have a two segment
assignment to complete.

The task will be first to develop a research topic, which can be anything
relevant to the course. Since we are studying World History from 15500 until
the present, clearly almost any topic will be acceptable! In consultation with
the Instructor, students will identifying a topic of interest, and prepare a
2-3 page research abstract. The abstract will have a set format: the
historical problem that needs to be explored will be clearly identified, and
an explanation of why this problem is important will provided. Based on the
students= general knowledge (ie, from the lectures, the text, other courses or
readings...) The broad themes of the topic to be investigated will be set out.
The approach students should take in this exercise is to think AIF I were
writing a full-blown research paper, what steps do I need to take to prepare
the best possible result.@ The abstract should hint at the major lines of
argument, and end with some general sense of what the students expects to
learn. This first portion will also include a bibliography of at least 10
scholarly articles relevant to the topic. Note, the requirement is for
scholarly articles, not monographs, not general essays written for a popular-
audience. To prepare this section, students will receive two levels of
training. Arrangements will be made with the reference librarians of Soper
Library for a guided tour through the reference holdings there. The Instructor
will supplement this training with a training session in the Holmes computer
lab, emphasizing resources available on-line, especially search engines and
searchable data bases available through other educational institutions. The
abstract and the bibliography will be due no later than 6 March 1998.

The second portion of the assignment will be to select, in consultation with
the instructor, one article from the bibliography, and to prepare a 5-7 page
critical review of that article. The review will again begin with an
introduction concerning the general topic and its importance. The review must
contain the following points: a general but clear and thorough outline of the
article=s major themes and arguments; a more focused examination of the
strengths and weaknesses of the article; an evaluation of the primary and
secondary materials used by the author(s); if appropriate a critique by the
student which offers differing arguments and analyses from that of the author;
and a conclusion which concisely evaluations the usefulness and the
contributions of the article.

This assignment will be due on May 1.

Each portion of the assignment is worth 100 points. Both segments must be
typed according to the typing instructions of the instructor.

* * *

## Map Quiz Study Guide

**

_Map Quiz 1:_** The World around 1600: Coimbra Lisbon Azores Goa Antwerp
Venice Seville Rome Florence Aleppo Hormuz Macao Malacca Moluccas Nanking
Nagasaki Beijing Potosi Mozambique Huancavelica Vera Cruz Acapulco Manila
Zacatecas Canarys **_Map Quiz 2:_ ** Central and South America: Tenochtitlan
Chan Chan Chich en Itza Tikal Amazon R. Yucatan Chavin Quito Cuzco Macchu
Picchu Lake Titicaca Tihaunaco La Paz Bogata Medellin Caracas Rios Uruguay and
Parana Brasillia Orinoco R. Sao Paulo Buenos Aires

**

_Map Quiz 3:_** Europe: Rhine R. Rhone R. Elbe R. Oder R. Zagreb Vistula R
Paris Dublin Belfast Berlin Prague Warsaw Bonn Bruxelles Sofia Gdansk Le Havre
Trieste Barcelona Lisbon Belgrad Madrid Amsterdam Istanbul Kiev Marseille
Vilnius St. Petersburg Riga Moscow Danube R. Buda  & Pest Sarajevo

**

_Map Quiz 4** :_ Africa: Dakar Capetown Soweto Cairo Algiers Monrovia
Brazaville Johannesburg Pretoria Luanda Maputo Dar-Es-Salaam Sao Tome Djibouti
Addis Ababa Nairobi Kinshasa Lagos Marrakech Tunis Oran Abidjan Lake Volta
Lake Chad Lake Victoria Khartum Tripoli Aswan Mogadishu Mombasa Antananarivo
Jenne Timbuktu The Nile (ALL OF IT!) Tangier Rabat

**

_Map Quiz 5:_** Asia: Beijing Seoul Yokohama Tokyo Sendai Pyongyang Tientsin
New Delhi Bombay Karachi Madras Bangkok Ho Chi Minh City Hanoi Manila Kuala
Lampur Calcutta Singapore Hong Kong Shanghai Taipei Canton Lhasa Kathmandu
Islamabad Dacca Phenom Phenh Mekong R. Kabul Colombo Djakarta Altay Mts.

**

_Map Quiz 6:_** The former "USSR": Tallin Dniester R. Dnieper R. Volga R. Kiev
Vilnius Riga Minsk Ob' R. Baku Tbilisi Donets R. Don R. Moscow Vladivostok
Amur R. St. Petersburg  Kabul Ural Mts.

Archangel Ulan Bator Sakhalin Irkutsk Prague Berlin Warsaw Bucharest Kazan
Beringovsky Odessa



