# The Virtual Classroom

## Syllabus

A major goal of this [Virtual Classroom](vc.html) is to utilize the Internet
and World Wide Web in actively exploring the social and environmental impacts
of industrial societies on the Circumpolar North. Equally important is the
opportunity to explore the range of human responses to these developments as
they have been shaped by diverse histories, political economies, and cultural
perspectives. However, as discussed in the Introduction, gaining this
knowledge requires that considerable attention be given to the workings of the
larger world system and the way its history is intertwined with that of the
Arctic and Subarctic's original inhabitants.

The classroom itself is composed of a set of case studies dealing with
specific issues faced by diverse groups at different times and places. The
settings range from isolated northern villages and towns to urban executive
suites of multinational corporations. In analyzing these [case
studies,](spicer.html) viewers are encouraged to envision themselves as
seminar participants addressing problems in different regions of the North.
Such an approach has a number of benefits not the least of which is that it
enables the viewer to learn how given events in one region are intimately
linked to comparable forces present in other settings. In each instance, the
specific problem chosen for investigation is linked to at least one of the
three themes selected by the staff of Arctic Circle for particular attention:
Natural Resources; History and Culture; Social Equity and Environmental
Justice. In many instances, several are involved.

Other, more specific issues to be addressed include the following:

> **Contrasting Views of the Environment** :This includes a comparative
analysis of differing premises, ideologies, and approaches to nature, natural
resource development, and environmental sustainability - including how they
have been influenced by various factors, historical and contemporary.

>

> **Cultural Values and the tangibility/intangibility of 'nature:'** While
some environmental costs of development can be quantified, (e.g., pollution
levels, new jobs, etc.) other costs relating to cultural or aesthetic values
are largely intangible. How do governments, corporations, indigenous peoples,
environmentalists, and others evaluate the social costs of given development
projects? Can a monetary cost be placed on cultural subsistence practices of
an indigenous population \-- or the aesthetic envisionment of a wilderness
area? In planning development endeavors, can subjective environmental values
be  "objectified" through the political process?

>

> **Property Relations** : What has been the impact of diferent forms of
property ownership [e.g., common, private, communal, state] on human-
environmental relations at critical historical junctures? Under what
circumstances, if any, are certain forms most likely to assist in promoting
policies of sustainable natural resource development for the people of the
region as well as the larger society? Under what circumstances does common
ownership of land and resources promote cooperation and collective involvement
that can enhance the sustainability of the resources in question \- as opposed
to creating a "tragedy of the commons" situation in which overall
responsibility for common or communally shared property is only minimally
taken? What forms of resistance can be expected from local indigenous
populations when their common or communal land is privatized or placed under
state control?

>

> **The Equity Issue** : The uneven distribution of costs and benefits
stemming from natural resource development regularly raise questions of social
and intergenerational equity. Thus, in any large scale development project, it
is important to determine not only how are resource mangement decisions made,
but who has the power to make them; and, finally, what is the overall impact
of these decisions on the peoples and environments in the given location?

>

> **Sustainable Development** : What are the differing premises underlying the
various approaches to 'sustainable development?' In what ways do these
differing premises influence the dual focus of the concept on (a) the limits
which nature imposes on human beings; and (b), the potential for human social
development that is contained within these limits?

In reviewing these case studies, the viewer will note that each one begins
with an **Introduction.** This is followed by a statement of **The Problem**
which raises key issues associated with the case. At the conclusion of this
discussion are suggested **References for Further Study** \- including those
drawn from other locations on the World Wide Web. In several instances (of
which the first case study is one example), a more in depth analysis of the
topic in question can also be found in one of the three directories of
ArcticCircle: Natural Resources; History and Culture; Social Equity and
Environmental Justice. The last section of the case study contains **The
Assignment.**

In tackling the problems associated with these case studies, participants will
have the satisfaction of knowing that that they are exploring some of the most
important issues affecting our time - including how to reconceptualize
relationships between human societies and the natural environment in which we
live. Hopefully, it will be an intellectual adventure worthy of your effort.

Finally, it should be mentioned that our virtual classroom is presently being
implemented on an experimental basis at several colleges and universities in
the United States, Canada, and northern Europe. We at Arctic Circle want to
emphasize that in such contexts, our virtual classroom should always be seen
as a supplement to existing educational endeavors, not a replacement for them.
Computer-based education in which students isolated from one another derive
most of their knowledge from a monitor, is always a diminutive form of
learning.

[Introduction](introvc.html)

* * *

[![ArcticCircle Home Page](/icons/accject.gif)](/)

