# ERG 255 -- PoliSci 289

# La Porte and Rochlin

_COURSE CALENDAR_ (revised February 15, 1998)

  
  

**Part 1: The Nature of the Problem**

1/19 _Public Holiday (Martin Luther King, Jr.), No Class_. Please read ahead.

1/26 Issues and Setting _(short assignment, due on 2/2)_

2/2 The Nature of the Problem

2/9 Technology and Social Experience: what is the social representation and
meaning of "technology?"

2/16 When do "Technologies" make a (social) difference? _(initial term paper
proposals due)_

2/23. Alternate Approaches _(initial _Term paper proposal_ due this day at the
latest)_

**Part 2: What Are We Looking At?**

3/2. _Discussion and Presentation of Paper Proposals_

3/9 What is the Phenomenon, and How Do We Conceptualize It?

3/16 System-Building, Scale and Scope

3/23 _SPRING BREAK_

**Part 3: What Is There to Learn?**

3/30 Organizational Complexity and Altered Social Realities

4/6 The Decline of Trust and the Dynamics of Controversy

4/13 Governments, Policy, and Politics: Energy and the Environment

**NOTE: ( _Paper Outline_ & Bibliography draft due ...)**

**Part 4: How Can We Judge? Sampling from Case Studies**

4/20 Case Studies (from the readings)

4/27 Case Studies (from the readings)

5/4 WRAP UP: Reflections and Critiques

5/11 TERM PAPERS DUE (in-class summary presentations)

FINAL EXAM: To be arranged/announced...

* * *

**REQUIRED TEXTS**

Albert H. Teich, ed., _Technology and the Future, 7 th ed._ (New York: St.
Martin's Press, 1997)

Diane Vaughan, _The Challenger Launch Decision: Risky Technology, Culture and
Deviance at NASA._  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997)

Wiebe Bijker, Thomas P. Hughes, and Trevor E. Pinch, eds., _The Social
Construction of Technological Systems_ (Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 1989)

* * *

Syllabus and Course Readings \-- As of 2/16/98

1/26/98

"Technology's Dark Side", _Chronicle of Higher Education_ , (June 30, 1993),
B1.

Leo Marx, "Does Improved Technology Mean Progress?" in Teich, _Technology and
the Future_ , 7th ed. **_(TF)_**

Langdon Winner, _Autonomous Technology_ , (Cambridge MA: MIT Press, l977),
l-l2

"Daedalus of New Scientist," "Pure Technology," _Technology Review_ , (June,
l970), 38-45

Florman, _Existential Pleasures of Engineering_ , any and/or all of it.

2/2/98 ............. The Nature of the Problem: technical-organizational-
political-policy relationships

_(Brief 2-4 page essay: What is the Puzzle of Large-Scale Technology in a
Democratic Society? Due 2/9/98)_

John McDermott, "Technology: The Opiate of the Intellectuals," in Teich, _TF._

Thomas P. Hughes, "The Technological Torrent," in Teich, _TF_

J.K. Feibleman, "Pure Science, Applied Science, Technology, Engineering: An
Attempt at Definition," _Technology and Culture_ , 2 (l96l), 35-7l.

R.P. Mulhauf, "The Scientist and the Improver' of Technology," _Technology and
Culture_ , l (l959), 38-47.

Rudy Volti, Ch. 1, "Nature of Technology," _Society and Technological Change_
, (New York: St. Martin's 1988) pp. 5-15.

2/9/98 ........... Technology and Social Experience: what is the social
representation and meaning of "technology"

A. Pacey. "Technology: Practice and Culture" _The Culture of Technology_.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1983., ch. 1, 1-12.

N.J. Vig, "Technology, Philosophy and the State," in Kraft and Vig, eds.,
_Technology and Politics_ , (1988), ch. 1. 8-32, 315-321.

E.W. Constant, "The Social Locus of Technological Practice: Community,
Systems, or Organization?" in W.E. Bijker, T.P. Hughes, and T. Pinch, eds.,
_The Social Construction of Technological Systems_ , (1987), 223-242.

R. Westrum, "Recent Theoretical Approaches," _Technologies and Society: The
Shaping of People and Things. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, (1991) ch. 4, 68-83._

S. Florman, "Technology and the Tragic View,.." in Teich, **_TF_.**

2/16/98 ... When do Technologies Make a Social Difference? **Initial Paper
Proposal due today: last possible day is 2/23**

T. La Porte, (Working paper) -- Joerges paper slipped in here? (see below)...

B. Jones, "From Pre-Industrial to a Post-Service Society," in B. Jones,
_Sleepers, Wake!_ Technology and the Future of Work, (l982) l-8.

L. White, _Medieval Technology and Social Change_ , (1979) ch. l, l-38 (skim
3-l3).

Ronald Hilton, "Technical Determinism: The Stirrup and the Plough," _Past and
Present_ 24 (1963), 90-100.

H. Hayter, "Barbed Wire - A Prairie Invention," _Journal of_ _Agricultural
History_ , (l939), l89-207.

W.D. Rassmussen, "Advances in American Agriculture: The Mechanical Tomato
Harvester.", _Technology and Culture_ , (Winter, l968), l43-l5l.

Wm. Friedland and Barton, "Tomato Technology", _Society_ , (Oct./Nov., l976)

F.P. Davidson, "Macro - Engineering: Its Social Implications", _Technology in
Society_ , (Fall, l979), l7l-l77.

J. Street, "Political Change and Technical Change," _Politics and Technology_.
New York: Guilford Press, (1992), 14-45.

Paul Ceruzzi, "An Unforeseen Revolution: Computers and Expectations,
1935-1985. **From TF,** 117-131.

\----- first set of readings through here ------

* * *

2/23 **** Alternate views of the setting: narratives, frames, and
constructions. **Last day to turn in preliminary paper proposal.**

Hajer, Maarten A. "Discourse Coalitions and the Institutionalization of
Practice: The Case of Acid Rain in Great Britain." In _The Argumentative Turn
in Policy Analysis and Planning_ , edited by Frank Fischer and John Forester,
43-76 Durham NC: Duke University Press, 1993.

Balfour, Danny L. and William Mesaros. 1994. "Connecting the Local Narratives:
Public Administration as a Hermeneutic Science." _Public Administration
Review_ 54, no. 6 (Nov-Dec): 559-564

Hughes, Thomas P., "The Technological Torrent," from Teich, **TF** , 42-54
(plus Teich's preface to this piece).

Winner, Langdon, "Upon Opening the Black Box and Finding it Empty: Social
Constructivism and the Philosophy of Technology," _Science Technology & Human
Values, _18 (No.3), Summer 1993, 362-378.

From Bjiker, Wiebe E., Thomas P. Hughes, and Trevor J. Pinch, eds., _The
Social Construction of Technical Systems_ ( **SCTS)** (Cambridge: MIT Press,
1993):

Pinch and Bjiker, "The Social Construction of Facts and Artifacts....", pp.
17-50

Bjiker, "The Social Construction of Bakelite...:", 159-190.

Cowan, Ruth Schwarz, "The Consumption Junction ....", 261-280.

3/2 _**Discussion of preliminary paper proposals, and catch-up time..**.._

3/9 What is the Phenomenon, and How Do We Conceptualize It?

Marx, Leo, "The Idea of `Technology' and Postmodern Pessimism," from _Does
Technology Drive History_ (237-258).

From Teich, **TF** ...

.....Sclove, Richard,  "Technological Politics as if Democracy Really
Mattered," 223-245.

..... Mazur, Alan, "Controlling Technology," 180-205.

......Wajcman, Judy, "Feminist Perspectives on Technology," 254-269.

Bozeman, Barry, "Why All Organizations Are Public: A Multi-Dimensional View of
Publicness," ch. 6. _All Organizations Are Public_ , (1987), 83-106.

Rochlin, Gene I., _Trapped in the Net: The Unanticipated Consequences of
Computerization_ (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1997), Chapter 4,
"Taylorism Redux?"

Jonas, Hans, "Technology and Responsibility: the New Role for Ethics" _Social_
_Research_ , (Spring, l973), 3l-54.

3/16 ... What is the Phenomenon continued ... System Building

Joerges, Bernward, "Large Technical Systems: Concepts and Issues," in R.Mayntz
and T.P. Hughes, eds., _The Development of Large Technical Systems_ , (1988),
9-36. (reprise)

La Porte, Todd R. and Paula Consolini, "Working In Practice but Not in Theory:
Theoretical Challenges of High Reliability Organizations," _Journal of Public
Administration Research and Theory_ , 1 (Winter, 1991), 23-49.

Braun, Ingo and Bernward Joerges, "How to Recombine Large Technical Systems,"
in Jane Summerton, ed., _Changing Large Technical Systems_ (Boulder: Westview,
1994), 25-52.

Rochlin, Gene I., Todd R. La Porte and Karelene H. Roberts,"The Self-
Designing High Reliability Organization: Aircraft Carrier Flight Operations At
Sea." Naval War College Review, 90 (Autumn, 1987), 76-90.

Rochlin, Gene I., "Broken Plowshare: System Failure and the Nuclear Power
Industry." In Jane Summerton, ed., _Changing Large Technical Systems_
(Boulder, CO.: Westview, 1994), 231-264.

Orr, David, "U.S. Energy Policy and the Political Economy of Participation,"
_Journal of Politics_ , 41 (1979), 1028-1056.

3/23 **Spring Break **....  an excellent time to read Diane Vaughan's book on
_Challenger_

\--------- second set of readings only through here -------------

* * *

3/30 Organizational Complexity and Altered Social Realities

Vaughan, Diane, _The Challenger Launch Decision_ (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago
Press, 1996). Best to have read through the whole thing, but the key chapters
to read if you are pressed are Chapters 1, 3, 6, and 9.

Rochlin, _Trapped in the Net_ , Chapters 2 (Autogomous Technology) and 3
(Networks of Connectivity).

4/6 Practical Paradigms for Public Policy or Perplexing Political
Perspectives? (some stuff to be copied)

Vaughan, Chapter Ten ("Lessons Learned")

MacKenzie, Donald, "Missile Accuracy ...", in SCTS, pp. 195-222.

MacKenzie, Donald and G. Spinardi. "Tacit Knowledge, Weapons Design, and the
Uninvention of Nuclear Weapons." American Journal of Sociology 101, no. 1
(1995): 44-99.

Bosso, Christopher, _Pesticides and Politics: The Life Cycle of a Public
Issue_ (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1992). Chapter 2:  "The
Pesticides Paradigm."

_(MORE TO COME)_

