History H105 U. S. History I  
James Haw  
Spring 2001

Office: CM 203; phone 481-6694; email haw@ipfw.edu  
Office hours: MWF 9-9:50, 11-11:50, and by appointment

Course requirements and grades:  
1\. Four examinations, each counting 20% of the course grade. Examinations are
40% multiple choice and 60% essay questions. A good essay should respond
clearly and directly to the question; should display sound reasoning or
interpretation; should support the major points with evidence or explanation;
should be consistent with the facts available to you; and should answer the
question as thoroughly as time permits.

A general makeup exam for students who have missed any of the first three
examinations will be given on April 18\. The makeup will be cumulative,
covering the material for all three examinations. Students who have taken all
of the first three examinations have the option of taking the makeup in an
attempt to improve their grades. Individual makeups will not ordinarily be
given.

2\. One paper based on one of the chapters listed on this syllabus from
Wheeler and Becker, _Discovering the American Past_ , vol. 1, counts 20% of
the course grade.

Plagiarism or academic dishonesty will result in a grade of zero for the
assignment in question, and in such cases the course grade will be computed on
a strict numerical average. University regulations require a course grade of F
for unauthorized withdrawal. If a student stays in the course through the
final examination but fails to complete one or more course requirements,
grades of zero will be given for the uncompleted requirements and the course
grade will be computed on a strict numerical average. __

_Tape recorders_ : History Department policy does not allow the use of tape
recorders in the classroom. The instructor will make exceptions on request for
students with disabilities.

_Student outcomes:_

Upon successful completion of this course, students will be better able to:

1\. Have a coherent general understanding of major developments in U. S.
history to 1877.  
2\. Grasp the relationship between events.  
3\. Synthesize information into a coherent overview.  
4\. Develop a historical consciousness, including awareness of the different
perspectives and ways of life of people in the past.  
5\. Use skills such as reading for content and thesis, effective listening and
note-taking, and clear writing, which are important for future learning and
career success.  
6\. Evaluate primary source material and draw appropriate interpretive
conclusions.  
7\. Develop a basic appreciation of historical method.

Assessment of the first five outcomes is primarily through examinations; of
the last two, primarily through the paper.

_Required reading_ :

Robert Divine et al, _America Past and Present_ , 5th ed., vol. 1  
William Wheeler and Susan Becker, _Discovering the American Past_ , 4th ed,
v.1

_Course outline and assignments_ :

Jan. 8 Introduction

10 Expansion of Europe (Divine, pp. 3-12, 14-29)

12 Cortez and Montezuma (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 1)

17 Virginia, 1607-1630 (Divine, 33-43, 72-75)

19 Massachusetts, 1630-1640 (Divine, 43-52)

22 Puritan Revolution and Restoration (Divine, 52-62, 82-84)

24 Massachusetts, 1640-1691, and the Glorious Revolution (Divine, 65-72,
84-90)

26 Slavery (Divine, 12-14, 75-81)

29 Demographics of Massachusetts (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 3)

31 Colonial Politics, 1690-1760 (Divine, 97-103, 114-119)

Feb. 2 Enlightenment and Great Awakening (Divine, 107-114)

5 FIRST EXAMINATION

7 Toward Revolution (Divine, 119-127, 131-148)

9 Independence (Divine, 148-162)

12 Boston Massacre (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 4)

14 Fruits of the Revolution (Divine, 165-178)

16 Confederation on trial (Divine, 178-191)

19 Ratification and the Hamilton program (Divine, 191-196, 203-211)

21 Jefferson and political parties (Divine, 216-220)

23 The 1794 Philadelphia election (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 5)

26 Foreign affairs and party conflict (Divine, 211-216, 220-227)

28 SECOND EXAMINATION

Mar. 2 Origins of the War of 1812 (Divine, 231-236, 249-258)

12 Continental expansion, Monroe Doctrine (Divine, 240-244, 261-265, 284-286)

14 Republican ascendancy, 1800-1824 (Divine, 236-240, 244-249, 278-281,
282-284)

16 Economic change, 1800-1850 (Divine, 269-278, 365-376)

19 Working women of Lowell (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 7)

21 Political realignment (Divine, 281-282, 286-287, 291-301)

23 Jacksonian democracy (Divine, 301-316)

26 American slavery (Divine, ch. 13)

28 Slavery from the inside (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 8)

30 Romantic reform (Divine, 321-335, 338-344)

Apr. 2 THIRD EXAMINATION

4 The abolitionists (Divine, 334-338)

6 Manifest destiny, Mexican War (Divine, 349-365)

9 Toward Civil War (Divine, 411-422)

11 Toward Civil War (Divine, 422-434)

13 Secession (Divine, 434-437, 441-448)

16 Civil War (Divine, 448-471)

18 MAKEUP EXAMINATION

20 Plans for Reconstruction (Divine, 481-488)

23 Results of reconstruction (Divine, 488-510)

25, 27 Catch-up or reading days

FOURTH EXAMINATION at time listed in class schedule  

* * *

  
HIST H105 Paper Requirements Spring 2001  
James Haw

You are to write a paper on the major issue raised in _any one_ of the
chapters that are listed below from Wheeler and Becker, _Discovering the
American Past_ , vol. 1. The paper should be five to eight pages long, typed
double-spaced with one-inch margins. Papers on chapters 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8
are due in class on the day that that chapter is discussed in class. _Late
papers on these chapters will not be accepted after a chapter has been
discussed in class_. (If you have written a paper on one of these chapters and
then are unable to attend class on the day it is discussed, have someone bring
it in for you on the due date, or mail it to me so that it will be postmarked
on the due date.) Papers on chapters 9 and 11 are due in class on April 23.
Late papers on these chapters will be penalized one letter grade.

Due dates and topics are listed below.

Chapter Date due Topic

1 Jan. 12 How did Cortez and other Europeans view the American Indians, and
vice versa? What consequences might these perceptions have had for European-
Indian relations?

3 Jan. 29 How and why did life change for residents of Andover and Concord
between about 1650 and 1760? How would people in these towns about 1760 have
felt about their lives and future prospects?

4 Feb. 12 Reconstruct what really happened at the Boston Massacre. Was Captain
Preston guilty?

5 Feb. 23 Why did John Swanwick defeat Thomas Fitzsimons in the election? Who
supported each candidate, and why? (The questions to consider on pp. 109-112
are a good guide to issues you should discuss.)

7 Mar. 19 How did Francis Lowell try to make it acceptable for young women to
come to Lowell and work in his factory? What did public opinion think about
Lowell and its workers? How did the working women of Lowell react to their
situation and to criticisms of them? Did the Lowell women accept or reject the
assumptions of the "cult of true womanhood?"

8 Mar. 28 What did the slaves think about slavery and their lives?  
(The questions to consider on page 198 are a good guide to issues you should
discuss; feel free to add others if you wish.)

9 Apr. 23 What were the major arguments for (Clay, Webster) and against
(Calhoun, Seward) the compromise of 1850? How was each speaker's rhetoric and
appeal calculated to persuade people to support his position?

11 Apr. 23 Why did President Andrew Johnson decide not to insist that the
former Confederate states give black men the right to vote after the Civil
War? (Note: there may be more than one reason. If so, explain all of them.
Which one(s) seem to be the most important reasons, and why?)  

* * *

  
Helpful Hints for your Paper

First, acquaint yourself with the background and context of the issue by
reading thoughtfully the sections of the chapter entitled "The Problem" and
"The Background." Your textbook may also be helpful here.

Look carefully at the sections entitled "The Method" and "Questions to
Consider" to get a better idea of how to analyze the evidence. You will find
that there are several questions that you need to ask of the evidence in order
to write a good analysis of the main topic question. Perhaps you will think of
questions and issues of your own, in addition to those raised in the book.

Read "The Evidence" section of the chapter carefully, and draw your
conclusions. Fit together your answers to all of the various questions raised
about the evidence to form a general conclusion about the main topic question.
_"The Evidence" is your main source for this paper_.

Your paper should include several things:

First, a brief introduction that states the issue your paper will deal with
and puts the issue in its historical context. This section should be short.

Second, an analysis in which you set forth your conclusions and show how you
reached those conclusions and why you think they are correct. This is the
major part of the paper, and should occupy most of the paper's length.
_Important: don't just assert your conclusions--give evidence to prove they
are correct_. Evidence should come from "The Evidence" in the chapter, and may
take the form of quotations or references. Be sure to explain what the
evidence proves. Quotations or references should be followed by the page
number and item number (if any) of the passage in the book to which you are
referring; formal footnotes will not be required for this paper, since all of
your references will presumably be taken from one book. Example: A
Philadelphia newspaper editorialized that aristocratic government supporters
wanted violence. (p. 99, no. 3)

All direct quotations, even very short ones, must be placed in quotation marks
and the source must be given. Failure to do that is plagiarism, and earns a
grade of zero for the paper. If you put a passage in your own words instead of
quoting it, put it entirely in your own words. Changing one word or two in a
sentence is an unacceptably close paraphrase, and is also considered
plagiarism. References to evidence that do not include a quotation also need a
note indicating the source.

Third, the paper should include a final summary that pulls together your
conclusions.

Differing interpretations of the evidence are to be expected. Papers will be
graded on the soundness and insightfulness of the conclusions, the use of the
evidence to support them, organization of the paper and writing style,
including grammar and spelling.

If you need help or want to discuss your paper, please see the instructor.  
    


