FAQ [
![](http://fastcounter.linkexchange.com/fastcounter?513864+1027735)](http://member.linkexchange.com/cgi-
bin/fc/fastcounter-login?513864)  
[FastCounter by LinkExchange](http://www.fastcounter.com/fc-join)  
  
![](index.gif)  
FAQ: Frequently Asked Questions  
  
Below you will find a list of Frequently Asked Questions. These have come from
both History majors and prospective majors.  
  
[**If you have a question which is not on this list, please e-mail us and we
will answer it for you and consider adding it to this
list.**](mailto:BurgessW@etsu-tn.edu)  
Search any of our pages, when you are on that page, by key-word?  
Hit CONTROL + F, and the search dialogue box will come up.**  
  
![](line_tiedye.gif)  
![](grbull.gif) **Questions about an Undergraduate History major**
![](grbull.gif)  
  
![](grbull.gif) **Questions from Transfer Students** ![](grbull.gif)  
  
![](grbull.gif) **Questions about "Intensive Courses"** ![](grbull.gif)  
  
![](grbull.gif) **Questions about Secondary Education Certification**
![](grbull.gif)  
  
![](grbull.gif) **Questions about the Graduate program in History**
![](grbull.gif)  
  
![](line_tiedye.gif)  
  
**

### Questions regarding a History major

**

![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Is History really the best major I can get?**  
  
    **A:** Do computers have the Buddha-nature? Hum....well, it is something to think about seriously. In the meantime.....   
  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: What can I do with a History major?**  
  
    **A:** Please take a look at [**FAQ: What Can I Do With a Degree in History?**](histfaq.htm) and [**Declaring a History Major?**](declare.htm) We have tried to answer this question at some length on both of these webpages  
  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: If I am a History major, do I still need a minor to
graduate?**  
  
    **A:** Yes, with the exception of a few special field concentrations, everyone including history majors must have minor, in order to graduate.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I want to make History my major and my minor. Can I do
that?**  
  
    **A:** No. Your minor must be in a different field.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: How many hours do I need to graduate?**  
  
    **A:** You need a minimum of 128 hours. This must include your Undergraduate Core, a major, a minor, and whatever number of electives necessary to make 128 hours. If you are seeking certification in Secondary Education, you will have more hours than 128, and it will take you more than four years to graduate. For information, contact Dr. Page (R-S 209) or Dr. Burgess (R-S 107) and the Department of Curriculum and Instruction, in Warf-Pickel Hall.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I had to take some Developmental Studies courses. Do
they count toward my graduation?**  
  
    **A:** No, they do not. No Developmental Studies course counts toward your 128 hours minimum necessary for graduation.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: What is the difference between a BS and a BA? And is one
better than the other?**  
  
    **A:** Neither is better than the other. The difference is a matter of emphasis. Please consult you catalogue for the exact course requirements, but in general, for the BS you must have additional Science (eight hours above core requirements) and some additional math courses. For the BA, you need the equivalent of two years of college-level foreign language.   
  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I took several years of a foreign language in High
School. Do I have to start out in First Year Spanish (German, French, etc.)?**  
  
    **A:** Not necessarily. Under certain circumstances you may get retrocredit for your High School work. Please go see [Dr. Burgess](mailto:Burgessw@etsu.edu), who will explain how to go about getting retrocredit.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: If I am doing a BA, not a BS, then how much Science and
Math do I need to take?**  
  
    **A:** You need to satisfy the General Education Core requirements. They can be found in your catalogue, but in they require a minimum of eight hours in Science and 3-4 hours of Math. Options are listed in the catalogue.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: But I want to do Secondary Education. Which is required
for certification?**  
  
    **A:** Either degree will be adequate for Secondary Education Certification. Science and math requirements depend upon which degree you are seeking. Please consult with the Department of History's advisor for Secondary Education Certification, Dr. Mel Page, (or if unavailable, Dr. Doug Burgess) or the Department of Curriculum and Instruction.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: How do I know which catalogue I am under? Is it this
year's? The year I became a History major? The year I entered ETSU?**  
  
    **A:** In most circumstances, your catalogue is the one the one you entered under, unless you specifically wish to declare a later _(not earlier)_ catalogue. If you are unsure, check with the Graduation Office or with Dr. Burgess (R-S 107).   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Do I have to see my advisor every semester before I
register?**  
  
    **A:** All student must see their advisor, if they have less than 60 hours. However, the History department wishes to see ALL advisees at least once each semester, particularly prior to registration. If you have less than 60 hours, you will be unable to register until your advisor clears your advisement hold. If you are seeking certification in Secondary Education, you need to see your advisor in Curriculum and Instruction **AND** your advisor in the History Department.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I don't have an advisor in the History department. How
do I get one?**  
  
    **A:** Please come see Dr. Burgess, in 107 Rogers-Stout (439-6691) or Dr. Page, in 209 Rogers-Stout (439-6802).   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I want to change my major to History. How do I do
that?**  
  
    **A:** Please see Dr. Burgess or Dr. Page. They will be glad to advise you and to fill out the necessary paperwork.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: How many hours are necessary for a History major?**  
  
    **A:** Thirty-three (33) hours is the minimum requirement. This includes three required courses and a series of upper-level electives. Please consult [**Requirements for a History Major or Minor**](http://www.etsu.edu/cas/history/majmin.htm) for further details.   
  
     If you are seeking or intending to seek certification to teach at the Secondary Level, your choice of upper-level electives is restricted by State Certification Requirements. Please see Dr. Page (R-S 209 ) or Dr. Burgess R-S 107) and the Department of Curriculum and Instruction in Warf-Pickel Hall.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I want to go to Medical/Law School. Will a History major
be looked favorably upon by admissions committees?**  
  
    **A:** Yes, in point of fact, many individuals admitted to Law and Medical programs were History majors at the undergraduate level. Both professions value a broad-based, liberal education. History majors score competitively on the LSAT and MCAT with other majors.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I want to work for a museum (or library, or archive, or
historical preservation project, or state/national park). Is a History major
required for this?**  
  
    **A:** No, not absolutely. **BUT** most of these professions require a graduate degree of some kind, and History is the natural undergraduate degree to acquire before proceeding to a post-graduate program in these specialized fields.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Must I take HIST 3910, Introduction to Historical
Methods before I take an upper-level classes.**  
  
    **A:** Yes, that it the intent of the curriculum for the department. Each level (1000 through 4000) requires longer and more complex research and writing assignments. You need, therefore, to take HIST 3410 after you have completed HIST 1010 and HIST 1020, and while you are completing HIST 2010 and 2020. According to current departmental policy, issuance of cuts will go first to sophomores, then juniors, then seniors. HIST 3410 is meant to be the FIRST upper-level class you take, NOT the last.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I don't see either HIST 2010 or HIST 2020 listed as part
of the History major. Do they count?**  
  
    **A:** No, they do not. They are 2000-level courses and part of the Undergraduate Core. They are not designated by specific number in the department curriculum, nor are they either 3000 or 4000-level courses.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: But HIST 1010 or 1020 can count as part of the Core,
right?**  
  
    **A:** This is correct. Either will count toward the satisfying of Core requirements, but it will not reduce the total number of hours you need to graduate.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I am thinking about an African/African-American Studies
(Appalachian Studies) minor. Can I count classes in that minor, like African-
American History since 1877, toward a History major as well?**  
  
    **A:** No, you may not count a class toward both an major and a minor.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Can I take a class twice and then count it once toward
the major and once toward a minor?**  
  
    **A:** No. If you repeat a class, the second grade automatically replaces the first grade and the first class is no longer figured toward your Earned Hours for graduation or your GPA.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I'm a transfer student. I transferred in some classes,
both in History and in other things that sound awfully similar to required
ETSU courses. How do I find out if that is the case?**  
  
    **A:** The Admissions and Registrar's Offices have fairly clear and complete regarding what transfers and what does not, and if things transfer, how they transfer. However, if you do have a class which you feel has been transferred incorrectly, go to see the advisor in the appropriate department. Bring with you as much information as you have, including catalogue descriptions of the course(s), syllabi, notes, test, and so froth. It the appropriate considers that there is a large degree of correspondence, he or she may write a letter to the Registrar's office, requesting that you be given the appropriate credit. At the point, the matter is in the discretion of the Registrar, who may concur or decline. Consult University policy in this, as in all such matters.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I need to drop a class. How do I do that?**  
  
    **A:** Provided it is not past the Drop date (the last day to drop a class), you should pick up the appropriate form from the Registrar's Office, complete it and turn it in. If you are not sure about the last day to drop, consult your Schedule of Classes or [ **Important Dates**](http://www.etsu.edu/reg/syllabus.htm). Consult University policy in this, as in all such matters.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Okay, it's past the last day to drop, but I still need
to get out of this class. Do I have any options?**  
  
    **A:** You can withdraw from the class(es) or you can withdraw completely from the University. You need to go to the Registrar's Office for the appropriate forms. You may receive either a "W" (Withdraw) or a "WF" (Withdraw Failing). Consult University policy in this, as in all such matters.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: What about Late Drops or Late Adds? Are there no such
things?**  
  
    **A:** Yes, there are. Each case is considered individually. You need to see the appropriate professor and upon his or her recommendation that you be allowed to add or drop, you will need signatures on the appropriate forms, usually including the Departmental Chair, the Dean of Arts and Sciences (or your college) and the Registrar. Simply filling out a form does not guarantee either a Late Add or a Late Drop. Individuals may either concur or decline to concur with your request, depending on the relevant circumstances. Consult University policy in this, as in all such matters.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I have financial aid for this semester. I am going to
drop some classes. How will this affect my financial aid?**  
  
    **A:** First, it would be best for you to consult the Financial Aid Office to make a determination on your particular circumstances. Having said that, ETSU's students are paid financial aid awards based on ALL attempted hours from the first day of classes. ALL attempted hours are counted for financial aid satisfactory academic progress purposes, even if the attempted hours do not show on the transcript.   
  

Please note that for continued financial aid eligibility, there are both
annual requirements for completion of hours AND a maximum number of total
attempted hours allowed per student. The ETSU Satisfactory Academic Progress
Standards are listed on page 15 of the 1999-2000 undergraduate catalog and on
page16 of the 2000-2001 undergraduate catalog. This is also listed on page 27
of the 1999-2000 graduate catalog.  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Some departments have "attendance policies"...you miss
X-number of classes and you fail. Does History have an attendance policy for
its classes?**  
  
    **A:** No. The Department has not department-wide policy regarding attendance. Some professors do take roll and have an incentive system for regular attendance. Check your syllabus and make an effort to comply, in good faith, with the expectations. If you are a History major, if you consider the matter responsibly, it makes no sense for you to consistently miss the class which are in the very field in which you are majoring...and although you may pass on technicalities....you may not receive positive recommendations for employment, graduate study, or professional schools.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I need/want a particular class. It isn't offered in the
upcoming semester. Aren't you teaching it anymore?**  
  
    **A:** A moments thought should make it clear that we cannot and do not teach every course listed in the catalogue every semester. We go through a rotation, which depending on the number of courses any given professor teaches, takes from one to two years. There are a few courses which are not currently being taught, since the professor who taught them has retired and not been replaced by someone in the same field. Under Dr. Day's chairmanship, the Department has tried to make general plan for two to three years in the future. If you have questions regarding this, contact Dr. Burgess (R-S 107), who will try to acquaint you with the rotation for each professor.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I'm doing a Secondary Ed. program. What about the
requirements for that program? What happens if they are not taught?**  
  
    **A:** First, you need to wait for the rotation process to take place. Then, on the off chance that a course you need is actually not taught, we can make some (limited) substitutions. You need to see either Dr. Page (R-S 209 ), or if he is not available, Dr. Burgess (R-S 107), to complete the appropriate substitution form.   
  
In practice, the Department of Curriculum and Instruction will not accept the
substitution until you pass the course in question.  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I see you have several scholarships listed in the ETSU
catalogue, like the Brown Scholarship and the Rogers Award. How do I apply for
these?**  
  
    **A:** You can't. These small monetary awards given to graduating seniors in their final semester. They are meant to publicly acknowledge their work, rather than provide monetary support.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I am a graduating Senior and I just got a letter saying
that I have to take something called a Core Exit Exam? What is this and do I
really have to take it.**  
  
    **A:** Yes, you really have to take it. It is an exam which is given to all graduating senior and is a determining factor in the funding of ETSU by the State of Tennessee.   
  
  
![](rtparrow.gif)  
  
  
![](line_tiedye.gif)  
  
**

### Questions from Transfer Students

**  
  

  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: How do I know which courses will transfer?**  
  
    **A:** In practice, if you went to an accredited school, most classes will transfer. This does not mean, however, that _all_ classes will have ETSU equivalents. Some class which you took at your former school may not be taught at ETSU. These classes, if they are "close" to ETSU classes may be considered as "equivalent". If they are not, they will still usually count as raw hours toward your 128 hours needed for graduation. If you believe that a course which you took at your former school is equivalent to an ETSU course, please see your advisor.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: But I took courses at "State College" which I want to
use to cover ETSU Core course, or courses in my major! It doesn't seem fair
that ETSU won't take them as equivalent courses!**  
  
    **A:** We understand your feelings, but it is not always possible to count absolutely all of your courses as equivalents. Sometimes this is the cost of transferring from one institution to another. However, we will be make every attempt to work with you in a positive fashion. Please, come to see [ Dr. Burgess](mailto:Burgessw@etsu.edu), who will try to help you resolve these matters.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I took a class on the Civil War (Viet Nam, Latin
America, etc.) at my former school. I don't seem to be getting credit for it
at ETSU. It is listed as a 2xxx elective. Why is this? And what can I do about
it?**  
  
    **A:** In practice, not much. ETSU is disinclined to give you senior-level credit for a sophomore-level course. If you attended a two-year institution, your World/Western civilization courses should be considered equivalent to our World Civilization courses. 2xxx-level survey courses in American History should be considered equivalent to our U.S. survey courses. Any other courses are unlikely to be considered the equivalent of upper-level (3000-4000) courses. They will count as hours toward your total necessary for graduation, but will not count toward you major.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Hey! What about these Intensive Courses? Do I have to
take them all?**  
  
    **A:** Consult your catalogue, but in general, unless you transfer in more than 60 hours, you must meet the requirements for all of the Intensive Courses. You need to check the pages that contain information about the Undergraduate Core for any special conditions which might exempt you from the Intensive courses.   
  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I went to a religiously affiliated/supported school. I
notice that some of my required religion courses seem to have been listed as
Philosophy or Humanities courses? Why is this?**  
  
    **A:** ETSU is a public institution, publicly supported, making every attempt to adhere to the First Amendment of the Constitution, both in the spirit and letter of the law. We do not have a Department of Religion, or Christian religion, or whatever kind of religion. Actual classes on religion are split between the departments of History, Philosophy, and Sociology, each of which examines religion from the perspective of each discipline. Your classes transfer accordingly.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I have a couple of years worth of transfer courses? How
long will it take me to graduate? Can I still graduate in four years of total
college work?**  
  
    **A:** This varies from student to student. Depending on what you took at your previous institution(s), you may be "on-track"...or you may not. This if something which you need to consult your advisor about. He/she will take a look at your record and then compare it against the degree requirements for ETSU. You should be aware that some courses may not have ETSU equivalents, or that your previous institution may have had a somewhat different idea about what constituted an undergraduate core. If that is the case, you will still have to meet ETSU Undergraduate Core Requirements. However, if you came from an accredited school, in general practice, other courses will count toward your hours necessary for graduation. There may be exceptions, however. So you need to consult your advisor.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I took a class on the Civil War (Viet Nam, Latin
America, Women's History, etc.) at my last school. It is listed as a 2xxx
Sophomore elective. You have a course on this. Why am I not getting credit and
what can I do about it?**  
  
    **A:** Not much. Was your previous school a two-year institution? If so, ETSU is disinclined to give you senior-level credit for a sophmore-level course. Courses such as this will count as part of the raw hours necessary for your graduation, but will not be accepted by the University or the Department of History as part of your major.   
  
If your previous institution was a four-year school, perhaps your
institution's catalogue description is sufficiently different from that of
ETSU that the Registrar has deemed it to be a different course.  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I went to school at East Stump State College straight
out of high school, and didn't do well. I worked for a number of years,
started a family, and decided to come back to school at ETSU. My grades at
ETSU have been really good, but my GPA is really low. They seem to be
calculating my old grades in with my new grades. Is this what is happening?**  
  
    **A:** Yes, ETSU calculates an overall GPA, including all of your previous coursework. There are some exceptions to this. Admissions can tell you about these exceptions.   
  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Since the History Major requires 33 hours, and I
transferred in 27 hours from my previous school, I should be able to finish my
major with three classes, right?**  
  
    **A:** No. Your degree will be granted by ETSU, not your previous institution. Transfer students must take a designated number of classes here at ETSU, no matter how many hours you took at your previous school. You must take at least two (2) 3000-level courses and three (3) 4000-level courses.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: But I can take anything I want to satisfy that
requirement?**  
  
    **A:** No, you still have to meet the distribution requirements of European, World, and U.S. History, between your transferred courses and your courses at ETSU.   
  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q:**  
  
    **A:**   
  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q:**  
  
    **A:**   
  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q:**  
  
    **A:**   
  
  
![](rtparrow.gif)  
  
![](line_tiedye.gif) **

### Questions about the Intensive Courses

**  

![](bluebox.gif) **Q: What are these "Intensive Courses", and do I have to
take them?**  
  
    **A:** Yes, you do have to take them. They are required for your degree. They are intended to reinforce certain academic skills: writing, oral communications, and some basic acquaintance with technology. All students are required to complete a certain number of these courses, both in and out of their major, prior to completion of their degree. You are no exception. Please consult your particular catalogue for the exact number of courses you must complete to be eligible for graduation.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: But I am a transfer student!!! Do I have to take them?**  
  
    **A:** Yes, you are no exception. However, depending on the number of hours you transfer on entering ETSU, you may have to take a smaller number than an entering freshman. If you have 60 or more hours from your previous institution, in practice the number is cut roughly in half. Please consult your particular catalogue for the exact number of courses you must complete to be eligible for graduation.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: How many of these courses to I have to take?**  
  
    **A:** In practice, if you are an entering freshman, you must take four (4) Writing Intensive courses, two (2) Oral Intensive courses, and (2) Technology courses.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: How many of these do I have to take in my major?**  
  
    **A:** In practice, a minimum of half in each category must be taken in your major. You may take more than half, but please consult with your departmental advisor prior to registering.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I need some of these courses, but I don't know which
course are designated as Intensive Courses. How can I find out?**  
  
    **A:** Well, in each semester's schedule book, the any intensive courses offered are marked according to the type. Or you can consult the [**Registrar's webpage** ](http://www.etsu.edu)for a list of the courses which have been designated as Intensive Courses.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Look, I took HIST 3xxx/4xxx about three years ago. It
doesn't seem to be an Intensive Course then, but it is now. Does that count
for me as an Intensive course?**  
  
    **A:** No, it does not. The [Registrar's webpage](http://www.etsu.edu) indicates which term any particular course was designated as an Intensive Course. If you took it prior to that designation, it does not count, and you will have to take a course which is currently designated as such.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Why does the History department have only a few courses
designated "Oral Intensive"?**  
  
    **A:** You must realize, if you consider it clearly, that each discipline within the College of Arts and Sciences has different methods and types of information which it is trying to convey to the student (ex.: History and Physics). In that case, each discipline may lend itself to more of one kind of Intensive courses than the other. In addition, enrollment in may courses offered by the History department is very high. Large numbers make it difficult to meet the minimum requirements for a course to be designated "Oral Intensive."    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I notice that the requirements for various Writing
Intensive courses, for instance, differ from class to class. Why is this? I
would have expected that requirements would be standardized.**  
  
    **A:** The simple answer is that college is different from high school. The longer answer is that the whole idea behind the Intensive courses is to provide you, as a student, with an integrated experience, based on a variety of types of work within each intensive "category". One class may emphasize a writing experience which is brief and concise, and may involve extemporaneous writing. Another may emphasize the idea of more lengthy and considered work, such as formal research papers or lengthy critiques of other work. You may have a job, someday. To quote a bit of traditional computer hacker wisdom, "If you are going to play in the REAL WORLD, then you've gotta learn REAL WORLD MOVES."    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: But I don't understand WHY I have to spend so much time
writing and being graded on my writing? I thought that History was learning
dates and names?**  
  
    **A:** This is a common mistake that people make, and given the experience that many people have in public school, this is not an unexpected conclusion. Although there are may excellent history teachers in the public schools, and we are indeed fortunate to have some of the best in our local area, there are also many everywhere that seem to be less than good.  
  
From the beginning of the doing of history in antiquity, history was about
communicating! Communicating clearly and bravely. Remember that _"historia"_
is a "critical inquiry in to causes and results". How do you expect to do that
if you cannot communicate yourself? Part of our moral obligation, if you will
allow the indulgence, is to teach you to communicate!!! Otherwise, the study
of history is of no value. Look at your teachers. Can they communicate
effectively with you? That is a part of what we undertook to teach you when
each of us made the decision years ago to this thing which we do, which we
call history. If we do not teach you to think clearly, if we do not teach you
to communicate that which you think clearly, then we have failed, and for most
of us, that means we have failed in our moral responsibilities. If you cannot
learn, or unwilling to learn, how to communicate clearly and bravely, then you
have failed in the same moral obligation before you have even gotten started.
Think on these things. You shouldn't undertake this just because you can't
think of anything better to do.  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: If I took a course at another institution, and transfer
it to ETSU, and it is considered to be an Intensive Course here, does that
count toward my total.**  
  
    **A:** No, it does not. It was not an Intensive Course at East Stump Community College, or wherever you took it. The only course which count as "Intensive Courses" are courses taught at ETSU and designates as such.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Look, I don't really want to take some of these courses!
Can I get an exemption?**  
  
    **A:** In a word,....not bloody likely. ETSU is committed to seeing to it that all students who graduate have had these courses, because we believe that they will better prepare you for the rest of your life.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q:**  
  
    **A:**   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q:**  
  
    **A:**   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q:**  
  
    **A:**   
  
  
![](rtparrow.gif)  
  
![](line_tiedye.gif) **

### Questions regarding Secondary Education Certification

**  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: My high school history teacher was important in my
education. I would like to teach history in high school. Who do I have to
see?**  
  
    **A:** You need to contact [ **Dr. Mel Page**](mailto:pagem@3etsu.edu) (R-S 208) or [ **Dr. Doug Burgess**](mailto:burgessw@etsu.edu) (R-S 107), in the Department of History. They will be happy to go over the requirements for graduation and certification. You should also contact **Ms. Michele Banner** , the professional advisor in the College of Education, who will acquiant you with the requirements for admission to the program which will certify you in Secondary Education.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: My high school history teacher was the football coach.
Do I need to be a coach in order to teach history?**  
  
    **A:** The short answer is **NO** , you do not need to be a coach in order to teach history in high school. However, it is the practice of some school board in East Tennessee to have the coaches teach history or to have the history teachers coach.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I want to be a coach. Do I have to be a history
teacher?**  
  
    **A:** Please, look at the previous question and answer. If you wish to coach, IMHO you need to go to speak to the appropriate academic advisors in the department of Physical Education. They can acquaint you with all the possiblities which are open you in regard to coaching.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I took several history classes. I find that they do not
match the list of courses required for certification. Can I get substitutions
for all of those course so that I don't have to take the courses the state
expects?**  
  
    **A:** Some limited substitutions are possible, before the fact. This means that you must contact either [ **Dr. Mel Page**](mailto:pagem@3etsu.edu) (R-S 209) or [ **Dr. Doug Burgess**](mailto:burgessw@etsu.edu) (R-S 107), **PRIOR** to taking the class, in order to see if the class you are thinking of taking is one which will substitute for any on the certification list. Some courses will not substitute. Please, do not wait until you are ready to graduate and have taken a full load of course before you come and ask about substitutions, you may find that some or all of the courses which you have take do not apply.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I would like to add History as a second field for
certification. How do I do this? Is an "ADD ON" the way to go?**  
  
    **A:** If you are an undergraduate and anticipate certification in two fields (history and "whatever"), then you need to meet the state certification requirements. If you have not been made aware of what these are, you may contact [ **Dr. Mel Page**](mailto:pagem@3etsu.edu) (R-S 209) or [ **Dr. Doug Burgess**](mailto:burgessw@etsu.edu) (R-S 107), or the professional advisor in the College of Education. The so-called "ADD ON" which you mention is designed for individuals who have already received certification, who have graduated with a B.A. or an M.A.T., who are currently teaching or seeking a teaching position, and who wish certification in an additonal field. **It is not designed for certification for those who have not yet received a B.A.** If you are an undergraduate, seeking certification, you must meet the expectations of the State of Tennessee in each area in which you hope to obtain certification. Please, see the advisor in the appropriate departments for that information.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I notice, when I look at the list of courses required
for certification, that I don't get much choice. I also notice that there are
a lot of courses that I really don't want to take. I want to take course on
war, or at least I only want to take courses in U.S. history. What's the deal
here?**  
  
    **A:** Both the Department of History (with it requirements for a major) and the State of Tennessee (with its requirements for certification) hold the opinion that "history" is more than wars and dates. In the opinion of both groups, you need a broad and diverse background, both to understand that the past is complex and complicated, and that it is not just made up of king and battles. Nothing says that you cannot take additional courses in particular subjects which you personally find interesting; such things can only make you a better teacher. However, you must meet state expectations in regard to particular courses.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Does HIST 4417 count as part of my major?**  
  
    **A:** No, it is a part of your "professional core", required by certification standards. We teach it as a courtesy, for the Department of Curriculum and Instruction.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I have the "check-sheet" for certification in secondary
education. Can I go by this for graduation purposes?**  
  
    **A:** No, you cannot. It is **only** a list of courses required for certification. If you only use that list to plan your courses, you will not graduate. It does not contain may courses necessary for graduation. Please, contact either [ **Dr. Mel Page**](mailto:pagem@3etsu.edu) (R-S 209) or [ **Dr. Doug Burgess**](mailto:burgessw@etsu.edu) (R-S 107), for additional information.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Look, I am getting close to graduation, I think I might
want to teach high school. Will this delay my graduation and for how long?**  
  
    **A:** The core of classes needed for certification is a minimum of 44 hours, not including any history courses necessary for certification. If you have not take any of these course, at the **very minimum** it will add three terms to your stay at ETSU. If you do not wish to do this, you have two options open to you: (1) you may graduate and then return as a Special student, and receive post-B.A. certification, or (2) you may seek an M.A.T. (Masters of Arts in Teaching). Either option will require a minimum of between 44 and 51 hours, depending on what you have taken as an undergraduate. If you are unsure how to proceed, please contact either [ **Dr. Mel Page**](mailto:pagem@3etsu.edu) (R-S 209) or [ **Dr. Doug Burgess**](mailto:burgessw@etsu.edu) (R-S 107), for additional information.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q:**  
![](rtparrow.gif)  
![](line_tiedye.gif) **

### Questions regarding the graduate program

**  

![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I am considering the idea of getting a Masters degree in
History? Who do I talk to?**  
  
    **A:** Please see [ **Dr. Dale Schmitt** (R-S) or [**Dr. Doug Burgess**](mailto:BurgessW@etsu.edu) (R-S 107). For information and admission forms, contact [**The School of Graduate Studies**]().   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: In general, what are your requirements for admission?**  
  
    **A:** Please, consult [Requirements for a Master's Degree in History.](http://gradpr.htm) In general, we like to see approximately 27 to 30 hours of upper-level history courses, with at least a 3.0 in those classes. Applicants with a lower GPA or lower average in their upper-level history courses may either accepted on a conditional basis or rejected. Conditions vary from student to student.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I've looked at the requirements for an M.A. in History,
and I get the feeling that the Masters programs differs in some substantial
ways from the undergraduate degree. Is that a correct idea?**  
  
    **A:** Yes, to some degree you are correct. The Masters degree, as a graduate degree, is meant to prepare you (or begin to prepare you) for a professional role as an historian or a professional in some related field. As such, you not only take classes, but are expected to accept training in writing, method, the practical matters of teaching and dealing with students, and various other areas important to the profession of the practice of History. In that sense, it is more than simply completing a set number of hours. It would be helpful to consider this example: graduate school is perhaps one of the last remnants of the old, medieval Master-Apprentice system of learning. When you enter a graduate program , you are formally beginning your apprenticeship.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: You mentioned a "committee". What is that and am I
assigned one automatically on entering the program?**  
  
    **A:** The "committee" is your thesis-supervision committee. No, you are not assigned one automatically. Following the completion of twelve (12) hours at the graduate level, you are required to file Candidacy papers with the Graduate School. Those papers include the names of the members of your thesis committee and a working thesis title.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: So how do I get a committee?**  
  
    **A:** First, you must decide on a subject for your thesis. Then you should approach the appropriate professor (whose field it is) and ask that he or she consider directing your thesis. If you have problems deciding on who is appropriate, please speak to Dr. Schmitt (R-S ) or Dr. Burgess (R-S 107).  
  
     Having decided on a topic and arranged for a thesis director, you need to approach at least two additional individuals to serve as Second and Third readers. In rare circumstances, the Department will agree to committee member from outside the department (such as a member of the Philosophy department), who for purposes of your thesis will be considered an "historian". If you are unsure whom to approach, your thesis director can offer suggestions.  
  
    Committee chairs and committee members serve at their discretion. Some may decline because your subject is to distant from their field or because they may feel unable to offer you adequate guidance in regard to your proposed thesis subject. In the final analysis, forming a committee is your responsibility. Failure to complete a committee is not a disaster, but you may have to consider changing or modifying your proposed subject if, in the opinion of the members of the department whom you approach, it is not feasible because of lack of resources, complexity of the problem given your current level of training, or they feel personally unable to offer adequate guidance.  
  
     You cannot complete your degree without forming a committee and completing a thesis. The collaborative process of researching and writing a thesis is fundamental to your training. Simply completing classes does not guarantee either a committee or graduation.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I'd like to go to graduate school, but the thought of a
thesis is, frankly, intimidating. Do I have other options?**  
  
    **A:** Yes, you may choose what is called the "Designated Paper Option". However, you need to do this, and set up your committee upon entry into the program. You may find the details in the Graduate Catalogue. If you are interested in this option, you need to consult with Dr. Schmitt (R-S) prior to, or at the time of your entry into the program.   
  
The Department is discussing a "Non-thesis Option", as well, which would
require a higher number of class hours.  This has not been put into place.  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I notice that a formal defense of the thesis is
required. Does the department require any written examinations, as well?**  
  
    **A:** This is an option, which is up to the members of your thesis committee.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I'm in/thinking of beginning the Masters program. I took
a 4xx7 class as an undergraduate at ETSU. Can I take the same class over again
in the graduate program?**  
  
    **A:** No, you may not repeat a class that ends in "7", at the graduate level, if you have taken that class as an undergraduate.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I am in the graduate program. How many classes with
numbers ending in "7" can I take?**  
  
    **A:** Three. If you exceed that number, then you must take at least two classes ending in "0", to maintain the so-called "30% Rule" for distribution of graduate courses.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Okay, so how many Independent Studies can I take at the
graduate level?**  
  
    **A:** The Graduate Committee customarily limits you to one, except under special circumstances. You need to consult with Dr. Schmitt, if you wish to take more than one Independent Study, to see if your circumstances qualify as an exception to the general rule.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Does my thesis count as part of my 30 hours or is it
separate and apart from that requirement?**  
  
    **A:** Yes, in practice your thesis counts as three of your 30 hours. However, you should be aware that your committee may ask you to consider taking additional hours, if they believe that you are not sufficiently prepared to complete your degree, particularly if you intend to pursue a Ph.D.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I am going to have some difficulty in paying for
graduate school. Are there any sorts of Graduate assistantships available, and
if so, how do I apply for them?**  
  
    **A:** The Department of History has a number of Teaching Assistantships and Tuition Waiver Scholarships. More information can be found at the following link: [**Requirements for the Masters Degree**](gradpr.htm)  
  
If you wish to apply for either a teaching assistantship or a tuition waiver
scholarship, then you need to pick up an application from the School of
Graduate Studies. In practice, if you wish to receive an assistantship at the
beginning of the academic year (Fall term), then you will need to have
completed and submitted your application by the preceding March. Normally, the
Graduate Committee meets in April to consider the distribution of
assistantships and tuition waivers. Should you miss that time-frame, go ahead
and turn in your application, as circumstances, sometimes favorable, will
allow us to award more positions in the summer.  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: How do they work?**  
  
    **A:** Teaching Assistantships cover your tuition (except for some minor fees), including out-of-state tuition, and provide you with a small stipend. Tuition waiver scholarships cover your tuition (except for some minor fees), but provide no stipend. In both cases, you will work for the Department. A teaching assistant works about 20 hours per week, a tuition scholarship person works about 8 hours a week.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: What sort of work would I do?**  
  
    **A:** You would, generally, be working with a professor as a classroom assistant or as a research assistant.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I want to teach. Can I do that?**  
  
    **A:** You may occasionally lecture, at the discretion of your supervising professor. Once you have completed a minimum of 18 hours at the graduate level, you are technically eligible to be assigned a class of your own. However, this is at the discretion of both the Chair of the Department and the Graduate Committee, who will consult on all such assignments. If you are in the verge of completing the requisite number of hours, and would like to be considered for a teaching assignment, please make this know to either Dr. Day, Dr. Schmitt, or Dr. Burgess, so that your name may be considered when assignments are made. **The completion of 18 hours in no way guarantees or entitles you to a class of your own, as departmental needs and responsibilities take precedent.**   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Is there a Graduate Student Association at ETSU?**  
  
    **A:** Yes, there is. You can find out more information through the School of Graduate Studies.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Are graduate assistants evaluated?**  
  
    **A:** Graduate assistants are overseen by the Graduate Committee. Those receiving awards, are evaluated though the normal process which evaluates classes. Those assigned their own classes are evaluated yearly by the Department's Peer Review Committee.  
  
Graduate students' rights are protected by the same Grievance process as other
employees of the institution.  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: What happens if I receive an assignment and then am
unable to work with the professor to whom I am assigned?**  
  
    **A:** You need to contact Dr. Burgess (R-S 107), who normally makes the assignments, or Dr. Schmitt (R-S), Chairman of the Graduate Committee. They will try to evaluate the problem and suggest courses of action.   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: What sorts of things can I reasonably be expected to do
for the professor to whom I am assigned?**  
  
    **A:** The University has very specific guidelines regarding the use of graduate assistants. You will be given a copy of these guidelines during your orientation and class assignments. Should you loose it, get a new copy from Dr. Burgess (R-S 107). Should you have any questions about whether your assignments fall within the parameters set by the University, see Dr. Schmitt, Dr. Day (Chair), or Dr. Burgess.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I am thinking about transferring to another institution
to complete my MA. Will all of my classes transfer?**  
  
    **A:** Probably not. In practice, most institutions will only accept six (6) hours for transfer. You need to contact whatever institution you are considering transferring to, and ask them about transfer credit.   
  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I want to do military history (or political history).
Why do I have to take Historiography?**  
  
    **A:** No matter where you pursue post-graduate degrees, you will be required to take a course on the philosophy of History. Merely knowing the road speed of a Tiger Tank or the rate of fire of a trap-door Springfield will not make you an historian. All it will make you is someone with a vague knowledge of useless trivia. That is not what we do. You might win some money on Jeopardy, but you will not be an historian. Therefore, you are required to take a course in the nature and theory of history. What is it? How does it work? Why is it studied? What is the purpose of that study? And so forth...   
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: Okay, but why do I have to take Research Methods course?
Why does it matter if I learn the "correct" way to do footnotes or
bibliography?**  
  
  
    **A:** Because if History is important enough to do at all, then it is important enough to do right. Otherwise, nothing separates you from a novelist or a movie writer. If someone wants to find your sources or examine books on the subject, then it is part and parcel of your professional (and indeed, moral) obligation to provide them with the means to do so. In order to learn how to do that correctly, you are expected to take a course on method. Besides, you may use your evidence wrong or come to the wrong conclusions. Scholarly work, done correctly and appropriately documented, and subjected to the critique of the scholarly community, is part of the process of doing history. Doing history is not for the slack. You must learn to do it correctly, otherwise you are essentially an amateur.    
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q: I am only able to take a course or two at a time, and
not every term. It may take me more than six years to finish my degree. How
will this affect me?**  
  
    **A:** If your time exceeds six years, you may be required by the Graduate School and the Department of History to recertify your course work by taking written exam.   
  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q:**  
  
    **A:**   
  
  
![](bluebox.gif) **Q:**  
  
  
       
  
![](rtparrow.gif)  
  
  

### More questions added on a regular basis. Check back.

  
  
  
  
  
[**What questions would you like us to answer?**](mailto:BurgessW@etsu.edu)
Your questions and suggestions are welcome.  
Please include your e-mail address so that we can contact you directly.  
  
![](smallbug.gif) [**Bugs?! Please, let us know!!**](mailto:BurgessW@etsu-
tn.edu) ![](smallbug.gif)  
  
**Would you like to search the Web? Well, here's your chance! Knock yourself
out!!**  
**SEARCH the Web Usenet  and display the results <OPTION VALUE="D SELECTED>in
Standard Form in Compact Form <OP

