[[Contents](contents.htm)] [[Index](index.htm)] [[Home](home.html)]
[[Previous](crewrite.htm)]

* * *

![](elephant.gif)  

# Creative Writing (ENGL 050)

## Course Information:

  * Texts and Course Description
  * Requirements
  * House Keeping and Fine Print
  * Outline and Schedule 
  

## Texts and Course Description

> Texts: Andre Breton, _Nadja_ ; Michael Ondaatje, _Coming Through Slaughter_
; William Carlos Williams, _Patterson_ ; and _Poetry to My Ear: An Interactive
Guide to the Art and Craft of Poetry_. Students are also required to read
material (poems, essays, short stories) distributed in class or posted on the
web, or placed on reserve in the library.

> This course satisfies a baccalaureate degree requirement in Art. Its goal is
to give students "practice and criticism in the reading, analysis, and
composition of fiction, nonfiction, and poetry writing." Because it is an
introductory course, ENGL 50 assumes that students do not possess the creative
writing skills of experienced novelists, poets, essayists, and playwrights. It
is not designed for English majors. But to focus on the obvious, it is a
college course and, as such, assumes college-level writing skills. It is
decidedly not a forum for remediation. Therefore, I hope that students will
regard ENGL 50 as an opportunity to develop strategies both for writing well
and for writing creatively.

  
Back to Course Information  

## Requirements

Note: Keep all materials returned to you. Points earned at semester's end
divided by possible points X 100 yields your final grade as a percentage.  
  
**Quizzes and Warm-Up Exerciese:**      This course demands a good deal of
reading. Almost every week, I will give short quizzes to determine (1) if
students have read assigned materials and (2) if students have comprehended
what they have read. 20 points each quiz. Additionally, I will frequently jump
start longer class projects by having students engage in a writing experiment
conducted in class. 20 points each experiment.  
  
**Projects:**      During the course of the semester, students are expected to
complete a number of homework assignments that lead to a full experience of
the types of writings organized under the term "creative writing." These
assignments follow directly from class readings and contribute toward
successful completion of the final texts that students are to assemble. 100
points per assignment.  
  
**Docu-Novella (End-of-Term Paper):**      All course work is designed to
contribute toward the completion of a collage text that combines fictive,
nonfictive, and poetic materials. This docu-text--what we might call a
"mystory" or "docu-novella"--is a student version of the course's central
models (texts by Breton, Williams, Ondaatje, and others). 300 points.  
  
**Class Participation:**      Talking about what we are reading and writing is
an explicit part of this course. If you do not like to attend class, do
regular reading assignments, and have participation required of you, you
should either not take this course or you should settle for a lower grade than
your written work might otherwise warrant. 100, totally subjective points.  
Back to Course Information  

## House Keeping and Fine Print

> Print out all papers on 8 1/2" X 11" smooth-edged paper. Double-space your
work, and use 1" margins. Give all projects a title, but do not type this
title, your name, my name, or this course's title on a separate cover page. Do
not place your work inside an attractive folder. Instead, all pertinent
information should appear on the first page of your work (upper right-hand
corner). Note: It is a good idea (1) to make a back-up copy of all work that
you turn in and (2) to keep all papers that are returned to you.

> I will show little-to-no toleration in dealing with late papers. I will
glance at late work only to determine whether it merits a grade of "D" or "F."
Late work is, by definition, below-average; deadlines are a normal and
necessary component of all scholarly and artistic production. Familiarize
yourself, early on, with course requirements.

> Feel free--make that, feel obligated--to check on the progress of your
writing during the course of this term. Should you need special assistance in
understanding or in completing an assignment, come see me. My office hours are
[posted](biogrphy.htm), but I am willing to make appointments to meet at other
times. My phone number is (717) 771-4157 (office). My email address is
[jmj3@psu.edu](mailto:jmj@psu.edu).

> No one missing class three times or more will pass ENGL 50. If you are tardy
or if you leave class early, you have missed 1/2 of that class. There is no
such thing as an excused or unexcused absence; there are only explained and
unexplained absences. A missed class means missed material. _Never--if you
miss class--ask me if you missed anything._ For example, let's say you miss
class becase your car breaks down. Then you missed class for a good reason.
But you still missed class. Missed notes should be copied from a fellow
student.

  
Back to Course Information  

## Outline and Schedule

ENGL 050 is organized into short units that contribute toward the completion
of a single large project: a _docu-novella_ or _mystory_. Each unit is one
week (one class meeting) long and involves four types of activities. First, we
will interrogate a course text: ask how we can employ it as a model for our
own writing. Next, we will perform a warm-up exercise suggested by our
discussion of this course text. The exercise will lead to a more developed
writing assignment. Finally, we will examine and critique each other's work in
a workshop setting. Every phase of this four-part process is equally
important.



  



 COURSE OUTLINE  
  
**WEEK 1**      SEP 11 -- Intro; Mystory Questionnaire  
  
**WEEK 2**      SEP 18 -- Ondaatje, pp. 1-102  
  
**WEEK 3**      SEP 25 -- Ondaatje, pp. 105-156; Anecdote Project Due  
  
**WEEK 4**      OCT 2 -- Williams, Book One  
  
**WEEK 5**      OCT 9 -- Williams, Book Two; Drama Project Due  
  
**WEEK 6**      OCT 16 -- Williams, Book Three; Research Project Due  
  
**WEEK 7**      OCT 23 -- Williams, Book Four; Metaphor Project Due  
  
**WEEK 8**      OCT 30 -- Williams, Book Five; Metonym Project Due  
  
**WEEK 9**      NOV 6 -- Breton, pp, 1-74  
  
**WEEK 10**      NOV 13 -- Breton, pp. 74-160; Ground Zero Narrative Due  
  
**WEEK 11**      NOV 20 -- Sherman's March (film)  
  
**WEEK 12**      NOV 27 -- Grammatological Rewrite Due  
  
**WEEK 13**      DEC 4 -- Mystory Due  
  
**WEEK 14**      DEC 13 -- Revised Mystory Due  



 THERE IS NO FINAL EXAM SCHEDULED FOR THIS COURSE.

