![](group.jpg)

**_Winter Study 1995 Group at Volubilis_**

HIST 275/REL 231(S): The Origins of Islam: God, Empire and Apocalypse

The rise of Islam in the seventh century C.E. is usually seen, by both Muslim
and non-Muslim historians, as a total break with the past. This course will
challenge that assumption by placing the rise of Islam in the context of the
history of late antiquity (c. 300-700 C.E.). The first half of the course will
examine the impact of Judeo-Christian monotheism in the ancient world, the
rise of confessional empires, articulation of new ideas about holiness and its
relation to sexuality and the transformations undergone by Judaism,
Christianity, Zoroastrianism and Manichaeism. We shall examine the
conversation of these traditions with classical paganism and philosophy, the
internal struggle within traditions to define rules of interpretation, the
impact of ascetic, iconoclastic and apocalyptic ideas and, finally, polemics
among the traditions. Attention will be given to borderlands (Armenia, Syria,
and Arabia) where the problems of regionalism and religious diversity were
prominent. We will then examine the career of Muhammad (PBUH) in the context
of Arabia, the spread of the Islamic empire into Christian and Iranian worlds,
the impact of apocalyptic expectations, the fixation of religious decision
making within the tradition and the question of conversion and religious
diversity within the commonwealth of Islam. The course will end with the end
of the Abbasid Caliphate in 1258.

**COURSE OBJECTIVES:**

1) To survey and construct a general outline of the major political, cultural
and religious trends in the Eastern Mediterranean from approximately 250 to
1250 C.E.

2) To give comparative consideration to a number os issues including: the
relation of monotheism to political empire, the idea of religious conversion,
the character of scripture and interpretation, iconoclasm, apocalyptic, and
the relation of religion and philosophy.

3) To develop critical skills for reading a variety of primary written and
visual materials.

4) To introduce the resources available for study of this time period
including WEB resources and to develop an overview of the different approaches
and tendencies that have guided that study.

**BOOKS ORDERED**

Augustine, _Confessions_

* * *

Brown, _The World of Late Antiquity_

__Brown, _Authority and the Sacred_

Cook, _Muhammad_

Fowden, _From Empire to Commonwealth_

__Hourani, _A History of the Arab Peoples_

__Markus, _The End of Ancient Christianity_

__Neusner, _There We Sat Down_

In addition there is a two part xerox packet available in Stetson. Part I is
available now and Part II will be available after spring break.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

1) Each class will be divided between a lecture/discussion and a more
intensive interaction with one text or artifact. Active participation is
expected in both activities of everyone.

2) Midterm exam will be due Friday, March 21.

3) Participation in research groups in preparation for final research paper.

4) 12-15 page research paper due Friday, May 23.

**SCHEDULE**

Friday, February 7 **Introduction: The World of the Third Century C.E.**

     Focus: Dura Europas 

Monday, February 10 **Empires and Ideologies: The Rise of the Sasanians**

     Fowden, _From Empire to Commonwealth_ pp. 3-36 

     Brown, _The World of Late Antiquity_ pp. 11-34 

     Xerox 1: Zoroastrian materials 

     Focus: The Inscription of Kartir 

     Zoroastrian Confession 

Wednesday, February 12 **The First World Religion: Manichaeism**

     Fowden, _From Empire to Commonwealth_ pp. 61-79 

     Brown, "The Diffusion of Manichaeism in the Roman Empire" (Xerox 2) 

     Xerox 3 : Selections from _Gnosis on the Silk Road_

      Focus: Manichaean Cosmogony, Confession and History 

Monday, February 17 **The Emergence of the Rabbi**

     Neusner, _There We Sat Down_ pp. 1-97 

      Focus: B. Talmud Megillah 25a-28a (xerox 4) 

Wednesday, February 19 **Rabbinic Judaism and its competitors**

      Neusner, _There We Sat Down_ pp. 98-140 

      Focus: The Synagogue 

Friday, February 21 **The Pagan Philosopher**

       Brown, _The World of Late Antiquity_ 34-81 

       Fowden, _From Empire to Commonwealth_ , 37-60, 80-99 

       Porphyry, _On Plotinus_ xerox 5 

       Plotinus, _On Dialectic_ xerox 6 

       Focus: The Life and Thought of Plotinus 

Monday, February 24 **The Notion of Conversion and Christianization**

         Brown, _The World of Late Antiquity_ pp. 82-112 

         Brown, _Authority and the Sacred_ , pp.3-26 

         Markus, _The End of Ancient Christianity_ , pp. 1-44 

          Epiphanius on the Ebionites (xerox 7) 

Focus: The Conversion of Josephus in Epiphanius

Wednesday, February 26 **The Christian and Pagan Pasts**

        Brown, _Authority and the Sacred_ , p.29-54 

        Markus, _The End of Ancient Christianity_ , pp. 87-121 

         Sallustius _Concerning the Gods and the Universe_ (xerox 8) 

         Focus: Sallustius 

Friday, February 28 **Antioch in the Fourth Century**

        Downey, _Antioch in the Age of Theodosius_ , p. 38-102 (xerox 9) 

        Libanius, _Autobiography_ , pp. 53-95 (xerox 10) 

        Focus: Antioch 

Monday, March 3 **Antioch in Decline**

    Xerox 10 Libanius _Autobiography_ 97-207 

    Xerox 11 Libanius, Oration 48 and 49 

     Focus: Libanius 

Wednesday, March 5 **Julian**

     Xerox 12 Julian, _Contra Galleanos_

     Xerox 13 Ammianus Marcellenius Year 342 

      Xerox 14 Libanius on the Death of Julian 

       Focus: Julian 

Friday, March 7 **Christian Antioch**

       Markus, _The End of Ancient Christianity_ pp. 125-179 

        Downey, _Antioch in the Age of Theodosius_ p. 103-156 (xerox 9) 

__         John Chrysostom "On Vainglory" (xerox 15

        John Chrysostom, "Homily on Saint Babylas" 

        Focus: John Chrysostom 

Monday, March 10 **Holy Men and Women**

        Brown, _Authority and the Sacred_ pp. 57-78 

        Markus, _The End of Ancient Christianity_ 181-228 

        Simeon Sylites (xerox 17) 

        Pelagia (xerox 18) 

       Focus: Simeon and Pelagia 

Wednesday, March 12 **Augustine**

     Augustine, _Confessions_ pp. 3-51 

Friday, March 14 **Augustine**

     Augustine, _Confessions_ pp. 52-132 

Monday, March 17 **Augustine**

     Augustine, _Confessions_ , pp. 133-221 

Wednesday, March 19 **Augustine**

     Augustine, _Confessions_ , pp. 221-305 

Friday, March 21 **The World of Justinian**

     Brown, _The World of Late Antiquity_ pp. 115-159 

     Focus: Hagia Sophia in Constantinople 

**Midterm Essay Due: Friday, March 21**

Write a 4-6 page answer to one of the following questions:

1\. Explore the interconnections between the themes of conversion and
asceticism in the materials we have examined. What do you think conversion
came to mean for Christian movements in the period after the Christianization
of the empire had begun?

2\. The relation to the past and a reformulation of the understanding of time
and memory has been a dominant theme in the Jewish, Pagan and Christian
materials we've examined. What do you consider the main features of that
reformulation?

3\. The city provides a model for human community for both Pagan and Christian
thinkers. What characteristics of the city and what changes in its character
are relevant for each of those visions?

4\. The notion of scripture and then the interpretation of scripture has been
a dominant feature of both Jewish and Chrisitian developments in late
Antiquity. What do you consider the main features of the rules of
interpretation that emerged. What do you consider the role of conflict of
interpretation in establishing those rules?

Monday, April 7 **The East on the Eve of Islam**

    Fowden, _From Empire to Commonwealth_ , pp. 100-137 

    Brown, _The World of Late Antiquity_ , 160-203 

     Crone and Cook "Hagarism" (xerox 19) 

     Kennedy, "Antioch and the Villages of Northern Syria in the Fifth and Sixth            Centuries" (xerox 20) 

     Focus: Antioch on the Eve of Islam 

Wednesday, April 9 **The Career of Muhammad**

     Hourani, _A History of the Arab Peoples_ , pp. 7-21 

     Cook, _Muhammad_

     Quran (xerox 21) 

     Focus: The Qur'an 

Friday, April 11 **Apocalypse and History**

    Fowden, _Empire to Commonwealth_ , pp. 138-175 

    Vasililiev, "Medieval Ideas of the End of the World" Xerox 22) 

     Brock, "Syriac Views of Emergent Islam" (xerox 23) 

     Focus: The Coming of Islam as seen by the Conquered 

Monday, April 14 **Umayyad rule**

****      Hourani, _A History of the Arab Peoples_ , pp. 22-37

     Grabar, "The Umayyad Dome of the Rock" and "The Symbolic Appropriation        of  the Land (xerox 24) 

     Focus: The Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem 

Wednesday April 16 **Umayyad rule and the Abbasid Revolution**

     Hourani, _A History of the Arab Peoples_ , pp. 38-58 

     Tabari, "History of the Year 129 (xerox 25) 

     Focus: The Desert Palaces 

Friday, April 18 **The Islamic Oikumene**

     Hourani, _A History of the Arab Peoples_ , pp. 83-146 

     Gaston Wiet, _Baghdad: Metropolis of the Abbasid Caliphate_ (xerox 26) 3-63 

     Focus: The Foundation of Baghdad 

Monday, April 21 **The Golden Age Abbasid Culture**

     Wiet, _Baghdad: Metropolis of the Abbasid Caliphate_ (xerox 26) 64-133 

      Jahiz, "Two Essays" 

       Focus: Jahiz 

Wednesday, April 23, **The Arts of Disputation and Polemics**

     Hourani, _A History of the Arab Peoples_ , pp. 59-82, 147-171 

     al-Ashari (xerox 27) 

     Saadya Gaon (xerox 28) 

     Focus: The emergence of Kalam 

Friday, April 25 **The Byzantine Iconoclastic Debate**

     Brown, "A Dark Age Crisis" (xerox 29) 

     Cormac, "Iconoclasm" (xerox 30) 

     Sahas,"Acts of the Seventh Ecumenical Council (787)" (xerox 31) 

      Focus: The Christian Iconoclastic Debate 

Monday, April 28 **Islamic Iconoclasm?**

      Allen, "The Arabesque, the Beveled Style and the Mirage of an Early Islamic           Art" (xerox 32) 

     Grabar, "Islamic Religious Art:The Mosque (xerox 33) 

      Focus: The Mosque 

Wednesday, April 30 **Abbasid Polity**

      _Baghdad: Metropolis of the Abbasid Caliphate_ pp. 133-175 

      Nizam ul-Mulk, _The Book of Politics_ (xerox 34) 

      Focus: Nizam ul-Mulk 

Friday, May 2 **The Rise of Mysticism**

Al-Ghazali, _Freedom and Fulfillment_ (xerox 35)

     Focus: al-Ghazali's Spiritual Crisis 

Monday May 5 **The Solution of Prophecy**

     al-Ghazali, _Freedom and Fulfillment_ **** (xerox 36) 

      Maimonides, _Guide for the Perplexed_ (xerox 37) 

       Focus: Maimonides and al-Ghazali on Prophecy 

Wednesday, May 7 **The Tradition of Philosophy and the Court**

       Hourani, _History of the Arab Peoples_ pp. 172-205 

       Ibn Rushd, _The Decisive Treatise_ (xerox 38) 

Friday, May 9 **Conclusion: The Islamic City**

        Kennedy, "From Polis to Medina" (xerox 39) 

        Kennedy, "Antioch: From Byzantium to Islam and Back" (xerox 40) 

        Abu Lughod "The Islamic City" (xerox 41) 

May 12-17 Preparing Research Papers

