362-142 syllabus

# 362-142  
EXPLORATIONS OF THE UNIVERSE

##  SPRING 1998

Steve Dutch, [University of Wisconsin-Green Bay](http://www.uwgb.edu/)  
Office: LS 116, Phone: 465-2246  
email: dutchs@uwgb.edu, HOME PAGE:[http://www.uwgb.edu/~dutchs](index.htm)

TEXT: SAGAN, _Cosmos_ , plus reserve readings:

  * Berthon, _Shape of the World_
  * Oberg, _Red Star in Orbit_
  * Sheehan _Worlds in the Sky_
  * Von Braun and Ordway, _Space Travel; A History_ 

  * Syllabus
  * History
  * Content of the Course
  * Teaching Philosophy
  * Carl and Me
  * [Link to Course Notes](cosindx.htm) 

## Syllabus

WEEK| VIDEO | TOPIC | READING  
---|---|---|---  
Jan. 21 |  COSMOS: SHORES OF THE COSMIC OCEAN  
POWERS OF TEN |  The scale of the Universe and Human History |  Sagan Ch. 1  
Jan. 26 |  SHAPE OF THE WORLD: HEAVEN AND EARTH |  The Discovery of Scientific
Laws  |  Sagan Ch. 7, Berthon Ch. 1-3  
Feb. 2 |  COSMOS: HARMONY OF THE WORLDS |  The Discovery of Scientific Laws |
Sagan, Ch. 3, Sheehan Ch. 1-3  
Feb. 9 |  SHAPE OF THE WORLD: EXCERPTS |  The earliest high-tech revolutions.
|  Berthon Ch. 4,6,7  
Feb. 16 | SPACEFLIGHT: I |  Venturing into space |  Oberg Ch. 1,2, Von Braun
Ch. 3,5,7  
Feb. 23 |  SPACEFLIGHT: II |  Leaving earth | Oberg Ch. 6,7, Von Braun Ch. 9,  
Mar. 2 |  COSMOS: HEAVEN AND HELL |  Earth and Venus. Catastrophes in Nature |
Sagan Ch. 4, Sheehan Ch. 4-6, 13  
Mar. 9 |  COSMOS: BLUES FOR A RED PLANET  
Midterm Thurs. March 11 |  Mars in Fact and Fancy |  Sagan Ch. 5, Sheehan ch.
7, 8  
Mar. 14-22 |  Spring Break  
Mar. 23 |  COSMOS: TRAVELERS' TALES |  Jupiter and the spirit of exploration
in two eras |  Sagan Ch. 6 , Sheehan Ch. 9  
Mar. 30 | SAIL ON VOYAGER|  The further travels of Voyager |  Sheehan Ch. 9-13  
Apr. 6 | COSMOS: THE LIVES OF THE STARS |  Atoms, matter, and the life cycles
of stars |  Sagan Ch. 9  
Apr. 13 |  ORIGIN OF THE UNIVERSE |  Galaxies and the structure of the
Universe |  Sagan Ch. 8, 10  
Apr. 20 |  COSMOS: ONE VOICE IN THE COSMIC FUGUE |  Evolution, Life, and Time
|  Sagan Ch. 2  
Apr. 27 |  COSMOS: THE PERSISTENCE OF MEMORY |  The nature of intelligence |
Sagan Ch. 11  
May 4-11 |  COSMOS: ENCYCLOPEDIA GALACTICA  |  Close encounters of various
kinds |  Sagan Ch. 12  
  
FINAL EXAM: FRIDAY MAY 15, 3:30-5:30 PM, LS 231

Grading:  

  * Midterm: 20% 
  * Writing Assignments 30% 
  * Final 40% 
  * Attendance and participation 10%

### Writing Assignment Topics

**Assignment I: Diagnostic: Due February 9, 1998**

In two pages, describe the single most interesting experience you have ever
had witnessing some astronomical phenomenon in the sky. Possibilities: Comet
Hale-Bopp, an eclipse, a spectacular meteor or aurora, a spacecraft launch, or
perhaps something unexplained. Do not write about weather phenomena such as a
violent storm or launching a weather rocket or balloon.

**Assignment II: Pick one: due April 27, 1998 (4-6 pages)**

  * Pick some major science fiction author and discuss his literary style, philosophy and understanding of science as reflected in his or her works. 
  * Pick some ongoing science-fiction media production ( _Star Wars, Star Trek, Babylon 5_ , etc.) and discuss its character and plot development and underlying philosophy. 
  * Summarize the history of our exploration of any specific Solar System object. 
  * Pick a famous woman astronomer and summarize her contributions. 
  * Discuss the role of the "longitude problem" in stimulating Western science and technology. 
  * Describe how our understanding of the nature of galaxies has evolved. 

Papers must be properly referenced. Include a note as to which referencing
standard you are using.

* * *

## About the Course

### History

When Carl Sagan's _Cosmos_ series came out in 1979, George O'Hearn of the
Education Program and I immediately decided to develop a course based on the
series (that's why the course, to this day, is cross-listed). We taught the
course for the first time during the fall of 1981. It was very successful. I
taught the course again during the summer of 1982 but only a handful of
students enrolled. Because of that low enrollment, the course languished for
several years (UWGB was under extreme pressure to raise enrollments in those
days). Finally, in the fall of 1985, I had a one-course reassignment for
serving as assistant chair of NAS. I decided to try offering the course as an
overload. It drew a very good enrollment and has been offered just about every
year since. I consider reviving _Cosmos_ one of my best accomplishments as an
instructor.

During the 90's, it started to become clear that _Cosmos_ was becoming dated.
Unfortunately, the things that distracted people most were not areas where the
science had become outdated, but comparatively trivial issues like changing
clothing and hair styles. In some areas, especially Solar System exploration
and cosmology, science has progressed enormously since _Cosmos_ was filmed.
For the most part, the series stands up surprisingly well. Nevertheless, I
changed the title of the course to _Explorations of the Universe_ to eliminate
any commitment to Cosmos and to allow the freedom to incorporate a broader
range of other material. I have dropped a few of the weaker _Cosmos_ episodes
and added material from other sources. I use _Morrison's Powers of Ten_ as an
additional text and cover the universe at progressively larger scales,
starting with atoms.

### Content of the Course

_Explorations of the Universe_ differs from a conventional astronomy course in
that it spends a lot of time on the broader social and historical context of
science. For example, accurate determination of the shape of the earth was one
of the major scientific problems of the 1700's. To determine the shape of the
earth accurately, you need to do very accurate local surveys at widely
separeted places in the tropics and in the arctic. You need to be able to
mount sizable expeditions, get them there, supply them, and protect them. You
also need world-class industry to make the extremely precise instruments
needed, and world-class scientists to develop the mathematical techniques to
analyze the data. You need, in short, to be a superpower. In the 1700's,
Britain and France engaged in perhaps the first modern high-tech superpower
rivalry, a forerunner of the Apollo Program and Star Wars.

Prerequisites for the course include any of a number of basic science courses,
but these are not show-stoppers. A student with no scientific background at
all might have difficulty, but if you have had reasonable exposure to science
you should do all right. If in doubt, we can discuss the matter.

### Teaching Philosophy

Since I was teaching the course as an overload myself when I revived it, I
decided the basic philosophy should be to concentrate more on enjoying Sagan's
series than on grading. That is still my belief. This should be an opportunity
for students to learn about some of the exciting things science has discovered
about the universe, without having to worry about being penalized for
exploring outside their comfort zone.

I used to think it was just about impossible to get a D or F in this course,
but eventually, alas, I was proven wrong. It became apparent that some
students were treating the course as a blow-off course. It is emphatically
not. I will make any reasonable (and sometimes unreasonable) accomodation to
students who have problems with illness, work, or difficulty understanding the
material. I will not accomodate students who simply want three easy credits.

### Carl and Me

I have never met or even corresponded with Sagan, who died December 20, 1996.
I differ from him on a number of serious points. Nevertheless I am an
enthusiastic fan of his work

One of the most common criticisms of Sagan is that he's "arrogant". Sagan does
not pretend that junk stops being junk if enough people believe in it.
Believers in UFO's and the paranormal loathe Sagan for that reason. But it's
not arrogance to state something boldly if the facts back you up. One of the
organizing themes in _Cosmos_ is the conflict between science and anti-
intellectualism, a conflict science seems to be losing at the moment.

Sagan has his flaws. It sometimes unnerves students to hear me criticize Sagan
while at the same time using his videos. I consider his occasional flaws to be
good teaching points. They show that even a top scholar can make mistakes or
fall prey to prejudices and stereotyping, they illustrate the need to use all
sources critically, and they show that there are legitimate differences of
opinion among scientists. Sagan's forays into religion, philosophy and
politics provide a good case study in the limitations of scientific
credentials outside of science.

[Return to Professor Dutch's home page](index.htm)

_Created 23 Dec 1996; Last Update 8 January 1998_

Not an official UW-Green Bay site

