|

 [ **Marquette Home**](http://www.marquette.edu/) ** ** **|**[
**Academics**](http://www.marquette.edu/academics/) |

[**FIND**](http://www.marquette.edu/find/)  
---|---  
  
**

![Growth of Western Civilization](imgs/westcivheader.gif) |

[![Go to Marquette Home](http://www.marquette.edu/img/logo.gif)](/index.html)  
---|---  
**

* * *



**History 002: Western Civilization**  
**Spring Semester 2001 Marquette University  
Dr. Phillip C. Naylor**

_"History is a struggle of the mind, an adventure."_  
Henri-Iren ee Marrou, _The Meaning of History_

[Final Exam Study
Sheet](http://academic.mu.edu/hist/naylorp/002/studyguide.html) | [Study
Suggestions and Prohibitions](suggestions.html) | [Assigned
Readings](readings.html)  
[Western Civ Series Program](series.html) | [Syllabus](syllabus.html)

` For your reference, the historic moment in early January 2001: Record
cumulative snowfall for Milwaukee in December (almost 50 inches); US economy
slowing; President-Elect Bush completes cabinet choices; Marquette men's
basketball team upsets touted DePaul team; Oakland Raiders, Baltimore Ravens,
Minnesota Vikings, and New York Giants in NFL conference championship games`

  
The objective of this course is to appreciate the importance of history in
breadth and depth. Western Civilization, as taught in the Varsity program, is
called the Wider West. It is a unique approach to Western Civilization and
offers students a broader perspective to the traditional Western Civilization
course. This packet provides you with lecture topics, reading and study
guides, examination and paper explanations, "Civ Series" descriptions, and
suggestions to assist you in this course. It offers you a general frame of
reference and should be consulted throughout the semester.

Please bear in mind that the lecturer and instructors will work on the
assumption that the material to be covered on a given date has been read by
the student prior to her or his attendance of the particular lecture or
discussion section. You should undertake to read ahead; failure to do so
before such class meetings will only serve to your detriment. **You are
responsible.**

In this course you will attend two lectures a week (Mondays and Wednesdays)
given by Dr. Naylor and one discussion section (either Thursday or Friday) led
by a graduate teaching assistant (TA). Discussion sections are not intended
for lecture purposes. Your TA may on occasion amplify or qualify a lecture
topic by way of placing it in perspective for class discussion; s/he may also
give a brief supplementary presentation. The discussion sections are designed
primarily to provide the student with an opportunity to discuss and clarify
information from the week's lectures. Other topics legitimately related to the
lectures may also serve as subjects for discussion. Your TAs will advise you
each week of the next subject for consideration and you should be prepared,
following your readings and the lecture, to participate actively in class
discussions.

It is expected that Western Civilization students will attend all lectures and
discussion sections. **You are responsible** for lecture/discussion section
material and announcements made during your absence from a class. Absences
from discussion sections should be explained to your instructor; s/he should
also be apprised of the reasons for your failure to be present for a lecture
(see below concerning missed examinations). If you miss several lectures, your
College will be contacted. If your TA is concerned about unexcused absences in
discussion section, s/he will also communicate directly or indirectly (via the
Advisement Center of the College of Arts and Sciences) with your College.

> **From the College of Arts and Sciences class attendance policy:**

>

> In the case of unavoidable absence (defined below), a student may make up
missed examinations, assignments and exercises within reason at the discretion
of the instructor according to conditions set forth in the course syllabus. It
is the student's responsibility to make arrangements with the instructor to
complete missed work in a timely fashion. In all other cases of absence,
instructors are not required to allow students to make up missed work. The
final course grade may be reduced to a degree commensurate with any incomplete
material.

>

> In the case of absences (regardless of cause) greater than the equivalent of
two weeks of class and/or lab, as defined in the syllabus, final grades can be
lowered up to a maximum of a half letter grade per additional absence.

>

> In the case of absences (regardless of cause) greater than the equivalent of
three weeks of class as defined in the syllabus, the student may be dropped
from the course, earning a grade of WA. After the WA grade has been issued,
the student may not apply for a grade of W.

>

> The College of Arts and Sciences defines unavoidable absences as those due
to debilitating illness, personal emergency, and, with prior approval,
participation in university-sanctioned athletic competitions. Students must
inform their instructors and the Arts and Sciences office, in a timely fashion
and with supporting evidence, of the reasons for their unavoidable absence.

Given this policy, it is imperative that you attend this course for manifold
reasons.

Please note that acts of dishonesty (e.g., "the illegitimate use of materials
in any form during a quiz or examination"; "copying answers from the quiz or
examination paper of another student"; "plagiarizing or falsifying materials
or information") as stipulated in the _Faculty Guide to Procedures_ (College
of Arts and Sciences) will result in severe penalties (e.g., an F for that
mark). Review or acquire a copy of the student "Ethos Statement"(August 1993)
from the Office of Student Affairs. Section B discusses examples of
"unacceptable behavior" that will not be tolerated. See also the
_Undergraduate Bulletin_ concerning expected student behavior.

There will be two major exams (Midterm [20%]; Final [30%]); two quizzes [20%];
two short papers [20%]; and 2 map quizzes [10%]). The two major examinations
will be subjective (essays). Written quizzes will be objective and subjective.
and will last for a portion of the discussion section period. The papers will
be exercises in historical methodology -- reception/perception -- and will be
explained by your TA. On each map quiz you will have 10 out of 12 sites to
find. You will match numbers/letters to the information given. Some of the
questions will be "identification-like --"Capital of the Habsburgs"; "Nelson
defeated Napoleon's navy at this site." Sites will be provided in Lecture.
Practice maps are included in the packet.

Class participation and attendance will also be taken into account concerning
the course grade. **If you cannot attend an examination, notify your TA at
least a day before the administration of the quiz/exam. Documentable proof
must be provided explaining your absence. Failure to provide this evidence
will result in an "F" for that particular examination.**

**![go to top](imgs/toparrow.gif)**

**< **[**History**](http://www.marquette.edu/history/)

* * *

**(C) 2001 **[**Marquette University**](http://www.marquette.edu/) **\-- Last
Update: April 24, 2001**

