# 362-142  
EXPLORATION OF THE UNIVERSE

## SPRING 2002

Steven Dutch, Natural and Applied Sciences, [University of Wisconsin - Green
Bay  
](http://weba.uwgb.edu/)Office: LS 475, Phone: 465-2246  
email: dutchs@uwgb.edu, HOME PAGE:  [http://www.uwgb.edu/dutchs](index.htm)

First-time Visitors: Please visit [Site Map and Disclaimer](sitemap.htm). Use
"Back" to return here.

* * *

TEXT: SAGAN, _Cosmos;_ Hacker _, A Pocket Style Manual_

### About the Course

  * Syllabus
  * [Link to Course Notes](CosmosNotesIndex.HTM)
  * History
  * Content of the Course
  * Teaching Philosophy
  * Carl and Me
  * [ Test and Quiz Questions](Exams/ExamMaster.htm)

## Syllabus

**WEEK** |  **VIDEO** |  **TOPIC** |  **READING**  
---|---|---|---  
Jan. 23  |  _Cosmos: Shores Of The Cosmic Ocean_ |  The Scale Of The Universe
And Human History  |  Sagan Ch. 1  
Jan. 30  |  _Cosmos: Harmony Of The Worlds_ |  The Discovery Of Scientific
Laws  |  Sagan Ch. 3,7  
Feb. 6  |  _Shape Of The World_ |  The Earliest High-Tech Superpower Rivalries
|  Web  
Feb.13  |  QUIZ: _Spaceflight: I_ |  Venturing Into Space  |  Web  
Feb. 20  |  _Spaceflight_ excerpts   |  Sputnik, Apollo, and the Cold War  |
Web  
Feb. 27  |  _Cosmos: Heaven And Hell_ |  Earth and Venus. Catastrophes in
Nature  |  Sagan Ch. 4  
Mar. 6  |  _Cosmos: Blues For A Red Planet_ |  Mars in Fact and Fancy  |
Sagan Ch. 5  
Mar. 13  |  _Cosmos: Travelers' Tales_ |  Jupiter and the spirit of
exploration in two eras  |  Sagan Ch. 6  
Mar. 16-24  |  Spring Break __ |    |  
Mar. 27  |    |  New ideas about solar systems  |  Web  
Apr. 3  |  QUIZ: _Cosmos: The Lives Of The Stars_ |  Stars, Atoms and Galaxies
|  Sagan Ch. 8-10  
Apr. 10  |    |  Galaxies and the Universe  |  Web  
Apr. 17  |  _Cosmos: One Voice In The Cosmic Fugue_ |  Evolution, Life, and
Time  |  Sagan Ch. 2  
Apr. 24  |  _Cosmos: Encyclopedia Galactica_ |  Close encounters of various
kinds  |  Sagan Ch. 11, 12  
May 1  |  QUIZ: Video Excerpts  |  Mirror in the Sky: What our ideas of aliens
tell about us.  |  Web  
May 8  |  Video Excerpts  |  Mirror in the Sky: What our ideas of aliens tell
about us.  |  Web  
  
FINAL EXAM: Wednesday May 22, 6:00-9:00 PM, CH 113

Grading:  |    |    |  F  |  Less than 60% of top score  
---|---|---|---|---  
Quizzes:  |  20%  |  D  |  60  
Writing Assignments I  |  10%  |  C  |  70  
Writing Assignment II  |  20%  |  BC  |  75  
Final  |  40%  |  B  |  80  
Attendance and participation  |  10%  |  AB  |  85  
  |    |  A  |  More than 90% of top score  
  
**Writing assignments must be turned in to pass the course.** Work that
appears to have been hastily assembled solely to meet this requirement will
not count. **Late assignments** **penalized 20% per day.  **

## Writing Assignment Topics

### Assignment I: Diagnostic: Due February 19, 2001 (2-3 pages)

What is a "primary source" in college writing? Why are primary sources
preferable? Give some examples of primary and secondary sources.

**

### ** Assignment II: Pick one: due April 30, 2001 (4-6 pages) **

**

  * Read the book on which any of the four films below was based, then view the film. How does the film differ from the book? What accounts for the differences? 
    * Book: _Rocket Boys_ by Homer Hickam, film: _October Sky_
    * Book: _The Right Stuff_ by Tom Wolfe, film: _The Right Stuff_
    * Book: _Lost Moon_ by Jim Lovell, film _Apollo 13_
    * Book: _2001_ by Arthur C. Clarke, film _2001_
  * Pick some major science fiction author and discuss his literary style, philosophy and understanding of science as reflected in his or her works. _Analyze the works: a plot synopsis is not acceptable._
  * Pick some ongoing science-fiction media production ( _Star Wars, Star Trek, Babylon 5_ , etc.) and discuss its character and plot development and underlying philosophy. _Analyze the works: a plot synopsis is not acceptable._

**Acceptable References:**

Guidelines for referencing are available on the page [_References for College
Papers_](file:///C:/Program%20Files/Microsoft%20FrontPage/temp/PAPERREF.HTM)
_. You are responsible for knowing and applying these guidelines_. The
following references are **not** to be used:

  * Textbooks of any kind 
  * Course and lecture notes 
  * Encyclopedias, dictionaries or any general reference works 
  * Newspapers or popular magazines 
**

  * Internet sources of any kind**

#### Standards

Standards I apply in grading writing are explained on the page [_What is an
A?_](file:///C:/Program%20Files/Microsoft%20FrontPage/temp/WHATSANA.HTM) _You
are responsible for knowing and applying these standards_. In simple terms, I
expect professional quality prose of the sort you would expect to see in Time,
Newsweek, or a good newspaper. A style manual is required for the course,
therefore, you have **no excuse __** for poor writing.

A minimally acceptable paper free of defects will get 7 points on a 10-point
scale. Papers that explore the topic in depth, show originality or extra
effort will be awarded sores of 8-10.

Any of the following defects will be docked one point per occurrence.

  * Improper or no references 
  * Confusion or misuse of: 
    * its and it's 
    * there, their and they're 
    * to, too and two 
    * hear and here 
    * affect and effect 
    * except and accept 
    * any other similar error - **look the words up to be sure of correct usage!**
  * Any misspelled proper name - **when in doubt, look it up!**
  * More than three spelling or grammatical errors of any kind 
  * Incorrect or inadequate references 
  * Any use of the slash construction (for example, and/or) 
  * Folders or covers of any kind 
  * Any other sloppy or superficial work

## About the Course

### History

When Carl Sagan's _Cosmos_ series came out in 1979, the late George O'Hearn of
the Education Program and I immediately decided to develop a course based on
the series. We taught the course for the first time during the fall of 1981.
It was very successful. I taught the course again during the summer of 1982
but only a handful of students enrolled. Because of that low enrollment, the
course languished for several years (UW-Green Bay was under extreme pressure
to raise enrollments in those days). Finally, in the fall of 1985, I had a
one-course reassignment for serving as assistant chair of NAS. I decided to
try offering the course as an overload. It drew a very good enrollment and has
been offered just about every year since. I consider reviving _Cosmos_ one of
my best accomplishments as an instructor.

During the 90's, it started to become clear that _Cosmos_ was becoming dated.
Unfortunately, the things that distracted people most were not areas where the
science had become outdated, but comparatively trivial issues like changing
clothing and hair styles. In some areas, especially Solar System exploration
and cosmology, science has progressed enormously since _Cosmos_ was filmed.
For the most part, the series stands up surprisingly well. Nevertheless, I
changed the title of the course to _Explorations of the Universe_ to eliminate
any commitment to _Cosmos_ and to allow the freedom to incorporate a broader
range of other material. I have dropped a few of the weaker _Cosmos_ episodes
and added material from other sources.

### Content of the Course

_Explorations of the Universe_ differs from a conventional astronomy course in
that it spends a lot of time on the broader social and historical context of
science. For example, accurate determination of the shape of the earth was one
of the major scientific problems of the 1700's. To determine the shape of the
earth accurately, you need to do very accurate local surveys at widely
separeted places in the tropics and in the arctic. You need to be able to
mount sizable expeditions, get them there, supply them, and protect them. You
also need world-class industry to make the extremely precise instruments
needed, and world-class scientists to develop the mathematical techniques to
analyze the data. You need, in short, to be a superpower. In the 1700's,
Britain and France engaged in perhaps the first modern high-tech superpower
rivalry, a forerunner of the Apollo Program and Star Wars.

Prerequisites for the course include any of a number of basic science courses,
but these are not show-stoppers. A student with no scientific background at
all might have difficulty, but if you have had reasonable exposure to science
you should do all right. If in doubt, we can discuss the matter.

### Teaching Philosophy

Since I was teaching the course as an overload myself when I revived it, I
decided the basic philosophy should be to concentrate more on enjoying Sagan's
series than on grading. That is still my belief. This should be an opportunity
for students to learn about some of the exciting things science has discovered
about the universe, without having to worry about being penalized for
exploring outside their comfort zone.

I used to think it was just about impossible to get a D or F in this course,
but eventually, alas, I was proven wrong. It became apparent that some
students were treating the course as a blow-off course. It is emphatically
not. I will make any reasonable (and sometimes unreasonable) accommodation to
students who have problems with illness, work, or difficulty understanding the
material. I will not accommodate students who simply want three easy credits.

### Carl and Me

I never met or even corresponded with Sagan, who died December 20, 1996. I
differ from him on a number of serious points. Nevertheless I am an
enthusiastic fan of his work

One of the most common criticisms of Sagan is that he's "arrogant". Sagan does
not pretend that junk stops being junk if enough people believe in it.
Believers in UFO's and the paranormal loathe Sagan for that reason. But it's
not arrogance to state something boldly if the facts back you up. One of the
organizing themes in _Cosmos_ is the conflict between science and anti-
intellectualism, a conflict science seems to be losing at the moment.

Sagan has his flaws. It sometimes unnerves students to hear me criticize Sagan
while at the same time using his videos. I consider his occasional flaws to be
good teaching points. They show that even a top scholar can make mistakes or
fall prey to prejudices and stereotyping, they illustrate the need to use all
sources critically, and they show that there are legitimate differences of
opinion among scientists. Sagan's forays into religion, philosophy and
politics provide a good case study in the limitations of scientific
credentials outside of science.

* * *

[Return to Professor Dutch's home page](index.htm)

_Created 23 Dec 1996; Last Update 21 January 2002 _

Not an official UW-Green Bay site

