**WESTERN CIVILIZATION  
FALL 2002  
CIV 100-05-06  
TTh 9:00-10:15 AM**



**_Objective_**

The objective of this course is to give students a better understanding of the
present age and what it owes to the past by demonstrating how Western
Civilization has moved through a sequence of historical periods.  In addition
to describing the _Zeitgeist_ or spirit of each period, the course focuses on
the relationships between religion, philosophy, and politics, and how those
relationships have interacted with other aspects of Western Civilization such
as economics and technology.

_**Instructors**_

_Section_ | _Room_ | _Professor_ | _Department_ | _Office_ | _Telephone_  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
   05 | GCC 104 | Andrew Kelley | Philosophy | Bradley 229C | 2445  
   06 | GCC 212 | Charles Dannehl | Political Science | Bradley 416 | 2478  
_**

Required Texts

**_

Marvin Perry, _Western Civilization, A Brief History_ , 4th edition.  
Anders Henriksson, _Non Campus Mentis: World History According to College
Students_.

_**(Strongly) Recommended Text**_

Joseph Gibaldi, _MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers_ , 5th edition.

_**

Requirements

**_

The combined class will meet for lecture in GCC 104 at the regularly scheduled
time on most Tuesdays and Thursdays.  Nine times during the semester, as noted
on the syllabus, the class will separate into individual sections led by one
of the two instructors to review course material, and to take the three
scheduled quizzes and three course examinations.  On those days, you must
attend the section in which you enrolled when you signed up for this course
because the instructor in charge of that section is responsible for grading
all of your coursework.  Professor Kelley's students will meet in GCC 104 and
Professor Dannehl's students will meet in GCC 212.

Three examinations, three quizzes, and one essay paper (approximately five
pages in length) will determine the student's overall course grade.  The first
exam will be worth 16 percent of the course grade while the second and third
exams each will be worth 20 percent of the course grade.  Each of the quizzes
will be worth 8 percent of the course grade.  The essay paper will be worth 20
percent of the course grade.

_**Class Attendance**_

Attendance will not be taken during the lectures on the assumption that you
are responsible university students and consider your academic career to be a
full-time job; therefore you _will_ attend class.   _The instructors consider
unexcused student absences to be indicative of a student's lack of commitment
to the course.   Poor attendance will adversely affect a student's chance of
receiving favorable treatment in the event of a grade-breaking situation at
the end of the semester._

_**Makeup Exam and Late Paper Policy**_

Permission to make up an exam will be granted only under very specific or dire
circumstances.

  1. Any student who will miss an exam due to required participation in a University-sponsored activity, e.g., membership on a University athletic team in scheduled competition, must notify the instructor in advance of the absence and provide documentation of the absence at that time.

  2. If a student is unable to take an exam due to an emergency, the student or their responsible designee must notify the instructor _in person or by telephone_ within **24 hours** of the exam. Email notification is unacceptable.

  3. The makeup exam must be taken prior to the graded original exam being returned to students in the class.  In extreme circumstances, e.g., a student's prolonged absence due to hospitalization, the instructor _may_ administer a makeup exam after the original exam has been returned.   This decision is at the sole discretion of the instructor and his decision shall be final.

  4. Proper documentation of the circumstances surrounding the student's absence from the original exam must be provided _prior to_ the makeup exam being administered.   Examples of proper documentation include the following:

    * for absences due to medical reasons, a doctor's excuse specifically covering the time during which the exam was scheduled;

    * for absences due to funeral attendance, a copy of the relevant obituary;

    * for obligatory court appearances, copies of relevant court documents noting the required date and time of appearance;

    * for automobile accidents, copies of relevant police reports and towing bills showing the exact date of the accident.

No essay paper will be accepted after the deadline for its submission.

Any exception or change to this policy shall be at the sole and final
discretion of the instructor.

**_

Class Schedule

_** **_Date_** |  | **_Lecture Topic_** |

_**Readings**_  
---|---|---|---  
Th | 8/29 | Introduction to Western Civilization | Perry, chap. 1 & pp. 664-7;  
Henriksson, Introduction & chaps. 1-3  
T | 9/3 | Hellenic Philosophy and Government | Perry, chap. 3;  
Henriksson, chap. 4  
Th | 9/5 | Roman Government and Law | Perry, chap. 4;  
Henriksson, chap. 5  
T | 9/10 | Religion in the Classical World | Perry, chaps. 2 & 5;  
Henriksson, chap. 6  
**Th** | **9/12** | **Quiz 1 and Mid-Section Review**  
**  (Sections Meet Separately)** |  
T | 9/17 | Medieval Quest for Security | Perry, chap. 6;  
Henriksson, chap. 7  
Th | 9/19 | Medieval Culture and Religion | Perry, chap. 7;  
Henriksson, chaps. 8 & 9  
T | 9/24 | Film: _The Seventh Seal_ \--Part I |  
Th | 9/26 | Film: _The Seventh Seal_ \--Part II and Discussion |  
_T_ | _10/1_ | _In-Class Review Session_  
_  (Sections Meet Separately)_ |  
**Th** | **10/3** | **FIRST EXAM**  
**  (Sections Meet Separately)** |  
T | 10/8 | The Renaissance and Its Arts | Perry, pp. 212-26;  
Henriksson, chap. 10  
Th | 10/10 | Renaissance Political and Religious Developments | Perry, pp.
226-51 & 263-77;  
Henriksson, chap. 11  
T | 10/15 | _FALL BREAK_ |  
Th | 10/17 | The Age of Power | Perry, pp. 251-63;  
Henriksson, chap. 12  
**T** | **10/22** | **Quiz 2 and Mid-Section Review**  
**  (Sections Meet Separately)** |  
Th | 10/24 | Film: _A Man for All Seasons_ \--Part I |  
T | 10/29 | Film: _A Man For All Seasons_ \--Part II and Discussion  
**ESSAY PAPER DUE** |  
Th | 10/31 | The Scientific Revolution | Perry, pp. 278-91  
T | 11/5 | The Enlightenment and Its Arts | Perry, pp. 291-312;  
Henriksson, chap. 13  
_Th_ | _11/7_ | _In-Class Review Session_  
  _(Sections Meet Separately)_ |  
**T** | **11/12** | **SECOND EXAM**  
**  (Sections Meet Separately)** |  
Th | 11/14 | The Age of Revolution | Perry, chaps. 11 & 12; pp. 368-78;  
Henriksson, chaps. 14 & 15  
T | 11/19 | The Age of Uncertainty | Perry, chap. 17, pp. 414-21;  
Henriksson, chaps. 17 & 18  
**Th** | **11/21** | **Quiz 3 and Mid-Section Review**  
**  (Sections Meet Separately)** |  
T | 11/26 | Ideology and War I | Perry, pp. 378-87, 421-34; chap. 14;  
Henriksson, 16 & 19  
Th | 11/28 | _THANKSGIVING BREAK_ |  
T | 12/3 | Ideology and War II | Perry, chaps. 16 & 18;  
Henriksson, chaps. 20-21  
Th | 12/5 | Ideology and War III | Perry, chaps. 19-21;  
Henriksson, chaps. 22-26 & Postscript  
_T_ | _12/10_ | _In-Class Review Session_  
_  (Sections Meet Separately)_ |  
**F** | **12/16** | **THIRD EXAM (12:00 NOON)**  
**  (Sections Meet Separately)** |  
  


[

**Return to the Course Home Page**](100indx.htm)

