Professor Mark S. Micale History 112

Department of History Foellinger Auditorium

Gregory Hall, Room 444 Fall, 2001

Office Hours: Wednesdays, Tuesdays and Thursdays

2:00-4:00 12:00-12:50

E-mail: msmicale@uiuc.edu





** History 112**



** Western Civilization:**

** **

** From 1660 to the Present**





_Course Content_ : The past 350 years have been extraordinarily eventful in
Europe. This introductory course will survey the major developments during
this long and dramatic period in European history with particular attention to
the years running from the mid-eighteenth to the mid-twentieth centuries.
Geographically, the course will focus on Britain, France, and German-speaking
central Europe with occasional consideration of Italy, Spain, and Russia. We
will study all aspects of the European historical experience with an emphasis
on events in politics, society, culture, and thought. Four themes in
particular will recur: 1) the great historical revolutions of modern Western
history; 2) democratic liberalism and its enemies; 3) the growing scientific
and material mastery of the natural world; and 4) the advent of Western
cultural and intellectual modernity.



_Course Readings_ : The basic textbook for the course is _The Western
Experience: 1750 to the Present_ (2001), written by Chambers, Hanawalt, Rabb,
Woloch, and Grew. Included with this work is a CD-ROM of visual materials. In
addition, a _Course Reader_ of documents and articles, which accompanies the
textbook, is required. Both the textbook and the _Course Reader_ have been
custom printed by the publisher for this course at the University of Illinois,
so please be sure to buy copies. The following books, all in affordable
paperback editions, are also required:

Friedrich Engels, _The Condition of the Working Class in England_

Arthur Koestler, _Darkness at Noon_

John Stuart Mill, _On Liberty_

Erich Maria Remarque, _All Quiet on the Western Front_



The course books are available for purchase at the Illini Union Bookstore,
Follett's Bookstore, and the TIS College Bookstore.





_Course Requirements and Grades_ : There will be a one-hour in-class midterm
examination and a three-hour scheduled final examination. The final exam
questions will be distributed in class two weeks before the day of the exam.
For the dates of these events, see below. There will also be weekly discussion
sections with a Teaching Assistant from the history department as well as two
five-to-six page essays. Your TA will assign, distribute, and grade the
essays. The two examinations will draw equally on material from lectures,
readings, and section discussions.

The midterm exam will constitute 20% of your grade and the final exam 30%. The
other half of your grade will derive from the two graded essays and from
attendance at and performance in your discussion section. Individual TAs will
determine how these grades are weighted comparatively. _Attendance at both the
lectures and the discussion sessions is mandatory_.



_Special Note_ : _Please remain in the auditorium hall for the full duration
of each lecture_.







** Schedule of Lectures and Readings**





1) August 23: Introduction to Western Civilization, Part II





** Part One:**

** The Age of the French Revolution**





2) August 28: The European Enlightenment



Weekly Readings: Chambers, _Western Experience_ , chap. 19, 656-674.



3) August 30: The Political and Social World of Eighteenth-

Century Europe



4) September 4: The French Revolution: The Moderate Phase



Weekly Readings: Frontispiece to the Diderot _Encyclopedia_ (1751); Immanuel
Kant,  "What Is Enlightenment?" (1784), both in the _Course Reader_.



5) September 6: The French Revolution: The Radical Phase



6) September 11: The Napoleonic Sequel



Weekly Readings: Thomas Jefferson, "Declaration of Independence" (1776);
"Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizenry" (1789), both in _Course
Reader_ ; Chambers, _Western Experience_ , chap. 20, 694-723, chap. 21,
727-756.



7) September 13: The Rise of European Conservatism





** Part Two:**

** Industrialization and Its Discontents**







8) September 18: The Industrial Revolution in Britain, 1770-1830



Weekly Readings: Edmund Burke, _Reflections on the Revolution in France_
(1790), _Course Reader_ ; Chambers, _Western Experience_ , chap. 22, 760-773.



9) September 20: The Growth of the Great European Cities





Friday, September 21: First Essay Due





10) September 25: Marx, Engels, and the Critique of Capitalism



Weekly Readings: Engels, _Condition of the Working Class in England_ (1845),
27-110, 223-246, 275-292; Chambers, _Western Experience_ , chap. 18, 624-643,
chap. 22, 773-793, chap. 23, 804-822, chap. 25, 881-883.



11) September 27: The Making of the European Middle Classes





** Part Three:**

** The Age of Victoria**





12) October 2: John Stuart Mill and British Political Liberalism



Weekly Readings: Mill, _On Liberty_ (1856), chaps. 1-4, pp. 55-162; Chambers,
_Western Experience_ , chap. 23, 799-804, 818-827.





13) October 4: The Cult of Progress and the Great Exhibition of  1851





14) October 9: In-Class Midterm Examination



15) October 11: The Life and Personality of Queen Victoria



(guest lecture by Professor Walter Arnstein)



Weekly Readings: Walter Houghton, _The Victorian Frame of Mind, 1830-1870_ ,
chap. 1: "Character of the Age," in _Course Reader_.



16) October 16: Darwin and the Darwinian Revolution



Weekly Readings: "Genesis," _The New English Bible_ ; Charles Darwin, _The
Descent of Man_ (1871), selections, both in _Course Reader_ ; Chambers,
_Western Experience_ , chap. 25, 883-887.





** Part Four:**

** European Society and Politics, 1860-1914**





17) October 18: The Rise of European Nationalism in Germany,  Italy, and
Eastern Europe



(guest lecture by Professor Paul Schroeder)



18) October 23: Europe's Imperial Surge, 1880-1914



Weekly Readings: Louis I. Snyder, ed., _The Imperialism Reader_ , selections,
in _Course Reader_ ; Chambers, _Western Experience_ , chap. 24, 834-863, chap.
25, 887-907.



19) October 25: The World of the European Jews: From the  Enlightenment to the
Eve of World War II



(guest lecture by Professor Adam Sutcliffe)



20) October 30: Nineteenth-Century European Feminism



Weekly Readings: Olympe de Gouges, "Declaration of the Rights of Woman and the
Female Citizen" (1791); Mary Wollstonecraft, _Vindication of the Rights of
Woman_ (1792), selection; John Stuart Mill, _The Subjection of Women_ (1869),
selection; Clara Zetkin,  "Women's Work and the Organization of Trade Unions"
(1892); Emmeline Pankhurst, "Why We Are Militant?" (1913); Alexandra
Kollontai, _The Autobiography of a Sexually Emancipated Communist Woman_
(1926), selections, all in the _Course Reader_ ; Chambers, _Western
Experience_ , chap. 26, 913-915.





** Part Five:**

** The Age of Catastrophes, 1914-1950**





21) November 1: The Great War of 1914-1918



22) November 6: The Bolshevik Revolution in Russia



Weekly Readings: Erich Maria Remarque, _All Quiet on the Western Front_
(1929); Chambers, _Western Experience_ , chap. 26, 919-921, chap. 27, 942-972,
chap. 28, 993-1001.



23) November 8: The Weimar Republic in Germany





Friday November 9: Second Essay Due





24) November 13: The Fascist World View



Weekly Readings: Benito Mussolini, "The Doctrine of Fascism" (1932); Adolf
Hitler, _Mein Kampf_ (1925), selections, both in the _Course Reader_ ;
Chambers, _Western Experience_ , chap. 27, 972-980, chap. 28, 1002-1013.



25) November 15: The Spanish Civil War (video lecture)



Thanksgiving Vacation!





26) November 27: The Nazi Dictatorship



Weekly Readings: Leni Yahil, _The Holocaust: The Fate of European Jewry_
(1990), Table E.1; Michael Shermer,  "How We Know the Holocaust Happened:
Debunkers and Deniers" (1997), both in _Course Reader_ ; Chambers, _Western
Experience_ , chaps. 26, 930-931, 935-936, chap. 28, 1013-1020, 1030-1033.



27) November 29: The Holocaust





Distribution in Class of the Final Examination





28) December 4: Stalinism in the USSR



<p cla

