**History 1377/Section 04512**

**MWF 10:00-11:00**

**Bob Buzzanco**

**AH 557**

**Office Hours: Wednesday, 9:00-10:00**

**743.3093**

**[home page:
vi.uh.edu/pages/buzzmat/buzzanco.htm](http://vi.uh.edu/pages/buzzmat/buzzanco.htm)**  
**[email: buzz@uh.edu](mailto:buzz@uh.edu)**

* * *

  
**Teaching Assistants: AH 525/713.743.3125**

**James Carter,   [jcarter@bayou.uh.edu](mailto:jcarter@bayou.uh.edu)**  
**     Office Hours: MWF, 9:00-10:00**

**Theresa Jach,   [trj3taj@aol.com](mailto:trj3taj@aol.com)**  
**     Office Hours: MWF, 9:00-10:00**

**Brian Behnken,
[bbehnken@dean.med.uth.tmc.edu](mailto:bbehnken@dean.med.uth.tmc.edu)**  
**     Office Hours: MWF, 11:00-12:00**  

* * *

**Books:**  
**Divine, Breen, Fredrickson, Williams, _America: Past and Present_ [referred
to as "text"]**

**Retrieving the American Past [referred to as RTAP]**

**William Craft, _Running a Thousand Miles for Freedom_ [referred to as
"Craft"]**

**Building the Continental Empire, by William Weeks [referred to as "Weeks"]**

* * *

  
**Grading:**

**Your grade in this course will be based on your scores on three exams, two
during the semester, 24 September and 29 October, and a final exam, 15
December. The first two tests will be worth 100 points each and the final will
be worth 150 points. If you miss an exam, there will be makeup tests given on
Friday 3 December only! during class time.** **On that day, you will be
required to make up either or both of your missing tests.   The only excuses
for missing that day will be medical or other emergencies, for which you will
provide written documentation.  If you miss the makeup test, you will receive
zeroes for those tests.**

**Make sure you attend class regularly and keep up with the assigned readings.
If at any time you are unsure of the material we are covering, please ask the
T.A. or me. If you have any questions about your grade on an exam, please see
the T.A. first and then, if you want to discuss it further, see me.**

* * *

  
**_Academic Honesty:_**

**You are expected to do your own work in this class. The tests will consist
of in-class essays and you will be expected to write your answers on your own.
If you have any questions about the University of Houston plagiarism policy,
please consult the University Handbook. Also, there are now many websites
covering various aspects of U.S. history. Feel free to peruse them--many are
quite useful--but do not turn in work from the web as your own. We are all
familiar with the various resources on the web and will be able to notice any
cases of turning in information from the web as your own.**  

* * *

  
**Classroom Decorum:**

**Please turn off pagers and cell phones before entering class. Remember, this
is a college course; you have decided to enrol and attend.   Therefore, if you
are in class it is imperative that you remain silent for the full fifty
minutes that class is in session.  If you decide to move about or make noise,
university regulations allow us to remove your name from the roster.**  


* * *

  
**_Topics and Readings_**  


**Week 1, Text, chapters 1; "The Indians' New World" in RTAP**

**European Background**

**Slavery in the New World**

* * *

  
**Week 2, Text, chapter 2; "What Did It Mean to be a Puritan" in RTAP**

**New England**

**Class in Colonial America**

* * *

  
**Week 3, Text, chapters 3-4; "Colonial American Political Culture" in RTAP**  
**                                             [No Class 6 September--Labor
Day]**

**18th Century American Society**

**Colonial Politics**

* * *

  
**Week 4, Weeks, chapters 1-2**

**Trouble in the Colonies**

**Class and Religious Dissent**

* * *

  
**Week 5**  
**                     [20 September--last day to withdraw without grade]**

**The North American Challenge**

**The Empire Strikes Back**

**TEST, 24 September**  

* * *

**Week 6, Text, chapter 5**

**War and Independence**

**Slavery and Freedom in an age of Revolution**  

* * *

  
**Week 7, Text, chapter 6**

**Blueprint for a New Nation**

**Making a Constitution**

* * *

  
**Week 8, Text, chapters 7-8**

**The Republic in Peril: Crisis and Change in the New Nation**

* * *

  
**Week 9, Text, chapters 9-10; "Growing Up in Nineteenth Century America" in
RTAP**

**The Age of Jackson**

**The Market Revolution**

* * *

**Week 10,   Text, chapter 13; "Nat Turner and Slave Resistance" in RTAP**

**Slavery, Economy, and Society in the South**

**TEST, 29 October**  

* * *

  
**Week 11, Text, chapter 12;   Weeks, chapter 2-6**  
**                 [5 November--last day to drop]**

**Slavery**

**Continental Expansion**  

* * *

  
**Week 12, Text, chapter 14**

**The Impending Crisis**  

* * *

  
**Week 13,   "From Artisans to Factory Hands" in RTAP; Craft, Running a
Thousand Miles for Freedom**

**Free Labor and Slave Culture**

**Abraham Lincoln and the Coming of War**  

* * *

  
**Week 14, Text, chapter 15;   Frederick Douglass, "What to the Slave is the
Fourth of July," in RTAP**  
**                     [No Class 26 November--Thanksgiving]**

**The Civil War**  

* * *

  
**Week 15, Text, chapter 16**

**Reconstruction**

**December 3: Makeup Exams**

**FINAL EXAM, 10 December, 11-2**  

* * *

