**

History 336

RUSSIAN CIVILIZATION

Autumn 1997

_Instructor_ : Kurt Schultz

_

Course Description_ :

**

A survey of Russian civilization from earliest times to the present. The
course will acquaint students with Russian geography, ethnic groups, and
religious institutions, as well as with the social, political, and economic
developments that have combined to produce a constantly evolving Russian
nation. Emphasis will fall on the period from the formation of a centralized
medieval principality in Moscow in the 1400s to the disintegration of the USSR
in 1991. Lectures and discussions will predominate during class hours. Each
evening after class students will have the opportunity to attend a non-
compulsory showing of a (usually) Russian-language film.

**_

Required Books_ :

All are available at SBX

**

MacKenzie & Curran, _A History of Russia, the Soviet Union, and Beyond_ , 4th
ed.

Fitzpatrick, _The Russian Revolution, 1917-1932_.

Dostoyevsky, _Crime and Punishment_.

I will occasionally ask you to read a brief article or small section from a
book or folder placed on closed reserve in the Main Library. I'll give you
plenty of advance notice.

**_

Class Meetings_ :

**

Days & Time |

Building & Room |

Office Hours |

Phone & E-Mail  
---|---|---|---  
  
I have discovered over the years that students in evening classes have
schedules too diverse to fit any set office-hour schedule. Therefore, in
addition to my _regular_ office hours at Dulles Hall, I will be perfectly
happy to set up appointments for any daytime or evening hour during the week.
Please try to set up the appointment in advance of your desired time.

**_

Class Participation, Attendance and Decorum:

_**

Classes will vary in format, but when I am talking you should always feel free
to stop me, raise questions, voice skepticism, and so on. If you do not
understand something, **tell me**! If you want to know more about something
I've only touched upon, **ask me**! Also, I believe that the exchange of
opinions is a key to learning, so I encourage you to challenge anything I say,
as long as it's done deently and in the spirit of wishing to learn.

Attendance is not compulsory. Do keep in mind that I will not devote my office
hours to going over previous material with anyone who is chronically absent.
Nor will I look kindly on students who are chronically late. Please arrive
before class begins.

In class, I expect your undivided attention. Occasional remarks to your
neighbor are perfectly OK, but nonstop chatter is not only impolite, but an
invitation to embarrassment. So, too, is sleeping. If you are exhauted, I
would much rather you slept at home than in class. In essence, the normal
rules of civilized and courteous behavior will apply to this class.

**_

EXAMINATIONS_ :

**

There will be one midterm and one final exam, both essay format.

**_

Midterm Exam_ :

**

You will receive a list of several essay questions one week before the midterm
exam in due and will have that week to develop and complete your answer to the
question of your choice. Midterm exams will be due at the beginning of the
appointed class, or must be electronically submitted to my e-mail account by
noon of the appointed day. We will discuss the details in depth well before
the midterm.

**_

Final Exam_ :

**

You will receive several essay questions one week prior to the final and will
be urged to study all questions in depth. You will be permitted to bring in
**one** 5 " x 8: index card containing outlined information relating to these
questions. At the start of the exam period, I will choose which question
students must answer. The final exam will be comprehensive. Please be sure to
read my handout, _Guide to Writing Short Answers and Essays in History_. "

**_

Make-Up Exam Policy

**_

If for any family or medical reason you find it absolutely necessary to miss
an examination, you must contact me before the examination and have my consent
to your absence if you wish to take a make-up exam. Under extraordinary
circumstances you may miss an exam without having notified me in advance and
not have to worry about being able to make it up; I do realize that life does
exist beyond the confines of my classroom.

**_

Paper_ :

**

There will be an out-of-class paper based on Dostoyevsky's _Crime and
Punishment_. I'll hand out something a week or so into the quarter that
describes the nature of this assignment.

**_

Quizzes_ :

**

There will be three take-home quizzes based strictly on material found in the
textbook, MacKenzie & Curran, _A History of Russia, the Soviet Union, and
Beyond_. There will be a mixed format of multiple-choice and fill-in-the-blank
questions along with a couple of short-answer Ids. I'll distribute study
guides well in advance of the quizzes.

**_

Method of Determining Final Course Grade_ :

** **

** Quizzes 20% |  **

** Midterm 30% |  **

** Paper 20% |  **

** Final 30%  
---|---|---|---  
  |   |   |  
**_

Enrollment_ :

**

You are solely responsible for ensuring that you are officially enrolled in
the course, by the official deadline, and that you have paid your fees
(however much I wish I could afford to help). Please attend to this matter if
you haven't already.

**_

Suggestions to Help You in the Course_ :

**First and fundamental, if you do not understand a course requirement or
course material, please ask about it. If you are sitting in class mystified by
something and thinking that you are the only one who doesn't get it, I can
assure you that you are probably in very good company. **Please ask questions
if you do not understand something!

**

Second, you can avoid disaster on exams and papers by running your idease past
me **ahead** of the dues date. You need not work in isolation after I hand out
exam questions: think about the questions; organize your thoughts; write up an
outline or draft; then check with me.

Third, if you do not understand how or why I graded q quiz, paper, or exam,
make an appointment to see me at the earliest oportunity. This might help you
understand what went wrong and how to prevnt a recurrence. It might also
reveal a mistake or misjudgment on my part.

Finally, read the handout I have distributed, _Guide to Writing Short Answers
and Essays in History_. This guide offers my tips for composing good Ids and
essays. It is indispensable reading if you wish to know what I expect to see
on quiz Ids and in your midterm and final exams.

The basic point here is that I would like your final grade to reflect as
closely as possible the amount of time and effort you have devoted to learning
and understanding. Unfortunately, such exact matches do not always occur.

