Philosophy and Economics 524

Philosophy of Economics

Syllabus

* * *

**Introduction:**

Philosophy and economics overlap considerably. The many questions that are of
interest both to philosophers and to economics fall into three main
categories: (1) methodological questions concerning the character of economics
as a science, (2) ethical questions concerning welfare, justice, rights, and
freedom, and (3) foundational questions concerning the nature of rationality
and social interaction.

This semester Philosophy/Economics 524 will focus mainly on questions that
fall under the second and third categories, although at the beginning of the
semester we will briefly discuss the structure and peculiarities of economic
theory (conceived of as a scientific theory designed to explain and predict
economic phenomena). In particular, the course will focus on game theory both
as a object concerning which one can raise foundational questions, and as a
tool for studying questions concerning efficiency, justice, rights, and
freedom.

The structure of the course, which is specified in detail below, is roughly as
follows. After some brief introductory material concerning the relations
between economics and ethics, we will study "expected utility theory," which
is the standard theory of rationality in contemporary economics and which is
also the theory of rationality employed in game theory. Parts of this theory
of rationality are also embedded in predictive and explanatory economic
theories, and after mastering the theory of rationality, we will turn in the
third week of the semester to the fundamental theory of contemporary economics
and will discuss superficially some of its methodological peculiarities. The
fifth and sixth weeks will then be devoted to the theory of welfare and the
relationships between so-called "positive" economics, the theory of
rationality, and morality. Weeks 7-10 will be devoted to the study of game
theory and its most important concepts, with special attention to mixed
strategies, the representation of knowledge, and equilibrium concepts. Week 11
and part of week 12 will focus on the oddities of repeated games and the
strains placed on the notions of rationality and common knowledge. The last
three and a half weeks of the semester will focus on applications of game
theory to the theory of justice, first via the theory of bargaining, then via
evolutionary game theory.

Because this is the first time that I have taught the course with this
particular emphasis, this schedule is not only tentative; it is bound to
change.

* * *

**Course Goals:**

1\. To provide some solid knowledge of the conceptual structure of standard
economic theory, its theory of rationality, and its relevance to ethics.

2\. To introduce the basic concepts of game theory, clarify the philosophical
questions they raise, and explore their relevance to moral questions
concerning efficiency, justice, rights, and freedom.

3\. To provide an introduction to philosophy of science, philosophy of social
science, and ethics. This course should help you to appreciate what
philosophical inquiry is and how it can contribute to work in economics.

4\. To provide an introduction to the nature of argument and of informal logic
in general: The course aims to help you to tell the difference between good
and bad arguments and to help you to present and criticize arguments
effectively. To the extent that this course helps you to make and criticize
arguments, it should be of considerable use to you, quite apart from its
particular subject matter.

5\. To help you to develop your abilities to present and to criticize
arguments both in discussion and, in particular, in writing: _Every_ good
essay, regardless of the subject matter, is an extended argument for some
thesis or conclusion. The only thing special about philosophy essays is the
extent to which one focuses upon the logic of the argument. This course should
help you to write more sharply organized, focused and effective essays.

The extent to which these course goals can be achieved is, of course, largely
up to you, but it is important that you appreciate what I are trying to
accomplish. If you cannot see how any particular class or reading assignment
relates to the goals of the course, please be sure to ask about it. In
abstract matters it is especially important and especially difficult to be
clear on what the point is. Keep asking "So what?" Since this course is much
more concerned with mastering skills than with merely acquiring information,
it demands your active participation.

* * *

**What this course does _not_ aim to do:**

1\. This course does not aim to provide a solid introduction to economic
theory. Although it will introduce many of the basic concepts of economics and
particularly of game theory, it is not designed to substitute for a course in
economic theory.

2\. This course does not aim to provide a thorough or precise introduction to
philosophy of science, to ethical theory, or to social and political
philosophy. Again it will introduce many basic concepts, but it is not a
substitute for courses in philosophy of science, ethics, or social and
political philosophy.

* * *

**Note:** Students are encouraged to discuss problems concerning the teaching
of this course with the instructor. If students wish to pursue a complaint
with someone else, they should contact James Anderson, Assistant to the
Chairperson, Philosophy Department, 5185 H.C. White Hall, 263-5162.

* * *

**Texts:**

Dan Hausman and Michael McPherson, _Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy_

Herbert Gintis, _Game Theory Evolving_

Brian Skyrms, _Evolution of the Social Contract_

Xeroxed collection

All will be on sale only at the Underground Textbook Exchange, 664 State
Street

* * *

**Course Web Site:**

A variety of material, including the syllabus, a bibliography, and other
materials will be available on the course web page at
http://philosophy.wisc.edu/hausman/524/524s00.htm. There will also be a course
discussion page, where class discussion can continue out of class at
http://philosophy.wisc.edu/524.

* * *

**Course Requirements:**

There will be frequent homework assignments, a midterm, a term paper, and a
final examination. Your semester grade will depend on the term paper (30%),
the midterm (15%), the final (25%), the homework (20%), and class
participation (10%).

**_Class Participation_ :** Attendance is optional, but class participation
will count for 10% of the semester grade.

**_Term Paper_ :** The term paper counts for 30% of your semester grade. It
should be about ten double-spaced typed pages (2,500 words), and the first
draft is due at the beginning of class on Wednesday, April 18. You will have
the opportunity to rewrite the term paper and to submit a revised version,
which will be due on Monday, May 7\. Revisions must be substantial, and when
you hand in your revision, you should resubmit the first version along with an
explanation of what revisions you have undertaken. If you submit a revised
version, your grade will be the average of your grades on the two versions.
All term paper topics must be approved by Wednesday, April 4.

**_Exams_** : There will be a midterm on Wednesday, March 21 and a final
examination during the scheduled examination period. Part of the examinations
will be in essay format. The exams will test your ability to apply the
concepts and arguments with which the course is concerned. Although the final
examination will be cumulative, it will focus on the latter part of the
course.

**_Homework and study questions_ : **Study questions will be distributed for
most of the classes. You are responsible for preparing answers so that the
questions can be fruitfully discussed in class. You are also responsible for
writing out answers to any questions that are marked with asterisks. Sometimes
homework will be collected and graded. Sometimes it will only be checked for
completion. Often, it will not be collected at all. You can drop your three
lowest homework grades, but homework may not be handed in after the class in
which it is collected. (You might want to think about the possible strategies
you and I may adopt in the game whose rules I have in this way specified.)

* * *

**Tentative Course Outline:**

_Note: The optional readings are not included in the course packet, and they
are _not_ expected of anyone. I have listed them only so that those who are
interested in the topic or who would like to see a more rigorous treatment
will know where to look._

* * *

_Monday, January 22_ : Introduction to philosophy and economics; economics,
ethics and rationality

_     Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy_, ch. 1, 2

* * *

_Wednesday, January 24_ : Introduction, continued; rationality under
conditions of certainty

_     Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy_, ch. 1, 2; and chapter 3,
section 3.1

    Optional: Gerard Debreu, _Theory of Value_ , ¡ì4.6 (pp. 55-59)

* * *

_Monday, January 29_ : Rationality, utility, and expected utility theory

_     Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy_, ch 3  
    Hausman, _The Inexact and Separate Science of Economics_ , ¡ì12.4 (xerox)

    optional:   
_         Game Theory Evolving_: 16.39, 16.40 (pp. 381-87)  
        John Harsanyi, _Rational Behavior and Bargaining Equilibrium in Games and Social Situations_ , chapter 3.

* * *

_Wednesday, January 31_ : Rationality and positive economics; introduction to
consumer choice theory

    Hausman, _The Inexact and Separate Science of Economics_ , 2.1-2.5 (xerox)

* * *

_Monday, February 5_ : The fundamentals of microeconomic theory

_     The Inexact and Separate Science of Economics_, ¡ì2.1-2.5, 3.1-3.6
(xerox)

* * *

_Wednesday, February 7_ : Methodological problems of positive economics. Are
unrealistic "assumptions" acceptable?

    Milton Friedman, "The Methodology of Positive Economics" (xerox)

* * *

_Monday, February 12_ : Realism, instrumentalism, and the appraisal of
economic theories

    Friedman, "The Methodology of Positive Economics" (xerox)  
    Hausman, "Why Look Under the Hood?" (xerox)

* * *

_Wednesday, February 14_ : Rationality in positive and normative economics

_     Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy_, ch 4

* * *

_Monday, February 19_ : Rationality and morality. Is it rational to be moral?

_     Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy_, ch. 5

* * *

_Wednesday, February 21_ : Welfare in economic theory

_     Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy_, ch. 6

* * *

_Monday, February 26_ : Welfare economics: efficiency and cost-benefit
analysis

_     Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy_, ch. 7

* * *

_Wednesday, Feburary 28_ : Introduction to game theory: definition of a game;
cooperative versus non-cooperative game theory, extensive forms

_     Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy_, sec. 12.1  
    Ross, "Game Theory," ¡ì1, 2.2, 2.3 (xerox)  
_    Game Theory Evolving_, ¡ì1.1-1.3

* * *

_Monday, March 5_ : Normal forms, Nash equilibrium, dominant strategies

    Ross, "Game Theory," ¡ì2.4-2.6 (xerox)  
_    Game Theory Evolving_, ¡ì1.4-2.2

* * *

_Wednesday, March 7_ : "Solving" games by eliminating dominated strategies

_     Game Theory Evolving_, ¡ì2.2-2.7, 2.9, 2.12, 2.13; optional 2.8, 2.14

    Optional (on the prisoner's dilemma):  
        Ken Binmore, _Playing Fair_. Cambridge: MIT Pres, 1994, chapter 3.

* * *

_Spring Vacation_

* * *

_Monday, March 19_ : Some sample simple games: Pure and mixed coordination,
chicken (hawk and dove) and assurance

_     Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy_, ¡ì13.2  
_     Game Theory Evolving_, ¡ì3.1-3.5, 3.12, 3.13; optional 4.29, 4.30

* * *

_Wednesday, March 21_ : Midterm examination

* * *

_Monday, March 26_ : Mixed strategies

GET 4.1-4.7, 4.9-4.10, 4.42; optional 4.14, 4.17, 4.25, 4.36

* * *

_Wednesday, March 28_ : Knowledge and information sets

    Ken Binmore, _Fun and Games_ , pp. 445-56 (xerox)

* * *

_Monday, April 2_ : Common knowledge, rationalizability, and correlated
equilibrium

    Ken Binmore, _Fun and Games_ , pp. 467-69, 476-88 (xerox)  
    Peter Vanderschraaf, "Knowledge, Equilibrium and Convention," Introduction and ¡ì1 (pp. 337-45) (xerox)

* * *

_*Wednesday, April 4_ : More on correlated equilibrium; introduction to
repeated games

_     Evolution of the Social Contract_, chapter 3.  
_     Game Theory Evolving_ ¡ì3.24, 4.43  
    Ross, "Game Theory," ¡ì4, 5

**_All term paper topics must be approved by April 4._**

* * *

_Monday, April 9_ : Subgame perfect equilibrium, backward induction, and
repeated games

    Ken Binmore, "Modeling Rational Players, Part 1" ¡ì1, 2 (pp. 179-94) (xerox)  
_    Game Theory Evolving_ 5.1-5.5

Optional: Robert Axelrod, _The Evolution of Cooperation_. New York: Basic
Books, 1984.

* * *

_Wednesday, April 11_ : Repeated games, trembling hands, and common knowledge
of rationality

    Ken Binmore, "Modeling Rational Players, Part 1" ¡ì3, 4 (pp. 194-204)  
_     Game Theory Evolving_ 5.11, 5.15-5.17; optional 5.13  
_     Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy_ ¡ì13.3  
    Philip Reny, "Common Knowledge and Games with Perfect Information" (xerox)

    optional: Philip Pettit and Robert Sugden, "The Backward Induction Paradox" (xerox)

* * *

_Monday, April 16_ : Game theory, rationality, and experimentation. Which game
is being played?

    Martin Hollis, "Penny Pinching and Backward Induction" (xerox)  
_     Game Theory Evolving_ ¡ì11.1-11.4

* * *

_*Wednesday, April 18_ : Bargaining: the Nash solution

    John Harsanyi, _Rational Behavior and Bargaining Equilibrium in Games and Social Situations_ , pp. 141-53 (xerox)  
_    Game Theory Evolving_ ¡ì15.1, 15.2, 15.7

**_First version of term paper due April 18._**

* * *

_Monday, April 23_ : Bargaining: Nash, Rubenstein, and Kalai-Smorodinsky

    Shaun Hargreaves Heap and Yanis Varoufakis, _Game Theory: A Critical Introduction_ , pp. 115-37 (xerox).  
    Jon Elster, _The Cement of Society_ , pp. 54-68 (xerox)  
_    Game Theory Evolving_ ¡ì5.6

* * *

_Wednesday, April 25_ : Nash, Kalai-Smordinsky and justice

    David Gauthier, _Morals by Agreement_ , pp. 129-50 (xerox)  
    H. Peyton Young, _Equity in Theory and Practice_ , pp. 116-129 (xerox)  
_    Economic Analysis and Moral Philosophy_, ¡ì13.4

* * *

_Monday, April 30_ : Justice: impartiality versus mutual advantage, the
relevance of the non-agreement point, and the problem of commitment

    Brian Barry, _Theories of Justice_ , pp. 76-85 (xerox)

    Optional:   
        David Gauthier, _Morals by Agreement_ , chapter 6  
        Edward McClennen, "Constrained Maximization and Resolute Choice," pp. 95-118 of Paul, _et al.,_ eds. _The New Social Contract: Essays on Gauthier._ Oxford: Blackwell, 1988.

* * *

_Wednesday, May 2_ : Evolutionary game theory and the explanation of fairness
norms

_     Evolution of the Social Contract_, Preface and chapter 1.

    Optional: _Game Theory Evolving_ , ¡ì9.1, 9.2

* * *

_*Monday, May 7_ : Evolution, rationality and commitment

_     Evolution of the Social Contract_, chapter 2

_**Revision of term paper due May 7.** (Be sure to include an explanation of
what revisions you have undertaken and be sure to resubmit the first version
of the term paper.)_

* * *

_Wednesday, May 9_ : Correlation, convention, asymmetry, and justice

    Peter Vanderschraaf, "Knowledge, Equilibrium and Convention," ¡ì1 (pp. 45-50) (xerox)  
    ESC, chapters 3, 4

* * *

**Office Hours:**

If my office hours, (Tuesdays 1:00-2:00 and Wednesdays 10:00-11:00) are not
convenient, see me after class to arrange another time to meet. My job is to
help you to master the skills and material with which this course is
concerned, so feel free to come see me.

* * *

**The Use of Email:**

Email can be a great convenience, but it can get out of hand. Feel free to
email me at dhausman@facstaff.wisc.edu with any specific questions you have
about assignments or requirements. If the question and answer are relevant to
others, I will post them on the course discussion page. _If you do not want
your question posted, you should let me know. Otherwise I will assume that in
emailing me, you've given me permission to post your question._ You can send
me substantive philosophical questions, too, provided that _you_ also post
them on the course discussion page. I will post my answers as well. That way I
can serve as many students as possible. Some questions are not appropriate.
For example,  "Could you please restate the last three lectures?" And some
questions are better discussed in person than over email. I'll do the best I
can to be helpful.

* * *

**A Note on Plagiarism:**

Plagiarism is a serious offense. All sources and assistance used in preparing
your papers must be precisely and explicitly acknowledged. If you have any
questions about what constitutes plagiarism, please come talk with me.
Ignorance of what constitutes plagiarism is not a defense. It is your
responsibility to be sure.

* * *

**The role of the readings in the course:**.

Although I will often cite and often criticize specific arguments from the
readings, the lectures usually present an independent perspective on the
issues. Critically engaging with the arguments in the lecture is your most
important task, but you will be better able to understand the arguments I make
if you study the readings carefully. The examinations will ask not only that
you have mastered the material in the lectures but that you be able to relate
the arguments in the lectures to the arguments in the readings and to respond
intelligently to questions concerning the important arguments in the readings.

* * *

**Some hints on reading philosophy papers:**

Although very few students will be able to master all the difficult material
we will be studying this semester, you should aim to grasp most of the
readings completely. The assignments are usually short, particularly when the
going gets rough. Here are some detailed hints about how to get a solid
understanding of the readings:

1\. Use your highlighter very sparingly. It is much more useful to pencil in
marginal notes summarizing or querying specific points than to highlight
passages. Actively engaging the author is much more valuable than merely
trying to assimilate the prose. And if you do highlight, only highlight a
small percentage of the text. (There is not much point to highlighting
everything, apart from adding color to the page!)

2\. Some of the texts are technical, and unfortunately the notation that game
theorists use can be difficult to understand. There is no good alternative to
pulling out a pad of paper and writing out the definitions and the steps the
arguments for yourself (This is especially true with respect to proofs.)

3\. The assignments are usually short, and you should plan on reading them all
(including the non-technical ones) at least twice. During the first reading of
the non-technical essays you should ask yourself:

a. What is the author's position?

b. What is the general structure of the paper? Is it a collection of separate
arguments, or does it aim to make one main argument?

c. What are the author's main assumptions? (Where is the author coming from?)

d. Against whom does the author take him/herself to be arguing? What is the
context in which the piece was written?

e. What is the main line of argument (or what are the main lines of argument)?

f. What objections does the author address and how successful is the author in
answering them?

g. How does the author's position relate to your views, to the views of other
authors, to the views defended in lecture? What criticisms would the author
make of arguments developed in lecture or in other readings? To what extent is
the position of the author open to criticisms made in lecture or in other
readings?

4\. During the second reading of the assignment, you should proceed more
slowly and critically. Rather than asking, as suggested above, questions about
what the author's purposes, organization, and argument _are_ , you should try
to _assess_ all of these and particularly the author's arguments

* * *

**General Directions on Essay Writing**

**Style and references:**

1\. You are expected to give references when you cite detailed claims or
arguments made in the readings, and your papers should, where appropriate,
show familiarity with relevant materials from the lectures or reading for the
course. But you are expected to write essays, not examination answers. So
don't introduce irrelevant matters to demonstrate that you have done the
course readings. ( _But you must not ignore relevant supporting arguments and,
particularly, objections in the readings. Simply ignoring challenges and
objections is a serious deficiency in an essay._ ) Cite the readings only when
they are relevant. Be sure that your paper is a well organized argument for
some clearly articulated thesis.

2\. When you quote, paraphrase, or make use of a point made by others, be sure
to document the source. We are not particular about what style you use. All
that matters is that your references be precise and usable. If you say that
Gintis thinks that Nash equilibria maximize the players' utilities, it should
be clear on what page Ginis supposedly says this. The easiest way to give a
reference is simply to put the source and page number in parenthesis. _Papers
without clear references (where needed) will be marked down._

3\. Papers must be typed or printed double-spaced with wide margins (at least
one inch) on _all_ sides, so that there is plenty of room for marginal
comments. Be sure to keep copies of your papers. Please do not use binders.

4\. Papers for the course must be essentially correct in their "mechanical"
aspects-- spelling, punctuation, grammar, typing, and so forth. _Papers with
more than 3 or 4 errors per page will be marked down_ , and if they are very
messy, they will not only be penalized, but they will also be returned for
correction before they are graded. Obviously spelling and typing are of no
intrinsic importance, but messy papers are hard to assess; and it is not
unfair to expect you to take responsibility for making sure that your papers
are correct in these regards. If you have difficulty with the mechanical
features of paper writing, please get someone to proofread your paper before
you hand it in.

* * *

**Hints on essay writing:**

1\. The paper topics are not recipes for writing your essays. You have to
decide what it is that you want to _maintain_ in your essays. _Do not regard a
paper topic as an essay examination question. The point is to write a well-
organized and unified argument for some clearly enunciated conclusion._

2\. The task of writing a good essay is virtually identical with the task of
thinking out a clear thesis or conclusion that you want to defend and then
elaborating and defending it. You should be able to say clearly and precisely
not only what your paper is about, but also what your paper _maintains_. Be
sure each of your papers has both a thesis--that it _asserts_ something
definite--and a logical organization. Once it is clear what you what to _show_
, you will have a criterion to decide what is relevant and the basis for
organizing your paper. Can you put your main point clearly in a sentence? Can
you say clearly in a sentence what your paper _shows_ or _proves_? Are all the
parts of your paper relevant to your main point? Is the structure of your
argument clear? No good essay merely summarizes things you have read and then
offers your remarks or points of comparison or differences you noticed. Every
acceptable essay integrates its remarks into an argument of its own.
Exposition of the views of others should always be part of _your_ argument for
_your_ thesis.

3\. Note that a well-organized paper is not merely orderly. For example, a
paper that argues that Gintis argues claims 1, 2, and 3 and that one can
defend claim 1 as follows, claim 2 as follows, but not claim 3 is certainly
orderly, and it certainly has a thesis. But it would only be well-organized--
truly one paper rather than three--if the discussions of the three claims bore
some relations to one another and if the paper added up to some unified and
substantive statement.

4\. Avoid first paragraphs that says things such as, "First I will discuss the
views of Skyrms and Binmore. Then I will discuss their strengths and
weaknesses. Then I will compare their conclusions and formulate my opinion."
Passages such as these make it sound as if your argument will begin only on
the last page. Exposition of the views of others has to find its place
_within_ your argument, not as a preface to your argument. If you think in
terms of what you want to _establish_ , and outline your paper in terms of
stages in your argument, your essay will be much stronger.

5\. Try to say exactly what you mean. Pay careful attention to your language.
Sentences such as "Games are complicated concepts" are unacceptably careless.
Value your words and use them accurately. Although I will know you pretty well
before I grade your essays, remember that your writing is one way of
presenting yourself, of saying who you are.

6\. To help in organizing your thinking, you should attempt to answer the
following three questions:

1\. What is your thesis--that is, what is it that you are trying to _maintain_
or _show_ or _prove_? What is your main _argument_ for your thesis?

2\. What is the most important objection to or criticism of your thesis that
you need to consider? Formulate that objection or criticism as an _argument_.

3\. What is your _argument_ in response to the objection or criticism
mentioned in answer to question 2?

If you cannot answer these questions clearly and easily, then there are
serious problems with your paper. Do not regard your papers as finished or
acceptable until each clearly implies answers to the above questions. (But an
essay is not, of course, a list of answers to any set of questions.) Taking
the task of answering these questions seriously can make a big difference in
the quality of your paper.

* * *

**Special considerations in writing papers for Philosophy/Economics 524:**

1\. In a political debate, the point is to win, and one consequently tries to
make the arguments of one's opponents sound as ridiculous and worthless as
possible. In a philosophical debate (or in writing a philosophy essay), in
contrast, the objective is to learn the truth. So you should try to make the
arguments conflicting with your views as compelling as possible, before you
answer them. If there are any objections to what you are maintaining that you
cannot answer, then you cannot be sure that you are right. Work hard at trying
to see "the other side".

2\. Although this course is cross-listed in the economics department, I'm
trained as a philosopher and the emphasis in the course is philosophical.
There's room in the papers for lots of economic analysis, but it should be
linked to philosophical points.

* * *

**Seeking help:**

As you are working on the final versions of your essays, please feel free to
come to me for help.

* * *

**Paper grading criteria**

* * *

An "A" paper typically has all of the following virtues, although in
exceptional cases papers with only five of the six virtues might merit an "A"

1\. It has a well-defined thesis and a logical organization.

2\. It shows good sense, intellectual honesty and struggle. It attempts to
defend a defensible thesis and takes seriously objections to that thesis.

3\. It is well-informed. _If_ there are passages in the assigned readings for
the course that are particularly relevant to the matters under discussion in
the essay, these are cited and discussed. The paper shows an awareness of
conceptual distinctions and clarifications developed in the course.

4\. It is intelligent, logical, and careful. The argument is carefully
articulated and developed. Obvious difficulties are anticipated and answered,
and gaps are closed.

5\. It is significant. The issues discussed, although typically matters of
detail, are of some importance, and their importance is made clear within the
essay.

6\. The paper is written in a lucid and grammatical style.

* * *

A "B" paper has the following virtues:

1-3. As before.

4\. It is logical and not careless. The argument is well articulated.

5\. It is not trivial. The essay provides some motivation for its topic.

6\. The paper is grammatical.

* * *

A "C" paper has at least the following virtues:

1\. It is orderly and has some focus.

2\. It shows some serious concern with the issues it deals with.

3\. It is not uninformed. Where relevant, it shows awareness of the content of
the course.

4\. There are some definite and cogent arguments in the essay.

5\. The paper has some point.

6\. The paper is readable and minimally grammatical.

* * *

A "D" paper

1\. Has some intelligible organization.

2\. Shows some concern with the issues it deals with.

3\. Shows minimal awareness of the course content.

4\. Makes some relevant and sensible argument

5\. Has some point.

6\. Is comprehensible.

