# PSC 121

  

# American National Government and Politics

  

# Spring 1997

  
Instructor: Gavan Duffy  
Office: 531 Eggers Hall  
Phone: 443-5764  
Messages: 443-2416  
Fax: 443-9082  
Home Page: [ http://web.syr.edu/~gavan/](http://web.syr.edu/~gavan/)  
Office Hours: W 2-4 and by appointment  
Email: [ gduffy@syr.edu](mailto:gduffy@syr.edu)  

## Course Objectives

This course surveys the primary institutions and processes of American
politics and government. It additionally articulates fundamental tensions that
recur regularly in American political life, such as those between majority
rule and minority rights, between individual liberty and social
responsibility, between national sovereignty and local autonomy, and between
the values of democratic theory and the realities of republican government.

The course thus discusses the "nuts-and-bolts" of our political institutions,
the fundamental issues pressing today, and those appearing on the horizon.
Although at Syracuse University this course is required only of political
science majors, many institutions require courses like it for all
undergraduates. They do so in the knowledge that students, as they assume the
rights and responsibilies of democratic citizenship, require foundations upon
which to choose wisely.

## Course Mechanics

The course consists of two lecture sections and one discussion section each
week. The lectures will be delivered primarily by the instructor, although
guest lecturers may be invited from time to time. Graduate teaching assistants
will lead the discussion sections, held on Thursdays or Fridays. The
discussion sections are designed to afford students the opportunity to discuss
issues that arise from the readings and lectures in smaller groups. _You must
be enrolled in both the lecture section and one of the discussion sections._

Grades will be calculated as follows:

  * **Examinations:** There will be three _cumulative_ examinations. _The lowest of the three grades will not count toward your final grade._ The remaining two examination grades will each count for 25% of your final grade. The exam format will be a mix of essay, short answer, identification, and so-called objective questions. 
  * **Papers:** Two short (5 to 10 pages) essays will be assigned in discussion section. Each will count for 15% of your final grade. 
  * **Quizzes:** The section leaders will administer three to six pop quizzes on the assigned readings. The lowest quiz score will be dropped. Your performance on these quizzes will count for 10% of your final grade. 
  * **Participation:** Your attendance and participation in section will count for the remaining 10% of your final grade. 
The examinations will assess your comprehension of the material presented in
the lectures and in the readings. While the lectures and the readings cover
the same topics, neither is a subset or summary of the other. _You cannot
expect to do well by attending the lectures and ignoring the readings or by
reading the text and skipping the lectures._ Quizzes will be based solely on
the assigned readings. Your quiz and examination grades will depend entirely
on your ability to answer questions about the course contents, and your paper
grades will depend entirely upon your ability to sustain a coherent, well-
reasoned argument. You will _never_ be graded on the basis of your political
opinions.

_Absolutely no make--up examinations or quizzes will be administered._ There
will be _no exceptions_ to this policy. Any student missing an examination or
quiz will receive a score of zero. Because the lowest quiz score and
examination score will be dropped, make-up exams and quizzes should not be
necessary. There will be no "curve." Students will receive grades based
entirely upon their performance.

Quizzes will not necessarily be administered on the same week in each section.
Do not rely on the knowledge that a quiz was administered in one discussion
section as a sign that one will be administered in another section on the same
week.

## Student Responsibilities

Students are expected to have completed the reading material _prior to_ the
session for which it is assigned. The lectures presuppose that students have
completed the assigned reading, but they do not merely summarize the reading.
You will find the lectures far more comprehensible if you read the material
beforehand. You will also find it easier to study for and perform well on
examinations if you keep up with the readings throughout the semester.
_Cramming is known to be a losing strategy_.

Students are expected to submit their papers on time to the leaders of their
discussion sections. Failure to do so will result in a penalty of one letter-
grade per day of lateness. Exceptions can be made for legitimate reasons, but
you must contract these beforehand with your discussion section leader.

Cheating and plagiarism constitute much more than serious violations of
University policy. They indicate a lack of respect for those fellow students
who will have worked hard to earn their grades. Any cheater or plagiarist
will, _at minimum_ , automatically receive a failing grade in the course.
Additional disciplinary action will be pursued within the University. It is
unfortunate that this must be emphasized in a course syllabus, as most
students perform honestly.

## Assistance

The graduate teaching assistants for this course are both pursuing the
doctoral degree in political science. They will hold regular office hours,
during which you have the opportunity to discuss your paper outlines and any
difficulties you may have with the course. The instructor is also available
during office hours to discuss any problems you might have with the course
material or with life in general.

## Texts

The following texts have been ordered and should be on sale at the Orange
Student Bookstore in Marshall Square.

  * Thomas E. Patterson, _American Democracy_. 3d edition. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996. 
  * William E. Hudson, _American Democracy in Peril: Seven Challenges to America's Future_. Chatham, New Jersey: Chatham House, 1995. 
  * [ W. Lance Bennett](http://weber.u.washington.edu/~polisci/faculty/bennett.html), _The Governing Crisis: Media, Money, and Marketing in American Elections_. 2d edition. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1996\. 
The Patterson volume is the main text for the lecture sections, while the
Hudson and Bennett texts will form the bases of the discussion sections. The
discussion sections are not lectures. They are for discussions, which the
graduate teaching assistants will facilitate. Students are expected to discuss
the Hudson and Bennett texts in these sections, although some discussion of
the lectures and of the Patterson text are certainly permissible.

## Course Schedule

The following will be our agenda for the semester. You are expected to have
read the assigned readings in the Patterson text _prior to_ the lecture.
Please note that the examination review sessions may also include new material
previously undiscussed in class. Thus, do not fail to attend these review
sessions, even if you believe you do not need the review.

**January 15:** Course Introduction **January 20:** Martin Luther King Day
No classes **January 22:** Basic Concepts of Governance -- Chapter 1.
**January 27:** Federalism -- Chapter 2. **January 29:** The Constitution --
Chapter 3.     **NB:** Also read the Constitution itself, plus The Federalist
No. 10 and The Feralist No. 51, all of which appear in appendices to the
Patterson text. **February 3:** Civil Liberties -- Chapter 4. **February 5:**
Civil Rights -- Chapter 5. **February 10:** Public Opinion -- Chapter 6.
**February 12:** Political Participation -- Chapter 7.      Paper 1 is due in
section this week. **February 17:** Elections -- Chapter 8. **February 19:**
Examination Review.      Come to class prepared to ask substantive questions
in preparation for the exam. **February 24:** First Examination. **February
26:** Political Parties -- Chapter 9. **March 3:** Interest Groups -- Chapter
10. **March 5:** The Mass Media -- Chapter 11. **March 10-14:** Spring Break.
Hooray! **March 17:** The Congress -- Chapter 12. **March 19:** Congressional
Policymaking -- Chapter 13. **March 24:** The Presidency -- Chapter 14.
**March 26:** Presidential Policymaking -- Chapter 15.      Paper 2 is due in
section this week. **March 31:** The Federal Bureaucracy -- Chapter 16.
**April 2:** Examination Review.      Come to class prepared to ask
substantive questions in preparation for the exam. **April 7:** Second
Examination. **April 9:** The Judiciary -- Chapter 17. **April 14:** Economic
Policy -- Chapter 18. **April 16:** Social Policy -- Chapter 19. **April 21:**
Foreign and Defense Policy -- Chapter 20.      At this session, the instructor
will announce a list of students who do not need to take the third
examination, since the already maintain an A average and the lowest
examination grade will be dropped. **April 29:** Examination Review -- Chapter
21.      Come to class prepared to ask substantive questions in preparation
for the exam.     The third exam will be held during the time period
_reserved_ for final examinations in classes that meet when ours meets. If you
discover that a conflict arises with the final exam period for another class,
please inform the other instructor as soon as possible, so that he or she may
move your exam to the proper time period for that class.  This document is
available on the World-Wide Web at [
http://web.syr.edu/~gavan/psc121-S97.html](http://web.syr.edu/~gavan/psc121-S97.html).

