    
History 543-051  
SEMINAR: INTER-AMERICAN RELATIONS, SINCE 1861  
**SYLLABUS**

  
Winter Quarter , 1999-2000  
Madison Hall 133  
Tuesdays, 6:00-9:45 p.m.  
**Course Home Page:** <http://history.latech.edu/webre/543sw.htm> | **Dr.
Stephen Webre**  
Madison Hall 114,  318/257-2872  
**Conference:**   MTWThF, 9:00-11:00 a.m.  
**e-mail:** [swebre@gans.latech.edu](mailto:swebre@gans.latech.edu)  
---|---  
  
The purpose of History 543 is to afford the graduate non-specialist an
opportunity to study in depth some aspect of the historical experience of the
Latin American nations. The topic under study this quarter is the history of
the relationship between the United States and the countries of Latin America,
with particular emphasis upon U.S. efforts to control events and manage
political, economic, and social change, especially in the twentieth century.  
  Webster defines a _seminar_ as a "group of advanced students studying under
a professor with each doing original research and all exchanging results
through reports and discussions." Accordingly, the conventional instructional
approaches of lecture and examination are deemphasized while a greater
responsibility is placed upon the student to prepare materials for
presentation in class.  
---  
  
**THIS SYLLABUS IS PROVIDED FOR YOUR INFORMATION AND GUIDANCE. YOU ARE
RESPONSIBLE FOR ITS CONTENTS. KEEP IT WITH YOUR CLASS NOTES AND BRING IT WITH
YOU TO CLASS AND TO CONFERENCES WITH THE INSTRUCTOR.**

**INTERNET AND E-MAIL.  ** By Friday, December 10, you must supply me with a
valid, active e-mail address.  All students enrolled at Louisiana Tech
University are entitled to free networked computer access.  If you do not have
Internet access on your own and have not already opened your Internet account
at Louisiana Tech, please do so without delay.  This is done at the Computing
Center in the basement of Wyly Tower and it requires a valid student
identification card.  In History 543, we will make extensive use of e-mail to
communicate with one another between class meetings.  Also, you will need
reliable access to the World Wide Web, because the syllabus and other required
materials will not be distributed in hard copy.

**ASSESSMENT.**   Most assignments and tasks are ungraded, but I will provide
you with frequent  
detailed assessments of your progress, as well as opportunities for self-
assessment. The final  
evaluation (final grade) will rest most heavily on finished written products,
that is, the book reviews, the bibliographic essay, and the research paper,
with appropriate weight given to the effectiveness of oral presentations and  
the assigned oral and written critiques of another student's paper.

**ADA STATEMENT.**   If you require special testing or classroom
accommodations under the Americans with Disabilities Act, you must meet with
me immediately so that I can make the necessary arrangements early in the
quarter.  All requests for accommodations under ADA must be accompanied by
written certification from the Office of Disabled Student Services, Wyly Tower
216, campus extension 3036.

**Readings**

Although I do not assume prior knowledge of Latin American history, I do
assume that you are familiar with the history of the United States and the
most essential aspects of United States foreign relations and that  _you will
accept the responsibility to inform yourself,_ through your own general
reading, on matters which may be unfamiliar to you. There are a number of
useful general works available in the Prescott Memorial Library; I will be
happy to make suggestions.

The seminar itself is structured around a program of directed readings and
research in the topic area. All students will read and be prepared to discuss
the following key works relevant to the seminar topic (these books are
available in the University Bookstore):  
    
  Gilderhus, Mark T.  _The Second Century: U.S.-Latin American Relations Since
1889._   Wilmington, Del.: Scholarly Resources, 2000.

Langley, Lester D., and Thomas Schoonover.  _The Banana Men: American
Mercenaries and Entrepreneurs in Central America, 1880-1930._   Lexington:
University Press of Kentucky, 1995.

Macaulay, Neill. _The Sandino Affair._ Chicago, 1967.  

Rabe, Stephen G.  _The Most Dangerous Area in the World: John F. Kennedy
Confronts Communist Revolution in Latin America_.   Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press, 1999.  
---  
  
With the exception of Gilderhus, these works are narrow (monographic) in focus
and are meant to provide for in-depth examination of particular issues or
episodes. A written review of each monograph (Langley and Schoonover,
Macaulay, and Rabe) will be due on the night assigned for its discussion.
Reviews shall be 500-750 words in length and will be prepared according to the
instructions to be found in **["Tips on Writing Book Reviews or
Reports."](543sw_tips.htm)**

A number of shorter items are also assigned, and will be available for reading
or copying at the Reserve Desk in the Circulation Department of Prescott
Memorial Library.  For your convenience, these materials can also be accessed
on the Internet through the **[Electronic Reserve](543sw_ereserve.htm)**
service.

From time to time, I may also make additional reading assignments involving
material helpful to an understanding of the various issues being discussed.
You are expected to come to seminar meetings prepared to discuss any such
assignments.  


**Research Project**

As a principal requirement in History 543, you will complete an individual
research project on a relevant topic chosen in consultation with me. The
purpose of the research paper is to afford the student experience in exploring
a limited question in great depth. Therefore, the emphasis will be on original
research conducted in primary sources, although you must also, of course,
identify, consult, and cite the pertinent secondary sources for background and
context.

Research projects will focus on some episode, question, or theme in the Latin
American policy of a specific presidential administration since 1861\. You
will communicate the results of your research in both written and oral
reports, as follows (for due dates, see the History 543
**[Calendar](543sw_calendar.htm)** ):  
    
  1\. Weekly oral progress reports (approx. 5-10 min.).

2\. Mid-term oral report (maximum 20 min.), to consist of a general
presentation on the historiography of the foreign policy in general, and the
Latin American policy in particular, of the presidential administration within
which the narrower research topic falls. This report will be based chiefly
upon secondary sources, although material from primary sources may prove
useful as well.

3\. Bibliographic essay (approximately 1,500 to 2,000 words, covering
approximately 6 to 10 books and/or scholarly journal articles) to accompany
the mid-term oral report. This essay will be duplicated for distribution to
all members of the seminar.

4\. Final paper (approx. 3,000 to 4,000 words), based on primary research and
devoted to the research question itself.

5\. Final oral presentation (maximum 20 min.), devoted to the paper topic. A
good oral report is a spoken version of the paper itself: that is, it should
not attempt to describe the paper or the research upon which it is based, but
rather simply to communicate its argument and contents to the audience.

6\. Oral (approx. 5-10 min.) and written (approx. 250-500 words) responses to
another student's presentation, as assigned by me.  
---  
  
For your convenience in planning your research project, I have provided a list
of **[presidential administrations](543sw_uspres.htm)** and a list of
**[suggested topics](543sw_topics.htm)**.  


**Graduate Student Facts of Life**

We assume that all graduate students are aware of the following facts of life,
but I include these reminders so as to leave no doubt.  
    
  Except in cases of clear necessity, _a serious graduate student does not
"cut" seminar meetings._ Similarly, a serious graduate student does not arrive
late or leave early. Work involving class participation cannot be "made up."  

Assignments and presentations are due when they are due. Graduate students are
presumed to aspire to professional status, and are expected to show a
commensurate degree of professional responsibility. Considerable value is
placed on the timely and proper completion of assigned tasks. _Substantial
grade penalties may result from missed deadlines, regardless of reason._

All written work prepared for submission in a seminar will be typewritten or
computer generated; all work will be double-spaced, and will be _free of
typographical, grammatical, and spelling errors._ Papers will adhere to
professional standards of presentation as set forth in Turabian's _A Manual
for Writers_ and in the **["History 505
Guidelines."](http://history.latech.edu/505guide.htm)**   _Written assignments
which do not meet these standards will be returned unread._

Examinations of the traditional sort are ordinarily not part of the seminar
experience. However, I reserved the right to administer a written examination
at or near the end of the quarter should I determine that the attitude or
performance of the class as a whole warrants it.  
  
---  
  
**[HOME](543sw.htm)  |  SYLLABUS  |  [CALENDAR](543sw_calendar.htm)  |
[HANDOUTS](543sw_handouts.htm)  |  [MAPS](543sw_maps.htm)**  
**[ELECTRONIC RESERVE](543sw_ereserve.htm)**

  
  
  
  

