### ** **

### **![](EParris.JPEG)**

    
    
    ** 
    HISU 345-01: _Salem Witchcraft_
    Professor Richard Latner
      **
    
    
    **215 Hebert Hall (862)-8606
    E-Mail:[latner@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu](mailto:latner@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu)
    Spring 1999**

**

* * *

**

History 345 is different from most history courses. It offers a  "learn by
doing" approach to history. Instead of studying what historians say about a
topic, we learn how to be historians. We learn the skills and methods of doing
history by exploring the outbreak of witchcraft in Salem Village (now named
Danvers), Massachusetts, in the late 17th century. Although we are necessarily
constrained by time and available records, we will sample different types of
evidence, such as trial testimony, tax records, sermons, church documents,
maps, and contemporary narratives. We will also read selected secondary
sources to understand topics connected to the Salem events, such as
Puritanism, witchcraft, and New England community and family life.

History 345 also differs from most history courses in that it is a computer-
assisted course. We will use computers to experience quantitative approaches
to the past and to see the connection between history and information
technology. Specifically, we will work with Macintosh computers, a data set,
and a statistical package to analyze information about Salem. History 345,
therefore, operates at the juncture of the humanities, social sciences, and
statistics. History 345 has a web site on the Tulane server, and a listserv
group to which all students will subscribe.

History 345 is a seminar. Class attendance and participation is required.
Class work, including discussion, is an integral part of the seminar. Reading
must be completed by the assigned class. There will be a number of written
exercises (papers) throughout the semester. Two papers will involve work with
the computer. These exercises are essential in organizing information and
improving basic skills of historical inquiry. Papers must be neatly typed or
word processed. Papers must be completed when due. Since they constitute that
week's seminar discussion, late papers cannot be counted as a normal part of
course work. Students are responsible for their own work. While you can
discuss readings and assignments with each other, the work turned in must be
your own.

Grading is based upon performance in reading, writing, and discussion. At the
option of the instructor, an examination may be given at the end of the
semester. Final grades, therefore, are the cumulative product of the written
exercises and all class work. Due to the special nature of this course, it
cannot be taken P/F.

History 345 meets regularly every Thursday as a seminar. There will also be a
series of one-hour computer lab sessions to learn the statistical package and
data set; they are scheduled for various Tuesdays. We will meet, when
scheduled, in the History Department's electronic classroom, Hebert 200. (The
schedule of classes for registration failed to include information about this
lab, but it is essential that we meet for the additional hour at various times
during the course.)

* * *

### REQUIRED READING

1\. Paul Boyer and Stephen Nissenbaum, eds., _Salem-Village Witchcraft_ (Bring
to class without fail every week.)

2\. Kenneth Lockridge, _A New England Town_

3\. Philip Greven, Jr., _Four Generations_

4\. Richard Godbeer, _The Devil's Dominion: Magic and Religion in Early New
England_

###  PHOTOCOPIED MATERIAL

1\. There will be a bound packet of supplementary reading available at the
Copy Center.

### COMPUTER DISKS

1\. Each student needs at least one (1) double-sided high density floppy,
initialed for Macintosh computers. Label one with your name and turn it in to
me. (It is recommended that you purchase a second for a backup.)

### STRICT RESERVE (Howard-Tilton)

1\. W. E. Woodward, Records of Salem Witchcraft

### SUGGESTED READING (available in bookstore)

1\. Jeffrey B. Russell, _A History of Witchcraft: Sorcerers, Heretics and
Pagans_

* * *

###  Preliminary Schedule of Classes

This schedule is tentative; a number of changes are likely to occur as the
semester progresses. Topics marked with an asterisk (*) indicate the
likelihood of a written assignment.

#### _THURSDAY SEMINAR_

_

Jan. 14  |

Introduction  
  
---|---  
  
Jan. 21 |

Trials*  
  
  
Jan. 28 |

Witchcraft  
  
  
Feb. 4 |

The Accused*  
  
  
Feb. 11 |

Accusers*  
  
  
Feb. 18 |

Chronology  
  
  
Feb. 25 |

Chronology Lab (Meet in Hebert 200)  
  
  
Mar. 4 |

Chronology Computer Exercise Due*  
  
  
Mar. 11 |

Puritanism  
  
  
Mar. 18 |

Salem Ministers  
  
  
Mar. 25 |

Family History*  
  
  
April 8 |

Socio-Economic Computer Session (Meet in Hebert 200)  
  
  
April 15 |

Village Politics*  
  
  
April 22 |

Computer Exercise on Social and Economic Considerations*  
  
  
* * *

_

#### _TUESDAY 1:00-1:50 ROOM 200 HEBERT_

This schedule is tentative and is subject to change.

Feb. 2 |

Introduction to Statistics and StatView  
  
---|---  
  
Feb. 9 |

StatView  
  
  
Feb. 16 |

StatView  
  
  
Feb. 22 |

Lab Open  
  
  
Mar. 2 |

Lab Open  
  
  
Mar. 23 |

StatView Review for Socio-Economic Data Set  
  
  
April 6 |

StatView Review for Socio-Economic Data Set  
  
  
April 13 |

Lab Open  
  
  
April 20 |

Lab Open  
  
  
* * *

* * *

