![](harvard_shield_72.gif)  
_Spring 2000_ |

## MEDVLSTD 119

### Syllabus

|

![](syllabus1.gif)  
---|---|---  
  
* * *

![](dot.gif) |

  
  


Requirements

Prerequisites

Work_load

The_Course

Background

Readings |

Papers and Exams

Offices

Syllabus

  Week 1

  Week 2

  Week 3 |

  Week 4

  Week 5

  Week 6

  Week 7

  Week 8

  Week 9 |

  Week 10

  Week 11

  Week 12

  Week 13  
---|---|---|---  
  


_Requirements_ |

There are four requirements for credit in the course: (1) a one-paragraph
summary of the readings for each section turned in at the beginning of each
section; (2) a _short_ paper (no more than five double-spaced typed pages
exclusive of notes); (3) an hour exam (Mar. 20); (4) a final exam (scheduled
at the whim of the FAS Registrar). (We will consider allowing students to
write a term paper in lieu of taking the final exam. More about this below
under "papers.")  
---|---  
  
Return_to_index |  
  
_

Meeting times._ |

This course is also listed as Law 42130-31. The FAS students will meet
together with the law students for lectures on Wednesdays and Fridays from
10:10 to 11:00 (Sever 202). The law students and FAS graduate students will
meet for "Section" on Thursdays from 9:40 to 11:00 in the Law School (Room
TBA). There is a separate section for the undergraduates on Fridays (time and
place to be arranged) and a separate "discussion class" for the undergraduates
on Mondays from 10:10 to 11:00 (Sever 202). By and large, Mr. Suarez-Potts
will lead the section and Prof. Donahue the discussion class, but in some
weeks the reverse may be the case.  
  
Return_to_index |  
  
_Prerequisites_. |

None. See below under "Background."  
---|---  
  
Return_to_index |

  
  
_Work load_ |

For a history course, the reading load is fairly light, but much of it is
documentary material, and is thus relatively slow going. Give priority to the
documentary materials. Not all classes have documentary assignments, but those
which do will devote a considerable amount of time to the documents, and
you'll be lost if haven't read them in advance. This is why we have both a
section (Fridays) and a "discussion class" on Mondays (without the law
students). You should bring the multilithed _Outlines and Documents_ (see
below under "Readings") with you to every class.  
_The key to keeping up with this course is preparation for each class,
particularly with the documents, and attendance at classes and sections_. Much
of our time in class will be spent discussing the documents. When I have
previously given this course, I have noted that students who read the
documents and attended classes did well, even if they hadn't done all the
secondary reading.  
---|---  
  
Return_to_index |  
  
_The Course_ |

This course is an attempt to discover how the distinctive features of the
"civil" law of the European Continent arose and why these distinctions
persisted. It is also an attempt to discover how the legal systems of
Continental Europe developed and were influenced by a group of ideas about
politics and public order that are frequently invoked today when we speak of
the "Western legal tradition." In order to do this we have to conduct a
"Cook's tour" of European legal history, to survey the sources and literature
of the law from the fall of Rome (roughly 500 A.D.) to the emergence of the
"natural law school" in the 17th century. That gives the course something of
the quality of "if-this-is-Tuesday-it-must-be-Belgium." We have attempted to
give focus to the course by emphasizing three topics, the capture of wild
animals as the foundation of "property," the formation of marriage, and the
rules about the use of witnesses in criminal and civil procedure. We wish
there were a more strictly public-law topic that we could use as well, but no
public-law topic has deep enough roots to allow us to trace it over this long
period of time. Hence our examination of public law will have to come about as
we unfold the history of institutions within which the law operated. We focus
on France. We will also deal with Germany, Italy, Spain and the Low Countries,
but France give us the backbone, while the other areas give us examples (as
does England by way both of comparison and contrast). The rest of the European
Continent will get only an occasional mention.  
We will proceed largely by way of lecture, interspersed with examination of
documents that are contained in _Outlines and Documents_. These documents will
largely carry the story of wild animals, marriage and witnesses. In each
period we will ask two questions: (1) how does the way people were thinking
about law in this period proceed from what had gone before and lead to what
was to come next (a largely diachronic question)? And (2) how was the way that
people were thinking about law in this period relate to the broader political,
social and intellectual developments in the period (a largely synchronic
question)? The ultimate question is comparative: why did Continental law
develop its distinctive features?  
---|---  
  
Return_to_index |  
_

Background_ |

No one (including the instructors) comes to a course like this with all the
necessary background information. We will try to say everything that we think
you need to know to make sense out of what is going on, and so, we will assume
that you do not have any of the relevant background. On the other hand, in a
survey course as broad as this one, we can say things only once. For this
reason, we would suggest, particularly if you have not taken a course in
medieval and/or early modern European history, that you read a good textbook
on one or both of these topics. We have asked the Coop to stock H. G.
Koenigsberger's, _Medieval Europe, 400-1500_ (1987) and the same author's,
_Early Modern Europe, 1500-1789_ (1987). Both books are a relatively quick
read, particularly if you're not trying to memorize kings and battles and
dates. We have included the page numbers below at the relevant spots enclosed
in square brackets at the end of the assignment.  
If you have taken a medieval and/or early modern European _legal_ history
course someplace else or if you have had a European history course that
devoted some time to legal development in the same periods, you probably
should not take this course. There is a graduate reading course this semester
(History 2126) for which you may be ready.  
---|---  
  
Return_to_index |  
  
_Readings_ |

There is, unfortunately, no really good textbook in English of European legal
history. We are asking you to buy two relatively short paper-backs: Manlio
Bellomo's, _The Common Legal Past of Europe: 1000-1800_ and Raoul van
Caenegem's _An Historical Introduction to Private Law._ (The latter may not be
available for purchase; the Coop reports that it is "out of stock" at the
publisher.) Neither of these is really a textbook. Probably the best textbook
is Robinson, Fergus and Gordon, _An Introduction to European Legal History_
(2d ed., 1994) [RFG], which is on reserve in the Law School, Hilles and
Lamont. As an alternative to Bellomo and van Caenegem, we have listed below
readings in number of different books, including RFG. One of them is a
classic, Paul Vinogradoff's, _Roman Law in Medieval Europe_. Two others are
new and controversial, Alan Watson's, _The Making of the Civil Law_ and Harold
Berman's _Law and Revolution_. To the extent that the libraries have them, we
have had these books put on reserve in Hilles and Lamont, and they are all on
reserve in the Law School. (The Law School also has a couple of copies of
extracts from these books in "course-pack" form.)  
By and large, we think that the books other than RFG do a better job of
covering the topics to which they refer than does RFG. On the other hand, some
people really like a textbook, and none of the books extracted is a textbook
(Bellomo and van Caenegem come close). You should read either RFG or the
extracts from the other books for class, and you might want to read what you
haven't read when you're reviewing the course for the exam.  
The multilithed _Outlines and Documents_ contains a number of documents, legal
sources in translation. These vary greatly in the length of their extracts.
When they are long, we want you to get a sense for the overall structure; when
they are short, you should focus on the detail. The Syllabus contains some
notes as to what is important.  
_Outlines and Documents_ also contains outlines for most of the lectures. We
will probably be revising these as we go along, but you should bring them with
you to class. Having this kind of material already written down saves you time
in taking lecture notes.  
---|---  
  
Return_to_index |  
  
_Papers and exams_ |

There will be a short paper required for the course. It should be no more than
five double-spaced typed pages exclusive of notes. It may analyze one or a
couple of the documents in the _Outlines and Documents_. The basic idea is to
present an _idea_ supported by _evidence_ (primary sources please). You may do
the paper any time during the semester. You should have chosen a topic no
later than Friday, March 24. You should turn in your first draft no later than
Friday, April 21. The final draft should be turned in before the beginning of
exam period (May 18).  
There will be an hour exam for the undergraduates on Monday, March 20. (We
will consider exempting from the hour exam seniors who are writing bachelor's
essays.) The hour exam will cover material in the first 19 lectures. There
will be one question, which will almost certainly involve analysis of a
document in _Outlines and Documents_.  
The final exam (to be scheduled) will be an "open book" exam and will contain
two or three questions. The first will give you a document drawn from the
_Outlines and Documents_ and will ask you to comment on the document and its
significance. The second will call for a more wide-ranging essay. A possible
initial question will ask for some identifications.  
If you wish to write a term paper in lieu of the final exam, you must take the
hour exam and get our approval of your term paper topic. The term paper should
cover material in at least two of major time periods of the course (e.g.,
early medieval and late medieval, or late medieval and early modern). It may
trace the history of a particular idea or institution from one period to
another or it may compare ideas and institutions in two different periods. In
order to get our approval of a term-paper topic, you will need to have
completed your short paper and to turn in a one-page statement or outline of
what you plan to write about by April 21. Students in the past who have taken
the paper option in the past thought that it was fun but that it involved more
work than taking an exam.  
---|---  
  
Return_to_index |  
  
_Offices_ |

Prof. Donahue's office is in Hauser 512 in the Law School. His assistant is
Ms. Robinson in Hauser 518, and his office hours are from 2:00-4:00 on
Mondays, or by appointment. An appointment is usually not necessary for the
office hours, but there is a sign-up sheet on the door. Mr. Suarez-Potts, who
will be teaching most of the sections, has an office in Robinson. His office
hours will be announced later.  
---|---  
  
Return_to_index |  
  
_Syllabus_ |

In what follows Bellomo=Manlio Bellomo, The Common Legal Past of Europe:
1000-1800 (Washington, DC: Catholic U. Press, 1995); Berman = H. Berman, Law
and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal Tradition (Cambridge [MA]:
Harvard Press, 1983); K1500 = H.G. Koenigsberger, Medieval Europe, 400-1500
(Harlow: Longman, 1987) (available at the Coop); K1789 = H.G. Koenigsberger,
Early Modern Europe, 1500-1789 (Harlow: Longman, 1987) (available at the
Coop); _Outlines and Documents_ = C. Donahue, Outlines and Documents on
Continental Legal History (unpublished, first installment available in class
or in Room 518 of Hauser Hall); RFG = O. F. Robinson, T. D. Fergus and W. M.
Gordon, An Introduction to European Legal History, 2d ed. (London:
Butterworths, 1994); van Caenegem = R. C. van Caenegem, An Historical
Introduction to Private Law (Cambridge [Eng]: U. Cambridge, 1988); Vinogradoff
= P. Vinogradoff, Roman Law in Medieval Europe, 2d ed. (Oxford: Clarendon,
1929); Watson = A. Watson, The Making of The Civil Law (Cambridge [MA]:
Harvard Press, 1981).  
---|---  
  
Return_to_index |  
  
_Week 1_ |

  
---|---  
  
Wed. Feb. 2. |

1\. Introduction. Reflections on the distinction between "common law" and
"civil law" and on what we mean by the "Western legal tradition."  
  
Fri. Feb. 4. |

2\. How the story came out. ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part XX). [Ask
yourself what the rules are about wild animals, marriage and witnesses in the
19th century codifications. Are the different codes more notable for their
similarities or their differences?] Bellomo, 1-26; van Caenegem, 1-15; RFG
vi-x.  
  
Section S1. |

How to read a statute. _Outlines and Documents_ , Part XX.  
_

Week 2_ |

  
  
Mon. Feb. 7. |

3\. Reflections on "fundamental legal categories": _ius_ vs. _lex_ , public
vs. private, criminal vs. civil, persons vs. things vs. actions, property vs.
contract vs. delict (tort). Justinian's _Institutes_ ( _Outlines and
Documents_ , Part I.A). [K1500 1-66.]  
  
Wed. Feb. 9. |

4\. The legacy of the ancient world: Roman law. RFG 1-10; Watson 1-38.
Justinian's _Institutes_ ; D.23.2; C.5.4; D.22.5; C.4.20 ( _Outlines and
Documents_ , Part I). [Focus on the overall structure of Justinian's
_Institutes_ rather than on the detail. In the case of the _Digest_ and the
_Code_ , try to get a sense for how the material is organized.]  
  
Fri. Feb. 11. |

5\. The legacy of the ancient world: Christianity. Paul's letter to the Romans
( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part II.A).  
  
Section S2 |

The legacy of the ancient world: New Testament extracts on marriage (
_Outlines and Documents_ , Part II.B).  
_

Week 3._ |

  
  
Mon. Feb. 14. |

6\. The "barbarian" invasions. van Caenegem, 16-29; RFG 10-23; Vinogradoff
11-42.  
  
Wed. Feb. 16. |

7\. Two "Barbarian" Law Codes--Aethelberht ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part
III.A). [Ask yourself two questions: (1) What is the overall structure of this
material? (2) What, if anything, does it have to say about wild animals,
marriage and witnesses?]  
  
Fri. Feb. 18. |

8\. Two "Barbarian" Law Codes--Gundobad (compared with the _Lex romana
burgundionum_ ) ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part III.B). [Same questions as
Lecture 7.]  
  
Section S3. |

Aethelberht and Gundobad. _Outlines and Documents_ , Part III.  
_

Week 4_ |

  
  
Mon. Feb. 21. |

Holiday, President's Day.  
  
Wed. Feb. 23. |

9\. Carolingian Institutions and "Feudalism." Bellomo, 27-43; RFG 23-70;
Documents on Continental feudalism ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part IV).
[K1500 67-135.]  
  
Fri. Feb. 25. |

10\. Eleventh Century Reforms. Berman 85-119, 273-332. Outlines and Documents
on the investiture controversy ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part V). [K1500
136-212.]  
  
Section S4. |

The Collection in 74 Titles ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part VI). [Ask
yourself two questions: (1) What is the overall structure of this collection?
(2) What, if anything, does it have to say about wild animals, marriage and
witnesses?]  
_

Week 5_ |

  
  
Mon. Feb. 28. |

11\. Reform and the "twelfth century renaissance." [review K1500 67-212; read
K1500 213-80]  
  
Wed. Mar. 1. |

12\. The Revival of Academic Law Study. Bellomo 44-60, 89-117; RFG 71-99;
Vinogradoff 43-70. Roman law glossators on wild animals (J.I.2.1.12-13,
D.41.1.55) ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part VII).  
  
Fri. Mar. 3. |

13\. The Institutions of Canon Law. RFG 122-152. Substantive Canon Law.
Marriage (J.I.1.10, D.23.2.5-6, Gratian C.27 q.2, Peter Lombard, selected
decretals on marriage) ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part VIII).  
  
Section S5. |

Wild animals and marriage in the glossators. _Outlines and Documents_ , Parts
VII and VIII.  
_

Week 6_ |

  
  
Mon. Mar. 6. |

14\. _Regnum_ and _sacerdotium_ in the 12th and 13th centuries. _Outlines and
Documents_ , Part V (again). [review K1500 213-80.]  
  
Wed. Mar. 8. |

15\. The Revival of Academic Law Study: Romano-canonical Procedure. Witnesses
(D.22.5, Gratian C.4 q.3, Tancred 3.6) ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part IX).
Read van Caenegem, 30-114 (this is a good overview for the hour exam, though
it takes us quite a bit further in time).  
  
Fri. Mar. 10. |

16\. Marriage litigation in the High Middle Ages. Smith c. Dolling (1271-1272)
( _Outlines and Documents_ Part XIV.A).  
  
Section S6. |

How to read a case. _Outlines and Documents_ , Part XIV.A.  
_

Week 7_ |

  
  
Mon. Mar. 13. |

17\. The Institutional History of the 12th and 13th Centuries. Bellomo 61-88;
RFG 179-207; Vinogradoff 71-96. [review K1500 213-80]  
  
Wed. Mar. 15. |

18\. _Coutumiers_ and _fueros_. Extracts from the _Usatges de Barcelona_ on
witnesses, marriage, and wild animals ( _Outlines and Documents_ Part X).  
  
Fri. Mar. 17. |

19\. Courts and Coutumiers in France. Extracts from the _coutume_ of
Tourraine-Anjou and from Beaumanoir on witnesses, marriage and marital
property, and wild animals ( _Outlines and Documents_ Part X).  
  
Section S7. |  _

Ustatges_ , Touraine-Anjou, and Beaumanoir. _Outlines and Documents_ , Part
XI.  
_

Week 8._ |

  
  
Mon. Mar. 20. |

Hour exam (will cover material in Lectures 1-19).  
  
Wed. Mar. 22. |

20\. Political Ideas of the 12th and 13th Centuries. Extracts from Bracton on
kingship and from the glossators on sovereignty. ( _Outlines and Documents_
Part XI)  
  
Fri. Mar. 24. |

21\. The Formation of a Persecuting Society? Developments in the law of
witnesses: _Tractatus de reprobatione testium_ ; Gandinus, _Tractatus de
maleficiis_ ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part XII).  Paper topics must be
chosen by this date.  
  
Section S8. |

Law and politics in the 13th century. _Outlines and Documents_ , Parts XI and
XII.  
  
Mon. Mar. 27 -- Fri. Mar. 31. |

Spring vacation.  
_

Week 9_ |

  
  
Mon. Apr. 3. |

22\. The Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries--Political and Constitutional
Developments. Bellomo 118-61. [K1500 281-387.]  
  
Wed. Apr. 5. |

23\. The Commentators. RFG 100-121. Commentators on wild animals: Bartolus on
D.41.1.1, .5; Portius and Faber on J.I.2.2.11-13 ( _Outlines and Documents_ ,
Part XIII); commentators on marriage: Panormitanus, _Consilium_ (15th c) (
_Outlines and Documents_ Part XIV.C).  
  
Fri. Apr. 7. |

24\. Courts and Case Reports--14th through 16th Centuries. Watson 39-52.
_Decisio S.R.R._ (1360 X 1365); _Decisio S.R.R._ (1574); the _Rota Fiorentina_
(1780) (Gorla article) ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part XIV.B, D, E).  
  
Section S9. |

Marriage in legal theory and legal practice. _Outlines and Documents_ , Part
XIV.  
_

Week 10_ |

  
  
Mon. Apr. 10. |

25\. "Renaissance" Europe--Political, Intellectual and Constitutional
Developments. Bellomo 162-73. [K1789 1-94.]  
  
Wed. Apr. 12. |

26\. Humanists, Humanism and the Law. RFG 280-310. Pithou on the _Collatio_ ;
Bodin on political theory ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part XV).  
  
Fri. Apr. 14. |

27\. Homologation of Custom and Reception. RFG 311-352; Watson 53-82. Coutumes
de la prevoste et vicomte de Paris ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part XVI.C).  
  
Section S10. |

Legal humanism. _Outlines and Documents_ , Part XV.  
_

Week 11._ |

  
  
Mon. Apr. 17. |

28\. The Seventeenth Century--Political and Constitutional Developments. RFG
353-376, 406-37. [K1789 161-224.]  
  
Wed. Apr. 19. |

29\. The _Grandes Ordonnances_. Decree, _Tametsi_ ; Ordonnance of Blois;
Ordonnance pour la procedure civile ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part XVI.A,
B, .D.  
  
Fri. Apr. 21. |

30\. The institutes of national law ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part XVII).
First draft of papers must be turned in by this date.  
  
Section S11. |

Compilations, proto-codification, codification. ( _Outlines and Documents_ ,
Parts XVI and XVII.)  
_

Week 12_ |

  
  
Mon. Apr. 24. |

31\. The Seventeenth Century--Intellectual Developments. [K1789 225-281.]  
  
Wed. Apr. 26. |

32\. Spanish Scholastics, "Elegant Jurisprudes," the Natural Law School, and
the _usus modernus pandectarum_. Watson 83-98.  
  
Fri. Apr. 28. |

33\. The Academics in Action. Pufendorf on wild animals ( _Outlines and
Documents_ , Part XVIII).  
  
Section S12. |

The relations between abstract ideas and legal results ( _Outlines and
Documents_ , Part XVIII.)  
_

Week 13_ |

  
  
Mon. May 1. |

34\. The Achievements and Failures of the _ancien r egime_. van Caenegem,
115-46. [K1789 282-331].  
  
Wed. May 3. |

35\. Domat and Pothier. Watson 99-125. Domat; Pothier on D.23.2; Pothier on
the contract of marriage ( _Outlines and Documents_ , Part XIX).  
  
Fri. May 5. |

36\. Final Lecture. The Road to Codification. van Caenegem, 170-97.  
  
Section S13. |

Codification vs. Reform. No specific assignment.  
  
Thu. May 18 |

Final papers must be turned in by this date.  
  


![](dot.gif) |

* * *

[[Home Page](../../../~med119)] [[Information and
Announcements](../../../~med119/info/index.html)]

Please send comments to [Charles Donahue](mailto:rspang@law.harvard.edu)



_

URL:  
http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~med119/syllabus/syll00_index.html_  
last modified:   01/11/00

Copyright (C) Charles Donahue, Jr.

* * *  
  
---|---

