|  **NEW YORK UNIVERSITY** ****

**DEPARTMENT OF HISTORY** ****

**G57.1755   Media and History**

Spring 1998

G57.1755

Barbara Abrash

Wednesdays, 6:10-7:50

Office hours: Wednesdays, 5:00-6:00 or by appointment

This course studies the period of the 1950s as mediated by film, television,
and photographs, and considers how the past is remembered, represented, and
understood in terms of visual imagery and narratives. The course proceeds from
the assumption that films and television cannot be understood apart from the
social and historical context in which they are made and in which they are
seen. We will examine a set of texts, written and visual, which are explicitly
concerned with visual representations of history and culture and explore the
ways in which they may be interpreted and used by historians. Screenings,
readings, class discussions, and projects provide students with the
opportunity to gain a direct understanding of visual materials both as
historical evidence and as resources for "telling" history.

Students are expected to have (or acquire) a working knowledge of the history
of the period. (See the attached list of general works, which are available in
the library and bookstores.)

_Required Reading_ :

John Berger. _Ways of Seeing_. Penguin, 1991

Erik Barnouw. _Documentary: A History of Non-Fiction Film_. Oxford, 1993

Erik Barnouw. _Tube of Plenty: The Evolution of American Television_. Oxford,
1982

Godfrey Hodgson. _America in Our Time: From World War II to Nixon_. Vintage,
1976

Lary May, ed. _Recasting America: Culture and Politics in the Age of the Cold
War_. Chicago, 1989

Robert A. Rosenstone. _Visions of the Past: The Challenge of Film to Our Idea
of History_. Harvard, 1995

Assigned books are available in the bookstore. Videos are available for
viewing at the Avery Fisher Media Center on the second floor of Bobst Library.

_Supplementary Reading:_

Mark Carnes, ed. _Past Imperfect: History According to the Movies_. Henry
Holt, 1995

George Lipsitz. _Time Passages: Collective Memory and American Popular
Culture_. Minnesota, 1990.

Karal Ann Marling. _As Seen in the Fifties: The Visual Culture of Everyday
Life in the 50s_. Harvard, 1994

Elaine Tyler May. _Homeward Bound: American Families in the Cold War Era_.
Basic Books, 1988.

Robert A. Rosenstone, ed. _Revisioning History: Film and the Construction of a
New Past_. Princeton, 1995.

Vivian Sobchak, ed. _The Persistence of History: Film, Television and the
Modern Event_. Routledge, 1996.

_Course Requirements_

The course meets once a week as a seminar. Students are expected to screen
assigned videos before class and to participate actively in class discussions.
Discussions focus on required readings and screenings, as well as on student
research projects. Class attendance and keeping up with assigned readings and
screening is mandatory. If you cannot attend a class, you must notify the
instructor.

Each person in the class will take notes on the reading at least once during
the semester and reproduce them for the class.

In addition to weekly video screenings and reading assignments, there are
three projects:

1\. A journal recording your observations of how "history" is represented in
the visual imagery of advertisements, television programs, films, magazines,
exhibitions, etc. This journal should also include detailed notes and comments
on each week's screenings.

2\. A public history presentation in the form of a visual narrative that deals
with an event of the 1950s, consisting of two parts. First, a presentation
(slide show, photographic exhibit, or videotape) which may take any narrative
form, but which combines image and text and utilizes visual material from the
1950s to create a historical narrative. Second, an essay that describes and
reflects upon the process by which you developed a historical argument and
proceeded to translate it into a visual narrative. An annotated bibliography
is to accompany the project. Your topic must be approved in advance by the
instructor.

Half-hour presentations of work-in-progress will allow for class discussion of
conceptual and historical problems. Completed projects include text, graphics,
and annotated bibliographies.

3\. A film review consisting of a 1,000-word essay, analyzing one or more
videos shown in the course in terms of the ways in which they represent,
interpret, and comment on "history." The essay is to be written as if intended
for publication in a scholarly journal. It must include an annotated
bibliography.

Videos that may be screened include:

ARE WE WINNING, MOMMY? Barbara Margolis

THE ATOMIC CAFE Pierce Rafferty, Jayne Loader

THE CASE OF MILO RADULOVICH Edward R Murrow

CHARGE AND COUNTERCHARGE Emile de Antonio

CHILDREN OF THE LEFT Eric Stange

COLOR ADJUSTMENT Marlon Riggs

CONSUMING IMAGES Bill Moyers

THE DAY AFTER TRINITY Jon Else

THE DAY THE COLD WAR CAME HOME Tony Kahn

EYES ON THE PRIZE Henry Hampton, et al

A FAMILY GATHERING Lise Yasui

FREEDOM ON MY MIND Connie Field

HALF LIFE Dennis O'Rourke

HARVEST OF SHAME Edward R Murrow

HISTORY AND MEMORY Rea Tajiri

KING: A FILMED RECORD Ely Landau

MCCARTHY; DEATH OF A WITCH HUNTER Emile de Antonio

EDWARD R MURROW: THIS REPORTER Susan Steinberg

NO PLACE TO HIDE Lance Bird, Tom Johnson

OPERATION CROSSROADS Bruce Connors

POINT OF ORDER! Emile de Antonio

RADIO BIKINI Robert Stone

REPORT ON SENATOR MCCARTHY Edward R Murrow

THE ROAD TO BROWN Mykola Kulish

SALT OF THE EARTH Herbert Biberman

THE TRIAL OF ALGER HISS John Lowenthal

YOU CAN'T GET THERE FROM HERE Rick Prelinger  
    


January 21 **Introduction**

**Screen:** _History and Memory_ (Rea Tajiri, 1991)

**Readings:**

The following texts are basic course books for the course. It is expected that
you will have read them within the first two weeks of the course.

Erik Barnouw. _Documentary: A History of Non-Fiction Film_

Godfrey Hodgson. _America in Our Time: From World War II to Nixon_  
    


January 28 **History in Pictures, History in Words**

Screen: _Radio Bikini_ (Robert Stone, 1989)

**Readings:**

Robert A. Rosenstone, "History in Images/History in Words: Reflections on the
Possibility of Really Putting History Onto Film," in _Visions of the Past_ ,
pp 20-44.

Frank Tillman, "The Photographic Image and the Transformation of Thought,"
_East-West Film Journal_ , June 1987, pp 91-110

Warren Sussman, "Did Success Spoil the United States," in May, _Recasting
America_ , pp 19-37

**Secondary Readings:**

Clayton R. Koppes, "Making and Unmaking Nuclear Mythology," in Rosenstone,
_Revisioning History_ , pp 128-233.  
    


February 4 **Ways of Seeing the 50s**

Guest Speaker: Kathleen Hulser.

**Readings** :

John Berger. _Ways of Seeing_

Kathleen Hulser. "Visual Browsing: Auto-flaneurs and Roadside Ads in the
1950s," in Peter Lang and Tom Miller, _Suburban Discipline,_ Princeton, 1997,
pp 9-19.

Jackson Lears, "A Matter of Taste: Corporate Cultural Hegemony in Mass-
Consumption Society" in May, _Recasting America_ , pp. 38-57.

**Secondary Readings** :

Karal Ann Marling. "Disneyland, 1955: A Place That Was Also a TV Show," in _As
Seen on TV: The Visual Culture of Everyday Life in the 1950s_ , pp. 87-126.  
    


February 11 **A visit to Prelinger Archives**

Guest Speaker: Rick Prelinger

Screen: _You Can't Get There From Here_ (Rick Prelinger, 1988)

**Readings** :

George Lipsitz. _Time Passages: Collective Memory and American Popular
Culture_ : "Popular Culture: This Ain't No Sideshow," pp. 3-20; "Precious and
Communicable: History in an Age of Popular Culture," pp. 21-39.

Clifford E Clark, Jr. "Ranch-House Suburbia: Ideals and Realities," in May,
_Recasting America_ , pp.171-191.

Lynn Spigel, _Make Room for TV: Television and the Family Ideal in Postwar
America_ , ch 2, "Television in the Family Circle," pp. 35-72.

February 18 **Fifties Television: Race, Ethnicity, and Family: I**

Screen: _Color Adjustment_ (Marlon Riggs, 1991)

**Readings:**

Erik Barnouw. _Tube of Plenty,_ Ch 3, "The Plastic Years," pp 99-148; Ch 4,
"Prime,"pp 152-340.

Janette L. Dates and William Barlow, _Split Image_ , ch. 1

**Secondary Readings** :

Herman Gray, "Remembering Civil Rights," in Lynn Spigel and Michael Curtin,
_The Revolution Wasn't Televised_ , Routledge,1997, pp 349-358.

Elaine Tyler May, "Explosive Issues: Sex, Woman and the Bomb," in May,
_Recasting America_ , pp 154-170.

Michael Winston, "Racial Consciousness and the Evolution of Mass Communication
in the United States," _Daedalus_ 111, (1982), pp 171-182.

John S. Wright, "To the Battle Royal: Ralph Ellison and the Quest for Black
Leadership in Postwar America," in _Recasting America_ , pp 246-266.  
    


**Initial Proposals for Projects Due**

February 25 **Fifties Television: Race, Ethnicity and Family: II**

Guest speaker: Jeffrey Schandler

Screen: Episodes from _The Goldbergs_ ; _Amos and Andy_

**Readings:**

David Marc. "Comic Visions of the City: New York and the Television Sitcom."
_Radical History Review_ 42 1988, pp 49-63.

George Lipsitz. "The Meaning of Memory: Family, Class, and Ethnicity in Early
Network Television," in _Time Passages_ , pp 39-76.

**Secondary Readings** :

Lary Mays, "Movie Star Politics: The Screen Actors' Guild, Cultural
Conversion, and the Hollywood Red Scare," in May, _Recasting America_ ,
pp.125-153.  
    


March 4 **Television: Representing History**

**Screen** : _Eyes on the Prize: Awakenings_ (Blackside, 1986)

**Readings** :

"We're not moving to the back, Mr. Blake: The Montgomery Bus Boycott," in
Clayborne Carson, et al eds., _Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights
Years_ , Penguin, 1987, pp.

Taylor Branch, _Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1954-63_ ,
Simon and Schuster, 1988, Ch 5, "The Montgomery Bus Boycott," pp 143-205.

**Secondary Reading:**

Jacqueline Jones, "The Long Walk Home," in Mark Carnes, ed., _Past Imperfect_
, pp. 262-265. (film review)

**Optional Screenings** :

_The Long Walk Home_ (Richard Pearce, 1987)

_King: A Filmed Record: From Montgomery to Memphis_ (Ely Landau, 1989)  
    


March 11 **Image as Icon: The Atomic Bomb**

Screen: _The Day After Trinity_ (Jon Else, 1981)

**Readings:**

Vincent Leo, "The Mushroom Cloud Photograph: From Fact to Symbol," in
_Afterimage_ , Summer, 1985.

Tom Engelhardt, "Fifty Years Under A Cloud: The Uneasy Search for our Atomic
History," _Harper's_ January 1996, pp. 71-76.

**Secondary Readings** :

David W. Noble, "The Reconstruction of Progress: Charles Beard, Richard
Hofstadter, and Postwar Historical Thought," in _Recasting America_ ,
pp.61-75.

Mark C. Carnes, " _Fat Man and Little Boy_ ," in Carnes, pp. 246-249. (film
review)

**Optional screening** :

_Fat Man and Little Boy_ , 1989

**Journals Due**  
    


**Final Proposals for Projects Due**

March 18 Spring Break

March 25 **Producing History**

Guest Speaker: Cara Mertes

**Readings** :

Women in 20th-Century American History: An NEH proposal for a television
series

Robert A Rosenstone, "The Historical Film: Looking at the Past in a
Postliterate Age," in _Visions of the Past_ , pp 45-79.

**Secondary Readings** :

Bill Nichols, "Telling Stories with Evidence and Arguments," in _Representing
Reality_ , pp. 107-133.

Hayden White, "The value of narrativity in the representation of reality,"
_Critical Inquiry_ , Autumn, 1980, pp 5-27.  
    


April 1 **The Question of Truth**

Screen: _Bontoc Eulogy_ (Marlon Fuentes, 1996)

**Readings:**

Thomas Cripps, "Historical Truth: An Interview with Ken Burns," _American
Historical Review_ , June 1995,

pp 741-764.

Michael Frisch, "The Memory of History," in _A Shared Authority_ , pp 15-27.

Linda Williams, "Mirrors Without Memories: Truth, History, and the New
Documentary," _Film Quarterly_ , Spring 1993, pp 9-21.

**Secondary Reading:**

Robert A Rosenstone, "Re-visioning History: Contemporary Filmmakers and the
Constructions of the Past," in _Visions of the Past_ , pp 169-197.  
    


April 8 **TV, Advertising, and Family Life**

Screen: _Consuming Images_ (Gail Pellett, 1989)

**Readings:**

Judith Williamson, "Woman is an Island: Femininity and Colonization," in Tania
Modleski, _Studies in Entertainment_ , pp. 99-118

Stewart Ewen. _All Consuming Images_ (selections)  
    


April 15 Class Presentations

April 22 Class Presentations

April 29 Class Presentations

May 6 **Final Projects Due**  
---|---

