### History 152  
American Civilization since 1877



_Course Description_ : History 152 is an introduction to American civilization
from the end of the Reconstruction period to the recent past. The course seeks
to have students gain a perspective on the position of the United States among
the nations of the world and on the controversies and agreements among
~mericans concerning the desired attributes of their own culture, government,
and ideals. The course focuses on central themes and issues in the development
of American society and institutions by raising questions about human values,
economic growth, institutional change, cultural development, and political
democracy as Americans have faced them since 1877\. Themes treated in the
course include: industrialization and its effects on the American society,
economy,and political processes; immigration and urbanization; Progressivism;
the struggle for social justice; World War I; social changes of the Twenties,
the Great Depression, and the New Deal; foreign policy between the world wars;
World War II; postwar affluence and social change, the Cold War and anti-
communism; minorities and civil rights; and the basic changes in American
society since the Vietnam era.



_Academic Objectives_ : We want you to develop the following skills and
competencies:

  1. To develop the ability to assess and think critically about historical issues and how people interpret those issues; 
  2. To gain a basic factual knowledge of this historical period; 
  3. To develop some skills in analyzing historical data andreaching informed conclusions about those data. 



_Required Books_ :

  1. Henretta, et al. _America's History_. vol. 2, since 1865. 
  2. _Retrieving the American Past_ , compiled by Citino, Spring Quarter,1997. 
  3. Harvard Sitkoff, _The Struggle for Black Equality. 1954-1992_ , Revised Edition. New York: Hill And Wang, 1993. 

**All three books are available for purchase at SBX.

_IMPORTANT_ : _Retrieving the American Past_ is a customized reader. Your
instructor has chosen certain essays and documents from a wide array of
possibilities. The selections are published in a unique version of the
_Retrieving the American Past_ reader prepared especially for your class.
**Make sure you purchase the correct version!** Each reader has a sticker on
the front cover with the name of the instructor who compiled the version and
the academic quarter in which it will be used. Don't use a version prepared by
another instructor and **don't** use a version prepared for a quarter other
than the one in which you are taking the course.



_Enrollment_ : All students must be officially enrolled in the course by the
end of the second full week of the quarter. No requests to add the course will
be approved by the department chair after that time.  Enrolling officially and
on time is solely the responsibility of each student.



_Examinations_ : There will be one midterm examination and a final exam. Both
will be primarily essay in nature. The final exam will be comprehensive.



_Make-up Exam Policy_ : If for **any family or medical reason** you find it
absolutely necessary to miss **an** examination, you must contact the course
instructor before the examination and have his consent to your absence if you
wish to take a make-up exam. Students must take the final exam at the
scheduled time. With the exception of emergencies and graduating seniors, no
make-up final exams will be given.



_Method of Determining Final Grade_ : Midterm Exam; Paper; Final Exam;
Attendance and Participation



_The Paper Assignment_ : Your paper assignment is to write a critical review
of Harvard Sitkoff's _The Struggle for Black Equality_. The paper should be
typed and approximately five double-spaced pages in length. You should observe
proper rules of grammar, usage, and style.

The review should be more than a simple book report. Rather than merely
summarizing the book's contents, you must offer a critical interpretation of
Sitkoff's study and his topic, the post-World War Two civil rights movement.
You may wish to address the following questions:

  * Did the postwar civil rights movement achieve all of its goals? 
  * How did the movement change over the course of the postwar period? Through what stages did it pass? 
  * If the movement was in some ways successful, were its successes the result of grass-roots activism, or changes in the policy of the federal government toward African Americans? Explain. 
  * What forms will "the struggle for black equality" take in the future, in your opinion? 
  * What strengths and weaknesses did you find in Sitkoff's analysis? 

Your paper should contain the best writing of which you are capable. It should
be well-written, detailed, and thoughtful. You may visit the instructor during
office hours or make an appointment to discuss your essay, or review an
outline or rough draft.



_Suggestions to Help You in This Course_ : First, if you do not understand a
course requirement or course material, please ask about it. We are here to
help and welcome opportunities to answer your questions.

Second, if you do not understand the grading of your examination or paper,
please seek clarification at the earliest opportunity.

Third, we would like to offer the following suggestions to assist you in
writing essay exams:

  * Always relate exam points to time. If one section comprises the majority of the points on a given exam, devote more of your time to it than to other sections. 
  * Outline your essay before beginning to write. If you do not outline, the result often is a helter-skelter answer. So outline -- quickly. Then begin writing a properly composed essay; write an introduction; compose the main portion of the answer; conclude with two or three sentences that summarize your argument. If you follow this procedure, rather than simply writing your essay as the thoughts occur to you, you are far more apt to write an organized, coherent essay. 
  * Remember that the prime concern of history is to analyze change or changes through a period of time. When, why, and how the changes occurred and the significance of the changes to American history are concerns at the center of each question you will be asked. As you study along through the quarter, try to use this framework as you read the assigned material and review your notes. When exam time comes, you then will be thinking along the right lines. 

We want you to succeed on examinations in general proportion to the effort you
expend studying. If this does not happen on the midterm, be sure to talk with
the instructor at the earliest opportunity.



_Reading Assignments_ : The reading assignments are listed below under
"Schedule of Assignments." Read each assignment in full by the week for which
it is assigned. Be prepared to discuss the _Retrieving the American Past_
selections in class. You may be asked to complete brief, in class writing
exercises on the scheduled readings.



_SCHEDULE OF ASSIGNMENTS_ :

`Week One: Mar. 31-Apr. 4. _America's History_ , Ch. 17, 18;`

**`_Retrieving_ , `**`"Irony and Paradox: Farmer Discontent."`  

`Week Two: Apr. 7-11. _America's History_ , Ch. 19, 20; _Retrieving_ , "The
Age of Industrial Violence."  
  
Week Three: Apr. 14-18. _America's History_ , Ch. 21, 22;  
_Retrieving_ , "The Debate Over Annexing the Philippines,1898-1900."`

`Week Four: Apr. 21-25. _America's History_ , Ch. 23, 24; _Retrieving_ ,"The
Grueling Battle For Woman Suffrage."`

  
`Week Five: Apr. 28-May 2. _America's History_ , Ch. 25, _Retrieving_ , "New
Deal Liberalism."`

  
`Week Six: May 5-9. _America's History_ , Ch. 27. **Midterm Exam: Wednesday,
May 7.**`

  
` Week Seven: May 12-16. _America's History_ , Ch. 28; _Retrieving_ , "The
Origins of the Cold War`

  
`Week Eight: May 19-23. _America's History_ , Ch. 29; _Retrieving_ , "American
Life in the 1950s."`

`**Paper Due: Friday, May 23.  
  
** Week Nine: May 27-30. _America's History_ , Ch. 30, 31; Sitkoff, _The  
Struggle for Black Equality. 1954-1992_.`

  
` (Note: No Classes Memorial Day, Monday, May 26)`  

`Week Ten: Jun. 2-6. _America's History_ , Ch. 32, 33.`

**`Final Exam: Wednesday, June 11 11:30-1:18, 371 Journalism Bldg.`**

