

**HISTORY 1N: FIRST-YEAR SEMINAR**

**SPRING 2000**



[**_The Production of History_**](commentary.htm#Description)



![](billandted.gif)





Why is the past so often a subject for contentious debate in the present? Why
are struggles over the shape and expression of memory such a persistent
feature in public and popular culture? What, if anything, is at stake in such
contests? How long and in what manner should we remember past injustices and
misdeeds? When and how does popular culture engage and represent the past
without engendering controversy or debate? How do we come to know history
outside of the classroom? What is the relationship between popular
presentations of the past and scholarly writings about history?

We will try to answer these and other questions by examining a variety of
episodes in the "production of history", ranging from the cancellation of an
exhibit on the decision to drop the atomic bomb at the Smithsonian Institution
to Bugs Bunny's encounter with Christopher Columbus.

History 1N is a first-year seminar. The reading load is fairly intensive, and
students will also be expected to complete a variety of writing assignments
and projects over the course of the semester. Attendance and participation in
discussion are a central part of your work in the course. We will also go on
one class trip which is mandatory for all participants. I may also schedule
several voluntary trips of various kinds, as well as a class dinner, possibly.
Do not sign up for this course if you are unprepared to handle the workload:
space is limited and a commitment to tackle the work in good faith is a
necessity.

Readings marked with an asterix will either be on reserve in McCabe Library or
distributed in the form of a handout.

**Warning:** Some of the links below may offend or disturb you, but I believe
it is important to deal with the total range of "productions of history" that
exist, however repugnant some of them may be. Just be sure to bring along your
critical thinking skills wherever this syllabus may take you.

**Please** inform me promptly via email, [
tburke1@swarthmore.edu](mailto:tburke1@swarthmore.edu), if any of these links
are not working.

* * *

Wednesday January 19

**Introduction**

> **Readings:**

>

>> Michel-Rolph Trouillot, _Silencing the Past_ , all

>>

>>  

Wednesday January 26

**The Historical Guild**

> **Readings:**

>

>> Marc Bloch, _The Historian's Craft,_ Chapter One,Two, Four and Five

>>

>> *Raphael Samuel, _Theatres of Memory_ , pp. 3-27

>>

>>  

Wednesday February 2

**Historical Scholarship Outside the Guild**

> **Multimedia (examine before class):**

>

>> The De La Pena Diary debate

>>

>>> [The basics of the controversy](http://www.seattletimes.com/news/nation-
world/html98/alam_091598.html)

>>>

>>> [Texana Book Reviews](http://www.lsjunction.com/cox98jan.htm)

>>>

>>> [True West, letter to the
editor](http://www.westernpublications.com/currentissue/ltrseditorialframe.html)

>>>

>>> [The deaths of Davy Crockett](http://www.comedyontap.com/deaths.html)

>>>

>>> [Daughters of the Republic of Texas](http://drtl.org/drt_info.html)

>>>

>>> [Alamo site: "rejected
sources"](http://hotx.com/alamo/esparza.html#rejects)

>>

>> Hobbyist magazines

>>

>>> [TheHistoryNet](http://www.thehistorynet.com/)

>>>

>>>> Please look around this site a bit. Take note of the kinds of subjects
that tend to covered and of the basic approach that the authors take to their
subjects. Look at some of the titles under "Magazines" and go to the intro
pages for several. Read at least a few of the articles here.

>

> **Multimedia (In-Class Viewing):**

>

>> Film selection: "The Civil War"

>>

>> Film selection: "Shoah"

>

> **Assignment:**

>

>> 2-3 page paper.

>>

>>> Military history is by far the best-selling genre of historical writing.
Much of it is written by "amateur" historians. Speculate: why do you think
military history is so popular with readers but so relatively unpopular with
academic historians? How does this disparity in relative popularity speak to
the general issue of amateur versus professional history?

>>

>>  

Wednesday February 9

**Memory and Folklore**

> **Readings:**

>

>> Joanne Rappaport, _The Politics of Memory_ , all

>

> **Multimedia (View before class):**

>

>> Film: "The Nasty Girl"

>

> **Assignment:**

>

>> Collect a testimony concerning the "Intercultural Center incident" at
Swarthmore College, October 1998. In an accompanying one-page paper, describe
what you see as the meaning and significance of this testimony.





Wednesday February 16

**Museums, Memorials and Monuments I**

> **Readings:**

>

>> Richard Handler and Eric Gable, _The New History in an Old Museum: Creating
the Past at Colonial Williamsburg_ , pp. 3-124, pp. 220-236

>

> **Multimedia (View before class):**

>

>> **-Colonial Williamsburg**

>>

>>> [ Colonial Williamsburg](http://www.history.org/almanack.htm)

>>>

>>>> Explore this site fairly thoroughly.

>>>

>>> [Evelynton Plantation](http://www.evelyntonplantation.org/)

>>

>> **-Holocaust museums**

>>

>>> [ Holocaust Memorial Museum, Washington
DC](http://www.ushmm.org/index.html)

>>>

>>>> Spend some time working through this site.

>>>

>>> [Museum of Tolerance](http://www.wiesenthal.com/mot/index.html)

>>>

>>>> Take a fairly detailed look at this site.

>>>

>>> [El Paso Holocaust Museum](http://www.huntel.com/~ht2/holocst.html#about)

>>>

>>>> Read just this one page.

>>

>> **-**[ **White Pine Public
Museum**](http://www.webpanda.com/white_pine_county/museum/membership.htm)

>>

>>> Look through the range of materials here to get a feel for the total range
of displays.

>>

>> **-**[ **National Czech and Slovak Museum**](http://www.ncsml.org/)

>>

>>> Examine the exhibits page and more if you have time.

>>

>> **-**[ **Virginia's Civil War**](http://www.civilwar-va.com/)

>>

>>> Look through some of the tours suggested here.

>>

>> **-**[ **American Cotton Museum**](http://www.cyberramp.net/~amcotton/)

>>

>>> Examine this site.

>>

>> **-**[ **The Diefenbunker**](http://www.diefenbunker.ca/indexe.htm)

>>

>>> Examine this site about this rather curious museum.

>>

>> **-**[ **Liberty Square at Walt Disney
World**](http://themeparks.miningco.com/library/weekly/aa120397.htm)

>>

>>> Description of this area of the themepark. Read the whole page carefully
except for the section on the Haunted Mansion.

>>

>> **-**[ **Ku Klux Klan Online
Museum**](http://www.kkk.com/artifactopening.htm)

>>

>>> Don't look at this repulsive site if it will unduly disturb you to do so,
but I want to ponder what the limits to museums and memorials are or should
be.

>>

>>  

**Field trip to Philadelphia museums, date TBA**



Wednesday February 23

**Museums, Memorials and Monuments II**

> **Readings:**

>

>> *Edward Linenthal, _History Wars: The Enola Gay and Other Battles for the
American Past_ , pp. 9-62

>>

>> *James Loewen, _Lies Across America_ , selection

>

> **Multimedia (View before class):**

>

>> Black History Month and similar memorials

>>

>>> [Black history](http://www.rr.gmcs.k12.nm.us/domagala.bhistory.htm)

>>>

>>>> Good centralized site. Casually peruse the links most directly related to
Black History Month as a memorial event.

>>>

>>> [Philadelphia Online's Black History
Month](http://home.phillynews.com/packages/history/KRT/morrison/html/2a.asp)

>>>

>>>> Java-intensive site, so watch out. Try the quiz.

>>

>> Veterans

>>

>>> [VFW's "Origins of Veterans Day"](http://www.vfw.com/amesm/origins.shtml)

>>>

>>> [VA's "Suggested Remarks" for Veterans
Day](http://www.va.gov/pubaff/vetday98/fldspch98.htm)

>>>

>>> [Battling Bastards of
Bataan](http://home.pacbell.net/fbaldie/Battling_Bastards_of_Bataan.html)

>>

>> [Waco Holocaust Electronic
Museum](http://www.mnsinc.com/SkyWriter/WacoMuseum/)

>>

>>> A memorial to the Branch Davidians who died during their confrontation
with the federal government. There is some disturbing stuff here, including
some material which sounds a lot like the typical sentiments of militia
groups, so be warned.

>>

>> [Crazy Horse Memorial](http://www.crazyhorse.org/)

>>

>>> Look at the material on the 50th Anniversary celebrations and familiarize
yourself with the memorial design.

>>

>> [Robben Island](http://www.robben-island.org.za/museum.htm)

>>

>> [Mount Rushmore](http://www.state.sd.us/tourism/rushmore/index.htm)

>>

>> [Grange Castle Restoration Project](http://ils.ie/grange/)

>>

>> [Agra Fort](http://www.meadev.gov.in/tourism/forts/agrafort.htm)

>>

>> [Widow Clarke House](http://shrike.depaul.edu/~phamiti)

>

>  
>

>  

Wednesday March 1

**Living History**

> **Reading:**

>

>> Tony Horwitz, _Confederates in the Attic_ , all

>

> **Multimedia (View before class):**

>

>> [ Living History International](http://www.livinghistory.org/)

>>

>>> Explore the materials linked to this site.

>>

>> [L'Age d'Or](http://www.geocities.com/Paris/Rue/1663/age.html)

>>

>>> Read the main page. Explore further if you wish to.

>>

>> [Society for Creative Anachronism](http://www.sca.org/)

>>

>>> Explore this site thoroughly.

>>

>> [Pennsylvania Renaissance Faire](http://www.parenaissancefaire.com/)

>>

>>> Explore this site.

>>

>>  
>>

>> **Multimedia (In-Class Viewing):**

>>

>> "Everybody Loves Raymond"

>>

>>> Re-enactment episode, short selections.

>

>  
>

> **Assignment** :

>

>> You will be assigned an event, historical person, or other historical
subject matter in the second week of the class. (Each student will have a
different assignment.) In a 5-6 page paper due at our March 1 class, describe
how you would approach designing a museum exhibit about or appropriate
memorial to this subject. Use of visual or other multimedia material to
accompany the prospectus is encouraged but not required. Do whatever research
you feel is necessary to understand the subject and adequately plan your
exhibit, but you are not expected to have an exhaustive knowledge of the
particular subject matter you are assigned.

>>

>> The most important aspect of this assignment is to discuss analytically and
philosophically the central purpose or objective of your exhibit, and how you
think the design of the exhibit would achieve that objective.

>>

>>  

**SPRING BREAK**



Wednesday March 15

**Public Policy and History**

> **Multimedia (View before class):**

>

>> **-**[ **Truth and Reconciliation Commission**](http://www.truth.org.za/)

>>

>>> Thoroughly read the materials at this site. Examine at least some of the
report.

>>>

>>> [BBC "Talking
Point"](http://newsvote.bbc.co.uk/hi/english/talking_point/newsid_144000/144250.asp)

>>>

>>>> Discussions of the TRC's work. Please read all the responses.

>>

>> **-Reparations for the enslavement of Africans**

>>

>>> [ NCobra Website](http://www.ncobra.com/)

>>>

>>>> Thoroughly read the materials at this site.

>>

>> **-Internment of Japanese-Americans**

>>

>>> [ "Military Necessity or Racial
Prejudice?"](http://www.odu.edu/~hanley/history1/Klimova.htm)

>>>

>>>> Read this article.

>>>

>>> [Speech by the Attorney-
General](http://www.usdoj.gov/ag/speeches/1998/0910cla.htm)

>>>

>>>> Read this speech.

>>

>> **-Native American land claims and the law**

>>

>>> [ Title XXV, Chapter 19: Land Claims
Settlements](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/25/ch19.html)

>>>

>>>> Read at least the Rhode Island, Maine, Florida and Connecticut sections.
Get a sense for how claims about history play a role in settling land claims
disputes.

>>>

>>> [Indian Land Claims map](http://www.cr.nps.gov/aad/nacd/namap-4.htm)

>>>

>>>> Examine the large PDF map, following instructions on loading the PDF
viewer.

>>>

>>> [Indian land claims controversies in New York
State](http://www.timesunion.com/news/special/landclaims/)

>>>

>>>> Read these three articles from a New York state newspaper about recent
and ongoing controversies.

>>

>> **-Official apologies**

>>

>>> [ Queen Elizabeth and Jallianwala
Bagh](http://www.cnn.co.jp/WORLD/9710/18/queen.india/)

>>>

>>> [Japan's role in Asia during World War
II](http://www.spokane.net/stories/1998/Sep/25/s456426.asp)

>>>

>>> [John Leo on
apologies](http://www.usnews.com/usnews/issue/970630/30john.htm)

>>>

>>>  
>

> **Assignment:**

>

>> In 1938, as part of the build-up to World War II, Adolph Hitler annexed the
portion of Czechslovakia known as the Sudentenland, arguing that because many
of its residents were German-speaking, it should be part of Germany. Many of
the Sudentenland Germans supported Hitler's actions. Much of the Sudentenland
was returned to the control of postwar Communist Czechslovakia and still
remains within the borders of the present-day Czech Republic. German-speakers
in the postwar Sudentenland claim that they were deprived of their property by
the postwar Communist government and are today lobbying the current Czech
Republic for reparations for the losses they claim to have suffered.

>>

>>  
>>

>> In a 2-3 page paper, compare these claims to the others we are reading
about for this week. Are the Sudentenland activists entitled to such
reparations? Why or why not? If so, on what should such reparations be based?

>>

>> **What I am looking for here is for you to develop your own systematic
criteria for how or when reparations are warrented. If not in this instance,
would you grant reparations in other cases? How do you make the distinction?
If you think reparations are never warranted, why do you think so?**

>>

>>  

Wednesday March 22

**Textbooks, Pedagogies and Education**

> **Readings:**

>

>> James Loewen, _Lies My Teacher Told Me,_ all

>>

>> _*_ US History standards, selections



Wednesday March 29

**Genealogy and Family History**

> **Multimedia (View before class):**

>

>> [ Rootsweb](http://www.rootsweb.com/)

>>

>>> Spend a lot of time working through this site and the materials linked to
it.

>>

>> [The American Immigrant Wall of Honor](http://www.wallofhonor.com/)

>>

>>> Pick a couple of surnames at random from the student directory and search.

>>

>> Jefferson-Hemings controversy

>>

>>> [Jefferson Family
Genealogy](http://genforum.familytreemaker.com/jefferson/)

>

> **Assignment:**

>

>> Using Rootsweb and a standard web-search engine like Hotbot or Webcrawler,
do genealogical research on your own surname. (We will discuss using search
engines in class.)

>>

>> Then compare this with what you already know of your own particular family
history. Be prepared to make a 5-minute oral presentation about what you found
and how you view your findings. What does it mean to find the history of
people with the same name, if anything?



Wednesday April 5

**Collections, Souvenirs, Antiques**

> **Multimedia (View before class):**

>

>> [ eBay](www.ebay.com)

>>

>>> Please follow these instructions carefully.

>>>

>>> On the Saturday, Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday before class, check the
following categories at eBay:

>>>

>>>> [Collectibles: Memorabilia:
Historical](http://listings.ebay.com/aw/listings/list/category208/index.html)

>>>>

>>>> [Collectibles: Militaria: Civil
War](http://listings.ebay.com/aw/listings/list/category136/index.html)

>>>>

>>>> [Antiques: Science
Instruments](http://listings.ebay.com/aw/listings/list/category361/index.html)

>>>>

>>>> [Antiques: Folk
Art](http://listings.ebay.com/aw/listings/list/category357/index.html)

>>>

>>> Please read the descriptions of at least five items in each category and
track their progress over the week. Note what the sellers say (and perhaps
don't say) about the origins, meaning and nature of the item. (Pick items
which have just recently been listed for auction so that you can watch them
over the whole week.) Also, observe overall which items seem to be attracting
the most activity (number of bids) and the highest prices in each category.

>>

>> [Lionheart Autographs](http://www.lionheartinc.com/index.htm)

>>

>>> Examine this site. What kinds of autographs and documents are available?
What determines their value?

>>

>> [Khoisan heads in the British
Museum](http://www.mg.co.za/mg/news/96feb/2feb-oldbones1.html)

>>

>>> Read this article.

>>

>> [Regimental Beersteins](http://www.regimentalbeerstein.com/index.html)

>>

>> [Hard to Find GI Joes](http://www.hardtofindgijoe.com/)

>>

>> Collectors' and Collectors' Societies Home Pages

>>

>>> [Japanese Swords collector](http://www.west.net/~kurrasch/kurrasch.htm)

>>>

>>> [Ken's Antique Radio Haven](http://home.fuse.net/kyoder/)

>>>

>>> [Larry's Bomber Command](http://www.nucleus.com/~ltwright/home.htm)

>>>

>>> [National Insulator Association](http://www.nia.org/)

>>>

>>> [Historical Model Railway Society](http://www.hmrs.org.uk/)

>

> **Assignment:**

>

>> 2-3 page paper. What objects seem to have historical value, and why? Which
objects do not seem to acquire value among collectors? Why are some objects
more valued for their histories than others?



Wednesday April 12

**Alternate Histories, Time Travel and Historical Romance**

> **Reading:**

>

>> Gardner Dozois, ed., _Roads Not Taken: Tales of Alternate History,_ pp.
xi-43, pp. 71-111, pp. 130-180, pp. 251-322

>>

>> *J.C. Herz, article on "Sid Meier's Gettysburg", _New York Times_

>

> **Multimedia (View before class):**

>

>> [ Amazon.com's "Historical Romance"
section](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ts/browse-
books/13371/002-3505709-0977045)

>>

>>> Look over the range of titles here. Note the eras and situations most
favored by writers in this genre.

>>

>> "Bill and Ted's Excellent Adventure"

>>

>>> Time TBA.

>

> **Multimedia (In-Class Viewing):**

>

>> Compilation videotape: scenes from alternate-history films and television
shows

>>

>> "Sid Meier's Gettysburg": short demonstration

>

> **Assignment:**

>

>> 5-6 page (approximately) paper.

>>

>>> At our March 29 meeting, you will be assigned an event. Write an alternate
history of that event. You can complete this assignment as an essay, as a
exercise in creative writing, or in a multimedia form, but you should find
some way to explain or make apparent the underlying assumptions or logic you
have used to guide the development of your alternate scenario. Do whatever
research you find necessary to complete the assignment, but you will not be
expected to have an exhaustive knowledge of the subject.

>>

>>  

Wednesday April 19

**Fictions, Entertainments and Promotions:**

**History in Popular Culture**

> **Readings:**

>

>> Larry McMurtry, _Lonesome Dove_

>>

>> *Articles on the controversy over the film "JFK"

>

> **Multimedia (View before class):**

>

>> "Gone With the Wind"

>>

>>> Time TBA.

>>

>> "JFK"

>>

>>> Time TBA.

>>

>> "Black Robe"

>>

>>> Time TBA

>

> **Multimedia (In-class viewing):**

>

>> "Hare We Go" or other Bugs Bunny cartoon

>>

>> Herbert Hoover doll

>>

>> Historically-themed computer games: demonstrations

>>

>>  

Wednesday April 26

**The Authority of History**

> **Assignment:**

>

>> Bring to class the following:

>>

>>  
>>

>> A URL for a museum site. Be prepared to describe the site and the museum
and to relate it to the ones we discussed earlier in the semester.

>>

>>  
>>

>> A photocopy of a newspaper or magazine advertisement that uses a
representation of the past as part of its appeal. Be prepared to discuss how
you view the advertisement.

>>

>>  
>>

>> An example of a public controversy over history of any kind which has
brought professional academic historians into dialogue or dispute with
productions of history outside the guild. Bring any background materials
(articles, etc.) relevant to your example to class and be prepared to discuss
your example.

>>

>>  
>>

>>  
>

>  



