**[John Bidwell](/oldbooks/faculty.shtml#bidwell)**  
[ No. 31: History of European and American Papermaking
[H-060]](/oldbooks/bulletin/history.html#bidwell)  
4-8 June 2001

1) _How useful were the pre-course readings?_

**1:** Very useful. **2:** Very. Dard Hunter -- enjoyable and comprehensive.
Gaskell -- concise and excellent overview. **3:** Yes, they were very useful,
though some very difficult to obtain. **4:** Good foundation. **5:** Good --
nice to have Febvre and Gaskell as alternate perspectives to Hunter. **6:**
Very useful. A little more clarification in required/recommended readings
would have been useful for me. (For instance -- knowing that we would not be
held accountable for all details in the recommended readings). **7:** I
applied late. **8:** Very useful; gave a great introduction to the field.
**9-** **10:** Very useful. **11:** Gave good idea of what course would cover
-- could be skimmed for areas of interest/weakness without requiring cover to
cover reading, so quite useful. **12:** Very useful and organized by various
categories.

2) _Were the course syllabus and other materials distributed in class useful
(or will they be so in the future, after you return home)?_

**1:** Yes. **2:** Yes, especially the bibliography. **3:** The syllabus was
useful as were the booklet of handouts. They will serve as a reference in the
future, and the bibliography will be invaluable. **4:** Helpful in
class...probably not for later except for bibliography. **5:** Yes. **6:**
Extremely useful for reference purposes, and handy to have when
illustrations/examples are needed to explain ideas/processes  &c. to others.
**7:** Yes. The class handout was well-organized and relevant to the lectures.
**8:** Yes -- we referred to the syllabus and related things frequently. The
bibliography will be extremely useful for future study. **9-10:** Yes. **11:**
Yes; helped to keep daily topics in larger perspective. **12:** Most
definitely, offered another viewpoint of paper history (esp. regarding the
industry and economics of the paper trade) and provided info. I have not found
published.

3) _Was the intellectual level of the course content appropriate?_

**1:** Excellent. **2:** Yes -- superb balance of commercial and economic
history with discussion of technique and analysis. **3:** Yes. JB is a walking
encyclopedia of paper history. He communicates well and is very thorough, with
a nice touch of humor. **4:** Yes. High level, challenging, interesting. Much
more detailed than library school courses -- great. **5:** Yes. **6:**
Absolutely. Intellectually stimulating, with ample opportunity to ask
questions in a friendly and supportive classroom environment. Appreciated
instructor's knowledge and ability to answer questions and speak
extemporaneously. **7:** Yes. The lectures and demonstrations focused on the
history of papermaking as well as practical information regarding paper
identification. I feel equipped to begin identifying paper. **8-10:** Yes.
**11:** Absolutely. **12:** Yes.

4) _If your course had field trips, were they effective?_

**1:** Yes! Two great field trips. **2:** Yes. Very helpful to have an
overview of reference books in the field; a delight to see high points of
papermaking. Both the trip to make paper by hand and the trip to the newsprint
mill were very useful experiences. **3:** The Bear Island tour was excellent.
Very useful. Fun too. The afternoon spent making handmade paper from garden
plants was a pleasant experience, but not educational, nor particularly
relevant to the topic of c18 and c19 paper history. **4:** Yes. **5:** Eye-
opening and worthwhile trip to Bear Island Mill -- hand papermaking good, but
I wonder if there was any way we could have made rag paper, since that's what
we spent most of the time talking about, not natural fibers. **6:** YES! Field
trips were invaluable learning experiences, as was our trip to UVa Special
Collections. Bear Island Paper Mill tour was the highlight of the week. Thank
you so much! **7:** Yes. **8:** Yes -- it was fun to make paper, and the
experience was important for understanding the traditional process. The trip
to Bear Island was great for seeing modern papermaking, the needs and
practices of the industry, and the process of machine-made papermaking. **9:**
Yes -- 1) Hand papermaking at a studio was good, but the papermaker did not
really seem extremely knowledgeable -- she doesn't make that much paper,
apparently. But it was a good exercise. 2) Bear Island paper mill was VERY
interesting. 3) Special Collections visit to discuss publications on
papermaking was also useful. **10:** Yes. In particular, the afternoon spent
making paper and the trip to Bear Island supported and reinforced our class
discussions. These trips also came at useful points in the course. **11:**
Very well spent. **12:** The tour to the paper mill was fabulous -- the day
spent making handmade paper I feel would have been more educational if we had
made traditional western paper with a person who makes their living producing
handmade paper. Possibly in the future, if someone could come from Dieu Donn e
or Tim Barrett's assistant (if he is not available).

5) _Did the actual course content correspond to its RBS brochure description
and Expanded Course Description (ECD)? Did the course in general meet your
expectations?_

**1-3:** Yes. **4:** Yes, but course and instructor exceeded expectations.
**5:** Yes. **6:** Yes. Class matched my expectations and more! **7-11:** Yes.
**12:** Yes, in every respect.

6) _What did you like best about the course?_

**1:** JB is a _paper animal!_ Absolutely encyclopedic; witty; articulate; a
terrific instructor. Great classmates, too. Also _loved_ the hands-on hand
papermaking day trip. **2:** JB's wonderful teaching, especially his superb
ability to balance useful statistical analysis and archival research with
delightfully well-told anecdotes. His love for his subject shows at every
point, and he is wonderfully kind to his students. **3:** The expertise of the
instructor -- someone who has so thoroughly researched the subject, digested
the information and presented it to us in a clear and organized fashion.
Excellent slides to illustrate issues and useful tables of data to show
trends. **4:** Instructor is enthusiastic and devoted to subject; _very_
knowledgeable, excellent communicator. **5:** Excellent economic and social
history from labor _and_ management perspectives. Good exercise on identifying
watermarks. **6:** The instructor, JB, and his love of paper, papermaking, and
papermaking history. **7:** The sequence of the lectures and their
relationship to the field trips: making paper by hand, followed by the trip to
the paper mill. I also enjoyed the afternoon during which we were introduced
to methods for identifying paper and the resource books. **8:** The field
trips. JB is also an extremely knowledgeable person in papermaking, and a
terrific storyteller concerning papermaking history. **9:** Instructor was
_excellent_ \-- knowledgeable, funny, and interesting. He talked about ugly
machines and made it INTERESTING -- now _that_ is a real talent! **10:** I
thoroughly enjoyed _everything_. JB is an excellent instructor, a mine of
information. **11:** JB. He didn't just pick out pieces from the reading list
\-- he gave us results of his own work and research, which is admirable. I was
grateful for the social and economic view of paper over and above looking up
watermarks and classifications. **12:** The variety of topics -- covered a
number of issues, and there were good visual examples ( _i.e._ papers to
examine and search for watermarks).

7) _How could the course have been improved?_

**1:** More (even a bit) on paper science: What pH is, why it's important in
paper; what lignin actually is; what range of light is damaging to paper;  &c.
Also might want to try co-teaching it with a papermaker; that would have
improved it even more. **2:** Larger classroom. **3:** Perhaps the afternoon
of garden papermaking could have been substituted with a papermaking stint
with a more traditional hand papermaker. A discussion of fiber preparation and
how that activity yields the paper's final qualities and properties would have
been useful. As the saying goes, "paper is made in the beater." **4:** Instead
of "alternative" fibers, I would like to see quality, white paper made by
hand. **5:** Better use of Special Collections time -- I was not as interested
in seeing RBS's collection of reference books as I was in seeing more
originals of manuals such as _Art de Faire le Papier._ Also, would have been
helpful to have brief discussion of paper chemistry (acid/alkaline), what
makes paper strong/weak, &c. Also, if there is _any_ way the class could be
held closer to Alderman, that would be great -- I felt isolated from the other
classes. **8:** I don't know. **9:** If there had been a more knowledgeable
papermaker for the "making paper" section, it would have helped a bit. **10:**
It would have been nice to have spent more time on watermark and paper
identifications. Perhaps this in-class exercise could be modified to give
students more time to examine the papers and consult the resources. **11:**
You can never be too thin, too rich or have too many samples; RBS has an
impressive collection, but one can always improve. **12:** Some of the topics
might have been better in a different order -- possibly if the class started
with first discussing the various types of paper briefly and looking at them
-- then going on to their history and in-depth study.

8) _We are always concerned about the physical well-being both of the RBS
teaching collections and of materials owned by UVa's Special Collections. If
relevant, what suggestions do you have for the improved classroom handling of
such materials used in your course this week?_

**1:** Ask students to wash hands after breaks and meals. **2:** Materials
were handled appropriately. **3:**? Can't think of any. **4:** There should be
no pens, food or drink on tables when handling the materials -- this was
forgotten. **5:** Bigger classroom space -- not much room to pass around
larger objects or look at objects as a group. **8:** None. **9:** Excellent
and careful handling of all materials at all times, including samples passed
around the class. **10:** A slightly larger classroom, with more tables and
flat surfaces. **11:** Some more support material could have been useful for
passing papers around -- just pieces of binder's board would do it -- folder
stock is too light to be good for passing. **12:** Some people in the class
did not seem to have prior handling with rare papers -- maybe a brief
discussion on proper handling at the start.

9) _Please comment on the quality/enjoyability of the various RBS activities
in which you took part **outside** of class (e.g. Sunday afternoon tour,
Sunday night dinner, evening lectures, Bookseller Night, Video Night, Study
Night, tour of the Alderman digital/electronic centers, printing
demonstrations,  &c.)._

**1:** Bookseller Night: almost everything was closed by the time I got there
at _7:30_. Quite disappointed. Dinner on Sunday night was excellent. **2:**
All excellent as usual. **3:** Edifying. **4:** Sun. dinner -- good food and
conversation. I personally was tired after class and would have enjoyed the
evening programs more if there had been time to relax and eat dinner
beforehand. **5:** Did not participate. **6:** Good opportunities to meet with
students in other classes; and learn more about RBS holdings, programs,  &c.
Sometimes too much included in a day depending on other activities -- but
thank you for including these activities for us! **8:** The Monday evening
lecture was excellent -- he is a true connoisseur, and his knowledge of his
collection and related history is inspiring. **9:** All was OK! (The food on
Sunday night dinner was quite good, by the way). **10:** The activities were
enjoyable and varied; excellent, as always. **11:** By the end of the day,
some physical activity is very welcome, so browsing around to look at things
is good -- sitting down again, at least without a break, is not. **12:** Might
be good to have the hours of the booksellers printed in the Vade Mecum -- some
were closed earlier than we thought, once we got there on Tues. night.

10) _Did you get your money's worth? Any final thoughts?_

**1:** ABSOLUTELY!! It's very difficult (impossible) to find a course
elsewhere on this subject. Remember it's a _HISTORY_ class: lots of economics,
law and social history as it pertains to paper. **3:** Yes! **4:** Very
worthwhile. **5:** You will never quite look at paper the same way again; you
will also keep looking at paper in the light. **6:** Absolutely got my money's
worth -- couldn't be happier and would recommend the RBS experience to anyone
and everyone. **7:** Yes. I appreciate the amount of work involved in
organizing a successful week at RBS. **8:** Yes (especially because I didn't
have to pay). My advice: come prepared -- having read the suggested readings.
Also come with money to spend in Charlottesville's terrific used and rare
bookshops. **9:** Yes -- it's a great class -- take it! **10:** Yes,
definitely. This was a wonderful course. Highly recommended. **11:** Got every
penny back with interest; would definitely recommend the course. **12:** Most
definitely -- I would recommend this course to anyone without hesitation.

_Number of respondents:_ **12**

  
**Percentages**  
|  Leave | Tuition | Housing | Travel  
---|---|---|---  
Institution gave me leave | Institution paid tuition | Institution paid
housing | Institution paid travel  
67% | 50% | 42% | 42%  
I took vacation time | I paid tuition myself | I paid for my own housing | I
paid my own travel  
8% | 33% | 42% | 42%  
N/A: self-employed, retired, or had summers off | N/A: self-employed, retired,
or exchange | N/A: stayed with friends or lived at home | N/A: lived nearby  
25% | 17% | 16% | 16%  
  

There were two rare book librarians (17%), two archivists or manuscript
librarians (17%), two general librarians with some rare book duties (17%), two
full-time students (17%), and four conservators, binders or preservation
librarians.

  

[RBS Home](/oldbooks/)

* * *

_Email us your comments[about RBS](/oldbooks/rbs/contacts.html) or [about this
Website](mailto:%20oldbooks@virginia.edu)  
[(C)](http://www.virginia.edu/oldbooks/privacy.html) [Rare Book
School](http://www.rarebookschool.org) at the [University of
Virginia](http://www.virginia.edu)  
Last Modified: Wednesday, 06-Feb-2002 13:23:22 EST_  

