  

> **

>

> Media 104 Class Syllabus  
>  ** Winter 2002

* * *

> **INSTRUCTOR:** Mary Slowinski

>

> **OFFICE:** D274D

>

> **

>

> PHONE:** 425-564-4067

>

> **EMAIL:** mslowins@bcc.ctc.edu

>

> **OFFICE HOURS:** posted at the beginning of the quarter

>

> **TEXTBOOKS:**

>

>> _THE CHILDREN ARE WATCHING:_ How The Media Teach About Diversity  
>  by Carlos E. Cortes, 2000

>>

>> _THE MEDIA MONOPOLY_  
>  by Ben H. Bagdikian, 1990

>

>  
>  
>  **

>

> COURSE DESCRIPTION:

>

> **

>

>> This course will allow students to develop critical viewing skills and to
analyze the origin, impact, and meanings of electronic and digital images from
both a personal and multi-cultural perspective. Additionally, students will be
able to discuss the ethical issues and choices in the development of
electronic media images and how they relate to multi-cultural issues. The
course will combine analysis, criticism, writing and debating skills, guest
lecturers, class discussions, written assignments, and a variety of media
examples assembled and presented by the instructor.

>

>  
>  
>  **

>

> COURSE GOALS AND OBJECTIVES:

>

> **

>

>> Upon completion of the class, the student will be able to:

>>

>> 1\. Cite and explain three examples of ancient myths and their role in both
their original cultures and our modern culture and three examples of media-
created myths and their role in present-day culture.

>>

>> 2\. Select an "American Myth" and explain how another culture could
perceive it (for example: how Native Americans might view the myth of the
cowboys and the old West).

>>

>> 3\. Cite three examples of how 18th and 19th Century media presented images
of non- American cultures and the effect of these images on American cultural
ideas.

>>

>> 4\. Cite and discuss three examples of American values and institutions
being shaped by electronic media since 1945.

>>

>> 5\. List three examples of current electronic media images (e.g.: MTV) and
explain their effect on our present and future cultural self-image.

>>

>> 6\. Compare and contrast print and non-print media images of Native
Americans during three time periods: prior to Westward Expansion (18th
Century), during Westward Expansion (19th Century), and post-expansion media
images and coverage (20th Century).

>>

>> 7\. Compare and contrast how the media portrays the 19th Century immigrant
experience (Ellis Island) with how the media portrays today's immigrants,
including Cubans ("Scarface"), Russians ("Moscow On The Hudson"), Asians,
Mexicans ("Stand and Deliver").

>>

>> 8\. Compare and contrast five examples of African American images in film,
from 1920 to the present.

>>

>> 9\. Explain the development and evolution of the black situation comedy
from 1969 ("Julia") to the present and compare it to non-black sitcoms of the
same period.

>>

>> 10\. Cite and discuss three examples of the media positively addressing the
issue of race, culture, and ethnicity.

>>

>> 11\. Discuss the role of the media in various "rights" movements, including
civil rights, women's liberation, and gay rights.

>>

>> 12\. Compare and contrast the female image on TV from the 50's to the 90's.

>>

>> 13\. Cite and discuss examples of "invisible cultures" and their portrayal
in American media, (including gays and lesbians, the elderly, children,
African and Native Americans, the disabled, etc.) and the symbolic
relationship between the number and types of media portrayals of a particular
group effects that group's public perception.

>>

>> 14\. Compare and contrast the amount of American news reporting for
different cultures and its effect on the American world view.

>>

>> 15\. Cite three examples of how multi-media can complement multi-
culturalism.

>>

>> 16\. List three ways new technologies can positively influence people in
recognizing and understanding other cultures.

>>

>> 17\. Develop (in student groups) a "public policy" to keep audiences
informed and minimize the possible harmful effects of new media technologies
on cultural history and perception.

>>

>> 18\. List five criteria for fairness and accuracy in the presentation of
multi-cultural images and apply them to the production of a simple electronic
media presentation on a multi-cultural issue.

>

> **  
>  
>

>

> MAJOR ASSIGNMENTS:

>

> **

>

>> 1\. There will be a series of essays students must write. Check the weekly
"exhibits" for what the content for the essays.

>>

>> 2\. For their final project, students will create and present a simple
electronic media message on a topic of choice that exhibits fairness,
accuracy, and objectivity of multi-cultural issues, as determined by criteria
examined in class and from assigned readings.

>

>  
>  
>

>

> **WEEKLY TOPICS AND DISCUSSIONS:

>

> **

>

>> _Week 1: History and Electronic Media as Myth Maker_

>>

>>   * Myth, metaphor, and the creation by media of "cultural diversity" and
"cultural metaphor"

>>   * Ancient myths, collective memory, and their role in both their original
cultures and our modern culture

>>   * Modern media-created myths and their role in present-day culture

>>   * Why the electronic media is a modern cultural metaphor; how the
electronic media defines our culture and our times

>>   * "American Myths" and how another culture could perceive it

>>

>>

>> ASSIGNMENTS: Read Chapters 1 & 4 in The Media Monopoly

>>

>>  
>>

>> _Week 2: Media and Cultural History of the World_

>>

>>   * Discussion of how American culture has "intruded" upon other cultures
via the modern media (EuroDisneyland, fashions, and American food franchises).

>>   * Is electronic media shaping American values?

>>   * Examples of recent electronic media images and their effect on our
society

>>

>>

>> ASSIGNMENTS: Read Chapters 2 & 3 in The Media Monopoly

>>

>>  
>>

>> _Week 3: Media Portrayals of Immigrants and Indigenous People_

>>

>>   * How does the media portray the immigrant experience? - Examples and
discussion

>>   * "Manifest Destiny" and its role in American expansion during the 19th
Century

>>   * Media images of Native Americans during three time periods: prior to
Westward Expansion (18th Century), During Westward Expansion (19th Century),
and Post-expansion media images and coverage (20th Century) (including camera
angle, subject placement, lighting)

>>

>>

>> ASSIGNMENTS: Read Chapters 2 & 3 in The Children Are Watching

>>

>>  
>>

>> _Week 4: African Americans and the Media_

>>

>>   * Can the media positively address the issue of race?

>>   * Media access and the Civil Rights Movement

>>   * The sitcom and the changing face of comedy

>>   * Exploring African culture using new media technology

>>

>>

>> ASSIGNMENTS: Read Chapters 4 & 5 in The Children Are Watching

>>

>>  
>>

>> _Week 5: Invisible Cultures in the Media_

>>

>>   * Media portrayals of women and their effect on viewers' emotions and
social behavior

>>   * The female image as media object from 1890 to the present

>>   * Women and MTV or where do Beavis and Butthead get their ideas anyway?

>>   * Women and film/women and journalism

>>   * Are media messages about women improving?

>>

>>

>> ASSIGNMENTS: Read Chapter 6 in The Children Are Watching

>>

>> MID-TERM ESSAY DUE NEXT WEEK

>>

>>  
>>

>> _Week 6: Invisible Cultures in the Media (cont'd)_

>>

>>   * Portrayal and Power or: How the number and types of media portrayals of
a particular group can symbolize that group's importance, power, and social
value (for example - during the early 1960's blacks were nearly invisible on
American television, while during the 1970's they were portrayed mainly as
pimp, pushers, and street hustlers)

>>   * Gays and Lesbians

>>   * Children and the elderly

>>   * The disabled

>>   * Breaking cultural stereotypes with media applications

>>

>>

>> ASSIGNMENTS: Read Chapter 7 in The Children Are Watching

>>

>>  
>>

>> _Week 7: American Media Looks at Today's World_

>>

>>   * "Fact" and "Opinion."

>>   * Concentration of ownership and the lust for ratings - how this can
jeopardize media content

>>   * American worldview: what does the electronic box tell us?

>>   * The world looks back: what is the worldview of the United States?

>>

>>

>> ASSIGNMENTS: Read Chapters 8 & 9 in The Children Are Watching

>>

>>  
>>

>> _Week 8: Dispelling The Myths_

>>

>>   * How broadcast television can be used effectively for teaching cognitive
skills and pro-social behavior

>>   * Individual influence on the media: getting seen and heard

>>   * How groups might influence media portrayals of different cultures

>>   * How different groups can themselves create positive portrayals and how
these portrayals might be made available to the largest possible audience

>>

>>

>> ASSIGNMENTS: Read Chapter 10 and the Epilogue in The Children Are Watching

>>

>>  
>>

>> _Week 9: Technology and the Future of Cultural Diversity_

>>

>>   * Multi-cultural multi-media

>>   * How multi-media can complement multi-culturalism

>>   * Positive and negative effects of new technology on multi-cultural
survival

>>   * How new technologies can positively influence people in recognizing and
understanding other cultures

>>   * How new technologies have altered the American public's viewing habits

>>   * Developing a technological policy for cultural survival

>>

>>

>>  
>>

>> _Week 10: Final Presentation Preparation_

>>

>> During this week, students will be working in groups preparing their final
presentations to the class.

>>

>>  
>>

>> _Week 11: FINAL PRESENTATIONS_

>>

>>  

* * *

> **

>

> PROCEDURES OF THE TELECOMMUNICATIONS DIVISION:**  
>  Revised Fall 2000

>

>  
>

>

> **Plagiarism***

>

> Any student submitting a paper which contains a paragraph or sentence from
another source, of which, when reviewed by an expert, neutral, third party,
contains so close a paraphrase as to be considered non-coincidental and which
does not cite the source clearly and distinctly, will be assigned a final
course grade of "F". All forms of plagiarism will be reported to the Dean of
Students and the student will be informed of this action.

>

> **F Grade, W Grade, and HW Grade**

>

> Students who fail a course will receive a letter grade of F. Students can
withdraw from class and receive a letter grade of W until the end of the
seventh week of the quarter. After that date, students will receive the grade
earned. In certain situations, approved by the Office of the Dean of Students,
a HW (Hardship Withdrawal) grade can be issued after the seventh week.

>

> **Withdrawal from class**

>

> College policy states that students must formally withdraw from a class by
the end of the seventh week of the quarter. (Registration Office: B125). If a
student has not withdrawn by that date, an appropriate letter grade will be
assigned for the course.

>

> **Disabled Students**

>

> Students with a disability requiring special accommodation from the College
and/or the instructor are required to discuss their specific needs with both
the Office of Disability Support Services (B233) and the instructor during the
first week of class.

>

> **Distribution of Grades**

>

> Grades will not be posted in the Telecommunications division or in faculty
offices, nor will the secretary give out grades. If a student wants to know
his/her grades prior to them being available by touch-tone phone
(425-641-2625, press 3#), the instructor should be provided with a stamped
(postage appropriate to weight), self-addressed envelope.

>

> ___________

>

> *If you are accused of Cheating, Stealing Exams, and/or Plagiarism, there is
a Bellevue Community College Discipline and Appeals Procedure (the right to
due process) which you may pursue. Contact the Associate Dean of the
Telecommunications Division (N212A), or the Dean of Student Services (B231A),
or the Associated Student Body offices (above the Cafeteria) for information
regarding the appeals process.

>

>  

