UCSB Hist 194HABC, 1998-99, **draft**  
**note: Prof. Glickstein will be seminar director in Winter and Spring 1999
quarters**  
Senior Honors Seminar  
Mondays, 2-5pm  

_SENIOR HONORS SEMINAR: SYLLABUS_

In this three-quarter seminar students write a senior thesis on a research
topic of substantial depth and complexity. In the fall quarter, honors
candidates begin their research and develop a prospectus and working
bibliography for their theses. Participants submit applications to the
campuswide competition for undergraduate research funding. The remaining two
terms of the seminar are devoted to independent research, conducted in
consultation with the students' individual mentors, and to writing, under the
guidance of the seminar director. The theses are usually 60-80 pages in
length. A copy of the final thesis is shelved in the departmental reading
room, with an abstract published on the world wide web. Students who
successfully complete this course are eligible for Graduation with Distinction
in the History Major.

**PREREQUISITES FOR ADMISSION**

  * GPA in the major of 3.6; 
  * Writing samples presented to the seminar director which demonstrate "honors quality" skills in composition (usually reviewed at end of previous year in June); 
  * A professor-sponsor ("mentor") for the research project, usually a regular professor in the History Department who is familiar with your work and willing to work with you for three quarters; 
  * Experience in writing a research paper (e.g. successful completion of a proseminar);
  * Prior or concurrent enrollment in Interdisciplinary Studies 1, "Library Skills" (1 unit), **or** equivalent familiarity with the use of on-line and CD-Rom library databases; 
  * Computer competence, including: ability to save, copy, and delete text files,  
mastery of a word processing program with automated footnoting and pagination,
and  
ability to send and receive e-mail messages.

**REQUIRED BOOKS** (yes, you _must_ purchase them)

Mary Lynn Rampolla, _A Pocket Guide to Writing in History_ (Boston: Bedford,
1995). $3.95  
This booklet gives advice about how one can conceive, research, organize and
write a history research paper. It includes examples of how to cite various
primary and secondary sources.

Diana Hacker, _A Pocket Style Manual_ (Boston: Bedford, 1997). $10.70 new; $8
used.  
Another booklet which, if read carefully, will save the seminar director a lot
of ink.

**COURSE SPECIFICS**

Each student in the seminar will undertake a major research project, resulting
in a **paper of 60-70 pages**. The research and writing will be under the
primary direction of a **mentor** whose area of scholarly expertise correlates
with the topic of the paper. Students who want to enroll in History 194H must
first discuss their plans with a mentor and obtain her or his support.

The honors seminar **director** presides over the regular meetings of the
seminar, reads and comments on the prospectus and successive drafts of the
research papers, and supplements the advice of the mentor. The final grade
awarded to each paper is determined in consultation between the seminar
director and the mentor.

**Outside funding** is available through the Special Programs Office of the
College of Letters and Science. Applications, including a proposed budget, are
due early in the Fall quarter. Recipients of grants must keep records of their
expenditures and will be asked to submit a report at the end of spring
quarter.

Each student will have two **peer reviewer** s in the seminar, who, in
addition to the director and the mentor, will read and comment on her or his
work. The quality of these reviewing efforts is calculated into each student's
final grade in the course.  
The seminar director will evaluate each student's work and give a provisional
grade at the end of Fall and Winter quarters, based on the work during that
quarter. These evaluations may affect the student's final grade. At the end of
Spring quarter each student will **present** her or his paper both to the
seminar, and at a departmental colloquium.

**Seminar discussions** are central to the **** program and attendance is, of
course, mandatory. The high quality of most of the papers produced in the
seminar is intimately linked to the intensive process of reading and re-
reading, discussion and reflection, polishing and repolishing, under the
guidance of other students and professors.

Seminar participants will **read and comment on papers** from a wide spectrum
of periods and areas-possibly ancient, medieval, or modern; American or
European; African or Asian. Of course none of us will be experts in all of
those periods and areas, but an underlying assumption of this seminar is that,
as humanist-historians, the participants will have wide-ranging interests and
a **willingness to delve into unfamiliar areas**. Relatedly, each paper is to
be written in such a way that intelligent, non-expert readers will be able to
follow its arguments.

Students in the honors seminar must be responsible adults who will maintain an
appropriate level of research and writing throughout the three quarters,
**meeting all deadlines** without constant reminders and exceptions. Students
who are unable to assume this responsibility will be asked to drop the course.
Similarly, students who prefer to work alone, without constant interaction and
critique from others, are advised to avoid this seminar.

**SCHEDULE**

**Fall quarter**.

1\. introductory meeting, getting acquainted

[Oct] 2\. discussion of titles and preliminary bibliographies; library skills

3\. SPUR grant applications; discussion of research methods, annotated
bibliographies

4\. (20 Oct.) first draft of prospectus due (6-10 pages; copies for all
seminar members);  
includes title, abstract, description, outline, and bibliographies of primary
and secondary sources.

5\. Discussion of final prospectuses and annotated bibliographies [SPUR
proposals due]

[Nov] 6\. individual consultations; submission of an article relevant to your
topic to the seminar director

7\. research break, pick up articles from peers: outline them for next week

8\. discussion of sample scholarly articles

9\. (24 Nov.) first installment (20pp.) due.

[Dec] 10\. discussion of first installments

**Winter quarter**.

[Jan] 1\. (5 Jan.) progress reports [awards ceremony]

2\. individual consultations

3\. individual consultations [MLK day]

4\. research & writing break

[Feb] 5\. (2 Feb.) 35 pages due

6\. discussion of 35-page installments

7\. discussion of sample conclusions

8\. writing break

[Mar] 9\. third installment (20pp.) due

10\. bibliography due; writing abstracts  

**Spring quarter.**

[Apr] 1\. progress reports

2\. abstract due

3\. discussion of abstracts, conclusion due

4\. discussion of conclusions

[May]5\. complete draft due (three copies)

6\. preparing peer rev. & oral presentations

7\. seminar presentations

8\. seminar presentations / SPUR reports

[June]9\. departmental presentations

10\. two archive copies due (dept, mentor)

