

**History 607.01**

**Early Byzantine Empire, A.D. 330-843**

**Autumn Quarter 1997**

**_Instructor:_** Professor Timothy E. Gregory, 365 Dulles Hall. Office Hours:
Monday 9:30-10:30, Monday and Wednesday 2:30-3:30, and by appointment at other
times. Telephone 292-1949 (office), 292-2674 (department), 291-4015 (home).
E-mail: [gregory.4@osu.edu](mailto:gregory.4@osu.edu)

**Web Site for the Course:** http://www.acs.ohio-
state.edu/history/isthmia/teg/hist60701

**_Required Texts:_**

Averil Cameron _The Mediterranean World in Late Antiquity_

George Ostrogorsky, _History of the Byzantine State_

Procopius, _Secret History_

_The Early Byzantine Empire_ (a book of readings, available only at Cop-Ez)

_A Chronology of Early Byzantine History_ (outline history of the period,

> > avilable only at Cop-Ez in the basement of Bricker Hall)

The first three books are available _only_ at SBX.

**_Course Description:_**

This course is designed as an introduction to early Byzantine civilization and
history, A.D. 330-843. In it we will trace the transformation of the ancient
world and the emergence of a distinctly medieval Byzantine civilization. We
will observe the growth and triumph of Christianity and its transformation
into a world religion. We will examine critically the myths concerning the
"fall of the Roman empire" and the typical evaluation of Byzantium. We will
attempt to understand Byzantine civilization through the eyes of the
Byzantines themselves, examining their values and comparing them with those of
our own. In this regard, we will seek to gain insight into the religious
sensitivities of the Byzantines and how Byzantine Christianity expressed
important transcendent ideas. We will also investigate relations between
Byzantium and its neighbors and pay special attention to the military
developments that influenced the course of history in this crucial period. The
Byzantine Empire represents a fascinating, although little-known chapter in
the history of mankind. This course is designed to explore some aspects of
that civilization and to expose you to challenging new ideas.

**Class:** Class will normally meet Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, from 10:30
to 11:50AM.



**_Class Schedule and Reading Assignments_**



(Note that for best results readings should be completed at the beginning of
each week; that will allow us to make best use of class time. Students should
regularly consult the class Web Site, since it will contain announcements,
links to further information, and hints for studying.)

September 25 ........... INTRODUCTION

> > > Ostrogorsky, pp. 1-21

> > > Readings 1 (Mango)

September 29.......... THE AGE OF CONSTANTINE THE GREAT

> > > Ostrogorsky, pp. 22-50

October 6 .......... THE FOURTH CENTURY

> > > Cameron, pp.12-56

October 13 .......... THE FIFTH CENTURY

> > > Ostrogorsky, pp. 51-68

>>>

>>> Cameron, pp. 57-103

October 20 .......... THE AGE OF JUSTINIAN

> > > Ostrogorsky, pp. 68-78

>>>

>>> Cameron 104-151

>>>

>>> Readings 2, 5 (Procopius & Brown)

>>>

>>> Procopius, _Secret History_

October 27 ............ COLLAPSE OF THE EARLY BYZANTINE SYNTHESIS

> > > Ostrogorsky, pp. 78-86

>>>

>>> Cameron, pp. 152-200

>>>

>>> Readings 3-4 (Lives of Daniel and Theodore)

November 3 .......... HERACLIUS AND THE RISE OF ISLAM

> > > Ostrogorsky, pp. 87-109

>>>

>>> Readings 6: 8-23

November 10........... ICONOCLASM I

> > > Ostrogorsky, pp. 110-146

>>>

>>> Readings 6: 85-105

November 17 .......... ICONOCLASM II

> > > Ostrogorsky, pp. 147-175

November 24 ..........CHALLENGE FROM THE WEST

> > > Ostrogorsky, pp. 175-186

December 1 ..........TOWARD A NEW SYNTHESIS

> > > Ostrogorsky, pp. 186-209

**_Student Responsibilities_**

**_Examinations:_** There will be one Mid-Term Examination, on October 27, and
a Final Examination.

**_Class Project:_** All students will be expected to complete a class
project.

> I. This may take the form of a **paper** on one of the following topics:

> > > Procopius: Write a paper in which you "solve" the discrepancy between
Procopius' treatment of Justinian in the _Secret History_ and in his other
works. What accounts for the difference and which picture is correct (or more
correct)?

> > > Theophanes: Write a paper in which you evaluate Theophanes as an
historian. What are his sources and what are his biases and shortcomings? To
what degree can his account be trusted? In the end do you think he is a "good"
historian?

**or**

> > > Another topic of your choosing on early Byzantine history. Topics should
be approved by the instructor at an early date and they should be analytic
rather than merely factual; that is, papers should seek to solve a problem
rather than simply reporting on a phenomenon. Students who are interested may
be able to make use of actual archaeological data from the period in their
project.

>>

>> Undergraduate papers should be between 4 and 8 pages in length and do not
need bibliography or footnotes; graduate student papers should be 15-30 pages
in length and should include bibliography and footnotes.

II. Alternatively, students may wish to do a **project utilizing the
Internet** (creation of web materials, Internet bibliography, etc.). One
possibility (for 2-3 people maximum) is to help maintain the class Web Site.

Class projects are due at class time on December 1. Late projects will be
subject to a considerable reduction in grade. To maximize your success,
consult with the instructor at an early date and make sure the project is a
viable one. Internet projects will probably require that you either put your
work on the Web or that you deliver some report or other tangible product to
the instructor. Projects will be graded on the basis of a) imagination, b)
accuracy, c) insight, and d) care and effectiveness of preparation.

For futher suggestions and ideas for this project, [click here](paper.htm).

**_Grades:_**

Grading will be at the discretion of the instructor, but the following
provides a rough indication of the values assigned the various parts of the
course:

> > > Mid-Term Examination 25%

>>>

>>> Class Project 30%

>>>

>>> Final Examination 35%

>>>

>>> Participation 10%

Grades in this course are **not** mechanically curved. Everyone can get an A
and everyone can fail.

All students should be aware that plagiarism, or any other kind of academic
dishonesty, is a serious offense and can result in penalties, including
failure in the course and dismissal from the University. All work in this
course must be your own, and dishonesty of any kind will not be tolerated.

[Return to the History 607.01 Main Page](index)



syl97.doc, rev. 30 Sept. 1997

