**

CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, SAN MARCOS

**

** HISTORY 318: SOCIETY AND CULTURE IN EARLY MODERN EUROPE

This  electronic version of the syllabus contains links to discussion
questions and other materials essential to the course.

**

Spring, 2002 Dr. Ann Elwood

Monday-Wednesday, 8:30-9:45 ACD 306          Office: CRA 1203

Office Hours: Monday, 11:20 a.m. -12:50 p.m.; Wednesday, 11:20 a.m.-12:00
noon; Friday, 9:00-9:50 a.m. Phone (I'm notoriously bad at picking up phone
messages): 750-8158

Hint: Use email to reach me --I read it at least once a day \-- at
_aelwood@mailhost1.csusm.edu_ or _aelwood@ucsd.edu._ Mailbox is in CRA 1239.

**

COURSE SYLLABUS

**

**

Required Reading:

**

Natalie Zemon Davis, _Fiction in the Archives

_

George Huppert, _After the Black Death: A Social History of Early Modern
Europe

_

Edward Muir, _Ritual in Early Modern Europe

_

Carlo Ginzberg, _Night Battles

_

Madame de Lafayette, _The Princess of Cl¨¨ves

_

Jonathan Spence, _The Question of Hu

_

**

Course Requirements % of Grade

**

Regular attendance and reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. Required to pass

Journal entries **(due every week at beginning of Monday class)** . . . . . .
. . . . . . . ..... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. .   . . . 35

Group Presentation (15% group grade, 15% individual grade) . . .30

Paper      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . ... . . . . . .. . . .. .
. .. . . . .. . .25

Participation and attendance  . . . . . . .. ... . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . .10

Grades for late journal entries will be lowered one grade (e.g., from A to B)
for every day they are late. Excuses don't count.

If you hand in your paper late, your grade will be lowered one-third of a
grade (from B to B-, for instance) for each day that it is late. **You are
responsible for keeping copies of all assignments that you hand in. Though it
is rare, papers do get lost.

**

**

Schedule of Classes and Assignments (Reading to be completed before class
meeting)

**

Scratch almost any historian, and you will discover a lover of stories. While
modern historians know that history is far from just a narrative, they find
ways to use its tales and its making of fiction (in the broad sense) as
entries into past societies. Early modern Europe (the period from 1400-1800)
presents rich opportunities for such analysis. It was a time when the story
had enormous power: for example, the stories of accusers in the witchcraft
trials helped to cause thousands of deaths. The process that Natalie Zemon
Davis discusses (the shaping of stories by sixteenth century people and
historians) has inspired this course. It is with her work, _Fiction in the
Archives_ , that we begin.

In a larger sense, we can also say that we construct or reconstruct (or
deconstruct) history--it is a tale a society tells about itself. A social and
economic base underlies that tale. Early in the course, we will examine the
changing social and economic status and power relations of early modern
Europeans (female and male) on all rungs of the society's ladder. We will also
explore other kinds of change  \--upheavals in religion, in government and
politics, in world view. As Edward Muir points out in _Ritual in Early Modern
Europe_ , ritual played an important part in those dynamics--at all levels of
society. We will examine the work of Carlo Ginsberg, who has reconstructed a
piece of microhistory--that of the harvest rituals of the witches of Fruili
and the witches' experiences with the Inquisition. Our study will help provide
answers to questions like: What made people believe in a story like that of
Christianity or the power of magic or of witches? What made them stop
believing? How did the story change and evolve?

We end with a book by Jonathan Spence, a historian of Chinese history, which
tells the true story of Hu, a man from China visiting France in the eighteenth
century, and the resulting culture clash. It echoes our earlier examination of
European views of the Other in what was to them the New World.

**

Week 1: **Movie: _The Return of Martin Guerre

_

Monday (February 4) and Wednesday (February 6): View movie and discuss, assign
group presentations

**

Week 2** **:** A study in historical interpretation: sixteenth century pardon
tales See[ timeline](timeline.htm) for the course

Read (by Monday, February 11): Davis, Introduction and Chapter 1; Huppert,
Preface, Chapter IX  [Week 2 Discussion
Questions](Week%202%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Monday (February 11): In-class library session (required); discussion of
reading

Wednesday (February 13):  Hands-on laboratory library session (required);
discussion

**

Week 3  ** Violence and gender differences in pardon tales

Read (by Monday, February 18): Davis, Chapters 2-3, Conclusion [Week 3
Discussion Questions](Week%203%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Monday (February 18): Lecture, discussion

Wednesday (February 20): Lecture, discussion, group meetings

PART II: CHANGING SOCIAL, ECONOMIC, and POLITICAL STRUCTURES

**

Week 4:** The Early Modern Village and City

Read (by Monday, February 25): Huppert, Preface, Chapters I-IV [Week 4
Discussion Questions](Week%204%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Monday (February 25): Discussion, group meetings

Wednesday (February 27): Lecture

**

Week 5: **Estates (Social Structure)

Read (by Monday, March 4: Huppert, Chapters V-VI [Week 5 Discussion
Questions](Week%205%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Monday (March 4): GROUP PRESENTATION: Prostitution in Early Modern Europe;
discussion; group meetings

Wednesday (March 6): Short lecture and discussion of reading

**



**

PART III: RITUAL IN EARLY MODERN EUROPE

**Week 6: Ritual Moment**

Read (by Monday, March 11): Muir, Part I, Chapters 1-2 [Week Six Discussion
Questions](Week%20Six%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Monday (March 11: GROUP PRESENTATION: German Peasant Wars; discussion; group
meetings

Wednesday (March 13): Short lecture and discussion of reading

**

Week 7:** **Rituals of the body**

Read (by Monday, March 18): Muir, Part II, Chapters 3-4 [Week Seven Discussion
Questions](Week%20Seven%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Link to color version of ["Battle Between Carnival and
Lent"](http://www.khm.at/data/page436/page436/BruegelKampf600.jpg)

Link to Holbein's ["Dance of
Death"](http://www.godecookery.com/macabre/holdod/holdod.htm)

Monday (March 18): GROUP PRESENTATION: Pilgrimages in Early Modern Europe

Wednesday (March 20): Short lecture and discussion of reading

**

Week 8: Rituals and the Reformation**

Read (by Monday, March 25): Muir, Chapters 5-6 [Week Eight Discussion
Questions](Week%20Eight%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Monday (March 25): GROUP PRESENTATION: Food and the Eucharist in Early Modern
Europe

Wednesday (March 27): Short lecture and discussion of reading

**

Spring Break, April 1-7

**

PART IV: WITCHCRAFT: CHANGING STORIES

**

Week 9: Witchcraft**

Read (by Monday, April 8): Ginzburg, Prefaces and Chapters I-II [Week 9
Discussion Questions](Week%209%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Monday (April 8): GROUP PRESENTATION: The Miller's Cosmology (Ginzburg's
_Cheese and the Worms_ ) ; discussion; group meetings

Wednesday (April 10): Short lecture and discussion of reading

**

Week 10: Witchcraft**

Read (by Monday, April 15): Ginzburg, Chapters III-IV [Week 10 Discussion
Questions](Week%2010%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Monday (April 15): GROUP PRESENTATION: Printing and books in Early Modern
Europe; discussion; group meetings

Wednesday (April 17): Short lecture and discussion of reading



PART IV: TALES OF NEW WORLDS

**

Week 11: The "Discoveries"**

Read (by Monday, April 22): [ Montaigne essay](Montaigne%20essay.htm) and
Huppert, Chapters VII-VIII [Week 11 Discussion
Questions](Week%2011%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Monday (April 22): GROUP PRESENTATION: Europeans and "the other" in the "New"
World; discussion

Wednesday (April 24): Short lecture and discussion of reading



PART V: THEATER

**

Week 12:** **Theater**

Read (by Monday, April 29): Huppert, Chapter X [Week 12 Discussion
Questions](Week%2012%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Monday and Wednesday (April 29 and May 1) View movie: _Much Ado About Nothing_
(a story by Shakespeare)



PART VI: COURT LIFE: FICTION AND FACT

**

Week 13: Ritual in Government**

Read (by Monday, May 6): Muir, Chapter 7 and Epilogue [Week 13 Discussion
Questions](Week%2013%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Monday (May 6): GROUP PRESENTATION: The king's court in the 17th century;
discussion

Wednesday (May 8) Short lecture and discussion of reading

**

Week 14: Court life in history and in a novel**

Read (by Monday, May 13): _The Princess of Cl¨¨ves_ [Week 14 Discussion
Questions](Week%2014%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Monday (May 13): GROUP PRESENTATION: The Jesuits in China

Wednesday (May 15) Short lecture and discussion of reading



PART VII: HU IS IN FRANCE (?)

**

Week 15: The Question of Hu**

Read (by Monday, May 20 ): _The Question of Hu._ [Week 15 Discussion
Questions](Week%2015%20Discussion%20Questions.htm)

Monday (May 20): GROUP PRESENTATION: Changing Notions of Madness in Early
Modern Europe; discussion

Wednesday (May 22): Short lecture, discussion of reading, conclusion

Papers due May 22

**

Week 16: **Final examination week

THE END

**

The Journal

**

Your journal is a personal intellectual record of thoughts generated by the
reading. On the average, you should try to write at least a page a week. (A
page is 250 words.) Your writing should be clear, well organized, legible, and
grammatically correct. If you tend to write very sloppy drafts, consider
rewriting your first draft.  **Journal entries must be typed. Do not email
your journal entry to me. Put a hard copy in my mailbox instead.

**_

Hints_: Don't use the journal as a place for keeping factual notes (you should
do that elsewhere). Feel free to take your ideas to the edge of possibility,
to link them to material presented earlier in the course or material from
other courses. Don't include your love life unless it is germane. For example,
you might relate your reading about peasant life to other history courses
(economic history, American rural history) or to contemporary issues (migrant
labor). You might explore internal contradictions in a writer's argument or
two opposing views and your own reaction to those views. Develop arguments.
Ask questions. When you write, focus on one or two themes or topics.

**

Don'ts: **Don't merely summarize readings or lectures. (Such exercises belong
in your notes, not in your journal.) Don't puff up a two-sentence idea just to
fill a page. Don't leave writing in your journal to the last minute.

**

Group Presentation

**

Beginning in the fifth week, small groups of four students each will give
presentations to the class on topics having to do at least tangentially with
the reading for that week. (See the class schedule for topics.) The
presentation can take any form your group chooses: a debate, reports on
articles dealing with controversies, a slide show with commentary, a video, a
dramatization. Avoid game-show formats--they fragment ideas too much. Minimum
length; 20 minutes.

Do not **read** your part of the presentation--instead, talk from notes,
unless you are quoting someone. Nothing is deadlier than a paper read in a
monotone. **Please note:** if you read your part in the presentation verbatim
from a paper or from note cards, your grade will be substantially lowered. If
it contains plagiarized material, you will receive a zero for both parts of
the presentation. When you use foreign words, be sure you know how to
pronounce them.

You should explore and present to the class any scholarly controversies that
surround the topic. Part of your presentation should include whole class
participation, either through a set of discussion questions you devise or
something else.

I will meet with your group two weeks before your presentation to discuss
bibliography, organization, approach, and content. As you find sources for
your presentation, please clear them with me. Use scholarly sources: books
published by university presses (example: Stanford University Press) or
articles in scholarly journals. More popular (as opposed to scholarly) books
may be accurate and often provide excellent graphic sources; some, however,
contain errors and unacknowledged biases, ignore debates between scholars on
the subject, or rake over outdated information. (Of course, some scholarly
books may also be biased or out of date.) It is acceptable to use research
from the Web, but please evaluate sources carefully  B some Web sites include
inaccurate information.

You will be given some class time to work together on the presentation, though
you will probably need also to schedule some outside time. Your group grade
will be determined through evaluation by me and the class. **However, I
reserve the right to lower the grade of anyone who does not pull his or her
weight in the group.**

For your individual grade, please hand in a portfolio that includes, among
other relevant materials, a research log (a dated, annotated list of books,
articles, and internet information [include URLs] that you used), a list of
group meetings you attended, your notes, and a brief informal summary of what
you contributed creatively to the group. Your grade will be based on the
quality of your research and participation.

**

Paper

**

Your paper (5-7 pages long) should be a thesis-based examination of a theme
that has dominated the course. Examples:

1\. Europeans and the  "Other" (within and outside of Europe)

2\. "Story" in Early Modern Europe

3\. Changing world views in Early Modern Europe

I have deliberately chosen very broad themes and would expect you to narrow
them according to your own interests. If you have a different idea for the
paper, please consult with me before using it. The paper should incorporate
ideas and books (at least three from the reading list) from the course as well
as any sources you used in your research for your presentation if relevant..
Cite your sources using _Chicago Manual of Style_ guidelines.

**

**



  
---

