![](twst_bar.gif)



![](Images/vanderwey.jpg) |  ![](Images/bosch.jpg) |  ![](Images/corregg1.jpg)
|  ![](Images/caravag1.jpg) |  ![](Images/chag.jpg) |  ![](Images/wsallmn.jpg)  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
Rogier van der Weyden (1400-1464)

|

Hieronymus Bosch (1450-1516)

|

Correggio (1490-1534)

|

Caravaggio (1573-1610)

|

Marc Chagall (1887-1985)

|

W. Sallmann, Head of Christ (1940)  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
# **Images of Jesus: Syllabus**

#### [**Prof. Anne McGuire**](http://www.haverford.edu/relg/mcguire/home.html)
**  
**

### ![](twst_bar.gif)

### **Course Description** :

This course offers an overview of images of Jesus, as he has been depicted in
a variety of genres, modes of representation, and periods. In the first
section of the course, we'll examine closely the earliest, most influential
depictions of Jesus: the narratives of the New Testament gospels, along with
other NT writings and selected non-canonical texts, such as the Gospel of
Thomas. In the second, we'll look closely at representations of Jesus in the
visual arts, from Byzantine icons and mosaics through the magnificent
frescoes, altarpieces, and paintings of later Western art. In the third and
final section of the course, we'll consider contemporary images of Jesus in
theology, popular religion, scholarship, and the arts, especially film.

Our goal in this course is not to distinguish between the "real" historical
Jesus and later mis/representations, any more than it is to rescue the "true"
Christ of faith from heretical misappropriations. Rather,our primary goal is
to understand the ways in which writers, artists, theologians of various
periods and ideological perspectives have constructed their own distinctive
images of Jesus through an active re-imagining of the person of Jesus, his
teachings, and the story of his life, death, and resurrection.

###   **Course Outline:**

  * Representations of Jesus in the New Testament and Other Early Christian Literature
  * Images of Jesus in the History of Art
  * Jesus in Contemporary Culture

### ![](openedbook.gif)**Required Textbooks:**

  * Jaroslav Pelikan, _Jesus Through the Centuries: His Place in the History of Culture_. HarperCollins 
  * Ben Witherington. _The Many Faces of the Christ : The Christologies of the New Testament and Beyond_. Crossroad 
  * Thomas F. Mathews, _The Clash of Gods : A Reinterpretation of Early Christian Art_. Princeton University Press 
  * Grubb, Nancy. _The Life of Christ in Art._ Abbeville Press 
  * John Dominic Crossan _Jesus : A Revolutionary Biography_. HarperCollins 
  * Marcus Borg, ed. _Jesus at 2000._ Westview Press 
  * Bible. New Revised Standard Version 
  * Additional Readings on reserve in Magill Library or handed out in class
  * Recommended: J. Pelikan, _The Illustrated Jesus Through the Centuries_. 

### **Course Requirements:**

  * Participation in Class Field Trips and Group Projects, as well as Independent Projects.
    * The class will make at least one field trip to the Philadelphia Museum of Art (PMA) for a tour of selected works in the museum's collection. 
    * Students are encouraged to visit the PMA and other museums on their own, especially during the second and third sections of the course. 
    * Students are expected to use the WWW for virtual museum visits and other resources. 
  * 3 short interpretive papers of 4-6 pages each, corresponding to the 3 sections of the course: 
    1. analysis of the depiction of Jesus in one or more writings of the New Testament or early Christian literature (due Friday, February 26); 
    2. analysis of the representation of Jesus in one or more works of art (due Friday, April 2);
    3. analysis of the image of Jesus in contemporary literature, theology, or the arts (music, poetry, film, theater, painting) and its relation both to the New Testament sources and to contemporary culture (due Thursday, April 29).
  * Participation in 2 group projects focused on the preparation of pages for the Tri-College Web pages.
    * Assistance will be provided in the preparation of Web pages using Claris Home Page for Mac or PC. Some class time may be used for computer lab workshops. 
    * Your work for these projects may overlap closely with your interpretive papers. 
    * These are designed to be collaborative projects; working groups will be assigned by mutual interest. Students will be expected to work together on the planning and completion of their class presentations and web pages. 
  * A final research project of 12-15 pages. 
  * Participation in class discussion, including at least two oral presentations in class (related to the interpretive papers and group projects (10%). 

## ![](twst_bar.gif)

### SYLLABUS: **Selected Course Readings**

### **I. Representations of Jesus in the New Testament and Other Early
Christian Literature (5 weeks: 1/18-2/25)**

####  T 1/19 Introduction to the Course: Images of Jesus

  * After class: Pelikan, Jesus Through the Centuries, 1-8

#### Th 1/21 The Identity and Significance of Jesus in the Jesus Movement and
the Earliest Church

  * Pelikan, 9-20
  * Witherington, The Many Faces of the Christ, 1-21; 73-99
  * Letters of Paul: Philippians, focus on Phil. 2:6-11; Galatians; 1 Corinthians 1-4
  * Look closely at the other NT pasages cited in Witherington 

##  

  * Begin to explore the excellent resources at the WWW site: [Frontline: From Jesus to Christ](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/religion/)
  * Suggestions:
    * [A Portrait of Jesus' World](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/religion/portrait/)
    * [A Chronology of Early Christian History](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/religion/maps/cron.html)
  * Recommended for further reading: J. D. Crossan, "Jesus and the Kingdom: Itinerants and Householders in Earliest Christianity," Jesus at 2000, 21-53

#### T 1/26 Jesus as Wisdom, Lord, Christ, Second Adam in 1 Corinthians and
Romans

  * 1 Corinthians; Romans
  * Witherington, 103-123
  * Marcus Borg, "From Galilean Jew to the Face of God," Jesus at 2000, 7-20 

#### Th 1/28 The Hidden and Revealed Messiah: The "Secret" of the Kingdom and
the Identity of Jesus in the Gospel of Mark

  * The Gospel of Mark, focus on 4:10-12, 8:22-10:52, 13, and 14:1-16:8
  * S. Davies, "The Gospel of Mark," NT Fundamentals, 98-106 (handout)
  * [What Are the Gospels?](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/religion/story/gospels.html)

#### T 2/9 The Teacher and Messiah of Israel: Images of Jesus in the Gospel of
Matthew

  * The Gospel of Matthew, focus on 1-2, 5-7 (Sermon on the Mount), and the Passion Narrative; Compare with GMark
  * Witherington, 127-150
  * Pelikan, 21-33

#### Th 2/11 The Christology of Luke-Acts and the Synoptic Gospels; The Gospel
of Thomas

  * The Gospel of Luke 
  * Witherington, 153-166
  * Pelikan, 34-45
  * [The Gospel of Thomas ](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/religion/maps/primary/gthomas.html)
  * Craig A. Evans, "Images of Christ in Canonical and Apocryphal Gospels," Images of Christ: Ancient and Modern, 34-72

#### T 2/16 Jesus and His Teaching in The Gospel of Thomas and other Non-
Canonical Texts

  * Reread the Gospel of Thomas with close attention to the identity of Jesus and his teaching on the Kingdom of God; compare with the Synoptic Gospels. Browse some of the links from: 
    * [The Gospel of Thomas Home Page](http://home.epix.net/~miser17/Thomas.html)
  * Browse the following resources on the Web; select a particular noncanonical text for closer reading and analysis
    * [The Noncanonical Home Page](http://wesley.nnc.edu/noncanon.htm)
    * [Apocryphal Gospels](http://wesley.nnc.edu/noncanon/gospels.htm)

#### Th 2/18 The Incarnate Word of God: The Identity of Jesus in The Gospel of
John

  * The Gospel of John, focus on the Prologue, the "I Am" Discourses, and the Passion Narrative
  * Compare John's Christology with the Christologies of Mk, Mt, Lk, and Thomas 
  * Witherington, 169-191

#### T 2/23 Class Presentation: Images of Jesus in Early Christian Literature

  * Additional reading tba

#### Th 2/25 Images of Jesus in the Early Church:

  * Early Christian Creeds
  * Pelikan, 46-82
  * Karen Torjesen, "'You Are the Christ': Five Portraits of Jesus from the Early Church," _J2000_ , 73-88
  * Begin reading T. Mathews, _The Clash of Gods_

**Mon., 3/1 Paper on Jesus in Early Christian Literature Due by 12 noon**

### **II. Images of Jesus in the History of Christian Art (4-5 weeks)**

####  T 3/2 **Icons and Iconoclassm: Byzantine Tradition and the Iconoclastic
Controversy**

  * T. Mathews, _The Clash of Gods_ , ch. 1-3
  * Selected Readings on Icons and Iconoclasm
    * John Meyendorff, "The Iconoclastic Crisis," _Byzantine Theology_ , 42-53.
    * John of Damascus, "Concerning Images," _On the Orthodox Faith_
    * John of Damascus, Excerpts from _Third Apology Against Those Who Attack Divine Images_

**Th 3/4 Visualizing Jesus: Representations of Jesus in the History of
Christian Art**

  * Pelikan, 83-94
  * T. Mathews, _The Clash of Gods_ , ch. 1-3
  * Begin to look carefully through N. Grubb, _The Life of Christ in Art_. 
    * Select a particular scene and an artist (or two) for further exploration. 

####  

##   **SPRING BREAK, March 6-14**

####  T 3/16 Field Trip: Visit to Philadelphia Museum of Art

#### Th 3/18 Studying Visual Images; Using the Resources of the WWW

#### T 3/23 Overview of Visual Images from Giotto through the Renaissance

  * Jane Dillenberger, ["Renaissance Art, Part I"](http://www.haverford.edu:8080/relg/relg216b/renart/ren1a.htm)
  * Pelikan, _Jesus through the Centuries_

####  Th 3/25 The Annunciation, Nativity, and Childhood of Jesus

  * Jane Dillenberger, ["Renaissance Art, Part II"](http://www.haverford.edu:8080/relg/relg216b/renart/ren2a.htm)
  * Pelikan, _Jesus through the Centuries_

####  T 3/30 Representations of Jesus in Galilee and Jerusalem

#### Th 4/1 Jesus in Jerusalem: The Baptism, Temptation, and Transfiguration
Narratives

T 4/6

#### Th 4/8 Jesus in Jerusalem I: Scenes from the Passion Narrative (Last
Supper, Gethsemane, Trial)

#### T 4/13 Jesus in Death and Resurrection: Pieta, Lamentation, Entombment,
and Resurrection

## ![](twst_bar.gif)

### **III. Images of Jesus in Contemporary Culture (2-3 weeks)**

####  Th 4/15 Images of Jesus in Contemporary Lesbian Feminist Theology

> > Selections from Carter Heyward and others

**T 4/20 Discussion of Denys Arcand's Film: Jesus of Montreal**

####  Th 4/22 Discussion of Martin Scorsese's Film: The Last Temptation of
Christ

#### T 4/27 Images of Jesus in Contemporary Liberation Theologies

#### Th 4/29 Images and Sounds: Images of Jesus in Music

##  ![](twst_bar.gif)

## **Return to**[ **Images of Jesus
Page**](http://www.haverford.edu/relg/mcguire/relg216b.htm)

**Return to**[ **Anne McGuire's Home
Page**](http://www.haverford.edu/relg/mcguire/home.html)

**Return to**[ **Dept. of Religion Home
Page**](http://www.haverford.edu/relg/index.html)

**This page is maintained by**[
**amcguire@haverford.edu**](mailto:amcguire@haverford.edu) **, Last updated
5/24/00**

