History H105

U. S. History I



James Haw Fall 2001

Office: CM 203; phone 481-6694; email Haw@ipfw.edu

Office hours: MWF 9-9:50, 11-11:50, and by appointment



Course requirements and grades:



1. Four examinations, each counting 1/6 of the course grade. Examinations are 40% multiple choice and 60% essay questions. A good essay should respond clearly and directly to the question; should display sound reasoning or interpretation; should support the major points with evidence or explanation; should be consistent with the facts available to you; and should answer the question as thoroughly as time permits.



A general makeup exam for students who have missed any of the first three
examinations will be given on Nov. 28. The makeup will be cumulative, covering
the material for all three examinations. Students who have taken all of the
first three examinations have the option of taking the makeup in an attempt to
improve their grades. Individual makeups will not ordinarily be given.



2. One paper based on one of the chapters listed on this syllabus from Wheeler and Becker, _Discovering the American Past_ , vol. 1, counts 1/6 of the course grade.



3. Twelve short quizzes count a combined 1/6 of the course grade. Six of the quizzes deal with the chapters being discussed from _Discovering the American Past_ , and will be given on discussion days. The other six are pop quizzes based on the study guide questions for the reading assignments in _America Past and Present_. Two quiz grades will be dropped; the best ten will count. There are no makeups for quizzes.



Plagiarism or academic dishonesty will result in a grade of zero for the
assignment in question, and in such cases the course grade will be computed on
a strict numerical average. University regulations require a course grade of F
for unauthorized withdrawal. If a student stays in the course through the
final examination but fails to complete one or more course requirements,
excluding quizzes, grades of zero will be given for the uncompleted
requirements and the course grade will be computed on a strict numerical
average.



_Tape recorders_ : History Department policy does not allow the use of tape
recorders in the classroom. The instructor will make exceptions on request for
students with disabilities.



_Student outcomes:_

Upon successful completion of this course, students will be better able to:

1\. Have a coherent general understanding of major developments in U. S.
history to 1877.

2\. Grasp the relationship between events.

3\. Synthesize information into a coherent overview.

4\. Develop a historical consciousness, including awareness of the different
perspectives and ways of life of people in the past.

5\. Use skills such as reading for content and thesis, effective listening and
note-taking, and clear writing, which are important for future learning and
career success.

6\. Evaluate primary source material and draw appropriate interpretive
conclusions.

7\. Develop a basic appreciation of historical method.

Assessment of the first five outcomes is primarily through examinations; of
the last two, primarily through the paper.



_Required reading_ :

Robert Divine et al, _America Past and Present_ , 5th ed., vol. 1

William Wheeler and Susan Becker, _Discovering the American Past_ , 4th ed,
v.1



_Course outline and assignments_ :



Aug. 20 Introduction

22 Expansion of Europe (Divine, pp. 3-12, 14-29)

24 Cortez and Montezuma (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 1)



27 Virginia, 1607-1630 (Divine, 33-43, 72-75)

29 Massachusetts, 1630-1640 (Divine, 43-52)

31 Puritan Revolution and Restoration (Divine, 52-62, 82-84)



Sep. 5 Massachusetts, 1640-1691, and the Glorious Revolution (Divine, 65-72,
84-90)

7  Slavery (Divine, 12-14, 75-81)



10 Demographics of Massachusetts (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 3)

12 Studying for the first examination

14  Colonial Politics, 1690-1760 (Divine, 97-103, 114-119)



17  Enlightenment and Great Awakening (Divine, 107-114)

19  FIRST EXAMINATION

21 Toward Revolution (Divine, 119-127, 131-148)



24 Independence (Divine, 148-162)

26 Boston Massacre (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 4)

28 Fruits of the Revolution (Divine, 165-178)



Oct. 1  Confederation on trial (Divine, 178-191)

3 Ratification and the Hamilton program (Divine, 191-196, 203-211)



8 Jefferson and political parties (Divine, 216-220)

10 The 1794 Philadelphia election (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 5)

12  Foreign affairs and party conflict (Divine, 211-216, 220-227)



15 SECOND EXAMINATION

17 Origins of the War of 1812 (Divine, 231-236, 249-258)

19 Continental expansion, Monroe Doctrine (Divine, 240-244, 261-265, 284-286)



22 Republican ascendancy, 1800-1824 (Divine, 236-240, 244-249, 278-281,
282-284)

24 Economic change, 1800-1850 (Divine, 269-278, 365-376)

26  Working women of Lowell (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 7)



29  Political realignment (Divine, 281-282, 286-287, 291-301)

31 Jacksonian democracy (Divine, 301-316)

Nov. 2 American slavery (Divine, ch. 13)



5 Slavery from the inside (Wheeler and Becker, ch. 8)

7 Romantic reform (Divine, 321-335, 338-344)

9 THIRD EXAMINATION



12 The abolitionists (Divine, 334-338)

14 Manifest destiny, Mexican War (Divine, 349-365)

16 Toward Civil War (Divine, 411-422)



19 Toward Civil War (Divine, 422-434)

21 Secession (Divine, 434-437, 441-448)



26 Civil War (Divine, 448-471)

28 MAKEUP EXAMINATION

30 Plans for Reconstruction (Divine, 481-488)



Dec. 3 Results of reconstruction (Divine, 488-510)

5, 7 Catch-up or reading days



FOURTH EXAMINATION at time listed in class schedule booklet





HIST H105 Paper Requirements Fall 2001

James Haw



You are to write a paper on the major issue raised in _any one_ of the
chapters that are listed below from Wheeler and Becker, _Discovering the
American Past_ , vol. 1. The paper should be five to eight pages long, typed
double-spaced with one-inch margins, using 10-point or 12-point type. Papers
on chapters 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, and 8 are due in class on the day that that chapter
is discussed in class. _Late papers on these chapters will not be accepted
after a chapter has been discussed in class_. (If you have written a paper on
one of these chapters and then are unable to attend class on the day it is
discussed, have someone bring it in for you on the due date, or mail it to me
so that it will be postmarked on the due date.) Papers on chapters 9 and 11
are due in class on Dec. 3. Late papers on chapters 9 and 11 _only_ will be
accepted through Dec. 7, but will be penalized one letter grade.



Due dates and topics are listed below.



Chapter Date due Topic



1 Aug. 24 How did Cortez and other Europeans view the American Indians, and
vice versa? What consequences might these perceptions have

had for European-Indian relations?



3 Sep. 10 How and why did life change for residents of Andover and Concord
between about 1650 and 1760? How would people in these towns about 1760 have
felt about their lives and future prospects?



4 Sep. 26 Reconstruct what really happened at the Boston Massacre. Was Captain
Preston guilty?



5 Oct. 10 Why did John Swanwick defeat Thomas Fitzsimons in the

election? Who supported each candidate, and why? (The questions to consider on
pp. 109-112 are a good guide to issues you  should discuss.)



7 Oct. 26 How did Francis Lowell try to make it acceptable for young women to
come to Lowell and work in his factory? What did public opinion think about
Lowell and its workers? How did the working women of Lowell react to their
situation and to criticisms of them? Did the Lowell women accept or reject the
assumptions of the "cult of true womanhood?"



8 Nov. 5 What did the slaves think about slavery and their lives?

(The questions to consider on page 198 are a good guide to issues you should
discuss; feel free to add others if you wish.)



9 Dec. 3 What were the major arguments for (Clay, Webster) and against
(Calhoun, Seward) the compromise of 1850? How was each speaker's rhetoric and
appeal calculated to persuade people to support his position?



11 Dec. 3 Why did President Andrew Johnson decide not to insist that the
former Confederate states give black men the right to vote after the Civil
War? (Note: there may be more than one reason. If so, Explain all of them.
Which one(s) seem to be the most important reasons, and why?)



Helpful Hints for your Paper





<span style='mso-tab

