#  Critical Perspectives in Law  
---  
  
##  Law A547 A, Autumn 2001 |

##  Course Home Page  
| [![Course
Home](http://www.law.washington.edu/LawSchool/graphics/navarrow.gif)Home](index.html)
| [![What's
New](http://www.law.washington.edu/LawSchool/graphics/navarrow.gif)Syllabus](syllabus.html)
| [![What's
New](http://www.law.washington.edu/LawSchool/graphics/navarrow.gif)Schedule &
Reading List](schedule.html) | [![What's
New](http://www.law.washington.edu/LawSchool/graphics/navarrow.gif)Handouts &
Assignments](assignments.html) | [![What's
New](http://www.law.washington.edu/LawSchool/graphics/navarrow.gif)Class
Notes](notes.html) | [![ |
](http://www.law.washington.edu/LawSchool/graphics/navarrow.gif)Class
Links](links.html)  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
  
## Syllabus

University of Washington School of Law

  
  

Critical Perspectives on Law (Law A547): Syllabus

  
  

Fall Quarter 2001

  
  

Professor Louis E. Wolcher

  
  

I. Course Requirements

  
  

We will meet three times per week: Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday at 2:30 pm,
in Room 135. Class attendance is very important, for many of the ideas we will
think together are challenging and difficult. All of the course readings,
which are described below, can be found in _Readings for Critical Perspectives
on Law_ , which is available for purchase at the Copy Center on the fourth
floor.

  
  

In order to satisfy the writing requirement for this course you must _either_
take a three-hour final examination _or_ submit a paper, not exceeding 20
double-spaced typewritten pages in length, on any subject of interest to you
which integrates one or more of the topics covered in this class. Please clear
your topic with me before you undertake this option. Papers, if you choose to
write one in lieu of taking the examination, are due when the final exam is
due. Upward (but not downward) adjustment of your grade is possible based upon
your level of engaged participation in classroom discussions. Excessive (more
than 3) unexcused absences during the quarter can lead to a downward
adjustment of your grade.

  
  

My office number is 428, my telephone number is 543-0600, and my email address
is _wolcher@u.washington.edu_. My office hours are any time I'm in my office
and say "come in," which happens to be a lot of the time between Monday and
Friday. Ruth Beardsley, my secretary, has her office in Room 418--if you miss
receiving any of the handouts I distribute in class, you may pick up a copy
from her during normal business hours. Her email address is
_giaconi@u.washington.edu_.

  
  

II. Readings

  
  

1\. First Week (October 2, 3, 4)

  
  

_a._ Aristotle, _Book V of the Nicomachean Ethics_ , in Lon Fuller, _The
Problems of Jurisprudence_ (Brooklyn: Foundation Press, 1949), 28-60.

  
  

2\. Second Week (October 9, 10, 11)

  
  

_a._ Karl Marx, _The German Ideology_ , in _Karl Marx: A Reader_ , Jon Elster
ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), 23-28.

  
  

_b._ Karl Marx, _On the Jewish Question_ , in _Karl Marx:_ _Early Writings_ ,
trans. T. B. Bottomore (New York: McGraw Hill, 1964), 3-31 (including
"Forward" by Erich Fromm).

  
  

3\. Third Week (October 16, 17, 18)

  
  

_a._ Kenneth Thompson, _Introduction_ , in _Readings from Emile Durkheim_ ,
trans. Margaret Thompson (Chichester: Ellis Norwood, Ltd., 1985), 12-20.

  
  

_b._ Emile Durkheim, _Review of Antonio Labriola_ , Essays on the Materialist
Conception of History, in _Readings from Emile Durkheim_ , trans. Margaret
Thompson (Chichester: Ellis Norwood, Ltd., 1985), 28-31.

  
  

_c._ Emile Durkheim, _Professional Ethics and Civic Morals_ , in _Readings
from Emile Durkheim_ , trans. Margaret Thompson (Chichester: Ellis Norwood,
Ltd., 1985), 139-58.

  
  

4\. Fourth Week (October 23, 24, 25)

  
  

_a._ Max Weber, _"Objectivity" in Social Science and Social Policy_ , in Max
Weber, _The Methodology of the Social Sciences_ , trans. Edward Shils & Henry
Finch (New York: The Free Press, 1949), 49-112.

  
  

5\. Fifth Week (October 30, 31, November1)

  
  

_a. Methodological Foundations_ , in Anthony Kronman, _Max Weber_ (Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1983), 6-36.

  
  

_b._ Louis Wolcher, _The Many Meanings of "Wherefore" in Legal History_ , 68
_Washington Law Review_ 559-650 (1993).

  
  

6\. Sixth Week (November 6, 7, 8)

  
  

_a. Religion and World Construction_ , in Peter Berger, _The Sacred Canopy:
Elements of a Sociological Theory of Religion_ (Garden City: Anchor Books,
1969), 3-28, 187-91.

  
  

7\. Seventh Week (November 13, 14, 15)

  
  

_a. The Body of the Condemned_ , and _Panopticism_ , in Michel Foucault,
_Discipline and Punish_ , trans. Alan Sheridan (New York: Vintage Books,
1979), 3-31, 195-228.

  
  

_b. Two Lectures_ , in Michel Foucault, _Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews
& Other Writings_, trans. Colin Gordon, Leo Marshall, John Mepham, Kate Soper
(New York: Pantheon Books, 1980), 78-108.

  
  

8\. Eighth Week (November 20, 21)

  
  

_a. The New Forms of Control_ , and _Conclusion_ , in Herbert Marcuse, _One-
Dimensional Man: Studies in the Ideology of Advanced Industrial Society_
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1966), 1-18, 247-57.

  
  

9\. Ninth Week (November 27, 28, 29)

  
  

_a._ Fran Olsen, _The Sex of Law_ , in _The Politics of Law: A Progressive
Critique_ , David Kairys ed. (New York: Basic Books, 3rd Ed., 1998), 691-707.

  
  

_b._ Luce Irigaray, _The Power of Discourse and the Subordination of the
Feminine_ , in _The Continental Philosophy Reader_ , Richard Kearney and Mara
Rainwater eds. (London: Routledge, 1996), 411-24.

  
  

_c. Defamation and Discrimination_ , in Catharine MacKinnon, _Only Words_
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993), 3-41, 113-26.

  
  

10\. Tenth Week (December 4, 5, 6)

  
  

  * _Critical Understanding of the Social Science Underpinnings of Race and Racism_ , in _Critical Race Theory: The Cutting Edge_ , Richard Delgado ed. (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1995), 157-204.
  
  

11\. Eleventh Week (December 11,12)

  
  

_a_. No new readings. Reprise of readings: towards a _synthesis_ (the Other
made immanent in the Same as a meta-theory of law and society), or towards the
_rupture of absolute difference_ (the radical heterogeneity of social life),
or towards . . . something else.



* * *

Top of Page

