* * *

**A NCIENT GREECE** Circa 2,000 BCE to 200 BCE

* * *

HIST 100 ( = CAMS 100)  Ancient Greece **Penn State Mont Alto** Dr. Kurt L.
Noll kxn12@psu.edu ktnoll@blazenet.net  ****  MWF  11:00-11:50 a.m. Conklin
202 (PicTel Room) **** Office Hours and Location: TBA  

* * *

  * Course Description and Objectives
  * Syllabus
  * Study Guides for Reading Assignments
  * Study Guides:  General Information
  * Ancient Greece on the Web
  * Book Review Instructions

* * *

Course Description and Objectives

In the tiny region around the Aegean, a culture was born that has profoundly
shaped subsequent generations of human civilization.  The impact of ancient
Greece can be felt even today in the United States.  From our "democratic"
political values to our "classical" architecture, from the tradition of
humanistic realism in our visual arts to the variety of philosophical
assumptions on our streets, from the references to the gods in our literature
to the religious and anthropological assumptions commonly heard in our houses
of worship --  in all of these aspects and more, the values and beliefs of
Pythagoras, Pericles, Plato, Aeschylus, Aristotle and many others impact us
still.  This course will provide an entry into that ancient society,
attempting to understand its world as those who lived in that world seem to
have experienced it.

**Objectives** :  
The student's objectives for this course are:

(1) Develop a full comprehension of the chronological history of ancient
Greece from the dawn of the historical period to about 200 BCE.

(2) Develop a full comprehension of the geography of the Aegean world.

(3) Be able to describe, in your own words, the emergence, transmission, and
evolutionary changes of intellectual and cultural aspects of Greek society,
such as, but **not** limited to, the inventions of democracy, philosophy,
tragedy, and epic.

(4) Recognize and discuss persons who played active roles in ancient Greece,
including, but **not** limited to:   Solon, Cleisthenes, Themistocles,
Ephialtes, Pericles, Alcibiades, Lysander, Epaminondas, Philip II and
Alexander III.

(5) Recognize and discuss fictional personalities who live in the literature
and art of ancient Greece, and whose presence in the modern world is often
taken for granted, including, but **not** limited to:   Zeus, Pallas Athene,
Phoibos Apollo, Aphrodite, Agamemnon, Priam, Helen, Paris, Achilles, Odysseus,
Penelope and Telemachus.

(6) Recognize and discuss major authors and philosophers as well as their
works and ideas, including, but **not** limited to:   Homer, Hesiod,
Herodotus, Thucydides, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes,
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle.

(7) Develop a comprehension of the methods by which modern historians
investigate the past, including an understanding of the genres of history
writing and related research, such as archaeology and epigraphy.

* * *

Syllabus

**Student Requirements** :  
You are required to:

(1) Attend all class sessions and participate in group discussion.

(2) Complete each reading assignment **prior** to the date for which that
assignment has been scheduled (See calendar ).  Take notes on each reading
assignment, so that you will have valuable comments and significant questions
with which to contribute to class discussion.

(3) Pass three scheduled exams.

(4) Write a book review. (See Book Review Instructions.)

**Student Evaluation** :  
Your grade will be based on a point system. By semester's end, you will have
had the opportunity to earn something in the neighborhood of 500 points, not
including bonus quizzes.  To determine your grade, add total number of
possible points excluding bonus quizzes.  Then add total number of earned
points including bonus quizzes.  Then divide total earned by total possible to
achieve a percentage of points  91%-100% = A;  81%-90% = B;  71%-80% = C;
61%-70% = D;  below 61% = F.

Class Participation:  If you demonstrate a pattern of regular attendance and
participation in class discussion, your final grade for the semester could
rise as much as one letter grade.  However, if you demonstrate a pattern of
absences from class, your final grade might go down by as much as one letter
grade.  Come to class and participate!

Bonus Quizzes:   Every now and then, without warning, the urge strikes me to
inflict a bonus quiz on the class.  These quizzes can cover anything discussed
so far during the semester.  The purpose is to encourage you to maintain a
regular pattern of review as part of your study habits.  The quizzes cannot
hurt your grade, but CAN help your grade enormously.  Review class notes and
reading assignments regularly.

Exams:  Each exam is comprehensive.  That is to say, each exam can include any
of the material covered to date.  A portion of each exam will derive,
verbatim, from the "Study Guides" sections of this Web Site. (See Study Guides
for Reading Assignments and see Study Guides: General Information.)  I will
provide more information about the exams in a class session.

Book Review:  The book review is worth 200 possible points.  Fifty points will
be awarded for turning in the paper on time.  If you are a day late, you lose
those 50 points. If you are a week late or later, your paper will not be
accepted, and you will receive a zero for the Book Review portion of the
grade.  Another 50 points will be awarded on the basis of style:  You must
employ correct English, including punctuation, spelling, syntax and so forth.
The remaining 100 possible points will be awarded on the basis of your paper's
content:  Did you follow instructions? (50 points)  Have you articulated a
reasonable evaluation and defended it with sound supporting argumentation? (50
points)  (See Book Review Instructions.)

**Academic Honesty and Responsible Behavior** :  
I expect you to be courteous to one another and to me at all times.
Inappropriate behavior or language will result in a poor participation grade
or expulsion.

It should go without saying that you must not cheat on quizzes or exams.  If
you are caught cheating, you will fail the course.  The book review should be
entirely your own work.  If you consult additional published sources, such as
books, journal articles, web sites, a teacher or professor, etc., be sure to
cite those sources in footnotes (See Book Review Instructions).  


**Required Texts** :  
Pomeroy, Sarah B., et al., _Ancient Greece: A Political, Social, and Cultural
History_   (New York/London: Oxford University Press, 1999).

Biers, William R., _Art, Artefacts, and Chronology in Classical Antiquity_
(London: Routledge, 1992).

Primary Texts:  You will be required to read portions of ancient literature.
You can access those documents in English translation at the following sites:

(A) Excerpts from Herodotus, _The Histories_ , Book II

(B) Primary Texts on
[Perseus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/Texts/chunk_TOC.html)

(C) Primary Texts on the [Classics Archive](http://classics.mit.edu/)

**Calendar** :

Introduction:  Aug. 25.

UNIT 1  \--  The Geography of the Aegean World  (Aug. 27)

Assignment:  Examine six maps in Pomeroy, et al., pages xxviii-xxix (Greece),
135 (Peloponnesus), 177 (Attica), 183 (Persia), 396-97 (Alexander's Campaign),
and 419 (The Greek view of the inhabited world), before Aug. 27.

UNIT 2  \--  What is "History"?  (Aug. 30 to Sept. 10)

(A) The Genres of History Assignment: Class Handout: Read "What is 'History'?"
before Aug. 30\.  
  (B) How is chronology determined? Assignment: Read Biers, chapters one and
two before Sept. 1.  
  (C) What is archaeology? Assignment: Read Biers, chapter three before Sept.
3.  
  (D) What is epigraphy? Assignment: Read Biers, chapters four and five before
Sept. 8.  
  (E) What was the "history" genre in the perception of the ancients?
Assignment: Class Handout: Read "What was 'History' in the Perception of the
Ancients?" before Sept. 10.

UNIT 3  \--  The Bronze, Dark and Archaic Ages  (Sept. 13 to Oct. 6)

(A) Prehistoric and Bronze Age Greece Assignment: Read Pomeroy, et al.,
chapter one, before Sept. 13.  
  (B) The Greek "Dark Age" Assignment: Read Pomeroy, et al., chapter two,
before Sept. 17.  
  (C) Archaic Greece Assignment: Read Pomeroy, et al., chapter three, before
Sept. 22.  
  (D) Homer and Hesiod (See Primary Texts on
[Perseus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/Texts/chunk_TOC.html) or [Classics
Archive](http://classics.mit.edu/).) Assignments:

(1) Read Hesiod's _Theogony_ , before Sept. 27.

(2) Read Homer's _Iliad_ , Books One and Three, before Sept. 29.

(3) Read _Iliad_ , Books Six and Nine, before Oct. 1.

(4) Read _Iliad_ , Books Sixteen and Twenty, before Oct. 4.

(5) Read _Iliad_ , Books Twenty-two and Twenty-four, before Oct. 6.

FIRST EXAM  \--  FRIDAY, OCTOBER 8

UNIT 4  \--  Greece from the Archaic to the Classical Age (Oct. 13 to Nov. 19)

(A) Sparta Assignment: Read Pomeroy, et al., chapter four, before Oct. 13.  
  (B) Athens Assignments:

(1) Read Pomeroy, et al., chapter five, before Oct. 18.

(2) Read Pomeroy, et al., chapter six, before Oct. 22.

(3) Read Pomeroy, et al., chapter seven, before Oct. 27.  
  (C) The Peloponnesian Wars Assignment: Read Pomeroy, et al., chapter eight,
before Nov. 1.  
  (D) Fourth Century Greece Assignment: Read Pomeroy, et al., chapter nine,
before Nov. 5.  
  (E) Classical Literature Assignments:

(1) Read excerpts from Herodotus, _The Histories_ , Book II, before Nov. 10.

(2) Read _Antigone_ , by Sophocles, before Nov. 15.  (See Primary Texts on
[Perseus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/Texts/chunk_TOC.html) or [Classics
Archive](http://classics.mit.edu/).)

BOOK REVIEW DUE MONDAY, NOVEMBER 15  (See Book Review Instructions.)

SECOND EXAM  \--  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 22

UNIT 5  \--  The Macedonian Kings and the Hellenistic Era (Nov. 24 to Dec. 10)

(A) Philip II of Macedon Assignment: Read Pomeroy, et al., chapter ten, before
Nov. 24.  
  (B) Alexander III of Macedon Assignment: Read Pomeroy, et al., chapter
eleven, before Dec. 1.  
  (C) The Successor States and Hellenism Assignment: Read Pomeroy, et al.,
chapter twelve, before Dec. 6.  
  (D) Summary Session, Dec. 10.

FINAL EXAM  \--  FINALS WEEK, time TBA

* * *

  
Study Guides for Reading Assignments  
    

* * *

  
Click here for Biers, _Art, Artefacts & Chronology_: Chapters  \--  1, 2, 3, 4  

* * *

  
Click here for  Pomeroy, et al., _Ancient Greece_ : Chapters  \--  1,  2,  3,
4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  11,  12  

* * *

**Study Guides for Biers, _Art, Artefacts & Chronology_**

Chapter One: Introduction: Classical Archaeology and Chronology

(1) All archaeology deals with what?

(2) Not all archaeological knowledge derives from excavations; much derives
from __________________.

(3) Most artifacts recovered archaeologically are ones that have been
___________, ____________, _______________, or _______________.

(4) How do ancient cemeteries differ from most archaeological discoveries?

(5) Why does New World archaeology differ from Old World archaeology?

(6) How does a culture designated "prehistoric" differ from one termed
"historic"?

(7) The most common find in any archaeological excavation is ____________.

(8) Define the "two ways of asserting the date of an object" (p. 6).

(9) Compare and contrast the table of dates for Greece on page 7 with the
table of dates in Pomeroy, et al., pages xix-xxvii and the table found on this
web site in the Study Guides: General Information section.

Chapter Two: How Time is Recorded  
    
(1) Describe three calendars in use simultaneously in ancient Athens.

(2) How was King Seleucus significant for time-reckoning by the ancients?

(3)  How were the Olympic Games significant for time-reckoning?

(4) What was the problem with the use of the Olympic lists?

(5) Briefly describe how our modern calendar came into use.

(6) What helps us determine chronology in Roman history?

Chapter Three: Relative Dating  
    
(1) Briefly define "stratigraphy."

(2) What is the general rule, "last in, first out?"

(3) What is "fill" and why does it present difficulties?

(4) What is a "closed/sealed" deposit?

(5) Define "terminus post quem" and "terminus ante quem."

(6) In a sense, archaeology is ____________, so careful records are necessary.

(7) How does the fact of stylistic change over time assist the chronologist?

(8) What are some problems with the employment of stylistic analysis?

(9) Stylistic change provides what kind of chronology?

(10) What are "stylometrics"?

(11) Stylistic sequences are useful only if _______________.

(12) What is a "fixed/set point"?  
    
Chapter Four: Absolute Dating  
    
(1) Roman Pompeii and Herculaneum are exceptions that prove what important
rule?

(2) Why is the relationship of a destruction level to a military event
difficult?

(3)  Name a significant danger in the use of literary evidence for
interpretation.

(4) How are eclipses significant to the issue of absolute dating?

(5) One of the most firm absolute chronologies in early Greek dating is
________.

(6) What is a "self-dating" artifact?  Give examples.

(7) Briefly describe three scientific methods that attempt to offer absolute
dates.



**Study Guides for Pomeroy, et al., _Ancient Greece_**

Chapter One: Early Greece and the Bronze Age

(1)  The Greek word for the land of "Greece" is _________________.

(2)  About ____% of Greece is mountainous, and only ____% can be cultivated.

(3)  Briefly describe an average Greek diet.

(4)  Why does the narration of "history" become much easier when the
researcher arrives at the seventh century BCE?

(5)  When the "high" civilization of Greece emerged in 1,600 BCE, the cultures
of the Near East and Egypt were already how old?

(6)  Briefly describe the social structure of an ancient Near Eastern City-
State.

(7)  Bronze is an alloy, consisting of ___% of copper and ___% of __________.
The addition of this second metal has what effect on the copper?

(8)  How did the introduction of bronze (as well as lead, gold and silver)
affect the social structure of the ancient world?

(9)  Define "Indo-European" language, and give three examples of it.

(10)  Why do modern archaeologists call Greece's Late Bronze Age the
"Mycenaean Age"?

(11)  Why do modern archaeologists call the Bronze Age society of Crete
"Minoan" society?

(12)  Minoan culture and economy appears to have peaked with the palace-
complex at Knossos at about _____ BCE.

(13)  The Minoan economy is called a "redistributive" economy.  What is a
redistributive economy and how do the elites and the commoners each benefit
from it?

(14) Why is the misfortune of the ancient inhabitants of Thera an advantage to
the modern historian and archaeologist?

(15)  What evidence suggests a Mycenaean takeover of Minoan Crete circa
1500-1450 BCE?

(16)  Compare and contrast Linear A and Linear B.  When did each flourish?
With whom is Linear A associated?  With whom is Linear B associated?

(17)  The finds at Pylos reveal Mycenaean civilization so well because they
remained undisturbed since 1,200 BCE.  In a sentence or two, describe that
kingdom's daily life.

(18)  The iconography of Minoan religious art is dominated by images of a
___________ who is called ___________ by the writings.

(19)  Among the 30 or so Mycenaean gods were several known to us also from
later "Archaic and Classical" Greek religion, some certainly attested, and
some less certain.  Name the six certain ones.

(20)  Briefly describe how Mycenaean civilization seems to have ended in the
13th and 12th centuries BCE.  


Chapter Two:  The "Dark Age" of Greece and the Eighth-Century "Renaissance"
(c. 1150-700 BC)

(1)  Briefly describe why the period after 1,100 BCE is called a "Dark Age."

(2)  What happened to population density during this period?

(3)  Archaeology shows that by about 950 or so BCE most weapons and tools were
made of ____________.

(4)  How did the shift in population density after the Mycenaean Age affect
the structure of government in early Dark Age Society?

(5)  How does the Linear B term "pasireu" illustrate the change discussed in
question # 4?

(6)  Define the genre of "epic."

(7)  Modern linguistic analysis of the Homeric epics places their composition
between about _______ and _______ BCE.

(8)  The epics attributed to Homer tell little about either the period in
which the tales are set or the period in which the epics were committed to
writing.  Thus, they tell little about the periods of ______________ and
_______________.  Instead, they tell much about the society of
___________________.

(9) The chiefdom society presupposed in Homer consists of a paramount
_______________, who leads  \--   through words and deeds  \--  a group of
lesser _______________.

(10)  What is the "way of life" for leaders in Homeric society?

(11) During the Dark Age, the only existing "law" was _________________.

(12)  Describe the relationship called a "xenos" (plural "xenoi").

(13)  In ancient Greek society, women were under the strict control of whom?

(14)  Usually, how did one become a slave in ancient Greece?

(15)  Although Greek religion never possessed an official "doctrine," who gave
the Greeks a general outline of the gods and the universe?

(16)  How did most ancient Greeks conceive "afterlife"?

(17)  In a sentence or two, describe the average "oikos."

(18)  What factors gave rise to increasing overseas trade and colonization at
the close of the Dark Age?

(19)  Greek writing emerged by the _________________ century BCE.

(20)  As Greece emerged from the Dark Age, a kind of "panhellenism" (all-
Greece-ism) manifested itself how?  


Chapter Three:  Archaic Greece (c. 700-500 BC)

(1)  According to Pomeroy, et al., this period saw two new ideas that "would
shape the history of the western world" (page 82).  Name those two ideas.

(2)  Most of the information about the period from 700 to 500 BCE derives from
__________________.

(3) In Homer's writings, a "polis" is a ___________, but during the Archaic
Age and later, the word "polis" referred to _________________________.

(4)  Essentially, the creation of the new "polis" system entailed a
recentralization (or unification) of power, much like the Mycenaean kingdoms,
except lacking a single  _____________________________.

(5)  The powerful families that usually led a polis retained their independent
status by creating an  _____________________.

(6)  Sparta's polis was distinctive in that it was headed by two
_________________, and an annual board of ______________________.

(7)  The Archaic Age saw the rapidly increasing spread of Greek
______________, from Spain to Colchis (=modern Georgia, east of the Black
Sea).

(8)  The early polis gave voting and governance privileges only to the
_______, _______ citizens.

(9)  What was the difference between a "slave" and a "helot"  (and other,
similar groups)?

(10)  What was a "hoplite," and what was a "phalanx"?

(11)  Briefly describe the conditions of hoplite battle.

(12)  How did the hoplite armies inadvertently alter the political
arrangements of the early polis?

(13)  Many Greek poleis (plural of polis) went through a phase of
______________ during the seventh and sixth centuries BCE (circa 670 to 500).
Give three reasons why this was the case.

(14)  Describe a typical "kouros" and a typical "kore."

(15)  What significant innovation occurred in architecture around the middle
of the seventh century BCE (circa 650 or so).

(16)  What was an "agora"?  What was a "stoa"?  What was a "gymnasion"?

(17)  Where were the two common places for the public performance of Lyric
poetry?  What are some of the common attitudes expressed by these poets?

(18)  What does "philosophy" mean?  Can you identify the following "pre
Socratic" philosophers, and summarize (in one sentence each) what they taught?

(a)  Thales of Miletus  
(b)  Pythagoras of Samos  
(c)  Xenophanes of Colophon  
(d)  Heraclitus of Ephesus  
(e)  Parmenides of Elea

(19)  What was an "amphictyony" and what practical purpose did it serve?

(20)  Briefly describe the two most significant panhellenic "attractions."  


Chapter Four:  Sparta

(1)  What is the problem of the "Spartan mirage"?

(2)  If "helots" in Spartan  society are roughly equivalent to Athenian slaves
(though "owned" by the state, not individuals), then the "perioikoi" were
equivalent to Athenian __________________, because both were "free" but could
not participate in government.

(3)  What was the result of the First and Second Messenian Wars?  What
emotional impact did the second of these wars seem to have had on the
Spartans?

(4)  The complex and peculiar Spartan "system" was designed to achieve one
goal.  Name that goal.

(5)  Fom birth, a Spartan male began a training program that emphasized
________________ and _________________________.

(6)  What was a Spartan "syssition" and what was the staple of its meals?

(7)  What was the primary duty of a Spartan woman?

(8)  The absence of the male in a Spartan household had what effect on the
Spartan woman's role?

(9)  Briefly describe the practice of pederasty.

(10)  At most, Spartiates represented ____% of their own Spartan population,
the remainder being helots and perioikoi.

(11)   Name three factors that contributed to the Spartan population
"problem."

(12)  Name an important event that benefited the helot resistance movement in
464 BCE.  This resulted in the new colony of ___________________.

(13)  Messenia finally became independent of Sparta in ______ BCE, with the
assistance of _____________.

(14)  The alliance known to historians as the "Peloponnesian League" emerged
in the final decade of the _______th century BCE.  


Chapter Five:  The Growth of Athens and the Persian Wars

(1)  Describe the nine leadership offices of early Athenian government.

(2)  What was the Council of the Areopagus?

(3)  Who was Solon of Athens, and roughly when did he live?

(4)  What put poorer farmers at an economic disadvantage in the Athenian
economy around the time of Solon?

(5)  What did Solon do about the "hektemoroi"?

(6)  Define each of the following classes in Athenian society:

(a)  pentakosiomedimnoi  (pronounced:  penta  -  kosio  -  med  -  im  -  noi)  
(b)  hippeis  (pronounced:  hip  -  pay  -  uss)  
(c)  zeugitai  (pronounced:  zeh  -  oo  -  gitai)  
(d)  thetes  (pronounced:  thay  -  tase)  
(e)  metics  (pronounced:  met  \- ics)  
(f)  slaves  
(g)  women

(7)  Of the classes in the previous question, which one(s) could serve,
according to Solon's new constitution, in the offices of the nine archons and
other higher magistracies?  Which could serve in the lower magistracies?  Who
served as hoplites?  Who served as lesser equipped troops and as sailors?
Which classes were participants in the new "ekklesia"?  Who could serve as
prospective jurors?

(8)  In what significant way did Solon prepare for the later Athenian move
toward democracy?

(9)  Who was Peisistratus and what did he do?

(10)  Who was Isagoras, and what was his plan for Athens?

(11)  How did Cleisthenes break the power of the old families in Athens?

(12)  What was the Council of Five Hundred, how was it chosen, and what role
did it serve?

(13)  What were the "strategoi," and what did each one represent?  How were
they chosen, and for how long could a strategos serve?

(14)  What and when was the "Ionian Rebellion"?

(15)  Who sensed danger for Athens in the fate of Miletus after 494 BCE?

(16)  What significant event occurred in 490 BCE?  How did Athenians interpret
that event?

(17)  What significant change in Athenian politics occurred circa 487 BCE?
What consequences developed from this change?

(18)  What was "Ostracism" and how was it done?

(19)  Briefly describe the War of 480-79 BCE, including the Battles of
Thermopylae, Salamis, Plataea and Mycale.

(20)  Whose long prose narrative chronicled the war with Persia from the Greek
perspective?  


Chapter Six:  The Rivalries of the Greek City-States and the Growth of
Athenian Democracy

(1)  What was the Delian League, and who was its effective leader until about
mid-century?

(2)  Briefly describe the final years of Themistocles.

(3)  Who led the movement to strip the upper classes of power during the 460s
and 450s BCE?  How did he succeed?  What was this man's fate shortly after his
reforms were in place?

(4)  Who dominated Athenian politics from roughly 461 to his death in 429 BCE?

(5)  Tension between Athens and the city of ______________ led to the first
Peloponnesian War of 460-445 BCE.  What was the most basic underlying economic
issue between these two cities?

(6)  The guiding spirit of Athenian imperialism was ____________________.  He
led Athenian policy largely through the power of ____________________.

(7)  What does the Greek term "demokratia" mean?  Essentially, Athenian
democracy entailed the creation of many one-year offices and no
__________________________ office.

(8)  In democratic Athens, what was a "liturgy"?  What was the liturgy known
as the "trierarchy"?

(9)  In what ways were the lyric poet Pindar's viewpoints opposite those of
the Athenian democrats?

(10)  Name the three great tragic playwrights of fifth-century Athens.

(11)  The characters in a Greek tragedy were never intended to be
_________________;  rather they were representatives of
________________________________.

(12)  Name three formal restrictions placed upon the author of a Greek
tragedy.

(13)  Pomeroy, et al., suggest that the shift away from "archaic" visual art
styles and toward the greater naturalism of classical sculpture had to do with
a rejection of ___________________ in the wake of the Persian wars.

(14)  Often the sculptors of classical Greece employed their art to tell the
tales of _______________________.

(15)  Why do we know much sculpture and intricately decorated pottery but no
painting from classical Greece?

(16)  What does vase painting reveal about male perspectives on women?

(17)  Why were infant girls considered of less value than infant boys?

(18)  What was the usual custom for the naming of an infant?

(19)  Briefly describe the customary Greek marriage.

(20)  Briefly describe the usual manner of sea-going vessels.  


Chapter Seven:  Greece on the Eve of the Peloponnesian War

(1)  Who was Thucydides, and why is he significant?

(2)  What major crisis threatened the Athenian empire in 440 BCE?

(3)  What important colony did Athens establish in 437 BCE?

(4)  Name three factors that seem to have led to the second Peloponnesian War
in the late 430s BCE.

(5)  What did Sparta seek to destroy in the second Peloponnesian War?

(6)  Who was Anaxagoras, and what did he teach?

(7)  Who was Empedocles of Sicily, and what did he teach?

(8)  Who were Leucippus and Democritus, and what did they teach?

(9)  What was the principal contribution of Hippocrates, and those who
followed him, to medicine?

(10)  Who wrote "Oedipus Tyrannus," and what is the tale about?

(11)  Who wrote "Medea," and what is the tale about?

(12)  Briefly describe the common sources of education in ancient Greece.

(13)  Whence do our modern words "music" and "lyric" derive?

(14)  Who were the sophists and why did the city of Athens in particular tend
to attract sophists?

(15)   Who was Protagoras of Abdera, and what did he teach?

(16)  What was the "Acropolis" of Athens, and who built it?  
         (Take a virtual tour of the Acropolis:  [Perseus Diagram with Photos](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/image?lookup=PS0024&type=plan)) 

(17)  What was the "Parthenon"?  Briefly describe it.  What was its primary
function?

(18)  Describe the major functions of the Athenian Agora.  


Chapter Eight:  The Peloponnesian War

(1)  Describe the distinctive tactics Pericles devised for the fighting of the
second Peloponnesian War.

(2)  How did the Spartans react to that plan?

(3)  What "defeated" Pericles in 429 BCE?

(4)  In 428 BCE, Athens faced a new challenge with the revolt of
_________________.

(5)  The Spartans destroyed _______________ in 427 BCE.

(6)  Which Athenian leader won the battle of Pylos, but lost an opportunity to
negotiate a peace and end the war?  When did this happen?

(7)  After Pylos, the theater of war moved north to the important city of
____________________, where the Spartan leader _________________ and the
Athenian ___________________ were both killed in battle.

(8)  Who negotiated a fragile peace in 421 BCE?  How long did that peace last?

(9)  Who wrote the comic "Peace," and what is it about?

(10)  In 416 BCE, Athens displayed a baldly aggressive imperialism in its
treatment of _____________, which inspired the "Trojan Women" by
___________________.

(11)  Who persuaded Athens to support Egesta against Syracuse's ally, Selinus,
in 415 BCE?

(12)  What was the "vandalization of the Herms," and of what significance was
it?

(13)  Who won and who lost at Syracuse?

(14)  During the final phase of the second Peloponnesian war,
____________________ occupied the northeastern portion of Attica, placing
Athens in a perpetual state of siege.

(15)  In _____ BCE, Alcibiades won renewed acceptance by Athens by promising
to bring _______________ support, a promise that never materialized.

(16)  Who brought the Persians, in the person of Cyrus the Younger, into the
Peloponnesian war, and for which side?

(17)  Alcibiades lost a naval engagement at Notium (northeast of Samos) to
_____________ in 407 BCE, and promptly did what?

(18)  The defeat of Athens in 405 BCE, at the battle of ____________________,
was irreversible because this loss cut Athens off from its primary source of
__________________________.

(19)  What are the possible reasons for which the city of Athens was spared
annihilation at the end of the war?

(20)  Briefly describe the government imposed on Athens by Lysander in 404-403
BCE.  Which student of Socrates led this new government?

(21)  Why was Socrates brought to trial in 399 BCE?  


Chapter Nine:  The Crisis of the Polis and the Age of Shifting Hegemonies

(1)  Why did Persia build an anti-Spartan coalition among the Greeks after 401
BCE?

(2)  The first anti-Spartan war of the fourth century is called the
__________________ War, the first stage in the collapse of _______________
hegemony.

(3)  How did Sparta ignite war with Thebes, and when?

(4)  The fiasco initiated by Sphodrias had the effect of uniting ___________
to the anti-Spartan cause of Thebes.

(5)  In 377, Athens initiated the new _______________________, founded by
Aristoteles.

(6)   Spartan power was severely crushed by ___________, led by
________________  and ________________, at the Battle of Leuctra in 371 BCE.

(7)  The brief ascendancy of Thebes ended when _________________ was killed at
_____________ in 362 BCE.

(8)  Who was Mausolus of Caria, and what role did he play in the
deconstruction of the second Athenian League?

(9)   After Thebes and Sparta crushed one another, and Mausolus crippled
Athenian power, Greece was vulnerable to the intervention of
____________________.

(10)  The Athenian ________________ was the highest court, its decisions could
not be appealed, and its jurors were drawn from
___________________________________.

(11)  Although the class divisions created by Solon survived into the fourth
century BCE (see chapter five, page 167), participation in government was now
_______________________.

(12)  In the fourth century, Athenian citizens were encouraged to participate
in the ekklesia (assembly) by what means?

(13)  Socrates complained that the government of Athens was government by
_______________.

(14)  One phenomenon that distinguished the polis of the fourth century from
that of the fifth was ___________________.  How were slaves involved in this
new situation?

(15)  Although Athens invented democracy, few philosophers wrote in support of
it.  Which sophist defends democracy in one of Plato's writings, and how?

(16)  Briefly describe "democracy" as Pomeroy,  et al., believe it was
"theorized" by the Athenians.

(17)  Define what is meant by the statement:  "Plato was an idealist and a
dualist."

(18)  What was the Academy, and who created it?  What was the Lyceum, and who
created it?

(19)  How did Aristotle differ from his teacher, Plato?

(20)  Which Greek rhetor envisioned a vast Greek empire ruling over "slavish
and effeminate" barbarians, such as Persia?  


Chapter Ten:  Philip II the Rise of Macedon

(1)  What is known about the Macedonian language of the ancient Iron Age?

(2)  Philip II's house arrest at ____________ from about 369 to 367 BCE gave
him first-hand insight into ________________________.

(3)  Philip II benefited from new military technology and tactics, such as
________________________.

(4)  When was the Battle of Crocus Field, who fought in it,  and why was it
significant?

(5)  As the power of Philip II increased, Athens did little.  Why?

(6)  The Athenian rhetor ________________ denounced Philip II consistently.

(7)  What was the Peace of Philocrates, and when?

(8)  What was the Battle of Chaeronea, who fought in it, and why is it
significant?

(9)  How did Philip II deal with Thebes and Athens in the 330s BCE?

(10)   Briefly describe the Corinthian League.

(11)  Who was Artexerxes III, and what had he accomplished prior to his
assassination in 338 BCE?

(12)  How did Darius III come to power?  How did Philip II view the situation
in Persia?

(13)  Who was sent to Anatolia to prepare for Philip II's invasion?

(14)  Why did Philip II fail to invade Persia?  


Chapter Eleven:  Alexander the Great

(1)  The swift response to Philip's assassination by ______________ secured
Alexander's throne.

(2)  Why do historians have difficulty reconstructing the career of Alexander?

(3)  The first actions required of Alexander were to squelch rebellions in
________________.

(4)  What was the first official action taken by Alexander after he crossed
the Hellespont?

(5)  Alexander's invasion of Anatolia suffered from three handicaps at the
outset.  Name them.

(6)  When and where was the Battle of Granicus?  Why was it significant?

(7)  Why did Alexander choose to move south along the Mediterranean coast
rather than moving inland to Mesopotamia?

(8)  When and where was the Battle of Issus?  Why was it significant?

(9)  Which Syro-Palestinian cities resisted Alexander's advance, and what
became of them?

(10)  How was Alexander received in Egypt?  How did Alexander react?

(11)  What city did Alexander establish in Egypt?

(12)  When and where was the Battle of Gaugamela?  Why was it significant?

(13)  By mid-October, 331 BCE, Alexander entered ________________.

(14)  How did Darius III die, and what did Alexander do after Darius' death?

(15)  During his Sogdian campaign, Alexander antagonized his Greek troops in
several ways.  Briefly discuss these.

(16)  When and where was the Battle of the Hydaspes?  Why was it significant?

(17)  Where was the slaughter of Alexander's campaigns said to have been
"unparalleled"?  How did Alexander fare during this period?

(18)  What did Alexander's troops experience through the region of Gedrosia?

(19)  How did Alexander antagonize his troops in Mesopotamia?

(20)  Alexander died in ____________, possibly of __________, at the age of
____ in ______ BCE.

Chapter Twelve:  Alexander's Successors and the Cosmopolis

(1)  Alexander's death sparked a long and confusing struggle for power.  At
the center of that struggle were two helpless relatives of Alexander who were
officially known as kings.  Name them and their relationships to Alexander.

(2)  What was the Lamian War and when was it fought?

(3)  After non-stop violence from Alexander's death to the unstable peace
agreements of 311 and 308 BCE,  five powerful leaders remained standing.  Name
them and the regions under their power.

(4)  What was the Battle of Ipsus, when, and why is it significant?

(5)  In the Hellenistic poleis, democracy existed in name, but power was
usually exercised by _________________.

(6)  Representative of a new mood in Hellenistic theater was _______________
of Athens.

(7)  Hellenistic Greece saw an enormous increase in the __________ population,
largely as a result of the chaotic wars following Alexander's deaths.

(8)  Classical philosophy had been ____________________, but the new
Hellenistic philosophies were designed to __________________________________.

(9)  Briefly describe the teachings of the following Hellenistic philosophies:

(a)  Stoicism  
(b)  Epicureanism  
(c)  Cynicism  
(d)  Skepticism

(10)  Briefly describe the principles upon which were founded the
administrative tactics of the Hellenistic kingdoms.

(11)  What was the Pharos? What was the Museum?  What was the policy of
Alexandria's library?

(12)  Briefly describe some of the advances in scholarship and science that
developed during the Hellenistic era.

(13)  Pomeroy, et al., note that the encounter of Greeks and non-Greeks in
this period can be viewed as a "melting pot" or as a form of cultural
"imperialism."  In your view, which of these interpretations best fits the
evidence?



* * *

Study Guides: General Information

(1)  **Chronology** :  Memorize this chronology now.  (As the semester
progresses, **add** **to** and refine this chronology from your reading and
from class discussion.)

  _Approximate Date_ | _Era Known As_ | _Primary Characteristics_  
---|---|---  
Prior to 3,200 BCE | "Lithic" (Stone) Ages  
{Paleo- , Meso- , Neo- , Chalco- } | Agrarian subsistence economies, with some
cities and trade  
3,200 to 2,100 BCE | Early Bronze Age | Small chiefdoms  
2,100 to 1,600 BCE | Middle Bronze Age  | Early/Middle "palatial" periods;
Linear A writing system emerges on Crete c. 1,800 BCE  
1,600 to 1,150 BCE | Late Bronze Age  
(Mycenaean Age) | Middle/Late "Palatial" periods;  Linear B writing emerges on
Crete and Greek mainland c. 1,450 BCE  
1,150 to 750 BCE | Iron Age (Greek  
"Dark" Age) | Sharp population decline;  Loss of writing;  Small chiefdoms;
Rapid population increase late in this period  
750 to 490 | Archaic Period | Emergence of a distinctive Greek culture and the
polis;  Greek script;  Hesiod and Homer  
490 to 323 BCE | Classical Period | Cultural Dominance of Athens:  Age of
Pericles;  Athenian philosophers and playwrights  
323 to 30 BCE | Hellenistic Period | International Cultural Melting Pot
(and/or Cultural Imperialism) in which Egyptian and Near Eastern peoples adopt
and modify Greek culture  
    


 (2)  **Geography** :  Be able to identify the following on a map  (in some
cases, spelling differs slightly from map to map):

    
(A)  Seas: Tyrrhenian Sea;  Mediterranean Sea;  Adriatic Sea;  Ionian Sea;
Aegean Sea;  Marmara Sea (=Propontis);  Black Sea;  Caspian Sea;  Aral Sea.
(B) Islands: Corsica;  Sardinia;  Sicily;  Corcyra;  Leukas;  Ithaca;
Kephallenia;  Zakinthos;  Kythera;  Crete;  Karpathos;  Rhodes;  Cyprus;  The
cluster of islands called the Cycladic Islands (=Cyclades);  Euboea;  Salamis;
Aegina;  Thasos;  Samothrace;  Lemnos;  Lesbos;  Chios;  Samos;  Chos.   (C)
Regions of the Mediterranean and Near East: Spain;  Italy;  North Africa;
Region of Cyrene on North Africa;  Egypt;  Palestine;  Syria;  Persian Empire;
Mesopotamia;  Anatolia;  the Balkans;  Greece.   (D) Regions of Greece:
Thrace;  Chalcidice;  Hellespont;  Troad;  Macedon;  Illyria;  Thessaly;
Epirus;  Boeotia;  Attica;  Phocis;  Aetolia;  Isthmus of Corinth;
Peloponnesus;  Argolis;  Laconia;  Messenia.  (Various names for portions of
Anatolia:  Phrygia;  Lydia;  Caria;  Aeolis;  Ionia;  Cilicia;  Cappadocia;
Galatia.)   (E) Rivers and Mountains: Nile River;  Euphrates River;  Tigris
River;  Oxus River;  Indus River;  Halys River.  Mount Olympus;  Mount
Parnassus;  Mount Helicon.   (F) Cities of the Near East: Persepolis;
Ecbatana;  Babylon;  Nineveh;  Tyre;  Gaza;  Memphis;  Thebes in Egypt;
Alexandria in Egypt.   (G) Cities of Greece: Troy (= Ilion = Ilium);
Mytilene;  Sardis;  Miletus;  Halicarnassus;  Amphipolis;  Potidaea;  Pella;
Thermopylae;  Thebes in Boeotia;  Eleusis;  Megara;  Athens;  Piraeus;
Phaleron (= Phalerum);  Corinth;  Mycenae;  Argos;  Sparta;  Pylos;  Olympia.  
 (3)  **Study suggestions for class discussion of UNIT 2   \--  What is
"History"?**

(A) The Genres of History  
  (1) Define two ways in which the word "history" is employed in popular
thought.

(2) Define "positivism."  How can "history" be dealt with in a "positivistic"
manner?

(3) Define "humanism."  How can "history" be dealt with in a "humanistic"
manner?

(4) Define "ideology."  How can "history" be dealt with in an "ideological"
manner?  
  (B) How is Chronology determined?  
  (1) Define "BC" and "AD."  Define "BCE" and "CE."

(2) How did the present dating system, in which we are now about to arrive at
year "2000 CE," come into existence, and when?

(3) How are centuries numbered BCE? and CE?

(4) Why is this year ( _19_ 99) part of the _20_ th century CE?

(5) What is the difference between a "relative chronology" and an "absolute
chronology"?

(6) How does a historian develop a relative chronology for ancient times?

(7) How does a historian determine an absolute chronology for ancient times?  
  (C) What is archaeology?  
  (1) Since archaeology is really a branch of anthropology, not history, how
does archaeology assist the historian?

(2) Name two practical reasons for the very strict procedures employed in
archaeological digging.

(3) What is pottery typology and why is it useful?

(4) What is stratigraphy and why is it useful?

(5) What one thing CAN archaeology do?  What one thing can archaeology NOT do?  
  (D) What is epigraphy?  
  (1) Define "epigraphy."

(2) Name the three most common media on which writing occurs in the ancient
world.

(3) Give examples of genres of writing that are distinctive to each of the
three media.

(4) Generally speaking, who did most of the writing in the ancient world?  How
is writing closely associated with "class"?  
  (E) What was "history" in the perception of the ancients?  
  (1) What does "historia" mean, and when did this genre become common?

(2)  How did the ancient historian define the terms: evidence, investigation
and hypothesis?

(3) Name common rhetorical strategies employed by the ancient Greek historian.  
  
(4) **The Gods of Ancient Greece** :  The relationships of the gods to one
another and to humans are complex, and often contradictory.  Here is an
overview with which to begin.

(A) First generation of the gods:  Uranos (Sky/Heaven) and Gaia (Earth)

(B) Second generation of the gods:  Cronus and Rhea;  a variety of gods called
the Titans;  Aphrodite

(C) Third generation of the gods:  Zeus and his siblings, Hera, Hestia,
Demeter, Poseidon and Hades

(D) Fourth generation of the gods:  Athene (=Athena);  Persephone;  Ares,
Hephaestus, the twins Artemis and Apollo, Hermes, Dionysus

(E) Other significant gods (a sample):  Asclepius,  Prometheus, Atlas and
Epimetheus;  Pan;  Hebe;  the Graces;  the Hours;  the Fates;  the Furies;
the Muses;  Orpheus;  Iris

(F) The Olympian gods are twelve:  Zeus and Hera;  Demeter, Poseidon, Athene,
Hestia, Apollo, Artemis, Hephaestus, Hermes, Aphrodite, Ares

(G) Among the Heroes:  Herakles (Hercules) son of Zeus, Jason son of Aeson,
Achilles son of Peleus, Diomedes son of Tydeus, Theseus son of Aegeus (or son
of Poseidon), Odysseus (Ulysses) son of Laertes, Priam King of Troy, Hector
son of Priam, Paris (Alexander) son of Priam, and the sons of Atreus,
Agamemnon and Menelaus  
    




* * *

Ancient Greece on the Web  


  * [Perseus Project](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/)
  * [The Ancient Greek World](http://130.91.81.72/GREEK_WORLD/INTRO.HTML)
  * [The Classics Archive](http://classics.mit.edu/)

  * [Exploring Ancient World Cultures](http://eawc.evansville.edu/)
  * [Diotima: The Study of Women and Gender](http://www.uky.edu/ArtsSciences/Classics/gender.html)
  * [ABZU: Resources for the Ancient Near East](http://www-oi.uchicago.edu/OI/DEPT/RA/ABZU/ABZU.HTML)

  * [The University Libraries of Penn State](http://www.libraries.psu.edu/)
  * [Penn State Mont Alto Home Page](http://www.ma.psu.edu/)
  * [History 102: Canaan and Israel](http://www.ma.psu.edu/~kxn12/his102/)



* * *

Book Review Instructions

**The Book Review is Due** :  ** MONDAY, NOVEMBER 15**

**Topic** :  
Each chapter of Pomeroy et al., _Ancient Greece_ , concludes with a section
titled "SUGGESTED READINGS."  Look through those suggested books, find one
that interests you, and order it through [The University Libraries of Penn
State](http://www.libraries.psu.edu/).  Except for the restriction described
in the next paragraph, you are free to choose any book from any of these
lists, so try to select one that interests you.

Please note that the "SUGGESTED READINGS" sections contain two genres of
history books.  A few of these volumes survey the entire field on a given
subject, and are designed as "textbooks" for that topic.  The others are
"monographs."  A monograph is a book written by a scholar (or scholars) that
attempts to break new ground in the research on a given topic.  Whereas the
"textbook" surveys past scholarship and presents history as generally accepted
by scholars in the field, the "monograph" represents the cutting edge, the
kind of information that might become part of future textbooks, if that
monograph convinces other scholars that its ideas are sound.  **When you
select a book for review, try to choose a monograph, not a textbook.**   (If
you are uncertain about the volume that you have chosen, discuss it with me.)

**Instructions for Writing Your Review** :  
After you have read the book carefully, taking notes from which to collect
your thoughts for the writing of your review, ask yourself the following:

(a)  Identify the central "thesis" of the author.  What new idea does this
author wish to convince you, the reader, to accept?  Usually, this thesis will
be advanced in the introductory or first chapter of the book.  Sometimes it is
also summarized in a preface or a concluding chapter, or both.  It is
imperative that you identify the author's "thesis," since that thesis is the
reason for the book's existence.

(b)  How is the book organized in order to "defend" the central thesis?   Do
the chapters successively advance a linear argument in defense of the thesis,
or does the author employ a different method of organization?

(c)  What are the most significant means by which the author has defended the
thesis?  Does the author devote much space to a discussion of primary
evidence, secondary evidence or reasoned argumentation?  Does the author claim
to have discovered or generated new evidence that places the topic in a new
light, or does the author reinterpret evidence already well known to his or
her field of scholarship?

(d)  How does the author conclude the work?  Does she or he offer suggestions
for future research in light of the new thesis?  Does the author make other
suggestions?

(e)  Are there other aspects of this book (not covered by the previous
questions) that you deem to be significant?

Your book review must include the following elements: (1)  At the top of page
one, type the full title and subtitle of the book under review, followed by
the author's name. Then type the city of publication, publisher's name, and
date of publication.  (If the volume is a "revised edition" or "second
edition," include that information prior to the city of publication.)  On the
next line after this information, type "Review by" and your name, and the
date.

(2)   Summarize succinctly the central thesis of the book, and narrate briefly
the primary supporting arguments by which that thesis has been defended.  Note
any particularly significant details, and explain why those details are
essential to the author's case.

(3) Evaluate the book.  In your view, is the author's thesis convincing?  Why
is it convincing, or why not?  Does the evidence discussed really support the
thesis?  Are there aspects of the evidence which might undermine all or part
of the author's thesis?  Is it possible that the thesis is partially correct,
but partially incorrect?  Is it possible that the thesis is correct, but that
the author has not taken the thesis far enough?  Are there additional aspects
to this evaluation not covered by these suggested questions?  (As part of this
evaluation, you might choose to do some research on the topic covered by the
book.  Research can begin with the author's bibliography and footnotes, and/or
[The University Libraries of Penn State](http://www.libraries.psu.edu/).)

(4) Summarize your findings.  Do you recommend that this book be given careful
consideration by others?  Or do you believe that the author has not made a
compelling case?  (Please note that I have not asked, "Do you like this book?"
An academic review of a book does not seek judgment on your enjoyment or lack
of enjoyment, as though the book were a form of entertainment.)

**Instructions for Presentation** :  
The paper must be five (5) pages, typed on a typewriter or word processor,
double spaced, with 1" margins on all four sides of the paper.  Use one side
of the paper only.  Staple the pages at the top, left corner.  Do **not** put
your paper in a binder or presentation case of any kind.   A title page is not
necessary.  Be sure to number each page.  If you have done additional
research, include at the end a full bibliography in which you list,
alphabetically by author's last name, every book, article or other source you
have quoted or depended upon in your paper.  **Before you turn in your Book
Review, be sure to check your spelling and grammar carefully.**   (It is a
good idea to have someone you trust proofread your work, so that obvious
grammatical and spelling errors can be corrected.)  
    
**Academic Style** :  
For all matters of academic style, consult:  Turabian, Kate L., _A Manual for
Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations_ (Fifth edition; Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press, 1987).

For footnote citations, see Turabian, fifth edn., pages 120-64.  
For bibliographies, see Turabian, fifth edn., pages 165-203.

Please note that most word processors follow accepted style for the insertion
of footnotes, and, probably, you will only need to introduce slight
modifications (or no modifications at all) to conform to Turabian style.

**See Also** :  Book Review Grade.  
    


* * *

Herodotus: The Histories, Book II (excerpts)  


TO BE UPDATED SOON

* * *

 Return to top  *** </FONT

