**![](../../images/undghistc1.gif)**

Fall 2002



**History of Western Civilization**

A history of Western civilization from its ancient Mediterranean origins
through the medieval and modern development of Europe to the contemprary
world. Students may not receive credit for HIST 100 and 101 or 102.

**Foundations of Western Civilization**

A survey of the evolution of western culture from the ancient Mediterranean
world to the formation of modern Europe. Cultures of the ancient Near East and
the enduring philosophical and religious contributions of Greece, Rome, and
early Christianity are examined. Special emphasis is placed on the social,
economic, and political transformations from the time of the dissolution of
the Roman Empire through feudal Europe and the Renaissance to the Reformation.

Students may not receive credit for HIST 100 and 101 or 102.

**U.S History**

(Please refer to Fall 2002 catalog for a listing of all sections and
instructors.)

An examination of American society from its founding documents, values,
institutions, and peoples to the present. **Students may not receive credit
for HIST 120 and 121 or 122.**

**Formation of the American Republic**

Social, political, economic, and intellectual growth of American institutions
from colonization through Reconstruction. **Students may not receive credit
for HIST 120 and 121 or 122.**

**Introduction to World History**

This course deals with the formation and historical evolution of major
societies in world history, with emphasis on comparison. East and South Asia,
the Middle East, Africa, Latin America, and Europe are all considered in this
context. The course also traces major changes in the world history framework
in terms of the nature and impact of significant international processes such
as trade, disease exchange, and cultural contact. The course emphasizes
connections between past and present, in the evolution of the major societies
and the global processes alike. Emphasis rests on key analytical problems and
the application of historical techniques to global issues.  

**History of the Modern Global System**

This course aims to provide an understanding of the processes that have shaped
the modern world, both Western and non-Western. While we will be tracing the
processes that reorganized people, reshaped cultures, and generated new
economies, this course is not a survey of individual world societies. Rather
the course will focus on the interactions and interdependence of these
societies, beginning in 1500. Thus themes that will be explored will include:
society, polity, and trade before the age of expansion, the commercial and
industrial revolutions, imperialism, nationalism, and post-colonialism, and
their legacies. By the conclusion of the course, students should have a grasp
of the major developments in world history since 1500.

**Freshman Seminar: Japan at War**

**Open to freshman and sophomores.** This course takes a look at one of the
most important conflicts in the twentieth century: the Japanese Empire's war
in the Pacific and Asia with USA and the Allies. The war is examined from a
range of perspectives including film, oral testimony, fiction, and narrative
historical writing. Not only will these perspectives give us some idea of
Japanese, American, and Chinese views of the war, they will also allow us to
think about the different ways history writing and imagining can be used to
treat the same events.

**Freshman Seminar: America in the 1960s**

John F. Kennedy, Martin Luther King, Richard Nixon, George Wallace, Jerry
Rubin, Tom Hayden, Betty Friedan, Malcom X, Janis Joplin, the Beatles, Timothy
Leary, Vietnam, Chicago, Woodstock. Each of these people and places conjure up
memories of that turbulent period in American history known as "The Sixties."
How can we make sense of them all? This course will help you to understand the
history behind these symbols, and more importantly, offer insight into how
they all fit together. It will be organized in roughly chronological order
around five overlapping themes-domestic politics and government, the push for
African-American equality and power, radical and feminist social movements,
cultural change, and foreign policy. As a seminar, the course requires
substantial student participation in class. Through reading, lecture,
interaction with other students, viewing film, and written analysis of course
content, you will develop a new understanding of the 1960s as a turning point
in American history.

  ** _200 Level Courses_**

**Survey of Latin  American Civilization**

This course focuses on the history of Spanish and Portuguese America from the
end of the fifteenth century through the early nineteenth century. Topics that
will be studied include European exploration in the Atlantic; the Maya, Aztec,
and Inca civilizations; wars of conquest; the ecological, cultural and
economic effects of contact among European, African, and indigenous
inhabitants of the Americas; and labor systems including slavery.

**Survey of Middle East Civilization**

This course will provide an understanding of the history of the Middle East
from the rise of Islam to the turn of the 20th century. The course will thus
cover Islam during the Prophet Muhammad's lifetime, its expansion and
consolidation during the period of Arab hegemony, Turkish migration and
resulting Turkic states like the Ottoman empire, and other issues that form
the background to the contemporary Middle East. By the conclusion of the
course, students should have a grasp of the major trends in Middle East
history, as well as an appreciation for the rich and complex culture that
characterizes the region.

**_300 Level Courses_**

**Introduction to Historical Method -- The Civil War**

This course examines the historical method in the abstract and in application.
We will use the American Civil War as a laboratory for an investigation into
the nature of how history and historians work. The class will work on a joint
research project. There is a possibility of a Saturday field trip (date to be
announced).

**Introduction to Historical Method**

This course is an introduction to the study of historical writing, research
techniques and the critical evaluation of primary and secondary sources
through the use of ancient, classical and medieval sources, and modern
interpretations of history. There will be short written projects and oral
presentations.  

**Western Europe in the Middle Ages**

Broad overview of the major developments and changes in the political, social,
economic, intellectual, and religious life of Western Europe from 300 to 1475
AD. The course will also introduce the student to the sources of medieval
history and to important historiographical debates in the field. Emphasis on
leading historical figures (e.g., Augustine of Hippo, Charlemagne, Francis of
Assisi, Joan of Arc) and patterns of personal and societal transformation.

**The Renaissance**

Survey of the Renaissance from its origins in late 14thcentury Italy to its
transmission outside of Italy to northern Europe by the late fifteenth
century. Emphasis on the growth and impact of humanism on intellectual life,
education, the arts, and politics. Most of the reading will be from primary
texts and images of the period.

**The History of Germany**

The years 1989-90 were historical for the fate of Germany and Europe with
Germany's unification. This class will examine how and why unification
occurred and describe the historical background propelling the Germans to seek
union. The course will consist of lectures, class discussion, slides, film and
talk by a German embassy official. The class is designed to introduce the
student to the political, social, and cultural history of 19th and 20th
century Germany with occasional discussions of Austria. Readings consists of a
text, novels, and several non-fiction paperbacks. There will be a mid-term
exam, a final, and several review essays.  
**Rise of Russia - Wade**

This surveys the course of Russian history from the 9th century to the middle
of the 19th century. Majors themes and topics from the first part of the
course include the emergence of the first state, Kievan Rus, and its cultural,
social and political features and legacies; the emergence of Moscow and the
building of a centralized and "Russian" state; the fate of Ukrainians and
others of the old Kievan state and later Russian Empire; Muscovite culture and
society, including the rise of serfdom and autocracy; Ivan the Terrible and
the "Time of Troubles". From the 17th century onwards particular attention
will be devoted to the Western Impact and the Russian response, especially the
policies of Peter the Great and their legacy to the present. The latter part
of the course will focus on the growth of the Russian Empire as a multi-ethnic
state, the cultural achievements of Imperial Russia, and the growing
discontent with autocracy and serfdom (including the great peasant revolts).
Classes will consist of lectures and discussion.  
**Rise of Russia - Gelb**

The purposes of this course are to give students a colorful overview of
Russian history from earliest times to the assassination of Aleksandr' II in
1881; to acquaint students with the deep-seated social and political problems
which began to tear the Russian state apart in the nineteenth century; to show
how Russia's malaise forced Aleksandr' II to embark upon the "Great Reforms";
and to consider the reasons why these reforms failed to halt the empire's
slide toward revolution. Particular attention will be paid to the multi-ethnic
context of the evolution of Russia and the Russian Empire.

**History of the Old South**

"History of the Old South" is essentially a lecture and discussion course that
explores the development of the antebellum United States South between the
Panic of 1819 and the outbreak of war in 1861. The evolving distinct nature of
the South is viewed through its political, cultural, economic, social, and
institutional life. Particular emphasis is given to the role of myths in
Southern society, to slavery, and to the character of Southern sectionalism.
Course requirements include readings, a research paper, a book review, and two
examinations.

**Modern Japan**

This course is a survey of Japanese history from the mid-Tokugawa period
(around 1750) to the end of the Pacific War in 1945. The course focuses both
on changes that preceded Western imperialism in East Asia and those that
followed in its wake. The study of political, social, intellectual, and
cultural developments will revolve around three interconnected themes:
imperialism, nationalism, and modernity.

**Revolution and Radical Politics in Latin America**

During the twentieth century, Latin America has witnessed both peaceful
political movements and violent revolutions aimed at redressing economic
inequalities and creating a more just society. This course will consider
several of these movements in comparative perspective: the Mexican Revolution,
the Arbenz government in Guatemala, the Allende regime in Chile, the Cuban and
Nicaraguan Revolutions, Sendero Luminoso in Peru. Among the questions we will
consider are the following: What factors account for the emergence of these
movements? What has determined their success or failure? What impact have they
had on society? What role has the United States played in fomenting or
preventing these radical political movements?

**Topics in History**

> **History and New Media**

This course is designed as an exploration of the process whereby history moves
from "atoms" to "bytes" or from text to a combination of media types. The
course also takes a look at the ways in which computers both help (and hinder)
historians in their roles as researchers, teachers, museum professionals, and
public historians. In other words, the course will provide a practical
introduction to the pros and cons of digital history. Among the topics to be
considered are: the varieties of digital history, criteria for evaluating
digital history content, information, and aesthetic design, issues in
presenting history in various digital forms, technical constraints and
opportunities, and future possibilities for digital history. Principally,
students will design and implement a PowerPoint presentation, an on-line
exhibit, and a web site. Although the course does not assume anything beyond a
basic knowledge of and familiarity with computers, it does require that
students have a willingness and enthusiasm for acquiring new computer skills.

> **History of World War I**

The Great War of 1914 to 1918, also known as World War I, in its scope, its
violence, and above all, its totality, ushered in a century of global war.
Never before had a war absorbed so many combatants. Never before had so many
nations been involved in the fighting. Never before had the slaughter been so
comprehensive and indiscriminate. Never before had the participants staked so
much for so little. World War I changed the face of modern Europe and the
world. The war paved the way for the Russian Revolution, World War II and the
global turmoil that would consume the rest of the century. It is the purpose
of this course to examine the history of World War I to determine the
significance and meaning of the conflict for this generation if Americans.

**Topics in Global History**

> **Women and Gender in Japanese History**

This course will focus on the experiences and representations of women in
order to highlight important themes in modern Japanese history. The course
examines Japanese history from the Tokugawa period (1600-1868) to the present
day, focusing on the ways in which the lives of women, and the meanings of
being a woman, have changed during the past few centuries of radical social
and cultural change.

> **Women in the Third World**

This course examines the contemporary history of women and women's movements
in non-Western societies-- the so-called "Third World." It focuses on specific
case studies in the Middle East (Iran, Algeria, and the Palestinians),
Afghanistan, Africa (South Africa and Nigeria) and Latin America (Brazil,
Argentina and Cuba). It examines the influence of nationalism, Western
colonialism, Marxism, religious movements, traditional customs, international
political developments, and global feminism on the status of women in these
parts of the world. We also will learn about the role women's movements have
played in national struggles and how these movements have challenged
discriminatory laws and traditional misogynist cultures in their societies.
Films, primary source documents, and autobiographical accounts will be used
extensively in the course.

> **U.S. and the Middle East**  

This course is designed to introduce students to United States' foreign policy
in the Middle East in the twentieth century. Particular emphasis will be
placed on examining U.S. policy from World War II to the present. We will
focus our attention on the evolution of American interests in several key
areas: the Cold War and the Middle East, United States and oil, the Arab-
Israeli conflict and the quest for peace, nationalism, inter-Arab politics and
Islam.

We will examine the pillars of our traditional policies of containing
communism, guaranteeing the supply of oil, promoting Israel, and trying to
reconcile conflicts among these goals under the full glare of domestic
American politics. Watershed events such as Camp David I, Irangate, U.S.
interventions in Lebanon, Libya, and in two Gulf Wars, and support for the
Oslo peace process between Israel and the Palestinian Liberation Organization
(PLO) as well as US policy since the collapse of the July 2000 Camp David
negotiations will be highlighted against the backdrop of U.S. national
interests and foreign policy decision making processes.

**Topics in European History**

> **Ireland and Britain:  Ethnic Conflict and Democracy**

For a democratic government, few issues are more difficult to resolve than
ethnic conflict within its own borders. Many of these conflicts, which were a
hallmark of 20th century Europe, are still unresolved, none more so than the
competing claims of Irish nationalists and Ulster Unionists in Northern
Ireland. The aim of this course is to examine how successive British
governments have attempted to settle, or simply contain, this problem over the
course of a century. At the same time, it will delve into the Irish Question's
impact on British politics. Particular attention will be given to partition as
a method of settling the claims of competing national groups. Finally, this
course will examine the 1998 Good Friday Agreement as a case study in
dismantling what has been called Ireland's "factory of grievances".

> **Nationalism in Eastern Europe**

In this course we will examine the history of modern Eastern Europe from the
middle of the nineteenth century through the spectacular collapse of the
region's communist regimes in 1989 and as close to the present as possible.
Class sessions will include a mix of lecture and discussion of scholarly
interpretations and controversies, and because we are dealing with Eastern
Europe, there are plenty of controversies! We will also investigate the rich
culture of the region in some detail, including a film series. The syllabus
for the course lives at:

> **Design of Cities: Early Modern Rome**

This course will focus on Rome as city and idea. While the primary emphasis
will be on the early modern city (15th-17th centuries), we shall look both
backward and forward to explore this "baroque jewel in an antique setting."
We'll examine Rome in terms of its buildings and its inhabitants. We'll
consider the "Eternal City" as habitation--investigating the effect of the
papacy; the role of the great patrician families; the city's streets and
street life; and the contentions among groups (class and nationality)--and as
destination--for VIPs, pilgrims, artists, writers, and well-heeled travelers
from northern Europe. Important to both of these functions of the city is
Rome's role as stage for civic ceremonies or simply for personal display.
We'll draw from legal, demographic, cartographic, literary, and architectural
evidence and examine the city as represented in various forms, including opera
(Puccini's Tosca) and the cinema (Fellini).

Students may undertake projects that relate to a course website, providing
data on buildings, streets, and neighborhoods linked to a 16th century map of
the city (but no technology skills are required).

> **The World of the Titanic**

On April 15, 1912, 1,523 passengers aboard the R.M.S. Titanic perished in the
icy waters of the north Atlantic. The deceased ranged from poor immigrants to
some of the most prominent members of the American elite. This course is
designed to give the student an appreciation of the R.M.S. Titanic and its
fateful voyage in its historical context. The student will gain an
appreciation of the transatlantic passenger industry before the Great War; the
construction of the Titanic; the biographies of its passengers and crew; the
life aboard ship; and the sinking of the ship. To place this tragedy in its
proper context, we will also examine the social, artistic, cultural, and
political world sometimes called the "Edwardian Age."

> **The Holocaust**

>

> **The Crusades**

The word "crusade" is a term fraught with significance. To some it connotes a
struggle of the highest moral worth. To others it conjures up ruthless
violence and intolerance. Indisputably, the Crusades marked a turning point in
history. For centuries after the disintegration of the western Roman Empire,
the peoples of western Europe were impoverished and insular, cut off from the
rest of the world by hostile seas and marauding invaders. The preaching of a
crusade to retake the Holy Land in 1095 marked the beginning of the reversal
of this trend. Since that time, the peoples of Western Europe have exported
their culture and expanded their borders.

This course will examine the Crusades largely from the perspective of the
historians, memoirists and mythmakers of the medieval world. We will examine
how Christians, Muslims, and Jews perceived the Crusades, the crusaders and
themselves, as well as how the Crusades changed both the homeland of the
crusaders and the lands they sought to conquer. We will explore the competing
images of the crusader: from epic hero to chivalric knight, from plundering
barbarian to soldier of God. These images and perceptions, as well as a
tradition of colonization inaugurated at this time, make up the legacy of the
Crusades which affects our world to this day.

**Topics in U.S. History**

> **A Biography of Jim Crow**

>

> **Frontiers in American History, 1607-1890**

From the time the English settlers stepped foot on American soil at Jamestown
through the end of the 19th century, the frontier lands to the west
represented a barrier of unknown dimensions as well as an alluring land of
opportunity. The movement into this frontier was swift and unstoppable. There
was a saying in the nineteenth century that if hell lay in the west, the
Americans would cross heaven to reach it. This course will study the expansion
across North America by peoples of Old World descent, the interaction of these
settlers with the native nations they encountered, and the effects of this
dynamic zone of contact between Old World and New World on American society,
values, identity, and character.

> **Virginia and the Revolutionary War**

This course will focus upon the political, social, economic, and ideological
background of Virginians during the most dynamic period of their history. From
the American Revolution to the election of 1800, Virginia made significant
contributions to the national concept of republican government. Although the
greatest attention will be upon the internal development of Virginia's
institutions and the role of its leaders, one cannot escape the irony that
they pursued liberty and freedom in a slaveholding state.

> **History of Race and Law**

>

> **Vietnam War**

How and why a small country half way around the world became so important that
more than 50,000 American servicemen died there is the question to be answered
by this course. The course will examine how the United States became involved
in Vietnam, and why there rather than elsewhere. Vietnamese history will be
briefly outlined, as well as US involvement in world affairs. It will examine
domestic politics and politicians as Kennedy, Johnson and Nixon, the Cold War
setting, how the war was conducted, and the military/civilian relationships.
It will be taught by one who was actually there. Classes will be in a
lecture/discussion format. Each student will do a book report and
presentation. There will be an in class midterm as well as a final.

> **The Cold War**

This course will examine the period after World War II when the United States
and the USSR led the divided world. It will begin by looking at how the two
camps arrived at their respective positions with a brief review of events from
the start of the 20th century to the beginning of the war. The association and
effects of domestic politics on world events will be stressed. Specific events
of the Cold War, as the Berlin Crisis, the Berlin Wall, the Korean War, the
Bay of Pigs, and the Cuban Missile Crisis will receive special attention.
There will be a segment on US involvement in Vietnam. Classes will be in a
lecture/discussion format. Each student will do a book report and
presentation. There will be an in class midterm as well as a final exam. ****

> **Creating Jefferson the Architect**

Among the Founding Fathers of the United States, Jefferson was the only one
with a clear understanding of the meaning of architecture and how it could be
used to give status to the new nation. The course will focus on Jefferson as
architect and the idea of meaning in architecture and the application of old
meanings as well as the creation of new meanings in Jefferson's own public and
private works. In addition, the course will explore how these original
meanings have been maintained, changed, or rediscovered from Jefferson's time
to the present and how in the course of the last century Jefferson the
politician was turned into Jefferson the architect. In order to gain first-
hand knowledge of Jefferson's buildings, a few Saturday field trips are
planned to Richmond, Charlottesville (University of Virginia), Monticello,
Williamsburg, Poplar Forest, and Philadelphia.

> **Roots of American Popular Music**

This course is the first-half of a two-semester historical survey of the
history of American popular music. In this first semester, we explore the
history of American roots music, which includes a wide array of music styles
including: the blues, gospel, early jazz, country, Western swing, Cajun,
zydeco, Tejano and Native American. Throughout the semester, we will study how
these different styles evolved, influenced each other, and were the foundation
for the emergence of rock and roll. Another important dimension of the course
will be learning how the history of race relations, gender relations, and
class in America play a key role in understanding why certain musical styles
develop and become popular. Since music is the focal point of the course,
weekly assignments include readings, listening to music, and screenings of
films about popular music.

> **Christianity, Secularism, and Democracy**

**_400 Level Courses_**

**Revolutionary Era American History, 1763-1812**

This course studies the American Revolution in its broadest sense, including
the Revolution's origins, the declaring of independence, the progress of the
war, the writing of the U.S. Constitution, and the emergence of the first
political parties. In addition to studying the "Founding Fathers," we also
look at the role of women, slaves, and ordinary people in the making of the
new nation. Readings include selected primary and secondary sources.

**The Civil War**

A survey of the causes, conduct and consequences of the American Civil War,
with emphasis on the interaction of the military and political. A field trip
may be planned. A mid-term and a final exam, along with a research project on
a common soldier will provide the grade. Classroom work will include both
lectures and discussions.

**The Russian Revolution**

This course focuses on the era of revolutionary activity, from the late 19th
century to the end of the 1920's, with emphasis upon the revolutionary
movement and the Russian Revolutions of 1917. We will explore why a
revolutionary situation developed, why it took the form that it did, and how
the revolutions contributed to the nature of the Soviet state and post Soviet
problems. Topics covered include the problems of late 19th century Russia, the
efforts to deal with them, the rise of revolutionary movements, the Revolution
of 1905 and the Duma Monarchy of 1906-17, the February and October Revolutions
of 1917, the civil war, establishment of the Soviet Union and the "Stalin
Revolution."

**Arab-Israeli Conflict**

This course explores the historical background and origins of the Arab-Israeli
conflict by examining contending perspectives of its historical narratives,
religious, social, legal, economic, cultural and political dimensions.
Particular emphasis is placed on analyzing the interplay between ideology and
policy as well diplomacy and conflict resolution that have manifested in the
transformation of conflict especially in the post-1967 period. Israeli, Arab,
Palestinian, and international perspectives on issues such as land, security,
recognition and identity will be closely analyzed. The final part of the
course will examine the Oslo agreement including opposition to the peace
process in Israel, the Palestinian territories and the Arab world.

**Senior Seminars**

> **The Third Reich adn the Holocaust**

This seminar is designed to acquaint the history student with the methods of
research and writing a major historical essay on a specific topic. The topic
will be the history of Germany during the 1930s and the relationship of Nazism
to the European holocaust during World War II. After several weeks of class
discussion and lectures on collectively read books, students will research and
write drafts and a final version of a paper, approximately 20-30 pages. Among
the books to read will be J. Spielvogel, Hitler and Nazi Germany, and
Christopher Browning, Ordinary Men.

> **The French Revolution**

The focus of this class is the writing of a research paper that incorporates
significant use of primary sources. Students will be encouraged to pursue a
topic interesting to them as long as suitable sources may be found. In
addition, the class will work together as a community sharing information and
providing constructive criticism. Each student will write and present a first
draft, write a critique of another paper, and integrate comments of the
instructor and others into a polished final draft. Class participation is
essential.

> **Harlem Renaissance**

This course considers the concept of the renaissance from multiple
perspectives and as a new way of thinking that occurs in several cultures.
Students will be expected to do considerable reading in preparation for doing
senior seminar papers that look at more than one of these movements.

> **The South Since 1865**

This research seminar for senior history majors will allow students to enjoy
the research and writing of a significant paper, which will include
considerable use of primary sources. The course will focus on the history of
the United States South since 1865. Topics of study will include
Reconstruction, the New South, the agrarian revolt, Southern progressivism,
the African-American response to Jim Crow, women in the South, the solid
South, the South during the New Deal, the Civil Rights Movement, and the new
search for Southern identity. Students will study the historiography and
interpretations of the region's history.



