CAYUGA COMMUNITY COLLEGE

  * fall 1996 
  * ENGLISH 101 H : Dr. MaryanneFelter 
  * HISTORY 101 H: Dr. Daniel Schultz 

texts:

  * Conrad, Joseph.The Norton Critical Edition of Heart of Darkness. New York: W.W. Norton, 1996. 
  * Forster, E.M. A Passage to India. any edition 
  * Walker,Alice. Possessing the Secret of Joy. any edition 
  * Hult, Christine.Researching and Writing Across the Curriculum. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1996. 

general policies:

    
    
    1. The college policy regarding cuts and absences is in effect in this class. Please check your
    student handbook.
    2. You must keep up with the assignments on the syllabus. This is an honors course with a fair
    amount of reading.Even if we get behind in class, stay with your reading schedule:
    we will catch up.  Those of you who are not registered for both English and History (because 
    of previously taking one or the other), see us after class on the first day so we can make accomodation
    in your readings/ assignments.
    3. All written assignments are due on the date scheduled on the syllabus.  They must be word-processed,
    preferably using weither Word for Windows of Word Perect since you will be loading your work into 
    a Webpage on the internet we are creating for this class.
    4. Essays must folow MLA guidelines for manuscript preparation.  We will review these in the English
    section, but if you have any questions, your writing text should have most of the answers for you.  
    There are also copies of the MLA style sheet on reserve in the library and in our offices.  You can always 
    ask us for help.
    5. You are required to do the field trip to the Johnson Museum in Ithaca on September 20th.
    Please make arrangements now to take the day off from work if this might be a problem for you. 
    We will notify the faculty that this is an honors trip, and ask them to excuse you from class that day.  
    But if you have any exams scheduled on that date you ought to make arrangements with your 
    professors ahead of time.
    6. Since this is a merged class, the writing you do in this class will count for nboth History and English.  
    You will be required to write three short papers (4-5 pages), one long research paper (20-25 pages), and 
    one bibliography.  All of these pieces will be handed in to both of us (one copy: we can share the reading).
    When you get it back, you will have the opportunity to revise anything you may need to revise and then 
    load each piece into the Website on the net.  We will encourage you to make links to other sites on the 
    net within the TEXT of your paper itself, and we will show you how to do this.  This website will become 
    a publication for you:  you can put this pn your resume; you can use it when you apply to transfer.  
    More than this, we are hoping to take some (all?) of you to a conference in the spring where you can
    show the SUNY system what you worked on and tell people what you learned by doing this. (This counts 
    as a conference presentation--another thing you can use on your resume).  You will also write a final
    exam that synthesizes the work you have done all semester.
    

week one: intropostcolonial theory/ background in imperialism/colonialismterm
paper topics/ research

    
    
    Sept 	4 	W  intro to course   *deBrunhoff,
    		Jean. The Story of Babar. New York: Random       House, 1933.
    	6 	F *Dorfman, Ariel. "Of Elephants and Savages." in
    		Charles Temple and Patrick Collins.eds. Stories and Readers:
    		New Perspectives on Literature in the Classroom.      
    		*Barry,Peter. "Postcolonial Criticism." from Beginning Theory.
    		New York: Manchester UP, 1995.   *"
    		Imperialism and the Imperial Proconsul." in R. Huttenbach. British Imperial 
      		 Experience. New York: Harper and Row, 1966.
    

suggested readings: Bannerman,Helen. Little Black Sambo. New York: The Platt
and Munk Co, 1925. Tiffin,Chris and Alan Lawson. "The Textuality of Empire."
in Describing Empire: Postocoloniality and Textuality. London: Routledge,
1994: 1-11." British Imperialism Stimulated by the Literature of Adventure,
1890-1900." in Louis Snyder.ed. The Imperialism Reader. New York: Van
Nostrand, 1962.

week two: images of colony and empire: connections between empire, patriarchy
and text

    
    
    9 	M 	*images and maps   
    		*slides: painting by Gerome   
    		*"Imperial Discovery and Gender Ambivalence." from Imperial Leather
      		*"Definitions." from Snyder. Imperialism Reader  
    		*excerpt from Albert Memmi. Portrait du Colonise. Paris: Buchet, 1957. 
    11 	W 	*Said, Edward. "Overlapping Territories, Intertwined
    		Histories." from Culture and    Imperialism. New York: Vintage,
    		1993.   
    		*Orwell, George. "Marrakech." from A Collection of Essays. New York: 
    		Harcourt    Brace and Jovanovich, 1946 (1953).
    13 	F 	*Lamming, George. "The Occasion for Speaking." in Ashcroft, Griffiths, and  
    		Tiffin.eds The Postcolonial Studies Reader. London: Routledge, 1995.   
    		*Kincaid, Jamaica. "A Small Place." in Ashcroft, Griffiths, and Tiffin.   
    		*Thiong'o Ngugi wa. "The Language of African Literature." in Ashcroft,
    		Griffiths,  and Tiffin.  
    		 research papers: how to research
    		 ASSIGNMENT ONE DUE
    

suggested readings: "Thomas Carlyle Expounds on the Mission of the Great
Anglo-Saxon Race." in Snyder. Imperilaism Reader.

week three: The Congo

    
    
    
    16 	M 	*images of Africa
      		*Conrad. Heart of Darkness   
    		*"Roger Casement's Congo Report."in Snyder. Imperialism Reader 
    18 	W 	*Lynne Rice. "Zaire from Colony to Nation: A brief history, 1908-1987." in  
    		 Norton Critical: 132   
    		*Chinua Achebe." An Image of Africa: Racism is Conrad's Heart of 
    		Darkness." in  Norton Critical: 251.
      		*Frances Singh. "The Colonialist Bias of Heart of Darkness."
    		in Norton Critical:  268.   
    		*important dates in Zaire 
    20 	F	PROPOSAL--RESEARCH PAPER DUE: BRING IT TO THE MUSEUM  WITH  YOU.   
    		field trip: Johnson Museum, Cornell University.  Be at the museum at 10 AM  sharp 
    		(we will be taken up to a special room and you must be escorted.  Please  make 
    		arrangements to carpool with other members of the class if this is easier for
        		you and remember the museum is about 45 minutes from Auburn--if you know 
    		where you are  going.  Give yourself enough time to get there safely. We will meet    
    		 with Ms. Carolyn Peter, a curator in the museum's print room, who will talk with     
    		us about orientalism in art.  Bring a notebook, review the questions we give you in    
    		class.  Be prepared to ask questions of Ms. Peters. After the lecture/discussion, we    
    		will take you all to lunch at some restaurant appropriate to the course.  If   
      		something awful happens and you cannot get there, you MUST call us ahead of     
    		time and let us know so we don't wonder where you may be and worry about for     
    		you.
    

week four: the Congo

    
    
    
    23	M 	*Basil Davidson. "Attitudes to Africa's Crisis: Historical Questions and      
    		Comparisons." Article 16 in The World and I, August 1990.   
    		*Colin Legum. "The Life and Death of Patrice Lumumba." in Patrice 
    		Lumumba.  Congo: My Country. New York: Praeger, 1962.   
    		*Patrice Lumumba."Conclusion: Crisis of Confidence." from Congo: 
    		My Country 
    25 	W 	*E.D. Morel. "The White Man's Burden." from The Black Man's
    		Burden. New York:  Monthly Review Press, 1969.   
    		*Edward Said. "Two Visions in Heart of Darkness." in Culture and 
    		Imperialism:     19-31. 
    27 	F 	*excerpts from Yambo Guologuem. Bound to Violence. London: Heineman, 1968.   
    		*excerpts from African myths, legends, stories   work on writing   
    		ASSIGNMENT TWO DUE
    

suggested readings: Ian Watt. "Impressionism and Symbolism." in Norton
Critical: 311" Sir Richard Burton's Sex Notes (1842-1885)" in Richard Zacks.
History Laid Bare: Love, Sex and Perversity from Ancient Etruscans to Warren
G. Harding. New York: Harper and Row, 1994. Thomas Carlyle. "The Nigger
Question." in English and Other Critical Essays. London: Dent, 1967." Cry of
Alarm." from Horizon History of Africa. New York: American Heritage Book Co.,
1971.

week five: Apocalypse Now 30 M *film: Apocalypse Now

    
    
    
    Oct	2 	W 	*finish film   *Mike Wilmington. "Worth the Wait."
    			in Norton Critical: 285   
    			*William M. Hagen. "Heart of Darkness and the process of Apocalypse 
    			Now." in Norton Critical: 293. 
    	4 	F 	*E.N. Dorall. "Conrad and Coppola: Different Centers of 
    			Darkness." in Norton  Critical: 301.   
    			BIBLIOGRAPHY DUE
    

week six: Vietnam

    
    
     
    
    	7 	M 	*images of Vietnam   
    			*Important Dates in Vietnam   
    			*John White. from  A History of a Voyage to the China Sea. Boston: Wells
    			and  Lilly, 1823.  
    			 "Chronology"
      			*excerpts from Tran van Tung. Viet-Nam. New York: Praeger, 1959.
      			CONGO PAPER  
    	9	 W 	*excerpts from Nguyen Du. The Tale of Kieu. New Haven: Yale UP, 1983.   
    			*Alexander Woodside. "The Historical Background [of the Tale of Kieu].
    			" in  Nguyen Du. The Tale of Kieu. New York: Vintage, 1973. 
    	11 	F 	*"Piety and Power." from Stanley Karnow. Vietnam. New York: 
    			Viking Press, 1983.
      			*"Jules Ferry's Defense of French Imperialism, 1890."
    			in Snyder. Imperialism     Reader      
    			*"Declaration of Independence of the Republic of South Vietnam, 
    			September 2, 1945.  in Snyder. Imperialism Reader.
    

week seven: Vietnam

    
    
    	14 	M 	holiday 
    	16 	W 	*Nguyen Huy Thiep. "The Water Nymph." from 
    			The General Retires and Other Stories. New York: Oxford UP, 1993.   *
    			*Leslie McClusky."Oral History." in P. Bizzel and B. Herzberg. 
    			eds. Negotiating Differences. Boston: Bedford, 1996.   
    			*Huy Can. "Truth Blazes even in Little Children's Hearts." 
    			in Bizzel and Hertzberg  
    	18 	F 	*Barbara Beidler. "Afetrthoughts on a Napalm-Drop in
    			Jungle Villages near  aiphong." in Bizzel and Herzberg
      			*Nguyen Chi Thien. "I Kept Silent." in Stuart Hirshenberg.ed.
    			The Many Worlds of Literature. New York: Macmillan, 1994.
     			 work on writing   
    			NOTECARDS AND OUTLINE DUE
    

suggested readings: Lyndon Johnson."American Policy in Vietnam." in M. Raskins
and B. Falls.eds. Vietnam Reader." Diaries of Viet-Cong Soldiers." in Raskins
and Falls Premier Pham van Dong of North Vietnam. "Policy Declaration." in
Raskins and Falls" Program of National Liberation Front of South Vietnam." in
Raskin and Falls.

week eight: India

    
    
    	21  	M 	*images of India   
    			*Important Dates in Indian History   
    			*Pico Iyer. "A Whole Subcontinent was picked up without half-
    			trying." Smithsonian January 1988:  42-56.
      			*Rudyard Kipling. "Gunga Din." The Works of Rudyard
    			Kipling. New York: Walter  Black, 1937.   
    			*Rudyard Kipling "The White Man's Burden." in T.S.Eliot. ed.
    			 A Choice of Kipling's Verse.London: Faber and Faber, 1962.   
    			VIETNAM PAPER 
    	23 	W 	*Timothy Foote. "Fifty Years on, 'O Best Beloved.'"
    			Kipling is making a comeback." Smithsonian. January
    			1986: 34-47. 
    	25 	F 	*Alfred Lord Tennyson. "Defense of Lucknow."
    			in Poems and Plays of Alfred Lord Tennyson. New York: Modern
    			Library, 1938.   
    			*John Greenleaf Whittier. "The Pipes at Lucknow." in Robert Penn
    			 Warren.ed. John Greenleaf Whittier's Poetry: an Appraisal and Selections. 
    			Minneapolis: U Minnesota Press, 1979.   
    			*George Orwell. "Shooting an Elephant." in A Collection of Essays.
    

week nine: India

    
    
    	28 	M 	*E.M. Forster. A Passage to India 
    	30 	W 	Forster/ work on writing
    Nov 	1 	F 	*George Trevelyan. "The Massacre at Cawnpore." in Ainslee 
    			Emnree.ed. 1857 in India: Mutiny of War of Independence. Boston: Heath,
    			1963.   
    			*"The Azimmgarh Proclamation." in Ainslee Embree
      			*"Mrs. Harris Describes the Seige at Lucknow, 1857."
    			in Snyder
    

week ten: India

    
    
    	4 	M 	*"Mahatma Gandhi's Call for Non-Violent Resistance, 1914."
    			 in Snyder.   
    			*Jawaharlal Nehru. " The Great Revolt in 1857: Racialism." 
    			The Discovery of India.New York: John Day, 1946. 
    	6   	W 	Mahasweta Devi. "Giribala." in Hischenberg 
    	8 	F 	Krishnan Varma. "The Grass Eaters." in Hirschenberg   
    			Bhisham Sahni. "We Have Arrived in Amristar." in 
    			Hierschenberg
    

week eleven: Egypt

    
    
    
    	11 	M 	*images of Egypt   
    			*Important Dates in Egypt   
    			*T.E. Lawrence. Chapter 3. Seven Pillars of Wisdom. New York: Doubleday, 
    			 1938.   
    			*T.E. Lawrence. "Introduction." Revolt in the Desert. New York: 
    			Doubleday, 1926.   
    			*John Rice. "T.E. Lawrence: He's Rejected in the Land where the 
    			legend began." The Citizen. August 19,1986: 20.   
    			INDIA PAPER
    	13	 W 	*Robert Hughes. "Self-Made Legend." (review of
    			John E. Mack. Prince of Disorder) Time. April 12, 1976: 93.
      			*excerpt from Sulieman Mousa. T.E. Lawrence: An Arab View. London:
    			Oxford UP., 1966. 
    	15 	F 	*Naguib Mahfouz. "Zaabalawi." in Maynard Mack,ed. The 
    			Norton Anthology of  World Literature, vol 2. New York: W.W. Norton, 
    			1995.
    

week twelve: Egypt

    
    
    
    	18 	M 	*Tewkik al-Hakim. "The Donkey's Markety." from Hirschenberg
      			*Tawfiq al-Hakim. The Suktan's Dilemma. from Norton Anthology
    			of World Lit 
    	20 	W 	*Nawal al-Saadawi. "The Mutilated Half." from Hirshchenberg   
    			*Nabil Gorgy." Cairo is a Small City." from Hirschenberg 
    	22 	F 	*Naguig Mahfouz. "Half a Day." from Hirschenberg   
    			writing work 
    

weeks thirteen, fourteen and fifteen: internal colonization

Below you will find three topics focussing on internal colonisation. You must
choose one: either African Americans, women, or Native Americans. Do all of
the asterisked reading under the topic you choose, and any of the suggested
reading you have time for. All students must also read the works listed on the
syllabus below which we will cover in class in more detail than we will have
time to do the others. Your final exam will be based on the topic you choose
to do for this section of the class.

    
    
    
    	25  	M 	Stokey Carmichael and C. Hamilton. "White Power: The Colonial 
    			Situation." in BlackPower. New York: Random House, 1967.   
    	27 	W 	RESEARCH PAPER DUE  
    	29 	F	Thanksgiving break
    
    Dec 	2 	M 	Kate Millet. "Instances of Sexual Politics." Sexual Politics. New 
    			York: Ballantine, 1970.
    	4 	W 	EGYPT PAPER 
    	6 	F 	Pauline Turner-Strong. "Captive Images." Natural History. 
    			December 1985: 51+ 
    	
    	9 	M 	Alice Walker. Possessing the Secret of Joy 
    	11 	W 
    	13 	F 
    

African Americans:

    
    
    photocopies of images
    chronology"
    African Americans" A Sociohistorical Perspective." from Vincent Parillo. Strangers to these    
    	Shores. New York: Macmillan, 1994.
    Jack E. White. "Genocide Mumbo Jumbo." Time. January 22, 1990: 20."
    Nat Turner." from R. Hofstadler. American Violence: A Documentary History. New York: Vantage, 
    	1974.
    Thomas Wentworth Higginson. from Nat Turner's Insurrection. in Lauter, Heath Anthology
    Countee Cullen. "Incident."
    Phyllis Wheatley. "On Being Brought from Africa to America." in Lauter
    Gustavus Vassa. from The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano, or Gustavus Vassa, the  
    	African, Written by Himself. in Lauter
    excerpt from Leslie Fishel and Benjamin Quarrels,eds. The Negro in America: A Documentary 
    	History"
    A Racist Statement." in Fishel"
    The Negro's Complaint." in K. Aram.et.al. History of Black Americans. New York: United 
    	Federation of  Teachers, 1972."
    Chronology of Slave Revolts." from H. Aptheter. Essays in the History of the American Negro. 
    	New York:  International Publishers, 1945."
    The Plurality Theory." in Fishel
    Stephen Jay Gould." Racist Arguments and IQ." in Nancy Comley et.al.eds. Fields of Writing:
    	Readings Across  the Disciplines. Boston: Bedford, 1994.
    Thomas J. Pressly. "Reconstruction in the Southern United States: A Comparative Perspective." 
    	Article 17.  OAH Magazine of History.
    Zora Neale Hurston. "What White Publishers Won't Print." in Anne Charters. The Story 
    	and Its Writer. Boston:  Bedford, 1995.
    June Jordan. "Poem about my Rights." in Lauter
    Nella Larsen. from Passing. in Lauter
    Thomas Glave. "--And Love them?" in Gloria Naylor.ed. Children of the Night: The
    	Best Short Stories by  Black Writers 1967 to present.Gloria Naylor.
    "Dawn." from Women of Brewster Place. New York: Penguin, 1980.
    Donald Petesch. Chapter Two. from A Spy in the Enemy's Country: The Emergence of Modern Black  
    	Literature. Iowa: U Iowa Press, 1989.
    

women:

    
    
    
    Susan Ladika. "Trafficking in Women on the Rise." Syracuse Herald-Journal. June 12, 1996: A3.
    Donu Kogbara. "One Woman's Campaign Against Genital Mutilation." MS. July/August
    	1993: 18.
    Barbara Reynolds. "The Move to Outlaw Female Genital Mutilation." MS. July/August 
    	1994: 92.
    "Women in America." in Vincent Parillo. Strangers to these Shores.
    Betty Freidan. from The Feminine Mystique. New York: Dell, 1983.
    "The Politics of Sex." Time. August 3, 1970: 15+_.
    from Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar. The Madwoman in the Attic: The Woman Writer and the
    	Nineteenth  Century Literary Imagination. New Haven: Yale UP, 1979.
    Simone de Beauvoir. "introduction" and "sexual initiation" from The Second Sex. 
    	New York: Bantam, 1970:  xiii-xxix; 347- 378.
    from Pierre Mornell. Passive Men, Wild Women. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1979.Gilman. 
    "The Yellow Wallpaper." in Lauter
    Marge Piercy. "Barbie Doll" and "What's that Smell in the Kitchen?" in Paul Hunter. 
    	Norton Introduction to  Poetry. New York: W.W. Norton, 1991.
    Angela Carter. "The Loves of Lady Purple." in Wayward Women and Wicked Girls: An 
    	Anthology of  Subversive Stories. New York: Penguin, 1986.
    Jamaica Kincaid. "Girl." in Wayward Women
    Andrea Dworkin. "Power." in Pornography: Men Possessing Women. New York: Dutton, 1979.
    D.H. Lawrence. "The Woman who Rode Away." in Complete Short Stories. New York: 
    	Penguin, 1972.
    Anne Enright. "The House of the Architect's Love Story." in The Portable Virgin. Dublin:
    	Minerva, 1991.
    John Donne. "Elegy: To his Mistress on Going to Bed."
    Annette Kolodny. "Surveying the Virgin Land: Documents of Exploration and Colonization." in 
    	The Lay of The  Land:  Metaphor as Experience and History in  American Life and Letters. 
    	Chapel Hill:" U Carolina  Press, 1975: 10-25.
    

Native Americans:

    
    
    photocopies of images
    Elias Boudinat. "An Address to Whites." in Lauter
    Charles Alexander Eastman. "The Soul of the Indian." in Lauter
    Standing Bear. "What I am going to tell you here will take me until Dark.
    	" in Lauter.
    "Alcatraz." in Vincent Parillo. Strangers to these Shores.
    D'Arcy McNickle. "Indian and European: Indian-White Relations from Discovery to 1876." 
    	in Simson and  Yinger.eds. The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social 
    	Science. Philadelphia, 1957.
    from Mary Jemison. A Narrative of the Life of Mrs. Mary Jemison. American Scenic and Historic 
    	Preservation  Society, 1971.
    from Samuel Baker. The Albert Nyanza. vol 1. London: Sidgwick and Jackson, 1962.
    from Mary Rowlandson.  A Narrative of the Captivity and Restauration of Mrs. Mary Rowlandson. 
    	in Lauter
    from John Trudell. Stickman. New York: Inandout Press, 1994.
    "Call that Story Back." in Gerald Vizenor ed. Native American Literature. USA: Harper
    	Collins, 1995.
    John Rollin Ridge. "Oppression of Digger Indians." in Lauter
    Washington Irving. "Chapter VII." The Works of Washington Irving vol III: Astoria. 
    	New York: Putnam, 1861.
    from George Catlin. Letters and Notes on the Manners and Customs of North American Indians. 
    	London,  1841.
    Wilbur Jacobs. "The Noble Savage Theme: Attitudes and Policies toward the Indian in
    	the British Colonies." in  Dispossessing the American Indian. Norman: U Oklahoma 
    	Press, 1972.
    James Hall. "Indian Hating." in Hershel Parker.ed. Norton Critical Edition: The Confidence
    	Man. New York:" W.W.  Norton, 1971.
    Gerturde Bonnin. "Impressions of an Indian Childhood.: in Lauter
    "Teckumseh." in W.C. Vanderwerth ed. Indian Oratory: Famous Speeches by Noted Indian
    	Chieftains.  Norman: U Oklahoma Press, 1971.
    "The Coming of the Spanish and the Pueblo revolt.
    " in LauterSir Walter Ralegh. "Of the Voyage for Guiana." in Peter Mancall. 
    	ed. Envisioning America: English Plans for the  Colonisation of North America,
    	1580-1640. Boston: Bedford, 1995.
    

