_COURSE OUTLINE: CPTR550_

  
Topics: Network Architecture

  
Instructor: Daniel Bidwell  
(bidwell@andrews.edu)

  
May 21, 2001 to June 8, 2001

# Course Content and Objectives

A study of the concepts and implementation of the client/server model of
computing. Examines four implementations of the client/server model. Surveys
the hardware and software used in network communications, including the
specifications and protocols for thin and thick coax ethernet, twisted pair
ethernet, fiber optics, slow IP mediums, UDP/IP, and TCP/IP. No discussion of
Networking can be complete without including the implications of security.

# Textbooks

[_Internetworking With Tcp/Ip: Client-Server programming and Applications: Bsd
Socket Version_ by Douglas Comer. Prentice Hall, 1996. ISBN 0-13-260969X.
](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/013260969X/bidwellscomputer)

[_TCP/IP Network
Administration_](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1565923227/bidwellscomputer)by
Craig Hunt. O'Reilly & Associates, Inc, 1992. ISBN 1-565923-22-7.

[_Essential System
Administration_](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0937175803/bidwellscomputer)by
AEleen Frisch. O'Reilly & Associates, Inc, 1991. ISBN 0-937175-80-3.

# Prerequisite: CPTR275

# Class Requirements and Grading

## Final Grade Distribution

    
    
    100 - 95 A 
     95 - 90 A- 
     89 - 87 B+ 
     86 - 83 B 
     82 - 80 B- 
     79 - 75 C+ 
     74 - 70 C 
     69 - 65 C- 
     64 - 50 D 
    

80% attendance is required to receive a successful audit

## Class Work - Weights Final Grade Distribution

    
    
    1. Homework             60% 
    2. Tests                30% 
    3. Class Participation  10% 
    

## Class Work - Description

### Assigned Reading

Chapters 1-16 of Internetworking with TCP/IP will be covered in detail. This
text will also cover information that is required for the homework problems.

The student will need a good understanding of the material from chapters 1-8,
and 12 of Essential System Administration before they can understand the
security aspects of networking. Chapters 1-9 and 11-13 will be covered when we
discuss how to secure your network.

### Homework

The client/server model can become very complex with real applications. For
the purposes of this class we will use the following simple model of which
program does what.

    
    
                     Client                  Direction               Server 
    
    Read from Terminal 
    
    Write to Server                  ->              Read from Client 
    
    Process data 
    
    Read from Server                 <-              Write results to Client 
    
    Write results to Terminal 
    

All homework problems will be done using either the C language on a unix
system or perl. These program can be tested on any unix system.

  
Problem 1. The first homework problem will be to write a program which does
**not** use the client/server model. This program will read a line from the
terminal, call a function to process the line, and then write the results back
to the terminal. The input line should have the format of: OPERATOR:STRING
where the operators indicated operations to be performed on the string. The
operators are: r to reverse the order of the string, and c to reverse the case
of the letters (change uppercase to lowercase and lowercase to uppercase). The
function that _processes_ the line will return a result in the same character
array followed by a new line.

  
Problem 2. The second problem will be to convert your function in problem 1 to
work with pipes. The client will handle the input and output between the
terminal and the program while the server will do the calculations and return
a result to client. You may wish to read the man pages for the pipe and fork
system calls.

  
Problem 3. The third homework problem will be to convert your string function
server in problem 1 to work with FIFOs. The client will handle the input and
output between the terminal and the program while the server will do the
string functions and return a result to client. You may wish to read the man
pages for the mknod system call.

  
Problem 4. The fourth homework problem may be done after reading up through
chapter 12 in the Comer book. This problem will be to convert your string
function in problem 1 to work with UDP sockets. The client will handle the
input and output between the terminal and the program while the server will do
the calculations and return a result to client.

  
Problem 5. The fifth homework problem may be done after reading up through
chapter 12 in the Comer book. This problem will be to convert your string
function in problem 1 to work with TCP sockets. The client will handle the
input and output between the terminal and the program while the server will do
the calculations and return a result to client.

### Exams

A test will be given on the last day of class.

# Course Topics

## Client/Server Model.

## Pipes.

## FIFOs.

## Shared Memory.

## TCP/IP Protocols.

## Sockets.

## Network Hardware.

## Ethernet: Thick, Thin, and Twisted Pair.

## CSMA/CD.

## Fiber Optics.

## Routing and Bridging.

## Network Design.

## Unix System Administration.

## Unix System Installation.

## Managing a Secure Unix Network.

## Managing NIS/YP.

## Managing NFS.

## Managing Automounter.

## Firewalls and other Security Measures.

# Course Level

This class is taught for the graduate level student taking a Computer Science
or Software Engineering Masters degree.

