![](images/700a_logo.gif)  
  
**Syllabus Fall 1996**  
  
  
Lectures are Tuesdays and Thursdays at 1:30-2:50 p.m.  
Weekly sections to be arranged.  
  
Course Instructor: Katherine J. Gill  
Office: Sterling Divinity Quadrangle, Chapel 130  
Office Telephone: 432-5023; email: katherine.gill@yale.edu  
Office Hours: Thursdays, 3:00-5:00; other hours by appointment.  
  
![](images/courseinfo.gif)  
This survey introduces students to the major intellectual, institutional, and
popular developments within Christian culture in Europe and the Mediterranean
from the first to the fourteenth century. Primary texts will include martyrdom
accounts, saints lives, the literature of monasticism, records of miracles and
pilgrimage, documents of major ecclesiastical councils and controversies,
liturgical poetry and drama, Crusade accounts, Jewish-Christian theological
debate, heresy trials, and the theological writings of monastic and scholastic
figures.  
  
A central course goal is the close observation of the ways in which different
historical societies and individuals have received, expressed and defined a
complex and not always (or obviously) consistent nexus of beliefs, ideas and
practices. Relatedly, the course focuses on the reciprocal ways social values
and a religious values have shaped each other **.** Relatedly, the course
focuses on the reciprocal ways social values and a religious values have
shaped each other. Other organizing concepts and emphases of the course are:
the dynamism of historical Christianity, the almost perpetual presence of
movements, reforms and revivals in its long history, and the diversity of
perspectives that characterize Christianity at any given time. Hopefully this
encounter with ancient and medieval Christianity will keep participants poised
between an increasingly informed sense of identity and disjunction. If those
who regard themselves as part of one of the many Christian traditions gain a
palpable sense of the otherness of historical Christianity which may, in turn,
serve them amid the diversity of religious positions which face them
nationally and globally today, then an additional objective will have been
achieved.  
  
Reading and writing assignments emphasize primary sources and aim to promote
close reading, textual analysis and evidence based cultivation of a historical
the imagination. The course also attempts to make the past more vivid through
the use of images and music as sources.  
  
![](images/adhochead.gif)  
In addition, lectures and readings have been coordinated with some of the
quickly expanding resources for teaching and learning on the World Wide Web.
The Ad Hoc Website consists of resources for the Teaching and Research of the
History of Christianity. This Website, the 700a History of Christianity Web
Site, includes the [syllabus](700asyl.htm), course outline, handouts as well
as extra weekly reading materials, images, bibliography and links to others
resources.  
  
It will be important for students to acquire a Yale email account in order to
access the course website and other materials linked to it. An account is free
for full time Yale Divinity School students. You may access the website from
any computer in the Yale Divinity School Library or the YDS Computer Cluster.
If you have a computer and modem, you will be able to access the site from
your home.  
  
The web address for Ad Hoc is: http:\\\ www.yale.edu\adhoc  
  
The web address for this site is:
**http:\\\www.yale.edu\adhoc\700index.html**. Questions? Email Ann Martino at
webassist.yale.edu.  
  
**Sections**  
Sections will meet once a week for 50 minutes. Section assignments and
discussion questions will be given in class and/or posted on the 700A website.  
  
![](images/readings.gif)  
A sourcebook in two volumes and 3 books include all the required readings. The
textbooks for the course will be available through the YDS Student Book
Supply. Here too is an atlas, which is highly recommended, especially if
participants do not have a similar tool. The course packets will be available
through RIS, 155 Whitney Ave (call 432-6560 to order packets and check
availability). The primary readings for this course are also available through
course website.

  * Sourcebook I: Weeks I-VI* 
  * Sourcebook II: Weeks VII-XIII* 
  * J. Lynch. _The Medieval Church._ New York: Longman, 1992. 
  * H. Grundmann. _Religious Movements in the Middle Ages._ Trans. By S. Rowans. Notre Dame: University of Notre dame press, 1995. 
  * J. Vitry. _Life of Marie D'Oignes._ Trans. By Margot King. Toronto: Peregrina Publishing Co., 1993. 
  * Charles S. Anderson, Augsburg Historical Atlas of Christianity in the Middle Ages and Reformation. Augsburg Publishing House: Minneapolis, 1967. 
* **Note** : The abbreviation ** _OR_** stands for **_Online Resources_**. The version of the syllabus available online through the Ad Hoc website contains a section for each class listing Online Resources that are thematically or chronologically related to lectures and readings. The designation OMS indicates that the source is **_The Online Medieval Sourcebook_**. Most of the readings for this course are available electronically.   
  
![](images/Requirements.gif)  
Lecture, attendance, section preparation and participation. Two questions
suggested by reading assignment due in section each week. Two short papers
(3-5 page) papers. A one page biographical article on one figure who lived
withing the time frame covered by the course using at least two of the
following sources: Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, Dictionary of
the Middle Ages, Encyclopedia of Early Christianity, New Catholic
Encyclopedia. Midterm. Final.  
  
Midterm and final will exams will consist of short answers, identification
questions, multiple choice questions, and short essay questions. The final
will also have a take-home segment which will be distributed on the last day
of class and due at the time of the final. Students will receive study
questions for both the midterm and the final.  
  
Lecture and section attendance and participation; a one page biographical
article: 20%  
Section written exercises: 10%  
Midterm: 20%  
Two short papers: 30%  
Final: 30%

* * *

## Schedule of Lectures and Readings

### Thurs. 9/5. Introduction.

What is our subject? Historical approaches and methods. The goals and purposes
of this course. Overview of the syllabus and requirements.

### ![](images/wk1head.gif)  
  
[1) Tues. 9/10. Religious Thought and Practice in the Roman Empire.](wk1a.htm)
__

Philosophical Schools. Mystery Cults. Judaism: Religious and Political
Movements in Late Antiquity. The Hellenized Jew. Imperial Cult. The Christians
as the Roman's Saw Them. Conversion. Religion and Identity. Religion and
Society.  
  
**Required Readings:** Sourcebook: Ferguson, Everett, _Backgrounds of Early
Christianity_ (Grand Rapids, Michigan, 1992):  "Ancient Roman Religion,"
154-165; "Hellenistic-Roman Philosophies," pp. 304-371. If you have time read
the Fergusson selection for next class. Sourcebook 1: Selections from Marcus
Aurelius's _Meditations_ Sourcebook 1: Pliny /Trajan Correspondence. (See also
pp. 557-558 in Ferguson readings for next class).

### [2) Thurs. 9/12. Diversity of Thought and Practice Among Early
Christians](wk1a.htm)U>._

Size, geographical distribution and character of early Christian communities.
Gnosticism and Rival Versions of Christianity. Jewish Christianity. What was
normative Christianity in the first three centuries? Forms and elements of
early liturgy: creeds, prayers, readings, song. Baptism and Eucharist.
Discipline and charity. Development toward a canon. What are our sources for
early Christianity? Literate spokespersons: the Apologists. Who were the
"Fathers"? What is Patrology or Patristics?  
  
**Required Readings:** Sourcebook: Ferguson, Everett, _Backgrounds of Early
Christianity_ (Grand Rapids, Michigan, 1992):  "Gnosticism, Hermetic
Literature, Chaldean Oracles," 282-293; "Christianity in the Ancient World,"
547-583. Sourcebook 1: Selections from Books 1 & 5 of Irenaeus, _Against All
the Heresies_ Sourcebook 1: "Thunder Perfect Mind." Sourcebook 1: _Letter to
Diognetus_ (c. 130-180), selections illustrating Christian ideals in second
century. Sourcebook 1: Justin Martyr,  "Christian Baptism and Worship," from
_Apology_ , I, 61-7. Note links to Gnositics and entire text of Irenaeus on Ad
hoc. Class handout: Selections from Egeria, _Itinerarium_ (381-4) and Justin
Martyr on conversion, from _Dialogue with Trypho_ , 110, 3-4.  
  
**Section 1.** Discuss: Sourcebook 1: Selections from Books 1  & 5 of
Irenaeus, _Against All the Heresies_ Sourcebook: Pagels, E., _The Gnostic
Gospels_ (New York: Vintage Books, 1989): xiii-xxiii, xxxii-27, 142-151.  
  
![](images/wk2head.gif)

### [3) Tues. 9/17. The Popular Face of Christianity. ](wk2a.htm)

Martyrdom and Persecution. The Blood of the Martyrs. Beginnings of Cult of the
Saints. Some late antique martyrs and their communities: Justin, Cyprian,
Perpetua and Felicity. Relics and commemoration of the dead. Patterns of
leadership and worship. Early institutional structures. The social presence of
early communities. Poverty, wealth and the importance of charity. The end of
state sponsored persecutions. Constantine and his conversion. Edict of
Toleration. Assessing the impact and import of Constantine.  
**Required Readings** : Sourcebook 1: Ignatius of Antioch (d. c. 107): _Letter
to Romans._ Sourcebook 1: _The Passion of SS. Perpetua and Felicity_ (203).
Sourcebook 1: _The martyrdom of Cyprian, from the official records._
Sourcebook 1: Cyprian (d. 258), _On the Unity of the Church_ (selection).
Sourcebook 1: _Conversion of Constantine_ , from Eusebius (d. c.339),
_Ecclesiastical History._ Lynch, Chapter 1,  "Ancient Christianity," pp. 1-18.  
  
**Handout** : Selections from ****_Martyrdom of Polycarp_ (d. 155 or 156).  
**Highly recommended to read over next 2-3 weeks** : Sourcebook 1: P. Brown,
"The Saint as Exemplar in Late Antiquity." _Representations_ 1 / 2 (Spring
1983): 1-26

### [4) Thurs. 9/19. The Creation of a Christian Elite.](wk2a.htm) __

The Patronage of Constantine and his family. Old St. Peters in Rome. The Holy
Sepulcher in Jerusalem. The New Rome of Constantinople. Christianization of
the aristocracy. Christianity and intellectual culture. Philosophers. Orators.
Bishops. Essence, substance, nature and likeness: the Council of Nicaea (325)
and the Arian Controversy. The Cappadocian Fathers. Ascetical movements of the
third and fourth centuries. Athanasius and Anthony. Gregory of Nyssa and
Macrina. Martyrdom and asceticism. Social dimensions of asceticism.
Theological debates and the late antique body. Theology and hagiography.  
  
**Handout** : Eusebius's _In Praise of Constantine_ (336); and Constantine's
Gifts to the Lateran and St. Peter's basilicas in Rome (313-337) as recorded
by _The Book of the Popes_.  
  
**Required Readings** : Sourcebook 1: Athanasius, _On Incarnation_
(selections; copywrited). Sourcebook 1: Athanasius, _Life of Anthony_ __
(selections). Sourcebook 1: _The Sayings of the Desert Fathers_ (selections).
**Section 2** Read in Sourcebook 1: Gregory of Nyssa's _Life of Macrina_ __
and _On the Soul and the Resurrection_ (selections). Compare and discuss the
relationship between theology and hagiography in the following works of
Athanasius and Gregory of Nyssa: Athanasius's _Life of Anthony_ and _On the
Incarnation_ ; and Gregory of Nyssa's _Life of Macrina_ __ and _On the Soul
and the Resurrection_ (selections). What do we learn about the theologians
Athanasius and Gregory from their hagiographical writings that we could not
know from their more formally  "theological" works? ![](images/wk3head.gif)

### [5) Tues. 9/24. Early Forms of Monasticism.](wk3a.htm) __

Desert _virtuosi_. Renunciation and self-denial: some social consequences of
living the  "angelic life." Varieties of early monasticism in the East.
Monasticism travels West: Paladius's biographies of early monks. Rural and
urban monasticism. House monasteries. Jerome, Paula and Eustochium. Melania.
Monasticism and Pilgrimage. Holy women in the Holy Land. Monastic life and the
scriptures. Scripture and learning. Augustine's _De doctrina christiana_. The
art of holy reading. Cassian and his Conferences. The quest for perfection and
the challenge of Pelagius. Free will and Grace. The Benedictine Rule in the
light of early ascetical movements and communities. Benedict as Exemplar.  
  
**Handout** : Selections from writings of Augustine on Grace and Free Will.  
  
**Required Readings:** Lynch, chapter 2, "The Beginnings of the Medieval
Church," pp. 19-34 Sourcebook 1: Palladius (c.363-c.424). _The Lausiac
History_. (selections from W. K. Lowther Clarke translation) Sourcebook 1:
Selections from correspondence of Paula, Eustochium, and Jerome (d. 420); and
from Jerome's letters to Marcella. Sourcebook 1: Cassian, _Conferences_ , Book
2, Conference 14, "The First Conference of Abbot Nesteros: On Spiritual
Knowledge." (especially chapters 8, 9 & 10). Sourcebook 1: Rule of St.
Benedict (selection; a different selection at Ad hoc site)  
  
**Highly reccomended for this week and the next:** Peter Brown, _The Cult of
the Saints_ , chapters 1 and 2, with notes.  
  
**Recommended** : Augustine's _De doctrina christiana_ (selection in
sourcebook; whole text in Ad hoc).

### [6) Thurs. 9/26. Christianity from Augustine to Gregory I.](wk3a.htm) __

How Rome "Fell." Who were the "barbarians." Emperors and officers; popes and
bishops. Shift from urban to rural recruitment. Augustine's life, work,
audiences and impact. _The City of God_. Gregory the Great: bishop, pope and
exegete. The world and worldviews of Augustine  & Gregory compared. Post-Roman
Christianity.  
  
**Required Readings:** Sourcebook 1 (closed reserve): Robert Markus, "The
Sacred and the Secular: From Augustine to Gregory the Great." Sourcebook 1.
Augustine (a) selections from the _City of God_ as found in *OMS and the
_Confessions_ (=Augustine's account of his own conversion as found in Book
Three, Chapter I, IV; Book Five, Chapter 13 and Book Eight, Book 6-12.)
Sourcebook 1. Gregory the Great (b), selections from _Pastoral Care_ and
_Moralia on the Book of Job_.  
  
**Recommended** : Selections from Ambrose's sermons on the meaning of baptism
preached during Easter week (c. 391) to catechumens about to be baptised (from
_De Sacramentis_ , or _Sermons on the Sacraments_ ). Augustine's _De doctrina
christiana_ (selection in sourcebook; whole text in Ad hoc). Sourcebook 1.
Gregory the Great (a) selections from _Dialogues_ : the beginning of Book I
and Book II, on the Life of St. Benedict.  
  
**Section 3:** Discuss the conceptions and representations of individual and
community in the writings of Augustine of Hippo and Gregory the Great (as
listed under Readings for Thursday and Section 3). How would you characterize
each writer's views of human nature. Discuss the ideals for a religious
society and a religious life implicit in these texts. How do Markus's ideas
relate to the class readings? Compare and contrast the way each author uses
Scripture in his writings. How is Gregory's approach to Scripture reflect his
views of God and of persons? If you had to liken the Confessions to one Book
or part of the Bible, what would it be? How is life like a text for each
author? What kind of an audience or for whom do you surmise each author is
writing? Sourcebook 1. Augustine (b): More selections from the _Confessions_
(on his mother Monica, from Book Nine and on memory, from Book 10). Sourcebook
1. Gregory the Great (b), selections from _Pastoral Care_ and _Moralia on the
Book of Job_.  
![](images/wk4head.gif)

### [7) Tues. 10/1. Mediterranean Changes and New Cultural Settings.
](wk4a.htm)

Fifth through Eight Centuries. Byzantium. Rise of Islam. Rome and the Papacy.
Ravenna. Overview of Christianity in Italy, the Iberian Penninsula, Gaul, and
northeastern Europe. Missionaries and Roman Models. The _Life of St. Martin_.
Christianity in Britain and Ireland. The role of monasticism in the spread and
reception of Christianity. Bede and his _Ecclesiastical History of the English
People_. Exporting Roman commodities: relics, monks, liturgy and manuscripts.
Opus dei: the Divine Office. Liturgy and Gregorian Chant in early medieval
Europe.  
  
**Required Readings:** Lynch, chapter 3, "The Conversion of the West
(350-700)," pp. 35-53. [Note:Byzantium and Islam briefly treated on p. 61-62].
Sourcebook 1: Sulpicius Severus, _Life of St Martin_ (selections). Sourcebook
1:  "The Ruin." In _The Earliest English Poems_. Trans. Michael Alexander. 2nd
ed., pp. 28-29. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977. Sourcebook 1: Irish Hermit
Poems. Selections from Jackson, Kenneth. _Early Celtic Nature Poetry_ , pp.
3-5. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1935. Sourcebook 1: Bede,
selections from _Ecclesiastical History of the English People._.

### [8) Thurs. 10/3. Modes and Agents of Conversion.](wk4a.htm)

Conversion, coersion, persuasion. Preaching, poetry and holy lives/sanctity.
What is Hagiography? Holy places, images and objects. Orthopraxis and
orthodoxy. Penitentials. Synod of Whitby. Holy reading: the Bible in the early
Middle Ages. Liturgy, time and cosmos. Rituals and power in early medieval
Europe. The Ruthwell Cross and early medieval spirituality.  
  
**Handout** : Selection from a sermon of Columbanus. "The Dream of the Rood."
"The Ascension" by Cynewulf.  
  
**Required Readings:** Lynch, chapter 4, "The Papal-Frankish Alliance," pp.
54-64. Sourcebook 1: Boniface. Selections from _The Letters of Saint
Boniface._ Trans. Ephraim Emerton. New York: Columbia University Press, 1940.
Sourcebook 1: Boniface (alias Wynfrith). Letter to Eadburga, 716-717 from
_Anglo Saxon Prose_ , trans. Michael Swanton (London: Everyman, revised ed.
1993): 36-42. . Sourcebook 1: Texts relating to church building, ritual
practice and holy objects in Ireland and England, _from Early Medieval Art.
300-1150_ , ed. Cecilia Davis-Weyer (Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1971): 70-79.  
  
**Recommended** : Eckenstein. _Women Under Monasticism._ Ch. IV,  "Anglo-Saxon
Nuns in Connection with Boniface." 118-142. Available at Ad Hoc website.
**Review from last class:** Bede, Book I, ch 23; Book II ch 33 (pp 65-91
acount of Roman mission to Kent); Book III, (pp138-197) Irish missions and
synod of Whitby.  
  
**Section 4:** Early Medieval Saints' Lives: St Martin and St. Brigit.
Sourcebook 1: Introduction to _Soldiers of Christ: Saints and Saints' Lives
from Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages_ , by Thomas F.X. Noble and
Thomas Head (Univeristy Park, Pennysylvania: Pennsylvania State Press, 1995):
xxiii-xliv. Sourcebook 1. Cogitosus. "Life of St. Brigit" .  
  
MIDTERM STUDY QUESTIONS AVAILABLE IN SECTION.  
![](images/wk5head.gif)

### [Tues. 10/8. YDS Convocation. No class.](wk5a.htm) _

**  
_** SHORT PAPER DUE IN CLASS 9 ON EARLY MEDIEVAL "LIFE WRITINGS" (3-5 pages).
Assess, analyse and compare the representations the human subject in two or
three of the saints lives we have read. As evidence for the practice and
prevailing values of Early Christianity what do these sources tell you? You
may want to orgainize your short paper around one or two recurrent themes or
tensions that you find in these life writings. Finally, compare the holy lives
you have selected to the _Life of Charlemagne_ (see 10-page selection in
Sourcebook 1). The life of Charlemagne is frequently identified as the first
secular biography in the middle ages. What is  "secular" about it? You might
want to use the article by Robert Markus to organize your concluding thoughts
on secular vs. sacred life writings in Early Christianity.  
**Read** : Sourcebook 1. "Einhard's Charlemagne: The Practical Hero." In _The
Early Middle Ages. 500-1000_. Ed. Robert Brentano.

### [9) Thurs. 10/10. Charlemagne, Europe, and the Concept of Christendom.
](wk5a.htm)

Kingdoms and Communities in Carolingian Europe. Europe, Byzantium and Islam.
Schism between the Eastern and Western Churches. The "Pirenne Thesis." The
rise of Charlemagne. The Carolingian reforms. The contexts of learning. Texts,
transmission and manuscripts. Likeness and presence: mediating the divine
through image, word and ritual. John of Damascus and the Iconoclastic
Controversy.  
**Handout 1** : Theodulf of Orleans. "Hymn for Palm Sunday."  
  
**Required Readings:** Lynch, Chapters 5 & 6, "The Church in the Carolingian
Empire" & "The Carolingian Renaissance," pp. 65-96. Sourcebook 1. The Donation
of Constantine. Sourcebook 1: John of Damascus: In Defence of Icons, c 730,
extracts from _On the Holy Icons and the Fount of Wisdom._ Sourcebook:
Selections on Carolingian art, iconoclasm and post-Carolingian discussions of
religious imagery. From Caecilia Weyer Davis, _Early Medieval Art.  
  
_**Section 5:** Relics, Images and Idols. Discuss the relationships between
the Carolingian debates about images and about the Eucharist. How do you
understand the relationships between the writings of theologians such as John
of Damascus, Radbertus and Ratramnus and the cult of the saints?  
**Read:** Selections from Paschasius Radbertus of Corbie: _The Lord's Body and
Blood_ and Ratramnus of Corbie: _Christ's Body and Blood_ (read enough of each
selection to be able to articulate the author's position and strategy of
argumentation).  
**Recommended:** One of the following articles from Patrick Geary's _Living
with the Dead in the Middle Ages_ , Cornell, 1994: "The Saint and the Shrine:
The Pilgrim's Goal in the Middle Ages" pp. 163-176. "The Ninth-Century Relic
Trade - A Response to Popular Piety? Pp. 177-193.  
  
![](images/wk6head.gif)

### [10) Tues. 10/15. Midterm. ](wk6a.htm)  
[11) Thurs. 10/17. European Society in the central middle ages.](wk6a.htm)

Economies and Societies. The Gift Economy: its mechanism and values. The
ritual ordering of human and divine relationships. Feudal society. The three
orders. Those who fought: Taming warrior society. Peace of God movements
(Lynch , p. 120). The Christian Warrior. Travel and pilgrimage in the central
middle ages. Liturgy, song and poetry.  
  
**Required Readings:** Lynch, Chapters 7 & 8, "The Collapse of the Carolingian
World" & "The Church in the Year 1000," pp. 97-135.  
  
**Section 6:** Discuss the attitude toward art, relics and sanctity revealed
by the Miracles of St. Foy, written by an initially skeptical monk. Sourcebook
2: "Miracles of Saint Foy." From _Readings in Medieval History._ Ed. Patrick
Geary. 2nd ed. Peterborough, Ontario and Lewiston, NY: Broadview Press, 1991.
Sourcebook 2: Dahl, Ellert.  "Heavenly images: The statue of St. Foy of
Conques and the signification of the Medieval `Cult-Image' in the West." _Acta
ad Archaeologiam_ (1978): 175-190.  
  
![](images/wk7head.gif)

### [12) Tues. 10/22. Those who prayed: monks and priests. ](wk7a.htm)

The new model monastery: Cluny. Cluny and Benedictine Monasticism in the 10th
& 11th Centuries. Liturgical culture of central Middle Ages. The Old Testament
and the Biblically shaped imagination. Other religious movements: wandering
preachers, hermits, experimental women's houses. Investiture Controversy. Pope
Gregory VII. The papacy defines its powers. The new model priesthood. Simony,
concubinage, homosexuality and the life of the average priest. The price of
purity. The birth of a persecuting society?  
  
**Required Readings:** Lynch, Chapters 9 & 10, "The Eleventh-Century Reforms"
& "The Rise of Christendom," pp. 136-164 Sourcebook 2: Readings on monastic
culture, spiritual friendship, and the "invesiture crisis."

### [13) Thurs. 10/24. Those who fought: Crusaders and Crusading](wk7a.htm).
__

Western and Eastern Christians. Christians and Non-Christians. The Muslim
world in the 9th-11th centuries. Jews in Muslim and Christian Culture. The
Crusaders' Set Off. Domestic enemies. Crusade against the Jews. Beyond the
Sea: Jews, Muslims and Christians appraised each other. Cultural encounter,
perception and conflict.  
  
**Required Readings:** Lynch, chapter 10 "The Rise of Christendom," revisit
pp. 159-167. Sourcebook 2: Documents on the crusades.  
  
**Section 7:** Discuss: Accounts of the First Crusade.  
![](images/wk8head.gif)

### [14) Tues. 10/29. Church government and ecclesiastical structures from
Gregory VII to Innocent III](wk8a.htm). __

Defining belief and practice. Canon law. Heresy and dissent. Intellectual and
popular heresies. The position of the laity in Christian society.
Institutional structures from the Investiture Crisis to the Fourth Lateran
Council. Slides: Romanesque architechture and sculpture. Art of Rome and the
papacy.  
  
**Required Readings:** Lynch, Chapters 11, 17 and 18 "the Age of the Papacy,"
"The Framework of the Christian Life," and "The Sacramental Life," pp.
168-182, 256-302. L. Eckenstein, _Women Under Monasticism.,_ Ch. VI,  "The
Monastic Revival of the Middle Ages." 184-221.

### [15) Thurs. 10/31. Anselm and His Context: Intellectual, Political,
Monastic.](wk8a.htm) __

Apostolic Life and Evangelical Awakening. Religious texts and manuscript
culture. Feudal and courtly culture. The Life and Writings of St. Anselm.  
  
**Required Readings:** Lynch, Chapter 12 "The New Testament Revival," pp.
183-196; Chapter 16 "The Schools," pp.239-255; (Chapter 17 "The Framework of
the Christian Life," also relevant here.) Sourcebook 2: Reading from Anselm.  
  
**Section 8:** Readings from Anselm.  
  
![](images/wk9head.gif)

### [16) Tues. 11/5. The Evangelical Awakening](wk9a.htm)

Monastic experiments. Cistercians. Carthusians. Canons Regular. The
Victorines. Women in religious life. New types of religious texts. The
"Twelfth Century Renaissance." Art. Music.  
  
**Required Readings:** Sourcebook: Bernard of Clairvaux, Hugh of St. Victor
and Hildegard of Bingen. L. Eckenstein, _Women Under Monasticism.,_ Ch. IX,
"Early Mystic Literature," pp. 305-353. [NB. Part I: Mysticism for Women in
England (305-325) and Part II: The convent of Helfta and its Literary Nuns."
(328-353). Lynch, Chapter 13 "Monastic Life: the Twelfth Century," pp.
197-216.

### [17) Thurs. 11/7. Schools, Cathedrals and Towns](wk9a.htm) __

Urban learning. Cathedral Schools. Wandering Scholars. Intellectual Encounters
with Arab and Jewish intellectual culture. New Learning. New audiences.
Professionalization of religious learning and clerical culture. Vocies of
opposition. Lovers and courtiers. Abelard. Heloise.  
  
**Required Readings:** Sourcebook 2: Lettters of Abelard and Heloise.
Sourcebook 2: Sources for intellectual history of 12-13th centuries. Lynch,
Chapter 16, "The Schools," pp. 239-255  
  
**Section 9** : Writings of Bernard of Clairvaux on _Song of Songs_ and _On
Loving God_.  
  
![](images/wk10head.gif)

### [18) Tues. 11/12. Heretics and New Types of Religious Orders ](wk10a.htm)

Wandering preachers. Waldensians. Cathars. Albigensian Crusade. Inquisition.
Apostolic life and voluntary poverty.  
  
**Required Readings:** Lynch, Chapter 14 "The Heretics." Grundmann, Chapter 1,
"The Religious Movement in the Twelfth Century: 'Apostolic Life' and
'Christian Poverty,'" pp. 7-30 and Chapter 2 "The Religious Movement under
Innocent III: The Rise of New Types of Orders," pp. 31-68, 216-227 (pages
209-239 optional). (check the pages).

### [19) Thurs. 11/14. Urban Religious Life. ](wk10a.htm)

The Rise of the Mendicant Orders. Preaching. Heresy. Beguines. Francis and
Dominic.  
  
**Required Readings** : Sourcebook: Franciscan and Dominican Texts. Lynch, Ch.
15 & 16 "The Friars" & "The Schools, (revisited)" pp. 228-255. Grundmann,
Chapters **** 3, "The Social Orgins of _Humiliati_ _,_ Waldensians, and
Franciscans " pp. Xx.  
  
**Section 10** : Discuss Franciscan and Dominican texts and article by Little
and Rosenwein: Sourcebook 2: Lester Little and Barbara Rosenwein article, with
supporting texts on poverty, "Monastic and Mendicant Spiritualities _" Past
and Present_ (1974).  
**Note:** If you want to get ahead of the game, anytime from now on would be a
good time to view the film on reserve at YDS library: The Anchoress" with a
folder of useful texts.  
  
![](images/wk11head.gif)

### [20) Tues. 11/19. Men and Women in Religious Culture in the Middle
Ages.](wk11a.html) __

Role of women in religious movements and institutions. The other Monasticism.
Levels of culture and modes of piety. Varieties of literacy and illiteracy.
Texts and their audiences. Courts, courtly love and religious quest. Urban
religious institutions and genres of literature. Liturgical and paraliturgical
forms of religious expression. Religious theatre. Collaboration, inspiration
and conflict between religious men and women. The problem with men's models of
religious life for men.  
  
**Required Readings:** Grundmann, Chapter 4, "The Orgins of Women's Religious
Movements," pp. 69-88 and Chapter 5, "The Incorporation of the Women's
Religious Movement into the Mendicant Order," pp. 89-134. _Life of Maire
D'Oignies_ by Jacques de Vitry.

### [21) Thurs. 11/21 Love, Annihilation and Danger. Beguine Culture and its
Analogues in Europe, 1200-1400 ](wk11a.html)

**  
Required Readings:** Grundmann, Chapter 6, "The Beguines in the Thirteenth
Century," and Chapter 7, " The Heresy of the 'Free Spirit' in __ the Religious
Movements of the Thirteenth Century _,_ " pp. xx (pages 237-245 optional).
Sourcebook 2: Selections from writings of Hadewijch, Mechtild of Magdeburg and
Marguerite Porete.  
  
**Section 11:** Marguerite Porete, _The Mirror of Simple Souls_ and the
Sermons of Meister Eckhart. Sourcebook: Marguerite Porete. _The Mirror of the
Simple Soul._ Trans. By Ellen Babinsky. New York: Paulist Press, 1993.  
  

* * *

**11/26 & 11/28 . FALL BREAK/THANKSGIVING:  
  
View film "The Anchoress."  
  
**Recommended: Article by John Coakely on clerical authors of lives of holy
women.  

* * *

![](images/wk12head.gif)

### [22) Tues. 12/3. The "Other": Mendicants and Jews.](wk12a.htm) __

Jews of Europe. Video: Debate Between a Christian and a Jew.  
  
**Due in class: SHORT PAPER DUE ON THE ANCRENE RULE AND THE FILM THE ANCHORESS  
  
Required Readings: ** Sourcebook 2: Short text reporting the Barcelona debate
on which the film is based.

### [23) Thurs. 12/5. Ordering of Christian Life and Thought. ](wk12a.htm)

Intellectual trends. Universities. Political Developments. Theology and
Theologians in the Later Middle Ages. Devotional forms. Religious Writers in
the Later Middle Ages. Latin and Vernacular Theology. S. Maria Novella.
Spanish Chapel Frescoes. Assisi, S. Francesco Assisi, frescoes of upper church
and Bonaventura's life of Francis. The Arena Chapel.  
  
**Required Readings:** Sourcebook: Short selections from Late Medieval Latin
and Vernacular Theology; summas, sermons and spiritual quest. Recommended:
Grundmann, Chapter 8 "The Origins of Religious Literature in the Vernacular,"
pp. 187-202.  
  
**Section 12** : Meister Eckhart and "Devotions of a Devout and Literate
Layman." Sourcebook (closed reserve): Meister Eckhart. From Essential Sermons,
ed. E. Colledge. And short pseudo-Eckhardian texts _  
  
![](images/wk13head.gif)

### [24) Tues. 12/10. The Practice of Christianity at the End of the Middle
Ages](wk13a.htm).

Last class. The church and the cycles of life. The Festival Year. Religious
Theater: Theology, devotion, dissent. Points of tension in the administration
of Christianity. Marsilius of Padua. William Ockham. Fiscal woes: Gospel of
the marks of Silver. The cost of Purgatory. Indulgences. Vernacular
Christianity: democratic or destabilizing? conventional or innovative?.
Conclusion: Consensus and dissonance in Christian culture at the end of the
Middle Ages.  
  
STUDY QUESTIONS FOR THE FINAL WILL BE HANDED OUT.  
  
**Required Readings:** Lynch, Chapters 19 & 20 "The Late Medieval Background"
& "The Late Medieval Church," pp. 303-335.Sourcebook: Short Selection from
Life of Margery Kemp; short selections of Wyclif and Lollards.  
  
**Recommended** (if you didn't read it last week): Grundmann, Chapter 8  "The
Origins of Religious Literature in the Vernacular," pp. 187-202. Sourcebook
selection from Mystery Play. Video: The Mysteries: Creation  
  
  
[Ad Hoc Homepage](index.html) | Top of Page |  

* * *

700a The History of Western Christianity: 70 - 1400 AD Ad Hoc--Teaching and
Research Resources  
for the History of Christianity  
Yale Divinity School, 409 Prospect Street  
New Haven, CT 06511  
  
Contact: [Anne Martino, Yale Divinity School Faculty Web
Assistant](mailto:%20ydsweb.assist@yale.edu)

    
    
    All contents copyright (C) 1996Yale University Divinity SchoolAll rights reservedAcademic year 1996-1997 URL: http://www.yale.edu/adhoc/

