**CISC 2490**  
**Unix Operating System II**  
**Syllabus**  

* * *

  
This syllabus is intended as a set of guidelines for the Unix Operating System
II course. North Lake College and your instructor reserve the right to make
modifications in content, schedule, and requirements as necessary to promote
the best education possible within prevailing requirements affecting t his
course.  
  

* * *

  
  

**North Lake College  
5001 N. MacArthur  
Irving, TX**

**CISC 2490**  
  
**Unix Operating System II**  
  
**COURSE DESCRIPTION**  
  
This course continues the development of Unix concepts and tools. Topics
include advanced file system management, additional editors, text formatting,
multi-tasking support and advanced shell programming.  
  
_**Prerequisite: Successful completion of CISC 1480 or demonstrated competence
approved by the instructor is required.**_  
(4 Credits {hours: 3 lecture 4 lab})  
  
**COURSE FOCUS**  
This course is designed to enable the student to continue their exploration of
the Unix operating system. It will provide the student the opportunity to:
develop additional kills using the two common Unix editors; craft additional,
complex shell scripts; learn more uses for Unix tools like awk and sed;
examine some of the internal processes of the operating system; and gain a
better understanding of Unix processes.  
  
**TEXT AND REFERENCES**  
  
**There are two _required_ texts for this course:**  
  
_**Harley Hahn's Student guide to Unix**_ , by Harley Hahn, published by
McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0-07-025492-3  
  
_**Unix in a Nutshell**_ by Daniel Gilly published by O'Reilly  & Associates,
Inc. ISBN 1-56592-001-5.  
  
Additional Unix reference books may prove helpful, however they are optional.
Three that are very highly recommended are the **sed & awk book by
Dougherty**, and **Learning the vi Editor by Lamb** , both are published by
O'Reilly & Associates, Inc. and **The Unix Philosophy** by Mike Gancarz
published by Digital Press.  
  
_**{Note: no Unix user or programmer can have too many Unix books ;-) }**_  
  
For a real interesting read, pick up:  
Unix System Architecture, by Prabhat K. Andleigh, published by Prentice Hall.

* * *

**COURSE GOALS (or objectives)**  
  
The following list of educational goals will be addressed in this course.
These goals are directly related to the performance objectives (Addendum A).
(* designates a CRUCIAL goal)  
  
Architecture and Theory:  
  
*1. describe the concept of a Virtual Machine  
*2. distinguish between an Interrupt and a Signal  
3\. describe process management  
4\. explain memory management with multiple processes  
*5. distinguish between real and virtual memory  
6\. describe CPU usage and sharing among processes  
7\. explain file/data access methods  
8\. describe the general system usage accounting services  
9\. explain the Unix user command interface  
*10. characterize Unix commands  
11\. identify Unix system services  
*12. describe the levels of Unix system software from Kernel to user written code  
13\. differentiate between Kernel space and User space  
14\. execute specific Kernel commands  
*15. identify Unix structures including but not limited to  
a. Page Table entry  
b. Virtual Address Structure  
c. Process Table entries  
d. Disk Inodes  
e. File Structures  
f. I/O Buffers  
16\. describe Unix system calls  
17\. define both named and unnamed pipes  
*18. describe the physical organization of a Unix file system  
19\. explain disk caching  
*20. define standard Unix I/O  
21\. distinguish between NFS and RFS  
22\. interpret context switching  
23\. explain the process creation (vfork) procedure  
*24. distinguish between swapping and paging  
25\. examine porting issues  
*26. explain how to write "portable code"  
27\. define the POSIX Interface standard  
**Editors:**  
*28. use the vi editor to perform the following tasks:  
a. open a new file for editing  
b. modify the contents of a file  
c. use ex commands from vi  
d. switch from vi to ex and back  
e. use advanced features  
f. use multiple files  
g. use buffers with edits  
h. using text objects  
*29. use the ex editor to perform the following tasks  
a. switch files during an editing session  
b. save the current buffer to another file  
c. use the autoprint feature  
d. use the wrapscan feature  
e. run shell commands from within ex  
*30. use sed to perform the following tasks  
a. match and modify patters than span lines  
b. perform flow of control tasks  
c. Join phrases  
d. use both pattern and hold spaces  
**Other Unix tools and features**  
*31. write awk scripts to perform text manipulation  
32\. use awk to generate useful reports  
*33. use awk scripts perform file access  
34\. handle arrays in awk  
35\. perform user interface tasks in awk  
*36. use nroff to perform simple text formatting  
37\. write Bourne shell scripts to perform user interface functions  
38\. write Bourne shell scripts to exercise conditional execution  
39\. write Bourne shell scripts to perform case selection  
40\. write Bourne shell scripts to perform looping operations  
*41. write Bourne shell scripts to process command line input  
*42. write Bourne shell scripts to process file input  
*43. write Bourne shell scripts to process command line parameters  
*44. write Bourne shell scripts to perform multiple Unix commands  
45\. demonstrate the ability to use common Korn shell commands  
  
**STUDENT CONTRIBUTIONS**  
  
Each student will spend at least 14 hours per week preparing for class.
Attendance at each class meeting is critical and required in this class. The
student is expected to complete each lab assignment using either the computers
at North Lake College, or their own computer running a Unix operating system
(or a variant which conforms to the general Unix standard). (The Linux
operating system is considered an excellent choice for a 386/486/586/Pentium
machine.)  
  

* * *

**COURSE EVALUATION**  
  
Your lab exercises and exams grades will be on a point basis, and the points
you accumulate through the semester will result in a grade being assigned as
is explained below.  
  
There will be two **(2) tests** , each worth **150 points**. (300 points
total.)  
**12 required lab assignments** worth **15 points**. (180 points total.)  
Some of these labs will have extra credit opportunities as well  
  
A **group/team presentation** of some facet of Unix. That presentation will be
worth up to **50 points**.  
  
**_at least one optional lab assignmens that will serve as an extra credit
opportunity_**.  
  
**Attendance/class participation** is critical to student success, and regular
attendance (missing no more than 1 class meeting) will be awarded **20
points.**  
  
**This gives a grand total of 550 points without extra credit**.  
  
Grades will be assigned on the following scale:  
**A=** | **495 points and above** | **(90%)**  
---|---|---  
**B=** | **494 - 440 points** | **(80%)**  
**C=** | **439 - 385 points** | **(70%)**  
**D=** | **384 - 330 points** | **(60%)**  
**F=** | **fewer than 330 points** | **:-(**  
  
  
  

* * *

**COURSE SCHEDULE**  
  
The class meets for 7 hours per week. This time will be divided between
lecture, exercises, and lab assignments. The actual amount of time in each of
these areas will vary depending on the topic under discussion.  
  
Addendum B is a tentative listing of the topics and reading assignments for
each week.  
  
**GROUP PRESENTATION:**  
  
One of the mainstays in the Unix world is that we Unix folks share what we
learn. That makes it possible to continue to grow without re-inventing the
wheel. Another facet of this world is that most of us work in groups or teams.
You will be  randomly assigned to a two person team that will last for the
duration of the course. We will discuss all the ramifications of the team
concept during the first class. Since you are now Unix _wizards_ , you have
the responsibility to share your knowledge with the rest of the Unix world,
represented here by the class.  
Therefore you will be asked to research, prepare and present one Unix topic or
tool, outside the prescribed range of the course, that you have discovered,
use, or have developed. Please schedule with your instructor when you would
like to present your material. It can be in the form of a demonstration or
presentation, and a LAB. Your goal is to impart new knowledge to this
microcosm of the Unix universe. There are two restrictions:  

> First, you may not present system administration type topics, that will be
covered in another class, and you will not be allowed to have root access so
don't depend on that.  
>  Second, plan to spend 30 minutes to one hour in your presentation. Try to
have the lab constructed so that it can be completed during the class session.
Please discuss all topics with your instructor before you begin working on
them.

  
**Standards:**  
Most companies require their scriptors to follow as set of standards, we too
have standards to which your scripts must adhere. Please review the [standards
document](scriptstd.html) and build all your scripts to those standards.  
  
**ADDENDUM A:**  
  
**PERFORMANCE OBJECTIVES**  
  
1\. The student will not be allowed references. The student will identify the
components of a Virtual Machine. Performance will be satisfactory if the
student identifies the components of a Virtual Machine in a way consistent
with the text and with class discussion.  
  
2\. The student will not be allowed references. The student will distinguish
between an Interrupt and a Signal. Performance will be satisfactory if the
student can successfully distinguish between an Interrupt and a Signal in a
way consistent with class discussion and the text.  
  
5\. The student will not be allowed references. The student will distinguish
between real and virtual memory. Performance will be satisfactory if the
student correctly distinguishes between real and virtual memory.  
  
10\. The student will not be allowed references. The student will describe the
general features of Unix commands. Performance will be satisfactory if the
student describes the general features of Unix commands in a way consistent
with the text and class discussion.  
  
12\. The student will be allowed references. The student will describe the
levels of software between the user written code to the Kernel code.
Performance will be satisfactory if the student correctly identifies the
levels of code between a user written script and the Kernel.  
  
15\. The student will be allowed references. The student will identify various
Unix structures including but not limited to:  
Page Table entries  
Virtual Address Structures  
Process Table entries  
Disk Inodes  
File Structures  
I/O Buffers  
Performance will be satisfactory if the student correctly identifies the
structures listed above, and can name elements of those structures.  
  
18\. The student will not be allowed references. The student will describe the
physical organization of a Unix file system. Performance will be satisfactory
if the student describes the physical organization of a Unix file system in a
manner consistent with descriptions in the text and in the lecture.  
  
20\. The student will not be allowed references. The student will describe the
standard for Unix I/O. Performance will be satisfactory if the student
describes the standard Unix Input and Output files in a manner consistent with
the documentation on the system.  
  
24\. The student will not be allowed references. The student will
differentiate between swapping and paging. Performance will be satisfactory if
the student describes the differences between swapping and paging in a manner
consistent with the text and the lecture.  
  
26\. The student will not be allowed references. The student will describe the
criteria necessary to create code that is portable from one Unix system to
another. performance will be satisfactory if the student describes those
criteria that are deemed critical to creating portable code as documented in
the lecture and in the text.  
  
28\. The student will be allowed references. The student will use the vi
editor to perform a series of edits on text files. Performance will be
satisfactory if the student performs the edits required on the files as
directed by circumstances and laboratory exercises.  
  
29\. The student will be allowed references. The student will use the ex
editor to perform a series of edits on text files. Performance will be
satisfactory if the student performs the edits required on the files as
directed by circumstances and laboratory exercises.  
  
30\. The student will be allowed references. The student will use the stream
editor (sed) to perform a series of edits on text files. Performance will be
satisfactory if the student performs the edits required on the files as
directed by circumstances and laboratory exercises.  
  
31\. The student will be allowed references. The student will use the Unix awk
tool to perform text manipulation. Performance will be satisfactory if the
student uses the awk tool to perform text manipulation to fulfill the
requirements of laboratory exercises in a manner that does not generate awk or
Unix errors.  
  
33\. The student will be allowed references. The student will use the Unix awk
tool to perform file access. Performance will be satisfactory if the student
uses the awk tool to access Unix files to fulfill the requirements of
laboratory exercises in a manner that does not generate awk or Unix errors.  
  
36\. The student will be allowed references. The student will use nroff to
format a file according to directions provided in a laboratory exercise.
Performance will be successful if the student uses nroff to generate a
document of the form specified by the instructor without generating either
Unix or nroff errors.  
  
41\. The student will be allowed references. The student will use one of the
command line input commands available in the Bourne shell to create code in a
script to take data from the comand line and process them.  
  
42\. The student will be allowed references. The student will use one of the
file input commands available in the Bourne shell to create code in a script
to take data from an input file and process them.  
  
43\. The student will be allowed references. The student will use one of the
input commands available in the Bourne shell to create code in a script to
accept data from the comand line parameters and process them.  
  
44\. The student will be allowed references. The student will use a
combination of Unix commands built within an executable script file, to
perform actions as specified in several laboratory exercises. Performance will
be satisfactory if the student combines a series of Unix commands in such as
way as to fulfill the requirements of laboratory exercises without generating
errors  
  

* * *

**Please also give careful attention to the following:**  
  
1\. Cheating: It is possible to obtain another student's work, modify it
slightly, and turn it in as your own. When you are caught cheating you will
receive a performance grade of F for this course. In addition, other action
may be taken as described in the Student Code of Conduct. Cheating robs two
people of their rightful reward: the person from whom you copy is deprived of
their right to the copyrighted work they did and you are deprived of the
learning experience you could have had. No one benefits from cheating, it will
not be tolerated.  
Besides, cheating is contrary to the mindset of a real Unix person.  
  
This does not mean I discourage discussion with your fellow students. I
encourage you to discuss solutions to problems from class with other members
of the class. In this class I encourage you to work in a group. I will expect
that the assignments you hand in will be based upon group effort. All I ask is
that you put the names of all the participants in the group on whatever you
hand in. That way I can know who to credit. What I am trying to avoid is
identical work, claimed for independent credit by two or more people.  
  
2\. Ethical computer usage: While this topic encompasses the problem of
cheating listed as item one, it is a far larger issue than simply cheating in
class. Any attempt by any student to compromise the integrity of the computer
lab, classroom computers, or other instructional or administrative machines or
steal or damage the software or hardware at North Lake or on other networked
computers will be dealt with in the most severe manner possible.  
  
You may not load personal software on any machine at North Lake College, nor
may you copy software from any North Lake College computer without prior,
written permission from both your instructor and the data processing
department.  
  
Along this same line, it is improper to use the computer resources of the
college to copy another's paper or other assignments to be submitted as your
own. Please use our equipment in an ethical manner. If you have any question
as to the proper/ethical use of this equipment, please feel free to discuss it
with your instructor prior to such use.  
  
Finally, you will be using the Internet to connect your lab machine to the
Unix computer(s) at North Lake College. **Please restrict your Internet usage,
during assigned lab and lecture time, to activities DIRECTLY related to your
course. Do not use the INTERNET connection to play games, check your private
(and non-class) E-mail or perform other non-class related activities**. If you
have an off-campus Internet provider, you may use that provider to log into
the North Lake College machines to work on your homework during non-class
hours.  It will be to your advantage to be able to access the Unix servers
from home. If you are working from home, the same rules of proper usage apply.
Do not download files across the Internet that are not directly related to
your course work in Unix II. You must also read and follow the DCCCD AUP.  
  
**ADDENDUM B:**  
  
**CISC 2490 Advanced Unix**  
_**Tentative Course Schedule**_  
  
Listed below is a _**tentative**_ schedule of the topics for lectures for the
Unix Operating System II course. Please note: the student is expected to read
the material in the text, and in other references if available, **before** the
class session in which the topic is discussed.  
  
Week | **Topic(s)**  
---|---  
1 | Intro/Overview/history  
general comments/ The Unix Philosophy  
  
| Leveling/Review/Refresh  
  
  
2 | Leveling/Review/Refresh  
  
| Leveling/Review/Refresh  
  
  
3 | Leveling/Review/Refresh  
  
| Leveling/Review/Refresh  
  
  
4 | Leveling/Review/Refresh  
  
| Introduction to the Korn shell  
  
  
5 | Unix Architecture/user commands  
  
| Advanced ed and ex  
  
  
6 | More ed and ex  
Smart (lazy) user interfacing  
  
|  Advanced vi  
  
  
7 | Advanced vi  
  
| File Processing (theory)  
  
  
8 | File Handling  
Standard Files and redirection  
Presentation 1 by:________________ Topic: ________________________  
  
| Interesting commands and ideas  
sort/cut/paste/join etc.  
**MID TERM**  
  
  
9 | Another shell, Tcsh  
Presentation 2 by:________________ Topic: ________________________  
  
| Process creation and management  
signals and semaphores  
Presentation 3 by:________________ Topic: ________________________  
10 | Process creation and management cont.  
  
| Pipes, unnamed and FIFO  
Presentation 4 by:_________________ Topic: ________________________  
11 | remote control  
Presentation 5 by:________________ Topic: ________________________  
  
| Text formatting with nroff  
Presentation 6 by:________________ Topic: ________________________  
12 | Power tools (grep/sed/awk)  
  
| Power tools (grep/sed/awk)  
Presentation 7 by:________________ Topic: ________________________  
13 | OH NO!!! CGI  
Necessary HTML, forms and CGI scripting  
  
| Common Gateway Interface scripts  
Presentation 8 by:________________ Topic: ________________________  
14 |  Shell "stuff" and scripting  
  
| Shell "stuff" and scripting  
Presentation 9 by:________________ Topic: ________________________  
15 | Shell "stuff" and scripting  
  
| Shell "stuff" and scripting  
Presentation 10 by:________________ Topic: ________________________  
Final Exam  | In class + Take Home  
  
  
_**NOTE The instructor reserves the right to modify this schedule depending
upon occurrences during the semester, the particular needs of the class, or
other unforeseen events which would necessitate schedule modification to best
meet the educational needs of the class**._  
  
Return to the Mad Dr.'s [Page](/~ttg/index.html)

