**TWENTIETH-CENTURY RUSSIA  
Curriculum materials developed by  
Michael J. Fontenot, Department of History, Southern University  
October 1999**

**Contents:  
**Overview  
Syllabus: Twentieth-Century Russia  
Bibliographies  
          Twentieth-Century Russia  
         The Collapse of the Soviet Union, Its Successor States, and the Former Easter Bloc  
Discussion Slides  [Under Construction]

**  
****Overview**

**Description  
** This is a proposal for the creation of a combined graduate and
undergraduate course (400/500 level) in 20th Century Russia. Chronologically,
it would begin in 1894 and continue to the present. Thus, the course would
begin with the weakening and collapse of Tsarism and extend through the
dissolution of the USSR and the emergence of the Confederation of Independent
States (the CIS). Major topics during this time period are provided below:

The first years of Nicholas II  
The Russo-Japanese War  
The 1905 Revolution  
Late Tsarist politics and economics  
Cultural trends in fin de siecle Russia  
The First World War  
The February Revolution of 1917  
The October Revolution  
The Establishment of Soviet Power  
The Russian Civil War  
The New Economic Policy  
The Rise and Triumph of Stalin  
The Velikii Perelom  
Stalinist Society  
Soviet Foreign Policy in the 1930s  
The Great Patriotic War  
The Soviet Empire takes shape  
The Cold War  
Post-War Reconstruction  
The Khrushchev Era  
Re-assertion under Brezhnev  
Soviet Culture in Transition  
The Era of Stagnation  
"Acceleration" and Retrenchment  
The Era of Perestroika  
The Collapse of the Soviet Bloc  
The Collapse of the Soviet Union  
The emergence of the CIS  
Current trends in the former USSR

**Justification  
** Unless they are taking methods courses, The Southern University history
department's graduate offerings are generally confined to the Americas and
Africa. Accordingly, students seeking our Master's degree in Social Studies
are exposed to a relatively narrow array of history courses. If they had more
opportunities to acquire a global perspective, they would be better prepared
for further work. This proposal is aimed at improving that situation.

A graduate course in 20th-century Russia is a particularly apt choice for that
broadening, regardless of whether fields of concentration are in history,
political science, or sociology. Students focusing on sociology will find that
20th century Russia is one vast sociological experiment. It is no accident
that Pitirim Sorokin's ideas are so pertinent to modern societies in
transition; he served in the Russian Provisional Government of 1917, and his
formative experiences were firmly sited in the flux of war and revolution.
Students studying political science will be able to draw lessons from a
remarkably thoroughgoing and consistent effort to instill Marxist principles
in a modern state, and can look at the Kerenskii and Gorbachev regimes as
parallel attempts to transform dictatorial regimes without surrendering
central authority or great-power status. History students will find this
course vital to understanding a host of issues, stretching from the
revolutionary dynamics at the end of World War One and the path to World War
Two to the Cold War's blossoming and passing away.

While a course in 20th Century Russia will not, by itself, sufficiently
broaden the graduate history curriculum, it will be a valuable step in that
direction.

**Costs  
** No additional costs will be associated with the addition of this course to
the curriculum. Materials not held at Cade Library are available at the
Middleton Library and in the various branches of the East Baton Rouge Parish
Library.

  
**Syllabus** : **Twentieth-Century Russia  
** Instructor: Dr. M. Fontenot

**Required Books** :  
Robert Service, _A History of Twentieth-Century Russia_. Cambridge,  
       Mass: Harvard Univ. Press, 1999.  
Vladimir N. Brovkin, ed. _The Bolsheviks in Russian Society: The  
       Revolution and the Civil Wars_. New Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1997.  
Robert C. Tucker, ed. _Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation._  
       American Council of Learned Societies, 1999  
David Remnick, _Lenin's Tomb: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire_.  
       N.Y.: Vintage Press, 1994.

**Scope:** This course surveys the history of Russia from 1894 to the present.
While political developments will provide the continuity necessary to a survey
course, social, economic, cultural and geographic factors will receive
treatment.

**Objectives:** After successfully completing this course, the student will
have realized the following aims:  
a. familiarity with crucial historical events in late Tsarist, Soviet, and
post-Soviet history  
b. an improved understanding of the vital and unique culture that dominates
the various territories comprising the former Soviet Union  
c. a heightened appreciation of the currents that exist in the former Soviet
Union and insight into the roots of these forces  
d. an understanding of cause-effect relationships  
e. an ability to use facts and concepts in a logical manner to analyze or
critique historical events and institutions or to support an historical
generalization  
f. an enhanced ability to communicate ideas clearly and convincingly, verbally
and in writing

**Procedure:** The approximate sequence of topics, reading assignments and
exams is listed on the attached schedule sheet. Read assigned material
thoughtfully and make full use of maps and illustrations. You will be held
responsible for readings, lectures and discussion material. At times, these
will correspond. However, it is expected that lectures and discussions will
complement reading material by clarifying and expanding significant topics and
by providing continuity and coherence to the history of the period.

**Grading:** There will be four 100 point exams. A 100 point class
participation will also be assigned. Finally, a 100 point, 12-15 page term
paper on a subject selected through consultation with the instructor is
required. Undergraduates will be required to have a bibliography of at least
15 scholarly articles and monographs. Graduate students' research papers will
be underpinned by annotated bibliographies of at least 25 scholarly books and
articles. In addition, graduate students will deliver oral reports on their
findings to the class. The final score will be based on a possible total of
600 points. 90% is an A, 80% a B, 70% a C, 60% a D.

**Bibliographies**

**TWENTIETH-CENTURY RUSSIA: BIBLIOGRAPY**  
Contents: Bibliographies  |  Communist Ideology and Measures  
---|---  
Guide to Archives |  Soviet Economics  
Encyclopedic Works |  Soviet Foreign Policy  
Handbooks |  Nationality Policy  
Dictionaries |  Soviet Culture  
Historiography |  Soviet Science  
Geography |  The Age of Perestroika  
Journals |  The NIS  
The Twilight of the Old Regime |  The Russian Federation  
WWI, Revolution and Civil War |  
  
**Bibliographies:  
**_American Bibliography of Russian and East European Studies._  
       Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana Univ. Press. Published annually since 1957.  
Heleniak, Timothy E. _Bibliography of Soviet Statistical Handbooks._ CIR  
       Staff Paper, No. 42. Washington, D. C.: Center for International Research. 1988.  
Horecky, P., ed. _Basic Russian Publications; a Selected and Annotated  
       Bibliography on Russia and the Soviet Union._ Chicago, Ill.: Univ. of Chicago, 1962.  
Maichel, K. _Guide to Russian Reference Books._ Stanford, CA: Stanford  
       Univ. Press, 1962.

**Guide to Archives:**  
Grimsted, Patricia Kennedy. _Archives and Manuscript Repositories in  
       the USSR_. 3 vols. to date. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton Univ. Press, to 1989.

**Encyclopedic Works:**  
Florinsky, M. T., ed. _McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Russia and the Soviet  
       Union._ New York: McGraw-Hill, 1961.  
_Great Soviet Encyclopedia. A Translation of the Third Edition._ 31  
       vols. New York: Macmillan. 1973.  
Utechin, S. V. _Everyman's Concise Encyclopedia of Russia._ New York:  
       Dutton, 1961.

**Handbooks:**  
Bezer, C., ed. _Russian and Soviet Studies; a Handbook._ Columbus, Ohio,  
       American Association for the Advancement of Slavic Studies, 1973.  
Katz, A. et al., _Handbook of Major Soviet Nationalities_. New York:  
       Free Press, 1975.  
Keefe, E., ed. _Area Handbook for the Soviet Union._ Washington, D. C.:  
       U. S. Government Printing Office, 1971.  
Weeks, Albert L. _The Soviet Nomenklatura._ 2nd ed. Washington, D. C.:  
       The Washington Institute Press, 1989. Current through 4/1/89.  
Wixman, Ronald. _The Peoples of the USSR: An Ethnographic Handbook._ N. Y.:  
       M.E. Sharpe,1988.

**Dictionaries:**  
Jackson, J. and R. Devlin, eds. _Dictionary of the Russian Revolution._  
       New York: Greenwood Press, 1989.  
Pushkarev, Sergei G. _Dictionary of Russian Historical Terms From the  
       Eleventh Century to 1917._ New York: Yale University Press, 1970.  
Wheeler, Marcus. _The Oxford Russian-English Dictionary._ London:  
       Clarendon Press, 1973.

**Historiography:**  
Mazour, A. G. _Modern Russian Historiography._ Princeton, N. J.:  
       Princeton Univ. Press, 1958\. The standard treatment.   
Kozicki, Henry, ed. _Western and Soviet Historiography: Recent Views._ N.Y.:  
       St. Martin's Press, 1993.  
Shteppa, K. F. _Russian Historians and the Soviet State._ New  
       Brunswick: Rutgers Univ. Press, 1962.

**Geography:**  
Banks, Arthur, cartographic consultant. _Russian History Atlas_.  
       London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1972.  
Chew, A. F. _An Atlas of Russian History: Eleven Centuries of Changing  
       Borders._ New Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1970.

**Journals:  
**_American Historical Review  
American Slavic and East European Review (ASEER)_. Now called the  
        _Slavic Review.  
Current Digest of the Soviet and Post-Soviet Press._ Translated excerpts.  
_Russian Review.  
Slavonic and East European Review (SEER)._ Generally known as the  
        _Slavonic Review._

**The Twilight of the Old Regime:**  
Ascher, Abraham. _The Revolution of 1905: Russia in Disarray._  
       Stanford, CA: Stanford Univ. Press, 1988.  
Black, Cyril E., ed. _Aspects of Social Change since 1861: the  
       Transformation of Russian Society._ Cambridge Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press,  
      1960\. An extremely provocative work.  
Byrnes, Robert F. _Pobedonostsev; His Life and Thought._ Bloomington, Ind.:  
       Indiana Univ. Press, 1968\. An excellent treatment of the architect of late   
       Tsarist absolutist theory.  
Golder, F. A., ed. _Documents of Russian History, 1914-1917_.  
       Gloucester, Mass: P. Smith, 1964. A very valuable collection.  
Miliukov, P. _Political Memoirs, 1905-1917._ Ann Arbor, Michigan: Univ.  
       of Michigan Press, 1967.  
Mirsky, D. S. _A History of Russian Literature, Comprising A History of  
       Russian Literature and Contemporary Russian Literature. _New York:  
      Knopf, 1949. Good on Russia's Golden and Silver Ages.  
Robinson, G. T. _Rural Russia under the Old Regime: A History of the  
       Land-Lord-Peasant World and a Prologue to the Peasant Revolution of  
     1917_. New York: Macmillan, 1949\. A basic work on the issue.  
Sutton, Jonathan. _The Religious Philosophy of Vladimir Solovyov:  
       Towards a Reassessment._ New York: St. Martin's Press, 1988.  
Von Laue, T. _Sergei Witte and the Industrialization of Russia._ New  
       York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1963.  
Vucinich, A. _Science in Russian Culture (1861-1917)._ Stanford, CA:  
       Stanford Univ. Press.1970.  
Wolfe, Bertrand. _Three Who Made a Revolution: A Biographical History._  
       New York: Stein and Day, 1984.

**World War One, Revolution and Civil War:**  
Abraham, Richard. _Alexander Kerensky, the First Love of the Revolution._ New  
       York: Columbia University Press. 1987.  
Browder, R. and A. Kerensky, eds. _The Russian Provisional  
       Government, 1917. _3 vols. Stanford, CA: Stanford Univ. Press, 1961.  
       The best collection of documents in English translation. The documents  
       are bound together by valuable connecting essays.  
Carr, E. H. _A History of Soviet Russia._ 9 vols. New York: Macmillan,  
       1951-1972. A work that cannot be omitted.  
Chamberlin, W. _The Russian Revolution, 1917-1921_. 2 vols. New York:  
       Macmillan, 1952. The path finding work on the Russian Revolution.  
Daniels, R. _Red October; The Bolshevik Revolution of 1917._ New York:  
       Scribner, 1967. An excellent general treatment.  
Ferro, Marc. _The Russian Revolution of February 1917_. tr. J. L. Richards.  
       Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1972. A fine treatment by a noted  
       French historian.  
Kerensky, A. _The Kerensky Memoirs: Russia and History's Turning  
       Point._ London: Cassell, 1966\. The last of many works on the revolution  
       by a major participant.  
Laqueur, W. _The Fate of the Revolution: Interpretations of Soviet  
       History._ London: Weildenfeld & Nicolson, 1967.  
Pipes, R. _The Formation of the Soviet Union: Communism and  
       Nationalism, 1917-1923._ Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press, 1954.  
      An indispensable book.  
Radkey, O. _The Agrarian Foes of Bolshevism: Promise and Default of  
       the Russian Socialist Revolutionaries, February to October, 1917._ New  
      York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1958.  
_____. _The Sickle under the Hammer: The Russian Socialist  
       Revolutionaries in the Early Months of Soviet Rule._ New York:   
       Columbia Univ. Press, 1963\. With the preceding volume, this is the  
       standard work on the SRs.  
Rosenberg, W. _Liberals in the Russian Revolution; The Constitutional  
       Democratic Party, 1917-1921._ Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univ. Press,  
       1974\. This is the primary history of the Kadets.  
Shkliarevsky, Gennady. _Labor in the Russian Revolution: Factory Committees  
       and Trade Unions,1917-1918. _N. Y.: St. Martin's Press, 1993.  
Slusser, Robert M. _Stalin in October: The Man Who Missed The  
       Revolution._ Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press, 1987.  
Stockdale, Melissa K. _Paul Miliukov and the Quest for a Liberal Russia,  
       1880-1918_. Ithaca, N. Y.: Cornell Univ. Press, 1997.  
Sukhanov, N. N. _The Russian Revolution, 1917: a Personal record._  
       tr. Joel Carmichael. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton Univ. Press, 1984.  
       Seven volumes in the unabridged Russian, this is a vital source.  
Volkogonov, Dmitri. _Lenin: A New Biography._ N. Y.: The Free Press, 1994.  
_____. Trotsky: The Eternal Revolutionary. N.Y.: The Free Press, 1996.  
Wheeler-Bennett, J. _The Forgotten Peace: Brest-Litovsk_. New York: W.  
       Morrow & Co., 1939.  
  
**The Communist Party, Its Ideology and Measures:**  
Conquest, Robert. _The Great Terror: A Reassessment._ New York:  
       Oxford Univ. Press, 1991\.   
Daniels, R. _A Documentary History of Communism._ 2 vols. Hanover:  
       University Press of New England, 1984.   
Fainsod, Merle. _How Russia is Ruled._ Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ.  
       Press, 1963.  
Malia, Martin. _The Soviet Tragedy: A History of Socialism in Russia,  
       1917-1991._ N. Y.: The Free Press, 1995  
Moore, B. _Soviet Politics: The Dilemma of Power._ Cambridge, Mass.:  
       Harvard Univ. Press, 1950.  
Schapiro, Leonard. _The Communist Party of the Soviet Union_. New  
       York: Random House, 1960.  
Ulam, Adam B.. _The Unfinished Revolution: Marxism and Communism  
       in the Modern World._ Bolder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1979.   
Von Laue, T. _Why Lenin? Why Stalin? A reappraisal of the Russian  
       Revolution, 1900-1930_. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1971.  
Voslensky, Michael. _Nomenklatura: the Soviet Ruling Class_.  
       tr. Eric Mosbacher. Garden City, N. Y.: Doubleday, 1984.  
  
**Soviet Economics:**  
Aganbegyan, Abel. _The Ecomomic Challenge of Perestroika_. tr. P. Tiffen.  
       Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 1988. Written by the chief   
       economic advisor to Mikhail Gorbachev.  
Bergson, Abram. _Planning and Productivity under Soviet Socialism._ New  
       York: Columbia Univ. Press, 1968.  
Davies, R. W. _Soviet Economic Development From Lenin to Khrushchev, 1917-  
       1965. _Cambridge Univ. Press, 1998.  
Dobb, M. _Soviet Economic Development Since the 1917 Revolution_.  
       New York: International Publishers, 1967.   
Lewin, M. _Russian Peasants and Soviet Power: A Study of  
       Collectivization_. tr. Irene Nove. New York: Norton, 1975.   
Schwartz, H. _The Soviet Economy Since Stalin_. Philadelphia: Lippincott,
1965.  
  
**Soviet Foreign Policy:**  
Brzezinski, A. _The Soviet Bloc: Unity and Conflict._ Cambridge, Mass:  
       Harvard Univ. Press, 1967.  
Dallin, D. _Soviet Russia's Foreign Policy, 1939-1942_. New Haven: Yale  
       Univ. Press, 1942.  
Degras, J., ed. _Soviet Documents on Foreign Policy, 1917-1941_. 3 vols.  
       New York: Octagon Books, 1978\.   
Gaddis, John Lewis. _Russia, the Soviet Union and the United States; an  
       Interpretive History._ 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill. 1990.  
Kennan, G. _Russia and the West Under Lenin and Stalin._ Boston:  
       Little, Brown, 1961.  
Pike, Douglas. _Vietnam and the Soviet Union--Anatomy of an Alliance._  
       Bolder, Colo: Westview, 1987.  
Ulam, A. _Expansion and Coexistence: Soviet Foreign Policy,  
       1917-73. _New York: Praeger, 1974.

**Nationality Policy:**  
Conquest, Robert. _The Nation Killers: The Soviet Deportation of  
       Nationalities._ London: Macmillan, 1970.  
Dmytryshyn, Basil. _Moscow and the Ukraine, 1918-1952._ New York:  
       Bookman Associates, 1956.  
Goldhagen, E., ed. _Ethnic Minorities in the Soviet Union._ New York:  
       Praeger, 1968.  
Von Rauch, Georg. _The Baltic States; The Years of Independence:  
       Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, 1917-1940._ Tr. Gerald Onn. London:   
       C. Hurst, 1974.  
  
**Soviet Culture:**  
Brown, E. _Russian Literature Since the Revolution_. Cambridge, Mas.:  
       Harvard Univ. Press, 1982.  
Churchward, L. _The Soviet Intelligentsia: An Essay on the Social  
       Structure and Roles of Soviet Intellectuals During the 1960s_. Boston:  
       Routledge & K. Paul,1973.  
Curtiss, J. _The Russian Church and the Soviet State, 1917-1950_.  
       Gloucester Mass.: P. Smith, 1965.   
Jacoby, Susan. _Inside Soviet Schools_. New York: Schocken Books, 1975.  
       Sakharov, Andrei. _Progress, Coexistence and Intellectual Freedom._ New   
       York: Norton, 1968.  
Solzhenitsyn, A. _The Gulag Archipelago: an Experiment in Literary  
       Investigation_. tr. Thomas P. Whitney. New York: Harper and Row, 1975.  
  
**Soviet Science:**  
Valsiner, Jaan. _Developmental Psychology in the Soviet Union_.  
       Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press. 1988.  
Vucinich, A. _The Soviet Academy of Sciences_. Stanford, CA: Stanford  
       Univ. Press, 1956.  
  
**The Age of Perestroika:**  
Bialer, Seweryn and Michael Mandelbaum, eds. _Gorbachev's Russia and  
       American Foreign Policy._ London: Westview, 1989.  
Black, J. L., ed. _USSR Documents, 1987: The Gorbachev  
       Reforms._ Gulf Breeze, FL: Academic International Press, 1988.   
_____. _USSR Documents Annual: Perestroika--The Second Stage._ Gulf  
       Breeze, FL: Academic International Press. 1988.  
Brown, Archie. _The Gorbachev Factor._ N. Y.: Oxford Univ. Press, 1997.  
Dawisha, Karen. _Eastern Europe, Gorbachev and Reform: The Great  
       Challenge._ Cambridge, Eng: Cambridge University Press, 1988.  
Dobbs, Michael. _Down With Big Brother: The Fall of the Soviet Empire._  
       New York: Knopf, 1997.  
Ekedahl, Carolyn McGriffert and Melvin A. Goodman. _The Wars of  
       Eduard Shevardnadze_. University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania State  
       University Press, 1997.  
Firth, Noel E. and James H. Noren. _Soviet Defense Spending: A History  
       of CIA Estimates, 1950-1990. _College Station, TX: Texas A&M Univ.  
       Press, 1997.  
Gorbachev, M. S. _The August coup : the Truth and the Lessons._  
       London: HarperCollins, 1991.  
Gorbachev, Mikhail S. _Memoirs._ New York: Doubleday, 1996.  
Gorbachev, Mikhail. _Perestroika : New Thinking For Our Country and  
       The World._ New York: Harper & Row, 1987.  
       254 pp. The classic exposition of Gorbachev's reformist position.  
Grachev, Andrei. _Final Days: the Inside Story of the Collapse of the  
       Soviet Union._ Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press, 1995.  
       Describes events from the August putsch to the dissolution of the USSR  
       by one of Gorbachev's aides.  
Kull, Steven. _Burying Lenin: the Revolution in Soviet Ideology and  
       Foreign Policy._ Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press, 1992.  
Ito Takayuki, ed. _Facing Up to the Past: Soviet Historiography  
       Under Perestroika_. Sapporo: Slavic Research Center, Hokkaido  
       University. 1989.  
Lewin, Moshe. _The Gorbachev Phenomenon: a Historical Interpretation_.  
       Berkeley: University of California Press. 1988.   
Ligachev, Yegor. I _nside Gorbachev's Kremlin: The Memoirs of Yegor  
       Ligachev._ tr. Catherine Fitzpatrick et. al. N.Y.: Pantheon, 1993.  
McDonnell, Lawrence. _October Revolution._ Staplehurst, England:  
       Spellmount, 1995. A BBC journalist's eyewitness account of the  
       storming of the Russian parliament.  
Medvedev, Zhores. _Gorbachev_. London: Basis Blackwell, 1986.  
       Politically-charged biography by an anti-Communist. Very valuable for  
       capturing the flavor of the times.  
Moskoff, William. _Hard Times: Impoverishment and Protest in the Perestroika  
       Years: The Soviet Union, 1985-1991_. New York: M. E. Sharpe, 1993.   
Mendelson, Sarah E. _Changing Course: Ideas, Politics, and the Soviet  
       Withdrawal from Afghanistan. _Princeton Univ. Press, 1998.  
       Focuses on the years 1985-91, but given background of Russian intervention  
       in Afghanistan from 1979\. Concentrates on the domestic politics behind the  
       military withdrawal.  
Miller, John. _Mikhail Gorbachev and the end of Soviet Power._ New York,  
       N.Y.: St. Martin's Press, 1993\.   
Morrison, John. _Boris Yeltsin: From bolshevik to Democrat._  
       N.Y.:Dutton: 1991. Generally favorable treatment of Yeltsin through his  
      displacement of Gorbachev. Written by a journalist.  
Remnick. David. _Lenin's Tomb: The Last Days of the Soviet  
       Empire_. New York: Vintage, 1994.  
Solovyov, Vladimir and Elena Klepikova. _Boris Yeltsin: A Political  
       Biography._ tr. David Gurevich. N.Y.: G. P. Putnam's Sons. 1992.  
Zinoview, Alexander. _Gorbachevism._ New York: Liberty, 1988.  
  
**The NIS:  
** Allensworth, Wayne. _The Russian Question: Nationalism,.  
       Modernization, and Post-Communist Russia._ Lanham, Md.: Rowman   
       and Littlefield, 1998.  
Brzezhinski, Zbigniew and Paige Sullivan, eds. _Russia and the  
       Commonwealth of Independent States: Documents, Data, and Analysis._  
       Armonk, N,Y.: M. E. Sharpe, 1997.  
Coleman, Fred. _The Decline and Fall of the Soviet Empire: Forty Years  
       that Shook the World, from Stalin to Yeltsin_. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1996.  
Diller, Daniel C. _Russia and the Independent States._ Washington,  
       D.C.: Congressional Quarterly, Inc., 1993.  
       Provides country profiles, a chronology, biographies, and key documents.   
       Excellent reference work which provides a brief survey of Russian and Soviet  
       history and treats themes like commonwealth structure, economic issues, and foreign policy  
Hardt, John P. and Richard F. Kaufman, eds. _The Former Soviet Union in  
       Transition._ N. Y.: M. E. Sharpe, 1993.  
Olcott, Martha Brill. "The New Nations of Central Asia." _The Successor  
       States to the USSR_. ed. John W. Blaney. Washington, D. C.:  
       Congressional Quarterly, Inc., 1995. 206-222.  
Park, Andrus. "Theories of Post-Communist Nationalism." _The Search For  
       Stability in Russia and the Former Soviet Bloc._ Ed. David Carlton  
       and Paul Ingram. Brookfield, USA: Ashgate, 1997. 119-139.  
Suny, Ronald Gregor. _The Revenge of the Past: Nationalism, Revolution,  
       and the Collapse of the Soviet Union. _Stanford, Ca.: Stanford Univ. Press, 1993.

**The Russian Federation:**  
Dunlop, John B. _Russia Confronts Chechnya: Roots of a Separatist  
       Conflict._ Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1998.  
Morrison, John. _Boris Yeltsin: From Bolshevik to Democrat._ New York:  
       Dutton, 1991.  
Remnick, David. _Resurrection Man: The Struggle for a New Russia._ New  
       York: Vintage, 1998.  
Scanlan, James P., ed. _Russian Thought After Marxism._ N. Y.: M. E.  
       Sharpe, 1994.  
Smith, Graham, et al. _Nation-Building in the Post-Soviet Borderlands:  
       the Politics of National Identities._ London: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1998.  
Solovyov, Vladimir and Elena Klepikova. _Boris Yeltsin: a Political  
       Biography_. tr. David Gurevich. New York: Putnam, 1992.  
Tucker, Robert C. "Russia and the West: From Cold War to Cold Peace."  
        _Russia and East Europe After Communism: The Search for New Political,  
       Economic and Security Systems. _eds. Michael Kraus and Ronald D. Liebowitz.  
       New York: Westview Press,1996. 283-296.  
Wanner, Catherine. _Burden of Dreams: History and Identity in Post-  
       Soviet Ukraine. _University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 1998.  
Yeltsin, Boris N. _The Struggle for Russia._ New York: Belka Publications
Corp., 1994.  
Zaprudnik, Jan. _Belarus at a Crossroads in History._ Boulder, Colo.: Westview
Press, 1993.

  
**ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY OF THE COLLAPSE OF THE SOVIET UNION, ITS SUCCESSOR
STATES, AND THE FORMER EASTERN BLOC**

Contents:  
The Collapse of the USSR  
The CIS  
Eastern Europe and Non-CIS Countries

**The Collapse of the USSR**  
Ekedahl, Carolyn McGriffert and Melvin A. Goodman. _The Wars of  
       Eduard Shevardnadze_. University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania  
       State University Press, 1997.  
       DK 290.3.S54.E38 1997.  
       331 pp., index, ill., bibliography, endnotes.  
       A good survey of Shevardnadze from his early career to his leadership  
      of the Georgian Republic. Good insight into his foreign policy.

Firth, Noel E. and James H. Noren. _Soviet Defense Spending: A History  
       of CIA Estimates, 1950-1990_. College Station, TX: Texas A&M Univ.   
      Press, 1997.  
       UA770.F467 1998. 291 pp. With illustrations, bibliography and index.  
       A useful study critical of the CIA's performance and valuable for an   
       evaluation of the forces behind perestroika. Concludes that Soviet   
       military received over 33% of GNP by 1991 and that the military share  
      of GNP tripled from 1960-1990. At the same time, domestic consumption  
      declined from 60% to 40%.

Gorbachev, M. S. _The August Coup : the Truth and the Lessons_.  
       London: HarperCollins, 1991.  
       127 pp., ill. Gorbachev's version of what happened, with conclusions  
       at variance from Yeltsin's.

Gorbachev, M. _Memoirs_. N.Y.: Doubleday, 1995.  
       769 pp., illustrations, index. English translation of Gorbachev, M. S.,  
       _Zhizn i reformy_. Moskva:  Novesti, 1995\. 2 vols., ill. Useful for   
       background and represents a vigorous defense of Gorbachev's policies.

Gorbachev, Mikhail. _Perestroika : New Thinking For Our Country and  
       The World_. New York: Harper & Row, 1987.  
       254 pp. The classic exposition of Gorbachev's reformist position.

Grachev, Andrei. _Final Days: the Inside Story of the Collapse of the  
       Soviet Union_. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press, 1995.  
       Describes events from the August putsch to the dissolution of the   
       USSR by Gorbachev's press spokesman. Was present at significant  
       conferences with leaders of other republics and provides detailed   
       insight into their proceedings.  
  
Kull, Steven. _Burying Lenin: the Revolution in Soviet Ideology and  
       Foreign Policy._ Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press, 1992.  
       DK288.K85 1992. 219 pp. bibliography and index. This study is based   
       on documents and interviews and traces the way in which Soviet elite   
       groups first modified, then abandoned, Leninism. His treatment of   
       Gorbachev's theorizing is interesting, although limited.

Ligachev, Yegor. _Inside Gorbachev's Kremlin: The Memoirs of Yegor  
       Ligachev._ tr. Catherine Fitzpatrick et. al. N.Y.: Pantheon, 1993.  
       DK 290.3.L54.A3 1993  
       369 pp., ill.  
       Interesting critique by a former, and reluctant, ally of Gorbachev's.

McDonnell, Lawrence. _October Revolution._ Staplehurst, England:  
       Spellmount, 1995.  
       DK510.763.M38 1994. 192 pp., illustrations, maps, index. A BBC   
       journalist's eyewitness account of the storming of the Russian parliament.

Medvedev, Zhores. _Gorbachev._ London: Basis Blackwell, 1986.  
       DK 290.3.G67.M43 1988  
       369 pp., index, glossary, endnotes and references combined.  
       Politically-charged biography by an anti-Communist. Very valuable   
       for capturing the flavor of the times.

Mendelson, Sarah E. _Changing Course: Ideas, Politics, and the Soviet  
       Withdrawal from Afghanistan._ Princeton Univ. Press, 1998.  
       DK289.M467 1998. 140 pp. Bibliography and index. Focuses on the   
      years 1985-91, but given background of Russian intervention in Afghanistan   
       from 1979. Concentrates on the  domestic politics behind the military withdrawal.

Miller, John. _Mikhail Gorbachev and the End of Soviet Power._ New York,  
       N.Y.: St. Martin's Press, 1993\.   
       DK288.M55 1993. 267 pp., biography and index.

Morrison, John. _Boris Yeltsin: From Bolshevik to Democrat_.  
       N.Y.:Dutton: 1991.  
       DK 290.3.Y45.M67 1991  
       303 pp., short bibliography.  
       Generally favorable treatment of Yeltsin through his displacement of   
       Gorbachev. Written by journalist.

Solovyov, Vladimir and Elena Klepikova. _Boris Yeltsin: A Political  
       Biography_. tr. David Gurevich. N.Y.: G. P. Putnam's Sons. 1992.  
       DK 290.3.Y45 1992.  
       320 pp., ill., index, bibliography. Notes rather than footnotes. Popular,   
       somewhat polemical treatment that has many personal touches. Has a   
       memoir-like feel.

**The CIS:**  
Allensworth, Wayne. _The Russian Question: Nationalism,  
       Modernization, and Post-Communist Russia._ Lanham, Md.: Rowman   
       and Littlefield, 1998.   
       DK510.555A45 1998. 351 pages, with an index and bibliography.  
       Provides an historical background and discusses the rise of the nationalistic   
       (Allensworth labels it the Neo-Nazi) right wing, as exemplified by Vladimir   
       Zhirinovsky. The author then evaluates the forces at work that oppose the   
       Black Hundreds mentality.

Allworth, Edward A., ed. _The Tartars of Crimea: Return to the  
       Homeland_. 2nd edition. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1998.  
       DK 508.9. K78. T37 1998  
       380 pp., with a bibliography of recent publications on the Crimea.  
       Valuable collection of sixteen articles and selected documents.   
       Details the past circumstances of  the Crimean Tatars, their present   
       situation, and efforts to form a modern identity.

Brzezhinski, Zbigniew and Paige Sullivan, eds. _Russia and the  
       Commonwealth of Independent States: Documents, Data, and   
       Analysis._ Armonk, N,Y.: M. E. Sharpe, 1997.  
       DK1.5.R876 1996  
       866 pps, maps, charts, index, bibliography  
       Covers period from the collapse of the Union Treaty (1991) through   
       1995-96. Organized by state, contains key documents, chronologies,   
       descriptions of political parties. Also contains demographic and   
      economic data.

Chenciner, Robert. _Daghestan: Tradition and Survival_. N.Y.: St.  
       Martin's Press, 1997.   
       308 pp., appendices, bibliography, index, ill., tables, maps.   
       Survey of Daghestan with reference to economics, prospects re oil,   
       its demoralization vis-a-vis outside cultures.

Diller, Daniel C. _Russia and the Independent States_. Washington,  
       D.C.: Congressional Quarterly, Inc., 1993.  
       DK293.D55 1993. 342 pages with illustrations, maps, and a bibliography.   
       Also provides country profiles, a chronology, biographies, and key documents.   
       Excellent reference work which provides a brief survey of Russian and Soviet   
       history and treats themes like  commonwealth structure, economic issues, and   
       foreign policy.

Dunlop, John B. _Russia Confronts Chechnya: Roots of a Separatist  
       Conflict._ Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1998.  
       DK511.C37D86 1998. 234 pp., maps, bibliography and index.  
       Gives the historical background to the Russian invasion of Chechnya,   
       examines the relationship between Moscow and the separatist leader,   
       Dudaev, and implies that the 1994 invasion was avoidable.

Haghayeghi, Mehrdad. _Islam and Politics in Cental Asia_. N.Y.: St.  
       Martin's Press, 1996.  
       264 pp., notes, bibliography, index, tables, maps.  
       Claims that hostility to democracy is one of the legacies of the USSR.   
       Sees Central Asia at the stage of religious revival. Mosque-building,   
       Islamization of society is occurring, but Central Asia is not yet radically  
       politicized. Excludes Azerbailjan, for it is a Caucasian state.

Lepingwell, John W. R. "New States and Old Soldiers: Civil-Military  
       Relations in the Former Soviet Union." _The Successor States to the  
       USSR._ ed. John W. Blaney. Washington, D. C.: Congressional Quarterly,  
       Inc., 1995. 57-76.  
       DK293.S83 1995. A useful article that examines the military role in the   
       collapse of the USSR. It also surveys the newly-independent states'   
       approaches to the building of their national military structures.

Lester, David. "Suicide in Post-Soviet Central Asia," _Central Asian  
       Survey_. Vol. 18, No. 1 (March, 1999), 121-124.  
       Notes that suicides rose noticeably and links that with the stresses  
       associated with the uncertainty produced by the collapse of the USSR.

Megoran, Nick. "Theorizing Gender, Ethnicity, and the Nation-State in  
       Central Asia." _Central Asian Survey_ , Vol. 18, No. 1 (March, 1999),  
       99-110. Notes that new portrayals of the nation have strongly masculine  
       themes. This is useful while looking at Edward Said's Orientalist arguments.

Mostov, Julie. "Endangered Citizenship," _Russia and East Europe After  
       Communism: The Search for New Political, Economic and Security   
      Systems_. eds. Michael Kraus and Ronald D. Liebowitz. New York: Westview  
      Press, 1996. 35-50.  
       DK293.R87 1996. Points out the difficult position of individuals in the new   
      successor states. Should be read along with Rudensky's "Russian Minorities  
       in the Newly-Independent States" to gain a feel for the perplexities faced by  
       former citizens of the USSR.

Olcott, Martha Brill. The New Nations of Central Asia." _The Successor  
       States to the USSR_. ed. John W. Blaney. Washington, D. C.: Congressional   
      Quarterly, Inc., 1995. 206-222.  
       DK293.S83 1995. Surveys the five Central Asian states of the CIS, argues  
      that a common culture and language explains the rapid appearance of viable   
      states. Examines resources and attitudes toward Russia.

Park, Andrus. "Theories of Post-Communist Nationalism." _The Search  
      for Stability in Russia and the Former Soviet Bloc_. Ed. David Carlton  
      and Paul Ingram. Brookfield, USA: Ashgate,. 1997. 119-139.  
       DK293.S4 1997. A good summary of the major arguments marshaled   
      against Russians in order to justify nationalistic stances.

Pilkington, Hilary. _Migration, Displacement, and Identity in Post-Soviet  
       Russia._ N.Y.: Routledge, 1998.  
       JV8190.P55 1998. Relies on interviews.  
       Argues that state interest rather than humanitarian concerns determined the   
       Russian Federation's response to migration. Analyses migration patterns and   
       attitudes. Argues that migrants are not people returning psychologically to their  
       cultural homeland. They either feel superior or different in some way and are  
       hybrids culturally.

Rudensky, Nikolai. "Russian Minorities in the Newly-Independent  
       States: An International Problem in the Domestic Context of Russia Today."   
        _National Identity and Ethnicity in Russia and the New States of Eurasia_.   
      Ed. Roman Szporluk. New York: M. E. Sharpe, 1994. 58-77.

Smith, Graham, et al. _Nation-Building in the Post-Soviet Borderlands:  
       the Politics of National Identities_. London: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1998.  
       DK293.N36 1998. 293 pp., illustrations, map, bibliography, and index.   
      Looks at nationalism, ethnicity, language issues, and gives historiographical  
      information. Valuable perspective that relies on deep background to approach  
       current issues.

Tucker, Robert C. "Russia and the West: From Cold War to Cold Peace."  
        _Russia and East Europe After Communism: The Search for New  
       Political, Economic and Security Systems_. eds. Michael Kraus and   
       Ronald D. Liebowitz. New York: Westview Press, 1996. 283-296.  
       DK293.R87 1996. The collection is 349 pages long, with bibliographic  
       references and an index. Tucker's is a good article for gaining the long view.  
       Points out those elements that remain constant in Russian-Western dynamics  
       and evaluates present and future prospects in light of that long view.

Wanner, Catherine. _Burden of Dreams: History and Identity in Post-  
       Soviet Ukraine._ University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania State   
       University Press, 1998.  
       DK 508.846.W36 1998  
       255 pp., index, references, notes, bibliography, maps. An interesting  
       survey of modern Ukraine, its problems and status. Done by an ethnographer.   
       Surveys the legacy of Soviet culture and methods of developing a mass   
       Ukrainian national consciousness.

Webber, Mark. _The International Politics of Russia and the Successor  
       States._ N.Y.: Manchester Univ. Press, 1996.  
       DK293.W43 1996. 366 pp., maps, bibliography, index. Looks at the   
      politics, government, security issues, economics, and foreign relations   
       of the former republics.

Zaprudnik, Jan. _Belarus at a Crossroads in History_. Boulder, Colo.:  
       Westview Press, 1993.  
       DK 507.5.Z37 19l9l3   
       278 pp, with Ill, maps.  
       The author is a former Radio Liberty analyst. Treats Belarus from   
       Kiev Rus times through Lithuanian, Russian, and Soviet control.   
       Offers a very harsh criticism of USSR policy, especially for its   
      consistently anti-nationalist stance versus Belorussians. Good   
       survey suited for non-specialists.

Zoppo, Ciro E. "Turkey and the Independent States of Central Asia."  
        _Rising Tension in Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union_.   
       eds. David Carlton, et al. Brookfield, Vermont: Dartmouth Publishing  
       Co., 1996. 133-150.  
       DK293.R57 1996. Useful article on the similarities and differences  
       between Turkey and the Central Asian states of the CIS. This was  
       presented to a course on disarmament and research on conflicts   
       held in Italy in 1995. The collection containing this article has 203 pp.,  
      bibliographic material, and an index.  
  
**Eastern Europe and Non-CIS Countries**  
Brown, J. F. _Hopes and Shadows: Eastern Europe After Communism_.  
       Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1994.  
       367 pp. A broad-based account. Argues that a fundamental revolution  
       occurred in Eastern Europe. That is not readily apparent only because   
       the leadership is transitional. Brown blames the USSR for what it did   
       not do--it did not prepare the population for democratic responsibilities  
      and did not prepare it for the adjustments required to enter a market   
       economy. Accordingly, a difficult road lies ahead before Eastern Europe  
       can participate in the economic and political currents of Western Europe.

_____. _Surge to Freedom; The End of Communist Rule in Eastern  
       Europe._ Durham, NC: Duke Univ. Press, 1991.  
       338 pp. Describes the collapse of Communism in each country,   
       concludes with an estimate of future prospects. Divides Eastern   
       Europe into a Northern tier with strong likelihood of a strong civil  
       society and a Southern tier full of ethnic rivalries. Very good on the   
       Balkans. Relies heavily on press accounts, Radio Free Europe   
       research reports, and secondary materials.

Dreifelds, Juris. _Latvia in Transition_. N.Y.: Cambridge University Press,
1996.  
       DK 504.8.D74 1996  
       Excellent summary on the Baltic States, and good on the post-Soviet  
       period in general. The work focuses on challenges to building a market  
       economy, democratization, security dangers (especially regarding Russian   
       neo-imperialism), and crime.

Malcolm, Noel. _Kosovo: A Short History_. N.Y.: New York University  
       Press, 1998.  
       492 pp. By a veteran writer on the Balkans. Surveys the tangled history  
      of Kosovo, relying largely on Albanian sources. Traces the root of the  
       problem to the Serbian annexation of Kosovo in 1912, when the Albanian  
       majority was denied self-rule. Predicted that secession would occur, and   
       that the process would be a violent one.

Pavkovic, Aleksandr. _The Fragmentation of Yugoslavia: Nationalism in a  
       Multi-national State_. N.Y.: St. Martin's Press, 1997.  
       DK293.N38 1994. A very useful article embedded in a group of   
       useful articles. This collection is 328 pp. In length, has maps,   
       bibliographies and an index.

Rosenberg, Tina. _The Haunted Land: Facing Europe's Ghosts after  
       Communism_. N.Y.: Random House, 1995.  
       437 pp. Excellent survey of the major issues--political, historical,   
       and economic--facing post-Communist society in Eastern Europe.   
       Based on numerous interviews.

Rothschild, Joseph and Nancy M. Wingfield. _Return to Diversity: A  
       Political History of East Central Europe Since World War II_.  
       Third Edition. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.  
       338 pp., index, footnotes, maps, bibliography.  
       This is the basic work to orient the student to post-war Eastern Europe.  
       Surveys the various successors to the Soviet Bloc regimes.

Smith, Graham, ed. _The Baltic States: The National Self-Determination  
       of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania._ N.Y.: St Martin's Press, 1994.  
       214 pp., tables. Eight articles and an introduction. The first four articles  
       deals with modern Baltic history, and the remainder treat perestroika   
       and the achievement of independence. Helps to fill gaps in an underdeveloped  
       area of research.

Taagepera, Rein. _Estonia: Return to Independence_. Boulder, Colo.:  
       Westview Press, 1993.  
  &nbsp

