_Reflections On Academic Success And Failure: Making It, Forsaking It,
Reshaping It_  
in B. Berger, ed., Authors of Their Own Lives, Univ. of California Press,
1990, pp.260-284  
    


[Back to Main Page](garyhome.html) | Notes

**  Gary T. Marx** _When I came West with the wagon, I was a young man with
expectations of something, I don't know what, I tarpainted my name on a big
rock by the Missouri trailside. But in time my expectations wore away with the
weather, like my name had from that rock, and I learned it was enough to stay
alive._ \--E. L. Doctorow, Welcome to Hard Times My attitudes toward work and
life were shaped by an unusual early career pattern --success beyond my
wildest expectations, followed by unexpected failure. Given the formative
power of that experience, I will restrict my attention to only one of the many
topics that an article on work and life might treat: occupational success and
failure. 1

Academic work is publicly and correctly viewed as having a sacred quality
involving the pursuit and transmission of truth. But it also involves a job or
career carried out in a competitive milieu where the usual human virtues and
vices are never far from the surface.2

I will try to shed some light on this secular side of the profession and to
offer some practical advice. I first describe my experiences, then discuss
seven characteristics of success and some practical conclusions I have drawn.
Although the themes are universal, I have written with two groups in mind:
persons beginning their career, and those at midcareer sorting it all out
--the former because I wish someone had told me these things when I was
starting out, and the latter because they may believe them.

_Life Could Be a Dream_

In 1970 there could not have been many sociologists just three years beyond
the Ph.D. who were as professionally satisfied and optimistic as I was. The
promise of the popular 1950srhythm-and-blues song "Shboom" that "life could be
a dream" hadcome true. Immigrants, gold miners, and aspiring actors might head
West, but as an ambitious academic born on a farm in central California I had
headed east to where I thought the real actionwas --Cambridge, Massachusetts.

I had a job at Harvard with a higher salary and a longercontract (negotiated
under threat of deserting to another Ivy League school) than the other
assistant professors in the Department of Social Relations. I taught only one
course and had a mammoth corner of office, where I was protected from
intruders by my own secretary in an outer office.

My book Protest and Prejudice had sold fifteen thousand copies and had been
translated into Japanese. Various chapters had been reprinted in more than
twenty books. The major newspapers, magazines, and radio and television media
gave good coverage to research I had done on the civil-rights movement, civil
disorders, and community police patrols. From my experience in presenting
papers at the annual meetings of the American Sociological Association I
assumed that it was not unusual to receive more than 150 requests for
preprints of a timely paper. 3

After receiving my Ph.D. from the University of California, I had barely
settled into Cambridge and got over jet lag in September 1967 when I received
an invitation to join the staff of

the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders. Barely a year before, in
beard and sandals, I had been sitting in smoke-filled cafes on Telegraph
Avenue in Berkeley, listening to folk music and talking about the machinations
of the power elite, plotting coups and bemoaning the sad role of co-opted
American intellectuals. At Harvard I became a regular on the Boston-Washington
shuttle and dressed in a three-piece suit. I eagerly rejected Thoreau's
advice, "Beware of all enterprises that require new clothes." Ignoring the
sarcasm, I chose instead to follow Bob Dylan's advice "Get dressed, get
blessed. Try to be a success."

A student-published course evaluation booklet (The Harvard ConfiGuide), known
for its biting critiques, praised my courses: "Marx ranks among the best
lecturers in the University.... If you don't take the course, at least sit in
on some of the lectures." I was fortunate to encounter an unusually bright,
well-read, socially conscious group of graduate and undergraduate students,
some of whom are now major figures in American sociology. We were on the same
side of the generation gap and shared intellectual interests, a desire to see
research aid social change, and a quest for professional status. Training
students and involving them in research was deeply fulfilling. (It also
allowed me to get more work done.)

I received several prestigious fellowships that enabled me to take leaves of
absence. My name was added to the list of those under consideration to be
invited for a year in residence at several think tanks. Consultation and
research money was falling into my lap. CBS-TV needed a consultant for a
series on urban areas. ABC-TV wanted a commentator on the Kerner Commission
report. Encyclopedia Britannica wanted an article on riots. The Joint Center
for Urban Studies of MIT and Harvard offered summer salaries. Unsolicited,
funding sources such as the Urban Institute and Law Enforcement Assistance
Administration offered me money for research; all they required from me was a
letter of a few pages, and I would receive a grant.

At a relatively young age I was fortunate to have the chance to serve on the
editorial boards of several major journals and was elected to the Council of
the American Sociological Association, enjoying the company of senior
colleagues old enough to be my parents and even grandparents. The mail
routinely brought inquiries about positions elsewhere, along with requests to
write books, articles, and reviews for both academic and popular publications,
serve on editorial and other boards, participate in symposia, and give
lectures and deliver papers at an array of academic meetings both in the
United States and abroad. The invitations removed from me the anxiety and risk
many of my peers experienced as they sought professional attention. I was not
conducting research with only a hope that someday, somehow, the results would
be published. Instead, I could adopt the more cost-effective and safe
technique of filling orders on hand. Since invitations were usually general, I
had the freedom to write on whatever I wanted.

It seemed to be a seller's market. In one of those nasty social principles
wherein the rich got richer, each invited article or presentation triggered
new invitations in an almost geometric expansion. Each article was an
investment that earned interest. My problem was not having the goods rejected
but finding it impossible to keep enough in stock. The certainty of
publication probably encouraged me to produce more than I otherwise might have
and perhaps to let it go to press earlier.

It also may have meant a freer, more interpretive writing and research style
because I did not have to conform to the expectations of an editorial board or
reviewers committed to a narrow notion of sociological research.4 Since
esteemed members of my profession were offering these invitations, my self-
confidence increased and I came to believe that I had important things to say.
Perhaps a positive labeling effect was at work.

I brushed up against a busy world of movers and shakers, elites, and academic
gatekeepers. Editors, reporters, lawyers, and heads of social research
consulting firms asked me to dine at expensive restaurants and private clubs
or tendered invitations to cocktail parties. Often they asked me for my
opinion or help on topics I knew nothing about. I negotiated a contract to do
a race-relations textbook with a colleague for what seemed in 1970 to be an
unprecedented sum, far greater than my annual salary. I had lunch with Vice
President Humphrey and dinner with several Cabinet secretaries. I attended
briefing lunches and dinners with other real and aspiring political leaders. I
was approached by a former (or so he claimed) CIA agent still working for the
government but in some other capacity. He had read Protest and Prejudice and
wanted to talk about the student movement. I eagerly responded to a request to
join a group of academics helping Robert F. Kennedy's 1968 presidential
campaign and drafted a position paper.

This bountiful professional harvest spilled over into private life. We lived
in a university-owned apartment in the heart of Cambridge in a former
botanical garden. We were invited to large, somewhat formal dinner parties
attended by celebrated American intellectuals in eighteenth-century homes. Our
son was the only nonconnected four-year-old accepted into Shady Lane, a
wonderful Cambridge school founded by William James and John Dewey. We bought
an expensive foreign car and land on Martha's Vineyard. Plans for the summer
home were drawn up. I developed a taste for sherry and even pretended to enjoy
playing squash.

I had moved from being an unknown graduate student at a state university in
the outback to what seemed to be the core of American academic and political
life.5 George Homans, Alex Inkeles, Seymour Martin Lipset, Talcott Parsons,
and David Riesman were all down the hallway from my office. It was the same
hallway that not long before had been graced by Pitirim Sorokin, Gordon
Allport, and Clyde Kluckhohn, located in a building named after still another
illustrious predecessor, William James. The periphery of the Kennedy circle of
advisers from Harvard beckoned. One of my mentors, Daniel P. Moynihan, had
moved on to a job in the White House.

I would eagerly return to my office (after an afternoon or day away) in the
hope of finding several neatly written pink phone messages requesting that I
return a New York or Washington call. Those little pink notes were lifelines,
unobtrusive symbolic indicators bearing evidence of a career in motion. The
higher reaches of sociology and perhaps even American intellectual life,
public service, the mass media, and a patrician life-style all seemed to be
beckoning. This was heady stuff for a person whose highest aspiration a decade
before had been to write a master's thesis that would receive one scholarly
citation and who kept the following lines from jazz-blues singer Mose Allison
in his top drawer: 6

_I made my entrance on the Greyhound bus_  
_I don't intend to cause a fuss_  
_If you like my style, that's fine with me_  
_But if you don't, just let me be_  
_I got some kids,_  
_I got a wife_  
_I'm just trying to swing my way through life_

As a student of American society I knew all about blocked mobility
aspirations. But my situation was the reverse (or so it seemed during those
glorious years of ascent). I had not been denied anything I felt entitled to.
Instead I sometimes felt I had received things I did not deserve. In three
short years, from 1967 to 1970, I had already achieved far more than I ever
intended or expected.

In the warm glow of solidarity offered by elites who validate each other's
status through self-fulfilling effects, it was easy to believe that what I was
doing was important and that my success was meaningful and appropriate and
could only increase. True, I knew that the chances of someone who had not
received at least one degree from Harvard getting tenure were very slim.7 But
I was too busy to think much about tenure in those early years. Besides, there
was always the exception, and wasn't I on the fast track (as the list of
achievements I also kept tucked away in the top drawer of my desk indicated)?
Clearly sociology offered a great career if you had the right stuff. Who knows
where it might lead? --an endowed chair, a deanship, a presidential
appointment, honorary degrees, plenary addresses, editorships, more foreign
translations, directorship of a research center, perhaps a best-selling novel
and even a movie career. Was life ever so sweet for a young academic? Could a
surfer from California disguised in academic clothing find happiness in an
eastern elite academic setting? Did the rising sun have to set?

My academic knowledge of stratification and fashion should have told me that
the dream could not last. That realization was not as sudden as when my chance
for all-city high-school track medals was dashed when I broke an ankle just
before the big meet in the Los Angeles Coliseum. There was no single
calamitous incident. But gradually the sweet smell of success turned slightly
rancid. As traditional achievements became less satisfying and little failures
accumulated, stalagmites of disillusionment, anger, and confusion built up
over several years.8 What I had naively assumed to be the natural order of
things turned out to be but a passing phase conditioned by historical factors
and luck.

_After the Fall_

In 1972 someone even younger than me, and with (at the time) a less impressive
teaching and publication record, was suddenly given tenure in sociology. I had
to give up my big office as a result. My book went out of print. A race-
relations reader I edited did not sell well enough to recoup the advance. The
race-relations text was never written. A partially written introductory text
done with several colleagues, and which was supposed to make us comfortable
and even rich, was rejected by the publisher. A number of editors I knew lost
or changed jobs. After more than a decade of receiving everything I applied
for, a grant application was rejected, and then another.

The Republicans had taken over Washington. Whites writing about minority
groups and favoring integration came under increased attack from segments of
the left and the right. Liberal approaches to social issues became less
fashionable.

Advertisements made up an increased proportion of my mail. The reporter
stopped calling. The pink phone messages were mostly from the library about
overdue books and reminders to bring home a quart of milk and some bananas.

When my two most supportive senior colleagues and mentors left Harvard for
Stanford, I realized that it was time to look further afield for work. Yet by
1972 the job offers had become fewer. A long promised job in the University of
California system turned out not to be there when I finally wanted it. A
promised year at the Russell Sage Foundation suddenly fell through. I had
several years left on my Harvard contract in 1973, but in an anticipatory
version of you-can't-fire-me-I-quit, I left Harvard for an associate
professorship at MIT. Although certainly a good move in a market that was
starting to tighten up, it was not the move to full professor that I naturally
assumed would be my right should I leave Harvard.

My son made some great ashtrays in his progressive private school, but my wife
and I came to have doubts about its permissive learning environment. Leaving
Harvard meant giving up our ideal Cambridge apartment in our ideal academic
ghetto and moving to a faceless suburb with affordable housing and neighbors
whose politics, life-styles, and landscaping were far from what we had become
accustomed to. The engine block in our foreign car cracked. A forest fire
burned our land on Martha's Vineyard and exposed its proximity to the
Edgartown dump. We sold the land.

I now had to confront ghosts that had lain dormant during the past decade of
continuous graduate school and professional success. My need for achievement
had been well served in those early years. I was able to leverage the success
I found against inner demons always ready to tell me that I was not worth
much.

Of course the need to display occupational merit badges is part of the
American achievement ethos. But I was also responding to childhood experiences
with a father who, whatever his virtues, was difficult to please. His own
needs were such that he made me feel very inferior.9 As a result I had a
strong need to prove myself. Seeking the external symbols of success was a way
to demonstrate to the world and myself that the inner doubts I harbored were
mistaken. Like Max Weber's Puritans looking for a sign of redemption through
their worldly striving, I looked for evidence of my competence through
competitive efforts --in high school through athletics, speech contests,
student government, and stylish conspicuous consumption, 10 and later in
graduate school and beyond by applying for grants and submitting papers for
publication. 11

My experience in those early years had supported a simple, adolescent,
Nietzschean (and probably male) view in which the world could be neatly
divided into winners and losers, leaders and led, those in the inner circle
and those outside it. Of course, depending on the arena, one might be in or
out. But many of my youthful memories revolve around a desperate need to be in
that circle. Good taste required not openly acknowledging the intensity of the
drive or that sweet, smug feeling that success made possible. But the quiet,
invidious feelings achievement permitted were terribly important. Through
grit, determination, hard work, and luck I had done a good job of showing the
world where I stood --at least up to the early 1970s. 12

Then things changed. The appropriate tragic model was not the Greek hero
destroyed by his own virtues, but the Biblical hero Job brought down by random
external forces. I was the same person doing what I had always done (and
probably even doing it better), and yet things were not working as they had
before. I had jumped through what I thought were the appropriate burning
hoops, but the cheers were now muffled. 13 I had worked very hard to reach the
brass ring, but it was always just out of reach. I had constructed a positive
self-image based on possessing a nice suit of clothes, but they now were in
danger of becoming outmoded and even being repossessed. I was suddenly
vulnerable in a way I had not been before. What is more, the achievements that
had given me so much pleasure in the past seemed less fulfilling on
repetition.

Not even old enough for a real mid-life crisis, I went through a period of
reassessment and asked all the familiar questions: What did it all add up to?
Was it worth it? Why keep playing the same old game if the connection between
merit, hard work, and reward was not assured or if the reward was not all that
great to begin with? What were my goals? Who was I, after losing some of the
formal trappings of success? What was important? Was there life after Harvard
and the bountiful harvest of my first decade in sociology? My answers were
hardly original, but they worked for me.

I came to terms with both winning and losing and was better able, as Kipling
advised, to "meet with Triumph and Disaster and treat these two imposters just
the same." I developed a perspective that made both failure and success easier
to understand and accept. A part of this perspective is awareness of a Woody
Allen paradox wherein when we do not have what we want, we are unhappy, but
should we get it, it turns out not to be enough. 14

_Seven Characteristics of Success_

While success is nice to have, it is not all it is cracked up to be:

1\. It does not last. Mark Twain said, "One can live for two months on a good
compliment." Depending on one's psyche two hours or two weeks might also
apply. But as a character in a Neil Simon play observes, "Nothing recedes like
success." With appalling regularity, there is always a later edition of a
journal or newspaper telling someone else's story. Books go out of print and
journal articles cease to be read. The pages rapidly yellow and are forgotten.
People ask what you are doing now. Colleagues who know what you have done
retire, and they are replaced by younger persons unaware of your
contributions. To make matters worse, unlike the natural sciences, sociology
is not very cumulative. Whatever social wheel you discover may be rediscovered
a few years later by someone at another school or in another discipline
unaware of what you have done (or at least not acknowledging it in a
footnote). The Romans were wise to have servants march next to victorious
generals in parades and whisper in their ears, "Fame is a passing phenomenon."

2\. You can never be successful enough (at least in your own eyes). No matter
how good you are, there is always someone better. Whatever you did, you could
always have done it better and done more, or done it earlier. You never were
as important or well known as you thought you were. Even the truly famous are
not exempt. 15 What is worse, you never really get there. As Durkheim
observed, in a rapidly transforming society you can never achieve enough
success. When what is at stake is something as open-ended as reputation,
productivity, impact, or accumulation, there is no clear limit. With each
higher level of achievement the definition of success changes such that it is
forever out of reach. By contrast, failure more often seems limited and
finite: you know when you have hit the wall.

3\. The more success you have, the harder it becomes to reach the next level
of achievement. As one moves from getting accepted to graduate school, to
getting a Ph.D., to getting a teaching job, to getting tenure and national
awards and distinction, the competition gets stiffer, the number of slots
declines, and the price of success increases. With each level of achievement
the field is narrowed. Once a certain level is reached, there is little
variation among participants. Everyone is qualified and hardworking, and there
are fewer rewards.

4\. There is a diminishing-returns effect. National Basketball Association
star Larry Bird captured it in his comment on receiving the Most Valuable
Player Award a second time: "It's funny because when you're a kid you can't
wait to get those trophies. You get 'em home and shine 'em up. Now I forget
all about 'em. I got one last year that I left in a friend's truck for a whole
year before he reminded me of it." 16 The satisfaction from external rewards
is not as great the second or third time around, whether it be delivering or
publishing a paper, writing a book, or getting a grant. Part of the reason may
be just the diminution of passion that comes with aging. But repetition does
not have the same kick. The sense of curiosity and expectation that
accompanies the initial pursuit of rewards weakens once they have been
achieved. It has become clear to me that a meaningful life cannot be
constructed out of repetitively doing things to please an impersonal public.

5\. Success may have costly and unintended side effects (apart from the price
initially paid to achieve it). There are the obvious dangers of hubris and
taking yourself too seriously and the bottomless-pit (or perhaps ceilingless-
roof) quality of success. Less obvious is the paradox that success brings less
time to do the very thing for which you are now being recognized. In an
academic setting increased achievement is associated with increased
responsibility. Being well known brings good-citizenship requests to review
articles and books, write letters of recommendation, and serve on committees.
Although such invitations are symbolic of success and can be directly or
indirectly marshaled to obtain still more success, they can seriously
undermine productivity. A virtue of obscurity is greater control over your
time and greater privacy.

Public visibility may bring requests for more information about your research,
job offers, and speaking, consulting, and research invitations. But being
quoted or reviewed in the print media or seen on television may also bring
appeals from job seekers, salespersons, and charities and requests for free
advice or help on topics you know little about. When your topic is
controversial, as mine on race, civil disorders, secret police, and
surveillance tended to be, you are also likely to get bizarre missives
including hate mail and threats, incomprehensible letters from very crazy
people, and be besieged by persons seeking to recruit you to propagate strange
ideas and schemes.

6\. The correlation between ability, or merit, and success is far from
perfect. This is of course a central sociological message. Factors beyond
merit that may bear on the distribution of rewards include the makeup of the
selection committee, what it had done the previous year, timing, the
characteristics of the applicant pool, and intellectual, ideological, or
personal biases. Even when the selection process is fair, rejections are often
more a comment on the scarcity of rewards than on the incompetence of
applicants. The major factors here are surely organizational. But the
structure and ambiguity of reward situations also make it possible to mask the
role sometimes played by corruption. With age and experience you come to feel
comfortable judging, and even sometimes doubting the judges. 17 There are
enough questionable cases involving tenure and promotion, the awarding of
grants, and the acceptance of materials for publication to make clear the role
of nonachievement criteria in social reward. Cynical awareness of this state
of affairs need not make you throw in the towel or become corrupt, but it may
mean slowing down, putting less emphasis on outcomes, and becoming more
philosophical about failure and success. This awareness can take some of the
sting out of defeat. It also ought to take some of the pride out of victory.
18

7\. There is no reason to expect that what you do next will be better, by your
own standards, than what you have done in the past or will necessarily bring
equivalent or greater recognition and reward. In graduate school and the early
professional years this may not be true. You start with little, so each
achievement is a milestone and more rewarding than the last. Yet this training
effect is short-lived. Career satisfaction in academia and the quality and
quantity of productivity are not linear, in spite of the rhetoric of cultural
optimism and metaphors of growth. Academics are not like professional
athletes, many of whom gradually peak over a period of three to six years and
then fall off. For the minority of Ph.D.'s who continue to do research after
receiving their degrees, the average pattern for both the quality of their
work and the recognition it receives is probably jagged. 19 There may be
periods of intense creativity and productivity, followed by periods of
reading, pursuing unrelated interests, or laying the ground for the next
period of activity.

Fallow periods, if that be the right term, are nothing to worry about (at
least if you have tenure). As in agriculture, they may even be functional.

_Practical Lessons_

Three broad practical lessons follow from these perspectives on success and
failure: (1) value the process of creating as an end itself;  
(2) develop new professional goals;  
(3) do not make your career your life. Turning to the first, it is necessary
to value the process of creating. Work has to be fun and interesting in its
own right, apart from any external rewards once it is finished. Harry Chapin
caught this idea when he sang:

_Getting off this dirty bus_  
_one thing I understood._  
_It has got to be the going_  
_not the getting there that's good._

In graduate school I was impressed by Erich Fromm's argument to live life such
that you did everything as an end in itself and not as a means. At the time I
saw this directive in terms of interpersonal relations. It never occurred to
me that the argument had local occupational application. But I now see that
once you have tenure, if you do not enjoy the research or writing (apart from
whatever payoff the finished product might bring), then it is not worth doing.
I came to realize that I got pleasure from finding partial answers to
questions I wondered about, turning a clever phrase, ordering a set of ideas,
and seeing connections between apparently unrelated phenomena. In a
competitive world of uncertain and perhaps unsatisfying reward there is much
to be said for valuing the process of production as an end in itself. 20

The focus on process and becoming can mean less concern over the quantity of
work produced and fewer comparisons to colleagues. It can protect against
judging yourself by some quantitative standard wherein whatever you do next
has to be more and better than what you did earlier and bring greater rewards.
If for personal satisfaction what matters is enjoying your work, then it does
not much matter how many publications that work eventually leads to, or how
quickly, or even in which places it gets published. I am not particularly
troubled that some of my work may never be published, or may be published a
decade after its completion, or may bounce down the prestige hierarchy of
journals before finding a resting place. This attitude contrasts markedly with
the rational cost-benefit calculation and the intensity and snobbishness about
publication I felt as a young academic. What matters most is a sense of
engagement with your work and of movement. I do not deny that the need for
social recognition can be congruent with, and even conducive to, the
advancement of knowledge or that there is pleasure in seeing an article or
book in print --producers need markets for validation and feedback. But that
is not enough to sustain research activity, particularly after a professional
reputation is established.

A second conclusion involves the need to develop new professional goals
because of the diminishing-returns effect and the increasing difficulty of
climbing ever higher. I broadened my professional and personal goals
(described in the next section). In the case of the former, I expanded my
intellectual repertoire. You are likely to discover early in your career that
you quickly master contemporary sociological research knowledge regarding your
topic (or if not, at least get bored with it). Occasionally there will be some
highly informative, useful, or fresh empirical findings, concepts, theoretical
approaches, or methods, but not often. Although by and large it is not true
that sociology consists of "findings of the obvious by the devious" (as an
Alison Lurie character suggests), there is not much new under the sun after
you have been out in it for a while. 21

I sustained intellectual interest by developing new substantive areas of
interest, turning to comparative research and to other disciplines,
investigating new sources of data and methods, and taking up consulting. My
initial interest was in race and ethnic relations, part of a more general
interest in stratification. Partly as a result of being a white studying
blacks in an age of black power, but more out of the fatigue I have described,
I shifted from race-relations research to questions combining my interest in
race and ethnic issues with an interest in collective behavior and, later,
deviance and social control. I now see the latter giving way to an interest in
questions concerning technology and society. Such moves are gradual and not
very rational. You cannot predict your intellectual trajectory by what you are
concerned with in graduate school. But I would venture that unless you change
and expand, it is easy to get turned off to intellectual inquiry.

Variety can come from studying in some other country what you have studied
here. It is fun, and there are solid intellectual grounds for doing it. I went
to India to study race relations. I went to France and England to study
police. I hope to go to Scandinavia to study computer systems. Beyond the new
intellectual horizons travel presents, it offers a new set of colleagues and
new bodies of literature and outlets for publication. Whatever knowledge may
be gained, I get a strange pleasure from struggling to read the French journal
I receive. Variety can also come from learning what other disciplines have to
say about your topic. One consequence of having spent more than a decade in a
planning department that is problem centered rather than discipline-centered
is a continual reminder of the variety of perspectives, methods, and data
sources needed to understand a phenomenon. In this sense discipline based
professional education, with its insular, self-aggrandizing, and often
imperialistic tendencies, does an intellectual disservice.

Although I always start with sociological questions, they are no longer
enough. Over the years they have been supplemented by a series of questions
from psychology, political science, economics, history, law, and ethics. What
is more, for the research that touches on public issues I have added a broad
normative question: given what I have learned from my research, where do I
stand on a policy issue, and what would I recommend? In graduate school, still
reeling from the conservatism of the 1950s and the thrust to make sociology a
science, such issues were ignored or seen as disreputable. I have also
broadened my definition of data and of what I feel comfortable working with.
For both my M.A. thesis on Father Coughlin and my Ph.D. dissertation on the
civil-rights movement I used standard survey research data. I continued to
conduct survey research for several years after getting the Ph.D., but now
rarely do. Instead, I have made increased use of observational, historical,
and literary materials. My book _Undercover_ has a historical chapter. In my
work on forms of interdependence between rule breakers and rule enforcers I am
analyzing novels and film. In my work on social movements I am investigating
the role of art and songs in mobilizing people. My work on electronic
surveillance methods for discovering violations deals directly with ethics.
This broadening I advocate may not endear you to those with highly specialized
disciplinary concerns who have their hands on the reward levers of your
profession. But it is likely to enhance the quality of the intellectual
product. The sense of growth and development it offers feels good and helps
keep one fresh.

What I have described represents diversification rather than displacement. I
have expanded the questions I am concerned with, the kinds of evidence I see
as data, the places I look for them, and the methods I use. The movement
between questions, data, methods, and location has not been linear. Instead it
has, to a degree, been cyclical. I think that characteristic is another key to
staying motivated. It is easy and fun to come back to a topic after having
been away for a while. New materials will have appeared, and the experiences
you have had in the interim may cause you to see what was once familiar in a
new way. There is some salvation in moving back and forth between qualitative
and quantitative, domestic and international, contemporary and historical,
basic and applied questions and the various social-science disciplines.

This diversity also makes it easier to have a few irons always in the fire. If
nothing more, it gives one a modest reason to go to work to check out the
mail. Beyond statistically improving your chances of success, having submitted
multiple articles, proposals, and grant applications can serve as a kind of
safety net for the imagination. When a rejection comes, you have the hope that
the other things still out will meet with a happier fate. Of course, there is
the risk of a harder fall if they all end up being rejected. However, with
enough nets and fishing lines out, that need never occur. The future has an
open-ended quality that can be wonderfully conducive to optimism.

I also guard against demoralization from rejection by typing out two letters
whenever I submit an article. The first is to the journal to which I am
submitting the article, and the second (undated) is to the next place I will
send the article if it is rejected. I would not deny, though, that there is
also wisdom in knowing when to fold, as well as when to hold. Another
professional goal that I actively pursued for a while (but am now ambivalent
about) involved earning extra income through consulting and textbook writing.
Earning money did not become an obsession, but I stopped seeing it as
necessarily an unworthy goal. It was what I did to earn it, I thought, that
merited moral evaluation, not the goal _per se_.

If making all the right academic moves did not insure success or satisfaction,
why not use the same skills and credentials to get rich? The payoff was likely
to be more certain and immediate, and the standard required was less
demanding.

Given disillusionment and fatigue with academic amateurism, it was easy to
rationalize spending more time playing for pay instead of for honor,
footnotes, and the acclaim of adolescents.22 However, as will be noted, this
emphasis is not without problems if you remain committed to academic values.

A reassessment of the bourgeois life began with my move from Berkeley to
Cambridge. My senior colleagues were living well, and well beyond their
academic salaries. Spacious, elegantly restored historic homes with cleaning
services, travel to exotic places in the winter and vacation homes in the
summer, camp and enriched education for children, gourmet foods and foreign
sports cars were not available to persons who gave all their royalties to
political causes (as I had originally planned to do) or who only did social
research gratis on behalf of causes they believed in. This shift in emphasis
began symbolically with my gradual acceptance of, and eventual belief in, the
usefulness of an electric can opener. We received one as a wedding present in
the 1960s, and it stayed in its unopened box for many years. For reasons I
cannot clearly recall, at the time it seemed to epitomize all that was wrong
with our society. Brick-and-board book shelves were replaced by real book
shelves. A new sofa eliminated the need for a draped Mexican serape to
disguise the sorry state of the sagging couch beneath it. We came to view
paying someone to clean the house as salvation rather than exploitation.

While it was nice to have the extra income, earning outside money was not all
that great either. It got boring, and I did not like the feeling of being a
sociologist for sale: have ideas and methods, will travel. I was not
comfortable with the salesmanship that pleasing and finding clients seemed to
require. After all, I had chosen an academic life rather than the commercial
life of my ancestors precisely to avoid the need to pander to customers. The
pressures to meet deadlines were much greater than in the university. I felt
the consulting reports I wrote were generally unappreciated and unread, except
for the oversimplified and watered down "executive summaries" with which they
had to begin. There were also role conflicts. The norms of scholarship
sometimes conflicted with the interests of my employer. The substitution of
market and political criteria for those of truth and intellectual rigor
troubled me. It was alienating to be told what research to do and to have
business persons and bureaucrats place conditions on intellectual inquiry. I
did not like the lack of editorial and distributional control over what was
produced.

I encountered bad faith on the part of employers. Thus, in an evaluation of a
community-oriented criminal-justice project I pointed out how innovative and
important the program was, while also honestly documenting problems and ways
of overcoming them. Imagine my surprise when the research document was not
used to improve the program but to kill it. It became clear that the hiring
agency viewed research as a tool to pursue a course of action that had been
decided before the research was undertaken.

In another example a well-established consulting firm hired me to write a
proposal for a large grant and promised me a major role in it. The grant was
funded, although all I received was an invitation to serve on the advisory
panel of the study.

I felt uncomfortable with the pressures and temptations to dilute work, cut
corners, treat issues superficially, and delegate tasks I was hired to do to
much lower-paid graduate students. These could be rationalized since
consulting standards were generally lower than those of academic peer review.
The goal was to maximize income rather than obtain a high level of
craftsmanship, which in most cases would not have been recognized or
appreciated.

I emphasized earning extra income for about five years. I met with some modest
financial success and learned some things about government programs, textbook
writing, and social science as business. It was a nice break from my early
years but clearly could not sustain me. I gradually moved back to a
predominant focus on academic work and caught a second wind.

I still appreciate the benefits of doing sociology in applied and remunerative
settings, and I have not given up such activities entirely --they can keep you
fresh, involved, and informed and be a source of research data and a way to
influence policy and shape debate. It is refreshing to meet people who
actually do things rather than merely talk about what others do. Yet if you
are fortunate enough to have a job in an academic setting, it seems foolish
not to take advantage of the freedom for intellectual inquiry it offers.

The third practical conclusion I reached was that your career cannot (or
should not) be your entire life. Not only did I question the payoff from
occupational success beyond a certain point, but I also saw the price that
excessive devotion to a career could extract from personal and family life.
The prospect of being a narrow, one-dimensional person with a good chance of
having family trouble and an early heart attack was unappealing, even if there
had been greater certainty in the hardwork-success -happiness connection.

In the initial years after moving from Harvard to MIT I left several projects
undone for lack of funding and graduate students. A bit weary and cynical
about the single-minded pursuit of academic achievement, I devoted more time
to highly personal, noncompetitive activities over which I had more control. I
spent more and better time with my family, rebuilt a dilapidated Victorian
house, learned to play the guitar, read novels, kayaked wild rivers, and
worked on a family history project. Watching "Sesame Street" with a young
companion, plastering and painting walls, scrutinizing the 1840 Detroit census
for information about a great-grandfather, struggling with an out-of-tune
guitar, and catching up on a decade's worth of unread novels were far removed
from the usual academic obsessions and compulsions.

The respite from an unrelenting focus on academic work gave me great pleasure.
Concrete activities provided immediate rewards. Ascriptive rather than
achievement criteria were present. There were no risks and no concern over
whether distant judges would find me wanting. These activities belonged to me
in some very basic sense. They could not be taken away or withheld by
editorial or academic gatekeepers. My family history, for example, was simply
waiting to be discovered. The work was intensely personal and involved no
deadlines or evaluations.

Yet as with exclusively playing the monastic academic game or going
commercial, focusing primarily on quality of life also has its limits. It is
not much fun to paint the same room a second time. Small children quickly
become adolescents who do not want to go on family outings with you. You can
trace back family history only so far.

After five years of spending considerable time on other things, I returned to
the conventional academic activities of applying for grants, writing journal
articles, and presenting papers. I was fortunate to find and help develop a
broad topic involving social control, deception, and technology that has
sustained me for more than a decade. I find issues of surveillance and society
and the revelation and concealment of information endlessly fascinating. The
topic has implications for social theory and social change. It is of interest
to academic, practitioner, and general audiences, and I have not had trouble
obtaining resources to investigate it. Through working with congressional
committees, federal agencies, public interest groups, and the media, the
research has also had some modest impact on shaping national debate and on
public policy. 23 But I have not pursued this project with the same single-
mindedness or desire for professional success of the early years. My life has
become more balanced.

There are some issues that I have not resolved. One concerns feelings of being
underutilized and underappreciated,24 which comes with being the only academic
sociologist in an interdisciplinary department of urban studies and planning
at a technology institute. 25 To be sure, in other ways my department and MIT
have offered a superb home. There are advantages to being left alone in an
environment where no one is like yourself. But it leaves a vague sense of
loss.26 The part of academic life that I have found most satisfying is
mentoring and working with younger colleagues and students on research. I
would have learned and published more and done less self-questioning had I had
the steady flow of students and the day-to-day validation and chance to
contribute that large graduate sociology programs offer. It does not feel
right to offer a new class or hold office hours and have few or no students
appear. What kind of a professor are you if no one seems interested in what
you profess?

Another unresolved issue is what to do with the anger I still feel toward
certain persons who have treated me unfairly or simply wounded my pride. These
actions were in discretionary contexts where what I believe to be the
ideological and personal motives could easily be masked. On any broad scale
such events were minor and are now long gone. Intellectually I know that to
dwell on the past is unproductive and I may even be wrong in attributing
personal and political moves to some of the rejections, but the feelings
remain. Life is too short to waste time on replaying the past, and the
evidence indicating unfairness is rarely unequivocal.

But in general I have ceased being so self-reflective. The issues about work,
life, and identity that had troubled me became less important. I realized I
was caught in the paradoxes of achievement and its discontents. I became more
accepting of dilemmas and tensions that had once consumed enormous amounts of
emotional energy. Instead of viewing these as problems to be solved and
choices to be made, I was better able to accept personal and professional
contradictions and multiple motives as the order of things and, in Robert
Merton's words, to appreciate the "functional value of the tension between
polarities."27 Sometimes I would be drawn to one end of a continuum and at the
other times to its opposite. Sometimes I would try to combine them in my
writing or bridge them in my political work.

I also realized that I wanted a number of things that could not be had to the
fullest extent or necessarily all at the same time. I compromised and settled
for less of any one in order to have some of each.28 Instead of worrying about
what I "really" was and what I valued most, I saw that I was probably more
marginal than most people. I came to value being something of an invisible
person and social chameleon, able to fit into, and move in and out of,
different worlds. This quality may be part of my intellectual interest in
deception, passing, and infiltration.

I am both the intensely driven, hardworking, competitive, ambitious person
(like those I encountered early in my career) and the laid-back bohemian
surfer of my California days; the intellectual interested in ideas for their
own sake and one of the progeny of Karl Marx and C. Wright Mills who wanted to
see ideas linked to change (perhaps a committed spectator, as Raymond Aron
termed it); the quantitative and systematic sociologist and the journalist
seeking to describe in language that people could understand what Robert Park
called the big story; the scholar and the handyman; the athletic, river-
running, beer-drinking, former fraternity man who could admit to still having
some neanderthal-like macho attitudes and feelings and the righteous carrier
of a new gender morality; a Jew with German and Eastern European roots and a
secular American at home on both coasts (and in northern as well as southern
California); the pin-striped suiter who could easily pass among elites and yet
announce when the emperor was scantily clad or naked --but always with
civility and in the King's English. And, as Levi-Strauss notes, sociological
inquiry can be enhanced by the skill of distantiation.

A cynic might suggest that the cautionary wisdom I have offered about success
be viewed skeptically, as sour grapes. Are my new goals just compromises made
out of necessity or, with appropriate professional socialization, is it
possible to start a career with them? If my career trajectory had continued
upward at its original pace, and had there been no fall, would I still have
reached the same conclusions? 29 1 certainly would not have thought as much
about these issues, and the emphasis might be somewhat different. But since
the fall I described was temporary, I am confident that my advice is sound and
represents more than the idiosyncrasies of my personal situation. It is based
on two decades of successes and failures, and not only those in the beginning.

Unlike the Doctorow character quoted in the epigraph to this essay, I came
East rather than West as a young man, and my expectations did not really wear
away. However, they did change, and I was able to put them in perspective.
Human existence is dominated by vast contingent forces that we gamely try to
channel and control. That we sometimes succeed should no more lull us into
thinking we can continually pull it off than should failure lead us to stop
trying.

It was once said of Willie Nelson that he wrote songs out of love but was not
above accepting the money. Nor am I above accepting professional recognition
should it come. Yet I have become more concerned with process and learned more
about how to deal with outcomes, whatever they are. I have become less
troubled by rejection and also less thrilled by success. I have sought a more
balanced life.

The Greeks gave their Olympic champions laurel wreaths as an ironic reminder
that victory could be hollow. In Greek mythology Apollo pursues the nymph
Daphne. She flees, and he runs after her. Abhorring the thought of marriage
she prays to her father to save her by changing the form that has so attracted
Apollo. Just as Apollo is upon her she is changed into a laurel tree. Is it a
sign of modernity and a cause of its malaise that we offer our Olympic heroes
gold instead?

[Back to Main Page](garyhome.html) | Top

_Notes_

I am grateful to my wife, Phyllis Rakita Marx, who has patiently and lovingly
helped me sort out these issues, and for further critical comments and
suggestions I wish to thank Jerry Aumente, Judith Auerbach, Murray Davis,
Rosabeth Kanter, John McCarthy, Nancy Reichman, Zick Rubin, Susan Silbey,
Barry Stein, Mike Useem, John Van Maanen, Chuck Wexler, and Jim Wood.

1\. Among other themes I would like to pursue at some point are the experience
of being at Berkeley in the 1960s; the move from the West Coast to the East
Coast; family life, parenting, and professional ambitions; teaching; the
selection of research topics; the uses of sociology and the role of moral
commitment in sustaining research; the method (and challenge) of writing
critical yet scientifically grounded essays. I have dealt a bit with the first
theme in "Role Models and Role Distance: A Remembrance of Erving Goffman,"
Theory and Society 13 (1984), and the last two in the introduction to
_Muckraking Sociology_ (New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Books, 1972).

2\. This seems to be particularly true for a discipline such as sociology that
specializes in the study of stratification and in which there is only limited
consensus about what constitutes good work. One observer even suggests that
academic fauna can be ordered according to the degree of concern shown toward
the outward presentation of self. Variation is inversely related to a
discipline's certainty of results: "Thus at one end of the spectrum occupied
by sociologists and professors of literature, where there is uncertainty as to
how to discover the facts, the nature of the facts to be discovered, and
whether indeed there are any facts at all, all attention is focused on one's
peers, whose regard is the sole criterion for professional success. Great
pains are taken in the development of the impressive persona.... At the other
end, where, as the mathematicians themselves are fond of pointing out, 'a
proof is a proof,' no concern need be given to making oneself acceptable to
others; and as a rule none whatsoever is given." Rebecca Goldstein, _The Mind-
Body Problem_. (New York: Norton, 1983), p. 202.

3\. Only later, when I gave what I thought was an equally timely paper and
received only a handful of requests, did I realize that on average 150 might
be more appropriate as a lifetime total.

4\. This more interpretive, discursive, sensitizing style inspired by authors
such as David Riesman, Erving Goffman, Herbert Gans, and Howard Becker was
later to get me into trouble when I had to take greater initiative in
submitting articles and applying for grants. Ground rules different from the
ones pertaining to the invited contribution were in force. In assessing my
mounting collection of failures in the early 1970s, I learned that as a humble
petitioner, rather than an invited guest, one had to conform more rigidly to
the conventional academic rules. Moreover, at that time quantitative methods
as ends in themselves were ascendant.

5\. I am reporting the elitist views encountered at Harvard. The University of
California, though not an Ivy League school, was certainly an institution of
enormous distinction. The consequences of being around highly successful
people who work very hard and see themselves as among the chosen are mixed. On
the one hand, they become role models and you mimic them. You get more done
than most people, and their sponsorship and advice help your career. On the
other hand, you have doubts about whether you could ever do anything as
impressive as they have done and (even if you could) whether you wish to pay
the price that such success may require.

6\. With success came ever greater aspirations. My modest goals as a young
professional were closely linked to what I thought I could accomplish. This
was no doubt a self-protective device. I had not yet learned to shoot for the
moon with the hope that if you miss, you might still grab a few stars. I think
the willingness to take risks and face failure are as (or more) important a
determinant of academic success as native ability.

7\. Even with a degree from Harvard, the odds were still against tenure, as
the cases of prize-winning sociologists Theda Skocpol and Paul Starr indicate.

8\. In retrospect I now see that this pattern was more a leveling off than a
fall, but that was not how it felt at the time. What had been unusual (and
more worthy of explanation) was the degree and consistency of the early
success, not the far more common pattern of intermingled success and failure
that followed.

There are of course variants of falls. Some are easier to deal with than
others. However poignantly felt, mine was gradual and partial. I had lots of
time for hedging bets, putting out safety nets, and devising alternatives.
That kind of fall is easier to respond to than one that is swift, total, and
unexpected. The latter is the case with the assistant professor who had
planned a large celebration and whose oh-so-sure department head had sent him
a case of champagne the night before the faculty voted to deny him tenure.

9\. Two examples will suffice. An account I heard too many times was that when
my mother would push me in the baby carriage accompanied by our handsome
collie, people would stop her and say, What a beautiful dog. A corresponding
family tale stressed my father's resemblance to Rudolph Valentino.

10\. To wit a "real sharp," chopped and lowered 1949 Pontiac convertible with
duo carburetors, chrome pipes, and dice hanging from the rearview mirror and
what used to be called "real cool threads" --a powder-blue one-button-roll

