**Handout 1  
Syllabus and Schedule of Classes  
Geography 1101 World Regional Geography First Summer 1998  
** Meeting Time: MTWRF, 9:45-11:15 AM  
Meeting Place: McEniry 146  
Instructor: Jerry Ingalls  
Office: McEniry 466  
Phone: 547-4260  
Office Hours: 11:00 AM -Noon, Monday through Thursday, or by appointment **  
  
**_SUBJECT MATTER  
_ This course utilizes six of the world's cultural regions as laboratories for
an exploration of the complex relationship that exists between humans, the
environments in which they live, their cultural background and an ever
increasing global interdependence. One goal of this class is an exploration of
the historical, environmental and cultural uniqueness of each region. In this
way we develop (or deepen) our appreciation of the character of individual
cultural regions. However, in an era of increasing global interconnectivity
where places are linked by common economic and political interests and ever
improving communication technology it behooves us to understand the
similarities among cultures and regions as much as the differences. To this
end initial classes develop various global issues such as trade, economic
development, population growth and resource provision. We then utilize these
geographical perspectives and models in an analysis of six cultural regions.  
  
_SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES_ (In order of priority and emphasis).  
1\. To develop a working knowledge of six selected cultural regions of the
world, of their specific problems and of the global nature of these problems.  
2\. To define and operationalize key global concepts such as economic
development, demographic transition, nation, state and nation-state and
cultural regions based on language and history.  
3\. To learn the location of the major nation-states of the world.  
  
_CONDUCT OF THIS CLASS:  
_ This class will be conducted under the provisions of the _UNCC Code of
Student Academic_ _Integrity._ It is the responsibility of each student to be
thoroughly familiar with the _Code_ . Under no conditions will joint efforts,
or collaboration on _any_ assignment or test be accepted.  
  
__SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS OF THE COURSE  
__ 1\. Attend all lectures--75% or more of all test materials will come from
lectures.  
2\. Take all examinations--exams are non-comprehensive and there is no
comprehensive final,  
thus, _everyone must take all 4 exams or fail this class regardless of the
final score .  
_ 3\. Evaluation of your class performance will be based on: _Possible Points  
_ a. Class attendance (1 point for each class attended). 25  
b. Examinations (4 exams of 50 questions each; 100 points for each exam) 400  
c. Map quizzes (3 quizzes for a total of 120 questions at 1 point each) _._
_120  
__TOTAL POSSIBLE POINTS_ 545  
  
_TEXTBOOK OR MATERIALS REQUIRED:  
_ Michael Bradshaw, _The New Global Order: A World Regional Geography_ , 1997.
Other readings will be provided.  
  
_GRADING AND TAKING EXAMS:_ _  
_ 1\. Make-up exams are scheduled for Thursday, June 25 at 11:30 AM in McEniry
466. Make-up are essay or open-ended questions. Failure to take all four exams
will result in automatic failure.  
2\. If you need to reschedule an exam for personal reasons or because you have
several exams on the same day, please speak to the instructor. It can probably
be arranged!!  
3\. Grading is done on the basis of a 10 percentage point scale: A = 90%, B =
80%, C = 70%, etc.  
4\. Regular exams are curved to middle C or 75%. There is no curve for map
quizzes.  
5\. The Map Quizzes. You need to memorize ___only the nation-states (countries
)_ of the world for these quizzes. The appendix in the text book (Data Bank,
pages 556 to 579) provides a list of the states you must know. Add Northern
Ireland, the Gaza Strip and the West Bank to this list.  
  
  
**_SCHEDULE OF CLASSES  
  
#   Day  Date  Topic Readings from Text  
  
Part 1. Introduction  
_**1  W   May 27  What is geography? Geography and this course; Culture and
Cultural Realms Chp 1  
2  R    May 28  What is a country? Culture, Cultural Hearths, Nation, State
and Nation-state  
3  F    May 29  What is a country? Nationalism and related terms  
4  M   June 1   Population, demographic transition and global Chp 1; Handouts
population trends and patterns  
5  T    June 2   Global Population and the Future; Doomsday or not? Handouts  
6  W   June 3   Economic Development: Capital and its sources  
7  R    June 4   Economic Development in the global economy  
8  F    June 5   **Examination 1  
  
_Part 2. Africa and Latin America  
_** 9   M   June 8   Africa: Overview, physical and environmental issues Chp 2  
10  T   June 9   Africa: Historical and economic development  
11  W  June 10  Africa: Examples for the future? Kenya, Nigeria, The Congo
(Zaire) and South Africa  
12  R   June 11  Latin America: Physical and cultural overview Chp 9  
13  F   June 12  Latin America: Mexico,Central America, Caribbean  
14  M  June 15   **Examination 2; Map Quiz 1; Covers Africa and Latin
America**  
  
**_Part 3. Mid East and North Africa  
_** 15  T   June 16  Mid East-North Africa: Physical and Cultural Overview Chp
3  
16  W  June 17  Mid East-North Africa: Muslims and Arabs; Wealth and Change  
17  R   June 18  Mid East-North Africa: Iran and Iraq: The US  
18  F   June 19  Mid East-North Africa: Israel and Palestine  
19  M  June 22  Exam 3: Mid East and North Africa; Map Quiz: All Mid East,
North Africa, Asia  
(less Russian Rhelm), Australia, New Zealand.  
  
_**Part 4. The Russian Realm and Europe**  
_ 20  T   June 23  Russian Realm: Environment and history Chp 7, 325-352;
364-379  
21  W  June 24  Russian Realm: From Czars to Communism and Beyond  
22  R   June 25  Russian Realm: Russia, the USSR and the CIS  
23  F   June 26  Europe: Physical and Cultural Overview Chp 6; Chp 7 356-364  
24  M  June 29  Europe: West and East Europe; Regions in Transition?  
25  T   June 30  Europe: Union or Fragmentation?  
26  W  July 1   **Examination 4; Map Quiz 3; Covers Europe and the Russian
Realm  
** It is scheduled during the regular final exam period; however, it will
begin at  
9:30 AM not 8:00 AM. This is not a final exam and the maximum time allowed is  
90 minutes  

* * *

[Home Page](../../index.html) |[ Faculty Page](../faculty.html) | [Gerald
Ingalls  
  
](../ingalls/ingalls.html).  

