### ENGL 4301

### [Tim Morris](/english/tim/index.html)

### History and Development of the English Language

### Winter 2000-2001 8AM-noon Mon/Tues/Wed/Thurs (plus one Friday) 310 Preston
Hall

### office hours: by appointment only (203 Carlisle)

### [tmorris@uta.edu](mailto:tmorris@uta.edu)

### office phone: metro 817 272 2692

### office mailbox 203 Carlisle Hall

### mailing address Box 19035, UTA 76019

to the schedule of readings and assignments

[Click here to explore linguistics resources on the
Web](linglinx/linglink.html)

[Click here for a print bibliography for this course](linglinx/bib.html)

**

course prerequisites:** ENGL 1301, 1302, and six hours of 2000-level English.

**

required textbooks:** _none

_**

syllabus** : this web-page and links constitute the syllabus for the course.

**

course description:** This course will provide background in basic concepts of
linguistics, principles of language change and historical linguistic study,
the development of the English language, and basic applied sociolinguistics.
The course is not intended to substitute for study in any of those areas, but
rather to introduce undergraduates, especially English majors, to concepts in
those fields, so that they can do further academic work, study literature, and
teach English with a basic general background in language study. Our method of
study is inductive and computer-mediated. Rather than study a traditional
textbook, we will set various problems that illustrate the history of the
English language, and suggest ways of solving these problems with the help of
computer and library resources.

**

course objectives:** Students who successfully complete this course will be
able to transcribe English speech phonemically; will know some principles of
etymology and semantic change, and how to use a historical dictionary; will be
able to identify and explain general features of Old and Middle English; will
know something about the status of evidence for English historical
linguistics; and will be able to discuss, from an informed perspective, the
social contexts and mechanisms of language change.

**

attendance** is completely optional, but I will not do any out-of-class
tutoring for students who miss class. You will be pretty much lost if you do
not attend class. If something prevents you from coming to class and keeping
up, you've simply had your semester affected negatively by bad things--or by
good personal commitments that you've chosen to place ahead of coursework.

**

drop policy:** drop before final drop date (19 December) guarantees W for the
course; drop after that is against university rules. _Remember that you may
drop a Winter Session course only by going to the Registrar's Office in Davis
Hall._ UTA instructors may not drop students for any reason, and the English
Department staff cannot drop you from this course.

**

assignments:** Ten (10) short assignments, due as indicated in the schedule
below. Final exam (in-class, pen-and-paper, closed-book), Thurs. 11 Jan.
9:30AM-noon.

**

grading:** Your grade in this course will be determined by a cumulative point
system. 12 points means an A for the course, 11 means a B, 10 means a C, and 9
means a D; less than 9 points means failure.

You earn points by making 1 grades on papers. Each of the short assignments
will earn a grade of either 1 or 0. No short assignment will ever be accepted
late; late papers will receive a grade of 0. Specific standards for each
assignment accompany that particular assignment.

The final exam may count 0, 1 or 2 points: 0 if you don't take it or show
unacceptably poor performance; 1 if your performance is good; 2 if your
performance is outstanding.

I consider this next point important enough to make here, on the syllabus: I
think that a B is a good grade for an undergraduate course, and that a C grade
is quite acceptable. The grade of A should indicate excellence rather than
mere completion of the course.

**

academic dishonesty policy:** It is the philosophy of The University of Texas
at Arlington that academic dishonesty is a completely unacceptable mode of
conduct and will not be tolerated in any form. All persons involved in
academic dishonesty will be disciplined in accordance with University
regulations and procedures. Discipline may include suspension or expulsion
from the University. "Scholastic dishonesty includes but is not limited to
cheating, plagiarism, collusion, the submission for credit of any work or
materials that are attributable in whole or in part to another person, any act
designed to give unfair advantage to a student or the attempt to commit such
acts." [Regents' Rules and Regulations, Part One, Chapter Vi, Section 3,
Subsection 3.2, Subdivision 3.22]

NOTE FOR PURPOSES OF THIS COURSE ONLY: You may collaborate on homework
assignments with other students in the class. You are on your honor to work
though the material and understand it thoroughly. You may not just copy
material that someone else, in this class or out of it, has prepared. You may
work jointly on assignments, and share information and techniques. I will
reserve the right to assign a 0 grade on any submitted papers that you do not
fully understand when questioned about the work. **You may _not_ collaborate
on the final exam.

disability policy:** The University of Texas at Arlington is on record as
being committed to both the spirit and letter of federal equal opportunity
legislation; reference Public Law 93112--The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as
amended. With the passage of new federal legislation entitled Americans with
Disabilities Act - (ADA), pursuant to section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act,
there is renewed focus on providing this population with the same
opportunities enjoyed by all citizens. As a faculty member, I am required by
law to provide "reasonable accommodation" to students with disabilities, so as
not to discriminate on the basis of that disability. Student responsibility
primarily rests with informing faculty at the beginning of the semester and in
providing authorized documentation through designated administrative channels.

**

schedule of assignments and readings

**

Mon 18 Dec: Introductions. The Syllabus. [Overview, with some axioms for the
study of language](ov.html).

Tues 19 Dec: [Short assignment #1](h1.html): Byte Chase (in class). [Phonetic
Transcription Workshop](ptw.html).

Wed 20 Dec: [Short assignment #2](h2.html) due: Inventory. Review of
Inventory. [Syntax workshop](syn.html).

Thurs 21 Dec: [Short assignment #3](h3.html) due: Phonetic Transcription.
Language [Families](ldf.html). Indo-European [languages](ie.html). Germanic
[languages](germ.html).



Tues 2 Jan: [Short assignment #4](h4.html) due: Indo-European cognates.
[Hwaet!](http://www.georgetown.edu/cball/hwaet/hwaet_toc.html) visit. [Old
English passage I](oep1.html).

Wed 3 Jan: [Short assignment #5](h56.html) due: etymology. [News
note](http://www.vocabula.com/VRDEC00Carkeet.htm).
[Hwaet!](http://www.georgetown.edu/cball/hwaet/hwaet_toc.html) visit. [Old
English passage II](http://mdavies.for.ilstu.edu/polyglot/).

Thurs 4 Jan: [Short assignment #6](h56.html) due: semantic shifts. [Middle
English passage I](http://mdavies.for.ilstu.edu/polyglot/). Old English
[history lecture](oehist.html).

Fri 5 Jan: [Short assignment #7](h7.html) due: Old English. [Middle English
passage II](http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/etcbin/toccer-
new?id=Cha2Can&images=images/modeng&data=/lv1/Archive/mideng-
parsed&tag=public&part=4&division=div1). Middle English [history
lecture](mehist.html).



Mon 8 Jan: [Short assignment #8](h8.html) due: Middle English. [American
English](amer.html). Modern English [history lecture](modhist.html).

Tues 9 Jan: [Short assignment #9](h9.html) due: Early Modern English.
[Dictionaries](dic.html). [Latin and Greek](lge.html).

Wed 10 Jan: [Short assignment #10](h10.html) due: American dialects. Review
for Final Exam; course evaluations

Thurs 11 Jan: 9:30 AM-noon: Final Exam



Top of the schedule

Top of the Syllabus

