### ENGL 4301

### Tim Morris

### History and Development of the English Language

### Spring 1998 11:00 AM -12:20 PM T/Th 211B Ransom Hall

### office hours: MWF 10-11 AM (618 Carlisle)  
TTh. 1-2 PM (618 Carlisle)

### [tmorris@uta.edu](mailto:tmorris@uta.edu)

### office phone: metro 817-272-2692

### office mailbox 203 Carlisle Hall

### mailing address Box 19035, UTA 76019

to the schedule of readings and assignments

[Click here to explore linguistics resources on the Web](linglink.html)

**

course prerequisites:** ENGL 1301, 1302, and six hours of 2000-level English.

**

Required Textbooks:** Charles Barber, _The English Language: A Historical
Introduction_ (Cambridge UP); Jean Aitchison, _Language Change: Progress or
Decay?_ (2nd edn, Cambridge UP)

**

course description:** This course will provide background in basic concepts of
linguistics, principles of language change and historical linguistic study,
the development of the English language, and basic applied sociolinguistics.
The course is not intended to substitute for study in any of those areas, but
rather to introduce undergraduates, especially English majors, to concepts in
those fields, so that they can do further academic work, study literature, and
teach English with a basic general background in language study.

**

course objectives:** Students who successfully complete this course will be
able to transcribe modern English speech phonetically; will know the
principles of etymology and semantic change, and how to use a historical
dictionary; will understand general principles of historical reconstruction in
linguistics; will be able to identify and explain general features of Old and
Middle English; will be able to discuss, from an informed perspective, the
social contexts and mechanisms of language change; and will have some general
knowledge of problems in the origin and nature of language.

**

attendance** is mandatory; roll will be taken. You may miss two meetings
without penalty, further missed classes can lower your grade; see below.

**

drop policy:** drop before final drop date (17 April) guarantees W for the
course; drop after that is against university rules. UTA instructors may not
drop students for any reason.

**

assignments:** Ten homework assignments, due on the Tuesdays indicated in the
schedule below.

**

grading:** Your grade in this course will be determined by a cumulative point
system. 10 points means an A for the course, 9 means a B, 8 means a C, and 7
means a D; less than 7 points means failure.

You earn points by making 1 grades on papers. Each of the homework assignments
will earn a grade of either 1 or 0. No homework will ever be accepted late;
late papers will receive a grade of 0. Specific standards for each assignment
will accompany that particular assignment.

You lose points by missing class. Your first two absences are free; each
subsequent absence costs a grade point. Except for religious holidays and
absences officially excused by the University, no absence will be excused. If
work, illness, or tragedy prevents you from coming to class and contributing,
you've simply had the misfortune to have your semester affected negatively by
bad things or personal commitments. The seminar nature of our discussion
meetings means that the course "happens" not just in the readings and papers
but also in active speaking and listening in class, hence these stringent
attendance requirements. I also require attendance at all lecture meetings
because the material delivered in lecture is an integral background for
writing the seminar papers.

I consider this next point important enough to make on the syllabus: I think
that a B is a good grade for an undergraduate course. It will be difficult to
complete all the course components successfully; I think that the grade of A
should indicate excellence rather than mere completion of the course.

**

academic dishonesty policy:** It is the philosophy of The University of Texas
at Arlington that academic dishonesty is a completely unacceptable mode of
conduct and will not be tolerated in any form. All persons involved in
academic dishonesty will be disciplined in accordance with University
regulations and procedures. Discipline may include suspension or expulsion
from the University.

"Scholastic dishonesty includes but is not limited to cheating, plagiarism,
collusion, the submission for credit of any work or materials that are
attributable in whole or in part to another person, any act designed to give
unfair advantage to a student or the attempt to commit such acts." [Regents'
Rules and Regulations, Part One, Chapter Vi, Section 3, Subsection 3.2,
Subdivision 3.22]

NOTE FOR PURPOSES OF THIS COURSE ONLY: You may collaborate on homework
assignments with other students in the class. You are on your honor to work
though the material and understand it thoroughly. You may not simply copy
material that another student, in this class or out of it, has prepared. You
may work jointly on assignments, and share information and techniques. I will
reserve the right to assign a 0 grade on any submitted papers that you do not
fully understand when questioned about the work.

**

disability policy:** The University of Texas at Arlington is on record as
being committed to both the spirit and letter of federal equal opportunity
legislation; reference Public Law 93112--The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as
amended. With the passage of new federal legislation entitled Americans with
Disabilities Act - (ADA), pursuant to section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act,
there is renewed focus on providing this population with the same
opportunities enjoyed by all citizens.

As a faculty member, I am required by law to provide "reasonable
accommodation" to students with disabilities, so as not to discriminate on the
basis of that disability. Student responsibility primarily rests with
informing faculty at the beginning of the semester and in providing authorized
documentation through designated administrative channels.

**

schedule of assignments and readings

**

Tues 20 Jan: syllabus, introductions

Thurs 22 Jan: [lecture:](22jan.html) the nature of language. [Barber ch. 1]

Tues 27 Jan: lecture: phonetics: a how-to. Bring Barber to class.

Thurs 29 Jan: [lecture](29jan.html): language change: some basics. [Barber 2,
Aitchison 1]

Tues 3 Feb: [Homework #1](98h1.html) due: phonetic transcription. [lecture:
etymology](3feb.html)

Thurs 5 Feb: review Homework #1

Tues 10 Feb: [Homework #2](98h23.html) due: etymologies. [lecture: semantic
change](10feb.html) [Aitchison 2,3]

Thurs 12 Feb: [review Homework #2](12feb.html)

Tues 17 Feb: [Homework #3](98h23.html) due: semantic change. [lecture: change
mechanisms and examples](17feb.html) [Aitchison 4,5,6,7]

Thurs 19 Feb: [review homework #3](19feb.html)

Tues 24 Feb: lecture: language families. [Barber 3, 4]

Thurs 26 Feb: [lecture: Old English](26feb.html) [Barber 5]

Tues 3 March: [Homework #4](98h4.html) due: language families and
reconstruction. lecture.

Thurs 5 March: review Homework #4

Tues 10 March: Homework #5 due: Old English. (Because the assignment uses
special symbols, it cannot be reproduced on the website.)
[lecture](10mar.html) [Barber 6,7]

Thurs 12 March: review Homework #5

Tues 24 March: Homework #6 due: Middle English. (Because the assignment uses
special symbols, it cannot be reproduced on the website.) [lecture: the
development of the language](24mar.html) [Barber 8,9,10]

Thurs 26 March: [review Homework #6](26mar.html)

Tues 31 March: no class meeting

Thurs 2 Apr: NO CLASS MEETING (as per printed syllabus)

Tues 7 Apr: [Homework #7](98h7.html) due: comparative Bible passages.
[lecture](7apr.html). [Aitchison 8,9]

Thurs 9 Apr: review Homework #7

Tues 14 Apr: [Homework #8](98h8.html) due: toponymy. [lecture: North American
dialect regions](14apr.html). [Aitchison 10,11]

Thurs 16 Apr: review Homework #8

Fri 17 Apr: last date to drop

Tues 21 Apr: [Homework #9](98h9.html) due: plurals. lecture. [Aitchison 13]

Thurs 23 Apr: [review](23apr.html) Homework #9

Tues 28 Apr: [Homework #10](98h10.html) due: origins of language. No lecture.
Course evaluations.

Thurs 30 Apr: [review](30apr.html) Homework #10. LAST CLASS MEETING

