### ENGL 3352: 001

### [Tim Morris](/english/tim/index.html)

### History of British Literature II Fall 2001

### 930-1050 AM Tues / Thurs 307 Preston Hall

### office hours: by appointment only  
[tmorris@uta.edu](mailto:tmorris@uta.edu)

### office phone: metro 817-272-2692

### office mailbox 203 Carlisle Hall

### mailing address Box 19035, UTA 76019

to the schedule of readings and assignments

**

course prerequisites:** ENGL 1301, 1302, six ENGL hours at the 2000 level, or
equivalent, or approval of department

**

required texts:** Wain, ed., _The Oxford Anthology of English Poetry BLAKE TO
HEANEY_ ; Byatt, ed., _The Oxford Book of English Short Stories_. Two short
stories on handouts. In addition, each student will read and report on one
substantial novel: these will be common texts that can be found in libraries
and used-book stores.

**

syllabus:** This syllabus may be updated as the semester goes on. I may post
updated versions that indicate readings, discussion plans, and reference
materials. However, every component of your grade is shown here at the
beginning. Please refer to the date and time of printing (at the bottom of
each page) to see when the version you are holding was printed. For continuous
updates look on line at
**http://www.uta.edu/english/tim/courses/3352f01/3352index.html

website: **This is a web-assisted course. Though it's taught in a conventional
classroom, the course site (again,
**http://www.uta.edu/english/tim/courses/3352f01/3352index.html** ) will
provide sketchy lecture notes and lists of useful links. As you study, you
must use the sites to supplement your class notes.

**

course description:** This is a reading / lecture course in the literary
history of England and Ireland from 1798 to 2001.

**

course objectives:** Students who successfully complete this course will know
something about major writers and literary movements of the past two centuries
in England and Ireland. They will have been exposed to a range of readings in
three genres: poetry, short fiction, and long fiction.

**

attendance** is optional except for seminar meetings.  Each seminar absence
will cost you four grade points (see below), the only exceptions being
absences formally excused by the University. Much of the course material will
be covered in lecture and seminar meetings, and you will be distinctly lost if
you don't come to class. If **anything** \--work, family, illness, whatever--
prevents you from coming to class and keeping up, you've simply had your
semester affected negatively by bad things--or by good personal commitments
that you've chosen to place ahead of coursework.

**

drop policy:** UTA instructors may not drop students for any reason. You may
choose to drop with a W until 16 November.

**

assignments:** two midterms, a 25-minute seminar report, a 10-page seminar
paper, and a comprehensive final exam; grading system and due dates are
indicated below. The seminar paper must be typed, must use MLA style, and must
cite all sources used in its preparation.

**

grading:** Grading is on a point system. Here are the point values for each
assignment:

  * Midterm One (poetry) (60) 
  * Midterm Two (short fiction) (40) 
  * Seminar Report (20) 
  * Seminar Paper (50) 
  * Final Exam (80) 

(Remember that you can also lose points, at a cost of four for each missed
seminar meeting.)

That makes a total of 250 possible points for the semester. Your final grade
is determined on the following scale:

  * 225-250 points: A 
  * 200-224 points: B 
  * 175-199 points: C 
  * 150-174 points: D 
  * 149 points and below: F

I think that a B is a good grade for an undergraduate course, and that a C
grade is quite acceptable. The grade of A should indicate excellence rather
than mere completion of the course.

**

academic dishonesty policy:** It is the philosophy of The University of Texas
at Arlington that academic dishonesty is a completely unacceptable mode of
conduct and will not be tolerated in any form. All persons involved in
academic dishonesty will be disciplined in accordance with University
regulations and procedures. Discipline may include suspension or expulsion
from the University. "Scholastic dishonesty includes but is not limited to
cheating, plagiarism, collusion, the submission for credit of any work or
materials that are attributable in whole or in part to another person, any act
designed to give unfair advantage to a student or the attempt to commit such
acts." [Regents' Rules and Regulations, Part One, Chapter Vi, Section 3,
Subsection 3.2, Subdivision 3.22]

**

disability policy:** The University of Texas at Arlington is on record as
being committed to both the spirit and letter of federal equal opportunity
legislation; reference Public Law 93112--The Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as
amended. With the passage of new federal legislation entitled Americans with
Disabilities Act - (ADA), pursuant to section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act,
there is renewed focus on providing this population with the same
opportunities enjoyed by all citizens. As a faculty member, I am required by
law to provide "reasonable accommodation" to students with disabilities, so as
not to discriminate on the basis of that disability. Student responsibility
primarily rests with informing faculty at the beginning of the semester and in
providing authorized documentation through designated administrative channels.

**

library:** Noel Anderson is the Librarian for the English Department. He can
be reached at 817 272 3000, ext. 4984, and by email at
[anderson@library.uta.edu](mailto:anderson@library.uta.edu) You will find
online databases for English among the Arts & Humanities databases at
<http://www.uta.edu/library/mavinfo/arts.html>

**

writing center:** located on the fourth floor of the Central Library, and at
[http://www.uta.edu/owl/ ](http://www.uta.edu/owl/), the Writing Center
provides free tutoring for UTA students. Tutors will not write your papers for
you, but will help you understand and use strategies for effective writing.

**

schedule of assignments and readings

**

Tues 28 Aug: syllabus, initial "orientation" in-class writing

Thurs 30 Aug: [Chronology](backg.html): British History 1798-1901

Tues 4 Sept: [Chronology](backg.html): British History 1901-2001

we will then study the literary history of the last two centuries in several
passes: the first pass will take us through poetry from 1798 to the present,
the second through short fiction, and the third through long fiction. Your
[best dictionary for this course is the
OED](http://www.oed.com/public/signin.htm).

**

Poetry

**

In England in 1798, poetry was the most elite and culturally significant form
of verbal art. In 2001, poetry is both a coterie art appreciated by very few
and a democratic craft practiced by millions--at once more and less accessible
to the public, but without the great cultural prestige of fiction, film, and
television. To give a thumbnail sketch: in the first half of the 1800s, poets
like Wordsworth and Byron were widely read and had great cultural authority.
In the second half of the 1800s, poets like Tennyson and Browning wrote
bestsellers, but had ceded the cultural center to novelists. In the first half
of the 1900s, poets like Eliot and Yeats were respected celebrities (both won
the Nobel Prize), but they were less and less read. In the second half of the
1900s, poets like Larkin and Hughes were notorious, but were rarely read at
all. (Both are now dead, and if you come to this course knowing the name of a
single living English poet, you are an unusual English major.)

Page numbers for poetry are from Wain, _Oxford Anthology

_

Thurs 6 Sept: [Romantic poetry](rom.html). Readings: Blake, Auguries of
Innocence (10-13); Wordsworth, Lines [Tintern Abbey] (38-42); Scott,
Patriotism (94-95); Coleridge, Kubla Khan (128-29); Southey, After Blenheim
(132-34); Landor, Rose Aylmer (142); Moore, The Minstrel Boy (147); Elliott,
When Wilt Thou Save the People? (151); Hunt, Jenny Kissed Me (154); Peacock,
Three Men of Gotham (156); Byron, Prometheus (168-70); PB Shelley, One Word is
Too Often Profaned (245)

Tues 11 Sept: Major Author: John Keats. Readings: Odes (Nightingale, Grecian
Urn, Psyche, [Bards], To Autumn, Melancholy), 265-74; La Belle Dame Sans Merci
(288-89)

Thurs 13 Sept: [Victorian poetry](vic.html). Readings: Thomas Hood, I
Remember, I Remember (300); EB Browning, "Go from me. Yet I feel that I shall
stand . . . " (349); Tennyson, Ulysses (374-75); Lear, all selections
(400-04); R Browning, Two in the Campagna (414-16); E Bronte, Last Lines
(428-29); Arnold, Dover Beach (455-56); Calverley, Ballad (482-83); Hopkins,
Spring and Fall (535); Wilde, Ballad of Reading Gaol (545-62)

Tues 18 Sept: Major Author: Christina Rossetti. Readings: all selections
(466-81)

Thurs 20 Sept: [Modernist poetry](modern.html). Readings: WB Yeats, The Second
Coming, Sailing to Byzantium (576-78), Among School Children (handout); Mew,
The Trees Are Down (589-90) The Farmer's Bride (handout); Thomas, The Owl
(602); Sassoon, Lamentations (614); Eliot, The Love Song of J Alfred Prufrock
(615-18); Owen, Anthem for Doomed Youth (648); Graves, Parent to Children
(655)

Tues 25 Sept: Major Author: Thomas Hardy. Readings: all selections (507-20)

Thurs 27 Sept: [Poetry Since Modernism](since.html). Readings: Ackerley, After
the Blitz, 1941 (handout); Smith, Not Waving But Drowning (659); Kavanagh,
Canal Bank Walk (handout); Betjeman, Slough (666-67); MacNeice, Snow (670),
The Sunlight on the Garden (671-72); Auden, Edward Lear (688), Lullaby
(689-90), Musee des Beaux Arts (690-91); Spender, "What I expected was" (708);
Barker, untitled piece and To My Mother (711-12); Hughes, View of a Pig
(741-42); Stevenson, Himalayan Balsam (747); Heaney, Punishment (749-50)

Tues 2 Oct: Major Author: Philip Larkin. Readings: all selections (724-34)

Thurs 4 Oct: First Midterm Exam, in class, no books or notes



**

The Short Story

**

[Short stories](ss.html) have been around since the dawn of language,
certainly; Chaucer's Canterbury Tales is a short-fiction collection. Many
novels are built out of collections of short narratives (think of Cervantes,
Don Quixote). The classic English short story, however, flourished in the age
of newspapers and magazines: the 1800s and the first half of the 1900s. The
genre is still going strong, but lost ground first to radio and later to TV as
the medium of choice for short-form story-telling. The stories we'll read this
semester are from a wide range of modes in English and Irish short fiction.
Very generally, we will move chronologically, and the five days of study will
look at five general categories: "dark" Victorian stories, arch or fabulous
Edwardian stories, modernism, mid-1900s realism, and postmodernism. But these
five categories share more things than not.

Page numbers for short stories are from Byatt, _Oxford Book

_

Tues 9 Oct: **Major Text:** Thomas Hardy, A Mere Interlude (63-92); other
readings: Mary Mann, Little Brother (93-96); Arthur Morrison, Behind the Shade
(105-109)

Thurs 11 Oct: **Major Text:** Saki, The Toys of Peace (155-159); other
readings: Charlotte Mew, A White Night (139-154); A.E. Coppard, Some Talk of
Alexander (180-187)

Tues 16 Oct: **Major Text:** Virginia Woolf, Solid Objects (204-209); other
readings: Rosamond Lehmann, A Dream of Winter (286-294); Bryan McMahon, The
Ring (handout)

Thurs 18 Oct: **Major Text:** Graham Greene, The Destructors (311-324); other
readings: Malachi Whitaker, Landlord of the Crystal Fountain (264-269); Frank
O'Connor, Guests of the Nation (handout)

Tues 23 Oct: **Major Text:** Penelope Fitzgerald, At Hiruharama (362-368);
other readings: Elizabeth Taylor, The Blush (355-361); Alan Sillitoe, Enoch's
Two Letters (372-380)

Thurs 25 Oct: Second Midterm Exam, in class, no books or notes



**

The Novel

**

[Novels](novels.html) have flourished in England since the late 1600s. A rise
in literacy rates, the explosion of the publishing industry, the rise of
newspapers and magazines (and hence outlets for serial publication) and the
coming of electric light (the means) and train travel (often the opportunity)
made novels a dominant form of popular entertainment in the mid-1800s, a
position they hold, with increasing highbrow respect, still today. We will
read selections from the whole great range of English and Irish fiction from
1798 to the present.

Each student will read a different major novel for this section of the course.
The course will be taught in seminar, with three students presenting papers
each day. (Note that roll will be taken, and you'll lose four grade points for
each seminar meeting you miss.)

Your seminar **_report**_ will be about 25 minutes long; you'll present: 1) a
plot summary of the novel you've read (this will be difficult to make
interesting, so try your best); 2) some sense of how the novel fits into the
author's career; 3) some sense of the novel's place in British literary
history; 4) some commentary on interesting formal or stylistic features of the
novel; 5) some appraisal of the novel. Your seminar **_paper**_ will focus on
#s 3, 4 and 5 in the above list (assume that your audience [me] knows the plot
of the novel and its place in the author's career reasonably well).  The
seminar paper is due on 6 Dec. no matter when you do your report.

_

The novels assigned are of slightly different lengths,_ and that's inevitable.
As far as possible, I have tried to balance length against density; the longer
your novel, the easier and lighter the read.

Novel seminar meetings begin Tues 30 Oct and continue through Thurs 6 Dec. We
will not meet on Thurs 1 Nov or Thurs 22 Nov. _

_

Course evaluations will be done in class on Tues 4 Dec. and Thurs 6 Dec.
Seminar paper due Thurs 6 Dec.

Thursday 13 Dec., 8-10:30am: Final Exam, in regular classroom, no books or
notes



Top of Syllabus

Top of Schedule

