### History 533.04  
HISTORY OF BRAZIL



This course surveys the history or Brazil during the colonial and independence
periods, with major emphasis on the 19th and 20th centuries. Students will
rain geographical and factual knowledge of Brazil, which will aid them in
studying other South American histories. They will also enhance their reading,
writing, and analytical abilities.



**ASSIGNED READINGS** (Copies are available for purchase only at S.B.X):

  1. Burns, E. Bradford. _A History of Brazil_. 3rd ed. This is the principal textbook for the course. In addition to reading the entire text you should study carefully all the maps; also, please take note of the Glossary, pp. 501-04, and the Historical Chronology, pp. 495-500 since these will be useful for reference. See also photo section, between pp. 258 and 259. 
  2. Azevedo, Aluisio. _Mulatto_. Univ. of Texas Press, 1993. 
  3. Conrad, Robert E. _Destruction of Brazilian Slavery, 1850-1888_. 
  4. Roett, Riordan. _Brazil: Politics in a Patrimonial Society_. 
  5. A COURSEPACK available only from Greydon Press (Zip Printers) at corner of Chittenden and High Streets. 



**CALENDAR OF DATES**

    
    
         Apr. 11  MAP QUIZ     Apr. 13  Students writing a term paper should have received preliminary              verbal approval of their topic from Prof. Cooper     Apr. 27  MID-TERM     May 2    Students writing a term paper should submit two copies of full              one-page outline that gives the title, the scope, and preliminary              bibliography that includes at least six sources that actually have              been consulted by this date.     May 16   Due date for BOOK REVIEWS. Late papers will incur a penalty of 2              points per calendar day up to a maximum penalty of 10 points. Two              copies are required.     May 23   Due date for TERM PAPERS. Late papers will incur a penalty of 2              points per calendar day up to a maximum penalty of 10 points. Two              copies are required of term papers.     Jun 2    Last day of class. Any required paper that has not been turned in              by start of class on June 2 will receive a zero.     Jun. 9   FINAL EXAM. Will be given from 7:30 A.M. to 9:18 A.M. in the              regular classroom. Any student who is absent without permission              from the final exam, and who does not contact Prof. Cooper with a              persuasive, well documented explanation by 10 AM on June 10 will              receive a zero and fail the course.



**LECTURE TOPICS AND READING ASSIGNMENTS**

The weekly lecture topics and appropriate reading assignments appear below.
These assignments are intended to complement the lectures as well as provide
material for discussion. Therefore, it is recommended that the 2 readings for
each week should be completed prior to the first lecture of each week. The
sequence of Prof. Cooper's lectures will usually, but not necessarily always,
follow the order given under the Lecture Topics. In some cases more than one
class period may be spent on a given topic, in other cases less than a class
period. It is expected that on two or three days slides will be shown.Please
note also that the reading assignments given in the right-hand column are not
necessarily coordinated with the lecture topic that appearsto the left on the
same line. Thus, for example, for the first week of the quarter (Mar. 28-30)
all of the readings in the right-hand column relate in some way to one or more
of the lecture topics, although not necessarily to the one that coincidentally
happens to be listed on the same line of type. It is particularly important to
remember that the assignment from Burns, always listed first, covers all of
the topics listed for that particular week, and not merely the one given on
the same line.

WEEK |

LECTURE TOPICS |

READINGS  
---|---|---  
  
Mar. 28-30 |

Introduction, Geographical background, Interactions: New challenges &
continuities |

Burns, 1-35

Roett, 1-13  
  
Apr. 4-6 |

Social amalgamation, Territorial expansion, Economic Dependency, Political
Evolution |

Burns, 37-97

Roett,15-18

Conrad, 1-12  
  
Apr. 11-13 |

Formation of nationhood, King John VI, Emperor Pedro I, Chaos into order;
Ending slave trade |

Burns, 99-148

Conrad, 13-47  
  
Apr 18-20 |

Economic conditions under the empire, Political affairs under the empire,
Foreign relations under the empire |

Burns, 149-196

Conrad, 48-131

Roett, 18-21

Azevedo, 7-26  
  
Apr.25-27 |

New Social Groups and New Ideas, Abolition, immigration & labor, The fall of
the empire, MIDTERM EXAM on April 27. |

Burns, 197-23

Conrad, 132-210

Azevedo, 31-140  
  
May 2-4 |

Middle groups & the military, First two civilian presidents;Antonio
Conselheiro and Canudos ,The Belle Epoque |

Burns, 234-27

Azevedo,141-2

Roett, 21-22.  
  
May 9-11 |

Diplomacy and the Amazon, Decline of the Old Republic, World War I & New
Nationalism |

Burns, 276-31  
  
May 16-18 |

New themes in History, Intellectual and political ferment |

Burns, 313-460  
  
May 23-25 |

Vargas, nationalism & industrialization, Juscilino Kubitschek & Brasilia,
Reform, radicalization and reaction |

Burns, 346-43,

Roett, 22-95  
  
May 30- Jun 2 |

Promise or threat of reform, The military in power,  The current scene |

Burns, 432-49,

Roett, 97-221  
  


**GRADES**

_A. The Grading Scale:_

    
    
         A       95-100     A-      93-94     B+      91-92     B       87-90     B-      85-86     C+      82-84     C       73-81     C-      70-72     D+      68-69     D       60-67

_B. Point Value of class assignments:_

    
    
         100     Mid-term     200     Final exam     100     Term paper. (Graduate students)      75     Book review (Undergraduates)      50     Map quiz      50     Oral reports on extra readings (Graduate students)



**PAPERS**

One paper will be required of all students. Undergraduates will write a book
review of 5-7 pages; graduate students will write a term paper of 10-12 pages
based on library research. Students writing term papers should see Prof.
Cooper during his office hours, or schedule an alternate appointment, early in
the quarter to discuss a suitable topic. Written instructions are included in
this syllabus for both assignments. All titles chosen for book reviews, and
all topics for term papers, must be approved by Prof. Cooper.

Two copies of all papers will be required, and they must be typewritten or
word processed. It is very important to proofread your paper carefully--there
is no excuse for an abundance of typographical, spelling, and grammatical
errors on papers that have been prepared outside of class. Papers so written
will be returned to the student for corrections and re-writing.

Late papers will be penalized two points per calendar day up to a maximum late
penalty of 10 points, although required papers that have not been turned in by
the start of the last class meeting on June 2 will receive a zero. Papers
should be turned in personally to Prof. Cooper: If for some good reason a
paper is turned in to the History Department office in Room 106, Dulles Hall,
a written receipt must be obtained from the front desk. Never slip a paper
under an office door. All authors,including term paper authors, should read
the section an Citations and Plagiarism" on p. 6 carefully. If you have any
doubts about the meaning plagiarism please speak to Prof. Cooper.



**EXAMINATIONS**

The in-class examinations will consist of one midterm (100 points), final exam
(200 points), and a map quiz (50) points. The usual format for examinations is
a combination of essay or short-essay questions (general 80%), and
identification (I.D.) questions (20%). The final exam will be comprehensive
exam over the entire quarter s work, but with somewhat greater emphasis on
material presented and assigned since the second midterm.

If for good reason a student must miss a scheduled exam it is expect that
he/she will notify Prof. Cooper as soon as possible, preferably before the
fact. His office telephone number is 292-5479; messages may be left at the
Dept. of History at 292-2674. Be prepared to provide written documentation if
you miss an exam. Make-up exams, if authorized by Prof. Cooper, may be either
written or oral at his discretion, and, if written would not necessarily
follow the same format as the scheduled examination. Written make-up exams are
usually scheduled by the Department of History on Friday afternoons at 3:00 or
4:00.



**GRADUATING SENIORS:** Graduating seniors are responsible for all regular
reading and written assignments, including all reading assignments for the
tenth week of the quarter, and should turn in their papers one week in advance
of the due dates given in this syllabus.



**GRADUATE STUDENTS:** Although the written examinations will be the same,
graduate student as would be expected, will be held to a higher level of
achievement than undergraduate students. All graduate students must write a
term paper of 10-12 pages in length based on library research. In addition,
all graduating students will read at least two extra books, totaling at least
400 page and make an oral report on these books to Prof. Cooper in his office
whenever the reading has been completed. Please be sure to obtain Prof.
Cooper's advance permission on the books to be read.



**SOME RECOMMENDED REFERENCE WORKS**

The following works are recommended for both writers of book reviews and term
papers. All would be worthy additions to your permanent library.

  * The recommended handbook of English grammar and standard usage is Edward P. J. Corbett, _Little English Handbook_ , 6th ed. (Harper Collins). 
  * Students who wish to consult a style manual on documentation are referred to the standard work in this field, _A Manual for Writers of Term Papers, Theses and Dissertations_ by Kate L. Turabian, 5th ed. (Univ. of Chicago Press). 
  * Another very useful brief source on style is _The Elements of Style_ by William Strunk, Jr. and E. B. White. 
  * A handy brief reference for correct spelling is _20,000 Plus Words_ by Charles Zoudek and G.A. Condon, 9th ed. (1991). 
  * If you have not yet acquired a dictionary, I recommend Webster's _Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary_ , which is updated regularly, and is renowned for its openness to new words, definitions, and usages. 



**INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARING THE BOOK REVIEW**

The primary purpose of the review is to evaluate the validity of the book and
its overall usefulness to students of the field. (Keep your classmates in mind
as a target audience.) Thus your review should indicate with reasonable
accuracy and completeness the purpose, contents conclusions, and merits of the
book. Do not say merely that it was "interesting" or "boring." Discuss its
merits and flaws, why you liked disliked it, and why you would or would not
recommend it. Perhaps some thoughtful reflection on the following questions
would help you to prepare your review. The following is not a checklist to be
answered point-by-point.

  1. What is the author's purpose in writing the book? 
  2. What is the field or discipline (history, political science, sociology, etc.) covered by the book? 
  3. What is the category, or genre (monograph, narrative, biography, fiction, textbook, etc.)? 
  4. How is it organized (chronologically, thematically, etc.)? 
  5. Would you consider the book to be chiefly a primary source (based on personal, direct, first-hand, or eyewitness experience), or chiefly a secondary source (a synthesis of some original research and the previous printed writings of other authors)? 
  6. Is the book primarily a straight narrative? Or is it primarily analytical? 
  7. Is there a central theme or thesis? If so, what is it? 
  8. What subjects or aspects does the author emphasize? 
  9. What major conclusions are drawn? 
  10. Is the author attempting to disprove some traditional idea on the subject about which she is writing? 
  11. Does the evidence brought forth by the author support her conclusions? 
  12. Does the author present any new evidence in the form of unpublished letters, original documents, diaries, contemporary testimonies, etc., or does she rely mainly or entirely on secondary works -- that is, books written by other people on the same subject? 
  13. Were foreign language works cited? 
  14. Which archives or libraries have been utilized by the author (see the footnotes, or endnotes, and the bibliography; if there are no such features in a book it is not likely suitable for a scholarly review.) 
  15. What qualifications (research, language skills, advanced degrees, first-hand observation, etc.) does the author have? 
  16. Does the narrative contain evidence, either implicit or explicit, of bias on the part of the author? 
  17. What do you consider the most important message delivered by the author? 
  18. Do you disagree with any or all of it? 



**CHOOSING WHICH BOOK TO REVIEW**

Book reviews must be on serious or significant historical works of least 200
pages in length; textbooks and novels (fiction) would rarely by acceptable.
Books which contain neither footnotes nor endnotes, and lack bibliography, are
rarely suitable for scholarly reviews. For History 533.04 the selections must
deal primarily with Brazil during any time period. Roett contains some useful
suggestions on pages 223-30.



**MECHANICS OF THE BOOK REVIEW**

All reviews must begin with a complete bibliographical citation. They may be
based on the samples given below. Be sure also to include the library call
number of any library book that was used.

Reviews must be typewritten (or written on a word processor), double-spaced,
and 5-6 pages long. TWO clear and legible copies must be turned in. Leave
ample margins of from 1-1/4 to 1-1/2 inches on all sides.

It is always best to turn in papers personally to Professor Cooper. If you
turn a paper in at the history office in Dulles Hall 106 you must obtain a
written receipt. Never slip a paper under an office door.



**SOME SAMPLE BIBLIOGRAPHICAL CITATIONS**

The following samples may be used as a model for the citation for the
particular book that you are reviewing. Place a similar citation at the head
of the first page of your review followed by the call number and the building
location of the specific library that houses your book.

  1. Aftosa: A Historical Survey of Foot-and Mouth Disease and Inter-American Relations by Manual A. Machado, Jr. (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1969, xv, 132, Bibliography. Index.) 
  2. Order and Progress: Brazil from Monarchy to Republic, by Gilberto Freyre. Edited and Translated from the Portuguese by Rod W. Horton. (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1970. xi-l, 422. Bibliography. Index.) 
  3. The Process of Government, by Arthur F. Lently, Edited, with an introduction by Peter H. Odegard. (The John Harvard Library) (Cambridge: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press 1967. xtii-xiv, 501. Bibliography.) 



**CITATIONS AND PLAGIARISM**

For students who have not previously written book reviews, it might helpful to
read some sample reviews in an outstanding historical journal such as, The
Hispanic American Historical Review or The American Historical Review. It must
be emphasized, however, that if any such published reviews are used directly
or indirectly as sources or references, they must be cited in a footnote or
endnote. In most cases its best to paraphrase the Ideas of other authors, but
if you copy their words directly (including, of course, the words of the
author whose book you are reviewing) you MUST enclose their words in
quotations marks. If you make only minor changes in the original wording you
would not use quotation marks, but you would still need a citation. To do
otherwise is to leave yourself open to questions of plagiarism. Please confer
with the instructor if you have any questions about citations or plagiarism.

If your citations come only from the book you are reviewing, as would be the
case in most reviews written for this class, you do not need to include formal
footnotes or endnotes a" long as you include a full bibliographical citation
to the book under review at the beginning of you paper. For references to the
book being reviewed you may "imply insert the page numbers in parenthesis
(e.g. "pp. 14-15"). But page numbers must the given for all quotations, and
all words that are copied exactly must be placed inside of quotation marks.



**INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARING THE TERM PAPER**

The purpose of writing the paper is to provide practice in searching out,
selecting, organizing, and presenting certain basic information and ideas on a
given topic in a scholarly manner. The paper is not expected to exhaust the
subject, but it must be based on a variety of sources, including ordinarily
articles from monographs, scholarly journals, and, possible, works written in
a foreign language. Typically at least ten different sources would be cited.
Standard textbooks ordinarily should not be cited.

Whereas the content of the paper is obviously important, considerable
attention must be given to scholarly mechanics. The sources from which
material has been drawn should be indicated properly in the footnotes, a
bibliography must be included at the end of the paper. This should include
only those sources which were actually cited in the footnotes. With regard to
matters of style (footnotes, bibliography, punctuation, etc.) students should
use as a model the style manual written by Kate L. Turabian: A Manual for
Writers of Term Papers, Theses and Dissertations. (See the recommendations
given earlier in this syllabus for reference works and the cautions given
under "Book Reviews" for plagiarism.)

There must be a full one-page abstract at the beginning of the term paper and
a former conclusion at the end. The abstract should be single-spaced and the
page left unnumbered. It should be written after the paper has been completed,
as it is intended to be a concise summary the specific contents of the paper;
it is not intended to serve as a general introduction.

The conclusion serves a different purpose from the abstract; it is intended to
summarize what has been demonstrated, clarified or proved in the term paper.
The conclusion is an integral part of the term paper, but it should be divided
from the rest of the text by a series of asterisks.

The term paper should be from 10-12 pages in length (not counting endnotes and
bibliography), typewritten (or word processed), and double-spaced. Papers
longer than 14 pages are not acceptable. Footnote should be typed on a
separate sheet at the end of the paper rather than placed at the bottom of the
page. Leave ample margins of from 1 1/4 to 1/2 inches on all sides throughout
the term paper. Use a clean, dark ribbon please.

TWO copies must be submitted. Both copies should be turned in loose-leaf
secured with a paper clip, or else in a kind of folder from which the sheets
can be removed quickly to facilitate grading.

It is very important to proofread your paper carefully--there is no excuse for
an abundance of typographical, spelling and grammatical error on papers that
have been prepared outside of class. Papers so written will be returned to the
student for corrections and re-writing.

There is a substantial penalty for late papers: please note careful the
deadline for submission. If you plan to have your term paper typed by another
person it is your responsibility to make adequate advance arrangements so that
your paper can be turned in on time.



**GEOGRAPHY OF BRAZIL**

Few students come to the study of Brazilian history with a substantial
knowledge of either the principal geographical features of the main political
subdivisions of the country; Yet such knowledge is indispensable to
understanding the readings and lectures and ultimately the history of Brazil.
The following assignment will require some concentrated individual effort, but
the benefits will be significant throughout the quarter. You are being asked
to familiarize yourself with all of the following terms. Most of the places
(states, cities, rivers, etc.) mentioned below can be located from any good
physical map of Brazil, or even from the maps on pages 11 & 13 in Burns, _A
History of Brazil_.

_I. States and Selected State Capitals_

Acre; Amazonas (Manaus); Roraima (a territory); Para (Belem); Amapa; Maranhao
(Sao Lois); Piaui; Ceara (Fortaleza); Paraiba (Joao Pessoa); Rio Grande do
Norte (Natal); Alagoas; Pernambuco (Recife); Sergipe; Bahia (Salvador); Goias;
Mato Grosso (Cuiaba); Mato Grosso do Sul (Campo Grande); Rodondia (a
territory); the Federal District (located within the state of Goias, and
includes the capital city of Brasilia); Minas Gerais (Belo Horizonte);
Espiritu Santo (Vitoria); Rio de Janeiro (Rio de Janeiro); Sao Paulo (Sao
Paulo); Parana (Curitiba); Santa Catarina (Florianopolis); Rio Grande do Sul
(Porto Alegre).

CAUTION: Be careful not to confuse the two states of Para (in the north) and
Parana (in the south) and the two states of Rio Grande do Sul (of great
importance) and Rio Grande do Norte (of lesser importance). In two cases
states and their capital cities have the same names (Rio de Janeiro, and Sao
Paulo).

_II. Rivers and River Systems_

(1) The Amazon River System

The Amazon; Solimoes (the name of the main course of the Amazon river
upstream); Rio Negro; Madeira; Tapajos; and the Xingu.

(2) The Parana-Paraguay River System

In addition to the two rivers mentioned in the name of the river system
(Parana; Paraguay), the system includes the Tiete, the Uruguay and the famous
estuary (not a river) the Rio de la Plata.

(3) The Sao Francisco River

This is commercially and historically the most useful river on Brazil

_III. Important Cities and Places not otherwise mentioned above_

(1) Cities: Campinas; Ouro Preto; Santos; Niteroi; Petropolis  
(2) Islands: Marajo Fernao de Noronha; Caviana  
(3) Bays: Guanabara Bay; Todos os Santos Bay

