# Syllabus:

## World Civilizations from c. 1000 to c. 1800

#### Course Objectives:

The general purpose of World Civilizations is to produce educated persons by
introducing students to the complex network of events, patterns, forces, and
interacting people that led to the world in which they presently live and by
teaching them to examine the origins of their world critically or
historically. History 104 will acquaint students with a broad historical
account of humankind's past from the year 1000 to about 1800. It will examine
the survival and constraining influences of those great world civilizations or
traditions that had been created during the ancient period and that still
effect us today, viewing them as human achievements. This general purpose may
be said to comprise several distinct objectives. The major objective is to
provide students with an awareness of the achievements and potentialities of
human institutions so that they can better understand their own role in the
modern world. Weaving a story of humankind's past in a global context, History
104 will show how rising wealth and expanding material culture in certain
regions and vast barbarian conquests led to a dynamic global interaction that
has increasingly impacted human life ever since. Global cultures interacted;
traditions were change changed, but they also constrained human options.
Because history enlightens us, with regard to who we are and what we may
achieve, it will help prepare students to make informed decisions in the
future.

Its second objective and major focus will be to show how the achievements of
people around the globe, during the period from 1000 to 1800, were expressions
of their specific the time and place. Wealth and material culture in China and
Western Europe and the extensive Mongol Eurasian conquests provided the
context. World Civilizations will develop the ability of students to ascertain
how human actions occur in such specific contexts. It will provide an
historical understanding of how the cultures were created by people with
specific environments and needs. Once created, however, these cultures and all
human institutions, at once constrain and enable people: they become part of
the environment. History 104 will show how civilizations were the human means
to creating order among people in spite of changing contexts, of organizing
production of human needs, establishing a sense of the importance and meaning
of human life, expressing joy and sorrow, and beauty and ugliness. Through the
completion of classroom assignments and exams, this course will develop the
ability of students to think logically, to analyze evidence, and to be precise
in thinking and writing, In a word, the objective is to arm students with an
understanding of their history, so that they may leave the university as
educated citizens who will seek to preserve what is good and change what is
not.

Providing students with an historical explanation of their world and
developing their ability to contextualize human achievements, the course will
help students to better understand who they are as individuals and as members
of communities, such as families, ethnic groups, states, regions, and the
world. This course will contextualize the following kinds of human
achievements:

###### 1\. cultures and civilizations, including urbanization & long-distance
trade

###### 2\. forms of political organization, especially state development

###### 3\. worldviews and religions

###### 4\. forms of economic life, including feudalism and capitalism

###### 5\. styles of everyday life and pleasure, emphasizing material culture

###### 6\. the arts and literature

There are further objectives. World Civilizations will introduce students to
the major human value systems created by people during the period from 1000 to
1800. It will show how values systems informed all human activity. It will
illuminate the relationships between socioeconomic arrangements, political
institutions, and value systems, as seen in literature, art, music, and
architecture. It is hoped that the historical approach, with its demand for
critical analysis, will develop student awareness of and capacity to judge
various forms of explanation and evidence. Finally, students will have writing
experience through required exams and papers.

We have glorious heritages, both as individuals and as groups. We are heirs to
the legacies and potentialities of our parents, families, various communities,
and the civilizations that have shaped our very beings. But as St. Bernard (d.
1153) remarked in his De diligendo deo, "To possess what one knows nothing
about, what glory can there be in that?" Let us not be like the notorious
rooster in Aesop's Fables who, finding a precious jewel in the dirt of the
barnyard, preferred a kernel of grain.

#### Evaluation, Examinations, and Final Grades

Students will be evaluated on their mastery of the content set forth in the
outline above, as demonstrated mostly in clear, expository written form. At
least fifty percent of the final grade will be based on the evaluation of
essays required on exams. In keeping with the major objectives of the course,
these essays will be graded mostly on the student's ability to recount a
history of civilization, to explain some of the significant human achievements
and their potentialities, and to place the human achievements studied during
the semester in an historical context. Nevertheless, essays must be written in
clear, proper expository English.

There will be a mid-term exam and a comprehensive final exam. These exams will
consist of objective questions (objective questions will usually comprise
short answers or identity problems) and essays. All of the objective questions
will be based on the list of terms for the course. Two-thirds of these exams
will consist of writing essays. These exams will be done in exam booklets
available at the bookstore. All exams must be done with the pen; the pencil
will not be allowed. Quizzes may also be given. Letter grades (i.e., A, B, C,
D, F) will be assigned for work on all exams and quizzes. Unexcused failures
to take these exams may result in the assignment of a zero grade for a missed
exam.

Semester grades will represent the semester average, calculated with the
following grade components: the average of any quizzes given, the mid-term
exam, and the double-value final exam. Hence, three components will be
averaged (four components if there are quizzes), with the final representing
two components. The instructor reserves the privilege of adding another
component, a class participation grade for students who have worked hard all
semester, in order to raise a student's final grade. Calculations will be made
using the 4-point system; i.e., A = 4, B = 3, C = 2, D = 1, F = 0, and zero =
-1. (Rounding off will move up from .51 or higher.)

#### Extra Credit Essays:

Students are encouraged to write a critical book review (four typewritten
pages) in order to raise their semester averages or to learn more. These
reviews must be based on the reading of the books selected for this purpose.
It will be the responsibility of students to discuss these reviews and the
selected books with the instructor. The grade on this project will represent
an additional component in the semester average.

#### Terms & Other Information:

Students should prepare definitions and explanations of the significance of
the names of people, places, ideas, and events as part of their routine study
as well as immediately before exams. A list of terms will be available on
closed reserve at the library. This list of terms will also be available by
internet. The latter list will be regularly updated and other information will
also be made available there.

#### Electronic Connections:

All of the class information, syllabus, various study questions sheets, terms
and announcements are available by internet. The course homepage address is
http://www.utc.edu/~bwright/. Students are encouraged to contact the
instructor with questions and problems by internet at bwright@cecasun.utc.edu.
Certain assignments may also be submitted by e-mail and the instructor may
wish to contact students by e-mail. If you do not have a personal computer,
please make use of the university facilities in the Hunter Student Lab,
Library, and other locations. If you do not have an account, please apply for
one. Help in using this medium may be obtained at the Hunter Student Lab and
in the Library.

#### Books Required:

The required textbook comes in two forms: 1) the textbook, A.M. Craig, W.A.
Graham, et. al., _Heritage of world Civilizations_ , Fifth Edition, Combined,
or, 2) the CD-Rom, _Discovering World History_. Students may choose whichever
form is most useful to them, but they should be aware that the CD-Rom offers
more features at a lower cost than the book. Two supplemental books will also
be required: Ibn Battuta, _Ibn Battuta in Black Africa_ , Jean Gimpel, _The
Medieval Machine_. Also recommended are Carolyn Merchant, _Death of Nature_ ,
& C. & W. Wiser, _Behind Mud Walls_. Short readings may be made available at
the library.

Created: 7 May (2. Jubilate), 2000.  
Comments to: [Dr. William J. Wright](mailto:bwright@cecasun.utc.edu)

Copyright (C) 1996 The University of Tennessee at Chattanooga. All rights
reserved.  
The University of Tennessee at Chattanooga is an EEO/AA/Title
VI/TitleIX/Section 504/ADA institution.

