Comparative Literature G6031  
**The Writing of History in the Middle Ages**

Robert Stein

rms9@columbia.edu

**Primary Texts (required):**

> > The Gospel according to Luke and Acts of the Apostles (any edition).

>>

>> Eusebius, _The History of the Church_ trans. G. Williamson (Penguin)

>>

>> Gregory of Tours, _History of the Franks_ trans. Lewis Thorpe (Penguin)

>>

>> Bede, _A History of the English Church and People_ trans. Leo Sherley-Price
(Penguin).

>>

>> Einhard and Notker the Stammerer, _Two Lives of Charlemagne_ trans. Lewis
Thorpe (Penguin).

>>

>> Anon. _Vita Heinrici IV. Imperatoris_ (T.E. Mommsen and K.F. Morrison,
_Imperial Lives and Letters of the Eleventh Century_ [Columbia UP, out of
print]).

>>

>> Galbert of Bruges, _The Murder of Charles the Good_ trans. James Bruce Ross
(MART 12, University of Toronto)

>>

>> William of Malmesbury, _History of the Kings of England_ _(_ Lanarch)

>>

>> _The Life of Christina of Markyate_ ed. C. H. Talbot (MART)

>>

>> Guibert of Nogent, _Self and Society in Medieval France: The Memoires of
Abbot Guibert of Nogent_ ed. John Benton (MART 15, University of Toronto)

>>

>> Geoffrey of Monmouth, _History of the Kings of Britain_ trans. Lewis Thorpe
(Penguin)

>>

>>  
>>

>>  

**Readings (including selected secondary material for the first half of the
semester):**

> > 1\. Introductory: Some questions of historiography and narrative
discourse.

>>

>> 2\. Luke-Acts: Biblical narrative, Roman rhetoric, and Late Antique
historiography. (Auerbach, "Figura"; _Mimesis_ , chaps. 2-3; Woodman, chap. 2)

>>

>> 3\. Eusebius: The formation of Christian Historiography (Hanning, chap. 1;
White, "Value of Narrativity in the Representation of Reality" _Content_ 1-25;
"Question of Narrative in Contemporary Historical Theory," _Content_ 26-57;
Genette,  "Frontiers of Narrative" _Figures_ , 127-144.)

>>

>> 4\. Gregory of Tours: _Historiae_ and the shape of historical narrative (
_Mimesis_ , chap. 4; Goffart, chaps. 1 and 3).

>>

>> 5\. Bede: "Historia Ecclesiastica" and the possibilities of national
history (Hanning, chap. 3; Goffart, chap. 4).

>>

>> 6\. "Vita Caroli" and "Vita Heinrici IV imperatoris": Hagiography, secular
lives, and historical narrative. (Partner, "Making Up Lost Time"; Southern,
"Aspects" part 1; Stein, "Signs").

>>

>> 7\. Galbert of Bruges: Feudal society, urban perspectives, and the crisis
of historical interpretation in the 12th century.

>>

>> 8\. Galbert of Bruges, continued

>>

>> 9\. William of Malmesbury: Norman England and narrations of power

>>

>> 10\. William of Malmesbury: Natio, Imperium, Ecclesia

>>

>> 11\. Christina of Markyate and Guibert of Nogent: Hagiography, confession,
and secular lives.

>>

>> 12\. Christina and Guibert, continued.

>>

>> 13\. Geoffrey of Monmouth: Truth, lies, fictions, history.

>>

>> 14\. Geoffey of Monmouth, continued, and wrap-up.

>>

>> **Partial List of Secondary Readings--much more to come:**

>>

>> Auerbach, Erich _Mimesis_ (Princeton)

>>

>> \--------------- "Figura" in _Scenes from the Drama of European Literature_
(xerox).

>>

>> Breisach, _Classical Rhetoric and Medieval Historiography_ (Kalamazoo:
Medieval Institute Publications, 1985)

>>

>> De Certeau, Michel, _The Writing of History_ (Columbia University Press,
1992)

>>

>> Duby, Georges _The Three Orders_ (Chicago)

>>

>> Genette, G¨¦rard, _Figures of Literary Discourse_ (New York: Columbia, 1988)

>>

>> \---------------, _Narrative Discourse_ (Ithaca: Cornell, 1980)

>>

>> Goffart, Walter _The Narrators of Barbarian History (A.D. 550-800)
Jordanes, Gregory of Tours, Bede, & Paul the Deacon_ (Princeton University
Press, 1988)

>>

>> Hanning, Robert W. _The Vision of History in Early Britain_ (New York:
Columbia, 1964).

>>

>> Leckie, R. William Jr., _The Passage of Dominion; Geoffrey of Monmouth &
the Periodization of Insular History in the Twelfth Century_ (University of
Toronto Press,1981)

>>

>> _Lies and Fiction in the Ancient World_ edited by Christopher Gill and T.P.
Wiseman (University of Texas Press, 1993.)

>>

>> Nelson, William R. _Fact or Fiction: the Dilemma of the Renaissance
Storyteller_ (Harvard, 1973)

>>

>> Otter, Monkia _Inventiones; Fiction & Referentiality in Twelfth-Century
English Historical Writing_ (University of North Carolina Press, 1996)

>>

>> Partner, Nancy F. Making Up Lost Time: Writing on the Writing of History"
_Speculum_ 61 (1986) 90-117.

>>

>> Partner, Nancy F. "Partner, Nancy F. _Serious Entertainments_ (Chicago: U
Chicago Press, 1976).

>>

>> Southern, Richard. "Aspects of the European Tradition of Historical
Writing," _Transactions of the Royal Historical Society_ 5th series 20 (1970)
173-96; 21 (1971) 159-79; 22 (1972) 159-80; 23 (1973) 243-63.

>>

>> Spiegel, Gabrielle M. "History, Historicism, and the Social Logic of the
Text in the Middle Ages" _Speculum_ 65 (1990), 59-86.

>>

>> Spiegel, Gabrielle M., _Romancing the Past_ (Berkeley and Los Angeles: U
California Press, 1993)

>>

>> Stein, Robert M. "Signs and Things: The _Vita Heinrici IV. imperatoris_ "
and the Crisis of Interpretation in Twelfth-Century History" _Traditio_ 43
(1987) 105-119.

>>

>> White, Hayden, _Content of the Form; Narrative Discourse & Historical
Representation_ (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1990)

>>

>> White, Hayden, _Tropics of Discourse; Essays in Cultural Criticism_ ,
(Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985)

>>

>> Woodman, A.J. _Rhetoric in Classical Historiography, four studies_ (London
and Sydney: Croom Helm, 1988)

