Northern Arizona University
Fall 1999  
College of Arts and Sciences
Department of History

**HISTORY 621: PROBLEMS IN ASIAN HISTORY: SUBALTERN SUBJECTS AND
"POSTCOLONIAL" HISTORIES**

**Sanjay Joshi
Meeting Time: Mon. 2.00-4.30 PM**  
**LA 206
Location: LA 203**  
**Phone: 523-6216
Office Hours: Wed. and Fri. 10.15-12.15**  
[Sanjay.Joshi@nau.edu](mailto: Sanjay.Joshi@nau.edu)  **
Web Page: http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~sj6/**

**Description, Background, and Objectives**

The _Subaltern Studies_ project originally emerged as a result of
dissatisfaction among scholars with the ways in which traditional
historiography erased histories of subordinated groups in South Asian society.
Over time however, _Subaltern Studies_ has become intellectual hot property
across the world and also developed a broad interdisciplinary following. Much
of the current global interest in _Subaltern Studies_ comes from the ways the
project intersects with, and contributes to, a larger "postcolonial" critique.
Historians and scholars from a variety of disciplines today regularly cite
_Subaltern Studies_ in their work, or use the Gramscian category of
"subaltern" as it has been deployed by Ranajit Guha and other members of the
_Subaltern Studies_ collective. Has "postcoloniality" enhanced or attenuated
the agenda of the Subalternists and historiography in general? This is the
basic question that the course hopes to explore.  


The "postcolonial" turn in _Subaltern Studies_ , while contributing to its
immense popularity within the realms of western academe, has also generated
its share of critiques and disagreements. A number of scholars have questioned
the premises, implications, as well as the results which the "postcolonial"
turn has produced in "Subalternist" historical writings. These critiques of
the _Subaltern Studies_ parallel, though are not identical to, the sorts of
questions being raised about postcolonial writing in the humanities, liberal
arts and social sciences more generally. By tracing the history of this
historiographical intervention, through exploring the changing nature of the
the _Subaltern Studies_ project, the course provides an opportunity to
evaluate the significance of "postcoloniality" in a specific historical and
historiographical context.  


**Prerequisites**

The course is open to graduate students from a variety of disciplines. A
background in South Asian history or culture is not a pre-requisite. But given
that much of the course does deal with historical and historiographical
questions relating to South Asia, some understanding of South Asian history
and culture will necessarily accompany our efforts to understand the debates
surrounding "subalternity." Familiarity with current debates in cultural
theory or social and cultural history, particularly as they relate to the
colonial and post-colonial contexts, is however desirable.

**Readings**

We cover a substantial amount of reading in this course. All required,
additional, and recommended texts have been ordered at the NAU Bookstore. In
addition to these, students will be required to read certain articles for
assessing the historiographical debates concerning the "Subalternists." These
have been collected in a course packet available at the NAU Bookstore, and can
also be put on reserve at the library, or be otherwise made available to all
students.

**Required Texts**

Jawaharlal Nehru. _Discovery of India_.

Sunil Khilnani. _The Idea of India_.

Ranajit Guha and Gayatri Spivak ed. _Selected Subaltern Studies_.

Ranajit Guha ed. _A Subaltern Studies Reader, 1986-1995_.

Gyanendra Pandey. _Construction of Communalism in Colonial North India_.

Partha Chatterjee. _Nation and Its Fragments_.

Shahid Amin. _Event, Metaphor, Memory_.

Lata Mani. _Contentious Traditions_.

A COURSE PACKET of readings.  


In addition you will need to read and report on at least **ONE** of the
following texts.  


**Additional Readings**

Ashis Nandy. _The Intimate Enemy_.

Ranajit Guha. _Elementary Aspects of Peasant Insurgency in India_.

Saurabh Dube. _Untouchable Pasts_.

Ranajit Guha. _Dominance Without Hegemony and Other Essays_.

Partha Chatterjee ed. _Texts of Power_.

Mrinalini Sinha. _Colonial Masculinity_.

Mary John. _Discrepent Dislocations_.

Amitav Ghosh. _In An Antique Land_.

David Hardiman. _Coming of the Devi_.

Sudipta Kaviraj. _Unhappy Consciousness_.  


Finally, there are two books that I recommend for BACKGROUND reading. We will
not discuss these directly in class, but they may provide useful background
material - one for the empirical background of South Asian history, and the
other a basic introduction to ideas about "postcoloniality"  


**Recommended Readings**

Leela Gandhi. _Postcolonial Theory_.

Sugata Bose and Ayesha Jalal. _Modern South Asia_.  


**Assignments and Evaluation**

Students will be required to write one formal paper, write regular one page
assignments on the readings, and make at least one oral presentation to the
class based on the readings for the week AND (one of) the additional readings
indicated for the week.  


**Paper**

The final paper for this class should be a substantial **_historiographical
review_** between fifteen and twenty pages in length. For this paper, students
may focus on either:

a. The changing intellectual and/or political concerns of any one of the
_Subaltern Studies_ scholars. **OR**  


b. How particular historical themes (e.g. nationalism, ethnic ("communal")
conflict, or questions of gender) are dealt with in the corpus of
"Subalternist" writings. **OR**

c. Evaluate the contributions, significance, and/or the problems associated
with using some **SPECIFIC** contribution of the _Subaltern Studies_ approach
in the historiography of another region of the world (or the
theoretical/empirical literature of another discipline) with which they are
familiar.  


This paper is **due December 10th** , and will count towards 45% of the course
grade. A typed proposal for this paper, outlining the topic as well as a
preliminary bibliography, is **due by October 25.**  


**Regular Reviews**

Students will be expected to write a weekly one-page review of SEVEN of the
readings between Weeks Three and Twelve (that is, September 20 through
November 22, inclusive). The review should provide an overview of the theme of
the week's readings, pose one **_substantive_** question relating to this
theme, and provide an answer in outline form. Students should be prepared to
elaborate on the outline orally in class. These will count towards 30% of the
course grade. The reviews are due on the FRIDAY BEFORE CLASS, and IN NO CASE
WILL REVIEWS BE ACCEPTED AFTER CLASS DISCUSSION OF MATERIALS.  


**Oral Presentation**

Each student will make an oral presentation of around fifteen minutes on at
least one occasion through the semester. The presentation will need to
incorporate both the week's regular readings, AND report on the **additional
reading** text assigned for that week. Students may choose any of the weeks
for which additional readings have been assigned, and weeks and texts will be
allocated on a "first come, first served" basis!! I strongly urge the students
scheduled to make the presentation to meet with me the week before the class
presentation. The oral presentation will count towards 15% of the course
grade.  


10% of the total grade will be based on my subjective evaluation of the
students' participation in the seminar.  


The grading scale will be as follows:

90% + = **A** ; 80-89% = **B** ; 70-79% = **C** ; 60-69% = **D** ; below 60% =
**F**.  


**Provisional Course Schedule (subject to modification)**  


**August 30** **_Course Introduction_**.  


**September 13** **_Histories of India: Imagining the Nation_**

_Readings_

Jawaharlal Nehru. _Discovery of India_. (Focus on Chapters One, Three, Four,
Seven, Eight)  


Sunil Khilnani. _The Idea of India._  


**September 20** **_Subaltern Studies: The Historiographical Context_**

_Readings_

Foreword, pp. v-x _Selected Subaltern Studies_ ( _SSS_ )  


Ranajit Guha, "Preface" and "On Some Aspects of the Historiography of Colonial
India," _SSS_.  


Nehru: Selections of your choice, preferably parts that you did not read last
week.  


**September 27** : **_Searching for the Subaltern_**

_Readings_ (From _SSS_.)

Gautam Bhadra, "Four Rebels of 1857."  


David Arnold, "Touching the Body: Perspectives on the Indian Plague."  


Gyanendra Pandey, "Peasant Revolt and Indian Nationalism."  


From _Subaltern Studies Reader_ ( _SSR_ )

David Hardiman, "Origins and Transformations of the Devi."  


_Additional Reading_

David Hardiman. _Coming of the Devi_.  


**October 4** **_Writing the Subalterns_**

_Readings_ (From _SSS_.)

Ranajit Guha, "Prose of Counter Insurgency."  


Gyanendra Pandey, "Encounters and Calamities."  


Shahid Amin, "Gandhi as Mahatma."  


Dipesh Chakrabarty, "Conditions for Knowledge of Working Class Conditions."  


_Additional Reading_

Ranajit Guha. _Elementary Aspects of Peasant Insurgency in India_.  


**October 11 _Early_ _Critiques and Responses_**

_Readings_

Rosalind O'Hanlon, "Recovering the Subject: Subaltern Studies and Histories of
Resistance in Colonial South Asia." _Modern Asian Studies_ 22, 1,
(1988):189-224. (CP)  


Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, "Subaltern Studies: Deconstructing
Historiography." _(SSS_ )  


Gautam Bhadra, "Mentality of Subalternity." ( _SSR_ )  


Ranajit Guha, "Introduction." _(_ _SSR_ _)_  


David Arnold. "The Colonial Prison." ( _SSR_ )  


_Additional Reading_

Ashis Nandy. _The Intimate Enemy_.  


**October 18** **_Subaltern Studies and Postcolonial Criticism_**

_Readings_

Sanjay Seth, Leela Gandhi, and Michael Dutton, "Postcolonial Studies: a
beginning..." _Postcolonial Studies_ , Vol. 1, No. 1: 7-11. (CP)  


Gyan Prakash, "Subaltern Studies as Postcolonial Criticism." _American
Historical Review_ 99, 5 (December 1994). (CP)  


Dipesh Chakrabarty, "Postcoloniality and the Artifice of History: Who Speaks
for 'Indian' Pasts? ( _SSR_ )  


Gyanendra Pandey, "In Defense of the Fragment: Writing About Hindu-Muslim
Riots in India Today." ( _SSR_ )  


Florencia Mallon, "The Promise and Dilemma of Subaltern Studies." _American
Historical Review_ 99, 5 (December 1994). (CP)  


Fredrick Cooper, "Conflict and Connection: Rethinking Colonial African
History." _American Historical Review_ 99, 5 (December 1994) (CP)  


_Additional Reading_

Ranajit Guha. _Dominance Without Hegemony and Other Essays_.

**October 25 _Colonialism and Postcoloniality_**

_Readings_

Pandey, _Construction of Communalism_.  


_Additional Reading_

Partha Chatterjee ed. _Texts of Power: Emerging Disciplines in Colonial
Bengal_.

**PAPER PROPOSALS DUE**  


**November 1** **_Postcoloniality and the Nation_**

_Readings_

Partha Chatterjee, _Nation and Its Fragments_.  


_Additional Reading_

Sudipta Kaviraj. _Unhappy Consciousness_.  


**November 8** **_Gendered Subalterns_**

_Reading_

Lata Mani, _Contentious Traditions: The Debate on _Sati_ in Colonial India_.

Ranajit Guha, "Chandra's Death." ( _SSR_ )  


_Additional Reading_

Mrinalini Sinha. _Colonial Masculinity_.

**OR**

Mary John. _Discrepant Dislocations_.  


**November 15 _Problems of Postcoloniality_**

_Readings_

Sumit Sarkar, "The Decline of the Subaltern in _Subaltern Studies_ " in his
_Writing Social History_. Delhi, Oxford University Press, 1997. (CP)  


Ram Guha, "Subaltern and Bhadralok Studies." _EPW_ August 19, 1995: 2056-58;
"Beyond Bhadralok and Bankim Studies." _EPW_ February 24, 1996: 495-96. (CP)  


Anita Chakravarty, "Writing History." _EPW_ December 23, 1995: 3320\. (CP)  


Arvind N. Das, "The Poor Man's Subaltern Studies," _Biblio_ : February 1996:
16-17. (CP)  


Dipesh Chakrabarty, "Radical Histories and the Question of Enlightenment
Rationalism: Some Recent Critiques of _Subaltern Studies_. _Economic and
Political Weekly_ ( _EPW_ ) April 8, 1995: 751-59. (CP)  


Dipesh Chakrabarty, "Minority Histories and Subaltern Pasts." _EPW_ February
28, 1998: 473-79. (CP)  


_Additional Reading_

Saurabh Dube. _Untouchable Pasts_.  


**November 22** **_Re-Writing Subaltern History_**

_Reading_

Shahid Amin. _Event, Metaphor, Memory_.  


_Additional Reading_

Amitav Ghosh. _In An Antique Land_.  


**November 29** **Course Review** and **Paper Presentations**  


**December 6 No Class: Write your papers!**  


**FINAL PAPERS DUE FRIDAY DECEMBER 10**

