![](world5.gif)

###  Edited by [Steven
Muhlberger](mailto:stevem@faculty.unipissing.ca?subject=World History of
Democracy)

####  Associate Professor of History, Nipissing University

#####  Writings \-- Bibliographies \-- Internet Resources \-- Newest Addition
to Site

#### Important New Link

##  An Introduction to this Site

This web site has two main purposes. The first is to expose certain historical
ideas and interpretations to comment and criticism by scholars and the
interested public.

In collaboration with Phil Paine, a long-time friend and independent scholar,
I have been thinking about the history of democracy as a world phenomenon for
over ten years. In between other projects, he and I have written a number of
short pieces on this topic, one of which, **"Democracy's Place in World
History,"** was published in the _Journal of World History_ in 1993 and
republished in _Bring History Alive!: A Source Book For Teaching World
History_ ([U.S.] National Center for History in the Schools, UCLA) in 1997.

We aim at a book. As a stepping-stone to this goal, we are pre-publishing on
the web some of what we have already written. Perhaps our material will be of
some use to you readers. We hope in return that you will critique the work,
suggest new avenues of investigation, and give us leads to relevant books and
articles that we have overlooked. When you are doing world history,
overlooking things is easy.

The second purpose of this site is to gather materials that will make the
investigation of the world history of democracy a little less difficult.
Initially this includes four short bibliographies I have compiled in the
course of my own research. I make no great claims for them, except that they
may help someone else get started. I've also provided some links to relevant
resources on the web.  
    
    
  

[Steve Muhlberger's Home Page](../muhlberg.htm) \-- [Phil Paine's Home
Page](http://www.interlog.com/~knossos/)

> * * *

>

>> > ###  Writings on the World History of Democracy

>

> ####  by Steve Muhlberger and Phil Paine

>

>> * A World History of Democracy: Part of a Draft Survey

>>

>>   * [Time Makes More Converts than Reason: A Preface](reason.htm)

>>   * [Chapter One -- Is There a History of Democracy?](history1.htm)

>>   * [Chapter Two -- Democracy at the Basic Level: Government by consent in
small communities](localdem.htm)

>>

>> * Other essays

>>

>>   * [Democracy in Ancient India](indiadem.htm) (by Steve Muhlberger).

>>   * [_A History of the Vote in Canada_ : A Review Article](canvote.htm) (by
Steve Muhlberger).

>>

>

>> > * * *

>

> ###

>

> ###  [Chronology of Modern Democracy:   Five Different Views](chronpag.htm)

>

> ####  compiled by Steve Muhlberger

>

> ###

>

> * * *

>

>  
>  An Eclectic Bibliography of the World History of Democracy

>

> ####  compiled by Steve Muhlberger

>

> Eclectic is the word, because it's not a "complete" anything. Nevertheless,
I hope readers will find these lists useful.

>

>   * [Theory](theory.htm)

>   * [Local self-government](local.htm)

>   * [Ancient democracy in India](ancient.htm)

>   * [Ancient democracy in the Mediterranean](ancmed.htm)

>

>

> ###

>

> * * *

>

>  
>  Additional Bibliography

>

>   * [Native American Political Systems and the Evolution of Democracy: An
Annotated
Bibliography](http://www.ratical.org/many_worlds/6Nations/NAPSnEoD.html#TOC)
by Bruce E. Johansen of the University of Nebraska at Omaha.

>   * [Suggestions from our readers.](readersg.htm)

>   * [Reviews available on the Internet.](reviews.htm)

>

>

> ###

>

> * * *

>

>  
>  Internet Resources

>

> I have listed here some information sources available on-line, and some
links to organizations concerned with issues of democracy and human rights.
I've not tried to be comprehensive -- I've just included what I consider most
interesting. If it's not here and you think it is good and useful, maybe I
don't know about it yet.  
>  
>

>   * **Essays, Opinion Pieces, Scholarly Sites and Syllabi elsewhere on the
Web**

>     * John Markoff's [Where and When was Democracy
Invented?](http://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/soc/groups/ccsa/markoff.htm), a paper
delivered in Spring 1999 at UCLA's [Center For Comparative Social
Analysis](http://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/soc/groups/ccsa/index.htm), is a fine
introduction to his work on modern democratic history, more thoroughly set out
in _Waves of Democracy: Social Movements and Political Change_. **Note:** when
this page loads, it presents the reader with a blank screen; you must page
down to find the text.

>     * [Democracy, Destiny, and the Clash of
Civilizations](http://www.ijt.cz/transitions/democra1.html) by Aleksa Djilas
(at the site for _[Transitions](http://www.ijt.cz/transitions/index.html)_ ,
the journal on post-communist societies).

>     * [Glory and the New World Order](glory.htm) by Daniel Szechi. Written
for an American audience and concerned with a specific policy question, this
short essay has something interesting to say about the motives of rulers.

>     * [Pol Pot](http://www.robertfulford.com/PolPot.html) by Robert Fulford.
Fulford explains why there should be no mystery about the Cambodian mass
murder's motivation.

>     * [Democracy, Civilization, and World
Order](http://www.indiana.edu/~workshop/seminars/spring1999_y673_syllabus.html)
was a seminar given at Indiana University in Spring, 1999 by Michael McGinnis
and Vincent Ostrom. The syllabus is very substantial and includes extensive
bibliography.

>     * [Freedom, Democracy, Peace; Power, Democide, and
War](http://www2.hawaii.edu/~rummel/welcome.html) by R.J. Rummel, perhaps the
most prominent proponent of the theory of "democratic peace," broadly that
freedom and democracy are antidotes to war and violence. This extensive site
provides access to Rummel's writings and other relevant scholarship.

>     * Given the interest in the Pinochet case, I have included the site
[Derechos Chile: Human Rights in Chile, Then and
Now.](http://www.derechoschile.com/english/about.htm)

>   * **Surveys of Freedom, Human Rights, and Political Institutions**

>     * [Freedom House Surveys](http://www.freedomhouse.org/) are available
from the Freedom House home page. These include _Freedom In The World_ , the
_Survey Of Economic Freedom_ , the _Survey Of Press Freedom_ , and _Nations In
Transit_ , a research report on Central and Eastern Europe and the Newly
Independent States, created for USAID. Also Freedom House has issued
[Democracy's Century](http://www.freedomhouse.org/research/demcent.htm), a
historical survey of developments since 1900.

>     * [The Amnesty International
Library](http://www.amnesty.org/ailib/index.html) includes a number of AI
reports relevant to various human rights issues.

>     * [Human Rights Watch World Report 2001](http://www.hrw.org/wr2k1/).

>     * [The Historical Atlas of the Twentieth
Century](http://users.erols.com/mwhite28/20centry.htm) by Matthew White is an
original and useful overview of historical developments in the last century.

>   * **Electoral Systems and Data**

>     * [Elections and Electoral Systems by
Country](http://www.psr.keele.ac.uk/election.htm).

>     * [International Elections
Calendar](http://www.klipsan.com/calendar.htm).

>     * [IFES Election Calendar](http://www.ifes.org/eleccal.htm).

>     * [Election Watch -- Journal of
Democracy](http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/journal_of_democracy/election_watch/).

>     * [Lijphart Elections Archive](http://dodgson.ucsd.edu/lij/).

>   * **Organizations of Interest (Alphabetical Order)**

>     * [Amnesty International](http://www.amnesty.org/).

>     * [Center for the Evolution of
Democracy](http://www.cedemocracy.org/engbrochure.html).

>     * [Center for Civil Society
International](http://solar.rtd.utk.edu/~ccsi/ccsihome.html) (esp. the section
on [Research and Opinion on Civil
Society](http://solar.rtd.utk.edu/~ccsi/resource/rsrchopn.htm)).

>     * [Freedom House](http://www.freedomhouse.org/).

>     * [Human Rights Watch](http://www.hrw.org/).

>     * [International Foundation for Election Systems
(IFES)](http://www.ifes.org/index.htm).

>     * [Journal of
Democracy](http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/journal_of_democracy/)

>

>

> * * *

>

> Originally posted on February 8, 1998.

>

> Last updated on May 22, 2001.

>

> This page has been visited ![](/lcgi/count.nlm?index.cnt) times since
November 15, 1999.

>

> * * *

