**369-Jewish Cultural History          Spring 2002**

University of Wisconsin-Madison

Department of Hebrew and Semitic Studies

Lecture:  M-W-F 2:25-3:15. 22 Ingraham Hall

(Optional discussion session: W 3:30-4:20. 214 Ingraham Hall)

******Dr. Esperanza Alfonso**

Office: 1340 Van Hise Hall

E-mail: [ mealfonso@facstaff.wisc.edu](mailto:mealfonso@facstaff.wisc.edu)

Office hours: M 4:00-6:00 **or by appointment  
  
**

**Course description and goals:**

The goal of this course is to provide a historically oriented introduction to
Judaism. Through lectures, readings and discussion in class students will gain
an understanding of how Judaism came into being and how it developed into many
"Judaisms" over time. Special emphasis will be put on the construction of
Jewish identity in contact with other cultures.

We will also examine methodological questions that will allow the student to
develop critical skills in the study of cultural history and religion.

No prior systematic study of Judaism is required to take the course.

**Requirements:**

-Regular attendance, engagement in the class and completion of readings are _essential_ for a successful completion of the course.

-Three in-class examinations: February 15, March 22 and between May 12-May 18.

-Three mini-essays each not more than three double-spaced pages (topics will be provided in advance). Due dates: February 22, April 5 and May 15.

-One movie critique (two-three double-spaced pages). Due date: March 4 or May 10.

**Books:**

The following books are available at the University Book Store:

Tanakh. A New Translation of the Holy Scriptures according to the Traditional
Hebrew Text. Philadelphia-Jerusalem: The Jewish Publication Society, 1985
(this version is recommended but any other edition of the Bible can be used).

Robert M. Seltzer. _Jewish People, Jewish Thought_ . London: Collier Macmillan
- New York: Macmillan, 1980.

Martin Gilbert. Jewish History Atlas. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, most
recent edition.

Lawrence H. Schiffman (ed.). Texts and Traditions. A Source Reader. Ktav
Publishing House, 1998.

Marc Saperstein _. The Jew in the Medieval World. A Source Book: 315-1791._
Cincinnati: Hebrew Union College Press, 1999.

**Course Reader:** Available at Bob's Copy Shop at University Square.

**Reserve readings in Helen C. White library:**

Elie Barnavi. _A Historical Atlas of the Jewish People : From the Time of the
Patriarchs to the Present._ New York: Knopf . Distributed by Random House,
1992.

Robert Chazan, ed. _Church, State and Jew_ . New York: Behrman House, 1980.

Barry W. Holtz, ed. _Back to the Sources_ . Reading the Classic Jewish Texts.
New York: Summit Books, 1984.

Nicholas de Lange. _Judaism_. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986.

Bernard Lewis. _The Jews of Islam_. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1987 reprint ed.

Jacob R. Marcus and Marc Saperstein. _The Jew in the Medieval World: A Source
Book, 315-1791_. Rev., new ed. Cincinnati: Hebrew Union College Press, 1999.

Raymond Scheindlin. _A Short History of the Jewish People. From legendary
Times to Modern Statehood._ Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.

A copy of the course reader will also be put on reserve.

**SYLLABUS**

******WEEK 1**

W, January 23: General introduction to the course: Textbook, course
requirements and course orientation.

Introduction to Jewish cultural history: Terminology, periodization and
conceptual framework.

Reading: Seltzer 7-12; 43-46; Course Reader 3.

**The ISRAELITES in the context of the Ancient Near East**

F, January 25: Early cultures in the Middle East. Israelite origins.

Reading: Seltzer 12-15.

******WEEK 2**

****M, January 28: Written and oral literary traditions (I): Biblical
narrative.

Reading: Seltzer 15-19; 47-66; Schiffman 11-24; Genesis 25-35; Course Reader
5-9.

W, January 30: Written and oral literary traditions (II): Revelation and law.

Reading: Seltzer 66-77; Schiffman 22-39.

Course Reader 11-13.

F. February 1: The conquest of the Land. Monarchy.

Reading: Seltzer 19-32; Schiffman 39-48.

**WEEK 3**

M, February 4: Classical prophetic literature.

Reading: Seltzer 77-111; Schiffman 50-56.

W, February 6: Babylonian exile. Exilic prophecy.

Reading: Seltzer 32-34, 119-126; Schiffman 56-9.

**The origins of " JUDAISM"**

F, February 8: The origins of Judaism in Persian Yehud.

Reading: Seltzer 112-117; Schiffman 70-73, 80-96.

******WEEK 4**

M, February 11: Post-exilic literature.

Reading: Seltzer 119-143; Schiffman 59-64, 109-116.

W, February 13: Who wrote the Bible?

Reading: Schiffman 117-120.

F, February 15: 1st EXAM.

**Judaism and Greek/Hellenistic culture**

******WEEK 5**

****M, February 18: Greece and Hellenisms.

Reading: Seltzer 117-119, 155-156; Schiffman 125-138.

W, February 20: Literature from Persian to Hellenistic times.

Reading: Seltzer 143-155.

F, February 22: Political and cultural unrest: Hellenophiles/Maccabean revolt.
Apocalyptic literature.

Reading: Seltzer 156-162; Schiffman 147-169.

****

**WEEK 6**

M, February 25: Transition from Hellenistic to Roman times. The Jewish
diaspora.

Reading: Seltzer 171-178; Schiffman 184-186.

W, February 27: The impact of Greek culture on the Jewish diaspora.

Reading: Seltzer 195-213. Schiffman 175-182, 199-203, 209-219.

F. March 1: MOVIE

**Judaism and Roman culture**

****

**WEEK 7**

M, March 4: Judea: The Hasmonean dynasty. The Roman-Jewish War (66-70 CE).

Reading: Seltzer 178-194; Schiffman 235-266, 372-396, 434-438, 442-469.

W, March 6: Religious groups within Judean Judaism.

Reading: Seltzer 213-225 or 231; Schiffman 266-299.

F, March 8: The rise of Christianity.

Reading: Seltzer 231-242; Schiffman 407-427, 565-568.

**Rabbinic Judaism**

**WEEK 8**

M, March 11: Rabbinic Judaism. Palestine 70 CE-4th c.

Reading: Seltzer 243-254; Schiffman 491-4, 503-4, 508-514, 522-31, 571.

W, March 13: Rabbinic Judaism. The Christianization of the Roman empire: 4th
c.-7th c.

Reading: Seltzer 254-256; Schiffman 589-90, 595-6; Marcus 3-7.

F, March 15: Rabbinic Judaism in Babylonia.

Reading: Seltzer 256-260; Schiffman 603-4, 609-11.

****

**WEEK 9**

M, March 18: Basic concepts in Rabbinic literature: Mishnah and Talmud.

Reading: Seltzer 260-7; 270-8; Course reader 15-26.

W, March 20: Midrash and other forms of Rabbinic literature.

Reading: Seltzer 267-70; 278-81; Course reader 27-44

F, March 22: 2nd EXAM .

******WEEK 10**

M, March 25, W, March 27 and F, March 29: **(SPRING RECESS)**

**Judaism and Islam**

******WEEK 11**

M, April 1: Judaism at the time of the Muslim conquest. Political and social
reorganization.

Reading: Seltzer 323-334; Marcus 14-20; Course reader 45-62.

W, April 3: Authority and leadership within the Jewish community. Karaites
versus Rabbanites.

Reading: Seltzer 334-342; Marcus 262-269; Course reader 63-65.

F, April 5: Changes in Jewish culture in contact with Islam.

Reading: Seltzer 373-381; Course reader 67-83.

**The making of the Sephardi tradition**

**WEEK 12**

M, April 8: De-centralization of Jewish intellectual authority. The Muslim
conquest of the Iberian Peninsula.

Reading: Seltzer 342-345; Course reader 85.

W. April 10: Jewish society in al-Andalus/Sepharad.

Reading: Seltzer 345-9; Marcus 335-339. ****

F, April 12: Cultural and intellectual life in al-Andalus/Sepharad.

Reading: Seltzer 382-408; Marcus428-432; Course reader 87-94.

**WEEK 13**

M, April 15: The Jews of Christian Spain.

Reading: Seltzer 364-72; Marcus 38-44.

W, April 17: Jewish culture in Christian Spain.

Reading: Seltzer 408-418; 425-429; Marcus352-4; Course reader 95-100.

F, April 19: The Spanish Inquisition.

Reading: Marcus 59-64; 195-200; Course reader 101-103.

****

**The making of the Ashkenazi tradition**

**WEEK 14**

M, April 22: Jewish communities in Medieval Christian Europe. Social and
political structures.

Reading: Seltzer 350-353.

W, April 24: Cultural paradigms and prototypes.

Reading: Seltzer 353-5.

F, April 26: The Crusades and their aftermath. Expulsions and Massacres.

Reading: Seltzer 355-364; Marcus 49-54, 128-152. ****

**WEEK 15**

M, April 29: Discussion: Judaism under Islam / Judaism under Christianity.

W, May 1: Ritual space: Synagogues (Slide show).

Reading: Course reader 105-123.

F, May 3: The arts: illumination of manuscripts.

Reading: Course reader 125-127 (Slide show and visit to the library).

********

******WEEK 16**

M, May 5: MOVIE

W, May 7: Review.

F, May 10: Final remarks.

**May 12-May 18: Final Exam.**

* * *

![](file:///C:/NETSCAPE/NETSCAPE/HTML/wiscinfo.gif)
![](file:///C:/NETSCAPE/NETSCAPE/HTML/aleph.gif)  
If you have trouble accessing this page, contact: Chris Dargis   ([
cadargis@facstaff.wisc.edu](mailto:cadargis@facstaff.wisc.edu) )  
Latest revision date: 1/18/2002 (cad)  

* * *

  

