![](../../../images/r.jpg)  
---  
|   | **Spring 2000**  
 **POL 3835  
International Relations**  
---|---  
![](../../../images/2-courses.jpg)  
|  Professor Raymond Duvall  
1373 Social Sciences Bldg.  
Office Hours: M,W,F 11:15-12:15, or by appt.  
Office Phone: 624-8576  
E-mail: rduvall@polisci.umn.edu  
  
Teaching Assistants:  
Giunia Gatta  
Dean Harvey  
Shannon Sanchez-Terry  
  

**Course Description:**

  

We focus on two important topics as a means to ask how various theoretical
perspectives provide distinct understandings of the structure and practices of
international relations. The first topic is the problem of ensuring security
for all people from organized violence (in the form of war, terrorism, etc.).
The second concerns the prospect for creating a globally stable and
sustainable world economy, in which all of humanity, including future
generations, can expect to prosper. We will consider three theoretical
perspectives for analyzing those topics: political realism, liberalism, and
critical constructivism.

  

The principal objective is to develop an appreciation of the ways in which
perspectives lead to different analyses. We will learn how each theoretical
perspective generates its own view of international relations, in terms of
providing a distinct understanding of the structure and practices of human
security and prosperity. Each shares the assumption that the many and varied
interactions among states and non-state actors in the global arena are vital
elements of our world. However, in interpreting these many and varied forms of
global politics, each of the perspectives offers not only a distinct
understanding of what international relations consist of, but also distinct
guidance about what international political activity should be. Therefore,
this course will explore how each perspective _explains events that occur in
the arena_ of global politics, and also explores how adherents of each
perspective think international actors _should act in this arena._ That is, we
will explore both the explanatory insights and the normative political
implications of each perspective. Through the highlighting of such theoretical
differences, the course is intended to provide the means for students to
develop their own theoretically informed analyses of issues in contemporary
international relations, such as what the important consequences of the
European Union are, or what the emerging security issues in Asia might be.

  

It is recommended that this course be taken prior to coursework at the 4xxx-or
5xxx-level in the field of international relations. Students in this course
should have some familiarity with the subject matter of world politics, such
as is provided in Political Science 1025.

  
  
  
  
  
  

**Course Objectives:**

  

At the completion of this course, you should be able to:

  

Demonstrate the ability to employ several influential theoretical perspectives
to analyze current situations in international relations;

Recognize the use of these perspectives in everyday speech, journalism, and
academic writing;

  

Identify important normative political implications at work within different
perspectives as those perspectives are used to analyze and/or to guide policy
with respect to situations in international relations;

Evaluate the relative explanatory success of the perspectives within the
context of real situations and events in international relations.

  

**Course Requirements:**

  

You are expected to complete all of the assigned readings listed on the
syllabus prior to the class session for which they are scheduled. Lectures and
discussions will not duplicate, but instead will build on, and hence will
assume prior familiarity with, assigned readings. Your active participation in
discussion and class activities is expected.

  

Written assignments include three short thought papers, which call for you to
apply the theoretical perspectives of course readings in analysis of specific
assigned topics in international relations. The paper assignments will be
distributed in class on Fridays (February 11, March 17, and April 28). Each
paper will be due ten days (or ten days plus Spring Break) after the
assignment is distributed (so, due dates are Mondays, February 21, April 3,
and May 8). Late papers will be penalized. [Note that the third paper is due
during exam week.]

  

A second type of writing that you are required to submit is a journal of your
analytic reflections on an on-going issue of your choice in international
relations. You are to select a contemporary issue from the list attached to
this syllabus, and to develop a degree of expertise on that issue. Then, you
are to pose focussed and clearly formulated analytical questions about the
issue - why and how things are occurring as they are. Your journal is to
record your thoughts about how to answer that analytical question in light of
the required readings. Five installments of the journal are due periodically
throughout the semester as indicated on the course calendar below. (More
detailed instructions for the journal will be distributed in class.)

  

Third, you will write a final exam. It will consist of essay questions in
which you are asked to compare and contrast the theoretical perspectives
discussed in this course. A study guide will be provided for the final exam,
which is scheduled for Saturday, May 13, 1:30-3:30.

  

Finally, you will be asked to complete in-class writing assignments ("five-
minute papers"). These "quizzes" are meant to provide feedback on how well you
understand key concepts from assigned readings. Five quizzes are scheduled
during the semester.

  
  

**Grades:**

  

Grades will be calculated on the following basis: the three assigned
analytical papers are 20% each, for a total of 60%; the journal is 20% (4% for
each of five installments); the 'quizzes' are 10% (five each at 2%); and the
final exam is 10%. In order to earn a passing grade, you must submit all three
analytical papers and the final exam, plus at least three journal installments
and at least three quizzes. Incompletes will be granted only in exceptional
circumstances, and only with my prior and explicit approval.

  

**Other Comments:**

****

I strongly encourage you to visit Giunia, Dean, Shannon or me during office
hours. Visits enable us to gauge how well the course is going and whether our
expectations are clear to you. They also enable you to explore specific issues
in greater depth. Please use office hours as a resource to help improve your
work over the course of the term.

  

If you have disabilities, special learning needs, or problems that emerge from
work commitments, family commitments, or medical emergencies, please let me
know what I can do to accommodate you. This syllabus is available in
alternative formats upon request.

**Course Readings:**

  

All of the assigned readings for the course can be obtained at the H.D. Smith
West Bank Bookstore for $96.45 (used) or $126.65 (new). Assigned readings are
from five books and one article:

  
  

1\. Richard K. Betts, ed., _Conflict After the Cold War: Arguments on Causes
of War and Peace._ Allyn and Bacon, 1994.

  

2\. David Campbell, _Writing Security: United States Foreign Policy and the
Politics of Identity_ , Revised Edition. University of Minnesota Press, 1998.

  

3\. Amitav Ghosh, _In an Antique Land: History in the Guise of a Traveler's
Tale._ Vintage Books, 1992.

  

4\. William Greider, _One World, Ready or Not: The Manic Logic of Global
Capitalism_. Simon and Schuster, 1997.

  

5\. Kenneth N. Waltz, _Man, the State and War: A Theoretical Analysis._
Columbia University Press, 1954.

  

and,

  

6\. Andrew Moravcsik, "Taking Preferences Seriously: A Liberal Theory of
International Politics," _International Organization,_ 51(4), Autumn, 1997:
513-553. (This article is available in the course packet room of the West Bank
Bookstore.)

  
  
  

_**CLASS SCHEDULE**_

  

****January 19 (W) Course overview and introduction - objectives,
expectations, and requirements.

  

January 21 (F) The importance of theoretical perspectives in the analysis of

and international relations.

January 24 (M)

Read: Betts, pp. 1-4 (Introduction: Does War Have a Future?)

Waltz, chapter I, (Introduction), pp. 1-15.

  
  
  

**_Political Realist Theory: power politics, national interest, and threats to
security in anarchy_**

  
  
  

January 26 (W) Foundations of (classical) political realism in a pessimistic
view of human nature.

  

Read: Waltz, chapter II, pp. 16-41.

  

January 28 (F) Harmony of interests -- No! Conflicts of interest --
inevitable.

  

Read: Betts, pp. 72-77 (part of Edward Hallett Carr, 'Realism and

Idealism' to "Military Power")

Betts, pp. 179-187 (Geoffrey Blainey, 'Paradise Is a Bazaar').

  

January 31 (M) Power politics results from the pursuit of interests in
conflict

  

Read: Betts, pp. 66-71 (Thucydides, 'The Melian Dialogue')

Betts, pp. 77-87 (part of Edward Hallett Carr, 'Realism and

Idealism')

Betts, pp. 445-447 (Edward Hallett Carr, 'The Limitations

of Realism').

  

February 2 (W) Systemic anarchy as the root of power politics: the neo-realist
or structural realist perspective.

  

Read: Waltz, chapters VI-VIII, pp. 159-238.

  
  
  
  

February 4 (F) The importance of the distribution of power in the context of
anarchy

  

Read: Betts, pp. 88-95 (Kenneth N. Waltz, 'The Origins of War in

Neorealist Theory')

Betts, pp. 110-123 (Geoffrey Blainey, 'Power, Culprits, and

Arms')

Betts, pp. 96-109 (Robert Gilpin, 'Hegemonic War and

International Change').

  

February 7 (M) Strategic interaction to alter the distribution of power
creates security dilemmas

  

Read: Betts, pp. 312-343 (Robert Jervis, 'Cooperation Under the Secuity
Dilemma', and Scott D. Sagan, '1914 Revisited').

  

****(Quiz at start of class)** **

  
  

February 9 (W) Do international limitations on military capabilities affect
the distribution of power in beneficial ways?

  

Read: Betts, pp. 358-382 (Charles H. Fairbanks, Jr. and Abram N.

Shulsky, 'Arms Control: The Historical Experience', and Kenneth N. Waltz, 'The
Spread of Nuclear Weapons: More May Be Better').

  

February 11 (F) Does systemic interdependence reduce the importance of
anarchy?

  

Read: Betts, pp. 221-231 (Kenneth N. Waltz, 'Structural Causes and Economic
Effects').

  

**_**(First journal installment due, covering readings for_**

**_January 26 through February 9)**_**

  
  

**__**___**[First paper assignment distributed in class]**_

  
  
  
  
  
  

February 14 (M) Realism and the prescription of desirable policy

  

Read: Betts, pp. 33-43 (Samuel P. Huntington, 'The Errors of

Endism')

Betts, pp. 505-520 (Samuel P. Huntington, 'America's

Changing Strategic Interests')

Betts, pp. 44-61 (John J. Mearsheimer, 'Why We Will

Soon Miss The Cold War').

  

February 16 (W) Review and discussion session on political realism

  
  
  

**_Bridging from Political Realism to Liberalism_**

  
  
  

February 18 (F) Are enduring structures of international security cooperation
possible?

  

Read: Betts, pp. 475-491 (Jack L. Snyder, 'Averting Anarchy in

The New Europe')

Betts, pp. 448-474 (Richard K. Betts, 'Collective Security

and Arms Control in the New Europe')

  
  

February 21 (M) Do realists misunderstand international systemic anarchy?

  

Read: Betts, pp. 157-172 (Richard H. Ullman, 'The Changed

Premises of European Security')

Betts, pp. 136-148 (Hedley Bull, 'Society and Anarchy

in International Relations')

  

_**[First paper due]**_

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**_Liberal Theory: interdependence, institutions, and individual interests_**

  
  

February 23 (W) Complex interdependence defines system structure, displacing
the central position of anarchy

  

Read: Betts, pp. 149-156 (Robert O. Keohane and Joseph S. Nye,

'Power and Interdependence').

Betts, pp. 492-504 (Hanns W. Maull, 'Germany and Japan:

The New Civilian Powers').

  

****(Quiz at start of class)****

  

February 25 (F) Modern capitalism makes violent struggles for international
power irrational

  

Read: Betts, pp. 176-178 (Norman Angell,'The Great Illusion').

Betts, pp. 196-206 (Joseph Schumpeter, 'Imperialism and

Capitalism').

  

February 28 (M) The internal structure and organization of states is very
important. Different types of states act differently in international
relations

  

Read: Betts, pp. 128-135 (Immanuel Kant, 'Perpetual Peace').

Waltz, chapter IV, pp. 80-123.

  

_**(Second journal installment due, covering readings for_

_February 11 through February 25)**_

  

March 1 (W) There can be a world of liberal peace

  

Read: Betts, pp. 263-279 (Michael W. Doyle, 'Liberalism and

World Politics').

March 3 (F) A comprehensive, systemic statement of liberal theory of

March 6 (M) international relations: individual interests, domestic

and institutions, and interdependent state preference

March 8 (W)

Read: Moravscik article (course packet)

  

****(March 8, Quiz at start of class)****

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**_Critiques of Contemporary Liberal International Relations through Liberal
Analytic Lenses_**

  
  
  

March 10 (F) International relations of environmental change

  

Read: Betts, pp. 425-441 (Thomas F. Homer-Dixon,

'Environmental Changes as Causes of Acute

Conflict')

  

March 13 (M) A liberal critique of the contemporary liberal global economy.

March 15 (W) Must a liberal necessarily say that global capitalism is good?

March 17 (F) and

March 20 (M)

Read: Greider, entire book (read approximately 110-120 pages

per class session).

  

_**(March 13, third journal installment due, covering readings for February 28
through March 10)**_

  

_**{Second paper assignment distributed in class, Friday,_

_March 17}**_

  

March 22 (W) Review and discussion session on liberal international relations

theory

  
  
  

**_A Marxian Flip-Side of Liberalism_**

  
  
  

March 24 (F) War, imperialism, and the Marxist critique of global capitalism

  

Read: Betts, pp. 188-195 (V.I. Lenin, 'Imperialism, the Highest

Stage of Capitalism').

Waltz, chapter V, pp. 124-158.

  

March 25-April 2 Spring Break

  
  
  
  
  
  

**_Bridging from Liberalism to Critical Constructivism_**

  
  
  

April 3 (M) Ideas, ideals, and ideologies override power and interests as
determinants of action

  

Read: Betts, pp. 250-262 (Stanley Kober, 'Idealpolitik')

Betts, pp. 5-18 (Francis Fukuyama, 'The End of History')

  

_**[Second paper due]**_

  

April 5 (W) Norms, morality and knowledge can change the conduct of
international relation

  

Read: Betts, pp. 19-32 (John Mueller, 'The Obsolescence of

Major War')

  
  
  

**_Critical Constructivist Theory: identities, representations, and the
productive powers of discourse_**

  
  
  

April 7 (F) Recognizing the social constructedness of identities

  

Read: Betts, pp. 280-292 (Ernest Gellner, 'Nations and Nationalism')

  

****(Quiz at start of class)****

  

April 10 (M) Producing state identities

  

Read: Campbell, Preface, Introduction, Chapters 1 and 2, pp.

ix-xi, 1-51.

  

_**(Fourth journal installment due, covering readings for_

_March 13 through April 7)**_

  

April 12 (W) Foreign policy as productive and performative of identity

  

Read: Campbell, chapters 3-4, pp. 53-90.

  
  
  

April 14 (F) Identities of the United States of America

Read: Campbell, chapter 5, pp. 91-132

  

April 17 (M) Securing state identity

  

Read: Campbell, chapters 6-7, pp. 133-189.

  

April 19 (W) Critical politics in the analysis of international relations

  

Read: Campbell, chapter 8 and Epilogue, pp. 191-227.

  

****(Quiz at start of class)****

  

April 21 (F) Post-colonial critical constructivism: displacing Euro-centrism,

April 24 (M) decentering the state, and problematizing the project of

April 26 (W) modernity

and

April 28 (F)

Read: Ghosh, entire book (read approximately 110-120 pages

per class session).

  

_**[Third paper assignment distributed in class, Friday,_

_April 28]**_

  

May 1 (M) Review and discussion session on critical constructivism

  

_**(Fifth journal installment due, covering readings for April 10 through
April 28)**_

  

May 3 (W) Comparing and contrasting political realism, liberalism, and

and critical constructivism as perspectives for the analysis of

May 5 (F) international relations

  

May 8 (M) _**[Third paper due]**_

__ (deliver to Political Science Department, 1414 Social Sciences Building,
_by 12:00 Noon_ )

  

May 13 (Sat) Final Exam, 1:30-3:30

  
  
  
  
  
  
  

**_Contemporary Issues of International Relations_**

  

_(Select_ _one to learn about and to focus on in writing your journal._ )

  

_I. Issues of security from organized violence_

  

A. The international relations of the means of violence, and efforts to
control those means

  

1\. nuclear weapons

2\. chemical weapons

3\. biological weapons

4\. new technologies for weapons and delivery systems

5\. small arms (automatic rifles, etc.)

6\. land mines

B. The international relations of the conduct of violent hostilities, and
efforts to avoid or reduce violence

  

\-- general themes

  

7\. dealing with "war criminals"

8\. eliminating rape as a weapon of war

9\. assuring rights of indigenous peoples and minority nationalities

10\. developing laws of war

\-- specific arenas of violent conflict or hostilities

  

11\. Northern Ireland

12\. Sri Lanka

13\. Chechnya

14\. Colombia

15\. Sudan

16\. Central Africa (Rwanda, Burundi, Congo)

17\. Ethiopia - Eritrea

18\. North Korea - South Korea

19\. Pakistan - India

20\. China - Taiwan

21\. Israel - Palestine

22\. Israel - Syria

23\. Turkey - Greece

24\. U.S. - Iraq

25\. U.S. - Cuba

26\. the Balkans (Kosovo, Albania, Macedonia, etc.)

  
  

II. Issues of global economic prosperity

  

C. The international relations of circumventing/managing economic crisis

\-- specific cases of concern about possible economic crisis

  

27\. Russia

28\. Philippines

29 29. Indonesia

30\. Thailand

31\. Mexico

32\. South Africa

33\. Argentina

\-- general themes of international economic crisis potential

  

34\. unrecoverable international debt

35\. stablizing and managing the global financial system

36\. dealing with trade wars

37\. the power and authority of international economic organizations, such as
the WTO and the IMF

  

D. The international relations of promoting sustainable development

38\. a common European currency

39\. expanding the EU

40\. strengthening ASEAN

41\. technology transfers

42\. intellectual property rights

43\. biotechnologies

44\. control over natural resources

45\. destruction of forests

46\. depletion of biodiversity

47\. deterioration of fisheries

48\. large dams

49\. water pollution and the degradation of water resources

50\. atmospheric pollution

51\. global warming

52\. health care

53\. provision of education and investment in human capital

54\. population

55\. industrialization

56\. agricultural productivity

57\. urbanization problems

  
  

III. Others

  

58\. Another issue of your choice (define clearly and precisely).

  
  
|  ** [S UMMER 2001](../../summer2001/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 2001](../spring2001/index.html)  
  
[FALL 2000](../fall2000/index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 2000](../../summer2000/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 2000](../index.html)  
  
[FALL 1999](../../fall1999/index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 1999](../../summer1999/index.html)  
  
[SPRING 1999](../index.html)  
  
[WINTER 1999](../../winter1999/index.html)  
  
[FALL 1998](../../fall1998/index.html)  
  
[SUMMER 1998](../../summer1998/index.html)  
  
**  
---|---  
![](../../../images/end.jpg)

