  |   |

![Al Bento Index page](index3d.gif)

_"Whatever you do will be insignificant, but it is very important that you do
it._ "  
Mahatma Gandhi

**Welcome!** You are reader ![](http://webteach.ubalt.edu/cgi-
bin/Count.exe?ft=1&pad=n&df=i1&dd=B). Version 2.0, created on October 15,
1995. This is an on-going library of tutorials, references and other
educational and research materials, created by [Al Bento](home.html) at the
[Merrick School of Business](http://business.ubalt.edu), [University of
Baltimore](http://www.ubalt.edu/www/). Visit also my
[Daily](select/daily.html) and [Web software](software.shtml) pages.

[Course materials] [Tutorials] [Teaching and research materials] [[Linux
pages](linux/index.html)] [Other UB references]

* * *

[![Netscape Now!
](now_anim_button.gif)](http://home.netscape.com/comprod/mirror/index.html



) Best viewed with Communicator or Internet Explorer. [![Internet Explorer
](ie_animated.gif)](http://www.microsoft.com/ie/)

## Tutorials

  * [Graphical access to the Web](webaccess.html)
  * [Introducing the Web](webpres.html) (not available in Lynx). 
  * [Creating a home page](html/essential.html). 
  * [Using telnet and FTP in Windows 95/NT](701/telnetftp/telftp.html). 
  * [Creating a WWW directory in UBmail](html/creatwww.html). 
  * [Access counters in your page: how to have one](http://ubmail.ubalt.edu/~abento/HTML/counter.html). 
  * Netscape tutorial on the [use of Netscape Composer](http://home.netscape.com/browsers/using/newusers/composer/index.html) for page development. 
  * [Obtaining and using Homesite for Windows ](homesite)
  * [Using sounds in your page](sounds/sounds.html)
  * [ Lists and Netscape extensions](701/mktmaps/lists.html). 
  * [ Tables and Netscape extensions](701/cservgra/tables.html). 
  * [Some basic background colors in Netscape](mycolors/color-table.html). 
  * [Frames, originally a Netscape extension](frames/frames.html)
  * [Using Imagemaps with the NCSA type of Web servers (Home, UBMail, MIS, etc.)](imgmap/maptutorncsa.html). 
  * [Client-side Imagemaps (most modern browsers)](imgmap)
  * [ Editing graphical files in Windows (includes gif animations)](701/cservgra/graphics.html). 
  * [Using tables for page formatting](http://home.ubalt.edu/abento/701/table-format/index.html). 
  * [Overview of Cascading Style Sheets](http://home.ubalt.edu/abento/701/css/index.html). 
  * [Introduction to CGIs and Forms](701/infocgi/cgis.html). 
  * [Essential Perl](701/perl-cgis/perl.html). 
  * [CGIs and Perl scripts](701/perl-cgis/cgiperl.html). 
  * [Essential JavaScript](701/javascript/javascript.html). 
  * [Introduction to Java Script by Vodoo](js-tutor/index.html) (mirror authorized by author -- Stefan Koch). 
  * [A scrolling JavaScript](701/javascript/scroll.html)
  * [Installing and using Pegasus Mail](pegasus/index.html)
  * [Sending attachments using Web browsers](other_mail/browsers-mail.html). 
  * [Windows NT FAQ](ntfaq/main.htm) (mirror authorized by author -- John Savill) 
  * [Installing Windows 95](751/5win952/win952.html)
  * [UBMail account maintenance](other_mail/ubmailclean.html)
  * [Frequently Asked Questions about PC-Pine](pinemail/pcpinefaq.html). 
  * [Pine Mail Client for Windows](pinemail/pinemail.html)
  * [How to compose messages using the EVE editor in Windows](faqmail/eve_win.html)
  * [NetTerm Keyboard Customization](faqmail/new_keyboard.html)
  * [PROCOMM Keyboard Customization](faqmail/keyboard.html)
  * [Downloading files using FTP and Lynx in UBMail](ftplynx.html) 
[Course materials] [Tutorials] [Teaching and research materials] [Other UB
references]  

## Teaching and research

A collection of instructional materials and research papers to facilitate
teaching, research and learning at Business Schools. Cases can be reproduced
for educational purposes only.

  * [Installation and Use of Linux](linux/aistutorial/index.htm) as a client and server operating system. 
  * [A Framework for Analysis of the Use of the World Wide Web for Business](ais/webaish.html) with Regina Bento 
  * [A Learning Centered Approach to Education Using Hypermedia and the Internet](ais/teach96h.html) with Ramu Kannan 
  * [Teaching how to create a home page](ais/aispres2.html)
  * [Voice: a case in systems development](640/voice.html)
  * [National: a case in Data Flow Diagrams](300/5sadfd/national.html)
  * [Porter Hospital: a case in DSS development](610/porter4.html)
  * [A paper on DSS development](300/design_paper.html)
  * [Technology and Higher Education](techighed.html) 

[Course materials] [Tutorials] [Teaching and research materials] [Other UB
references]  

## Courses

These materials can be reproduced for educational use only. Please contact the
author for other uses.

  1. ### INSS300 - Management Information Systems

This is an undergraduate core course in MIS. Created with Freelance Graphics
and converted to the Web. Last version: Fall of 1995. All course materials are
linked to the [course syllabus ](300/300syl.html). Prerequisites: Introduction
to Computers, like INSS 200 or equivalent.

  2. ### INSS315 - Information Technology

This is an undergraduate required course in the CIS major. Last version:
Spring of 1997. All course materials sre linked to the [course syllabus
](315/315syl.html).Prerequisites: Introduction to Computers, like INSS 200 or
equivalent.

  3. ### INSS401 - Internet and Business

This an elective class for undergraduate students. Last version: Fall 1998.
Class materials are available on the Web, only. All course materials are
linked to the [course syllabus ](401/index.html). Prerequisites: Introduction
to Computers, like INSS 200 or equivalent. This course was offered previously
as INSS497 - Special Topics in Internet and Business.

  4. ### INSS452 - Web Server Management and CGI Programming

This is an elective class for undergraduate students in CIS specialization or
in the BS in MIS program. Last version: Fall 2001. All course materials will
be linked to the [course syllabus](452/index.html). Prerequisites: a working
knowledge of Visual Basic and web development basic concepts (see my [Internet
and Business](401/index.html) course).

  5. ### INSS497 - Internet and Network Security

This is an elective class for undergraduate students in CIS specialization or
in the BS in MIS program. Last version: Fall 2001. All course materials will
be linked to the [course syllabus](497SEC/index.html). Prerequisites: working
knowledge of Information Technology (INSS315), Internet basic concepts
(INSS401), and Telecommunications (INSS427).

  6. ### INSS 610 - Information Systems Techniques

This is a required course in the MS in MIS Program. Last version: Spring 2002.
All course materials are linked to the [course syllabus ](610/index.html).

  7. ### INSS640 - Information Systems and Technology

This is a core course in the MBA program. This section was open to AMBA
students only. Last version: Fall 1996. All course materials are linked to the
[course syllabus ](640/640syl.html).

  8. ### INSS641 - Information Resources Management

This is a required course in the M.S. in MIS program. Created with Harvard
Graphics and converted to the Web (some charts will be redone soon). Last
version: Fall 1995. All course materials are linked to the [course syllabus
](641/641syl.html)

  9. ### INSS650 - Telecommunications

This is required course in the M.S. in MIS program, with emphasis on
networking using Windows 2000. Last version: Fall 2002. All course materials
are linked to the [course syllabus ](650/).

  10. ### INSS701 - Internet Development for Business 

This is an elective class for the MBA and M.S. in MIS programs, offered since
Summer 1995. Last public version: Fall 1999. Class materials are available on
the Web, only. All course materials are linked to the course syllabus. You can
see a [draft of the syllabus](701/indexnolinks.html) without links.
Prerequisite: INSS610 or INSS640.

  11. ### INSS737 - Management of Information Systems

This is an elective course in the MBA and M.S. programs. Last version: Fall
2000. All course materials are linked to the [course
syllabus](http://home.ubalt.edu/abento/737/). Prerequisite: INSS610 or
INSS640.

  12. ### INSS751 - Operating Systems

This is an elective course in the M.S. in MIS program. Last version: Spring
2001. Created with Presentation Graphics and converted to the Web. All course
materials are linked to the [course syllabus ](751)

  13. ### INSS752 - Web Server Management and CGI Programming 

This course was offered for the first time in the Spring 2001 as Special
Topics (INSS797). Last version: Fall 2002. All course materials are linked to
the [course syllabus](752/index.html). Prerequisites: a working knowledge of
Visual Basic and web development basic concepts (see my [Internet Development
for Business](701/indexnolinks.html) course).

  14. ### INSS753 - Internet and Network Security 

This is a new course, offered for the first time in the Fall 2001 as Special
Topics (INSS797). Last version: Fall 2002. All course materials are linked to
the [course syllabus](753/index.html). Prerequisites: working knowledge of
Telecommunications (INSS650), Internet basic concepts (INSS701), and Operating
Systems (INSS751).

[Course materials] [Tutorials] [Teaching and research materials] [Other UB
references]

## University of Baltimore reference materials

The explanations provided in the references below (created by many different
authors) may only work at the University. Again, most are available for
educational use only. Please contact directly the author(s) for other uses.

  * [Posting assignments in the ASSIGNMENTS area of the Forums, by Steve Fritsche](http://ubonline.edu/webmbahome.nsf/87e1c1baa52b52848525676f00578d21/313facb6c5c820af852569dd005e848e). 
  * [Quick start manual to UBMail and the Internet](http://www.ubalt.edu/cis/noc/doc/iug/). 
  * [Many Happy <Return>s! - A Quick Email Guide For UBMAIL Users, by Regina Bento](http://ubmail.ubalt.edu/~rbento/happyreturns.html)
  * [Getting Started on Pine](pinemail/Getting_Started_On_Pine.html)
  * [Mini-guide to Pine](other_mail/pine_email.html)
  * [Mini-guide to EDT](other_mail/vax_edt.html)
  * [Lynx user guide](http://www.ubalt.edu/www/cis/noc/lynx.html)
  * [VMS help queries](http://ubmail.ubalt.edu/htbin/vmshelp)
  * [UBMail users search](http://www.ubalt.edu/ubmail/form_userdir.html)
  * [VAX - EDT Editor](gopher://ube.ubalt.edu:70/00gopher_root1%3A%5BEDITORS%5Deditors.edt)
  * [Vmail manual](gopher://ube.ubalt.edu:70/00gopher_root1%3A%5BMAIL_UA%5Dmail_ua.vmail)
  * [Using Imagemaps with the CERN Web server (no longer available at UB)](imgmap/maptutor.html). 
  * [Creating a www directory in the SGIs](sgi-old/creatwww-worf.html)
  * [Taking your picture in the Indys and uploading to the WWW directory](sgi-old/picture.html)
  * [Using the Webmagic editor in the SGIs](sgi-old/webmagic.html)
  * [Brief introduction to image development in Showcase](sgi-old/showcase.html) 

[Course materials] [Tutorials] [Teaching and research materials] [Other UB
references]

* * *

This page is maintained by [Al Bento ](http://home.ubalt.edu/abento/home.html)
who can be reached at
[abento@ubmail.ubalt.edu](mailto:abento@ubmail.ubalt.edu). This page was
updated on August 20, 2002. Although we will attempt to keep this information
accurate, we can not guarantee the accuracy of the information provided.  
  
---|---

