![](./assess_files/image001.jpg)

Drop by: when my door is open.

|

**Pre-Modern World History (HIST 105)**

Dr. Darlene L. Brooks Hedstrom

Wittenberg University

Spring 2002

T/TH 8-9:30 am



**Office Hours:**

M & W= 9:30-11:30

T & Th= 1:30-3:30

#### Or by appointment

#### Office: 329-6338, 303 Hollenbeck

[dbrookshedstrom@wittenberg.edu](mailto:dbrookshedstrom@wittenberg.edu)

  
  
---|---  
  
**Class
link:**<http://www4.wittenberg.edu/academics/hist/dbrookshedstrom/105World/World.htm>

**Class Description:**

This World History course will closely examine how pre-modern empires,
religions and people regarded those who differed from themselves during the
period from 3000 BCE-1400CE. We will consider how travel, motivated by the
need for conquest, conversion, and/or commerce, reveals the history of those
who ventured to areas outside their own empires. In reading accounts referring
to the "Other," as perceived by these ancient individuals, we will learn about
how civilizations become more interconnected until at 1250 CE there was what
some historians have called a "world-system" that allowed the Afro-Eurasian
landmass to be connected in a way not seen before in history. Since the course
covers 4500 years, we will be examining in detail selected empires, religions
and individuals so that rather than skimming the surface of several
civilizations, we will develop a detailed understanding of a few selected
places, events, empires and individuals.

The course is divided into four sections. Section 1 will serve as an
introduction to the ancient history of the Middle East and China by examining
the commercial and military activities of the Mesopotamians, Egyptians, Indo-
Aryans, Persians and Chinese. Section 2 will further explore how ideas and
beliefs spread to new regions along seas and land routes. Topics to be
explored are the spread of Buddhism, the influence of the Greco-Roman world
through Hellenism and the establishment of the Silk Routes with connected the
Roman and Chinese empires. Section 3 will be an in-depth examination of the
role of religious travel in the spread of faith and culture throughout the
Afro-Eurasian landmass. The three religions considered are Buddhism, Islam and
Christianity. Section 4 will assess how connected the Afro-Eurasian landmass
was in 1250 CE. We will study such key areas and topics as European cities,
the Crusades, the Indian Ocean Trade and the importance of the Mongol Empire.

This course does not pretend to cover the history of the entire world during
the pre-modern period since that would be an impossible task for both
instructor and student. However, the questions that we will examine by looking
at how Africa, Asia and Europe became connected through the use of sea and
land routes will provide the tools necessary to explore the commonality of the
human experience and the curiosity to investigate how regions developed and
responded to similar issues. With this experience you will be able to study
other areas of the world with a fresh perspective on how the world has become
connected and how regions have influenced each other.  
  
---  
  
### Course Objectives:

    
    
    **In this course we will:**
    
    
      

，      identify and describe historical events and concepts relevant to the
world societies discussed in the course. Particular attention will be given to
empires, world religions, individuals and concepts that brought together areas
of the world into cross-cultural contact.

，      distinguish the difference between primary and secondary sources
(historical texts vs. interpretations made by historians)

，      read and analyze _primary sources_ to identify the perspective of the
author, purpose of the work, and the source's reliability for historical
events and concepts

，      read and analyze _secondary sources_ to identify the author's use of
historical data to support his or her argument and to assess the validity of
that argument

，      construct arguments and counter-arguments using historical events and
concepts to support or refute general statements

，      draw and locate precisely key cities, boundaries, territories, etc.
that relate to the material discussed in class

，      assess further development in your critical reading and analytical
reasoning skills, in cooperative learning through discussions  
  
---  
  
### Readings & Texts:

    
    
    _The Heritage of World Civilizations_ (Vol. 1-Brief Edition w/CD Rom)
    
    
     Casson, Lionel. _Travel in the Ancient World_. Johns Hopkins University Press, 1994
    
    
     _The Human Record (Sources in Global History)_ , Andrea & Overfield
    
    
     _The Persian Boy_ , M. Renault
    
    
     _Eaters of the Dead_ , M. Crichton
    
    
     _In Xanadu_ , W. Darmayple
    
    
    Foltz, Richard C. _Religions of the Silk Road_. St. Martins Press, 2000.
    
    
     Frye, Richard N. _The Heritage of Central Asia_.



Some Primary and Secondary sources are linked from the Syllabus Calendar page
or available at Electronic Reserve (ERes).

**Assessment for HIST 105:**

Your final, overall grade will be determined by the definitions for the course
grade as found below. To get a particular final course grade (in white), you
must meet or exceed the standards for each of the two categories (in grey):
Graded Work and Pass-Fail Work Assignments. In order to do well in this class
you must excel in both categories of assessment **Your final grade will
reflect the learning that you convey** , not necessarily all that you believe
you learned.*



The assignments are designed to encourage your improvement and success in this
course. The earlier assignments are focused upon specific skills you will need
in order to analyze and respond thoughtfully to historical documents. The
second half of the course will build upon these earlier exercises and will
require a higher level of critical thinking, analysis and synthesis.



You will be assessed in two categories in this course:



**Category 1:** **Pass-Fail Assignments:** Document Assignments and WebCT
exercises (see syllabus for the questions-often they will be found in the
Human Record Source book). Being prepared for each class is non-negotiable.
The material in this course will in often cases be completely new to you; in
order to help facilitate your learning, these assignments will help you come
to prepared to class for further study and reflection upon the assigned text.



**Category 2:** **Graded Work:** Quizzes, Papers, Final and Exams (discussed
below).



Below is further explanation of assignments including criteria for grading.



**Course Grade**

|

#  Graded Work

|

# Pass-Fail Work  
  
---|---|---  
  
# A

|

100-94%

|

Pass for **90%** or more of assignments  
  
# A-

|

93.9-90%

|

Same as above  
  
# B+

|

89.9-87%

|

Pass for **85%** or more of assignments  
  
**B**

|

86.9-83%

|

Same as above  
  
# B-

|

82.9-80%

|

Same as above  
  
# C+

|

79.9-77%

|

Pass for **75** % or more of assignments  
  
**C**

|

76.9-73%

|

Same as above  
  
# C-

|

72.9-70%

|

Same as above  
  
# D+

|

69.9-67%

|

Pass for **65** % or more of assignments  
  
**D**

|

66.9-63%

|

Same as above  
  
# D-

|

62.9-60%

|

Same as above  
  
**F**

|

59.9% and below

|

Fail for **64.9** % _below_ of assignments  
  


Example: If a student gets an **A-** average in **graded work** , but earns a
**pass grade** for only **77%** of the pass-fail work, he receives a **C** for
his course grade, because **C** is the highest level at which he meets or
exceeds the standards for both graded and pass-fail work.



In order to achieve an **A- Course Grade** as defined here, a student must
earn an average of graded work between 90-93.9% **AND** earn a **pass grade**
of **90% or higher** for all PF assignments (to be determined individually for
each class). The two categories are **not** averaged, but are used together to
**_define_** the characteristics of the final course grade. If you have any
questions about this system, please do not hesitate to come and see me to
discuss your progress _during_ the semester.

##  

*Any absences beyond the permissible number will, of course, lower any final grade according to the procedure explained in my classroom policies. You, as a member of this course, have the responsibility to be aware of your own absences and how your lack of attendance will affect any final course grade.

* * *

### Graded Work Assignments: 5 major projects over the semester for HIST 105

**Exams    & Quizzes **

|

** 25% **

|

1 Exam and unannounced quizzes  
  
---|---|---  
  
Maps

|

**10%**

|

**2 submissions**  
  
**Active class Participation**

|

**10%**

|

  
  
**Argumentative Essays  **

|

**30%**

|

**3 submissions**  
  
**Final Exam **

|

**25% **

|

**May 15 8 am (please make note)**  
  
**

* * *

**

###  

###  

###  

<h3 style='tab-stops:45.8pt 91.6pt 137.4pt 183.2pt 229.0pt 274.8pt 320.6pt
366.4pt 412.2pt

