![](topper.jpg)  
---  
**_

    

[Desert Hermits](desert.html)

[Eastern Monasticism](eastmon.html)

[Benedictine Monasticism](benmon.html)

[Irish Monasticism](irimon.html)

[Anglo-Saxon Monasticism](angmon.html)

[Merovingian and Carolingian Monasticism and Mixed Rules](mermon.html)

[Medieval Monastic Women](medwomen.html)

[Cluny and other reforms of the Central Middle Ages](medref.html)

[The Cistercians](cist.html)

[The Military Orders](milord.html)

[The Franciscans](franciscan.html)

[The Dominicans](dominican.html)

[Later Middle Ages Through the Dissolution of the Monasteries](dssolut.html)

[Monasteries Online](mononline.html)

[General Resources](gensource.html)

[Virtual Tours](tours.html)

[Syllabus](4950s.html)

[Web Crossing Discussions](http://jasmine.gcsu.edu/webx?gcsu)

[Medieval Monasticism Main Page](4950.shtml)

[Georgia College & State University](http://www.gcsu.edu) _** |

> ###  The Venerable Bede: Biography and Introduction to his Writings

>

>  
>

> Bede was born in Monkton, located near Jarrow in Northumbria, sometime
around 672. At the age of seven, Bede's parents placed him in the monastery at
Wearmoth under the care of Benedict Biscop. Biscop later transferred him to
Wearmoth's sister monastery at Jarrow. The earliest reference to Bede is in an
anonymous _Life of the Abbots_. In 685 there was a serious outbreak of plague,
which virtually wiped out the population of Wearmoth as well as the monastery
of Jarrow. At Jarrow, all those who could recite the antiphons perished; only
the abbot Ceolfrid and a small boy were left. They managed to continue singing
the antiphons. It is generally thought that the boy was Bede, and his ability
to recite the antiphons at such an early age is an indication of his careful
and thorough training under Biscop. Bede became a deacon at the age of
nineteen. This was unusual, since cannon law stipulated twenty-five as the
minimum age for the deaconate. Bede's "merits [in terms learning and holiness]
must have been very great indeed to permit the ecclesiastical authorities to
anticipate the canonical age by so much as six years." (1)

>

> Bede was one of the greatest scholars of his age. In many ways, his
achievements were a product of the times. Bede lived during the golden age of
Northumbrian art and culture. Stone churches were beginning to replace the
traditional wooden churches of England. Stone masons were imported from Gaul
and other parts of the continent to build them, bringing with them Roman
culture and traditions. The number of monasteries was rapidly increasing, and
there were great achievements in art such as the Lindisfarne gospels. The
archbishop Theodore greatly stimulated learning and scholarship in the Church
by encouraging the study of the Greek language and ancient Greek works.

>

> Many churchmen traveled to the continent to study, such as Bede's mentor,
Benedict Biscop, who was very much a part of the cultural awakening of
England. Biscop had studied on the continent at Lerins from 665 to 667, and
had also made several trips to Rome. Biscop was, then, heavily influenced by
Roman culture and practices. Under his leadership, Wearmoth and Jarrow were
leaders in promoting the unification of the English church through the
observance of Roman practices. On his various trips, Biscop brought relics,
paintings, and books back to his monasteries. He created a large library at
Jarrow which made it one of the cultural centers of Northumbria. Bede had
access to important ancient works, which undoubtedly influenced his
development as a scholar.

>

> Wearmoth and Jarrow also had the advantage of being located in Northumbria,
one of the areas which had been most heavily influenced by the Celtic church.
The Celts had Christianized the island long before the Gregorian mission had
arrived. The Celtic church was not only rich in learning, but also much more
individualistic in nature than the Roman Church. It was organized around the
monastery, unlike the parish structure of the Catholic Church. The Celtic
Church emphasized monastic life over secular life, and the contemplative and
ascetic nature of Irish monastic life heavily colored the Celtic church.

>

> The monasteries at Wearmoth and Jarrow "had the special advantage ... that
there met all the main streams of learning, from Rome and from the Celtic
church, from Canterbury and from Gaul." (3) These various influences are all
evident in Bede's works. Bede had "lucid style of Latin which formed an
excellent vehicle for the remarkable narrative powers of its author." (4) His
earliest works, _De Orthographia_ and _De Arte_ were intended to serve as
manuals for his students in the meaning and grammatical function of words and
in different verse forms.

>

> Bede wrote several commentaries on the Bible, the most noteworthy of which
was the six volume _In Lucae Evangelium Exposito_. Bede relied on the use of
allegories and numerical mysticism to explicate biblical meanings. For
example, in _De Templo Salomonis_ , Bede likened the temple of Solomon to the
"holy universal Church", and argued that his use of 30,000 laborers was
related to the Trinity. His biblical commentaries also emphasize the need for
strict orthodox practices. As mentioned earlier, Jarrow was one of the centers
of Roman custom; all of Bede's works, including his _History_ , argue for the
supremacy of Roman practices.

>

> Bede was also a skilled hagiographer, and wrote a _Life of Saint Cuthbert
and Lives of the Saints_. The miracle stories found in the _Ecclesiastical
History_ are, in many instances, taken from these works.

>

> Several of Bede's works written prior to the _History_ deal with chronology.
These works have a significant influence on Bede's development as a historian.
The _Liber de Temporibus_ , written in 703, and the _de Temporae Ratione_ ,
written in 725, both conclude with a chronicle of the six ages of the world.
The chronicle in the earlier work is rather sketchy and contains little
information on the Gregorian missions.

>

> _De Temporae Ratione_ contains a much more detailed chronicle, which
reflects the chronological theories Bede developed within the actual text of
the work. In this treatise, Bede provided a detailed explanation of counting
on the fingers up to one million. This was the basis for further theories on
the division of time from the smallest units to the largest, which culminated
in a discussion of problems with calculating time in terms of lunar and solar
years.

>

> At the end of the treatise, he included a chronicle of the different ages of
the world. Like Saint Augustine and Isidore of Seville, Bede believed that
time could be divided into six ages represented by the Creation, the Flood,
Abraham, David, the Captivity of Judah, and the Birth of Christ. Most
chronologists agreed that the first five ages had lasted for 5,500 years.
Bede, however, was not content to accept the work of others and, using
Jerome's Latin translation of the Hebrew Bible, proceeded to make his own
calculations. He came to the conclusion that the first five ages had lasted
only 3, 952 years, which had the effect of denying that Christ was incarnated
during the sixth age. To Bede's horror, he was charged with heresy.

>

> _De Temporae Ratione_ is important for understanding Bede's development as a
historian. His diligence in making his own calculations is an indication of
his preference for primary sources, as opposed to second and third accounts.
The chronicle of the sixth age found in this work also shows that Bede was
already beginning to collect information for his History. It was an enlarged
version of the chronicle in _Liber de Temporibus_ , and "came to enjoy great
popularity and frequently copied as an independent work [which] contain[ed]
several references to events in the history of the English in Britain." (5)

>

> The skill Bede displayed as a chronologist and his scrupulous attention to
sources in this work are the basis for the innovations of the _Ecclesiastical
History_. The _History_ provides one of the few sources of information on
early English history. It also established the use of the modern system of
chronology, the _annus domini_. Prior to the _Ecclesiastical History_ , there
were several different systems of calculating dates, such as the four year
Olympiad, the fifteen year Indiction, and the _annus mundi_ , which all
related to the Paschal cycle of 532 years. The correct reckoning of time was
important for the Church, not only for determining when to recite the Divine
Office each day, but for calculating the proper observance of the major
festivals. The liturgical year centered around Easter, which was a "movable"
festival. Unlike the Nativity, which was tied to the winter solstice, Easter
had originated out of the Passover and was calculated according to the lunar
year. The Julian calendar was based on the solar year; hence, the celebration
of Easter fell on different days from year to year.

>

> Difficulties in calculating the correct dates for Easter had created
conflicts between the Celtic and Roman churches in England. Bede was a strong
advocate of Roman orthodoxy, and paid particular attention to this problem in
his _History_. These difficulties with uniform calculations of time prompted
Bede to use the _annus domini_ as a method for relating simultaneous event,
and events which occurred in different parts of the world. This was a
monumental task, since "he had to take account in his various chronological
calculations of several different eras of the world with different starting
points, of Imperial regnal years from both the eastern and the western empire,
of consular years, of Indictions which might begin variously on 1 September,
25 September, or 25 January ... and also of the regnal years of half a dozen
Anglo-Saxon kings reigning contemporaneously but succeeding to their several
kingdoms at different dates in a year which had no uniform beginning even
within England itself." (6)

>

> By recalculating all these various time tables and placing events within a
single framework, Bede established modern chronology. This achievement, makes
the _History_ one of the most important works of the Middle Ages. Though
modern research has uncovered some minor discrepancies in Bede's chronology,
in view of the enormous achievement he made, these discrepancies ought to be
overlooked. Bede was clearly a conscientious historian who relied on his own
calculations and pioneered the modern method of using sources.

>

> In the preface to the _History_ , he describes the process by which he
obtained his information. The abbot Albinus form Canterbury provided him with
information on the Roman mission from records and from testimony of people
with first hand knowledge. Bede also based his narrative on papal archives,
and relied on the testimony of "countless faithful witnesses who either knew
or remember[ed] the facts." (7) Although he included many miracle stories in
the _History_ , he used only those which were verified by several sources or
by extremely trustworthy sources. As one historian notes, what is surprising
is not that there are such stories in a work of history, but "that there are
not more of them." (8) Bede was one of the first historians to look at
evidence with a critical eye.

>

> [Continue on to a discussion of Bede's _History_ and the issue of whether it
represents a work of English  "nationalism." ](bede2.htm)

>

> ### NOTES

>

> 1\. Whiting, C. E., "The Life of the Venerable Bede" in Thompson, A. H.,
ed., _Bede: His Life, Times, and Writings_ (New York: Russell and Russell,
1966), 10.

>

> 2\. Ibid., 10.

>

> 3\. Blair, P. Hunter, "The Historical Writings of Bede" in Blair, _Anglo
Saxon Northumbri_ a (London: Variorum Reprints, 1984), 221.

>

> 4\. Blair, P. Hunter, _The World of Bede_ (New York: St. Martin's Press,
1970), 268.

>

> 5\. Ibid., 269.

>

> 6\. Bede, _History of the English Church and People_ (Middlesex: Penguin
Books, 1955), 35. Future references to this work will be abbreviated as H.E.

>

> 7\. Colgrave, Bertram, "Bede's Miracle Stories," in Thompson, 201.

>

> 8\. Brown, Peter, _Society and the Holy in Late Antiquity_ (London: Faber
and Faber, 1982), 287.

>

>  
>

>  
  
|  ** Below: The bell tower at Glendalough, Ireland.  
Photo by Dr. Vess. ** |  ![](bottomphatred.jpg)

