![](topper.jpg)  
---  
**_

    

[Desert Hermits](desert.html)

[Eastern Monasticism](eastmon.html)

[Benedictine Monasticism](benmon.html)

[Irish Monasticism](irimon.html)

[Anglo-Saxon Monasticism](angmon.html)

[Merovingian and Carolingian Monasticism and Mixed Rules](mermon.html)

[Medieval Monastic Women](medwomen.html)

[Cluny and other reforms of the Central Middle Ages](medref.html)

[The Cistercians](cist.html)

[The Military Orders](milord.html)

[The Franciscans](franciscan.html)

[The Dominicans](dominican.html)

[Later Middle Ages through the Dissolution of the Monasteries](dssolut.html)

[Monasteries Online](mononline.html)

[General Resources](gensource.html)

[Virtual Tours](tours.html)

[Syllabus](4950s.html)

[Web Crossing Discussions](http://jasmine.gcsu.edu/webx?gcsu)

[Medieval Monasticism Main Page](4950.shtml)

[Georgia College & State University](http://www.gcsu.edu) _** |

> **Dr. Vess's Virtual Tours of Monasteries**

My great love is monastic history and spirituality. Although I was "corrupted"
by nuns at a fairly advanced age (I say this tongue-in-cheek, but often I
wonder whether some of my Protestant relatives really think it true!), it took
in a big way. Now they've got me. I think.

I've been very privileged in life to have visited some of the most well-known
medieval monastic sites, and am pleased to be able to share these experiences
with others through my virtual tours. I hope those who explore these sites can
get a sense of the sacred nature of all of these places, and of the life of
_ora et labora_ the monks and nuns lived there.

In these tours, you will find not only living testaments to the beauty of
monastic spirituality in the ruins of the monastic churches and grounds, but
also evidence of some of the trials and tribulations of past ages. You will
find traces of monastic involvement in the Hundred Years' War in the gatehouse
at Battle Abbey, and of cultural conflict between the Irish and the Anglo-
Normans at Mellifont Abbey in Ireland. These stories, as well as many others,
remind us that monasteries were never completely separate from the world which
surrounded them nor divorced from its pressing issues.

The Benedictine monastery is intended to model for the world the
transformation of life through the vows of stability, obedience, and
_conversatio morum suorum._ For St. Benedict of Nursia, the monastery was to
be a  "school for the Lord's service," a workshop where the "tools of the
spiritual craft" can be developed (RB Prologue: 45; 4:75). The monastic life
embodies the way of peace through the harmonization of prayer and work and of
the soul with its maker and all of creation. The origin of the word "monastic"
is from the Greek word _monos_ , meaning "single" or "alone." Looked at from
that point of view, we are all always in a monastery; we are all, in our
deepest selves, alone with God. In that sense, all of our worlds, no matter
where we are, can be for us and for others a monastery. It is only up to us to
make them so.

I would like to dedicate all of these tours to the Benedictine Sisters of Mt.
St. Scholastica, who taught me the ethos of the monastic life in a way books
can never capture. I would especially like to thank Sister Therese Elias,
O.S.B., with whom I traveled to many of these places and who made my trips
there possible; Esther de Waal, UK, whose books have often inspired me and who
also made my trips possible to many of these places; and Father Marcus Losack,
of the C¨¦ile D¨¦ organization in Ireland, whose spiritual guidance during my
journeys to the Celtic lands will always hold a special place in my heart.

#### Come and share these special places with me through the pages below:

> [ Virtual Tour of the Ruins of Fountains
Abbey](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/fa2/foun1.shtml)

[Virtual Tour of Rievaulx
Abbey](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/rie/rievaulx.shtml)

[Celtic Monasticism: History and Spirituality
](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/celtic/celtic.shtml)

> This is a very large discussion/tour, with several subchapters:

>

> [Virtual Tour of Lindisfarne
Priory](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/lindis/lindisfarne.shtml)

>

> [Virtual Tour of
Iona](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/iona/iona.shtml)

>

> [Virtual Tour of
Glendalough](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/glendalough/glendalough.shtml),
Ireland.

>

> [Virtual Tour of the Hermitage of St. Finbarr,
Ireland](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/finbarr/finbarr.shtml)

>

> [Virtual Tour of Celtic Holy
Wells](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/wells/wells.shtml)

>

> [Virtual Tour of Irish High
Crosses](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/highcrosses/hcrosses.shtml)

>

> [Virtual Tour of St. David's and associated sites in
Wales](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/stdavids/stdavids.shtml)

>

> [Virtual Tour of Mellifont Abbey in
Ireland](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/mellifont/mellifont.shtml)

>

> This Irish Cistercian abbey is interesting for the conflict between the
Anglo-Normans and Irish that occurred there.

>

> [Virtual Tour of Clonmacnois,
Ireland](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/clonmacnois/clon.shtml)

[Virtual Tour of the Hermitage of Robert of
Knaresborough](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/knares/knares.shtml)

[Virtual Tour of Whitby
Abbey](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/whitby/whitby.shtml)

[Virtual Tour of Kirkstall
Abbey](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/kirkstall/kirkstall.shtml)

[Virtual Tour of St. Augustine's Peter and Paul church, later known as St.
Augustine's
Abbey](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/augustine/augustine.shtml)

[Discussion of Canterbury Cathedral Monastery and virtual tour of the
Cathedral](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/canterbury/canterbury.shtml)

[Virtual Tour of Battle
Abbey](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/battle/battle.shtml)
and the battlefield of the [Battle of
Hastings](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/hastings/hastings.shtml)

[Virtual Tour of the Monastery of Hosios
Lukas](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/ids/medieval/hlukas/hosios.shtml)
in Greece

[Virtual Tour of the grounds and buildings of Mt. St. Scholastica in Atchison,
Kansas: a modern Benedictine
monastery](http://www.faculty.de.gcsu.edu/%7Edvess/sch.htm)

    with a brief discussion of Scholastica 

>  

>  



  
  
|  ** Below: The bell tower at Glendalough, Ireland.  
Photo by Dr. Vess. ** |  ![](bottomphatred.jpg)

