**

HISTORY OF ART 283: The Modern City SCHEDULE  
**Prof. David B. Brownlee and Ms. Alison Bechtel Fall 2000

OFFICE HOURS: Brownlee (Thurs. 3-5, in Jaffe 210; please make appointments in
advance at the dept. office). Bechtel (Mons. 4-5)  
EMAIL: dbrownle@sas.upenn.edu, bechtel@sas.upenn.edu

_Lecture_ _Section for the Week  
S 8 Orientation none  
_11 Introduction What is a city? and  
13 ---  term paper strategies  
_* 15 The ancient and medieval city  
_ 18 The Renaissance and Baroque ideal city Philadelphia: medieval  
20 Philadelphia: The Green Country Town and enlightenment  
_22 Philadelphia: The first capital  
_ 25 Philadelphia: The age of Furness Philadelphia:  
27 --- river to river  
_* 29 Philadelphia: Suburban tales _  
O 2 London: 17th and 18th centuries The suburb  
4 London: John Nash  
_6 London: Victoria's Capital  
_ 9 London: Commerce and Transportation The home  
11 ---  
_12 (fall break)  
_16 London: Urban and suburban homes Ebenezer Howard  
* 18 London: The Garden City   
_20 St. Petersburg: Founding  
_ 23 St. Petersburg: Baroque and neoclassical review  
25  St. Petersburg: 19th-century patterns  
_27 MID-TERM EXAMINATION  
_ 30 Paris: 17th century Paris film  
N 1 Paris: 18th century and C.-N. Ledoux

_

3 Paris: Revolution and Empire  
_6 Paris: Restoration and July Monarchy Term paper  
8 --- progress reports  
_10 Paris: Second Empire  
_13 Washington: Politics and Planning The City "Parlante"  
15 Washington: The Capitol and White House  
_17 Washington: 19th-century growth  
_20 Washington: The City Beautiful none  
22 Vienna: The Ringstrasse  
_24 (Thanksgiving)  
_ 27 Vienna: Otto Wagner and Camillo Sitte Sitte and Freud  
29 Vienna: Freudian themes  
_*D 1 Boston: Beginnings, Bulfinch, and Beacon Hill  
_ 4 Boston: Greek Granite  Puritan Boston and  
6 Boston: Back Bay Quaker Philadelphia  
_8 Boston: H. H. Richardson____________________________________________ __  
11 Boston: The Emerald Necklace  none (review TBA)

* Papers due on these dates; see separate assignment sheets.

Attendance at discussion sections is REQUIRED.

Weighting: proposal 15%, mid term exam 25%, term paper 30%, final exam 30%

ALL assigned work must be completed to receive a passing grade in the course.

**

HISTORY OF ART 283 READING LIST

**

Prof. David B. Brownlee Fall 2000

All books on reserve at the Fine Arts Library in the Furness Building.



E. Digby Baltzell. _Puritan Boston and Quaker Philadelphia: Two Protestant_  
_Ethics and the Spirit of Class, Authority, and Leadership_. New York:  
Free Press, 1979. F 73.3 B33

*Allan Braham. _The Architecture of the French Enlightenment_. Berkeley and  
Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1980. NA 1046 B75

Iurii A. Egorov. _The Architectural Planning of St. Petersburg_. Tr. Eric  
Dhulosch. Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1969. NA 9211 E413

*Ebenezer Howard. _Cities of Tomorrow_. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1965.   
HT 161 H6 1965

*Kenneth T. Jackson. _The Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of America_.   
New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985. HT U5 J33 1985

*Donald J. Olsen. _The City as a Work of Art: London, Paris, Vienna_. New   
Haven: Yale University Press, 1986. NA 970 O47 1986

David H. Pinkney. _Napoleon III and the Rebuilding of Paris_. Princeton:  
Princeton University Press, 1958. DC 733 P59

John W. Reps. _Monumental Washington: The Planning and Development of the  
_ _Capital City_. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967. NA 9127 W2  
R4

*Carl E. Schorske. _Fin-de-si ecle Vienna: Politics and Culture_. New York:  
Knopf, 1980. DB 851 S42 1980

Camillo Sitte. _City Planning According to Artistic Principles_. Tr. George  
and Christine Collins. New York: Random House, 1965. NA 9030 S613 1965

John Summerson. _Georgian London_. 3d. edition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,  
1978\. NA 970 S8 1978

George Tatum. _Penn's Great Town: 250 Years of Philadelphia Architecture_. 2d.  
edition. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1961. NA 735  
P5 T3 1961

*Walter Muir Whitehill. _Boston: A Topographical History_. 2d. edition.  
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1968. F 73.3 W57 1968

*Gwendolyn Wright. _Building the Dream: A Social History of Housing in  
_ _America_. New York: Random House, 1981. HD 7293 W74

*Available for purchase at the Pennsylvania Book Center, 130 South 34th  
Street. This is _NOT_ the Penn Bookstore on Walnut Street.

**

HISTORY OF ART 283 READINGS

**

Prof. David B. Brownlee Fall 2000



_

To be read before the Mid-term Examination

_

INTRODUCTORY: Olsen chapts. 1-2, 15-18.

PHILADELPHIA: Tatum pp. 17-127, 151-202.

LONDON: Summerson chapts. 1-7, 12-17, 19-21, epilogue.  
Olsen chapts. 3 and 12. Howard pp. 7-28, 41-69, 89-159.

ST. PETERSBURG: Egorov pp. xiii-xix, 1-40, 83-154, 183-211.

SUBURBS SECTION: Jackson chapts. 1-7.

THE HOUSE SECTION: Olsen chapts 7-11.  
Wright introduction and chapts. 2-8.



_

To be read before the Final Examination

_

PARIS: Braham pp. 158-209. Pinkney pp. 3-104, 127-221.  
Olsen chapts. 4 and 13.

WASHINGTON: Reps pp. 1-69, 94-138.

VIENNA: Schorske pp. xvii-xxx, 3-115, 181-278.  
Olsen chapts. 5, 6, 14. Sitte pp. ix-xvii, 3-38, 47-53, 83-164.

BOSTON: Whitehill pp. 1-173.

PURITAN/QUAKER SECTION: Baltzell chapts. 1-3, 7-10, 14 (optional), 16

**

HISTORY OF ART 283 TERM PAPER ASSIGNMENT

**

Prof. David B. Brownlee Fall 2000



**_

TOPIC SELECTION IS DUE AT 11 A.M. ON FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 29

PROPOSALS ARE DUE AT 11 A.M., WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 16

FINAL PAPERS ARE DUE AT 11 A.M., FRIDAY, DECEMBER 1

**_



Note that this is a three-part assignment, requiring topic selection, a
research proposal, and a research paper.

TOPIC SELECTION. In order to assign each student a unique topic and to insure
the timely commencement of research, you must identify _three_ cities on which
you would like to conduct research. You may rank your preferences (1, 2, 3).
Select your cities from the attached list of suggestions, or seek prior
approval for other cities. You should exploit your command of foreign
languages to the greatest extent possible.

RESEARCH PROPOSAL. This should identify the salient themes associated with the
selected city between ca. 1750 and 1914 _and_ review the research resources.
The proposal should take the form of a three-page essay and an annotated
bibliography.

RESEARCH PAPER. The length of your paper should be 15-20 pages. You should
focus your discussion on _one or a small number_ of the themes that you
identified in your research proposal. Do not attempt to survey all aspects of
your city's development.

Plagiarism is a very serious offense against the standards of an academic
community and it will be treated very severely. Make sure you understand what
it means. Of course, the sources of all quotations, obscure facts, and
interpretations other than your own must be footnoted, and a complete
bibliography of works consulted is required.

Good writing is an essential part of your work. WATU and non-WATU students
alike are encouraged to submit outlines and rough drafts of work for review by
the instructors.

Extensions may only be granted by Prof. Brownlee, and they must be requested
in person.

**

HISTORY OF ART 283 TERM PAPER TOPICS

**

Prof. David B. Brownlee Fall 2000



_FRANCE_ _GERMANY_ _USA_ _ASIA

_

Nancy Karlsruhe Annapolis Calcutta  
Lyons Berlin Savannah Hong Kong  
Marseilles Munich Portland, ME Bombay  
Lille Hamburg Cleveland Singapore  
Bordeaux Dresden San Francisco New Delhi  
Rouen Wurzburg New Orleans Manila  
_UNITED KINGDOM_ Hannover Los Angeles _AFRICA  
_ Edinburgh Stuttgart Detroit Cairo  
Glasgow Frankfurt Harrisburg Cape Town  
Brighton _ITALY_ Albany Algiers  
Liverpool Turin Pittsburgh Johannesburg  
Manchester Rome Cincinnati _CANADA  
_ Bristol Milan New Haven Toronto  
Crewe Naples Charleston Halifax  
Cardiff Genoa Hartford Quebec  
Birmingham _OTHER EUROPE_ Providence Montreal  
Bournville Dublin Atlanta Ottawa  
Saltaire Barcelona St. Louis Winnipeg  
Leeds Madrid Pullman _AUSTRALIA  
_ Derby Basel Nashville Melbourne  
Nottingham Geneva Williamsburg Sydney  
Newcastle Amsterdam Baltimore Canberra  
Plymouth Rotterdam Manchester, NH Adelaide  
Belfast Moscow Richmond Perth  
_SCANDINAVIA_ Kiev Wilmington Darwin  
Helsinki Warsaw Trenton _LATIN AMERICA  
_ Copenhagen Athens Newark, NJ Mexico City  
Oslo Budapest Kansas City Havana  
Stockholm Brussels Houston Buenos Aires  
Gdansk (Danzig) Ft. Worth Rio de Janeiro  
Prague Caracas  
Zurich





**

HISTORY OF ART 283 REFERENCE WORKS FOR TERM PAPERS

**

Prof. David B. Brownlee Fall 2000



All books are either on reserve or in the reference section of the Fine Arts
Library in the Furness Building.



Erwin Gutkind. _International History of City Development_. 8 vols. New York:
Free Press, 1964-1972. (1: Central Europe;  2: Alpine and Scandinavian
Countries; 3: Spain and Portugal; 4: Italy and Greece; 5: France and Belgium;
6:  Netherlands and Great Britain; 7: Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary; 8:
Bulgaria, Romania, and the USSR.) HT  111 G8

Pierre Lavedan. _Histoire de l'urbanisme, vol. 2, Renaissance et temps_
_modernes_. Paris: H. Laurens, 1959. NA 9030 L3  vol. 2

________. _Histoire de l'urbanisme, vol. 3, Epoque contemporaine_. Paris: H.
Laurens, 1952. NA 9030 L3 vol. 3

John W. Reps. _Cities of the American West: A History of Frontier Urban_
_Planning_. Princeton: Princeton University  Press, 1979. HT 123.5 A17  R46

________. _The Forgotten Frontier: Urban Planning in the American West before_
_1890_. Columbia, MO: University of  Missouri Press, 1981. HT 123 R44 1981

________. _The Making of Urban America: A History of City Planning in the_
_United States_. Princeton: Princeton  University Press, 1965. NA 9105 R45

________. _Tidewater Towns: City Making in Colonial Virginia and Maryland_.
Williamsburg: Colonial Williamsburg  Foundation; Charlottesville: University
of Virginia Press, 1972. HT 167.5 V8 R46

_______. _Town Planning in Frontier America_. Columbia, MO: University of
Missouri Press, 1980. NA 9106 R46 1980

**









HISTORY OF ART 283 FIRST ASSIGNMENT

**

Prof. David B. Brownlee 8 September 2000



1 DOUBLE-SPACED, TYPEWRITTEN PAGE

_

DUE FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 15

_



Analyze the attached plan of Karlsruhe, identifying its few most important
physical traits and attempting to explain them. You will immediately realize
that some forms can be explained by the functions that they fulfill, while
others are best explained by their intended symbolism. Take care to
differentiate between the two.

You should do NO RESEARCH for this project. Concentrate on the analysis of the
raw visual data. There will be many opportunities to do research later.

The work will not be graded, but it must be submitted to complete the course
for credit. The project will be discussed in section.



