
    **HISTORY OF ART 283: The Modern City				SCHEDULE
    Professor David B. Brownlee and Mr. Stanley Weed		Fall 1996
    
    
    OFFICE HOURS: Brownlee (Mon. 3-5, Thurs. 3-5, in Jaffe 210; please make 
    appointments in advance at the dept. office).  Weed (TBA)
     
    EMAIL: dbrownle@mail.sas.upenn.edu, sweed@mail.sas.upenn.edu
    
    
    	LECTURE						SECTION
    
    
    S  4	Introduction					none
       6  	The ancient and medieval city                                           
    
       9	The Renaissance and Baroque ideal city		What is a city? and
    * 11	Library orientation				term paper strategies
      13  	Philadelphia: The Green Country Town                                 
    
      16  	Philadelphia: The first capital			Philadelphia:
      18  	Philadelphia: The age of Furness                river to river
      20    --
                                                                         
      23  	Philadelphia: Suburban tales			The suburb
      25	London: 17th and 18th centuries			
      27  	London: John Nash                                                       
    
      30  	London: Victoria's Capital			none
    O  2  	London: Commerce and Transportation
       4  	London: Urban and suburban homes                                        
    
    *  7  	London: The Garden City				Ebenezer Howard
       9	--
      11	--                                                                      
    
      14  	(fall break)					review
      16  	St. Petersburg: Founding
      18  	St. Petersburg: Baroque and neoclassical                                
    
      21 	St. Petersburg: 19th-century patterns		none 
      23  	MID-TERM EXAMINATION
      25  	Paris: 17th century                                                   
    
      28  	Paris: 18th century and C.-N. Ledoux		Paris film
      30	Paris: Revolution and Empire		
    N  1  	Paris: Restoration and July Monarchy                                    
    
       4  	Paris: Second Empire                            Term-paper progress
       6  	Washington: Politics and Planning		reports
       8  	Washington: The Capitol and White House                              
    
      11	Washington: 19th-century growth			The City Parlante
      13  	--
      15  	Washington: The City Beautiful                                         
    
      18  	Vienna: The Ringstrasse                         Sitte and Freud        	
      20  	Vienna: Otto Wagner and Camillo Sitte		
      22  	--                                                                      
    
    * 25  	Vienna: Freudian themes				none
      27  	Boston: Beginnings, Bulfinch, and Beacon Hill           
      29  	(Thanksgiving)                                                          
    
    D  2  	Boston: Greek Granite               		Puritan Boston and      
       4	Boston: Back Bay				Quaker Philadelphia
       6  	Boston: H. H. Richardson                                                
    
       9  	Boston: The Emerald Necklace 			none (review TBA)
    
    * Papers due on these dates; see separate assignment sheets.
    ALL assigned work must be completed to receive a passing grade in the 
    course.
    
    
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    
    HISTORY OF ART 283					READING LIST
    Prof. David B. Brownlee					Fall 1996
    
    
    All books on reserve at the Fine Arts Library in the Furness Building.
    
    
    *E. Digby Baltzell.  Puritan Boston and Quaker Philadelphia: Two 
    Protestant Ethics and the Spirit of Class, Authority, and 
    Leadership.  New York: Free Press, 1979.  F 73.3 B33
    
    *Allan Braham.  The Architecture of the French Enlightenment.  Berkeley 
    and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1980.  NA 1046 B75
    
    Iurii A. Egorov.  The Architectural Planning of St. Petersburg.  Tr. Eric 
    Dhulosch.  Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press, 1969.   NA 9211 E413
    
    Ebenezer Howard.  Cities of Tomorrow.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1965.  
    HT 161 	H6 1965
    
    *Kenneth T. Jackson.  The Crabgrass Frontier: The Suburbanization of America.  	
    New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985.  HT 
    U5 J33 1985
    
    *Donald J. Olsen.  The City as a Work of Art: London, Paris, Vienna.  
    New Haven: Yale University Press, 1986.  NA 970 O47 1986
    
    David H. Pinkney.  Napoleon III and the Rebuilding of Paris.  Princeton: 	
    Princeton University Press, 1958.  DC 733 P59
    
    John W. Reps.  Monumental Washington: The Planning and Development of the 	
    Capital City.  Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967.  NA 
    9127 W2 R4
    
    *Carl E. Schorske.  Fin-de-si¨¨cle Vienna: Politics and Culture.  New York: 	
    Knopf, 1980.  DB 851 S42 1980
    
    Camillo Sitte.  City Planning According to Artistic Principles.  Tr. George 	
    and Christine Collins.  New York: Random House, 1965.  NA 9030 
    S613 1965
    
    *John Summerson.  Georgian London.  3d. edition.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 	
    1978.  NA 970 S8 1978
    
    George Tatum.  Penn's Great Town: 250 Years of Philadelphia Architecture.  2d.
    edition.  Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1961.  
    NA 735 P5 T3
    
    *Walter Muir Whitehill.  Boston: A Topographical History.  2d. edition.  	
    Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1968.  F 73.3 W57 1968
    
    *Gwendolyn Wright.  Building the Dream: A Social History of Housing in
    America.  New York: Random House, 1981.  HD 7293 W74
    
    
    * Available for purchase at the Pennsylvania Book Center, 3726 Walnut Street.
    
    
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    HISTORY OF ART 283						READINGS
    Prof. David B. Brownlee						Fall 1996
    
    
    
    
    To be read before the Mid-term Examination
    
    INTRODUCTORY:  Olsen chapts. 1-2, 15-18.
    
    PHILADELPHIA:  Tatum pp. 17-127, 151-202.
    
    LONDON:  Summerson chapts. 1-7, 12-17, 19-21, epilogue.  
    Olsen chapts. 3 and 12.  Howard pp. 7-28, 41-69, 89-159.
    
    ST. PETERSBURG:  Egorov pp. xiii-xix, 1-40, 83-154, 183-211.
    
    SUBURBS SECTION:  Jackson chapts. 1-7.
    
    
    
    To be read before the Final Examination
    
    PARIS:  Braham pp. 158-209.  Pinkney pp. 3-104, 127-221.  
    Olsen chapts. 4 and 13.
    
    WASHINGTON:  Reps pp. 1-69, 94-138.
    
    VIENNA:  Schorske pp. xvii-xxx, 3-115, 181-278.  
    Olsen chapts. 5, 6, 14.  Sitte pp. ix-xvii, 3-38, 47-53, 83-164.
    
    BOSTON:  Whitehill pp. 1-173.
    
    THE HOUSE SECTION:  Olsen chapts 7-11. 
    Wright introduction and chapts. 2-8.
    
    PURITAN/QUAKER SECTION:  Baltzell chapts. 1-3, 7-10, 14 (optional), 16
    
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    HISTORY OF ART 283                           	TERM PAPER ASSIGNMENT
    Prof. David B. Brownlee				Fall 1996
    
    
    
    
    
    PROPOSALS ARE DUE AT 11 A.M., MONDAY, OCTOBER 7
    FINAL PAPERS ARE DUE AT 11 A.M., MONDAY, NOVEMBER 25
    
    
    Note that this is a two-part assignment, requiring both a 
    research proposal and a research paper.
    
    
    	RESEARCH PROPOSAL.  In order to assign each student a unique 
    topic and to insure the timely commencement of research, you must submit 
    a research proposal.  This should identify the salient themes associated 
    with three cities between ca. 1750 and 1914 and review the research 
    resources for each. Select your cities from the attached list of 
    suggestions, or seek prior approval for other cities.  You should exploit 
    your command of foreign languages to the greatest extent possible.
    
    	The proposal should take the form of three one-page essays (one 
    devoted to each city) and three one-page annotated bibliographies.  Rank 
    the cities according to your preference.  
    
    	RESEARCH PAPER.  The length of your paper should be 15-20 pages.  
    You should focus your discussion on one or a small number of the themes 
    that you identified in your research proposal.   Do not attempt to survey 
    all aspects of your city's development. 
    
    	Plagiarism is a very serious offense against the standards of an 
    academic community and it will be treated very severely.  Make sure you 
    understand what it means.  Of course, the sources of all quotations, 
    obscure facts, and interpretations other than your own must be footnoted, 
    and a complete bibliography of works consulted is required.
    
    	Good writing is an essential part of your work. WATU and non-WATU 
    students alike are encouraged to submit outlines and rough drafts of work 
    for review by the instructors.
    
    	Extensions may only be granted by Prof. Brownlee, and they must 
    be requested in person.
    
    
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    
    HISTORY OF ART 283                           		TERM PAPER TOPICS
    Prof. David B. Brownlee				   	Fall 1996
    
    
    
    
    
    	FRANCE		GERMANY		USA			ASIA
    	Nancy		Karlsruhe	Annapolis		Calcutta
    	Lyons		Berlin		Savannah		Hong Kong
    	Marseilles	Munich		Portland, ME		Bombay
    	Lille		Hamburg		Cleveland		Singapore
    	Bordeaux	Dresden		San Francisco		New Delhi
    	Rouen		Wurzburg	New Orleans		Manila
    	UNITED KINGDOM	Hannover	Los Angeles		AFRICA
    	Edinburgh	Stuttgart	Detroit			Cairo
    	Glasgow		Frankfurt	Harrisburg		Cape Town
    	Brighton	ITALY		Albany			Algiers
    	Liverpool	Turin		Pittsburgh		Johannesburg
    	Manchester	Rome		Cincinnati		CANADA
    	Bristol		Milan		New Haven		Toronto
    	Crewe		Naples		Charleston		Halifax
    	Cardiff		Genoa		Hartford		Qu¨¦bec
    	Birmingham	OTHER EUROPE	Providence		Montr¨¦al
    	Bournville	Dublin		Atlanta			Ottawa
    	Saltaire	Barcelona	St. Louis		Winnipeg
    	Leeds		Madrid		Pullman			AUSTRALIA
    	Derby		Basel		Nashville		Melbourne
    	Nottingham	Geneva		Williamsburg		Sydney
    	Newcastle	Amsterdam	Baltimore		Canberra
    	Plymouth	Rotterdam	Manchester, NH		Adelaide
    	Belfast		Moscow		Richmond		Perth
    	SCANDINAVIA	Kiev		Wilmington		Darwin
    	Helsinki	Warsaw		Trenton			LATIN AMERICA
    	Copenhagen	Athens		Newark, NJ		Mexico City
    	Oslo		Budapest	Kansas City		Havana
    	Stockholm	Brussels        Houston			Buenos Aires
    			Gdansk (Danzig)	Ft. Worth		Rio de Janeiro
    			Prague					Caracas
    			Zurich
    
    
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    HISTORY OF ART 283                 	REFERENCE WORKS FOR TERM PAPERS
    Prof. David B. Brownlee			Fall 1996
    
    
    
    All books are either on reserve or in the reference section of the Fine 
    Arts Library in the Furness Building.
    
    
    
    Erwin Gutkind.  International History of City Development.  8 vols.  New 
    	York: 	Free Press, 1964-1972.  (1: Central Europe; 2: Alpine and 
    	Scandinavian Countries; 3: Spain and Portugal; 4: Italy and Greece; 5: 
    	France and Belgium; 6: Netherlands and Great Britain; 7: Poland, 
    	Czechoslovakia, and Hungary; 8: Bulgaria, Romania, and the USSR.)  
    	HT 111 G8
    
    Pierre Lavedan.  Histoire de l'urbanisme, vol. 2, Renaissance et temps 	
    	modernes.  Paris: H. Laurens, 1959.  NA 3030 L3 vol. 2
    
    ________.  Histoire de l'urbanisme, vol. 3, Epoque contemporaine.  Paris: 
    	H. Laurens, 1952.  NA 3030 L3 vol. 3
    
    John W. Reps.  Cities of the American West: A History of Frontier Urban 	
    	Planning.  Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979.  
    	HT 123.5 A17 R46
    
    ________.  The Forgotten Frontier: Urban Planning in the American West 
    	before 	1890.  Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press, 1981.  
    	HT 123 R44 1981
    
    ________.  The Making of Urban America: A History of City Planning in 
    	the United States.  Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965.  NA 
    	9105 R45
    
    ________.  Tidewater Towns: City Making in Colonial Virginia and 
    	Maryland. Williamsburg: Colonial Williamsburg Foundation; 
    	Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 1972.  
    	HT 167.5 V8 R46
    
    _______.  Town Planning in Frontier America.  Columbia, MO: University 
    	of Missouri Press, 1980.  NA 9106 R46 1980
    
    
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------
    
    
    HISTORY OF ART 283					FIRST ASSIGNMENT
    Prof. David B. Brownlee					4 September 1996
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    1 DOUBLE-SPACED, TYPEWRITTEN PAGE
    
    DUE WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 11
    
    
    
    Go to the top of City Hall tower.  (Its tour hours are Monday-Friday, 
    12-4:30.)  Choose ONE of the four quadrants of the city that are defined 
    by the intersection of Broad and Market Streets.  Analyze what you see, 
    proposing explanations and periodization for the visible physical 
    phenomena, starting at your feet and moving outward as far as you can see.
      
    You should do NO RESEARCH for this project.  Concentrate on the analysis 
    of the raw visual data.  There will be many opportunities to do research 
    later.
    
    The work will not be graded, but it must be submitted to complete the 
    course for credit.  The project will be discussed in section during the 
    week of 16 September.**
    

