##  ![](greybar.gif)

##  Department of History

#  EUH-3323: EASTERN EUROPE IN THE MIDDLE AGES

####  Professor: [Dr. Florin
Curta](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/index.html)

####  Office: 202 Keene-Flint Hall

####  Office hours: T 1:45-3:45; R 10:30-11:30 and 1:45-2:45, or by
appointment

####  Phone: 392-0271, ext. 240

####  E-mail: [fcurta@history.ufl.edu](mailto:fcurta@history.ufl.edu)

Class will meet in Keene-Flint 011 on  T 8:30-10:25 and R 9:35-10:25  
    
    
  

* * *

![Glagolitic inscription \(Baska Tablet\), late eleventh century](bassc2.jpg)

  

###  COURSE SYLLABUS

####  Spring 2002

  
_Course description_

    The medieval history of Eastern Europe is poorly represented in today's scholarly work published in English. Scholarly interest in Eastern Europe focuses especially on the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the period of nationalism. The medieval history of the area is given comparatively less attention, which often amounts to slightly more than total neglect. For most students in medieval studies, Eastern Europe is marginal and East European topics simply _exotica_. One reason for this reticence to engage in serious research in that area may be the uneasiness to treat its medieval history as (Western) European history. When peoples of Eastern Europe come up in works on the medieval history of Europe, they are usually the marginalized, the victims, or the stubborn pagans. To many historians, they appear only as the object of the conquest and colonization that shaped medieval Europe and their role is restricted to that of victims of the "occidentation," the shift towards the ways and norms of Romano-Germanic civilization. The conceptual division of Europe leaves Slavs, Magyars, and Romanians out of the main "core" of European history, though not too far from its advancing frontiers of "progress" and "civilization." Who were those peoples? What made them so difficult to represent by the traditional means of Western historiography? What historical circumstances separate the Western from the Eastern half of the European continent? What social structures and political institutions were responsible for the specific developments in the medieval history of the area? How were ethnicities formed in that region and under what circumstances did the ethnic groups come into being? Above all, this course aims to answer some of these questions. Since it is impossible to get more than a taste of the subject in a semester, we will concentrate on major problems, such as the search for political, economic and religious stability/power, the interaction of secular and religious forces, the influence of the Byzantine, Carolingian, and Ottonian empires in Eastern Europe, the role of the region in the medieval history of the Continent. Following a chronological order, we will look, each week, at the questions and problems raised by the study of this region, and at some of the primary sources from which historians draw their analysis.   


###  TEXTBOOKS

  * Florin Curta, _The Making of the Slavs. History and Archaeology of the Lower Danube Region, c. 500-700_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001 (hereafter _Curta_ ); on two-hour reserve in [Library West](http://www.uflib.ufl.edu/west.html)
  * Pal Engel, _The Realm of St. Stephen. A History of Medieval Hungary, 895-1526_ , London/New York: I. B. Tauris, 2001 (hereafter _Engel_ ); on two-hour reserve in [Library West](http://www.uflib.ufl.edu/west.html).
  * Most other  readings for this course are either from the Coursepack (hereafter _Pack_ ) or from articles and papers placed on "traditional" and [electronic reserve](http://web.uflib.ufl.edu/reserve.html) in  [Library West](http://www.uflib.ufl.edu/west.html)
  * In addition, there will be some readings from the Internet Medieval Sourcebook, compiled by Paul Halsall ([www.fordham.edu/halsall/sbook.html](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/sbook.html)). You will therefore need to have access to and be familiar with the Web.

NOTE: It is essential that you read the assigned sections in the _Pack_ and
the articles on reserve _ahead_ , i.e., before the time they are due in class.
Class meetings will be organized around a lecture/discussion format and your
weekly assignments  will necessitate familiarity with the material.  


####  ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADING POLICIES

    There is no attendance policy, but you are responsible for attending all lectures and reading the required texts. Class participation  may be taken into account to determine the overall grade. The basis for evaluation of performance will be a reading journal and five in-class assignments. Below is a detailed description of these assignments and the corresponding percentages of your final grade. Extra-credit work will be accepted only for students with active participation in class discussions. If necessary, I will explain the format of the extra-credit option during regular office hours. You are otherwise encouraged to keep in touch with me by e-mail, if you have any questions: I check my mailbox regularly, and promise to answer quickly. 

_Reading journal_. A quick glimpse at the list of weekly topics (see below)
will no doubt convince you that this is a course with serious readings. You
will be expected to digest a substantial amount of information in a fairly
short period of time. The best way to do this is to keep a journal. Before
every class meeting, you will post an e-mail message on my address (on top of
this syllabus), in which you will discuss briefly the readings for the coming
meeting, ask questions and/or make comments, raise issues that need
clarification, etc. All e-mails should arrive at least 12 hours before class
meetings. Be sure to keep your postings to a reasonable length (175 to 250
words long). I do not want you to spend too much time on them, but I expect
you to give an articulate presentation of your thoughts. Needless to say, I
also expect you to check on correct grammar and spelling before clicking on
"Send." Because the journal is designed to demonstrate your efforts towards an
initial understanding of the readings, I must have ** _ _in time__** one
report for each class meeting, every week (except, of course, week 9). The
reading journal represents seventy percent of your final grade, 2.5% for each
entry. I will send written feed-back (via e-mail) on weekly entries midway
through the term. Reading reports _cannot_ be made up; you simply _need_ to
have a journal entry for every class meeting. Be aware that missed reports may
result in a substantially lower grade.

_In-class assignments_. The remaining thirty percent of your final grade will
be based on five short assignments in class. All five will consist of
multiple-choice, map, matching, short-essay questions, or a combination
thereof. Besides material covered in class lectures, the in-class assignments
will focus primarily on primary source readings from the _Pack_ and the
Internet   Medieval Sourcebook.  A careful study of these texts is necessary
for a good performance at the test. Because in-class assignments are
announced, I do not intend to grant any make-ups, except for emergencies
(e.g., illness), in which case I may ask for official justification.

_Grades_. The following scale will be used in determining your final grade  
    
  Percentage | Grades  
---|---  
93-100 | A  
85-92 | B+  
75-84 | B  
65-74 | C+  
55-64 | C  
45-54 | D+  
35-44 | D  
under 34 | E  
  
* * *

  


###  COURSE WEEKLY TOPICS

[Week 1 (January 8 and 10): What is Eastern
Europe?](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur1.html)  
---  
[Week 2 (January 15 and 17): East European Dark
Ages](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur2.html)  
[Week 3 (January 22 and 25): Early medieval
Balkans](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur3.html)  
[Week 4 (January 29 and 31): The West in the East. In-class assignment
#1](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur4.html)  
[Week 5 (February 5 and 7): "Steppe
empires"](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur5.html)  
[Week 6 (February 12 and 14): Conversion to
Christianity](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur6.html)  
[Week 7 (February 19 and 21): The "iron century." In-class assignment
#2](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur7.html)  
[Week 8 (February 26 and 28): Early medieval
Russia](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur8.html)  
Week 9 (March 4-8): Spring break  
[Week 10 (March 12 and 14): New powers
(I)](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur10.html)  
[Week 11 (March 19 and 21): New powers (II).
](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur11.html)  
[In-class assignment #3](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur11.html)  
[Week 12 (March 26 and 28): Economy and
society](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur12.html)  
[Week 13 (April 2 and 4): Catholicism and Orthodoxy. In-class assignment
#4](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur13.html)  
[Week 14 (April 9 and 11): Crusades in Eastern
Europe](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur14.html)  
[Week 15 (April 16 and 18): The Balkans and the
Mongols](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur15.html)  
[Week 16 (April 23): Late medieval or early modern? In-class assignment
#5](http://web.clas.ufl.edu/users/fcurta/EastEur16.html)  
  
* * *

  
2001 Florin Curta; the Zvonimir relief from Split is (C) Croatia Net  


