![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif)  
** Geoffrey de Villehardouin  
_Chronicle of The Fourth Crusade and The Conquest of Constantinople_  
[Original Electronic Text
](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/basis/villehardouin.html)at the Internet
Medieval Sourcebook web site.
![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif)  

### FLIGHT OF MOURZUPHLES - SECOND FIRE IN CONSTANTINOPLE

As they had settled, so was it done, and they encamped before the walls and
before the towers by their ships. Count Baldwin of Flanders and Hainault
quartered himself in the scarlet tents that the Emperor Mourzuphles had left
standing, and Henry his brother before the palace of Blachernae; and Boniface,
Marquis of Montferrat, he and his men, towards the thickest part of the city.
So were the host encamped as you have heard, and Constantinople taken on the
Monday after Palm Sunday (12th April 1204).

Now Count Louis of Blois and Chartres had languished all the winter with a q '
uartan fever, and could not bear his armour. And you must know that this was a
great misfor-

64

tune to the host, seeing he was a good knight of his body; and he lay in one
of the transports.

Thus did those of the host, who were very weary, rest that night. But the
Emperor Mourzuphles rested not, for he assembled all his people, and said he
would go and attack the Franks. Nevertheless he did not do as he had said, for
he rode along other streets, as far as he could from those held by the host,
and came to a gate which is called the Golden Gate, whereby he escaped, and
avoided the city; and afterwards all who could fled also. And of all this
those of the host knew nothing.

During that night, towards the quarters of Boniface Marquis of Montfcrrat,
certain people, whose names are unknown to me, being in fear lest the Greeks
should attack them, set fire to the buildings between themselves and the
Greeks. And the city began to take fire, and to burn very direfully; and it
burned all that night and all the next day, till vesper-time. And this was the
third fire there had been in Constantinople since the Franks arrived in the
land; and more houses had been burned in the city than there are houses in any
three of the greatest cities in the kingdom of France.

That night passed and the next day came, which was a Tuesday morning (13th
April 1204); and all armed themselves throughout the host, both knights and
sergeants, and each repaired to his post. Then they issued from their
quarters, and thought to find a sorer battle than the day before, for no word
had come to them that the emperor had fled during the night. But they found
none to oppose them.

### THE CRUSADERS OCCUPY THE CITY

The Marquis Boniface of Montferrat rode all along the shore to the palace of
Bucoleon, and when he arrived there it surrendered, on condition that the
lives of all therein should be spared. At Bucoleon were found the larger
number of the great ladies who had fled to the castle, for there were found
the sister _[Agnes, sister of Philip Augustus, married successively to Alexius
II., to Andronicus, and to Theodore Branas]_ of the King of France, who had
been empress, and the sister _[Margaret, sister of Emeric, King of Hungary,
married to the Emperor Isaac, and afterwards to the Marquis of Montferrat.]_
of the King of Hungary, who

65

had also been empress, and other ladies very many. Of the treasure that was
found in that palace I cannot well speak, for there was so much that it was
beyond end or counting.

At the same time that this palace was surrendered to the Marquis Boniface of
Montferrat, did the palace of Blachernae surrender to Henry, the brother of
Count Baldwin of Flanders, on condition that no hurt should be done to the
bodies of those who were therein. There too was found much treasure, not less
than in the palace of Bucoleon. Each garrisoned with his own people the castle
that had been surrendered to him, and set a auard over the treasure. And the
other people, spread abroad throughout the city, also gained much booty. The
booty gained was so great that none could tell you the end of it: gold and
silver, and vessels and precious stones, and samite, and cloth of silk, and
robes vair and grey, and ermine, and every choicest thing found upon the
earth. And well does Geoffry of Villehardouin the Marshal of Champagne, bear
witness, that never, since the world was created, had so much booty been won
in any city.

Every one took quarters where he pleased and of lodgings there was no stint.
So the host of the pilgrims and of the Venetians found quarters, and greatly
did they rejoice and give thanks because of the victory God had vouchsafed to
them-for those who before had been poor were now in wealth and luxury. Thus
they celebrated Palm Sunday and the Easter Day following (25th April 1204) in
the joy and honour that God had bestowed upon them. And well miaht they praise
our Lord, since in all the host there were no more than twenty thousand armed
men, one with another, and with the help of God they had conquered four
hundred thousand men, or more, and in the strongest city in all the world -
yea, a great city \- and very well fortified.

### DIVISION OF THE SPOIL

Then was it proclaimed throughout the host by the Marquis Boniface of
Montferrat, who was lord of the host, and by the barons, and by the Doge of
Venice, that all the booty should be collected and brou-ht together, as had
been covenanted under oath and pain of excommunication. Three churches were
appointed for the receiving of the

66

spoils, and guards were set to have them in charge, both Franks and Venetians,
the most upright that could be found.

Then each began to bring in such booty as he had taken, and to collect it
together. And some brought in loyally, and some in evil sort, because
covetousness, which is the root of all evil, let and hindered them. So from
that time forth the covetous began to keep things back, and our Lord began to
love them less. Ah God! how loyally they had borne themselves up to now! And
well had the Lord God shown them that in all things He was ready to honour and
exalt them above all people. But full oft do the good suffer for the sins of
the wicked.

The spoils and booty were collected together, and you must know that all was
not brought into the common stock, for not a few kept thin-s back, maugre the
excommunication of the Pope. That which was brought to the churches was
collected together and divided, in equal parts, between the Franks and the
Venetians, according to the sworn covenant. And you must know further that the
pilgrims, after the division had been made, paid out of their share fifty
thousand marks of silver to the Venetians, and then divided at least one
hundred thousand marks between themselves, among their own people. And shall I
tell you in what wise? Two sergeants on foot counted as one mounted, and two
sergeants mounted as one knight. And you must know that no man received more,
either on account of his rank or because of his deeds, than that which had
been so settled and orderedsave in so far as he may have stolen it.

And as to theft, and those who were convicted thereof, you must know that stem
justice was meted out to such as were found guilty, and not a few were hung.
The Count of St. Paul hung one of his knights, who had kept back certain
spoils, with his shield to his neck; but many there were, both great and
small, who kept back part of the spoils, and it was never known. Well may you
be assured that the spoil wa- very great, for if it had not been for what was
stolet- and for the part given to the Venetians, there would if have been at
least four hundred thousand marks of silver and at least ten thousand horses-
one with another. Thus were divided the spoils of Constantinople, as you have
heard.

67

### BALDWIN, COUNT OF FLANDERS, ELECTED EMPEROR

Then a parliament assembled, and the commons of the host declared that an
emperor must be elected, as had been settled aforetime. And they parliamented
so long that the matter was adjourned to another day, and on that day would
they choose the twelve electors who were to make the election. Nor was it
possible that there should be lack of candidates, or of men covetous, seeing
that so great an honour was in question as the imperial throne of
Constantinople. But the greatest discord that arose was the discord concerning
Count Baldwin of Flanders and Hainault and the Marquis Boniface of Montferrat;
for all the people said that either of those two should be elected.

And when the chief men of the host saw that all held either for Count Baldwin
or for the Marquis of Montferrat, they conferred together and said:  " Lords,
if we elect one of these two great men, the other will be so filled with envy
that he will take away with him all his people. And then the land that we have
won may be lost, just as the land of Jerusalem came nigh to be lost when,
after it had been conquered, Godfrey of Bouillon was elected king, and the
Count of St. Giles became so fulfilled with envy that he enticed the other
barons, and whomsoever he could, to abandon the host. Then did many people
depart, and there remained so few that, if God had not sustained them, the
land of Jerusalem wouldhavebeenlost. Letusthereforebewarelestthesame mischance
befall us also, and rather bethink ourselves how we may keep both these lords
in the host. Let the one on whom God shall bestow the empire so devise that
the other is well content; let him grant to that other all the land on the
further side of the straits, towards Turkey, and the Isle of Greece, and that
other shall be his liegeman. Thus shall we keep both lords in the host."

As had been proposed, so was it settled, and both consented right willingly.
Then came the day for the parliament, and the parliament assembled. And the
twelve electors were chosen, six on one side and six on the other; and they
swore on holy relics to elect, duly, and in good faith, whomsoever would best
meet the needs of the host, and bear rule over the empire most worthily.

68

Thus were the twelve chosen, and a day appointed for the election of the
emperor; and on the appointed day the twelve electors met at a rich palace,
one of the fairest in the world, where the Doge of Venice had his quarters.
Great and marvellous was the concourse, for every one wished to see who should
be elected. Then were the twelve electors called, and set in a very rich
chapel within the palace, and the door was shut, so that no one remained with
them. The barons and knights stayed without in a great palace.

The council lasted till they were agreed; and by consent' of all they
appointed Nevelon, Bishop of Soissons, who was one of the twelve, to act as
spokesman. Then they came out to the place where all the barons were
assembled, and the Doge of Venice. Now you must know that many set eyes upon
them, to know how the election had turned. And the bishop, lifting up his
voice-while all listened intentlyspoke as he had been charged, and said: "
Lords, we are agreed, let God be thanked! upon the choice of an emperor; and
you have all sworn that he whom we shall elect as ern,,)eror shall be held by
you to be emperor indeed, and that it any one gainsay him, you will be his
helpers. And we name him now at the self-same hour when God was born, THE
COUNT BALDWIN OF FLANDERS AND HAINAULT! "

A cry of joy was raised in the palace, and they bore the count out of the
palace, and the Marquis Boniface of Montferrat bore him on one side to the
church, and showed him all the honour he could. So was the Count Baldwin of
Flanders and Hainault elected emperor, and a day appointed for his coronation,
three weeks after Easter (16th May 1204). And you must know that many a rich
robe was made for the coronation; nor did they want for the wherewithal.  from
Geoffrey de Villehardouin [b.c.1160-d.c.1213], _Memoirs_ or _Chronicle of The
Fourth Crusade and The Conquest of Constantinople,_ trans. Frank T. Marzials,
(London: J.M. Dent, 1908)

**Note: Changed Words**

Frank Marzial's translation is quite readable, but, in an effort to emulate
the Authorized Version (King James Version) of the Bible he sometimes used
archaic words. A few of these have been changed throughout this etext version.

_eikon_ \- changed to _icon_  
_embassage_ \- changed to _embassy_  
_Lewis -_ changed to _Louis_  
_oversea_ \- changed to _overseas_

This text is part of the [Internet Medieval Source
Book](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/sbook.html). The Sourcebook is a
collection of public domain and copy-permitted texts related to medieval and
Byzantine history.

Unless otherwise indicated the specific electronic form of the document is
copyright. Permission is granted for electronic copying, distribution in print
form for educational purposes and personal use. If you do reduplicate the
document, indicate the source. No permission is granted for commercial use.

(c)Paul Halsall Apr 1996  
halsall@murray.fordham.edu

  
![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif)  
[Return to the syllabus. ](http://history.hanover.edu/courses/344f97lu.html)  
[Return to the History Department.](http://history.hanover.edu)
![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif) **

