**

INTERNET INFORMATION RESOURCES FINAL PROJECT**

**Subject Oriented Web Presentation**

![](l_airbr1.gif)

**[Topic Selection](final.htm#topic)** |

**Content/Format:** | [**Grading and Points**](final.htm#points)  
---|---|---  
**[Title&Intro](final.htm#title)** | **[Links](final.htm#links)** |
**[Annotations](final.htm#anno)** | **[Bibliography](final.htm#biblio)**  
  
**Learning Objectives:**

Students will learn to use the Internet to find, evaluate and use information
for academic research. In addition, students will learn to publish on the
World Wide Web.

**Project Outcomes:**

Students will complete a research project which will result in a well
organized, documented and presented Web publication on a scholarly and/or
international topic of interest to them.

**Project Topic and Format Selection:**

The form of the presentation may be:

  1. Subject research and resources:
    * (for example)
      * Restoration of medieval castles
      * Business Use of  ISDN
      * History of Tai Kwan Do
  2. Annotated list of subject Web sites:
    * (for example)
      * Physics sites on the Web
      * Web sites for international business
      * Buddhist religion sites on the Web
  3. Tutorials or interactive training
    * (for example)
      * How to design an English cottage garden
      * Teaching elementary age students about weather
      * How to find a job overseas, or in a particular field, on the Web
  4. Other? (Discuss with Instructor, if you have another idea for another type of   research project appropriate for this class PLEASE let the instructor know.)

Each student will select a unique topic of personal use or interest suitable
for academic research. This topic should requires students to use the Internet
to look for both **international/multicultural and/or scholarly** print and
Internet resources on the topic. Students will need to select topics in
consultation with the Instructor.

When selecting your topic, think carefully about its scope. For example, doing
research on a person like "Benazir Bhutto", may be too narrow a topic, but
"Women Heads of State" or "Politics in Pakistan" might be broader, more
realistic topics. Just "Pakistan" would be too broad. The depth of information
on topics varies dramatically on the web. You will need to do quite a bit of
research and "surfing" in order to find a realistic topic. Also think
carefully about matching your topic to the format that would display your
research in its best light. You will be required to let me know which topic(s)
you are seriously considering, or have selected as part of Exercise 4.

**Individual Project Content and Format:** Your completed individual project
will consist of a number of files that you will [FTP to your VAX
WWW](wsftp.htm) directory. The final project HTML document will probably
include:

  * A title section with:
    * your name
    * project title
    * date
    * and table of contents (or list of sections, or outline of project).
    * You must also include a "mail to" link with your E-mail address.
    * This section will be a separate file. **YOU MUST CALL THIS FILE title.htm.** All of the subsections of this project will link from links on this page. Your project URL will then be:
    * **http://cc.weber.edu/~** yourvaxusername **/title.htm**
  * An introduction to your list of resources, or training presentation. This section may be a separate file called **intro.htm**
    * Here you will describe and define the scope of your topic.
    * You will also describe your research strategy, successes and limitations.
      * How and why did you select your topic?
      * How did you find your resources?
      * What search terms did you consider?
      * What search terms did you use?
      * Provide an example of an effective search statement you used
      * Did you use Boolean logic, truncation, phrase or field searching?
      * Which search engines, catalogs and periodical indexes did you use?
      * Which were most effective and why? 
    * Why did you present the project the way you did?
    * What were the problems and successes of your research?
    * You will also summarize some of the most important information you have gathered on your topic. This should demonstrate your insight into the topic you have chosen to learn about. This is your chance to tell me and others about the topic, and why it is interesting and useful to you. What are some of the new things that you learned about the topic from doing this research?
  * Your annotated resources, list of web sites, or tutorial with at least 16-18 internet resources (ten to twelve URL's, use of at least two graphics and four bibliographic references) on your topic. These will be in a file which may be called **links.htm** :
    * You will need to find at least ten to twelve quality resources.
    * In order to find ten high quality sources to annotate, you will probably need to find at least 25 to look at, and sift from.
    * Each of the resources should be from unique and different domains/sites/locations. These may be http, telnet, ftp, gopher, etc...
    * Each resource hyperlink will be carefully evaluated in a descriptive paragraph or annotation. Please remember the checklists from [Exercise 1](ex1.htm). These will help you develop excellent critical evaluations. Please see the sample annotations, good and bad, below. I expect descriptive, critical analysis of the Web resources you select. **Content is important! Do not produce another set of "content free" Web pages.**
      * **Sample annotation for a Web site:**

**_Sporting Clube de Portugal_**

The page tells the main information that you need to know about the club the
stadium where they play, its capacity, the number of associates (members of
the fan club) that the club has and the year that it was founded. Also, It
gives a summary of this years results, the players stats, and the history of
the European honors, the Portuguese cup honors and the Portuguese league
honors that the team has won. The other thing that this page had that is
really nice is the personalized (recent) history of all the players who were
in the club or who are coming to the club. This is also in a couple of other
sites but about different teams. This is important because then it gives you a
look at the team itself not just their won-loss record.
http://jupiter.di.uminho.pt/~rui/futebol/sporting/  

    * In addition to these eight resources, you will need to include some other different types of Internet resources, including at least two graphics. You may also find other media, software, FTP'd files, etc. appropriate for your topic. These may be included anywhere throughout your project.
    * Each Internet resource will be displayed as a hyperlink in your final project Web document.
  * A short **annotated** bibliography your topic in a file you may call **biblio.htm** :
    * Much very useful information is not on the Web, but we can use the Web to find print information. You will need to use the Internet accessible online catalogs and periodical indexes to find two books, and two articles (from traditional print publications) on your topic. You must use at least one online library catalog or "OPAC" and at least two different periodical indexes. These must be sited in a "bibliography" section of your project. For the books and articles, use the [MLA, APA or Turabian examples](http://library.weber.edu/libinstruct/citing.htm)  or ask for help at the Reference desk to accurately document the source.
    * The annotation will describe and evaluate the source. **Please compare the quality and content of these print resources to the resources found only on the Web.** At the end of the annotation, list the title of the index or catalog where you found the record.
    * Below are sample citations and annotations:
**

Bibliography:**  
    * **Sample annotation for a book:**

**Fallon, Steve. _Hungary: A Travel Survival Kit_. Berkeley: Lonely Planet,
1994.**

This Lonely Planet guide book is a comprehensive travel guide to Hungary.
There are six detailed maps of Budapest's various neighborhoods, and
additional maps of other urban areas and historic sites. The bus, train and
subway information is clearly presented for each locale at the end of each
chapter. Some of this same information is located on the Internet, the subway
routes for example, but it is not available in one location, and not with this
level of detail. Salt Lake City Public Library City Cat online catalog.
http://salty.slcpl.lib.ut.us/search/

    * **The above examples illustrate adequate annotations.** **The** **following annotation is an example of a low quality annotation:**

This was a good book about Hungary, because it had alot of good information
for people going to Hungary. It has more information than the Internet. Salt
Lake Library.  


  * You will also include at least one link to a **full text magazine or newspaper article** on your subject. Find one to link to or save one and link to that file.

[**Oral Presentations:**](oral.htm) Students will also prepare a brief (5-6
minute) oral report on their projects. This will be presented to the  
class as noted on syllabus. Here students will demonstrate their Web
documents, their ability to use Netscape effectively, and  
share with the rest of the class the two or three best sites they have found
on their topics.

**Grading/Points:** It is assumed that students be concerned with and include
the following in their final projects:

  * overall attention to writing and composition skills
    * effective word choice and sentence skills
    * perfect or near-perfect mechanics including spelling and punctuation.
  * a clear and thought-provoking main idea
  * an appropriate sense of audience
  * effective organization
  * interesting and convincing supporting materials
  * accomplish the objectives of the assignment and demonstration of original thinking.

All presentations will be graded using the following point system and
generally the following criteria,  
depending on the format that you have selected:

     **60** points for the Introduction (title and intro) 

               10 points for the title section, well defined topic, thought-provoking main idea, presentation 

               15 points for the appropriate sense of audience and effective organization 

               35 points for the thorough research strategy 

    **200** points for the Annotated Resource List or Tutorial or ? (links and biblio) 

               20 points for the content, organization, interesting and convincing supporting resources found 

               20 points for style, demonstrating original thinking.

               presentation may include at least: 

               50 points for the 10-12 URL's - complete, accurate 

               50 points for the 10-12 annotations - carefully describing and evaluating info/source 

               20 points for the 2 references and annotations to books from Online catalogs complete, accurate,   
               describing and evaluating source 

               20 points for the 2 references and annotations to current periodical articles complete, accurate, describing   
               and evaluating 

               20 points for at least one 1 link to a full text magazine or newspaper article 

**Content** = What you have to say, and how you say it. The quality of
material and writing, support materials found and original thinking.  
**Organization** = Is the information arranged logically, are sections and/or
ideas easy to follow?  
**Presentation** = How does it all look? Are graphics used appropriately for
the subject and audience?

     **40** points for the [Oral Presentation](oral.htm)

               Clear, concise introduction and conclusion 

               Content, organization, presentation 

               Something interesting about the topic 

               Research strategy summary 

               Demonstrate two or three (max) top sites 

Points will be deducted for errors in HTML coding, grammar, word choic,
punctuation, and/or spelling errors which detract from the project.

Points may also be deducted for too few, or poor quality, resources.

**300 points total for Final Project**

**DUE DATE: See syllabus for Due date.**

**You must send an email message to the Instructor, before the due date with
the URL (http://cc.weber.edu/~yourvaxusername/title.htm) where I can find your
project. Late projects will not be graded.**

Please stop by my office, visit me at the reference desk, or send me E-mail
anytime you need help with your research, and/or ask for an appointment at any
time.

![](l_airbr1.gif)

Last updated April 22, 1998. Please send comments or questions to [Carol
Hansen](mailto:chansen@weber.edu)

[LS315 Page](iis.htm)

