---  
| |

**Study Questions, Brunelle, History 110A**

**[Home](Default.htm)
Bottom**

**[Syllabus, 100A](history_110a.htm)

Week One:

1\. Why did ancient societies engage in what Bentley and Ziegler call Athe

Quest for Order@? How did these societies end up organizing themselves?

2\. What role did the need for water in ancient societies play in where they
were located and how they were organized?

3\. Why did social stratification develop in complex societies? What do you
think were some of the consequences for history from this development?

4\. What was AThe Code of Hammurabi@? Why was it important? What do we learn
from it about attitudes toward gender, class, and justice in Mesopotamian
societies?

5\. Using what you have learned about Mesopotamia and Egypt, what do you think
are some of the basic characteristics of civilization? Why do you choose these
characteristics?

6\. What was the influence of Mesopotamia on Hebrew culture? Of Egypt on Kush
and African history?

_Geographical ID =s, Week One_

> > > > > > > > > > > > Mesopotamia Thebes

>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>> Nile Persian Gulf

>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>> Yellow River Palestine

>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>> Tigris and Euphrates Rivers Anatolia

>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>> Nubia Mediterranean Sea

>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>> Syria Babylon

>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>  

_Geographical ID =s, Week Two_

> > > > > > > > > > Indus River Harappa

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Khyber Pass Mohenjo-daro

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Deccan Plateau Himalayas

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Iranian Plateau Ganges River

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Hindu Kush Tibetan Plateau

_Study Questions, Week Two_

1\. How did the need for a steady supply of water affect the technological,
economic, political and legal development of ancient societies?

2\. Describe Harrapan society. Where was it located, what was it=s economic
basis, was it urban or rural, how was it organized and why did it decline?

3\. Who were the Aryans? What was their economy and culture like when they
entered India? How did they interact with the Dravidian peoples already
present in India?

4\. Describe Vedic society in India? Was it urban or rural? What sort of
social hierarchy developed? What were gender relations like?

5\. What is Acaste.@ Why did a caste system develop in Indian society? How did
caste influence the development of Indian society?

6\. How do the Upanishads reflect the blending of Aryan and Dravidian
values?** **What is the relationship between them and the social order of
Vedic age India?

**



**

_Study Questions, Weeks 3 and 4 (Bentley, chs. 4 and 5)_

_Geographical ID =s_

> > > > > > > > > > Yellow Sea Korean Peninsula

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Gobi Desert Yangzi River

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Zhou Dynasty Yucatan Peninsula

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Teotihuacan Andes Mountains

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Amazon River Lake Titicaca

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Indonesia Micronesia

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Polynesia Melanesia

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> New Guinea New Zealand

                                                                                                    Philippines



Questions

1\. What was Athe mandate of heaven@? Why did this concept arise? Why was it
important to the enduring tradition of strong centralized government in China?

2\. Describe the social order in China. Why did social distinctions arise in
China, and in other ancient societies?

3\. Describe the special role of the institution of the family in Chinese
history. Why was the extended family so central public and private affairs in
China?

4\. Why did writing serve Aas the foundation for a distinctive secular
cultural tradition in ancient China@? Why was it more important in Chinese
culture than religion?

5\. What was the relation between the ancient Chinese and their neighbors to
the North, West and South?

6\. Who were the Olmecs? Why do we call subsequent ancient societies in
central America their heirs?

7\. What was the Chav¨ªn cult? Why did it arise and how did it influence the
development of ancient Andean society?

8\. How did the earliest humans get to Australia and New Guinea? Where did
they come from? How did Austronesian speaking peoples differ in society and
culture from the Aborigines of Australia? Why?



_Study Questions, Week 4, (Wiesner, ch. 3)_

1\. What does each of the creation account in chapter three tell us about how
the people who wrote them sought to explain the creation of the world?

2\. What does each creation account tell us about the larger cosmology of each
of the peoples who wrote them down?

3\. What is the difference between ideographic and phonetic writing? What are
the advantages and disadvantages of each?

4\. Why was writing linked to power in each society that developed it?

5\. What is the difference between how a historian approaches a religious
document such as the Rig Veda, the Torah or the Bible, and how a theologian or
a believer in the religion approaches it?

****



_Study Questions, Week 6 (Bentley, ch. 8)_

Geographical ID=s

> > > > > > > > > > Bactria Persia

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Punjab Ceylon

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Tibet Mekong River

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Caspian Sea Aral Sea

Study Questions:

1\. What brought about the unification of India under the Mauryan Empire? What
were the achievements of that empire?

2\. According to your textbook, Aduring the sixth and fifth centuries B.C.E.,
a rash of new religions and philosophies rejected the _brahmin =s_ cults.@
What were these new religions, why did they arise and how did their teachings
challenge the _brahmins_?

3\. What were the teachings of Buddhism? Why did early Buddhism become popular
in India?

4\. What is the relationship between religion and caste in India? How did it
affect the development of Indian political structures?

5\. Why in the ALegacy@ video do they call India the AEmpire of the Spirit@?
What does this tell us about the world view of Indian culture, and its
relationship to religion?

****

_Study Questions, Brunelle, Week 7, (Bentley, ch. 9, Wiesner, ch. 3, new book;
ch. 4, old book)_

_Geographical ID =s:_

> > > > > > > > > > Peloponnesus Sparta

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Athens Attica

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Ionia Troy

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Crete Knossos

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Aegean Sea Adriatic Sea

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Ionian Sea Sardinia

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>> Corsica Sicily

>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>  

_Study Questions:_

1\. What were the main differences between classical Greece and classical
societies elsewhere? What was Aclassical@ about classical Greece?

2\. What was the _polis_? How did this institution shape Greek culture?

3\. How do the contrasting constitutions of Sparta and Athens help to
illustrate the variety of political styles in classical Greece?

4\. Why do historians refer to the age of Alexander and his successors as the
Hellenistic age? How did Hellenistic culture and society differ from Hellenic
Greek society?

5\. Who were the three greatest philosophers of classical Greece? How were
their ideas related to each other? How did their philosophies differ?

6\. How do the Egyptian, Greek and Buddhist Indian cultures represent the
human form?

7\. What do these depictions of the human form tell us about the values of
these cultures?

8\. What is the difference between an _aspective_ and a _perspective_ approach
to the human form? Why would some societies tend to favor one over the other?



_World History Style Sheet and Instructions for Paper, History 110A_

**

As it=s authors explain, A[t]he primary goal of _Discovering the Global Past_
is to encourage students just beginning to study world history to practice
history in the same way as professional historian do, that is, to examine
primary sources in order to answer questions about the past. By primary
sources, we mean original sources, which can be written documents, or objects
from material culture (pictures, sculptures, technology, etc.), as well as
oral records, that date from the period under study. This is the most exciting
aspect of the historian =s work!

In the brief (4-5 pages) paper which you will write for this course, you will
use the evidence in a given chapter of _Discovering the Global Past_ to answer
the central question(s) posed in the chapter. The authors provide you with
plenty of assistance and clues in answering the question(s) the evidence you
are studying raises. In most chapters, the questions are restated concisely in
the final paragraph of the  AQuestions to Consider@ section. If you have
difficulty identifying which questions you need to address in your essay,
please do hesitate to ask me.

In answering the questions posed in your chapters, just as you answer the
study questions I hand out to you, you should build some kind of argument or
interpretation. This means that rather than offering a rambling Astream of
consciousness@ **** essay, you must build a **structure** into your paper. As
a rule, this will mean that your papers should begin with an **introduction**
in which you concisely state the problem or question(s) you are seeking to
solve, your thesis or general argument outlining your answer (s) and the paper
=s general organizational plan. Next, in what is called the **body** of the
essay, you explain your argument, and offer evidence to support it. Again, the
paper should not ramble. Each paragraph must have a **topic sentence** , and
the topic sentences should relate to each other and carry the reader point-by-
point to the end of the paper. The final part of the essay, the **conclusion**
, you should sum up your argument, restate your answer to the question(s)
{i.e., your thesis} and in general conclude the paper.

In this paper, it is important that you offer **your own thoughts** about the
problems you are studying. The evidence in the chapter, and the information
and hints authors offer, is sufficient for you to answer the questions they
raise. There is no need for you to consult outside sources. Rather, you need
to **think** about the evidence, and devise your own answers. By the same
token, the authors = text purposely **does not** contain the answers;
therefore, there is no need for you to quote heavily or paraphrase the text in
your papers.

**

Remember to finish a draft of your paper by the due date marked on the
syllabus. Plan to revise the paper before your hand in the final draft! Also,
the paper _must be typed, including the draft!

_**







**

_Writing Hints_

**

In theory, most of you have studied basic English grammar and style before you
came to Cal. State Fullerton. Below are a few reminders. If you are worried
about your English or your writing ability, remember **** that the
**University Learning Center** (Lower Level of McCarthy hall, Room 33) can
help you. They have drop-in hours, Monday through Thursday, 8:30-7:00, and
Fridays 8:30-noon. Also, try reading Strunk and White, _The Elements of
Style_.

1\. All sentences must have a **subject** and a **predicate** , which usually
means a noun and a verb. Sentences which lack one of these elements are
incomplete, and called Asentence fragments.@

2\. Independent and dependent clauses containing a subject and a predicate
should not be attached in the same sentence unless they are linked by words
such as Aand,@ Aor,@ Abecause,@ Abut,@ Atherefore,@ Aalthough,@ Athus,@ or
Atherefore.@ Long sentences **** containing many clauses run together are
called **run on sentences** and should be broken up.

3\. All paragraphs must contain a **topic sentence**. Every sentence in the
paragraph should relate to the topic sentence. Sentences which do not relate
to the topic sentence belong in separate paragraphs. As a rule, one or two
sentences are not enough for a complete paragraph. Conversely, paragraphs that
run the length of a page or more are probably too long and ought to be broken
up.

4\. Your papers should be **typed, double spaced and contain 1 " margins on
all sides.

**

5\. **Indent** five spaces at the beginning of each paragraph. **Do not** put
more space between paragraphs than you have between lines. That purpose (to
tell you that a new paragraph is beginning) is served by the indentation.

6\. Make sure your verb tenses are **consistent**. **Do not** change from
simple past to present or conditional (would, would have done) or future from
line to line.

7\. Avoid writing in the **passive** (or indirect). A good indicator of
whether or not you are using the passive is when you have the word  Aby@ in
your sentence (as in Athe book was written by the author@). Almost all of the
time, thoughts can be better expressed using active phrasing (Athe author
wrote the book@).

8\. Vary your sentence structure from time to time. Begin sentences with
dependent clauses on occasion (ABecause the author needed to earn a large
royalty in order to pay the rent, he wrote the book quickly **@ ** instead of
AThe author needed to earn a large royalty. He needed to pay the rent. So he
wrote the book@). **

_Study Questions, Brunelle, Week 8 (Bentley, ch. 10, Wiesner, ch. 4)_

I. Geographical I.D.=s

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > Rome Tiber River Macedonia Po River

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Iberia Rhone River Pyrenees Carthage

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Gaul Libya Damascus Jerusalem

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Byzantium Alps Danube River Rhine River

Study Questions:

1\. Why do the authors of your textbook call the early Roman empire
Acosmopolitan@?

What do they mean by the term? Give some examples of Rome=s cosmopolitan
character.

2\. What was the source of the main internal tension in the Roman Republic and
the Roman Empire? How did the Romans deal with this problem?

3\. What was the main external threat to the Roman Republic and the Roman
Empire? How did the Romans deal with this problem?

4\. Why did the Roman Republic decline? How do you explain its transformation
into an empire?

5\. How did Christianity change from a Jewish sect to a gentile religion? How
do you explain its attraction to people throughout the Roman Empire?

6\. Why did the Romans and the Han Chinese face a new problem of legitimizing
their political power? Why can we not apply to their societies modern concepts
of political authority?

7\. How did the Romans and the Han Chinese redefine political authority to
suit a new level of world mastery?

8\. What do Roman and Han Chinese views of imperial authority tell us about
the ways in which they understood the state and its power?

9\. Compare and contrast the decline and fall of the Han and Roman empires. Do
you see any similarities in the reasons for their fall, and in the reactions
of the Chinese and Romans to the disappearance of their empires?



_Study Questions, Brunelle, 110A, Week 9 (Bentley, chs. 11, 12, Wiesner, ch.
10)_

Geographical ID=s

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > Land Route, Silk Road Sea Route, Silk
Road Red Sea Constantinople

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Antioch Tyre Persian Gulf Caspian Sea

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Taklamakan Desert Luoyang Guangzhou Balkans

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Isthmus of Kra Straits of Melaka Hungary Alexandria

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Hippo Caucasus Mountains

Study Questions:

1\. What were the ASilk Roads@? Why did it develop during the classical era?
What was its significance for the development of civilizations that used it?

2\. According to your textbook, the Silk Roads served as highways not only for
trade, but also for cultural and biological exchanges. Explain.

3\. Why does your textbook call Byzantium a Asurvivor society@?

4\. Why was Justinian Athe most important of the early Byzantine emperor@?
What contributions did his reign make to the Byzantine empire and Western
civilization?

5\. How was Byzantine culture and religion different from that of Western
Europe? How did this division come about?

6\. What was the influence of Byzantium on the development of Slavic culture?

7\. What does Wiesner mean by a Aworld system,@ and why does she consider the
Atrans-Asian contacts@ to constitute the basis of such a system? How would you
characterize this system?

****

S _tudy Questions, Brunelle, 110A, Week 10 (Bentley, chs. 13, 20 and Wiesner,
ch. 5)_

Geographical ID=s

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > Arabia Medina Baghdad Cairo

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Khyber Pass Oxus River Mecca Damascus

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Atlas Mountains Abyssinia Tangier Cholula

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Chichen Itz¨¢ Caribbean Sea Gulf of Mexico Cuzco

Study Questions

1\. Islam arose in the Arabian Peninsula. Especially at its early stages, it
Afaithfully reflected the social and cultural conditions of its homeland.@
(Bentley, 304) As it expanded, however, it became increasingly affected by the
culture of the Arab, Persian, Greek, and Indian societies in which it came
into contact. Describe some elements of Islam that reflected its Arabian
origins. Discuss other elements derived from other cultures which it conquered
and/or converted and drew into the _dar al-Islam_.

2\. Describe the basic beliefs of Islam. What is the relationship between
Islam and the Jewish and Christian religions?

3\. Discuss the theological divisions (Sunni versus Shiite) and the rise and
fall of the Umayyad dynasty during the early centuries of Islam. Do you detect
any parallels between the problems with which the Muslims had to grapple, in
theology and organization, and those which faced Christians in the later Roman
empire and early Middle Ages?

4\. What effect did Islam have on the status of women in the Arabian world?
How did their status change as Islam spread outside of Arabia? Why?

5\. Discuss the rise of the Aztec empire. How did it differ from imperial
states in the eastern hemisphere (Rome, Han China, for example)? What elements
did it have in common with other empires?

6\. How did the Inca maintain order and control in their empire? Why did no
large class of merchants and skilled craftsmen develop within it? What were
the main social classes?

7\. How did political leaders within Buddhism, Christianity, and Islam
encourage the growth of their chosen religious community?

8\. What differences and similarities do you see in the actions of Christians,
Buddhists, and Muslims and what they viewed as most important in the lives of
their communities?



_Study Questions, Brunelle, 110A, Week 11 (Bentley, chs. 14, 15)_

Geographical ID=s

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > Taklamakan Desert Tibet Silla
Kingdom Annam

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Champa Heian Nara Bengal

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Malabar Coast Coromandel Coast Delhi

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Gujarat Strait of Melaka Madagascar

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Mozambique Zanzibar Sumatra Angkor

Study Questions

1\. What were the accomplishments of the Tang Dynasty? In what ways did Tang
rulers build on the foundations laid by the Han? In what ways did they improve
on the institutions of Han rule, to avoid some of the problems which the Han
faced?

2\. Why was land distribution reform such a serious problem for the Roman
Empire, the Han, and then the Tang Dynasties? How did each of these empires
attempt to cope with the problem? Why did each ultimately fail?

3\. Explain why China=s economy expanded during the Tang and especially the
Song Dynasties, to the point that it became Athe economic powerhouse of
Eurasia.@ (Bentley, 335) How did the agricultural facet of this expansion
resemble a similar growth in the _dar al-Islam_?

4\. What did foot binding in China and the veil in Islam have in common? Why
do you think these practices became popular among certain groups?

5\. Why does the video AChina: The Mandate of Heaven,@ argue that the concept
of the mandate of heaven has been the central guiding principle for all of
Chinese society from the ancient past to the present? Explain.

6\. According to your textbook, in both northern and southern India Apolitical
division and conflict between states@ characterized Indian history. (Bentley,
360) Why? In the absence of Chinese style imperial rule, what kept India Aa
coherent and distinct society@? (Bentley, 356)

7\. How did India influence Southeast Asian society? What was the attraction
of Indian culture there?

8\. By what means did Islam spread into India and Southeast Asia? What was its
attraction, and to whom? Why did Islam never become an exclusive faith in
these regions?



Study Questions, 110A, Brunelle, Week 12 (Bentley, chs. 16, 17)

Geographical ID=s

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > Paris London Aachen Rhine River

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Seine River Scandinavia North Sea Alps

>>>>>>

>>>>>> Anatolia Samarkand

Study Questions

1\. Your textbook states that Athree developments of the early medieval era
served as foundations for the development of the powerful European society
that emerged in the high middle ages.@ (P. 380) Explain.

2\. Explain the success of the Franks in temporarily reviving empire in
medieval Europe. Why did their efforts ultimately not succeed in building an
enduring empire?

3\. What was feudalism like in Europe? What was the manorial economy? Why did
they become the primary political and social organization of medieval society?

4\. What was the role of Roman Christianity in the development of European
society? Why? How did it resemble the role of religion in the other cultures
we have studied?

5\. Your textbook describes the period from 1000 C.E. to 1500 C.E as AAn Age
of Cross-Cultural Interaction.@ Explain why.

6\. What was the most important impact of the nomadic empires on the lives of
peoples and experience of societies throughout much of the eastern hemisphere?
Explain and give examples.

7\. How was Chinggis Khan able to unite the Mongol people and lead them to
victory over many other peoples in the creation of a vast Mongol empire?

8\. What was Abarbarian@ western European society like according to the
ALegacy@ video? What was its relationship with the rest of world?

**



**

_Brunelle, Study Questions, History 110A, Week 13 (Bentley, ch. 18, Wiesner,
ch. 7)_

_Geographical ID =s_

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > Lake Chad Senegal River Gambia River Niger
River

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Gulf of Guinea Congo River Lake Victoria Zambezi River

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Kalahari Desert Orange River Madagascar Timbuktu

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Mali Empire Benin Zimbabwe ` Ethiopia

Study Questions:

1\. What was the ABantu Migration@? What was its significance for African
history?

2\. How did Islam arrive in Africa? Why did is spread so successfully there?

3\. Why did the empire of Mali arise where it did? How was the success of Mali
linked to the development of trade with the outside world?

4\. Discuss the development of _Swahili_ society in East Africa. What does the
fact that _A Swahili_**@ **itself is an Arabic word tell you about the multi-
cultural origins of that society?

5\. What was African society like in the smaller states and stateless
societies of sub-Saharan Africa?

6\. How did Christians and Muslims perceive each other at the time of the
Crusades. How did these perceptions influence the ways in which Christians and
Muslims chose to deal with each other?

****



_Brunelle, Study Questions, 110A, Week 14 (Bentley, ch. 19; Wiesner, ch. 9)_

_Geographical ID =s_

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > > Normandy Aquitaine London Paris
Vienna

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>

>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>>> Aragon Castile Portugal Budapest Denmark

Study Questions:

1\. Your textbook states that during the Ahigh middle ages@ Europeans Abuilt a
vibrant and powerful society on the political, economic, and cultural
foundations laid during the early middle ages.@ (p. 452) Discuss.

2\. Why did the dream of a centralized political structure fail in medieval
Europe?

3\. Your textbook states that during the High Middle Ages, Europe Aexperienced
dramatic economic growth and social development@ that Aclosely resembled the
processes that in an earlier era had strengthened China, India, and the
Islamic world.@ (p. 457) Discuss.

4\. Discuss the changes that took place in Western Christianity between 1000
and 1300. What sort of reform movements and popular heresies developed? Why?

5\. What was the Black Death, and how did it influence the course of medieval
Christian and Islamic history? How did these peoples deal with the Black
Death?

Back to Top



**



  
---|---|---

