[![Home](HOME.GIF)](welcome.html)[![Personal](PERSONAL.GIF)](PERSONAL.HTM)[![Democratic
Peace](MIRACLE.GIF)](MIRACLE.HTM)[![Democide](DEMOCIDE.GIF)](MURDER.HTM)[![20th
C.
Democide](2OTH.GIF)](20TH.HTM)[![Megamurderers](MEGA.GIF)](MEGA.HTM)[![Lesser
Murderers](LESSER.GIF)](LESSER.HTM)[![Why
Democide](WHY.GIF)](WHY.HTM)[![Dimensions](DIMEN.GIF)](DIMENSIONS.HTM)[![Conflict](VIOLENCE.GIF)](VIOLENCE.HTM)[![Methods](TECH.GIF)](TECH.HTM)[![Theory](THEORY.GIF)](THEORY.HTM)[![Policy](POLICY.GIF)](POLICY.HTM)[![Links](LINKS.GIF)](LINKS.HTM)  
  
  
**

**

#### Death By Government

[Contents](NOTE1.HTM) || [Preface](NOTE1.HTM#PREFACE)

[Chapter 2:](DBG.CHAP2.HTM) "Definition of Democide"

[Chapter 3:](DBG.CHAP3.HTM) "Pre-Twentieth Century Democide"

_Also Relevant_

[Methods and Procedures](METHOD.HTM)

* * *

####  Other Democide Related Documents On This Site

_Nontechnical:_

["Democide vs genocide. Which is what?"](GENOCIDE.HTM)

["War isn't this century's biggest killer"](WSJ.ART.HTM)

["How many did communist regimes murder?"](COM.ART.HTM)

_Professional:_

["Democide in totalitarian states: mortacracies and
megamurderers"](CHARNY.CHAP.HTM)

["The Holocaust in comparative and historical perspective"](HOLO.PAPER.HTM)

[Graduate Syllabus](SYL.HTM) on Repression and Democide

_Statistical:_

["Power kills: genocide and mass murder"](POWER.ART.HTM)

["Power predicts democide"](JCR.ART.HTM)

_Books:_

[_Lethal Politics_](NOTE4.HTM)

[_China's Bloody Century_](NOTE2.HTM)

Nazi [_Democide_](NOTE3.HTM)

[_Statistics of Democide_](NOTE5.HTM) (entire) **  
---  
  
# DEATH  
BY GOVERNMENT

# Chapter 1  
20th Century Democide*

##  By R.J. Rummel

**  
  
**Power gradually extirpates for  
the mind every humane and gentle virtue.  
\----Edmund Burke. _A Vindication of Natural Society_

Power, like a desolating pestilence,  
Pollutes whate'er it touches.  
\----Shelley. _Queen Mab_ III

Power tends to corrupt;  
absolute power corrupts absolutely.  
\---- Lord Acton. Letter to Bishop Creighton **  
---  
  
  
Power kills, absolute Power kills absolutely. This new Power Principle is the
message emerging from my previous work on the causes of war1 and this book on
genocide and government mass murder--what I call
[_democide_](DBG.CHAP2.HTM)\--in this century. The more power a government
has, the more it can act arbitrarily according to the whims and desires of the
elite, the more it will make war on others and murder its foreign and domestic
subjects. The more constrained the power of governments, the more it is
diffused, checked and balanced, the less it will aggress on others and commit
democide. At the extremes of Power 2, totalitarian communist governments
slaughter their people by the tens of _millions_ , while many democracies can
barely bring themselves to execute even serial murderers.

These assertions are extreme and categorical, but so is the evidence
accumulated in this book, [_Death By Government_](NOTE1.HTM), and its
complement [_Statistics of Democide_](NOTE5.HTM). Consider first war. [Table
1.1](DBG.TAB1.1.GIF) shows the occurrence of war between nations since 1816.
In no case has there been a war involving violent military action between
stable democracies 3, although they have fought, as everyone knows, non-
democracies. Most wars are between nondemocracies. Indeed, we have here a
general principle that is gaining acceptance among students of international
relations and war. That is that _democracies don't make war on each other_. To
this I would add that the _less_ democratic two states the _more_ likely that
they will fight each other.

This belligerence of unrestrained Power is not an artifact of either a small
number of democracies nor of our era. For one thing the number of democratic
states in 1993 number around seventy-five, or also taking into account forty-
eight related territories, about one-fourth of the world's population. 4 Yet
we have had no war--none--among them. Nor is there any threat of war. They
create an oasis of peace.

Moreover, this is historically true of democracies as well. If one relaxes the
definition of democracy to mean simply the restraint on Power by the
participation of middle and lower classes in the determination of power
holders and policy making, then there have been many democracies throughout
history. And whether considering the classical Greek democracies, the forest
democracies of medieval Switzerland, or modern democracies, they did or do not
fight each other (depending on how war and democracy is defined, some might
prefer to say that they rarely fought or fight each other).5 Moreover, once
those states that had been mortal enemies, that had frequently gone to war (as
have France and Germany in recent centuries), became democratic, war ceased
between them.6 Paradigmatic of this is Western Europe since 1945. The cauldron
of our most disastrous wars for many centuries, in 1945 one would not find an
expert so foolhardy as to predict not only forty-five years of peace, but that
at the end of that time there would be a European community with central
government institutions, moves toward a joint European military force by
France and Germany, and zero expectation of violence between any of these
formerly hostile states. Yet such has happened. All because they are all
democracies. Even among primitive tribes, it seems, where Power is divided and
limited, war is less likely.7 Were all to be said about absolute and arbitrary
Power is that it causes war and the attendant slaughter of the young and most
capable of our species, this would be enough. But much worse, as the case
studies in this book will more than attest, even without the excuse of combat
Power also massacres in cold blood those helpless people it controls. _Several
times more of them_. Consider [table 1.2]( DBG.TAB1.2.GIF) and [figure 1.1](
DBG.FIG1.1.GIF), the list and its graph of this century's _megamurderers_
\--those states killing in cold blood, aside from warfare, 1,000,000 or more
men, women, and children. These fifteen megamurderers have wiped out over
151,000,000 people, almost four times the almost 38,500,000 battle-dead for
all this century's international and civil wars up to 1987.8 The most absolute
Power, that is the communist U.S.S.R., China and preceding Mao guerrillas,
Khmer Rouge Cambodia, Vietnam, and Yugoslavia, as well fascist Nazi Germany,
account for near 128,000,000 of them, or 84 percent.

[Table 1.2](DBG.TAB1.2.GIF) also shows the annual percentage democide rate
(the percent of its population that a regime murders per year) for each
megamurderer and [figure 1.1](DBG.FIG1.1.GIF) graphically overlays the plot of
this on the total murdered. However, such massive megamurderers as the Soviet
Union and communist China had huge populations with a resulting small annual
democide rate. For their populations as a whole some less than megamurderers
were far more lethal.

[Table 1.3](DBG.TAB1.3.GIF) lists the fifteen most lethal regimes and [figure
1.2]( DBG.FIG1.2.GIF) bar graphs them. As can be seen, no other megamurderer
comes even close to the lethality of the communist Khmer Rouge in Cambodia
during 1975 through 1978. As described in Chapter 9 of _Death By Government_ ,
in less than four years of governing they exterminated over 31 percent of
their men, women, and children; the odds of any Cambodian surviving these four
long years was only about 2.2 to 1.

Then there are the kilomurderers, or those states that have killed innocents
by the tens or hundreds of thousands, such as the top five listed in [table
1.2]( DBG.TAB1.2.GIF): China Warlords (1917-1949), Atat¨¹rk's Turkey
(1919-1923), the United Kingdom (primarily due to the 1914-1919 food blockade
of the Central Powers in and after World War I, and the 1940-45 indiscriminate
bombing of German cities), Portugal (1926-1982), and Indonesia (1965-87). Some
lesser kilomurderers were communist Afghanistan, Angola, Albania, Rumania, and
Ethiopia, as well as authoritarian Hungary, Burundi, Croatia (1941-44),
Czechoslovakia (1945-46), Indonesia, Iraq, Russia, and Uganda. For its
indiscriminate bombing of German and Japanese civilians, the United States
must also be added to this list (see [_Statistics of Democide_](NOTE5.HTM)).
These and other kilomurderers add almost 15,000,000 people killed to the
democide for this century, as shown in [table 1.2]( DBG.TAB1.2.GIF).

Of course, saying that a state or regime is a murderer is a convenient
personification of an abstraction. Regimes are in reality people with the
power to command a whole society. It is these people that have committed the
kilo and megamurders of our century and we must not lose their identity under
the abstraction of "state," "regime," "government," or "communist." [Table
1.4]( DBG.TAB1.4.GIF) lists those men most notorious and singularly
responsible for the megamurders of this century. Stalin, by far, leads the
list. He ordered the death of millions, knowingly set in train events leading
to the death of millions of others, and as the ultimate dictator, was
responsible for the death of still millions more killed by his henchman. It
may come as a surprise to find Mao Tse-tung is next in line as this century's
greatest murderers, but this would only be because the full extent of
communist killing in China under his leadership has not been widely known in
the West. Hitler and Pol Pot are of course among these bloody tyrants and as
for the others whose names may appear strange, their megamurders are described
in detail in _Death By Government_ s. The monstrous bloodletting of at least
these nine men should be entered into a Hall of Infamy. Their names should
forever warn us of the deadly potential of Power.

The major and better known episodes and institutions for which these and other
murderers were responsible are listed in [table 1.5]( DBG.TAB1.5.GIF). Far
above all is gulag--the Soviet slave--labor system created by Lenin and built
up under Stalin. In some 70 years it likely chewed up almost 40,000,000 lives,
over _twice_ as many as probably died in some 400 years of the African slave
trade, from capture to sale in an Arab, Oriental, or New World market. 9

In total, during the first eighty-eight years of this century, almost
170,000,000 men, women, and children have been shot, beaten, tortured, knifed,
burned, starved, frozen, crushed, or worked to death; or buried alive,
drowned, hung, bombed, or killed in any other of the myriad ways governments
have inflicted death on unarmed, helpless citizens or foreigners. The dead
even could conceivably be near 360,000,000 people. This is as though our
species has been devastated by a modern Black Plague. And indeed it has, but a
plague of Power and not germs.

The souls of this monstrous pile of dead have created a new land, a new
nation, among us. Let in Shakespeare's word's "This Land be calle'd The field
of Golgotha, and dead men's Skulls"10 As clear from the megamurderers listed
in [table 1.2]( DBG.TAB1.2.GIF) alone, this land is multicultural and
multiethnic, its inhabitants believed in all the world's religions and spoke
all its languages. Its demography has yet to be precisely measured and only
two rough censuses, the most recent constituting _Death By Government_ , have
so far been taken.11 But this last census does allow us to rank this land of
the murdered sixth in population among the nations of the living, as shown in
[figure 1.3]( DBG.FIG1.3.GIF).

This census and the estimates of explorers also enables us to estimate
Golgotha's racial and ethnic composition, which is pictured in [figure 1.4](
DBG.FIG1.4.GIF). Chinese make up 30 percent of its souls, with Russians next
at 24 percent. Then there is a much lower percentage of Ukrainians (6
percent), Germans (4 percent), Poles (4 percent), and Cambodians (2 percent).
The remaining 30 percent is made up of a diverse Koreans, Mexicans, Pakistanis
(largely ethnic Bengalis and Hindus), Turk subjects, and Vietnamese.

But still, is Golgotha dominantly Asian? European? What region did most of its
dead souls come from. [Figure 1.5]( DBG.FIG1.5.GIF) displays two different
ways of looking at this: the percent of Golgothians from a particular region
and also the percent of a region's 1987 population in Golgotha. While most,
some 40 percent, are from Asia and the Middle East, the highest proportion of
any region's population in Golgotha, around 22 percent, is from the territory
of the former Soviet Union. In other words, Asians are the largest group while
the former Soviet Union has contributed the most of its population. Note that
18 percent of Golgothians are former Europeans, including those from all of
Eastern Europe except the former USSR; Europe has contributed 6 percent of its
population to this land of the murdered.

So much for Golgotha and a summary overview of its statistics. As I already
have made clear, Golgotha owes its existence to Power. I can now be more
specific about this. [Table 1.6]( DBG.TAB1.6.GIF) summarizes the most prudent
democide results and contrasts them to this century's battle-dead. [Figure
1.6]( DBG.FIG1.6.GIF) gives a bar chart of these totals.12 Note immediately in
the figure that the human cost of democide is far greater than war for
authoritarian and totalitarian regimes, while although for democracies they
suffer fewer battle-dead than other regimes, this total is still greater than
democratic domestic and foreign democide. In evaluating the battle-dead for
democracies keep in mind that most of these dead were the result of wars that
democracies fought against authoritarian or totalitarian aggression,
particularly World War I and II, the Korean and Vietnam Wars.13

Putting the human cost of war and democide together, Power has killed over
203,000,000 people in this century. If one were to sit at a table and have
this many people come in one door, walk at three miles per hour across the
room with three feet between them (assume generously that each person is also
one foot thick, naval to spine), and exit an opposite door, it would take over
five years and nine months for them all to pass, twenty-four hours a day, 365
days a year. If all these dead were laid out head to toe, and assuming each is
an average 5 feet tall, they would reach from Honolulu, Hawaii, across the
vast Pacific and then the huge continental United States to Washington D.C. on
the East coast, _and then back again almost twenty times_. 14 Were each of
these people also an average of two-feet wide, then to bury them side-to-side
and head-to-toe would take fifty-five square miles. Even digging up every foot
of all of San Marino, Monaco, and Vatican city to bury these democide and war
battle-dead would not be sufficient to bury half of them.

Now, as shown in [table 1.6]( DBG.TAB1.6.GIF) and [figure 1.6](
DBG.FIG1.6.GIF), democracies themselves are responsible for some of the
democide. Almost all of this is foreign democide during war, and mainly those
enemy civilians killed in indiscriminate urban bombing, as of Germany and
Japan in World War II.15 It also includes the large scale massacres of
Filipinos during the bloody American colonization of the Philippines at the
beginning of this century, deaths in British concentration camps in South
Africa during the Boar War, civilian deaths due to starvation during the
British blockade of Germany in and after World War I, the rape and murder of
helpless Chinese in and around Peking in 1900, the atrocities committed by
Americans in Vietnam, the murder of helpless Algerians during the Algerian War
by the French, and the unnatural deaths of German prisoners of war in French
and American POW camps after World War II.16

All this killing of foreigners by democracies may seem to violate the Power
Principle, but really underlines it. For in each case, the killing was carried
out in secret, behind a conscious cover of lies and deceit by those agencies
and power-holders involved. All were shielded by tight censorship of the press
and control of journalists. Even the indiscriminate bombing of German cities
by the British was disguised before the House of Commons and in press releases
as attacks on German military targets. That the general strategic bombing
policy was to attack working men's homes was kept secret still long after the
war.

Finally, with the summary statistics on democide and war shown in [table 1.6](
DBG.TAB1.6.GIF), we now can display the role of Power. [Figures 1.7A-D](
DBG.FIG1.7.GIF) illustrate the power curves for the total democide and battle-
dead ([figures 1.7A-B]( DBG.FIG1.7.GIF)); and for the intensity of democide
and battle-dead, both measured as a percent of a regime's population killed
([figures 1.7C-D]( DBG.FIG1.7.GIF)). In each case, _as the arbitrary power of
a regime increases massively, that is, as we move from democratic through
authoritarian to totalitarian regimes, the amount of killing jumps by huge
multiples_.

Two more figures will exhibit the sheer lethality of Power. [Figure 1.8](
DBG.FIG1.8.GIF) shows the proportion of war and democide dead accounted for by
authoritarian or totalitarian power together and compares this to the
democratic dead. For all this killing in this century, democide and war by
democracies contributes only 1 and 2.2 percent, respectively to the total.

And in [figure 1.9]( DBG.FIG1.9.GIF), one of the most important comparisons on
democide and power in _Death By Government_ , the range of democide estimates
for each regime-level of power is shown. As mentioned in the preface, I have
collected over 8,100 estimates of democide from over a thousand sources to
arrive at an absolute low and high for democide committed by 219 regimes or
groups. It is highly improbable that the actual democide would be below or
above this range. The totals that have been displayed in previous figures have
been the sum of conservatively determined mid-totals in this range, and are
shown in the figure. Now, what [figure 1.9]( DBG.FIG1.9.GIF) presents for each
type of regime, such as the authoritarian, is the range resulting from the sum
of all the lows and highs for all the democide of all regimes of that type.
The difference between the three resulting ranges drawn in the figure can only
be understood in terms of Power. As the arbitrary power of regimes increase
left to right in the figure, the range of their democide jumps accordingly and
to such a great extent that the low democide for the authoritarian regime is
_above_ the democratic high, and the authoritarian high is _below_ the
totalitarian low.

So Power kills and absolute Power kills absolutely. What then can be said of
those alleged causes or factors in war, genocide, and mass murder favored by
students of genocide. What about cultural-ethnic differences, outgroup
conflict, misperception, frustration-aggression, relative deprivation,
ideological imperatives, dehumanization, resource competition, etc.? At one
time or another, for one regime or another, one or more of these factors play
an important role in democide. Some are essential for understanding some
genocides, as of the Jews or Armenians; some politicide, as of "enemies of the
people," bourgeoisie, and clergy; some massacres, as of competing religious-
ethnic groups; or some atrocities, as of those committed against poor and
helpless villagers by victorious soldiers. But then neighbors in the service
of Power have killed neighbor, fathers have killed their sons, faceless and
unknown people have been killed by quota. One is hard put to find a race,
religion, culture, or distinct ethnic group whose regime has not murdered its
own or others.

These specific causes or factors accelerate the likelihood of war or democide
once some trigger event occurs and absolute or near absolute Power is present.
That is, Power is a necessary cause for war or democide. When the elite have
absolute power, war or democide follows a common process (which I call "the
conflict helix" 17).

In any society, including the international one, relations between individuals
and groups is structured by social contracts determined by previous conflicts,
accommodations, and adjustments among them. These social contracts define a
structure of expectations that guide and regulate the social order, including
Power. And this structure is based on a particular balance of powers
(understood as an equilibrium of interests, capabilities, and wills) among
individuals and groups. That is, previous conflict and possibly violence
determine a balance of powers between competing individuals and groups and a
congruent structure of expectations (as for example, war or revolution ends in
a new balance of powers between nations or groups and an associated peace
treaty or constitution). This structure of expectations often consists of new
laws and norms defining a social order more consistent with the underlying
distribution of relative power.

However, relative power never remains constant. It shifts as the interests,
capabilities, and wills of the parties change. The death of a charismatic
leader, the outrage of significant groups, the loss of foreign support by
outgroups, the entry into war and the resulting freedom of the elite to use
force under the guise of war-time necessity, and so on, can significantly
alter the balance of power between groups. Where such a shift in power is in
favor of the governing elite, Power can now achieve its potential. Where also
the elite have built up frustrations regarding those who have lost power or
nonetheless feel threatened by them, where they see them as outside the moral
universe, where they have dehumanized them, where the outgroup is culturally
or ethnically distinct and the elite perceive them as inferior, or where any
other such factors are present, Power will achieve its murderous potential. It
simply waits for an excuse, an event of some sort, an assassination, a
massacre in a neighboring country, an attempted coup, a famine, or a natural
disaster, that will justify beginning the murder en masse. Most democides
occur under the cover of war, revolution, or guerrilla war or in their
aftermath.

The result of such violence will be a new balance of powers and attendant
social contract. In some cases this may end the democide, as by the
elimination of the "inferior" group (as of the Armenians by the Turks). In
many cases this will subdue and cower the survivors (as of the Ukrainians who
lived through Stalin's collectivization campaign and intentional famine). In
some cases, this establishes a new balance of power so skewed toward the elite
that they may throughout their reign continue to murder at will. Murder as
public policy becomes part of the new structure of expectations, of the new
social order. Consider the social orders of Hitler, Stalin, Mao, Pol Pot, and
their henchmen.

As should be clear from all this, I believe that war and democide can be
understood within a common framework. It is part of the same social process, a
balancing of powers, where Power is supreme.

It is not apparent, however, why among states where Power is limited and
accountable, war and significant democide do not take place. Two concepts
explain this: that of cross pressures and of the associated political culture.
Where Power is diffused, checked, accountable, society is riven by myriad
independent groups, disparate institutions, and multiple interests. These
overlap and contend; they section loyalties and divide desires and wants.
Churches, unions, corporations, government bureaucracies, political parties,
the media, special interest groups, and such, fight for and protect their
interests. Individuals and the elite are pushed and pulled by their membership
in several such groups and institutions. And it is difficult for any one
driving interest to form. Interests are divided, weak, ambivalent; they are
cross-pressured. And for the elite to sufficiently coalesce to commit itself
to murdering its own citizens, there must be a near fanatical, driving
interest. But even were such present among a few, the diversity of interests
across the political elite and associated bureaucracies, the freedom of the
media to dig out what is being planned or done, and the ever present potential
leaks and fear of such leaks of disaffected elite to the media, brake such
tendencies.

As to the possibility of war between democracies, diversity and resulting
cross-pressures operate as well. Not only is it very difficult for the elite
to unify public interests and opinion sufficiently to make war, but there are
usually diverse, economic, social, and political bonds between democracies
that tie them together and oppose violence.

But there is more to these restraints on Power in a democracy. Cross-pressures
is a _social force_ that operates wherever individual and group freedom
predominates. It is natural to a spontaneous social field. But human behavior
is not only a matter of social forces, but also depends on the meanings,
values, and norms that things have. That is, democratic _culture_ is also
essential. When Power is checked and accountable, when cross-pressures limit
the operation of Power, a particular democratic culture develops. This culture
involves debate, demonstrations, protests, but also negotiation, compromise,
and tolerance. It involves the arts of conflict resolution and the acceptance
of democratic procedures at all levels of society. The ballot replaces the
bullet, and particularly, people and groups come to accept a loss on this or
that interest as only an unfortunate outcome of the way the legitimate game is
played. "Lose today, win tomorrow."

That democratic political elite would kill opponents or commit genocide for
some public policy is unthinkable (although such may occur in the isolated and
secret corners of government where Power can still lurk). Even publicly
insulting and dehumanizing outgroups in modern democracies has become a social
and political evil. Witness the current potency of such allegations as
"racism" or "sexism." Of course, the culture of democracy operates between
democracies as well. Diplomacy, negotiating a middle-way, seeking common
interests, is part of the operating medium among democracies. A detailed
political history of the growth of the European Community would well display
this. Since each democracy takes the legitimacy of the other and their
interests for granted, conflict then is only a process of non-violent learning
and adjustment between them. Conferences, not war, is the instrumentality for
settling disputes.

In sum, then, where absolute Power exists, interests become polarized, a
culture of violence develops, and war and democide follow. In this century
alone, by current count, absolute-totalitarian-Power has murdered near
138,000,000 people ([table 1.6]( DBG.TAB1.6.GIF)). Over 14,000,000 more of its
subjects have died from battle in their wars. Where among states Power is
limited and accountable, interests are cross-pressured and a culture of
nonviolence develops, no wars have occurred and comparatively few citizens
have been murdered by the governing elite, and even most of those killed is
questionable. About 90 percent of the citizens killed by democracies have been
by marginally democratic Spain (during its 1936-1939 Civil War and by
Republicans after the war), India, and Peru (during its struggle against the
communist Shining Path guerrillas).

This picture of Power and its human costs is new. Few are aware of the sheer
democide that has been inflicted on our fellow human beings. That Hitler
murdered millions of Jews is common knowledge. That he murdered overall near
21,000,000 Jews, Slavs, Gypsies, homosexuals, Frenchmen, Balts, Czechs, and
others, is virtually unknown. Similarly, that Stalin murdered tens of millions
is becoming generally appreciated; but that Stalin, Lenin, and their
successors murdered almost 62,000,000 Soviet citizens and foreigners is little
comprehended outside of the Soviet Union (where similar figures are now being
widely published). Then there is Mao Tse-tung's China, Chiang Kai-shek's
China, the militarist's Japan, Yahya Khan's Pakistan, Pol Pot's Cambodia, and
the others listed in [table 1.4]( DBG.TAB1.4.GIF), who have murdered in the
millions. Even those students of genocide who have tried to tabulate such
killing around the world have grossly underestimated the toll. The best, most
recent such accounting came up with no more than 16,000,000 killed in genocide
and politicide since World War II. 18 But this estimate does not even cover
half of the some 35,000,000 people likely murdered by just the Communist Party
of China from 1949 to 1987 ([table 1.2]( DBG.TAB1.2.GIF)).

Moreover, even the toll of war itself is not well understood. Many estimate
that World War II, for example, killed 40,000,000 to 60,000,000 people. But
the problem with such figures is that they include tens of millions killed in
democide. Many war-time governments massacred civilians and foreigners,
committed atrocities or genocide against them, executed them, and subjected
them to reprisals. Aside from battle or military engagements, during the war
the Nazis murdered around 20,000,000 civilians and prisoners of war, the
Japanese 5,890,000, the Chinese Nationalists 5,907,000, the Chinese communists
250,000, the Nazi satellite Croatians 655,000, the Tito Partisans 600,000, and
Stalin 13,053,000 (above the 20,000,000 war-dead and democide by the Nazis of
Soviet Jews and Slavs). I also should mention the indiscriminate bombing of
civilians by the Allies that killed hundreds of thousands, and the atomic
bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Most of these dead are usually included
among the war-dead. But those killed in battle versus in democide form
distinct conceptual and theoretical categories and should not be confused.
That they have been consistently and sometimes intentionally confounded helps
raise the toll during World War II to some 60,000,000 people, way above the
estimated 15,000,000 killed in battle and military action. And that the almost
universally accepted count of genocide during this period also is no more than
"6,000,000" Jews, around 13 percent of the total war-time democide, has
further muddled our research and thought.19

Even more, our appreciation of the incredible scale of this century's
genocide, politicide, and mass murder has been stultified by lack of concepts.
Democide is committed by absolute Power, its agency is government. The
discipline for studying and analyzing power and government and associated
genocide and mass murder is political science. But except for a few specific
cases, such as the Holocaust and Armenian genocide, and a precious few more
general works, one is hard put to find political science research specifically
on this.

Now, one university course I teach is introduction to political science. Each
semester I will review several possible introductory texts (the best measure
of the discipline) for the course. I often just shake my head at what I find.
Given the democide totaled in [table 1.2]( DBG.TAB1.2.GIF) the concepts and
views promoted in these texts appear grossly unrealistic. They just do not fit
or explain, or are even contradictory to the existence of a Hell-State like
Pol Pot's Cambodia, a Gulag-State like Stalin's Soviet Union, or a Genocide-
State like Hitler's Germany.

For instance, one textbook I recently read spends a chapter on describing the
functions of government. Among these were law and order, individual security,
cultural maintenance, and social welfare. Political scientists are still
writing this stuff, when we have numerous examples of governments that kill
hundreds of thousands and even millions of their own citizens, enslave the
rest, and abolish traditional culture (it took only about a year for the Khmer
Rouge to completely suppress Buddhism, which had been the heart and soul of
Cambodian culture). A systems approach to politics still dominates the field.
Through this lens politics is a matter of inputs and outputs, of citizen
inputs, aggregation by political parties, government determining policy, and
bureaucracies implementing it. Then there is the common and fundamental
justification of government that it exists to protect citizens against the
anarchic jungle that would otherwise threaten their lives and property. Such
archaic or sterile views show no appreciation of democide's existence and all
its related horrors and suffering. They are inconsistent with a regime that
stands astride society like a gang of thugs over hikers they have captured in
the woods, robbing all, raping some, torturing others for fun, murdering those
they don't like, and terrorizing the rest into servile obedience. This exact
characterization of many past and present governments, such as Idi Amin's
Uganda, hardly squares with conventional political science.

Consider also that library stacks have been written on the possible nature and
consequences of nuclear war and how it might be avoided. Yet, in the life of
some still living we have experienced in the toll from democide (and related
destruction and misery among the survivors) the equivalent of a nuclear war,
especially at the high near 360,000,000 end of the estimates. It is as though
one had already occurred! Yet to my knowledge, there is only one book dealing
with the overall human cost of this "nuclear war"--Gil Elliot's _Twentieth
Century Book of the Dead_.

What is needed is a reconceptualization of government and politics consistent
with what we now know about democide and related misery. New concepts have to
be invented, old ones realigned to correct--dare I write "modernize"-- our
perception of Power. We need to invent concepts for governments that turn
their states into a border to border concentration camp, that purposely starve
to death millions--millions!--of their citizens, that set up quotas of those
that should be killed from one village or town to another (although murder by
quota was carried out by the Soviets, Chinese communists, and Vietnamese, I
could not find in any introductory or general political science literature
even a recognition that governments can be so incredibly inhumane). We have no
concept for murder as an aim of public policy, determined by discussion among
the governing elite in the highest councils, and imposed through government
bureaucracy. Indeed, in virtually no index to any general book on politics and
government will one find a reference to genocide, murder, killed, dead,
executed, or massacre. Such is not even usually indexed in books on the Soviet
Union or China. Most even omit index references to concentration or labor
camps or gulag, even though they may have a paragraph or so on them.

A preeminent fact about government is that some murder millions in cold blood.
This is where absolute Power reigns. A second fact is that some, usually the
same governments, murder tens of thousands more through foreign aggression.
Absolute Power again. These two facts alone must be the basis of our
reconceptualization and taxonomies. Not, as it is today, only whether states
are developed or not, third world or not, militarily powerful or not, or large
or not. But also and more important, whether Power is absolute, and whether it
has engaged in genocide, politicide, and mass murder.

In any case the empirical and theoretical conclusion is this. The way to end
war and virtually eliminate democide appears to be through restricting and
checking Power. This means to foster democratic freedom. 

* * *

### NOTES

> * From the pre-publisher edited manuscript of Chapter 1 in R.J. Rummel,
_Death By Government_ , 1994. For full reference to this book, the list of its
contents, figures, and tables, and the text of its preface, click
[book](NOTE1.HTM).

>

> 1. Rummel ([ _Understanding Conflict and War_](UCW.HTM), ["Libertarianism
and International Violence"](DP83.HTM), ["Libertarian Propositions on Violence
Within and Between Nations"](DP85.HTM)).

>

> 2. Power capitalized stands for government power and its holders (such as
Stalin), agencies (such as government departments and bureaucracies), and
instruments (such as armies, concentration camps, and propaganda).

>

> 3. Since democratic Finland joined Nazi Germany in its war on the Soviet
Union during World War II, Great Britain declared war on Finland. No military
action apparently took place between Finland and Britain, however.

>

> 4. Were it not for India becoming authoritarian, around 40 percent of the
world's population would be democratic. This is based on Freedom House's
classification of states as free, partially free, or unfree, depending on
their civil liberties and political rights. For their latest classification,
see Freedom Review 24 (February 1993): 4-41.

>

> 5. For some contrary evidence from classical warfare among Greek city
states, see Russett 1993, chapter 3.

>

> 6. The historian Spencer Weart has studied the history of warfare since
ancient times for possible examples of war between democracies. In spite of
the many democracies that have existed throughout history, he has found no
clear case of such as war [See Spencer Weart, _Never At War_ , New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1998].

>

> 7. Ember, Ember, and Russett (1991).

>

> 8. Battle-dead up to 1980 is from Small and Singer's (1982) compilation of
wars and battle-dead. That for the remaining years is my estimate.

>

> 9. I calculate a mid-estimate of near 17,000,000 Africans killed in the
slave trade. See line 92 of [Table 2.1A](SOD.TAB2.1A.GIF) in the [_Statistics
of Democide_](NOTE5.HTM).

>

> 10. William Shakespeare, King Richard II, iv, i, 144.

>

> 11. The first was by Elliot (1972).

>

> 12. Democide is appropriately compared to international war battle-dead,
rather the total international and domestic war battle-dead. Totalitarian
regimes use their absolute power to suppress any opposition before it can
employ arms against it, and thus come out relatively low on domestic battle-
dead (although still higher than democracies). What internal war does occur is
usually at the inception of the regime, as for the very bloody civil war after
the Bolshevik coup in Russia in 1917, or after a major war when under foreign
occupation the opposition is able to arm themselves and organize, as for the
guerrillas that fought against Soviet reoccupation of the Baltic States after
the Second World War.

>

> 13. However one evaluates the rightness or wrongness of American
intervention in Vietnam, one fact has become clear from the documents,
interviews, and speeches of Vietnamese officials since the end of the war: the
Vietnam War was started by communist North Vietnam in order to takeover South
Vietnam. Since South Vietnam was recognized by a number of states, including
the United States, as a sovereign state, this was an act of international
aggression. And it was not until the South was near military collapse that the
United States fully intervened with massive force to save her. See chapter 11
of [_Death By Government_](NOTE1.HTM).

>

> 14. Back and forth, over 4,838 miles one way, near twenty times? This is so
incredible that I would not believe the calculation and had to redo it several
times.

>

> 15. The appropriateness of including this type of killing under democide is
discussed with regard to its [definition](DBG.CHAP2.HTM).

>

> 16. Democide by the United States, Great Britain, and France is detailed in
[_Statistics of Democide_](NOTE5.HTM). For the United States, see
[](SOD.CHAP13.HTM). See [Chapter 14](SOD.CHAP14.HTM) for France and the United
Kingdom.

>

> 17. See my _The Conflict Helix: Principles and Practices of Interpersonal,
Social, and International Conflict and Cooperation_ , New Brunswick:
Transaction Publishers, [1991](NOTE9.htm).

>

> 18. Barbara Harff and Ted Robert Gurr. "Toward Empirical Theory of Genocides
and Politicides: Identification and Measurement of Cases since 1945."
International Studies Quarterly, Vol. 32 (1988): 359-371.

>

> 19. During the war the Soviets committed genocide against at least nine of
their distinct ethnic-linguistic sub-nations, including ethnic Germans, ethnic
Greeks, Crimean Tatars, and Balkars. Genocides by others include those of the
Germans against Slavs, Gypsies, and homosexuals; Croatians against the Serbs,
Jews, and Gypsies; the Serbs against Croatians and Moslems; the Hungarians
against their Jews; the Serbs, Poles, and Czechs against their ethnic Germans.

* * *

####  For citations see the _Death By
Government_[REFERENCES](DBG.REFERENCES.HTM)

  
  

* * *

  
Go to top of document **

