**Sociology 388, Advanced Methods for Tabular Arrays.** ****



Fall Quarter, 2001



Professor Michael J. Rosenfeld

mrosenfe@stanford.edu

<http://www.stanford.edu/~mrosenfe>

(650) 723-3958

Office Hour: Wednesday 2:20-3:30



TA:

Young-Choon Kim

ychoon@stanford.edu

TA Office hours Monday 12:30-2:30 in Bldg 120, room 031



Class meets Mondays and Wednesdays 11:00A- 12:15P

Meyer Library, Room 143

Section meets Fridays, 11A-Noon in Meyer Library 143











**Introduction:**

This class is restricted to graduate students, with preference to doctoral
students in the sociology department.

This class should provide students with theoretical and practical knowledge of
how to analyze categorical data, and how to interpret and understand the
results of that analysis. The class will start with the simplest case- a 2x2
table, and work up to more complicated datasets and models. We will discuss
log linear models for ordinal and nominal categories. We will discuss measures
of goodness-of-fit. If time and interest permit, we may also discuss log
multiplicative models, and latent class models.

Most of the lectures and assignments will rely on the statistical package
STATA. Meyer library has licenses for STATA on both Macs and Windows machines.
Regular class meetings will take place in Meyer library 143, which is a Mac
lab. Early assignments will also emphasize the use of the spreadsheet Excel,
which will allow students to work with simple models directly. I will post
notes and homework answers on my website, <http://www.stanford.edu/~mrosenfe>.

Grading will be based on homework, a final paper, and (depending on class
size) a brief presentation of the final paper.



  



**Required** **Readings** **(Available at Stanford Bookstore):**

**** Agresti, Alan. 1996. _An Introduction to Categorical Data Analysis_. New
York: Wiley.

Hout, Michael: 1983. _Mobility Tables_. Beverly Hills: Sage Press.



**Recommended** **Reading** **:**

Agresti, Alan. 1990. _Categorical Data Analysis_. New York: Wiley.



Also: Students are expected to have some familiarity with STATA, and I will
explain in detail how to use the small number of commands that are relevant to
this class. Students may want, however, to purchase the reference guide to
STATA, or the introduction to STATA, or the software itself (to run on your
own machine). See <http://www.stata.com/>. Copies of the STATA manuals are
available in the Meyer library.













**Grading:**





|

**Due**

|

**Pct of final grade**  
  
---|---|---  
  
Homework 1

|

Monday, October 8

|

15%  
  
Homework 2

|

Monday, October 15

|

15%  
  
Homework 3

|

Wednesday, October 24

|

15%  
  
Paper abstract

|

Monday, October 29

|

0%  
  
Paper Draft

|

Monday, November 12

|

0%  
  
Final Paper

|

In class Wednesday, December 5

|

55%  
  


  





Two examples of Cross tabulated data:



1)Occupation by Race



|



|

Race

|

  
  
---|---|---|---  
  


|



|

White

|

Non White  
  
Occupational Class

|

Other

|

42,012

|

7,146  
  


|

White Collar

|

17,216

|

2,361  
  


source: 2000 CPS, nationally representative data, unweighted





This table has one ordinal dimension (occupational class) and one nominal
dimension (race). Some simple questions: Are Whites overrepresented in White
collar jobs? Are non-Whites underrepresented in the more desirable jobs? How
great is this underrepresentation or overrepresentation, and how significant
is it?





2) Husband's Race by Wife's Race





|

**Wives**

|



|



|



|

  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
**Husbands:**

|

NH Black

|

Mexican

|

Other Hisp

|

All Others

|

NH White  
  
Non Hisp Black

|

4074

|

63

|

32

|

42

|

215  
  
Mexican

|

25

|

3947

|

143

|

95

|

1009  
  
Other Hispanic

|

16

|

132

|

239

|

18

|

304  
  
All Others

|

19

|

78

|

18

|

1022

|

360  
  
Non Hisp White

|

103

|

1156

|

373

|

492

|

28453  
  


source: 1990 Census PUMS for Los Angeles County



This table has symmetric, nominal categories. Some questions will be: Is the
tendency to endogamy equally strong in all racial and ethnic groups? Which
kinds of intermarriage are especially unlikely, or especially likely? What
different kinds of models fit the data well, and by which standard of goodness
of fit? What kinds of gender effects are evident in racial intermarriage?





  

**_Examples of articles that use loglinear models with intermarriage data:_**

Botev, Nikolai. 1994. "Where East Meets West: Ethnic Intermarriage in the
Former Yugoslavia" _American_ _Sociological Review_ 59: 461-480



Fu, Vincent Kang. 2001. "Racial Intermarriage Pairings". _Demography_ 38:
147-159



Hout, Michael and Joshua Goldstein. 1994\. "How 4.5 Million Irish Immigrants
Became 40 Million Irish Americans: Demographic and Subjective Aspects of
Ethnic Composition of White Americans" _American Sociological Review_ 59:
64-82



Kalmijn, Matthijs. 1991a.  "Shifting Boundaries: Trends in Religious and
Educational Homogamy" American Sociological Review 56: 786-800



Kalmijn, Matthijs. 1991b. "Status Homogamy in the United States" American
Journal of Sociology" 97: 496-523



Kalmijn, Matthijs. 1993. "Trends in Black/White Intermarriage." _Social
Forces_ 72: 119-146



Pagnini, Deanna L. and S. Philip Morgan. 1990. "Intermarriage and Social
Distance among U.S. Immigrants at the turn of the Century." _American Journal
of Sociology_ 96 (2): 405- 432



Qian, Zenchao. 1997. 'Breaking Racial Barriers: Variations in Interracial
Marriage Between 1980 and 1990' _Demography_ 34: 263- 276



Rosenfeld, Michael J. 2001. "The Salience of Pan- National Hispanic and Asian
Identities, in U.S. Marriage Markets", _Demography_ 38: 161-175



Sandefur, Gary and Trudy McKinnell. 1986. "American Indian Intermarriage _"
Social Science Research_ 15: 347-371





**_References on the methodology of loglinear models:_**

Clogg, Clifford C. and Edward S. Shihadeh. 1994. _Statistical Models for
Ordinal Variables_. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Press.



Hout, Michael. 1983. _Mobility Tables_. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Press



Raftery, Adrian. 1986. 'Choosing Models for Cross- Classifications'. _American
Sociological Review_ 51: 145- 146



Weakliem, David L. 1999. "A Critique of the Bayesian Information Criterion for
Model Selection" _Sociological Methods and Research_ 27 (3): 359- 397



Xie, Yu. 1999. "The Tension Between Generality and Accuracy". _Sociological
Methods and Research_ 27 (3): 428- 435

