**

The Renaissance  
B353 (C929) Fall 1999  
H509 (C938)

** Instructor: | Dr. Wietse de Boer  
---|---  
Office: | CA-503D  
Phone/voice-mail:  | (317) 274-5499  
E-mail: | wdeboer@iupui.edu  
Office hours:  | MW. 12:30-1:30 p.m., and by appointment.  
Classes:  | CA-219, M. 5:45-8:25 p.m.  
  
**[ADDITIONAL COURSE MATERIALS](b353outlin0913.htm)**

**Course description and objectives**

ARenaissance@ is the conventional name for an unparalleled transformation in
late medieval European literature, art, and high culture generally. It is a
crucial chapter in the long tradition that links the culture of Greek and
Roman antiquity with that of early modern Europe. We will study the
development and most important manifestations of the Renaissance in Italy,
with occasional excursions to other areas of Europe. Culture, even high
culture, is never an isolated phenomenon. Accordingly, we will highlight the
socio-political life of cities and courts that formed the backdrop and feeding
ground of the Renaissance. Finally, we will consider the question of why the
Renaissance has been so influential and important in the modern world, and may
still be so for us.

We will use various study methods in this class. Lectures and secondary
readings will provide a basic narrative of the most relevant political,
social, and cultural developments; your command of these will be tested in
exams. However, the best (and ultimately, only) way to acquaint oneself with
the past is the direct study of its primary sources. This will be our other
endeavor: the close reading of some classic texts will allow us to deepen our
understanding of the Renaissance world, as well as develop the basic skills
necessary for the interpretation of any historical source. Students will
practice these skills in presentations, discussions, and papers.

**

Requirements

**

1\. Consistent _attendance_ at lectures and discussions is essential for a
satisfactory completion of the course; two or more unexcused absences will
result in a lower grade. _Participation_ in the class discussions makes up
part of the final grade. Be sure to read the discussion materials in advance;
bring the relevant texts to class.

2\. In the course of the semester students will be required to give a brief
_presentation_ of a reading assignment, and lead the ensuing class discussion.
Topics and dates will be mutually agreed upon during the second class meeting.
Think about your preferred topic and date in advance, but be aware that you
may have to compromise, so have several back-up options ready.

3\. Students must write one paper and take two examinations.

The _paper_ will be based on one of the assigned primary sources; you may
develop the theme of your in-class presentation. You are required to submit a
1-2 page outline of this paper two weeks before the due date of this paper. I
will grade the outline and add comments to help improve your paper. The paper
itself will be 9-10 pages long. All papers are due in class or in my mailbox
on the due date. Late papers will result in a lower grade.

The _exams_ will consist of short identifications and an essay question. The
identifications (of terms and names) will be taken from the reading and
lecture materials. The essay questions will require you to develop a short
historical argument on the basis of reading and lecture materials. The midterm
exam will be in-class, the final will be given during finals week.

Make-up exams and paper extensions will be granted only with a doctor=s
excuse.

Exam and paper due dates:

10/25  | Midterm exam  
---|---  
11/15 |

Outline paper due.  
11/29  | Paper due.  
12/20 | Final exam, 5:45-7:45 p.m.  
  
> > .

4\. Students taking the course for _graduate credit_ will generally be
expected to perform at a higher level than undergraduates. The paper
assignment will have a different format; there will be additional reading
assignments, to be discussed in a few separate meetings with the instructor.

**

Grades

**

The final grade will be determined according to the following formula:

midterm exam  | 25%  
---|---  
paper outline | 5%  
paper | 25%  
final exam | 30%  
participation, presentation | 15%  
  
Plagiarism, cheating on exams, and other forms of intellectual dishonesty will
not be tolerated. They will be dealt with in accordance with general
university policy. If you are unsure what constitutes plagiarism, ask, or
consult the _Indiana University Bulletin, School of Liberal Arts, Indianapolis
Campus, 1998-2000_ , p. 21.

**

Books ordered for purchase

> > **

>>

>> Zophy, _A Short History of Renaissance Europe_ , Prentice Hall.

>>

>> Castiglione, _The Book of the Courtier_ , Penguin Classics.

>>

>> Cellini, _Autobiography_ , Penguin Classics.

> > Bartolom¨¦ de Las Casas, _A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies

>>

>> _

> > Pico della Mirandola, _On the Dignity of Man

>>

>> _

> > Thomas More, _Utopia

>>

>> _

The books listed are stocked at the IUPUI Bookstore. All other assigned
readings will be on reserve at the University Library's Reserve Desk and, as
much as possible, on electronic reserve.

**

Internet use

**

For any communication with the instructor, don=t hesitate to use the E-mail
address provided above.

You can find the text of this syllabus also on the home page of the Department
of History. Additional course handouts will be posted there when needed during
the semester. For access to these materials, please observe the following
instructions:

(1) From off-campus locations, use the internet address for the departmental
home page: http://www.iupui.edu/it/history/History.html

> > (You must use the lower and upper case letters as provided here.)

At the home page:

Click on **Syllabi/Course Handouts

> > **

>>

>> Click on **Fall 1999

>>

>> **

>>

>> Click on **B353, C929

>>

>> **

(2) From any computer in the library, in public clusters on campus, or in
offices on campus:

> > From Windows, click on the Netscape icon. The IUPUI home page will appear.

At the IUPUI home page:

> > Click on **Academics

>>

>> **

>>

>> Click on **Schools

>>

>> **

>>

>> Click on **IU School of Liberal Arts

>>

>> **

>>

>> Click on **Academic Departments

>>

>> **

>>

>> Click on **Department of History

>>

>> **

>>

>> Click on **Syllabi/Course Handouts

**

Click on **Fall 1999

**

Click on **B353, C929

**

You can print in the library or in any public cluster.

What if you can=t access the internet? Ordinarily, we expect students to
access materials on the internet. However, if you absolutely cannot access the
internet either on campus or at home, we will provide you with paper copies.

**

Schedule

**8/30 Introduction: Goals, themes, and organization of the course. The
ARenaissance@: the term and its meaning. **

**

9/6 **No class: Labor Day

**

9/13 The Renaissance and urban culture (lecture)

> > _Reading_ : Zophy, ch. 1-2

>>

>> Dante (discussion)

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Dante, _Inferno_ , canti 32-34 (reserve)

9/20 Socio-economic conditions of the Renaissance (lecture)

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Zophy, ch. 3

>>

>> Boccaccio (discussion)

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Boccaccio, _Decameron_ , Introduction and Day 10, Story 10
(reserve)

9/27 Humanism, Arenaissance,@ and the classics (lecture)

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : J. Burckhardt, _The Civilization of the Renaissance_ , Part
Three: The Revival of Antiquity (reserve)

>

>> Humanist values and dilemmas (discussion)

>

>> _

>>

>> Reading_ : Petrarch, AThe Ascent of Mont Ventoux@ (reserve); Pico Della
Mirandola, _On the Dignity of Man_ , 3-34

10/4 Fifteenth-century humanism between politics and philosophy (lecture)

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Zophy, ch. 5

> > Man and the Natural World (discussion)

>>

>> _

>>

>> Reading_ : Pico Della Mirandola, _The Heptaplus_ , in Id., _On the Dignity
of Man_ , 63-174 (esp. 67-84, and Expositions I, II, IV, and VII).

10/11 The rise of court culture (lecture)

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Zophy, ch. 4

> > Identity and comportment (discussion)

> > _Reading_ : Castiglione, _The Book of the Courtier_ , pp. 31-104.

10/18 The culture of civility (lecture)

> > The role of gender (discussion)

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Castiglione, _The Book of the Courtier,_ pp. 201-42.

10/25 MIDTERM EXAM

11/1 Art and patronage. Guest lecture by Prof. Stephanie S. Dickey, Herron
School of Art

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Zophy, ch. 6

> > The life of an artist (discussion)

>>

>> _

>>

>> Reading_ : Cellini, _Autobiography_ , pp. 15-38, 312-76.

11/8 Visit to Indianapolis Museum of Art (provisional; details to be
announced). Alternative lecture topic: The Italian Crisis

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Zophy, ch. 7-8

11/15 PAPER OUTLINE DUE

> > European Politics: State-Building and Expansion (lecture)

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Zophy, ch. 9

>>

>> Confronting the Other: violence and conversion (discussion)

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Bartolom¨¦ De Las Casas, _A Short Account_ , pp. 1-41, 127-30

11/22 The Northern Renaissance (lecture)

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Zophy, ch. 10

>>

>> Imagining a better society (discussion)

>>

>> _

>>

>> Reading_ : More, _Utopia_ , entire, but esp. pp. 69-132

11/29 PAPER DUE

> > Reformation, education, and science (lecture)

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Zophy, ch. 11-12

> > Christianity and civility (discussion)

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Erasmus, _On Good Manners for Boys_ (reserve)

12/6 The Renaissance as a historical concept: the birth of Amodern man@
(lecture)

> > _

>>

>> Reading_ : Huizinga, AThe Problem of the Renaissance@ (reserve)

12/13 Conclusions. Review for final exam.

12/20 FINAL EXAM 5:45-7:15 p.m.

