#  **Gov 495 (GOV328) Comparative Politics: Europe**

**Summer 2002**  
**Prof. David Penna**

**_Course Description:  _** This course will survey the politics, government
and policies of the major countries of Europe, both West and East. The course
will provide a foundation for understanding the politics of most developed
countries. Among the topics that will be included will be the history,
political culture, government structure, electoral system, party development
and legislative process of each country. The course will conclude with a brief
introduction to the European Union and its influence on both member states and
potential member states.

**_Required Text:  _** Almond, Dalton and Powell, **European Politics Today,**
2nd edition.

**_Course Requirements:  _** The grade in this course will be based on the
following items:

  * Mid-Term Exam (open book, in class)-- 30%
  * Final Exam (take home) 30%
  * Map/Events quizzes 10%
  * Chapter quizzes 15%
  * Presentations/Information Searches 10%
  * Class participation 5%

**_Examinations:  _** There will be two examinations for the course. The mid-
term will be in class and open book essay exam. It will focus on the first six
chapters of the book and class discussion/presentations. While the exam is
open book, it is expected that students should study and prepare for the exam
to be able to do well.

The final exam will be a take home exam. It will focus primarily on the last
unit of the course but some comparisons will need to be drawn using material
learned earlier in the course both relating to theories and concept and to the
three established democracies in Europe.

**_Maps/Events quizzes:_** During the course students will be given
approximately 5 map and historical events quizzes. The students will be asked
to fill in or match answers. For the map quizzes, students will be given an
answer guide to study (i.e. the completed map). For the events quizzes,
students will be able to find appropriate answers in the text.

**_Chapter quizzes:_** Students will be given 11 chapter quizzes, i.e. one for
each chapter in the text. The quizzes will be short multiple choice quizzes
that will be designed to test the students reading of the assigned pages for
that day. Students can drop their lowest quiz grade.Missed chapter quizzes
cannot be made up.

**_Information Searches and Presentations:  _** On certain days during class
time students, working in groups, will be given time to search for information
on certain topics in the Microcase database or on the internet in the
government lab. Each group will then report back to the class on their
findings and post it in the Resources/Links portion of the my.gallaudet.edu
course.

**_Class Procedures:_** Students are expected to show up everyday for
class.Absences or tardiness will prevent students from taking chapter quizzes
and will harm their grade. If students are aware that they will be absent on a
certain day, they should make prior arrangements with the teacher. Note that
the definition of prior mean before something happens.  
Students are expected to read the assigned text everyday and to pay attention
in class. Students are expected to participate actively through answering and
posing questions and working in small groups.  
The professor will provide an on-line version of this syllabus and linked to
each day's reading will be an outline for discussion. You are encouraged to
print off the outline and bring it to class with you. DO NOT just read the
outlines and not read the text--you will not be able to pass the chapter
quizzes if you do so. The outlines are intended to help you organize the
information from the book, assist you in studying for the test, and enable you
to follow class discussion.

**_Office Hours:  _** I will normally be in my office from 7:30-9:00, and 12-1
every day. My e-mail address is David.Penna@gallaudet.edu and my office is HMB
S235L.

**_Reading Schedule:_ _Students are expected to read the assigned pages BEFORE
class on the assigned day. (Note there is a chapter quiz for every assigned
reading)._**

May 20--

  * Introduction to the course, no assigned reading.
  * Information search: How is Europe different from the Rest of the world?

May 21

  * Reading: Chapter 1--[The European Context.](eurcompbackground.html)

May 22

  * Reading: Chapter 2--[Democratic Political Culture and Political Action](eurcomppolcul.html).
  * Information search

May 23

  * Reading: Chapter 3--[Democratic Government](compeaurgovstruct.html)
  * Map Quiz 1
  * Information Search

May 24

  * Reading: Chapter 4--[England](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/david.penna/England.html)
  * Events Quiz 1
  * Information Search

* * *

  
**_May 27--No class-Memorial Day_**

May 28

  * Reading Chapter 5--[France](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/david.penna/France.html)

May 29

  * Reading Chapter 6--[Germany](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/david.penna/Germany.html)
  * Events Quiz 2

May 30  
**Mid-Term Exam**

May 31

  * Reading Chapter 7--[Spain](Spain.htm)

* * *

  
June 3

  * Reading Chapter 8--[Russia](http://facstaff.gallaudet.edu/david.penna/Russia.html)
  * Map Quiz 2

June 4

  * Reading Chapter 9--[Poland](Poland.htm)
  * Events Quiz 3

June 5

  * Reading--Chapter 10--[Hungary](Hungary.htm)
  * Information Search

June 6

  * Reading--Chapter 11--[European Union](EUpolitics.htm)
  * Distribution of Final exam

June 7th

  * No class--work on final exam

* * *

  
June 10th (Deadline) Final exams Due by noon.

