**PA 8500: ISSUES IN PUBLIC-PRIVATE SECTOR COOPERATION**

Department of Public Administration  
University of Nebraska at Omaha  
Omaha, Nebraska 68182  

**Fall Semester 1997**  

Instructor: Dr. Robert Blair  
Thursdays, 5:15 to 7:50 pm, Allwine Hall, Room 303  
E-Mail: [**rblair@fa-cpacs.unomaha.edu**](mailto:rblair@fa-cpacs.unomaha.edu)

**COURSE OVERVIEW**

The delivery of many public services are accomplished through complex networks
of linkages among entities in the public sector, private sector and the not-
for-profit sector. This course introduces students to issues relating to
cooperation between the public and private sectors, and the not-for-profit
sector, in the field of public administration and management. Emphasis is on
examining organizational processes, institutional relationships, and the tools
and techniques of intersectoral cooperation. Such cooperative activities and
arrangements have become an important aspect of contemporary public
administration, most notably in policy development and program implementation.

**COURSE OBJECTIVES**

There are three objectives to the course:

  * Familiarize students with the methods and techniques of intersectoral cooperation, and develop the skills needed to foster, improve, facilitate and administer joint activities between the public, not-for-profit, and private sectors. 

  * Develop awareness of the management implications of increased intersectoral cooperation. Administrative issues, like control, accountability, and efficiency, as well as policy issues, like effectiveness, are involved. Greater involvement by the private sector dramatically alters patterns of public administration. 

  * Learn how public-private cooperation works outside the classroom. Examine and apply public-private cooperation methods in a field or work setting. Focus on the implications and issues of public-private cooperation in a policy, program, or administrative area. 

**COURSE TOPICS**

While many of the readings focus on the process and issues of public-private
cooperation on the national or international level, there will also be
considerable discussion on the state and local level.

This course examines several general topics, including but not limited to:

  * Historic relationship between public and private sectors. 

  * Critical management issues (like accountability and responsibility) pertaining to public-private cooperation. 

  * Function of government in the marketplace (an important public-private cooperation issue). 

  * Public administration trends like third party government and privatization. 

  * The partnership of government and business in public policy implementation. 

**INSTRUCTIONAL METHODS**

People learn in different ways. Accordingly, several learning techniques are
employed in this course. In addition to lectures and assigned readings, there
are structured discussions that follow a graduate seminar format, small group
and focused discussions of readings, a self-directed small group research
project, and independent research.

Since this is a graduate course, lectures are limited in scope. The instructor
will usually summarize and add material not included in assigned readings.
Instead, there will be considerable class discussion and analysis of the
readings. Therefore, students are expected to read the assignments **before**
class and contribute to discussions in a meaningful and scholarly manner.

Several times during the semester there will be small group discussions of
class material. Students are expected to take an active part in these
discussions. The instructor will often provide guidelines to the discussions.
Student participation includes the integration of readings and relevant
professional and personal experiences. Each student will also be responsible
for helping lead one of the class discussions.

This type of learning approach will make the course materials more meaningful
and enjoyable. But it will only succeed if students are prepared for class!

**ELECTRONIC MAIL AND COMMUNICATION**

All MPA students are required to get e-mail accounts or addresses. (Many of
you may already have accounts through UNO or a private firm like AOL.) Some
assignments, class plans, and correspondence will be given or clarified via
e-mail. E-mail is also a good way to contact students and the instructor. If
you need an e-mail account at UNO contact Zuheir Nabulsi 554-3505 at Eppley
Administration Building 110c.

To help facilitate class discussion and interaction a list serve has been
created. Postings on the list serve will be available to everyone in this
class. Students will respond to questions posted by the instructor and can
contact others in class.

To subscribe: send e-mail message to:  
**[majordomo@s-cwis.unomaha.edu](mailto:majordomo@s-cwis.unomaha.edu)**  
leave the subject area blank, then in body of message type:  
subscribe ppcooper "your e-mail address"  

You will receive an acknowledgement if you have successfully subscribed. To
post messages you e-mail to:
[**ppcooper@s-cwis.umaha.edu**](mailto:ppcooper@s-cwis.unomaha.edu)

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS**

  1. Class participation. This is a graduate course and part of the learning experience includes the use of a seminar format for discussion. Students are expected to contribute to class discussion and participate in the lively exchange of ideas and experiences. Discussions, of course, will focus on issues and topics contained in assigned readings. Students are expected to complete reading assignments and prepare for discussion before class. For each assignment this syllabus includes a set of questions that provide a starting point for class discussion. Other questions may be provided in class. 

Because of the participatory nature of the instructional methods, class
attendance is especially important. It is recommended that students inform the
instructor of anticipated absences. Remember, each evening class is equivalent
to a week of day classes.

You will be evaluated for the participation requirement in the following
manner: one-third of the total points is for in-class participation and
discussion, one-third for class attendance, and one-third for list serve
participation.

  2. Research essay. In order to gain exposure to scholarly research in public administration and public policy, students are required to submit one essay (4 to 5 page maximum, doubled-spaced, typewritten) on a topic of their choice that relates to a public, private or not-for-profit cooperation. The essay should focus on a recent research article found in a **scholarly journal** on public administration or public policy. The article should be less than three years old. Several journals can be found in the University Library. Contact me if you are not sure if a specific journal is appropriate. 

The essays should be a critical analysis of the research article and not a
review or summary of its contents. A good essay will incorporate class
discussion, class readings, and the student's personal experience (if
appropriate). One way to analyze an article would be to compare and contrast
findings or conclusions of the author with concepts and ideas discussed in
class.

  3. Case study discussion and paper. Students will read several case studies during the semester. The readings are in one of the required texts (Kettl). Students will be assigned to a small group and discuss one of the case studies in class. A 4 to 5 page, type-written, double spaced paper that analyzes **one of these cases** in terms of class discussion and readings will then be submitted later. The discussion group will help students organize thoughts and generate ideas for their paper. 

  4. Class discussion. Each student, one time during the semester, will be responsible for leading the class discussion. In essence, a student will help facilitate the class discussion for that weeks collection of readings. The format for the discussion is open. You may use traditional seminar format (e.g. a prepared set of discussion questions for anyone to answer), small group discussions, case problems, etc. The discussion will be for approximately 45 minutes. Everyone, of course, needs to prepare for class to support your fellow classmate leading the discussion! 

  5. Group research project. The group research project is an important part of this class. Students will work with a small group of student colleagues on a research project. In general, the project consists of the description and analysis of an issue, topic, policy, or program of state, local or national (or international) interest that pertains to public/private/not-for-profit cooperation. These topics may include, but are not limited to: health care, education, employment, community development, environment, economic development, criminal justice, etc. 

The specific research topic should be of mutual interest to group members. One
approach to a group paper is to have each member focus on one aspect of the
cooperative process. A written project report that integrates the individual
work of the group members will be submitted at the end of the semester. Each
student is required to submit a paper that reflects their contribution to the
project. The paper should be type-written, double spaced and about 10 to 15
pages long.

This research project integrates classwork with the experience of researching
and investigating an actual policy or program area. Since research in public
agencies is usually done in a group setting, a research group project is a
more realistic way to learn about the various components of public
administration. In addition, it will enable the student to learn from
colleagues.

After the identification of topics and the selection of the study groups, the
group will need to meet and plan for the completion of the project. There will
be a couple of times when the group can meet during class time.

Research groups are encouraged to begin their work as soon as possible. In
addition to including a limited number of scholarly journal articles and
policy research reported in books, it may be necessary to incorporate such
tools of public administration research and analysis as personal interviews,
field observations, examination of public documents, and case studies. This
project is not intended to be one that can be completed solely by library
research.

  6. Research project presentation. Students will make a presentation to the class on their research project at the end of the semester. The presentation should be more than a series of speeches, it should be an interactive experience with fellow students that includes audio-visual materials, structured class discussion, role-playing, field trip, guest speakers, etc. The presentations will take about one hour. 

  7. Examination. A comprehensive, written final exam will be given following the completion of reading assignments. The specific format of the examination will be discussed in class, but generally it will be open book. One of the benefits of an in class written examination is that it helps the graduate student prepare and sharpen skills needed for the passing of the comprehensive exams for the MPA degree. 

**GRADING AND STUDENT EVALUATION.**

There are 400 total points for this course. There is no class curve. All
students in this class can receive an A. In order to receive an A+, the
student will need a minimum of 380 points; for an A, 360 points; for a B+, 340
points, for a B, 320 points; for a C+, 300 points; for a C, 280 points; and
for a D, 240 points. The points will be allocated in the following manner:

1\. Class participation. |  50 points  
---|---  
2\. Research essay |  25 points  
3\. Case study |  25 points  
4\. Class discussion. |  50 points  
5\. Research project paper. |  100 points  
6\. Research project presentation. |  50 points  
7\. Examination. |  100 points  
  
Only in extreme cases of hardships will a course incomplete be given.

**TEXTBOOKS**

Ernest R. Alexander. 1995. _How Organizations Act Together:
Interorganizational Coordination in Theory and Practice_. Australia: Gordon
and Breach Publishers.

Donald F. Kettl. 1993. _Sharing Power: Public Governance and Private Markets_.
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution.

Steven Rathgeb Smith and Michael Lipsky. 1993. _Nonprofits for Hire: The
Welfare State in the Age of Contracting_. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press.

These books are available at the University Bookstore.

**COURSE SCHEDULE**

**Aug. 28** \--INTRODUCTION. Begin to identify research groups.

**Sept. 4** \--BASICS OF INTERORGANIZATIONAL COORDINATION (IOC). Is IOC a
product of modern society? Why do we study coordination? Are there some
commonalities in IOC? Read Alexander Chap. 1-3.

**Sept.11** \--STRUCTURES FOR IOC. Why do we need structures for IOC? How can
we coordinate without structure or hierarchy? What is the function of the
boundary spanner? Read Alexander Chap. 4-6.

**Sept. 18** \--THE PROCESS OF IOC. What are some types of interorganizational
networks? Are informal networks effective for IOC? How does the market
function as an IOC structure? Read Alexander Chap. 7-8.

**Sept. 26** \--A MODEL TO FACILITATE IOC. What is a definition of IOC? Can a
conceptual framework improve IOC? What are some of the factors that influence
IOC networks? Read Alexander Chap. 9-10. RESEARCH ESSAY DUE.

**Oct. 2** \--PRIVATIZATION AND COMPETITION IN PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION. What is
the competition prescription? Can market economies really work in the public
sector? Does principal-agent theory improve privatization? Read Kettl Chap.
1-2.

**Oct. 9** \--MANAGEMENT ISSUES OF CONTRACTING OUT. How can we make government
a smart buyer? How can we improve accountability of contractors? Is equity an
issue of contracting out? Read Kettl Chap. 7-9.

**Oct. 16** \--CASE STUDY DISCUSSIONS. What can we learn from these case
studies to improve the management of public-private contracts? What would you
do differently? (Additional questions will be provided.) Read Kettl Chap. 3-6.
RESEARCH GROUPS REPORT ON PROGRESS.

**Oct. 23** \--TOPIC TO BE DECIDED. Readings to be provided. CASE STUDY ESSAY
DUE.

**Oct. 30** \--NONPROFITS AND PUBLIC SERVICES. What has been the traditional
role of nonprofits? How has it changed? What does this changed role mean to
public administration? What is the "contracting regime?" Read Smith and Lipsky
Chap. 1-3.

**Nov. 6** \--MANAGING NONPROFITS. What are some goal differences between
public-nonprofit partnerships? Can these differences be resolved? Who are the
new "street-level bureaucrats?" Can they be managed? Read Smith and Lipsky
Chap. 4-7.

**Nov. 13** THIRD SECTOR AND PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION. How can we improve the
contracting regime? Should we privatize the human services? What are the
implications of a changed nonprofit sector to community and citizenship? What
does that mean to public administration? Read Smith and Lipsky Chap. 8-10.

**Nov. 20** \--EXAMINATION

**Nov. 27** \--THANKSGIVING DAY HOLIDAY

**Dec. 4** \--PRESENTATIONS

**Dec. 11** \--PRESENTATIONS

**Dec. 18** \--RESEARCH PROJECT PAPER DUE

![](line2.gif)

[Return to UNO PA Home Page](pahome.html)

