**

SPEA V522

HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
IN NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS

SPRING 1999

**



Professor James Perry  
IUB-SPEA 410C  
812-855B5971  
E-mail: [perry@indiana.edu](mailto:perry@indiana.edu)  
Web site: <http://www.indiana.edu/~pubadm/index.html>

**

Online Office Hours:** After the semester begins, I will poll the class
regarding good times for online office hours.  
**Bloomington Office Hours:** Thursday, 2-3 pm or by appointment  
**Indianapolis Office Hours:** I expect to be in my Indianapolis office, which
is in the Center for Urban Policy and the Environment, one day a week. I will
also be available on some Wednesdays during the class time listed in the
schedule of classes. Iwill announce my formal Indianapolis office hours at the
beginning of the semester.

**

Acknowledgement:** This course has been developed in collaboration with
Professor Debra Mesch, School of Public and Environmental Affairs, Indiana
University-Purdue University Indianapolis.

**

Contents:  
![](bullet7.gif)**Course Overview and Objectives  
![](bullet7.gif)Texts  
![](bullet7.gif)Class Format  
![](bullet7.gif)Course Guidelines  
![](bullet7.gif)Course Requirements  
![](bullet7.gif)Grading  
![](bullet7.gif)Course Schedule and Assignments  
![](bullet7.gif)Course-Related Websites



![](green and black stripe.gif)



**

COURSE OVERVIEW AND OBJECTIVES

**

Nonprofit organizations are different. They are unlike both private companies
and government in fundamental ways, while similar in other respects. Nonprofit
organizations, like business and government, must rely on effective human
resource management for their long-term success. Unlike the other sectors,
however, those who are attracted to nonprofit organizations are often
motivated in different ways from their counterparts in the private and public
domains. Human resource managers in nonprofit organizations must be concerned
with unique issues of balancing organizational, board, staff, and volunteer
concerns, while also maintaining a committed, motivated, and productive
workforce.

Human resources-that is, paid staff and volunteersCmake the organization what
it is. This course is based on the premise that the distinctive nature of
nonprofits affects the human resource management of such an organization. The
purpose of the course is to provide students working in nonprofit
organizations with a basic understanding of the human resource management
issues facing nonprofits today. Specifically, the course objectives are as
follows:

![](bullet5.gif)  To provide an overview of the human resource management
areas necessary for the productive functioning of nonprofit organizations.

![](bullet5.gif)  To master selected theories and concepts of motivation,
particularly applicable to the management of staff and volunteers in nonprofit
organizations.

![](bullet5.gif)  To examine some of the major human resource issues and
concerns confronting nonprofit managers today.

**



**

![](green and black stripe.gif)



**

TEXTS

**

Two books are required:

Joan E. Pynes, _Human Resources Management for Public and Nonprofit
Organizations_ (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 1997).

Steve McCurley and Rick Lynch, _Volunteer Management_ (Downers Grove, IL:
Heritage Arts Publishing, 1996).

The books have been ordered at the bookstores on the following Indiana
University campuses: Bloomington, Fort Wayne, Gary, Indianapolis, Kokomo, and
South Bend. Pynes may also be ordered from Amazon Books ( and probably other
online book sellers) at the following URL:
[http://www.amazon.com](http://www.amazon.com/). McCurley and Lynch may also
be purchased from the Points of Light Foundation at 1-800-272-8306. When
ordering, refer to publication # 370. The cost is $25 plus $4.95 shipping and
handling. Shipments are made via UPS ground and require about 10 days for
delivery after an order is placed.

Other readings and cases in the syllabus are available electronically from
Errol, an electronic reserve system available through the IUPUI library. These
items are followed by the designation (Errol) in the syllabus. You will be
able to access these resources online as a registered student for the course.

Two nonprofit sector newspapers, the _Chronicle of Philanthropy_ and
_Nonprofit Times_ , may also interest you. Selected portions of them are
available on the web at:

_

Nonprofit Times_ [http://www.nptimes.com](http://www.nptimes.com/)

_

Chronicle of
Philanthropy_[http://www.philanthropy.com](http://www.philanthropy.com/)

**



**

![](green and black stripe.gif)

**



CLASS FORMAT

**

This is a web-based course. I will be able to meet and be available to
students in the vicinity of Bloomington and Indianapolis, but most of our
interaction will be via the internet. Our internet exchanges will also be
asynchronous (that is, not at concurrent times). This characteristic of how
the course will be delivered has advantages and disadvantages. Among the
advantages are that the format gives you a good deal of flexibility about when
you log in and contribute. It also gives you time to prepare thoroughly and
reflect about the issues raised in the readings, cases, and exercises. The
electronic format for our interchanges also provides an opportunity for
everyone to contribute without the constraints of limited time for in-class
discussion and differences in verbal skills.

One of the disadvantages of the format is that we will not enjoy the same
level of intimacy that can be achieved in a seminar format. Feedback among
participants will not be as quick or as rich. My hope, however, is that each
of you will carry on your interchanges with me and your peers recognizing the
need for care and completeness in your communications and the virtues of good
humor. Our communications can (and I hope will) be augmented by phone if that
form of two-way communication seems more appropriate and effective.

My philosophy of teaching is quite simple and I do not see a need to change it
because of the format for this course. I believe that students learn best by
actively participating in the teaching-learning process. Since this is a
graduate course, I consider each of you to be experienced professionals and in
a position to be a valuable resource to each other. You can learn as much from
your classmates as you can from me (this format may magnify the importance of
this view). You will be asked to participate in numerous cases, discussions,
and exercises.

One difference between this course and most others in which you and I have
been involved is that it is our (you _and_ me) first web-based course. Given
our collective inexperience with this format, we will probably need to
exercise more than our usual patience with one another.

**

Oncourse**. Most of our interactions will occur in the context of Oncourse, a
software system that provides a comprehensive set of tools for the creation,
management, and viewing of sophisticated World Wide Web-based teaching and
learning environments. After you register, you will receive a password that
will give you access to the course materials on Oncourse. You can preview
Oncourse prior to registering at
<http://weblab.iupui.edu/projects/Oncourse.html.>



![](green and black stripe.gif)



**

COURSE GUIDELINES

**

Although this course is offered in a distance learning format, it does not
alter our basic responsibilities to one another. It is _your responsibility_
to do the following:

  * Be prepared to contribute each week to the online discussions 
  * Complete assignments on time 
  * Participate in class discussion 
  * Inform me of any problem or situation that may be interfering with your learning or performance in the course 
  * Provide feedback on the strengths and weaknesses of the course in a professional manner

It is _my responsibility_ to do the following:

  * Provide activities designed to accomplish course objectives 
  * Assist in providing an atmosphere conducive to learning 
  * Grade and return assignments in a timely fashion and appraise students of their progress on a regular basis 
  * Respond to student concerns



![](green and black stripe.gif)



**

COURSE REQUIREMENTS

Cases/Exercises.** _Fifteen percent_ of your final grade will be determined by
written case assignments. These cases are designed to provide you an
opportunity to think about how you would handle specific managerial issues.
There is no right or wrong answer for the assignments. Grades will be
determined on how well you support your arguments. All work is to be submitted
on the due date assigned. The written case assignments are designated in the
syllabus. Each assignment should be typed and double spaced. The length of
each case is specified on your course schedule and will vary according to the
nature of the assignment.

**

Human Resource Evaluation Project.** The major assignment for the term will be
an evaluation of human resource management in a nonprofit organization. This
project accounts for _forty percent_ of your course grade. This project is
designed to provide you with direct experience with an existing nonprofit
organization. Your goal will be to gather information from published
documents, interviews, and other sources that permits you to describe and
evaluate human resource management in the nonprofit organization you select.
Your paper should include the following types of information:

  1. Description of the organization, including its mission, size, and types of employees.
  2. Leader and organizational philosophy/approaches to motivation and commitment.
  3. Major human resource management policies.
  4. Assessment of the effectiveness of HRM in the organization, including fit between philosophy and operating policies. 
  5. Specific recommendations for improving HRM.

Please note that it is not necessary to examine an organization with a defined
HR department or director of personnel. This assignment is intended to expose
you to human resource issues as they are handled in the diversity that is the
nonprofit sector, which includes both large and small nonprofit organizations.
If you are presently working in a nonprofit organization, then the assignment
gives you an opportunity to become familiar with how human resources are
managed in an organization with which you are unfamiliar.

Project deadlines:

Organization to be examined (1 page description) |

Week 5  
---|---  
  
Analysis plan (include data you intend to collect, interviews
planned/executed, etc.) |

Week 9  
  
Final Written Report Due |

Week 15  
  


This assignment may be done individually or in pairs. If done in pairs, each
person will receive the same letter grade. I will expect a level of effort
from a two-person project roughly twice that of an individual project. Working
in pairs may be appropriate either if you have a particularly challenging
project in mind that could not be done individually or if you work
particularly well with a peer and enjoy the mutual support.

**

Participation.** Participation is extremely important in this class and
accounts for _forty five percent_ of your grade. Your participation grade will
depend upon the quantity _and_ quality of your contributions to discussions.
Most of the Oncourse discussions will be organized by the topic for a given
week (e.g., Week 2, Strategic Human Resource Management; Week 9, Compensation
and Benefits). This means it will be important for you to login to Oncourse
early in the week (probably Monday) to make your initial contribution to the
discussion. It will be necessary for you to return to the discussion at mid-
week and probably again before the discussion ends on Sunday to review what
others have contributed and follow-up with additional contributions.

**

Requirements for Written Work. ** All written assignments should be clearly
written and well organized. They are to be typed, double spaced, and
proofread. Please do not use binders or covers. All assignments are expected
to be submitted or postmarked by the date due.

You may submit your assignments in several ways: (1) Indiana University campus
mails; (2) U. S. Postal Service; or (3) as an attachment to an e-mail. I
encourage you to keep a copy of what you submit in case the original does not
arrive.

**

Grades of A+/A/A-. ** To receive a grade in the "A" range, you have gone well
beyond the criteria of acceptable graduate work. The organization of your case
is easy to follow, spelling and grammar is correct, and writing style is
effective. Beyond that, your analysis is of such outstanding quality that I am
impressed with your comprehension of the material and the solutions that you
recommend. Not only have all important factors been recognized, but you have
also gone beyond the reading material in writing your analysis.

**

Grades of B+/B/B-.** Generally, acceptable graduate work will be assigned a
grade in the B range. To receive this grade, the organization of your case
must be easy to follow, spelling and grammar must correct, and writing style
must be effective. Your analysis should distinguish between fact and opinion
and avoid excessive rehash of case facts. Your case should also reflect a good
understanding of the material and the solutions that you select should follow
logically from your analysis and evaluation.

**

Grades of C+/C/C-. ** Grades in the "C" range fall below graduate quality.
This grade will be assigned if the case analysis is not well written, did not
address the issues of the case, did not answer the questions asked, or the
analysis is sketchy or superficial.

If your writing is deficient, or if you feel that you need help in enhancing
your writing skills, the Writing Centers or Academic Support Services on
various IU campuses are resources that are available to you. The location and
phone numbers of some of these resources are:

  * IUB--316 N. Jordan-- 812-855B6738 
  * IUPUI--Cavanaugh Hall Room 427-- 317-274-2049 
  * IUSB-- 1726 Hildreth Street (NS453)-- 219-237-4495 
  * IPFW-- Student Academic Counseling Services Office-- 219-481-6814 
  * IUN-- 4th floor of Hawthorn Hall-- 219-980-6502



![](green and black stripe.gif)

**



GRADING

**

The evaluation criteria will be weighted in the proportions below to derive
the final grade:

Written Cases |

15%  
---|---  
  
HR Evaluation Project |

40%  
  
Participation (includes contributions to case discussions and exercises) |

45%  
  
**



**

![](green and black stripe.gif)

**



COURSE SCHEDULE AND ASSIGNMENTS

**

**WEEK 1** |

Introduction and Overview (January 11-17)  
---|---  
  
  |

Pynes, Chap. 1, AHuman Resource Management in a Dynamic Environment@  
  
  |

Philip H. Mirvis, "The Quality of Employment in the Nonprofit Sector: An
Update on Employee Attitudes in Nonprofits Versus Business and Government,"
_Nonprofit Management and Leadership_ , Vol. 3, No. 1, Fall 1992, pp. 23-41
(Errol).  
  
**

WEEK 2** |

Strategic Human Resource Management **** (January 18-24)  
  
  |

Pynes, Chap. 2, AStrategic Human Resource Management@  
  
  |

McCurley and Lynch, Chapter 1, "An Introduction to Volunteer Involvement;"
Chap. 2, "Planning a High-Impact Volunteer Program;" and Chap.15, "Measuring
Volunteer Program Effectiveness"  
  
  |

James Perry and Debra Mesch, AStrategic Human Resource Management,@ in Carolyn
Ban and Norma M. Riccucci, _Public Personnel Management: Current Concerns,
Future Strategies_ (2d ed.), 1997 (Errol).  
  
  |

Exercise: Scanning the Contemporary Work Environment. This exercise will be
posted on Oncourse prior to January 18.  
  
**

WEEK 3** |

Workforce Diversity and Employment Law (January 25-31)  
  
  |

Pynes, Chaps. 3 and 4, AManaging a Diverse Workforce@ and AEqual Employment
Opportunity@  
  
  |

Judith E. Nichols, "Seeking Minority Leadership," _Fund Raising Management_ ,
June 1993, pp. 27-30 (Errol)  
  
  |

Exercise: Is This Unlawful Discrimination? (Errol). Read each of the incidents
in the exercise. Prepare _brief_ answers to questions 3 (a)-(c) in part IV.
This is a written assignment that you are required to submit by January 27.  
  
**

WEEK 4** |

Managing Volunteers: Overview and Framework (February 1-7)  
  
  |

McCurley and Lynch, Chapter 3, "Organizing a Volunteer Program;" and Chap. 13,
"Volunteer-Staff Relations"  
  
  |

Pynes, Chap. 12, AVolunteers in the Public and Nonprofit Sectors@  
  
  |

Case: "Volunteers or Paid Staff" (Errol). This case is for discussion only.
The questions for discussion will be posted on Oncourse prior to February 1.  
  
**

WEEK 5** |

Motivating Volunteers and Staff (February 8-14)  
  
  |

Pynes, Chap. 5, AJob Analysis@  
  
  |

McCurley and Lynch, Chapter 4, "Creating Motivating Voluntary Jobs;" Chap. 12,
"Retention and Recognition"  
  
  |

David Knoke and Christine Wright-Izak, "Individual Motives and Organizational
Incentive Systems," _Research in the Sociology of Organizations_ , Vol. 1
(1982), pp. 209-254.  
  
  |  **

Note:** A brief (1 page maximum) description of the organization you have
selected for your human resource evaluation project is due.  
  
**

WEEK 6** |

Recruiting Volunteers and Staff (February 15-21)  
  
  |

Pynes, Chapter 6, ARecruitment and Selection in the Public and Nonprofit
Sectors@  
  
  |

McCurley and Lynch, Chapter 5, "Recruiting the Right Volunteers"  
  
  |

Case: AExecutive Hiring Dilemma@ (Errol). This case is for discussion only.
The questions for discussion will be posted on Oncourse prior to February 15.  
  
**

WEEK 7** |

Selecting and Hiring Volunteers and Staff (February 22-28)  
  
  |

McCurley and Lynch, Chapter 6, "Screening and Interviewing"  
  
  |

Case: AHiring by Degrees@ (Errol). This case is for discussion only. The
questions for discussion will be posted on Oncourse prior to February 22. BR  
**

WEEK 8** |

Performance Appraisal and Performance Management (March 1-7)  
  
  |

Pynes, Chap. 7, APerformance Evaluation.@  
  
  |

McCurley and Lynch, Chapter 11, "Evaluation, Positive Corrective Action and
Termination"  
  
  |

Case: AWhose Vision Is It, Anyway?@ (Errol). Answer the discussion questions
at the end of the case. This is a written assignment that you are required to
submit by March 3.  
  
**

WEEK 9** |

Compensation and Benefits (March 8-12)  
  
  |

Pynes, Chap. 8, ACompensation@ and Chap. 9, ABenefits."  
  
  |

Steve Werner and Gretchen Gemeinhardt, "What Factors Determine Pay Levels?,"
_Compensation and Benefits Review_ , September-October 1995, pp. 53-60 (Errol)
__  
  
  |

Oster, S. M., "Executive Compensation in the Nonprofit Sector," _Nonprofit
Management and Leadership_ , Vol. 8, No. 3 (1998), pp. 137-151 (Errol).  
  
  |

Steinberg, Richard, "Profits and Incentive Compensation in Nonprofit Firms,"
_Nonprofit Management and Leadership_ , Vol. 1 (Winter 1990), pp. 137-151
(Errol)  
  
  |  **

Note** : The analysis plan for your project is due at this session.  
  
**

SPRING BREAK:** March 13-21  
  
**

WEEK 10** |

Training and Development of Volunteers and Staff (March 22-28)  
  
  |

Pynes, Chap. 10, ATraining and Development.@  
  
  |

McCurley and Lynch, Chapter 7, "Orientation and Training"  
  
  |

Case: "Hungry for Feedback" (Errol). This case is for discussion only. The
questions for discussion will be posted on Oncourse prior to March 22.  
  
**

WEEK 11** |

Leadership and Supervision (March 29-April 4)  
  
  |

McCurley and Lynch, Chapter 8, "Supervising for Maximum Performance;" Chapter
9, "Supervising the 'Invisible Volunteer';" and Chapter 10, "Special
Supervisory Situations"  
  
  |

Robert D. Herman and Dick Heimovics, AExecutive Leadership,@ _The Jossey-Bass
Handbook of Nonprofit Leadership and Management._ San Francisco, CA: Jossey-
Bass, 1994, Chap. 7, pp. 137B153.  
  
  |

Richard M. Cyert, "Defining Leadership and Explicating the Process,"
_Nonprofit Management and Leadership_ , Vol. 1, No. 1, Fall 1990, pp. 29-38
(Errol).  
  
  |

Case: "The Case of the Meddlesome Board Chair" (Errol). This case is for
discussion only. The questions for discussion will be posted on Oncourse prior
to March 29.  
  
**

WEEK 12** |

Boards as a Special Human Resource Issue (April 5-11)  
  
  |

Kevin P. Kearns, "Effective Nonprofit Board Members as Seen by Executives and
Board Chairs," _Nonprofit Management and Leadership_ , Vol. 5, No. 4 (Summer
1995), pp. 337-358.  
  
  |

Cases: ASolving the Ultimate Problem: How to Handle an Ineffective
Chairperson@ (Errol) and "Deadwood: How an Organization Can Deal with
Ineffective Board Members" (Errol). Write a two-page essay that analyzes the
issues in the cases and recommends how the problems they raise should be
resolved. Submit your written analysis by April 7.  
  
**

WEEK 13** |

Risk Management (April 12-18)  
  
  |

McCurley and Lynch, Chapter 14, "Risk Management"  
  
  |

Katherine S. Vargo, "Risk Management Strategies." In Tracy Daniel Connors
(ed.),  
  
  |  _

The Volunteer Management Handbook_. New York: John Wiley  & Sons, 1995, pp.
322-338.  
  
**

WEEK 14** |

Emerging Issues (April 19-25)  
  
  |

Pynes, Chap. 13, AEmerging Issues.@  
  
  |

McCurley and Lynch, Chapter 17, "Some Final Suggestions"  
  
**

WEEK 15** |

Wrap up/Course Evaluations (April 26-May 2)  
  
  |

Human Resource Evaluation Project Final Reports Should be Submitted on or
Before May 3.  
  


![](green and black stripe.gif)



**

COURSE-RELATED WEBSITES



Sites about Human Resource Management

**

HRM Resources on the Net  
<http://www.nbs.ntu.ac.uk/staff/lyerj/hrm_link.htm>

Human Resources Information Management Mall (HRIM Mall)  
[http://www.hrimmall.com](http://www.hrimmall.com/)

Society for Human Resource Management  
[http://www.shrm.org](http://www.shrm.org/)

HRM Links  
<http://www.dnai.com/~conrado/HRLinks.html>

Red Ridge Software  
[http://www.redridge.com ](http://www.redridge.com/)

**

Sites about Employment Law

**

AHI=s Employment Law Resource Center--has HR discussion area and HRM problem
solver.  
[http://www.ahipubs.com ](http://www.ahipubs.com/)

HR Law Index--All Net articles, legal publications and law firm postings
concerning HRM.  
[http://www.hrlawindex.com](http://www.hrlawindex.com/)

**

Sites About Nonprofit Organizations

**

Information for Nonprofits  
[http://www.nonprofit-info.org](http://www.nonprofit-info.org/)

National Center for Nonprofit Boards  
[http://www.ncnb.org](http://www.ncnb.org/)

Nonprofit Resources Catalogue  
<http://www.clark.net/pub/pwalker>

Nonprofit Times  
[http://www.nptimes.com](http://www.nptimes.com/)

Chronicle of Philanthropy _  
_[http://www.philanthropy.com](http://www.philanthropy.com/)

Support Center for Nonprofit Management  
<http://www.supportcenter.org/sf>

**

Sites about Volunteer Issues

**

Points of Light Foundation  
[http://www.pointsoflight.org ](http://www.pointsoflight.org/)

Online Resources for Volunteer Managers  
<http://www.impactonline.org/vv/vonline.html>

Online Resources for Volunteer Managers--Website Resource List  
<http://www.impactonline.org/vv/vonline1.html>

Volunteer Resource Bank  
<http://www.pg.com/docCommunity/volunteer_links>



