  **LAND 240  **  
**HISTORY OF LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE**  
Fall Semester 1999  
Instructor: N.J. Volkman  
Graduate Assistant: Elizabeth McIllrath  
[CLASS PROJECTS](Project%20Topics.html)

**SYLLABUS  **

**I . INTRODUCTION**

The purpose of LAND 240 is to examine the quality of human use of Asian,
African, and European landscapes from prehistory of contemporary times. Our
examination of the past is concerned with three major issues: the
comprehension of specific landscape contexts, the quality of human response to
these landscapes, and design response to cultural and environmental factors.

**II . COURSE DESCRIPTION**

"History of Landscape Architecture" is a general introduction to the history
of human settlement, land use and landscape architecture outside the North
America. The format for the class includes scheduled lectures, scheduled
quizzes and exams, class discussions, and a semester project. Most of the
lectures will be accompanied by a series of slide images that help to
illustrate the lecture content. Occasionally we will view video works to gain
a better understanding of the subject. All of the class presentations are
aimed at building a comprehension of the role of environmental context and
human values in landscape use.  **III . COURSE OBJECTIVES**  

  
By the end of the course individuals should be able to:

  * Recognize how key themes of landscape use have been applied to specific landscapes 
  * Recognize and appreciate different cultural traditions of landscape use. 
  * Recognize distinctive stylistic and functional periods of landscape use. 
  * Identify renowned landscapes 
  * Explain the significance of outstanding works of landscape architecture 
  * Apply principles from the history of landscape architecture to current landscape issues. 

**IV . GRADING REQUIREMENTS AND WEIGHTS**

Final course grades are based upon the following components with their
respective weights:

  
  | Average of all quizzes (except two lowest which are dropped)  | 30%  
---|---  
Exam 1 | 25%  
Exam 2 | 25%  
Project  | 20%  
To receive credit for any quiz, exam or project your graded work must be
returned to the instructor immediately after being reviewed.

**V . REFERENCES**  

  
**_Texts_** : (on reserve in Evans Library and in Technical Reference Center)  

**_Main Text_** : Landscapes in History: Design and Planning in the Eastern
and Western Traditions, Phillip Pregill and Nancy Volkman, **_2nd Edition_**

**_Additional reading on Africa_** : African Cities and Town Before The
European Conquest, by Richard W. Hull, Chapter 2 only. - copies of this
chapter will be available on reserve in the Technical Reference Center.

The handouts used in this course are the property of the instructor. By
handout I mean all materials generated for this class, including, but not
limited to syllabi, quizzes, exams, readings, printed notes, etc. Because
these materials remain owned by the instructor, you do not have the right to
copy handouts, unless I expressly grant permission. You do have permission to
make single copies of all class material available on the internet for your
personal use.

**VI . COURSE SCHEDULE**

Each Monday a brief quiz will be given over the text chapter shown in the
"Readings" column for that week. _All quizzes must be taken on a "min-essay
book" scantron.  _ **WEEK OF** |  **TOPIC** |  **READINGS**  
---|---|---  
August 30 |  Introduction and key themes/ Ancient Europe and Middle East |
Chapter 1, 2 & 3  
September 6 |  Site Planning in Ancient Egypt and Greece |  Chapter 4 & 5*  
September 13 |  Urbanism and Site Planning in the Roman Empire |  Chapter 6  
September 20 |  Urbanism and Site Planning in Medieval Europe |  Chapter 7 & 8
except p. 185-193  
September 27 |  Islamic and African Land Use and Design |  Chapter 8 p.
185-193 Reading in Hull  
October 4 |  Chinese Landscape Design and City Planning |  Chapter 12 p.
287-319  
**OCTOBER 8** |  **FIRST EXAM** |  
October 11 |  Japanese Landscape Design and City Planning |  Chapter 13  
October 18 |  Land Use in Southeast Asia |  Chapter 12 p. 320-339  
October 25 |  The European Renaissance |  Chapter 9  
November 1 |  The European Renaissance |  Chapter 10 ( p. 233-241)  
November 8 |  The Landscape Gardening School/18th and 19th Century City
Planning |  Chapter 10 ( p. 241-257)  
November 15 |  Modern City Planning |  Chapter 10 ( p 257-263) And Chapter 11  
November 22 |  Modern Site Planning |  None  
November 29 |  Modern Site Planning |  None  
**DECEMBER 3** |  **SECOND EXAM** |  
December 15 @ 10:30 |  Exam Return  |  
  


  * Quiz the week of September 6 will also include questions dealing with the content of course syllabus.

**VII . SEMESTER PROJECT**  

  
**_Project description_**

          Your semester project will require that you follow a contemporary issue, related to landscape architecture, in popular literature, such as magazines and newspapers. You are then to relate that issue to what you have learned about the history of landscape architecture in class. 

           You may choose any issue that relates to landscape architecture to follow in popular literature. The only limitation is that the subject under discussion must be presented as an issue in the contemporary landscape. Thus, descriptions of gardens would not be appropriate, since they are presentations about a place rather than a discussion of issues. Some general topical areas in which you would be likely to find issue-oriented articles are; city planning, urban design, environmental issues such as pollution or wild life habitat destruction, urban sprawl, or undesirable site locations. These are general areas--you will need to focus your review to more specific issues or these issues in a specific place. Make sure that the issue you choose is related to landscape, not just to objects out-of-doors in the landscape. 

          You are to then search for and read articles on the issue that you have chosen to follow. These articles must date to the period from July 1, 1999 to the project due date. From all those articles that you read you are to select the four best articles-- with best being defined as those with the most information, the most analysis, and the most balanced discussion of the issue--which you will copy and submit with other material in a report.   
    


The report that you are to write will be an essay with the following four
sections:

  
       **A.** An introduction that describes the nature of the issue that you have been following, any key sub-issues, and a statement of your personal position on the issue
  
**B.** A detailed discussion, which outlines the major pros and cons of the
issue and explains the major discussion points from the articles you have
reviewed. This discussion should also evaluate relevant examples from
landscape history.  
**C.** The essay will conclude with a defense of your personal position on the
issue. This must include; a statement of your own personal conclusions; the
rationale for them; supporting facts or opinions from the articles you have
read (this support will be in the form of a shortened statement of the
information presented in section B); and discussion of how landscape
architectural history influenced your evaluation of the issue.  
**D.** An appendix that contains copies the four best articles you have read.
All of these articles must date between July 1, 1999 and the project due date
--in other words they must be current articles.  
  **Note:** Sections B and C should be the longest part of your report.  

  
All of your written material must be in your own words with citations of the
articles from which any ideas that are not your own are drawn. Citations are
to be in either of two forms, depending on the information available to you:
(Author, date, page, column)

  
(Publication name, date, page, column)  The citation is to be placed at the
end of each sentence that contains the ideas of others. If you wish to cite
more than four articles you may do so by listing those not copied for the
report in a bibliography.

**_Project requirements:_**

  


  * A minimum 800 word typed report
  * Xerox copies of the four best articles with the source and date noted
  * A bibliography of other materials read and cited in your essay
  


                    These materials are to be turned in on 8 1/2 by 11 white paper stapled in the upper left-hand corner, with all pages including the photoduplicated article pages numbered in the order that they are to be read. No report should be in any type of folder or binder. You may include hand drawn illustrations such as maps if they aid your essay. 
**_Project due dates_** (all due at 11:30 A. M.)

  


  Preliminary selection of issue | Oct. 1  
---|---  
Final selection  | Oct. 15  
Project due  | Nov. 19  
**_Grading criteria_** (each will count toward 20% of your final project
grade)

  




  * Quality of issue selected-how closely does it involve the landscape; how complex are the questions involved; etc. 
  * Uniqueness of issue selected-automatic 100% for this criteria if you are the only one to select this issue; 85% if selected by more than two people; 75% if selected by more than four people; 55% if selected by more than seven people. 
  * Quality of articles included with report or in bibliography-automatic 100% if you select high quality articles included in no other report; otherwise grade no higher than 75% 
  * Originality of thought in analyzing the issue 
  * Quality of your writing-- which would include primarily the persuasiveness of your essay, but also technical matters such as spelling, grammar, and punctuation 

Examples of suitable articles will be discussed in class and will be available
for review in the Technical Reference Center.  **VIII . RULES OF THE COURSE**

Participation, in the form of thoughtful comments or questions, is always
welcome. Your education is dependent of your involvement in the class.

Attendance in class is not required or recorded. You are responsible for your
own attendance. Attendance is important, though, because not all of the topics
covered or sites discussed are in the text.

Attendance at quizzes and exams is required, unless you have a documented,
university-accepted excuse. After the regular exam is given slides will not be
available for review so it is to your advantage to take the exam at its
regular time.

There will be no make-up quizzes. If you miss a quiz and have a documented
excuse the absence will simply be excluded in your final grade calculation.

Late projects are not accepted without prior approval, well in advance of the
due date. If you do have a last minute emergency submit the work done up to
that point with a written statement of why it is incomplete. We will then
decide to grade what has been done or give a extension based upon the degree
of completion and the nature of your excuse. You may be requested to document
your excuse.

All final dates for exams will be announced one week prior to their
occurrence. Unless something important happens expect them to be as listed in
the syllabus. Exams cover material up to and including the lecture immediately
prior to its date.

Exams will be returned as soon as we can grade them. **Do not ask about
them!** Exams are returned only during class time. All exams must be returned
to the instructor at the end of the review of the exam in order to receive
credit for that exam.  

According to University policy all work submitted for a grade is the property
of the University, and may be kept by the instructor.

As commonly defined plagiarism consists of passing off as one's own the ideas,
words, writing, etc. which belong to another. In accordance with this
definition, you are committing plagiarism if you copy the work of another
person and turn it in as your own, even if you should have the permission of
that person. Plagiarism is one of the worst academic sins, for the plagiarist
destroys the trust among colleagues without which research cannot be safely
communicated. If you have questions regarding plagiarism, please consult the
latest of the Texas A&M University Student Rules, under the section
"Scholastic Dishonesty."

I reserve the right to adjust course procedures, schedules, and rules if need
arises during the semester.

**IX . DISABILITIES**

The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) is a federal anti-discrimination
statue that provides comprehensive civil rights protection for persons with
disabilities. Among other things, this legislation requires that all students
with disabilities be guaranteed a learning environment that provides
reasonable accommodation of their disabilities. If you believe you have a
disability requiring accommodation, please contact the Office of Support
Services for Students with Disabilities in Room 126 of the Student Services
Building. The phone number is 845-1637.

**X . PREREQUISTITE COURSES**

None

**XI . ESTIMATED COSTS** Text  | $80.00  
---|---  
Notes pencil  | 5.00  
Project  | 10.00  
Scantron  | .15  
  
**XII . OFFICE HOURS**

Nancy Volkman: Room 310, Langford Architecture Center, Building A

Office Hours: Monday through Thursday 8:00-11:15 as posted on the schedule
sheet on my office door.  
Telephone: 845-5041  
E-mail: [nvolkman@archone.tamu.edu](mailto:nvolkman@archone.tamu.edu)  
    


