# PSC 356

  

# Political Conflict

  
Syracuse University London Centre  
Spring 1999  
  
**Provisional Syllabus**  
Instructor: Gavan Duffy  
London Phone: TBA  
Home Page: [ http://web.syr.edu/~gavan/](http://web.syr.edu/~gavan/)  
Office Hours: TBA  
Email: [ gduffy@syr.edu](mailto:gduffy@syr.edu)  

## Course Description

With the demise of the Cold War, regional political conflicts and civil wars
have displaced superpower rivalries as the paramount threats to global peace
and security. Although political scientists have long studied such conflicts,
the ongoing international political transformation has sparked renewed
interest in this area of political sociology. A large number of substantive
questions appear regularly in the scholarly discourse. Representative
examples, which we will address in seminar, include:

  * Why do some conflicts become intractable, or resistent to efforts to resolve them? 
  * Why do some conflicts lie dormant for years or even generations, only to arise again later? 
  * What are the signs of impending conflict that can be used as early warnings by third parties who might intervene to head off violent outcomes? 
  * What conditions promote and inhibit conflict settlements and their implementation? 
  * How does the context of international political and economic cooperation and competition affect the course of conflicts? 
  * Why do people engage in conflicts despite the enormous potential costs to them personally and relatively small personal benefits? 
Syracuse University describes itself as "a student-centered research
university." This means, among other things, that it actively encourages
faculty to bring its research interests and results into the classroom and to
engage students collaboratively in efforts to find answers to questions of
substantive importance. This seminar does just that. Our seminar will survey a
variety of works that pertain to the current research interests of the
instructor. Our readings and discussions of this literature will culminate in
a consideration and critical analysis of the instructor's contributions.

Students will present, both orally and in a written research paper, critical
accounts of the usefulness of theoretical models of conflict processes and of
participation in conflict, as provided by the instructor. By assessing these
models against the available record of a particular political conflict,
students will show where the model adequately explains the course of the
conflict they study, where it fails to explain, possibly how marginal
improvements to the theory might be made, and possibly how wholesale revisions
of the theory might improve our understanding of political conflict. In
essence, then, students' final projects for this course collectively
constitute a retrospective empirical test -- a "retrovalidation" or
"retroinvalidation" of the instructor's theoretical conjectures.

In previous seminars, students have contributed by showing how particular
conflicts cohere with and fail to cohere with the instructor's conjectures.
While the former have contributed to the instructor's confidence in his
conjectures, the latter have shown him where he has needed to reformulate or
elaborate his conjectures. In sum, the experience has proven profitable as a
collaborative learning experience both for the students and for the
instructor. This is our goal.

Taking advantage of our location in the United Kingdom, we will also focus on
the conflict in Northern Ireland. Specifically we will examine processes of
conflict and peace leading to the 1998 Good Friday Agreement and its
implementation. We will examine the provisions of that agreement and the
political events leading that led to it and followed upon it. We will pay
particular attention to the actions of political leaders who have tried to
create peace in this arena of longstanding political leaders. We will invite
outside speakers involved in the production of peace to meet with us
personally to discuss the peace process and its prospects. Their personal
experiences should add color and depth to our understandings of the course
materials.

Classes will be held in seminar format. Students will be expected to have
digested fully the assigned reading material before class, coming prepared
with questions about and commentary on their contents. There will be no formal
lectures, only informal discussions of the reading materials. For the final
few sessions, no readings are assigned so that students can turn their
attention to the preparation of their final papers. During these sessions,
students will deliver oral reports on their works in progress.

Students should come away from the seminar with a deeper understanding of the
processes of political conflict, including reasons for their eruption, the
causes of their intractability, and the means for gaining peacemaking
leverage. Students should also take from the seminar personal experience in
the fundamental processes of social theory construction.

## Grading Criteria

Student grades will be assessed on the basis of class participation,
performance in two oral presentations and on two examinations, and the quality
of the final paper. The weighted distribution of these factors upon final
grades is presented below.

  * Seminar participation: 10%. 
  * First presentation: 10%. 
  * Second presentation: 15%. 
  * First examination: 20%. 
  * Second examination: 20%. 
  * Final paper: 25%. 
The participation grade will be assessed on both the quantity and the quality
of students' participation in seminar. Students who prepare themselves for
class by reading the assigned materials and who actively participation in the
seminar discussions can expect to maximize their participation grades.

Two presentation grades will be assessed. The first is a preliminary
accounting of a political conflict _other than the conflict in Northern
Ireland_ that students will examine in their final papers. Students will
present their early research results during the class sessions of February 8
and February 15. At the end of the semester, students will present the
arguments of their research papers during class. Students who present well-
researched material cogently and coherently and who respond fully to questions
in seminar can expect to maximize their presentation grades.

Again, students' final papers will compare the theoretical model of conflict
processes to a substantive political conflict. Students may select any
particular conflict, subject to the instructor's approval. Students are
encouraged to compare, where appropriate, the processes of the conflicts they
study for their final papers with the processes of the Northern Ireland
conflict studied in class.

## Books

Each student should purchase a copy of each of the following books. Additional
readings listed will be placed on reserve.

  * Charles Tilly. _From Mobilization to Revolution_. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1978. ISBN 07-554851-8. 
  * John McGarry and Brendan O'Leary, _Explaining Northern Ireland_. Oxford: Blackwell, 1995. ISBN 0-631-18349-3. 
The Tilly book surveys the main meta-theoretical approaches to understanding
and explaining collective violence. This overview will helpfully frame the
instructor's contribution, as students will see how it differentially draws
upon these approaches. The McGarry and O'Leary volume will serve as an entry
point into the literature on the conflict in Northern Ireland. It was selected
primarily because of its even-handedness and willingness to consider and
compare a wide variety of explanatory formulations.

## Course Schedule

The schedule below is tentative. We may wish to dwell on certain questions
more deeply, which would compel us to revise our expectations of the depth to
which we would entertain other questions later in the term. Additional reserve
readings may also be identified. Schedule adjustments may also be needed in
order to accomodate guest speakers. Any schedule changes will be announced in
seminar.

**January 18:** Course Introduction. **January 20:** Collective Action.
Tilly, Chapters 1 and 2. **January 25:** Mobilization.      Tilly, Chapter 3.
**January 27:** Opportunity.      Tilly, Chapter 4. **February 1:** Changing
Forms of Collective Action.      Tilly, Chapters 5 and 6. **February 3:**
Conflict Processes.      Gavan Duffy and Nathalie J. Frensley, "Community
Conflict Processes: Mobilization and Demobilization in Northern Ireland." In
James W. Lamare, ed., _International Crisis and Domestic Politics: Major
Political Conflicts in the 1980s._ New York: Praeger, 1991, pp. 99-135.
**February 8-15:** Student Presentations. **February 17:** Revolution and
Rebellion.      Tilly, Chapter 7. **February 22:** Examination Review.
**February 24:** First Examination. **March 1:** Nationalist Discourses.
McGarry and O'Leary, Chapter 1. **March 3:** Green Political Economy.
McGarry and O'Leary, Chapter 2. **March 8:** Unionist Discourses.     McGarry
and O'Leary, Chapter 3. **March 10:** Marxian Interpretations.      McGarry
and O'Leary, Chapter 4. **March 15 and 17:** Spring Break.      No class.
**March 22:** Contemporary Peace Documents.      The Downing Street
Declaration, Appendix A of McGarry and O'Leary.     Analysis, Appendix B of
McGarry and O'Leary.     The Good Friday Agreement, handout. **March 24:**
Explanations from Religion.      McGarry and O'Leary, Chapter 5. **March 29:**
Cultural Interpretations.      McGarry and O'Leary, Chapter 6. **March 31:**
Liberal Explanations.      McGarry and O'Leary, Chapter 7. **April 5:**
Comparative Perspective.      McGarry and O'Leary, Chapter 8. **April 7:**
Explanations and Prescriptions.      McGarry and O'Leary, Chapter 9. **April
12:** Examination Review. **April 14:** Second Examination. **April 19 to
April 26:** Student Presentations. **April 29:** Papers due.      After this
deadline, papers should be mailed to the instructor care of the Department of
Political Science at Syracuse University, Syracuse NY 13244 USA. Late papers
will be penalized. Students who need extra time due to extenuating
circumstances must contract for an incomplete with the instructor.  This
document is available on the world-wide web at [
http://web.syr.edu/~gavan/psc356.html](http://web.syr.edu/~gavan/psc356.html).

