Duke University

Department of Political Science

**PS 93: International Relations**

**Spring 2001**

  
  

Course hours: Mon & Wed 1:10 - 2:00 p.m.
Peter Feaver

Class location: Social Sciences 139
331 Perkins Lib

Office hours: Mon & Wed 2:15-3:15 p.m.
660-4331

or by appointment  


Teaching Assistants: Huang, Teh-yi (th10@duke.edu)

Taran, Sergiy (sergiy.taran@duke.edu)

Van Loo, Jon (jmv3@duke.edu)

Weinberger, Seth (shw5@duke.edu)  
    
    


_Overview of the Course_

The purpose of the course is to provide students with the background and
conceptual tools they need to understand contemporary international relations.
In other words, this course is intended to help students make sense of the
confusing daily stream of headlines coming from around the world.  


The course will introduce students to the wide range of issues that make up
the study of international relations, including the workings of the state
system, the causes of war, the evolving nature of power, the basics of the
international political economy, and special global challenges like the
environment and nuclear proliferation. The course will cover both the military
and the socio-economic aspects of international relations.  


This course is organized around the metaphor of Chinese food. In the
beginning, students will examine the basic ingredients of the study of
international relations. We will consider the actors, goals, means, and
consequences of state interaction -- IR's soy sauce, ginger root, garlic, and
MSG. The rest of the course is designed to give an overview of the breadth and
scope of the wide-ranging field of international relations. Along the way,
students will get a taste of follow-on courses they might choose to take in
international security, international political economy, international law,
American foreign policy, and so on. You might say that this is the "dim sum"
of international relations courses in the department of Political Science. The
fortune cookie dessert will be a look to the future and an examination of some
of the most important issues currently on the international agenda: friction
along civilizational faultlines, global village problems, and current debates
in American foreign policy.

_Requirements and Grading_  


One in-class midterm exam worth 20%  


One take-home midterm exam worth 20%  


One final cumulative in-class examination worth 40%  


The remaining 20% is a Preceptor grade consisting of class participation,
weekly current events quizzes, and a short writing project.  
    
    


_Readings_

The following books are on order at the bookstore:

Steven L. Spiegel, _World Politics in a New Era_ , Second Edition {listed
below as Spiegel, _WPNE_ }  


Robert Art & Robert Jervis, _International Politics: Enduring Concepts and
Contemporary Issues_ , Fifth Edition {listed below as Art, _IPECCI_ }  


Thomas L. Friedman, _The Lexus and the Olive Tree_ , 1 Anchor Edition (Bantam
Doubleday Dell, 2000)  


Readings not included in one of the texts can either be found on e-reserve or
are available online via Duke computers. _These readings are listed in the
syllabus in italics_.  


In addition, I strongly encourage you to read regularly one of the major
newspapers _(New York Times_ or _Washington Post_ ) and/or one of the major
news weeklies ( _Time_ , _Newsweek_ , _U.S. News & World Report_, or _The
Economist_ ). All are available on the WWW.  


The course is designed so that it is impossible to get an A unless the student
is actively keeping up with what is going on in the real world. About half of
the preceptor grade (roughly 10% of the course grade) will be based on current
events quizzes. The quizzes will be drawn from that week's _New York Times_
and from Friedman's _The Lexus and the Olive Tree_. The exams will also ask
you to relate general IR concepts to current events.  


The Spiegel textbook is included because it provides background history and
illustrations. It should _not_ be relied upon, however, as the primary text of
the course. Spiegel is especially unreliable for the theoretical/analytical
concepts. At points, Spiegel defines terms or uses conceptual language in a
way that contradicts the lectures or the other readings. In every such
instance, the lectures or other readings are more authoritative and should be
used instead of Spiegel. Students who read only Spiegel and rely on him to the
exclusion of the other readings will most likely do poorly on the exams. If
you already have a strong historical background, then you may not need to read
Spiegel at all.

**COURSE OUTLINE**

  
  

_CONCEPTS OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS_

1\. **Introduction** Wednesday, 10 Jan

* Introduction, Spiegel, _WPNE_ , pp. 1-26   
    
    


2\. **Anarchy: Domestic vs. international politics** Wednesday, 17 Jan

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Kenneth N. Waltz, "The Anarchic Structure of World Politics," pp. 49-69 

_* Ole Holsti, "Models of International Relations and Foreign Policy,"
Diplomatic History 13, 1 (Winter 1989), pp. 15-43. **THIS IS ONLY AVAILABLE ON
ELECTRONIC RESERVE**_

* Friedman, _The Lexus and the Olive Tree_ , Chapters 1-3   
    
    


3\. **Actors: The nation-state et al.** Monday, 22 Jan

* Chapter 2, Spiegel, _WPNE_ , pp. 29-35 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Jessica Mathews, "Power Shift," pp. 534-546 

_* Robert Keohane and Joseph Nye, "Transgovernmental Relations and
International Organizations," _World Politics_ , October 1974 Available from
Duke computers through library database website - JSTOR_  
    
    


4\. **Goals: National Interest** Wednesday, 24 Jan

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Hans J. Morgenthau, "The Moral Blindness of Scientific Man," pp. 7-16 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , J. Ann Tickner, "A Critique of Morganthau's Principles of Political Realism," pp. 17-29 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Joseph M. Grieco, "Anarchy and the Limits of Cooperation," pp. 70-74 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Alexander Wendt, "Anarchy is What States Make of It," in Art, _IPECCI_ , pp. 75-82 

_* Stephen D. Krasner, _Defending the National Interest_ (Princeton University
Press, 1978), pp. 5-34 **THIS IS ONLY AVAILABLE ON ELECTRONIC RESERVE**_  


* Friedman, _The Lexus and the Olive Tree_ , Chapters 4-6   
    
    


5\. **Instruments: Power** Monday, 29 Jan

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Robert J. Art, "The Fungibility of Force," pp. 245-261 

_* Joseph S. Nye, Jr., "Soft Power," _Foreign Policy_ (Fall 1990), pp.
153-171. **THIS IS ONLY AVAILABLE ON ELECTRONIC RESERVE**_  


6\. **Shaping Forces: Nationalism** Wednesday, 31 Jan

* Spiegel, _WPNE_ , 54-75, begin with "Concert of Europe" 

_* Amitai Etzioni, "The Evils of Self-Determination," _Foreign Policy_ , No.
89 (Winter 1992/93):21-35 Available from Duke computers with advanced search
at the "Academic Index, Expanded" electronic database_  


* Friedman, _The Lexus and the Olive Tree_ , Chapters 7-9   
    
    


7\. **Three images: levels of analysis** Monday, 5 Feb

_* J. David Singer, "International Conflict: Three Levels of Analysis," World
Politics 12, No. 3 (April 1960), pp. 453-461. Available from Duke computers
through_ (www.jstor.org/jstor)  
    
    


8\. **System vs. State** Wednesday, 7 Feb

_* Margaret G. Hermann & Joe D. Hagan, "International Decision Making:
Leadership Matters," _Foreign Policy_ , Spring 1998, pp. 124-138 Available
from Duke computers with advanced search at the "Academic Index, Expanded"
electronic database_

* _reread:_ Art, _IPECCI_ , Kenneth N. Waltz, "The Anarchic Structure of World Politics," pp. 49-69 

* _reread:_ Art, _IPECCI_ , Joseph M. Grieco, "Anarchy and the Limits of Cooperation," pp. 70-74   


* Friedman, _The Lexus and the Olive Tree_ , Chapters 10-12   
    
    


9\. **MID-TERM I** Monday, 12 Feb  
    
    


_THE INTERSECTION OF SECURITY AND POLITICAL ECONOMY: REGIMES AND INTERNATIONAL
COOPERATION_

10\. **Security dilemma and power management** Wednesday, 14 Feb

* Spiegel, _WPNE_ , Security, pp. 487-496 

_* Charles A. Kupchan and Clifford A. Kupchan, "Concerts, Collective Security,
and the Future of Europe," _International Security_ (Summer 1991) 16, No.1,
pp. 114-161, only read through p. 144_ **THIS IS ONLY AVAILABLE ON
E-RESERVES**  


* Friedman, _The Lexus and the Olive Tree_ , Chapters 13-15   


11\. **Three images and the causes of War** Monday, 19 Feb

* Spiegel, _WPNE_ , The World Wars, pp. 81-132 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Robert Jervis, "Offense, Defense, and the Security Dilemma," pp. 184-204   
    
    


12\. **What is International Political Economy?** Wednesday, 21 Feb

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Robert Gilpin, "The Nature of Political Economy," pp. 278-294 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Robert O. Keohane, "Hegemony in the World Political Economy," 

pp. 295-307

* Spiegel, _WPNE_ , Introduction to International Economics, pp. 247-290   


* Friedman, _The Lexus and the Olive Tree_ , Chapters 16-18   


13\. **Globalization** Monday, 26 Feb

* Spiegel, _WPNE_ , Evolution of the Global Economy, pp. 291-328 

_* Joseph M. Grieco and G. John Ikenberry, "Economic Globalization and its
Discontents," available online at
http://www.duke.edu/~pfeaver/grieco_reading.chapter6.htm_

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Robert Wade, "Globalization and Its Limits," pp. 363-381 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Paul Krugman, "Competitiveness: A Dangerous Obsession," pp. 392-402   
    
    


14\. **Regimes and International Cooperation** Wednesday, 28 Feb

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Robert O. Keohane, "A Functional Theory of Regimes," pp. 134-140   


* Friedman, _The Lexus and the Olive Tree_ , Chapters 19-20   


15\. **Ethics and International Relations** Monday, 5 Mar

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Rhoda E. Howard and Jack Donnelly, "Human Rights in World Politics," pp. 30-48 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Margaret E. Keck and Kathryn Sikkink, "Transnational Activist Networks, pp. 547-553   


16\. **International Law** Wednesday, 7 Mar

* Spiegel, _WPNE_ , International Law and Organization, pp. 375-392 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Hans J. Morgenthau, "The Future of Diplomacy, pp. 118-134 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Steven R. Ratner, "International Law: The Trials of Global Norms," 

pp. 554-559  


17\. **International Government** Monday, 19 Mar

* Spiegel, _WPNE_ , International Organizations, pp. 393-428 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Adam Roberts, "The United Nations and International Security, pp. 141-149 

_* Helman and Ratner, "Saving Failed States," _Foreign Policy_ , Number 89,
Winter 1992-93, p. 3-20 Available from Duke computers with advanced search at
the "Academic Index, Expanded" electronic database_

**MID-TERM II: Handed out at end of lecture**

  
  
  
  

_SPECIAL TOPICS IN INTERNATIONAL SECURITY_

18\. **The Cold War As History** Wednesday, 21 Mar

_* Zbigniew Brzezinski, "The Cold War and Its Aftermath," _Foreign Affairs_
Fall 1992 Available from Duke Computers via Pro-Quest on the Duke Library
website - search by title, not author_

* Spiegel, _WPNE_ , The Cold War, pp. 133-186   
    
    
  

**MID-TERM II: Due at beginning of lecture**

  
  

19\. **The Nuclear Revolution** Monday, 26 Mar

* Art, _IPECCI_ , John Mueller, "The Irrelevance of Nuclear Weapons," pp. 205-219 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Robert Jervis, "The Utility of Nuclear Deterrence," pp. 220-228 

* Spiegel, _WPNE_ , Requirements for Deterrence, pp. 497-538   


20\. **The Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction & Terrorism**
Wednesday, 28 Mar

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Kenneth N. Waltz, "Peace, Stability, and Nuclear Weapons," pp. 461-475 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Robert J. Art, "The Danger of NBC Spread," pp. 476-481 

* Spiegel, _WPNE_ , Terrorism, pp. 461-473   
    
    


_SPECIAL TOPICS IN INTERNATIONAL POLITICAL ECONOMY_

21\. **Colonialism and Imperialism** Monday, 2 Apr

* Spiegel, _WPNE_ , North-South Economic Relations: The Challenge of Development, 

pp. 329-372

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Stephen D. Krasner, "Power vs. Wealth in North-South Economic Relations," pp. 308-322   


22\. **Wielding Economic Power** Wednesday, 4 Apr

* _Jesse Helms, "What Sanctions Epidemic," Foreign Affairs 78, No. 1 (January/February 1999), pp. 2-8. Available from Duke computers with advanced search at the "Academic Index, Expanded" electronic database._

* _John and Karl Mueller, "Rethinking Sanctions on Iraq," Foreign Affairs 78, No. 3 (May/June 1999), pp. 43-53. Available from Duke computers with advanced search at the "Academic Index, Expanded" electronic database._   


23\. **Globalization run amok? The Asian Economic Meltdown** Monday, 9 Apr

* Spiegel, _WPNE_ , East Asia, pp. 230-240 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Robert Wade, "National Power, Coercive Liberalism, and "Global" Finance," pp. 482-489 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Jeffrey E. Garten, "Lessons for the Next Financial Crisis," pp. 490-501 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Dani Rodrik, "The Global Fix," pp. 502-507   
    
    


_LOOKING TO THE FUTURE_

24\. **Global Village** Wednesday, 11 Apr

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Garrett Hardin, "The Tragedy of the Commons," pp. 508-513 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Julian L. Simon, "The Infinite Supply of Natural Resources," pp. 514-521 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Thomas Homer-Dixon, "Cornucopians and Neo-Malthusians, pp. 522-524 

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Richard N. Cooper, "Toward a Real Global Warming Treaty, pp. 525-533   
    
    


25\. **Clash of Civilizations** Monday, 16 Apr

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Samuel P. Huntington, "The Clash of Civilizations?" pp. 423-438 

_* Robert Kaplan, "Anarchy," _Atlantic Monthly_ , Feb 1994, pp. 44-76. Located
on the Web at:
http://www.theatlantic.com/election/connection/foreign/anarchy.htm_  


26\. **Ethnic Conflict vs. Virtual War: Kosovo and Beyond** Wednesday, 18 Apr

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Chaim Kaufmann, "Possible and Impossible Solutions to Ethnic Civil Wars, pp. 439-460 

_* Michael Mandelbaum, "A Perfect Failure," Foreign Affairs 78, No. 5
(September/October 1999), pp. 2-8. Available from Duke computers with advanced
search at the "Academic Index, Expanded" electronic database._

_* James B. Steinberg, "A Perfect Polemic," Foreign Affairs 78, No. 6
(November/December 1999), pp. 128-133. Available from Duke computers with
advanced search at the "Academic Index, Expanded" electronic database._

_* Edward N. Luttwak, "Give War a Chance," Foreign Affairs 78, No. 4
(July/August 1999), pp. 36-44. Available from Duke computers with advanced
search at the "Academic Index, Expanded" electronic database._

_* Michael Ignatieff, "The Virtual Commander," The New Yorker, Aug. 2, 1999.
**THIS IS ONLY AVAILABLE ON ELECTRONIC RESERVES**_  


27\. **Challenges for America in the New Millenium** Monday, 23 Apr

* Art, _IPECCI_ , Samuel P. Huntington, "Why International Primacy Matters," pp. 382-391 

_* Richard Bernstein and Ross H. Munro, "China I: The Coming Conflict with
America," _Foreign Affairs_ , March/April 1997, pp. 18-32 Available from Duke
computers with advanced search at the "Academic Index, Expanded," electronic
database_

_* Robert S. Ross, "China II: Beijing as a Conservative Power," _Foreign
Affairs_ , March/April 1997, pp. 33-44 Available from Duke computers with
advanced search at the "Academic Index, Expanded," electronic database_

_* Gerald Segal, "Does China Matter," Foreign Affairs 78, No. 5
(September/October 1999), pp. 24-36. Available from Duke computers with
advanced search at the "Academic Index, Expanded" electronic database._  


28\. **Review** Wednesday, 25 Apr

