## _Natural Systems-Fall '99_

## Project Proposal Menu

# ![](/thumbs/TMERedBay91T.jpeg)

It is 6:36 AM on Thursday, September 5, 2002. This page has served 3073 people
since 07/11/99.

* * *

These are Research Proposals for Natural Systems 1, Fall'99. Please feel free
to browse...

You can [**Input Your Research Proposal**](/nsfall99/nsentry.html) **** , and
then review feedback on this page.

**Peer Review** is a fundamental component of doing science.To help make your
projects more scientifically sound, you are being called upon to put forward
your ideas, proposals, lab packets and final report as well as  provide
feedback to your peers.

**Remember:** Look at the [NS syllabus](/courses/ns1fallsyl99.html) to for
details on the specifics to be included in your proposal. Make sure it is
complete! USe the following as a guide!

**1\. Introduction**

  1. Purpose/Problem. What is your hypothesis? 
  2. What do you plan to accomplish? 
  3. Relevance, if any. Why is this research interesting? 

**2\. Relevance of your research question**

  1. Literature Review--What have others done? 
  2. How does your research relate to a larger question (like the real World)? 

**3\. Materials and Methods**

  1. What is your experimental design? Is it statistically sound? 
  2. Describe important materials and how they will be used. 
  3. Describe other methods. How will you involve the class in your study? Be specific! 
  4. Have you included a **Data Sheet**? 
  5. Include a specific time-line of research execution 

**4\. Results (To be included in your final report)**

  1. Observations 
  2. Tables (numerical data) and figures (graphs, drawings, etc.) when appropriate 

**5\. Discussion & Conclusions**

  1. Interpret your results, explaining why you got the results you did. 
  2. Think beyond the project. What additional questions do you have? 
  3. What suggestions do you have for further investigation? 

#### Natural Systems Research Proposals:

  * [ The Attitudes of People Towards Nature (9/28/00) [ Researcher: Laura Baverman, Noah Applebaum, Michael Davis-Section: Myers ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/TheAttitudesofPeopleTowar.html )
  * [ Draft 3 The effects of household chemicals on plants (10/20/99) [ Researcher: Amy Hall, John Wood, Chris Kolososki, and Matt Howell-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft3Theeffectsofhouseho.html )
  * [ Water Conservation Data Table (10/15/99) [ Researcher: Emily, Katie, Elena, and Megan-Section: Myers ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/WaterConservationDataTabl.html )
  * [ Proposal 1 (2nd topic) Water Conservation (10/15/99) [ Researcher: Emily Janssens, Katie Leith, Elena Merlino, Megan Ruge-Section: Myers ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Proposal12ndtopicWaterCon.html )
  * [ Does the full moon change cravings for chocolate (compaired to other phases?) (10/14/99) [ Researcher: Quincy E. Sarah Y. Jenea S. Leah K. Holly VH. Joy U.-Section: Zinn ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Doesthefullmoonchangecrav.html )
  * [ Draft two: Flower children (10/7/99) [ Researcher: Bethany Fish, Mike Magee, Stephanie Wolfe, Katie Pekarek-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Drafttwo.Flowerchildren.html )
  * [ Weather Forecasting (correction) (10/3/99) [ Researcher: Brad Kalchek, Justin Hamill, Louie Banks, Andy Dooley-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/WeatherForecastingcorrect.html )
  * [ Draft 1: Miami Leaf Drop (10/2/99) [ Researcher: Liz Hauser, Spencer Davis, Marty Pazol, Kristi Gerard-Section: Nicholson ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft1.MiamiLeafDrop.html )
  * [ Is there a difference? Society's definition of beauty vs. Miami University students (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Ali, Joey, Jenny, and Melissa-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/IsthereadifferenceSociety.html )
  * [ Oxford Birds and Feeding Habits (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Lene Martin, Katie Casanta, Malika Kirling, John Heineman -Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/OxfordBirdsandFeedingHabi.html )
  * [ Birth order personality vs. (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Nick, Nikki, Kristy, Lindsey-Section: Myers ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Birthorderpersonalityvs..html )
  * [ Revision to: Draft 2: How swans react to human behavior. (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Matt, Brad, Greg, and Brian-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Revisionto.Draft2.Howswan.html )
  * [ (9/30/99) [ Researcher: -Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/B.html )
  * [ The Effects of a Drought on Water Pollution (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Leslie B, Jackie K, Adam G, David S, Peter K, Matt W-Section: Nicholson ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/TheEffectsofaDroughtonWat.html )
  * [ Weather Forecasting (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Brad Kalchek, Justin Hamill, Louie Banks, Andy Dooley-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/WeatherForecasting.html )
  * [ Freeing Our Brachiopod Brothers From Their Bedrock Confines (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Jenny Germano, Kristin McCartney, Caroline Wagner, Jason Ivaliotis-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/FreeingOurBrachiopodBroth.html )
  * [ How color effects mood (works cited) (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Mazzarini, Schmidt,, Friermood, Myers-Section: Myers ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Howcoloreffectsmoodworksc.html )
  * [ Draft 1, How color effects your Mood (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Dan Mazzarini, Nicole Schmidt, Mike Friermood, Amy myers-Section: Myers ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft1Howcoloreffectsyour.html )
  * [ A Study in the Ecosystems of Aquatic Insects (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Timothy Breihan, Andrew Davis, Christopher Haedt, Michael Loeffelman-Section: Zinn ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/AStudyintheEcosystemsofAq.html )
  * [ Revision/Draft 2: Human Behavior with Relation to the Lunar Cycle (9/30/99) [ Researcher: The Lunar-Mooners: Kate, Danielle, Lauren, Megan, Lauren-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Revision.Draft2.HumanBeha.html )
  * [ Draft 1: Our Water World (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Katie, Elena, Megan, and Emily-Section: Myers ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft1.OurWaterWorld.html )
  * [ Analyzing Sleeping Patterns Between Western Majors and Architecture Majors (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Brooke Drcar, Anne Diehl, Brian Molski, Leslie Roberts-Section: Myers ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/AnalyzingSleepingPatterns.html )
  * [ Lichen Distribution in the Oxford Temperate Deciduous Forest (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Jamie Wells and Max Comisar-Section: Nicholson ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/LichenDistributionintheOx.html )
  * [ Draft 3: The Moon Over Miami: How The Lunar Cycle Affects The Moods Of MU Students (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Brandon Black, Julie Housiaux, Brandy McQueary, Micah Sherman-Section: Nicholson ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft3.TheMoonOverMiami.H.html )
  * [ Draft (9/30/99) [ Researcher: -Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft.html )
  * [ Draft 1 Even the Squirrels are Different (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Mike, Naosuke, Amanda, Jeremy, Lyndsey-Section: Myers ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft1EventheSquirrelsare.html )
  * [ Bug's Life (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Amber Bennett, Andrew Watkins, Sarah Canole-Section: Nicholson ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/BugsLife.html )
  * [ Taste Buds Taste (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Nikki, Leslie, Liz, Molly, and Amy-Section: Nicholson ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/TasteBudsTaste.html )
  * [ (9/30/99) [ Researcher: -Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/A.html )
  * [ THE FACELIFT OF A TREE (9/30/99) [ Researcher: KRISTIE WIDING, ANDREA, ALICIA, ABENI-Section: Zinn ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/THEFACELIFTOFATREE.html )
  * [ Draft 2:Smart Colors (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Marlo Dowell, Laurel Batcheller, Shawn Stickle and Beth Campbell-Section: Myers ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft2.SmartColors.html )
  * [ Draft 2: The Effects of Air Pollution on Area Lichens (9/30/99) [ Researcher: Creighton, Marissa, Mike S.-Section: Zinn ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft2.TheEffectsofAirPol.html )
  * [ Draft 2: How swans react to human behavior. (9/29/99) [ Researcher: Matt Kelly, Brad Hamilton, Brian Foster, and Greg Dutton-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft2.Howswansreacttohum.html )
  * [ Reaction of Human to stimulation of their Sight (9/29/99) [ Researcher: Abby Hoicowitz, Annie McNerney, Lamour Hudson, Rhett McCoy-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/ReactionofHumantostimulat.html )
  * [ Typology of Western College Majors in relation to Architecture/Interior Design Majors (9/29/99) [ Researcher: Nick Frentsos, Lauren Bohl, Sarah Westheimer, Brad Iest-Section: Myers ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/TypologyofWesternCollegeM.html )
  * [ Impacy of Humans on the Domestication of Squirrels (9/29/99) [ Researcher: Laura Dean, Heather Miller, Jill Dann, Cleveland Dodds-Section: Zinn ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/ImpacyofHumansontheDomest.html )
  * [ Draft 1 Tent caterpillars (9/29/99) [ Researcher: Shannon, Kelsi, Matt, Katie, Ervin-Section: Zinn ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft1Tentcaterpillars.html )
  * [ Evaporation at Western Pond as Compared Seasonally (9/29/99) [ Researcher: James Boukalik, Sean Collins, Alec Risch, Drew Vankat-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/EvaporationatWesternPonda.html )
  * [ Draft 2 The effects of household chemicals on plants (9/29/99) [ Researcher: Jonathan Wood Chris Kolososki Amy Hall and Matt H-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft2Theeffectsofhouseho.html )
  * [ Draft 2- The Moon Over Miami: How the Lunar Cycle Affects the Moods of MU Students (9/28/99) [ Researcher: Brandon Black, Julie Housiaux, Brandy McQueary, Micah Sherman-Section: Nicholson ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft2-TheMoonOverMiami.H.html )
  * [ flower children's proposal (9/27/99) [ Researcher: mike magee, katie pekarek, bethany fish, stephanie wolfe-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/flowerchildrensproposal.html )
  * [ Draft 1: Human Behavior with Relation to the Lunar Cycle (9/27/99) [ Researcher: The Lunar-Mooners: Kate, Danielle, Lauren, Megan, Lauren-Section: Cummins ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/Draft1.HumanBehaviorwithRA.html )
  * [ Plant Chat (9/27/99) [ Researcher: Chris Robbins, Tony Wentz, Sarah Shook, Lorri Bazzel-Section: Nicholson ] ](/nsfall99/ProposalArticles/PlantChat.html ) 

**IMPORTANT** : If this page seems to be missing recently added documents,
click the "Reload Page" button on your Web Browser to update the menu.

#### NS 1, Fall 99- The "4-Step Program" and Class Postings

1999-Natural Systems Research Categories Project Ideas Research Proposal Lab
Packet Final Discovery Lab Reports Progress Reports

#### Natural Systems, Discovery Project Submissions

|

#### Search for Submissions Entered....

|

#### Examine Progress Reports .....  
  
---|---|---  
  
#### [Research Ideas](/nsfall99/ideamenu.html)

| [**in the last 10 days**](/RECENT_14400.fdml) | [**visit the Progress Report
page**](/nsfall99/progress99menu.html)  
  
#### [Research Proposals](/nsfall99/proposalmenu.html)  
  
#### [Complete Lab Teaching Packet](/nsfall99/labpacketmenu.html)  
  
#### [Final Discovery Lab Report](/nsfall99/finalmenu.html)  
  
#### [Return to Natural Systems Syllabus](/courses/ns1fallsyl99.html)

####

* * *

Visit the rest of the site!

#### Weather

[ Hurricanes & Tropical
Weather](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/coriolis/hurricanes.html)

[Radar & Severe
Weather](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/coriolis/radarseverewth.html)

[Main Weather
Site](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/coriolis/weathersites.html)

[Numerical
Models](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/coriolis/computermodels.html)

[Midwest Weather](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/coriolis/ohioweather.html) |

#### Discovery Labs

[Moon](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/lab/moonlab.html)

[Frisbee](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/lab/frisbeelab.html)

[Geologic Time](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/lab/geotime.html)

[Earth-Sun](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/lab/sunlab.html)

[Taxonomy](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/lab/taxonomylab.html) |

#### Tropical Ecosystems Courses

[Trop Marine Ecology
Syllabus](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/html/TropEcolSyl.html)

[Tropical Ecosystems of Costa Rica
Syllabus](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/html/TropEcoCostaRica.html)

[Trop Marine Ecology
IMAGES](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/html/TropEcoImages.html)

[Trop Ecosystems of Costa Rica
IMAGES](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/html/TropEcoCostaRicaImage.html)  
---|---|---  
  
#### [Return Home](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/html/index.html)

|

#### [Field Course
Research](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/FieldCourses/FieldCourses.html)

|

#### [Earth Science
Resources](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/html/EarthSci.html)  
  
![](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/Photos/mailmov.gif) Any mail, comments or
suggestions? You can [**Add to my
Guestbook**](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/Guestbook/AddGuest.html),[ **View
the Guestbook**](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/guestbook/guestbook.html)
**** or [**e-mail me
privately**](http://jrscience.wcp.muohio.edu/mail/mail.html) ****.

**Thanks for stopping by!**

