# RHE 309 / TLC 311

## Computers and Writing  
Fall 2001 TTH 12:30-2:00  
FAC 7  

* * *

##  

  
**== the S . y . l . l . a . b . u . s ==**

  
|  |  MOO Project  
---  
**Date** |

**In-Class**

|

**Reading for Next Class**

|

**Homework**  
  
T

Jan 15

| Intro to each other and the course | In _CyberReader_ : Wolley  | Learn your
[UT EID](https://utdirect.utexas.edu/nlogon/eid_suite/suite_entry.wb), get an
[Individually Funded (IF) account](http://www.utexas.edu/cc/account/) that
allows you to publish web pages on UT's server (click "I agree to the Rules,"
log in with EID, then check the box to add CCWF UNIX Services to your
account), and activate your [UT email
account](http://www.utexas.edu/cc/email/). Or, if you choose, you may use
another email account as long as you can access if from the CWRL classroom.
Please also get a zip disk and keep it with you.  
  
TH

Jan 17

|

[Discuss Reading](woolley.htm); go over cheat sheat and log onto
[LinguaMOO](http://lingua.utdallas.edu) (apply for a character).



| In _CyberReader_ : Heim |

Sign up for [class listserv](http://babbage2.cwrl.utexas.edu/cgi-
bin/lyris.pl?enter=rhe309-davis&text_mode=0&lang=english) ; post a brief self-
introduction to the listserv. Tell us who you are and what kind of background
and/or interest (if any) you have with the Net.  
  
T

Jan 22

| [Discuss Reading](heim.htm) ; create a MOO avatar; explore Lingua (@exam +
look). Discuss [Architext assignment](architext.htm) ; sign up for reading
presentations | In _CyberReader_ : Rheingold "Intro to Virtual Community" |
Begin thinking carefully about your architext project  
  
TH

Jan 24

|  NO CLASS: your job is to **make absolutely sure** that your web account is
ready to go: you need to know your URL, your user name and password, and the
ftp address to which you will upload your files. Go through
[these](http://www.utexas.edu/learn/puboptions/personal.html) procedures. If
you hit a snag, go to the help desk **today** to figure it all out.  |  In
_CyberReader_ : Turkle | Find an interesting room in LinguaMOO and post a
description of it on the listserv  
  
T

Jan 29

|

Discuss readings in LinguaMOO--Discussion leader: Davis

Discuss [S/R #1](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/%7Edavis/crs/331/sr.htm)

|  | Write SR #1  
  
TH

Jan 31

|

S/R 1 presentations due (orally in 3 small groups) and hand in hard copy.
Discuss [Architext assignment](architext.htm) and project ideas; discuss
project [proposals](mooprop.htm).



| In _CyberReader_ : Meyer, Lewis, The Mentor |

Write proposal for MOO project and post it to the list  
  
T

Feb 5

|

Discussion leaders: Dwayne Smith and Preston Fick

Workshop: MOO building: [@create $notes and $things, and Dig a
"home.".](create.htm)

[MOO discussion logs](moologs.htm)

| In _CyberReader_ : Harper's _Forum_ |  MOO project  
  
TH

Feb 7

|

Discussion leaders: Philip Quan and Tessa Baird

Workshop: MOO building: more on digging rooms

| In _CyberReader_ : Herring and Rheingold "Teledildonics"  
| MOO project; send a brilliant observation or idea from the reading to the
listserv  
  
T

Feb 12

|

Discussion leaders: Sheetal Patel, Erik Lough, Lisa Davidson

Workshop: MOO building; sketch out design plan; discuss s/r1 paper issues

| In _CyberReader_ : Postman and Paglia; Bolter | MOO project;  
  
TH

Feb 14

|

Discussion leaders: Hans Shinn, Andy Merritt, Stuart Jordan

[Discuss S/R #2](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/%7Edavis/crs/331/sr-tips.htm)

|   | Write S/R #2 on Rheingold or Bolter  
  
T

Feb 19

|

S/R #2 due orally and hard copy



|

In _CyberReader_ : Leslie, and Leary, "The Cyberpunk: The Individual as
Reality Pilot"

| MOO Project; send a brilliant observation or idea from the reading to the
listserv  
  
TH

Feb 21

|

Discussion leaders: Jacob Walker, Suzy Philley

Workshop: MOO building: Look at Tale of Troy and examine Wilson's All In One
Room (audio, graphics, noises, etc.)

|

In _CyberReader_ : Bruckman and Stone  



| Send a note to the listserv updating us on your architext  
  
T

Feb 26

| Discussion leaders: Solape Osoba, Hui Yang, Lauren Patranella, Amy Jew | In
_CyberReader_ : Dibbell  |

MOO Project. Send a brilliant observation from the reading to the listserv  
  
TH

Feb 28

|

Discussion leaders: Christina Teagarden, Dwayne Lawhon

Discuss S/R 3

|   | write S/R #3 on Stone or Dibbell  
  
T

Mar 5

|

MOO Workshop



|   | Prepare architext for peer review  
  
TH

Mar 7

|  [Peer Review MOO project](moo-workshp.htm) |   | Revise architext  
  
  
Hypertext Project  
---  
  
T

Mar 12

|

SPRING BREAK





|   |  
  
TH

Mar 14

|  SPRING BREAK  |



|

  
  
T

Mar 19

|

Architext due. Discuss [EZine and hypertext assignments](zines.htm)

Take a look at these
[EZines](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/%7Edavis/crs/erhet/rstarget.htm#zines) to
get some ideas

|





| Write S/R 3  
  
TH

Mar 21

| No Class (4Cs) |

Library research: Complete Module1 and 2 on
[TILT](http://tilt.lib.utsystem.edu/)



| Send proposal for your individual hypertext project to the list.  
  
T

Mar 26

|

S/R 3 due (hard copy).

Dreamweaver demo (LEADERS: Ade and KaKit); create a test page
([webfolio](webfolio.htm))

Determine [Zine groups](zinepositions.htm).

|

Library research: Complete Module and the follow up on
[TILT](http://tilt.lib.utsystem.edu/) (Take the quiz)



| Send application for a zine position to listserv: lists qualifications and
convince us that you're the right person for this job. Work on hypertext.  
  
TH

Mar 28

|

Intro to HTML (LEADERS: Liliana and Nishant)

FYI: [html tags](http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/kenseito/rhe309/);  [color
codes](http://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/kenseito/rhe309/hexcode.html) (both
courtesy of Kensei Ito)  |

Ch. 1-2 in Faigley's _Longman's Guide to the Web_

Hypertext "essays": Bernstein's ["Chasing Our
Tails"](http://www.eastgate.com/tails/) and LOOK at Mark Amerika's
[Hypertextual Consciousness 1.0](http://www.altx.com/hyperx/htc2.html) (don't
need to read this one; just note structure)



| Work on hypertext.  
  
T

Apr 2

|  Hypertext Structure: go over [Hypertext
Gardens](http://www.eastgate.com/garden/) in class  |

Faigley, Ch. 3-4



| Work on hypertext.  
  
TH

Apr 4

|

Intro to Photoshop (LEADERS: Ya-mei and Basil)

Work on hypertext.

|

Faigley, Ch. 5-6





| Work on hypertext.  
  
T

Apr 9

|

Describe HT project plan and progress to peer partners (groups of 3--15 mins).
Discuss research materials, questions, etc.(15 mins)

At least half the class: Work on hypertext.

| Faigley Ch. 7-9  | Work on hypertext.  
  
TH

Apr 11

|

[Citing Sources](sources.htm) (in text and in Works Cited page); Zine meeting.

Work on hypertext.

|   | Work on hypertext.  
  
T

Apr 16

|

Walk through web page in dreamweaver. Sign up for conferences with me (next
week). zine group meeting. W **ork on hypertext.**

|    | Prepare draft of ht for peer review #1  
  
TH

Apr 18

| [Peer Review #1](ht-wksp1.htm);  |   | Work on hypertext.  
  
T

Apr 23

|

M, T, W: Conferences with me on your hypertext (no class)

|   | Work on hypertext.  
  
TH

Apr 25

|

work on hypertexts

|   | Prepare hypertext for peer review #2  
  
T

Apr 30

|

Course evals. Create [webfolio.htm](webfolio.htm) shell together. Work on
hypertexts. Last minute stuff.





|   | Prepare hypertexts for peer final review.  
  
TH

May 2

| [Final HT peer review](hyp-workshop.htm) |   | Complete peer reviews by
tomorrow morning, 9am. Finish hypertext and webfolio; due by 9am next Thursday
via email to me (that is: email me the URL to your webfolio, which should
offer a link to your hypertext).  
  
TH

May 9

| Webfolios (with hypertext link included) due by 9am |   | ta ta  
  
Bye Bye  
  


[Aims of the Course](309desc.htm#aims)  
| [Course Policy](309desc.htm#policy) | [Materials and
Assignments](309desc.htm#materials)  
| [back to courses](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/%7Edavis/crs/crs.htm)  
---|---|---|---  
  
  
  

