  
**THE NEW POLITICAL ANTHROPOLOGY**  
**ANTH 250, ANTH 650, POL 514    -   TTh 1:35-2:50  LCI 108  (Fall 2000)**  
**Jon W. Anderson ( email:**[ **anderson@cua.edu**](mailto:anderson@cua.edu)
**)**  


Authority and community, persuasion and communication, coercion and loyalties
in transitions to the post-modern "new world order" form the subject of this
course.   It examines cultural constructions of "community" and "identity" in
the contemporary world, ethnic violence, trans-national networks and cultural
heritage politics that have come to comprise the anthropology of politics.
This new political anthropology pays particular attention to organizations and
relations that are problematic for classical approaches to freedom and order,
domination and resistance, religious activism and community, and made all the
more so by the communications revolution.  Special attention will be given to
the social practices of media that foster "imagined" or "virtual" communities.  


Course **requirements** include a schedule of **readings** (4 books and some
articles) for **discussion in class**. There will be a **midterm paper** on
readings to that point. By midterm, students will select and present an
outline of topics for a final **term paper.**  


Required Reading:

Anderson, Benedict. _Imagined Communities: Reflections on the origin and
spread of nationalism_. London: Verso, 1991.

Handler, Richard. _Nationalism and the politics of culture in Quebec_.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1988.

Herzfeld, Michael. _The Social Production of Indifference: Exploring the
Symbolic Roots of Western Bureaucracy_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1992.

Eickelman, Dale F. & Jon W. Anderson (eds.) _New Media in the Muslim World:
The Emerging Public Sphere_.   Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999.  
    
    

What is political anthropology?

Political anthropology is the study of politics "up close," classically in
face-to-face decision-making and authority in small-scale societies. The "new"
political anthropology shifts the topic from primitive/traditional societies
and from decision-making or conflict-resolution to the contemporary world.  It
deals with contemporary "ethnic" politics, fundamentalisms, and with the
mediation of authority and participation as discourses about identity,
authority, community.  It asks how these are socially organized and imagined.
These shifts break with classic dichotomies of political analysis--such as
rational action/primordial sentiment, instrumental/psychological,
interests/ideology--and with speculation that would universalize such
dimensions.  In this course we will focus on transactions in identity and on
the social practices of media in political (public) realms.



What we will do in this course.

This class will operate as a mixture of lecture (usually on Tuesdays) and
seminar (usually on the Thursday meetings); so you should come to class
prepared to discuss readings assigned for that day.  Participation counts for
10% of your grade.  There will be a short paper on a film (20%) due by the end
of September (See below), a midterm (30%) and a research paper or project
(40%) due at the end of the course in lieu of a final.  For the midterm, you
will be asked to develop a comparison or an application of ideas in the first
two books, Anderson's Imagined Communities and Handlers Politics of Culture.
Graduate students must develop a research paper that departs in some
substantial and original way from the assigned readings;  ideally, it should
be part of an eventual thesis project, and necessarily it must be discussed
with me before mid-semester (Oct 11).   You may develop a case study around
current or long-standing issues--such as northern Ireland, the Balkans,
Nigeria, Somalia, European "unification," the reorientations of post-Soviet
Central Asia, Islamic or other fundamentalisms, Israel/Palestine, India,
liberation theology, insurrections and resistance in South America, economic
networks in East Asia or various venues of "cultural" politics in the
contemporary USA--using perspectives and approaches examined in this course.

Undergraduates may do a research paper, or alternatively develop a project
(for presentation in class after Thanksgiving) on imagined or "virtual"
communities that are formed by or around the social practices of media in the
"information age."  Such communities can be found in the "newsgroups" and
special-interest mailing lists on the Internet where people interact, and also
on Websites that attempt the same thing (with different techniques) or
celebrate identities.  Simulated on-line worlds in which people participate
are also eligible.  All students have access to these lists and "groups" where
the sort of processes we will examine in this course can be observed, even
joined. You might want to prepare a project as a Webpage;  if so, it should be
more than a collection of links.  To set up your homepage on the CUA system,
see [Creating a Personal Home
Page](http://infocenter.cua.edu/KnowledgeBank/Tips/personal.cfm) from the CUA
Computing Center.  Note that your homepage is a public document, available
worldwide to Internet users.

We will read and discuss four books (available in the bookstore and in the
library) and some supplementary articles (available in the Anthropology
Department commons room).  Benedict Anderson's _Imagined Communities_ is a
modern classic and provides our point of departure.   Handler's book is a
study of Quebecois ethno-nationalism, Herzfeld's examines supposedly rational
bureaucracy as ritual and symbolic action.  The essays in _New Media in the
Muslim World_ take a bottom-up look at the social practices of expanding
participation in mediated communication that come back to Anderson.



How to contact me

My office hours are Tuesday and Thursday 3:30-5  pm in the Life Cycle
Institute #209; otherwise, I can be found at the Anthropology Department, 10
Marist.  I can always be contacted via electronic mail (to
[anderson](mailto:anderson@cua.edu) on the CUA computing system). This is
preferable to calling the Anthropology Department, for I check my electronic
mail daily. If you don't know how to use electronic mail, the computing center
offers short courses.  




Syllabus



**(AUG 29)   Introduction: Theme and Topics of the Course.

(AUG 31)  Reimagining political authority and community.

READ: **Clifford Geertz, "Thick description: toward an interpretive theory of
culture."  In The Interpretation of Cultures (New York: Basic Books, 1973. pp.
3-30).  See also Part IV for an early statement of a culturalist approach to
the politics of post-colonial "nation-building."    For a more systematic,
theoretical formulation of the parallel interlude in the emergence of western
nation-states, see Juergen Habermas, The Structural Transformation of the
Public Sphere (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1989).  


**(SEP 5)   "Imagined" community, print capitalism.

Read:** Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities (London: Verso, 1991), Chs.
1-3  
_Recommended_ : John B. Thompson, The Media & Modernity (Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1995);  Elisabeth L. Eisenstein, The Printing Press as an
Agent of Change (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979)  


**(SEP 7)   Creoles, vernaculars and "journeys" in the colonial state.

Read:** Benedict Anderson, Chs. 4-7  
_Recommended_ : Lee Drummond.  "The cultural continuum: A theory of
intersystems,"  Man (n.s.) 15: 352-374, 1980.  


**(SEP 12)   Peoplehood: Ethnicity and racism, nationalism and "nature."

Read:** Benedict Anderson, Chs. 8-11  
**Read:** Jon Anderson. "Poetics  & politics in ethnographic texts: A view
from the colonial ethnography of Afghanistan."  In Writing the Social Text:
Poetics & Politics in Social Science Discourse, Richard H. Brown, ed.  New
York: Aldine de Gruyter, 1991.  
Recommended:  
    


**(SEP 14-19)   Mobilization: discursive action

Read:** James C. Scott, "Domination, acting and fantasy."  In The Paths to
Domination, Resistance and Terror.  Carolyn Nordstrom & JoAnn Martin, eds.
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992),  pp. 55-84.  
_Recommended_ : Paul Dresch, "The significance the course of events take in
segmentary systems." American Ethnologist 13: 309-24, 1986.  Jon Anderson,
"Khan and khel: the dialectics of Pakhtun tribalism." In The Conflict of
Tribe and State in Iran and Afghanistan, Richard Tapper, ed.  (London: Croom
Helm, 1983),  pp. 119-149.

**

Read:** Michael W. Foley, "Organizing, ideology, and moral suasion: political
discourse and action in a Mexican town."   Comparative Studies in Society and
History  32:455-487, 1990.  
_Recommended_ : Faye Ginsburg, "Saving America's souls: Operation Rescue's
crusade against Abortion."  In Fundamentalisms & the State,  Martin Marty & R.
Scott Appleby, eds.  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993),  pp.
557-588;  Regina Bendix.  "National sentiment in the nactment and discourse of
Swiss political ritual."  American Ethnologist 19: 768-790, 1992.  


**(SEP 21) Social practices of media

Rent and Watch** "Wag the Dog," "Citizen Kane," or "Z" (available in video
rental stores) and write a 500-600 word (2 page) essay on social practices of
media in political discourse.  Use concepts introduced in the readings to
_identify practices_ (from "reading [or watching] together" to "hidden
transcripts") of representation, persuasion, mobilization depicted in one of
these films.   What is the discourse they depict?  How are media related in a
system?  What kinds of communities (and sub-communities) are imagined?  


**(SEP 26-28)   "Cultural" nationalism

Read:** Handler, Richard.  Nationalism and the Politics of Culture in Quebec
(Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1988).  


**(OCT 3-5)   Ethnic  & sectarian violence

Read:** Peter Loizos.  "Intercommunal killing in Cyprus."  Man 23: 639-53,
1988.  
**Read:** Stanley J. Tambiah, "Reflections on communal violence in South
Asia."   The Journal of Asian Studies 9: 741-60, 1990.  
_Recommended_ :  Anton Blok, The Mafia of a Sicilian Village (New York: Harper
& Row, 1974); Stanley J. Tambiah, "Buddhism, politics and violence in Sri
Lanka."  In Fundamentalisms & the State,  Martin Marty & R. Scott Appleby,
eds.  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993),  pp. 589-619;  Martin
Kramer,  "Hizbulah: the politics of Jihad."  In Fundamentalisms and the State,
Martin E. Marty & R. Scott Appleby, eds. (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1993).



**(OCT 10) Mid-term exam **

Develop a comparison of Anderson's and Handler's ideas



**(OCT 12-17)   Bureaucratic representation

Read:** Michael Herzfeld, The Social Production of Indifference: Exploring the
Symbolic Roots of Western Bureaucracy  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1992).  
**Review:** Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities, Ch. 10.  
_Recommended_ : Berhard S. Cohn, Colonialism and Its Forms of Knowledge: The
British in India (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1996;  Eickelman,
Dale F.  "Intelligence in an Arab Gulf state."  In Comparing Foreign
Intelligence, Roy Godson, ed.  New York: Pergamon-Brassey's, 1988.  pp.
89-114.

  


**(OCT 19)   New intelligentsias & their institutions

Read:** Dale Eickelman. "Mass higher education and the religious imagination
in contemporary Arab societies.  American Ethnologist 19: 643-55, 1992.  
John R. Bowen, "Legal reasoning and public discourse in Indonesian Islam." In
New Media in the Muslim World, Dale F. Eickelman & Jon W. Anderson, eds.
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999)  
Maimuna Huq, "From piety to romance: Islam-oriented texts in Bangladesh." In
New Media in the Muslim World, Dale F. Eickelman & Jon W. Anderson, eds.
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999).  
_Recommended:_ Mehrzad Boroujerdi,   Iranian Intellectuals and the West: The
Tortured Triumph of Nativism (Syracuse, Syracuse University Press, 1996;
Michael M.J. Fisher, Iran: From Religious Dispute to Revolution (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1980);  Arjun Appadurai, "Disjunction and difference
in the global cultural economy."  Public Culture 2(2): 1-24, Spring 1990.  




**(OCT 24) Vernacular politics: new media, new players

###

Read:**  Jenny White, "Amplifying trust: community and communication in
Turkey."  In New Media in the Muslim World, Dale F. Eickelman & Jon W.
Anderson, eds. (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999).  Also:  Dale F.
Eickelman & Jon W. Anderson, "Redefining Muslim Publics."  In New Media in the
Muslim World, Dale F. Eickelman & Jon W. Anderson, eds. (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1999). _

Recommended:_ Annabelle Sreberny-Mohammadi & Ali Mohammadi, Small Media: Big
Revolution: Communication, Culture and the Iraniann Revolution.  Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1994.  Jon W. Anderson, "Conspiracy theories,
premature entextualization, and populat political analysis."  Arab Studies
Quarterly 4(1): 96-102, Spring 1996.  


**(Oct 26) Resistance

###

****Read:** Dale F. Eickelman, "Communication  & control in the Middle East:
Publication and its discontents."  In New Media in the Muslim World, Dale F.
Eickelman & Jon W. Anderson, eds. (Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
1999);  Lila Abu-Lughod, "The objects of soap opera,"  In  Daniel Miller, ed.
Worlds Apart: Modernity through the Prism of the Local (London: Routledge,
1995).



**(OCT 31) Diaspora, exile, and transnational networks

###

Read:** Jon W. Anderson, "Cybarites, knowledge workers and new creoles on the
information superhighway."  Anthropology Today  11(4): 13-15, 1995; Jon W.
Anderson, "The Internet & Islam's new interpreters."  In New Media in the
Muslim World, Dale F. Eickelman & Jon W. Anderson, eds. (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 1999);  Gregory Starrett, "Muslim identities and the great
chain of buying."  In New Media in the Muslim World, Dale F. Eickelman & Jon
W. Anderson, eds. (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999).  
    
      


**(Nov 7)   Transnational networks

###

Read:** M. Hakan Yavuz, "Media identities for Alevis & Kurds in Turkey."  In
New Media in the Muslim World, Dale F. Eickelman & Jon W. Anderson, eds.
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1999).  
_Recommended:_ Aihwa Ong, Flexible Citizenship: The Cultural Logics of
Transnationality (Durham: Duke University Press, 1999; Arjun Appadurai,
"Patriotism and its futures."   In Modernity at Large (Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 1996).  




**(Nov 9) Re-presentations: Globalization at ground level

###

****Read:**   Najwa Adra, "The 'Other' as Viewer: Reception of western and
Arab televised representation in rural Yemen."  In The Construction of the
Viewer, Peter L. Crawford & Sigurojn B. Hafsteinsson, eds.  (Hojbjerg:
Intervention Press, 1996), pp. 255-269;   Lila Abu-Lughod, "The objects of
soap opera: Egyptian television and the cultural politics of modernity."  In
Daniel Miller, ed.  Worlds Apart: Modernity through the Prism of the Local
(London: Routledge, 1995). _

Recommended:_ James L. Watson, ed.   Golden Arches East: McDonalds in East
Asia (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997);  
    


**(Nov 14) Citizenship and its alters

###

****Read:** Chock, Phyllis. "'A Very Bright Line:' Kinship and Nationality in
U.S. Congressional Hearings on Immigration;"  Coutin, Susan.  "Citizenship and
Clandestinity Among Salvadoran Immigrants"  Political and Legal Anthropology
Review 22(2), November 1999.

  


**(NOV 16)   NO CLASS **



**(NOV 21)   Dissent and its suppression

** _Recommended:_ Lisa Wedeen, Ambiguities of Domination: Politics, Rhetoric,
and Symbols in Contemporary Syria (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1999);  Ervand Abrahamian, Tortured Confessions: Prisons and Public
Recantations in Modern Iran (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999);
Mamoun Fandy, Saudi Arabia and the Politics of Dissent (New York: St. Martin's
Press, 1999)  




**(NOV 23) Thanksgiving Vacation **



**(Nov 28-29)   Student Presentations **



**(Dec 5-7)   Student Presentations **



    
  Rev: Aug 31, 2000

