[accessibility instructions for people with disabilities](instructions.shtml)
![skip to content](white_space.jpg) ![skip to timelines](white_space.jpg)  
---  
![the rhetoric of columbine](banner_650_web.gif)[d](banner_d.shtml)  
  
## [syllabus](index.shtml) | [schedule](schedule.shtml) | [columbine
packet](packet.shtml) | [assignments](assignments.shtml) |
[forums](forums.shtml) | [learning record](http://lro.cwrl.utexas.edu)  
  
| Instructor's Name: Bill Wolff | Office Location: FAC 16  
---|---  
Course Hours:  | Classroom Location:  
Unique Number:  | Office Hours:  
email: [**wolffwi@mail.utexas.edu**](mailto:wolffwi@mail.utexas.edu) |  office
phone: 471-2072  
**[DRC Office](http://www.drc.utexas.edu/)** : Parlin 3, 471-6109 | **[Writing
Center](http://uwc.fac.utexas.edu/)** : FAC 211, 471-6222  
  
  
**Required Texts**

  * _Newsweek Magazine. Special Report: Massacre in Colorado._ 3 May 1999.
  * _Time Magazine. The Columbine Effect._ 19 March 2001.
  * Hacker, Diana. _Research and Documentation in an Electronic Age._ Bedford Books, 1999.
  * course packet with readings from:
    * Porter, Bruce, and Beth Nimo. _The Martyrs' Torch_. New York: Destiny Image Publishers, 2000.
    * Bernall, Misty, and Madeleine L'Engle. _She Said Yes : The Unlikely Martyrdom of Cassie Bernall_. New York: Pocket Books, 2001
    * Scott, Darrell, Beth Nimmo, and Steve Rabey. _Rachel's Tears - The Spiritual Journey of Columbine Martyr Rachel Scott_. New York: Thomas Nelson, 2000.
    * Nimmo, Beth, and Debra K. Klingsporn. _The Journals Of Rachel Scott A Journey Of Faith At Columbine High_. New York: Thomas Nelson, 2001.
    * Spina, Stephanie Urso, ed. _Smoke and Mirrors: The Hidden Context of Violence in Schools and Society_. New York: Rowman Littlefield, 2000.
    * Watson, Justin. _The Martyrs of Columbine : Faith, Tragedy, and Politics_. New York: Palgrave, 2002.
    * Epstein, Edward Jay. _News From Nowhere: Television and the News._ Chicago: Ivan R. Dee, 2000; 1973.

**Course Description**

> In this course we will analyze the rhetoric of the murders at Columbine High
School as a way to begin discussing the respresentations, psychology, and
politics of school violence. By using a variety of sources -- magazine
articles, scholarly texts, government documents, news reports, Web sites -- we
will look critically at not only the depictions of school violence, but at how
it is reported, interpreted, and dramatized. Our discussions will lead us to
answer important questions about what I am calling "the rhetoric of
Columbine": What are the implications of the coverage of the murders? What is
the goal of the attempts to categorize the murderers and the victims as
"murderers" and "victims"? What role does fear play in intrepreting the
events? Is there any real cure to school violence? In the end, is "school
violence" really just an artificial term for something else entirely?

>

> Although the course will involve a substantial reading component, our
primary focus will be on your writing. You will write two short papers (4 - 6
pages) and one extended research paper (11 - 15 pages). I'll expect you to
hand in rough and final drafts of each short paper, and three rough drafts and
a final draft of the research paper. You will also complete an essay proposal,
research process essays, and peer responses. It's important for us to
understand that we each have our own interpretation of current events, most
likely because of how we related pr did not relate to what happened in
Littleton, Colorado, and other towns across the country. Ultimately, this
course will challenge us to re-think how we came to believe what we do, and
how the rhetoric of what we see on TV and in the news shapes - and often
distorts - our perceptions of tragic events.

**Objectives**

> **Rhetoric** : Students will develop their ability to look critically at the
way Columbine was represented in various media, and will gain the tools
necessarily to discuss what they observe in rhetorical terms.

>

> **Research** : Students will develop their ability to conduct research in
both the library and on the Internet. They will learn the importance of in-
depth research that uses a variety of sources.

>

> **Critical Thinking, Writing, and Reading** : Students will develop their
ability to analyze events in the media and in the texts they read. Students
will learn to write academic expository texts in which they uses sources --
both scholarly and primary -- to support and further their own ideas on a
subject.

>

> **Technology** : Students develop their ability to read Web pages
rhetorically, which allows students to consider not only what gets said, but
also how it gets said. They will also learn how to use various tools, which
can help them develop their abilities in the other course objectives.

>

> **Collaboration** : Students will develop the ability to work
collaboratively in activities that range from online discussion postings to
peer reviews to in-class discussion.

**Attendance**

> Since writing is an activity, you will be learning by doing and by becoming
more self-aware about what you are doing. For this reason, much of your time
in class will be spent in activities, not in lectures. Therefore, it is more
than usually important that you come to class faithfully and that you
participate in the activities planned. If genuine disaster should befall you
and you must miss a class, please check with other students to find out what
you have missed. _After SIX absences for **any reason** you will fail the
course. After two absences your final grade will drop one full grade for every
absence. For example, if a student has 3 absences, they will receive no higher
than a B in the course; 4 absences no higher than C; 5 absences no higher than
a D. A student is considered late if they arrive after the sign-up sheet has
gone around the room - lateness equals .5 absences._

**Office Hours**

> Office hours are designed for you, giving you a more private environment in
which we may talk about your papers, your performance in class, etc. If you
are unable to see me during my office hours, do not hesitate to make an
appointment to see me at a different time. My schedule is flexible to fit
yours. We will have two required conferences -- the first during Week 10, the
second during Week 14.

**Students with Disabilities**

> The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY.

**Grading**

> Grades in this course are determined on the basis of a **[Learning Record
Online](http://lro.cwrl.utexas.edu)** , which accompanies a portfolio of work
presented both at the midterm and at end of term. These portfolios present a
selection of your work, both formal and informal, plus ongoing observations
about your learning, plus an analysis of your work development across five
dimensions of learning: confidence and independence, knowledge and
understanding, skills and strategies, use of prior and emerging experience,
and reflectiveness. This development centers on the major strands of work in
the course: rhetoric and composition, research, technology, critical thinking,
and collaboration.

>

> Late coursework will be factored into your final grade in the following way:
for every 3 late assignments, your final grade will be lowered by one full
letter grade.

>

> Final grades for the course are: A, B, C, D, and F.  
  
  
  
---  
  
* * *  
  
  
  
syllabus  
schedule  
columbine packet  
assignments  
forums  
learning record |  last updated 2 May 2002  
(C) 2001 by Bill Wolff  
[wolffwi@mail.utexas.edu](mailto:wolffwi@mail.utexas.edu)  
<http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~wolff/>  
  

