 St. Lawrence University  
 Department of Government

  ** _Government 361: Contemporary U.S. Foreign Policy_**

 Professor Karl K. Schonberg  
 Fall 2001

Office Hours: 208 Hepburn.  Wednesday 11:00-1:00, Thursday 12:00-2:00 and by
appointment.  
Phone: office: 229-5434  
E-mail: [kschonberg@mail.stlawu.edu](mailto:kschonberg@mail.stlawu.edu)

**Overview:**   American foreign policy since the end of the cold war has been
in a period of transition, as U.S. leaders have been forced to reevaluate
their nation's role in a changed international system.  This course will offer
students the historical, theoretical, and political context necessary to an
understanding of this unusual moment in the history of American foreign
relations.  The first part of this course will examine a variety of
contemporary issues and actors in U.S. foreign relations, including the
constraints of the domestic political context, and the roles of the major
institutional players involved in the making of foreign policy.  The second
part will consider and critique current U.S. foreign policy toward East Asia,
Russia, Europe, Latin America, Africa, and the Middle East.  The third part
will examine current and prospective U.S. foreign policy as it relates to a
variety of substantive issues, including arms control, military intervention,
globalization and trade, the environment, and international law.  The final
class session will consider the future of American foreign policy.

**Requirements:** Four **short papers (40%)** will be completed by students.
These should be typed essays of roughly 4-5 pages in length.  The first of
these must be submitted by September 24; the second by October 15; the third
by November 5; and the fourth by  December 10.  These papers should present
the author's reactions to class readings assigned for the day they are
submitted, and must be handed in at the beginning of class on that day.  They
are not intended to be research papers, though some reading on the subject
beyond the assignment listed on the syllabus is strongly encouraged.  Most
importantly, these papers must present a thoughtful and opinionated commentary
on the issues being examined.  A **research paper of roughly 18-20 pages
(35%)** will be due on Friday, December 21.   A detailed preliminary **outline
of this paper (10%)** , including thesis statement and bibliography, will be
due on Thursday, October 25.  This outline should be approximately six pages
in length, double-spaced.  **Class participation (15%)** is expected to be
informed, thoughtful, and frequent.   At a minimum, I expect you to be in
class, having completed and carefully considered the assigned reading, and
prepared to engage in discussion.

**Texts:**   The following required texts are available for purchase at the
bookstore:

  * Glenn P. Hastedt, _Annual Editions:   American Foreign Policy, 01/02_.  Dushkin/McGraw-Hill, 2001.
  * Robert J. Lieber, _Eagle Rules? Foreign Policy and American Primacy in the 21st Century_.   Prentice Hall, 2002.
  * Jerel A. Rosati, _The Politics of United States Foreign Policy_ , 2nd Edition.  Harcourt-Brace, 1999.
  * Eugene R. Wittkopf and Christopher M. Jones, _The Future of American Foreign Policy_ , 3rd Edition.  St. Martin's, 1999.

 Students will also be expected to read a major newspaper daily; the _New York
Times_ is available at the bookstore, though you are encouraged to read the
national daily newspaper of your choice, in print or online.

    Also note that clicking on the weekly subject headings below will link you to additional internet resouces on these topics.

* * *

**_I.   The Institutional Context_**

September 3:  _Introduction_

September 10: _[Historical Context and the Role of the
Presidency](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/links2.html)_  
    Rosati, 13-42; 65-148.   
    Annual Editions, 130-133. 

September 17: _[The Role of Congress, the Judiciary, and the
States](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/links2a.html)_  
    Rosati, 303-374.   
    Lieber, 47-69.   
    Annual Editions, 118-129; 159-165 

 September 24: _[Defense, Intelligence, and the State
Department](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/links3.html)_  
    Rosati, 149-201; 213-252.   
    Wittkopf, 279-282.   
    Annual Editions, 134-145. 

**Short paper #1 must be submitted on or before September 24.**

 October 1: _[Political Culture, Public Opinion, and the
Media](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/links4.html)_  
    Rosati, 375-414; 505-52.   
    Lieber, 16-46.   
    Annual Editions, 100-108; 151-158.   
        Film:  _Wag the Dog_ (1997)   
    
    
  

**_II. Regional Issues_**

 October 8: _[East Asia](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/links5.html)_  
    Wittkopf, 192-214.   
    Lieber, 194-213.   
    Annual Editions, 63-77.   
    _Supplementary reading to be provided._

 October 15: _[Europe and Russia](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/links6.html)_  
    Wittkopf, 160-91.   
    Lieber, 70-132.   
    Annual Editions, 38-62; 146-150. 

**Short paper #2 must be submitted on or before October 15.**

 October 22: _[The Middle East](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/links7.html)_  
    Wittkopf, 215-223.   
    Lieber, 152-193.   
    Annual Editions, 78-85   
    _Supplementary readings to be provided._

**October 25 (Thursday):   Research paper outline/thesis
statement/bibliography due in Hepburn 102 by 4:00 p.m.**

 October 29: _[The Developing World](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/links8.html)_  
    Wittkopf, 224-266; 279-282.   
    Lieber, 133-151; 214-240.   
    Annual Editions, 86-97.   
    
    
  

**_III. Substantive Issues_**

November 5: _[Proliferation and Arms
Control](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/links9.html)_  
    Wittkopf, 295-312.   
    Lieber, 282-298.   
    Annual Editions, 206-224.   
    _Supplementary readings to be provided._

**Short paper #3 due on or before November 5.**

 November 12: _[Ethnic and Regional Conflict and Military
Intevention](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/links10.html)_  
    Rosati, 201-212.   
    Wittkopf, 283-94; 313-20.   
    Lieber, 241-281.   
    Annual Editions, 32-37; 114-117; 186-205. 

**November 17-25: Thanksgiving Recess**

November 26: _[Trade and
Globalization](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/links12.html)_  
    Rosati, 253-276.   
    Wittkopf, 321-56; 105-12.   
    Lieber, 299-323.   
    Annual Editions, 166-186. 

December 3: _[The Environment and International Law and
Institutions](http://it.stlawu.edu/~ksch/links13.html)_  
    Wittkopf, 140-48.   
    Lieber, 324-352.   
    _Supplementary readings to be provided._

December 10: _The Future of U.S. Grand Strategy_  
    Rosati, 577-84.   
    Wittkopf, 22-38; 46-82.   
    Annual Editions, 17-31. 

**Short paper #4 must due on or before December 10.**

**December 21, 11:30 a.m.: Research Paper Due in Hepburn 208**

* * *

**Research Paper Guidelines**

 For your paper due December 21 you will be expected to critically examine an
issue of your choice in contemporary American foreign relations.  In writing
these papers, you are encouraged to ask whether an organization or policy in
which you are interested could or should be changed for the better.

 This format is suggested only as a guide.  So long as it deals with the
subject matter of the course broadly defined, the argument of the paper is
your choice, and I encourage you to examine an issue that interests you in a
creative way.

 This is an upper level research paper.  Very significant evidence from a
variety of scholarly sources (journals and texts) is expected.  Evidence from
newspapers, magazines, and web sites will also be of value in many cases, but
this material should be seen only as a complement to extensive research and
evidence from scholarly sources.

Consult with me early and often as you consider possible topics and begin to
write.  I can't tell you what to write about, but I will give you my opinion
of ideas you may have, and possibly suggest other approaches to the topic you
want to discuss.  I'll be happy to meet with you during my office hours or by
appointment for this purpose, but please feel free to call me at home as well
if you have a question or idea you'd like to discuss.  This assignment
requires you to assert your thoughts and opinions about a particular topic in
the news in a knowledgeable way, and to support your argument with very
substantial research.  In many cases, you will find it useful to begin your
research by consulting periodicals like the
_[Economist](http://www.economist.com)_ , _[Foreign
Affairs](http://www.foreignaffairs.org)_ or _[Foreign
Policy](http://www.foreignpolicy.com)_.

 As you begin to write, your first and foremost concern should be, "what is my
argument?"  Do not start to type until you know what your paper is about and
you have a clearly formulated thesis statement.  This should be one sentence,
stating concisely and specifically the point your paper will be trying to
prove.  It should be a debatable point (a good thesis is not obvious or self-
evident), which declares your opinion in precise detail.  This statement
should appear very early in your paper--ideally in the first paragraph--and
every sentence that follows should be intended to prove it.  Outline your
argument carefully and in detail before you begin writing, and after letting
the reader know what you intend to prove, let them know how you intend to
prove it in a few sentences.  Do not spend time on general introductory or
concluding paragraphs which are only loosely related to your thesis.

 Proofread your essay carefully before you submit it, or better still, have
someone else read it and critique it.  No matter how well you write, any paper
will benefit from a trip to the writing center.  Note that proofreading and
spell-checking are not the same thing, and both are required.  You are not
being graded primarily on style, but a disjointed, muddled presentation can
very definitely make your argument unclear and ineffective, for which you will
lose points.

 Provide citations if you directly quote a source, paraphrase an argument
found elsewhere, or refer to factual information which is not common
knowledge.  Citations may be parenthetical in the paper's text, footnotes, or
endnotes.  Form is your choice; I have no preference as long as it is
consistent throughout the paper.  Citations should include (or refer to a
bibliographical reference which includes) the author's full name, title of the
work, publisher and date of publication, and page number.  Citations from the
Internet should provide, in a footnote or endnote, the long site name listed
in the location box of your browser.

 Your paper will be graded on the coherence of your argument and the
effectiveness with which it is asserted and proven.  It will not be graded on
the amount of material you include.  These papers are expected to be roughly
18-20 pages in length, but this is only a guideline, not a requirement.  If
you feel you have made your case concisely and effectively, do not feel
compelled to write more, make the fonts or margins bigger, or otherwise change
your paper to get onto the next page.  Use 12 point type, and one inch margins
on the top, bottom, and both sides of the page.  Number your pages, and start
counting with the first page of text..

 Papers must be submitted to Hepburn 208 no later than 11:30 a.m. on December
21.  Papers submitted after that time will be considered late.  Extensions
will be given only in cases of very serious illness or family emergency.
Computer problems are not an acceptable excuse.  No extensions will be given
on December 21 under any circumstances.  Late papers will be penalized one
half grade (.5 on the four-point scale ) per day late.  
    
    
  

**Short Paper Guidelines**

 You will be expected to hand in four short papers reacting to assigned course
readings over the course of the semester.  Only one paper may be submitted for
credit before September 24; one more between then and October 15; one more
between October 15 and November 5; and one more between November 5 and
December 10.  The first of these papers must be submitted no later than Monday
September 24; the second by Monday, October 15; the third by Monday, November
5; and the fourth by Monday, December 10.

 Please note, however, that you may hand in any of these papers earlier, which
means the topics and due dates are largely up to you.  While the first paper
must examine one of the aspects of U.S. foreign relations examined in the
first four weeks of class, for instance, the choice of subjects within that
period is yours--though if you wish to write about Congressional activism in
recent foreign policy, you must hand the paper in on September 17, since that
is the day we discuss the role of Congress.

 Beyond these requirements, you are encouraged to think and argue creatively
about any aspect of an assigned subject which interests you.  If you wish to
write about U.S. policy toward Russia, for example, you must hand your paper
in on October 15--since that is the week in which we'll discuss that issue--
but you are free to write about democratization, trade, the dispute over the
ABM treaty, or any other aspect of current U.S. policy in that region.

 These papers should be roughly 4-5 pages (double-spaced) in length.  They are
not required to refer to any additional research beyond the assigned readings,
though your argument will invariably be stronger if you consult one or two
additional texts, articles, web sites, etc., and you are strongly encouraged
to do so.  As with the longer paper described above, these papers should begin
with a focused, coherent thesis and be organized throughout to prove that
point.  They should reflect a careful examination of the _entire_ reading
assignment for that week, and should argue a point which reflects the
student's agreement, disagreement, or expansion upon some aspect of that
material.   Think of this assignment as an invitation to ask what you consider
to be a useful discussion question about a given week's topic, and to compose
your own answer to that question.  You are also strongly encouraged to use
this assignment to criticize points made in the texts with which you disagree.

 The structure and composition of these essays is very much your choice, and
you should make every effort to think and write creatively about the topics
raised in the readings.  You should also feel free to contact me at any point
before these essays are submitted with questions or ideas you'd like to
discuss.

 These papers must be handed in at the beginning of class on the day on which
the reading assignment you are critiquing is to be discussed (if you wish to
write a paper on the subject to be discussed in the week October 1-5, for
example, you must submit that paper on Monday, October 1).  Late papers will
be penalized .5 per day late, as described above.  The standards for editing
and style described above also apply.  
    
    
    
    


