---  
| |



**[Homepage](Default.htm)        [World History
Syllabus](WorldHistorySyllabus.htm)           [World History
Questions](worldhisques.htm)**

**Bottom**

![fountpen.wmf \(1458 bytes\)](fountpen.jpg)
![307731.jpg \(30847 bytes\)](307731.jpg)                       ![Pcclone.wmf
\(5362 bytes\)](Pcclone.jpg)**

****World History Style Sheet and Instructions for Paper, History 110A**

**As its authors explain, the main goal of _Discovering the Global Past_ is to
encourage students just beginning to study world history to practice history
in the same way as professional historian do, that is, to examine primary
sources in order to answer questions about the past. (Wiesner, p. xii) By
primary sources, we mean original sources, which can be written documents, or
objects from material culture (pictures, sculptures, technology, etc.), as
well as oral records, that date from the period under study. This is the most
exciting aspect of the historian =s work!**

**In the brief (4-5 pages) paper which you will write for this course, you
will use the evidence in a given chapter of _Discovering the Global Past_ to
answer the central question(s) posed in the chapter. The authors provide you
with plenty of assistance and clues in answering the question(s) the evidence
you are studying raises. In most chapters, the questions are restated
concisely in the final paragraph of the  AQuestions to Consider@ section. If
you have difficulty identifying which questions you need to address in your
essay, please do hesitate to ask me.**

**In answering the questions posed in your chapters, just as you answer the
study questions I hand out to you, you should build some kind of argument or
interpretation. This means that rather than offering a rambling Astream of
consciousness@ essay, you must build a structure into your paper. As a rule,
this will mean that your papers should begin with an introduction in which you
concisely state the problem or question(s) you are seeking to solve, your
thesis or general argument outlining your answer (s) and the paper=s general
organizational plan. Next, in what is called the body of the essay, you
explain your argument, and offer evidence to support it. Again, the paper
should not ramble. Each paragraph must have a topic sentence, and the topic
sentences should relate to each other and carry the reader point-by-point to
the end of the paper. The final part of the essay, the conclusion, you should
sum up your argument, restate your answer to the question(s) {i.e., your
thesis} and in general conclude the paper.**

**In this paper, it is important that you offer your own thoughts about the
problems you are studying. The evidence in the chapter, and the information
and hints authors offer, is sufficient for you to answer the questions they
raise. There is no need for you to consult outside sources. Rather, you need
to think about the evidence, and devise your own answers. By the same token,
the authors = text purposely does not contain the answers; therefore, there is
no need for you to quote heavily or paraphrase the text in your papers. **

** **

**Remember to finish a draft of your paper by the due date marked on the
syllabus. Plan to revise the paper before your hand in the final draft! Also,
the paper _must be typed, including the draft!_**

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

**Writing Hints**

**In theory, most of you have studied basic English grammar and style before
you came to Cal. State Fullerton. Below are a few reminders. If you are
worried about your English or your writing ability, remember that the
University Learning Center (Lower Level of McCarthy hall, Room 33) can help
you. They have drop-in hours, Monday through Thursday, 8:30-7:00, and Fridays
8:30-noon. Also, try reading Strunk and White, _The Elements of Style_.**

**1\. All sentences must have a subject and a predicate, which usually means a
noun and a verb. Sentences which lack one of these elements are incomplete,
and called Asentence fragments.@**

**2\. Independent and dependent clauses containing a subject and a predicate
should not be attached in the same sentence unless they are linked by words
such as Aand,@ Aor,@ Abecause,@ Abut,@ Atherefore,@ Aalthough,@ Athus,@ or
Atherefore.@ Long sentences containing many clauses run together are called
run on sentences and should be broken up.**

**3\. All paragraphs must contain a topic sentence. Every sentence in the
paragraph should relate to the topic sentence. Sentences which do not relate
to the topic sentence belong in separate paragraphs. As a rule, one or two
sentences are not enough for a complete paragraph. Conversely, paragraphs that
run the length of a page or more are probably too long and ought to be broken
up.**

**4\. Your papers should be typed, double spaced and contain 1 " margins on
all sides.**

**5\. Indent five spaces at the beginning of each paragraph. Do not put more
space between paragraphs than you have between lines. That purpose (to tell
you that a new paragraph is beginning) is served by the indentation.**

**6\. Make sure your verb tenses are consistent. Do not change from simple
past to present or conditional (would, would have done) or future from line to
line.**

**7\. Avoid writing in the passive (or indirect). A good indicator of whether
or not you are using the passive is when you have the word Aby@ in your
sentence (as in Athe book was written by the author@). Almost all of the time,
thoughts can be better expressed using active phrasing (Athe author wrote the
book@).**

**8\. Vary your sentence structure from time to time. Begin sentences with
dependent clauses on occasion ( ABecause the author needed to earn a large
royalty in order to pay the rent, he wrote the book quickly@ instead of AThe
author needed to earn a large royalty. He needed to pay the rent. So he wrote
the book@).**

** **

**9\. Make sure that the objects of your pronouns are crystal clear. When in
doubt, restate the original noun or reorganize the sentence. Example: AThe
vicious monsters struggled with the soldiers. They used their armor to win the
battle.@ To whom does Athey@ in the second sentence refer?**

**To Top** **

**  
---|---|---

