

_University of Minnesota_ |  History of Medicine  
---|---  
  
[Home](home.htm)  


[The Program](program.htm)

[Faculty](faculty.htm)

[Graduate Studies](gradstudies.htm)

[Undergraduate Studies](undergrad.htm)

[Graduate Students](students.htm) [](degrees.htm)

[For Medical Students ](medstud.htm)

[Events Calendar](events.htm)

[Minnesota Medicine](minnesota.htm)

[Links](links.htm)

|  
Undergraduate Studies

 **Undergraduate Minor in the History of Medicine**

Undergraduate students may earn a minor in the history of medicine. The minor
consists of at least twelve semester credit hours that meet these criteria:

1\. Six hours must include the introductory survey of the history of medicine
(HMed 3001, 3002).

2\. The remaining hours may be from any course offered by the History of
Medicine Program

For further information and to file your individual program design contact the
Director of Undergraduate Studies, [Dr. Jennifer L.
Gunn](mailto:gunnx005@tc.umn.edu), 510 Diehl Hall, (612) 624-1909.

**Undergraduate Courses**

**HMed 3001. Health Care in History 1** **** (3 credits)
[Eyler](mailto:eyler001@tc.umn.edu)  
This course is the first semester of a two semester introduction to the
history of disease and to the social and intellectual history of modern
European and American medicine. It is designed to be part of a general liberal
arts education, and it presupposes no special technical knowledge of the
biomedical sciences. The two semesters form a chronological sequence (HMed
3001, 3002), but either may be taken separately. The focus of HMed 3001 is
from classical antiquity through the first third of the nineteenth century. We
will explore how some of the basic concepts of Western medicine came into
being and investigate the practice of physicians, surgeons, midwives, and some
of the alternative health care providers. We will also study the role of
institutions and of social and economic change in the development of health
care in Europe and America. During this semester the histories of bubonic
plague and of smallpox provide opportunities to consider the changing paterns
of disease and death and the human response to major epidemics.  
**HMed 3001 is Writing Intensive and meets Liberal Education Requirements:
Historical Perspective & International Perspective** **.**

**HMed 3002. Health Care in History II.** (3 credits)
[Gunn](mailto:gunnx005@tc.umn.edu)  
An introduction to the intellectual and social history of European and
American medicine and health care in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.

**HMed 3040. Human Disease and the Environment in History.** (4 credits)
[Eyler](mailto:eyler001@tc.umn.edu) _  
_ The changing relationship of human health and the environment. The course
will examine the ways in which human-induced environmental changes have
altered our experiences with disease and our prospects of health.

**HMed 3401. Early History of Medicine: The Classical Tradition.** (4 credits)
[Eyler](mailto:eyler001@tc.umn.edu)  
The early history of medicine from its emergence in the ancient civilizations
to the mid-seventeenth century, including the relation of medical thought to
prevalent diseases and to anatomical and physiological knowledge.

**HMed 3402. Health Care in Modern History: 1650-1850.** (4 credits)
[Gunn](mailto:gunnx005@tc.umn.edu)  
The effect of the Scientific Revolution on western medicine. Thomas Sydenham
and the concept of distince diseases, new chemical and mechanical theories of
medicine, rise of medical teaching, pathological anatomy and definition of new
diseases, impact of chemistry and physics on medicine in early 19th century,
cell theory, discovery of anesthesia, sectarian medicine in the United States.

**HMed 3403. Health Care in Modern History: 1850 - present** (4 credits)
[Gunn](mailto:gunnx005@tc.umn.edu)  
Developments in western medicine and public health from the mid-nineteenth
century to the present. Medicine's increasing reliance upon science and
technology, evolution of hospitals, specialization, biomedical research,
organization of health care delivery. Shift of emphasis from infectious to
chronic diseases, changing explanations of disease and responsibility of
health.

**HMed 3055. Women, Health and History** (4 credits) [
Gunn](mailto:gunnx005@tc.umn.edu)  
This seminar investigates women's historical roles as healers, patients,
research subjects, and health activists. Using secondary literature, diaries,
biographies and archival materials, students will have latitude within the
seminar format to explore individual interests. Topics to be covered include:
views of gender and the body; reproduction and childbirth; mental health;
nursing; women physicians, public health reformers; the Black Women's Health
Movement; alternative practitioners; disparities in diagnosis treatment,
research, and health careers; and the Women's Health Initiative. The course is
intended for mid-upper level undergraduates. It does not require any previous
work in history or history of medicine. [Click here to see
syllabus](http://www.med.umn.edu/history/3055-syll.htm)  
**HMed 3055 meets Liberal Education Requirements: Historical Perspective &
Cultural Diversity.**

