* * *

##  Progress Report

* * *

**[Home](6950_7752.html)**

|

**[Syllabus](6950_7752syllabus.html)**

|

**[Research  
Questions ](rquestion.html)**

|

**Progress Report**

|

**Data**  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
  |



**Department of Teaching and Leaning Professional Ties Research Team Report  
Prepared by: Lisa C. Yamagata-Lynch  
May 09, 2002**

> > >  
>>>

>>> **Overview**  
>  As a response to the request of the current interim chair of the Department
of Teaching and Learning Don Kauchak, I am preparing this progress report
regarding the professional ties research that Claudia Conner (T &L; Master's
student), Ursula Sorensen (T&L; doctoral student), and myself were involved
during the 2002 spring semester. In this brief report I will explain what we
have accomplished as a research team thus far.

>>>

>>> **Background  
>  ** We began this research as part of the 6950/7752 course parameters. I
offered this course during the 2002 spring semester, and the primary goals in
the course was to examine the following:

>>>

>>>   1. professional networks of T&L; community members--including instrument
development, data collection, and data analysis,

>>>   2. knowledge management activities within the department--including
instrument development, data collection, and data analysis,

>>>   3. tracking the sociocultural evolution of the department and what role
socially mediated artifacts take within our everyday work--including initial
instrument development and data collection.

>>>

>>>

>>> To meet the above goals in my class, we explored several theoretical
frameworks including the broad literature in professional network analysis,
knowledge management, and sociocultural theory.

>>>

>>> Then my students and I studied the literature on survey development. Once
my students were ready to become involved in the survey development we
developed the T&L; Professional Ties Survey during the month of January and
March (due to the Olympics there were no productivity during the month of
February). The survey is attached in this report as [Appendix
A](final_ties_survey.pdf).

>>>

>>> We distributed and collected the survey during March. While we were
waiting for the surveys to be turned in, in class my students and I examined
the literature on qualitative research and interview techniques. After we
collected the completed surveys, we began the analysis process. During March
to April we developed semi-structured interview questions regarding
professional ties. The interview questions are attached to this report as
[Appendix B](interview_questions.pdf). We conducted these interviews and
transcribed them during the month of April. In class, we shared our interview
transcripts and examined themes prevalent in all interviews.

>>>

>>> **Survey**  
>  The T &L; Professional Ties Research Team distributed 30 surveys to T&L;
faculty and administrative assistant mailboxes. 16 surveys were completed and
turned in to the research team. Of the 16 surveys, 9 surveys were completed by
clinical faculty, 5 by tenure-line faculty, and 2 by administrative
assistants.

>>>

>>> Appendix C ([descriptive statistics](tie_strength_mean.pdf) and
[graph](tie_strength_graph.pdf)) presents the distribution of average
professional tie strength between T&L; department members and other community
members. The professional tie strength ranged from 0 to 5 where 0 was the
weakest tie and 5 was the strongest tie. The descriptive statistics and the
bar graph indicate that T&L; department members sharing strongest professional
ties with department secretaries (4.00), students in class (4.00), within
department colleagues (3.81). The least ties were with business sectors
(1.00), funding agencies (1.69), and professional organizations (2.75).

>>>

>>> Appendix D ([descriptive statistics](contact_frequency_mean.pdf) and
[graph](contact%20_frequency_graph.pdf)) presents the distribution of average
contact frequency between T&L; department members and other community members.
The possible response for contact frequency were 0-none, 1-once a year,
2-three to four times a year, 3-every other month, 4-once a month, 5-two to
four times a month, 6-two to four times a week, and 7-daily. The descriptive
statistics and the bar graph indicate that T&L; department members having most
frequent contact with department secretaries (6.03), within department
colleagues (5.88), students in class (5.19). Department members reported to
have least frequent contact with business sectors (0.86), funding agencies
(0.81), and professional organizations (2.38). Overall, professional ties and
contact frequency were positively correlated within the data we collected from
our sample.

>>>

>>> The findings of the qualitative portion of the survey are presented as
[Appendix E](survey_qualitative_findings.pdf). Appendix E lists the following:

>>>

>>>   * activities that enhance the professional growth of T&L; faculty and
administrative assistants,

>>>   * resources or tools that T&L; faculty and administrative assistants
reported they use to maintain professional ties,

>>>   * resources or tools that T&L; faculty and administrative assistants
reported they thought ought to be more readily available.

>>>

>>>

>>> Please examine the items that correspond to the above categories in
Appendix E. Additionally, please note that the sequencing to which the items
are presented has no significant meaning.

>>>

>>> **Interviews  
>  ** The T&L; Professional Ties Research Team conducted a total of 6
interviews including 3 clinical faculty and 3 tenure-line faculty. We are
still in the midst conducting a thematic analysis of the interview
transcripts. [Appendix F](code_draft.pdf) presents our initial attempt in
identifying overarching themes in all interviews. T&L; faculty, who we
interviewed, expressed concerns regarding the following areas:

>>>

>>>   * department structural issues,

>>>   * department leadership issues,

>>>   * department communication issues,

>>>   * department goal related issues,

>>>   * student related issues, ¡¤ existing frustrations.

>>>

>>>

>>> Please examine subordinated themes related to the above meta-themes in
Appendix F.

>>>

>>> **Future Direction of Research**  
>  Both of my students involved in this research wish to continue this study
as independent studies over the summer. Thus, we intend to continue our
interview analysis and conduct focus group interviews with T &L; faculty and
administrative assistants during the summer.

>>>

>>>  
  
---|---  
  
* * *  
  
_Last updated: May 9, 2002 by [Lisa Yamagata-Lynch](mailto:%20Lisa.Yamagata-
Lynch@ed.utah.edu)_  
  


  

>  

