**Seminar for Teaching about East Asia**

Spring 2001



Prof. Stephen Averill

History Department, Michigan State University



_Contacting the Instructor:_             Office hours: M, W, 1-3 p.m. Office
phone: 517-355-3417; Home phone: 517-332-6139; Fax (History Dept.):
517-353-5599. E-mail: averill@msu.edu.



_Course Overview_             The seminar is intended to provide a broad
overview of the history and cultures of the East Asian countries of China,
Japan, and Korea. Because the topical and chronological scope of the material
to be covered is so great, and the time available is so limited, it will be
impossible to provide comprehensive or detailed coverage of any given topic or
region. Instead, the emphasis will be on familiarizing teachers with major
concepts and trends, and on acquainting them with resources that they can use
to deepen their own knowledge in the future.



_Attendance and Participation Policy_   Each participant is required to engage
in 30 contact hours. If a participant must miss class for an acceptable reason
(such as illness or coaching), the participant must make up the contact hours.
The form of the make-up is at the discretion of the instructor, but the
substitute contact hours will be linked to the course. Seminar members will
also be expected to prepare for and to participate actively in the seminar
sessions; as part of their responsibilities, participants may be asked to
prepare and present brief oral reports on current events and/or useful
pedagogical materials and resources.



_Snow days or Emergency Days_     If school is cancelled in the school
district in which the seminar meets, the seminar will also be cancelled and
the class session will be made up. If there might be confusion about the class
cancellation, the instructor will call the Indiana University East Asian
Studies Center to inform them of the situation. Participants in the seminar
may then call the following toll-free number to find out if the class will be
held: 1-800-441-EASC.



_The Teacher Implementation Plan (TIP)_                     All participants
must develop a TIP for use at their respective schools. As a minimum, each TIP
should include the following items: An explanation of what opportunities you
will have to teach about Asia next semester (level, subject area, hours of
instruction); three lesson plans (one each for China, Japan, and Korea); a
brief essay on the pedagogical philosophy that underlies your choices; an
explanation of how you will apply the seminar to your own teaching; an
extensive resource list citing books, periodicals, videos, and websites
related to the lesson plans. More detailed information will be provided in
class.



_Stipends_             Upon completion of the 30 hour seminar and submission
of a satisfactory implementation plan, each participant will receive a stipend
of $300. During the following school year, the participant’s school
will receive up to $300 for the purchase of teaching resources. This $300 is
intended for the school at which the participant is employed. **If the
participant changes schools, it is the participant’s responsibility to
inform the Indiana University East Asian Studies Center, in order that the
stipend may be processed correctly**. At the end of that school year, the
participant will receive an additional stipend of $200 upon submission of a
report describing the success of classroom implementation and suggestions for
improvement.



_Graduate Credit_             Participants who wish to receive graduate credit
for the course from Indiana University will be asked to complete additional
requirements. Details will be provided by the instructor.



_Materials_             Copies of the following books and other materials will
be made available to all seminar participants. Additional materials may be
distributed in handout form from time to time during the seminar:



Rhoads Murphey, _East Asia: A New History_ , 2nd edition. This is the newest
edition of one of the standard college textbooks that covers the entire span
of East Asian history.



Richard Kim, _Lost Names_. A novel/memoir about a child and his family living
in Korea during the time when it was a colony of Japan.



Rae Yang, _Spider Eaters_. A memoir of a Chinese woman living through the
period before and during the Cultural Revolution.



Elizabeth Bumiller, _The Secrets of Mariko_. A account of a year in the life
of a contemporary Japanese housewife, as told by an American journalist.



_To Live_. A videotaped version of an award-winning Chinese film by the well
known director Zhang Yimou. The film focuses on the experiences of a Chinese
family during the period from approximately the late 1940s down into the
1970s.



SPICE materials: _Mapping Asia_ and _Demystifying the Chinese Language_. SPICE
(Stanford Program on International and Cross-Cultural Education) is a non-
profit educational program at Stanford University that since 1976 has produced
a wide range of curriculum materials for use by elementary and secondary
school teachers. Two of their curriculum units will be distributed to you;
copies of a number of other units will be available for you to examine.





**OUTLINE OF CLASS SESSIONS**



**Note:** In addition to the topics and activities outlined below, time will
be set aside during most class periods for brief discussions of current
events, useful websites, and classroom implementation of topics presented.
There will almost certainly be other video viewings in the latter part of the
course in addition to those already listed below.



**January 25             Session 1\. Introduction: Lands & Peoples of East
Asia**



            **Topics** : Introduction to course and requirements; self-introductions of participants; introduction to East Asian geography, peoples, and languages.

**Video** : _Misunderstanding China_.

**Reading Assignment** : No reading will be assigned before class; SPICE units
on _Mapping Asia_ and _Demystifying the Chinese Language_ will be distributed
and discussed briefly in class.



**February 1             Session 2\. East Asia’s Ancient
Civilizations**



            **Topics:** Political/cultural overview: The Neolithic in East Asia; the first historical states (Shang, Zhou, Qin, and Han in China; Yamato, etc. in Japan, etc.); the Silk Road; development of early political ideas, bureaucracy, Mandate of Heaven, etc.; China’s political/religious traditions: Confucianism, Taoism, Buddhism.

            **Video:** Selection from _The Confucian Tradition_.

            **Reading Assignment:** Rhoads Murphey, _East Asia: A New History_ , Chapts. 1-4, 



**February 8             Session 3\. Imperial China**



            **Topics:** Political/cultural overview of China’s mid- and late-imperial history (Tang, Song, Yuan, Ming, and early Qing dynasties); notions of dynastic cycle, “Central Kingdom”-tributary system, etc.; cultural overview: Buddhism vs. Neo-Confucianism; literati culture and the gentry; civil service examinations; notions of family/kinship.

            **Video:** _China’s Cosmopolitan Age: the Tang_.

            **Reading Assignment:** Murphey, _East Asia_ , Chapts. 5-8 (to p.161).



**February 15             Session 4\. Early Japan and Korea**

            **Topics:** Political/cultural overview of the early history of Japan and Korea (including the Heian, Kamakura, Ashikaga, and early Tokugawa periods in Japan, and through much of the history of the Yi Dynasty in Korea); political styles and dynamics of rule; extent of Chinese influence; Shinto and Buddhism. 

            **Video:** _Shinto: Nature, Gods, and Man._

**Reading Assignment:** Murphey, Chapts. 9 (material on Korea, pp.174-87)-11,
13.



**February 22-24             Session 5\. East Asian Civilization through Art**

            **Topics:** Slide presentation and lecture by an outside speaker on some major traditions of artistic expression in East Asia. The classroom presentation will take place as usual on Thursday evening. As a follow-up to the classroom presentation, on Sunday Feb.25 there will be a field trip to U. of Michigan Art Museum. Details will be provided in class.



            **Reading Assignment:** Begin reading Murphey, _East Asia_ , Chapts. 12, 14-15, which will be discussed in class on March 1.





**March 1             Session 6\. East Asia and the West**



            **Topics:** Canton system of trade and its tensions; the mid-century rebellions; Opium Wars and the unequal treaties; the Perry Mission and its aftermath; the Self-Strengthening Movement and the Meiji Restoration. Discussion of teaching the Opium War, Perry and the contact between Japan and the West, etc.

            **Reading Assignment:** Finish Murphey, _East Asia_ , Chapts. 12, 14-15; begin reading Rae Yang’s _Spider Eaters_.



**March 8             NO CLASS--MSU SPRING BREAK--BUILDINGS CLOSED**

                       

                        **Reading Assignment:** Murphey, _East Asia_ , Chapts. 17-18 (through p. 351); continue reading Rae Yang’s _Spider Eaters_. If you have time, view the video of the film _To Live_.



**March 15             Session 7\. China in Revolution**

            **Topics:** China from the 1890s through the 1960s; the collapse of the imperial system, the rise of revolution; the Anti-Japanese War and Communist victory; Mao’s China: the Great Leap Forward and the Cultural Revolution.

            **Video** : Selections from _China in Revolution_.

            **Reading Assignment:** Finish Rae Yang’s _Spider Eaters_. Also, before class view the video of the film _To Live_ , if you have not already done so.



**March 22             NO CLASS--INSTRUCTOR ATTENDING CONVENTION**

                       

            **Reading Assignment:** Murphey, _East Asia_ , Chapt. 18, pp. 351-61; begin reading Richard Kim, _Lost Names_.





**March 29             Session 8\. Japan’s Empire and the Pacific War**

            **Topics:** Japan during the first half of the 20th century; the tensions of modernization; the acquisition of empire; the road to Pearl Harbor; war in China and in the Pacific; the American Occupation; Korea under Japanese rule; the Korean War.



            **Reading Assignment:** Murphey, Chapts. 16 (material on Korea, pp.304-08), 19; complete Richard Kim, _Lost Names_.



**April 5             NO CLASS--LANSING AREA SCHOOLS’ SPRING BREAK**



            **Reading Assignment:** Murphey, _East Asia_ , Chapt. 21, Chapt. 22, pp. 426-33; begin reading Elizabeth Bumiller, _The Secrets of Mariko_.



**April 12             Session 9\. Contemporary Japan**

            **Topics:** Political/cultural overview of Japan since the Occupation; postwar political dynamics; Japan’s “economic miracle” and its consequences; contemporary salaryman life and culture; relations among Japan, Asian nations, and the U.S.



            **Reading Assignment:** Complete Elizabeth Bumiller, _Secrets of Mariko_.



**April 19             Session 10\. Contemporary China**

            **Topics:** China since the Cultural Revolution; the post-Mao reforms; the tensions of reform; the protests of Spring 1989 and the June 4 crackdown; the PRC, Taiwan, and Hong Kong; China and the U.S.



            **Reading Assignment:** Murphey, _East Asia_ , Chapt. 20

