     
---  
  
**new(s) media**  
**is290-1**

  
  |  
---|---  
_time_ |  thursday 4:30-6:30  
_place_ |  205 south hall  
  |  
_professor_ | **warren sack**  
_email_ | [new-media-prof@sims.berkeley.edu](mailto:new-media-
prof@sims.berkeley.edu)  
_office hours_ |  thursday 2:00-3:30  
  |  
_tutor_ | **dilan mahendran**  
_email_ | [dilan@sims.berkeley.edu](mailto:dilan@sims.berkeley.edu)  
_office hours_ |  tba  
  |  
_course email list_ | [new-media@sims.berkeley.edu](mailto:new-
media@sims.berkeley.edu)  
_course web site_ |
[www.sims.berkeley.edu/courses/is290-1/s02/](http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/courses/is290-1/s02/index.html)  
_student pages_ |
[www.sims.berkeley.edu/courses/is290-1/s02/assignments.html](http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/courses/is290-1/s02/assignments.html)  
_resources_ |
[www.sims.berkeley.edu/courses/is290-1/s02/resources.html](http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/courses/is290-1/s02/resources.html)  
  |  
_description_  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


  | This is a graduate seminar/studio course in which we will explore the role
of new media technologies (especially software-based technologies) in the
production, distribution, and reception of the news.  The focus this term will
be on international news.  We will consider macro and micro phenomenon which
influence the form and content of the news and we will consider how new media
technologies can or do amplify, transform or counter the powers of these
phenomena.  Phenomena to be covered include the influences of ownership of the
media, law and the media, geography, race, religion, language, ideology, story
format, news sources, editing, and history.  Each week will be devoted to a
different macro or micro influence on the form, content, distribution, or
reception of the news.  Students will be assigned a series of design and
analysis exercises in which they will be asked to examine or propose how new
media technologies can be designed to improve the quality, quantity and
presentation of news and information.  We will be especially concerned with
existing and proposed software technologies to search, sort, cluster, archive,
present, edit, and author the news.  Readings will be drawn from humanities
and social science works of media studies and also from the technical
literatures of information retrieval, artificial intelligence, human-computer
interaction, computer-supported cooperative work, and multimedia.  
  |  
_requirements_  
    
    
    
    


  | Every week there will be a reading assignment and a design or analysis
exercise.  The readings are intended to give you ideas on how to conceptualize
and approach the design and analysis exercises.  This course is a studio
course which means that every week we will spend an appreciable amount of time
looking at and discussing student work.  After completing the week's
assignment we will ask you to upload your work to the course website before
the next week's meeting time.  During the following week's meeting time we
will discuss the work that you have uploaded to the website.  Final project
reviews will take a similar form.  As a student you will be asked to show your
work, be given the chance to describe what you have done, and then will
receive feedback from fellow students, the professor and tutor, and possibly
several invited guests.  
  |  
_grading criteria_  
    
    
    


  |  | weekly exercises |  | 80%  
---|---|---  
final project |  | 20%  
  |  
_readings  _  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


  | **books**

(These books are recommended, but not required.  Individual chapters from
these books and other materials will be available in the course reader and on
reserve at the library.)

Meenakshi Gigi Durham and Douglas M. Kellner (editors) _Media and Cultural
Studies: Keyworks_ (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2001)

Herbert Gans, _Deciding What's News: A study of CBS Evening News, NBC Nightly
News, Newsweek and Time_ (New York: Vintage, 1979)

Ben Bagdikian, _The Media Monopoly, Sixth Edition_ (Boston: Beacon Press,
2000)

Edward Said, _Covering Islam: How the media and the experts determine how we
see the rest of the world_ (New YorK; Pantheon, 1981)

**course reader**

A collection of xeroxed articles will be  available as a reader that can be
purchased from Copy Central on Bancroft.  (The reader is not yet at Copy
Central.)

**online articles**

The online articles are available for download at the URLs hyperlinked in the
readings listed below.  
  
  |  
_resources_

  | Throughout the term we will be collecting pointers to code archives,
websites, books, and articles. These will be resources for better
understanding the assigned readings and for finding related work for the final
projects.  The resource list can be accessed through this link:
[resources](http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/courses/is290-1/s02/resources.html).  
  |  
  
    
    
  **schedule**  
---  
_date_ | _topic_ | _technology_ | _readings_ | _assignment due_  
---|---|---|---|---  
  |   |  |   |   |  
24 jan | **introduction** |  old-new media technologies |   |  
  |   |  |   |   |  
31 jan  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


  | **ownership**

guest speaker:  
[kim norlen](http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/~knorlen/)  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


  | social networks  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


  | _required_

ben bagdikian, _the media monopoly_

edward herman and noam chomsky, "a propaganda model"

xeroxed copies of the readings for this week can be found in the hall outside
of room 314 south hall.  


_recommended_

[columbia journalism review, "who owns what?"](http://www.cjr.org/owners/)

["the big ten," _the nation_ , jan. 7-14,
2002](http://www.thenation.com/special/bigten.html)

[mediachannel.org, "the media ownership
chart"](http://www.mediachannel.org/ownership/)

[gabe lucas, kim norlen, valerie lanard, _media
map_](http://dream.sims.berkeley.edu/media-map/)  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


  | _who owns whom?_

your assignment for this week is to explore the media ownership of our
immediate area (berkeley).  you may work in a group if you would like to.

(1) pick a media type from the list of local media that you you find [here
(e.g., local newspapers, or local television, or local
radio).](http://www.ci.berkeley.ca.us/aboutberkeley/media.html)

[(2) use lucas, norlen and lanard's media map, and/or www.hoovers.com, and/or
the urls listed to the left to discover the owning companies, the owner's
owner's, etc. of each of the local media
companies.](http://www.ci.berkeley.ca.us/aboutberkeley/media.html)

[(3) try to discover interrelationships between the local companies and their
owning companies.  do the same people sit on the boards of different
companies? does a company own a significant stake of it
competitor?](http://www.ci.berkeley.ca.us/aboutberkeley/media.html)

[(4) code these relationships up in a form that could be machine readable.
you might chose to do this as an xml document, or you might simply chhose to
do this in a simple way -- an indented list with some notation for pointers
will probably work just
fine.](http://www.ci.berkeley.ca.us/aboutberkeley/media.html)

[(5) invent a graphical means of expressing this information.  you might
borrow ideas from one of the readings, you might find some software available
online for charting out trees or graphs, or you might just sketch it out with
pencil and paper.](http://www.ci.berkeley.ca.us/aboutberkeley/media.html)

[(6) post both (a) your coded relationships and (b) your graphical
representation of these ownership relationships to your course webpage.  if
your graphical representation is not in digital form, please scan it in so
that we can look at it in
class.](http://www.ci.berkeley.ca.us/aboutberkeley/media.html)

  
  |   |  |   |   |  
7 feb  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


  | **sources**

guest speaker:  
[jeff ubois](http://www.ubois.com/)  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


  | web clients  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


  | _required_

herbert gans, _deciding what's news_ (chapters 1 and 4)

teun van dijk, _racism and the press_ (chapter 6)

_recommended_

[steve rendall, "fox's slanted sources: conservatives, republicans far
outnumber others"](http://www.fair.org/extra/0108/sources.html)  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


  | _revealing sources_

(1) go to the new york times online, "international" news section.  select
twenty stories from the stories listed there:
[www.nytimes.com/pages/world/](http://www.nytimes.com/pages/world/index.html)

(2) for each news story note (a) who wrote the story (this could be a
journalist, a group of journalists, or even an organization; e.g., the
associated press); (b) the affiliation of the writer (e.g., john smith,
associated press); (c) all of the people or entities who were directly cited;
note, again, that the cited entity could just as well be a group or
institution as an individual (e.g., "today, in response to bush's state of the
union addres, iran said..."); (d) all of the affiliations of the directed
cited people or entites; (e) all of the indirectly cited sources (e.g., "both
sides"  are the source in the following indirect citation: "both sides
insisted that they were supporting the government of mr. karzai, and both
sides offered a chorus of vituperation..."); and, (f) all of the affiliations
of the indirectly cited sources (which, in the case of "both sides" above
would also require on to resolve who the "sides" refer to.

(3) see if you can sort these authors, directly cited sources, and indirectly
cited sources into two or more categories.  use the van dijk, gans, and
rendall articles to get some ideas about how you might sort these sources out.

(4) while you are doing the work for (2) \-- i.e., while you are finding
sources -- also write done the words, phrases, or punctuation that indicated
to you that a source is cited in the text.  here is my list written in the
programming language lisp:
[sources](http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/courses/is290-1/s02/source-
patterns.txt).  you don't need to write this out in lisp; a list of words,
phrases, etc. will be perfect.

(5) put your work up on the web so that we can have a look at it in class.  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


  
|   |  |   |   |  
14 feb  
    
    
    


  | **narrative form**  
    
    
    


  | information extraction  
    
    
    


  | teun van dijk, "news schemata"

[ralph grishman, "information
extraction"](http://www.cs.nyu.edu/cs/projects/proteus/muc/ie-survey-
frascati-97.ps)

christopher riesbeck, "micro sam"

roger schank and robert abelson, "scripts" | _inverting the pyramid_

  This week's exercise can be found here: [link to
exercise.](http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/courses/is290-1/s02/is290-1-s02-exercise-3.html)  


  
|   |  |   |   |  
21 feb

  | **personalization and**  
**point of view** |  information extraction

  | [sara elo, "plum: contextualizing news for communities through
augmentation](http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/courses/is290-1/s02/plum.pdf)

richard terdiman, discourse/counter-discourse | _extra! extra!_

 This week's exercise:  The point of this week's exercise is to consider how a
news article might been automatically annotated with extra background and
context material that is useful for a particular group or community of people.

(1) Read Elo's thesis

(2) For each news script you defined for last week's assignmen, identify at
least two stories in that the script applies to.

(3) Now, for each news script, identify at least three online sources of
background and/or contextual material that would be pertinent for the
community or culture that posseses the script.  Try to find background sources
that are different from the one's Elo uses (e.g., the CIA factbook).

(4) For each news story identified in step (2), annotate the news story in a
Plum-like fashion with the background materials you have found.  You might do
a simple layout in HTML like is done with Plum, or you might device something
more graphically ambitious.

(5) Post your work to the web so that we can look at it in class.  
  |   |  |   |   |  
28 feb

  | **ideology, myth, and metaphor** |  information extraction

  | [george lakoff, "metaphors of the gulf
war"](http://lists.village.virginia.edu/sixties/HTML_docs/Texts/Scholarly/Lakoff_Gulf_Metaphor_1.html)

[george lakoff "metaphors of terror
(9/11)"](http://www.press.uchicago.edu/News/911lakoff.html)

[warren sack, _actor-role analysis: ideology, point of view and the
news_](http://www.sims.berkeley.edu/courses/is290-1/s02/sack-thesis.rtf) |
_all the news that fits_

(1) pick an international news topic that is being written about from two or
more political points of view.  examples: afghanistan, palestine, american
military advisors in the phillipines, etc.

(2) find both (a) the recurrent actors in news stories about your chosen topic
(e.g., "george bush" might be one such actor; and, (b) the roles assigned to
the actors (e.g., a role might be a specific position, like "preseident", or
it might indicate a general sort of agency (e.g., "terrorist").

(3) find the roles that are politically "loaded."  for example, the roles like
"terrorist" and "criminal" and "aggressor" are politically loaded because they
are pejorative terms.  no one calls themself a "terrorist."  rather, peoples
tend to call their adversaries "terrorists."  see my thesis for more details.

(4) pick three of the "loaded" roles and compile a list of lexical and/or
grammatical clues that one can use to identify the role in a news text.  This
part of the assignment is exatly like what we did in identifying the role of
"source" for february 7th.  see the end of my thesis for example definitions
of several such roles.

(5) now try to name the larger scenarios, the larger stories or myths into
which the identified actors and roles fit.  if you have two different
political viewpoints, then you are likely to have two different stories (and
thus two different sets of roles).  you can begin this process identifying
actor-role pairings that are consistent for each political point of view that
you have identified as pertinent to the news topic.  if you have a little more
time and you want a better understanding of this, have a look at george
lakoff's book "moral politics: what conservatives know that liberals don't.
lakoff identifies two stories about family life: one for conservatives and one
for liberals.  he claims these differing attitudes, the differences in the
stories about families, are central to any understanding of the differences
(and internal consistencies) of american conversative versus american liberal
politics.  write out your two or more stories as single paragraphs.

(6) post your (a) list of actors; (b) list of roles; (c) three role
definitions; and, (d) two or more paragraph long stories to the web so that we
can have a look during class.  
  |   |  |   |   |  
07 mar  
    
    
    


  | **translation and culture**  
    
    
    


  | machine translation  
    
    
    


  | edward said, _covering islam,_ introduction, and chapter 1 (pp. ix - 73)

edward said, _orientalism,_ introduction (pp. 1 - 28) | lost in the
translation

(1) read said to get a feel for what he means by "orientalism" and see his
analysis of western media's coverage of "islam" as a subject.

(2) go to the webpage www.ajeeb.com.  use internet explorer.  netscape does
not work with this site.  this site is an arabic-to-english (and vice versa)
translation site.  site up for a user account.

(3) on three separate days this week, use the ajeeb software to translate the
arab-language newspaper www.aljazeera.net.

(4) compare the three days of front page articles on al-jazeera to the front
page articles for the same three days at the new york times site.  some issues
to consider in your comparison: (a) are the articles on the two sites covering
the same events or different events?  when they cover the same events, is the
coverage the same or different?  when the coverage is the same, what sorts of
mistakes do you note that the arab-to-english translation software seems to be
making?  (i am assuming you do not read arabic.  if you do though, that's
great.  we will have even more to talk about in class.)

(5) according to traditional western scholarship the term "orient" is suppose
cover a part of the world that excludes and, in some ways, parallels the
"occident."  however, these terms are far from symmetrical.  universities in
the west have departments called "oriental studies," but none called
"occidental studies."  are there asymmetries between the small collection of
front page articles you collected for step (4) that illustrate this
orient/occident asymmetry?  does this pair of terms help you explain what you
see in the al-jazeera paper versus what you see in the new york times?  what
implications might this have for translating the new york times into arabic
and/or translating al-jazeera into english?

(6) cut and paste articles -- or entire front pages -- from al-jazeera and the
new york times.  juxapose them in such a manner as to illustrate the findings
you arrived at for steps (5) and (6).  anotate these resulting collages with
your own text if you think that will clarify your findings.

(7) put everything up on the web so that we can discuss it during class.  
    
    
    


  
  |   |  |   |   |  
14 mar

  | **language and nationalism** |  machine translation  | robert e. park,
_the immigrant press and its control_

benedict anderson, "nationalism and imperialism" from _imagined communities_ |
find two or more non-english language or "foreign" "local" news products and
bring them into class.  for example, you might bring a videotape of a short
segment from a spanish-language tv channel broadcast from northern california
and a url to a news site written for indian nationals living in northern
california.  
  |   |  |   |   |  
21 mar

  |  
**objectivity** |  
computational linguistics | hodges and kress, _news and ideology_

bruno latour, _science in action_

warren sack, ["questioning the news"](questioning-news.rtf)  
  | just the facts mam!

(0) Pick a date (e.g., today) and a statement that is discussed as a fact in
the news (e.g., "The U.S. is at war with Afghanistan.")

(1) Go to Lexis-nexis (<http://web.lexis-nexis.com/universe/>) and find a date
prior to which the fact was not discussed as a fact (e.g., September 10th).
Let's call that date the "start date."

(2) Pick a newspaper listed in Lexis-Nexis and do the following: Beginning at
the start date, collect a series of articles that address a topic related to
the fact (e.g., the WTC, the highjackings, etc.)  Chart the transformations in
statements between the start date and the first mention of the fact as a
statement.  Use the transformations named in either the hodges and kress
aticle, my one-page summary, and/or the latour article.

(3) Diagram these transformations of statements from "pre-fact" to fact and
plot them chronologically so that we can see how fast (or how slow) this
transformation from pre-fact -- or opinion -- to fact occurred.

(4) Read my paper on "questioning news" and speculate on how you might write a
computer program to do steps 1, 2, and 3.

(5) Put your diagrams and speculations up online so that we can see them in
class.  
  |   |  |   |   |  
28 mar | **spring break** |  |  |  
  |   |  |   |   |  
04 apr | **international differences** |  |  
klaus bruhn jensen, _news of the world: world cultures look at television
news_

teun van dijk, _news analysis_ | _news diary_

the point of this week's exercise is to begin to address the issue of how
differing news content relates to its reception, i.e., its audience and their
interactions with one another.

(1) pick two days.  they do not need to be contiguous.  for these two days
keep a news diary to record the news that you have read (e.g., in a newspaper
or magazine); heard (e.g., on the radio); or watched (e.g., on television) and
the conditions or contexts in which you have read, heard or watched the news.
during these two days record the following whenever you read, hear, or watch a
news story:  
(a) the venue: e.g., the nytimes, the 6:00 news on a given tv channel, etc.;  
(b) the headline or topic of the news story;  
(c) the time of day when you heard, read, watched the news story  
(d) the place or location (e.g., at home, in the library, etc.)  
(e) the number of people you read, watched, or heard this story with.  for
example, watching a cnn story on tv at the airport will probably mean that you
saw the story with about 50 people.  or, sharing the paper with your partner
over breakfast would count as reading the story with one other person.  
(f) note whether or not you discussed this story with others.  note the time,
place and number of people you discussed the story with.  it may be that you
won't discuss the news story with anyone until days after you read, hear or
watch it.

(2) figure out a way to present your results chronologically and put your
results up on the web.

(3) in class we will focused on trying to understand how the news stories that
you came across during these two days influenced or shaped various social
interactions.  
  |   |  |   |   |  
11 apr  
    
    
    
    
    


  | **lakoff**  
****  
    
    
    
    
    


  |  
    
    
    
    
    
    


  | [lecture by george lakoff on "metaphors and war"](sack-write94.rtf)

  |  
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


  
  |   |  |   |   |  
18 apr

  | **audience**

  | weblogs and newsgroups | david morley, _the nationwide audience_

ian ang, _desperately seeking the audience_

[warren sack, "future news: constructing the audience constructing the
news"](sack-write94.rtf)  
  | _new(s) roles_

through reflection and through empirical observation it is possible to
understand the "audience" of the news as something more than a group of
listeners, watchers, or readers.  with, for instance, the advent of
newsgroups, weblogs, etc., the news reader becomes -- also -- the news writer
or, at least, the news commentator or editorializer.  sometimes amateur news
editorializers also become news editors.  witness, for example, phil agre's
red rock eater (see http://dlis.gseis.ucla.edu/people/pagre/rre.html).

in our discussion last week we identified a set of audience roles including
news reader, news writer, news editor, news browser.  we also found examples
of uses of the news that went outside of an understanding of news as
information.  for example, we saw how news was often grist for communication
and conversation; we also heard about news -- e.g., npr morning news -- as
audio "wallpaper"; i.e., that which functions a many people's background
environment as they eat breakfast or drive to work.

this week's exercise is more speculative in nature than the exercises of
previous weeks.  the point is to sketch out either (a) a new role for a news
audience member; or, (b) a new function or use for news.  your answer can take
the form of a paragraph or two of text and/or drawings and visual
illustrations.  you can approach this exercise any way that you want.  i will
outline a possible way of approaching one version of the exercise -- the
exercise to identify a new role -- in the following steps:

(1) visit a news-oriented weblog, newsgroup, or listserv -- e.g.,
metafilter.com, weblab.org, etc.

(2) find a message containing a news article published in an edited news
forum.  e.g., many newsgroup participants copy newspaper articles into the
newsgroup in order to spark discussion about a current event.

(3) watch how the stated facts in the news artcile get rewritten, restated,
challenged, etc. in responses to the post containing the original story.

(4) think about the sorts of work involved in subsequent posts as the work of
someone playing an identifiable role.  for example, there might be a chronic
contrarian -- a troll looking to start a flamewar -- that inhabits the group
and thus constantly challenges everyone and everything.  there might, on the
other hand, be a person in the group -- or a set of people -- devoted to
faciliating and smoothing over differences.  there might an amateur fact
checker constantly vigilant for possible errors, etc.

(5) put your role description(s) up on the web.  also, document your
description with the messages, etc. that motivated your observations.

next week we will discuss two things: (a) for each new news function proposed
we will examine what sorts of new audience roles are implied by this new
function; and, (b) for each new news audience role identified we will examine
the news functions and/or new news technologies implied by such an audience
role.

  
  |   |  |   |   |  
25 apr | **projects** |  |  |  
  |   |  |   |   |  
02 may | **projects** |  |  |  
  |   |  |   |   |  
09 may | **final presentations** |  |    |  
  |   |  |   |   |

