**Humanities 1030:**

**Exploring the Arts in Detroit**

**4 credits**

**Fall 1999 - Call No. 70241 Section 003**

**12:50 - 2:40 MW, 1151 Old Main**

* * *



Click on the following links to view details of this course

Instructor  
Course Objectives  
General Education Program Requirements  
Course Text  
Class schedule  
Course Requirements  
[Most Recent Posting of Grades](grades70241.html)  
[Information Gathering Field Trip Assigment](Info_Field_Trips.html)

Or:  
[Return to Jenkins' Home Page](../index.htm)

* * *

**Instructor** : Mark Jenkins, 577-6923 - 51 W. Warren, 4th floor

Office Hours: Generally, before class and by appointment

email: [mark.jenkins@wayne.edu](mailto:mark.jenkins@wayne.edu)

* * *

**Common Course Objectives of HUM 1030:**

1\. To explore, understand, & appreciate the various functional and stylistic
characteristics of old and new architectural styles in Detroit & the Detroit
Metropolitan Area.

2\. To explore, understand, & appreciate the various functional & stylistic
characteristics of the variety of sculptures in Detroit & the Detroit
Metropolitan Area.

3\. To understand & appreciate the Detroit Institute of Arts & other cultural
areas & institutions of Detroit & the Detroit Metropolitan Area. And to
explore, understand & appreciate the various kinds & styles of paintings in
the Detroit Institute of Arts.

4\. To explore, understand & appreciate the Detroit Symphony Orchestra as a
major cultural institution & to explore, understand and appreciate the kinds
of music the orchestra performs and records.

* * *

**Undergraduate General Education Program**

Humanities 1030 satisfies the Visual and Performing Arts component of the
Humanities Group Requirement in the University and/or College of Liberal Arts
General Education Program.

* * *

**Course Texts** **:** (from Marwil's Bookstore on Cass  & Warren)

(1) **Detroit Architecture AIA Guide.** WSU Press, 1980.

(2) Fleming & Pevsner. **Penguin Dictionary of Architecture.** Penguin, 1980.

(3) Henshaw, Julia, ed. **The Detroit Institute of Arts: Visitor's Guide.**
WSU Press, 1995.

**Additional:**

  * $1 to 2$ Admission to DIA (with student I.D.)
  * Humanities Course Packet: Available for no more than $6 from Humanities Office, 4th Floor, 51 W. Warren. (Students are strongly advised to purchase this packet directly from the Humanities Office. Past experience has demonstrated that, when students copy other students' Course Packets, the possibility of turning in a journal using the wrong format, and thus receiving an unsatisfactory grade, is greatly increased.)  

* * *

**Projected Schedule of Topics** **:**

Any major adjustments in the syllabus will be announced well in advance.

  * 9/8: 12:50 - 2:40 -- Introduction to Course _(Syllabus)_
  * 9/13: 12:50 - 2:40 -- Introduction to Architecture & Characteristics of Old Style _(Course Pack)_
  * 9/15: 12:50 - 2:40 -- Characteristics of Old Style Architecture _(Course Pack)_
  * 9/20: 12:50 - 2:40 -- Characteristics of Old Style Architecture _(Course Pack)_
  * 9/22: 12:50 - 2:40 -- Characteristics of Old Style Architecture _(Course Pack)_
  * 9/27: 12:50 - 2:40 -- Characteristics of New Style Architecture _(Course Pack)_
  * 9/29: 12:50 - 2:40 -- **SLIDE EXAM** & Detroit Architecture: Old Style _(Slide Handout)_
  * 10/4: 12:50 - 2:40 -- Detroit Architecture: Old Style _(Slide Handout)_
  * 10/6: 12:50 - 2:40 -- Detroit Architecture: New Styles _(Slide Handout)_
  * 10/11: 12:50 - 1:55 -- [**EXAM 1**](exam1_study.html)
  * 10/13: 12:50 - 1:45 -- Styles of Art and Functions of Art _(Course Pack: Art Terms)_
  * 10/18: 12:50 - 1:45 -- Styles of Art and Functions of Art _(Course Pack: Art Terms)_
  * 10/20: 12:50 - 1:45 -- Styles of Art and Functions of Art _(Course Pack: Art Terms)_
  * 10/25: 12:50 - 1:45 -- Styles of Art and Functions of Art _(Course Pack: Art Terms)_
  * 10/27: 12:50 - 1:45 -- Styles of Art and Functions of Art _(Course Pack: Art Terms)_
  * 11/1: 12:50 - 1:45 -- Detroit Sculpture _(Read Henshaw, pp. 6-18, 310-321)_
  * 11/3: 12:50 - 1:45 -- Detroit Sculpture _(Read Henshaw, pp. 6-18, 310-321) -_[ **PROJECT 1**](Project1_Instr.html) **(ARCHITECTURE) - DUE IN CLASS: WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 3**
  * 11/8: 12:50 - 1:45 -- Paintings from the Detroit Institute of Arts _(Slide Handout)_
  * 11/10: 12:50 - 1:45 -- Paintings from the Detroit Institute of Arts _(Slide Handout)_
  * 11/15: 12:50 - 1:45 -- Paintings from the Detroit Institute of Arts _(Slide Handout)_
  * 11/17: 12:50 - 1:45 -- Paintings from the Detroit Institute of Arts _(Slide Handout)_
  * 11/22: **NO CLASS**
  * 11/24: **NO CLASS**
  * 11/29: 12:50 - 1:45 -- Introduction to Music and the Symphony Orchestra _(Course Pack: Music)_
  * 12/1: 12:50 - 1:45 -- Introduction to Music and the Symphony Orchestra _(Course Pack: Music)_
  * 12/6: 12:50 -1:45 -- The Detroit Symphony and Symphony Music _(Course Pack: Music)_
  * 12/8: 12:50 -1:45 -- The Detroit Symphony and Symphony Music _(Course Pack: Music) -_[ **PROJECT 2**](Project2_Instr.html) **(PAINTING) - DUE IN CLASS: WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 8**
  * 12/13: 12:50 - 1:45 -- The Detroit Symphony and Symphony Music _(Course Pack: Music)_
  * 12/15: 12:50 - 1:45 -- The Detroit Symphony and Symphony Music _(Course Pack: Music)_

[**_FINAL EXAM_**](studyg_final-70241.html) **: WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 22 in 1151
Old Main (This Room)**

  * **10:40 a.m. - 12:10 p.m.** **Final Exam begins** _ **on time -- do not arrive late.**_
  * **No Final Examinations will be rescheduled, except as noted in University Policy.**

* * *

**Course Requirements:**

  * **_Attendance for the full class period is required_** **.** You are responsible for all material presented in class, and you are expected to participate in classroom discussions. Attendance will be taken at the beginning (and, occasionally, the end) of each session. **Students who arrive late or leave early will not be given credit for attendance.** In the case of an unavoidable absence, it is your responsibility to obtain all class notes, handouts and announcements from another student. (I will _not_ distribute copies of my lecture notes. Missed handouts may be obtained from me at my office during office hours.) Common courtesy would suggest a phone call to the instructor's office, explaining the reason for your absence. _**Attendance and participation count for 50 points of your grade for the course; therefore an absence or failure to attend for the full period will lower your grade by 50 points divided by the total number of class sessions (1.786 points)**_ **. There is no way to make up credit for classes missed.**
  * **Students are expected to be attentive** to the lecture, to participate in class discussions and to maintain a courteous demeanor at all times. Students who engage in side conversations or are otherwise disruptive will be asked to leave the class.
  * **_No eating or drinking is allowed in the classroom_** **.** Students who fail to comply with this policy will be asked to leave the class.
  * **There will be 2 types of Required Field Trips:** Project Field Trips and Information Gathering Field Trips. Project Field Trips will include: Two Architecture Trips and Two Painting Trips; Information Gathering Field Trips will include four required trips to a variety of sites such as the following: Architecture; Sculpture; Public Location; Cultural Heritage; Art Gallery. Some of these trips may be combined, if possible.
  * **From the 6** **th** **week on, class will be scheduled to meet half-time**. Field trips will count as class time and will be undertaken at each student's convenience. Occasionally, students may be asked to remain for the full session.
  * **There will be Two Projects**. Each Project is valued at 100 points, for a total of 200 points. 
    * **Project 1:** One Journal on Old Style Architecture and One Journal on New Style Architecture.
    * **Project 2:** Two Journals on Paintings.
  * Projects 1 and 2 must be **typed** and **given to me personally in class on the date due**. Handwritten papers will not be accepted. For policy regarding late papers, see below.
  * **A Slide Exam** worth 30 points will be given during the fourth week of class. Students will be asked to identify the style of various historic architectural monuments that have been viewed in class.
  * **Exam I** will cover architecture and will be based on class lectures, discussions and reading. The exam will consist of possible slide identifications, multiple choices, short answers, definitions, and matching sections. A Study Guide will be provided for this exam. This exam is valued at 95 points. _Experience shows that students are well advised to begin studying (definitions, etc.) for this exam from the first day of class._
  * **The Final Exam** will focus on the latter half of the course and the four Information Gathering Field Trips. The final will be based on class lectures and discussions, class slide viewings of sculptures and paintings, and class musical discussions and listenings. There will be objective questions, short answer questions, matching sections, multiples choices, and slide identifications. A Study Guide will be provided for this exam. Directions for the Information Gathering Field Trips will be provided during the first half of the semester. The final exam is valued at 125 points.
  * **Unannounced Quizzes:** There may be unannounced "extra credit pop quizzes" at any time during the semester. The purpose of such quizzes is to encourage students to be regular in attendance and to keep up with the course material.
  * **Writing and Presentation:** Matters of good college writing and presentation will be considered in Journal grades.
  * **_Make-Ups_** **:** "Make-Ups" and are **not given automatically**. The student will be eligible for a  "Make-Up" only if 1) documented evidence of an emergency is presented and 2) the student contacts me before the start of the exam or quiz. If you wake up sick or your car breaks down on your way, call my office (577-6923). If I am not available, leave a message on my voice mail or call the secretary at 577-3035. The office is usually staffed from 7:45 a.m. and voice mail is available. It is not possible to make-up missed class times.
  * **_Late Projects_** **are not accepted automatically.** The student will be eligible to turn in the project late only if 1) documented evidence of an emergency is included with the journal when it is turned in and 2) the student contacts me before the class at which the Project is due. If you wake up sick or your car breaks down on your way, call my office (577-6923). If I am not available, leave a message on my voice mail or call the secretary at 577-3035. The office is usually staffed from 7:45 a.m. and voice mail is available. In any event, **Late Projects will be reduced 1 letter grade (10 points) for every day late including weekends** \-- to insure fairness to all students. Late papers may be turned to me or the secretary at my office at any time the office is open. To avoid all such difficulties, students are encouraged to turn in projects (directly to me in class or at my office) early.
  * **Plagiarism:** **Plagiarized work will automatically receive a failing grade for the course.** Direct use of course material, close paraphrase of source material, and resemblances to other students' papers are considered plagiarism. If you use other people's published work, quote and cite it. In the case of resemblances to other students' papers, because it is almost always impossible to determine which paper was the original, both papers will be treated as plagiarized work. Thus, students are advised not to share completed papers with one another. **See attached statement.**
  * **_Add & Withdrawal Policy:_** Same as university; see schedule of classes. No withdrawals will be granted to students who have committed plagiarism.
  * **_Grading System:_** There will be 500 points total for the course achieved from the following:

> Points & Scale:

_Points:_ |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | _Scale:_ |  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
Attendance | 50 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | A | 470 - 500 points  
Slide Quiz | 30 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | A- | 450-469 points  
Exam 1 | 95 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | B+ | 435-449 points  
Project 1 | 100 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | B | 420-434 points  
Project 2 | 100 |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | B- | 400-419 points  
Final Exam | ___125_ |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | C+ | 385-399
points  
  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | C | 370 - 384 points  
**Total** | **500** |    |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | C- | 350 - 369
points  
  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | D+ | 335-349 points  
  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | D | 320-334 points  
  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | D- | 300-319 points  
  |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   | E | 0-299 points  
  
**Note:** I sincerely hope that all will enjoy and do well in this course. I
am available for conferences and discussions about the course materials.

