  
|

#### [ _![Syllabus
Menu](../../h364/images/loc123_00.gif)_](../../h364/index.htm)_  
[Home Page](../../h364/fall_01/index_main.htm)_

#### _[![1 pm
Calendars](../../h364/images/endck_10.gif)](../../h364/calendar.htm)[  
]()__[Daily Calendar](../../h364/calendar.htm) _

#### [![](../../new/resource/books.gif)  
_Project Resources_ ](../../new/resource/index.htm)

#### _[![Student
Projects](../../h364/images/train.gif)](../../h364proj/index.htm)[  
](../../h364proj/index.htm)[ Student Projects](../../h364proj/index.htm)_

#### _[![](../../h364/images/verraz.gif)](../index.htm)  
[Supplementary Materials ](../index.htm)_

#### [_/~History_](../../index.htm)  
  
---  
  


![](../../h364/images/trans.gif) |  |  |

**The History of American Technology  
The Automobile Industry Before 1900** |

[**Before 1900**](index.htm)

|

**[1900 \- 1909](cars_10.htm)** |

[**1910 \- 1919**](cars_20.htm) |

**[1920 \- 1929](cars_30.htm)** |

**[1930 \- 1939](cars_40.htm)**

|

**[1940 \- 1959](cars_60.htm)**

|

[**Since 1960**](cars_90.htm)  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
**[The Moving Assembly Line](assmbl_1.htm)**  
  
**BACK ||[NEXT](cars_10.htm)**  
  
**1769**

Nicholas-Joseph Cugnot (1725-1804) built a steam powered gun tractor capable
of 2 mph. In addition to pulling an artillery piece, the vehicle could carry
up 4 people. Cugnot's vehicle proved unmaneuverable and was quickly wrecked in
what some consider the first automobile accident.

* * *

**1789**

First U.S. patent on a steam-powered land vehicle granted to Oliver Evans.

* * *

**1801**

Richard Trevithick built a full-size road carriage powered by steam. It blew
up after just four days of operation. He had carelessly let the boiler go dry.

* * *

**1879**

George Selden filed for his patent on a 'road engine'. The high speed internal
combustion engine was yet to be invented, and Selden managed to keep the
patent 'pending' for over 15 years--it issued in 1895.

* * *

**1895**

French automobile manufacturer Emile Constant Levassor drove one of his cars
over the 1,170 kilometer course in the Paris-Bordeaux-Paris race at an average
speed of 24 kilometers per hour. The longest stop for servicing took just 22
minutes. Levassor had been in the automobile manufacturing business since
1891. Automobiles were already considered a common sight on the streets of
Paris.

* * *

French and German manufacturers were selling cars through catalogues.

* * *

In Springfield, Massachusetts, Charles and Frank Duryea, two bicycle
mechanics, formed the first U.S. company to manufacture automobiles. The
brothers had built their first working automobile in 1893. That 1893 vehicle
had been built by outfitting a second-hand carriage, which cost $70, with a
one-cylinder gasoline engine.

* * *

George Selden, a patent lawyer who never manufactured an automobile, received
the infamous Selden patent, which gave him exclusive rights to make
automobiles powered by an internal combustion engine. Until the courts ruled
against Selden in 1911, he and the infamous Association of Licensed Automobile
Manufacturers (formed 1903) attempted to enforce a strict monopoly on auto
manufacturing.

* * *

The most famous 'infringer' was Henry Ford, and the 1911 ruling on the Ford
suit against the validity of the Selden patent was what finally broke the hold
of the ALAM monopoly--which wanted to maintain the automobile as a high-end,
luxury product on the model that was actually followed in the development of
the British automobile industry.

* * *

**1898**

Fewer than 30 firms were manufacturing automobiles in the U.S.

* * *

**1899**

Henry Ford quite his safe job at Detroit Edison to devote full time to the
fledgling auto industry. He had already failed in an auto venture (1896), but
he was convinced that if he could get the right financial backing he could
make money in automobiles. He went to work for other automakers, but the real
focus of his effort for the next several years was on auto racing. The "999",
which he put on the track against leading cars of the day in 1900, managed to
beat the competition by 1/2 mile in a 5 mile race. Ford himself drove his race
cars at times, but he also hired a daredevil bicycle rider named Barney
Oldfield to run races such as the 5-miler in 1900.

* * *

The United States Census of Manufactures recorded statistics on the automobile
industry for the first time. Some 30 manufacturers had produced an estimated
2,500 automobiles and the industry stood 150th in the value of its products in
the U.S. economy.

* * *

During the just the first 4 months of the year, investors provided no less
than $388 million in start-up capital for new automobile companies.

* * *

There were about 8,000 motor vehicles in the U.S.

* * *

The Packard brothers, who had operated Packard Electric in Warren, Ohio, since
1890, introduced their first automobile, a 3-speed, chain-drive model powered
by a 12 h.p. one-cylinder engine. The Packard emerged as the solid leader in
the American luxury car market in the 1920s, and while the company struggled
during the depression of the 1930s, it survived among the "Middle Five" until
1954 when Packard merged with Studebaker. The Packard mark quickly
disappeared, and the combine struggled on into 1964 before ceasing production
altogether.

**BACK ||[NEXT](cars_10.htm)**

* * *

