Professor Rich Keiser

|

Fall 2000  
  
---|---  
  
Willis 417, x-4122

|

[Office Hours](../../../resources/officehours.html)  
  
**AMERICAN STUDIES 396**

**POLITICAL SCIENCE 367**

American Studies 396 will explore the people, the environment, and the values
associated with American suburbs, particularly in the post-WWII era. We will
pose questions about the social, political, economic, psychological, gender,
and racial implications of suburbia. We will consider why, given the
ubiquitous criticisms of suburbia, so many Americans continue to strive to
live there. Over the course of the term, we will analyze the evolving patterns
of suburban life from a variety of perspectives: history, political science,
literature, film, journalism, sociology, architecture, and material culture.

This course also has an explicit agenda of building formal research skills and
is intended to be a preparatory course for the comprehensive exercise process
in American Studies.

A seminar is a collaborative enterprise. In a seminar, students take important
responsibility for producing stimulating discussions and presenting the
results of their research and thinking. The success of the course (and whether
it is a fun learning experience) will depend both on your willingness to
complete the reading and viewing assignments on time and your eagerness to
participate. Read actively, consider keeping a journal of your impressions,
record ideas you aren't prepared to evaluate yet but want to think about
further. To insure that you come to class having connected with the authors
and ready to contribute your thoughts on the issues raised, one third of the
class will be required to prepare a one page, double spaced set of talking
points for most classes. This will be two or three paragraphs (not an outline)
that develop two or three ideas from the readings and viewings that you think
are interesting, irritating, worthy of further research, or represent a
connection to previous topics. Bring one copy to class for yourself and send
me one copy by e-mail by nine am of the class day.

**Grading:** Class participation (50%) will be the most crucial aspect of your
grade in this 300-level seminar. If you are someone who does not typically
feel comfortable speaking in class, then you should send me e-mails with your
thoughts about the readings, preferably before they are discussed in class. We
may have quizzes which will also provide an opportunity to measure
preparedness for class and thoughtfulness about the material. Failure to
attend class makes participation rather difficult. The prospectus (25%) will
be graded and there is an expectation of improvement with each draft. Students
are urged to meet with their advisors and with me to discuss the prospectus. A
comprehensive final examination will comprise the remainder of the course
grade (25%). Read ahead on the syllabus and plan accordingly for athletic
events, holidays, and conflicts with other classes.

Office Hours will be announced during the first week of classes. My office is
417 Willis and my phone is 4122. I am glad to take calls at home but please do
not call after 9 pm.

Exercise in Prospectus Writing  
  
---  
Sept. 12: S. Van Evera, "Hypotheses, Laws, and Theories: A User's Guide," and
"What are Case Studies?"

Historical Development of Suburbia  
  
---  
Sept. 14: K. Jackson, _Crabgrass Frontier_ , chs. 1-6.

**For Class Discussion:** The author is discussing changes that can accurately
be called revolutionary. What are the agents (causes) of change? Is change the
result of individual and democratic decisions (following Tocqueville or an
economic invisible hand), cultural predispositions (rooted where?),
governmental decisions, entrepreneurial profit-making activity, technological
changes, or some other non-constant?

Sept. 17: Film "The City" 7 pm.

Sept. 19: Jackson, chs. 7-13; and "The Common Good: Public or Private." In R.
Baxandall and E. Ewen, _Picture Windows: How the Suburbs Happened_ (ch. 6);
and "Postwar Housing Politics: The McCarthy Hearings on Housing." In R.
Baxandall and E. Ewen, _Picture Windows: How the Suburbs Happened_ (ch. 8).

**For Class Discussion:** Reconsider the questions of September 28\. Are some
of these causal variables independent while others are intervening and still
others are antecedent? Specify! Would analysis be facilitated if we decided
that there were multiple cases within what Jackson calls suburbanization
(hence separate dependent variables, each with a separate explanatory story)?
What two or three large sets of cases (or classifications) of suburbanization,
that together encompass Jackson's entire portrayal, would you create? For
example, instead of studying the topic of governance, one might choose to
separate the study of governance in direct democracies, republics, and
dictatorships thereby creating three cases or types. Remember, don't use the
independent variables to define or delineate the cases to be explained (which
is your dependent variable) -- that is tautological (i.e., don't suggest that
there are certain suburbs created by technological advance and others created
due to governmental policy unless technology and policy are not independent
variables).

Sept. 21: Jackson, chs. 14-16;

J. Garreau, _Edge City_ , Intro, chs. 1-2

S. Chawkins, "Homes Sprouting and Farms Dying"
(latimes.com/news/state/reports/suburbs)

Do these two authors seem to agree or disagree about the nature of suburbia in
the late 20th century? How does this/these suburbia portrayal(s) differ from
the post-World War II portrayal?

Community/anomie, identity/conformity (note interdisciplinary approach)  
  
---  
Sept. 22: Avalon (Film showing at 4 pm).

Sept. 26: P. Roth, "Eli, the Fanatic," Goodbye Columbus

Sept. 28: "David Riesman" _Time,_ Sept. 27, 1954;

W. McClay, _The Masterless: Self and Society in Modern America,_ chs. 7-8;

L. Stevens, "Are Suburbs Harmful to Your Mental Health?"
(nytsyn.com/live/Depression).

**Reminder:** All students are required to meet with the professor, in office
hours (or at The Contented Cow), to discuss their comps prospectus prior to
October 12.

Oct.3: R. Putnam, "Tuning In, Tuning Out: The Strange Disappearance of Social
Capital in America," _PS: Political Science and Politics_

J. M. Smith, "Online but not antisocial" _New York Times_ (February 18, 2000);

E. Allison and J. Brennan, "The Malling of America: Conflict between
consumption and community " (unpublished paper, June 1994)

"Mall of America packet."

Political Coalitions and Personal Affinities  
  
---  
  
Oct. 5: R. Cook, "Suburbia: Land of Varied Faces and A Growing Political
Force," _Congressional Quarterly_ (May 24, 1997).

S. Garland, "The 'Burbs Fight Back," _Business Week_ (June 2, 1997).

"Platform for the Twenty-First Century: The Suburban Agenda." In G. Scott
Thomas, _The United States of Suburbia_ (ch. 6).

Oct. 10: J. Barron, "A Suit of High-Priced, Hight-Tech Armor " _New York
Times_ (August 6, 2000).

J. Garreau, "Phoenix: Shadow Government," _Edge City_ (ch. 6).

E. McKenzie, "From Garden City to Privatopia," _Privatopia_ (ch. 1).

E. McKenzie, "Trouble in Privatopia," _The Progressive_ (October 1993).

A. Stark, "America, the Gated?" _Wilson Quarterly_ (Winter 1998).

P. Goldberger, "It Takes a Village: The anti-sprawl doctors make a manifesto,"
_The New Yorker_ (March 27, 2000).

Suburbs were a refuge for the family from the dysfunctional city  
  
---  
  
Oct. 12: Bring 3 copies of your typed prospectus to class. You will break into
groups of 3 and use the entire class time to give each other constructive
feedback about your work.

Oct. 17: **Revised version of prospectus is due by 10 am in my office** , 417
Willis.

Also read the following 5 brief newspaper clips.

D. Kelley, "As Suburbs Change, They Still Satisfy," _Los Angeles Times_
(latimes.com/news/state/reports/suburbs).

A. Jarrell, "The Face of Teenage Sex Grows Younger," _New York Times_ (April
3, 2000).

L. Mundy, "Sex and Sensibility," _Washington Post_ (July 16, 2000).

B. Harris, "A Wake-Up Call for a Suburban Refuge," _Los Angeles Times_ (Feb.
7, 1999).

M. Graham, C. Bahls, and R. Giordano, "Unease outside city limits: Drugs and
gangs flourish," _Philadelphia Inquirer_ (September 28, 1998).

<Frontline Video>

Oct. 19: B. Friedan, _The Feminine Mystique_ , chs. 1, 2, 10, 12.

Oct. 20: Film "The Positively true Adventures of the Texas Cheerleader
Murdering Mom"

Oct. 24: I. Levin, _The Stepford Wives._

Oct. 25: Film: American Beauty

Oct. 26: Class time will be devoted to individual sessions with students
revising the comps prospectus. Begin reading the Keating book.

Oct. 31: Class time will be devoted to individual sessions with students
revising the comps prospectus. Begin reading the Keating book.

Nov. 1: **Final graded version of comps propsectus due by 4 pm** @ Willis 417
office.

Race and Suburban Development  
  
---  
  
Nov. 2: W. D. Keating, _The Suburban Racial Dilemma_ , chs. 1-10.

Nov. 7: Keating, chs. 11-13.

Nov. 9: S. Thernstrom and A. Thernstrom, "Cities and Suburbs," _America in
Black and White_ (ch. 8). New York: Touchstone, 1997.

"Old Towns, New Families." In R. Baxandall and E. Ewen, _Picture Windows: How
the Suburbs Happened (_ ch. 15).

"New Immigrants." In R. Baxandall and E. Ewen, _Picture Windows: How the
Suburbs Happened_ (ch. 17).

A. O'Connor, "Learning to Look Past Race,"
(latimes.com/news/state/reports/suburbs)

Nov. 14: D. Dent, "The New Black Suburbs," _New York Times Magazine_ (June 14,
1992).

D. Gordon, "'White Flight' Taking Off in Chicago Suburbs," _Chicago Reporter_
26:8 (December 1997).

W. Glaberson, "Beach Club Settles Suit on Race Bias," _New York Times_ (April
4, 1992).

