From renlit@english.sxu.edu Mon Sep 3 05:23:11 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (Norman Boyer) Date: Sun, 02 Sep 2001 23:23:11 -0500
Subject: [renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus Message-ID:
<4.2.2.20010902231554.00c0eb10@mail.sxu.edu> Hello all (I hope all!!), I've
fixed up the list and kept aol people at their aol addresses, so we'll be able
to keep the right to post limited to us. So it's OK to begin sending the hello
messages (you can just reply to this message if you wish. PLEASE sign your
name. I'd suggest beginning like a memo: Hello Message (later--Posting 1 Group
A) From Your Name I've also revised the syllabus, since I was feeling a bit
rushed. For immediate use: I've split the assignment for Wednesday into two
days, with pp. 107-144 (and the Virgil Eclogue 4 I gave you) for Wednesday,
and pp. 145-181 for Friday. What was Friday's assignment shows up the next
week. There are lots of other changes. I've already posted the new syllabus on
the web page, and I'll have copies on Wednesday. One of my problems has been
with the last paper, since I'm not sure what is reasonably available for
research, so I've gone back to a second short paper plus the take-home final.
NB From renlit@english.sxu.edu Mon Sep 3 20:31:34 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (renlit@english.sxu.edu) Date: Mon, 3 Sep 2001 15:31:34
EDT Subject: [renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus Message-ID:
<6b.1a096864.28c53496@aol.com> Jennifer Koziel From renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue
Sep 4 00:02:12 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu (Brian Gabryel) Date: Mon, 03
Sep 2001 18:02:12 -0500 Subject: [renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus
Message-ID:

Hello message

From: Brian Gabryel

Hey everyone. I have some prior experience with early modern literature, as
well Cleopatra. I enjoyed reading Antony and Cleopatra last semester in
Shakespeare and look forward to futrue discussions regarding women and
political power.

Brian Gabryel  
  

  

* * *

Get your FREE download of MSN Explorer at
[http://explorer.msn.com](http://go.msn.com/bql/hmtag_itl_EN.asp)  
From renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4 00:47:12 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (Carol Medrano) Date: Mon, 3 Sep 2001 16:47:12 -0700
(PDT) Subject: [renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus In-Reply-To:  Message-
ID: <20010903234712.97186.qmail@web10408.mail.yahoo.com> \--- Brian Gabryel
wrote: ...and look forward to futrue discussions regarding women and political
power.

Brian Gabryel brian...i've never had a futrue discussion before...hee-hee. :)
hi, this is carol medrano. i was in the same shakespeare class that brian was
in, so i too have had the pleasure of being introduced to cleopatra. i also
saw the movie, Elizabeth. it was pretty good, but i'm not really sure how much
of it was based on fact. it will be interesting to find out. carol

* * *

Hello message

From: Brian Gabryel

Hey everyone. I have some prior experience with early modern literature, as
well Cleopatra. I enjoyed reading Antony and Cleopatra last semester in
Shakespeare and look forward to futrue discussions regarding women and
political power.

Brian Gabryel  
  

  

* * *

Get your FREE download of MSN Explorer at
[http://explorer.msn.com](http://go.msn.com/bql/hmtag_itl_EN.asp)  
_______________________________________________ Renlit mailing list
Renlit@english.sxu.edu http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit
__________________________________________________ Do You Yahoo!? Get email
alerts & NEW webcam video instant messaging with Yahoo! Messenger
http://im.yahoo.com From renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4 03:45:31 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (huda krad) Date: Tue, 04 Sep 2001 02:45:31 Subject:
[renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus Message-ID:

ME TOO! by the way this is huda....

i meant i also took the shakespeare class with carol and brian (hi carol! hi
brian!) and i'm not just taking this class because it's required of me since
it counts for a british lit course...really! After reading and seeing the
videos in class, Cleopatra sounds like she was a pretty cool lady. okay maybe
i should say that she seems to be an inspirational woman as her role
represents a unique version of gender issues in politics.  Cleopatra struggles
to prove that she can rule a country just as any other man can (representing
the whole idea that men and women are equal), BUT at the same time she uses
traditional "female strategies"--the stereotype of what women are good at
(seduction)--to attain power.  What i'm seeing in her is some sort of conflict
between modern gender issues and traditional, stereotypical gender issues. In
other words, there's a conflict between "a woman is able to rule just as any
other man" versus "a woman is able to rule, but only if she uses her body to
get there". i hope some of you see what i'm saying because this is definitely
a "futrue discussion regarding women and political power" that we can discuss,
right brian? see y'all in class...

huda krad  

  

* * *

Get your FREE download of MSN Explorer at
[http://explorer.msn.com](http://go.msn.com/bql/hmtag_itl_EN.asp)  
From renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4 04:02:37 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (Carol Medrano) Date: Mon, 3 Sep 2001 20:02:37 -0700
(PDT) Subject: [renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus(HUDA)(Brian) In-Reply-
To:  Message-ID: <20010904030237.15903.qmail@web10408.mail.yahoo.com> my gosh,
huda, we were only supposed to say hello, not write our first paper.lol :) i
don't know, brian, do you think huda is trying to make us look bad? but then
of course, brian is the only one of us who has ever had "futrue" discussions.
i guess i'm the only one who is lacking. i better think of something... carol
\--- huda krad  wrote:

* * *

ME TOO! by the way this is huda....

i meant i also took the shakespeare class with carol and brian (hi carol! hi
brian!) and i'm not just taking this class because it's required of me since
it counts for a british lit course...really! After reading and seeing the
videos in class, Cleopatra sounds like she was a pretty cool lady. okay maybe
i should say that she seems to be an inspirational woman as her role
represents a unique version of gender issues in politics.  Cleopatra struggles
to prove that she can rule a country just as any other man can (representing
the whole idea that men and women are equal), BUT at the same time she uses
traditional "female strategies"--the stereotype of what women are good at
(seduction)--to attain power.  What i'm seeing in her is some sort of conflict
between modern gender issues and traditional, stereotypical gender issues. In
other words, there's a conflict between "a woman is able to rule jus! t as any
other man" versus "a woman is able to rule, but only if she uses her body to
get there". i hope some of you see what i'm saying because this is definitely
a "futrue discussion regarding women and political power" that we can discuss,
right brian? see y'all in class...

huda krad  

  

* * *

Get your FREE download of MSN Explorer at
[http://explorer.msn.com](http://go.msn.com/bql/hmtag_itl_EN.asp)  
_______________________________________________ Renlit mailing list
Renlit@english.sxu.edu http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit
__________________________________________________ Do You Yahoo!? Get email
alerts & NEW webcam video instant messaging with Yahoo! Messenger
http://im.yahoo.com From renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4 05:19:34 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (Norman Boyer) Date: Mon, 03 Sep 2001 23:19:34 -0500
Subject: [renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus In-Reply-To:  Message-ID:
<4.2.2.20010903231539.00c16a90@mail.sxu.edu>  Hello all,  
  
Huda's point is good and will be interesting to keep in mind as we turn to
Elizabeth, who did not use seduction and of course claimed at least to have
remained a virgin queen.  The comparison seems obvious, I guess, but I hadn't
made the obvious connection until Huda's message arrived.  We'll have some
other interesting variations to throw in as we go, so let's definitely keep
this issue in front of us.  
  
NB  
  
At 02:45 AM 09/04/2001 +0000, you wrote:  
  

> ME TOO! by the way this is huda....  
>  
>  i meant i also took the shakespeare class with carol and brian (hi carol!
hi brian!) and i'm not just taking this class because it's required of me
since it counts for a british lit course...really! After reading and seeing
the videos in class, Cleopatra sounds like she was a pretty cool lady. okay
maybe i should say that she seems to be an inspirational woman as her role
represents a unique version of gender issues in politics.  Cleopatra struggles
to prove that she can rule a country just as any other man can (representing
the whole idea that men and women are equal), BUT at the same time she uses
traditional "female strategies"\--the stereotype of what women are good at
(seduction)--to attain power.  What i'm seeing in her is some sort of conflict
between modern gender issues and traditional, stereotypical gender issues. In
other words, there's a conflict between "a woman is able to rule jus! t as any
other man" versus "a woman is able to rule, but only if she uses her body to
get there". i hope some of you see what i'm saying because this is definitely
a "futrue discussion regarding women and political power" that we can discuss,
right brian? see y'all in class...  
>  
>  huda krad  
>  
>

>

> * * *

>

> Get your FREE download of MSN Explorer at
[http://explorer.msn.com]('http://go.msn.com/bql/hmtag_itl_en.asp')  
>  _______________________________________________ Renlit mailing list
Renlit@english.sxu.edu <http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit>

From renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4 06:21:45 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (renlit@english.sxu.edu) Date: Tue, 4 Sep 2001 01:21:45
EDT Subject: [renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus Message-ID:
<113.428e8f3.28c5bee9@aol.com> Ummm...so, we're supposed to talk about our
prior encounters with Renaissance literature/Cleopatra, eh? OK. Well, a couple
of semesters ago I took the Renaissance discourses on the "other," I took
Shakespeare, have read "Antony and Cleopatra" as well as "Julius Caesar:, etc.
I know that this may sound way out there, but I'm a music major, and believe
me, we had our fair share of learning about Renaissance literature in my music
history classes. ~~Liz Krasner~~ From renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4
07:17:40 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu (huda krad) Date: Tue, 04 Sep 2001
06:17:40 Subject: [renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus(HUDA)(Brian)
Message-ID:

sorry carol, i guess i misread the instructions for the first posting... :)  
  
huda![](http://graphics.hotmail.com/emwink.gif)

  

* * *

Get your FREE download of MSN Explorer at
[http://explorer.msn.com](http://go.msn.com/bql/hmtag_itl_EN.asp)  
From renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4 11:56:49 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (Carol Medrano) Date: Tue, 4 Sep 2001 03:56:49 -0700
(PDT) Subject: [renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus(HUDA)(Brian) In-Reply-
To:  Message-ID: <20010904105649.28844.qmail@web10402.mail.yahoo.com> hey,
huda, how did you get that smiley face by your name? i,ve been trying to
figure out how to do that. carol \--- huda krad  wrote:

* * *

sorry carol, i guess i misread the instructions for the first posting... :)  
  
huda![](http://graphics.hotmail.com/emwink.gif)

  

* * *

Get your FREE download of MSN Explorer at
[http://explorer.msn.com](http://go.msn.com/bql/hmtag_itl_EN.asp)  
_______________________________________________ Renlit mailing list
Renlit@english.sxu.edu http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit
__________________________________________________ Do You Yahoo!? Get email
alerts & NEW webcam video instant messaging with Yahoo! Messenger
http://im.yahoo.com From renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4 13:33:17 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (Monika) Date: Tue, 4 Sep 2001 07:33:17 -0500 Subject:
[renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus References:
<4.2.2.20010902231554.00c0eb10@mail.sxu.edu> Message-ID:
<002101c1353d$c6933d60$1cbeb618@elmhst1.il.home.com> Hello, just a simple
introduction. I seem to be more frustrated with Cleopatra, rather than really
intrigued. Sometimes I feel as if I am reading not enough into it, but it
appears to me as if her role is strictly defined to the seductress. Aside from
the first part of the book, where her lineage was discussed, I found that I
know more about anything Ceasar did, as opposed to her. During most of this,
she is locked away in the palace, guarded. I'm not sure I am articulating this
as well as I should, but it is 7:30am. Monika \----- Original Message -----
From: Norman Boyer  To:  Sent: Sunday, September 02, 2001 11:23 PM Subject:
[renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus > Hello all (I hope all!!), > > I've
fixed up the list and kept aol people at their aol addresses, so we'll > be
able to keep the right to post limited to us. > > So it's OK to begin sending
the hello messages (you can just reply to this > message if you wish. > >
PLEASE sign your name. I'd suggest beginning like a memo: > > Hello Message
(later--Posting 1 Group A) > From Your Name > > I've also revised the
syllabus, since I was feeling a bit rushed. For > immediate use: I've split
the assignment for Wednesday into two days, with > pp. 107-144 (and the Virgil
Eclogue 4 I gave you) for Wednesday, and pp. > 145-181 for Friday. What was
Friday's assignment shows up the next week. > > There are lots of other
changes. I've already posted the new syllabus on > the web page, and I'll have
copies on Wednesday. One of my problems has > been with the last paper, since
I'm not sure what is reasonably available > for research, so I've gone back to
a second short paper plus the take-home > final. > > NB > >
_______________________________________________ > Renlit mailing list >
Renlit@english.sxu.edu > http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit > From
renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4 14:19:11 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu
(suejim) Date: Tue, 4 Sep 2001 08:19:11 -0500 Subject: [renlit] OK to post and
revised syllabus References:
<20010904105649.28844.qmail@web10402.mail.yahoo.com> Message-ID:
<003901c13544$3031c1a0$ef7f3604@d0s8c5> hi Renliters Well I have read
Antonyand Cleo in Shakespeare. This is my fourth class with Dr Boyer, and I am
a junior. We also discussed a bit about victoria in ENG 201\. Hope that we all
have a great semester. Hi everyone-Hope that u had a great summer-Lisa Sertich
\---- Original Message ----- From: Carol Medrano  To:  Sent: Tuesday,
September 04, 2001 5:56 AM Subject: Re: [renlit] OK to post and revised
syllabus(HUDA)(Brian) > hey, huda, > how did you get that smiley face by your
name? i,ve > been trying to figure out how to do that. > carol > --- huda krad
wrote: > >

* * *

>

>

sorry carol, i guess i misread the instructions for > the first posting... :)  
  
huda src="http://graphics.hotmail.com/emwink.gif" > width=12>

  

* * *

Get your > FREE download of MSN Explorer at
href='http://go.msn.com/bql/hmtag_itl_EN.asp'>http://explorer.msn.com  
> _______________________________________________ > Renlit mailing list >
Renlit@english.sxu.edu > http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit > > >
__________________________________________________ > Do You Yahoo!? > Get
email alerts & NEW webcam video instant messaging with Yahoo! Messenger >
http://im.yahoo.com > _______________________________________________ > Renlit
mailing list > Renlit@english.sxu.edu >
http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit >
\---------------------------------------------------- NetZero Platinum Sign Up
Today - Only $9.95 per month!
http://my.netzero.net/s/signup?r=platinum&refcd;=PT97 From
renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4 15:20:22 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu
(renlit@english.sxu.edu) Date: Tue, 4 Sep 2001 10:20:22 EDT Subject: [renlit]
OK to post and revised syllabus Message-ID:  Hello Everyone- This is my first
class pertaining to anything involving Cleopatra or Elizabeth. I've always had
this stereotype in my head as to what type of women they were, but this
stereotype is beginning to fade as I read about Cleopatra. Cleopatra wasn't as
powerful as I believed her to be-in a way she was almost pathetic. She had to
seduce the most powerful men in order to achieve her own political ambitions.
Has society changed that much since her time period when it comes to women and
their political space? Well, I'm excited to find out more about these women.
Sherri Gibson From renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4 18:22:51 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (renlit@english.sxu.edu) Date: Tue, 04 Sep 2001
13:22:51 -0400 Subject: [renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus Message-ID:
<09ABB8F5.3B63BB72.63FE6432@cs.com> How's it goin'? This is Cristin Finnigan,
by the way. I haven't had much experience with either Elizabeth or Cleopatra
as individuals, though have had much experience with circumstances in their
times of rule through lit and history classes. I really can't say anything
about Cleopatra or who I *thought* she was as opposed to who, as I'm currently
learning, she really *was*. Everything I read about her is pretty much new to
me, as will be the case for Elizabeth. But, anyhoo... I must away... Catch ya
on the flip side. ~Cristin From renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4 20:12:52 2001
From: renlit@english.sxu.edu (renlit@english.sxu.edu) Date: Tue, 04 Sep 2001
15:12:52 EDT Subject: [renlit] OK to post and revised syllabus Message-ID:
<85.f63054c.28c681b4@aol.com> Hi Everyone, My name is Jennifer and i am a
senior graduating with a degree in english and secondary education in may
2002. This is my second class with Dr. Boyer and look forward to learning
about who Cleopatra was and what she did in her lifetime. Looking forwarding
to getting to know everyone this semester! Good Luck with classes. Jennie From
renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4 21:04:14 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu
(renlit@english.sxu.edu) Date: Tue, 4 Sep 2001 16:04:14 EDT Subject: [renlit]
OK to post and revised syllabus Message-ID: <116.435eacd.28c68dbe@cs.com> Suzy
Shanklin Hello everyone. I took this class because it has an intersting
subject matter. I don't have much background on Cleopatra except for one movie
-but who doesn't find her fascinating? I love art and can't wait to view the
exhibit at the Field Museum! I love being able to explore all the different
views and opinions that surround Cleopatra and look forward to forming some of
my own and hearing some of yours. From renlit@english.sxu.edu Tue Sep 4
23:32:51 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu (Norman Boyer) Date: Tue, 04 Sep
2001 17:32:51 -0500 Subject: [renlit] Groups Message-ID:
<5.0.2.1.2.20010904171857.0233cec0@mail.sxu.edu> Here is the list of Group A
and Group B people for Cleopatra. You are in no way restricted to discussing
that week's readings. Group 1 consists of old hands from Shakespeare, so you
should know what to do. This time I decided to start from the end of the
alphabet, not the start. Please sign your name and label as Posting 1, etc.
Thanks See tomorrow you in class and at the Sigma Tau Delta gathering. NB
GROUP 1 Carrie Fischer Brian Gabryel Sheila Haran Lori Heffron Amal Ibrahim
Sarah Kaminski Jennifer Koziel Huda Krad Cheryl Kuropas Carol Medrano Pam Roll
Lisa Sertich GROUP 2 Angel Burgess Cristin Finnigan Sherri Gibson Christopher
Heath Nihad Khalil Elisabeth Krasner Sharia Leal Monika Mikolajczyk David
Russian Suzanne Shanklin Marietta Skiadopoulos From renlit@english.sxu.edu Wed
Sep 5 00:54:36 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu (renlit@english.sxu.edu)
Date: Tue, 4 Sep 2001 19:54:36 EDT Subject: [renlit] Groups Message-ID:
<5f.1a6cba16.28c6c3bc@aol.com> \--part1_5f.1a6cba16.28c6c3bc_boundary Content-
Type: text/plain; charset="US-ASCII" Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit OK so I
guess I am in group 1. Cleopatra seems like a pretty cool chick, so I am
excited to be learning more about her. The Field Museum should be cool too!
Cheryl Kuropas \--part1_5f.1a6cba16.28c6c3bc_boundary Content-Type: text/html;
charset="US-ASCII" Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit OK so I guess I am in group
1.  Cleopatra seems like a pretty cool chick, so  
I am excited to be learning more about her.  The Field Museum should be cool  
too!  
  
Cheryl Kuropas \--part1_5f.1a6cba16.28c6c3bc_boundary-- From
renlit@english.sxu.edu Wed Sep 5 01:47:20 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu
(Carol Medrano) Date: Tue, 4 Sep 2001 17:47:20 -0700 (PDT) Subject: [renlit]
Groups In-Reply-To: <5f.1a6cba16.28c6c3bc@aol.com> Message-ID:
<20010905004720.37375.qmail@web10401.mail.yahoo.com> Dr. Boyer, i just want to
make sure i've got this straight. so far we are to post a hello message, group
1 should post a response to the readings or anything that relates to our
discussions in class, and we have a 200 word paper to hand in regarding hilary
clinton and political space. (is that due tomorrow?) now, the paper on hilary
can be either posted on the list or handed in to you in class, right??? thanks
for clearing things up for me. :) (huda hasn't told me how to put a smiley
face on my messages yet:( carol \--- Cheri1beri@aol.com wrote: > OK so I guess
I am in group 1. Cleopatra seems like > a pretty cool chick, so > I am excited
to be learning more about her. The > Field Museum should be cool > too! > >
Cheryl Kuropas > __________________________________________________ Do You
Yahoo!? Get email alerts & NEW webcam video instant messaging with Yahoo!
Messenger http://im.yahoo.com From renlit@english.sxu.edu Wed Sep 5 04:06:55
2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu (Norman Boyer) Date: Tue, 04 Sep 2001
22:06:55 -0500 Subject: [renlit] Groups In-Reply-To:
<20010905004720.37375.qmail@web10401.mail.yahoo.com> References:
<5f.1a6cba16.28c6c3bc@aol.com> Message-ID:
<4.2.2.20010904220150.00c1ea80@mail.sxu.edu> Yeah. But don't panic on Hillary.
Let's try to bring her into the discussion on Friday, so something on her by
then is fine (this is not graded and I don't expect polished--I want your
response to what you find). And yes the A responses should be posted by Sunday
night. We've already had some good comments that people can react to. NB At
05:47 PM 09/04/2001 -0700, you wrote: >Dr. Boyer, >i just want to make sure
i've got this straight. so >far we are to post a hello message, group 1 should
>post a response to the readings or anything that >relates to our discussions
in class, and we have a 200 >word paper to hand in regarding hilary clinton
and >political space. (is that due tomorrow?) now, the >paper on hilary can be
either posted on the list or >handed in to you in class, right??? >thanks for
clearing things up for me. :) (huda hasn't >told me how to put a smiley face
on my messages yet:( >carol >--- Cheri1beri@aol.com wrote: > > OK so I guess I
am in group 1. Cleopatra seems like > > a pretty cool chick, so > > I am
excited to be learning more about her. The > > Field Museum should be cool > >
too! > > > > Cheryl Kuropas > > > >
>__________________________________________________ >Do You Yahoo!? >Get email
alerts & NEW webcam video instant messaging with Yahoo! Messenger
>http://im.yahoo.com >_______________________________________________ >Renlit
mailing list >Renlit@english.sxu.edu
>http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit From renlit@english.sxu.edu
Wed Sep 5 05:38:57 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu (Carol Medrano) Date:
Tue, 4 Sep 2001 21:38:57 -0700 (PDT) Subject: [renlit] Groups In-Reply-To:
<4.2.2.20010904220150.00c1ea80@mail.sxu.edu> Message-ID:
<20010905043857.86349.qmail@web10402.mail.yahoo.com> thanks ;) \--- Norman
Boyer  wrote: > Yeah. But don't panic on Hillary. Let's try to > bring her
into the > discussion on Friday, so something on her by then is > fine (this
is not > graded and I don't expect polished--I want your > response to what
you > find). And yes the A responses should be posted by > Sunday night. We've
> already had some good comments that people can react > to. > > NB > > At
05:47 PM 09/04/2001 -0700, you wrote: > >Dr. Boyer, > >i just want to make
sure i've got this straight. so > >far we are to post a hello message, group 1
should > >post a response to the readings or anything that > >relates to our
discussions in class, and we have a > 200 > >word paper to hand in regarding
hilary clinton and > >political space. (is that due tomorrow?) now, the >
>paper on hilary can be either posted on the list > or > >handed in to you in
class, right??? > >thanks for clearing things up for me. :) (huda > hasn't >
>told me how to put a smiley face on my messages > yet:( > >carol > >---
Cheri1beri@aol.com wrote: > > > OK so I guess I am in group 1. Cleopatra seems
> like > > > a pretty cool chick, so > > > I am excited to be learning more
about her. The > > > Field Museum should be cool > > > too! > > > > > > Cheryl
Kuropas > > > > > > > > >__________________________________________________ >
>Do You Yahoo!? > >Get email alerts & NEW webcam video instant > messaging
with Yahoo! Messenger > >http://im.yahoo.com >
>_______________________________________________ > >Renlit mailing list >
>Renlit@english.sxu.edu > >http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit > >
_______________________________________________ > Renlit mailing list >
Renlit@english.sxu.edu > http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit
__________________________________________________ Do You Yahoo!? Get email
alerts & NEW webcam video instant messaging with Yahoo! Messenger
http://im.yahoo.com From renlit@english.sxu.edu Wed Sep 5 15:21:32 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (renlit@english.sxu.edu) Date: Wed, 5 Sep 2001 10:21:32
EDT Subject: [renlit] hello and intro from Pam Roll Message-ID:
\--part1_fc.ba23eab.28c78eec_boundary Content-Type: text/plain; charset="US-
ASCII" Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit Hi everyone- I've been out of town so
I'll try to get caught up a bit. Like many of you, I encountered Antony and
Cleopatra last semester in Dr. Boyer's Shakespeare class. I've also touched on
several other early feminine authors in Dr. Boyer's Eng. Lit. to 1700. Last
semester I took Dr. Poston's Women and War, which presented an interesting
perspective of the female warrior quite beyond the context of Xena, and
definitely challenged the idea of patriarchal systems. As an avid reader of
historical fiction from Arthur to Victoria, the Elizabethan element of this
class appeals to me. Since I don't want Carol to complain that this is too
long, let me just close by saying that we will all be analyzing her
keyboarding skills for any "futrue" typos! -Pam
\--part1_fc.ba23eab.28c78eec_boundary Content-Type: text/html; charset="US-
ASCII" Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit Hi everyone-  
I've been out of town so I'll try to get caught up a bit.  Like many of you,  
I encountered Antony and Cleopatra last semester in Dr. Boyer's Shakespeare  
class.  I've also touched on several other early feminine authors in Dr.  
Boyer's Eng. Lit. to 1700.  Last semester I took Dr. Poston's Women and War,  
which presented an interesting perspective of the female warrior quite beyond  
the context of Xena, and definitely challenged the idea of patriarchal  
systems.  As an avid reader of historical fiction from Arthur to Victoria,  
the Elizabethan element of this class appeals to me.  
Since I don't want Carol to complain that this is too long, let me just close  
by saying that we will all be analyzing her keyboarding skills for any  
"futrue" typos!  
-Pam   
\--part1_fc.ba23eab.28c78eec_boundary-- From renlit@english.sxu.edu Wed Sep 5
16:12:01 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu (Carol Medrano) Date: Wed, 5 Sep
2001 08:12:01 -0700 (PDT) Subject: [renlit] hello and intro from Pam Roll In-
Reply-To:  Message-ID: <20010905151201.37579.qmail@web10401.mail.yahoo.com> et
tu,pam? hee-hee! carol...still smiley-faceless :( (i think i just made up a
word!) \--- Proll666@aol.com wrote: > Hi everyone- > I've been out of town so
I'll try to get caught up a > bit. Like many of you, > I encountered Antony
and Cleopatra last semester in > Dr. Boyer's Shakespeare > class. I've also
touched on several other early > feminine authors in Dr. > Boyer's Eng. Lit.
to 1700. Last semester I took Dr. > Poston's Women and War, > which presented
an interesting perspective of the > female warrior quite beyond > the context
of Xena, and definitely challenged the > idea of patriarchal > systems. As an
avid reader of historical fiction > from Arthur to Victoria, > the Elizabethan
element of this class appeals to me. > Since I don't want Carol to complain
that this is > too long, let me just close > by saying that we will all be
analyzing her > keyboarding skills for any > "futrue" typos! > -Pam > >
__________________________________________________ Do You Yahoo!? Get email
alerts & NEW webcam video instant messaging with Yahoo! Messenger
http://im.yahoo.com From renlit@english.sxu.edu Wed Sep 5 18:34:40 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (Norman Boyer) Date: Wed, 05 Sep 2001 12:34:40 -0500
Subject: [renlit] hello and intro from Pam Roll In-Reply-To:  Message-ID:
<5.0.2.1.2.20010905123031.01aeb6d0@mail.sxu.edu>  Hi all,  
  
Pam gives us another interesting perspective, so those of you who were in the
Women and War course please feel free to add that perspective to our
discussions.  There may also be interesting paper connections--for example,
how is Cleopatra (or another woman warrion [if Cleo counts as one]) used in,
say, 19th or 20th century British (or other) war propaganda?  The British
warrior Queen Bonduca (or Boadicea) who fought the Romans in the 60s CE is
also available.  
  
NB  
  
At 10:21 AM 09/05/2001 -0400, you wrote:  

> Hi everyone-  
>  I've been out of town so I'll try to get caught up a bit.  Like many of
you,  
>  I encountered Antony and Cleopatra last semester in Dr. Boyer's Shakespeare  
>  class.  I've also touched on several other early feminine authors in Dr.  
>  Boyer's Eng. Lit. to 1700.  Last semester I took Dr. Poston's Women and
War,  
>  which presented an interesting perspective of the female warrior quite
beyond  
>  the context of Xena, and definitely challenged the idea of patriarchal  
>  systems.  As an avid reader of historical fiction from Arthur to Victoria,  
>  the Elizabethan element of this class appeals to me.  
>  Since I don't want Carol to complain that this is too long, let me just
close  
>  by saying that we will all be analyzing her keyboarding skills for any  
>  "futrue" typos!  
>  -Pam

From renlit@english.sxu.edu Thu Sep 6 04:28:47 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (Norman Boyer) Date: Wed, 05 Sep 2001 22:28:47 -0500
Subject: [renlit] An Important Service Provided Message-ID:
<4.2.2.20010905222733.00adb780@mail.sxu.edu> Hi, all, Giving away the secret
of Huda's wink, here's the URL for it that I got from the code for her letter.
"http://graphics.hotmail.com/emwink.gif" NB From renlit@english.sxu.edu Thu
Sep 6 04:52:58 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu (renlit@english.sxu.edu)
Date: Wed, 5 Sep 2001 23:52:58 EDT Subject: [renlit] posting 1 Message-ID:
<20.1b7092f9.28c84d1a@aol.com> Hello, my name is Carrie Fischer and I have had
class with many of you before at this fine academic institution. My experience
with both Cleopatra and Elizabeth is very limited and the little knowledge I
have comes from Shakespeare, that this why I thought this class would be
interesting. Women and their political space-what to say... Well, the few
women I know of that have had any kind of power are from eons ago. American
women in politics only get attention if someone catches wind of who there
sleeping with or a corrupt action...oh wait...that happens to all politicians.
The little political space that American female politicians is sad. The ones
that are usually strong enough to make a difference sacrificed something along
the way, morals, family, money...I love politics, don't you? From
renlit@english.sxu.edu Thu Sep 6 05:37:14 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu
(Carol Medrano) Date: Wed, 5 Sep 2001 21:37:14 -0700 (PDT) Subject: [renlit]
An Important Service Provided In-Reply-To:
<4.2.2.20010905222733.00adb780@mail.sxu.edu> Message-ID:
<20010906043714.49904.qmail@web10406.mail.yahoo.com> wow! dr.boyer, that's
very ingenious of you! i do believe you have just given a name to our little
icon: "Huda's Wink." i wonder how long before it catches on nation wide.
unfortunately, i'm forever yahooing...no hot mail here. :( \--- Norman Boyer
wrote: > Hi, all, > > Giving away the secret of Huda's wink, here's the > URL
for it that I got > from the code for her letter. > >
"http://graphics.hotmail.com/emwink.gif" > > NB > >
_______________________________________________ > Renlit mailing list >
Renlit@english.sxu.edu > http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit
__________________________________________________ Do You Yahoo!? Get email
alerts & NEW webcam video instant messaging with Yahoo! Messenger
http://im.yahoo.com From renlit@english.sxu.edu Thu Sep 6 14:52:37 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (Jim Sertich) Date: Thu, 6 Sep 2001 08:52:37 -0500
Subject: [renlit] 1st posting Message-ID:
<005d01c136db$309e4120$8b143004@d0s8c5> This is a multi-part message in MIME
format. \------=_NextPart_000_005A_01C136B1.470F9780 Content-Type: text/plain;
charset="iso-8859-1" Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-printable Hi
everyone.=20 Lisa Sertich 1st posting Cleopatra Cleopatra has led an
interesting life, not only for her time, but = also of the time of today. It
is strange that she was so powerful as a = ruler. Back then women were
considered to be second class citizens{today = women still make less money
than men}[and obey men}only Cleo was not = going to let this stop her. She
took the throne at a young age which = seems unusual to us because the average
ruler that we are used to today = as president is ususally male, and over
35yrs old. We still have yet to = have a women president. It would be
interesting to try to picture Cleo = as the first women president, a little
older yes, but ruler of the U.S. = more than 2000 yrs after her lifetime.
After reading Shakepeare's play = Antony and Cleopatra, I believe that it
should be renamed as to = Cleopatra and Ceasar. Bernard Shaw did do this, with
reversed names. = Cleo is definetly the main character, her name should go
first, or maybe = the play should be called Cleo, Ceasar and Antony, it is
something to = think about. Cleo had an unusual family life, I never realized
that she = had so many siblings. There wasa lot of brother-sister incest =
marriages. Wouldn't the offspring have mutations and abnormalities due = to
this???? Cleo, however, decided that she didn't want to continue this =
tradition. Ceasar was 30yrs older than her, and Antony was 13yrs older. = Cleo
was definetly smarter than both of them yet all her power was in = her
sexuality. I don't believe that she reallly loved either of them, = she just
wanted power; using sex to get what she wants, today Cleo would = almost be
considered a prostitute. It is also said that Cleo's father = may have 2
wives,{page 4} could this be where Cleo inherited her = personality????Cleo is
definetly one interesting person. Lisa Sertich =20
\------=_NextPart_000_005A_01C136B1.470F9780 Content-Type: text/html;
charset="iso-8859-1" Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-printable

Hi everyone.

Lisa Sertich

1st posting

Cleopatra

    Cleopatra has led an = interesting=20 life, not only for her time, but also of the time of today.  It is = strange=20 that she was so powerful as a ruler. Back then women were considered to = be=20 second class citizens{today women still make less money than men}[and = obey=20 men}only Cleo was not going to let this stop her. She took the throne at = a young=20 age which seems unusual to us because the average ruler that we are used = to=20 today as president is ususally male, and over 35yrs old. We still have = yet to=20 have a women president. It would be interesting to try to picture Cleo = as the=20 first women president, a little older yes, but ruler of the U.S. more = than 2000=20 yrs after her lifetime.  After reading Shakepeare's play Antony and = Cleopatra, I believe that it should be renamed as to Cleopatra and = Ceasar.=20 Bernard Shaw did do this, with reversed names. Cleo is definetly the = main=20 character, her name should go first, or maybe the play should be called = Cleo,=20 Ceasar and Antony, it is something to think about.  Cleo had an = unusual=20 family life, I never realized that she had so many siblings.  = There wasa=20 lot of brother-sister incest marriages. Wouldn't the offspring have = mutations=20 and abnormalities due to this???? Cleo, however, decided that she=20 didn't want to continue this tradition. Ceasar was 30yrs older than = her,=20 and Antony was 13yrs older. Cleo was definetly smarter than both of them = yet all=20 her power was in her sexuality. I don't believe that she reallly loved = either of=20 them, she just wanted power; using sex to get what she wants, today = Cleo=20 would almost be considered a prostitute. It is also said that = Cleo's father=20 may have 2 wives,{page 4} could this be where Cleo inherited her=20 personality????Cleo is definetly one interesting person. Lisa Sertich =20 

\------=_NextPart_000_005A_01C136B1.470F9780--
\--------------------------------------------------------------- NetZero
Platinum Only $9.95 per month! Sign up in September to win one of 30 Hawaiian
Vacations for 2! http://my.netzero.net/s/signup?r=platinum&refcd;=PT97 From
renlit@english.sxu.edu Thu Sep 6 15:54:45 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu
(renlit@english.sxu.edu) Date: Thu, 6 Sep 2001 10:54:45 EDT Subject: [renlit]
Cristin's 1st posting Message-ID: <132.135f373.28c8e835@cs.com> Ok, I know I'm
in Group B and this is early, but my interest has been piqued... In a message
dated 9/6/01 8:56:55 AM Central Daylight Time, suejim@netzero.net writes:
"Back then women were considered to be second class citizens{today women still
make less money than men}[and obey men}" I'm sorry, Lisa, could you clarify
what you mean by "and obey men"? Are you talking about women today, or back
then? Just wondering. "Cleo was definetly smarter than both of them yet all
her power was in her sexuality. I don't believe that she reallly loved either
of them, she just wanted power; using sex to get what she wants, today Cleo
would almost be considered a prostitute." >> This is something I find really
interesting about Cleopatra. It seems like she is very intelligent, and does
know how to get what she wants. Maybe she simply wants to play into the
stereotype that women are seductive and manipulative knowing that sexuality IS
going to work in getting her power. Personally, it seems to me that she uses a
combination of intellect and sexuality - sexuality being the only way for a
woman to "get to" a man in those days. As far as being a prostitute, we all
sell ourselves in different ways to get what we want; be it working a job
where we're treated like slaves simply because we want more money, or taking
all the required yet pointless classes just because we want to graduate...
(ahem...)... Cleopatra knew what it took to be successful, and went out and
got it - she decided to "play the game." That's the way it seems to me,
anyway. Catch ya later... ~Cristin From renlit@english.sxu.edu Thu Sep 6
20:34:58 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu (suejim) Date: Thu, 6 Sep 2001
14:34:58 -0500 Subject: [renlit] Cristin's 1st posting References:
<132.135f373.28c8e835@cs.com> Message-ID:
<001201c1370b$048cf880$d1153004@d0s8c5> Christin, I meant back then women
obeyed men.{Not many do now} We are reading about this alot in Carol Poston's
Victorian Lit class. Sorry if the way I wrote it was confusing. ----- Original
Message -----Lisa Sertch From:  To:  Sent: Thursday, September 06, 2001 9:54
AM Subject: Re: [renlit] Cristin's 1st posting > > Ok, I know I'm in Group B
and this is early, but my interest has been > piqued... > > In a message dated
9/6/01 8:56:55 AM Central Daylight Time, > suejim@netzero.net writes: > >
"Back then women were considered to be second class citizens{today women >
still make less money than men}[and obey men}" > > I'm sorry, Lisa, could you
clarify what you mean by "and obey men"? Are you > talking about women today,
or back then? Just wondering. > > "Cleo was definetly smarter than both of
them yet all her power was in her > sexuality. I don't believe that she
reallly loved either of them, she just > wanted power; using sex to get what
she wants, today Cleo would almost be > considered a prostitute." >> > > This
is something I find really interesting about Cleopatra. It seems like > she is
very intelligent, and does know how to get what she wants. Maybe she > simply
wants to play into the stereotype that women are seductive and > manipulative
knowing that sexuality IS going to work in getting her power. > Personally, it
seems to me that she uses a combination of intellect and > sexuality -
sexuality being the only way for a woman to "get to" a man in > those days. As
far as being a prostitute, we all sell ourselves in different > ways to get
what we want; be it working a job where we're treated like slaves > simply
because we want more money, or taking all the required yet pointless > classes
just because we want to graduate... (ahem...)... Cleopatra knew what > it took
to be successful, and went out and got it - she decided to "play the > game."
That's the way it seems to me, anyway. > > Catch ya later... > ~Cristin >
_______________________________________________ > Renlit mailing list >
Renlit@english.sxu.edu > http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit >
\--------------------------------------------------------------- NetZero
Platinum Only $9.95 per month! Sign up in September to win one of 30 Hawaiian
Vacations for 2! http://my.netzero.net/s/signup?r=platinum&refcd;=PT97 From
renlit@english.sxu.edu Thu Sep 6 23:13:00 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu
(huda krad) Date: Thu, 06 Sep 2001 22:13:00 Subject: [renlit] huda's wink
Message-ID:  okay, so if we call it "huda's wink", will i be famous? i guess i
don't have to write any poetry or fiction anymore....forget school! i know how
to make smiley faces! (sorry to bother all of you who continue to get these
many "irrelevant" emails" :)
_________________________________________________________________ Get your
FREE download of MSN Explorer at http://explorer.msn.com/intl.asp From
renlit@english.sxu.edu Thu Sep 6 23:13:30 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu
(huda krad) Date: Thu, 06 Sep 2001 22:13:30 Subject: [renlit] huda's wink
Message-ID:  okay, so if we call it "huda's wink", will i be famous? i guess i
don't have to write any poetry or fiction anymore....forget school! i know how
to make smiley faces! (sorry to bother all of you who continue to get these
many "irrelevant" emails" :)
_________________________________________________________________ Get your
FREE download of MSN Explorer at http://explorer.msn.com/intl.asp From
renlit@english.sxu.edu Fri Sep 7 04:49:59 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu
(renlit@english.sxu.edu) Date: Thu, 6 Sep 2001 23:49:59 EDT Subject: [renlit]
Cristin's 1st posting Message-ID:  In a message dated 9/6/01 2:39:44 PM
Central Daylight Time, suejim@netzero.net writes: << Christin, I meant back
then women obeyed men.{Not many do now} >> LOL!! How true THAT is... :) No
problem, I just thought I might have missed something. ~Cristin From
renlit@english.sxu.edu Sun Sep 9 21:07:21 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu
(renlit@english.sxu.edu) Date: Sun, 9 Sep 2001 16:07:21 EDT Subject: [renlit]
posting 1- Pam Roll Message-ID:  From renlit@english.sxu.edu Sun Sep 9
21:22:18 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu (Carol Medrano) Date: Sun, 9 Sep
2001 13:22:18 -0700 (PDT) Subject: [renlit] Re:hey, pam, i think you shot us a
blank!!!!:( In-Reply-To:  Message-ID:
<20010909202218.1031.qmail@web10404.mail.yahoo.com> \--- Proll666@aol.com
wrote: > > _______________________________________________ > Renlit mailing
list > Renlit@english.sxu.edu > http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit
__________________________________________________ Do You Yahoo!? Get email
alerts & NEW webcam video instant messaging with Yahoo! Messenger
http://im.yahoo.com From renlit@english.sxu.edu Sun Sep 9 21:37:55 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (renlit@english.sxu.edu) Date: Sun, 9 Sep 2001 16:37:55
EDT Subject: [renlit] posting 1- Pam Roll Message-ID:
<9.1b22636a.28cd2d23@aol.com> \--part1_9.1b22636a.28cd2d23_boundary Content-
Type: text/plain; charset="US-ASCII" Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit Hey
everyone- It seems to me that from Grant's history of Cleopatra to the
articles on Hillary Clinton, as well as from the discussion in class, there is
a strong, almost instinctive expectation that a woman in a political space
should display a greater sense of morality and compassion than that expected
from a man. There is also a sense that she should be non-aggressive and
somewhat retiring, remaining within the traditional feminine role. In
Cleopatra's case, there was great outrage and a general non-acceptance of her
"inappropriate" sexual liasons and aggressive war-like behavior. While perhaps
her femininity itself was not questioned, her use of it certainly was. Julius,
Antony and Octavian, on the other hand, were known to be adulterous as well,
but it did not detract from their political roles (in Antony's case, if his
mistress had been anyone other than Cleo, no one would have paid much
attention). These same men's quest for empire was not only accepted, but
applauded. Cleopatra's desire for re-establishing her own empire through the
same means, however, was denounced. Hillary has met with much the same
attitude 2000 years later. Her lack of a soft femininity and her strong
aggressive style offended many. Her husband's sexual misadventures actually
reflected poorly on her when she did not react as a weak and helpless woman
but chose rather to forge ahead with her own ambitions. The point of these
examples is that women in the political sphere are judged at an almost
instinctive level not by the same standards with which we judge men, but
rather in contrast to those standards. If a woman assumes the attitudes and
actions established by her successful male counterparts in order to succeed
for herself in the political arena, the result is often criticism and ridicule
instead of respect and success. The political world is still an extemely male
dominated sphere. After 2000 years, it seems we still have a long way to go.
\--part1_9.1b22636a.28cd2d23_boundary Content-Type: text/html; charset="US-
ASCII" Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit Hey everyone-  
It seems to me that from Grant's history of Cleopatra to the articles on  
Hillary Clinton, as well as from the discussion in class, there is a strong,  
almost instinctive expectation that a woman in a political space should  
display a greater sense of morality and compassion than that expected from a  
man.  There is also a sense that she should be non-aggressive and somewhat  
retiring, remaining within the traditional feminine role.  
In Cleopatra's case, there was great outrage and a general non-acceptance of  
her "inappropriate" sexual liasons and aggressive war-like behavior.  While  
perhaps her femininity itself was not questioned, her use of it certainly  
was.  Julius, Antony and Octavian, on the other hand, were known to be  
adulterous as well, but it did not detract from their political roles (in  
Antony's case, if his mistress had been anyone other than Cleo, no one would  
have paid much attention).  These same men's quest for empire was not only  
accepted, but applauded.   Cleopatra's desire for re-establishing her own  
empire through the same means, however, was denounced.  
Hillary has met with much the same attitude 2000 years later.  Her lack of a  
soft femininity and her strong aggressive style offended many.  Her husband's  
sexual misadventures actually reflected poorly on her when she did not react  
as a weak and helpless woman but chose rather to forge ahead with her own  
ambitions.  
The point of these examples is that women in the political sphere are judged  
at an almost instinctive level not _by_ the same standards with which we judge  
men, but rather in _contrast_ to those standards.   If a woman assumes the  
attitudes and actions established by her successful male counterparts in  
order to succeed for herself in the political arena, the result is often  
criticism and ridicule instead of respect and success.  
The political world is still an extemely male dominated sphere.  After 2000  
years, it seems we still have a long way to go.
\--part1_9.1b22636a.28cd2d23_boundary-- From renlit@english.sxu.edu Mon Sep 10
03:22:42 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu (Carol Medrano) Date: Sun, 9 Sep
2001 19:22:42 -0700 (PDT) Subject: [renlit] 1st Posting Message-ID:
<20010910022242.66142.qmail@web10406.mail.yahoo.com> Carol Medrano 1st posting
group A Hey Gang- In my mind, comparing Cleo to Hilary is a little like
comparing apples to oranges. They both have similarities, but they come from
different trees. I'm thinking in terms of Cleo's identity. Cleo was born a
noble; she was born to be a Queen. Her entire childhood was spent preparing
her for her duties as a queen. It wasn't spent trying to teach her HOW to be a
queen, because she WAS a queen. When Antony died, her reason for being died
too. Not because of her love of Antony, but because of what Antony's death
meant to her reason for existing. She didn't die when she had the snakes bite
her; she died the moment Antony died. On the other hand, Hilary's identity is
not exclusive to that of a "queen." She has other things in her life that give
her purpose. If she were to lose all of her political space, she would still
have her identity as a mother, a lawyer, a speaker to give her a reason to
live. The death of her political career would not be the death of her.
__________________________________________________ Do You Yahoo!? Get email
alerts & NEW webcam video instant messaging with Yahoo! Messenger
http://im.yahoo.com From renlit@english.sxu.edu Mon Sep 10 04:31:26 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (Brian Gabryel) Date: Sun, 09 Sep 2001 22:31:26 -0500
Subject: [renlit] 1st Posting Message-ID:

Brian Gabryel  
1st Posting

Recently, the class discussions have questioned the political spaces of both
Cleopatra and Hilliary Clinton.  Having minimal information regarding the
motives of these two politicans, I, personally, would be hesitant to declare
both Hilliary and Cleopatra as the icons of the female political movement.  By
no means is my intention to slander or disregard the positive attributes each
possesses.  In fact, Cleopatra's ability to stand up to the dominant male
leaders of her time is admirable to say the least.  I fully understand those
perspectives that question if the ends justify the means?(referring to Cleo's
ability to convince the leaders by utilizing her sexuality).  However, I
believe that at her time, sexual acts would be the only way for her political
agenda to be fulfilled.  As degrading as that may sound, historic evidence has
revealed the label "second class citizen" associated with women and peasants
of poor social standing.  The fact of the matter is, she utilized her
strengths and avoided her weaknesses-a good gameplan for anyone in politics.
The question that still remains is where would Cleopatra's place be in a
modern day political platform and how would the media/public respond to her?  

Hillary, on the other hand, should not be classified under the same heading as
Cleopatra. Not because of the personal scandales that surround her name, or
for her questionable marriage decisions, heck, i don't even care that she
claimed being a lifetime yankee fan after parading around the north side of
chicago in cubs gear.  The fact of the matter is time.  As Professor Boyer
says, "we'll see in twenty years." So right now, I think too many feminists
are too eager to label her a female political icon.  Personally, I look at the
results. I could care less about the gender of the potential offical.  Would
it be nice to see a female president? Sure, but it would not be an incintive
for me to vote for her. If she got my vote it would be because of her platform
and governmental issues, not because of her gender.

  

* * *

Get your FREE download of MSN Explorer at
[http://explorer.msn.com](http://go.msn.com/bql/hmtag_itl_EN.asp)  
From renlit@english.sxu.edu Wed Sep 12 15:30:05 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (renlit@english.sxu.edu) Date: Wed, 12 Sep 2001
10:30:05 EDT Subject: [renlit] lori heffron - 1st posting Message-ID:
<78.1a8d273b.28d0cb6d@cs.com> Lori Heffron- 1st posting---- It amazes me that
Cleo was the only female during this period that acquired positioning,
reputation & fame. I found it very interesting that she was very well read
with a high intellectual level in many areas. How was she alone, the only
woman with ambition and passion in this fashion? Cleo definitely knew how to
play the game and move about within her space, around the obstacles around
her. You have got to give it to her! She can be seen as the early version of
the Women's Lib movement. Not only did Cleo display female political space,
she probably influenced fashion and cosmetology which still shows her
influences today. Cleo was a woman with attitude and knew that her destiny was
not to be a slave to men. She made men a slave to her in more ways than one.
Yes, I agree that Caesar and Antony were no better with their motives of power
and lust; however, it is so baffling that Cleo had that charisma which enabled
her to bait the both of these powerful men into her web. She found their
weakness...and we all know where that was. It surely has nothing to do with
keeping a man happy by feeding him. After Cleo hooked Caesar or Antony, she
also had a way of making these men feel dependent on her for their security,
self esteem and success as a ruler. Actually, in one way, Cleo triggered the
death of both men. She pushed Caesar into changing the assembly into a
dictatorship by him, which lead to his own men betraying him and causing much
chaos in Rome. Then Cleo pushed the dream into Antony's head, especially when
Antony always felt less than Caesar in terms of a powerful ruler. Thus, she
led Antony to betray Octavian's rule by reaching Antony's ego to attain more
glory as total ruler of the world. In conclusion, Cleo was able to reach these
men psychologically with remark, in a male dominated world. From
renlit@english.sxu.edu Wed Sep 12 15:43:38 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu
(renlit@english.sxu.edu) Date: Wed, 12 Sep 2001 10:43:38 EDT Subject: [renlit]
lori heffron-- hello Message-ID: <54.1ac1f371.28d0ce9a@cs.com> Hello campers!
Just a belated hello and intro to sign on. I had Shakespeare last semester
which covered Cleo. I thought it was very interesting and brought out a lot of
topics. A couple years back I had Poston's class-- Brit Lit which covered Vera
Brittain and other women within British society life surrounding World War 1.
Having been born in the 60's era, like some of us, I have seen a lot of issues
concerning women's roles in society. It is no longer the days of June Cleaver
or the Stepford Wives, that is for sure. It has been amazing to see women
evolve within society and change. Some things I agree with and some I don't.
See ya in class--- Lori Heffron From renlit@english.sxu.edu Wed Sep 12
20:45:04 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu (sarah kaminski) Date: Wed, 12 Sep
2001 19:45:04 Subject: [renlit] (no subject) Message-ID:  Dear class, This
messsage is both my introduction and my 1st posting. My name is Sarah Kaminski
and I know, or have had classes with most of the people in this class. I hope
that this will be an interesting an informative class. I also hope that we can
engage in some lively class disscusion. While I think that CLeo was an amazing
women I must say that I am not really a fan of Hilary Clinton. In my mind the
two women are on very different levels. Our image of Cleo has been shaped by
hundreds of years, and her greatness has stood the test of time, but I do not
think that Hilary will. While they may be similar in the fact that they are
both women who occupy a political space, I think that is where their
similarities stop. Women in politics should be as normal as men in politics,
and if we keep seeing it as something special then it will remain to be
something special and women will always occupy a smaller political space then
men. Comparing Cleo and Hilary is like comparing Ceasar Agustus and President
Clinton. THey are both men who occupy a political space, but big deal!
Personally I am much more interested in the historical effect that Cleo has
had on women in general, in fashion, and as an icon. While her political space
has something to do with this there is something else about Cleo that has made
her so famous - The woman had style. She was a Diva, a Madonna, a Queen. And
for this she should be admired and studied. -Sarah
_________________________________________________________________ Get your
FREE download of MSN Explorer at http://explorer.msn.com/intl.asp From
renlit@english.sxu.edu Thu Sep 13 05:49:49 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu
(Norman Boyer) Date: Wed, 12 Sep 2001 23:49:49 -0500 Subject: [renlit] Sad
News Message-ID: <4.2.2.20010912234256.00c25850@mail.sxu.edu> Dear Students, I
am very sorry to have to report that one of our class members was verbally
assaulted in Parking Lot 1 after class Wednesday. Please, people, we need to
stick together. If you see anything happen on campus, please at least collect
information such as license plate numbers. Victims are usually in no condition
to do that themselves. I am happy to serve as intermediary in getting such
information to the proper University authorities if you are uncomfortable
doing so. NB From renlit@english.sxu.edu Thu Sep 13 15:02:03 2001 From:
renlit@english.sxu.edu (Carol Medrano) Date: Thu, 13 Sep 2001 07:02:03 -0700
(PDT) Subject: [renlit] Sad News In-Reply-To:
<4.2.2.20010912234256.00c25850@mail.sxu.edu> Message-ID:
<20010913140203.93986.qmail@web10408.mail.yahoo.com> i am deeply saddened by
your report,dr boyer. there should be no place for hatred in our school, in
our community, and in our nation. no good ever comes from hate. hatred has
caused enough heartache and pain, and it's consequences has touched us all. i
don't know how much more of hatred's consequences my heart can stand. carol
\--- Norman Boyer  wrote: > Dear Students, > > I am very sorry to have to
report that one of our > class members was > verbally assaulted in Parking Lot
1 after class > Wednesday. > > Please, people, we need to stick together. If
you > see anything happen on > campus, please at least collect information
such as > license plate > numbers. Victims are usually in no condition to do >
that themselves. > > I am happy to serve as intermediary in getting such >
information to the > proper University authorities if you are > uncomfortable
doing so. > > NB > > _______________________________________________ > Renlit
mailing list > Renlit@english.sxu.edu >
http://english.sxu.edu/mailman/listinfo/renlit
__________________________________________________ Terrorist Attacks on U.S. -
How can you help? Donate cash, emergency relief information
http://dailynews.yahoo.com/fc/US/Emergency_Information/ From
renlit@english.sxu.edu Thu Sep 13 17:00:29 2001 From: renlit@english.sxu.edu
(Norman Boyer) Date: Thu, 13 Sep 2001 11:00:29 -0500 Subject: [renlit] Fwd:
Re: Time for Boethius Message-ID:
<5.0.2.1.2.20010913104313.01b04e70@mail.sxu.edu> Dear Friends, There has been
much discussion on the international Chaucer listserv about relevant literary
works to discuss. The contribution below, from a professor at the University
of Houston, seems especially relevant to the future teachers among you. I
think we will also find our portions of The Aeneid an interesting response to
loss (even if the rest of the poem goes in more nationalistic, imperialistic
directions). I hope we can see how we as literature teachers can provide
relevant ways of getting into issues bothering students through literary texts
without necessarily having to use more direct discussions. Those of course can
also be very beneficial, as I think our Wednesday discussion was. But that one
worked in part because most of us know each other pretty well. I certainly
feel less comfortable with similar discussions in my other classes, where I
don't know very many of the students. Of course in the situation below, the
proper text was already in place. It's a little harder when, as has happened
to me, the reading assignments were act 1 of A Midsummer Night's Dream and the
first half of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight. NB >X-Sender:
engllq@mail.uh.edu >Date: Thu, 13 Sep 2001 09:06:41 -0500 >Reply-To: Chaucer
Discussion Group  >Sender: Chaucer Discussion Group  >From: "Lorraine K.
Stock"  >Subject: Re: Time for Boethius >To: CHAUCER@LISTSERV.UIC.EDU >X-RCPT-
TO:  > >Alan's and laura's suggestion about teac

