# **ENGL1260 Introduction to Women's Literature:**

# **Coming of Age In the U.S.**

**Spring 1997 T/R 12:30 - 1:45**

**Farrand/McCauley**

# **Dr. Kayann Short**

**Office hours: Wed. 12:30-2:30 and by appointment**

**21267 Farrand L-175**

**[shortk@spot.colorado.edu](mailto:shortk@colorado.edu)**

What does it mean for girls to "come of age" in the United States? Through
analyzing works of fiction, poetry, autobiography, and essay, we will examine
how girls from diverse backgrounds confront the social expectations regarding
gender, race, class, religion, and sexuality that determine their transition
from girlhood to womanhood. We will explore how girls imagine their futures
and fulfill their dreams in a society which fails to value fully the questions
and contributions of young women. By studying the connection between form and
content, we will investigate how the discursive strategies of women writers
and filmmakers create possibilities for artistic expression and social agency.

* **Required Texts: **

**All texts are available at Word is Out Bookstore**

**Growing Up Female: Stories by Women Writers from the American Mosaic, Susan
Cahill, ed. (Mentor, 1993).**

**The House on Mango Street, Sandra Cisneros (Vintage Books, 1989).**

**Diary of a Young Girl, Anne Frank (Bantam).**

**Coming of Age in Mississippi , Anne Moody (Dell, 1986).**

**Nisei Daughter, Monica Sone (Washington, 1953).**

**Reviving Ophelia, Mary Pipher (Ballantine, 1994)**

**Girl , Interrupted, Susanna Kaysen (Vintage 1993).**

**Listen Up: Voices from the Next Feminist Generation, Barbara Findlen, ed.
(Seal Press, 1995).**

**In the Heart of the Valley of Love, Cynthia Kadohata (Penguin, 1992).**

**Under the Feet of Jesus, Helena Mar ia Viramontes (Dutton, 1995). **

**Solar Storms, Linda Hogan (Scribner, 1995).**

**Packet**

* **Course Work:**
Course work involves reading all assignments, writing one essay paper,
participating in a group performance, and completing a take-home final (due
the last day of class). Attendance will be taken and points will be deducted
for more than two non-prearranged absences. Late work will not be accepted
without prior arrangement. Grades will be distributed as follows:

30% 5-6 page essay due the Thursday before spring break

20% group performance (see below)

30% final exam

10% class assignments and thinking questions

10% attendance/participation (more than two missed classes will lower grade)

Group Performance: The goal of the group performance is to illustrate how one
of the main texts explores coming of age in women's literature. Each group
will consist of approximately five members and will need to meet several times
outside of class to discuss strategies for creating a 15-20 minute
presentation. Performances might incorporate ideas from other works read in
class, historical background, the public reception of the work, secondary
critical sources, and/or multi-media resources. (See Dr. Short for use of
video camera.) The group will receive a cumulative grade based on creativity,
complexity, and effort. **THIS IS NOT A BOOK REPORT! BE AS CREATIVE AS YOU
DARE.**

**Reading Assignments:**

Week One: Introductions

Tuesday January 13: Introductions; "Hips" by Sandra Cisneros

Thursday January 15: Read Sacks, "Therapist offers insights." Meeting with
Christine Denning, Intervention specialist at Boulder High School

Weeks Two - Four: Coming of Age

Tuesday January 20: Growing Up Female (reports will be assigned in class)

Thursday January 22: Growing Up Female

Tuesday January 27: Growing Up Female

Thursday January 29: Read Higginbotham, "Teen Mags," Devereaux, "The Real
Meaning of Girl Talk"; Video:Girls Like Us

Tuesday February 3: House on Mango Street

Thursday February 5: Discuss epistemology; Piercy, "Unlearning Not to Speak"

Weeks Five - Seven: Remembering Girlhood

Tuesday February 10: Diary of a Young Girl ; Pipher, "Developmental Issues"
Thursday February 12: Diary of a Young Girl

Tuesday February 17: Coming of Age in Mississippi

Thursday February 19: Coming of Age in Mississippi (Group Presentation #1)
Tuesday February 24:Nisei Daughter

Thursday February 26: Nisei Daughter (group presentation #2); relocation map

Weeks Eight - Ten: Acting Out Anger

Tuesday March 3: Girl, Interrupted ; Pipher, "Within the Hurricane"

Thursday March 5: Girl, Interrupted (Group Presentation #3)

Tuesday March 10: Listen Up

Thursday March 12: Listen Up

Tuesday March 17: Read Pipher, "Worshipping the Gods of Thinness"; Rawe,
"Measuring Up"; Video: Slim Hopes

Thursday March 19: No class

Spring Break

Weeks Eleven - Thirteen: Changing the World

Tuesday March 31: Under the Feet of Jesus ; Willey, "The Girl Who Tells"

Thursday April 2: Under the Feet of Jesus;

Tuesday April 7: Pipher, Sex and Violence

Thursday April 9: Read Garcia, "I Just Came Out Pregnant," Gomez, "I Lost it
at the Movies,'

Tuesday April 14: Solar Storms

Thursday April 16: Solar Storms (Group Presentation #4) 'Some Like Indians
Endure,' Paula Gunn Allen; 'For All Those Who Were Indian in a Former Life,'
Andy Smith' Durham, "Teachings of My Grandmother"

Week Fourteen: Imagining the Future

Tuesday April 21: In the Heart of the Valley of Love

Thursday April 23: In the Heart of the Valley of Love; Pipher, "Let a Thousand
Flowers Bloom" and "A Fence at the Top of the Hill" (Group Presentation #5)

Week Fifteen: The Next Step

Tuesday April 28: Walker, "Becoming the Third Wave"; Denfeld, "Feminism 2000"

Thursday April 30: Final due

Films for extra credit:

Just Another Girl on the IRT

Girls Town

Mi Vida Loca

Anne Frank Remembered

The Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love

* * *

| [Dr. Kayann Short's Homepage](http://spot.colorado.edu/untitled/index.html)|
[Women's Studies Index Page](http://www.colorado.edu/farrand/WSshort/)|
[Colorado University](http://www.colorado.edu/)|

