                            | 

#  English for Teachers

_Syllabus for Fall 1998_



* * *

###  September October November December

The class meets on Monday and Wednesday, 3:00-4:50 p.m.in Arts & Sciences 22,
"The Mac Classroom/lab."

Dr. Nancy Zuercher's office is Dakota 230, and her office hours are MWF 12-1
in Dakota 230, MWF 9-9:50 in A&S 22, or by appointment. You're welcome to call
her office phone number, 677-5229 or e-mail her at nzuerchr@usd.edu.  


####  "To teach is to learn twice." --James Britton

English 408, English for Teachers, is designed to acquaint preservice teachers
with the teaching of secondary English through reading, writing, listening,
speaking, thinking, participating, and teaching. English 408, a pre-
professional course, blends current theory with practice and useful strategies
with content. The class, which is experiential, follows a workshop model. As
you learn about teaching, you simultaneously hone your own skills in writing,
reading, speaking, listening, and thinking. You will often be a learner in
simulated classroom situations; sometimes you'll be the teacher.

**Required texts:**

  * Cisneros, Sandra. _The House on Mango Street._ Vintage, 1989. **(THMS)**
  * _English Journal_ (gifts to you from NCTE), January 1997, November 1995, January 1994, October 1993 **(EJ)**
  *  Maxwell, Rhoda J., and Mary Jordan Meiser. _Teaching English in Middle and Secondary Schools._ 2nd edition. Prentice-Hall, 1997. **(M &M) **
  * Other text(s) for multicultural literature--TBA

**Supplies:**

  * Large loose-leaf binder (8 1/2 x 11) and paper  
  * Pen and pencil 
  * Dividers for binder (6--1 for each assignment listed on page 2)
  * Post-it notes
  * 2-pocket folder (prong-free)
  * 2 new high-density 3.5" computer disks for your exclusive use in English 408\. Name the disks with your first and last names; add "-bu" to the name of the second one for your back-up disk. Write your name and English 408 on the disk label before attaching it to your disk.
  * Disk box to protect your disks 

**Objectives of the course:**

  * Expanding your knowledge of language, literature (especially multicultural), writing, grammar, and technology
  * Integrating technology into learning and teaching
  * Learning strategies for teaching language, literature, writing, and grammar
  * Reflecting on your learning, your beliefs and values of teaching, classroom ethics  
  * Synthesizing your past experiences and current practices
  * Connecting practice and theory
  * Participating actively in a reading-writing workshop
  * Planning lessons and teaching them 
  * Learning formative and summative strategies for assessment, evaluation and grading
  * Using library and Internet sources for English language arts 
  * Practicing classroom research

**Expectations:**

  * Attend each scheduled class.
  * Bring your current journal, log, reading responses to each class.
  * Bring texts to class when needed.
  * Meet assignment deadlines.  
  * Respect, support, encourage, and work cooperatively with others.
  * Ask good questions.
  * Give your best and participate with good faith effort.
  * Act and speak as a professional.

**Attendance:** As most of the teaching/learning in this class is
experiential, active, and collaborative, indicating that classes can't be
"made up," your attendance is required. If you are absent, you are responsible
for getting information about the missed class before the next class from a
student in the class.

**Originality:** All work must be original to this class. You may not use work
that you've used for credit in another class.  

**Plagiarism Policy:** This class adheres to the English Department's policy
on plagiarism. Plagiarism is defined as using the words and/or ideas of
another, representing them to be your own, without proper credit to the author
or source. Whether intentional or unintentional, plagiarism will result, at a
minimum, in a grade of zero for that assignment. See the USD Student Handbook
for other possible consequences.  
    
    

####  "The best teachers of teachers are other teachers."  
\--National Writing Project/Dakota Writing Project

* * *

###  SEPTEMBER: Class as Community of Teachers and Learners

    
    
    W  2    Introduction to the course. WIC--NZ.
            
            
    ASSIGNMENT: Work on autobiography due Sept. 21. Buy books and
            supplies.
    
    M  7    Labor Day--no class 
    
    W 10    WIC--NZ. Building Classroom Community: "In Lieu of Whip and
            Chair." 
            
            ASSIGNMENT: Continue working on autobiography--due Sept. 21.
    
    M 14    WIC--NZ. Agenda Building. Introduction to Mac Classroom: Word
            Processing
            
            ASSIGNMENT: Continue working on autobiography due Sept. 21.
    
    W 16    WIC--NZ. Building Classroom Community.Introduction to Mac
            Classroom 2: preview of resources and mentor project.
    
            ASSIGNMENT: Complete autobiography to hand in on Sept. 21. Bring
            M&M to class.
    
    M 21    WIC--NZ. AUTOBIOGRAPHY DUE. Models of teaching/learning.
            
    Discussion of strategies for active reading. Introduction to The
            House on Mango Street (THMS).
    
            
    ASSIGNMENT: M&M, chapter for your group. Finish The House
            on Mango Street by Sept. 30.
    
    W 23    WIC--Janelle. Planning workshop 
            ASSIGNMENT: Polish group presentations. Finish reading chapters of
            M&M that other groups present, and note your questions.
    
    M 28    WIC--Rebecca L. Group presentations. 
            
            ASSIGNMENT: Finish THMS.
    
    W 30    WIC--Chrissy. Discussion of THMS
    
            ASSIGNMENT: Read M&M, Chapter 6, "Teaching Composition," using
            your choice of response for active reading.

Return to the top of this page.  


###  OCTOBER: Writing, Reading, Responding, Mentoring, Researching, Teaching

    
    
    M  5    WIC--Emily. GUEST TEACHER: Sue Morrell, Bon Homme High School.
            Collaborative planning for mentor project.
            
            ASSIGNMENT: Read and proofread letters to your mini-class and put
            the finished copy in Nancy Zuercher's mailbox, 226 Dakota Hall, by noon
            Wed., Oct. 7. Send e-mail to listserv with your reflections on the
            letters from your mini-class and some possible research questions
            for your teacher research paper by noon Friday, Oct. 9. In a
            single e-mail message, reply to the classmate whose name you drew,
            another classmate of your choice, and copy to nzuerchr by noon
            Tuesday, Oct. 13.       
            
    W  7    Class meets today in Dakota Hall, room 201, the home of USD's new 
            [Writing Center](http://www.usd.edu/engl/writinglab.html) 
            GUEST TEACHER: Jan Hausmann, Writing Center Director
    
            ASSIGNMENT: Finish M&M,
    	Chapter 6, "Teaching Composition" 
    
    M 12    Native American Day--no class
    
    W 14    WIC--Stephen
            Workshop for responding to BH students
            Research questions honed. Teacher research. Internet.
    
            ASSIGNMENT: Respond to BH students. Read M&M, Chapter 7,
            "Teaching Literature"
    
    M 19    WIC--Heather
            MOO introduction and discussion of "Teaching Literature"
    
            ASSIGNMENT: Review today's MOO transcript 
            
    W 21    WIC--Stacy
            MOO discussion of "Teaching Literature" continues.
    
            ASSIGNMENT:  Read M&M, Chapter 8, "Selecting Literature"
    
    M 26    WIC--TBA
            
            ASSIGNMENT:  Read M&M, Chapter 9, "Improving Writing. . ."
    
    W 28    WIC--Joanne
    
            ASSIGNMENT:  Read M&M, Chapter 10, "Understanding Grammar"
     

Return to the top of this page.  


###  NOVEMBER: Reflecting, Researching, Teaching Literature

    
    
    M  2    WIC--Rebecca M.
            ASSIGNMENT:  Read M&M, Chapter 11, "Evaluating English Language
            Arts"
    
    W  4    WIC--Nichole
            ASSIGNMENT:  Read M&M, Chapter 12, "The Nature of Language""
    M  9    
    
    	
    	WIC--Astrid
            ASSIGNMENT: Complete teacher research paper for Monday, Nov. 16
    
    W 11    Veterans' Day--no class
    
    M 16    WIC--Dirk
            Teacher research paper is due. Include drafts and copies of
            supporting research in your folder.
    
            ASSIGNMENT: Teaching plan;
    	selections from EJ
    
    
    W 18    WIC--Michele
            ASSIGNMENT:  Teaching plan;
    	selections from EJ
    
    
    M 23    WIC--Julie
            ASSIGNMENT: Teaching plan is due Mon., Nov. 30
    
    M 30    WIC--TBA
            Teaching plan is due today.
            
            ASSIGNMENT: From teachers for the Dec.2  class

Return to the top of this page.  


###  DECEMBER: Teaching, Assessing, Evaluating

    
    
    W  2    Today's teachers:
    
            ASSIGNMENT: From teachers for the Dec. 7 class
    
    M  7    Today's teachers:
    
            ASSIGNMENT: From teachers for the Dec. 9 class
    
    W  9    Today's teachers:
    
            ASSIGNMENT: From teachers for the Dec. 14 class
            
    M 14    Today's teachers:
    
    W 16    12:30-2:30 (Time scheduled for final exam) Assessment.
            Course Evaluation.
     

Return to the top of this page.  
    


[Go to the English 408 home
page.](http://www.usd.edu/~nzuerchr/408/index.html)  
---|---  
  
[](http://www.usd.edu/~nzuerchr/408/index.html)

