#  Chicano and Latino Literature Syllabus

##  Department of English, University of Texas at Austin

##  Course Description and Syllabus Fall 1996

**Instructor: Luz Elena Ramirez**  
**Unique Numbers: 28555/30325**

![](pookline.gif)

Welcome to the Chicano and Latino Literature Web page at UT. I think a little
background history may help us to understand the terms "Chicano" and
"Latino,"how they differ from one another, and where they overlap. The history
of the word "Chicano" is both social and economic, and bears heavily on the
identities that we will be addressing in selected literature. First of all,
Mexicans living in what is now the Southwest became U.S. citizens after the
U.S.-Mexico War. In 1848, both countries signed the Treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo, which stated that Mexico would cede the Southwest to the United
States for $15 million. The U.S., in turn, promised to respect the cultural
and property rights of Mexicans living in the territory.

In spite of this agreement, more than a century passed, and most Mexican-
Americans remained in the same vexed position they were immediately after the
War--without land. During the 20th-century, Mexican Americans embarked on a
renewed struggle for land with the United Farm Workers Movement. Fighting
against diverse forms of discrimination and institutionalized racism, Mexican
Americans, many of whom who by the 1960s identified themselves as Chicano,
created both grass roots and national organizations to reclaim their property
rights and, in many ways, their cultural heritage.

At various points in time, Mexican-Americans have been called Hispanic,
Chicano and, on Census forms, "other." The word Chicano, in particular, has
become celebratory and a term of resistance, but it also marks differences
between older Mexican Americans and a younger, more political generation.

If the term Chicano refers to a political and cultural movement,then the term
Latino may be considered a more general term that includes immigrant and many
kinds of Spanish-speaking populations. Latinos may be Mexican Americans, or
Cuban-American exiles, Puerto Rican translocators, Guatemalen political
refugees, or even South American immigrants, such as my family and myself.

As we shall see in this course, the debates over land, class, language, and
self-expression continue for both the Chicano and Latino people. In order to
acknowledge the complexities of Chicano and Latino writers, and especially
their complicated engagement with mainstream American culture, I first situate
the syllabus within a Latin American context. The course is then divided
thematically into four parts. **Part I: The Americas** offers critical
perspectives of Spanish colonialism and points to the constructed nature of
history. In **Part II** , we read the work of Peruvian writer Jose Mariategui
and Cuban critic Roberto Retamar in order to explore how issues of race,
class, and land are manifest in selected literary texts. In **Part III** , we
look at representations of gender in the home and in the community. This
section is especially important because it shows similarities and differences
among Latino cultures-- Mexican-American, Cuban-American, and Dominican-
American.

We "conclude" the course in **Part IV: BORDERS REAL AND IMAGINED**. Students
complete two main projects: the family narrative and research essay. The
former gives rhetorical validity to personal experiences and individual
voices; the latter offers students an opportunity to participate in a pre-
existing discourse about Chicano and Latino subjectivity.

**I. THE AMERICAS**

  * 08/28 Overview of Course ![](conquest.jpeg)
  * 08/30 Tveztan Todorov, "Columbus and the Indians" in CP
  * 09/02 No Class
  * 09/04 [Tveztan Todorov](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/student/victory.html), "The Reasons for Victory," in CP [Jose Marti](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/student/jose.html), "Our America" in CP
  * **09/06 Lynn Heyck, "Latinos Past and Present" in CP; Short Paper Response**
  * 09/09 [Jose Mariategui](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/student/mariategui.html), "The Problem of Land" in CP ![](seven.jpeg)
  * 09/11 Jose Mariategui, "The Problem of Land" in CP
  * 09/13 [Roberto Retamar](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/student/retamar.html), "Caliban" in CP
  * 09/16 Roberto Retamar, "Caliban" in CP
  * 09/18 Tomas Rivera, _This Migrant Earth_
  




**II. STRUGGLES OF THE LAND AND ISSUES OF RACE**  


  * 09/20 Tomas Rivera, _This Migrant Earth_ ; **Group Response for Web site Due**
  * 09/23 Tomas Rivera, _This Migrant Earth_
  * 09/25 PBS _!Chicano!_
  * 09/27 PBS _!Chicano!_
  * 09/30 Octavio Paz "Mexican Masks"
  * 10/02 Octavio Paz "Mexican Masks"
  * 10/04 Arturo Islas [_Rain God_ Computer Interchange](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/interchanges/raingod.html)
  * 10/07 Arturo Islas, _Rain God_
  * 10/09 Arturo Islas, _Rain God_
  * **10/11 Essay I Due**

  
**III. COMMUNITY AND THE HOME**  


  * **10/14 Cristina Garcia, _Dreaming in Cuban_**
  * 10/16 Cristina Garcia, _Dreaming in Cuban_
  * 10/18
  * 10/21 Ana Castillo, _So Far From God_
  * 10/23 Ana Castillo, _So Far From God_
  * 10/25 Ana Castillo, [_So Far From God_ Computer Interchange](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/interchanges/castillo.html)
  * 10/28 Ana Castillo, _So Far From God_
  * 10/30 Julia Alvarez, _How the Garcia Girls Lost Their Accents_
  * 11/01 Julia Alvarez, _How the Garcia Girls Lost Their Accents_
  * 11/04 Julia Alvarez, _How the Garcia Girls Lost Their Accents_
  * 11/06 Julia Alvarez, _How the Garcia Girls Lost Their Accents_
  * 11/08 Sandra Cisneros, _House on Mango Street_
  * 11/11 Sandra Cisneros, _House on Mango Street_

  
**IV. BORDERS: REAL AND IMAGINED**  


  * **11/13 Family Narratives**
  
[Lisa Billalobos](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/family/famlisa.html)  
[Catherine Chacon](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/family/famcat.html)  
[Sylvia De Leon](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/family/famsylv.html)  
[Gabriel Herrera](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/family/mary.html)  
[Bryan Rubio](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/family/autobio.html)

  * 11/15 Gloria Anzaldua, "Homeland/Aztlan" in CP
  
[Short Essay: What does the Border mean to
you?](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/border/index.html)

  * 11/18 Discussion of Gloria Anzaldua's "New Consciousness"
  * 11/20 Discussion of Border Responses
  * 11/22 [Final Essay](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/assignments/essay.html)
  * 11/25 Topics and Research Due
  * 11/27 No Class
  * 11/29 Thanksgiving
  * 12/02 Peer Reviews
  * 12/04
  * **12/06 Final Essay Due with Portfolio and Course Evaluations**

[Return to Chicano and Latino Literature Home
Page](http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/~ramirez/infra/ramirez.html)

