![](images/cleardot.gif) |  |  | ![](images/menu3_00.gif)  
---  
[![](images/faculty.gif)](facspec.html) | ![](images/menu3_00.gif)  
[![](images/courses.gif)](courses.html) | ![](images/menu3_00.gif)  
[![](images/handbook.gif)](handbook.html) | ![](images/menu3_00.gif)  
[![](images/news.gif)](news.html) | ![](images/menu3_00.gif)  
[![](images/events.gif)](events.html) | ![](images/menu3_00.gif)  
[![](images/links.gif)](links.html) | ![](images/menu3_00.gif)  
[![](images/home.gif)](home.html) | ![](images/menu3_00.gif)  
  




![Ph.D. Program in English, CUNY-Graduate Center](images/english2.jpg)  
  

  
S pring 2001 C ourse D escriptions

  * 70200  
Th, 2:00-4:00 p.m.  
**Caribbean Women's Literature, 1970-present**  
Prof. Barbara Webb

This course will explore the relationship between gender and culture in the
fiction, poetry, and essays of Caribbean women writers. Although these writers
represent a variety of responses to the challenges faced by Caribbean women in
general, they share a common emphasis on the relationships within the family
and nation that tend to perpetuate the inequities of class, race, and gender
associated with the colonial past. We will discuss their reinterpretations of
Caribbean history and culture, their revisions of nationalist discourse, and
their experiments with language and literary form. The course includes texts
by Olive Senior, Lorna Goodison, Opal Palmer, Erna Brodber, Jamaica Kincaid,
Jean Rhys, Michelle Cliff, and Edwidge Danticat. The major focus of the course
is the writing by women from the English-speaking Caribbean; but given the
increasingly cross-cultural focus of Caribbean literature since the 1960s,
selections by writers such as Paule Marshall, Rosario Ferre, and Maryse Conde
will also be discussed. This course will be conducted as a seminar with class
discussions of assigned readings and oral presentations each week; a term
paper (15-20 pages) will also be required.

  * 70500  
Th, 6:30-8:30 p.m.  
**Chaucer's Ends: The Canterbury Tales**  
Prof. Scott Westrem

Everyone agrees that when Geoffrey Chaucer died in 1400, he left unfinished,
and possibly unordered, a collection of tales supposedly told by a group of
pilgrims on the road to the shrine of St. Thomas ид Becket, Britain's most
popular medieval pilgrimage site. Yet almost everyone would also agree that
the resulting book, which he called "the tales of Caunterbury," has guaranteed
Chaucer his place with Shakespeare as a towering writer of literature in
English. In fact, as Harold Bloom observes in The Western Canon, the Tales
"consists of giant fragments" that leave the reader with "little impression of
something unfinished." Although there are actually times when the impression
of "unfinishedness" is quite powerful, Bloom's sense of the work may explain
why even the editors who arrange Chaucer's collected works place his Tales
first (though everyone believes he was writing it in his last years), and thus
before The Book of the Duchess, which most scholars consider to be his
earliest major poem, and one which he actually did complete, probably around
two decades before he turned to the "General Prologue."

In this seminar, we will read the Book and almost all of the Tales, asking
many questions, only one of which will be: What is Chaucer doing? Thinking
about the question will lead us to examine his sources (most of them in other
languages), themes, narrative voice, character development, and use of genres;
we will also pay attention to crucial--if apparently fusty--matters such as
codicology, since manuscript evidence certainly influences important
conclusions scholars draw about the text. We will of course pay attention to
Chaucer's indebtedness to the international literature of his day,
particularly to the Italian and French writers of his generation (and one
earlier) whose work he used (and transformed) in stunning ways that make him
an originator of the very idea of comparative literature. We will also examine
pertinent criticism (with an attempt to grasp something of the history of
Chaucer criticism), including work by D. W. Robertson, Donald Howard, Jill
Mann, V. A. Kolve, David Aers, Lee Patterson, Mary Carruthers, and Carolyn
Dinshaw. Knowledge of Middle English is not a prerequisite for this seminar,
but a desire to learn it is; we will spend a fair amount of time in early
sessions on Chaucer's language. I pay a great deal of attention to student
writing with assignments spread throughout the semester: four informal
"reaction" papers, one 6-8 page paper requiring work with a manuscript
(original or facsimile) or some other medieval artifact, and a lengthier
(15-page) research paper. If successful, this seminar will never finish.

Required Texts: The Riverside Chaucer, gen. ed. Larry D. Benson, 3rd ed.
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987) and Oxford Guides to Chaucer: The Canterbury
Tales, ed. Helen Cooper (New York: Oxford U P, 1989, rpt. 1991).

  * 74100  
M, 6:30-8:300 p.m.  
**Lyric, Prose, Modernity**  
Prof. Joshua Wilner

In one of Baudelaire's late prose poems, a poet tells of losing his halo while
dodging traffic on a crowded boulevard: "It slipped from my head into the mire
of the pavement, and I didn't have the courage to pick it up - better to lose
my insignia than to break my bones." In this allegorical anecdote, Baudelaire
captures the desanctified language of the lyric poet as it passes through the
busy, crowded world of prose.

The cultural condition Baudelaire evokes and its connection with a changing
sense of the relationship between poetry and prose will be the subject of this
course. We will begin by examining a group of romantic texts (some pages from
Rousseau's Reveries, some fragments by Schlegel, the debate over "poetic
diction" between Wordsworth and Coleridge) which more or less directly
challenge neo-classical genre theory and adumbrate formal possibilities which
will emerge more distinctly over the course of the century. We will then turn
to another group of romantic texts, including writings by Dorothy Wordsworth,
Coleridge, Keats, Byron and Mary Shelley, to study the gender sub-text which
informs this history - a sub-text in which the figure of poetic election is
male and the matrix of prose female. De Quincey's Confessions of an English
Opium-Eater, which was a self-conscious experiment in "impassioned prose," and
Baudelaire's pre-symbolist Artificial Paradises, which was directly influenced
by De Quincey and marked the later Baudelaire's turn from poetry to prose, are
at the historical center of the course. They will provide a bridge between the
romantic writers with whom we began and the late nineteenth and early
twentieth century writers of experimental prose with whom we will conclude:
Rimbaud, Stein, Woolf, and Benjamin.

Requirements: for 4 credits - one short (3 to 5 page) and one long (15 to 20
page) paper; for 2 credits - one 5 to 7 page paper.

  * 74100 (a mini-course; 2 credits)  
4 sessions, April 17, 19, 24 and 26, 11:45-1-45.  
**Wordsworth and Clare**  
Prof. Angus Fletcher

  * 74200   
W, 4:15-6:15 p.m.  
**Victorian Poetry and Poetics**  
Prof. Donald Stone

In his Preface to Lyrical Ballads, Wordsworth made grandiose claims for poetry
("the breath and finer spirit of all knowledge") which Victorian poets were to
draw upon in a variety of ways: the choosing, for example, of "incidents and
situations from common life"; the blurring of the distinction between poetry
and prose-or, for that matter, between poetry and other disciplines, such as
philosophy, psychology, and religion. In addition, the Victorians gained from
their Romantic predecessors a sense of the poet as "unacknowledged legislator
of mankind" (Shelley), as "rock of defence of human nature" (Wordsworth). In
this course we will be looking at some of the ways in which Victorian poets,
as heirs to the Romantics, redrew the boundaries of poetry, allowing them to
write as sages and critics, artists and moralists. For the first class,
students are urged to reread or reread Wordsworth's "Preface"-- and are
recommended to look at Shelley's "Defence of Poetry and Carlyle's "The Hero as
Man of Letters." Thereafter, we will survey some of the varieties of Victorian
poetic expression, taking the form of Tennyson's poetics of loss; of Arnold's
merging of poetry and criticism; of the Brownings', Clough's, and Meredith's
use of poetry as fiction; of the Victorian novelists' use of fiction as poetry
(selected passages from Thackeray, Elliot, Charlotte Bronte, Peter); of the
fusing of painting and poetry by the Pre-Raphaelites (Dante and Christina
Rossetti, Morris, Swinburne); of the expression of religion in poetry
(Hopkins, Newman); of the comic spirit in Lear, Carroll, Thackeray, and W. S.
Gilbert; of the love of poetic craft in Hardy; of the outpourings of (in
Yeats's phrase) the "Tragic Generation" (Wilde, Dowson, John Davidson, James
Thomson); and finally of the creations of (Yeats's phrase again) the "Last
Romantics"-Yeats, Henley, Housman, and Kipling.

This is a vast literary terrain, and it is expected that students will focus
on poets they particularly like and want, or need, to study. If students want
to add authors to the list (Sir Henry Taylor? Alice Meynell? Thomas Lovell
Beddoes?), they are encouraged to do so. We will also consider some of the
major critical positions on poetry-by Arnold, Browning, Bagehot, Ruskin,
Pater, Symons, among others-made during this period. Each student is
responsible for an oral presentation and a term paper.

texts: The Major Victorian Poets: Tennyson, Browning, Arnold, ed. William
Buckler (Riverside ISBN 0-395-14024-2) The Penguin Book of Victorian Verse,
ed. Daniel Karlin (Penguin ISBN 0-14-044578-1) Thomas Hardy, Selected Poetry
(Oxford ISBN 0-19-283273-5)

  * 74300  
F, 11:45-1:45 p.m.  
**The Victorian Novel**  
Prof. Felicia Bonaparte

The nineteenth century was an age of radical and constant change. Old ideas
were being challenged. New ideas were being born. Self, society, human
relationships, history, politics, science, art, every area of human thought,
every aspect of human existence, every detail of human life was in a state of
transformation. Our purpose in this course will be to understand these
revolutions and to examine the many ways in which the nineteenth-century novel
sought to reflect them and address them. We will therefore be concerned both
with what the novels say and with the complex ways they say them, thus with
the manner in which the novel comments on social, psychological,
philosophical, historical, political, and economic realities, as well as with
its language and structure. Finally, we will be concerned with the larger
aesthetic issues raised by the these novelists themselves as they attempt to
work out a form uniquely designed to express their vision.

Readings will include the following (in the editions cited, where listed):
Jane Austen, Mansfield Park (Penguin); Emily Bronte, Wuthering Heights
(Norton); Charlotte Bronte, Villette; William Makepeace Thackeray, Vanity
Fair; Charles Dickens, Bleak House (Norton); George Eliot, Middlemarch (Oxford
World Classics, Bonaparte introduction), George Meredith, The Egoist; Thomas
Hardy, Jude the Obscure (Oxford World Classics, Sutherland introduction).

  * 74800  
W, 6:30-8:30  
**Remapping Early American Studies: North American Studies in a Global Frame**  
Prof. David Kazanjian

This course remaps early American literature via current, critical debates
about the "transatlantic," "global," or "international" circuits of that
literature. We will read and discuss early American texts, as well as the
methodologies and approaches through which those texts have been understood,
in order to examine critically both American Literature and American Studies.
We will set the stage with two weeks of readings on the current, critical
debates, including work by Jenny Sharpe, Amy Kaplan, Donald Pease, and Michael
Denning. We will then examine a series of textual and historical flash points
in early American, cultural and literary history:

* European Narratives of Discovery and Exploration  
* The Sexing and Racing of Criminality in Late Seventeenth and Late Eighteenth-Century North America  
* The Eighteenth-Century Rise and Nineteenth-Century Decline of Black Sailors on the North Atlantic  
* The Turn of the Nineteenth-Century Movement for a National Culture  
* "Dime Novels" and the U.S.-Mexico War

Major themes will include: white settler colonialism; class, race, sexuality,
gender, and ethnic formations; the rise of the nation-state and national
culture; manifest destiny and imperialism; "exceptionalism" and
"internationalism;" canon formation; "highbrow" and "lowbrow" literatures.
Primary material could include texts by: Richard Hakluyt, William Bradford,
John Smith; Ann Hutchinson, Mary Rowlandson, "Adam," Samuel Sewall, John
Saffin, Johnson Green; Brition Hammon, Olaudah Equiano, Venture Smith, Nancy
Prince, George Henry; J. Hector St. John de Crevecoeur, Susanna Rowson,
Charles Brockden Brown, William Apess; George Lippard, Ned Buntline, Harry
Halyard.

  * 74900  
Th, 6:30-8:30 p.m.  
**Melville**  
Prof. William Kelly

The works: most of the prose, a significant chunk of the poetry, the critical
tradition. An oral report; a seminar paper. Deep divers of every persuasion
are welcome; the faint of heart are encouraged to seek enlightenment in other
venues.

  * 75100  
W, 2:00-4:00 p.m.  
**Postwar American Fiction**  
Prof. Morris Dickstein

This course will examine some of the most important works of fiction published
in America after 1945 as literary works but also as reflections of some
significant social developments taking place in the country, including the
effects of the war, echoes of the Holocaust, the new middle-class affluence,
the growth of mass culture, the decay of the cities and migration to the
suburbs, the cold war, the new ethnicity, the rise of the Beats and the
counterculture, the civil rights revolution, the war in Vietnam, and the
resurgence of feminism. The writers may include Norman Mailer, Flannery
O'Connor, J.D. Salinger, Ralph Ellison, Saul Bellow, Joseph Heller, John
Cheever, Philip Roth, John Updike, Jack Kerouac, Vladimir Nabokov, Thomas
Pynchon, Raymond Carver, and Toni Morrison, among others. Some attention will
be paid to the influence of their predecessors who wrote between the wars.
There will be some readings and oral reports dealing with the other arts, such
as film, painting, and music, and with the social critics of the period, among
them David Riesman, William H. Whyte, C. Wright Mills, and Betty Friedan. An
oral report and a term paper will be required of each member of the seminar.

  * 75100  
T, 2:00-4:00 p.m.  
**Art and Thought of the 1950's**  
Prof. Louis Menand

A study of art, literature, film, and ideas, mostly American, in the 1950s. We
will try to see the works we study in their social context, particularly the
context of the Cold War. We will examine specifically the following topics:
the Hiss case; the post-studio Hollywood movie; Abstract Expressionism; the
philosophy of Wittgenstein, Sellars, and Quine; the New York intellectuals;
the Beats; the Sputnik crisis; Elvis Presley and the emergence of rock 'n'
roll; the photography of Robert Frank; the literature of ethnicity;
structuralist theory (Frye, Merton, Barthes, and Chomsky); the civil rights
movement; and European cinema (Breathless, Hiroshima Mon Amour, The 400 Blows,
La Dolce Vita, and Black Orpheus, all released in the United States in 1959).
Texts include: Advertisements for Myself, The Liberal Imagination, On the
Road, Howl, Mythologies, The Little Disturbances of Man, Peyton Place, Sunset
Boulevard, and The Cat in the Hat.

Students not enrolled in a Ph.D. program must have the permission of the
instructor.

  * 75200  
T, 4:15-6:15 p.m.  
**Passing, Lynching and Jim Crow in African American Literature**  
Prof. Michele Wallace

This course will examine issues of gender, sexuality, passing, lynching and
hybridity in Afro-American literature at the turn-of-the-century precisely
because such thematic juxtapositions were paramount among the preoccupations
of black writers during this period. Given any familiarity with the political
and sociological context of their lives, the reasons for this become obvious.

Reconstruction had ended in the 1870s with a compromise on the part of the
status quo in the North with native whites in the South conditional upon the
denial of the civil rights of Afro-Americans, despite passage of the 13th,
14th and 15th Amendments designed to protect them. Lynchings, race riots,
institutionalized Jim Crow segregation and aggressive racism in the schools,
the penal system, and in property and voting regulations were gradually but
increasingly widespread and commonplace throughout the South where the
overwhelming majority of the black population was still located. Attempts to
escape, either in groups or individually, to unsettled territories in the West
or South of the Mexican border, and to found black towns (as in Their Eyes
Were Watching God and in Paradise), more often than not resulted in the spread
of Jim Crow conditions. No one knows how many previously black identified
persons who were light enough to pass, and who had once enjoyed certain
privileges as free blacks during slavery and as upper class mulattoes during
Reconstruction, ultimately passed over into whiteness for their own safety;
darker skinned blacks almost uniformly kept their secrets and helped them
hide.

It was one of those historical moments, not nearly so rare (although rarely
spoken of) as some of us like to think, when fascist sentiments ran rampant
throughout the land, not only against blacks but Jews, Catholics, Native
(Indians) Americans, Asians and swarthy immigrants of all descriptions. Yet it
was also a time of great hope and aspiration for a small and upwardly mobile
black intellectual elite (composed of roughly the 10,000 blacks who, against
all odds, achieved a college education by 1920). These so called "leaders,"
whom DuBois hopefully called the "Talented Tenth" (when they were in fact no
more than a fraction of 1% of the "race") could not necessarily foretell how
long the struggle of their people for freedom and opportunity would be.
Needless to say this educated elite frequently but not always overlapped with
the formerly upper class mulattoes, many of whom were forced to flee to the
North in order to avoid being lynched and burnt out. Both Ida B. Wells and
Charles Chesnutt are representative of this cohort. The elite, historian
Rayford Logan and others tell us, formed the first great migration of blacks
to the North.

Through a careful reading of three of the crucial black texts of this period--
Booker T. Washington's Up From Slavery, W.E.B. Du Bois's Souls of Black Folk
and Ida B. Wells' On Lynchings, we hope to come to a better understanding of
how and why American writers of fiction about the South, such as Charles
Chesnutt, Kate Chopin, Mark Twain and James Weldon Johnson, constructed the
often melodramatic stories of frustrated black and mulatto struggle and uplift
that have come down to us.

Readings  
Leon Litwack, Trouble in Mind: Black Southerners in the Age of Jim Crow, Knopf
(1999)--Textbook.  
Booker T. Washington, Up From Slavery (1901)  
W.E.B. DuBois, The Souls of Black Folk (1903)  
Ida B. Wells, On Lynching (1890s)  
Gail Bederman, Manliness  & Civilization: A Cultural History of Gender and
Race in the U.S., 1880-1917, Univ. of Chicago P, 1995--Textbook.  
Charles Chesnutt, Mandy Oxendine (1899)  
Joel Chandler Harris, Uncle Remus and Brer Rabbit, Applewood Books (1907)  
Paul Lawrence Dunbar, The Sport of the Gods (1901)  
Albert Boime, The Art of Exclusion: Representing Blacks in the Nineteenth
Century, Smithsonian P, 1990--Textbook.  
Mark Twain, Puddinhead Wilson (1894)  
Kate Chopin, The Awakening (1899)  
Anna J. Cooper, A Voice from the South (1892)  
James Weldon Johnson, The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man (1912)

  * 77100  
M, 4:15-6:15 p.m.  
**Maidens, Madmen, and Haunted Houses: 18th and 19th Century Gothic Fiction**  
Prof. William Coleman

The course will examine gothicism from its origin in the late 18th century
through the flowering of the genre in the 19th century, with some reference to
modern gothic literature and cinema. It will discuss the literary influences
(Shakespeare the German Schauerroman tradition, French erotic fiction, the
novel of sentiment) and the cultural influences (antiquarianism, the
picturesque) in the development of gothicism. The course will emphasize the
importance of gothicism in the presentation of character in European fiction-
as a vehicle to depict psychological states, especially mental disorders and
sexual obsessions. This is symbolized in the central prop of gothic fiction,
the haunted house. The course will also describe gothicism as a genre which
women (the predominant writers of the genre) used to describe their limited
roles, functions, and rights to other women (the predominant readers of the
genre). This is expressed in the central character conflict of gothic fiction-
an innocent heroine pursued by a male figure anxious to subject her to
arbitrary religious, political, or familial power. Finally, the course will
describe gothicism as a response to three late 18th century revolutions: the
aesthetic revolution whereby Longinus supplanted Aristotle (thus Burke's
observation in On the Sublime and the Beautiful, that under certain
circumstances pain and danger are attractive, provided a basis for the
aesthetics of gothicism), the literary revolution expressed in the works of
the so-called Age of Sensibility, and the political revolutions of the period
1775-1815 (thus, the marquis de Sade's description of gothic fiction in his
Idee sur les romans as "the fruit of the revolution of which all Europe felt
the shock"). The course will reflect and acknowledge Joyce Carol Oates's
observation, that gothicism is "...not a literary tradition as much as a
fairly realistic assessment of modern life."

  * 79000  
Th, 4:15-6:15 p.m.  
**Composing: Writing Theory and Practice**  
Prof. Sondra Perl

Over the past quarter century, a new field has grown from observing writers at
work. These studies of composing have generated new perspectives for writing
classrooms, new approaches for developing student interest in writing, and new
theoretical views on reading, writing, and what it means to create. In this
course we will survey the landmark contributions to research on composing --
works by Emig, Graves, Perl, Rose, Heath, Flynn, Sommers, and others. But the
emphasis will be on developing students' abilities to extend this inquiry
themselves. We will raise key questions: What is writing? How does it unfold?
Who are we or who do we become as we write? What fosters or thwarts the act of
composing? And we will use the writing we do together as the basis for
responding.

Students will be asked to fulfill three requirements during the term: (1)
present a critical review of one major body of work in the field, (2) keep a
weekly response journal on assigned readings, and (3) produce by the end of
the term a portfolio of work written during the seminar.

  * 79500 (Intensive Intersession Version)  
Day/Time TBA  
**Theory and Practice of Literary Scholarship and Criticism**  
Prof. David Greetham

This intensive course is intended to provide students with the theoretical,
conceptual, and methodological framework for dealing with the increasingly
complex (inter)disciplinary arrangement of data in media from print to
hypertext, and to give practical experience in archival access, data
manipulation, and textual production. Operating under a number of different
theoretical approaches (from intentionalism to reception to culture criticism
to gender studies), the intensive seminar organizes the various practical
methods in archival research (enumeration, description, transcription,
production, and so on) within a recognition that historical moment,
ideological position, gendered identity and other personal and cultural
"markers" will influence the apparently objective, positivist assumptions of
"strict and pure" bibliography. Students in the course will thus be exposed to
the necessary bibliographical and archival skills necessary to gain command of
data, but will also be introduced to the conceptual underpinnings of this
practique. This balance between the theory and practice means, for example,
that we will be just as likely to encounter Derrida's Archive, Fever and
Werner's forthcoming collection on The Poetics of the Archive as we will more
"conventional" approaches as Altick's Art of Literary Research or Harner's
Literary Research Guide. The means of integrating these approaches will
inevitably be intertextual, and the textualization of data will be our
acknowledged organizational principle. This means that our investigation of
manuscript, print, and hypertext will be continually informed by the awareness
of the textuality of both the medium and the message. Research thus becomes,
and is embedded in, text and culture.

The intensive format of the course reflects its theoretical/practical
interrelations. We will meet often (usually twice a week), and for longer
periods (usually three hours, with a break) than in the conventional seminar,
but we will complete the course in just one month! There will be much less
emphasis on external archival work and much more on in-class discussion of the
specific results of the issues raised by each assignment. I will be on call
throughout this period, by e-mail or phone, and we may construct our own-
online website for assignments and discussion. This version of U795 will
address those students who are interested in linking archival and
bibliographical research to their other critical work, but it is only fair to
acknowledge that the intensive version will not provide as much experience in
library work as the semester-long versions offered during the regular term.

Course requirements:  
Attendance at and participation in all sessions; preparation of short
research/textual assignments for each session; completion of final print or
hypertext edition.

Required texts:  
D. C. Greetham, Textual Scholarship: An Introduction (Garland, 1994); Jerome
J. McGann, A Critique of Modern Textual Criticism (Virginia,1992, 2nd ed.);
Peter L. Shillingsburg, Scholarly Editing in the Computer Age (Michigan, 1997,
3rd ed.); G. Thomas Tanselle, A Rationale of Textual Criticism (Pennsylvania,
1989). All are available in paperback.

  * 79500  
W, 4:15-6:15 p.m.  
**Theory and Practice of Literary Scholarship and Criticism**  
Prof. Norman Kelvin

This course relates textual scholarship to contemporary theories of literary
and cultural interpretation, including those of Bakhtin, J.L. Austin, Derrida,
Foucault, Baudrillard, Kristeva, Eagleton, Jameson, Greenblatt, Sinfield,
Gates, and Morrison. With these as context, we take up such areas of textual
scholarship as textual criticism and scholarly editing, focusing on questions
to be raised and answered in establishing texts for scholarly use - e.g., for
writing doctoral dissertations. There will be special attention to the
positions taken by Greetham, McGann, and Tanselle, but the question before us
at all times will be, how does textual scholarship-i.e., the choosing or
making of a copytext-relate to the modes of interpretation we employ as
scholar-critics? The term-project will be a critical edition of a short poem
or other brief work, and what is meant by "critical edition" will be explained
and discussed. Part of the term-project will also be a reading of the text
established, and in developing the reading students will be encouraged to use
the literary theory or theories most relevant to their own interests.

  * 80400  
W, 2:00-4:00 p.m.  
**Linguistics of Modern Poetry**  
Prof. Edmund Epstein

The special needs of modern British and American poetry put a great strain
upon the English language. Modern poets, such as Yeats, Eliot, Pound, Hopkins,
Wallace Stevens, Robert Lowell, John Berryman, and some others meet this
unprecedented crisis in two ways:

1) they employ all the resources of the language, including some deep
properties that play little part in casual language, and 2) they "sabotage"
the English language in subtle ways, to achieve their ends.

Yeats, Eliot and Stevens attempt "timeless" effects in their Symbolist poetry.
Hopkins builds the essence of what he is describing--the "instress"-- into the
language of his poems. Lowell and Berryman experiment with the disrupted and
anguished tone and register of modern discourse in their characteristic
poetry.

This course will be an introduction to linguistics, as well as an exploration
of the characteristic means of expression in modern British and American
poetry. There will be introductions to necessary elements of the phonological,
syntactic, and semantic elements of language.

In the class discussions on modern poets, there will also be reference to
other poets who experiment with the English language: Pope, Shakespeare,
Donne, Emily Dickinson..There will also be reference to poets in other
languages, whose practices elucidate those of modern British and American
poets: Rilke, Baudelaire, Laforgue, Montale, among others.

Texts: There will be no texts; the instructor has prepared material on
language for the class. The students will be able to acquire the texts for
analysis in editions of the poets to be analyzed, and in anthologies of modern
literature.

  * 80400  
T, 6:30-8:30 p.m.  
**Asian Encounters**  
Prof. Eve Sedgwick

This seminar concerns the relation of Asian religious thought--especially
Buddhism--to European and American culture. Vedanta, Taoism, and Buddhism have
"arrived" and been influential in western thought in many forms through many
different encounters over many centuries. Thus, by now an Asian encounter with
western culture must also be understood as a re-encounter with a palimpsest of
previous Asian currents and influences (as well as vice versa). Necessarily,
then, the seminar also involves a range of difficult methodological,
theoretical, and political issues surrounding authenticity, dissemination,
appropriation, recognition, and perhaps especially, pedagogy.

Reading will be drawn from Buddhist sutras, Romantic and Transcendentalist
literature, German philosophy, New Age and self-help literature, critical
religious studies, and twentieth-century American fiction and poetry.

  * 80400  
T, 4:15-6:15 p.m.  
**Ear Training: Poetry, Music, Performance**  
Prof. Wayne Koestenbaum

An experimental-experiential-introduction to the ABCs of poetry, at least its
musical dimension: how to hear verse. At the seminar's core is the work of
five writers for whom music was a powerful metaphor: John Keats, Walt Whitman,
Emily Dickinson, Wallace Stevens, and Langston Hughes. We will read them
deeply and closely, our ears tuned to musical tropes and to sonorous values
(vowel, consonant, pause, rhyme, measure).

Though our focus is on these five poets, we will also listen to music itself
(including Scriabin's mystical/erotic Poииmes for piano), in order to explore
how music can aspire to the condition of poetry, to hear how words are set to
music, and to appreciate individual vocal timbre (Elisabeth Schwarzkopf,
Billie Holiday). Exploring philosophies of listening and of performance, we
will ask (to use Gertrude Stein's terms): what is the difference between
playing for oneself and playing for strangers, or between writing for oneself
and writing for strangers?

Critical texts may include John Cage's Silence, Jacques Attali's Noise, Edward
Said's Musical Elaborations, and Roland Barthes's The Responsibility of Forms.
For assistance in matters of metrics we will consult Alfred Corn's The Poem's
Heartbeat.

The seminar will take place in a room with a piano and CD player, encouraging
frequent demonstrations. Course requirements are an essay (20-25 pages), and a
performance, its nature up for discussion. It may be a musical performance, a
poetic recitation, a dramatic event, a dance, or a sonic intervention of any
kind, including an unveiling and contextualization of a recorded piece.) No
musical or poetic background is required, though students already steeped in
these arts are welcome to enroll.

The course is devoted to the rapturous meanings of audition-but no "auditors,"
in the academic sense of the word, will be allowed. Students, however, may
take the seminar for two credits, which will entail the performance but not
the essay.

  * 80500  
M, 2:00-4:00 p.m.  
**Narrative Theory and Theoretical Practice**  
Prof. Gerhard Joseph

This course will survey the developments in narrative theory from the end of
the nineteenth to the late twentieth century, using various fictions as texts
to exemplify and test the theories. We will begin with a brief overview of the
theory of fiction from Henry James to Wayne Booth, and then take up some
issues in structuralism and post structuralism, gender in narrative, and
theories of African-American, post-colonial, and cyber narrative. Some of the
readings will be in duplicated handouts, but we will also use Wallace Martin's
Recent Theories of Narrative and Narrative/Theory, ed. By David Richter. The
literary texts may include (but need not be limited to) Austen's Pride and
Prejudice, Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, Dickens's David Copperfield, some
Henry James short stories, Conrad's Heart of Darkness, Morrison's Sula,
Nabokov's Pale Fire, Gibson's Neuromancer, and Mark Danielewski's House of
Leaves. Students will make a class presentation considering a fictional text
of their choice in light of a given week's theoretical perspective and write a
final long paper applying some aspect of narrative theory to a narrative text.

  * 81000  
W, 6:30-8:30 p.m.  
**Dissertation Workshop**  
Prof. Tom Hayes

Designed to help students write the prospectus (which should not take all
term) and/or the dissertation, this writing workshop will respond to the needs
and the size of the group. There may or may not be assigned readings and
exercises, at the beginning. One certain thing is that everyone will read, and
respond in writing to everyone else's work, and that the pages to be discussed
will be circulated among members of the workshop at least a week ahead of
time.

  * 81300  
M, 6:30-8:30 p.m.  
**The Melodramatic Imagination: Drama in the 19th Century**  
Prof. Anne Humpherys

Melodrama was a dominant mode of meaning-making in 19th century Britain.
Though the term has a specific meaning in terms of work written for the stage,
recently scholars, most writing in the wake of Peter Brooks' seminal study
"The Melodramatic Imagination," have used melodrama as a means to understand
19th century politics, social policy, and economics, as well as painting and
the novel. This course will both continue that work and survey 19th century
British drama. We will begin at the beginning with the emergence of melodrama
out of the French revolution, look at the way it took shape in 19th century
drama; consider the way it formed the 19th-century novel; look at some
examples of its integration into the understanding of history and social
conditions ("The Communist Manifesto," for example, is a 19th century document
that understands history in melodramatic terms), and end with speculation
about its loss of force as a tool of understanding. We may briefly consider
its survival in 20th century film. Readings will include plays, novels, and
19th century plays, novels, and social documents as well as recent critical
materials; among these will be plays by Dion Boucicault and novels by popular
writers as well as George Eliot and Thomas Hardy.

There will be a class project which will involve, in addition to studying the
texts themselves, looking at works about 19th century acting techniques, music
and the mechanics of the stage, all of which I hope will lead to a
performance. Students will write a final paper which may grow out of the
performance or alternatively engage the issues of the course in the context of
other readings.

  * 81400  
W, 2:00-4:00 p.m.  
**Shakespearean Tragedy and Religious Identity**  
Prof. Richard McCoy

This course will focus on four major groups of Shakespearean plays and
consider some of their major themes and issues, including the problem of evil
and the ethical and teleological dimensions of tragedy, the historical impact
of the Reformation on English drama, and the growing awareness of individual
and alien identities in the early modern period.  
The 10 plays will be grouped accordingly:  
1) The great Shakespearean tragedies: Hamlet, Othello, King Lear, and Macbeth  
2) Roman plays that confront alien religious beliefs: Titus Andronicus and
Julius Caesar  
3) Problem plays that deal with religion - Measure for Measure and The
Merchant of Venice.  
4) History plays that probe the origins of the English Reformation: King John
and Henry VIII.

Our secondary reading will begin with selections from classic texts on the
genre, including Aristotle and Nietzsche, as well as A. C. Bradley's immensely
influential Shakespearean Tragedy. We will also utilize the critical theories
of Rene Girard, Mieke Bal, and others, to probe the ritual aspects of tragedy,
as well as the scholarly approaches of Stephen Greenblatt, Debora Shuger, and
others who concentrate on the religious dimensions of Shakespearean theater.
Finally, we will explore the increasingly self-conscious inwardness prompted
by sectarian conflict through selections from Reformation historians,
including Eamon Duffy, Christopher Haigh, and others. Assignments will consist
of a brief (5-minute) oral report, an annotated bibliography, and a research
paper or teaching portfolio.

  * 81500  
F, 11:45 a.m. - 1:45 p.m.  
**Gender and Class in Milton, Blake, and Their Puritan and Counter-Puritan
Traditions**  
Prof. Jacqueline DiSalvo

This class will begin with a study of class, gender and sexuality as it
appears in Paradise Lost and Samson Agonistes and their Biblical traditions.
We will attend to the historical context of the Puritan Revolution and recent
historicist, Marxist, feminist, psychoanalytic readings by such scholars as
Nancy Armstrong, Aschaf Rushdy, David Lowenstein, Joseph Wittreich, Mary
Nyquist, David Norbrook, Sharon Achenstrin, Laura Knoppers etc. Then we will
consider Blake's Romantic and counter-Puritan appropriation and revision of
Milton. Finally we will examine the Miltonic legacy in American Puritanism via
Nathaniel Hawthorne and will study the feminist revisions of these traditions
in Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, and Toni Morrison's Paradise.

Students will be expected to do substantial reading in primary and secondary
works, to contribute to the seminar through an oral presentation and to submit
a term final paper or shorter papers. Students can prepare by reading several
essays in Christopher Hill, Society and Puritanism in Pre-Revolutionary
England, especially on Puritans, Industriousness, Sabbatarianism, the Poor,
the Bawdy Courts, the Church, Parish, Household and Community.

  * 81600  
W, 6:30-8:30 p.m.  
**Ulysses**  
Prof. Elizabeth Tenenbaum

Perhaps the most deviant epic ever written, James Joyce's Ulysses is arguably
the richest twentieth-century fictional text written in English. Its salient
strengths include its seamless interweaving of authorial insights into the
motivations that structure public life and the needs that generate personal
behavior; its vivid representation of the multiple social enclaves accessible
to its male protagonists; its astute dramatizations of personal delusions that
consign their holders to social marginality; its effective conjoining of
linguistic experimentation with precise renderings of multiple idiolects; and
its recurrent use of intertextuality to juxtapose Ireland's way of life with
practices and values that have evolved in civilizations long inaccessible to
Ireland due to both chronological and geographic barriers.

Devoting a full semester to a single literary text should afford each student
time to carefully examine and prepare to discuss each individual chapter of
Ulysses. It will, moreover, make it feasible for students to familiarize
themselves with an array of critical and theory-based essays, many of which
entail astute observations by some of Joyce's most insightful commentators.

Seminar participants are expected to have read both Dubliners and Portrait of
the Artist as a Young Man before the start of spring semester. Since Portrait
traces the formative year of a figure who is to become one of Ulysses' two
protagonists, our first meeting will focus on key episodes in this highly
unconventional bildungsroman. Subsequent seminar sessions will open with an
overview of the reading assigned for that day, often move on to a student's
report on a group of relevant studies, and culminate in an open discussion of
the textual segment at issue.

The following texts are required readings for this course: Ulysses, ed. Hans
Gabler (Random House); Notes for Joyce: An Annotation of James Joyce's
Ulysses, ed. Don Gifford and Robert J. Seidman; Re-viewing Classics of Joyce
Criticism, ed. Janet Dunleavy; A Companion to James Joyce's Ulysses, ed.
Margot Norris; and one of the following biographies: Richard Ellman, James
Joyce (revised edition) or Morris Beja, James Joyce: A Literary Life. (If
possible, read Ellman's thorough study. If time pressure makes you hesitate to
embark upon this definitive work, settle for Baja's 125-page volume.) This
seminar requires each student to present a short oral report and to submit
either two 7-to-8-page papers or a single essay approximately 15 pages long.

  * 83100  
Th, 11:45 a.m. - 1:45 p.m.  
**Women Writers of the 18th Century**  
Prof. Rachel Brownstein

In the eighteenth century, Virginia Woolf pointed out, the middle-class woman
began to write; in the same period the novel, as Ian Watt put it, rose. Others
have observed that biography became important in Boswell's and Johnson's
century. All these factors worked to demystify and domesticate authorship-and
to provoke readers' curiosity about the personal lives of authors.

This course will focus on the emergence of the figure of the women writer. We
will begin with the stagy question that Catherine Gallagher asks about Aphra
Behn, "Who was that masked woman?" The connections between writers and
actresses (for in fact the women who began to write were not all middle
class), and the still-significant links between publishing and self-display,
will be our themes. Reading different kinds of texts, we will study the ways a
woman writer's works seem to construct, conceal, and market a provocatively
secret identity. The writers in question are Behn (d. 1689) and women of the
century that followed hers: Eliza Haywood, Mary Wortley Montagu, Charlotte
Lennox, Sarah Fielding, Frances Burney, Maria Edgeworth, Elizabeth Inchbald,
Mary Wollstonecraft, Ann Radcliffe, Charlotte Smith and-if there is time-the
young Jane Austen.

Students will be responsible for devising three useful questions about each of
these writers; for making a class presentation on a work by one of them; and
for writing a ten-to-fifteen-page paper about an eighteenth-century woman
writer who may or may not be represented in the syllabus.

  * 84800  
Th, 2:00-4:00 p.m.  
**American Naturalism and the Market**  
Prof. Marc Dolan

This course will examine the subtle shift from realist to naturalist poetics
at the turn of the twentieth century. In many ways, the changes of this period
have stayed with American writing to this day. Naturalism remains the "default
poetic" for self-articulation within American Society, from the psychological
and sociological self-interpretation of afternoon talk shows to the endless
stream of American autobiography (which took much of its current shape during
this era). Class discussions in this course will be historicist as well as
formalist and will consider the impact of American imperialism, Southern and
Eastern European immigration, racist and racialist thought, the increasing
dominance of the social sciences, the growth of a national consumer economy,
and the development of other non-literary arts (e.g, recorded music, concert
music, dance, theatre, interior design, painting, film) on the practice of
American Writing.

Course requirements include active participation in class discussions, a
relatively brief presentation summarizing relevant scholarship on a text under
study, and a longer presentation and essay reflecting original scholarship in
the field.

Texts may include:  
Stephen Crane, The Red Badge of Courage (1895)  
Harold Frederic, The Damnation of Theron Ware (1896)  
Paul Lawrence Dunbar, Lyrics of Lowly Life (1896)  
Charles Chesnutt, The Wife of His Youth (1899)  
Frank Norris, McTeague (1901)  
Pauline Hopkins, Of One Blood (1902-03)  
W.E.B. DuBois, The Souls of Black Folk (1903)  
Edith Wharton, The House of Mirth (1905)  
Jack London, Martin Eden (1909)  
James Weldon Johnson, The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man (1912)  
Willa Cather, The Song of the Lark (1915)  
Abraham Cahan, The Rise of David Levinsky (1917)

  * 84800  
Th, 11:45 a.m. - 1:45 p.m.  
**American Women Realist Writers**  
Prof. Neal Tolchin

This course examines recent attempts to recover the history of 19th century
American women's fiction. We will begin with an early 19th century work,
Catherine Maria Sedgwick's Hope Leslie (1827), a novel about Puritan and
Native American relations. We will focus on Harriet Beecher Stowe, Sarah Orne
Jewett, and Kate Chopin, whose work has emerged in recent criticism as central
to the reconstruction of the tradition of 19th century American women
novelists. To gain a sense for the work that still needs to be done to map out
the legacy of women writers in this period, we will explore writers popular in
their time but less well known to us today. Lillie Devereaux Blake's Fettered
for Life surprises readers by its realism and feminism; the short stories of
Mary Wilkins Freeman are particularly subtle and powerful. To explore the
multicultural dimensions of this area we will read short stories by Sui Sin
Far (Asian American) and Zitkala-Sa (Native American), as well as fiction by
African American writers such as Pauline Hopkins and Frances Harper. To
conclude we will read a novel by Willa Cather to explore the legacy of 19th
century women writers for a 20th century author.

Requirements: oral report, research paper, class participation and attendance.

  * 86000  
Th, 11:45 a.m. 1:45 p.m.  
**Queer Theory and Questions of Race**  
Prof. Steven Kruger

Feminist and queer theorists have recognized that gender and sexuality are
crucially interimplicated with class, race, ethnicity, nationality, religion.
But how effectively has queer theory dealt specifically with questions of
race? In what ways, while making sexuality its main object of inquiry, has it
also developed a nuanced analysis of race? In addressing such questions we
will read theoretical work by writers like Foucault, Sedgwick, Butler,
Edelman, de Lauretis, and Dollimore, who might be seen as having "founded"
queer theory. We will focus, too, especially on queer work that has engaged
explicitly with questions about race; authors who may be read here include
Anzaldua, Moraga, Lorde, Munoz, Pellegrini, Harper, Reid-Pharr. Alongside the
theoretical readings, we will look at several recent cultural productions
(probably a novel, some poetry, and a film-to be chosen in consultation with
the class) in which sexuality and race are explored in interlocking, complex,
and perhaps problematic ways. The work for the course will include seminar
presentations and a final essay.

  * 86000  
T, 11:45-1:45 p.m.  
**Theory and Space**  
Prof. Peter Hitchcock

What use is the concept of space in the study of literature? Cultural theory
has been concerned with space from the time that culture itself became an
object of analysis. That history has much to do with provenance, the abstract
and concrete spaces of cultural practice. Clearly, however, the righteous
concern with spatiality was coterminous with particular projects of space,
including imperial and colonial expansion. We might call this the territorial
unconscious of culture, one which is deeply historical and is a linchpin in
understanding periods, genres, forms, and technologies of cultural expression.
This course will not attempt to encapsulate such a history, but will be
concerned to shed light on the increasing importance of spatial theory in the
interpretation of literature. We will address some of the major statements on
the articulation of cultural space (including Benjamin's Arcades Project, de
Certeau's Practice of Everyday Life, Bachelard's Poetics of Space, Foucault's
Discipline and Punish) alongside geography's crucial role in bridging the
humanities and the social sciences (for instance, Lefebvre's Production of
Space, Harvey's Condition of Postmodernity, Soja's Postmodern Geographies,
Smith's Uneven Development). We will then attempt three case studies which
themselves require alternative approaches for literary critique: urban spaces,
postcolonial spaces, and feminist spaces. Each one will interanimate the
other(s). Primary texts (Berger's Lilac and Flag, Dangarembga's Nervous
Conditions, Djebar's So Vast the Prison) will be supplemented by a variety of
secondary material (including Williams, John, Bhabha). Our major concern
throughout will be not just a politics of culture, but the development of
methodologies of literary space, something that the term essay should reflect.

[top]

  
  

  
  
  
![](images/map.gif)

  

Last modified: 12/2/00  
Comments to [mgold1@gc.cuny.edu](MAILTO:mgold1@gc.cuny.edu)

