MILITARY LAW. By GENERAL WILLIAM T. SHERMAN. WASIIINGTON, D.C., May 15, 1880.
GENERAL, W. S. HANCOCK, President of the Military Service Institution,
Governor's Island, N. Y. Harbor. Dear General,-In continuing the subject of my
letter of December 9,1879, so handsomely presented in the second number of the
printed proceedings of your Institution, my object is only to assist some one
else who may undertake the work suggested, of compiling the Common Law
Military, as has long been done by Blackstone, Coke, Kent and others, for the
Common Law Civil. The Military Act of Great Britain, and the Articles of War
in our own country, are so easily found that I may safely assume that they are
familiar to all military students, and as our civil code of laws is derived
chiefly from England, I propose to limit my researches to the military history
of that country rather than attempt to look for rules and precedents in the
annals of France, Germany or Russia, although these are new among the leading
military nations of the world. Alexander Fraser Tytler, Esq., Judge Advocate
D. of N. Britain, published in 1816, an Essay on Military Law and the practice
of Courts Martial, which, in my judgment, better masters the subject than the
hundreds of authors who have treated of it since, and I beg to quote from him
largely, being the whole of his introduction, and some characteristic
paragraphs from his second chapter, although the whole book should be studied
by all army officers. INTRODUCTION. The foundation of the Military or Martial
Law is that which is common to all law whatever-the necessity of things. As,
from the condition of human nature, no state can subsist without occasional
warfare, it was an early discovery in political economy, that a body of
professional soldiers was much better fitted for attaining the ends both of
security and defence, and the achieving of conquests (which a necessary policy
at times must justify) than those temporary forces which were raised by
occasionally embodying and arming a portion of the citizens. War is a science
which is not to be attained in any measure of perfection, without a regular
initiation in its elements, and a long and uninterrupted exercise of its
duties. Moreover, as there is in all liberal professions an esprit du corps,
or general character of the body, which is known to have the most admirable
effect in cherishing the laudable, and in suppressing the faulty or degenerate
temperaments of the individuals which compose it, the principle of honor,
which is the general character of the military order of citizens, could not
have had its full operation unless the military vocation had stood
discriminated from all others, and ranked as a profession which gave to its
members an appropriate character and name in civil society. Expediency,
therefore, and the wisest policy, having rendered the military condition a
regular profession in all civilized nations, it became necessary that this
body of men, who, from their number, were capable of becoming either a
powerful instrument of good, or a formidable engine of evil, should be
regulated by certain laws, exclusively adapted and proper to their state. It
was requisite that they should act with regularity, with promptitude, and
unanimity; and for that purpose it was essentially necessary that they should
feel themselves perpetually under the strictest subordination, and yield the
most perfect and absolute obedience to the command of their leaders. For this
purpose, a sacrifice of a greater portion of the personal liberty of
individuals is necessary in the profession of a soldier, than in any other of
the employments of civil life; for without that sacrifice the army could not
for a moment be kept together. Necessity, therefore, requires that certain
restraints should be imposed on all the ranks of men who compose the military
force of the state, which are foreign to the condition of other citizens. But
when it is considered for what a noble end those sacrifices are made, no less
than the security, peace, and welfare of the whole community, and that in
themselves they infringe not on any one essential ingredient of rational
liberty, or the most comfortable enjoyment of life; when it is considered that
those trivial restraints are most amply compensated by the wise, humane and
bountiful provisions that are made for the soldier, after he is released with
honor from the fatigues of his profession, and the immunities and privileges
he enjoys in that title, above all others of his fellow subjects; there is no
man possessing a liberal or well constituted mind, who will complain of the
hardships of the military profession, far less arraign its peculiar
regulations of inexpediency or injustice. The chief point in which the
condition of a soldier differs from that of another citizen with respect to
personal liberty is, that his professional conduct being regulated by the
Articles of War, it is in the power of the Sovereign, and entirely at his
discretion to enact such Articles of War as may to him seem most expedient for
the government of the army, over which he is in that respect exclusively the
legislator. And this power, it is alleged, in the hands of an arbitrary prince
might reduce the condition of a soldier to a state of the most abject
servitude. But let it be considered, that the Sovereign of Great Britain is in
no sense to be regarded as an arbitrary prince or absolute monarch. His powers
and prerogatives are most specially defined, and so wisely limited by the laws
and constitution of the realm, that no prince who occupies the throne of these
kingdoms, be his individual character and disposition ever so prone to
tyranny, can materially affect or abridge the liberties of any class of his
subjects. Under the constitution of Great Britain, theoretically speaking,
there is no standing army; for although in reality the army is not annually
disbanded, yet the annual consent of parliament is required to keep it in
existence. It is, therefore, in the nature of things, impossible, that any
arbitrary enactments, tending to degrade the condition or abridge the
liberties of the soldiery, could have a longer duration than a year. Moreover,
the Mutiny act, by which the King is authorized to frame Articles of War, and
which in fact is the code of Military law, is the operation of parliament, and
not of the Sovereign. It undergoes an annual revision in both houses; it is
subject to alteration and amendment by the wisdom of the legislature; and
thus, by the very limited term of its duration and frequency of its renewal,
it is more truly and immediately framed by the people itself, than any other
of the existing statutes of the realm. It is true, that by the Mutiny-act, a
power is granted to the Sovereign 'of framing Articles of War for the better
government of his Majesty's forces, and of constituting Courts-martial, with
power to try, hear, and determine any crimes or offences by such Articles of
War, and inflict such penalties as the articles direct.' But even this
extensive power has its limits; and these are of such a nature as to bar every
possible exertion of a tyrannic authority, or arbitrary infringement of the
valuable rights of the subject. For while the right of framing Articles of
war, and inflicting penalties, is declared to belong to the Sovereign, it is
at the same time provided, 'That no officer or soldier shall, by such Articles
of war, be subjected to any punishment extending to life or limb, for any
crime which is not expressed to be so punishable by the Mutiny-act.' The
penalties, therefore, which is competent for the Sovereign to decree by his
own authority, must at the worst be of a very light and subordinate nature,
and calculated merely for the enforcement of good discipline; since the
greater crimes, and their appropriate punishments, are defined and regulated
by the Mutiny-act, which, as already said, is the operation, not of the
Sovereign per se, but of the united branches of the legislature; and the
penalty of death cannot be inflicted by any article of war 'unless for such
crimes as are expressed to be so punishable by the Mutiny-act.' Besides this,
when it is considered that even those subordinate penalties, which it is
competent for the Sovereign to enact by Articles of war or other regulations
for the army, cannot be inflicted but through the medium of a court-martial,
which has the essential characteristics of a jury, and is in fact a trial of
the subject by his peers; we shall immediately be convinced that this power of
the Crown, which has furnished much subject of intemperate declamation to
writers tinctured with republican prejudices, can never be exercised, under
our excellent constitution, to the injury of the subject, or the abridgement
of any of the valuable rights of that honorable class of men who compose the
military force of the state. The only other particular in which the condition
of a soldier is in any shape different from that of other citizens with
respect to personal liberty, is what is indeed essential and inherent in the
very nature of his profession; he is under authority; he is not his own
master, or, as the lawyer say, sui juris; he can neither dispose of his own
time, nor regulate at pleasure his own actions; and having once embraced the
military profession, he cannot, when he chuses, divest himself of that
character; but must, in all matters connected with his vocation, be
subservient to the commands of his Sovereign, and under him to the authority
of those officers who are his superiors. But to complain of these
peculiarities of the military profession either as being substantial
grievances, or as restraints which derogate in any sense from the dignity of
our nature, is a mark of the most extreme folly and perversion of
understanding. Either the army must cease to exist, or it must be linked
together in all its parts by the most absolute obedience and submission of the
several ranks to their superior officers. For as its function is to act as a
regular and perfect machine, of which all the parts in their mutual dependence
on each other, tend to produce one great, uniform, and simple effect; it is
evident that such effect can never be accomplished, unless, like the
mechanical structure of a time-piece, all those various parts are in due
connection, each acted upon by a superior power, and in its turn regulating
its inferior, while the whole derives its motion from one great and ultimate
moving power. If a soldier complains of the restraints of his vocation, he
throws no impeachment on his profession, but arraigns himself of folly, who
did not perceive that those restraints are essential to its condition. These
remarks I mean not to address to our modern advocates for the natural and
imprescriptible rights of man, those benevolent apostles of liberty, who in
their zeal for the happiness of the whole human race, overlook and utterly
disregard all the inferior ties of ordinary patriotism; the predilection for
one particular country above all others, the respect for its laws, the duty of
obedience to its government, the partial affection for its constitution. Of
this enlightened species of philanthropy, it is an essential doctrine that the
military condition, which hitherto, in every civilized nation, has been held
as honorable, dignified and manly, is a state of the most unjust, intolerable,
and debasing servitude. But if, with these generous advocates in the cause of
humanity, I wave all argument, (and that for the best of reasons, because we
hold no common principles of reasoning on which the argument could be
conducted), it is with real concern that I am compelled to notice, and in so
doing, widely to dissent from the opinions of authors of a very different
class indeed from those above alluded to; of authors who, not only on the
score of profound abilities, and extensive knowledge of the laws and
constitution of their country, but of real philanthrophy, are, from the
general scope and tenor of their writings, entitled to the highest regard and
veneration of their fellow citizens. With what pain must every well wisher to
his country, or (what is a synonymous term) every friend to its excellent
constitution, peruse the following opinions of Sir William Blackstone, drawn,
as I shall immediately show, from false principles, and penned in an unguarded
moment, and at a period of time long antecedent to that fatal exemplification
which our days have witnessed of the pernicious tendency of all such
doctrines. 'Martial law,' says that author, 'which is built upon no settled
principle, but is entirely arbitrary in its decisions, is as Sir Mathew Hale
observes, in truth and reality no law, but something indulged rather than
allowed as law. The necessity of order and discipline in an army is the only
thing which can give it countenance; and therefore it ought not to be
permitted in time of peace, when the King's courts are open for all persons to
receive justice according to the laws of the land.' He who wishes to form
rational and sound opinions either in philosophy, in politics, or indeed, in
any science, must emancipate himself from all slavish subjection to the
authority of great names. Sir Mathew Hale and Sir William Blackstone, men
profoundly versed in the Civil laws of their country, which they have most
ably explained and illustrated, have but incidentally touched on the subject
of Martial law, whose doctrines they had no call to propound, and whose
principles therefore they were at no pains to investigate. Had those great
masters of civil jurisprudence bestowed the same attention on this subject
that they have exercised on those which fell immediately within their own
department, we should have met with no such rash and ill-founded positions as
those which I have above quoted. In fact the whole of the foregoing paragraph
of Sir William Blackstone teems with error, with inconsistency, and with
misrepresentation. The principles of Military law are as certain, determinate,
and immutable, as the principles are of the common and statutory law, which
regulate the civil classes of society. The author himself, in the very next
sentence, assigns the great principle on which all Military law is built, and
which is coeval with, and essential to the existence of civil society; the
necessity of order and discipline in an army. The Martial Law is a code or
body of regulations for the proper maintenance of that order and discipline,
of which the fundamental principles are, a due obedience of the several ranks
to their proper officers, a subordination of each rank to their superiors, and
the subjection of the whole to certain rules of discipline, essential to their
acting with the union and energy of an organized body. The Mutiny-act and
Articles of War which contain these rules of discipline, are framed, as we
have already observed, by the joint will and co-operation of the two houses of
parliament and of the Sovereign, the legislative and executive powers of the
state; and the observance of these rules is enforced, either by plain,
specific, and fixed penalties appropriated to each offence, where such offence
is of a positive nature, admitting of no gradations, or are left, in certain
cases where the offence admits of degrees of criminality, to the decision of a
jury, in other words, of a court-martial. With what justice or propriety the
military law can therefore be said, in the words of Judge Blackstone, to be
'entirely arbitrary in its decisions' every impartial mind will determine. But
this law, according to the same author, which, being built on no settled
principles, receives its countenance from the necessity of maintaining order
and discipline in an army, ought therefore not to be permitted in time of
peace: a most extraordinary conclusion indeed, and of which it is not a little
difficult to perceive the connection with its premises. To justify this
conclusion, the author ought previously to have shewn that the existence of an
army in time of peace was a thing in itself unnecessary and illegal; for while
an army exists, it must be kept under order and discipline. But the necessity
of some permanent military force at all times, for security's sake, is self-
evident; and the Bill of Rights itself declares a standing army in time of
peace, if with the consent of parliament, to be legal and constitutional.
Unless, therefore, the author could have shewn, that the same army which in
time of war requires the enforcement of a code of laws, and appropriate
penalties for the breach of them, is in time of peace to subsist by some
magical bond and connection of its parts, and is to be perfectly trained and
regulated without any settled rule of discipline; we must, however
unwillingly, pronounce, that the position contained in the above sentence is
in the last degree incongruous and absurd. Nor is the last clause of the
sentence quoted one whit more consonant to reason or just argument. Military
or martial law ought not to be permitted in time of peace, because 'the King's
courts are open for all persons to receive justice according to the laws of
the land.' Can the laws of the land, that is the common and statute law,
administered in the King's ordinary courts apply to or take cognizance of
breaches of military discipline? Are the civil courts competent to the trial
of desertion, mutiny, disobedience of orders, insolence to superior officers,
breach of arrest, false musters, etc.? Are these tribunals vested with the
power of punishing cowardice? Or does the common and statutory law reach the
nameless and undefinable offences arising from that turpitude of conduct in
the ordinary occurrences of life, which the military code most emphatically
describes as 'unbecoming the character of an officer or a gentleman'? Yet
without some power which is adequate to the restraint and correction of all
those deviations from the duty of a soldier, the army could not exist for a
single day. In a similar spirit of false reasoning, the same respectable
author expresses his regret, that the soldiery 'should be reduced to a state
of servitude in the midst of a nation of freedmen; for Sir Edward Coke informs
us, that it is one of the genuine marks of servitude, to have the law which is
our rule of action, either concealed or precarious: Misera est servitus, ubi
jus est vagum aut incognitum.' But where, it must be asked, is the country
here alluded to, where the Military law is either vague and precarious, or
unknown? Surely it is not Britain. Can that law be termed vague or precarious
which consists but of a very few simple regulations, deliberately enacted by
the whole branches of the legislature; renewed it is true, in their binding
obligation from year to year, but scarcely undergoing even the most trivial
alteration? Can that law be termed concealed or unknown, which receives not
only the ordinary promulgation of all other acts of the legislature, by its
entry in the printed statute book, but which must, by positive regulation, be
repeatedly inculcated on the memory of every individual of the military
profession? For the Articles of War, the substance of the military code, must
be read at the head of every regiment once every two months. How then can it
be with justice asserted, that this law is either concealed or precarious?
Such positions are equally absurd as they are mischievous. It gives me pain to
make these remarks on a few particular notions of an author, for whose
opinions, on the general doctrines of the law, I have, in common with the
world, the highest respect. But I plead here the cause of the Military
profession, which is injured and degraded, through actual ignorance of the
nature of its establishment and laws. To the truth of Sir Edward Coke's
general maxium, all men must subscribe: the conclusion flows necessarily from
its premises: But if those premises are false when predicated of the British
government as now existing, the conclusion with respect to it must fall of
course. That the summary mode of execution, which was termed The Martial Law
in former periods of our history, (when the prerogative of the Crown seemed to
have no determined limit), deserved all those characters of tyranny which have
been assigned to it by Hale and Coke, we may most readily acknowledge: But to
the Martial law as it exists at present, under an improved and settled
constitution and a clearly defined prerogative of the Crown, these characters
have not the most distant applicability. It was therefore a palpable oversight
(but in a matter of this high consequence not easily excusable) in our great
commentator on the laws of England, to have applied the description of an
antiquated and justly exploded tyranny, to a well regulated, moderate, and
humane system, such as the present Law-military of this country; a system as
different from the former, as the constitution of England is at this day from
the actual government under the House of Tudor. 'Martial law (says a high
authority) such as it is described by Hale, and such also as it is marked by
Sir William Blackstone, does not exist in England at all.' The modern British
soldier, enjoying in common with his fellow subjects, every benefit of the
laws of his country, is bound by the military code, solely to the observance
of the peculiar duties of his profession; a code which is simple in itself,
reasonable in its enactments, easy in all its obligations; level to the
meanest understanding, and more effectually promulgated and better known than
any of the ordinary statutory laws of the realm. He complains not himself of
the hardships of his lot; he honours his own vocation, and justly accounts it
derserving of the honour and respect of others. But with much reason he
complains of those who studiously labour to degrade his condition, by that
officious regret, which, while it seems to spring from a desire for the
melioration of the military state, tends, by its effects on the minds of the
weak and ignorant, to dissolve the fundamental and necessary obligations by
which alone it can subsist. The author of the following Treatise trusts, that
one result of his undertaking, (though he does not propose it as his principal
end,) shall be a complete disproof of all such false and injurious opinions
regarding the military condition and its laws. But for that important purpose,
and to clear the way by the removal of all prejudices, he shall begin by
tracing the origin of the Military Law of England, and its progress in the
different periods of our history, to that regular system which at present
obtains over the British dominions. EXTRACTS FROM CHAPTER II. OF THE AUTHORITY
OF COURTS MARTIAL. The mode of trial by Court Martial possesses all the
benefit of trial by jury, and has moreover some advantages that are peculiar
to itself. It has been frivolously urged, that the essence of the trial by
jury, being that any man shall be tried by his peers or equals,
noncommissioned officers and private soldiers, when tried by a Court Marshal,
have not that benefit, as the Mutiny-act declares that no member of a Court
Martial shall be under the rank of a commissioned officer. But in truth this
objection is founded entirely in a misunderstanding of the meaning of the
words, 'trial by peers.' By this expression it is not meant that the persons
who compose the court should be, in every respect, of the same rank and
station in life with the party who is to be tried, for this would in some
cases be an unattainable requisite, and in many would be attended with much
disadvantage, instead of benefit, to the party accused. Some stations are so
low and so peculiarly characterized, that a jury of those who were literally
the peers, or of like condition with the prisoner, could not be assembled, nor
would their character admit of their sitting in judgment on the life of a
fellow creature. The true meaning of a trial by peer is, that those who
compose the jury are men, who, from their rank in life, have no privileges
beyond what are enjoyed by the criminal whom they are to try; who are subject
to the same laws with himself, and are therefore under no bias or temptation
to stretch them to his prejudice. The Military law, as contained in the
Articles of War and Mutiny-act, regulates alike the conduct of the highest
commissioned officer and the private soldier. The former is under no
temptation to stretch or pervert that law to the prejudice of the latter,
because its sanctions are alike explicit as to the duties of both: and the
higher has no interest or advantage in abridging the privileges of the lower,
but on the contrary a natural incitement to maintain their common rights.
Among the peculiar advantages of the mode of trial by Court Martial, may be
reckoned this, which is essential to its judgments, that they are the result
not of an unanimous concurrence of the opinions of all the jurors, but of a
majority of them in cases where the punishment does not affect the life of the
criminal; and in capital cases, of nine out of thirteen, or two-thirds of the
jurors where the number exceeds thirteen. Where unanimity is requisite, it is
evident that in all cases of difficulty there must be a concession of the
right of private judgment, and an implicit acquiescence in the sentiments of
some leading members of the jury; otherwise matters could never be brought to
an issue. But this concession must often be attended with a violation of the
dictates of conscience to individuals; and in cases where an individual,
either from scruple of conscience or a worse motive, refuses to make that
concession, an iniquitous verdict must be the consequence. In the sentences of
Courts-Martial, no concession of the right of private judgment is necessary.
All the members of the court have their unbiased judicative power; and even
the influence of opinion is guarded against as far as possible, by the order
in which the opinions and votes of the members are given: the youngest member
of the court being required to give his opinion first, and the rest following
in progressive seniority up to the president, who votes last. It is likewise a
material advantage of the trial by Court Martial, that the whole evidence is
accurately taken down in writing, in presence of the members of the court, who
may at all times resort to the written proceedings, which in the close of the
trial, and before sentence, are always read over to them, and compared with
and corrected by their own notes taken during the trial; so that every one of
the jurors must be completely master of the whole body of the evidence, * * *
* * * * * * * * The Martial or Military law, as contained in the Military act
and Articles of War, does in no respect either supersede or interfere with the
civil and municipal laws of the realm. On the contrary, it is expressly
declared by the Mutiny act, section (8,) eight, that nothing in that statute
shall extend or be construed to exempt any officer or soldier whatsoever from
being proceeded against by the ordinary course of law. Hence it appears, that
soldiers are equally with all other classes of citizens, bound to the same
strict observance of the laws of the country, and the fulfilment of their
social duties, and are alike amenable to the ordinary civil and criminal
courts 'of the country, for all offences against those laws, and breach of
those duties. It follows, therefore, that no crime for which the common or
statute laws of the country have provided a punishment, is cognizable before a
Court-Martial; nor can the military power interfere to prevent the punishment
of any soldier guilty of such offences, or supersede, by any judicial
procedure in a Court-Martial the ordinary effect of the laws of the country,
unless in those extraordinary emergencies, when the legislature may find it
necessary to proclaim Martial law for the suppression of rebellion, and to
declare per expressum, that all crimes and offences committed in furtherance
of such rebellion, shall be tried in a summary manner by Courts-Martial
notwithstanding the ordinary courts of justice may at the time be open; a
remedy of the most violent nature, and justifiable only by that absolute
necessity of circumstances, when the salus popili becomes the suprema lex. The
Military law is in fact so much subordinate to the civil, that the Military
power is expressly required to give its aid for carrying the civil laws into
execution. The Mutiny-act decrees, that if any officer, soldier, etc., shall
be accused of any capital crime, or any offence against the person, estate, or
property of any of his Majesty's subjects, which is punishable by the known
laws of the land, the commanding officers of all regiments, troops, or
parties, are required to use their utmost endeavor to deliver over such
accused person to the civil magistrate, and to assist the officers of justice
in apprehending such offender: and this under a most severe penalty in case of
refusal to give such aid, no less than being ipso facto cashiered, and
declared incapable of holding any civil or military office within the kingdom.
* * * * * * * * * * * On the other hand, the sentences of Courts-Martial are
entitled to have their full effect and consequences in judgment, as the
decisions and awards of the King's ordinary courts of justice. The Mutiny-act
declares, 'That the Articles of War established by his Majesty shall be
judicially taken notice of by all judges, and in all courts whatsoever;' and
this enactment is without doubt extended to all sentences of Courts-Martial
pronounced in conformity to those articles. The civil power will likewise lend
its aid to supply any deficiencies in the powers of Courts-Martial, where the
end is the proper enforcement of military discipline and jurisdiction. Thus,
for example, as the military jurisdiction does not extend to enforce the
appearance of witnesses who are in a civil line of life, or to compel them to
give their attendance in a Court-Martial, they will in case of refusal to obey
the summons of the Judge-Advocate, be cited or subpoenaed for that purpose by
the civil magistrate, on application by petition from the Judge-Advocate,
setting forth the necessity of the case, and the importance of their testimony
to elucidate the matters to be tried. The civil power likewise gives its
assistance to the military in the apprehending of deserters; it being declared
lawful for the constable, head-borough, or tythingman of any town or place to
apprehend or cause to be apprehended any person reasonably suspected to be a
deserter, and to bring him before a justice for examination; when, if, either
by the party's confession, or by the testimony on oath of one or more
witnesses, or the justices own knowledge of the fact, the suspected person is
found to be an enlisted soldier, the justice is authorized to commit him to
goal, and give notice thereof to the Secretary at War, that he may be
proceeded against according to law." * * * So far, therefore, from there being
any hostile interference between the civil and military powers of the state,
we see it most wisely provided that the most perfect comitas and harmony shall
subsist between them; and the provinces of each being distinctly defined, they
are each required to lend an amicable aid to the other in carrying their
proper jurisdiction and authority, into full effect. The Military Law while it
authorizes every measure necessary for the punishment of offenders, is most
strictly watchful to obviate every possible means of oppression, and to guard
the administration of justice from every taint of malice or of private
resentment. The Mutiny-act therefore, with equal wisdom and humanity provides
that offences which at the time of commission, have been deemed of too slight
a nature for prosecution, shall not, at any distance of time, when the
evidence of exculpation or alleviation may chance to be weakened, be urged as
matter of arraignment against the offender by declaring in express words that,
'no person shall be liable to be tried and punished for any offence against
any of the said Acts or Articles of War, which shall appear to have been
committed more than Three years before the issuing of the commission or
warrant for such trial; unless the person accused, by reason of his having
absented himself or some other manifest impediment, shall not have been
amenable to justice within that period: -in which case he shall be liable to
be tried at any time, not exceeding two years after the impediment shall have
ceased.' Indeed, material justice requires, that all offences should become
the subject of investigation and trial as speedily as possible after the time
of their commission; nor is it consistent either with candour or with equity
to pass over in silence the first slight deviations from duty, arising perhaps
from ignorance or inexperience, thus tempting the incautious offender to
greater enormities, and afterwards to bring the former in aggravation of his
guilt; or even, as has been too frequently done, to make them parts of one
accumulated charge against him. A procedure of this kind can receive no
apology from the affected plea of humanely overlooking slight offences, for
these offences, if so trivial as to merit no animadversion at the time, ought
to be for ever buried in oblivion, not treasured up for a future day of
account; and if considerable enough to merit notice or censure, it is
blameable in no mean degree to overlook them. The sentence of a Court-Martial
like that of every subordinate judicature, is subject to review, and may be
appealed from by the party who conceives that he has suffered injustice. No
sentence of a Court-Martial is indeed complete, till it has been approved of
by his Majesty, or by a commander-in-chief having that authority delegated to
him by special commission. The appeal from the sentences of Courts-Martial
lies to the supreme Civil courts of law, as the courts of King's Bench and
Common Pleas in England and Ireland, and the Court of Session in Scotland. It
has likewise been supposed that the proceedings of Courts-Martial are subject
to review in either of the Houses of Parliament: for in a debate in the House
of Commons on the Mutiny-bill, an amendment being proposed to that clause of
the oath to be administered to the members of a Court-Martial, binding them
not to discover the opinion or vote of any particular member, 'unless required
to give evidence as a witness by a court of justice,' by adding to it to these
words, 'or in both Houses of Parliament,' the amendment was rejected, on the
ground, that they were virtually included on the denomination of courts of
justice. But as the clause of the Mutiny-act authorizing redress against the
sentences of Courts-Martial specifies only the courts of record, under which
denomination are generally understood to be comprehended only the King's
ordinary Courts of Justice, and the House of Commons is in no sense to be
considered as such; it would seem that the above opinion is ill founded. Nor
is there any example of such judicative power being exercised by the House of
Commons. The proceedings of general Courts-Martial have indeed been called for
in that House, and have been censured as arbitrary and illegal; but there is
no instance of the reversal of any sentence by it as a court of justice, or
award of damages for illegal proceedings. It may indeed be maintained with
more plausibility, that the House of Lords, as the supereminent court of
appeal has the power of reviewing the sentences of Courts-Martial, as well as
those of all other courts of Judicature within the kingdom: but we know of no
instance where in practice this appeal has been directly brought from the
judgment of a Court-Martial: and the safest course for any party feeling
himself aggrieved by the sentence of the military court, would be, to follow
the mode pointed out by the Mutiny-act, by bringing a writ of error* in the
Court of King's Bench in England or Ireland, or a suspension in the Court of
Session in Scotland; from the judgment of which courts, the ultimate appeal is
competent to the House of Lords. This procedure is no contradiction of that
clause of the Mutiny-act which declares, that 'no sentence of a Court-Martial
signed by the president thereof, shall be liable to be revised more than
once'; for that clause only debars the revisal of such sentence more than once
by the same or any other Court-Martial. * * * * * * * * * * * The sentences of
a Court-Martial may likewise become the subject of prohibition, and be
arrested in their execution, by interference of the King's Civil courts, on
the ground of the Military court having exceeded its jurisdiction and powers;
as if, for example, a Court-Martial shall have tried and condemned, for a
military offence, a person not subject to the Military law.( This excess of
jurisdiction appears to be the only legal ground on which a prohibition can be
issued; for it is no ground of prohibition, that a court has decided wrong in
a matter clearly within its jurisdiction, although such decision may be a just
ground of appeal, or a sufficient foundation for a review of the sentence. As
no sentence of a general Court-Martial is complete until it has received the
approbation of his Majesty, or of the commander in chief to whom that power
has been specially delegated, the King, or such commander disapproving of the
sentence, may order the court to reconsider or review their proceedings, and
recommend to them an alteration of their judgement: but as it is not
consistent with the royal powers, under the British constitution, actually to
exercise any judicial authority, which belongs alone to the courts of justice;
so his Majesty can neither himself make any alteration on the sentence of such
courts, nor commit that power to any other. All, therefore, that is competent
for his Majesty to do, if the sentence of a Court-Martial shall not meet with
his approbation, is to order the court to revise their proceedings: and even
this power is limited; for the Mutiny-act declares 'that no sentence given by
any Court-Martial, and signed by the president thereof, shall be liable to be
revised more than once.' By the constitution of Great Britain, the King has
power of pardoning or remitting the sentences of Courts-Martial, as of all
other courts of justice. This branch of the royal prerogative is founded upon
this ratio, that as the King represents the body of the public, and possesses
by delegation all its powers and rights with regard to the execution of the
laws, all breaches of the public law are considered as personal offences
against the sovereign; to whom therefore it belongs of right to pardon
offences against himself: and as it is not competent for any court by its own
authority to dispense with the rigour of positive laws, however strongly the
particular circumstances of a case may plead for such dispensation; so it is
of the utmost consequence for the ends of justice, that an equitable power of
this kind should be lodged with the chief magistrate, from whose hands it is
likely to be issued with the least hazard or suspicion of partial or impure
motives, 'It is (as Sir William Blackstone well remarks) one of the great
advantages of monarchy above any other form of government, that there is a
magistrate, who has it in his power to extend mercy wherever he thinks it is
deserved, holding a court of equity in his own breast, to soften the rigour of
the general law in such criminal cases as merit an exemption from punishment.'
The King's pardon may either be granted simply, which gives a complete
discharge and immunity from the punishment decreed: or conditionally, which
operates a commutation of a capital sentence, or one inflicting a very high
measure of punishment, into a milder. Of the latter we have daily examples in
the case of felons who have received a capital sentence, to whom the royal
pardon is extended, on condition of transportation to some of the colonies and
plantations either for life or for a term of years: and the King's pardon is
in like manner frequently granted to deserter's condemned to death by a Court-
Martial, on condition of their enlisting in certain regiments stationed
abroad. The royal pardon is frequently extended to those who are condemned by
a general Court-Marshal in consequence of a recommendation to mercy contained
in the sentence of the court; who although they may have found themselves
obliged by a sense of duty, or in consequence of the strict letter of the law,
to pronounce a penal sentence, may yet be of opinion that there are
alleviating circumstances in the case which render the prisoner a proper
object of the royal clemency. In such case, the recommendation of the court is
generally founded on the mention of those favourable circumstances. But in all
cases, whatever, the Sovereign has it in his power to grant either a
conditional or a free pardon whenever it shall seem good to him, though there
should be no recommendation from the court to that effect. In the Essay
proper, Mr. Tytler traces the origin, rise and progress of Military Law in
Great Britain and her dependencies, front the Feudal period, essentially
military, to the Reign of Charles I. Again to the Revolution of 1649, and
finally to the time of the adoption of the First Mutiny Act by Parliament,
viz.: April 3rd, 1689. During this most eventful period, controlled by men of
powerful intellect like Cromwell, the Military Law "advanced by regular and
desultory steps" just as did the Civil Law but whether the army was commanded
by the King or by the Parliament its internal government was the same, the
only questions being who was to command the army? who should give the supreme
orders? whom should it serve? and to whom it owed allegiance and obedience?
The final result was that the King or Executive did command the army, but its
existence, its support, and the laws for its government were enacted by
Parliament, so that in no event could its concentrated power be directed
against the Nation, but against its enemies foreign and domestic, all parties
concurring that mutiny, sedition, desertion and all manner of irregularities
within the army should be promptly and severely punished to the end that it
might remain a powerful machine to support and maintain the integrity and
honor of the State in which all citizens were alike concerned. Such were the
Constitution and Law of England when our country formed a part of that Realm,
and from her laws, and her precedents we have derived all our military notions
and customs, which form the Common Law Military to-day, and which we are sworn
to observe when not controlled by actual statutes. In England the constitution
is unwritten, whereas ours is written, clearly and succinctly; and every word
and paragraph have been critically examined and tested by the ablest lawyers
and statesmen of the civilized world. Our own national experience in war has
been considerable and doubtful points have been adjudicated by the Supreme
Court of the United States, a tribunal of law now recognized as second to none
on earth, so that we are peculiarly favored. The constitution recognizes the
necessity of an army. The President is its constitutional Commander-in-chief,
but Congress provides for it, and makes all laws for its government, so that
on these points, which cost England so dear, there is and can be no doubt with
us. The Laws and Rules for the government of the army, for its internal
administration, for the punishment of mutiny, sedition, desertion, waste of
public property, etc., are sufficiently clear and specific, but when the army
is used in a foreign country as in Mexico, or in an Indian Reservation or in
districts of country where the civil law and the civil authorities are weak,
if not actually powerless, our Statutory Code is so imperfect that army
commanders have been compelled to resort to the common laws of war, as derived
from inherited customs, or from usages which have grown up in our own
experience. We are constantly reminded by our lawyers that the people are
jealous of the army, that the army is a constant threat to the civil liberties
of the people, that the military must at all times be subordinate to the civil
power etc., that Military Law in the words of Blackstone is no law at all, and
like expressions which were most popular in the English Revolution two hundred
and fifty years ago, but which are as senseless to-day as would be the call of
the Muezzin from Trinity steeple in New York City. In a recent decision made
by the Supreme Court of the United States, October Term, 1879, in the case of
Neil Dow vs. Bradish Johnson, Mr. justice Field enunciated The Law of to-day,
which is as binding on the citizen as the soldier. "We fully it agree with the
presiding justice of the Circuit Court in the doctrine that the military
should always be kept in subjection to the laws of the country to which it
belongs, and that he is no friend to the Republic who advocates the contrary.
The established principle of every free people is that the law shall alone
govern; and to it the military must always yield. We do not controvert the
doctrine of Mitchell vs. Harmony; on the contrary we approve it. But it has no
application to the case at Bar. The Trading for which the seizure was then
made, had been permitted by the executive Department of our Government. The
question here is, what is the law which governs an army invading an enemy's
country? It is not the Civil Law of the invaded country; it is not the Civil
Law of the conquering country; it is the Military Law, the law of war, and its
supremacy for the protection of the officers and soldiers of the army, when in
service in the field in an enemy's country, is as essential to the efficiency
of the army, as the supremacy of the Civil Law at home, and in time of peace
is essential to the p reservation of liberty." The judgment of the Court in
the case was: "An officer of the army of the United States, whilst in service
during the late war in the enemy's country, was not liable to a civil action
in the courts of that country for injuries resulting from acts of war ordered
by him in his military character; nor could he be called on to justify or
explain his military conduct in a Civil Tribunal upon any allegation of the
injured party that the acts complained of were not justified by the
necessities of war. He was responsible only to his own Government, and only by
its laws administered by its authority could he be called to account." This
decision of the Supreme Court places the Military Law, "the law of war," on
the plane where it has always belonged; coequal with the Civil Law in its
proper sphere of action. All laws are equal being supreme, and the only
practical question in each case is-what is the law at the place, and at the
time of the controversy? Is it Civil, or is it Military? To determine this is
the province of the Judiciary; one of the independent tripartite powers of our
Government; and this august tribunal having raised the laws of war to their
proper standard, it behooves all military men to aid in reducing these laws to
a well defined code. The case of Mitchell vs. Harmony referred to by judge
Field can be found in Howard's Reports, Vol. XIII. pages 115-149. Chief
Justice Taney delivered the opinion of the Court. Mitchell was Lieutenant-
Colonel of the Regiment of Volunteers in the Mexican War commanded by Colonel
Doniphan, which executed the movement from Santa Fe to Chihuahua. Harmony was
a trader, who had started from Independence, Missouri, with a train of goods,
before the fact of the declaration of war with Mexico was known, with the full
sanction of law and the license of the Treasury officials. General Kearney's
column overtook this train on the Plains, did not interfere with its lawful
traffic, but only required it to follow behind the army, and to trade with the
Mexicans after they had submitted to the authority of the United States. After
reaching Santa Fe, General Kearney with a small escort turned west to
California, leaving Doniphan to go on to Chihuahua, and Harmony followed as
far as San Elizaris, where he hesitated and resolved to turn back by reason of
the dangers of war. But he was compelled to follow, whereby he lost his whole
"outfit," for which he sued Lieut.-Col. Mitchell, and obtained judgemnent in
the Circuit Court of the United States for the Southern District of New York
for $95,855.38 with interest at 6 per cent. after November 9th, 1850, chiefly
for the reason that because Mitchell had compelled Harmony at San Elizaris to
follow the expedition, there was no legal justification for this trespass on
his private property, he being engaged in a lawful business. Judge Taney in
his opinion states that, "It is admitted that the Plaintiff (Harmony) against
his will was compelled by the Defendant to accompany the troops with the
property in question when they marched from San Elizaris to Chihuahua, and
that he was informed that force would be used if he refused. This was
unquestionably a taking of the property by force from the possession and
control of the Plaintiff, and a trespass on the part of the Defendant unless
he can show legal ground of justification." This the Defendant, Lieut.-Col.
Mitchell, of course undertook, and he had the benefit of able counsel in the
Hon. J.J Crittenden. Chief justice Taney resumes: "There are without doubt
occasions in which private property may lawfully be taken possession of, or
destroyed to prevent its falling into the hands of the public enemy; and also
when a military officer charged with a particular duty may impress private
property into the public service, or take it for public use. Unquestionably in
such cases the Government is bound to make full compensation to the owner, but
the officer is not a trespasser." "But we are clearly of opinion that in all
these cases that the danger must be immediate and impending; or the necessity
urgent for the public service, such as will not admit of delay, and when the
action of the civil authority would be too late in providing the means which
the occasion calls for. It is impossible to define the particular
circumstances of danger or necessity in which this power may be lawfully
exercised. Every case must depend on its own circumstances. It is the
emergency which gives the right, and the emergency must be shown to exist
before the taking can be justified." The Supreme Court decided that the
emergency did not warrant the trespass on private property, therefore affirmed
the judgment with costs, and Colonel Mitchell paid dearly for his act. The
case of Cross, Hobson & Co., vs. Ed. H. Harrison, December Term 1853, reported
in 16, Howard, page 164, contains many points of great interest to military
students. The syllabus contains among several matters two points of special
importance. "In the war with Mexico, the Port of San Francisco was conquered
by the army of the United States in the year 1846, and shortly afterwards the
United States had military possession of all of Upper California. Early in
1847 the President of the United States, as Constitutional Commander-in-Chief
of the army and navy, authorized the military and naval Commanders of the
United States forces in California, to exercise the belligerent rights of a
conqueror, and to form a Civil and Military Government for the conquered
Territory, with power to impose duties on imports and tonnage for the support
of such Government, and the army which had the conquest in possession." "The
formation of the Civil Government in California, when it was done, was the
lawful exercise of a belligerent right over a conquered Territory. It was the
existing Government when the territory was ceded to the United States as a
conquest, and did not cease as a matter of course, or as a consequence of the
restoration of peace, and it was rightfully continued after peace was made
with Mexico, until Congress legislated otherwise, under its constitutional
power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations respecting the
territory or other property belonging to the United States." Mr. Justice Wayne
delivered the opinion of the Court in this case, and after reciting the facts,
and passing on the arguments, he used the following language: "The purpose of
this suit is to recover from the defendant certain tonnage duties and imports,
which were paid to him by the plaintiff upon ships which had arrived in San
Francisco, and upon foreign merchandise which had been landed from them
between the 3d of February, 1848, and the 13th of November, 1849. Harrison had
been appointed Collector for the Port of San Francisco by Colonel Mason,
Military Governor of California. They were paid however until sometime in the
fall of 1848 at the rate of the war tariff; which had been established early
in the year before by the direction of the President of the United States."
"The authority for that purpose given to the Comniatider-in-Chief of our naval
force on that station was to establish Port Regulations, to prescribe the
conditions upon which American and foreign vessels were to be admitted into
the Ports of California, and to regulate import duties. That war tariff
however was abandoned as soon as the Military Governor received from
Washington information of the exchange and ratification of the Treaty with
Mexico, and duties were afterwards levied in conformity with such as Congress
had imposed on foreign merchandise imported into the other ports of the United
States, Upper California having been ceded by the "Treaty to the United
States. This last was done with the consent of the Executive of the United
States, or If without any interference to prevent it. Indeed from the letter
of the then Secretary of State, and from that of the Secretary of the
Treasury, we cannot doubt that the action it of the Military Governor of
California was recognized as allowable and lawful by Mr. Polk and his Cabinet.
We think it was a rightful and correct recognition under all the
circumstances, and when we say rightful that it was Constitutional, although
Congress had not passed an Act to extend the collection of tonnage and import
duties to the Ports of California." "The Government of which Colonel Mason was
the Executive had its origin in the lawful exercise of a belligerent right
over a conquered territory. It had been instituted during the war, by command
of the President of the United States. It was the government when the
territory was ceded as a conquest, and it did not cease as a matter of course,
or as a necessary consequence of the restoration of peace. The President might
have dissolved it by withdrawing the army and navy officers who administered
it, but he did not do so, Congress could have put an end to it, but it was not
done. The right inference from the inaction of both is, that it was meant to
be continued until it had been legislatively changed." "Our conclusion from
what has been said is that the Civil Government of California, organized as it
was from a right of conquest, did not cease or become defunct in consequence
of the signature of the treaty or from its ratification. We think it was
continued over a ceded conquest without any violation of the Constitution or
laws of the United States, and that until Congress legislated for it, the
duties upon foreign goods imported into San Francisco were legally demanded,
and lawfully received by Mr. Harrison the Collector of the Port, who received
his appointment according to instructions from Washington, from Governor
Mason." I was in California at the time of this transaction, and was
intimately associated with Colonel Mason as his Assistant Adjutant-General. At
that time Captain H. W. Halleck, U. S. Engineers, was acting Secretary of
State, and by reason of his familiarity with international law was of infinite
assistance to his Chief, Colonel and Governor Mason. As soon as we learned
that the Treaty of Peace had been signed at Guadalupe Hidalgo, many good men
concluded that the war having ceased, the Military Government of California
necessarily terminated; and when the knowledge that the Treaty had been
confirmed by the Senate was made known then these same men were certain, and
some even proposed violently to disregard the existing Government; call a
convention of the people, and proceed to establish a new Government of their
own fabrication. Colonel Mason forbade this, was denounced as a tyrant,
usurper, and an enemy to Republican Government, but he never wavered,
asserting that from the necessity of the case, the then existing Government
was lawful in its inception, and must continue in force till Congress provided
another. The final judgment of the Supreme Court was not announced till
December, 1853, confirming the action of Colonel Mason, and demonstrating the
absolute necessity that army officers should be lawyers as well as soldiers.
Had Colonel Mason hesitated in his course of action he might have gained large
temporary local popularity, but would have laid the foundation for innumerable
costly law-suits. The case was argued in the Supreme Court by Messrs. Merrick
and McCullok for the Plaintiff's, and by Mr. Cushing, Attorney General, for
the Defendant, and reference was made by the Plaintiff's counsel to certain
points not here in before given. These authorities show clearly that the
domain and the sovereignty of the United States always must be distinct; and
may or may not be both in full exercise at once, as is even the case with all
nations. The sovereignty of the United States is operative in foreign
countries,-both in war and peace; her domain is local. In war we taxed goods
brought into Tampico, Mexico, while in our military occupancy; and also laid
imports on goods brought thence into the collection districts of the United
States. And again, In war Great Britain by force of arms occupied Castine,
(Maine), a port within a collection district of the United States, and foreign
goods were there imported during such hostile occupancy; hence upon the
abandonment of that port by the foe, the United States had no right to lay
imports on said goods then and there found, because her sovereignty was, as to
that port in her domain, suspended by hostile occupancy." The case of Pryor N.
Coleman vs. the State of Tennessee, decided in the October Term, 1878, Supreme
Court of the United States contains much valuable matter on the subject now in
hand. Mr. Justice Field delivered the opinion of the Court from which I
extract. "This case comes before us from the Supreme Court of Tennessee. The
Plaintiff in error, the defendant in the Court below, was indicted in the
Criminal Court for the District of Knox County in that State on the 2nd of
October, 1874, for the murder of Mouring Ann Bell, alleged to have been
committed in that county on the 7th of March, 1865. To this indictment he
pleaded not Guilty, and a former conviction for the same offence by a General
Court Martial regularly convened for his trial at Knoxville, Tennessee, on the
27th of March, i865; the United States at that time, and when the offence was
committed, occupying with their armies East Tennessee as a Military District,
and the defendant being a regular soldier in their military service, subject
to the articles of war, military orders, and such military laws as were then
in force by their authority. The Plea states that before the said Court
Martial thus convened at Knoxville, then the headquarters of the Military
District, the defendant was arraigned upon a charge of murder, in having
killed the same person mentioned in the indictment, and that he was afterwards
on the 9th of May, 1865, tried and convicted of the offence by that tribunal
and sentenced to death by hanging, and that the said sentence is still
standing as the judgment of the Court Martial, approved as required by law in
such cases, without other or further action thereon. In consideration of the
premises, and by reason of the said trial and conviction, and of the jeopardy
involved in said proceedings, the defendant prays that the indictment may be
quashed." After arguing the case at some length and quoting the new 58th
Article of War, which confers on Courts Martial in time of War, jurisdiction
over murder, assault and battery with intent to kill, manslaughter, mayhem,
wounding by shooting or stabbing with an intent to commit murder, robbery,
arson, burglary, rape, &c.;, &c.;, Judge Field proceeds: "Previous to its
(58th Article of War) enactment the it offences designated were punishable by
the State Courts, and persons in the military service who committed them were
delivered over to those Courts for trial * * * with the known hostility of the
American people to any interference by the military with the regular
administration of justice in the Civil Courts. No such intention should be
ascribed to Congress in the absence of clear and direct language to that
effect." "We do not mean to intimate that it was not within the competency of
Congress to confer exclusive jurisdiction upon Military Courts over offences
committed by persons in the military service. As Congress is expressly
authorized by the constitution 'to raise and support armies' and 'to make
rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces,' its
control over the whole subject of the formation, organization and government
of the national armies, including therein the punishment of offences committed
by persons in the military service would seem to be plenary." * * "It is well
settled that a foreign army permitted to march through a friendly country, or
to be permitted to be stationed in it by authority of its government or
sovereign is exempt from the civil and criminal jurisdiction of the place."
"If an army marching through a friendly country would thus be exempt from its
civil and criminal jurisdiction, a fortiori would an army invading an enemy's
country be exempted. The very fact that war is waged between two countries
negatives the possibility of jurisdiction being exercised by the tribunals of
the one country over persons engaged in the military service of the other for
offences committed while in such service. Aside from the want of jurisdiction,
there would be something incongruous and absurd in permitting an officer or
soldier of an invading army to be tried by his enemy, whose country he had
invaded." The final judgment was, "That the judgment of the Supreme Court of
Tennessee must be reversed, and the cause remanded with directions to
discharge the defendant from custody by the Sheriff of Knox County on the
indictment and conviction for murder in the State Court. But as the defendant
was guilty of murder, as clearly appears not only by the evidence in the
record in this case, but in the record in the proceedings of the Court
Martial, a murder committed too under circumstances of great atrocity, and as
he was convicted of the crime by that court and sentenced to death, and it
appears by his plea that said judgement was duly approved, and still remains
without any action having been taken upon it, he may be delivered up to the
military authorities of the United States to be dealt with as required by
law." And the prisoner was so delivered into the custody of the military
authorities, his sentence was modified by the President to imprisonment for
life, and he is now so imprisoned at the Albany Penitentiary, New York. I have
thus endeavored to give in as concise a form as possible the status of English
and American Military Law up to the present moment, and trust that it will be
of service to our army officers, not that I would willingly have them accept
this as final and conclusive, but to give direction to their studies, because
truth and knowledge are in the bottom of a well, and can only be gained by
labor and toil inseparable from success in any Profession. From these premises
I derive the following conclusions: The United States is a nation whose
aggregate Power equals that of any other on earth, and the exercise of this
Power is sub-divided by the Constitution between the Legislative, Executive
and judicial branches of Government. To Congress is delegated the Power to
declare war (and make conquests); to raise and support armies; to make Rules
for the Government and Regulation of the Land and Naval Forces; to provide for
calling forth the militia to execute the Laws of the Union, suppress
Insurrections and repel invasions; and to make all Laws, which shall be
necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing Powers, &C.;,
&C.; "The President shall be Commander-in-chief of the Army and Navy of the
United States, and of the Militia of the several States when called into the
actual service of the United States." "The j

