**

DR. KATHERINE M.B. OSBURN  
HONORS 401: COLLOQUIUM IN POLITICAL ACTIVISM  
FALL SEMESTER, 1999 OFFICE: HENDERSON, 110  
PHONE: 372-6297 EMAIL _:[kosburn@tntech.edu](mailto:kosburn@tntech.edu)_  
OFFICE HOURS: MWF: 11:00-11:50; M: 1:00-3:00; AND BY APPOINTMENT  
web page: http://iweb.tntech.edu/kosburn

Course Description  
**    In 1962 the college students who eventually formed the Students for a
Democratic Society (SDS) composed their manifesto for political activism, the
Port Huron Statement. In this document, they noted that the events confronting
their generation "were too immediate and crushing in their impact, [and] too
challenging in the demand that we as individuals take the responsibility for
encounter and resolution." The student activism of the 1960s, which resulted
from a unique combination of historical circumstances, had far-reaching
effects on every aspect of American society. In contrast, today's college
students seem apathetic and apolitical. This may be, however, because they
fail to understand either the long and inspiring history of effective social
movements or the immediate importance of political activism to their lives.
This course seeks to inform them of both, and to give them skills to organize
campaigns for meaningful social change. **

**

    We will begin with an historical survey of social movements in America. While this story originates even before the U. S. was a nation, we will start with the late nineteenth century, following the rise of industrial capitalism. Enormous economic and social transformations resulting from industrialization and urbanization led to massive upheavals in American society. A wide range of social movements, using a variety of strategies and tactics to realize their goals, grew out of this turmoil. In order to understand the nature of social change, we will study the U. S. as a cultural system, considering the connections between economic, social, and political structures and ideas. The goal of these assignments is to help students understand the history of social movements and to articulate their own ideologies of social change.

    As we study the history of American social movements, the students will pick an issue that compels them to "take the responsibility for encounter and resolution," and they will design a campaign to institute change according to a blueprint of their own creation. This project may be done individually or in groups. For this component of the course, the students will train in the tactics and strategies of political action, using the principles of the Midwest Academy. (The Midwest Academy, located in Chicago, is a training center for community organizers that teaches principles of effective organization and political action.) Students will learn how to research their issue, target persons in a position to effect change, design a campaign to institute their desired aims, and map a media strategy to publicize and garner support for their cause. This "hands-on" experience will involve students in some type of community action and will hopefully prove to be empowering. (I am, of course, prepared for the fact that it may also result in disillusionment with political action.) Whatever results, the experience will help develop leadership and citizenship among Tech students and will also help them to participate in an educational experience that reaches beyond the classroom.

**

Course Objectives: **  
1\. As always, to develop critical and analytical thinking and writing skills.  
2\. To comprehend several basic principles of historical thinking such as
change and continuity over time, multiple causation with respect to historical
events, and the origins of present social, political, environmental, and
economic problems.  
3\. To give the students a basic knowledge of the major events, ideas, and
personalities of a variety of social movements in American history.  
4\. To help the student develop a theory of social change and an ideology of
significant social and political engagement in their communities.  
5\. To give the student hands-on experience in political activism and to
expose them to the political processes of democracy (or what passes for
democracy) and community organizing.  
6\. To encourage the students to examine what is necessary for a successful
community.  
7\. To empower students as citizens and as human beings to bring about
meaningful social change.

**

Course Requirements: **  
1\. **READINGS** : While I will give some lectures, this is primarily a
seminar based on student discussions. Therefore, your grade will depend
heavily on attendance and class participation. Every class period students
must turn in a brief write-up of the readings (2 or 3 paragraphs will suffice
and these may be handwritten provided they are legible) which addresses the
following questions:

a. What is the main point of the readings--that is, the authors' thesis?  
b. How does the author support his/her thesis--that is, what evidence does
he/she offer?  
c. What question or questions, if any, do the readings raise for you?

2\. **PROJECT** : The student will design and execute an activism project of
her/his choice on any topic. This project can be either at Tech or at the
state, local, or national level and can involve any aspect of social,
economic, environmental, or political activism. There are a number of steps to
this process, and I have prepared a handout that breaks this down into
specific activities. See __activism project__ handout for the nuts & bolts of
how to construct a campaign. A paper explaining the activism project and a
presentation of the project experience to the group will be required.

3\. **GRADES** : Grades for this colloquium will be based on two things:
**class attendance and participation,** including turning in write-ups,
participating in class discussions, and completing the assignments in the
activism project handout. If you complete all of the assignments in a
satisfactory manner, you will get full credit here. We will discuss exactly
what we think we can realistically do given out individual projects and agree
on a criteria for what is satisfactory. The second part of the grade will be
for **the activism project** itself. Here the student will be graded on the
research she or he has put into the issue, judged in part by her/his strategy
chart, media campaign, and by her or his presentation to the class. You will
not be judged by whether or not you effect any significant change in your
campaign just on whether or not you really tried to make your ideas for social
change a reality. All I ask is that you spend the next 16 weeks doing
everything you can reasonably be expected to do to realize your vision for a
better world, whatever that may be.

**

Assigned Readings** _:  
_ 1\. Robert A. Goldberg, _Grassroots Resistance: Social Movements in
Twentieth Century America.  
2\. _ Kim Bobo, Jackie Kendall, Steve Max. _Organizing For Social Change: A
Manual for Activists in the 1990s._ Second Edition.  
3\. Center for Community Change, _How to Tell and Sell Your Story_.  
4\. Documents packet.

**

SCHEDULE OF READINGS & ASSIGNMENTS:

**

For each week we will consider the readings, discuss our campaigns, and,
sometimes, hear guest speakers. You should be able to demonstrate progress on
your campaign each week.

_

Week 1: August 25, INTRO., Why should you give a tinker's damn about
activism?_

Student activism: we will discuss a short (5 paragraphs) essay on student
activism; The fundamentals of organizing; Discussion of your projects: what
issues engage you and what do you want to work on? I will give a brief lecture
providing background on social change in America during the last hour

_

Week 2: September 1, Social Movements: Structure and Organization

_**

Readings:** Goldberg, Intro. and chapter 2; Bobo et. al., chapters 1-3. Please
complete the assignments outlined in the __activism project__ handout.

_

Week 3: September 8, Workers of the World

_**

Readings:** Document: The Knights of Labor Platform, 1878; Goldberg, Chapters
3 & 5; Video: _The Grand Army of Starvation

Week 4: September 15, The Strategy Chart_

**Readings:** Bobo et. al., chapter 4. Please bring a preliminary strategy
chart for your campaign (see the __activism project__ handout). We will spend
the entire evening going over our strategy charts.

_

Week 5: September 22, Tactics for Social Change: Actions & Accountability._

**Readings:** Bobo et. al., chapters 5, 7, and 8. Please complete the
assignments outlined in the __activism project__ handout.

_

Week 6: September 29, Tactics for Social Change: The Media_

**Readings:** _How to Tell and Sell Your Story_. Please complete the
assignments outlined in the the __activism project__ handout.

_

Week 7: October 6, Media work, con't.;_

**Readings: _** _ Bobo et. al., chapter 9. Complete the assignment outlined in
the __activism project__ handout.

_

Week 8: October 13, The Civil Rights Movement_

**Readings:** Goldberg, chapter 7; Documents: _Letter From a Birmingham Jail,
1963; The Black Panther Party Platform and Program, 1966;_ Video: _Eyes on the
Prize

Week 9: October 20, Civil Rights, con't, _

Discussion of _Eyes_ ; Guest Speaker: __ John Johnson, Earth First! on civil
disobedience.

_

Week 10: October 27, Campus Revolt

_**

Readings: **Goldberg, chapter 8; Document _The Port Huron Statement._ Guest
speaker: Amy Mondoloch on the current student movement.

_

Week 11: November 3, "Uppity" Woman ****

_**

Readings: **Goldberg, chapter 9; **** Documents: _The NOW Bill of Rights,
1967; The SNCC Position Paper on Women in the Movement, 1964

Week 12: November 10, the Future of Environmentalism?? The Natural Step._

**Readings:** See web links on my web page and come prepared to discuss the
Natural Step Movement.

_

Week 13: November 17, Thunder On the Right

_**

Readings: **Goldberg, chapter 6.

Week 14: November 24.

There will be no formal class on this day since it is the day before
Thanksgiving. I will be in my office for consultation all day on Wednesday
(except for when I am in class) so that I can help you can pull together your
projects. you must sign up to speak with me either Tuesday or Wednesday of
this week.

Week 15: December 1, _The Legacy of Activism

_

**Readings:** Goldberg, chapter 10. We will discuss Goldberg and begin the
student presentations. Further, for your presentations read Bobo et. al.,
chapter 13, Being a Great Public Speaker. You will give a speech to the class
on your topic and you will be graded by both myself and your peers on how well
you "inspire" us to action.

Week 16: December 8, Student presentations, con't **

PROJECTS DUE @ FINAL EXAM TIME:  
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 15, 3:30-5:30

**

