* * *

#  Kevin Fox Gotham

* * *

**Assistant Professor of Sociology**  

* * *

     **_Address:_**
     Department of Sociology
     220 Newcomb Hall
     Tulane University
     New Orleans, LA 70118
     _Phone:_ 1-504-862-3004
     _Fax:_ 1-504-865-5544

_**Email:** _ kgotham@tulane.edu  


**_Areas of Research and Teaching Specialty :_**

Urban Sociology  
Sociological Theory  
Race and Ethnicity  
Stratification and Inequality  
Political Sociology  
Comparative-Historical Sociology  
Social Control and Criminology

  
_Last updated: 8/01/2002_ **_Biographical Information_ :** I was born on
September 7, 1966 in Kansas City, Missouri and lived in Kansas City, Kansas
most of my life before moving to New Orleans in July 1997. I completed my B.A.
(1990), M.A. (1992), and Ph.D. (1997) in the Department of Sociology at the
University of Kansas.

Generally, I am interested in how cities develop, how they are organized, how
they change, how they affect people, and what they might look like in the
future. The bulk of my research examines the segregative effect of federal
housing programs, the racially discriminatory aspects of post World War II
urban planning, and the negative effect of neighborhood racial composition on
mortgage lending (e.g., redlining).  In other work, I investigate racial
conflicts over federal efforts to locate low-income housing in suburban areas,
the role of community identity in the emergence of a locally-based anti-
expressway movement, the impact of real estate blockbusting on neighborhood
racial change in the post World War II era, and the negative consequences of
the market-centered orientation of federal housing policy.  
Over the last few years have I published a series of articles that examine the
links between the built environment of public housing and the symbolic
meanings people and groups attach to spaces in the city.  I have also
published work that explores the impact of city revitalization efforts and
pro-growth strategies on metropolitan development, gentrification, and
neighborhood socio-economic stability.

Click
[here](http://www.elsevier.com/inca/publications/store/6/2/2/1/4/6/index.htt)
for more information, including a brief description and table of contents,
about my edited volume on urban redevelopment.  Click
[here](./PublicationsMasterHTML.html) for a list of all my publications,
including journal articles, books, and book chapters.  See my  [curriculum
vitae](./VITAEmasterHTML.htm) for a comprehensive list of professional
appointments, publications, awards and honors, presentations, committee
memberships, courses taught, and so on.

My recently published book, _Race, Real Estate, and Uneven Development: The
Kansas City Experience, 1900-2000,_ (SUNY Press) explores the interlocking
nature of racial discrimination and class factors in the origin and
development of racial residential segregation since the turn of the century.
Traditional urban perspectives emphasize the role of consumer demand and
market dynamics as the motors of metropolitan development and the subsequent
segregation of classes, races, ethnic groups, and land-uses.  In my book, I
reexamine these assumptions from a critical political economy perspective that
places racial stratification at the heart of the analysis of metropolitan
development.  I emphasize the importance of analyzing housing as a system of
social stratification and provide a novel account of the role of the real
estate industry and federal housing policy in the development of racial
residential segregation and uneven development, focusing on a case study of
Kansas City.  Drawing on extensive primary research, I investigate, for
instance, how the leading actors within the emerging real estate industry
cultivated and promulgated a segregationist ideology that linked the
residential presence of blacks with neighborhood deterioration and other
negative consequences.  Turning to the origin of the Federal Housing
Administration (FHA), I show how race and racial discrimination became
institutionalized as a central component of the modern mortgage system that
profoundly affected postwar suburbanization.  Later chapters focus on the
segregative effect of urban renewal, school administrative actions, real
estate blockbusting, and mortgage redlining.  Throughout the book, I show how
real estate activities and federal housing policy have traditionally reflected
an ideology of privatism that celebrates the supremacy of the "free" market
and reinforces sentiments favoring social exclusion and isolation.  In the
final chapter, I draw attention to the fact that while race is no longer an
explicit real estate selling tool, it has become an unspoken but understood
element of other seemingly non-racial factors - exclusionary zoning, gated
neighborhoods, property values, and school quality - that work together to
perpetuate racially segregated settlement spaces.  Click
[here](http://www.sunypress.edu/details.asp?id=60566) for more information
about my book.

Over the past year, I have launched two major long-term research projects.
First, I am exploring the growing impact of urban tourism on U.S. cities and,
in particular, the transformation of New Orleans into an entertainment hub.
Specifically, I am gathering data on the rise and dominance of tourism in New
Orleans, the consequences of this economic shift, and the transformation of
local festivals such as Mardi Gras into large-scale tourism-based spectacles.
Today, Mardi Gras is the linchpin of the regional tourism industry and a major
marketing device used by private and public groups to attract consumption-
oriented investment. Major developers and real estate interests now regularly
rely on Mardi Gras imagery and motifs to create commercial spaces including
arts districts, historic areas, museums, casinos and gaming facilities, and
shopping areas.  In this way, Mardi Gras connects with the production of
spectacular environments and involves the circulation of people to specific
locations that are consumed as spaces - spaces of leisure, recreation,
history, and amusement.  In addition to my focus on tourism and the changing
nature of Mardi Gras in New Orleans, I am looking at how and various cultural
strategies of urban redevelopment (e.g., historic preservation, arts
districts, museums, and so on) have affected the social and spatial
organization of the French Quarter and the Warehouse District.  The
theoretical work of George Lukacs, the Frankfurt School, Guy Debord and the
Situationists, David Harvey, Manuel Castells, and Henri Lefebvre, among others
inform my empirical research on New Orleans and tourism.

Second, I am investigating the "globalization" of U.S. real estate industry
and, in particular, the institutional and political changes that have occurred
in the financing of housing over the last few decades.  I focus on how these
changes are affecting the spatial organization of cities and metropolitan
areas, and the production and consumption of housing (e.g., what is built,
where it is built, for whom it is built, how much does it cost, and who can
afford it).  I am also examining the effect real estate deregulation,
securitization, privatization, and globalization is having on international
housing markets and forms of financing.

**Recent Courses Taught** Urban Sociology (see  [Fall 2001
syllabus](./UrbSocSyllabusFall01.htm) )  
Social Theory (see [Spring 2002 syllabus](./TheorySyllabusSpring02.htm) )  
Urban Organization (see [Spring 2000 syllabus](./UrbanOrgsyllabus00.htm) )  
Urban Policy and Planning (see [Spring 2002
syllabus](./UrbPolSyllabuSpring02.htm) )

  
**Some of my favorite web sites include:** [American Sociological
Association](http://www.asanet.org)  
[CorpWatch](http://www.corpwatch.org)  
[Critical Theory website](http://www.uta.edu/huma/illuminations/)  
[International Sociological Association](http://www.ucm.es/info/isa/)  
[Community and Urban Sociology](http://www.commurb.org/)  
[Comparative and Historical
Sociology](http://www.sla.purdue.edu/academic/soc/comphist/)  
[Urban Affairs Association](http://www.udel.edu/uaa/index.html)  
[Situationist International](http://nothingness.org)  
[Radical Urban Theory](http://www.rut.com)

