![](graphics/book.gif)

* * *

[ General | Biography | Office Hours|Unscheduled
Absence|Text|Prerequisites|Grading Components|Grading Scale|Grading Statement]  
  
---  
  
[Tests|Reserve Materials|Critical Dates|Course Objectives and Course
Structure|Interactive Study Guides|Course Policies and Helpful Hints]  
  
[[Course Schedule](schedule.html)]  
  
[[Return to Home Page](index.html)]  
  
* * *

**General**  

  * **Professor:** Dr. Ciro G. Scotto 
  * **Office:** MRH 3.730 
  * **Phone:** (512) 343-5500 
  * **Home Phone:** (512) 343-5500 
  * **e-mail:** cscotto@mail.utexas.edu 

**Biography**      I was born and raised in Brooklyn, New York. I completed my
undergraduate studies at the University of California, Davis, where I studied
composition with Richard Swift. I graduated cum laude and won the Olge Brose
Valente Prize for Composition. I completed my graduate studies at the
University of Washington where I studied composition with John Rahn and James
Beale. While at Washington, I won the Warren Babb Music by People Award. In
1991, I was selected by Gunther Schuller to attend the Sandpoint Music
Festival as both composer and conductor. During the festival, my composition,
_Exchanges_ , for solo violin, was premiered. I taught at the university of
California, Davis, the University of California, Santa Barbara, the Cornish
college of the Arts, and the university of Washington. I have composed works
for solo instruments, chamber ensembles, and chamber orchestra. My commissions
include the Puget Sound Flute Quartet, The East Shore Chamber Players, the
Gotham Ensemble, the pianist Robert Taub, and Fear No Music. My compositions
were a regular feature on the Seattle Spring New Music Festival. My
compositions have also received performances across the united States and in
Canada. On November 5th, 1995, The Rainier Chamber Winds premiered my chamber
orchestra composition _Tetralogy_. On February 23, 1996 Fear No Music
premiered my work _Confessions_ , for chamber ensemble. On April 23, 1996, the
New Music Ensemble at the University of Texas premiered my guitar trio _Three
Words for Three Guitars_. As well as my composing and conducting work, I have
written articles on the music of Milton Babbitt, Gunther Schuller, Roger
Reynolds, and others. I have also presented several papers at the Society of
Music Theory's National Conference.

**Office Hours**      Monday, Wednesday, Friday 12:00--1:00 PM, additional
times by appointment, and **always available by e-mail**.

**Unscheduled Absence**      If I cannot be in class due to an emergency (for
example, my wife is pregnant and will be giving birth at the end of the
semester, so I may have to run to the hospital), I will try to call the office
to send someone over with instructions for you. For example, what you should
read or analyze. If nobody comes to the classroom by 15 past the hour, you may
leave. I will contact everyone by e-mail with instructions.

**Text**     _Form in Tonal Music_ , An Introduction to Analysis, by Douglass
M. Green; _Complete Piano Sonatas_ , Vol. I by Ludwig van Beethoven, edited by
Heinrich Schenker; _Tonal Harmony_ by Stefan Kostka  & Dorothy Payne;
_Workbook for Tonal Harmony_ by Stefan Kostka  & Dorothy Payne.

**Prerequisites**      Freshman theory and the first semester of Sophomore
theory.

**Grading Components**      Homework| 40%  | Midterm| 20%  | Final| 30%  |
Class Participation| 10%

**Grading Scale**      The following grading scale will be used: 90+=A;
80-89=B; 70-79=C; 60-69=D. Any average below 60 is failing. Numerical values
(0-100) will be assigned to the homework, the midterm, and the final. From
these values, your final grade will be calculated. A grade of "incomplete"
will be given only in conformance to official university policy (i.e., extreme
emergency such as hospitalization, death in the family etc. occurring during
the last three weeks of the semester).

**Grading Statement**      Homework that is one class session late will
receive a 5 point deduction. (For example, if a homework assignment is due on
Monday and you turn it in on Wednesday, 5 points will automatically be
deducted.) Homework that is two class sessions late will not be accepted
without prior consent of the instructor. (I will allow late homework that is
two class sessions late for illness and family emergencies.) Tests can only be
"made-up" with the prior consent of the instructor. Acceptable reasons for not
taking a test on the test date are illness and family emergency.

**Tests**      Only one test, the midterm, is scheduled during the course of
the semester. It will be given on **March 7, 1997** during the regularly
scheduled class meeting. It will cover all the material through March 5, 1997.
Although we have only one scheduled test, I will give short quizzes from time
to time. Some will not be announced in advance.

**Reserve Materials**      Recordings of the Beethoven Sonatas are on reserve
in the Fine Arts Library.

**Critical Dates**      |  January 16| Last day of the official add/drop
period.  
Last day undergraduate students may register without the approval of the
registrar.  | January 22| Last day to apply for a graduate degree.  | January
29| Twelfth class day.  
Last day an undergraduate student may add a course.  
Last day to drop a course for a possible refund.  
Last day a graduate student may add a course.  | February 10| Last day to drop
a course without a possible academic penalty.  | March 24| Last Day an
undergraduate student may with the Dean's approval, withdraw from the
university or drop a course.  |  Additional important information can be found
at the UT Austin [registrar's](http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar)
office.  |  Additional important information can be found at the UT
Brownsville [registrar's](http://sp21n1.utb.edu/univ/) office.

**Course Objectives and Course Structure**      We will complete our knowledge
of Western harmonic practice by studying the use of the Neapolitan and
Augmented sixth chords. We will practice writing short exercises that include
these chords, and we will analyze several pieces to learn how they function
within the context of compositions. After completing our harmonic vocabulary,
we will study form. This course is designed to teach you the analytical skills
necessary to examine form in Western art music. We will review basic forms,
such as binary and ternary forms, but we will spend the majority of our time
on sonata, rondo, and fugal forms. The goal of this course is to have you
become a critical thinker or critical interpreter of music's structure. Since
music rarely follows textbooks models exactly, you must develop analytical
skills to understand music's structure and communicate your insights to
others. Although the majority of our class meetings will be lectures, there
will be ample time for discussion, especially in the latter part of the
course. Therefore, I expect you to come to class prepared to talk about the
current composition.

**Interactive Study Guides**      This class is special, because it involves
more than one UT campus. I want the class to be one extended classroom rather
than two separate classrooms coexisting side by side. I will be implementing
several technical aids that will help us achieve this goal. Aside from this
goal, these innovations should enhance your learning experience. I see these
aids as a way of me giving you the student more personalized attention. Rather
than having one teacher for 30 students, I hope the technology helps you to
feel that you a have personal teacher. That is, I can gear the learning
experience more towards your individual needs than to just a broad
perspective. Here are just some of the ways we will accomplish this goal.

**e-mail**      You must have an e-mail account. This will be our primary
means of communication outside the classroom. I will use e-mail to send
important announcements to the entire class. Eventually, I will expect you to
submit your homework via e-mail, and I will return your assignments via
e-mail. Every UT student can get an e-mail account free of charge. If you do
not know how to set up an account, see the systems administrator either in
your computer lab or in your library lab. Your should have your account by the
beginning of the second week of classes. At that time, I will be collecting
e-mail addresses. To register your e-mail address for the class, send me a
message at [cscotto@mail.utexas.edu](MAILTO:cscotto@mail.utexas.edu).

**World Wide Web**      The World Wide Web will be an extremely important part
of this class. Eventually, it will be the primary means of distributing
information. For example, handouts for class meetings will be posted on the
web, and you will be expected to printout the handouts before class and bring
them with you. I will attempt to publish each class lecture after the material
is presented in class. (This does not relieve you of the responsibility of
taking notes.) I will try to supplement the lecture notes with additional
information by creating links to more detailed explanations and more examples.
I will also attempt to publish practice tests and self tests that will give
you immediate feedback. You can and should make requests for additional
material that you need extra help with or just want to know more about. I will
try to create documents that fulfill these needs. Since this web site will be
interactive and incorporate sound (you will be able to hear musical examples),
you must have the correct browser setup: Netscape 3.0 or 3.0.1, Apple's
QuickTime Netscape Plugin 1.1, and Apple's QuickTime software version 2.5. Do
not worry if this does not mean anything to you. I will provide detailed
[instructions ](BROWSER.HTML) for setting up your home computer. Lab
computer's will be setup for your use.

**Music Notation Programs**      A music notation program, such as Finale,
Nightingale, or Notewriter will be very useful. If you do not own one of these
programs, your computer lab should have them installed. If you are not
familiar with the operation of these programs, we may spend a little class
time learning the basics.

**612B/Music4 BB**      Some of you may have spent some time reading or
posting to news groups. I will have a bulletin board for this class up and
running sometime during this semester. I will post a new question to the board
each week. I want you as a class to discuss and express your views on the
current topic. I will monitor this list.

**Course Policies and Helpful Hints**      I reserve the right to be flexible
with the course schedule. Attendance is essential. Essentially, this class is
a seminar of colleagues getting together to discuss a common interest, music.
Therefore, you should come to each class meeting ready to participate.

* * *

[![](graphics/hmbtn.gif)Home Page ](index.html) ![](graphics/upbutt.gif)Back
to Top

Page last updated 1/17/97  
[Send comments cscotto@mail.utexas.edu

