            * **University at Albany SCHOOL  OF PUBLIC HEALTH: **
          * **H STA571  Topics in Medical informatics: **
  * **SYLLABUS**
                          * **[Back to HOME page](index.html)**
  * ** ** Spring Semester. Three credits, Call Number  7135,  Requires SKN, approval of the instructor: Donald F. Parsons MD, PhD. (518) 474-7047, Fax: (518) 474-8590.  dfp10@telemed.wadsworth.org.  Meet Tuesdays and Thursdays 9:45-11:05 am in Room C6,  the University at Albany School of Public Health,  East,  Rensselaer Campus.  26 lectures/demonstrations: 
  * Textbook: Patrice Degoulet and Marius Fieschi "Introduction to Clinical Informatics." Springer 1997. ISBN 0-387-94641-1

  * **Lecture 1**.    **What is medical informatics (MI) ?** Definition and content. The study of the clinical decision process. History of its development as a separate information science. Where it is taught. To medical students, nursing students, and public health students. Ever-increasing use of computers in health care. Professional organizations, journals, change with time of the titles of publications. Resources on the Internet and CDROMs. The types of data, its collection, storage and formatting. The need for good security with clinical data. Knowledge and intelligence. Computers in medicine, networking. Operating Systems and programming.   Degrees in MI, careers in MI. Crossover between basic science, computer science and clinical science. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 2. Medical records and the classification and storage of data.** Needed data: admit note, SOAP,   . The PAPER record: disadvantages, Patient orientated (Flexner) or Problem orientated (Weed).  Components: Admit note (Chief Complaint- CC, History of the Present Illness - HPI, Past Medical History -PMH, Family History \- FH, Social History - SH, Oral Review of Symptoms - ROS, Physical Exam \- PE, Chest X-Ray -CXR, impression , plan, etc.). Progress note: SOAP Subjective observations, Objective, Assigned Plan.  Discharge summary: death, exit or transfer.  Narrative text modifiers: tuples, time, clinical lab reports, databases, disease and procedure codes, comparison of HCPS, ICD-10, SNOMED, MESH-UMLS. Legal aspects. Ownership and access to patient records.
  * The Computer -based Patient Record (CPR): security, advantages. In relation to the Hospital Information System (HIS). Data entry, computer and network security. Storage media: stability and legality. Electronic signatures. Types of CPR in current use. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 3. Medical Computers. Software and hardware:   **Mini and micro-computers. Workstations and Main Frames. Cache and other types of memory, architecture of Sparc workstations, special features of clinical workstations. Networking. Palmtop computers with radio connections. Operating Systems (Unix, NT, IBM VM/CMS, Digital VMS, Mac and DOS), basic programming languages (C++, Java, Fortran, Perl, Pascal, Lisp, machine language), medical languages: MUMPS. Communication hardware and software.  CPU and process management: RISC and SPARC. Memory:RAM , ROM, 32-bit multi-threading.  Multi-user access in Unix, NT , work stations and and mainframes. Medical uses of artificial neural networks. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 4. Writing and Publishing HTML Pages, Video-consulting and Operation of WWW Servers:** Embedded markup, typesetting, and foreign computer text: PostScript, word processed, nroff, TeX, hypertext, Portable Document Format, HTML, inter-conversion and processing. Links, major tags and layouts, tables, graphics, compression of graphics, multi-media, Java Applets. Publication to different WWW servers Apache, Sun, Lotus Domino. Server databases. Browsers (Netscape, HotJava), Java Applets, and Plug-ins.  Video-consulting using Netscape "Conference."  main design factors (process management of a large number of simultaneous users) of Web HTTPD servers. HTTPD for Intranets, and for off-line organization of local complex of documents or databases.  PPP connections and POP and IMAP mail servers. How to make Web sites secure enough for holding clinical data.   **First In-Course Project:** Use your Unix account or your PC to write your own Home Page as a Biography. Include 3 graphics, and 2 links to other sites and 2 to medical resources sites. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 5.  Medical Information Infrastructure  (LANS, WANS, and medicine on the Internet). **Why Local Area Networks (LANs) are needed, IP addresses, Integration of LANS, network topology, the 7 network layers, the responsibility of System Administrators. Wide Area Networks (WANs): speed capability of different linkages (phone, Integrated Services Digital Network - ISDN, co-ax, EtherNet, fiber, microwave, satellite). Modem speeds, compression and error checking. Fast land lines and the local economy.  E-mail and Multi-purpose Internet Mail Extensions \- MIME. The TCP/IP standards. Electronic Data Interchange (EDI), advantages. Voice Recognition Software. Growth of the Internet, Internet II, the NSF and high speed national backbone busses.  PPP serial setup for home to office connections. Some medical informatics and public health WWW sites. WWW search engines. FTP, TELNET, Archie, WAIS, Gopher. Healthcare mailing lists and sources of standards (CDC MMWR, clinical guide-lines, on-line Coding of EDI messages, CME, HL-7 and other text and image standards. Given by DFP.
  * **Lecture 6.  Security of Electronic Clinical Messaging:**Security of present-day e-mail, MIME, and EDI. Commercial bank security of electronic money exchanges. Store and Forward versus open direct connections. Clinical and insurance uses of EDI. X12 standard for EDI. HFCA requirements. National standard formats for EDI forms. Community Health Information Networks (CHINs). Patient security requirements (privacy, confidentiality and integrity of the data). Procedures to reduce the effect of computer, link, and software failures. Security declarations of hospital workers, physical security of computer hardware, hacker break-ins. Security of Unix as a computer and network OS. History of Cryptography. Data Encryption Standard (DES) of US government, public and private keys, symmetric and asymmetric keys. The RSA algorithm. Electronic signatures. Firewalls, audit trails, fault-tolerant computers and RAIDS.  Barcodes. Patient identifiers. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 7. Hospital Information Systems (HIS):** subsystems and their architectures, Master Files, Laboratory Information Systems (LIS), Pharmacy Information Systems (PhIS), Hospital event monitoring.  Accreditation requirements (quality of administration, clinical care, research and education). Designing the HIS: present information flow, hardware (number of terminals, nurse stations, and workstations, and bandwidth needed for their connections).  Architecture: centralized, modular and distributed computing. Downtime risks for all the network. Open architecture allows connection of many types of PCs, workstations, etc. The CIO position, the HIS administrator position. Masterfile Analyst ensures that all procedures are covered, Standards must be followed (ASTM, HL-7, and the ACR/NEMA and DICOM standards for x-rays). The VA Hospital networks use the Distributed Hospital Computer System (DHCP) type of HIS. Subsystems of the HIS: Clinical laboratory, anatomic pathology, blood bank, immunology, bacteriology and pharmacy. Summaries of most common HISs: Citation Computer Systems, PathNet, Pathfinder/intellipath, RED. Clinical Event Monitoring. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 8. On-line Medical Libraries and Medical Literature Databases.** Types of information retrieval: text, data. History of medical literature searching, measures of retrieval efficiency and scoring algorithms, missing good papers, getting irrelevant ones. The Index Medicus. MeSH (Medical Subject Headings), MEDLARS - Medical Literature and Retrieval System. Keyword search of MEDLINE, free text searching (BRS), scoring algorithms. How MEDLINE is used by primary care physicians, use of Artificial Intelligence, the Unified Medical Language SYSTEM UMLS Thesaurus relation to the Codes. GRATEFUL MED, Lonesome Doc. Natural Language Processing, Factor analysis, artificial neural networks, search program feedback methods. The other databases CATLINE, AVLINE. CANCERLIT, PDQ, HEALTH planning, CHEMLINE, DIRLINE. World wide distribution of NLM tapes and CDROMS. Searching over the Internet. Obtaining MMWR, CDC WONDER on -line statistical analysis. Other non-NLM medical databases. Obtaining new knowledge by Datamining of clinical databases. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 9. Telemedicine (State, National and International).** Definition. Remote areas around the world. History of its development. Phases if development. Number of TM projects in USA at this time. Maximizing the band width of phone lines, error free compression of the images . Using ISDN. Use for closed institutions, sparsely populated areas of Australia, military outposts, NASA, public health use of WWW sites. Video consulting. Need for image standards. Detail of the rural network in Nebraska. HCFA concern for safety, and cost. Need for completely integrated network for the medical center that is responsible for a rural consortium. High resolution needed for tissue sections. Use of Terestial Microwave, sat ellite using VSAT. Armed forces funding of the development of Picture Archiving and Communication Service (PACS). Telemedicine for Surveillance: the US CDC system of WWW sites. Surveillance in France, the French Communicable Disease Network for fast identification of epidemics. Surveillance in the UK. Recent telemedicine references. Use of satellites for healthcare services. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture/Demo 10.   **Demonstration of the **** Quick Medical Reference (QMR) Decision Support System (DSS). Quick work-up for abdominal pain and following the changes in the Frequency and Evocative Strength of items in the differential diagnosis list as more test results are fed in. Demonstration on a SUN Sparc 5 of the plotted and mapped data from the FCDN computers in Paris <http://www.b3e.jussieu.fr:80/sentiweb/>. Recent epidemics of influenza were followed as a movie of the week-by-week incidence as the virus entered France via a port, spread across the country and then died out. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture /Demo 11.** **The use of Web Technology to provide fast communication between county and state health departments and national linking of the Web sites to the CDC. Part 1.** Given by **Dr. Ivan J Gotham** ,  Director, Bureau of HEALTHCOM Network Systems Management and Health Statistics Group, New York State Department of Health , Empire State Plaza, Albany NY 12237. Phone: (518) 473-1809; Fax: (518) 486-1632. ijg01@health.state.ny.us.  See: Parsons DF, Garnerin P, Flahault A, and Gotham IJ. 1996. Status of electronic reporting of notifiable conditions in the United States and Europe. **Telemedicine Journal** 2(4): 273-284.

  * **Lecture /Demo 12. The use of Web Technology to provide fast communication between county and state health departments and national linking of the Web sites to the CDC. Part 2.** Given by **Dr. Ivan J. Gotham**.

  * **Mid-term test.**

  * **Lecture 13. Medical Imaging Systems**. Types of medical images, the physics of x-ray images, digitizing images (resolution, compression and transmission). Teleradiology, tele-mammography, image processing. Storing of compressed images (Picture Archiving and Communication System \- PACS). The Radiology Information Service - RIS to manage patients, films and reports. Managing the digital output of Computerized Axial Tomography (CAT), Magnetic   Resonance Imaging (MRI), nuclear medicine imaging. Pixels, voxels, image enhancing and pattern recognition of images, contrast transfer functions for a system, histogram normalization and removal of blank areas. Displays and image hardcopy. JPEG, Wavelet compression, and other lossless compression algorithms, sizes if binary images of common x-rays, and transmission times over common linkages. Selected imaging WWW sites. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 14. Artificial Intelligence (AI), Expert Systems and Production Rules.** How to make computers more useful in handling high-level medical data. Understand the mechanisms of human intelligence and learning. Knowledge representation (store inferences, integration and analysis of complex, dynamic processes, how experts acquire their skill, causal reasoning, temporal reasoning, problem solving methods, models for handling uncertain knowledge). Use of production rules and frames, the Arden Syntax. Production systems: backward and forward chaining. Types of learning that are useful clinically. Merging physiology with AI. Applications of AI (large knowledge bases, Decision Support Systems (DSS), symbolic and fuzzy logic, monitoring and interpretation of complex lab results, heuristics, reading natural language files). Data Mining. CLINAID. on-line interpretation of EKG. Interpretation of antigen profiles in matching blood, assistance in reading pathology slides. Pathfinder /Intellipath System. RED. MENTOR, ACORN, Post-Operative Expert Medical System (POEMS). VIE-PNN (parenteral feeding of neonates). GERMWATCHER (nosocomial infections). HEPAXPERT, LIPORAP, PEIRS, PUFF, DXPLAIN, ILIAD, APACHE, KARDIO, and SLEEP CONSULTANT. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 15. Bayesian Probability Calculations**. Planning for optimal well being of the patient. Selecting from a set of alternative diagnoses or treatments. Evidence-Based medicine, meta-analysis, statistical analysis, ROC curves, types of bias, concordance and discordance. Bayes Theorem. Decision Trees. Expected values decision making, sensitivity analysis. Case studies. Given by Andrew Reilly, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health. Albany and the Department of Biometry and Statistics, University at Albany, School of Public Health.

  * **Lecture 16. Knowledge Bases and Decision Support Systems (DSS** ): The inevitability of making a clinical decision and acting on it. "Medical practice IS medical decision making." Computer simulation of human reasoning. History of decision analysis. Probability estimates, evoking strength and prevalence. Heuristics. On-line DSS: QMR modes (diagnosis, teaching, spreadsheet of the present status of a patient). Bayes probability calculations, decision trees, ONCOCIN (cancer chemotherapy), MYCIN (help identify bacteria and selection of antibiotics). HELP (includes patient monitoring), DXPLAIN (general diagnosis), TIA (cardiac ischemia), on-line clinical calculator (dosages). Integration with the HIS event monitoring. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 17. Sub-Information Systems of the HIS (Laboratory Information Systems (LIS), etc.):** architecture for linking into the HIS: schematic of data flow, the on-line needs for laboratory information, centralized, modular and distributed architectures. The IBM Patient Care System (PCS), the Distributed Hospital Computer Program of the VA with modules for patient registration, ADT, outpatient scheduling, laboratory and pharmacy information services, radiology, dietics, surgery, nursing and psychiatry. Prescription decision support (screen orders, adjust for kidney failure, body weight, etc. Bar code identification of patients, specimens, reports, the Machine Readable Identification Systems (MRIS). The Citation, PathNet, Pathfinder/Intellipath, RED systems. Point of Care automated blood chemistry. Technicon SMA-7 for automated hematology.  Microbiology and Immunology Labs: rapid automated blood culture and bacteria identification. Automated Immune Assays. The Pharmacy and Drug Information Service. The Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee. Computerization gives: patient medication profile, print labels, alert for wrong dosage, robotic filling of prescriptions. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 17A. Using Large Health Care Databases.** Mainly covers research using the NY State Department of Health SPARCS discharge summaries from all hospitals and clinical units in New York State.    **Given by Mike Zdeb PhD.** sz03@health.state.ny.us

  * **Lecture 18. Patient Monitoring for Nurses and Physicians:** computerized access to the Clinical Information Service (CIS) from the ICU and ER. Design pathways for monitor results to reach health care personnel. Sensor signal manipulation. RS232 computer connection for EKG, BP, respiratory rate, oximeter, digitize analog signals on-line. Self-regulating closed loops (respirator, drug infusion, labor, a diabetic). The IEEE Medical Information Bus. EKG interpretation. EEG analysis. Design of patient monitoring computer/human interface (memory limitation, use of colors, chunking. Data collected by nurses. The Nursing Diagnosis (unified terminology, the "unitary" person, the "exchanging" concept, psychologic assistance. Medical informatics in nursing training. Professional resources for nurses (societies, journals, WWW sites). Bedside acquisition of patient data: palm top computers, speech recognition, Clinicom bedside terminal, barcode reader and printer, monitoring in nursing homes. NursEXPERT system. Home-based tele-monitoring and visiting nurses. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 19. Nursing Informatics:** Progress in hospital automation, nursing actions and information flow. Admission assessment, administration of medications, vital signs, IV and overall intake and output, treatments, nursing resources, associations and journals.       **Given by David Curry RN-C, MSN**. Assistant Professor of Nursing, Information Sciences, University at Plattsburgh. curryd@splava.cc.plattsburgh.edu and http://www.plattsburgh.edu/nur/curry.htm.

  * **Lecture 20. Medical Informatics and the Family Doctor:** gateway function of the generalist physician, direct the patient to a specialist. Evaluate the severity of the illness, patient surveillance, give preventive help, arrange cancer screening. Office practice, increasing chronic disease. Office information and insurance software management. Link to hospital HIS and to commercial labs and x-rays etc. DSS use, literature search on-line, managing appointments. Use PCR (problem orientated). On the computer, show medical history and physical examination forms. National Preventive Services Campaign has Guides for counseling and education. "The Clinicians Handbook of Preventive services." AHCPR Supported Guidelines. FDA advice ("switches" of drugs mandated by HMOs) Internet aids for the generalist (see summary). Practice Aids for rural practitioners. The Nebraska State system. Automation in Physician Office laboratories. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 21. The Role of Computers in Medical Education:** Computer-based medical education. Computer Assisted Instruction - CAI. Authoring languages, interactive CDROMS allow students to practice dangerous treatments. Lotus Notes Distributed (Distance) Learning in Learning Space and Domino servers. Increase focus on the decision process in place of memorization. CDROMS for CME. Where medical informatics is now being taught. Need to learn how to learn. Multi-media effective since brain reacts to different stimuli. Interactive, mistakes learnt right away. Authoring languages: in place of C++ and Pascal use: Programmed Logic for Automated Teaching (PLATO) is the most used: ADAM is similar. Choice of ASCII or HTML. Case history may be dynamic and the disease and treatment progress week by week. Use hypertext links to jump through the info. Based on abnormal physiology. CBX CDROM used for resident exams, HeartLab, TIME, GUIDON. Lists of CDROM libraries. Nursing education by CAI. Many programs available. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 22. Outcomes Analyses:** Physicians and insurers learn the worth and cost-effectiveness of particular treatments. Interrelation of structure, process and outcome. Establish that outcome is mainly due to the treatment. Need large databases. HCFA Model. Pennsylvania Healthcare Cost Containment Council of 1986. Cleveland Health Quality studies. NY State cardiac surgery initiative. Medicaid Managed Care Survey. Evaluation of data sources before use.    **Given by Professor Diana Dewar PhD** , University at Albany School of Public Health.

  * **Lecture 23. Information Processing in Infectious Diseases: Focusing on Antibiotic Use, Bacterial Resistance and Outcomes Studies:** Application to individual patient care, periodic reporting, cascade susceptibility reporting, pharmacy daily monitoring of antibiotic prescribing practices, pharmacokinetics. The ICU. Antibiotic limitations. Guide lines of the hospital Antibiotic, Pharmacy and Therapy Committee. PK Analyst Model #7 computer program for kinetics. Hospital epidemiology, nosocomial surveillance system, main anatomic sites. Added healthcare cost of these infections. **Given by Michael Miller MD,** Head of the Infectious Disease Department of the Albany Medical College.

  * **Lecture 24. Clinical Trials Research:**  History of development of Clinical Trials, ONCOCIN, ACME. Goal. Cancer drugs. Lab research with mice. Clinical trials need a Research System incorporated into the HIS. Glossary of statistical terms used. Prospective and retrospective trials. Parallel or crossover, randomization and blinding. Institutional Review Board (IRB). Confounding variables, the importance of time, dealing with incomplete or uncertain data, choice of statistical method, the protocol selection model (PSM) like ClinQuery. Current statistical packages, MEDLOG, ARAMIS, Duke Univ. Cardiovascular Disease database, ECOG/CALGB cancer clinical trials. Grant sources. Pediatric AIDS Clinical Trial Group. Role of the FDA. Examples of querying the HIS to get specific patient data. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 25. Advances in Computer Applications in Health Care:** Trends indicated by: MI Web sites, agenda of medical informatics conferences, types of MI papers recently published, current MI grant awards, MI activities of IBM, SUN, Microsoft, etc.  Top topics: human/computer interface, compression of data and better storage , connectivity , data distillation. Other gaps: bring NLM search to bedside and ER, automation of generalist office , CPR, HIS, teaching MI, all images in digital form (film-less radiology), more decision support, completion of networking of medical centers, datamining of knowledge bases, secure Web sites. Java stations. Final summary of useful WWW. Given by DFP.

  * **Lecture 26. Revision Day for the Course**. DFP
  * **Final Exa** m. 
  * **To top of page**
  * =================================================================================================

