**Dr. George Vascik**

590 Mosler

785-3290

**Course Objectives**

The objectives of this class are three-fold: to encourage historical thinking
and awareness, to help the student think critically about the past and its
impact upon our present lives and institutions, and to stimulate the student
to view the study of history as fertile ground for life-long learning and
personal enrichment. The course will examine three threads of human
development since 1500. 1) What sort of structures of government various
societies in the European cultural area have developed and how individuals
have related to those structures. 2) How social and economic change since the
European rediscovery of the Western Hemisphere has transformed the face of
world civilization. 3) How war and revolution have transformed the lives of
Europeans.

**Texts**

There is one text book and three supplemental texts for the class:

J. McKay, B. Hill, J. Buckler, A History of Western Society.

Voltaire, Letters on England.

Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Communist Manifesto.

Primo Levi, Survival in Auschwitz.

Assigned readings from these texts should be completed prior to the class in
which they will be discussed. If you don't read, you will be unable to follow
the lecture. To that end, we will have weekly quizzes on the assigned texts.
You cannot expect to successfully complete the class without completing the
reading. I suggest that you prepare to read the textbook twice: once prior to
class, and a second time after class in conjunction with the study guide.

**Grades**

Students' grades are derived from two sources: the individual student's
comprehension of the material covered in lectures, and the assigned reading
material. A passing grade will require mastery of both. All grades will be
determined in the following manner:

5 map quizzes 10%

5 of 7 textbook quizzes 10%

Voltaire quiz 10%

Marx quiz 10%

Levi quiz 10%

midterm examination 25%

final examination 25%

There will be no curve. Students are expected to take all exams at the
scheduled time. If for any reason you can not make an exam, contact me
beforehand. Otherwise, a make-up will only be possible with a doctor's excuse.

**Office Hours**

I will be holding office hours on TR from 12:00-2:30. I also have an answering
machine at home, so you can always reach me there at 523-9990.

**Lectures and readings**

1/8 Course introduction  


  

**Early Modern Europe**

  

1/10 [Peasant life](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/peasantlife.html)
(HWS, pp. 628-656)

1/15 [The early modern
nobility](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/nobility.html) (HWS, pp.
660-684)  (text quiz)

1/17 [The expansion of
Europe](http://w3.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/expansion.html) (HWS, pp.
502-523)(map quiz, p. 500)

1/22 [The roots of French
absolutism](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/frenchabs.html) (HWS, pp.
486-502)

1/24 [The Sun King](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/sunking.html) (HWS,
pp. 530-548) (text quiz)

1/29 [Absolutism in Central Europe:
Austria](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/austria.html) (HWS, pp. 564-589)

1/31 [The limits of
absolutism](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/limits.html)(text quiz)

2/5 [Power and politics in Tudor
England](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/tudor.html) (HWS, pp. 466-475)

2/7 [Stuart Absolutism ](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/stuart.html)(HWS,
pp. 546-559) (text quiz)

2/12 [The British Settlement](http://w3.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/british.html)

2/14 Quiz on Voltaire, [Letters on
England](http://w3.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/voltaire.html)

2/19 exchange day holiday

2/21 [French Revolution](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/frenchrev.html)
(HWS, pp. 690-712)

2/26 [Napoleon Bonaparte](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/napoleon.html)
(HWS, pp. 712-718) (map quiz, p. 756)

3/4 Midterm examination  


  

**Modern Europe**

  
  

3/12 spring break

3/14 spring break

3/5 [The Industrial Revolution](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/ir.html)
(HWS, pp. 724-749)

3/7 Quiz on Marx, [The Communist
Manifesto](http://w3.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/marx.html)

3/19 [19th century Europe](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/19th.html)
(HWS, pp. 795-860)

3/21 [The European
cataclysm](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/cataclysm.html) (HWS, pp.
890-908) (map quiz, p. 902)

3/26 [The Russian
Revolution](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/russianrev.html) (HWS, pp.
908-922)

3/28 [Stalinist Russia](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/stalinist.html)
(HWS, pp. 956-968) (text quiz)

4/2 [Weimar Germany](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/weimar.html) (HWS,
pp. 940-944) (map quiz, 920)

4/4 [The Nazi
dictatorship](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/nazidictatorship.html) (HWS,
pp. 970-987) (text quiz)

4/9 [Hitler's War](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/hitlerswar.html)

4/11 Quiz on Levi, [Survival in
Auschwitz](http://w3.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/levi.html)

4/16 [The Marshall
Plan](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/marshallplan.html) (HWS, pp.
992-1004)

4/18 [The European social welfare
state](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/welfarestate.html) (HWS, pp.
1009-1025) (text quiz)

4/23 [Soviet rule in Eastern
Europe](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/easterneurope.html) (HWS, pp.
1004-1009,1031-1046)

4/25 [The Europe of the
future](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/fallofsovietunion.html) (HWS, pp.
1046-1060) (map quiz, 1052)  
    
    
    
    


