  

**Political Science W3322: The American Congress**

Spring 2000 Prof. Gregory Wawro | |  854-8540  
---|---|---  
741 International Affairs Bldg. | |  [gjw10@columbia.edu
](mailto:gjw10@columbia.edu)  
Office Hours: Wed. 2-4 and by appt. | |  
  
Teaching Assistant:

Matt Atlas | | 854-6713  
---|---|---  
819 International Affairs Bldg. | |  [mja37@columbia.edu
](mailto:mja37@columbia.edu)  
Office Hours: Wed. 4-5 and Fri. 1-2 | |  
  
The 106th Congress is most likely to be remembered for the event that began
its first session: the Senate's acquittal of President Clinton on the two
charges on which the House impeached him at the end of the 105th Congress.
Little else was accomplished in the first session and conditions do not favor
the passage of landmark legislation in the second session. In the House,
Republicans find themselves with a razor thin majority, and Democrats seem to
be content to let the House be unproductive so that they can once again level
the charge that Republicans are running a ``do-nothing'' Congress.
Polarization between the parties in the House and the Senate makes it unlikely
that bipartisan coalitions will form to pass legislation concerning the major
issues of the day, such as health care, the solvency of Social Security and
Medicare, and campaign finance reform.

How will members of the 106th Congress behave given the conditions they find
themselves in? How will the approaching presidential and congressional
elections affect efforts to address the top issues on the legislative agenda?
Can Republicans and Democrats work in a bipartisan manner or will they be more
confrontational as each party attempts to define an agenda for the 2000
elections? Can President Clinton continue to trump congressional Republicans
on important issues or will lame--duck status prevent him from leaving much of
a legacy? Have the members of the Republican leadership put their internecine
conflicts behind them or will there be more disputes as the 2000 campaigns
intensify?

The goal of this course is to help you answer questions such as these. By
exploring issues of individual motivation, institutional structure and
constraints, and the problems of collective decisionmaking we will attempt to
gain a thorough understanding of what is arguably the most important branch of
the Federal Government.

**Course Requirements**

In addition to attending class diligently, you are required to write a midterm
and a final exam. Each student will also write a 6 to 10 page paper. I will
provide a list of paper topics that you can choose from. You are required to
turn in a 1 to 2 page summary of your paper which includes a thesis statement,
the general outline of your argument, and a preliminary list of sources.
Students are strongly encouraged to use Strunk and White's _Elements of Style
_ as a guidebook for their writing (this book is available in just about any
book store and can also be accessed over the Web at
http://www.bartleby.com/141/index.html/). The paper will account for 35% of
your final grade, the midterm for 25%, and the final exam for 40%.

Note the following dates:

  * March 9: Midterm
  * April 6: Summary of paper due
  * April 27: Paper Due
  * May 11: Final Exam 

**Make-ups will not be given and late work will not be accepted except for
reasons of certified medical necessity or family emergency.**

**Course Readings** (available from Labyrinth Books, College Reserves, and
through \textit{CQ Library}, an online service. The articles assigned from
\textit{Congressional Quarterly Weekly Report (CQWR)} can be accessed through
\textit{CQ Library} by going to the \textit{CQWR} page and searching on the
page number and date of the article.))

     Birnbaum, Jeffrey H. and Alan S. Murray. 1988. _Showdown at Gucci Gulch._ New York: Vintage Books. 

     Davidson, Roger H. and Walter J. Oleszek. 1996. _Congress and Its Members._ 6th ed. Washington, D.C.: CQ Press. 

     Deering, Christopher J. and Steven S. Smith. 1997. _Committees in Congress._ 3rd. ed. Washington, D.C.: CQ Press. 

     Fenno, Richard F. 1997. _Learning to Govern: An Institutional View of the 104th Congress_ Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press. 

     _Reader for the American Congress_ (R)--available from the Village Copier (all readings denoted with an ``R'' are also on Reserve in Butler Library). 

In addition to the course readings, students should closely follow the
activities of Congress in _The New York Times_ and _CQWR_.

I have set up a Web site that contains numerous links to sites that are
relevant to this course, including sites that will help you keep on top of
current events. The URL is [ http://www.columbia.edu/~gjw10/w3322.html
](http://www.columbia.edu/~gjw10/w3322.html). Students should also check the
site regularly for course announcements.

**Course Outline**

  1. **Introduction**
    * Wynn, ``A Year of Grudging Compromises and Unfinished Business,'' _CQWR_ , 11/27/99, p. 2846 
    * Foerstel, ``Parties Maneuver for Identity In Hopes of Swinging 2000,'' _CQWR_ , 1/1/00. p. 8 
  2. **Historical and Institutional Background**

    * Davidson  & Oleszek: Chapters 1 and 2 

  3. **Elections**
    * Davidson  & Oleszek: Chapters 3, 4, and 5
    * Jacobson and Kernell, Chapters 1-5 from _Strategy and Choice in Congressional Elections_ (R)
    * Jacobson, ``National Politics and Congressional Elections'' from _The Politics of Congressional Elections_ (R) 
  4. **Congressional institutions and procedures**

    1. **Committees and Subcommittees**

      * Smith and Deering, _Committees in Congress_ , entire. 
    2. **The Floor**

      * Davidson  & Oleszek: Chapters 8 and 9
      * Smith, ``Revolution in the House: Why Don't We Do It on the Floor?'' from _New Perspectives on the House of Representatives_ , 4th ed. (R) 
    3. **Parties and party leadership**

      * Davidson  & Oleszek: Chapter 6
      * Sinclair, ``Organization, Communication, and Accountability'' from _Legislators, Leaders, and Lawmaking_ (R) 
      * Koszczuk, ``Master of the Mechanics Has Kept the House Running'' from _CQWR_ , 12/11/99, p. 2960 
      * Cassata, ``Lott's Task: Balance the Demands of His Chamber and His Party'' from _CQWR_ , 3/8/97 
  5. **Congress, the Executive, and the Courts**

    * Davidson  & Oleszek: Chapters 10 and 11
    * Moe, ``An Assessment of the Positive Theory of 'Congressional Dominance' '' (R) 

  6. **Congress and External Pressures**
    * Davidson  & Oleszek: Chapter 12
    * Birnbaum and Murray: Chapters 1-6
    * Hosansky, ``Hill Feels the Big Clout of Small Business,'' _CQWR_ , 1/10/98 

  7. **Congress and Fiscal Policy**

    * Davidson  & Oleszek: Chapter 13
    * Birnbaum and Murray: Chapters 7-11 and Epilogue 
  8. **Congress and Foreign Policy**

    * Davidson  & Oleszek: Chapter 14
    * Burgin, ``Assessing Congress's Role in the Making of Foreign Policy'' from _Congress Reconsidered_ , 6th ed. 
  9. **The Republican Takeover**

    * Fenno, _Learning to Govern_
    * Gimpel, Chapters 1-3 from _Legislating the Revolution_ (R) 
  10. **Conclusion**

    * Davidson  & Oleszek: Chapter 15 
  

* * *

Tue Jan 20 15:59:30 EST 1998_

