**_

> University of Wisconsin-La Crosse

>

> Department of Health Education and Health Promotion_**

> **_

> C-I 212 _**

> **_

> _**

> **_

> Level One Clinical Experience in Health Education_**

> **

> Instructor:**

> > R. Mark Kelley, Ph.D.  
>  209 Mitchell Hall  
>  785-6791  
>  kelley.roy@uwlax.edu

> **

> Texts:**

> _

> School Health: Helping Children Learn._

> > National School Board Association, 1993. Available at Textbook Rental

> **

> Course Goal:**

> > This clinical experience fulfills the state requirement for certification.
Students must have 100 hours of clinical experience before they can enter
student teaching. This first level experience is designed to give the health
education majors an opportunity to see first-hand how the school setting
facilitates the school health program, by observing and participating in ways
appropriate to their experience. It is hoped that this opportunity to be
involved in the school will help the pre-service student determine the
appropriateness of the selection of teaching as a profession.

> **

> Course Format:**

> > Students will be assigned to a teachers at Jefferson Elementary School and
Central High School. Each student will spend a designated number of hours each
semester (27) with a supervising teacher. Approximately 13.5  hours will be
spent at Jefferson Elementary School and 13.5 hours will be spent at Central
High School. The first half of the semester will end at the end of the week
prior to Spring Break. Four times during the semester, the students will meet
in a seminar setting to discuss focused observations and readings they have
completed in regard to selected topics cited in the syllabus. All of those
meetings will be at the university. These meetings will be from 5-6pm on
January 28, March 4, April 1, and May 6 in 263 Cartwright.

> **

> Course Evaluation:

** **

> **

> Clinical Observation Participation (evidenced by journal entries) - 75%

> > Research Reports, Sharing Sessions, & Journal - 25%

> **

> Clinical Observations:**

> > Twenty-seven (27) hours of time spent in the school with the assigned
teacher is mandatory for completion of this course. A list of suggested
activities that can be done in completion of this requirement is found in the
Clinical Experience handbook for Level One Clinical. A student should try to
arrange for activities that will support the discussion in the upcoming
discussion group. A journal entry of the activities of the week will be
provided to the instructor via email each week.

> **

> Seminar Sessions:**

> > Each sharing session will emphasize a particular dimensions of the school
and/or the school health  program. Students should read three professional
resources related to the assigned issue and gather information while in their
clinical assignment to help them discuss how their particular school
assignment addresses the issue to be discussed. The sharing sessions are then
designed to be the culminating experience for synthesizing ideas gathered from
the variety of sources. All sessions will occur in Cartwright

> **

> Readings:**

> > Students will select three authoritative resources (professional journals,
texts, professional/trade books) to read in addition to the text, then develop
an abstract in the following format:

>

>   * an appropriate citation i.e. authors name (year), journal, volume(issue
number).

>   * identify the main point, personal reaction to the author's point and
discuss the implications of these ideas for the support of the school health
program.

>   * type these abstracts and bring them to the class meeting times.

>

**

> Topics to be addressed:**

> **

> Session One (2/3; 5-6pm, TBA):  **

> > Course Introduction

> **

> Session Two (3/3; 5-6pm, TBA):**

> > Discussion topic: Pupil Services, Adult Programs, & Student Programs. Read
from text, Ch. 1, "Our Children's Health is our future," (pg  1-4) and Ch. 2
"First Things First" (pg 6-10); "School Health Services," (pg. 30-34). Three
reading from professional journals should consider the issue of "Full Service
Schools," "School Based Clinics," current trends in providing health services
for school age youth.

> **

> Session Three (4/7; 5-6pm, TBA):**

> > Discussion topic: Family and Community connections, Healthy School
Environment. Optimizing Learning for the Elementary School Child. Read from
text: "Healthy School  Environment" (pg. 33-39); 3 reading from professional
literature should address teacher/student relationship;  understanding
developmental characteristics of the elementary age child . . . What schools
do to pay attention to those characteristics.

> **

> Session Four (5/5; 5-6pm, TBA):**

> > Discussion topic: Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment. Evaluation of
the experience and observation of the learning setting. Read from text:
"School Health Education" (pg 23-29); other readings should consider the most
effective teaching strategies for impacting on the health and health education
of children.

> **

> Journal Observations:**

> > Completed on a weekly basis. Write a weekly journal entry to be submitted
via email to the instructor at the end of each week. The journal entries will
include:

>

>   * What was the goal and objectives of the lesson observed?

>   * What instructional materials, methods and strategies used?

>   * How did the teacher interact with students to give and receive feedback
and/or give positive or negative reinforcement?

>   * What is the teacher's management style? How does the teacher deal with
classroom interaction and discipline?

>   * What was the most important thing you learned today?

>   * Other reactions/comments

>

**

> Evaluation: pass/fail -  **

> > To receive a "pass", students must complete all seminars, all observation
hours, and all written expectations, or an equivalent substitution in cases of
illness or other excuses deemed acceptable by the instructor. A minimum of 27
hours is not negotiable.

> [University of Wisconsin - La Crosse](http://www.uwlax.edu/) | [College of
Health, Physical Education, and
Recreation](http://perth.uwlax.edu/HPER/index.html) |  
 | [Department of Health Education and Health
Promotion](http://perth.uwlax.edu/hper/HEHP/) |

This page is maintained by [R. Mark
Kelley](http://perth.uwlax.edu/faculty/kelley/).

