![main navigation
bar](http://oit.sfasu.edu/faculty/mmcculler/navbars/navbarsyllabus.gif)

[![secure](navbars/securedot.gif)](http://oit.sfasu.edu/faculty/mmcculler/securedir.htm)

##### * * * [ Where to find M.McCuller](tsw_locations.html) *** [Site
Map](tsw_sitemap.htm)

[Check out the old SFA English 273.501 message
board](http://apps3.vantagenet.com/zforums/thread.asp?id=11132834)

#### SAMPLE SYLLABUS

#####
![](graphics/Image14.gif)![](graphics/Image12.gif)![](graphics/Image14.gif)  
  
_This SAMPLE syllabus is for Technical and Scientific Writing, English 273.501  
internet classes presented by Melane McCuller, from Stephen F. Austin State
University, Nacogdoches, Texas._  
(Because this internet class will respond to the needs of the students
throughout the semester, please always note the changes in the syllabus--you
will receive notice, but **_watch the last date updated_** to be sure you have
the latest version. No major assignments will ever be added, but CHANGES in
focus, details, or deadlines are frequent.)  

#### Last updated 7-1-01.

# Spring Semester, 2001

#### Syllabus Quick Jumps: January February March April The Final

#### And if you want to get back here in a hurry, click one of the "fancy" TOP
buttons.

[![](graphics/webct.gif)WebCT](http://144.96.222.15/webct/public/home.pl?action=print_home/)
will be used for chats, grade maintenance, and course content. A calendar
shows an overview of non-syllabus and syllabus items. Students will receive a
course ID and initial password for entry into the course as soon as you
register.

Students are encouraged to use Yahoo! Messenger for quick contact when I am
online, or to add a comment to the [Message
Board](http://apps3.vantagenet.com/zforums/thread.asp?id=11132834) Check out
the instant Messenger at [
![](http://opi.yahoo.com/online?u=melanezoe&m=g&t=2)](http://edit.yahoo.com/config/send_webmesg?.target=melanezoe&.src=pg)

####
![](graphics/Image14.gif)![](graphics/Image12.gif)![](graphics/Image14.gif)  

####

#####

**Legend:** |

**Project Due** |

One of the five biweekly projects is due, by the stated time (you may turn
them in early, but you will be held to the same standard as the rest of the
class.)  Your email send time or my email receipt time will be noted. The
earlier ones are individual work, the later ones may be group efforts.  
---|---|---  
  
**Example** |

Rarely, I will ask you to turn in an example of a particular type of writing
gleaned from magazines, newspapers, friends, teachers, junk mail, internet
ads, etc. If your example is from printed material, you can scan it in and
email it or fax it to me.  Examples are **NOT** **work you write yourself.**
To each example, attach a note explaining who you think the audience is.
Depending on the example, I may ask why/why not the example is effective, what
type it is, or your opinion on some feature as noted on the syllabus. You earn
one point for turning in the example, one point for the notation. No makeups.  
  
**Read** |

Requiring NO TEXTBOOK is unusual for any college class, I realize. I try it
every third year or so. Having examined dozens of texts, I find they all cover
the same information, although different editors have different ideas as to
how examples, layout, and emphasis should be handled. So you may choose ANY
TEXTBOOK YOU SEE THAT APPEALS TO YOU this semester. I will recommend chapters,
sections, or examples for you to find in a textbook or on a publisher's
website. While I strongly recommend that you buy one to keep at home while you
do assignments--it helps you to have models or writing samples to guide your
work--you can also go to the library or borrow one of mine.

As college students you are expected to read assignments prior to the exercise
that requires the information imparted so that you will know what I'm talking
about and what you are writing about. I will certainly know whether or not you
have read by the quality of your discussion, questions, and written work.  
  
**Message, chat, email, survey** |

Regular scheduled chat at 6:00 p.m. each Thursday night. Others scheduled in
response to student's schedules. You must attend at least one a week. I keep
score, so don't skip the chats.

Message board, chatroom, or email comments are not from a textbook. You can
take notes or not, but you are expected to log on for any scheduled chats or
respond to any posted message on the boards.  The comments and discussion take
the form of examples to clarify the textbooks used, samples of "what I want"
on your written work, "walk-throughs" on computer procedures that will improve
the quality of your text, graphics, layouts, etc. For the most part they are
short and to the point. We do much Q & A work, so be prepared to answer.

Periodic surveys will be offered to assess your progress (graded as regular
2-point assignments for merely completing them).  
  
**Practice** |

Almost every message/chat period you will do extemporaneous writing. These may
be marked for your benefit, but not graded (points received only for doing the
work.) No makeups on missed work here; catch up by asking a class member to
explain what we did and why.  
  
**Oral Reports** |

The in-class reports are private (via chat, phone, or personal visit with me,
not in chat time with the class.) Only the final Oral Presentation is a
publicly presented effort, the one time I ask you to come to class for graded
work; I may invite guests to watch. Out-of-area students will be accommodated
via some other media: phone conference, teleconference, video taped
presentation.  We will work it out.  
  
####
![](graphics/image14.gif)![](graphics/image12.gif)![](graphics/image14.gif)

#### [![Email Melane McCuller](graphics/mpmailb4-i.gif)E-mail me a
question](mailto:mmcculler@sfaadm.sfasu.edu) if you don't understand an
assignment.

####

####

Date  |

Process  |

Specifics  
---|---|---  
  
**Week of Jan 15** |

Orientation/  
Diagnostic

BRING PHOTO OF YOURSELF  |

Complete the online orientation.

If at all possible, come to the in-class orientation, **Thursday, January 18,
6:30 p.m. in Ferguson 417**.

I will explain the syllabus, answer questions on policies and expectations,
demonstrate samples of work to be turned in. Most importantly, I will get you
logged on to WebCT and make sure you can handle the technology. You can also
meet your classmates.

We will scan your photos for the Gallery (optionally, email me one or bring
one on disk).

**Please do the[online
orientation](http://www.oit.sfasu.edu/orientation/gettingstarted.html) **
whether or not you come to the in-class session.  
  
**Week of Jan 22**

 TOP

  |

Chat1 - Thur. 6:00 p.m.  |

Discuss audience. This is an important concept, so we will spend a great deal
of time on it during the semester.  
  
Read  |

Audience--find out why it is important and how to identify your target
audience.  
  
Practice 1 \- turn in by Friday  |

Write [two
memos](http://oit.sfasu.edu/faculty/mmcculler/assignments/twomemos.htm) after
audience discussion, using two tones for same class-assigned scenario.

Before you write the memos, you will

1\. have to create your own personal stationery using the word processor of
your choice--Microsoft Word, WordPerfect, Claris Works, Apple Works, etc. You
may use templates or "stationery" provided by the software, but _you must
personalize it_. You also must be familiar with basic wordprocessing features
such as indents, tabs, text boxes, and so on. We will use some chat time to
cover these points.

2\. have to know the proper format and use of a memo (covered in all tech
writing textbooks).  
  
**Week of Jan 29** |

Example  |

Find a resume **NOT** YOUR OWN. Pay attention to the intended audience (who is
it and did the author properly target the audience) and the format (is it
effective and what would improve it.) This is for your own benefit and will
not be turned in. Be sure to ask about those elements you notice that are not
effective.  
  
Read  |

Anything you can find on resumes. I have some good books in my office, and the
Counseling and Careers center third floor, Rusk, can help you. There are
numerous web sites that will help you.  
  
Practice 2 \- Turn in by friday  |

Write list of jobs you want, employers, and **draft** a letter of application.  
  
Survey on Resumes  |

Study for ideas, not picky details. The survey will be taken online (posted on
WebCT).  
  
**Week of Feb 5** TOP |

[PROJECT #1](http://oit.sfasu.edu/faculty/mmcculler/assignments/assign1.htm)
DUE Friday |

Resume and Cover Letter  
  
Read  |

Designing visuals: graphics, layout, fonts,--all the elements that go into
preparing a document other than the actual content.  
  
[Practice 3 (paragraph)](assignments/chartassign.htm)

[and 4 (graphic)](assignments/chartassign.htm)  |

Exercise on how graphics and spreadsheet visuals enhance communication of
facts (or distort facts.) Write a descriptive paragraph with an associated
chart/graph/table on a topic assigned via the message board.  
  
**Week of Feb 12** |

Example  |

Find but don't turn in an example of a procedure, process, or instruction
sheet (instructional writing). Note audience and type.  Study it hard for
effective elements. I will give a survey on this to assess what you really
found (effective or not) in your sample.)  
  
Read  |

Effective procedures, processes, instruction manuals/sheets. Focus on
organizing content.  
  
[Practice 5](assignments/practice5.html)  |

Write a mini illustrated mechanism description for one topic assigned, which
is to describe **one** of these: a bone, a straw or a pencil. Concentrate on
clarity, conciseness, and completeness. If I can't clearly envision the tool
you are describing, you get to write it anew. More information on the
assignments page.  
  
Initial examination of final project topics.  |

Begin thinking about a final project. Post your idea on the discussion board
under Final Project Ideas, AND Email me your idea so I can comment on its
feasibility.  For those of you who decide to work in an interest/major field,
meet group members online and arrange to provide schedules so you can set up
meeting times for group work.  
  
**Week of Feb 19** TOP |

[PROJECT #2](http://oit.sfasu.edu/faculty/mmcculler/assignments/assign2.htm)
DUE Friday |

Illustrated procedure or process  
  
Read  |

Proposals--using facts to make a case  
  
Example  |

Study some examples of formal proposals suitable for a situation found in your
discipline. Try professors, newspaper, textbooks, or government and industrial
websites for sources. Note audience; underline, quote  or highlight the theme
statement.  EMAIL ME THE THEME STATEMENT and tell me what you think of the
proposal's format. Do NOT email me the proposal itself.  
  
[Practice 6](assignments/practice6.html) |

There are five steps to writing a proposal as will be discussed in chat--see
the message board and assignment for more info, For class you will begin this
process, turning in a short concept paper (several paragraphs). THIS WILL BE
**FOR** YOUR FINAL PROJECT, so put some thought into it.   After I read the
concept paper you email me, I will let you know it is feasible or not so you
can then write Project 3--the actual proposal.  
  
**Week of Feb 26**

  |

Read  |

Argument, logic, organization, fact gathering  
  
Example 5  |

Find an example of a good argument (try political essays, grant proposals,
purchasing justifications).  
  
Practice 7  |

Write a list of 10 questions your audience will ask about the topic of your
proposal. Then list the set of facts that will answer each--NO opinion, just
facts.  
  
**Week of March 5** TOP |

[PROJECT #3](http://oit.sfasu.edu/faculty/mmcculler/assignments/assign3.htm)
DUE Wednesday |

Proposal to produce Final Project  
  
Read  |

Correspondence--memos, letters, faxes, email  
  
Example  |

From the following selection, find but do not turn in three documents. It's a
good idea to find a variety of printed and emailed documents--remember, you
don't write any of these; FIND them:

complaint letter, request letter, good news or bad news letter, informative
memo.  
  
Practice 8  |

For each of the above documents, note audience, correspondence mode, purpose,
and tone with the following information: Analyze the **key words** in your
examples that alerted you to their purpose.  . Email me the results (three
paragraphs--one about each document).  
  
**Week of March 5** TOP |

Read  |

Supporting matter (abstracts, bibliographies, forwords, prefaces, appendices,
and so on.)  
  
**Week of March 12** |

SPRING BREAK

  |

Enjoy yourselves.

  
  
**Week of March 19** |

Example  |

Locate example of 2-3 page scientific magazine or journal article in your
field (helpful if it relates to your project.) You will be writing three
documents regarding the article. On an email to me note the title of the
article, the author, and find and quote the topic sentence.  
  
|

Practice 9  |

After reading the assignments page, message board or email from me about
abstracts, bibliographies, and glossaries, you will write an abstract &
glossary as assigned.  
  
**Week of March 26**

  |

[PROJECT #4](http://oit.sfasu.edu/faculty/mmcculler/assignments/assign4.htm)
Due next Wednesday (April 4) |

Administrative papers  
  
Oral Progress Reports  |

Private orals (via email or chat) relating to progress on your final project--
be prepared to show evidence of all written material, schedules, dummy,
progress, complaints, etc.  
  
Practice  |

Group or individual work on project: outline, sources, styles, size, layout,
font choice, description of final product, etc.  Turn in via email your
outline plus a comment on each of the above choices.  
  
**Week of April 2** TOP |

Read  |

Analytical Reports  
  
Practice  |

Assemble elements of progress report--schedule, budget, letter of transmittal,
other prefatory elements as needed, etc. Work on progress report. Focus hard
on concrete elements--facts, statistics, problems and solutions, changes
needed.  
  
 Practice 10 (solution memo)  |

After reading notes on message board, write and turn in problem solution as
assigned.  
  
**Week of April 9** |

[PROJECT #5](http://oit.sfasu.edu/faculty/mmcculler/assignments/assign5.htm)
DUE Wednesday, 13th |

Progress Report  
  
Read  |

Review  
  
Practice  |

Assemble elements of progress report--schedule, budget, letter of transmittal,
other prefatory elements and end matter as needed, etc. Turn those in when
done. Work on final project.  
  
**Week of April 16   **TOP | Practice 11  | Turn in "price list" or quotes for
printing your project from some Printer/Quick Copy.  
  
Read  |

Review  
Practice  |

For the next two weeks, submit drafts to each other, sending me a courtesy
copy, for peer editing and for instructor comment. If you don't have drafts,
you can't take advantage of the difference between "editing" and "criticizing"
(grading.)  
  
**Week of April 23** |    | You should be printing, filming, digitally
recording, or otherwise producing your final copies. Turn in the project as
soon as you finish, any time during the week.  
[FINAL WRITTEN PROJECT
DUE](http://oit.sfasu.edu/faculty/mmcculler/assignments/fincheck.htm) |
Project due Wednesday, April 25, 5 p.m. (or earlier if you want a grade before
you plan your oral).  
**Week of April 30** TOP |

  |

  
  
Read  |

Oral Communication  
  
**Week of May 7** |

Catch up on assignments  |

Turn in rewrites.  
  
Prepare for Oral Final  |

Criteria and hints for producing an effective oral and/or video presentation.
Be prepared to tell me about the materials you will need for your presentation
(VCR, slide projector, overheads, etc.) Practice run-throughs and timing  
  
**May 17** |

Final Exam  |

Oral Presentation - 15 minutes - Ferguson 417  


#### Go back to the top of this page.

#### [![Email Melane McCuller](graphics/mpmailb4-i.gif)E-mail me a
question](mailto:mmcculler@sfaadm.sfasu.edu) if you don't understand an
assignment.  

####

##### Alternate Site Directory -

##### [SFA's Home Page](http://www.sfasu.edu/) * [Site Map](tsw_sitemap.htm) *
[Mel's Home Page](melweb.htm) * [Syllabus](tsw_syllabus.htm) *
[Policy](tsw_policy.htm) * [Book list](booklist.htm)* [Projects](projects.htm)
* [Tech Write Directory](tsw.htm) * [Links](links.htm) *
[Assignments](assigns.htm) * [Where to find M.McCuller](tsw_locations.html)

#####

##### Last updated 4-3-01.

