[![](Ryan.gif)](http://www.rochester.edu/College/FS/Seminars/DigiCult/ExitSurvey.html)  
  
**Click on image to fill out Spring 1996 confidential course evaluation  
  
[Click here to see data from the Spring 1996 course
evaluation](http://www.rochester.edu/College/FS/Seminars/DigiCult/RawDataS96.html)**  
[Visit the Fall 1996 Seminar at the University of
Rochester](http://www.rochester.edu/College/FS/Seminars/DigiCult/DigiCultF96.html)  
[Visit the Spring 1997 Seminar at University of
Rochester](http://www.rochester.edu/College/FS/Seminars/DigiCult/Spring1997/Syllabus97.htm)  
  
[![](rib_bar_wh.gif)](http://www.eff.org/blueribbon.html)  
  

* * *

HOME | [Overview](4Overview.html) | [Virtual](5aVirtual.html) |
[Hypermedia](6aHypermedia.html) | [Worlds](7aWorlds.html) |
[Cyborg](8aCyborg.html) | [Bibliography](1aBibliography.html) | [Class
Directory](http://orac.ee.cornell.edu/unit1/pgs/directory/)

* * *

![](digital_culture.gif)

logo designed by [Jim Costanzo](http://www.thing.net/~costanzo)

* * *

**Cornell University:** **S Hum 417 (also Theatre Arts 417).** This seminar
will examine how digital technologies are transforming contemporary culture
and everyday life. Topics for reading and discussion will include the
transformation of discourse by hypermedia, simulation and virtual worlds,
transformations of identity in on-line communities, the political economy of
information and telecommunications, ethical issues of surveillance and data
security, and new forms of political organization and cultural resistance.
There will be weekly on-line discussions in addition to the regular seminar
meetings. Our emphasis will be cultural analysis and criticism from a
humanities perspective; extensive computer literacy is not a prerequisite.
However, Cornell students must have a network id and a basic knowledge of
navigating Bear Access.

  * Sponsor and Instructor
  * Who may participate and how?
    * Required reading
    * Student responsibilities 
      * Class participation
      * Projects/Evaluated work
      * Description of the three required projects
  * [Overview of weekly topics](4Overview.html) 

* * *

### Sponsor and Instructor

The seminar on Digital Culture is co-sponsored by the Society for the
Humanities at the Andrew D. White Center for Humanities at Cornell University,
and by the University of Rochester. The seminar meets on Mondays from
2.30-4.25 during the Spring semester of 1996 in Room 201 of the A.D. White
House. Students interested in enrolling are encourage to meet with the
instructor in advance of registration.  
  
The seminar will be taught by [David
Rodowick](http://www.rochester.edu/College/FS/Rodowick/DNRHome.html),
Professor of English and Visual and Cultural Studies, and Director of the Film
Studies Program at the University of Rochester. David Rodowick is also a
Visiting Fellow at the Society for the Humanities during the 1995/96 academic
year. His office hours are on Wednesday mornings from 10-11 and Thursday
afternoons from 3-4 at the Andrew D. White House, 27 East Avenue, Room 214.
You may also reach him by phone at 607-255-9284, or by email at
[dnr1@cornell.edu](mailto:dnr1@cornell.edu)  
  

* * *

### Who may participate and how?

Participation for credit is limited to 17 students at Cornell University and 5
students at the University of Rochester. If you'd like to meet the
participants of the Spring 1996 seminar, please go to the [class
directory](http://orac.ee.cornell.edu/unit1/pgs/directory/).  
  
The seminar is also open to on-line visitors who may participate in two ways.
Individuals with access to [CU-SeeMe](http://cu-seeme.cornell.edu/)
videoconferencing may "lurk" at seminar meetings by connecting to the
University of Rochester reflector established for the seminar . The reflector
may also be available for free-form discussion outside of class time. If you
would like to join us using CUSee-Me videoconferencing, please sign our [guest
book](CUSeeMe%20form.html).  
  
There will also be a moderated UseNet group dedicated to discussing the weekly
readings in advance of each seminar. The UseNet group is open to anyone who
has read the weekly material thoroughly and is prepared to discuss the
readings seriously. Students at Cornell University should subscribe to
**cornell.class.shum417**. Off campus participants should subscribe to our
listserve **digicult-L**. There is a bi-directional gateway between the two
lists: anything posted on one will appear on the other. To subscribe, send the
following message to [listproc@cornell.edu](mailto:listproc@cornell.edu):
**subscribe digicult-L <your name>**  
  
You can also read postings by going to the seminar [mirror
site](http://www.graphics.cornell.edu/~gordon/NotNews/) maintained by Gordon
Kindlmann.  
  

* * *

### Required readings

The only required book is Howard Rheingold's The Virtual Community:
Homesteading on the Virtual Frontier.  
  
At this time there are no xerox packets to buy. Course materials are available
on the World Wide Web via the seminar's home page. You may also download these
materials and print them out if you wish. Required and recommended texts for
each week are listed below under [Overview of weekly topics](4Overview.html).  
  
All required readings can also be found on two-hour reserve at Uris Library.
If the net goes down--and it often does--please make sure you complete the
weekly reading at the library. The original sources for the readings can be
found in the syllabus [bibliography](1aBibliography.html). You may want to
print a copy out and keep it handy in case network communications are cranky.
You may also want to consider buying the recommended books for the class.
These are anthologies that contain many of the required readings.  
  
**A note on copyright.** The required readings have been placed on-line with
the permission of the authors and/or their publishers. Copyright notices will
usually be found at the top of each essay. Links to the home pages of authors
and publishers, where known , can be found on the syllabus
[bibliography](1aBibliography.html).  
  

* * *

### Student responsibilities

#### Participation of registered students

Attendance and participation at weekly meetings is mandatory and will count as
part of your final grade. All registered students must have electronic mail
accounts and access to the World Wide Web.  
  
Weekly meetings will be dedicated to serious and critical discussion of the
assigned readings. The work load is heavy--around 100 pages/week--so plan in
advance to keep up. Required and recommended readings are available at and
through this Web site. Each student should be prepared to discuss the readings
**thoroughly** at the weekly seminar meeting.  
  
To this end, each registered student is also required to participate on the
UseNet group **in advance** of the weekly seminar meetings. You should post
your comments on the readings as well as respond to the postings of other
seminar members. Also feel free to use this group as a forum for posting any
events or information you feel will be useful for the group and its readers.
**Your weekly postings should be made by midnight on the Friday before our
Monday afternoon meetings.**  
  

* * *

#### Projects/Evaluated work

Registered students will also be required to complete three projects:

  * a book review from the seminar list of [recommended books](/Macintosh%20HD/Desktop%20Folder/Recommended.html); 
  * an on-line research report; 
  * a short critical essay on a topic of your own choosing. 

You may complete these projects in any order, and you may integrate them into
a larger project if you wish. In any case, you must turn in work on each of
the following due dates: **February 26** , **April 1** , and **May 6.**  
  
With the instructor's permission, you may also elect to pursue a larger
research project instead of three short projects. In this case, you must turn
in a proposal and bibliography on the first due date, a draft of your paper on
the second due date, and a complete draft on the final due date. The completed
paper should be approximately 7000 words (that is, 20 pages at about 350
words/page).  
  
Students are also free to propose one or more projects alternative to the ones
suggested by the instructor. For example, you may think about doing a digital
arts project or working on a participant ethnography of various forms of
virtual community: UseNet, BBSs, MUDs and MOOs, IRCs, etc.  
  
**Policy on late work and incompletes.** Due dates for each of the projects
are firm. Please plan now to complete your work on the assigned day. For each
day that a given project is late, 1/2 letter grade will be subtracted as a
penalty. I will not authorize an incomplete for this class except in cases of
family or medical emergency.  
  

* * *

#### Description of the three required projects

**Book reviews.** There is a list of [recommended
books](/Macintosh%20HD/Desktop%20Folder/Recommended.html) attached to this
syllabus. Each registered student will sign-up for a different book on the
list and review it in a short paper (approximately 5 pages at 350 words/page).
Time and energy permitting, we may publish these reviews on-line with
hyperlinks to the list of of recommended readings. Students are welcome to
suggest other books as well.  
  
**On-line research report.** This is an exercise in pursuing research on-line.
In consultation with the instructor, you will choose a topic to research using
on-line resources. This topic may also form the basis of your final paper if
you wish. On-line resources can include:

  * the World Wide Web and various indexes; 
  * Internet search engines (Archie, Veronica, WAIS, etc.); 
  * Cornell Libraries search engines through Bear Access; 
  * Cornell Libraries CD-Rom data bases; 
  * and anything else you can think up! 

Your report should include a bibliography of information and resources you
located plus a short essay (approximately 5 pages at 350 words/page) reporting
critically both on your sources and the research process. Think of this as a
bibliographic essay in contrast to your book review.  
  
**Short critical essay.** In consultation with the instructor, you will choose
a concept, question, or issue raised by the class readings, then write a
critical essay on that subject. This essay should be approximately 8-10 pages
at 350 words/page.

* * *

HOME | [Overview](4Overview.html) | [Virtual](5aVirtual.html) |
[Hypermedia](6aHypermedia.html) | [Worlds](7aWorlds.html) |
[Cyborg](8aCyborg.html) | [Bibliography](1aBibliography.html)

* * *

![](granite_top.gif)[![](granite_right.gif)](4Overview.html)

Last updated 29 March 1996

[dnr1@cornell.edu](mailto:dnr1@cornell.edu) David Rodowick

