>  
**RELIGION 24  
  
WOMEN AND RELIGION**  

  
This course is an introduction to the religious experiences of American women
in various historical periods, contexts and traditions. Our approach will
emphasize cultural and spiritual diversity in women's lives, as well as issues
of religious empowerment, piety, leadership, and theoretical questions
involving gender, spirituality, the body, and social and ethnic differences.

It is expected and necessary that you prepare for class by completing the
assigned readings for each week. You will be graded on your participation in
class (30%) In addition, the following assignments will be required:

Oral presentations: (30%) Each student is expected to write and present two
short papers during the course of the term.These papers will consist of a
discussion and critique of the issues raised in the readings for that week.
Papers should be five pages in length and are due to me no later than 9:00 am
on the day of the class presentation. Late papers will not be accepted and
will be graded as a zero.

Discussion questions: Students not doing presentations in a given week should
write out three questions for discussion in class.

Final examination: (40%) A take-home examination will be given at end of the
term.

Texts for this course are available for purchase at the College bookstore and
are on General Reserve at McCabe Library.

  
  
  
  
  

**WEEK/DAY/TOPIC**

1\. TU - Introduction to course, assignment of presentations  
TH - _Women in the New World_ : Jacqueline Peterson, "American Indian Women
and Religion," in Rosemary Ruether, WOMEN AND RELIGION IN AMERICA, VOL. TWO,
pp. 1-41; and Lillian Webb, "Black Women and Religion in the Colonial Period,"
in the same volume, pp. 233-259. Mary Maples Dunn, "Saints and Sisters:
Congregational and Quaker Women in the Early Colonial Period," AMERICAN
QUARTERLY 30, 1978, and reprinted in Janet Wilson James, WOMEN IN AMERICAN
RELIGION

2\. TU - _Women and Witchcraft_ : Carol Karlsen, THE DEVIL IN THE SHAPE OF A
WOMAN, pp. 1-19, 117-152  
TH - _Women and Revivalism_ : Nancy Cott, "Young Women in the Second Great
Awakening," FEMINIST STUDIES 3, 1975; Carroll Smith-Rosenberg, "The Cross and
the Pedestal: Women, Anti-Ritualism and the Emergence of the American
Bourgeoisie," in Smith-Rosenberg, DISORDERLY CONDUCT

3\. TU - _Women and Revivalism, cont._ : Martha Blauvelt, "Women and
Revivalism" in WOMEN AND RELIGION IN AMERICA, VOL. ONE, pp. 316 367; "Jarena
Lee," in Bert Loewenberg, BLACK WOMEN IN NINETEENTH CENTURY AMERICAN LIFE  
TH - **Indiana seminar - NO CLASS**

4\. TU - _Women as Religious Outsiders_ : Jean Humez, GIFTS OF POWER, pp. 71
154  
TH - Barbara Brown Zikmund, "The Feminist Thrust of Sectarian Christianity,"
in Rosemary Ruether, WOMEN OF SPIRIT: FEMALE LEADERSHIP IN THE JEWISH AND
CHRISTIAN TRADITIONS, pp. 206-224  
Mary Farrell Bednarowski, "Outside the Mainstream," JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN
ACADEMY OF RELIGION 48, June 1980

5\. TU - _Women's Spheres_ \- Barbara Welter, "The Feminization of American
Religion" in DIMITY CONVICTIONS; Barbara Welter, "The Cult of True Womanhood,
1820-1860" AMERICAN QUARTERLY 18, 1966, and reprinted in Welter, DIMITY
CONVICTIONS  
TH - Ann Braude, RADICAL SPIRITS, 10-31, 84-116

6.TU, TH - _Women and Traditional Religion I_ : Sonia Johnson, FROM HOUSEWIFE
TO HERETIC, pp. 61-150, 235-301, 321-353

  
  
7\. TU - _Women and Traditional Religion II_ : Ann Braude, "The Jewish Woman's
Encounter with American Culture," in WOMEN AND RELIGION IN AMERICA, VOL. ONE,
pp. 150-192; Evelyn Beck, NICE JEWISH GIRLS and Christie Balka, TWICE BLESSED  
TH - _Religion and Right Wing Womanhood_ : Kathleen Blee, WOMEN OF THE KLAN,
pp. 42-98, 101-122

8\. TU - _Spiritual Narratives_ : Dorothy Day, THE LONG LONELINESS, pp. 1 83,
132-243  
TH - Nellie McKay, "Nineteenth Century Black Women's Spiritual
Autobiographies," in INTERPRETING WOMEN'S LIVES: FEMINIST THEORY AND PERSONAL
NARRATIVES  
"Elizabeth," in Bert Loewenburg, BLACK WOMEN IN NINETEENTH CENTURY AMERICAN
LIFE

9.TU - _Black Women and Religion_ : Evelyn Higginbotham, RIGHTEOUS DISCONTENT  
TH - RIGHTEOUS DISCONTENT, (cont.); Cheryl Gilkes, "Together and in Harness:
Women's Traditions in the Sanctified Church" SIGNS 10, Summer 1985, reprinted
in Micheline Malson, BLACK WOMEN IN AMERICA: SOCIAL SCIENCE PERSPECTIVES

10\. TU - _Women and Neo-African Religion_ : Karen McCarthy Brown, MAMA LOLA:
A VODOU PRIESTESS IN BROOKLYN, 1-20, 94-139  
TH - MAMA LOLA, cont., pp. 312-328; David Estes, "Black Spiritual Churches of
New Orleans" in Catherine Wessinger, WOMEN'S LEADERSHIP IN MARGINAL RELIGIONS

11.TU, TH- _Women and the New Theologies_ : Judith Plaskow, WEAVING THE
VISIONS, pp. 111-118, 139-162, 179-198, 235-243

12\. TU - _Women and New Age Spirituality_ : Margot Adler, DRAWING DOWN THE
MOON, pp. 94-135; Andy Smith, "For All Those Who Were Indian in a Former
Life," in Carol Adams, ECOFEMINISM AND THE SACRED  
TH - DRAWING DOWN THE MOON, cont., pp. 176-229

13\. TU, TH - _Women in World Religion_ s: Paula Cooey, AFTER PATRIARCHY, pp.
15-86, 146-165

14\. Review and final examination

