**

History of Operations Other Than War

**

PUBP 750-001, #07176

HIST 615-006, #07479

ITRN 701-001, #07176

Tuesday, 19.10-22.00, Arlington (Old Law School) Rm 234

Instructor: E. P. Visco

Syllabus

This course examines the roles and activities of military forces in carrying
out missions unrelated to war, declared or not. Such activities are referred
to under a variety of names: contingency operations, operations other than
war, stability and support operations, and others; the names change, but the
activities do not. And that is one of the considerations of the course. Two
widely held beliefs are explored in the course. The first is that the mission
of armed forces, with principal emphasis on the forces of the United States,
is to fight and win the nation's wars. The second belief is that there is
something new and perhaps unique about US recent operations other than war,
particularly peace support operations, when compared to operations during the
19th and first half of the 20th centuries. The scope of the course is both
geographical and temporal.

For coherency, the sequence of the course will follow the chronology described
by Sweeney (Jerry K. Sweeney, ed., _A Handbook of American Military History
From the Revolutionary War to the Present_ , Westview Press, 1996), amended by
the instructor. That chronology is:

    * The Building Period: 1775-1815

    * The Institutional Period: 1816-1865

    * The Reform Period: 1866-1914

    * The Unsettled Period: 1915-1941

    * The Global Period: 1942-1963

    * The Uncertain Period: 1964-1994

    * The Undefined Period: 1995-1999

Each period will provide one or more operations for seminar discussions;
readings will be assigned so that students will prepare to engage in
discussions well-informed about the basic features of the operations. Students
may be asked to lead the case discussions. The history of the operations will
be used to provide bases for examining the two widely held beliefs. Operations
will be assessed in terms of:

    * Mission and objectives (risk assessment? understood? communicated? feasible?) 

    * Plan (process and product; risk assessment?)

    * Preparation (logistics, people, other; sufficient? timely?)

    * Deployment and movement

    * Operations and actions (related to mission; documentation?)

    * Mission completion (measures of performance; measures of effectiveness; exit criteria?) 

    * Re-deployment (re-assignment; release of people and materiel)

    * Stand-down (documentation?).

The assessments will include consideration of consequences--intended and
unintended. In addition, a qualitative analytic structure, adopted from the
'mini-methods' of Neustadt and May (see texts, below), will be applied,
explored and tested for use in identifying lessons from the past that are
useful for the present and future.

An independent student paper will be required. The paper will compare an
operation from the 18th, 19th or first half of the 20th century with an
operation from the second half of the 20th century. The analytic framework
used for the comparison can be the one outlined in this syllabus and used in
the course or an alternative of equal or superior capability. The paper should
follow the standards of graduate student effort but no format is dictated. The
needs of the topic dictate that the size will be not less than 15 pages, but
length is not a critical evaluation characteristic. Students will brief their
papers at the final and penultimate sessions of the class; each briefing
should be designed to be presented in 20 minutes with five additional minutes
provided for questions. Overhead viewgraphs are the preferred medium for the
briefings. The paper will represent the final examination in the course.

A mid-term examination will be required. It will be a "take home" examination.

Course grades will be determined by combining student accomplishments in four
categories: 1. The mid-term examination (20%); 2. Class participation (25%);
3. The major paper (45%); 4. Briefing (10%).

_

Texts:

_

Robert W. Coakley, _The Role of Federal Military Forces in Domestic Disorders,
1789-1878_ , Center of Military History, US Army, Washington, DC, 1988. [CMH
publications are available from the Government Printing Office; orders can be
placed on-line through the Federal Government's Web pages. The Federal Stock
Number for this book is: 008-029-00167-5; its price is $29.00.]

Clayton D. Laurie and Ronald H. Cole, _The Role of Federal Military Forces in
Domestic Disorders, 1877-1945_ , Center of Military History, US Army,
Washington, DC, 1997. [Stock Number: 008-029-00333-3; price: $40.00.]

Andrew J. Birtle, _U.S. Army Counterinsurgency and Contingency Operations
Doctrine 1860-1941_ , Center of Military History, US Army, Washington, DC,
1998. [Federal Stock Number: 008-029-00337-6; price: $19.00.]

Richard E. Neustadt and Ernest R. May, _Thinking in Time. The Uses of History
for Decision Makers_ , The Free Press, 1986 [to my way of thinking, a valuable
and interesting book on approaches to problem solving using history as a
contributing tool].

_

Other References of Interest:

_

Hans Delbruck, _History of the Art of War (Volume I, Warfare in Antiquity;
Volume II, The Barbarian Invasions; Volume III, Medieval Warfare; Volume IV,
The Dawn of Modern Warfare)_ , University of Nebraska Press, English language
edition 1975 (first published in 1900).

Frank N. Schubert, ed., _The Nation Builders. A Sesquicentennial History of
the Corps of Topographical Engineers. 1838-1863_ , Office of History, US Army
Corps of Engineers, 1988 [may not be easily found; look to someone in the Army
to get a copy, perhaps].

Senator Sam Nunn, _Domestic Missions for the Armed Forces_ , Strategic Studies
Institute, US Army War College, February 1993 [presented at the Fourth Annual
Strategy Conference of the Army War College; SSI can be contacted at
717-245-3376].

Frank N. Schubert, _Building Air Bases in the Negev. The U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers in Israel, 1979-1982_ , US Army Center of Military History, 1992
[CMH is at Fort McNair, Washington; phone number is ; do not know if book is
available from the Center; it may be available from the Government Printing
Office].

Kenneth Allard, _Somalia Operations: Lessons Learned_ , Institute for National
Strategic Studies, National Defense University Press, January 1995
[publications of the NDU can often be obtained free by calling the Press;
otherwise, they are available from the Government Printing Office].

Antonia Handler Chayes and George T. Raach, eds., _Peace Operations.
Developing An American Strategy_ , Institute for National Strategic Studies,
National Defense University Press, October 1995.

Larry Wentz, contributing editor, _Lessons From Bosnia: The IFOR Experience_ ,
Institute for National Strategic Studies, National Defense University Press,
1977 [can be obtained from CCRP Publications Distribution Center, c/o Evidence
Based Research, Inc., 1595 Spring Hill Road, Suite 250, Vienna, VA 22182].

Tom Czerwinski, _Coping with the Bounds. Speculations on Nonlinearity in
Military Affairs_ , Institute for National Strategic Studies, National Defense
University Press, 1998 [probable the most understandable, to date, exposition
of the insufficiency of linear thinking for dealing with military analysis and
the need for a focus on complex adaptive systems as the next step in the
progression; the book may be available from the CCRP Publications Distribution
Center, above].

_



_

