**PHIL 80: Seminar in Philosophy: Deconstructing Orientalism: Post-Colonial
Theory.**  
**Earlham College, Spring Semester 1999-2000**  
**Tuesday, Friday 1:00-2:20. Carpenter 323**  
**Instructor: Ferit G uven**  
**Office: Carpenter 331**  
**Office Hours: Monday 1:00-2:00 Tuesday 2:30-3:30 and by appointment**  
**Office Phone: 983-1399 (voice mail)**  
**e-mail: guvenfe@earlham.edu**

**Course Description:** This course will study discourses on Orientalism and
Colonialism (and Post-Colonial Theory) in light of the ideas of 20 th Century
philosophers. The course aims to be interdisciplinary, incorporating
anthropology, politics, history and philosophy. Our general question will be
how philosophical discourse influences interactions among cultures.
Specifically, I want to investigate the relationship between Modern philosophy
(and science) and European Colonialism. What conceptual backgrounds inform
particular ways of understanding culture? Is European philosophy necessarily a
"dominating" discourse? Finally, how can one understand "our" current
preoccupation with multi-culturalism and pluralism in light of "our" history?
Even though neither Orientalism nor Colonialism are considered to be "popular"
anymore as descriptive terms, they still determine the relationship between
the West and the East. In this seminar we will learn the historical,
political, social and ethical background of Colonialism and Orientalism in
order to assess how much they are still very much at work today. At a time
when the Western countries feel the need, and even willingness to learn about
other cultures, and their ways of thinking, a study of how different cultures
interacted in the past is inevitable. Not only has the West defined the East
as its Other, and constituted its identity in opposition to the East, but also
the knowledge the West produced about the East became a tool for the East to
understand its own identity in the form of "self-colonization." There is,
therefore, a very difficult question of representation to be addressed. How is
the East represented in the West? How do so called "scientific and scholarly"
works contribute to the formation of concrete policies? The general aim of
this course is to investigate how very complex social, political, historical
and philosophical ideas contribute to the ways in which we perceive those who
are other than us.

**Required Texts:** (available in the Earlham College bookstore)  
Martin Heidegger. _The Question Concerning Technology_  
Michel Foucault. _Discipline and Punishment_  
Edward Said. _Orientalism_ ,  
Timothy Mitchell. _Colonizing Egypt_  
In addition to these texts, I will provide photocopied material from Jacques
Derrida, Gayatri Spivak, Homi Bhabha, etc

**Course Requirement and Evaluation:**  
You are expected to write three short papers (5-6 page) and one long paper
(10-12 page). I will provide paper topics for each assignment. You are also
allowed to decide on your own topic provided that you discuss your topic with
me at least a week before the deadline. Along with the paper topics I will
also provide specific guidelines for each topic. Besides this, for every paper
(including papers on topics of your own choice) you are responsible for
following the general guidelines provided. (See "Comments and Suggestions for
Papers").  
For each week, two students will work together in order to prepare a ** _two
paged_** (single-spaced) protocol of the material discussed during the
**_previous_** week. A protocol is a carefully edited summary of the previous
class sessions written in _full sentences_.  Protocols will be photocopied by
the student who wrote it and handed out to all students at the beginning of
each Tuesday to be read aloud, and will serve as a cumulative record of the
course. The students who prepare the protocol should come to class a couple of
minutes early, so that the protocols will have been distributed at the
beginning of the class (i.e., at 1:00). In addition to reviewing the material
covered in the previous class, the protocol should include announcements made
in class, questions raised, and, if possible, future questions for the
material to come. The best protocols will be those that do not simply
reproduce verbatim everything that was said during class, but those that
rearrange the material thematically, editing out what was unimportant, and
emphasizing what was significant. The point of this is not only to get you to
work together, but also to allow you to think during class, and not just take
notes; because someone will be taking notes for you, you can concentrate on
the ideas being presented, and participate without having to write
frantically. Also you will have a summary of every class which will help you
with writing papers.  
Your grade will be calculated according to the following distribution: Paper
I: 15%, Paper II: 15%, Paper III: 15%, Paper IV: 30%, Protocol: 15%, Class
Participation and Attendance: 10%.

**Class participation and attendance:**  
There will be no final examination. Indeed, there will be no exams in this
course. However, in order to make sure that you are doing the reading, I may
give in class quizzes. The success of this course is dependent upon your
contribution. In order for all of us to have a good course your individual
contribution will be needed. Given the size of the class, missing a session
will be very disruptive for all of us. Consequently, you should feel a
responsibility not only to me, but also to your friends in this course. I am
not inclined to legislate strict attendance policies, however, if you miss
more than four sessions you will fail this course.  
Our sessions will start at 1:00 pm. Students are expected to come on time.
Walking into the classroom while the session is in progress is extremely
disruptive for everybody; so is walking out while the session is in progress.
I ask you not to do these.  
Office hours are for students to discuss ideas, assignments and questions. You
are encouraged and welcome to come by my office or make appointments for times
other than scheduled office hours. You should take advantage of office hours
and appointments not simply to discuss your papers (you are obviously welcome
to do that too) but also to understand ideas, and texts discussed in class.

**Calendar** :  
There may be some modifications to this calendar. It is your responsibility to
be aware of these changes. These changes may be announced in class. If you
miss a class you should make sure that you are informed about the assignments
for the next session.

Week 1: January 14: Introduction  
Week 2: January 18-21: Heidegger. "The Age of the World Picture"  
Week 3: January 25-28: Heidegger. "Science and Reflection"  
Week 4: February 1-4: Foucault. _Discipline and Punish_  
Week 5: February 8-11: Foucault. _Discipline and Punish_  
Week 6: February 15-18: Foucault. _Discipline and Punish...._......... **First
Paper Due**  
Week 7: February 22: Said. _Orientalism_  
Week 8: February 29 March 3: Said. _Orientalism_  
Week 9: March 7-10: Said. _Orientalism_  
Week 10: March 14-17: Said.
_Orientalism_........................................ **Second Paper Due**  
Spring Break: March 20-24:  
Week 11: March 28-31: Mitchell. _Colonizing Egypt_  
Week 12: April 4-7: Mitchell. _Colonizing Egypt_  
Week 13: April 11-14: Selections from Derrida, Spivak, Bhaba...... **Third
Paper Due**  
Week 14: April 18-21: Selections from Derrida, Spivak, Bhaba  
Week 15: April 25: Review and Evaluation

**Final Paper:** **May 3 for Seniors**  
.................... **May 4 for non-Seniors**  
Back to [Homepage](http://www.earlham.edu/~guvenfe/index.htm).

