World History Sara Watts  
    
[Home](index.html)  
    
[Syllabus](syllabus.html)  
    
[Primary Readings](readings.html) |  |  Ultranationalism in Germany and Japan

Nationalism, the most important single cause of World War 1, became even more
potent and poisonous in the 1920s and 1930s, leading to a second world war
many times more costly and horrifying than the struggle of 1914 to 1918. In
Italy and Germany extreme nationalism was the driving force behind rightwing,
antidemocratic movements personified by Benito Mussolini, whose Fascists
seized power in Italy in 1922, and Adolf Hitler, whose Nazis took over Germany
in 1933. In Japan ultranationalists never subverted the limited dmocracy
established by the 1890 constitution, but in the 1930s their views inspired
millions and became dogma within the Japanese military.

These three nations in which nationalism ran wild were similar in several
respects. All three were recent creations: Italy gained national unity between
1859 and 1870, Germany achieved the same in 1871, and Japan emerged from its
feudal past only after the Meiji Restoration of 1868. All three had weak
parliamentary governments and lacked experience in democratic politics. All
three resented their treatment after World War I: the Germans were humiliated
by the Versailles Treaty, while the Italians and Japanese were insulted by the
refusal of Great Britain and France to recognize all their territorial claims.
Finally, all three faced severe economic problems after World War I that
extreme nationalists claimed could be solved by expansion and conquest.

Although ultranationalism in each state differed in certain respects, it had
the same tragic result: it led all three nations into catastrophic wars. After
conquering Manchuria in 1931, invading China in 1937, attacking the United
States at Pearl Harbor in 1941, and expanding into Southeast Asia, Japan
conceded defeat only when atomic bombs devastated Hiroshima and Nagasaki in
August 1945. Germany launched World War II in Europe with its attack on Poland
in September 1939, but after conquering much of western Europe and invading
the Soviet Union in 1941, its armies were steadily pushed back until the
leaders of a devastated land surrendered in May 1945. Italy entered World War
II on the side of Germany in 1940, but its armies performed poorly, and only
massive support from Nazi Germany prevented its rapid collapse. Anti-Fascists
captured Mussolini and shot him without trial on April 28, 1945, just a few
days before Adolf Hitler committed suicide in his bunker under the rubble of
what had been Berlin.  
   The Dreams of the Fuhrer   97 _Adolf Hitler, MEIN KAMPF_  
Born the son of an Austrian customs official and his German wife in 1889,
Hitler moved to Vienna at the age of nineteen to seek a career as an artist or
architect. His efforts failed, however, and lie lived at the bottom of
Viennese society, drifing from one low-paying job to another. In 1912 he moved
to Munich, where his life fell into the same purposeless pattern. His
enlistment in the German army in World War I rescued Hitler, giving him
comradeship and a sense of direction that had been lacking. After the war a
shattered Hitler returned to Munich, where in 1919 he joined the small German
Workers party, which in 1923 changed its name to the National Socialist German
Workers' party, or Nazis.

After becoming leader of the National Socialists, Hitler staged an abortive
coup d'etat against the government of the German state of Bavaria in 1923. For
this he was sentenced to a five-year prison term (serving only nine months),
during which he wrote the first volume of his major political work, _Mein
Kampf (My Struggle)._ It centers on his theories concerning the superiority of
the Aryan race, most "purely" represented in modern history by Germans and
other Nordic peoples. To a remarkable degree this work, completed in 1925,
provided the basic ideas that inspired his millions of followers and guided
the National Socialists until their destruction in 1945.

_QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS_  

  1. What broad purpose does Hitler see in human existence?
  2. How is progress to be attained for humanity, according to Hitler?
  3. What in Hitler's view are the basic dissimilarities between Aryans and Jews?
  4. What does Hitler fear most from the Jews?
  5. What is Hitler's view of political leadership?
  6. What role do parliaments play in a "folkish" state, according to Hitler?
  7. How does Hitler plan to reorient German foreign policy? What goals does he set for German), and how are they to be achieved?
  8. How have Hitler's ideas been influenced by his understanding of the theories of Charles Darwin? (See Chapter 8, source 65.)
  9. Based on what Hitler says in these excerpts, what can you guess about his objections to the ideologies of democracy, liberalism, and socialism?

NATION AND RACE

There are some truths that are so plain and obvious that for this very reason
the everyday world does not see them or at least does not apprehend them.
People pass by these truths as if they were blind and are highly astonished
when they Suddenly discover what everyone Should know. . . .

So humans invariably wander about the garden of nature, convinced that they
know and understand everything, yet with few exceptions are blind to one of
the fundamental principles Nature uses in her work: the intrinsic segregation
of the species of every living thing on the earth. . . . Each beast mates with
only one of its own species: the titmouse with titmouse, finch with finch,
stork with stork, field mouse with field mouse, house mouse with house mouse,
wolf with wolf. . . . This is only natural.

Any cross-breeding between two not completely equal beings will result in a
product that is in between the level of the two parents. That means that the
offspring will be superior to the parent who is at a biologically lower level
of being but Inferior to the parent at a higher level. This means the
offspring will be overcome in the struggle for existence against those at tile
higher level. Such matings go against the will of' Nature for the higher
breeding of life.

A precondition for this lies not in the blending of beings of a higher and
lower order, but rather the absolute victory of the stronger. The stronger
must dominate and must not blend with the weaker orders and sacrifice their
powers. Only born ,weaklings can find this cruel, but after all, they are only
weaker and more narrow-minded types of men; unless this law dominated, then
any conceivable higher evolution of, living organisms would be unthinkable. .
. .

Nature looks on this calmly and approvingly. The struggle for daily bread
allows all those who are weak, sick, and indecisive to be defeated, while the
struggle of the males for females gives to the strongest alone the right or at
least the possibility to reproduce. Always this struggle is a means of
advancing the health and power of resistance of the species, and thus a means
to its higher evolution.

As little as nature approves the mating of higher and lower individuals, she
approves even less the blending of higher races with lower ones; for indeed
otherwise her previous work toward higher development perhaps over hundreds of
thousands of years might be rendered useless with one blow. If this were nor
the case, progressive development would stop and even deterioration might set
in. . . .

All the great civilizations of tile past died out because contamination of
their blood caused them to become decadent . . . . in other words, in order to
protect a certain culture, tile type of human who created the culture must be
preserved. But such preservation is tied to tile inalterable law of the
necessity and the right of victory of the best and the strongest.

Whoever would live must fight. Whoever will not fight in this world of endless
competition does not deserve to live. Whoever ignores or despises these laws
of race kills the good fortune that he believes he can attain. He interferes
with the victory path of the best race and with it, the precondition for all
human progress. As a result, his human sensitivity consigns him to the level
of pitiful beasts. . .

It is an idle undertaking to argue about which race or races were the original
standard bearers of human culture and were therefore the true founders of
everything we conceive by the word humanity. It is much simpler to deal with
the question as it pertains to the present, and here the answer is simple and
clear. What we see before us today as human culture, all the yields of art,
science, and technology, are almost exclusively the creative product of the
Aryans.1 Indeed this fact alone leads to the not unfounded conclusion that the
Aryan alone is the founder of the higher type of humanity, and further that
lie represents the prototype of what we understand by the word: MAN. He is the
Prometheus2 from whose brow, the bright spark of genius has forever burst
forth, time and again rekindling the fire, which as knowledge has illuminated
the night full of silent mysteries, and has permitted humans to ascend the
path of mastery over the other beings of the earth. Eliminate him and deep
darkness will again descend on the earth after a few thousand years human
civilization will die out and the earth will become a desert.

If we were to divide mankind into three categories - the founders of culture,
the bearers of culture, and the destroyers of culture, only the Aryans can be
considered to be in the first category. From them are built the foundations
and walls of all human creations, and only the outward form and colors of
these are to be attributed to varying characteristics of the other individual
peoples. He provides the mightiest building stones and designs for all human
progress; only how these designs have been carried out can be attributed to
the shifting characteristics of other peoples. .

The Jew provides the greatest contrast to the Aryan. With no other people of
the world has the instinct for self-preservation been so developed as by the
so-called chosen race.' The best proof of this statement rests it, the fact
that this race still exists. Where can another people be found in the past
2,000 years that has undergone so few changes in its Inner qualities,
character, etc. as the Jews? What people has undergone upheavals as great as
this one - and nonetheless have emerged unchanged from the greatest
catastrophes of humanity, What an infinitely tenacious will to live and to
preserve one's kind is revealed in this fact. . . .

Since the Jew --- for reasons I will deal with shortly \- never had a
civilization of his own, others have always provided the foundations of his
intellectual labors. His intellect has always developed by the use of those
cultural achievements he has found ready at hand around him. Never has it
happened the other way around.

For though their drive for self- preservation is not smaller, but larger than
that of other people, and though their mental capabilities may easily give the
impression that their intellectual powers are equal to those of other races,
the Jews lack the most basic characteristic of a truly cultured people, namely
an idealistic spirit.

It is a remarkable fact that the herd instinct brings people together for
mutual protection only so long as there is a common danger that makes mutual
assistance necessary or unavoidable. The same pack of wolves that an instant
ago combined to overcome their pre), will soon after satisfying their hunger
again become individual beasts. . . . It goes the same way with the Jews. His
sense of self sacrifice is only apparent. It lasts only so long as it is
strictly necessary. As soon as the common enemy departs, however, as soon as
the danger is gone and the booty secured, the superficial harmony among the
Jews ends, and original conditions return. Jews act together only when a
common danger threatens them or a common prey attracts them. When these two
things are lacking, then their characteristic of the crassest egoism returns
as it force, and out of this once unified people emerges in it flash a swarm
of rats fighting bloodily against one another.

1 See Footnote 9 from Chapter 8, source 70 for a brief discussion of the term
Aryan.  
2 In Greek mythology Prometheus was the titan (titans were offspring of
Uranus, heaven, and Gaea, earth), who stole fire from the gods and gave it to
humans, along with all other arts and civilization. He was also variously
regarded as the creator of man (from clay), the first mortal man along with
his brother Epimetheus), and humanity's preserver when Zeus threatened to kill
all human beings.  
3 A reference to the Jewish conviction developed in the Hebrew scriptures that
God had chosen the Jews to enter into a special relationship or covenant in
which God promised to be the God of the Hebrew's and favor them in return for
true worship, and obedience.

If the Jews existed in the world by themselves, they Would wallow in their
fifth and disasters; the), would try to get the best of the other in a hate-
filled struggle, and even exterminate one another, that is, if their absolute
lack of a sense of self sacrifice, which is expressed in their venality, did
not turn this drama into comedy also. . . .

That is why the Jewish state - which should be the living organism for the
maintenance and improvement of' the race - has absolutely no borders. For the
territorial definition of a state always demands a certain Idealism of spirit
oil the part of the race which forms the state arid especially an acceptance
of the idea of work. . . . If this attitude is lacking then the prerequisite
for civilization is lacking.

> [Hitler describes the process by which the European Jews in concert with the
communists have come close to subverting and controlling other people and
nations in Europe]

Here he stops at nothing, and his vileness becomes so monstrous that no one
Should be surprised if among Our people the hateful figure of the Jew is taken
as the personification of the devil and the symbol of evil . . . .

How close they see their approaching victory can be seen in the frightful way
that their dealings with members of other races develop.

The black-haired Jewish youth, with satanic joy on his face, lurks in wait for
hours for the innocent girls he plans to defi1e with his blood, and steal the
young girl from her people. With every means at hand he seeks to undermine the
racial foundations of the people they would subjugate. . . . For a people
which is racially pure and is conscious of its blood, will never be able to be
subjugated by the Jews. The Jew in this world will forever only be the masters
of bastardized people. . . .

Around those nations which have offered sturdy resistance to their internal
attacks, they Surround them with a web of enemies; thanks to their
international influence, they incite them to war, and when necessary, will
plant the flag of revolution, even on the battlefield.

In economics he shakes the foundations of the state long enough so that
unprofitable business enterprises are shut down and come under his financial
control. In politics he denies the state its means of self-preservation,
destroys its means of self-maintenance and defense, annihilates faith in state
leadership, insults its history and traditions, arid drags everything that is
truly great into the gutter.

Culturally, he pollutes art, literature arid theater, makes a mockery of
natural sensibilities, destroys every concept of beauty and nobility, the
worthy and the good, and instead drags other men down to the sphere of its own
lowly type of existence.

Religion is made an object of mockery, morality and ethics are described as
old-fashioned, until finally the last props of a people for maintaining their
existence in this world are destroyed.

PERSONALITY AND THE IDEAL OF THE FOLKISH STATE

_The folkish world view differs from the Marxist world view fundamentally in
that it not only recognizes the value of race, but also that of the
Individual, and makes these the pillars of its very structure._ These are the
sustaining factors in its view of the world.

The folkish state must care for the well-being of its citizens by recognizing
in everything the worth of the person, and by doing so direct it to the
highest level of its productive capability, thus guaranteeing for each the
highest level of participation.

Accordingly, the folkish state must free the entire leadership, especially
those in political leadership, from the parliamentary principle of majority
rule by the multitude, so that the right of personality is guaranteed without
any limitation. From this is derived the following realization. _The best
state constitution and form is that which with unquestioned certainty raises
the best minds from the national community to positions of, leading authority
and influence. . . .  _

Beginning with its smallest component and including the highest direction of
the Reich, the state must be anchored to the principle of personality.

There are no majority decisions, rather only responsible individuals, and the
word "advice" will once again have its original meaning. Each man will have
advisers at his side, _but the decision will be made by one man._  

The principle that made the Prussian army in its time the most splendid
instrument of the German people will have to become someday the foundation for
the construction of our completed state: _authority of every leader downward
and responsibility upward. . . . ._  

This principle of binding absolute responsibility with absolute authority will
gradually bring forth an elite group of leaders which today in an era of
irresponsible parliamentarianism is hardly thinkable.

4 The word Hitler uses, volkisch, is an adjective derived from Volk, meaning
"people" or "nation,'' which Hitler defined in a racial sense; thus a
"folkish" state is one that expresses the characteristics of and furthers the
interests of a particular race, in this case, the Aryans.  
5 German for empire. Later, Hitler's Germany would be known as the Third Reich
or third German-centered empire in central Europe. The first two were the Holy
Roman Empire, which began in the tenth century and was formerly ended by
Napoleon in 1806. The second was the government of the newly united Germany
from 1871 to 1918.

THE DIRECTION AND POLITICS OF EASTERN EUROPE

_The foreign policy_ of _the folkish state has as its purpose to guarantee the
existence on this planet_ of _the race that it gathers within its borders.
With this in mind it must create a natural and healthy, ratio between the
number and growth of the population and the extent and quality of the land and
soil. The balance must be such that it accords with the vital needs of the
people._ What I call a _healthy_ ratio is one in which the support of the
people is assured by its own land and soil. Any other condition, even if it
lasts centuries or a thousand years, is nevertheless an unhealthy one and will
lead sooner or later to damage, if not the total destruction of the affected
people. _Only a sufficiently large space on the earth can assure the
independent existence of a people. . . ._  

_If the National Socialist Movement really is to be consecrated in history as
fulfilling a great mission for the people, it must, spurred_ by _knowledge and
filled with pain over its true situation on this earth, boldly and with a
clear sense of direction, take up the battle against the aimlessness and
incompetence_ of _our_ fo _reign policy. It must, without consideration of
"traditions" or preconceived notions, find the courage to gather our people
and their forces and advance them on the path from their present restricted
living space to new land and soil. This will free the people from the dangers
of_ _disappearing from the earth altogether or becoming a slave people in the
service of another._  

_The National Socialist movement must seek to eliminate the disproportion
between our People's Population and our territory - viewing this as a source_
of _food as well as a basis for national power - and between our historical
past and our present hopeless impotence._ While doing so it must remain
conscious of the fact that we as protectors of the highest humanity on earth
are bound also by the highest duty that will be fulfilled only if we inspire
the German people with the racial ideal, so that they will Occupy themselves
not just with the breeding of good dogs, horses, and cats but also show
concern about the purity of _their own_ blood.

Against everything else we National Socialists must hold unflinchingly to Our
goal of foreign policy, namely, _to secure for the German people the land on
this earth to which they are entitled. . . ._  

_State boundaries are made by man and can be changed by man._  

The fact that a nation has acquired a large amount of land is no mandate that
this should be recognized forever. This only goes to prove the strength of the
conqueror and the weakness of the conquered. And only in force lies the right
of possession. If today the German people are imprisoned within an impossible
territorial area and for that reason are face to face with a miserable future,
this is not the commandment of face, any more than a revolt against Such a
situation would be a violation of the laws of fate; . . . . the soil on which
we now live was not bestowed upon our ancestors by Heaven; rather, they had to
conquer it by risking their lives, so with us, in the future we will win soil
and with it the means of existence of the people not through some sort of
folkish grace but only through the power of the triumphant Sword.

But we National Socialists must go further: _The right to land and soil will
become an obligation if without further territorial expansion a great people
is threatened with its destruction._ And that is particularly true when the
people in question is not some little nigger people, but the German mother of
life, which has given cultural shape to the modern world. _Germany will either
become a world power or will no longer exist. To_ achieve world power an
expansion in size is needed, which will give the state meaning in today's
world and will give life to its citizens. . .

_And so the National Socialists consciously draw a line below the direction of
our foreign policy before the war. We take up where we broke off six hundred
years ago. We put a stop to the eternal pull of the Germans toward the south
and western Europe and turn our gaze to the land of the east. We put an end to
the colonial and commercial policy of the Prewarperiod and shift to the land-
oriented policy of the future._  

When today we speak of new territory and soil in Europe, we think primarily of
_Russia_ and her subservient border states.  
  The Destiny of Japan   98 - _THE WAY OF SUBJECTS_

In the summer of 1941, only a few months before the bombing of Pearl Harbor,
the Japanese Ministry of Education issued "The Way of Subjects," a pamphlet
that became required reading for high school and university students. It
reflects the basic principles of Japanese ultranationalism, a growing force in
the 1920s and 1930s.

Racial and Cultural pride had characterized the Japanese for centuries and was
a major reason for their unified and wholehearted Support of modernization

during tile Meiji period. In the 1930s and 1940s nationalism intensified and,
as in Germany and Italy, became identified with reactionary antidemocratic and
antisocialist movements. It grew in response to several developments,
including resentment of the West for Its treatment of Japan after World War 1,
fears of a reunified China under Chiang Kai-shek and the Nationalists,
concerns about economic fluctuations and social tensions caused by the Great
Depression, opposition to "dangerous" ideologies such as socialism and
communism, and anxieties about Western influence on Japan.

The ultranationalists denounced democracy, socialism. and the influence of big
business on Japanese life. They praised Japanese virtues of harmony and duty,
idealized the past, demanded absolute obedience to the emperor, and called for
the revival of warrior values. They also clamored for Japanese imperialist
expansion, claiming that only this could save Japan from overpopulation and
economic isolation.

With widespread support in the rural Population and army, ultranationalism
peaked between 1931 and 1936, when its disciples assassinated business leaders
and government officials, including a prime minister, and plotted to overthrow
the government. The most serious coup attempt took place in February 1936,
when officers and troops of the Fifteenth Division attacked and held downtown
Tokyo for three days before authorities suppressed their rebellion. The
government survived, but to satisfy the extremists it cracked down on leftist
politicians and acceded to the army's demands. The balance of Japanese
politics had shifted to right-wing militarists, setting the stage for the
invasion of China in 1937 and the bombing of Pearl Harbor in 1941.

_QUESTIONS FOR ANALYSIS_  

  1. What is the stated purpose of "The Way of Subjects"?
  2. According to the authors, what are the distinguishing characteristics of Western nations?
  3. In what ways are Western attitudes and ideologies threatening Japan, according to the authors? 
  4. According to the authors, how do the Japanese differ from other people? What do they see as Japan's special mission? 
  5. What is the purpose of the Greater East Asia Coprosperity Sphere?
  6. What, according to the authors, is the role of individual Japanese in fulfilling the nation's mission?
  7. To what extent do the authors' views of Japan's future resemble Hitler's dreams for Germany (Chapter 11, Source 97)?
  8. If Giuseppe Mazzini (Chapter 8, source 69) had been given an opportunity to critique _.._. "The Way of the Subjects," what might he have said?

PREAMBLE

Tile way of the subjects of the Emperor issues from the polity of the Emporer,
and is to guard and maintain the Imperial Throne coexistent with the Heavens
and tile Earth. This is not an abstract principle, but a way of daily
practices based on history. Tile life and activities of tile nation are all
attuned to the task of strengthening tile foundation of the Empire.

Looking to the past, this country has been widely seeking knowledge in the
world since the Meiji Restoration, thereby fostering and maintaining the
prosperity of the state. With the influx of European and American Culture into
this country, however, Individualism, liberalisin, utilitarianism, and
materialism began to assert themselves, so that tile traditional character of
the Country was much impaired and the virtuous habits and customs becqueathed
by our ancestors were affected unfavorably.

With the outbreak of tile Manchurian Affair1 and further occurrence of the
China Affair,2 the national spirit started to be elevated gradually, but there
is still much to be desired in point of the people's understanding the
fundamental principle of polity its it whole and their consciousness as
Subjects of the Emperor. It is deeply regrettable that, well knowing the
dignity of the Empire's polity, people are likely to be satisfied with making
it a mere conception, and fall to let it be expressed in their daily lives.

If this situation is left unremedied, it will be difficult to eradicate the
evils of European and American thought that are deeply penetrating various
strata of Japan's national life, and to achieve the unprecedentedly great
tasks by establishing a structure of national solidarity of guarding and
maintaining the prosperity of the Imperial Throne. Herein lies an urgent need
to discard tile self-centered and utilitarian ideas and to elevate and
practice the way of the Emperor's subjects based on state service as the
primary requisite.

PART I

The thoughts that have formed the foundation of Western civilization since the
early period of the modern age are individualism, liberalism, materialism, and
so on. These thoughts regard the strong preying on tile weak as reasonable,
unstintedly promote the pursuit of luxury anti pleasure, encourage
materialism, and stimulate competition for acquiring colonies and securing
trade, thereby leading the world to a veritable hell of fighting and bloodshed
. . . . The self-destruction in the shape of the World War finally followed.
It was only natural that cries were raised even among men of those countries
after the war that western civilization was crumbling. A vigorous movement was
started by Britain, France, and the United States to maintain the status quo
by any means. Simultaneously, a movement aiming at social revolution through
class conflict on the basis of thoroughgoing materialism like Communism also
vigorously developed. On the other hand, Nazism and Fascism arose with great
force. The basic principles of the totalitarianism in Germany and Italy are to
remove the evils of individualism and liberalism.

That these principles show great similarity to Eastern culture and spirit is
it noteworthy fact that suggests the future of Western civilization and the
creation of a new culture. Thus, the orientation of world history has made the
collapse of the old world order a certainty. Japan has hereby initiated the
construction of a new world order based on moral principles.

The Manchurian Affair was a violent out burst of Japanese national life long
suppressed. Taking advantage of this, Japan in the glare of all the Powers
made a step toward the creation of a world based on moral principles and the
construction of a new order. This was it manifestation of the spirit, profound
and lofty, embodied in the founding of Empire, and an unavoidable action for
its national life and world mission. Japan's position was raised suddenly to
the world's forefront as a result of the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-05 . . . .

The general tendency of world domination by Europe and America has begun to
show signs of a change since then. Japan's victory attracted the attention of
the entire world, and this caused a reawakening of Asiatic countries, which
had been forced to lie prostrate under British and American influence, with
the result that an independence movement was started.

Hopes to be free of the shackles and bondage of Europe and America were ablaze
among the nations of India, Turkey, Arabia, Thailand, Vietnam, and others.
This also inspired a new national movement in China . Amid this stormy
atmosphere of Asia's reawakening, Japan has come to be keenly conscious of the
fact that the stabilization of East Asia is her mission, and that the
emancipation of East Asian nations rests solely on her efforts. .

1 The Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931.  
2 The invasion of China in 1937.

PART III

Viewed from the standpoint of world history, the China Affair is a step toward
the construction of a world of moral principles by Japan. The building tip of
a new order for securing lasting world peace will be attained by the
completion of the China Affair as a steppingstone. In this regard the China
Affair would not and should not end with the mere downfall of the Chiang Kai-
shek regime. Until the evils of European and American influences in East Asia
that have led China astray are eliminated, until Japan's cooperation with New
China as one of the links in the chain of the Greater East Asian Coprosperity
Sphere4 yields satisfactory results, and East Asia and the rest of the world
are united as one on the basis of moral principles, Japan's indefatigable
efforts are sorely needed . . . .

Japan has a political mission to help various regions in the Greater East
Asian Coprosperity Sphere, which are reduced to a state of quasicolony by
Europe and America, and rescue them from their control. Economically, this
country will have to eradicate the evils of their exploitation and then set up
an economic structure for coexistence and coprosperity. Culturally, Japan must
strive to fashion East Asian nations to abandon their following of European
and American culture and to develop Eastern culture for the purpose of
contributing to the creation of a just world. The East has been left to
destruction for the past several hundred years. Its rehabilitation is not an
easy task. It is natural that unusual difficulties attend the establishment of
a new order and the creation of a new culture. Overcoming these difficulties
will do much to help in establishing a world dominated by morality, in which
all nations can co-operate and all people can secure their proper positions. .
. .

It is urgent for Japan to achieve the establishment of a structure of national
unanimity in politics, economy, culture, education, and all other realms of
national life. Defense is absolutely necessary for national existence. A
nation without defense is one that belongs to a dream world. Whether defense
is perfected or not is the scale that measures the nation's existence or ruin.
National growth and development can hardly be expected without perfection of
defense. . . .

With the change of war from a simple military matter to a complicated total
affair, the distinction between ,A,artime and peacetime has been clouded. When
the world was singing peace, a furious economic and cultural war was staged
behind the scenes, among nations. Unless a Country is organized even in time
of peace, so that the total struggle of the state and the people is constantly
concentrated on the objective of the country, and the highest capacity is
displayed, the country is predestined to be defeated before taking to arms. .
. .

3 Chiang Kai-shek (1887 -1975), Successor to Sun Yat-sen as head of the
Nationalist party, was the recognized leader of wartime China, even though the
communists under Mao Zedong controlled large parts of the country.  
4 The Japanese term for their Asian empire.

PART IV

The cardinal objective of strengthening the total war organism is solely to
help the Imperial Throne, and this can be attained by all the people
fulfilling their duty as Subjects through their respective positions in
society. The Soviet Union has world domination through Communism as its
objective, and for this that country follows the policy of using force through
class dictatorship.

Standing on the national principle of blood and soil, Germany aims at
destroying the world domination of the Anglo-Saxon race and the prevailing
condition of pressure brought to bear upon Germany. . . . And for this she has
succeeded in achieving thoroughgoing popular confidence in, and obedience to,
the dictatorship of the Nazis, and is adopting totalitarianism. Italy's ideals
are the restoration of the great Roman Empire, and her policy for realizing
them is not different from that of Germany This country stands on the
dictatorial totalitarianism of the Fascists. . . .

The ideals of Japan are to manifest to the entire world the spirit of her
Empire-founding. . . . There is virtually no country in the world other than
Japan having such a superb and lofty mission bearing world significance. So it
can be said that the construction of a new structure and an armed state is all
so that Japan may revive her proper national standing and return to her
original status of supporting the Throne by the myriad subjects. thereby
perfecting the workings of national strength and leaving no stone unturned in
displaying her total power to the fullest extent.

The Imperial Family is the fountain source of the Japanese nation, and
national and private lives issue from this. In the past, foreign nationals
came to this Country only to enjoy the benevolent rule of the Imperial Family,
an became Japanese Subjects spiritually and by blood. The Imperial virtues are
so great and boundless that all are assimilated into one.

Here is the reason for the present glorious State, in which the Emperor and
his subjects are harmonized into one great unit. That the myriad Subjects with
one mind are glad to be unified in their devotion to tile Throne is tile
substance of the Imperial subjects.

The way of the subjects is to be loyal to the Emperor in disregard of self,
thereby supporting the Imperial Throne coextensive with the Heavens and with
the Earth. All the Rulers of Japan respected their subjects, calling them
"honorable treasures." The subjects are conscious of their being the Imperial
subjects. . . . The great duty of the Japanese people to guard and maintain
the Imperial Throne has lasted to tile present . . . and will last forever and
ever. To serve the Emperor is its key point. Our lives will become sincere and
true when they are offered to the Emperor and the state.

Our own private life is fulfillment of the Way of the Subjects: in other
Words, it is not private, but public, insofar as it is held by the subjects
supporting the Throne.

"As far as the clouds float and as far as the mountains and valleys expand,"
the land is Imperial territory and the people living there are Subjects of the
Emperor. It is not correct to observe, therefore, that private life has
nothing to do with the state and is quite free. Every action has not only a
private side, but has more or less connection with the state. All must be
unified under the Emperor. Herein lies the significance of national life in
Japan.  
   The Legacy of World War I

In the two decades after World War I weapons became more destructive,
nationalism more impassioned, and leaders' ambitions more fantastic. As a
result, the war that began at the end of those decades, World War II, became
the most devastating and destructive war in history. Modern communication and
transportation systems evolved so that generals could plan and execute massive
complicated campaigns such as the German invasions of the Soviet Union in 1941
and the Allies' Normandy invasion in 1944. The airplane, only a curiosity in
World War I, became a major source of destruction in World War II, making
possible the German assault on English cities in 1940, the Japanese attack on
Pearl Harbor in 1941, the around-the-clock bombing of Germany by Britain and
the United States from 1943 to 1945, and the American fire-bombing of Tokyo in
1945.

Only the closing months of the war, however, fully revealed the demonic
possibilities of modern technology and large bureaucratic states. As Allied
armies liberated Europe in the spring of 1945, they found in the Third Reich's
concentration and extermination camps the horrifying results of the Nazi
assault on political enemies, dissidents, prisoners of war, gypsies, Slavs,
and especially Jews. Then on August 6 the United States dropped an atomic bomb
on Hiroshima, Japan. It killed nearly eighty thousand people, seriously
injured twice that number and obliterated three-fifths of the city. On August
9 the United States dropped a second atomic bomb on Nagasaki, aiming to
destroy the Mitsubishi shipyards. It missed its target but destroyed half the
city and killed seventy-five thousand people.

A half century later the names Hiroshima and Nagasaki still evoke nightmares
in a world in which thousands of nuclear warheads exist and many nations have
the capacity to manufacture nuclear weapons. Similarly, the Holocaust, the
Nazi attempt to exterminate the Jews, continues to haunt the world. Racism is
universally condemned, but it shows few signs of abating. Anti-Semitism has
resurfaced in central and eastern Europe, the Serbs have bombed and starved
Bosnian towns and cities in the name of "ethnic cleansing," state boundaries
have been redrawn because of ethnic and religious rivalries, and racial
tensions plague the United States, South Africa, and dozens of other
societies. The Holocaust was not simply an aberration resulting from the
unique prejudices of the Germans or the perverse views of their leaders.
Something much more basic in human nature seems also to have been involved.  
---|---|---  


