**_

Recorded Sound

_**

Individual Projects In Computer Music \- Terry Pender

G6630, call # 97748

email: mando@woof.music.columbia.edu

3 Credits

Mondays 1 to 4

Room 317 Prentis Hall

**

Course Description

**

As music moves into the next millennium, we are continually confronted by the
pervasive use of new music technologies. The world of music is changing
rapidly as these technologies open and close doorways of possibility. An
appreciation of this shifting technological environment is necessary for
active listeners seeking a profound understanding of how music functions in
our society. Furthermore, understanding how these technologies function is now
almost essential for contemporary composers and theorists working to build an
intellectual context for the creation of new musical art.

This class will make use of the new Columbia University Digital Recording
facility for all of the course work.

**Class attendance is mandatory** \- you must attend class, there will be no
make up sessions if you miss a day. Missing three classes will lower your
final grade by one grade level.

Assignments will be due when noted in this syllabus. Assignments received
after the due date will be lowered one grade level. My lecture notes will be
available on the Web. You are responsible for all lecture material and you
will have **4 quizzes** on that material. The dates for the quizzes will be
announced in class one week before the quiz. Most of the listening material
will also be online. Due to current copyright law, most soundfiles are
password protected. The login and password are the same as those for the
online studio signup sheet.

You will be responsible for one **final project** due the last day of class.
You must submit your final project on CD. Late Final Projects will not be
accepted. I will create a compilation CD of all the final projects for
distribution to the class.

**_

TENTATIVE SYLLABUS ****

_**

_**Week 1**_ \- 9/10/01 - Signing up for studio time online, backing up files
to CD, transferring files between MacIntosh and Linux computers. [History of
record production part 1](./recordproduction1.html). The early days of
recording, Les Paul.

**Discussion** \- Individual and group projects.

**Assignment 1 - proposal for final project - proposal due on 9/24/01.**

**Listening**

Les Paul - [Chicken Reel](./sounds/Chicken.mp3), [Lover](./sounds/Lover.mp3)

Bill Haley - [Rock Around The Clock](./sounds/RockAround.mp3)

**_Week 2_** \- 9/17/01- Introduction to Digital mixing and recording through
the Yamaha O1V mixing console with ProTools Mix Plus 24. Importing Samples and
MIDI files into Pro Tools. [Basic Mixing Techniques](BasicMixingMethod.html).
Recording the voice. Burning audio CDs.

**

Assignment 2 - Record several (4-5) vocal samples to be processed and used in
a short text based composition. Assignment due 10/01/01.

**

_**Week 3**_ \- 9/24/01- Introduction to audio editing - copy and paste,
crossfades and Pro Tools audiosuite. Introduction to Peak VST 2.55.

**

Assignment 3 - Create 2 different compositions using the text you recorded
during week 2. One piece should be 37 seconds long, the other must be 2
minutes and 10 seconds long. Assignment due on CD - 10/08/01.

**

**_Week 4_ \- **10/1/01 - [CMC's microphones](CMCMicrophones.html). [Basic mic
technique](mic1.html), condensor vs. dynamic and microphone characteristics.
Working the "[Sweet spot](MicSweetSpot.html)." Using the built-in digital
effects on the Yamaha O1V mixing console, using sends and buses. How to use
Pro Tools Plug-ins.

**Discussion** \- The use of text in an electronic composition.

**Assignment 4 - Record a new group of non-vocal samples. Multi-track Mixing
Project 1 - The Beatles - For No One - mix due 10/15/01.**

**Listening**

Paul Lansky - [Idle Chatter](./sounds/Idle.mp3)

Charles Dodge - [Speech Songs I](./sounds/Dodge.mp3)

Terry Pender - [Recognitions](Recognitions2.mp3)

****

_**Week 5**_ \- 10/08/01-[ Introduction to EQ](Equalization.html), common EQ
settings. [Microphones Technique Part 2](mic2.html), transients, proximity
effect and mic placement.

**Discussion** \- The Power of Place: Spatial placement, sonic sculptures, the
aural environment. Constructing a sense of space: spatial time and placement.
Reverberation and filtering techniques. Creating a mixing strategy. Creating a
style based on timbre.  Microphones and phase

**Listening**

The Beatles - [For No One](./sounds/ForNoOne.mp3), [Dear
Prudence](sounds/DearPrudence.mp3)

**

Assignment 5 - Mixing Project 2 - Beatles - [Dear
Prudence](sounds/DearPrudence.mp3) \- mix due on 10/29/01.

**

_**Week 6**_ \- 10/15/01 - [Stereo microphone technique](stereomic.html).
Mechanical Music Systems move into the digital age. Loop-based music
production interfaces. Creating drum loops and using sample CDs.

**

Assignment 4 - Create 2 compositions using your collection of samples. One
piece will be loop-based, mechanical, rhythmic, and quirky. The second
composition will be a slow, subtle, ambient piece that could use phase
vocoding, comb filtering, reverb, delay, chorus, etc. Once again, assemble the
piece in ProTools. Assignment due 11/12/01.

**

 Both pieces should be 3 minutes long - exactly, so be careful of your timing.
You may have to go back and do more editing of your final mix if it is too
long or two short. 3 minutes exactly for a total of 6 minutes of music. You
must take your final mixes and create a two track CD with those two
compositions.

**_Week 7_** \- 10/22/01 - Using Metasynth to create background textures. [The
History of Record Production, pt. 2](./recordproduction2.html) \- Elvis and
Buddy Holly. [Introduction To Compression](Compressors.html). Common
Compression Settings.

**Listening**

Elvis Presley - [That's All Right](./sounds/ThatsAllRight.mp3), [Jailhouse
Rock](./sounds/JailhouseRock.mp3)

Buddy Holly - [Maybe Baby](./sounds/MaybeBaby.mp3), [That'll Be The
Day](./sounds/ThatllBeTheDay.mp3), [Peggy Sue](./sounds/PeggySue.mp3)

**Assignment 5 - Mixing Project 3 - Beatles -[Fool On The
Hill](sounds/FoolOnHill.mp3) \- mix due 11/19/01.**

**_Week 8_** \- 10/29/01 - New Traditions: Defining an aural sense of space,
creating a virtual sonic world. Introduction to Reverb and spatial effects.
[Phase](Phase.html). Creating a larger than life performance. Using the auto
tune plug-in to correct pitch. Make it bigger, fuller, and louder with EQ,
reverb, doubling, and compression. History of Record Production, pt.3 - Tom
Dowd, Phil Spector, Phil Ramone, Brian Wilson.

**Listening**

** ** The Beach Boys - [Caroline, No](./sounds/CarolineNo.mp3), [God Only
Knows](./sounds/GodOnlyKnows.mp3)

** ** Selections from Tom Dowd and Phil Spector

_**Week 9**_ -11/05/01 - no class - academic holiday.

_**Week 10**_ -11/12/01 - Audio delivery on the Web: Survey of current
techniques, strengths and weaknesses. Downsampling your music to work on the
Web. How to put audio on a Web page - MIDI, Real Audio, Shockwave, Koan and
MP3. History of Record Production , pt.4 - What was going on in England, Joe
Meek, Decca Studios, experimentation, etc.

**Assignment 6** **\- Put all of your compositions or portions of them on your
Web page. Assignment due 11/26/01.**

**Listening**

Brian Eno - The Drop ( Koan project).

**_Week 11_** \- 11/19/01 - Using the Eventide Orville and the Roland Sound
Module.

**Listening**

The Beatles - [Fool On The Hill](sounds/FoolOnHill.mp3), [Hello
Goodbye](sounds/HelloGoodbye.mp3)

**_Week 12_** \- 11/26/01 - Koan Pro - composing algorhythmic music for the
Web. History of Record Production **,** pt.5 - More on England - Trident
Studios, The Manor, Pink Floyd, Midi, digital production ideas.

**Listening**

Mike Oldfield - Tubular Bells

Pink Floyd

Queen - Bohemian Rhapsody

Brian Eno & Robert Fripp ****

**

Assignment 7 - Mixing project 4- The Beatles - [Hello
Goodbye](sounds/HelloGoodbye.mp3) \- Mix due 12/3/01.

**

**_Week 13_ ** -12/03/01 - Flexible time, History of Record Production, pt.6 -
George Martin and the Beatles.

**Listening** \- Selections from the Beatles

****

_**Week 14**_ \- 12/10/01 - Last day of class, **Final projects due**. We will
listen to all final projects in class.



[Back to Recorded Sound homepage.](RecordedSound_home.html)

