![](hius.jpg)  
![](maps.jpg)



[American Passages](http://www.harcourtcollege.com/history/ayers), a website
for the American Passages textbook, includes numerous maps, listed by chapter.

> From: Harcourt College Publishers

**Individual Maps**

[Caribbean in 1763](carib-colony.htm), a map of the Caribbean in 1763 created
by the Woodson Institute's Digital Mapping Project.

> From: [The Carter G. Woodson Institute for Afro-American and African
Studies](http://www.virginia.edu/%7Ewoodson/)

[Modern Caribbean](modern-carib.htm), a map of the modern Caribbean created by
the Woodson Institute's Digital Mapping Project.

> From: [The Carter G. Woodson Institute for Afro-American and African
Studies](http://www.virginia.edu/%7Ewoodson/)

[Outline Map of the Southeast](se.htm), for taking notes.

> From [Scott Foresman](http://www.scottforesman.com/)

[Admission of States and Territorial Acquisition](territories.htm), a map
showing the current boundaries of the United States and their origins with the
dates of admission of states.

> U.S. Bureau of the Census  
>  From: [SunSITE
Alberta](http://sunsite.ualberta.ca/)[](http://sunsite.ualberta.ca/)

[Territorial Growth of the United States, 1775-1900](territorial-growth.htm),
a series of maps of the United States showing dates of territorial
acquisition, dates of territorial organization, and dates of the admission of
states.

> U.S. Bureau of the Census  
>  From: [SunSITE
Alberta](http://sunsite.ualberta.ca/)[](http://sunsite.ualberta.ca/)

[Boundaries of the United
States](http://www.ac.wwu.edu/%7Estephan/48states.html), an animated map
showing the development of national and state boundaries in the United States.

> Created By: [Ed Stephan](http://www.ac.wwu.edu/%7Estephan/), Western
Washington University

[The South in the American
Revolution](http://sunsite.ualberta.ca/pub/Digital_Collections/Mirror/PCL-Map-
Collection/historical/Southern_1778-1781.jpg), 1778-1781, a map of the South
during the American Revolution showing dates and locations of engagements.

> American Military History, United States Army Center of Military History,
1989  
>  From: [SunSITE Alberta](http://sunsite.ualberta.ca/)

[The United States During the Civil War,
1861-1865](http://www.culturalresources.com/images/maps/USAcivilBig.jpg), a
map of the United States showing Union states and territories in one color and
Confederate states in another color.

> The Century Atlas of the World, 1900  
>  From: [Cultural
Resources](%3Cfont%20size%3D%221%22%20face%3D%22Verdana,%20Arial,%20Helvetica,%20sans-
serif%22%3Ehttp://www.culturalresources.com/%3C/font%3E)

[Union Occupation During the Civil War, 1861-1865](occupation.htm), a map
showing Union occupation of the Confederate states during the Civil War.

> American Military History, United States Army Center of Military History,
1989  
>  From: [SunSITE
Alberta](http://sunsite.ualberta.ca/)[](http://sunsite.ualberta.ca/)[](http://sunsite.ualberta.ca/)

[Confederate States of America](csa.jpg), a map showing limits of northern
control and Federal forts never in Confederate control.

> D. W. Meinig, The Shaping of America: A Geographical Perspective on 500
Years of History (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1993), vol. 2,
p. 485.

[The Borderlands and Some Fracture Lines](dissent.jpg), a map showing regions
of dissent in the North and the South during the Civil War.

> D. W. Meinig, The Shaping of America: A Geographical Perspective on 500
Years of History (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1993), vol. 2,
p. 488.

**Map Collections**

  * [The American Revolution and Its Era, 1750-1789](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/gmdhtml/armhtml/armhome.html), a collection by the Library of Congress of maps of North America and the West Indies during the Revolutionary Era searchable by geographic location.
  * [South in the Revolution Maps](http://www.libs.uga.edu/darchive/hargrett/maps/revamer.html), a collection of maps from the University of Georgia. 
  * [Exploring the West from Monticello](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/exhibits/lewis_clark/home.html), a past map exhibit on Lewis and Clark from Alderman Library at the University of Virginia. 
  * [Railroad Maps, 1828-1900](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/gmdhtml/rrhtml/rrhome.html), a collection of railroad maps by the Library of Congress searchable by geographic location. 
  * [Maps of Liberia, 1830-1870](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/gmdhtml/libhtml/libhome.html), a collection by the Library of Congress of maps of a free black settlement in Africa sponsored by the American Colonization Society.
  * [Panoramic Maps Collection, 1847-1929](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/pmhtml/panhome.html), a collection by the Library of Congress of panoramic maps.
  * [Antebellum South Maps](http://www.libs.uga.edu/darchive/hargrett/maps/expand.html), a collection of maps from the University of Georgia. 
  * [Civil War Maps](http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/gmdhtml/cwmhtml/cwmhome.html), a collection of Civil War maps by the Library of Congress searchable by geographic location.
  * [Civil War Maps](http://www.libs.uga.edu/darchive/hargrett/maps/civil.html), a collection of maps from the University of Georgia.

![](nav.jpg)

[[home](home.htm)][[syllabus](syllabus.htm)][[papers](papers.htm)][[contact](contact.htm)][[links](links.htm)][[maps](maps.htm)][[materials](http://toolkit.virginia.edu/2001_Fall_HIUS323-1/materials)][[schedule](http://codd.itc.virginia.edu/cod/list.cgi?semester=20013&mnemonic=hius&cnbr=323&submit=Search)]



_This web site was designed by Susanna Michele Lee for the[Virginia Center for
Digital History](http://www.vcdh.virginia.edu)._

