**![](../../Graphics%20II%201/jahc3top_3.gif)**

**HISTORY INSTRUCTION AND THE INTERNET: A LITERATURE REVIEW**

By

Ann Wynne

Professor and chair of history at Orange Coast College in Costa Mesa, Ca.  
and co-chair of the College Internet Education committee.

A version of this paper was presented at the  
Second Learning on the Internet Conference  
at Santa Rosa Community College in California during April, 1998.

Copyright 1998

[**Abstract**](http://www.mcel.pacificu.edu/jahc/jahcII1/articlesII1/Wynne/WynAbs.HTML)

[**Japanese abstract**](WynneII1.html)

**INDEX**  
.01.  Introduction: Old Wine-New Bottles  
.02. The Research Agenda  
.03. History Instructors On-line  
.04. In Search of "the Learning Community."  
.05. Works Cited



_.01. **Old Wine-New Bottles**_ (Return to Index)

The Internet is a worldwide computer network. It decentralizes and
democratizes access to knowledge bases in ways that used to be impossible.
Likewise, the new social history democratizes pedagogy because it deals with
evidence from a variety of sources to give voice to a range of human endeavors
(Burke 1). The advent of powerful computer-controlled, interactive, multimedia
databases move sources of material culture such as photos, images, sound, and
motion pictures into the foreground in the analysis of this social history
orientation (Wynne, _Using Nonprint_ 30).

The technology of educational delivery has evolved from the oral lecture, an
artifact from the Middle Ages. To lecture derives from the Latin verb "to
read," and reflects the reading of a text by the professor because books were
one-copy handwritten manuscripts. The advent of the Industrial Revolution
required the spread of mass education of workers via the group lecture model
in large bureaucratic schools modeled after the economy of scale of the
factory system (Bates 1). In the early 20th century the teaching-learning
function became organized around behavioral psychology strategies of
measurable objectives. This method came to dominate computer-aided instruction
(CAI) such as programmed learning. Koschmann noted, "CAI applications utilize
a strategy of identifying a specific set of learning goals, decomposing these
goals into a set of simpler component tasks, and, finally, developing a
sequence of activities designed to eventually lead to the achievement of the
original learning objectives (5-6)." Such drill and practice computer programs
emphasize instructional efficiency.

In the early 1970s, the direction of instructional design was influenced by
the cognitive science of artificial intelligence (AI). In this research the
computer program attempts to simulate the role of an intelligent tutor in a
complex knowledge domain. The critical issue for these types of studies is
instructional competence because AI attempts to properly represent expert
knowledge (Koschmann 12).

A newer concept in cognitive learning is labeled constructivism. Both the
historian and the learner construct their own mental models of the past based
on the interaction of new information with their prior knowledge. Learning is
a reflective, generative process best facilitated by active, collaborative
forms of pedagogy (Herman, Aschbacher, and Winter). Challenging, participatory
assignments using a variety of print and graphical non-print sources
accommodates a portfolio of methods to assess ways students acquire and
demonstrate historical understanding by making personal connections to subject
matter (Gardiner).

While constructivist theory stresses the idea of an individual's cognitive
self-regulation, the concept of situated cognition posits the notion that the
concept of mind forms a reciprocal loop from the individual to the wider
social community. Knowledge is situated in a particular learning community and
its culture. Teachers must mimic professional historians and develop
activities akin to historical apprenticeships to induct students into the
historian's distinct academic culture, patterns of discourse, and ways of
conceptualizing the world (Brown, Collins, and Duguid 32). In a teacher-
centered class the source of authority is the instructor and the text. In a
learner-centered environment the instructor's role is turned into a
facilitator, guiding collaborative learning groups. This idea represents
"instruction as enacted practice" (Koshchmann 14).

To some educational researchers, the move toward an apprenticeship model of
history education evidenced a naive assumption about a student's readiness to
learn in terms of possible prerequisite content knowledge and literacy skills
(Wineberg 7). The most recent national assessment of the historical abilities
of American high school students revealed that students evidenced great
difficulties interpreting primary source documents beyond mere superficial
levels (Hawkins _et_. _al_.189)

Similar to history curriculum culture wars of the 1980s, the current
discussion over traditional versus digital history instruction suffers from
useless polarization (Nash, Crabtree, and Dunn). Instead of incremental
matching of a student's learning style to appropriate delivery systems, debate
participants have divided the discourse into the forces of the past against
those of the future (Boettcher 48; Tomei 56). Detractors of Web-based pedagogy
fear a worst case scenario. They predict a marriage between higher education
and technology which permits the deskilling of professors and the
commoditization of education at the sacrifice of its core humanistic values
(Noble 2; Weiss 1). Others compare faculty members who resist technology-based
pedagogy with a modern form of academic priesthood fearful of a loss its
authority to the new networked knowledge revolution (Raschke 16). Such a two-
valued approach to the problem has proved counter-productive. A networked
history class constitutes a kind of historical learning community and culture.
The question to ask is how does historical understanding manifest itself in
such a community and how can we come to know its properties?

.02. _  **The Research Agenda**_ (Return to Index)

Duderstadt stated that the modern university is experiencing pressures from an
accelerating and shifting set of conditions. These include the primacy of
intellectual capital in the new economic order; globalization; the connection
between multimedia technology and the instantaneous exchange of information;
and the replacement of hierarchical institutions such as corporations,
universities, and governments with democratic networked groups. Today
knowledge resides as digitally encoded forms and is universally accessible. It
no longer is "the prerogative of the privileged few in academe" (3).

As experts with core competencies, history educators have reason to resist
change. Academic professions enjoy market niches and partial knowledge
monopolies. Disciplinary specialization reduces the ability to sense important
changes in the wider environment. Although resistance to change may be in part
motivated by self-interest, this resistance may prove beneficial because it
forces people to distinguish between lasting versus transitory knowledge.
Studies find that self-appointed famous experts predict future events with the
same poor track record as average people (Starbuck). Yet the educational
horizon appears crowded at this juncture in history with all sorts of pundits
predicting this and that about the demise of the physical institutions of
higher learning in favor of virtual ones (Noam 4).

One truism sensed by many rank and file history educators and long ignored by
educational researchers was the tacit dimension to the knowledge base for
teaching (Shulman 100). Wynne discovered that these theories-in-action
demonstrated by case studies of expert high school history teachers are
heavily influenced by an entrepreneurial spirit, a form of performance art,
personally situated curricular scripts, and an intuitive sensitivity to
students in affective domains (Wynne, _Keepers_ 308-309). These are hardly a
set of procedural routines easily captured by a computer program. As Kidder
suggested, in the rush to get on the technology bandwagon, institutions may
favor hiring techno-wizards and not instructors who understand students. He
shared the old adage that if you want to teach history, geography, or math to
Mary, it is as important to know Mary as it is to know the subject (223).

The competition to bring courses on-line may be based on exaggerated and
unproven claims of improved learning outcomes. Most educational software
developed in the last 30 years lacks an empirical research base of
longitudinal studies involving large numbers of students (Bork 3). Forsyth
declared that the first generation of Internet courseware was largely hype
consisting of electronic page turning overlaid with some random access search
and indexing features (13). In a survey of current distance learning programs
Pogroszewski discovered that relatively few institutions were successfully
adopting interactive technology tools such as chat rooms, groupware
conferencing programs, and threaded discussion lists to deliver electronic
courses (1). This fact is especially disturbing because cooperative student
learning is the stated preferred pedagogical strength of Web-based instruction
(Khan). As with the dearth of published findings on the nature of exemplary
collegiate history instruction, more research is needed comparing face to face
with virtual forms of classroom communications. (Brooks 88-91). The same
instructor would have to use the same readings, assessments, teach the same
material, and use similar pedagogical methods for both the on-campus and on-
line class history course. Students of fairly similar abilities would have to
be randomly assigned to each course treatment.

It logically follows that this much needed research should aid in a theory
building process to help identify how exemplary history educators at all
levels of schooling successfully adapt both content and pedagogical knowledge
to computer-mediated learning worlds (Gunawardena and Zittle 9). What subject-
specific best practices work in tapping the democratic educational potential
of the World Wide Web? Ethnographic studies should document how teams of
history instructors, instructional designers, and programmers structure highly
complex and critically demanding interactive virtual courseware. This
courseware needs to be beta-tested in on-campus networked computer labs with
students of varying ability levels in order to diagnose students' difficulties
interpreting the program's navigational structure and in mastering course
materials (Bork 5; Draper 1). In the formative and summative evaluation of
these learning objects the educational community must also be sensitive to the
aforementioned skills in the affective domain. For a student of history
examples of such affective skills would be the development of an ability to
sense historical empathy for the problems and solutions of past generations or
a passionate excitement for enjoying history as a grand narrative story
(Wynne, _Keepers_ 166-172). Although research indicates there is no
significant difference in learning outcomes when comparing traditional
classroom instruction to alternative delivery systems, including new media,
educators should not assume that computer-mediated teaching is neutral
(Ehrmann 5). Robinson warned that  "we need to think about the substitution of
cyberspace for shared human space, the difference between interaction with the
computer and interaction with other humans*and how (it) will affect academic
life and all our communities" (23).

.03. _  **History Instructors On-Line**_ (Return to Index)

Far from eliminating the primacy of the instructor, the art of authoring,
teaching, and maintaining a web-based history course may be more time
intensive than teaching lecture courses. Similar feedback has been anecdotally
reported by college history instructors who have pioneered in teaching
distance education Western Civilization courses (Feig; Knox; O'Donnell;
Raiford). This finding is not surprising because the shift towards
constructivist interactive pedagogy demands a steep learning curve involving
not only mastery of Internet-based history resources, but cross-disciplinary
forays into an understanding of computer graphics, course design, cognitive
psychology, human-computer interface issues, and so forth (McCormack and
Jones; Trinkle and Auchter). But at the core of the enterprise are the domain-
specific skills of the history educator. Honey and Hawkins found that teacher
ownership-"the process of generating ideas and strategies that make sense
within the particular circumstances of one's own classroom and curriculum-is a
key to successful use of digital archives " (30). Teachers and students must
be provided with analytic tools to enable them to access digital source
materials in ways that make sense to them. These tools might include story
boards, spreadsheets, image analysis tools, databases, timelines, and
templates, but the relevant content links should be assembled by the
instructor. It is common sense to state that "indexing schemes that work well
for a classroom teacher are likely to be very different from those that
function effectively for a scientist or scholar" (Honey and Hawkins 5).

The history teacher who chooses to experiment with virtual teaching will be
challenged to spend time filtering and evaluating the academic value of
historical websites. In a recent review of such sites, O'Malley and Rosenzweig
discovered that commercial search engines did not expend as much rigor in
ranking history sites as they expended energy pursuing advertising dollars
(4). On the _Yahoo!_ annotated history list a site promoting racist and anti-
semitic historical views was listed side by side with a national women's
history program (4). These reviewers concluded that commercial history web
sites push glitzy, canned treatments of subject matter rather than serious
historical productions. They lamented that politically controversial and
independent history sites will not be able to compete financially with the
commercial ones (13). Emphasis in website reviews should focus on pedagogical
rather than commercial uses such as the site constructed by Dr. Skip Knox of
Boise State University.

The metaphor of a community of scholars was used by Knox to describe his on-
line asynchronous freshman Western Civilization course (2). When Professor
Knox first offered a virtual course, he tried to act as a guide on the side
rather than a sage on the stage. He translated this to mean he was to provide
objectives, course requirements, weekly discussion questions, and then he
would wait for a spontaneous student reaction. Nothing happened. He realized
that without his leadership they were merely "separate individuals who would
separately earn three credits of history and who might by accident have
something to say to one another" (2). The sense of a common educational
community with a common purpose is essential to either a virtual or real
class. For Dr. Knox, his course's list-serv discussion group is the lifeline
of his community of scholars.

He has retooled his Web pedagogy with a writing style he referred to as Web
rhetoric. It is a style of writing both formal and conversational in the
tradition of dramatic storytelling.

Each Web page serves to present a thought, a concept, a scene in a narrative.
The link between one page and the next is a caesura, and the end of a page is
a dramatic moment, rather like a dramatic pause in public speaking. The reader
has to click on the mouse button and wait a moment (but not too long!) for the
next screen to appear. Just as the end of a chapter in a book should propel
the reader forward to the next chapter, so the words at the end of one Web
page should create a little tension and lead the reader forward. (Knox 4)

Knox believes that external hyperlinks should be sparsely used. To him, solid
Web pedagogy involves designing the material in such a manner that the learner
is able to create a quick mental model of the boundaries of the work expected.
There are internal links of sound files to help a student with pronunciation
of difficult terms. Graphics are not embedded in Web lectures because of long
download times. External links are provided under supplemental activities, but
Internet exploration is subordinated to formal study requirements.

Several points of interest can be made. First, the dramatic flair for
storytelling in Knox's Web lectures has been identified in one case study as a
pedagogical characteristic of the teaching style of exemplary history
lecturers (Wineberg and Wilson). Experienced history teachers are not content-
managers of some bureaucratic teacher-proof canned curriculum. They are
managers of meaning and content transformers through their own agencies.
Secondly, Knox's students were socialized by years of teacher-led schooling
and were naturally confused by an open-ended environment. Students as well as
teachers will require retooling of old habits to adapt to a learner-centered
model of instruction. And finally, Knox came to discover what the research
seems to indicate. The most powerful factor is the elegance of the curricular-
instructional design and not the due to the properties of the particular
delivery system (Ehrmann 5).

In a more radical departure from current practice, other practitioners have
begun to experiment with knowledge building communities. Scardamalia and
Bereiter explained this process by distinguishing between first and second
order environments. In the former, learning is asymptotic, evidencing little
progressive complex problem solving in a given domain. In the latter
intentional progress made by one advances the knowledge of the collective
environment (249). This was the original idea behind the invention of
hypertext whereby the ability to think in a non-linear fashion would
enfranchise the creativity of learning communities. Instructors may someday
assess the progressive learning by an individual or a group of learners by
studying the complexity of the structure of their hyperlinked knowledge maps
of a given historical topic. Such complex structures seem to indicate deeper
understanding (Harasim _et_. _al_. 253-253). Detractors of hypertext have
suggested it degrades the reader's search for deep meaning and internal
complexity as in a study of linear text because hypertext reading rewards
superficial thinking in which  "the linkages between texts*now matter rather
than the internal coherence of the texts themselves" (Davison 4).

Feig described a distance learning course in Western Civilization as a
developing knowledge building community. Students worked for extra-credit in
multimedia computer labs researching topical history links. This project
became the basis of two fifty-page Internet books on the ancient and modern
worlds that form the core of Dr. Feig's on-line courses at Foothill Community
College in California. New groups of virtual and campus-bound students
continue to add to the project. She encourages her students to personally
chart changes in their perceptions of organizing and understanding historical
subjects. The instructor builds Web research exercises around the Internet
books into the course requirements and moderates this discussion by posting
weekly conceptual, collaborative position papers to guide her novice Internet
historians. These on-line conferences are held synchronously and students
respond in real time email. Dr. Feig stated in a telephone interview with this
researcher that she has found her own thinking about history has been
transformed by involvement in the project (Feig _Interview_ ). For example,
this is a statement from her on-line syllabus:

Each week, students peruse the Internet through the _Ancient World_ with the
wonderful range of things to think about. Archeology, art, music, theater,
books and writing, language, philosophy, politics, war and peace, life and
living, psychology, sociology, history, geometry, and astronomy and biology,
building and architecture and engineering. Economics and geography, women and
men and children, farming and town planning, rivers and deserts and mountains,
gods and godesses. Birth and death, magic and mystery, aspiration and despair,
palaces and mud huts, the freedom to rule empires, and the chains of
everlasting slavery. Poetry, logic, weaponry, sports, courage and cowardice,
love and hate, and genius. (Feig, _Ancient World_ 1)

These topics most likely serve as a mirror into ways students identify with
aspects of subject matter as well as the signature of the instructor's
philosophical curricular framework. Dr. Feig is a Holocaust history scholar
and has worked with others on worldwide human rights issues. This passionate
commitment to a curricular vision and to dramatization of the curriculum to
teach historical empathy may also be a key to good teaching practices (Wynne,
_Keepers_ 168). Talking head researchers, either in a telecourse, CD-Rom, or a
multimedia Internet history course, do not necessarily understand how to
successfully get material across to undergraduates. Reputational and
evaluative criteria should be established to identify and reward exemplary
history instructors whose wisdom of years of practice prove they do. For any
on-line project to succeed, history educators with core competencies essential
to the production process must be accorded partnership in the enterprise in
terms of intellectual property rights (Robinson 51). As Knox put it,  "The
information is free, but the teaching costs " ( 10).

Another example of a knowledge building community is the American Studies Web
program at the University of Virginia. This project started in 1996. It was
part of a new master's degree in American Studies designed to emphasize the
use of new technologies. Howard reported that it was far more expensive and
time intensive that university administrators, state legislators, and members
of the public had envisioned (1). This electronic village features samples of
graduate and undergraduate work in American Studies; a digital library of
public domain books; and a continuously growing virtual museum exhibit of the
nation's capital. Howard revealed that students expressed the belief that
their projects were bound together in the progression of building the entire
site. The site became a joint stock company, with student pride of ownership
continuing after graduation. The question of intellectual property was now
defined as communal property.

The value of the by-product could only be realized when someone else
expropriated the material, changed it, added to it. It was something that
couldn't be sold, only given away. Title, it seemed, was vested more in the
user than in the producer*It also yielded old-style, low-tech rewards: the
ability to think, to write, and to work intensely on matters of genuine
concern, things that have always seemed to me the central goals of a liberal
education. (Howard 7)

.04.  _**In Search of the "Learning Community" **_(Return to Index)

It seems that this essay has only briefly illustrated both the potentialities
and problems of distance education Web-based history instruction. Education
jargon has picked up the phrase the "learning community" from business
organization literature, but what is needed are real blueprints on how to
achieve this goal within academic domains (Prusak). Research funds need to be
carefully targeted to publish a body of educational case literature of on-line
teacher lore developed by pioneer on-line history educators across levels of
schooling. Or else, to paraphrase a line from _Alice in Wonderland_ , if we
don't know where we are going, then any road will do. History educators need
not buy into the overly optimistic rhetoric of technological determinism, but
neither should they be blinded to the historic learning and research
opportunities that are unfolding in their midst in other university
disciplines. It may contribute to our understanding of what processes guide
how novice history students transition into outstanding ones. History
pedagogues could participate in triangulated research teams of content-area
specialists, cognitive scientists, natural language acquisition experts, and
computer scientists to develop new curricular-instructional models emphasizing
apprentice historical internships along four dimensions: knowledge
integration, authentic real world problems, product-oriented course outcomes,
and collaborative teamwork (Guzdial 3). Because student-teacher and student-
student academic conversations can be electronically archived, researchers
from these fields will begin to build theories of how a student vicariously
learns from peers and how an individual's domain-specific mental schemata
develops by recognizing connections made through reusable historical dialogues
(Human Communication Research Center 1). The model building process could
include inventing expert software to tutor students in historical essay
writing using primary source documents or creating reliable objective tests
based on cognitive mapping of historical concepts.

O"Donnell lamented the absence of a critical climate of discourse beyond the
university walls in the present day worlds of politics, radio, and television
(6). Just as no one confuses Oprah Winfrey with Plato, Dan Rather can't
substitute for Herodotus . This is one reason there may be a cultural divide
between academics and industry representatives who arrive on campus hawking
the latest million dollar technology system. It is the job of teachers to
teach students how to become aware of "massive manipulation by the media and
the information industry" (Nigohosian 7). Teaching has a long history as a
service profession.

This observation reveals a new appreciation of the complexity of human
understanding. Expertise appears to mean far more than having the right
answers or formulating rules and principles to govern professional behavior.
It refers to that sense of familiarity which, grounded in experience and
practice, appeals primarily to senses of intuition and "feel"*.Knowledge, some
theorists are given to say, is inextricably bound up in what it means to be
human--in culture, in moral vision, and in the particular relationships that
frame the learning event*.This insight is again substantiated by a wealth of
new literature in which teachers describe their work as less hierarchical, and
less dependent on a detached and calculating rationality. Rather, knowledge is
bound up in a teacher's sense of pedagogical mission, in his own biography,
and in the special conditions under which he works. (Welker 131-132)

What appears at first view as faculty resistance to technology and change, may
be in reality a resistance to any Faustian bargain that might violate concern
for students. If the old myths and stories about education are not working we
may need new ones. The new ones should focus less on the technical language of
re-engineering and more on new metaphors of what it means to be an educated,
historically aware citizen of the next millenium (Carvin).





.05.  [**Works
Cited**](http://www.mcel.pacificu.edu/jahc/jahcII1/articlesII1/Wynne/WynWorks.HTML)
(Return to Index)

Ann Wynne  
[awynne@occ.cccd.edu](mailto:awynne@occ.cccd.edu)

![](../../Graphics%20II%201/NavBottom.GIF)

