![](hius.jpg)  
![](papers.jpg)



  * due dates for writing assignments
  * sources for writing assignments
  * orientation sessions for Special Collections
  * [writing tips](tips.htm)

**Due Dates for Writing Assignments**

**Due Date** | **Writing Assignment**  
---|---  
October 25 | five-page essay, using the Valley Project's newspapers, censuses,
and other sources before 1861: what difference did slavery make?  
November 1 | five-page essay, using the Valley Project, Secession Editorials
on-line, newspapers on microfilm in Periodicals/Microfilms Room of Alderman,
or manuscripts in Special Collections in Alderman: why secession?  
November 8 | five-page essay, using the Valley Project, newspapers on
microfilm, Civil War Newspapers on-line, or manuscripts in Special
Collections: was the Civil War an internal crisis for the South?  
November 20 | five-page essay, using the Valley Project, HarpWeek on-line, or
newspapers on microfilm: what did Reconstruction change?  
December 6 | final paper of fifteen pages, offering a coherent analysis of the
coming, fighting, and aftermath of the Civil War in the American South  
  
  * Note: All papers are due in section, except paper 4.

**Sources for Writing Assignments**

  * You may choose one of the following sources for each writing assignment. 
  * Remember that you must use at least **two** separate kinds of sources--the Web, the newspapers on microfilm, or the diaries and letters of Special Collections--in two separate brief papers and in the final paper.  

**Orientation Sessions for Special Collections:**

  * Monday, October 8 at 3-3:30
  * Wednesday, October 10 at 9-9:30
  * Thursday, October 11 at 11-11:30
  * Monday, October 15 at 1-1:30
  * Tuesday, October 16 at 10-10:30
  * Wednesday, October 17 at 2-2:30

**What difference did slavery make?  ** (due:  October 25)

> _Valley Project_.   The [Valley of the
Shadow](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/) online archive
contains documents and images about Augusta County, Virginia, and Franklin
County, Pennsylvania, before, during, and after the Civil War.  The archive is
divided into three parts:  the Eve of War, the War Years, and Aftermath.  Use
Part 1 on the [Eve of
War](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/contents.html) for this
paper assignment.  Part 1 includes newspapers, censuses, and other sources
before 1861.  With the newspaper database, you may search [all Valley Project
Civil War newspapers before
1861](http://jefferson.village.Virginia.EDU/vshadow2/news/allnews.html),
individual newspapers ([Valley
Spirit](http://jefferson.village.Virginia.EDU/vshadow2/news/vsnews.html),
[Franklin
Repository](http://jefferson.village.Virginia.EDU/vshadow2/news/frnews.html),
[Staunton
Spectator](http://jefferson.village.Virginia.EDU/vshadow2/news/ssnews.html),
and [Republican
Vindicator](http://jefferson.village.Virginia.EDU/vshadow2/news/rvnews.html))
before 1861, or all newspapers from either
[Augusta](http://jefferson.village.Virginia.EDU/vshadow2/news/au.countynews.html)
or
[Franklin](http://jefferson.village.Virginia.EDU/vshadow2/news/fr.countynews.html)
county before 1861.  The [Public
Records](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/govdoc/public.html)
section of Part 1 includes the
[census](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/govdoc/census.html) of
both counties, [tax
statistics](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/govdoc/tax.html)
for Staunton, Virginia, and Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, and the [free black
registry](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/govdoc/free.html) for
Augusta.  You are encouraged to browse Part 1 of the Valley Project on your
own for the many other sources--including [letters and
diaries](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/letters.html) and
[church
records](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/church.html)\--available
for your paper.

**Why secession?** (due:  November 1)

> _Manuscripts in Special Collections_. Special Collections, located on the
second floor at Alderman Library, has set aside several collections of
manuscripts for your examination. The [list of available
collections](secession.htm) includes the papers of politicians and future
soldiers discussing secession. Special Collections has restricted
[hours](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/speccol/about/operations.html), so plan
ahead for your visit.

> _Valley Project_.   The [Valley of the
Shadow](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/) online archive
contains documents and images about Augusta County, Virginia, and Franklin
County, Pennsylvania, before, during, and after the Civil War.  The archive is
divided into three parts:  the Eve of War, the War Years, and Aftermath.  Use
Part 1 on the [Eve of
War](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/contents.html) for this
paper assignment.  Part 1 includes newspapers, censuses, letters and diaries,
and church records. Concentrate on sources from October 1860 to April 1861.

> _Newspapers on Microfilm_.   Alderman Library owns numerous newspapers on
microfilm from the Civil War period.  Read through a southern newspaper from
October 1860 to April 1861. You may find a newspaper to examine using
Alderman's [Historical U. S. Newspaper](http://fisher.lib.Virginia.EDU/news/)
database, which allows you to locate holdings for a particular state and year.
For example, if you are interested in Virginians' responses to Lincoln's call
for 75,000 troops after the firing on Fort Sumter, you would enter "Virginia"
and "1861" in the "State and Year Range" search form.  To search by newspaper
title, you must use [Virgo](http://virgo.lib.virginia.edu/).  Microfilm
collections and microfilm readers are located in the Periodicals/Microfilms
Room on the third floor of Alderman Library.  Be sure to enter your name on
the sign-in sheet for the microfilm readers.  You are limited to one hour on a
microfilm reader when others are waiting.  Unlike Special Collections, the
Periodicals/Microfilms Room operates on the same
[hours](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/hours/libhoursnf.html) as Alderman
Library.  The morning is the best time to find an available microfilm reader
and receive staff help with your materials.

> _DeBow's Review_. The Making of America archive from the University of
Michigan and Cornell University provides searchable page images of [DeBow's
Review](http://www.hti.umich.edu/m/moajrnl/moajrnl_browse.html), a southern
magazine about "agricultural, commercial, and industrial progress." James D.
B. DeBow began his magazine in New Orleans in 1846, but moved it to
Washington, D. C., in 1853. By the beginning of the Civil War, _DeBow's
Review_ was the most widely circulated southern periodical. Once in the Browse
menu of Making of America, click on  "DeBow's Review." You may browse through
the journal issue by issue or you may search the journal for keywords. For
example, to find articles on secession, click on "boolean search" and enter
"secession OR disunion." You may not simultaneously search by keyword and by
year, so you must scroll down to view the hits from the relevant years. Be
careful not to use the search icon on the navigation bar across the bottom of
the screen, which searches through all the journals in the Making of America
archive and not just _DeBow's Review_.

**Was the Civil War an internal crisis for the South?**   (due: November 8)

> _Manuscripts in Special Collections_. Special Collections, located on the
second floor of Alderman Library, has set aside several collections of
manuscripts on the Civil War for your examination. The [list of available
collections](crisis.htm) includes the papers of soldiers and civilians
discussing the war and their experiences. Special Collections has restricted
[hours](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/speccol/about/operations.html), so plan
ahead for your visit.

> _Valley Project_.   The [Valley of the
Shadow](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/) online archive
contains documents and images about Augusta County, Virginia, and Franklin
County, Pennsylvania, before, during, and after the Civil War.  The archive is
divided into three parts:  the Eve of War, the War Years, and Aftermath.  Use
Part 2 on the War Years for this paper assignment.  Part 2 includes
newspapers, images, battle maps, letters and diaries, soldiers' dossiers,
official records, and student projects.

> _Newspapers on Microfilm_.   Alderman Library owns numerous newspapers on
microfilm from the Civil War period.  You may find a newspaper to examine
using Alderman's [Historical U. S.
Newspaper](http://fisher.lib.Virginia.EDU/news/) database, which allows you to
locate holdings for a particular state and year.  For example, if you are
interested in partisan warfare in Tennessee, you would enter "Tennessee" and
"1861" to "1865" in the "State and Year Range" search form.  To search by
newspaper title, you must use [Virgo](http://virgo.lib.virginia.edu/).
Microfilm collections and microfilm readers are located in the
Periodicals/Microfilms Room on the third floor of Alderman Library.  Be sure
to enter your name on the sign-in sheet for the microfilm reader.   You are
limited to one hour on a microfilm reader when others are waiting.   Unlike
Special Collections, the Periodicals/Microfilms Room operates on the same
[hours](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/hours/libhoursnf.html) as Alderman
Library.   The morning is the best time to find an available microfilm reader
and receive staff help with your materials.

> _Civil War Newspapers_.   [The Civil War:  A Newspaper
Perspective](http://etext.virginia.edu/accessible/civnews/) contains full text
articles from issues of the _New York Herald_ , the _Richmond Enquirer_ , and
the _Charleston Mercury_.   The database includes news articles, eye-witness
accounts of battles and events, official reports from government and military
officials, editorials, advertisements, biographies, battlefield maps, and
illustrations.  You may search the database by keyword or phrase or you may
browse by month and year.

**What did Reconstruction change?**   (due:  November 20)

> _Valley Project_.   The [Valley of the
Shadow](http://jefferson.village.virginia.edu/vshadow2/) online archive
contains documents and images about Augusta County, Virginia, and Franklin
County, Pennsylvania, before, during, and after the Civil War.  The archive is
divided into three parts:  the Eve of War, the War Years, and Aftermath.  Use
Part 3 on the Aftermath for this paper assignment.  Part 3 includes property
claims, veteran records, maps and images, newspapers, letters and diaries, and
public records.

> _HarpWeek_.   [HarpWeek](http://app.harpweek.com/) contains images of
articles from Harper's Weekly for the Civil War Era and Reconstruction (1857
to 1871).  You may search the index of Harper's Weekly or the full text of the
articles or you may browse the issues by date.

> _Newspapers on Microfilm_.   Alderman Library owns numerous newspapers on
microfilm from the Civil War period. Sample the newspapers for the
Reconstruction period. You may find a newspaper to examine using Alderman's
[Historical U. S. Newspaper](http://fisher.lib.Virginia.EDU/news/) database,
which allows you to locate holdings for a particular state and year.  To
search by newspaper title, you must use
[Virgo](http://virgo.lib.virginia.edu/).  Microfilm collections and microfilm
readers are located in the Periodicals/Microfilms Room on the third floor of
Alderman Library.  Be sure to enter your name on the sign-in sheet for the
microfilm reader. You are limited to one hour on a microfilm reader when
others are waiting.   Unlike Special Collections, the Periodicals/Microfilms
Room operates on the same
[hours](http://www.lib.virginia.edu/hours/libhoursnf.html) as Alderman
Library.   The morning is the best time to find an available microfilm reader
and receive staff help with your materials.

**Final Papers.**   (due:  December 6)

![](nav.jpg)

[[home](home.htm)][[syllabus](syllabus.htm)][[papers](papers.htm)][[contact](contact.htm)][[links](links.htm)][[maps](maps.htm)][[materials](http://toolkit.virginia.edu/2001_Fall_HIUS323-1/materials)][[schedule](http://codd.itc.virginia.edu/cod/list.cgi?semester=20013&mnemonic=hius&cnbr=323&submit=Search)]



_This web site was designed by Susanna Michele Lee for the[Virginia Center for
Digital History](http://www.vcdh.virginia.edu)._

