![](hsa 10{newimage11}.gif)**COURSE SYLLABUS **

**HISTORICAL STUDY A 16 **

**THE MAKING OF MODERN SOUTH ASIA **

**PROFESSOR SUGATA BOSE **

  
  

**Time: M and W, 1-2**

**Place: Sever 113**

  
  

****This course seeks to provide the historical depth and the comparative
context in which to understand contemporary South Asia through an historical
inquiry into the making and multiple meanings of modernity. Surveys the
history, culture and political economy of the subcontinent from 1526 to the
present. Covers the period of the Mughal empire, its regional successor
states, British colonial conquest, Indian anti-colonial resistance,
independence and partition, and post-1947 developments. Major topics include
the formation of Indo-Islamic cultures; late pre-colonial state and society;
the transition to colonialism; social, economic and cultural change under
British rule; nationalism before and after Gandhi; regional and religious
identities; decolonization and partition; the character of the post-colonial
era in India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. Significant use of primary written
sources (in English) and multi-media presentations.

  
  

The South Asian subcontinent is home to over a billion people, just over 23%
of humanity. A panoply of languages and religions, the region has a rich and
complex history and culture. Yet for far too long Orientalist stereotypes had
depicted South Asia as composed of certain simple and spurious religious and
cultural essences shorn of all their complexity. New scholarship on the region
provides a more dynamic conception of the peoples of the subcontinent as
historical actors contributing to and engaging with the multiple meanings of
modernity. Historians of South Asia have put forth arguments about many
alternative routes to modernity and the different ways in which the peoples of
the subcontinent dealt with the challenge of the modernity of the European
enlightenment. In particular, the efforts to resist British colonial rule were
balanced by creative attempts to adapt and appropriate as well as question and
reject elements of European modernity. There are vigorous debates about the
historical roots of South Asian nationalism, a key sign of modernity, and the
extent to which it was or was not derivative of Western models.

  
  

Drawing on the newest and most sophisticated multi-disciplinary scholarship in
the field, this course will explore the history, culture and political economy
of what is today a strategically and economically vital part of the world. The
testing of nuclear devices by India and Pakistan in 1998 and the conflict in
Kashmir have made South Asia the recipient of an unaccustomed dose of media
attention. A key development that alters any conception of the international
order at the beginning of the new millennium, nuclearization of South Asia
should not be the only reason for taking this course. The 1990s have witnessed
important shifts in economic policy making it important to assess the history
of the region's articulation to a world economy along with an examination of
its persistent problems of poverty and inequality. Genuine prospects of peace
and cooperative development vie with disputes, especially over Kashmir, making
South Asia a flashpoint of possible nuclear conflagration. Flourishing
electoral democracy co-exists in the region with deep strains of
authoritarianism, often within the same country. The notion of changeless
tradition in South Asia was always a myth, but perhaps never more so than at
the present moment as South Asians negotiate their place in an arena of global
interconnections in the throes of rapid change. The subcontinent is a
fascinating laboratory in which to analyze the unfolding of such themes in
modern history as colonialism, nationalism, partition, the modern state,
economic development, center-region problems and relations between Asia and
the West.

  
  

In the age of the great Mughal empire in India some of the finest literary and
artistic creations took the form of the 'illuminated manuscript' which
juxtaposed brilliant calligraphy with delicate miniature paintings. The
portrayal of the individual in these paintings might give students an insight
into India's pre-colonial modernity on par with any inquiry into the origins
of modern individualism in Europe. The art of the book almost everywhere in
the world had initially combined written pages with visual illustrations. Yet
modern historians seem to have forgotten the art which enabled the
incorporation of 'more than one trajectory of sensory perception and its
active articulation'. (1)

Technological strides made in the late twentieth century afford the
possibility of recovering the aesthetic idiom for the creation of polyphonic
histories that blend modes of perception through vision and sound with
linguistic expression. So this core course, while according the highest value
to the written word, will also aspire to give students a multimedia immersion
in the history and culture of the South Asian subcontinent. It is a challenge
for enquiring minds to sharpen cognitive skills through an interactive
learning process while broadening and deepening their knowledge of the global
historical context in which they live. Located at the point where technology
can be at the service of history and culture, the course through its
multimedia presentations accompanying the lectures and an interactive website
will bring to life through fonts and films, maps and music, visual images and
voices, the rich and complex history of more than a fifth of humanity.

  
  

The basic text which the students will be asked to read ahead of class
meetings will be Sugata Bose and Ayesha Jalal, Modern South Asia: History,
Culture, Political Economy (London and New York, Routledge, 1998; Delhi:
Oxford University Press, 1997 and Lahore: Sang-e-meel, 1998). The book is a
work of synthesis and interpretation covering the entire spectrum of modern
South Asian history - social, cultural, economic and political. It is written
in a lucid and accessible style for a wide audience of students and non-
specialists with an intellectual curiosity about the region. After swiftly
sketching the pre-modern history of the subcontinent, the book concentrates on
the last three centuries from c. 1700 to the present. Selected primary sources
will be made available through a course package and from Stephen Hay (ed.),
Sources of Indian Tradition, Volume 2.

  
  

The course will seek to embellish a lively historical narrative told through
lectures with the perception and articulation of vision and sound. I plan to
use a wide array of photographs, slides, voice tapes, music recordings and
film footage that will evoke and interpret the subcontinent's Indo-Islamic
culture; the character and achievements of the Mughal empire and its regional
successor states; the structure and ideology of the British raj; the meaning
and efficacy of subaltern resistance; the refashioning of social relations
along lines of caste, class, community and gender; the different strands of
anti-colonial nationalism; and the dynamics, as well as the legacies, of the
process of decolonization.

  
  
  
  

**A Week by Week Schedule of Topics and Reading Assignments:**

  
  

Week 1 Wed Sep 19 **Introduction**

![](hsa 10{newimage10}.gif) Sugata Bose and Ayesha Jalal,  Modern South Asia:
History, Culture, Political Economy, pp.1-11

  
  

Week 2 Mon Sep 17 and Wed Sep 19 **Antiquity and Modernity in South Asia**

A. Contested Views of Ancient India

![](hsa 10{newimage9}.gif) B. The Making of Indo-Islamic Cultures

Sugata Bose and Ayesha Jalal,  Modern South Asia: History, Culture, Political
Economy, pp. 12-34 ****

Amartya Sen, 'On Interpreting India's Past' in Sugata Bose and Ayesha Jalal
(eds.),  Nationalism, Democracy and Development: State and Politics in India,
pp. 10-35

Romila Thapar, A History of India, pp. 136-166

Romila Thapar, 'Imagined Religious Communities? Ancient History and the Modern
Search for a Hindu Identity' in Modern Asian Studies, 23, 2 (1989), pp.
209-231

K.N. Chaudhuri, Asia before Europe: Economy and Civilization of the Indian
Ocean from the Rise of Islam to 1750, pp. 42-66

Burton Stein, Vijayanagar, pp. 140-146

  
  

Week 3 Mon Sep 24 and Wed Sep 26 **The Mughal Empire and its Regional
Successors**

![](hsa 10{newimage8}.gif) A. State, Society and Economy, 1526-1707

B. India between Empires: Decline or Decentralization, 1707-c. 1800

Bose  & Jalal, Modern South Asia, pp. 35-56

John F. Richards, The Mughal Empire, pp. 1-5

Muzaffar Alam and S. Subrahmanyam (eds.), The Mughal State, pp. 1-16, 55-71

Susanne Rudolph, 'State Formation in Asia: Prologomenon to a Comparative
Study' in  Journal of Asian Studies, 46, 4 (1987), pp. 731-746

C.A. Bayly, Indian Society and the Making of the British Empire, pp. 7-44

Muzaffar Alam, The Crisis of Empire in Mughal North India, pp. 1-17, 299-318

![](hsa 10{newimage7}.gif)

Week 4 Mon Oct 1 and Wed Oct 3 **The First Century of British Colonial Rule**

A. State, Society and Economy under Company Raj, 1757-1857

B. Reform, Resistance and the Revolt of 1857

Bose  & Jalal, Modern South Asia, pp. 57-96

Bayly, Indian Society, pp. 45-78, 136-206

Sugata Bose (ed.), South Asia and World Capitalism, pp. 1-39

Ranajit Guha and Gayatri Spivak (eds.), Selected Subaltern Studies, pp. 45-86

*Stephen Hay (ed.), Sources of Indian Tradition Vol. 2, pp. 15-44, 177-180

Sugata Bose, Peasant Labour and Colonial Capital, pp. 38-52, 140-153

Satyajit Ray, Shatrunj ke Khilari (The Chess Players) [film]

  
  

Mon Oct 8 Columbus Day Holiday

Week 5 and 6 Wed Oct 10 and Mon Oct15 **Colonialism and Nationalism,
1858-World War I**

![](hsa 10{newimage6}.gif) A. State, Economy and Society at the High Noon of
Colonialism

B. Elites, Subalterns and Swadeshi Nationalism

Bose  & Jalal, Modern South Asia, pp. 97-125

Sumit Sarkar, Modern India, 1885-1947, pp. 24-42, 87-100

Sugata Bose 'Nation as Mother' in Bose & Jalal (eds.),  Nationalism, Democracy
and Development, pp. 50-75

Partha Chatterjee, The Nation and its Fragments, pp. 3-13

*Hay, Sources, pp. 72-83, 120-127,130-172, 180-195

Bose (ed.), Credit, Markets and the Agrarian Economy of Colonial India, pp.
1-28

Ray, Charulata [film]

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

Week 6 and 7 Wed Oct 17 and (after the midterm on Mon Oct 22) Wed Oct 24
**Colonialism, Nationalism and 'Communalism', 1919-1939**

![](hsa 10{newimage5}.gif) A. State, Economy and Society under Late
Colonialism

B. The Relationship between Nationalism and 'Communalism'

Bose  & Jalal, Modern South Asia, pp. 126-155

David Washbrook, 'The Rhetoric of Democracy and Development in Late Colonial
India' in Bose & Jalal (eds.), Nationalism, Democracy and Development, pp.
36-49

Bose (ed.), South Asia and World Capitalism, pp. 305-324 (article by
Rothermund)

Ayesha Jalal, 'Exploding Communalism: the Politics of Muslim Identity in South
Asia' in Bose & Jalal (eds.) Nationalism, Democracy and Development, pp.
76-103

*Hay, Sources, pp. 194-204, 243-288, 296-333

Shahid Amin, Event, Metaphor, Memory, pp. 1-6

*Jawaharlal Nehru, Towards Freedom, pp. 59-64

*Bose & Bose (eds.), The Essential Writings of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose, pp. 197-219

Week 7 Mon Oct 22 MIDTERM EXAM (no section this week)

  
  

Week 8 Mon Oct 29 and Wed Oct 21 **War and Decolonization, 1939-47**

![](hsa 10{newimage4}.gif) A. Economic Crisis and Famine

B. The Quit India and Azad Hind Movements

Bose  & Jalal, Modern South Asia, pp. 156-164

Amartya Sen, Poverty and Famines, pp. 52-83

Sugata Bose, 'Starvation amidst Plenty' in Modern Asian Studies, 1990, pp.
699-727

Chatterjee, Nationalist Thought, pp. 131-162

Leonard Gordon, Brothers against the Raj, pp. 548-588

Bose, Rebels against the Raj [film]

  
  

Week 9 and 10 Mon Nov 5, Wed Nov 7 (Mon Nov 12 Veterans' Day Holiday) and Wed
Nov 14 **Nation, Reason and Religion: Independence, Partition and Pakistan**

![](hsa 10{newimage3}.gif) A. The Politics of Union and Partition

B. The Meanings and Memories of 1947

Bose  & Jalal, Modern South Asia, pp. 165-200

**** Ayesha Jalal, Self and Sovereignty, pp. 386-422

*Stephen Hay, Sources, pp. 205-242

Mushirul Hasan (ed.), India's Partition, pp. 102-132

Sugata Bose, 'Nation, Reason and Religion: India's Independence in
International Perspective' in Economic and Political Weekly, 1 August, 1998,
pp. 2090-2097

Ayesha Jalal, 'Nation, Reason and Religion: the Punjab's Role in the Partition
of India' in  Economic and Political Weekly, pp. 2183-2190

Veena Das, Critical Events: An Anthropological Perspective on Modern India,
55-83

Saadat Hasan Manto, Black Milk [short stories]

  
  

![](hsa 10{newimage2}.gif)Week 11 Mon Nov 19 and Wed Nov 21 **Post-Colonial
South Asia: States and Politics, 1947-1971**

  
  

Bose  & Jalal, Modern South Asia, pp. 201-219

Atul Kohli (ed.), India's Democracy, pp. 3-17

Ayesha Jalal, The State of Martial Rule: the Origins of Pakistan's Political
Economy of Defence, pp. 49-93

Ian Talbot, Pakistan: A Modern History, pp. 1-20

  
  

Week 12 Mon Nov 26 and Wed Nov 28 **Post-Colonial South Asia: States and
Politics,**

**1971-2000**

  
  

![](hsa 10{newimage1}.gif) Bose  & Jalal, Modern South Asia, pp. 220-238

Sumantra Bose, 'Hindu Nationalism and the Crisis of the Indian State' in Bose
& Jalal, Nationalism, Democracy and Development, pp. 104-164

Rounaq Jahan, Bangladesh Politics, pp. 65-80

Bose, Mandir, Masjid, Mandal and Marx [film]

  
  

****Week 13 Mon Dec 3 **The Political Economy of Development and Economic
Reforms**

  
  

Jean Dreze and Amartya Sen,  India: Economic Development and Social
Opportunity, pp. 1-56, 179-204

Jayati Ghosh, 'Development Strategy in India' & Pranab Bardhan, 'The State
against Society: the Great Divide in Indian Social Science Discourse' in Bose
& Jalal (eds.), Nationalism, Democracy and Development, pp. 165-195

Sugata Bose, 'Instruments and Idioms of Colonial and National Development' in
Fred Cooper and Randall Packard (eds.), International Development and the
Social Sciences, pp. 45-60

Francine Frankel, India's Political Economy, pp. 3-27

  
  

****Week 13 and 14 Wed Dec 5 and Mon Dec 10 **Region versus Center, Nations
against States**

  
  

Jalal,  Democracy and Authoritarianism, pp. 157-200

Khan, Islam, Politics and the State, pp. 229-246 ****

Rounaq Jahan,  Pakistan: Failure in National Integration, pp. 185-204

Alastair Lamb, Kashmir: A Disputed Legacy, pp. 322-343

Balraj Puri, Kashmir: Towards Insurgency, pp. 54-69

Sumantra Bose, The Challenge in Kashmir, pp. 30-53

  
  

Week 14 Wed Dec 12 **South Asian History at the Turn of the Millennium**

  
  

![](hsa 10{newimage0}.gif) Bose  & Jalal, Modern South Asia, pp. 239-244

  
  

**Course Requirements** : An in-class midterm and a final examination. The
midterm exam will be held in Week 7 on Monday October 22. There will be no
section meeting that week. Fewer readings have been assigned for Week 7 as
students will be expected to review earlier readings. The final exam is
scheduled for Wednesday January 16.

  
  

A set of one-page papers for section discussion. Two short (5 page) papers due
the fifth (Wed Oct 10) and tenth week (Wed Nov 14) of class. The first short
paper may address a major debate in history or historiography, for example,
the merits and weaknesses of the 'subaltern studies' approach. The second
short paper could be a review of a literary work, e.g. Kalpana Bardhan (ed.
and trs.), Of Women, Outcastes, Peasants and Rebels (short stories) or Saadat
Hasan Manto, Black Milk (short stories set in the context of the partition).
These are just suggestions. Students will have considerable flexibility in
choosing their exact topics in consultation with me and section leaders.

  
  

In addition to the two collections of short stories mentioned above, the
following books in paperback, to be extensively used, have been ordered at the
Harvard Coop: Sugata Bose and Ayesha Jalal, Modern South Asia: History,
Culture, Political Economy; C.A. Bayly, Indian Society and the Making of the
British Empire; Sugata Bose and Ayesha Jalal (eds.), Nationalism, Democracy
and Development: State and Politics in India and Stephen Hay (ed.), Sources of
Indian Tradition Vol. 2. All other readings have been put on reserve in Lamont
and Hilles Libraries and are also available for purchase in the form of a
Sourcebook compiled by the Core Office.

Grade distribution will be as follows: attendance, section papers and
discussion 10%; first short paper 10%; midterm exam 25%; second short paper
15%; final exam 40%.

  
  

**Office Hours** : My office hours will be on Mondays 2.15-3.45 and Wednesdays
2.15-3.45 in Robinson L-01

**Sections** : The purpose of the sections will be to encourage critical
reading of the assignments and enable students to take informed positions in
major debates that animate modern South Asian history and historiography. The
section leaders are Neeti Belliappa (head), Eric Beverley and Hussein Rashid.
The section times are Mondays 3-4 (HR), Tuesdays 3-4 (EB), Wednesdays 3-4 (HR)
and Thursdays 3-4 (NB). Selected primary materials available in English will
be discussed and their significance analyzed. Section meetings will also be
used to enable students to elaborate on the points they make in the one-page
response papers.

1\.  On 'Methods of Polyphonic History' see K.N. Chaudhuri, From the Atlantic
to the Arabian Sea (Firenze: Schifanoia, 1995), pp. 15-18.

