  **THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY**  
**  DEPARTMENT OF SOCIOLOGY**  
**  Autumn 1998**  
**  Sociology   666:  POLITICAL SOCIOLOGY Call # 16541-1**  
**  Ives Hall 219   MW 1:30-3:18**  
**  Professor J. Craig Jenkins**  
**  Office:  Bricker 394**  
**  Phone:  292-1411 or 292-6681 (messages)**  
**  Office Hours:  MW 3:30-5:00 or by appointment**  
**  Email:  jenkins.12@osu.edu**

  

COURSE OBJECTIVES

This course surveys contemporary research and theory in political sociology.
Political sociology is the study of organized power in social life.   Because
of the centrality of the state in contemporary societies, our analysis centers
on the struggle for control over the state.  We begin with a discussion of
general approaches to the study of politics and the state (pluralist, elitist,
marxist and state-centered) and how these apply to the political economy of
the U.S. and public policy formation.  We then turn to a comparative cross-
national examination of the politics of social protest movements, ethnic
conflicts, democratization and the political economy of development.  In
addition to a general overview of theory and research, students are expected
to develop independent research projects and experience in professional
presentations .

**_STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES:_**

This material is available in alternative formats upon request.  Please
contact Robyn Hart, Undergraduate Academic Counselor, Dept. of Sociology, 302
Bricker Hall, 292-1175.  Students with disabilities are responsible for making
their needs known, and seeking the available assistance in a timely manner.

**_COURSE REQUIREMENTS_**

Course grading will be based on the following requirements.

 1.  _Class Participation:  _  Students are expected to come to class prepared to discuss all of the assigned readings for each session.  All students will be responsible for a team presentation on one of the assigned research articles in the reading packet plus a 5 page written critique of it.  Students will select their research article on the 2nd class meeting.  (20 percent of course grade)   
2.  _  Term Paper Presentation:_   Only graduate students will be required to do a 10-minute  oral presentation at the end of the quarter on their term paper project.  Undergraduates may elect to do this as extra credit.  You should use an overhead or other visual aid to overview your project.  Emphasize its main original contribution, not a review of details or literature and practice multiple time before class to gauge the time available.   Time is scarce so practice your presentation multiple times before class!!.   (For graduate students, this will factor into the participation grade; for undergraduates, it will be treated as extra credit).   
3.  _Midterm Exam_.   The midterm exam will be an essay exam of 3-5 questions drawn from a list covering required readings and class discussion in the first half of the course.  This will be a take-home exam with a 4 hour time limit (25 percent of course grade).   
3\. _Term Paper:_   Each student will write 8-10 page term paper on a topic of
her/his choosing to be approved by the instructor.  A 1/2-page outline and
bibliography of at least 10 items is due on Wednesday October 30.  This paper
could be a literature review of a specific topic or theory, a research
prospectus statement or an original piece of research.   Suggestions for
literature reviews are listed below.  (30 percent of course grade).  
4.   _Final Exam_ :  The final will be an essay exam identical to the midterm but focused on the materials in the last half of the course.  Graduating seniors will turn in their essays by Monday December 2 5 PM (25 percent of course grade).   
    
**_BOOKS_**

All students should purchase the following books at University Bookstore, SBX,
Longs and Buckeye Books. All are available in paperback.

G. William Domhoff _Who Rules America_?   (3rd edition)   Mayfield  1998\.  
Sidney Tarrow _Power in Movement_   (2nd edition).  Cambridge University Press
1998.  
Philip McMichael  _Development and Social Change_. Pine Forge Press 1996.  
Ted Robert Gurr and Barbara Harff  _Ethnic Conflicts in World Politics_.
Westview 1994.  
Georg Sorensen _Democracy and Democratization   _(2nd edition).  Westview
1998.  
  ** __**

**_READING PACKET_**   (Marked "C" in Course Readings Below)

These are available in a course pack at Copez.  They are professional research
papers eligible for a critical review (see instructions below).  They have
been selected because they exemplify original theoretical development and
analysis of original data in a way that has serve as a paradigm for subsequent
research.

Useem, Michael   1982   "Classwide Rationality and the Politics of Managers
and Directors of Large  Corporations in the  
    United States and Great Britain" _Administrative Science Quarterly_ 27:199- 226.   
Jacobs, David.  1988.   "Corporate Economic Power and the State: A
Longitudinal Assessment of Two  Explanations"  
    _American Journal of Sociology_   93:852-81.   
Hicks, Alexander and Joya Misra.  1993.  "Political Resources and the Growth
of Welfare in Affluent  Capitalist Democracies,  
    1960-1982."  _American Journal of Sociology_ 99:668-710.   
Jenkins, J. Craig and Charles Perrow  1977  "Insurgency of the Powerless:
Farm Worker Movements in  the United States,  
    1946-1972"  _American Sociological Review   _ 42:249-268.   
Amenta, Edwin, Bruce G. Carruthers and Yvonne Zylan  1992  "A Hero for the
Aged?  The Townsend  Movement, the  
        Political Mediation Model and U.S. Old Age Policy, 1934-1950"  _American   Journal of Sociology  _98:308-339   
Snyder, David and Edward M. Kick. 1979.  "Structural Position in the World
System and Economic  Growth, 1955-1970"  
    _American Journal of Sociology_   84:1096-1126.   
Olzak, Susan. 1989.  "Labor Unrest, Immigration and Ethnic Conflict in Urban
America, 1880-1920."   _American Journal of_  
    _Sociology  _ 1303-33.   
Beck, E. M. and Stewart Tolnay.  1990.  "The Killing Fields of the Deep South:
The Market for Cotton  and the Lynching of  
    Blacks, 1882-1930"  _American Sociological Review_.   55:526-540.   
Higley, John and Michael Burton. 1989.   "The Elite Variable in Democratic
Transitions and   Breakdowns."   _American_  
    _Sociological Review_   54:17-42   
Crenshaw, Edward.  1996.  "Democracy and Demographic Inheritance"  _American
Sociological Review   _ 60:702-718.

**_COURSE SCHEDULE AND READINGS_**

Sept  23        Introduction  
Sept  28        Paradigms in Political Sociology:
Domhoff Ch 1-3  
                     Pluralist, Elite, Class and State-Centered Theories   
Sept  30        Elites and Policy Making
Domhoff Chs.  4 & 7  
                                                                                                        Useem (C)   
Oct     5        Elites and the Political System
Domhoff Chs  5, 6 & 8  
                                                                                                        Jacobs (C)   
                                                                                                        Hicks and Mishra (C)   
Oct     7        Theories of Social Protest:  Relative Deprivation
Tarrow Intro and Chs. 1 & 2  
                     Resource Mobilization & Political Process Theories   
Oct   12        The Development of the "Social Movement"
Tarrow Chs. 3-4  
Oct   14        Political Opportunities and Collective Action
Tarrow Chs. 5-8  
                                                                                                          Jenkins & Perrow (C)   
Oct   19        Protest Cycles & Policy Outcomes
Tarrow Chs. 9 & 10  
                    Amenta, Carruthers & Zylan (C)   
Oct.  21       Transnational Movements
Tarrow Chs. 11 & Conclusion

********          Take-Home Midterm Exam Due Start of Class Monday  Oct 26
*************

Oct.   26        What Is Development?
Modernization,  McMichael Intro, Chs. 1-3  
                      Dependency and World System Theories  Snyder & Kick (C) 

********       Term Paper Outline Due Start of Class Wednesday October 30
*************

Oct    28        The Development/Globalization Projects
McMichael Chs. 3-6  
Nov     2        Development Policies & Response
McMichael Chs. 7 & 8  
Nov     4        Patterns of Ethnic Conflict
Gurr & Harff Chs. 1-4  
Nov.    9        Theories of Ethnic Conflict:  Relative Deprivation,
Gurr & Harff Chs. 5-8  
                      Mobilization and International Explanations                   Olzak (C)   
                                                                                                          Beck and Tolnay (C)   
Nov.   11    Veterans Day Holiday !!!  
Nov.   16    Early Warning & Preventive Diplomacy?
Gurr & Harff  Ch.  9  
Nov.   18    What is Democracy? Democratization?
Sorensen Intro & Chs. 1-2  
                                                                                                          Higley and Burton (C)   
Nov.   23    Democracy & Development
Sorensen  Chs. 3-4  
                                                                                                         Crenshaw (C)   
Nov    25    The Future of Democratization
Sorensen  Ch. 5

*********       Term Paper Due Classtime Monday November 30
****************************

Nov    30    Term Paper Presentations  
Dec      2     Term Paper Presentations ****

*********      Take-Home Final Exam  due 5 pm Wednesday December 9 at 390
Bricker   ***********

**PROFESSIONAL RESEARCH PAPER CRITIQUES**

Each student will write a 5 page critical review of one of the professional
research papers in the reading packet.  This critique should address the
following questions:  
1)  What is the theoretical vantage point of the author?  How does this guide
the selection of problem, specific hypotheses and method?  
2)   What are the major hypotheses being advanced in the paper?  How well are
these borne out in the evidence presented?  What improvements in the
hypotheses and methods used can you recommend?  
3)   How might critics from a different theoretical orientation evaluate this
work?

You will also be a member of a 2-3 person team which will lead a 20 minute
class discussion of this paper.  To prepare, identify the main arguments and
distinctive points of the work and be able to locate it in terms of other
course readings and discussions.  Handouts or transparencies are encouraged.

**  TERM PAPER ASSIGNMENT**

You can develop one of three types of term papers:  1) a literature review of
an important problem in the study of political sociology that critically
assessing existing ideas and evidence for these; 2) a research prospectus that
defines an important problem for study and outlines a method for studying this
problem (i.e. a research design statement); or 3) a new analysis of some
problem based on new evidence that you or others have collected that might
turn into a publishable article or part of a larger project  such as a
dissertation or thesis.  Since the objectives of each of different, the
criteria for grading will differ.  The best literature reviews summarize
current theory and research on some problem and provide a critical assessment
of the limits of existing work.  You should have an significant bibliography
(10-20 items) based on journal articles as well as monographs.  Use the
Sociofile Index available through the Main Library Reference Desk or through
Gopher via Homenet.   In your essay, be certain to explain the limits of
existing work and how these might be addressed.  A research prospectus
statement defines a problem as important for study, puts it in the framework
of existing literature and provides a research design for studying this
problem.   The strength of the problem definition as well as the design are
central.   An original research piece uses new evidence to evaluate a problem.
This could include original data collection or secondary use of existing data
(e.g. Gurr's Minorities at Risk data in the appendix of his book).  A listing
of cross-national data sets maintained by the Sociology Research Lab (3rd
floor Bricker) is available on request.  For citations, please use standard
sociological citation method, i.e.:

>  Domhoff, G. William. 1996.  State Autonomy or Class Dominance?   NY:
DeGruyter.  
>  Hooks, Gregory. 1990.  "The Rise of the Pentagon and U.S. State Spending."
_American Journal   of Sociology_

