![Professor Alex Deschamps](images/alex2.gif)  
---  
[Home](index.html) | [My Info](afdaboutme.html) | [Courses
Info](afdcourses.html) | [Class Notes](afdnotes.html) | [Links](afdlinks.html)
| [PDA Info](afdpda.html)  
![------------------------------------------------------------](images/spacer.gif)  
---  
[Women's Studies](http://www.umass.edu/wost), 208 Bartlett, [University of
Massachusetts](http://www.umass.edu), Amherst, MA. 01003  
Office: Bartlett 7B ![*](images/dot_black.gif) Hours: Mon 1:00-2:30pm & Wed
11:00am-12:30pm or by appointment  
Telephone: (413) 545-1958 ![*](images/dot_black.gif) Fax: (413) 545-1500
![*](images/dot_black.gif) Email:
[afd@wost.umass.edu](mailto:afd@wost.umass.edu)  
---  
![-------------------------------------------------------------------](images/spacer.gif)  
---  
**Wost 187H** |  **Introduction to Women's Studies [Orchard Hill]** |  **Fall
2002**  
---|---|---  
  | Tu & Th: 09:30-10:45am at Field 104 |  
![-------------------------------------------------------------------](images/spacer.gif)  
---  
  
**Course Description**

Placing women's experiences at the center of interpretation, this class
introduces basic concepts and perspectives in Women's Studies. Focusing on
historical and contemporary issues for women, we will examine women's lives
with a particular emphasis on the ways in which gender interacts with race,
class, sexual orientation, ethnicity and other socio-cultural factors. The
central aim is to foster critical reading and thinking about women's lives and
the ways in which the interlocking systems of colonialism, racism, sexism,
ethnocentrism and heterosexism shape women's and men's lives; and how women
have resisted these inequalities, worked to create new systems of change and
engage in national and global practical transformational politics.

**Course Requirements**

  * Reading assignments must be completed by the class period for which they were assigned.
  * In addition to fulfilling a general education requirement (IU), this course is an HONORS 4 Credit course and particular attention will be paid to your writing (content, style, mechanics and presentation). If you have writing problems, let me know so that I can be of help to you.
  * You are responsible for knowing when assignments are due and handing them in on time. Due dates of assignments are in this syllabus.
  * Regular attendance and occasional in class exercises. Three unexcused absences will result in your final grade being marked down one full letter.
  * Discussions will provide the opportunity to talk critically and analyze issues and topics. You will be expected to have completed and thought about all of the readings for each class.

**Written Assignments and Exams**

  * Occasional in-class assignments will be part of the attendance and participation grade. (20%)
  * In-Class examination. Thursday October 03, 2002. (20%)
  * Take home examination. Due Tuesday October 15, 2002. (20%)
  * One 3-5 page written assignment based on the readings, lectures, class discussions and other presentations. Topics and detailed guidelines will be given out. Papers must be typewritten and double-spaced. Papers must be handed in on due dates. Late papers will be graded down. Due Tuesday November 05, 2002. (20%)
  * An out of class assignment. Due no later than Tuesday November 19, 2002. Guidelines will be given. (10%)
  * Learning Communities Project. Guidelines will be given. Summaries due December 12, 2002.(15%)

**Academic Honesty**

My assumption is that students are generally honest. Necessary action, in
compliance with official guidelines, will be taken against students who commit
academic dishonesty. Please read and familiarize yourselves with the
University Policy Statement on Academic Honesty, Course Requirements,
Attendance, Religious Observances, and other relevant policies, in the
Undergraduate Rights and Responsibilities Booklet. Caucus with me about
resources for learning needs.

**Required Books**

Howard Zinn:

    A People's History Of The United States 1492-Present. (Twentieth Anniversary Edition). New York. Harper Perennial, 2001.
Arlene Avakian & Alexandrina Deschamps:

    A Transdisciplinary Introduction to Women's Studies. ISBN: 0-7872-9375-X. Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company, 2002.

Books are available at Food For Thought Bookshop, North Pleasant Street,
Amherst and also on reserve in the library.

**Topics and Questions to Be Covered for the Semester**

**The Social Construction of Gender, Race, Class & Sexuality, Diversity &
Difference**

What is "Women's Studies" and who are the "women"? How is "woman" defined?
Does "objective knowledge" exist? In what ways do social, cultural, political
and economic forces determine knowledge? Is there a "woman's perspective"? If
there is, how do race, class and sexual orientation impact that perspective?
How are women alike? How do women differ? Does the common experience of
patriarchy unite us across our differences? As a concept, oppression has had a
long history in contemporary feminist scholarship. What does it mean? Why is
it important to think about it? What are some of the tensions today? Will the
regular methods of scholarship and science be adequate for the task of
understanding the diversity between women? Will new tools be necessary?
Furthermore, how do we encourage women to relate at the points of their
"different similarities" to promote growth, creativity, and social change?

   What is the ideological foundation of the United States? What is the
importance of history? How were European American women's lives shaped by the
social, legal, religious and economic forces of the time? How has our
knowledge of American Indian women been limited? What is the economic
foundation of slavery? What was the experience of African American women in
slavery? What were the economic reasons for imprisoning Japanese Americans in
concentration camps? How did this affect the experiences of Asian American
women?

**Social & Political Movements: Abolition & Women's Rights, The Civil Rights
Movement, The Second & Third Waves Of Feminism**

What is abolition? Who were the people involved in the movement? What were the
roles of men and women of different races? Was gender an issue? What was the
relationship between African American and European women in the abolition
movement and the women's rights movement? What were the economic and political
bases for lynching? How has lynching impacted and continues to impact gender
and race relations? How do societal attitudes towards African American men and
caucasian women contribute to the justification for lynching? What were the
goals of the civil rights Movement (CRM)? What were the Jim Crow laws? What
was the role of women in the CRM? What did the CRM accomplish? Why was the CRM
seen as the "Borning Struggle"? How was the women's movement of the late 1960s
and early 1970s shaped by social expectations for women? What can we learn
from the successes and mistakes of the movement? What still needs to be done?
Where shall we put our greatest efforts? What should be our priorities? How do
we revitalize the energy, optimism, and power of the women's movement, and
where shall we take it into the future?

**Institutions that Shape Women's Lives-Work**

What is the nature of women's work? How is it related to societal expectations
for women? How do race and class impact on definitions of women's work? Has
the work that women have traditionally done been considered work? Where are
women in the economy? Do education, individual talents, skills and effort
determine women's placement in the work force? Are there still obstacles to
women in the work force? What are the consequences and remedial strategies?

**Institutions that Shape Women's Lives-The Family, Gender, Violence &
Recurring Issues**

How is family defined? What are cross-cultural and historical differences in
family forms? What are the roles of women in the family? What has been and is
the role of the state in maintaining family systems? How does racism shape
family life? How do economic, political, and social pressures impact families?
What roles do racism and sexism play in shaping public policy on the family?
What are the strategies women of color have developed to ensure survival of
their families? Who is poor? What is the connection between women and poverty?
Why are single mothers usually worse off? Who are these single mothers? What's
wrong with current poverty policies and what's the unfinished agenda? What is
heterosexism and how does it impact on same sex families? How are definitions
of family related to cultural assumptions about sexuality, race, gender and
class?

   What is the societal basis of violence against women? Why do women stay
with men who hurt them? What significant changes have the women's movement
made to abused girls and women? Women in this culture live with the reality of
rape, what are cultural myths about rape? What is the relationship between
rape and cultural definitions of aggressive sexuality for males and passivity
for females? How has the activism of feminists affected treatment of rape
victims by police and the judicial system?

**Institutions that Shape Women's Lives-Health Care, Media, Public Policy,
Legal System**

What is the basis of our health care system? Who does it benefit? What are the
ways in which gender, race and class impact the quality and kind of health
care received? What changes in the health care system have resulted from the
efforts of women activists? What are the major contemporary issues with our
Health Care system? Why does abortion continue to be a major issue for women?
Has abortion always been illegal? What are the consequences of denying women
access to abortion? What do we mean by reproductive health and reproductive
rights? Is sterilization justified? What are the connections between
sterilization abuse and population control nationally and globally?

**Resistance, Alliance and Coalition Building: Platforms for Action**

What is resistance? What are the ways in which resistance is impacted by
gender, race, class, age, disability and sexuality? How do we continue to work
for change that can begin to reverse the dynamic of patriarchal domination by
challenging and transforming the way in which we look at ourselves in relation
to each other and to the world? What is consciousness raising? How do we raise
awareness and understanding, our own and others, for social action and change?

![-------------------------------------------------------------------](images/spacer.gif)  
---  
![\[Top\]](images/top_arrow.gif) [[Home](index.html)] [[My
Info](afdaboutme.html)] [[Courses Info](afdcourses.html)] [[Class
Notes](afdnotes.html)] [[Links](afdlinks.html)] [[PDA Info](afdpda.html)]  
![](images/spacer.gif)  
Website design and maintenance by [Michael
Deschamps](mailto:msdez84@fastmail.fm)  
![Msdez Creations](images/msdez.gif)  
Copyright (C) 2002  
[![Valid XHTML1.0](images/vh10.gif)](http://validator.w3.org/check/referer)  
Last Updated: August 29, 2002

