Dr. Karla B. Hackstaff  
Office: SBS 339  
Soc. 599; Fall 1998  
Time: Wed. 6:00-8:30pm  
Office Hours: TTh 3:45-5:00 pm  
Th 12:30-1:00 pm or by appt.  
Office Phone: 523-2128  
Classroom: SBS 210  

#  SOCIOLOGY 599 -- SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GENDER

**_Description of the Course_ :** This course analyzes gender as a social
construction that organizes our identities, interactions, and institutions in
particular ways. The course begins by raising central questions: What is
"gender"? What does it mean to say something is socially constructed? What are
the paradoxes of gender? How does gender influence knowledge construction? The
course focuses upon how an array of institutions construct gender -- beginning
with science. We examine biological accounts of gender in the context of a
discussion on science. How do the biological sciences account for gender and,
alternatively, how might knowledge of gender constructions inform scientific
knowledge? Next, we analyze the close relationship between constructions of
gender and sexuality. The course proceeds to examine the constructionist
approach in the context of institutions: school, family, work, the criminal
justice system, politics, and culture. Over the term, we will address a
variety of debates concerning "essentialism vs. constructivism," "care vs.
justice vs. multiple ethics," "agency and/or structure," and "equality,
sameness and difference. "  

**_Objectives of the Course_ :** The aim of this course is to familiarize
students with recent literature that examines how gender informs, influences
and organizes our lives through practices and institutions. We will
continuously address how other identities and positions in society such as
class, culture, race-ethnicity, age, and sexual orientation interact with
gender. By the end of the course students should be equipped to apply and
critique the social constructionist approach and have a working knowledge of
the central debates concerning gender. Students should be able to produce a
sophisticated sociological analysis of the meaning of gender as a practice and
an institution and, perhaps, a greater appreciation for the processes of
social change.  

**Required Readings. Books:**  
Coffins, Patricia Hill. 1990. _Black Feminist Thought_ Boston: Unwin Hyman.  
Lorber, Judith. 1994. _Paradoxes of Gender_. New Haven: Yale University Press.  
Messerschmidt, J. 1997. _Crime as Structured Action Gender Race- Class. and
Crime in the Making_. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
Messner, M. 1997. _Politics of Masculinities: Men in Movements_. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.  
Stein, Arlene. 1997. _Sex and Sensibility_. Berkeley: University of California
Press,  
Thorne, Barrie. 1993. _Gender Play: Girls and Boys in School_. New Brunswick,
New Jersey: Rutgers University Press.  

**_Required Readings on File in Sociology Department_ : **[SR=Sociology
Reserve]  
Benhabib, Seyla. 1986. "The Generalized and the Concrete Other: The Kohlberg-
Gilligan Controversy and Moral Theory," in _Feminist Social Thought_ , Diana
Tietjens Meyers (ed.) New York: Routledge, 1997, pp. 735-756.  
Bordo, Susan. 1993. "Material Girl" AND "Postmodern Subjects, postmortern
Bodies, postmodern Resistance" in _Unbearable Weight: Feminism Western Culture
and the Body_. Berkeley: University of California Press. pp. 245-275 and
277-300.  
Coltrane, Scott. 1994. "Stability and Change in Chicano Men's Family Lives,"
in _Men's Lives_. M. Kimmel and M. Messner (eds.) Boston Allyn and Bacon.
1995, pp. 469-484.  
Deyhle, Donna and Frank Margolis. 1995. "Navajo Mothers and Daughters:
Schools, Jobs, and the Family," _Anthropology and Education Quarterly_ , 26:2,
pp. 135-167.  
Friedman, M. 1987. "Beyond Caring: The De-Moralization of Gender," in
_Feminist Social Thought_. Diana Tietjens Meyers (ed.) New York: Routledge,
1997, pp. 664-679.  
Gilligan, Carol. 1977. "In a Different Voice: Women's Conceptions of Self and
Morality, " in _Feminist Social Thought_ , Diana Tietjens Meyers (ed.) NY:
Routledge 1997, pp. 547-582.  
Harding, S. 1990. "Feminism, Science, and the Anti-Enlightenment Critiques,"
in _Feminism/Postmodernism_. Ed. By Linda J. Nicholson. New York: Routledge.
Pp. 83-106  
Hubbard, Ruth. 1995. "Sexism and Sociobiology: For Our Own Good and the Good
of the Species," pp. 103-121; "Gender Ideology and the Biology of Sex
Differences," 163-178; and "In a Science Restructured Along Feminist Lines,
Would the Laws of Gravity No Longer Hold?" pp. 205-217; in _Profitable
Promises: Essays on Women Science and Health_. Monroe, Maine: Common Courage
Press,  
Kuchta, David. 1996. "The Making of the Self-Made Man: Class, Clothing, and
English Masculinity" in _The Sex of Things: Gender and Consumption in
Historical Perspective_. Victoria de Grazia with Ellen Furlough (eds.)
Berkeley: Univ. of CA Press. pp. 54-78.  
Moody-Adams, Michelle. 1991. "Gender and the Complexity of Moral Voices," in
_Feminist Social Thought_ Diana Tietjens Meyers (ed.) New York: Routledge,
1997, pp. 680--694.  
Segura, D. 1989. "Chicana and Mexican Immigrant Women at Work: The Impact of
Class, Race, and Gender on Occupational Mobility," _Gender and Soci_ 3:1,
37-52.  
Smith, Dorothy. 1980. "Women's Perspective as a Radical Critique of
Sociology," in _Feminism and Methodology_ pp. 84-95.  
Williams, C. 1992. "The Glass-Escalator: Hidden Advantages for Men in the
"Female" Professions," _Social Problems_ , Vol 39, No. 3, pp. 253-267.  
West Candace and Don Zimmerman 1987. "Doing Gender" _Gender and Society_
1(2):125-5 1.  

**_Other Recommended Books_**  
Anderson, Margaret and Patricia Hill Collins. 1998. _Race, Class, and_ . NY:
Wadsworth Publishing.  
Connell, Robert. 1987. _Gender and P_ . Stanford: Stanford University Press.  
Elliot, P. and Mandell, Nancy. 1995. _Feminist Issues* Race- Class and
Sexuality_ . Scarborough, Ontario: Prentice Hall Canada Inc. Fausto-Sterling,
Anne, 1985. Myths of New York: HarperCollins. Jagger, Alison M. 1994. _Living
with Contradictions_ Boulder: Westview Press.  
Kimmel, M. and M. Messner. 1995. _Men's Lives_. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.  
Renzetti, C. And D. Curran. 1995. _Women- Men and Society_. Boston: Allyn and
Bacon.  
Meyers, Diana Tiejens (ed.) 1997. _Feminist Social Thought_ , New York:
Routledge.  

**_GRADING AND COURSE REQUIREMENTS_**  
28% or 140 points General Attendance and Participation: This course will be
taught as a seminar. While some lecture will be presented, students will be
expected to raise questions for discussion on the week's readings. Bring in 3
questions for discussion, copied onto an index cards with your name on it.
(What puzzles, mystifies, intrigues, bugs you?) Pass the cards one direction.
Asterisk no more than one question you want to address on each card. We'll
start with the questions deemed central. These cards will be the basis for
class discussion. The author presents her/his own question. Be sure to bring
the day's readings or your notes to class. Turn the card into me at the end of
class. They Will be worth 10 points each. On the day you present/facilitate
discussion (see below), your questions will be part of the presentation. At
the end of the course--weeks 14  & 15--your index card will raise questions
related to your research paper, and we'll address one from each of your cards.
If you miss class but submit an index card on time, this is worth 3 points.

12% or 60 points: Review of Paper Every student will turn in a draft of your
final paper by 11/1 8/98--to me and to another student in the class. You will
assess your colleague's draft and provide supportive comments, questions, and
criticisms of the draft by 11/25/98 to the author and to me. What are your
experiential and/or intellectual reactions to the project, argument, clarity
of writing and/or organization. What would strengthen your colleague's work?
Article or theory recommendations? You receive 30 points for your review, and
30 for your draft (and comments back from me on each of your drafts as well).

25% or 125 points: Class Presentations (asterisks signify eligible weeks):
Every student will organize a presentation related to the readings/topic for
one class. This will entail describing, analyzing and critiquing the book/or
article cluster in terms of its theory, method, author, audience, and the
debates or issues raised by the book. What are its contributions to the
literature? What are its drawbacks? Also an attempt to apply to an alternative
context or draw out the implications of the study is also expected--social
policy, laws, films, tv, other culture/nations, etc. A one-page outline, with
the usual three questions will also be turned in (this can double as a
handout). I recommend presenting on a cluster of readings that you see as
potentially relevant to your research paper.

35% or 175 points: Final Research Paper:  
This will be a 25-page, research paper based on gender. All papers must use
the course readings and address one of the debates raised in the course (1)
epistemological (2) essentialist/constructivist (3) care and justice (4) how
to achieve equality (5) agency and structure. A variety of approaches are
desirable. The paper can be based upon:  

  1. data you have collected [IF you have submitted a Human Subjects Proposal for the purposes of your master's thesis.] 
  2. library research--pursuing a debate, a competing theory, a neglected institution (e.g. medicine, sports, media, religion, etc), or topic (rape, environment, tattoos, etc.) 
  3. analysis of select science fiction novels that provide new visions of gender. 
  4. an analysis of the conceptualization of gender used in recently published articles in sociological journals (97-98).
  
You will give a 15 min. presentation at term's end worth 10% (50 pts.) of the
175 points.

  
**MY COURSE POLICIES:**  

  1. No late papers or assignments. Papers or assignments must be submitted in class or in my box in the department before closing time that day. You should have the secretary initial your paper before putting it in my box. One third grade is lost for each day late. It is only fair that every student have the same amount of time in which to write the paper. 
  2. Each assignment will be given points, a letter grade, or an indication of progress so you know how you are doing as you go along in the course. 
  3. Cheating on exams or plagiarism on papers is not tolerated (you will flunk the course). 
  4. No incompletes. Incompletes are only given under the most dire of circumstances. 
  5. I will be available at the above-mentioned office hours and by appointment. I will not generally be available on Fridays. 
  6. I reserve the right to give an exam if students are not coming to class prepared for discussion.

_RELATED UNIVERSITY POLICIES:_  

  1. **Learning Disabilities/Physical Handicap Policy:**  
Students who have a learning disability or physical handicap should make
arrangements for class assignments/exams so academic performance does not
suffer due to the disability or handicap. You should consult with me early in
the semester so we can make arrangements.

  2. **Institutional Review Board Policy:**  
Any study involving observation of or interaction with human subjects which
originates at Northern Arizona University, including a class project, report,
or research paper, must be reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review
Board (IRB) for the Protection of Human Subjects in Research and Research-
Related Activities. The IRB meets once per month. Proposals must be submitted
for review _at least fifteen_ working _days prior_ to their monthly meeting.
Students should consult with the course instructors early in the course to
ascertain if their projects need to be reviewed by the IRB and/or to secure
information on appropriate forms and procedures for IRB review. The student's
instructor and department chair must sign the application for approval by the
IRB. A copy of the IRB Policy and _Procedure Manual_ is available in each
department's administrative office.

  3. **Safe Environment Policy:**  
The Safe Working and Learning Environment Policy of Northern Arizona
University seeks to prevent discrimination on the basis of sex, race, color,
age, national origin, religion, sexual orientation, disability or veteran
status, and sexual harassment and sexual assault. You may obtain a copy of
this policy from your Department office. If you have any concerns related to
this policy it's important that you contact your department Chair, or call the
Academic Ornbudsperson at 523-9368 or the University Office of Affirmative
Action at 523-3312.

  

**INTRODUCTION: WHAT IS GENDER?**

8/26 WEEK 1: **Introduction:** The Social Construction of Gender Semester
Overview and Aims.  
_Readings_ : The syllabus.

**9/2 WEEK 2** : Analyzing Gender  
What is "gender"? What does it mean to say gender is socially constructed?  
_Readings_ :  

Lorber, Judith. 1994. _Paradoxes of Gender_  
Intro.  & Ch. I "Night to His Day': The Social Construction of Gender" (pp.
1-36)  
West C. and D. Zimmerman 1987. "Doing Gender" _Gender and Society_ 1(2):125-5
1. [SR]  
_Recommended Reading for those wanting background (on reserve in Soc. Dept.)_  
Elliot, P. and Mandell, N. 1995. "Feminist Theories," in Mandell (ed.) In
Mandell,(ed.) _Feminist issues: Race, Class, Sexuality_. Scarborough, Ontario:
Prentice Hall Canada, pp. 3-31  
Anderson/Collins: "Shifting the Center and Reconstructing Knowledge," pp. 1-9
and "Conceptualizing Race, Class, and Gender" pp. 56-69. In _Race, Class &
Gender_.  
Lorber Ch. 6 "Out of Eden: The Social Evolution of Gender" (pp. 123-143).
(Paradoxes)  
BE PREPARED TO SIGN UP FOR PRESENTATIONS  

**9/9 WEEK 3** : Constructing Knowledge: Epistemological Debates  
_Reading_ :  

Collins, Patricia Hill. 1990. Black Feminist Thought  
Ch. I "The Politics of Black Feminist Thought" (pp. 3-18)  
Ch. 2 "Defining Black Feminist Thought" (pp. 19-40)  
Ch. 10 "Toward an Afrocentric Feminist Epistemology" (pp. 201-220)  
Ch. I I "Knowledge, Consciousness, & the Politics of Empowerment" (p.221-238)  
Harding, S. 1992. "Feminism, Science, and the Anti-Enlightenment Critiques,"
in Feminism/Postmodernism Ed. by L. J. Nicholson. NY: Routledge. pp 83-106.
[SRI  
Smith, Dorothy. 1980. "Women's Perspective as a Radical Critique of
Sociology," in Feminism and Methodology pp. 84-95. [SRI  

***9/16 WEEK 4:** Accounting for Gender: Biology, Science, and Feminist
Critiques

_Reading_ :

Lorber, Judith. 1994. _Paradoxes of Gender_  
  
Ch. 2 "Believing is Seeing: Biology as Ideology (pp. 37-54)  
Ch. 3 "How Many Opposites? Gendered Sexuality (pp. 55-79)  
Ch. 4 "Men as Women and Women as Men: Disrupting Gender" (pp. 80-96)  
Hubbard, Ruth. 1995. "Sexism and Sociobiology: For Our Own Good and the Good
of the Species," pp. 103-121; "Gender Ideology and the Biology of Sex
Differences,"  
163-178 in _Profitable Promises_ Monroe, ME: Common Courage Press. [SRI (Begin
Stein)

***9/23 WEEK 5: Gender/Sexuality: Essentialist and Constructivist Debates**  
_Reading_ :

Stein, A. 1997. _Sex and Sensibility_ Berkeley: University of California
Press. (Entire book)

***9/30 WEEK 6: Constructions of Children and Gender in School: A Case Study**  
What distinguishes constructionist from socialization theories of gender?  
_Reading_ :

Thorne, B. 1992. Gender PIay (entire book)  
Recommended Reading:  
Renzetti, C. And D. Curran. 1995. "Early Childhood Gender Socialization," in
_Women- Men and Society_ Boston: Allyn and Bacon. Pp. 77-104.

**10/7 WEEK 7: Constructing Families**  
_Reading_ :

Lorber, Judith, 1994. _Paradoxes of Gender_ Ch. 7 "Rocking the Cradle:
Gendered Parenting" (pp. 144-171)  
Ch. 8 "Daily Bread: Gender and Domestic Labor" (pp. 172-193)  Collins,
Patricia Hill. 1990. _Black Feminist Thought_ Ch. 6 "Black Women and
Motherhood" (pp. 115-13 8) Coltrane, Scott. 1994. "Stability and Change in
Chicano Men's Family Lives," in Men's Lives M. Kimmel and M. Messner (eds)
Boston: Allen and Bacon. 1995, pp. 469-484. [SR}  
Deyhle, Donna  & Frank Margolis. 1995. "Navajo Mothers and Daughters: Schools,
Jobs, & the Family," _Anthropology and Education Quarterly_ , 26:2, pp.
135-167. [SR]  
_Recommended Readings_ : Dill, Bonnie Thornton. 1988. "Our Mothers' Grief
Racial Ethnic Women and the Maintenance of Families," _Journal of Family
History_ , 13:4, pp. 415-43 1. Coltrane, Scott. 1998. _Gender and Families_.
Thousand Oaks, Ca: Pine Forge Press.

**10/14 WEEK 8: Constructing Work** _Readings_ :

Collins, Patricia Hill. 1990. _Black Feminist Thought_ Ch. 3 "Work, Family,
and Black Women's Oppression" (pp. 43-66)  Lorber, Judith. 1994. _Paradoxes of
Gender_ Ch. 9 "Separate and Not Equal: The Gendered Division of Paid Work"
(pp. 194-222)  
Ch. 10 "Guarding the Gates: The Micropolitics of Gender" (pp. 225-252) Segura,
D. 1989. "Chicana and Mexican Immigrant Women at Work: The Impact of Class
Race,  & Gender on Occupational Mobility," Gender and Society 3:1, 37-52. [SRI
Williams, C. "The Glass-Escalator: Hidden Advantages for Men in the 'Female'
Professions," pp. 253-267. [SRI  
Recommended Readings: Amour T. And J. Matthaei. 199 1. Race- Gender & Work.
Boston Ma: South End Press. Reskin, B. And 1. Padavic. 1994. Women and Men at
Work. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press. OR recent news reports on
comparable worth or affirmative action policies.

**10/21 WEEK 9: Constructing Crime: Case Studies**  
What is crime? How do gender, race, class constitute constructions of crime?
What are the limits of structure and/or agency for the reconstruction of crime
and law?  
_Readings_ :

Messerschmidt, James. 1997. _Crime as Structured Action: Gender, Race. Class-
and Crime in the Making_. (Entire book)

_Recommended Film_ : "Rosewood"  

**10/28 WEEK 10: Constructing Morality: Debates about Care and Justice**  
_Reading_ :

Gilligan, Carol. 1977. "In a Different Voice: Women's Conceptions of Self and
Morality" (pp. 547-582 from Feminist Social Theory) [SR]  
Friedman, M. 1987. "Beyond Caring: The De-Moralization of Gender" (pp. 664-679
from FST) [SR]  
Moody-Adams,Michelle. 1991. "Gender and the Complexity of Moral Voices" (pp.
680-694 from FST) [SR]  
Benhabib, Seyla. 1986. "The Generalized and the Concrete Other: The Kohlberg-
Gilligan Controversy and Moral Theory" (pp. 735-756 from FST) [SRI

**11/4 WEEK 11: Culture and Commodifications of Gender**  
_Readings_ :

Lorber, Judith. 1994. Paradoxes of Gender Ch. 5 "Waiting for the Goddess:
Cultural Images of Gender" (pp. 97-119) Collins, Patricia MD. 1990. _Black
Feminist Thought_ , Ch. 4 "Mammies, Matriarchs, and Other Controlling Images"
(pp. 67-90) Ch. 8 "The Sexual Politics of Black Womanhood" (pp. 163-180)  
Bordo, Susan. 1993. "Material Girl" and "Postmodern Subjects, Postmodern
Bodies, Postmodern Resistance" in _Unbearable Weight: Feminism, Western
Culture and the Body_. Berkeley: University of California Press pp. 245-275  &
277-300. [SRI  
Kuchta, David. 1996. "The Making of the Self-Made Man: Class, Clothing, and
English Masculinity" in _The Sex of_ Thing Victoria de Grazia with Ellen
Furlough (eds.) Berkeley: Univ. of CA Press. pp. 54-78. [SRI

_Recommended CD or Video_ : Madonna or Other?  

**11/11 WEEK 12: Social Movements and Constructions of Gender**  
_Readings_ :

Messner, Michael. 1997. _Politics of Masculinities: Men in Movements_.

_Recommended_ : Current events related to the Promise Keepers, Pro-
Choice/Life, etc.  

**11/18 WEEK 13: Politics and the Constructions of Gender**  
What is equality? What is justice? What can people do to advance equality?
Given history, how might we envision and produce social change?  
_Readings_ :

Collins, Patricia Hill. 1990. _Black Feminist Thought_ Ch. 7 "Rethinking Black
Women's Activism" (pp. 139-162) Lorber, Judith. 1994. _Paradoxes of Gender_.
Ch. I I "The Visible Hand: Gender and the State" (pp. 253-281)  
Ch. 12 "Dismantling Noah's Ark: Gender and Equality" (pp. 282-302)

DUE: Preliminary, though legible draft of final paper (2 copies)  

**11/25 WEEK 14:**  
[ 11/26 THANKSGIVING BREAK--open to alternative meeting time if we can
coordinate an acceptable meeting time for everyone in advance.]  
DUE: Review of colleague's draft. [I will also provide feedback]  

**12/2 WEEK 15 Reading Week**  
15 minute Presentations of your Research Project  
DUE: Research Paper  

**12/9 WEEK 16: Finals Week**  
Possible second round of presentations and/or party!

