_**Syllabus**_ **  
****History 130, Sec. 1  
****Racial and Ethnic Groups in the United States  
****Fall 1999  
****TRF 10:00-10:50, CPS 233**

  

**Introducti** **on** |

**Course Materials** |

**Readings** |

**Electronic Media** |

**World Wide Web**  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
**Attendance** |

**Office Hours** |

**Tests** |

**Assignments** |

**Grading** |

**Extra Points**  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
_When I went to school I learned George Washington never told a lie-Slaves
were happy on the plantation-The men who opened the West were giants-and we
won every war because God was on our side. But where my kid goes to school he
learns George Washington was a slave owner-slaves hated slavery-the men who
opened the west committed genocide-and the wars we won were victories for U.S.
imperialism. No wonder my kid's not an American. They're teaching him some
other country' s history._  
Jules Fiefer, 1970

**_Introduction_**

This course is a survey of the peoples who live in the United States according
to their racial, ethnic, religious, and national origins. We will look at how
and why they came here, their group experiences on and after their arrival,
and how they fit into U.S. economics, society, politics, and culture over
time. To do this, we will borrow principles and concepts from anthropology,
sociology, cultural geography, and other disciplines.

The related issues of race and ethnicity are central to U.S. history, and
together constitute one of the most difficult aspects of our history to study
and understand. In one semester, you can not learn everything there is to know
about our topic, and no one expects you to do so. We do expect you to learn
the basic facts about racial and ethnic groups in the U.S., as well as the
issues that have revolved around relations between and among those groups over
the last several hundred years. Though you will not know all the answers at
the end of the semester, you should by that time know the important questions.

In this class we will take advantage of the communication infrastructure
available on campus in a number of ways. This syllabus, the study guides, and
possibly other materials as well, will be available from my history department
web page. In addition to making announcements in class about schedule changes,
opportunities for extra credit work, or other items of interest, I will
regularly communicate with you through campus email, and I expect you to
communicate with me through the same medium. There are enough labs in the
academic buildings and residence halls on campus to give every student access
to this technology on a daily basis. If you're not using these resources
regularly, you should be. If you don't know how to access your email and the
campus network in the labs, see me immediately.

* * *

**_Course Materials_**

**Textbook (rental):**  
Peter Kivisto. _Americans All: Race and Ethnic Relations in Historical,
Structural, and Comparative Perspectives_. 1995.

* * *

**_Readings (additional)_**

I may announce and require additional readings at any time during the semester
at my discretion.

* * *

**_Electronic Media_**

Issues relating to race and ethnicity are at the forefront of the national
consciousness, and establish the focus for much of the news and discussion on
the alternative electronic media, whether public or private. Commercial
television and radio provides a poor diet of news and commentary. To expand
your news and analysis horizons, during this semester you should make an
effort to listen periodically to radio programs such as "Morning Edition,"
"All Things Considered," and "Talk of the Nation" on National Public Radio;
Wisconsin Public Radio programs such as "To the Best of Our Knowledge" and the
morning call-in shows of Tom Clark et al.,; or some of the commercial talk
shows, which often consider matters relating to race and ethnicity.

* * *

**_The World Wide Web_**

Every day there is more and more information available on the World Wide Web,
in almost every conceivable way: printed words, still and moving pictures, and
now sound as well, including National Public Radio, Wisconsin Public Radio,
and many other radio stations and networks from around the world. This
availability is both a blessing and a curse.

It is a blessing because, in a news starved nation such as ours, information
about our own country as well as others around the world is available twenty-
four hours a day, on demand. If you are interested in knowing what is going on
in Miami's Little Havana, the Navajo reservation, or Tibet, you can look it up
on the web and probably have more information to pick through than you can
ever read.

But how good is that information? Is what you are reading on a web site true
factually? If you are reading opinion, is it respectable? Regarding issues of
race and ethnicity, perhaps more than with most other issues, there are those
who use the world wide web-all too effectively, unfortunately-to disseminate
misinformation (knowingly or unknowingly) so as to promote hatred of and even
violence against other races, ethnies, or nationalities.

As with everything else you read, read everything you find on the world wide
web _**critically**_.

* * *

**_Attendance_**

I require and expect you to attend all class meetings. I will take attendance
at all meetings by attendance sheet. You may lose up to three points off of
your final grade for an unreasonable number of absences (except in very
special circumstances, anything over three). Do not call me ahead of time to
tell me that you will miss class, unless you expect to miss several classes in
a row. But in timely fashion I do expect you to submit to me a formal written
note or e-mail which explains the absence and states the date or dates
involved. These notes make record-keeping easier, and together with your
signature on the sign-up sheet constitute your record of attendance, on which
part of your final grade depends.

If you come in late, please sit near the door and remember to sign the
attendance sheet. You are responsible for all assignments, announcements, and
lecture or discussion material covered in every class meeting, and for all
information conveyed to you through email.

* * *

**_Office Hours_**

I encourage you to come to my office to talk about any concerns you have
regarding course material, preparation for tests, studying, writing, etc. You
do not need an appointment during posted office hours; if you need to see me
outside posted office hours, arrange for an appointment beforehand.

Please do not feel shy about coming to my office. I get paid to help you learn
about history, but more than that to help you learn \par how to read, and
write, and think with some clarity and informed judgment. If I can help you
with that one-on-one I will be glad to do it.

We can work out almost any problem (i.e., deadlines, assignments, test
preparation) if you come to me beforehand or immediately after a problem
occurs. If you let a problem remain unresolved until the end of the semester,
however, it will be too late to take corrective measures. Taking tests at the
appointed time is important; I will allow a make-up only for a valid excuse.
If you miss a test or assignment, it is your responsibility to ensure that you
complete it in a timely manner. Except in extraordinary circumstances, any
test or assignment not completed before the next one is due will receive a
zero.

If you need to speak to me call my office; if I am not in leave a message on
the Audix service, which is available twenty-four hours a day, or leave an
email. You must follow-up on phone messages regarding absences with a note or
email on your return to class.

* * *

**_Tests_**

There will be four major exams, each covering roughly one-fourth of the course
material. Exams will consist of twenty multiple-choice questions (worth two
points each), two brief identifications (worth ten points each), and an essay
question (worth forty points). I will distribute brief identifications and
essay questions in the weeks prior to the exam. You must write your brief
identifications in complete sentences, without abbreviations, listing, or
other shortcuts. Because of the time afforded for preparation of the test, I
expect that your essay will be well organized, and that the argument will be
effective and support the conclusions presented. Your essay should be written
legibly in correct English and contain a minimum of spelling errors. Your
writing is an important part of your grade on the test.

* * *

**_Assignments_**

There will be two out-of-class assignments. The first is the compilation of a
five-generation ancestor chart. The grade will be based on completion and
documentation of the assignment, not the amount of information on the chart;
no one will be penalized for an incomplete chart. We will discuss how to go
about this in class.

The second assignment will be to write a short essay about a current short
newspaper, magazine, or internet news or feature story, column, or editorial
cartoon that deals with race or ethnicity in the United States, either
contemporary or historical. You must submit a copy of the item as well as an
essay of 250 to 500 words in the form of an evaluation or a review, or a
personal reflection on the historical and cultural issues involved.

You must show good citizenship in bringing in your assignment. You may bring
in a good quality photocopy; if you bring in an original clipping, it must be
your own, and not clipped out of a library copy. Defacing library property by
clipping from it is a crime as well as a rejection of some of our core
academic values.

* * *

**_Grading_**

The grade for the course is based on 500 points. Each test is worth 100
points; the genealogy assignment is worth 30; the media assignment is worth 30
points, and attendance, general classroom demeanor, and participation is worth
40. To facilitate learning names and grading participation, I will ask you to
fill out a form that includes biographical information as well as a photograph
of yourself. It is due at the beginning of the second week of class.

Your writing--as opposed to the content your writing conveys--is a component
of every assignment, and is an integral part of your grade. University
education is not just about mastering factual material--which is important--
but also about developing the ability to communicate information. Expressing
your ideas well is as important as having good ideas and information to
convey; the former is indispensable to the latter.

Because aspects of race and ethnicity are never far from the surface of life
in the United States and sometimes erupt like a sore on the body politic--as
in white's reaction to the O. J. Simpson acquittal, or trouble between African
Americans and Korean grocery store owners that erupt into violence and even
murder--we may look at these issues from time to time in classroom
discussions, whether they relate directly to the topic of day or not. Your
grade will not be based on some "politically correct" view of race and
ethnicity in the United States, but on your participation, mastery of course
materials, and your ability to communicate.

* * *

**_Extra Point Work_**

You may gain up to three extra points this semester by attending a campus
presentation relating to race and ethnicity in the United States or anywhere
around the world and to write a report about it. I will announce suitable
presentations in class; you may bring any campus presentation to my attention
for approval. To gain extra points, your essay on the presentation must
contain a well-written summary of the presentation and some thoughts on what
the speaker had to say, as well as your original notes. Your submission should
be two to three double-spaced, typed pages and present a neat, professional
appearance. You may gain one point, added to your final average, for each
submission.

* * *

[![](backled1.gif)](hist130.htm)

