[![](../../graphics/programhed.gif)](/program/)  
  
  

  
**Search:**  
  
[ Advanced](/search/) [![program](/graphics/programblob.gif)](/program/)  
[![admissions](/graphics/admissionsblob.gif)](/admissions/)  
[![students](/graphics/studentsblob.gif)](/students/)  
[![](/graphics/facultyblob.gif)](/faculty/)  
[![alumni](/graphics/alumniblob.gif)](/alumni/)  
[![events](/graphics/eventsblob.gif)](/events/)  
[![resources](/graphics/resourcesblob.gif)](/resources/)  
  
  
  
[![](/graphics/home.gif)  
  
[![jobs](/graphics/jobs.gif)](/jobs/)  
  
[![contact](/graphics/contact.gif)](/contactus.html)  
  
[![directions](/graphics/directions.gif)](/directions.html)  
  
[![ucb](/graphics/ucb2.gif)](http://www.berkeley.edu)  
  
[![about](/graphics/aboutsite.gif)](/aboutsite.html)  
| ![](../../graphics/cleardot.gif) |

**Courses Offered  
Fall Semester 2000**  

See the [Schedule of Classes](fall2000.html) for  
course numbers, times, rooms, etc.

**Hot Soup: Producing Creative News Features for Radio  
Laura Sydell**

This class is for students who want to creatively explore the medium of radio
and gain practical experience reporting and producing for KQED FM, one of the
nation's largest public radio affiliates. Hot Soup, a weekend magazine show
hosted by National Public Radio's Chris Arnold, is a forum for producers and
reporters to take unconventional approaches to stories in both content and
style. Each program explores a different theme, from  "people who work with
large things" to "unusual ways to influence politics," to "human relationships
with animals." Working closely with the instructor and the show's producer
(awarding winning radio producer, Kathy McAnally) students in this class will
have an opportunity to produce and report two complete shows.  
The class will come up with themes and story ideas for each program, collect
audio, write scripts and have the opportunity for their work to be heard by
hundreds of thousands of KQED listeners. For students who are serious about
radio this is a great opportunity to test and refine your skills as a writer,
producer, and reporter. This course is open only to students have some
knowledge of how to edit and collect tape.

Laura Sydell has been an award winning correspondent for National Public  
Radio and a staff reporter at WNYC radio in New York City.

**Introduction to New Media Publishing**  
**Scholle Sawyer and Jason Snell**

This class will introduce you to the major technical and editorial issues the
Web poses for journalists today. The purpose of the class will be to make you
Internet literate. By the end of this class, you will be qualified to write
about Internet-related topics with some degree of authority. You will also be
able to create a Web site with both text and images, and will learn important
editorial principles that will make you a more well-rounded 21st-century
journalist. If you've never surfed the Web, this is your chance to learn what
everyone's talking about and get the basic skills you need. If you've had a
web site up since 1994 and got your first J200 scoop off a Usenet newsgroup,
this is your chance to fill any holes in your knowledge and think about the
full impact the Web can have on your role as a journalist.  
During the last half of the semester, you will publish a long article or group
of articles on the web using Macromedia Dreamweaver. As you plan your project
you'll be responsible for thinking about how best to use the Web to tell your
story and gathering any additional materials such as photographs, sounds,
video clips, and the like. This class is a prerequisite for advanced new media
classes.

Scholle Sawyer is Executive Editor of Macworld and Jason Snell is Editor of
Macworld.com

[Course syllabus](syllabi/newmediasyllabus.html)

**Multimedia Reporting  
Jane Ellen Stevens**  

During 15 two-hour class meetings, we'll explore the basics of reporting in
the revolutionary medium of multimedia. We'll restructure traditional print
stories to include text, still photos, video clips and graphics. We'll report
stories that include these elements, and publish them on the school's Web
site. We'll also address the demands that multimedia makes as a medium that
reflects life in real time, including providing context, updating, developing
an interactive relationship with readers/viewers/users, and offering links to
resources.

Prerequisite: Introduction to New Media Publishing Class or equivalent skills.

Jane Stevens is a freelance multimedia journalist who specializes in science
and technology. Her clients include Discovery Channel Online and MSNBC.com.
Her latest adventure, "Russian Space Camp," can be seen at:
<http://www.discovery.com/news/features/spacecamp/spacecamp.html>

[Course syllabus](syllabi/multmedsyl.html)

**Business Journalism**  
**Andrew Leckey**

The course will cover the basic knowledge, writing skills and career
opportunities in the rapidly-growing field of business journalism. Students
will write articles for designated daily newspapers, business publications and
web sites. There will be talks by journalists from business news sources such
as the Wall Street Journal, Forbes magazine, CBS MarketWatch and Bloomberg
LLP, as well as business editors of general newspapers. Several "field trips"
are included. Lectures will seek to remove the "fear factor" from reporting on
business; explain the many types of coverage ranging from technology to
traditional fields; and equip students to make use of financial information.

Andrew Leckey is the nationally-syndicated investment columnist for the
Chicago Tribune and television reporter for the syndicated Quicken.com "Money
Reports." He was previously a financial anchor on the CNBC cable television
network. Leckey has written six books on investment and is series editor of
the annual "Best American Business Stories" anthology. He was a fellow of the
Media Studies Center in New York City and a Knight-Bagehot Fellow in business
journalism at Columbia University.

**Covering the Middle East: The Facts on the Ground  
Lamis Andoni**

This course will combine comparitive analysis of Middle Eastern press coverage
with on-the-ground reporting from an extensive field trip to the region. In
the beginning stages, students will be asked to write down their assumptions
of Iraq, the sanctions, the Gulf War, and the Arab-Israeli conflict,
especially the peace process. In subsequent classes we will compare press
coverage of these issues in the United States, Europe, Israel, and the Arab
World - from mainstream dailies, alternative weeklies, Internet sites, and
from on-the-ground human rights reports. Along the way we will consider these
questions: What is the difference between the declared objectives of policy
and the reality on the ground? What labels do different press outlets use to
describe the players in a conflict? In what ways do the narratives of history
become defined by the victors, and by the vanquished?

In the first half of the class, students will conduct comparative critical
analyses of specific areas of coverage. This will be followed by pre-reporting
and assigning of stories for the field trip, which is expected to take place
toward the end of the semester in either Iraq, or in the West Bank, Gaza and
Jerusalem. The final assignment will be an extensive report  
based on the field trip.

Lamis Andoni has reported on Middle Eastern affairs since 1982. She has
written for The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Financial Times, Al
Hayat (London), Al Ahram (Cairo), Le Monde Diplomatique, and The Journal of
Palestine Studies. She covered the War of the Camps in Lebanon from 1983-87,
the Iran-Iraq war from 1984-88, and the 1991 Gulf War for The Christian
Science Monitor. A special focus of the class will be the challenge of
reporting civil and international conflicts.

  
**Reporting the Border: Environment, Trade, and Development  
Sandy Tolan**

Events along the U.S.-Mexico border remain remote to most Americans, obscured
from view despite our proximity. The border is often the focus of U.S. policy
towards Mexico, especially in the areas of drug and immigration policy, but
coverage tends to be crisis-driven and sporadic. Yet with social forces
tearing at Mexico from within, and with growing economic pressure on Mexico
from the United States and from global economic forces, the social and
environmental consequences along the border are mounting.  
This hands-on reporting class will consider the human and environmental
challenges in a region in constant flux, from Tijuana to Nogales to Nuevo
Laredo to Brownsville. In readings, film and radio documentaries, frequent
guest lectures, and reporting from the field, we will investigate the toxic
New River flowing from Mexicali into California's Salton Sea; threats to
worker health and safety among maquiladora workers in Nogales; the impact of
the bear grass harvest for Mexican broom factories upon native basket weavers
in Arizona; dangers from pesticides to chile pickers in southern New Mexico's
booming salsa picante industry; the binational source of the smoggy skies in
Texas's Big Bend National Park; the human toll of desertification in northern
Tamaulipas; and declining biodiversity and uncontrolled growth on both sides
of the border. Along the way we will examine sustainable solutions to many of
these problems. Central to our consideration will be the role of NAFTA and
global economic forces in exacerbating and/or alleviating these formidable
problems.  
Within the first several weeks, each student, in consultation with the
instructor, will choose an issue or issues to report and write about for the
semester. Students may work on their own or in teams of two. Previous
journalism classwork or experience is helpful. Students will be expected to
produce several short feature articles or one magazine-length piece, or their
broadcast or online equivalents. Modest funds will be available for travel  
to the border; such travel will be limited to eight students, with priority
given to students from the School of Journalism. It is expected these students
will travel in two or more groups to the border, where the instructor and his
production company are producing  "Border Stories," a public radio series on
environment and development, and where students would join production teams
already in the field. Students interested in  
participating in the class but unable to travel to the border will be given
alternate assignments.

Texts: La Frontera (Weisman, with Dusard); Coyote (Conover); On the Border  
(Miller); Zapata's Revenge (Barry); U.S.-Mexico Borderlands: Historical and  
Contemporary Perspectives (Martinez, ed.); others.

Sandy Tolan is a co-founder of Homelands Productions, an independent public-
interest journalism organization based in Gloucester, Massachusetts. Since
1982, Tolan has produced dozens of documentaries for NPR and Public Radio
International. Much of his focus has been on land, water, natural resources
and indigenous affairs, in the American Southwest, Mexico, Central and South
America, the Caribbean, Bosnia, the Middle East, India, the U.S. Pacific
Northwest and the American eastern seaboard. He is the author of Me and Hank,
an exploration of heroes and ace relations in America through the experience
of baseball slugger Hank Aaron. Tolan was a 1993 Nieman Fellow at Harvard
University. He is currently at work on Border Stories, a public radio
documentary series set along the U.S.-Mexico border.

**J-2** **00 Reporting the News  
Lydia Chavez, William Drummond, Cynthia Gorney, Susan Rasky, Rob Gunnison and
Paul Grabowicz**

Journalism 200,  "Reporting the News," is the required core course for all
first year students taken during the first semester. This course, an intensive
15-week workshop, provides the foundation for the rest of the curriculum and
will take up much of the entering student time. J200 stresses hard news
reporting, writing, and editing. In classes of no more than 12 students,
faculty members with extensive experience in newspaper reporting run their
classes much like newsrooms. The aim is to produce publishable newspaper
stories. Many class assignments do end up in print, often in local dailies,
weeklies, and regional newspapers. Entering students may take just one
additional 2-unit background course so they can devote adequate time to this
seminal and time-consuming course.

**Additional sessions on copy-editing with Andrea Behr will also be assigned
and scheduled by your J200 instructor.

**News Photography  
Ken Light**

This class provides an overview of photojournalism and news photography that
includes learning basic photographic skills, from camera controls to exposure
and film selection. Students shoot news and street photographic assignments
and work on in-house Journalism School publications; they have the opportunity
to develop film, work with Photoshop or use the school black and white
darkroom as well as having  
their work critiqued.

Ken Light, curator of the Photojournalism Center at the School, is the author
of five monographs including Texas Death Row.

**Advanced Photography  
Ken Light**

An exploration of magazine photography as applied to photo essay, day
assignments and book projects, as well as content based lectures (location
lighting, environmental portraiture, etc.) and critiques. Students work on in-
depth assignments that include research, reporting and photographing.
Legal/ethical and business issues are explored, including fund-raising and
grant writing to support extended projects.

**Investigative Reporting  
Tim Reiterman**

This two-semester course will emphasize the development, reporting and writing
of in-depth newspaper projects. The goal is to build publishable projects from
the ground up while working in a team setting. The course work includes three
hours a week of classroom instruction, discussion and guest lectures, plus
field reporting. The course work and readings will focus on investigative
reporting techniques, including public records, applications of computer-
assisted reporting, legal and ethical considerations, and the operations and
standards of major newspapers.

Tim Reiterman, the Schumann Teaching Fellow in Investigative Reporting, is the
State Projects Editor of the Los Angeles Times. He helped direct reporters in
the Pulitzer prize winning coverage of the 1992 Los Angeles riots and the 1994
Northridge earthquake and is the co-author, with John Jacobs, of Raven: The
Untold Story of the Rev. Jim Jones and His People and co-editor of a Los
Angeles Times book, Understanding the Riots.

  
**Introduction to Television News  
Joan Bieder, Bob Calo**

Students will learn the basic tools of television in this introductory course
-- writing and reporting for broadcast, shooting, and Avid editing. They will
report and produce 2 -3 minute television news stories and produce a full half
hour television news program at the end of the semester. For the first time
this year we will divide the course into two constituencies: First year
students will learn the basics, but still concentrate their time on J-200.
Second year students will be on an accelerated track within J 282. Building on
their first year reporting skills, and free of the J-200 constraints, the
second year students will master the digital cameras and editing systems early
and begin to produce more sophisticated work with an emphasis on experimenting
with new forms of television news.

Joan Bieder is a former producer for ABC News and permanent member of the
faculty.  
Bob Calo is a Producer for NBC News dateline, and joins the faculty this year
in the television program,

**Advanced Television News  
Joan Bieder, Bob Calo  
**

This course is limited to second year students who are enrolled in J282.

**Radio News  
George Lewinski**

This course teaches basic radio, including  "writing for the ear," analog and
digital recording and editing, news and news feature story preparation and
voice coaching. The centerpiece of the course is a weekly half-hour magazine
program broadcast over KALX-FM on Thursday mornings. Students are expected to
fully participate in the preparation of the program, assuming all the roles
necessary to produce it.

George Lewinski is a correspondent of the radio program MarketPlace.

**Creating a Magazine  
Clay Felker**

This course will explore in both theoretical and practical ways of creating a
magazine from scratch. Students will be actively involved in the entire
process, from conceiving story ideas to learning how to report and write from
a point of view, learning how to represent and present ideas graphically, and
participating in the editing and desktop production before the final magazine
is printed.  
Here's the basic idea of the magazine we'll create: At the end of a
millennium, a new kind of city -- let's call it The Information City -- is
being created in the San Francisco Bay Area. This is one of the most dramatic
and significant urban developments of our time. It introduces a pattern of
discontinuity in the material basis of the economy, society and culture. This
is a complex and combustible combination of exploding science and technology,
along with the tectonic shift in multicultural diversity, an extraordinary
expansion of global capitalism, a crisis of patriarchy and the nation-state.
The result is a development, in the Bay Area, of a new kind of city (perhaps
even another type of city-state). This historic process is the event that the
course will examine, through the creation of a new experimental magazine,
perhaps called i-Bay, or i-City. As the center of power in the area shifts
from the city of San Francisco down to San Jose and the environs of Silicon
Valley, a new urban entity is being spawned. The exploration of elements of
this new information city will be the subject of the course. Writing
assignments will teach how to interpret the meaning and significance of the
subject, based on extensive reporting.

Clay Felker, the founding editor of New York magazine and former editor of
Esquire, Manhattan, Inc., and the Village Voice (among others), is the
director of the Felker Magazine Center.

**Computer Assisted Reporting  
Paul Grabowicz**

Students learn how journalists are using the Internet to help report stories.
They get instruction in using Web search engines and subject guides, exploring
information databases on the Web, using news groups and discussion lists, and
finding sources and interviewing people on-line. They also learn how to use
spreadsheet and database programs, and how to do a basic Web page. And they
get an overview of the world of on-line publishing and the problems that new
media poses for the press and society.

Paul Grabowicz, Director of the New Media Program, is a columnist for the
Online Journalism Review and the co-author of California, Inc.

[Course syllabus](syllabi/carfall2000.html)

**Breaking News  
Lowell Bergman**

In seminars that will devolve into independent assignments, we will explore
how to study and select subject areas that are likely to provide stories and
information that will make news. The philosophy and politics of investigative
journalism will be a major subject of study and discussion. What is worth
investigating and why? Students will be expected to read and become familiar
with the history of "muckraking" and investigative reporting.

Particular attention will be given to story development and research that can
be used for both print and broadcasting. As the stories develop pitch
memorandums will be submitted to outside news organizations [e.g. Paul Mason
at ABC Weekend News] to attract production interest. Students will be given
specific research-reporting assignments designed to develop in-depth reporting
skills after individual conferences with the instructor.

Lowell Bergman was a former 60 Minutes producer for Mike Wallace and is
currently a PBS Correspondent .

**Reporting Across Cultures and Writing About Your Own  
Victor Merina**

This course will focus on how journalists cover racial, ethnic and other
undercovered - and often uncovered - communities. Since much of that reporting
involves delving into cultures different from our own, we will look at cross-
cultural reporting and how we can move beyond the stereotypical or commonplace
story. We will explore ways to deal with reluctant sources and to locate key
documents or background material. We will learn how to utilize methods such as
the use of listening posts and community guides to help us navigate a
particular neighborhood and find its real issues. We also will look at the
challenges faced in reporting on our own racial, ethnic and other communities,
particularly when doing investigative pieces or stories that are deemed
critical. We will discuss how to remain sensitive in our reporting and writing
yet still manage to produce a fair, accurate and insightful story. Students
will take part in an on-line project at the Poynter Institute website that
catalogues and reviews stories nationwide that deal with race relations,
race/ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation and faith/religion.

Victor Merina is a former Los Angeles Times staff writer and investigative
reporter. He has spent the last year as a Ford Foundation diversity fellow
working in New York for the Poynter Institute for Media Studies. Victor spent
nearly 20 years at the Times where he worked on the series---"And Justice for
Some: Solving Murders in Los Angeles County"\---that was a 1997 Pulitzer
finalist and won the Investigative Reporters and Editors Gold Medal and the
Society of Professional Journalists headliner award.

**On Being a Foreign Correspondent  
Rone Tempest**

The Foreign Correspondent: The art and practice of working as an overseas
print, electronic or internet correspondent. Course will trace the evolution
of the foreign correspondent from Xenophon to MS-NBC including readings from
Sir Henry Morton Stanley; Ernest Hemingway; Ernie Pyle; Janet Flanner; Evelyn
Waugh; Oriana Fallachi; Thomas Friedman; John Herr; Neil Sheehan; Keith
Richburg. Taught by a veteran foreign correspondent with guest lectures from
several former and current correspondents for New York Times; Washington Post
and Los Angeles Times. Classroom discussions will range from practical (what
to pack; travel and health tips; setting up files and reference library) to
theoretical (reporting models in the post-Cold War era; seeking a balanced
report; with American-centruism). Each student will be assigned to follow an
international beat similar to those held by overseas print correspondents and
produce oral and written reports analyzing the coverage in various media.
Other assignments will include interviews with diplomats with goal of
producing a class project collecting foreign diplomatic perceptions of
coverage in the American press.

Rone Tempest is veteran of 16 years as a foreign correspondent for the Los
Angeles Times. Between 1983-1999 Tempest was posted in New Delhi, Paris,
Beijing and Hong Kong and covered stories in more than 40 countries on six
continents including the assassination of Indira Gandhi; the Union Carbide
Bhopal pesticide plant disaster; The Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan; the
fall of Communism in Eastern Europe; the death of Den Xiaoping; the Hong Kong
handover and wars in Argentina (Falklands); Grenada; Sri Lanka; Afghanistan
and the Persian Gulf.

**Photography Tutorial  
Mimi Chakarova **

This photo tutorial will emphasize the technical aspects in photography such
as darkroom skills, lighting, cropping, composition, editing, and
presentation. Students will be working on weekly assignments as well as a
final project that would directly correlate with the material covered in class
as well as to the courses taught by Ken Light. The tutorial will encourage
students to explore the darkroom and to improve not only their conceptual
understanding of the medium, but especially their technical, shooting and
printing, knowledge of photography.

Several Photoshop tutorials will also be incorporated in the class for those
students who are interested in learning digital photography and its
possibilities. The sessions will cover scanning, resolution, and tools
applicable to image manipulation, color correction, and output. The
Photography Tutorial and its content will be, of course, to a large extent
determined by the questions raised by students, their levels of experience in
the medium, as well as their final goals.

Mimi Chakarova is a Lecturer at the Journalism School and Special Projects and
Publications Coordinator.

**Elections 2000  
Susan Rasky**

The political gods have smiled on California this Fall even if the
presidential candidates end up fighting their biggest battles elsewhere. The
state has four, maybe five, very juicy congressional races that could
determine whether Democrats regain control of the House, at least two cutting
edge initiatives - drug rehab and school vouchers - and what promises to be a
particularly nasty state senate race right across the hills in Contra Costa
County. We'll be reporting and writing (for publication) about all of those,
plus our own dull U.S. Senate race, and the livelier one underway in Nevada.
The class will cover polling, ad watch, campaign finance investigative
techniques, candidate and district profiling, the role of third parties, and
the wacko world of California initiatives. Expect visits from consultants,
pollsters, political ad-makers, lawyers and flaks, perhaps even a candidate or
two. Expect to put in campaign trail time on the weekends. We'll catch up with
George W. and the Big Al somewhere in the Midwest battleground states (date
and location TBD.) Instructor approval required.

**Writing About Film at a Time of Conflict  
Michael Sragow**

What should be demanded of movie critics, columnists and reporters in an age
when the idea of popular movies as art is considered obsolete, and "art
movies" are often bogus? How do movie journalists address an audience that is
increasingly fragmented and niche-oriented? How does a critic keep from
becoming jaded, shrill, or clownish? How do feature writers avoid puffery, and
commentators resist raillery? What are the creative and destructive tensions
inherent in writing on specific arts at general-interest publications? What do
movie artists themselves feel about the level of coverage and debate in
newspapers and magazines and on TV, radio and web-sites? These questions and
others will be addressed in classroom discussions and writing assignments
designed to present a realistic perspective on today's movie journalism -- and
to stimulate students to develop standards of their own.

**Asia Colloquium  
Carolyn Wakeman**

Asia Colloquium, a new course that will alternate with Covering Asia in the
fall semester, provides a background seminar for all students interested in
Asia reporting. Weekly meetings will provide a forum for discussion of the
region that features projects and  
perspectives of J-School faculty, students and visiting scholars as well as
visiting journalists. Students will examine regional issues in the news and
analyze different reporting styles while they design their own individual
semester-long projects investigating a specific country  
or topic. The class will also report on Asia issues and events for the
school's Web site.

**Reporting and Writing About the Technology Revolution for Magazines  
Jim Fallows and Katie Hafner**  

In this course students will learn how to plan, report, shape and write a
magazine article. For subject matter we will focus on the intersection of the
tech world and the "real" world -- the social, political, and economic
consequences of the tech revolution.

The class will explore the process of long-form, non-fiction writing \-
stories other than the spot news produced for a daily newspaper or a Web site.
The class will meet in one, three-hour session a week to discuss article
ideas, article structure and the art and craft of magazine pieces.

Students in the class will produce one feature-length story on a particular
subject. That topic preferably will be about the social impact of some facet
of the technology and electronic information revolution that is the source of
much of the news in this part of the world.

[Course syllabus](syllabi/techrevsyl.html)

**Documentary Production  
Jon Else**  
(Description to follow)

