

George Mason University



Jurisprudence Seminar                             Professor Krauss



**_Syllabus_**



**I. About the seminar** ****

      The Jurisprudence Seminar examines the nature of the judicial function (and, resultingly, the nature of Law) through a series of weekly discussions and the drafting of a substantial research paper.  This seminar has proven over the years to be one of the most stimulating, and challenging, courses given at GMUSL.  Very current events (i.e., the Florida Supreme Court's "interpretation" of that state's election statutes) lend to a theoretical seminar a practical importance that is both unusual and compelling.

      The structure of this year's edition of the seminar is open-ended, i.e., your interests, manifested during the course of the semester, can impact on the content of classes.  This will be the case most particularly, but not exclusively, for the final weeks.  _Please_ tell me a.s.a.p. of any topics you wish to explore. 

      Subject to your adaptation, then, here is a breakdown of the problems likely to be covered by readings (no compulsory book, rather photocopied readings) in this seminar.

1\. **Introduction to the problem of interpretation in Law.   **This
introductory portion of the seminar should take two or three weeks.  It has as
its goal to persuade you of the use, indeed the necessity, of
"intellectualizing" questions of interpretation.  The participatory nature of
the seminar should also be established during this period.

2\. **Legal reasoning: a critical analysis.   **Are the processes of
argumentation (for lawyers) and of justification (for judges) _logical_?   Do
they lend themselves to the conclusion that there is _one_ right answer to all
or any legal questions?  Can/Should human legal interpreters be replaced by
"objective" computers to some extent?

3.  **Analysis of "schools" of interpretation.  **The next part of the seminar introduces you to grand debates in legal interpretation today.  Does interpretation exist, or is there no real difference between _interpretation_ of a [legal] text and _creation_ of a [legal] text? Is the  'rule of law' [as opposed to the rule of judges] intelligible?  Is any separation of legal powers possible?

Among the 'schools' to be examined is the 'literalist' school (i.e. the
meaning of a text is found in its words); the subjectivist or 'interpretivist'
school (the meaning of a [legal] text is found in the intention of its
author); other 'interpretivists' (i.e. who deny that literalist or
subjectivist interpretations are possible while maintaining that there does
nonetheless exist one 'right' answer to any legal dispute); and 'non-
interpretivists', who hold that interpretation is intrinsically indeterminate
(and, therefore, that legal 'interpretation' is in reality policy-making).

4.   **Other interpretive issues.   **This could include an introduction to feminist interpretive jurisprudence, to "critical race theory", to the potential for economic analysis of interpretive issues, etc.  _Your feedback will be vital in the selection of these topics._   Please don't let me down!

            The classroom readings and discussions will, hopefully, encourage you to examine relationships between legal interpretation and interpretation in other fields: in effect you will be forced to clarify and refine your own vision of legal philosophy. 

**II.   Research paper**

      The paper can cover a variety of subjects.  I must emphasize that the following list is _not_ all-inclusive: you may request my permission to select another topic. In a typical year, at least half of the students enrolled in the seminar choose topics other than those listed below. Permission to research another topic will be granted _if_ your project is an interesting one and is related to the seminar's subject matter.  

1.    Analysis of the  duties of the interpreter of an immoral law.

2.    Analysis of an important _debate_ in legal interpretation (e.g. Hart vs. Fuller, Fish vs. Fiss, Fish vs. Dworkin, Hart vs. Dworkin, West vs. Posner, etc.).

3.    **Critical, theoretical** analysis (and discussion of the relevance to Law) of a recent book discussing the phenomenon of interpretation.   Among very many other possible choices, consider these examples (in alphabetical order by author): 

Delgado,  _The Rodrigo Chronicles:   Conversations About America and Race_,
(New York: N.Y.U. Press, 1995).

Diggins,  _The Promise of Pragmatism:   Modernism and the Crisis of Knowledge
and Authority_,       (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994).

Eco,  _The Limits of Interpretation_ ,       (Indianapolis: Indiana University
Press, 1990)

Eisenberg,  _The Limits of Reason:   Indeterminacy in Law, Education and
Morality_,  1993)

Greenawalt,  _Law and Objectivity_ ,       (Oxford: Oxford U. Press, 1992).

Haack, _Evidence and Inquiry: Towards Reconstruction in Epistemology_
(Cambridge:   Blackwell, 1993)

Held,  _Feminist Morality:   Transforming Culture, Society and Politics_,
(Chicago: U. of Chicago P., 1994).

LaRue,  _Constitutional Law as Fiction:   Narrative in the Rhetoric of
Authority_,  1995)

Minda, _Postmodern Legal Movements_ (New York: NYU Press, 1995)

Searle, _Mind, Language and Society_ (New York: Basic Books, 1998)



4.    Study of the possible uses of artificial intelligence in legal interpretation. 

5.    Study of a "school" of literary or biblical interpretation: e.g. subjectivism (E. Hirsch), deconstruction (J. Derrida, N. Frye, S. Fish), semiotics (U. Eco), etc. and of its relevance for legal interpretation.

6.    Analysis of some aspect of "Critical Legal Studies" or "Feminist Jurisprudence" or "Critical Race Studies".

7.    _Interdisciplinary_ analysis of the concept of author's intention. [I.e., what does literary studies have to say about this?   Biblical studies?]

8.    Analysis of the nature and content of _stare decisis_.

            In principle, I prefer that papers be done individually.  I will grant rare exceptions to this rule upon adequate justification, but I do want to make it clear that increased quality _and_ quantity will be required from team members in this case. 

**III. Timetable for paper submission**

      I find that I'm by nature "soft":  i.e. if I don't bind myself in advance, I tend to grant all student requests for late submissions.  This almost never has good results for the student or me.  So I'm binding myself.  I hereby announce that the following calendar is mandatory, that no extensions will be granted, and that failure to comply with a deadline will result in a penalty of up to one "notch" (off your final grade) per late day.  Plus, and more importantly, I'll be really mad at you for missing the deadline!

**1**.         On or before **February 5** , 2000, you will submit two copies
of a typed **proposal** for your paper. [1]   The proposal should be 2-3 pages
long, should demonstrate that you have read a bit about your topic (i.e., that
you're not choosing any old topic just because the deadline is upon you...),
and should show why you're interested in it.  You are strongly encouraged (but
not obliged) to meet with me beforehand to discuss possible topics.

            I will return the proposal to your mailbox, more or less annotated[2] and marked "approved" or "disapproved" by Friday, Feb. 9.  If the topic is disapproved, you must meet with me on Feb. 12 to select a satisfactory topic.  If you don't have a suitable topic to propose at that meeting I will assign one.   Don't worry:  I do _not_ anticipate having to resort to this.

**2**.         If you wish to request an **extension** for the submission of
the final paper (see immediately _infra_ ), you must do so on or before
**March 12** [absolutely no exceptions allowed on this].  A response to your
request will be provided within three days.  Denial of the request is the
default position: i.e., your extension request will be granted only if you
convince me that: a) you have done substantial research thus far; and b) you
will put the summer to good use.  **  **

            For obvious reasons no extension can be authorized if you are a graduating student. 

_             _Even if you are not a graduating student, the extension should
not be requested unless you expect to substantially improve the paper over the
summer.  Grading standards are higher for papers submitted after an extension.
What's more, students may lose focus on a subject matter if, for example, they
work full-time during the summer in a law office.  Such students may postpone
researching and writing their paper until August (when previous research is no
longer fresh).  On the other hand, a summer during which, say, 100 quality
hours are spent on research and writing can transform an excellent term paper
into a prize-winning, publishable article that can reap long-term rewards.
This is _not_ a pipe-dream:   it has happened for over a half dozen students
in this seminar.  It has changed career plans and enriched lives.

**3.      March 26** is the deadline for submission of the **_optional_ first
draft**.   [This deadline is extended to May 7, but the first draft is then
compulsory, for those to whom an extension has been granted.] The draft should
be 15-50 pages long.  It can be 'rough', i.e., structure and form need not be
polished and research need not be complete.  The first draft should, however,
demonstrate substantial research and thought.

Why do a first draft if it is optional?  Because it will elicit feedback from
me.  With my other time commitments, if a draft is not submitted by the
deadline I cannot commit to  providing feedback before the final paper is
submitted.

One week after the first draft deadline, I will return the draft with written
comments.  I will indicate what type of grade the first draft looks "headed
for", and what could be done to improve the grade.  Note that your first draft
doesn't "cost" you anything:  a "C" draft followed by an "A" final paper earns
an "A" grade.

**5**.         On or before  **May 7** you will submit the final draft. [This
deadline is pushed back as far as Labor Day for those who have obtained
extensions.]   Total length of the final paper must be 20-50 pages, unless
written authorization to submit a longer or shorter paper is granted.

_An annotated bibliography must accompany your paper_ (but its length is not
included in the page total).   The bibliography will list and summarize (one
short paragraph per entry) sources use in preparing your paper, whether or not
you cite them in the paper.  Blue book or Maroon book citation methods are
preferred; parallel cites are not required.

 Remember (as stated above) that recipients of the extension must **** hand in
a first draft by May 7.  So everyone has a paper of some sort due on this
date.

Each draft of a paper should be double-spaced with normal margins (so I can
annotate it).  Footnotes must be single-spaced and contained on each page of
text (i.e. no _end_ notes). If your word processor won't print _foot_ notes,
change word processors!

**IV Class participation**

      The final paper will count for 3/4 of the "final grade".  My evaluation of your class work will determine the rest.  You are expected to attend and participate in each class session.  You may be assigned specific discussion responsibilities for a class sessions.



  

* * *

[1] Everything you submit to me should be typed, in two copies.  I will keep
one copy for my files, and annotate and return to you the other copy.  If you
submit only one copy I will not be able to return anything to you.

[2] I find that I give more help to those who have demonstrated hard work.  If
your proposal is well thought through and researched, I will likely provide
you with more feedback then if you lead me to believe that you have done
little work yourself.

