**History 341.19  ** **Court, Cloister, and City in Medieval Civilization**
**Fall 1999** **Monday and Thursday, 1:05-2:25**  

**Professor Tom Head**

**Office hours (Hunter West 1507):** Monday and Thursday, 2:45-3:45, or by
appointment

**E-mail (preferred):** thead@shiva.hunter.cuny.edu

**Phone:** 212-772-5484 **Fax:** 212-772-5545

**Website:** http://urban.hunter.cuny.edu/~thead/index.htm

**ERes (Electronic Reserve Shelf):** http://maxweber.hunter.cuny.edu/eres

**  Course code:** Hist341.19 **Password:** beowulf

** **

**Course requirements:** Regular attendance in class and completion of the
required reading assignments are both crucial requirements of the course. The
most important written requirements for the course are two take-home
examinations. Each examination will be approximately 6-9 typed pages in length
and will count for 40% of the final grade. There will also be a short (two
typed pages) essay on a museum looking assignment. Each of these assignments
will be worth 10% of the final grade. Attendance will be worth 10% of the
final grade.



**Course policies and guidelines:** Detailed guides to the assignments, as
well description of the policies about grading, makeups, incompletes, and
other information about the course will be posted on ERes. All students should
familiarize themselves with these policies in due course. **Any infringement
of academic honesty by plagiarism or cheating will be taken seriously and a
grade of 0 given for the assignment in question.**

** **

**Schedule of Class Topics and Reading Assignments**

 Note: Assigned readings must be completed before class on the dates noted
below.



Monday 8/30. Introduction.

 Thursday 9/2. Rome: Imperial Court and Capital City.

 No reading assignment.

       

Monday 9/6. **No class: Labor Day.**

Thursday 9/9. **No class: Hurricane Head.**

 Monday 9/13. The Barbarian Court (1).

Required Reading: have begun reading _Beowulf_ , trans. Michael Alexander
(Penguin, 1973). Available at bookstore. Also consult the "Guide to Reading
_Beowulf_ " available on ERes.

 Thursday 9/16. **No class: Hurricane Floyd.**

Monday 9/20. **No class: Yom Kippur.**



Tuesday 9/21. The Barbarian Court (2).

**Note special day in place of Yom Kippur.**

Required Reading: Finish _Beowulf_ for discussion.



Thursday 9/23. Lords and Castles.

Reading: (1) _The Battle of Maldon_ ; (2) _The Complaint of Hugh of Lusignan_
OR Hrotsvit of Gandersheim, _Foundation of the Monastery of Gandersheim_ OR
_The Chronicle of the Counts of Anjou_ ; (3) documents concerning the Council
of Charroux. (All these works are available on Eres in folder marked for
9/23).

Illustrative reading: Examine "Sutton Hoo" folder on ERes. It contains a
brief, illustrated (two-page) description of excavation; several pictures of
objects (the helmet, the whetstone) found in the "Redwald" grave of Mound #1
(all now in British Museum); links to a virtual tour of the excavation.



Monday 9/27. Courtly Entertainments.

Required Reading: Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 2_ , chap. 11 (
**available on reserve at Hunter College Library and on sale at the Hunter
College Bookstore for History 314** ).

Illustrative Reading: examine "troubadours: their instruments and their songs"
(Eres); a folder on "castles" will provide gateways to images and virtual
tours of medieval castles (ERes). **Note: these will not be available until
Saturday the 25 th.**



Thursday 9/30. Love and Marriage.

 Required reading: Drogo of Sint-Winoksbergen, _Life of St. Godelieve_ (ERes).

 Illustrative reading: legal texts concerning marriage (ERes).



Monday 10/4. Courtly Love and Vernacular Literature. **Discussion.**

Required Reading: Patricia Ann Terry (trans.), _The Honeysuckle and the Hazel
Tree: Medieval Stories of Men and Women_ (Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1995), particularly "Introduction," "The Nightingale,"
"Lanval," "Eliduc," and "The Chatelaine of Vergi." **Available at the
bookstore.**



Thursday 10/7. The Origins of the Monastic Ideal.

Required reading: selections from Athanasius, _The Life of St. Antony of
Egypt_ ; from Gregory the Great, _The Life of St. Benedict of Nursia_ ; from
_The Rule of St. Benedict_.

Illustrative reading: Wolfgang Braunfels, _Monasteries of Western Europe_ ,
chaps. 1 and 2 (Library reserve).



Monday 10/11. **No class: Columbus Day.  **



Wednesday 10/13. The Physical World of the Monastery.

**Note special day in place of Columbus Day.**

Required reading: Hrotsvit of Gandersheim, _The Foundation of the Monastery of
Gandersheim_.

Illustrative reading: _The Life of St. Leoba_ ; Wolfgang Braunfels,
_Monasteries of Western Europe_ , chaps. 3 and 4; a folder marked "abbeys"
providing gateways to images and virutal tours of monateries (ERes).



Thursday 10/14. The Social World of the Community. **Discussion**

Required reading: Jocelyn of Brakelond, _Chronicle of the Abbey of Bury St.
Edmund's_ (to be made available at bookstore and on Eres).



Monday 10/18. The Monastic Scriptorium and School.

Required reading: "The Production of Manuscript Books" (ERes); Philippe Wolff,
_The Awakening of Europe_ , Part I, chapter 4. (Library Reserve [also under
title _The Cultural Awakening_ ]: CB351. W613. 1968).

Illustrative Reading: Marshall Baldwin, _Christianity Through the Thirteenth
Century_ , pp. 144-58 (Library Reserve); Jean Leclercq, _The Love of Learning
and the Desire for God: A Study of Monastic Culture_ , chaps. 5 and 7 (Library
Reserve).

**Research assignment handed out.**



Thursday 10/21. The Spiritual Community and the New Monasticism

 Required reading: Bernard of Clairvaux, _On Loving God_ (ERes).

Illustrative reading: _The Conversion of Pons of L eras_ (ERes); Colman Barry,
_Readings in Church History_ , pp. 401-417 (Library Reserve); Marshall
Baldwin, _Christianity Through the Thirteenth Century_ , pp. 170-181 and
243-75 (Library Reserve); Jean Leclercq, _The Love of Learning and the Desire
for God: A Study of Monastic Culture_ , chaps. 9 and 10 (Library Reserve).



Monday 10/25. The Cloister and the World.

Required reading: _The Miracle of St. Maximinus of Micy_ (ER es); _The Journey
of the Relics of St. Ursmer through Flanders_ (ERes).

 Illustrative reading: Charters from the abbey of Saint-Trond (ER es).

**Questions for take-home midterm handed out.**



Thursday 10/28. **No class: for preparing examination.**

** **

Monday 11/1. The origins of the medieval city.

Illustrative reading: Robert-Henri Bautier, _Economic Developoment of Medieval
Europe_ , pp. 9-79 (Library Reserve).

**Midterm take-home examination and research assignment due.**



Thursday 11/4. Markets and the Development of the Medieval City.

Required reading: Dulcie Duke, _The Growth of the Medieval Town_ (available in
bookstore).

Illustrative reading: Howard Saalman, _Medieval Cities_ (Library Reserve);
documents about urban fairs (ERes.)



Monday 11/8. The Origin of the French Communes.

 Required reading: texts about Toul, Laon, and Le Mans (ERes).

Illustrative reading: John Mundy and Peter Riesenberg, _The Medieval Town_ ,
pp. 15-52, and appropriate documents (Library Reserve).



Thursday 11/11. The Origin of the Italian city State.

 Required reading: selections from Villani, _chronicle_ (ERes).

Illustrative reading: Bautier, _Economic Developoment of Medieval Europe_ ,
pp. 101-109 (Library Reserve); Mundy and Riesenberg, _The Medieval Town_ , pp.
104-112.



Monday 11/15. Religion and the City.

Required reading: Caroline Bynum, "Fast, Feast, and Flesh: The Religious
Significance of Food to Medieval Women" (xerox handout).

 Illustrative reading: selections from Chaucer, _the Wife of Bath_ and _The
Book of Margery Kempe_ (ERes).



Thursday 11/18. The Crisis of the Medieval City.

Required reading: Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 3_ , chap. 15

Illustrative material: readings on urban sanitaiton, the black death, and the
Ciompi revolt (Eres).

**Museum assignment handed out.**



Monday 11/22. The Changing Physical and Social Topography of Cities.

 Videos concerning Siena and Nuremberg will be shown.



Thursday 11/25. **Thanksgiving.**



Monday 11/29. Humanism and Civic Culture (1).

Required reading: Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 3_ , chap. 16.

Illustrative reading: Giulio Carlo Argan, _The Renaissance City_ (Library
Reserve).



Thursday 12/2. Humanism and Civic Culture (2). **Discussion.**

Required reading: Christine de Pizan, _Book of the City of Ladies_ , pages
TBA.

**Questions for take-home final handed out.**



Monday 12/ 6. Italian Cities and Courts.

 Required reading: selections from Boccaccio, _The Decameron_ and Castiglione,
_The Courtier_ (ERes).

Illustrative reading: Alison Cole, _Virtue and Magnificance: Art of the
Italian Renaissance Courts_ , chap. 1 (Library Reserve).



Thursday 12/9. The Triumph and Failure of the Roman Revival and the Papal
Court.

Required Reading: Fiero, _The Humanistic Tradition, 3,_ chap. 18.

Illustrative reading: selections from Erasmus, _Julius Exclusus_ (ERes).



Thursday 12/16. **Final take-home examination and museum assignment due.**

