A SYLLABUS FOR CONTEMPORARY ARAB WORLD

Tue., Fri., 2:10--3:25

Office/Hours: Fri. 1:00--2:00

  
  

THE AMERICAN UNIVERSITY

College of Arts and Science

DEPARTMENT OF SOCIOLOGY

  
  
  
  

65.225.02 CONTEMPORARY ARAB WORLD

Fall 1999

  
  
  
  
  
  

Hurst #2?

  
  

E-Mail: iali@gusun.georgetown.edu

  
  

PURPOSE AND SCOPE

CONTEMPORARY ARAB WORLD investigates social change in the Arab World. It
examines the social, economic, political, and ideological structures of the
contemporary Arab World with an emphasis on the regional impact of the rise
and fall of oil revenues, the centrality of the state, and the rise of
political Islam. This course employs a macro-sociological approach which
situates the region in the global political economy and introduces students to
its problematics and historicalcultural specificity.

The course is analytically divided into five parts. The first introduces the
student to the sociology of the "Third World" with special reference to Arab-
Islamic societies. The second overviews the social history of the region and
of its cultural specificity: Islam. The third assesses the character, stages,
and consequences of European imperialism on the region. The fourth examines
the structure and dynamics of the contemporary Arab World including the
questions of ethnicity, religious sects, and social class and their
intersection. In this section, the issues of gender and family are considered.
In this part, the course analyzes the passing of the old order as a
consequence of oil-based wealth. The rapid rise and fall of oil revenues and
the social, economic, political, and ideological consequences of such change,
including the rise of political Islam, are discussed. Most significantly, the
expanded role and functions of the state in the postindependence period will
be highlighted, including their social implications. The fifth and final part
of the course assesses the future of the region in terms of prospects for
political liberalization and the social impact of current economic reforms.

  
  

65.225 CONTEMPORARY ARAB WORLD is a second-level course in Curricular Area
111, The International and Intercultural Experience, in the University's
General Education Program. This course is the second of a two-course sequence.
Students who take CONTEMPORARY ARAB WORLD after 33.105 World Politics, 61.185
Forms of the Sacred Religions of the East, or 65.1 10 Views from the Third
World will complete the two-course sequence in Curricular Area III of the
General Education Program.

  
  

COURSE REQUIREMENTS

Students are expected to attend lectures, see the films, participate in
classroom discussions and in other group activity. The student is expected to
keep up with the weekly assigned readings. In conjunction with the course, the
student is expected to read daily newspaper articles on the Arab World (and
the Middle East), Islam, and Arab/non-Arab relations, in The Washington Post
or The New York Times. In addition the student should also review two
periodicals, Middle East Report and Middle East International, both of which
are available on newsstands and at the AU Library. The first ten minutes of
each class period may be directed at discussion of current events, especially
if relevant to course content.

Selected videotapes for viewing in class are listed in the syllabus. Others,
which are optional, are for independent viewing in the library. They are also
noted in the syllabus and/or assigned during the course. A list of Arabic
novels and other works of fiction in translation is available upon request
from your instructor.

  
  
  
  

Student performance in this course will be evaluated in terms of the
following:

  
  

Quiz/Assignment 20%

Midterm exam 30%

Final exam 40%

Participation 10%

  
  
  
  

Academic Integrity

Standards of academic conduct are set forth in the University's Academic
Integrity Code. You are obligated to become familiar with your rights and
responsibilities as defined by the Code. Violations of the Code will not be
tolerated. Violations include receiving inappropriate assistance on
examinations or in writing papers and plagiarism.

  
  
  
  

Evaluation

A: demonstration of superior written work in fulfillment of course
requirements; improvement during the semester will be weighed in evaluation.

B: excellent written work in fulfillment of course requirements; improvement
during the semester will be weighed in the evaluation.

C: satisfactory written work in fulfillment of course requirements.

D: assigned work is not satisfactory or not completed and/or student fails to
meet minimum attendance requirements.

F: failure to meet minimum course goals--written assignments, class
participation and exams.

  
  

4 Keys to Succeed in this Course:

1\. DO THE READING

2\. Take notes or summarize readings (useful for literature review paper)

3\. Participate in class discussions

4\. Nothing is above criticism

  
  
  
  
  
  

REQUIRED TEXT and READINGS

  
  

Halim Barakat, The Arab World (University of California Press, 1993)

  
  

Bookstore Packet. The instructor has also prepared other relevant and
interesting readings from numerous sources which are collected in a packet on
sale at the Bookstore.

  
  

Readings on Reserve. All other assigned readings are on reserve in the
Library.

  
  
  
  

Note: The instructor reserves the right to make changes to readings, topics,
and dates provided in this syllabus.

  
  

COURSE OUTLINE

  
  
  
  

(W1) Introduction & Orientation: Scope of the Course

  
  

No Reading: Procedure, Lecture, and Discussion

  
  
  
  

(W2) The Arab World: An Overview

  
  

A. The Arab World: Geography, Population, Resources, Division, Differentiation
in Culture, Religion-Sect, Ethnicity, Class, Wealth and Poverty

  
  

Reading:

  
  

Barakat, Ch. 3, "Arab Identity," pp. 32-47, Ch. 9, "National Character and
Value Orientations," pp. 181-205.

  
  

Videotape: "The Arabs Today," to be shown and discussed in class.

  
  
  
  

(W3) Classic Orientalism and Other "Essentialisms"

  
  

A. Orientalism

B. Theocentrism

C. Cultural exceptionalism

D. Methodological exceptionalism

E. Arab/Muslim apologetics

  
  

Readings:

  
  

Walid Khalidi, Arabs and the West, The Forum, XXXII, December 1957, pp. 15-17,

HANDOUT

Barakat, Ch. 1, "Social and Political Integration," pp. 3-1 1, Ch. 2, "Arab
Society," pp. 12-31.

  
  

Recommended:

  
  

Edward Said, "Orientalism, PP 1-31

Said, "Islam and the West," pp. 3-32, Covering Islam, 1981,

M. Rodinson,"Westem Views of the Muslim World," pp.3-83, in Europe and the
Mystique of Islam, 1989.

L. MichalA, Cruel and Unusual: Negative Images of Arabs in American Culture
(Washington, DC: ADC, 1988).

S. Sabbagh, Sex, LIes and Stereotypes: The Image of Arabs in American Popular
Fiction (Washington, DC: 1990).

  
  

(W4) Classic and New Orientalism, Cont'd

  
  

Readings:

  
  

John Esposito, "Islamic Fundamentalism and the West," Ch. 6, pp. 168-212, in
The Islamic Threat. PACKET

Ali Mazroui, The Muslim world and the West," Foreign Affairs
(September/October 1997) RESERVE

  
  

Videotape: A short segment of the Bill Moyers Program on the Arab World and
Islam. It may be shown and discussed in class if time permits.

  
  
  
  

(W5) Arab Historical and Cultural Background

  
  

A. Who are the Arabs; Arab Identity

B. What is Islam; Islamic Sects

C. Rise and Fall of Arab-Islamic Empire; Decline and Division.

D. Islamic and Arab Culture

  
  

Readings:

  
  

Esposito, The Straight Path, Chapters 2, "The Muslim Community in History,"
andCHapter 3, "Religious Life: Belief and Practice." PACKET

Barakat, Ch. 7, pp. 125-9; section on popular religion.

  
  
  
  

Recommended:

  
  

Barakat, Ch. 10, "Creative Expression," pp. 206-238.

  
  
  
  

(W6) The Making of the Contemporary Arab World

  
  

A. Ottoman Dominion, 1516-1917

B. European Imperialism, 1800-1917; Decline and Fall of the Ottoman Empire

C. Political and Economic Balkanization

D. European Colonialism, 1919-1950

E. The Destruction of Palestine; Rise of Israel

F. Economic, Political, Social and Ideological Transformation: Rise of Radical
Arab

Nationalism

  
  

Readings:

  
  

Peter Mansrield, "The Long Decline," "The West Counterattacks," pp. 54-72, in
The Arabs (Thomas Crowell, 1976). PACKET

Mansfield, "Ottoman Subjects," pp. 73-118, in The Arabs. PACKET

Hershlag, "The Capitulatory System and Its Economic Implications," pp. 42-46,
and "The Spread of Foreign Concessions," pp. 47-52, in Introduction To The
Modern Economic History Of The Middle East, 1964. PACKET

  
  

(W7) Independence and Its Dilemmas

  
  

A. The Heritage of European Imperialism

B. The Struggle for Independence; The Struggle to Remain Independent; Era of
Radical Nationalism

  
  

Readings:

  
  

Albert Hourani, "The End of Empires (1939-1962)," Ch. 2 1, in A History of the
Arab Peoples, pp. 353-373.

Hourani, "The Climax of Arabism," Ch. 24, in A History of the Arab

Peoples (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1991), pp. 401-415. Hisham
Sharabi, "The Heritage of European Domination," pp. 23-42 in Nationalism and
Revolution In The Arab World. PACKET

Sharabi, "Socialism and Revolution," pp. 67-8 1, in Nationalism and Revolution
In The Arab World. PACKET

  
  

\---------- MIDTERM EXAM

  
  

W9) Women and the family

A. The Family: Changing patterns

B. Women: Differential roles

  
  

Readings:

  
  

Barakat, Ch. 6, "The Arab Family and the Challenge of Change," pp. 97-118.
Judith Tucker, ed., Arab Women: Old Boundaries, New Frontiers, Ch. X, "The
Arab Family in History," pp. 195-207. PACKET

Robert Springborg and James Bill, Politics of the Middle East, Ch. 3, section
on

"The Primordial Group Nexus: The Family," pp. 98-116. PACKET

Basem Musallam, "Sex and Society in Islam" (Entire Essay) RESERVE

  
  

Feature Film--Optional: "Wedding In Galilee" VHS 727. You can see it in the
Library independently or in groups.

  
  
  
  

(W9) Social Dynamics: Class, Sect, Ethnicity

  
  

A. Intertwined identities

B. Social change

  
  

Readings:

  
  

Barakat, Ch. 5, "Social Class: Beyond the Mosaic Model," pp. 73-96.

F. Khuri, "Sects and Religious Minorities," pp. 77-93, Imams and Emirs (Saqi,
1990).

PACKET

Samih Farsoun, "Class Structure and Social Change In the Arab World: 1995,"
pp. 221240 in H. Sharabi, ed., 7he NextArab Decade: Alternative Futures
(Boulder:

Westview Press, 1988). PACKET

Bill and Springborg, Ch. 3, section on "Class Structure: Horizontal

Stratification," pp. 116-135. PACKET

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

(W10) The Political Economy of Development and Oil: Social Impact

  
  

A. The political economy of development

B. The political economy of oil

  
  

Readings:

  
  

Farsoun, "Oil, State and Social Structure in the Middle East," Arab Studies

Quarterly, Vol. 10, No. 2, pp. 155-175. PACKET

Alan Richards and John Waterbury, "Contradictions of State-Led Growth," in
Political Economy of the Middle East, pp. 219-237.

  
  
  
  

(W11) The State and Authoritarian Rule: Social contract

  
  

Readings:

  
  

Hazem Beblawi, "The Rentier State In The Arab World," Arab Studies Quarterly,
Vol.

9, No. 4, pp. 383-397. In PACKET.

Giacomo Luciani, "Economic Foundations of Democracy and Authoritarianism: The
Arab World in Comparative Perspective," pp. 457-475 in Arab Studies Quarterly,
Vol. 10, No. 4. PACKET.

  
  
  
  

Recommended:

  
  

Michael Hudson, "State, Society and Legitimacy: An Essay on Arab Political
Prospects in the 1990s, " pp. 22-37 in Sharabi, ed., The Next Arab Decade.
PACKET Barakat, Ch. 8, "Arab Politics: Its Social Context," pp. 148-178.

Luciani, "Resources, Revenues, and Authoritarianism in the Arab World: Beyond
the Rentier State?" Ch. I 1, pp. 211-228, in Rex Brynen et al., eds.,
Political Liberalization and Democratization in, the Arab World.

  
  

(W 1 2) The Rise of Political Islam: Causes and Social Impact

A. Underlying causes: Various interpretations

Readings:

  
  

Philip Khoury, "Islamic Revivalism and the crises of the Secular State in the
Arab

World," in Ibrahim Ibrahim, ed., Arab Resources. PACKET

Richard Mitchell, Ch. 5, The Islamic Movement: Its Condition and Future
Prospects, in

Barbara Stowasser, ed., The Islamic Impulse, pp. 75-86. PACKET

John Esposito and John Voll, Ch. 8, "Egypt: Governmental, Populist, and
Extremist

Islam," in Esposito and Voll, eds., Islam and Democracy, pp. 173-9 1. PACKET

  
  

Recommended:

  
  

Barakat, Ch. 7, "Religion in Society," pp. 119-147.

  
  

(W 13) Prospects for Political Liberalization

  
  

Samih Farsoun and Christina Zacharia, "Class, Economic Change and Political
Liberalization in the Arab World," Ch. 13, pp. 261-80, in Political
Liberalization. PACKET

Sa'd Eddin Ibrahim, in Richard Norton, ed., Civil Society in the Middle East.

  
  
  
  
  
  

(W14) Economic Reform and Its Social Impact

  
  

A. The winners and the losers

  
  

No Reading Assigned for Economic Reform Lecture

  
  
  
  

Recommended:

  
  

Yahya Sadowski, "The New Orientalism," in MERIP. PACKET

We will discuss this article in the second part of class.

