* * *

![Musical Notes](notes1.gif)

* * *

MUSIC HISTORY AND APPRECIATION 100

Syllabus - Summer 1997

_Professor Carole Chardonnay_

(Office hours: Summer hours may vary, please see me for current schedule)

Music 103H Phone - 432-5041

**Professor's note: Please be so kind as to use these hours for questions and
concerns, not the time before, between and after class, as the technology set
up takes time and concentration. Thank you.**  
---  
  
_"Living is the trade I would like to teach." Jean Jacque Rousseau_  
---  
  
Description - This class fills a requirement for transfer in the Humanities.
Humanities defines as to how one relates to the rest of the world with the
knowledge that one has attained; therefore the knowledge imparted in this
class relates to the student's life.

The subject of this class is life. The vehicle to that end is music.

Paradigm - The course design creates an environment of interactive learning
that challenges the conceptual analysis and critical thinking of the
individual student by addressing the catalyst to change, the human condition,
the cultural indicators in history, and the resultant paradigm shift reflected
by music. Methodology: computer generated presentations, discourse,
multimedia, live performance and observational discovery in continuum.

Educational Philosophy

Mission Statement - Mega sensory teaching engages meta learning. Mega -
invokes the 14 learning intelligences. Meta - expects more comprehension,
inviting change / transformation within the student.

Protocol - 21st century educational evolution mandates minimizing the "stage
sage" in favor of "step aside and guide," procedures. The 2nd millennium
educational vision views the teacher as "orchestrater / coach."

1\. "Cultural Assumptions." The professor will challenge the student to
question "cultural assumptions." Academia is a microcosm of life where
opportunities for questioning, competition and collaboration must exist. Ex.

a. It is assumed that "all men are created equal." What about women and
children?

b. Cheating is about getting caught. Or is it the theft of one's own
development?

c. Ghetto Mentality. One is told they are nothing, so they act like nothing.
Or is it a stereotype based on bias?

d. Coke Machine Theory of Education Put in two quarters and out comes the
answer. Or is it based on two conflicting attitudes: 1. How easy is this
class? 2. What am I going to learn?

2\. "Greatness." The opposite of greatness/excellence in music is mediocrity.
Does too much exposure to mediocrity develop a tolerance for less than best?

a. What makes the genius of Mozart? b. Beethoven, his music and
humanitarianism.

3\. "Values." "Werklichkeit" - Fact and Truth. An invitation for the student
to address values, truths and principles in history through art/music.
Academic elitism tends to erode away the value system of students, and
replaces it with nothing.

a. The consciousness / attitude of a culture is directly reflected in its
music. What is the human condition, the cultural indicators that create a
catalyst for change and a direct paradigm shift in music? b. Beauty is in the
beholder. How is the beholder/beauty defined in history? Does the aesthetic
standard of beauty change throughout history? i.e. censorship?

4\. "Cultural and Spiritual Traditions."

Respect and understanding for the student's learning readiness, property,
ethnicity, culture and spiritual traditions will be maintained.

a. Carl Roger's Mastery Learning proposes that anyone can be taught to learn.
Time, repetition and ethnicity are not factors for assessing learning

.

b. The quality of silence. Noise pollution is not a class factor.

"Yesterday the people of Italy put hay on the streets so as not to distract
Giuseppe Verdi while composing."

Large Forum learning success is based on attentiveness, concentration,
appropriate behavior and an environment of quiet and calm. "So be it!"

c. Cultural diversity is evident across the OCC campus.. Diversity does not
make a nation great, freedom does. The freedom (choices that do not infringe
upon the freedom of another) of an individual to practice the traditions of
their roots is invited and encouraged. The retention of culture, language and
music are the struggles of cultural diversity.

d. _"The spirit is a song. Without song there is no life." Isaac Stern_  
---  
  
Educational Ideologies, Objectives, Goals.

_Perfection of means and confusion of goals seem to challenge our age. Albert
Einstein_  
---  
  
Professor's Note: It is said that Ideologies and Philosophies change every
three generations. Please peruse the above and below listed and determine if
they are due for change. Include these observations in the Libretto / Journal.  
---  
  
1\. Relevancy Relevancy effects retentive learning. The product of education
is independence. Implementation of independence is self-actualization
evidenced by individual creativity.

2\. Nexus - Bridge Connection with other Subjects.

3\. Projects. Kinesthetic learning. (Hands on) Libretto / CD ROM

4\. Reference Resources. Information doubles every 18 months. Textbooks become
inaccurate dinosaurs in the evolution of education.

5\. Computer Literacy.

The class protocol is based on computer generated presentations and
assignments as a format for modeling the importance of computer literacy.

The difference between the "haves and the have nots" in the 21st century will
be based on computer literacy. The computer is the greatest boon to education
since the Gutenberg Press-Renaissance.

6\. Critical and Conceptual Thought through Observational Discovery in
Continuum.

It is only with the heart that one can see rightly. Saint Exupery

Documentation, discourse and conceptual mapping (interacting with contained
information) will be utilized through student discernment of writings of
"authorities in the field," (experts) towards individual problem solving.

Critical and Conceptual Thought is the collection of knowledge and the process
of converting that knowledge into individual concepts known as "cognitive"
learning.

Critical and Conceptual Thought is not:

a. Preconceived opinion = prejudice (prejudged)

b. Over- exaggerated belief = stereotype

c. Threshold observation = occupational bias.

d. Selective bias. A perception, point of view, that allows opinion to appear
as fact.

7\. The "Whole Student." The term "Whole Student" refers to a 100% rate of
success.

8\. Fun Life is not a dress rehearsal.

9\. Rubrics (method of evaluation) Assessment is based on the quality of
observational discovery in continuum and the ability to conceptualize
knowledge through resources. It is that phenomenon of measurement that enables
student accountability.

Three Sections 1. 12:30pm. - 2:00pm.,Tuesday and Thursday-FA 119, 2. 2:00 \-
5:00pm., Tuesday - FA 119, 3 7:00-10:00pm, Wednesday, FA 116.

Course Assistants Responsible for attendance, seating, posting and recording
of grades. Questions on these subjects should be addressed to them.

Texts and Supplies - (OCC bookstore)

1\. Weiss and Taruskin, Music in the Western World.

2\. DiskNotes. The Chardonnay DiskNotes contain lecture notes, assignments and
additional readings.) The disk may be obtained from the Mac Lab located on the
4th floor of the Library for $1.00. This Lab is equipped with Power Macs which
read and translate a variety of word processing programs - both Macintosh and
IBM. Ask for assistance.

If the student has access to a PC, tell the Assistant the software used on
that PC for word processing. i.e. Claris Works, Word Perfect 5.0, Windows,
etc. If the student does not have access to a PC, the Mac Lab is available for
student use. There is an hourly fee for this service - a collaborative venue
is recommended.

It is strongly recommended that students acquire a PC for their continued
success in higher education and life. 3. Mel Bay. You Can Teach Yourself
Recorder

4\. Recorder - a musical instrument found in the woodwind family.

5\. 3x5 cards Attendance verification, Reactions, Questions.

6\. Journal -Libretto

Grades (Two options)

1\. Earned Grade - All work is required. (A-F) See (Rubrics / DiskNotes)

2\. Credit - No Credit - The student will do all of the work, but will express
to the Records Office a CR/NCR option. (CR averages into a GPA of C.)

Class Requirements

1\. Attendance - Absences are unacceptable and inappropriate! (ADA - average
daily attendance is the common denominator for Community College budgets. An
absence affects future students: less course offerings, dropping of needed
classes towards graduation, less teachers and larger classes. If the student
is not in class, no $.) Of the 550 points for an A, 200 points are attendance.
Absence from a 1 1/2 hour session -50 points. The Educational Code mandates an
automatic drop following 3 absences.

Make-up: The student may attend another Music 100 section due to emergency,
with permission from the professor.

2\. Mid Term and Final. Observational Discovery Journal/Libretto in Continuum.

Handwritten and typed versions. (See Journal Guidelines)

3\. Recorder - The student will be instructed in the reading and playing of
music and a musical instrument and will demonstrate an understanding and
ability to perform as part of the Mid Term and Final Exams.

4\. Concert Attendance - Reaction to six concerts presented in class. The
Nature of Concert Formats.

a. Orchestra - (Symphony - Philharmonic - Chamber)

b. Choral

c. Recital - Vocal - Instrumental

d. Opera

e. Musical Theatre - Comedy

f. Jazz-Folk-Rock

"Vita Brevis, Ars Longa! (Life is short, art long!)

Fine

Syllabus

Click here to return to: [Main Page](default.html)  
---  
  
* * *

![](notes1.gif)

* * *

