![](../clearpixel.gif) |  
---|---  
| ![ Peace Building in Divided Societies ](../33.596_TextureBanner.gif)  
|  
---  
| [![ Home ](../33.220/home_TextureButton.gif)](../index.html)  
---  
[![ 33.220 ](../33.519/33.220_TextureButton.gif)](../33.220/33.220.html)  
[![ 33.519 ](../33.596/33.519_TextureButton.gif)](../33.519/33.519.html)  
[![ 33.596 ](../33.596/33.596_TextureButtonOn.gif)](../33.596/33.596.html)  
[![ 33.609 ](../bio/33.609_TextureButton.gif)](../33.609/33.609.html)  
[![ Bio ](../bio_TextureButton.gif)](../bio/bio.html)  
| ![](../clearpixel.gif) | ![](../clearpixel.gif)  
---|---  
|

**SIS 33. 596: FALL 1998

WEDNESDAY 8:10-10:40 PM

Dr. Mohammed Abu-Nimer  

**_Phone (202) 885 1656              _

_Fax      (202) 885 1661  

E-mail:_    [abunim@american.edu](mailto:abunim@american.edu)

_Office:      _SIS Annex 2

**_Office Hours:_** Wed 1-2:00 and 6-7:00 pm  & Thurs.2-4:00 p.m. (or by
appointment)

_Teaching assistant:_ Erin McCandless

_E-mail:_ [ EM4444A@american.edu](mailto:EM4444A@american.edu)

Home: (202) 986-6463  

**Office Hours:** Monday 1:30-3:00pm  

**Course Objectives and Description:

** This course focuses on different peace-building approaches and strategies
utilized in the context of deep-rooted conflicts and divided societies in a
broad perspective. Therefore, it aims to: (1) identify and understand the
characteristics of deep rooted conflicts and the nature of ethnic relations in
divided societies; (2) examine theoretical frameworks which underline certain
peace building strategies and approaches; (3) understand the complexity and
challenges involved in implementing peace building strategies in the context
of deep-rooted conflicts.

In light of these objectives, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict-known to be one
of the most complex case of deep-rooted conflict-will be critically reviewed
and examined.  Both dimensions of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in the
West Bank and Gaza, as well as the relationship between Palestinians and Jews
within Israel will be investigated. Therefore, historical, cultural, social,
and religious factors involved in this conflict will be reviewed.

In addition, this course investigates numerous challenges faced by the Israeli
and Palestinian peacemakers in various historical phases of the conflict along
with the different peace-building approaches and strategies they have
employed, including the initiation of dialogue, launching peace organizations
and massive protest movements, monitoring of human rights abuse, educating for
democracy and curriculum development, carrying out conflict resolution
training, encouraging intercultural and interreligious encounters, and
conducting formal negotiations.  Moreover, this course will identify and list
the profiles of peacemakers in divided societies, hence, examining the social,
religious, and other features of  Palestinian and Israeli peace activists.
The course will evaluate the impact and role of national and grassroots
movements in promoting peace and negotiation, instead of focusing solely on
that of the political elite in perpetuating or settling the conflict.

Thus, the course will focus on protest and peace movements which aim to change
the status quo. Scholars and activists have continuously expressed doubts in
regard to the extent to which a peace movement, regardless of whether it is
based on the resources or the magnitude of mass mobilization, can really bring
political and social change to societies. This course examines, this issue in
the context of the Israeli- Palestinian peace movements. The course will
evaluate the impact of the main social and political movements (Israeli peace
movement, Palestinian peace activists and the Intifada) in launching the
recent peace initiative in the Middle East.  In order to understand the
complexity of these movements, the course will first explore some basic
elements of the conflict, such as: (a) the national and religious roots of the
Arab-Jewish conflict; (b) the current issues under negotiation; (c) the
alternative solutions proposed; and (d) the social and political obstacles for
the implementation of a negotiated settlement.

In this context, students will discuss the dilemmas and obstacles awaiting
activists who work for peace, through these movements.

Examples from other deep rooted conflicts such as Cyprus, Northern Ireland,
South Africa will be utilized in the course too, However, the main case study
will be the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

**Course requirements and expectations** :

The final grade will be based on:

\- 20%  Book review (biography)

 \- 20% A group report on peace building project

\- 40%  Research paper

\- 10% Summaries

 \- 10%  Participation

Students are expected to attend all classes and take an active role in the
class discussions as well as in the presentation of materials and assignments.
Each student is expected to have an e-mail account on the internet, in order
to subscribe to two networks that provide information on current events in the
region.

Readings summaries: you are expected to hand in a summary of the weekly
reading every class. The summary should not be descriptive only (do not
describe what in each article), but highlight points that you find interesting
in the readings, compare articles, express your opinion (evaluate what you
read).  You have to complete at least 10 weeks of readings.

Book review (bibliography): each student is expected to thoroughly review a

biography of an Israeli or Palestinian. Through the biography the student
should clarify the relationship and attitude which the reviewed person had/has
with the various efforts of peace building. Also identify the impact which
this person had/has on the course of the conflict. The paper is due in class
on October 14th.

In groups of 3-4 members, students are expected to select a peace building
project from Palestinian-Israel context or other case study and contextualize
that project in the peace building theoretical framework. The project is due
in class on November 18, 1998.

Research paper is due on December 9, 1998 in class. Each student is expected
to conduct a research paper using primary or secondary sources (archival,
empirical data, etc.). The paper 's topic can be on any case study or question
that deals with peace building in divided society. Information on paper format
and length will be distributed during the semester.

**Required Readings:

**

1\. Hall-Cathalla, D.,  _The Peace Movement in Israel 1967-1987_ , New York:
St. Martin's Press, 1990.

2\. Elizabeth Warnock Fernea and Mary Evelyne Hocking (eds.). _Israeli and
Palestinians:

 The Struggle For Peace_, Austin:University of Texas Press, 1992.

3\. Paul Lederach, J. _Building Peace : Sustainable Reconciliation in Divided
Societies

_ Washington D.C. : USIP, 1997.

4\. Gordon and Gordon, (ed). _Israel/Palestine: The Quest For Dialogue_ , New
York: Orbis,1991.

5\. Weiner, Y. (ed). _The Handbook of Interethnic Coexistence_ , New York:
Continuum,1998 .

6.  Two Course Packs on Reserve : Recommended and Required articles.

**Recommended Readings:

** 1\. Hurwitz, D. (ed). _Walking the Redline: Israelis in the Search of
Justice for Palestine

_ Philadelphia: New Society Publisher, 1992.

2\. Robinson, G. "The Logic Of Palestinian State-Building After Oslo."
_Building A Palestinian State the Incomplete Revolution_., Bloomington and
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1997

**Course Outline:

_Sept. 2   Introductions

_**\- Background, expectations, syllabus, readings, etc.

\- Assigning up the case studies

\- Theoretical and historical frameworks

1\. Chapters 1 and 2 (Lederarch)

**_Sept. 9 Theoretical Framework

_** \- What are the unique characteristics of divided societies and deep-
rooted conflicts?

\- What are the strengths and limitations of the 'transformative peace
building approach'?

**Required Readings

** 1\. The Dynamics and Process of Conflict (Chapter 5. Lederach)

2\. The Peace-building and Reconciliation Framework (Chapter 3,4,6 Lederach)

**Recommended Readings:

** 1\. Burton and Dukes, (Eds.). Readings in Management and Resolution, St.
Martins, 1990

**_Sept. 16. An Overview: Israeli-Palestinian Conflict

_** \- What are the major historical events in this conflict?

**Required Readings:

** 1\. Avraham Zilkha, "History of Israeli- Palestinian Conflict" (Fernea: Ch.
1)

2\. Chronology and maps  (Reserve)

3\. M. Muslih, "A History of Israeli Palestinian Conflict" (Fernea: Ch. 2).

**Recommended Readings:

** 1\. Kemerling, B. Steering, "A Path Under Occupation." In _The Making of A
People_ , New York: the Free Press, 1993. (Reserve)

2\. Beinin, J., "New History, New Politics." (Fernea and Hocking, PP. 80-87)

3\. Rothman J., "Politics From the Inside Out: A Cultural History of Modern
Jewish and Palestinian Nationalism." In _Cooperation and Confrontation:
Resolving Ethnic and Regional Conflict_ , Newbury Park and London: Sage
Publications, 1993 (Reserve)

**_Sept 23. Causes, Parties, and Issues: A Right Wing Perspective

_** \- Who are the major players or actors in the conflict?

\- What are the issues?

**Required Readings:

** 1\. Tessler, "The Political Right in Israel." (JPS, Vol. XV, 1986)
(Reserve)

2.  Ian Lustick, "The Worldview of Jewish Fundamentalism." In _For the Land and the Lord_ , New York: Council of Foreign Relations Press, 1988. (Reserve)

3\. Lisa Taraki, "The Islamic Resistance Movement in the Palestinian
Uprising," _MERIP_ , February, 1989. (Reserve)

4\. Matti Steinberg, "The PLO and Palestinian Islamic Fundamentalism,"
_Jerusalem Quarterly_ , No. 52, 1989. (Reserve)

**Recommended Readings:

** 1\. Avruch, K. "Jewish Fundamentalism in Israel." In _Critical Essays on
Israeli Society, Politcs, and Culture_ , Books on Israel II. Eds. Lustick, I.
and Rubin B., New York: SUNY Press, 1991. (Reserve)

2\. Hamas "Waiting for Secular Nationalism to Self-Destruct: An Interview with
M. Zahhar," _JPS_ , xxiv, no.3, 1995. (Reserve)

**_Sept. 30 Peace Building on the Political Elite Level: The Top Down Approach

_** \- What are the current developments and future prospect for peace and
conflict?

\- What are the major current obstacles in the peace process?

\- What were the obstacles in pre-Oslo period?

\- How was the conflict perceived by peacemakers in the pre-settlement period?

\- What are major developments that followed the settlement?

\- What were the challenges that brought the collapse of the settlement?

**Required Readings:

** 1.  Khalidi, A. "The Palestinians: Current Dilemmas, Future Challenges,"
_JPS_ , xxiv, no. 2, 1995. (Reserve)

2\. Sara Roy, "Alienation or Accommodation?"  _JPS_ , xxiv, No. 4, 1995.
(Reserve)

3\. Avi Shalim, "Israeli Politics and Middle east Peacemaking," _JPS_ , xxiv,
No. 4, 1995. (Reserve)

4\. Robinson, G. "The Logic Of Palestinian State-Building After Oslo."
_Building A Palestinian State the Incomplete Revolution_., Bloomington and
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1997. (Reserve)

5\. Mansour, C. "The Palestinian-Israeli Peace Negotiation: An Overview and
Assessment," _JPS_ , xxii, no 3, 1993. (Reserve)

**Recommended Readings:

** 1\. Norton, "Toward enduring peace in the Middle East." (Fernea and
Hocking)

2.  Vitalis, "Options for Peace." (Fernea and Hocking)

3\. Tamari, S., "The Future in the Present Issue." (Fernea and Hocking)

**_

Oct. 7 Peace building through protest movement

_**\- What role do protest and peace movements play in peace building?

\- How and why do they emerge?

\- Who are the leaders of such movements?

**Required Readings:

** 1\. "Upsetting the Balance." (Chapter 1. Hall-Cathala)

2\. "The Peace Movement Emerges." (Chapter 2. Hall-Cathala)

3\. "The Rise and Fall of Peace Now." (Chapter 3. Hall-Cathala)

**_Oct. 14 Decline of Peace Movement: Over Coming the Challenge

_ *  _Book review is due in class(the biography of a peacemaker).

_** \- How do ethnic differences impact the internal dynamics of peace
building groups?

\- What are the challenges in keeping a unified peace building movement?

**Required Readings:

** 1.  "Ethnicity and the Peace Movements." (Chapter 5. Hall-Cathala)

2\. "New Mezrachi Initiatives and Dialogue." (chapter 6. Hall-Cathala)

3\. "Dovish Parties and Protest Organizations." (Chapter 8. Hall-Cathala)

**Recommended Readings

** 1\. Frank Rupprecht, "Peace Movement in History and at Present." In _Peace
Movement in History and at Present: Towards a Comparative Analysis of Peace
Movements,_ Dartmoth, Gower. Publication, 1990.   (Reserve)

2.  "Non-violence, Free Speech and Nuclear War." (Chapter 9. Hall-Cathala)

**_

Oct. 21 Protest Among the Dominated Groups as a Tool for Peace Building

_**\- How do dominated groups convey their initiatives for peace?

\- What were the Intifada's impacts on the Israeli society and the peace
movement?

\- What was the role of non-violence strategies in the Intifada?

\- Who are the 'protest movement' leaders?

**Required Readings:

** 1\. Kaufman, "The Intifada and the Peace Camps in Israel: A Critical
Introspective," _JPS,_ Vol. L, xvii, 1988. (Reserve)

2.  Benor, Y., "Intifada." In _My Enemy, My Self_ , New York: Doubleday, 1989

(Reserve)

3.  "Profiles of Israeli and Palestinian Peacemakers." (Fernea and Hocking) 

**Recommended Readings:

** 1\. Kaminar, R. . Politics of Protest: the Israeli Peace Movement and the
Palestinian Intifada, New York: Orbis, 1996

2\. Lockman, Z., and J. Beinin (eds.) . The Palestinian Uprising Against
Israeli Occupation, Boston, MA: South End Press, 1989

**_Oct. 28 Women's Peace and Protest Movement: Strong Actors in Peace Building

_** \- What allow women to be such strong actors in peace building?

\- What are the obstacle which block effective participation in women's peace
organizations?

**Required Readings:

** 1\. Michallef,  "Israeli-Palestinian Women Movement." (Fernea and Hocking)

2\. Yvonne Deutsch, "Israeli Women: From Protest to a Culture of Peace."  In
_Walking the Redline: Israelis in the Search of Justice for Palestine,_
Hurwitz, D. (ed.), Philadelphia: New Society Publisher, 1992. (Reserve)

3\. Nadia Hijab, "Palestinian Women: The Key To A Secular, Democratic State."

In _Palestinian Self Government: An Early Assessment_ , The Center For Policy
Analysis on Palestine, Washington DC 1994. (Reserve)

**Recommended Readings:

** 1\. Ebba Augustin, "Developments in the Palestinian Women's Movement During
the Intifada."  (Reserve)

**_Nov. 4 Peace Building Through Dialogue

_** \- What are the principles of 'dialogue'?

\- How to conduct dialogue-group?

\- How do religious principles influence dialogue?

**Required Readings:

** 1\. Gordon and Gordon, Introduction 1-17 and Conclusion:116-125

2.  Volkan, "The Tree Model: Psychopolitical Dialogue and the Promotion of Coexistence." (Weiner, Handbook).

3.  "Against Racism For Dialogue." (Chapter 4. Hall-Cathala)

**Recommended Readings:

** 1.  Haim Gordon and Jan Demarest, "From Dialogue to Responsibility:
Bridging Conflict Resolution and Peace Education," In _Research in Social
Movements, Conflict and Change_ , Vol. 7, Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1984.
(Reserve)

**_Nov. 11 Dialogue and Power in Peace Building:   A Palestinian Perspective
and an Israeli perspective

_**\- How do power relations influence the perception, willingness, and
outcome of dialogue?

\- What are the obstacles for and pitfalls of dialogue?

**Required Readings:

** 1\. Aloni,S., "The Quest for Human Rights and The Need for Dialogue: Two
Sovereign Peoples." (Gordon and Gordon, pp.21-29)

2.  Shakdiel, L., "Dialogue as an Opportunity for Spiritual Growth: Linking Tradition with Creativity." (Gordon and Gordon, pp. 43-59)

3\. Ashrawi, H., Principles, "Politics, and Pronouns: Evolution of the
Palestinian-Israeli Dialogue." (Gordon and Gordon, pp. 103-116).

4\. Hussaini, "The Prospect for Dialogue: Accepting the PLO." (Gordon and
Gordon, pp. 29-39)

5\. Ateek, S., "The Basic principles of Dialogue in the Israeli-Palestinian
Conflict: Respect, Honesty, Sincerity, Humility," (Gordon and Gordon, pp.
59-75)

6\. Abdel Shafi, H., "Integrity and Dialogue: My Reasons for Skepticism."
(Gordon and Gordon pp. 149-160)

**Recommended Readings:

** 1\. Uri Davis, "The Alternative: The PLO," In _Israel: An Apartheid State_.
London and New Jersey: Zed Books Ltd., 1987. (Reserve)

2\. Jonathan Kutab, "An Exchange on Dialogue: The Pitfalls of Dialogue," _JPS_
, Vol. 17, No 2, 1988. (Reserve)

3\. Kaufam, E., "An Exchange on Dialogue: Israeli Palestinian Dialogue
Prospect for Grass Roots Communication," _JPS_ , Vol 17, No 2, 1988. (Reserve)

**_Nov. 18 Peace Building Tools for Minority- Majority Relations

* Group project is Due in class.

_**\- Historical and political overview of Arab-Jewish Relations in Israel

\- Contact Hypothesis: Strengths and limitations

\- Theories of encounter and inter-group relations

\- Techniques of encounters

**Required Readings:

** 1\. Amir, Yehuda, "Contact Hypothesis in Ethnic Relations." (Handbook)

2.  Derman-Spark, "Anti-bias education: Toward a World of Justice and Peace." (Handbook)

3\. Hewstone and Brown (eds.), "Contact is Not Enough: An Inter-group
Perspective on the Contact Hypothesis." In _Contact and Conflict in Inter-
group Encounters_ , New York: Basil Blackwell, 1986. (Reserve)

4\. Bard, "Variety of Coexistence Efforts in Israel: Lessons For the USA."
(Handbook)

**Recommended Readings:

** 1.  El-Asmar, _To Be An Arab in Israel_ , The Institute for Palestine
Studies, 1978.

(Reserve)

2\. Sharp, "Nonviolence Action in Acute Interethnic Conflicts." (Handbook)

3.  Kriesberg, "Coexistence and Reconciliation of Communal Conflicts." (Handbook)

4\. Walzer, "Education, Democratic Citizenship and Mulitculturalism."
(Handbook)

**_Dec. 2 Reconciliation and Coexistence Tools of Peace Building:

Models of Coexistence Work Between Arabs and Jews In Israel:

_Required Readings:

**1\. Hall-Cathalla,  "Peace Through Encounters and Education." (Chapter 7.
Hall-Cathalla)

2.  Feureverger, "Oasis of Peace: A Community of Moral Education in Israel." (Handbook)

3\. Bar and Eady, "Education to Cope with Conflict: Encounters between Jews
and Palestinian Citizens of Israel." (Handbook)

4.  Sonnenschein, Halabi, and Friedman, "Israeli-Palestinian Workshops: Legitimation of Palestinian Identity and Changes in Power Relationships." (Handbook)

5\. Hertz-Lazarowitz, Kupermintz, and Lang, "Arab-Jewish Student Encounter:
Beit Hagefen Coexistence Programs." (Handbook)

**Recommended Readings:

** 1\. Jaffe, "Ethnic and Minority Groups in Israel: Challenges for Social
Work Theory." (Weiner, Handbook)

2\. Desivilya, "Jewish-Arab Coexistence in Mixed Medical Teams: A Pilot
Study." (Weiner, Handbook).

**_Dec. 9 Peace Building through Conflict Resolution Techniques

_ * _Research paper is due in class for presentation

_** \- What are the contribution of conflict resolution techniques in peace
building?

\- What are the limitations?

\- How do the dominant and dominated groups perceive such techniques?

**Required Readings:

** 1\. Coleman and Deutsch, "The Mediation of Interethnic Conflict in
Schools." (Weiner, Handbook)

2\. Morton Deutsch, "Constructive Conflict Resolution: Principles, Training,
And Research." (Weiner, Handbook)

**Recommended Readings:

** 1\. Jay Rothman, "Dialogue in Conflict: Past and Future." (Weiner,
Handbook)

2\. Sherman, "Application of Dispute Resolution in the Israeli-Palestinian
Conflict." (Fernea and Hocking)

3\. Kelman H., "Acknowledging the Other's Nationhood: How to Create A

 Momentum for the Israeli-Palestinian Negotiation," _JPS_ xxii, no. 1992.

**Recommended Readings:

** 1.  Toscano, An Answer to War: Conflicts and Intervention in Contemporary
International Relations (Weiner, Handbook)

2\. Kelman , Informal Mediation by the scholar/practitioner (Weiner, Handbook
)  
![](../clearpixel.gif) |  
---|---  
|  |

[[Home](../index.html)] |

[[33.220](../33.220/33.220.html)] |

[[33.519](../33.519/33.519.html)] |

[[33.596](../33.596/33.596.html)] |

[[33.609](../33.609/33.609.html)] |

[[Bio](../bio/bio.html)]  
---|---|---|---|---|---

