![](http://www.yale.edu/yup/images/mastbooks.jpeg)

[![](http://www.yale.edu/yup/images/0300069219s.jpg)  
](http://www.yale.edu/yup/books/069219.htm)

|

RADIO FREE EUROPE AND THE PURSUIT OF DEMOCRACY  
My War Within the Cold War  
  
by George Urban

* * *

[Return to book's catalogue page](http://www.yale.edu/yup/books/069219.htm)  
  
Chapter One: Preparations  
  
My eyes remained dry when the Soviet system finally imploded; yet I felt a
curious pang of loss. A sparring partner who had in some ways served me well
had fallen by the wayside. A predictable foe beyond the hills, often heard but
seldom seen, had paradoxically been a source of reassurance. Having a great
enemy had been almost as good as having a great friend and -- at times of
disaffection within our own ranks -- arguably better. A friend was a friend,
but a good adversary was a vocation. Or was it, I sometimes wondered, that my
long preoccupation with the "dialectic" had so thoroughly infected me that I
could imagine no life beyond an adversarial one? The reader will judge.

It was not that my contrapuntal relationship with communism responded to some
deeply felt need in my character. The compulsion to argue, fence, and fight,
almost regardless of the objectives, was not the force that drove me --
although it was, all too clearly, the motivation that fuelled some of my
friends and colleagues in the Cold War. But even I was taken aback when the
ground began to shake around the Soviet system and empire. Would they be
swallowed up by their own incompetence without a final knock-out blow from us?
Would history in my lifetime pit us against another worthwhile challenge?
Would it bestow on Europe another unifying enemy of the stature of Stalin --
anyone as ruthless, cunning, and worthy of our blade? True, the ideology of
communism was unlikely to desert us -- ideologies seldom do; but it was the
practical embodiment of that ideology -- Soviet power and the Soviet
organisation of human lives -- that had absorbed most of my energies and given
meaning to my life; and it was the self-destruction of that outwardly
indestructible colossus that made me, in 1989, rejoice and feel deprived at
the same time.

If it sounds as though I spent the Cold War pursuing intellectually enjoyable
activities, that was not always the case. Tangling with the Leninist utopia
was mostly tedious. Like a repeating groove on a gramophone record, the
polemics were confined to a smallish number of themes of increasing absurdity.
With a few exceptions, they strained my patience without stimulating my
imagination or intellect.

In contrast to the remarkable Soviet achievements in the craft of subversion
and global image building, much Soviet and all Chinese broadcast propaganda
was parochial, simple-minded, and mis-directed. (And I said so, to the
astonishment of my Chinese hosts, when I was given a tour, as a "friendly"
visitor, of the Chinese foreign broadcasting establishment in Peking in 1979.)
There were no audiences for "positive heroes" in Western Europe; the show
elements of the show trials were blindingly obvious; and the Colorado beetles
allegedly dropped by American aircraft to destroy the North Korean potato crop
could destroy no potatoes because there were none to destroy. Poles, Czechs,
and Hungarians found it a little difficult to believe, especially after the
oppressive applications of Soviet power in 1956 and 1968, that imperialism and
colonialism were exclusively capitalist devices; and to the proletariat of
East Germany it was not immediately obvious that the West German workers under
capitalist management were getting progressively impoverished while they in
the German Democratic Republic were marching forward to an ever more radiant
future.

The surrogate component in communist propaganda was just too inept, the
incitement too crude, and the vocabulary too transparent to carry credibility.
Only Western intellectuals bent on self-delusion would be deceived. We in the
West had an easier time of it with the words we were addressing to the East.
In the electronic age, the facts spoke for themselves. All Western public
diplomacy had to do was to provide the echo chambers and voice the sentiments
of those who could not speak for themselves.

Grappling with the theory of communism was a different matter. There existed a
higher sort of hermeneutics of the sacred texts. Such criticism could be
intriguing and deployed to some purpose; but the demand for it was minimal,
and what demand there was came principally from Western universities where
Marxism was riding high and the taste for public jousting was widespread.
Tilting lances with academic communists, whether of the orthodox or
deviationist school, was always worth a visit to Cambridge or Columbia
University. In the communist countries themselves, however, the canons of Marx
and Lenin were, outside the official coteries, treated with contempt and had
become socially unacceptable.

It was only towards the end of the Soviet system and after its collapse that
the Cold War gave me a modicum of satisfaction. It was then that I had my
first encounters with people who had read me or listened to me over the years
behind the Curtain and who told me how some of us, and the institutions we
represented, had, apparently, contributed to keeping the spirit of resistance
alive and brought a measure of light into their universe. This was good to
know. It was a reward for the rather puritanical work ethic I had imposed on
myself to obliterate the pain of having to wrestle, day after day, with the
repetitive falsehoods and empty triumphalism of Soviet propaganda.

One of the most remarkable pieces of feedback came my way on my very first
visit to post-Soviet Kiev in November 1991.

While I was waiting for my guide, Oxana, at the Cafe Dnieper, someone
unexpectedly tapped me on the shoulder and asked in fair English:

"You are George Urban, aren't you?"

"And who are you, and how do you know my name?"

"Ah," a squat-looking middle-aged man replied, taking off his fur hat,
"thereby hangs a long tale, which I haven't got time to tell you right now
because a party of German businessmen I'm escorting to Simferopol is waiting
in a car downstairs. Let me just say this: I had heard from your interpreter,
Oxana Taranenko, a former colleague of mine, that she was meeting the Austrian
Airlines flight from Vienna, with you on board. My German guests were on the
same plane, so I decided to try to make myself known to George Urban."

"But why did you? And how is it that my name means anything to you?"

"Well," he went on, speaking at great speed, partly in English, partly in
German, "This may surprise you. I had been an officer in the KGB, ending up
with the rank of colonel. As we can now talk about these things quite freely,
I want you to know that for many years I was a spy and had to learn German and
English, and other languages. At one time I was the head of the USSR's entire
spy network in the Middle East. But then the Israelis got me -- and eventually
I fell from grace . . ."

"This is all highly interesting, but how do I come into your story?"

"Oh, that's very simple. When I was being trained for intelligence work as a
young officer, one of the Western journals we had to study as part of our
syllabus was Encounter magazine, because that, we were told, would give us an
insight into the enemy's thinking and ideological machinations at the most
sophisticated level. Now, your name and your writings figured prominently in
Encounter for many years. I had to study you," he said with great emphasis,
"study you! How could I forget your name?"

"And did you find our writings in Encounter useful as a clue to what the
'enemy' was plotting?"

"Useful, useful -- I found it so fascinating that gradually you and your
colleagues weaned me away from my oath and my ideology and made me into a
dissident. You see, the Encounter syllabus was too persuasive. It spawned
doubt, then occasional insubordination, and finally open dissent in the mind
of a master spy! I read you first as a threat and then as a source of
inspiration. Can you beat that?" he said with a broad grin. "I was arrested
and given a prison sentence, and when things began to change under Gorbachev,
I was released and took up a post as professor of German literature at Kiev
University, where your guide, Oxana, too, is a lecturer. In any case, I have
to rush; let me just thank you and Encounter for having done what you have for
us."

The story of the ex-KGB colonel (Yuri Linov was the name he gave me) was the
highlight of my trip and an extraordinary recognition of the Encounter group's
work in the contest of ideas. But in the 1950s and 1960s, any prospect that we
could turn the tables on communism had been distant in the extreme and not, as
I then saw it, worth a lifetime's investment of intellectual energy.

I found the Soviet system not only cruel and oppressive but also crude and
vulgar. There was a grubbiness, a meanness and degradation about organised
communism that offended my sensibilities. Even to argue against it struck me
as implying complicity. Should I allow myself to be distracted from my other
and, as I liked to believe, more worthwhile, pursuits in philosophy and
literature? And could one challenge an ideology from liberal democracy's
uncertain platform, "light denied"?

Clearly, I was suffering from the half-truth syndrome that troubled Arthur
Koestler. My will, my instincts, my youth were all lined up to do battle with
the false creed, but what exactly the true creed was, was harder to decide. I
saw European unification, in the early 1950s, as the only new and deeply
encouraging initiative. It was a fitting though much belated response to the
1914-45 European civil war. But in Britain, despite Churchill's 1946 Zurich
address, the idea of a united Europe was being treated with condescension, if
not contempt. A nation that had won World War II on paper but had in reality
lost it could not muster the humility or the vision to fit in with the other
losers. The grave consequences of that postwar British hubris are still with
us. Britain's self-imposed satellite status vis-a-vis the United States is by
now a fact of life, even though Britain is, formally at least, part of the
European Union. For a nation supposedly as realistic as the English (the
Irish, the Welsh, and the Scots are a different matter) to be deluded by a
myth of superiority for so long and with such self-damaging effect is one of
the sad marvels of the modern world.

In the event, I managed to gather a certain amount of assurance from the
anxious man's customary belief that so much wickedness cannot go unpunished.
But that was more of a prayer than a programme. I drew strength, more
seriously, from the spirit of the Stefan George Circle, which was the subject
of my slowly evolving doctoral dissertation and, in a different sense, from my
very private interpretation of Christianity. But these were abstract,
philosophical, and aesthetic sources of inspiration. To apply them to
international communications would have been a hopeless and perhaps even
ridiculous enterprise. "A private radio station broadcasting esoteric verse to
select East European audiences in the small hours," should have been my chosen
medium -- as an irreverent George Mikes (then a BBC colleague) once quipped in
the mid-1950s. He may have been right.

The decision was made for me by the way the Soviet Union was run and Soviet
power was exercised. I found myself a belligerent the day I joined the BBC in
late 1947, and I went on being profoundly involved in the global engagement to
the end. I never doubted that what I was doing was right and important. I was
putting my shoulder to the wheel with an enthusiasm that some of my friends
thought was worthy of a better cause. I myself did frequently wonder whether
creating some good, no matter how humble, in one's private environment might
not leave a more positive mark, and give more satisfaction, than polemicising
with a dated, and even then clearly ailing, tyranny. A book, a strong
spiritual commitment, even two stanzas of verse, might survive, give a modicum
of pleasure, or induce reflection; but who would remember the rank and file
who contributed in one way or another to the demise of bolshevism -- if indeed
it ever occurred? For in the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s the Soviet system was on
the march, and it was not wholly beneficial for one's career or intellectual
reputation to be known as an anticommunist.

Least of all was it easy to oppose the Soviet system from the right or even,
as I did, from the liberal right. My long preoccupation with Stefan George, my
defence, at various meetings in London, of Cardinal Mindszenty after his show
trial in 1949, the "reactionary" and, I might add, very mediocre poetry I had
published in Hungary (duly banned by the authorities) had made me suspect in
the eyes of various socialists and fellow-travellers at many British
universities, in some sections of the BBC, and of the British press. My first
application for a job in Britain was turned down by the BBC Monitoring Service
on the argument (openly stated) that I was too hostile to the new facts of
life in Eastern Europe. Significantly, the post I eventually obtained in the
European Service had just been vacated by a writer who had gone back to
Hungary to support the same Soviet-sponsored regime that had caused me to
leave. Within two years he was in prison, and his case was not exceptional. In
those early postwar years, Stalin, Tito, Matyas Rakosi, Anna Pauker, and other
Stalinist leaders had many admirers in the British establishment. For them,
World War II had not quite ended and wartime allies remained friends.

There was, I readily concede, a large piece of truth in the BBC's contention
that I was hostile to "the new facts of life" in Central Europe. I had never
been a communist, a social democrat or indeed a member of any political party
in Eastern Europe or elsewhere. This set me apart from many of my co-
belligerents, whose confrontation with communism began with a confrontation
with their earlier convictions and consciences as members of Marxist, and
mostly also Leninist-Stalinist, congregations. The advantages of having these
fallen communists on our side as colleagues were many. They spoke with the
eloquence and fervour of the convert and were therefore indispensable to
undermining the rationale of communism. I respected them for the thoroughness
of their heresy. Most of them were still fuelled by the search for social
justice; that motivation was helpful, but they were also overwhelmingly driven
by the desire to get even with their past delusions and to warn the world
against imitating their folly. Above all, they were sharpening their knives
for their former comrades. Although I admired these people for being what they
were, I could never quite feel at ease in their company, nor, I suspect, could
they in mine. Their protestations were too intense, their cynicism too stark,
and their analyses too reflective of the world they thought they had left
behind. They marched in negative step, but in step all the same. I was
marching to a different drummer.

My dispute with communism, however, was not merely something history had
imposed on me, much less just an intriguing way of making friendships and
alliances with people with whom, in the absence of a common enemy, I would
probably have forged no such friendships. My critique of communism had
powerful roots in what, from my late teens on, I thought was the right way of
judging and doing things. To say that I was a born reactionary would be to
miss the point, for the implication would be that the far Left was pursuing
"action," whereas all holistic schemes for the betterment of the human
condition can surely be regarded as the truly retrograde (and, alas, only too
common) element in history. But it is certainly true that I had been
spiritually committed even before I fully understood what Marxism and Leninism
were about.

From an early age I believed that all mechanistic explanations of man and
history stemmed from a naive conception of human affairs. Henri Bergson and
Karl Popper, when I eventually read them, came as recognitions, not
revelations. My profound belief in the autonomy and irreducible worth of the
individual and of work was as strong in my youth as it is now. To explain them
through the categories of background, race, nationality, religion, or even
culture struck me as factually mistaken and morally demeaning. Reductionism
was, for me, the great intellectual crime of our century.

More important, I saw reductionism and deterministic views as ignoble.
Nobility mattered. Could anyone choose to look for his ancestors in the zoo
when they could be found instead on Olympus? The Hungarian elite would spill
little ink in arguing whether Darwinism or religion was the true way of seeing
the world, for "truth," though constantly invoked, was not all-important for
them. Honourable conduct was. The truth was forever contingent, elusive, and
open to human error, but we could tell noble behaviour from base behaviour, a
good Samaritan from a Cain. It followed that whatever the "scientific" truth
about man and history, the Judeo-Christian view of it was nobler and more
life-enhancing than anything we could read in the works of Marx and Darwin.
This did not mean that members of the Magyar elite were profoundly Christian.
They were usually Christian in name only, but they did have an exalted,
spiritual, resigned yet hopeful, sweet-sour view of themselves and their
nation. It sustained them as scholars, bohemians, and nation builders -- for
then as now, they tried to be all three.

I opposed communism not only because the Soviet system was a ruthless and
totalitarian dictatorship (though that would have been reason enough), but
because it encapsulated in particularly objectionable form everything I felt
was repulsive about the reshaping of our civilisation after two fratricidal
world wars: the cult of "scientific" materialism and pragmatism, with the
attendant enfeeblement of the spiritual dimension in our lives; the mindless
application of Cartesian categories to the humane sciences; the destruction of
the environment; the population drift from small communities to megatowns, the
massification of society; the meaninglessness of work; the alienation of
labour; the depersonalisation of the individual and the destruction of his or
her dignity. I may have been fighting modernity itself, as some unfriendly
critics suggested, but I like to think I was opposing only a thoroughly
debased and debasing form of it -- a travesty of the values of the
Enlightenment from which communism claimed to have descended. This
misapplication of rationalism and the progressivist view of history upset me
as much as the Soviet incorporation of the Baltic states or Stalin's show
trials.

In short, my slowly evolving participation in the Cold War was driven by
principle rather than by any prospect of a career-promoting international
conflagration. For me the Cold War was to remain just that; I never conceived
the contest of ideas as a prelude to a shooting war. At the age of thirty-
seven, while a staff member of the BBC, I joined the Inns of Court Regiment of
the British Territorial Army because I felt I was in need of toughening, but I
did so on William James's principle that young (and not so young) men needed
to embrace the "moral equivalent of war." I would have hated to fire a shot in
anger. My father and three of my uncles had served in the Austro-Hungarian
army in World War I, and their stories haunted me into adulthood. The ravages
of that senseless slaughter were everywhere around me in Hungary in the form
of armless and legless veterans with begging bowls on their knees and the fear
of the future in their eyes. My vaccination against violence came early in
life and has stayed with me to this day. The Hungarian conservative
establishment's revisionist braggadocio left me cold, although I was well
aware of the historical injustice and political folly of the Treaty of Trianon
which had given rise to it. In November 1938, my father took his family to
Kassa (Kosice) to attend the reintegration of his ancestral home into Hungary.
My own enthusiasm was small.

Years later, the British inclination to glorify wartime achievement, the
jingoism of the gutter press, the use of the expression to have had a good war
(could there be such a thing?), and the award of knighthoods and peerages for
warlike pursuits struck me as uncivilised, wholly inconsistent with what
Continentals had been led to believe was British "culture," and singularly ill
suited to promote European reconciliation and unification. A sense of
contrition would have done the British, the Germans, the French, the Americans
-- all of us -- a power of good, but it was nowhere to be found, not even,
with rare exceptions, in the Church. Everything in me rebelled against the
notion that serving the "national interest" could relieve a nation of moral
responsibility, and now in 1996, in the light of the barbaric war in the
former Yugoslavia, appeals to the national interest -- as though the national
interest represented some self-evidently superior good -- strike me as
especially reprehensible. Nor, for the same reason, could I subscribe to the
philosophy of "my country, right or wrong." Indeed, in 1959 my forlorn attempt
to use a single moral yardstick on my own small patch in foreign broadcasting
brought about the termination of my contract with the BBC.

As deputy programme organiser in the BBC's European Service, I had the
temerity to suggest that Britain's repressive policies in the crown colony of
Cyprus vis-a-vis the rebellious Archbishop Makarios and his supporters were
incompatible with our libertarian message to Soviet-occupied Hungary in the
aftermath of the 1956 revolution and therefore counterproductive on the
international scene. My refusal to participate in one particularly offensive
broadcast earned me a reprimand for insubordination. I was downgraded in
status, my earnings were reduced, and I was eventually eased out of the
organisation, but not before British policy had performed a volte-face on
Cyprus, the colony had gained independence, and yesterday's political wisdoms
had suddenly been repudiated. I was then told that, yes, historically I had
been vindicated and could, if I so wished, be rehabilitated; but BBC
broadcasters were paid to do as they were told -- not to have historical
foresight or moral scruples. I declined rehabilitation and within a few weeks
accepted a generous offer from Erik Hazelhoff, then director of Radio Free
Europe (and a famous hero of the Dutch Resistance), to join his organisation.
Little did I suspect that one day I would be occupying his post.

I have never regretted my protest. It provided me, in retrospect, with fresh
strength for the struggles that lay ahead, with the Soviet system and with the
numerous members of Western establishments who--whether out of cowardice,
conformism, or opportunism -- seldom hesitated to give the Soviets and their
agents of influence the benefit of the doubt. I was now in the possession of a
single yardstick for all seasons -- a rare gift in political life. But the
consciousness of having been penalised for speaking the truth before it was
opportune to do so has stayed with me.

Among the more distant influences that shaped my attitude towards communism of
the Soviet type, the idiosyncratic culture of Hungary was an important one. I
will say little about it because it is all but inaccessible to those who do
not command the language. Let me simply state that from the beginning of the
eighteenth century to the middle of our own, Hungarian life and letters gave
us dozens of poets possessing the highest powers of thought and feeling. They
speak to us in phrases that linger and haunt the mind. Their intoxication with
the music of words puts them on a par with the best we can read in the
literature of the more widely spoken European languages. To say that the
Hungarian sensibility brought forth in the verbal arts geniuses of the stature
of Bela Bartok and Zoltan Kodaly in the musical world is to understate their
achievement. A great literature laced with universal sympathies but housed in
a small nation's language -- could there be a more poignant tragedy for
writers and potential readers alike?

For many years, I was caught up in the cadences of Hungarian verse. It is
poetry in the sense in which poets are seers and legislators and the rhythm of
their words is a portent of destiny. To condense feelings in verse struck me
as not only the most economical but also the most sui generis Hungarian way of
being. But the Hungarian communion with the perennial topics of poetry --
childhood, love, disillusion, disloyalty, old age, death -- was a communion
with a difference. Much of the best Hungarian verse was deeply anchored in
history and intensely patriotic. Hungary's poets of the eighteenth and
nineteenth centuries conjure up the sounds and images of Magyar battles with
the Turks, the Austrians, and the tsar's army; they speak to us about the
loneliness of political exile and the pain of national oppression. Yet beyond
the suffering there is a fund of perpetual life; we hear of a Hungarian God in
Heaven and a protective Hungarian providence. We sense a nationalism more
intent on the preservation of a dwindling race than on conquest or aggression.

I dwell on these peculiarities of the Hungarian collective experience because
they made the nation especially resistant to communism. It is not that
Hungarian literature is entirely without a social message, even though much of
the message was peasant-socialist and wholly untheoretical. There are
egalitarian and radical currents in Sandor Petofi, Endre Ady, and Attila
Jozsef, and especially in the village-exploring populist prose writers of the
1920s and 1930s. But these voices, although widely heard and discussed, had
little practical political impact on precommunist society. The nation deserved
better, for the Hungary I knew was ripe for radical change. An impoverished
and partly landless peasantry, almost serflike in its deference to the gentry
and nobility, was crying out for rights and land reform, while industrial
labour was trying to escape from self-perpetuating poverty, social
stigmatisation, and working conditions reminiscent of the "satanic mills" of
mid-nineteenth-century England. Alongside this vast underclass there lived, in
a state of guilt-ridden but not unhappy symbiosis, a highly educated, vibrant,
and ultrasensitive intelligentsia.

It was this cruel nexus between deprivation in the ranks and a creative but
powerless compassion in the intellectual elite that made Hungary fertile
ground for the highest achievements in music, literature, the visual arts,
mathematics, and the natural sciences. Felix culpa? I would shun so callous an
attribution. Yet undeniably, many of these achievements occurred under the
mostly illiberal regency of Miklos Horthy. A fully liberal Western-style
government might have achieved less--a fully illiberal Muscovite regime did
achieve less -- in point of fact, almost nothing at all. In Hungary as
elsewhere, Stalinism proved the death of a genuinely national culture.

Why the wretched state of the Magyars did not upset me more than it did I
cannot easily explain. My slightly privileged status based on a little family
wealth -- and pride -- cannot account for it, because some of my friends with
similar backgrounds were deeply disturbed by the same conditions and sided
with the Social Democrats or the peasant Left and in a few cases even with the
then completely isolated small band of underground communists. Looking back
over a distance of fifty years, I can only surmise that my mental makeup would
just not have allowed me to go along with the idea that greater social justice
-- of which I was otherwise passionately in favour -- would make for greater
human happiness, if, indeed, I could have brought myself to concede in the
first place that happiness was a goal of human existence. Christianity
certainly supported no such view. I was conscious of the need for the tragic
sense of life long before I read Unamuno.

There was something unworthy, even indecent, about making the satisfaction of
creature needs and comforts the central concern of great political parties and
governments, I felt on arriving in Labour-dominated Britain in 1947, and the
resulting public debate struck me as thin and demeaning. These needs did, of
course, have to be met, and met quickly, for the state of Britain in those
early postwar years was appalling even by the standards of war-ravaged
Hungary. But the improvement of the social condition of society could not be
an end in itself. It had to be subordinated to ideas that pointed beyond the
mundane round of housing, feeding, and breeding. Yet the promotion, with full
state support, of the welfare and education of all did not seem to me to be in
conflict with a higher dispensation. A decent and civilised standard of living
was, indeed, its precondition. Without fully realising it, I was a one-nation
conservative and an advocate of the social teaching of the Roman Catholic
Church.

Politicians whose programme and rhetoric were confined to problem solving
upset me, and I felt sorry for the audiences they attracted. For one brought
up to see Britain through idealistic Hungarian eyes, it was hard to believe
that such disadvantaged audiences still existed. But they did, and it didn't
take me long to discover that subtle British wartime propaganda as well as my
own self-delusions during the war had left me with a more lasting legacy than
I had been ready to admit.

Socialisms of Marxist inspiration ran counter to what I fondly imagined was
the unstoppable spiritualisation of our self-understanding. I had been, to be
sure, equally outraged by the violence, the nationalistic phrase-mongering and
rabble-rousing propaganda of the various fascist movements that mushroomed in
Central Europe before and during the war, but those were for me beneath
contempt: it was any self-respecting person's manifest duty to thwart them. I
tried to do my bit in that direction too as a member of a short-lived and not
very effective resistance movement in 1944-45. My revulsion against
communists, pragmatists, do-gooders, scissors-and-paste historians, easy-
profit makers, and the newly rich and vulgar persuaded me to deepen, whilst
already in Britain, my study of Stefan George and his circle. I spent seven
years doing so, working simultaneously at the BBC, and produced a mediocre
volume under the less than popular title of Kinesis and Stasis. This was my
doctoral dissertation and a labour of love, but it was a firebreak against the
devastating triviality of the modern world and a reaction to that particularly
barbaric form of rationalism and muddy populism that poured into Europe in the
wake of the Red Army in 1944-45.

In spirit, but to some extent in practice too, I became a belated associate of
the George Circle. I met some of its members and dedicated myself to that
solemn Hauch of an esoteric existence which made it easier to bear the
depressing realities of an impoverished and downgraded postwar England. At the
time, I did not think I was trying to escape from the real world. I was
convinced that the poetry of George and the writings of Friedrich Gundolf and
other scholarly disciples were the only world fit to be embraced by a man of
common sense. That one of George's early followers -- Ludwig Klages, the turn-
of-the-century feminist "cosmic" philosopher -- unwittingly provided fuel for
the subsequent ideological fantasies of certain nazi thinkers (many of
George's favourite disciples were German Jews later active and famous in the
United States and New Zealand) did not dampen my enthusiasm, although I
realised that my choice of subject caused eyebrows to be raised by one or two
unknowledgeable left-oriented British intellectuals. Like all men and women of
great stature, George was liable to be used and abused by all sides.

Stefan George died in December 1933. He resisted Nazism in all its forms and
chose to be buried in Minusio in Switzerland with his head turned away from
nazi Germany. One of his disciples, as a schoolboy and a young man, was Count
Klaus Schenk von Stauffenberg -- the staff officer who led the plot to kill
Hitler on July 20, 1944, and paid for its failure with his life.

For me, George was the consummate symbol of the individual's refusal to be
depersonalised, to be subsumed under the categories of a progressivist
history, to be treated as raw material for social engineering. Also, and not
least, George was a king among poets and a composer of words which did,
indeed, communicate before they were understood. "A spark of that holy fire"
of which the twentieth century had emptied itself, he stood for the prophetic
strain in human thinking and for unshakeable integrity. His world was a self-
enclosed whole in which harmony prevailed -- a house was a house, a vase was a
vase, everyone knew his office and performed his duty. The euphony of his
words seemed to reach me from some nonterrestrial source and to point to a
fulfilment beyond the human adventure. At times, in my arrogance, I had
visions of having been "sent" to mediate George's legacy to the less inspired
and, I am ashamed to admit, I treated things and people in the workaday world
with a touch of condescension. But it was the workaday world in which I had
myself to pull my weight, and to which, after periodic excursions into other
and sweeter realms, I had to return. The particular approach and tenor of my
critique of Marxism-Leninism and the Soviet system probably bore some of the
marks of my long and exhilarating immersion in the sounds and ideas of Stefan
George and his extraordinary circle.

(C) Yale University Press

back to top  
  
[HOME](http://www.yale.edu/yup/) ||
[SEARCH](http://www.yale.edu/yup/search.html) ||
[BROWSE](http://www.yale.edu/yup/browse.html) || [ORDERING
INFORMATION](http://www.yale.edu/yup/order.html)  
  
YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS  
  
---|---

