**![Chapter 9](_derived/chapter_9.htm_cmp_rmnsque010_bnr.gif)**  
[![Home](_derived/home_cmp_rmnsque010_hbtn.gif)](index.html)
[![Up](_derived/up_cmp_rmnsque010_hbtn.gif)](study%20guide.htm)
[![Syllabus](_derived/syllabus.htm_cmp_rmnsque010_hbtn.gif)](syllabus.htm)
[![Paper
assignment](_derived/paper%20assignment.htm_cmp_rmnsque010_hbtn.gif)](paper%20assignment.htm)
[![Diseases](_derived/Diseases.htm_cmp_rmnsque010_hbtn.gif)](Diseases.htm)
[![Oral
presentations](_derived/Oral%20presentations.htm_cmp_rmnsque010_hbtn.gif)](Oral%20presentations.htm)
[![Old Exams](_derived/old_exams.htm_cmp_rmnsque010_hbtn.gif)](old_exams.htm)  
Contact [G. Maroni](mailto:gmaroni@unc.edu)

  
  
---  
  


| |

From The Economist.

April 2001

GENETICS AND INSURANCE

The knowledge that genetics can provide about our future health could play
havoc with the life insurance industry. How can we balance the competing
demands of consumers' right to privacy an the insurers' need to assess risks,
asks Daniel Altman?



Imagine a moment of decision. Your father died of Huntington's disease, a
degenerative brain disorder, and so did his father. There's a strong chance
that you, too, carry the genetic mutation that causes Huntington's. Knowing
your family history, insurance companies already want to charge you more for
life insurance, your family's best protection against losing you too soon. But
you still want to get tested, so that you can plan for the eventualities of
the disease. Then again, testing positive could render you ineligible for life
insurance altogether. It's a classic Catch-22.

Deciding how insurance markets should respond to the growing availability of
genetic information requires a lot of science and some moral choices. If
genetic information can predict how likely a person is to contract an illness
or to die prematurely, possessing that information will affect how consumers
and insurers behave. When people take out life insurance policies, they pay in
monthly premiums for, say, 30 years. If they die during that period their
families receive lump sum death benefits. The premium and the lump sum are
calculated on the basis of actuarial assumptions about the population as a
whole combined with knowledge of the individual concerned (smoker or not,
history of cancer in the family and so on).

We are now faced with a step change in the potential knowledge about the
individual taking out a policy. The use of this knowledge should take account
of three basic principles: economic efficiency, fairness and privacy.
Unfortunately, they frequently conflict. To preserve privacy people ought to
be able to keep their genetic information to themselves. But that intrudes on
economic efficiency: when consumers know their risks but insurers do not,
either companies go bankrupt from paying unexpectedly high claims or premiums
have to be raised, discouraging low-risk consumers--in both cases the market
collapses. Protecting the market from this new information probably requires
insurers to distinguish between people with different genes when they
calculate premiums--and that raises concerns about fairness and social
solidarity.

The advent of genetic testing has already changed the way insurance companies
do business, and governments have been left scrambling in their wake. In
Britain insurers are allowed to use relevant tests in calculating premiums.
The government's views on privacy are therefore clear; less clear is the
approach to those who will now find it more expensive, or impossible, to buy
insurance.

The human genome won't necessarily reveal many certainties, but it will reduce
the uncertainty that makes risk-pooling worthwhile. When people learn more
about their risks, the usefulness and profitability of insurance falls. This
is true whether risks are ruled out or confirmed as certainties: on the one
hand, residents of igloos never buy fire insurance; on the other hand, owners
of demolition-derby cars don't buy car insurance.

THE ADVERSE SELECTION PROBLEM

Though the test for the single genetic mutation that invariably causes
Huntington's disease received the most attention last year--thanks to its
acceptance for insurers' use by Britain's Genetics and Insurance Commission
(GAIC)--it is not typical. Individuals with the Huntington's gene have trouble
obtaining life insurance because they are almost certain to die prematurely,
and the disease generally incapacitates its victims in early middle age. But
most gene-related health problems come in the form of higher risks, rather
than virtually sure things.

Better examples are BRCA1 and BRCA2, genetic mutations that bring women a
greater chance of contracting certain cancers. A reasonably conservative
estimate is that BRCA-positive women bear a 65 per cent chance of contracting
breast cancer or ovarian cancer; the former is often curable, the latter more
often fatal. Women who lack the mutation face a cancer risk of about 12 per
cent. At age 30, BRCA-positive women can expect to live nine fewer years, on
average, than their BRCA-negative counterparts. The GAIC is currently
considering allowing insurers to use tests for these genes in determining
premiums.

Given their shorter life expectancies, women who test positive for the BRCA
mutations are likely to view life insurance policies as a bargain for their
families. They will probably pay far less in premiums before collecting a
death-benefit than others who insure at their age, as long as the insurance
companies don't know the secret of their genes. BRCA-positive women should
therefore be more likely to purchase life insurance (or health insurance), and
possibly more likely to buy a generous policy.

What happens next? After receiving less revenue before each pay-out, insurers
will have to raise premiums to avoid making losses. That makes life insurance
less of a good deal for BRCA-negative women; the BRCA-positive women will
start to chase them out of the insurance pool. Every time a BRCA-negative
woman leaves the pool, her insurer's average revenue per person drops, and
premiums for everyone else must be raised. Fairly soon, the rates will be so
high that only BRCA- positive women will want to insure.

This process is called "adverse selection." Because insurers are unaware of
the test results, they cannot distinguish the high-risk women from the rest in
order to charge them higher premiums. When individuals take advantage of this
asymmetry in information, rocketing premiums and shrinking insurance pools
result. That seems good reason to give insurers access to genetic information.
Some recent research reaches a different conclusion.

A study led by Krupa Subramanian of Temple University, in Philadelphia,
examined the BRCA case explicitly. Her team used a simulation to determine
what would happen to life insurance markets if 5 per cent of women took
genetic tests for BRCA mutations. (This figure seems realistic, given the
current cost of the BRCA test of #1,500 and the reluctance of many people to
take tests.) Without any knowledge of the women's BRCA test results, insurance
companies could face annual claims six times higher than anticipated and court
immediate bankruptcy. But Subramanian also showed that, using family cancer
histories for all the women's immediate relatives, insurance companies could
reduce the excess costs to a mere 10 per cent of the amount associated with an
average woman's claim.  And even that discrepancy could be eliminated by
preventive procedures undertaken by women who test positive for BRCA.

It is a rosy picture--genes remain private, insurers survive and women live
longer--but not necessarily an accurate one. For insurers, the long-standing
practice of taking family histories will not always be a solution. Don Powell
of the Wellcome Trust's Sanger Centre, near Cambridge, the country's leading
institute of genome research, adds that most genetic diseases are also
dependent on multigenic activity--the conjunction of several faulty genes.
Those combinations will be harder to deduce from family histories alone.

On the other hand, it is unclear whether people buy life insurance in the
manner predicted by adverse selection. Research by Cathleen Zick at the
University of Utah suggests that women who are tested for BRCA are more likely
to make a purchase decision based on family history than on test results.

POLICY CHOICES

Given the existence of adverse selection, several courses of action are
available to policymakers. First, testing could be banned altogether.
Alternatively, testing could be allowed, with voluntary disclosure of results
--or divulging the results of genetic tests could be mandatory. Perhaps the
tests themselves should be mandatory. It is possible to forecast some of the
outcomes of these policies.

1\. No testing. In this scenario, the informational asymmetry disappears along
with the genetic tests. Consumers know no more than insurers, and markets
remain as they have been. The downside is that all the positive effects of
genetic testing, such as early identification of risks to help in financial
planning and preventive care, also vanish. Doctors will also not know whom to
treat if a vaccine is developed for a genetic disease.

2\. Voluntary testing, voluntary disclosure. Assuming genetic tests become
cheaper, as advances in technology guarantee they will, we will end up with a
situation in which consumers get tested to show insurers that they do not
carry undesirable mutations. (Zick and her collaborators observed exactly this
phenomenon; women in their sample who tested negative for BRCA mutations often
shared the results with their insurers.) Insurance companies could offer these
people standard or even cut-price policies (though the latter would contradict
the code established by the Association of British Insurers), safe in the
knowledge that their risks were normal. The test for a given disease could
quickly turn into a screening mechanism--anyone who does not undergo the test
would be presumed to carry the mutation. Eventually, the population would be
split into two distinct insurance pools: those who can verify their good genes
and pay low premiums; and those who either cannot or decline to be tested, and
are obliged to pay high premiums.

3\. Voluntary testing, mandatory disclosure. Here insurers can discriminate
between their customers on the basis of genes. With costly testing, not
everyone would necessarily want to find out the mysteries of their genes.
Those who were curious, however, might still be discouraged. Testing positive
for an adverse mutation would surely place them in expensive insurance pools--
perhaps better not to know at all? In this case, some people whose lives would
be improved by early detection of dangerous mutations might not be tested. And
of course, people who cherish their privacy might object to mandatory
disclosure.

4\. Mandatory testing. Any government that decides to test everyone
undoubtedly wants to use the information it finds, so this policy should imply
mandatory disclosure as well. For such a policy to be cost-effective, testing
would have to be inexpensive. The situation closely parallels the second part
of case two, in which testing and disclosure were almost, in effect,
mandatory. Adverse selection would be expunged, but not without cost;
mandatory testing carries a bevvy of potentially unsavoury side effects.
Ethicists warn of a "burden of knowledge" that comes with knowing one's
genetic code. Some people, upon learning of an unpromising future, might
become despondent. Others might engage in eugenics--refusing to have children
with those who carry genetic mutations. This situation has already begun to
develop in Turkish and Greek Cyprus. Both countries have had mandatory testing
for thalassaemia, a fatal blood disease, for more than two decades.

From the point of view of economic efficiency, case one is almost certainly
inferior. To abdicate from all the benefits of genetic science would lead to a
huge loss in welfare, now and even more so in the future. Case two would play
havoc with insurance markets; many individuals who could benefit from risk-
pooling would be driven away. Britain has chosen case three, in which
insurance markets--both the consumers and insurers--are protected at a cost to
some individuals. Nevertheless, an implicit screening process will evolve. And
as tests for more diseases become available, the gaps between insurance
premiums for gene-healthy people and untested people will widen.

There are some mitigating factors. First, everyone has some genetic mutations,
and usually some bad ones. So insurance premiums are unlikely to vary too much
for most of the population once the biggest risks have been identified. Powell
expects that day to come within a period of years, especially for many forms
of cancer. Second, privacy campaigners will be relieved to know that many
insurance industries outside Britain have taken only cautious steps to combat
genetic adverse selection. US insurers, for example, have been low-key in
lobbying for access to genetic test results. They hope that the medical
benefits of genetic research will offset the costs of informational
asymmetries.

WHAT ABOUT THE UNINSURABLES?

At the moment, government's role is a small one. The GAIC establishes whether
tests are sufficiently reliable to be used by insurers. The results of
accepted tests can then be used to determine who is covered by life or health
insurance, and how much they pay in premiums. The Data Protection Act
guarantees that this information does not leak out to others. But business has
filled the vacuum left by government's inaction--it has begun regulating
itself. In 1997 the Association of British Insurers adopted a 51-point code of
practice dealing with genetic testing. The code prevents insurers from asking
that tests be conducted, and from transferring genetic information between the
file of a tested person and that of an untested member of the same family. If
genetic tests approved by the GAIC are ever found to be unreliable, customers
who were incorrectly charged higher premiums will have their policies
reassessed and their extra payments refunded. These guidelines roughly
correspond to those set forth by the Nuffield Council on Bioethics, an
independent group of eminent persons whose 1993 report on genetic screening
was among the first comprehensive examinations of the topic.

This armour protecting the insurer-consumer relationship has some chinks,
however. Ian Frater, spokesman for the life insurance business of Britain's
largest insurer, Norwich Union, states that genetic test results of family
members would be included in the "history" that a potential customer would be
expected to divulge. That policy contradicts point 16 of the code, but is
closer to the spirit of the Nuffield Council's report. The code also contains
a provision that absolves customers of their responsibility to divulge the
results of genetic tests in one special case: when the life insurance policy
involved carries benefits under #100,000 and is linked to a mortgage for the
purchase of a new house.

In the US, laws passed by roughly two-thirds of state governments have
overridden the tenets of such a code: genetic profiles cannot be used to
determine premiums or to deny insurance coverage unless a resultant disease
has already been diagnosed. Federal law also bars the denial of health or life
insurance to workers who are part of their employers' group-insurance plans.
(Despite these laws, a survey recently conducted by the Genetic Alliance found
widespread evidence of genetic discrimination in life insurance markets.)
Britain's system, following case three, has no such prohibitions. Soon it will
have a problem. The Huntington's Disease Society of America estimates that one
in every 1,000 people carries the Huntington's mutation--so what is Britain to
do about all the uninsurables?

This is an obvious point for the state to step in. John Harris, from
Manchester University's Centre for Social Ethics and Policy, notes that in
Britain, "there is not so much of a right to insurance, but a presumption that
it should not be revoked unless there is a very good reason." He believes that
a principle exists under which insurance is an important social benefit. If
the government conforms to this principle, it will find itself with a number
of choices. First, the government could adopt laws similar to those in place
in the US--essentially forcing insurers to accept customers with adverse
genes, but preventing customers without health-impeding mutations from
separating themselves. This forced pooling would still leave insurers open to
the sort of adverse selection problems that are likely to make US legislators
reconsider their earlier decisions. The only workable solution in this vein
would be to nationalise the system and offer standardised policies based on
age and earnings rather than medical status. With the entire pool under one
roof and no choice in policies, adverse selection would simply disappear.
Genetic knowledge would become a huge boost to socialisation of insurance.

A different solution, proposed by those economists who favour the preservation
of individual choice, is for the government to offer subsidies to those who
would otherwise face high premiums or denial of coverage. A person who tests
positive for the Huntington's mutation would be assigned a coupon by the
government, and any insurer who agreed to cover that person could collect the
value of the coupon. No one could obtain a coupon unfairly, since a genetic
test would be required as proof of need. Insurers would no longer need to
discriminate, since the coupons' values would be set to level the playing
field. In addition, the system would remove any disincentive against testing.
It amounts to a form of genetic insurance: everyone pays a premium in the form
of taxes, so that those who discover costly genetic mutations will be
protected.

THE FUTURE

The unlocking of the human genetic code is sure to transform the insurance
industry. Only the genetic test for Huntington's is currently approved by the
GAIC for use by insurers, but that number will grow, with tests for
Alzheimer's and various types of cancer under consideration. As it stands now,
life insurers almost never reassess their client's policies after signing a
contract. But with advances in genetic science, that is likely to change.
Frater suggests that customers' premiums would have to be readjusted if a
"miracle cure" were found for the genetic diseases for which they are at risk.

Moreover, the battle for public opinion will intensify. A survey by the
government's Human Genetics Commission (HGC), an advisory body, found that 90
per cent of Britons believe that genetic information should be shared only by
consent. One could argue that doing business with a given insurer is a choice
which must be accompanied by that consent--essentially waiving the right to
privacy. But if a right to insurance exists as well, the two come into
conflict; exercising one requires the surrender of the other.

From an ethical standpoint, the distinction between a right to insurance and
the right to privacy will be crucial. Insurance affords a kind of social
protection, but it also links the fortunes of people who have no way of
monitoring each others' behaviour. Those who keep adverse genetic information
to themselves could engage in adverse selection, or fail to take preventive
measures that would reduce the costs of their eventual claims; both actions
would harm other members of their insurance pool. Is that a greater injustice
than the potential suffering of uninsurables? Preserving privacy implicitly
requires that the insured act in a socially responsibly fashion at the expense
of personal gain. That may be too much to expect. Indeed, the British
government appears to have decided that it is. But in the next few weeks the
HGC will publish a big report on genetic testing and insurance markets which
may challenge that assumption. This debate has just begun.

Daniel Altman is an economics correspondent for The Economist.

Here are some additional websites for information about social, ethical and
legal issues:

http://www.kumc.edu/gec/geneinfo.html (aimed at professionals but has

information about support groups for different genetic conditions)

http://www.geneclinics.org/ (for understandable information about different
genetic diseases, testing options, and patient management)

  
---|---|---

