  |   |   |   |   |  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  |  | [![ACM home page](acmhome.gif)](/index.html)  
---  
[![Off-campus study programs](o-cstudy.gif)](/o-cstudy/index.html)  
[![Central European Studies home page](cestitle-sm.jpg)](index.html)  
  
  
![](smallpt.gif)[Central Europe - A region in transformation](intro.html)

![](smallpt.gif) [Outline of the program](intro.html#Outline)

![](smallpt.gif) [Olomouc](olomouc.html) & [Palacky University](palacky.html)

![](smallpt.gif) [Student life](studentlife.html)

![](smallpt.gif) [Field trips](prague.html)

![](smallpt.gif) [Links and resources](news.html)

![](smallpt.gif)[Courses for fall 2003](history.html)

![](smallpt.gif)Academic info: [2003 dates](academic.html),
[eligibility](academic.html#Eligibility), [credit &
grades](academic.html#Credit)

![](smallpt.gif)[Costs](costs.html)

![](smallpt.gif)[How to apply](apply.html)

![](smallpt.gif)Contacts: [campus program advisors](contact.html) & [ACM
office](contact.html)  
  
  |   |   |  |

Courses  
  
---  
  
All courses are required. With the exception of language courses, all classes
are conducted in English.

  * [History of East Central Europe](history.html) _(5 credits)_
  * [Czech Language](language.html) _(5 credits)_
  * [Society and Politics in the Czech Republic](society.html#Society) _(3 credits)_
  * [Modern Czech Literature](literature.html) _(3 credits)_

  
  
Society and Politics in the Czech Republic

**Instructors:** Palacky University faculty

This course examine sociopolitical developments in the Czech Republic. In
addition to contemporary political issues, study topics include the
complicated transition to a capitalist economy and ethnic tensions in Czech
society. In the past, students have gone on field trips to places of local
interest. ****  
  
**Syllabus and readings from past programs**

_Note: topics and readings may vary in fall 2003, but are likely to be
similar._

**Topics:**

  * [Geography](society.html#Geography)
  * [Czech culture](society.html#Culture)
  * [History](society.html#History)
  * [Political development & social problems](society2.html#Development)
  * [Political systems](society2.html#Systems)
  * [Gypsy issue](society2.html#Gypsy)
  * [Economy](society2.html#Economy)
  * [Central European cooperation](society2.html#Cooperation)

  
  
**Geography**

Lecturer: Milena Odlozilova

The Czech Republic is a small, but interesting country in the heart of Europe.
Its area is comparable to that of Lake Superior. It abounds in historical
monuments as well as geographical places of interest. There are numerous
castles and chateaux, mountains and lakes, here and there still a virgin
natural landscape. More than 10 million people live in three historical
regions -- Bohemia, Moravia and Silesia.

  * _Lecture:_ Physical Environment and Economic Conditions -- Location, area, waters, mountains, climate, soils, flora, fauna, agricultural conditions, raw materials, mineral waters, national parks, environment. Population, races, nations, big cities, economy, industrial areas, regions and their characteristics: Western Bohemia, Central Moravia, Silesia, spas, travelling, Czech "records." 

[Return to top of page](society2.html)  
  
**Czech Culture**

Lecturer: Milada Hirschova

The Czech Republic consists of the three historic lands: Bohemia, Moravia and
Silesia. These lands contain regions with specific cultural features. These
features refer to language, traditions, habits, proverbs etc. There are,
nevertheless, common cultural features of the population living in the Czech
Republic.

  * _Lecture:_ Main Features of the Czech Culture -- Common and specific cultural features of the Czech culture.

[Return to top of page](society2.html)  
  
**History**

Lecturer: Jiri Lach _(Dept. of European Studies, Palacky University)_

The lectures will deal with Central European history in past centuries with
emphasis on Czech (or Czechoslovak) history. They will provide general
overview illustrated on Czech examples. The second part will be focused on
modern history since 1945. It will discuss the spread of Communism into the
region and various aspects of its impact on society.

_Lectures:_

  * Czechoslovakia between 1918 -1938 -- Heritage of the Habsburg times. World War I and the fight for an independent state. The idea of Czechoslovakism. Masaryk's foundation of the state and its first years. Czechoslovakia as an island of democracy and freedom in Central and Eastern Europe: truth or fiction? 
  * From Munich Pact to Communist Coup -- Position of Czechoslovakia in the international order. 1938: Munich pact and its consequences. Protectorate Bohemia and Moravia and political representation in exile up to the end of the war. Totalitarian democracy 1945-48: consequences of the war, party system of so called National front, nationalization, election of 1946, communist coup in 1948.
  * Czechoslovakia from 1948 to 1969 -- Politics of Stalinism: means of oppression show trials. Impact of the heavy industrialization. Political and economic origins of the Czechoslovak crisis in late 1960's. Prague Spring: the year of hope and failure. Communist party and the society, international limits for Czechoslovak liberalization \-- the role of the USSR and Warsaw pact invasion. Prague Spring fallout (from August 21, 1968 to April 1969).
  * Czechoslovakia in the Era of Normalization -- 1969 changes in the Party , Husak' s leadership and purges, challenge of the Helsinki Agreement of 1975 and dissident activities, Charter 77. Influence of Gorbachev's Perestrojka. The Year of Miracle: 1989.

_Required Reading:_

  * Krejci, Jaroslav -- Machonin Pavel: Czechoslovakia 1918-1992. A Laboratory for Social Change. London: Macmillan Press 1996. 

_Recommended Reading:_

  * Volgyes, Ivan: "Politics in Eastern Europe," Chicago, The Dorsey Press, 1986, pp. 62-103.
  * Stokes, Gale: "From Stalinism to Pluralism: A Documentary History of Eastern Europe since 1945," New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991 (selected documents).

[Return to top of page](society.html)  
  
[Syllabus and readings from fall 2001 continued](society2.html)  
  
  |

__updated 8/22/02__

|    |   |   |  |   |

* * *

|  
---|---|---  
  |

[Central European Studies home](index.html) | [ACM home](/index.html) | [Off-
campus study](/o-cstudy/index.html) | [About ACM](/intro/index.html) | [Info
for faculty & staff](/faculty/index.html) | [Info for high school students &
counselors](/admiss/index.html)

|  

