**HST333, Europe since 1945**

DR. GEORGE VASCIK

590 MOSLER HALL

785-3290

In May 1945, men and women from London to Moscow left their factories and bomb
shelters to celebrate in the streets the downfall of Hitler's tyranny and the
end of the Second World War. Crushed, hungry and occupied by the mighty armies
of the United States and the Soviet Union, Europeans looked forward to a
brighter future. Looking forward to the post-War reconstruction, Europeans
asked themselves what internal and external conflicts (social, economic,
political, ideological, confessional) cause war? Was it possible to build
societies that eschew war and ensure human happiness and well-being? A common
attempt to solve these questions, however, was cut short by the Cold War and
until 1989, a divided Europe sought different solutions to these common
concerns. This course will examine the multiple causes of the Cold War and
explore the two roads Europe followed after 1945. It will conclude by
returning to the original questions: what causes war, what role should the
state play in ensuring human happiness and well-being and whether the
nation/state is the only viable means of political self-organization. Through
group projects, we will try to envisage the pros and cons of a united Europe
and speculate as to where the Europe of the future is headed.

**Texts**

The texts for this course are:

Felix Gilbert, _The End of the European Era_

Milan Kundera, _The Unbearable Lightness of Being_

John LeCarre, _Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy_

Alexander Solzhenitsyn, _One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich_

The lecture schedule portion of this syllabus details the pages in Gilbert
(EEE) relevant to each section meeting. It is expected that you will
facilitate class discussion by completing these readings prior to the class
for which they are assigned.

**Grades**

Successful completion of the course will require mastery of both the texts and
material presented in lecture. Grades will be determined in the following
manner:

Textbook quizzes      20%  
Book discussions      15%  
Midterm exam           20%  
Final exam                20%  
Web project               25%

The [web project](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/HST333web.html), the
textbook quizzes, and the class discussions should be seen as integral
elements of each student's grade.  Since I will be keeping track of individual
participation on a daily basis, class attendance is important..

**Office hours**

I will be holding office hours on MW from 11:30-12:00 and on TR from 1:00-2:15
and 2:30-4:00, and on R from 6:00-7:00.  I am available Friday mornings in
Oxford, if that would be more convenient.  I have an answering machine, so you
can always reach me at home at 523-9990 or via e-mail at
[vascikgs@muohio.edu](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/www.vascikgs.muohio.edu).

**Lecture and reading schedule**

8/24 Course introduction **The Origins of European Division**

8/31  [Betrayal at Yalta?](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/yalta.html)
(EEE, 324-52)

         [Potsdam and the debate over Germany ](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/potsdam.html)(EEE, 355-65) 

9/7    [Establishing Soviet power in Eastern
Europe](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/easterneurope.html) (EEE, 365-91)

         [Political and military containment](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/containment.html) (EEE, 391-94) 

**Eastern Europe**

9/14   [Stalinizing Eastern
Europe](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/stalinizing.html)

_         discussion of _One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich__

9/21   [Destalinization and the "lessons" of
1956](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/destalinization.html) (EEE, 409-13,
440-49)

9/28   [From Khrushchev to
Brezhnev](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/khrushchev.html) (EEE, 450-53,
457-67)

_          [discussion of _TheUnbearable Lightness of
Being_](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/kunderaweb.html)_

**10/5   Midterm examination**

10/12  [Gorbachev and reform from
above](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/gorbachev.html) (EEE, 520-532)

           [The Revolutions of 1989](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/1989.html) (EEE, 532-558) 

10/19  [Yeltsin and the future of
Russia](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/yeltsin.html)

            [A Russian Weimar?](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/russweimar.html) **Western Europe**

10/26   [Rebuilding
Europe](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/rebuilding.html) (EEE, 116-143,
167-199)

11/2     [The British
dilemma](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/dilemma.html) (EEE, 405-08)

            [Creating the British welfare state ](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/welfare.html)(EEE, 419-24) 

            [The Thatcherite challenge to corporatism](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/thatcherite.html) (EEE, 483-96) 

11/9      _discussion of _Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy__

11/16   [The failure of the Fourth
Republic](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/4threpublic.html) (EEE, 400-05)

            [De Gaulle and the Fifth Republic](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/degaulle.html) (EEE, 425-43, 481-3, 500-04) 

11/30    [Adenauer and atlanticist
Germany](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/adenauer.html) (EEE, 394-400,
434-36)

            [Brandt, Schmidt, Kohl](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/brandt.html) (EEE, 473-81, 496-500) 

12/7      [European
integration](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/integration.html) (EEE,
436-440, 516-19)

            [The Euro and the future of Europe](http://www.ham.muohio.edu/~vascikgs/euro.html)

**12/14    Final examination due**  
    


