**SYLLABUS: APM 152**

**Applied Trumpet**

Dr. William Stowman

Climenhaga 26 ext. 3030

**Course Objectives:**

The purpose of this course is to expose the student to the major aspects of
trumpet performance and to develop an appropriate fundamental approach to the
instrument. On a weekly basis, students will be required to prepare materials
that address the following areas: tone production, breathing, technical
development and maintenance, musicianship, style, and interpretation. Areas of
further consideration will include transposition, orchestral excerpts, smaller
trumpets, sight reading, and improvisation. Students will participate in
devising a plan of study for the semester to ensure their specific individual
goals are met in addition to the goals of the applied instructor.

**Grading**

The final (semester) grade in Applied Trumpet will consist of:

*weekly lesson grades (60%)

*final jury grade (20%)

*research paper (20%)

Instructions and guidelines for papers will be presented during lesson times.
The paper is due during the last week of classes. Rough drafts are welcomed at
any time after the topic is discussed with and approved by the instructor.

**Attendance Policy**

Students that must miss a lesson should notify the instructor _in advance_
(preferably one full day before the lesson) to schedule a make-up lesson.
Make-up lessons will be granted at the discretion of the instructor. Messages
can be left via voice mail ext. 3030, e-mail, or by leaving a note on my
office door. Absences without advance notification will not be made-up.



**Trumpet Curriculum**

**Year I**

**Daily Routine:**

Stamp: Warm-up

Clarke: Technical Studies

**Technique:** ****

Clarke: Technical Studies

Schlossberg: Daily Drills and Technical Studies

Arban: Complete Conservatory Method

**Etudes:**

Voxman: Selected Studies

Concone: Lyrical Studies

**Transposition:**

Getchell: First Book of Practical Studies

**Solos:**

Hadyn: Concerto, Mvt. II

Bozza: Badinage

Peeters: Sonata, Mvt. II

Fitzgerald: English Suite

Italian Suite

Corelli: Sonata VIII

**Orchestral Excerpts:**

Category I

**Textbooks:**

Johnson: The Art of Trumpet Playing

****Year II****

**Daily Routine:**

Little: Embouchure Builder

Johnson: Upper Register

Stamp: Lip Flexibilities

**Technique:**

Clarke: Characteristic Studies

Arban: Characteristic Studies

**Etudes:**

Voxman: Selected Studies

Small: 27 Etudes

Bousquet: 36 Celebrated Studies

**Transposition:**

Getchell: Second Book of Practical Studies

**Solos:**

Goedicke: Concert Etude

Arban: Fantasie Brilliante

Hummell: Concerto

**Excerpts** :

Category II

**Textbook:**

Sherman: Trumpeters Handbook

****Year III****

**Daily Routine:**

Stamp: Warm-up

Clarke: Technical Studies

**Technique:**

Arban: Complete Conservatory Method

Small: 27 Melodious Etudes

Pietsch: Virtuosity Studies

**Etudes:**

Charlier: Transcendental Etudes

Brandt: Etudes

**Transposition:**

Cafferelli: 100 Melodic Studies

**Solos:**

Kennan: Sonata

Bloch: Proclamation

Presser: Suite for Unaccompanied Trumpet

Hindemith: Sonata

**Excerts:**

Category III

**Textbook:**

Tarr: The Trumpet

****Year IV****

**Daily Routine:**

Smith: Lip Flexibilities

**Technique:**

Vizzutti: Trumpet Method, Vol. II

Webster: Method for the Piccolo Trumpet

**Etudes:**

Smith: Top Tones

Bitsch: 20 Etudes

**Transposition:**

Sachse: 100 Studies

**Solos:**

Torelli: Concerto in D

Purcell: Sonata

Handel: Suite in D

Haydn: Concerto

Arutunian: Concerto

Pakhmutova: Concerto

**Excerpts:**

Category IV

**Textbook:**

Farkas: The Art of Musicianship

Mathie: Trumpet Teacher Guide  

****Orchestral Excerpts****

**Category I** :

Beethoven: Leonore No. 2

Leonore No. 3

Brahms: Academic Festival Overture

Mussorgsky: Pictures at an Exhibition

Respighi: Pines of Rome

Tchaikovsky: Cappriccio Italien

**Category II** :

Debussy: Fetes

Mahler: Symphony No. 5

Shostakovich: Symphony No. 5

Ravel: Piano Concerto in G

Sibelius: Symphony No. 2

**Category III** :

Mahler: Symphony No. 1

Mahler: Symphony No. 3

Stravinsky: Petrouchka

Gershwin: American in Paris

Brahms: Symphony No. 1

**Category IV** :

Bruckner: Symphony No. 7

Mahler: Symphony No. 2

Gershwin: Piano Concerto No. 2

Stravinsky: Soldiers Tale

Debussy: La Mer

****Suggested Reading List for Trumpeters****  

Altenburg, Johann Ernst. Trumpeters and Kettledrummers' Art. trans. by Edward
Tarr. (Halle, 1795), Nashville: The Brass Press, 1974.

Baines, Anthony. Brass Instruments: Their History and Development.New York:
Scriber, 1978.

Barbour, J. Murray. Trumpets, Horns and Music. Ann Arbor: Michigan State
University Press, 1963.

Bate, Philip. The Trumpet and Trombone. New York: Norton, 1966.

Bellamah, Joseph L. A Survey of Modern Brass Teaching Techniques. San Antonio:
Southern Music Co., 1976.

Bendinelli, Cesare. The Entire Art of Trumpet Playing. (1614), trans. by
Edward Tarr. Nashville: The Brass Press, 1975.

Dale, Delbert A. Trumpet Technique., 2nd ed. London: Oxford University Press,
1985.

Davidson, Louis. Trumpet Technique. Rochester, NY: Wind Music Inc., 1970.

Endsley, Gerald. Comparative Mouthpiece Guide for Trumpet. Denver: Tromba,
1980.

Fantini, Girolamo. Modo per imparare a sonare di tromba. (Frankfort, 1638),
trans. And commentary by Edward Tarr. Nashville: The Brass Press, 1978.

Farkas, Philip. The Art of Musicianship. Bloomington: Musical Publications,
1976.

Green, Barry with W. Timothy Gallway. The Inner Game of Music.Garden City, NY:
Anchor Press Doubleday, 1986.

Hardin, Anne. A Trumpeter's Gruide to Orchestral Excerpts. 2nd rev. & enl. ed.
Columbia, SC: Camden House, 1986.

Hunt, Norman. Guide to Teaching Brass. 4th ed. Dubuque, IA: Wm. C Brown, 1990.

Johnson, Keith. The Art of Trumpet Playing. Denton, TX. Gore Publishing, 1981.

King, Robert. Brass Players Guide. North Easton, MA: Robert King Music, 1990.

Lowrey, Alvin. Lowrey's International Trumpet Discography. Columbia, SC:
Camden House, 1989.

Mathie, Gordon. The Trumpet Teacher Guide. Cincinnati: Queen City Brass, 1984.

Rasmussen, Mary. A Teacher's Guide to the Literature of Brass
Instruments.Durham, NH: Appleyard Publications, 1968.

Sherman, Roger. The Trumpeter's Handbook. Anthens, OH: Accura Music, 1979.

Smithers, Don. The Music and History of the Baroque Trumpet Before 1721\. 2nd
ed. Carbondale: University of Southern Illinois Press, 1988.

Tarr, Edward. The Trumpet, trans. by Edward Tarr and S.E. Pank. Portland:
Amadeus Press, 1988.

Various. Brass Anthology, 2nd rev. ed. Evanston, IL: The Instrumentalist,
1984.

Weast, Robert. Keys to natural Performance for Brass Players. Des Moines: The
Brass World, 1979.

