#  Political Science



##  Faculty

**Ronald J. Busch** (Ph.D., The Ohio State University, 1969) Associate
Professor Emeritus. Interests include American political institutions, public
opinion formation and political party functioning, urban politics, local
policy issues such as financing public education, democratic choice processes
and the impact of institutional choices (such as representational rules) on
ethnic and minority representation.  
[r.busch@csuohio.edu](mailto:r.busch@csuohio.edu)

**Everett F. Cataldo** (Ph.D., The Ohio State University, 1965) Professor
Emeritus. Interests include public policy issues in advanced democratic
states, particularly related in resolving conflicts over education and
integration, and environmental issues affecting the Great Lakes region, such
as toxic waste and acid rain. Canadian politics.  
[e.cataldo@csuohio.edu](mailto:e.cataldo@csuohio.edu)

[Robert B. Charlick](http://www.csuohio.edu/polisci/bob.html) (Ph.D., UCLA,
1973) Professor.  Interests include conflict resolution and prevention,
political transitions, democratic governance processes particularly in the
non-western world, the impact of democratization on public policy and
governance practices.  
[r.charlick@popmail.csuohio.edu](mailto:r.charlick@popmail.csuohio.edu)

**David R. Elkins** (Ph.D., Kansas, 1992) Associate Professor. Interests
include public policy in urban communities, urban economic development
conflicts and coalition building, taxation policy.  
[d.elkins@popmail.csuohio.edu](mailto:d.elkins@popmail.csuohio.edu)

**Rodger M. Govea** (Ph.D., Syracuse University, 1979) Associate Professor.
Interests include comparative political processes including leadership
succession and political transitions, and causes and potential management of
political violence, particularly in Latin America.  
[r.govea@csuohio.edu](mailto:r.govea@csuohio.edu)

**Barbara B. Green** (Ph.D., Harvard, 1959) Professor. Interests include
comparative political dynamics in former communist states of the USSR and
Eastern Europe, German politics, comparative study of democratization in
former communist states, election observer and analyst in that region.
Comparative political theory of freedom and liberty.  
[b.green@csuohio.edu](mailto:b.green@csuohio.edu)

**Edward B. Hasecke** (Ph.D., Ohio State University, 2002) Assistant
Professor. Interests include American political institutions, particularly the
rules and procedures in Congress, with an emphasis on agenda setting and the
role of political parties.  
[e.hasecke@csuohio.edu](mailto:e.hasecke@csuohio.edu)

**Charles B. Hersch** (Ph.D., U.C. Berkeley, 1987) Associate Professor.
Interests include political theory, particularly, the role of the arts in
political education, and public law, with an emphasis on American
constitutional theory.  
[c.hersch@csuohio.edu](mailto:c.hersch@csuohio.edu)

**John D. Holm** (Ph.D., UCLA, 1969,
[Vita](http://www.csuohio.edu/polisci/holmvita.html)). Professor. Interests
include comparative democratic development, particularly in Africa and other
non-western states, processes of political participation, political leadership
succession, and political leadership choice.  
[j.holm@csuohio.edu](mailto:j.holm@csuohio.edu)  
[Syllabus for African
Politics(psc323)](http://www.csuohio.edu/polisci/psc323.html)

**Leon H. Hurwitz** (Ph.D., Syracuse University, 1971) Professor. Interests
include political processes in Western European democracies, political and
economic integrationprocesses, integration of professional labor markets.  
[l.hurwitz@csuohio.edu](mailto:l.hurwitz@csuohio.edu)

**B. James Kweder** (Ph.D., University of North Carolina, 1972) Associate
Professor Emeritus. Interests include urban politics and policy processes,
intergovernmental aid, communityand neighborhood development, practitioner in
urban leadership training (Sterling Institute graduate trainer) for both
governmental and non- governmental organizations.  
[b.kweder@csuohio.edu](mailto:b.kweder@csuohio.edu)

**Joel A. Lieske** (Ph.D., University of North Carolina, 1971) Professor.
Interests include political behavior aand public opinion, American political
culture and federalism, American government, state and urban government,
public policy, political parties and interest groups, and research
methodology.  
[j.lieske@csuohio.edu](mailto:j.lieske@csuohio.edu)

**Donald E. Schulz   **(Ph.D., Ohio State University, 1977,
[Vita](http://www.csuohio.edu/polisci/schulzvita.html)) Professor and Chair.
Interests include Latin American politics, U.S. foreign policy, U.S. national
security policy, International Relations, and Comparative Politics.
Specialization in U.S.-Latin American security issues.  
[d.schulz02@csuohio.edu](mailto:d.schulz02@csuohio.edu)

**Hans E. Segal** (Ph.D., Case Western Reserve University, 1968) Associate
Professor, Emeritus. Interests include Middle East politics, international
politics andpolitical theory.  
[h.segal@csuohio.edu](mailto:h.segal@csuohio.edu)

**Forrest Qingshan Tan** (Ph.D., Emory University, 1990) Associate Professor.
Interests include comparative politics with an emphasis on East Asian and
Chinese Politics, international relations emphasizing the political economy of
East Asian development, foreign policy and Sino-U.S. relations.  
[q.tan@csuohio.edu](mailto:q.tan@csuohio.edu)  

* * *

[Return to the Table of Contents](index.html#toc)

[![](graphics/mailtoic.gif)](mailto:d.elkins@csuohio.edu) [Questions,comments,
suggestions???](mailto:d.elkins@csuohio.edu)

Please direct email inquiries to: _d.elkins@csuohio.edu_

Revised: August 20, 2002

