[![](gettysburg.jpg)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/)

ANTHROPOLOGY  COURSES

_Distribution requirements:_   All full-credit anthropology courses may be
used to fulfill the College's liberal arts distribution requirement in Social
Sciences, _except_ 300-level methods courses (Anthropology 309 and
Anthropology 323).  The following Anthropology courses fulfill the Non-Western
Cultures distribution requirement:  Anthropology 103, Anthropology 220,
Anthropology 228, Anthropology 232, Anthropology 234, Anthropology 235,
Anthropology 236, Anthropology 237, and Anthropology 301.

_Prerequisites:   _Most upper-level anthropology courses require either the
Anthropology 103 or Anthropology 105 introductory courses (except as noted in
course descriptions).  The [Sociology
302](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-
courses.html#soc302) methods course is required for the Anthropology 309 and
Anthropology 323 methods courses, and it is strongly recommended for the
Anthropology 308 theory course.   Anthropology 308 is a prerequisite for the
Anthropology 400 seminar.

For course descriptions, click on the titles from the following list:

![](door.gif)Anth 103:  Introduction to Cultural Anthropology  
![](fire.gif)Anth 105:  World Prehistory and Human Evolution  
[![](japanese.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#jpn150)[Jpn 150:  Japanese Culture and
Society](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#jpn150)(affiliated course)  
![](japan-women-sm.gif)[Jpn 225:  The Anthropology of Japanese
Women](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#jpn225) (affiliated course)  
![](globebutton.gif)Anth 220:  World Cultures  
![](people.gif)Anth 228:  Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Gender and Sex Roles  
![](meso.gif)Anth 232:  Precolumbian Civilizations of Mesoamerica  
![](hourglass.gif)Anth 234:  Principles of Archaeology  
![](pyramids.gif)Anth 235:  Early Civilizations in Cross-Cultural Perspective  
![](parrot.gif)Anth 236:  Precolumbian Civilizations of South America  
![](africa.gif)Anth 237:  African and Afro-Latino Cultures:  Studies in Power
and Ritual  
![](news3.gif)Anth 238:  The Anthropology of Contemporary Issues  
![](board.gif)Anth 250-270:  Topics in Anthropology  
[![](prism-
trans.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#anth251)[Anth 251:  The Anthropology of
Religion](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#anth251)  
![](tools2.gif) Anth 274:  Practicum in Archaeological Analysis  
![](desktop.gif) [Anth 301:  Social Life of
Things](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anth301)  
![](books3.gif)Anth 308:  History of Anthropological Theory  
![](tent.gif)Anth 323:  Field Methods in Social Research  
![](graduate.gif)Anth 400:  Anthropology Seminar  
![](desktop2.gif)Anth 450s, 470s:  Individualized Study  
![](ribbon.gif)Anth 460:  Research Course

Visit the list of  
[SOCIOLOGY
COURSES](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-
courses.html#top)  
---  
  
![](up.gif) Back to top of page  
  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](door.gif)**  Anth 103:   Introduction to Cultural Anthropology**

Comparative study of social practices and cultural systems in various
societies, using a series of case studies dealing mainly with non-Western or
Western attempts to understand them.  Course gives an overview of the history
of cultural anthropology, major questions and theoretical debates, fieldwork
and research methods, and the relevance of anthropology to the modern world.
No prerequisite.  _(Offered every semester.)_

Prof. Catherine Howard

For a sample course syllabus, click on the books: [![](books-
use.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~choward/intro-s00/introsyllabus-s00.html)

![](up.gif) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](fire.gif)**  Anth 105:   World Prehistory and Human Evolution**

Introduction to physical anthropology and archaeology, the two subdisciplines
of anthropology that focus on the question of human biological and cultural
change through time.  The course examines how anthropologists interpret human
genetic variation, the behavior of non-human primates, the evolution of fossil
hominids, and major developments in technology and material culture.  No
prerequisite. _(Offered every semester.)_

[Prof. Julia Hendon](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/Webpage/index.html)

For a sample course syllabus, click on the books: [![](books-
use.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/syllabi/a105syl.htm)

  
![](up.gif) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](japanese.gif)**  Japanese 150:   Japanese Culture and Society
**(affiliated course)

Introduction to themes, issues and institutions in contemporary Japan, as seen
through the lens of Japanese culture and examined from an anthropological
perspective.  Major topics discussed include cultural notions used in the
construction of self and gender; family, marital, and kinship relationships;
social organization; education; work; and religious and ritual practice.  No
prerequisite.  _  (Offered on an occasional basis.)_

Staff

  
[![](up.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#scroll 1) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](japan-women-sm.gif)**  Japanese 225:   Anthropology of Japanese Women
**(affiliated course)

Examination of the lives of women and the dynamics of gender in Japanese
society. Course explores various aspects of Japanese women's roles and their
relations with men and other women and critically assesses the ways in which
Japanese women's roles are shaped through the life course by such factors as
family and kinship relationships, education, work, class, and religion.  No
prerequisite. (Majors or minors in the Dept. of Sociology and Anthropology can
take this course for credit as an anthropology elective.) _  (Offered on an
occasional basis.)_

Prof. Reiko Itoh

  
[![](up.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#scroll 1) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](globebutton.gif)**Anth 220:   World Cultures**

Study of various cultures in Asia, the Pacific, Africa, Europe, and the
Americas, viewing them through the distinctive lens of cultural anthropology.
Discussion of selected case studies about cultural patterns and social
practices in a diversity of societies.  Prerequisite:  Anthropology 103.
_(Offered every other year.)_

Prof. Catherine Howard  


[![](up.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#scroll 1) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](people.gif)**Anth 228:   Cross-Cultural Perspectives on Gender and Sex
Roles**

An examination of the social roles of women and men, their dynamics of sexual
identity, and the ideologies of gender in various societies.  Course explores
broad theoretical issues (such as biological vs. cultural determinants; gender
stratification and inequality; the effects of social, cultural,and economic
variables), as well as a range of studies of specific societies.
Prerequisite:  Anthropology 103 or  [Sociology
101](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-
courses.html#soc101).  _(Offered on an occasional basis.)_

[Prof. Julia Hendon](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/Webpage/index.html)  


[![](up.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#scroll 1) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](meso.gif)**  Anth 232:   Precolumbian Civilizations of Mesoamerica**

Introduction to the organization and development of Native American
civilizations in Mexico and Central America.  Evidence from archaeological and
ethnographic research, Native texts and art, and Spanish Colonial writings is
used to study religious beliefs, sociopolitical organization, economic
relationships, and intellectual achievements of such groups as the Olmec,
Maya, and Aztecs.  Period prior to the sixteenth-century Spanish conquest is
emphasized but modern indigenous cultures arealso studied.   Prerequisite:
Anthropology 103 or Anthropology 105.  _(Offered every other year.)_

[Prof. Julia Hendon](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/Webpage/index.html)

For a sample syllabus, click on the books: [![](books-
use.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/syllabi/ant232syl.html)

[![](up.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#scroll 1) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](hourglass.gif)**  Anth 234:   Principles of Archaeology**

Study of the practice of archaeology -- the combination of methods and
theoretical concepts that together result in archaeological interpretations of
past human behavior and society.  Using a case study approach, students are
introduced to the nature of archaeological interpretation.  Prerequisite:
Anthropology 103, Anthropology 105, or one Anthropology 200-level course.
_(Offered every year.)_

[Prof. Julia Hendon](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/Webpage/index.html)

For a sample syllabus,  click on the books:[![](books-
use.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/syllabi/a234.htm)

[![](up.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#scroll 2) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

[![](pyramids.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#ids253)**  Anth 235:   Early Civilizations in Cross-Cultural
Perspective**

Study of the origins and development of the earliest urban societies by
comparing and contrasting examples from different parts of the world, such as
China, Mesopotamia, Mesoamerica, Egypt, and  South Asia.  Using a broad range
of evidence, including archaeological data, written texts, and art, the course
studies the causes and consequences of the shift to more centralized political
systems and more specialized economic organization.  The course takes both
cross-cultural and historical perspectives.  Integral to the course is a
discussion of how civilization and the state have been defined.  This
discussion includes a review and critique of theories for the develpment of
civilization and the state.  Prerequisite:  Anthropology 103 or Anthropology
105 .  _(Offered every other year.)_

[Prof. Julia Hendon](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/Webpage/index.html)

To see a sample syllabus, click on the books: [![](books-
use.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/syllabi/ant235syl.html)  


![](up.gif) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](parrot.gif)**  Anth 236:   Precolumbian Civilizations of South America**

Introduction to the organization and development of Native American
civilizations in South America.  Evidence from archaeological and ethnographic
research, Native texts and art, and Spanish Colonial writings is used to study
religious beliefs, sociopolitical organization, economic relationships, and
intellectual achievements of such groups as the Inka, Moche, and Chavin.
Period prior to the sixteenth-century Spanish conquest is emphaized but modern
indigenous cultures are also studied.  
Prerequisite:  Anthropology 103 or Anthropology 105.  _(Offered every other
year.)_

[Prof. Julia Hendon](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jendon/Webpage/index.html)

To see a sample syllabus, click on the books: [![](books-
use.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/syllabi/a236syl.htm)  


![](up.gif) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](africa.gif)**  Anth 237:   African and Afro-Latino Cultures:  Studies in
Power and Ritual**

Cross-cultural comparisons of society, politics, religion, and identity in
Africa and the African diaspora of Latin America and the Caribbean.  Course
explores case studies of religious rituals and spirit possession, slave
revolts and wars of independence, cultural movements and ethnic mobilizationon
both sides of the southern Atlantic.  Prerequisite:  one prior course in
Anthropology, African American Studies, _or_ Latin American Studies.
_(Offered every other year.)_

Prof. Catherine Howard  


![](up.gif) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](news3.gif)**Anth 238:   The Anthropology of Contemporary Issues**

Exploration of how anthropologists analyze current issues in international
affairs and industrialized societies, including the United States.  Case
studies illustrate anthropological perspectives on topics such as nationalist
movements and international development, immigration and ethnic diversity,
urban gangs and suburban shoppers, changing gender roles and reproduction
practices, modern myths and rituals.  Course also discusses challenges of
conducting fieldwork in diversified societies and ethical dilemmas arising in
politically sensitive settings.  Prerequisite:  Anthropology 103 or [Sociology
101](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-
courses.html#soc101) (open to 2nd and 3rd-year students only).  _(Offered
every other year.)_

Prof. Catherine Howard

For a sample course syllabus, click on the books: [![](books-
use.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~choward/contemporary-F99/contemporary-
syl-F99.html)

[![](up.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#scroll 2) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)  


![](board.gif)**  Anth 250-270:   Topics in Anthropology**

Exploration of a particular topic chosen by a faculty member.  _(Offered on an
occasional basis.)_

Staff  


[![](up.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#scroll 2) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](prism-trans.gif)**Anth 251:   The Anthropology of Religion**  


> Investigation of the role of organized, formal religions (although not
necessarily monotheistic ones), their theology and sociology, as they either
support or critique a burgeoning capitalism.  The religions that will be
explored include Christianity, Islam, and Confucianism/Taoism \-- the
religions of Europe and the new World, the Middle East and South Asia, and
China and East Asia.  _Prerequisite:_   Anthropology 103 or [Sociology
101](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-
courses.html#soc101).  _(Offered on an occasional basis.)_

>

> Staff

  
[![](up.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#scroll 2) Back to list  
  
![](bluechisel.gif)  


![](tools2.gif)  **Anth 274:   Practicum in Archaeological Analysis**

Practical learning experience in archaeological data analysis and research.
Working with the staff of the  
Gettysburg National Military Park, students carry out labwork, including
artifact processing and classification, data entry and research.  The exact
mix of activities varies from semester to semester.  Prerequisite:  Consent of
instructor and previous course work in archaeology, history or Civil War Era
Studies.  One-half credit course; may be repeated with consent of instructor.
Same as CWES 274.  _(Offered every semester.)_

[Prof. Julia Hendon](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/Webpage/index.html)

To see a sample syllabus, click on the books: [![](books-
use.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/syllabi/274syllabus.htm)  


![](up.gif) Back to list  
  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](desktop.gif)  **Anth 301:   Social Life of Things**

Cross-cultural exploration of how members of various societies, past and
present, invest objects with symbolic meanings as they produce, utilize,  and
exchange them in everyday life.  Drawing primarily on non-Western case
studies, the course will integrate perspectives from studies of material
culture in fields such as economic anthropology, archaeology, and the
anthropology of art.  These resources will illuminate the many ways that
things acquire a kind of metaphorical life in association with the lives of
people who use them.  Prerequisites:  two anthropology courses, one of which
must be either [Anthropology
103](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#anth103) or [Anthropology
105](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#anth105).  _(Offered every other year.)_

[Prof. Julia Hendon](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/Webpage/index.html)  
Prof. Catherine Howard

![](up.gif) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](books3.gif)**Anth 308:   History of Anthropological Theory**

Analysis of the rise of anthropology and development of its major theoretical
models.  Course traces theprecursors of anthropology, the emergence of the
field of "anthropology" and its subdisciplines in the nineteenth century, the
elaboration of the culture concept and fieldwork methods in the twentieth
century, and recent trends in post-colonial anthropology.    Prerequisite:
Anthropology 103 or Anthropology 105.  Strongly recommended: [Sociology
302](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-
courses.html#soc302).   _(Offered every other year.)_

[Prof. Julia Hendon](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/Webpage/index.html)

To see a sample syllabus, click on the books: [![](books-
use.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~jhendon/syllabi/a308syllabus.html)  


![](up.gif) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](tent.gif)**Anth 323:   Field Methods in Social Research**

Seminar on how sociologists and anthropologists conduct ethnographic
fieldwork.  Topics include how theory informs research, ethical issues, and
developing descriptive fieldnotes.  Students carry out original research
projects using field methods such as participant observation and qualitative
interviewing, and learn how to gather data, analyze results, and write up
ethnographic reports.  Prerequisite:  C- or better in [Sociology
302](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-
courses.html#soc302).  (Same as [Sociology
323](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-
courses.html#soc323).)  _(Offered once a year.)_

Prof. Catherine Howard

To see a sample syllabus, click on the books:[![](books-
use.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~choward/field-s00/field-
syllabus-s00.html)  


[![](up.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#scroll 3) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](graduate.gif)**Anth 400:   Anthropology Seminar**

Intensive culminating research experience for anthropology-sociology majors.
Seminar is designed around a particular topic or debate, which provides a
unifing theme for students' individual research projects.  Course guides
students as the consolidate their understanding of the anthropological
perspective.   Prerequisite: Anthropology 103, Anthropology 105, and C- or
better in Anthropology 308, or consent of instructor. _(Offered once a year._
_)_

Prof. Catherine Howard

To see a sample syllabus, click on the books: [![](books-
use.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/~choward/seminar-1/seminar.html)  


[![](up.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/anthro-
courses.html#scroll 3) Back to list

  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](desktop2.gif)**Anth 450s, 470s:   Individualized Study**

Independent study in fields of special interest, including internships,
outside the scope of regular course  
offerings.  Prerequisite:  consent of faculty sponsor.  _(Offered by special
arrangement only.)_

 Staff

Click here for the department's [Guidelines for Internships and Individualized
Studies](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/guidelines.html).

  
![](up.gif) Back to list  


  
![](bluechisel.gif)

![](ribbon.gif)**  Anth 460:   Research Course**

Individual investigation of a research topic in anthropology under the
guidance of a faculty member.  Topic must be approved by department.  Project
culminates in written and oral presentations of a formal paper to the faculty.
Required for [Department
Honors](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-anthro-
honors.html).  Students must submit a proposal a minimum of two weeks before
the end of the semester preceding the proposed study.  Prerequisite:  Consent
of department faculty; open to juniors and seniors only.   _(Offered by
special arrangement only.)_

Staff  


![](up.gif) Back to list

[![](back.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-
courses.html#top) Go to list of Sociology courses

![](bluechisel.gif)  
     [PROGRAM](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-anthro-program.html) |   [COURSES](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-anthro-courses.html) |  [MAJORS  &  MINORS](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-anthro-majors.html) |  [OPPORTUNITIES](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-anthro-opportunities.html)  
---|---|---|---  
   [FACULTY](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-
anthro-faculty.html) |
[CAREERS](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-
anthro-careers.html) |  [HONORS
PROGRAM](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-
anthro-honors.html) |  [WEB
RESOURCES](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/soc-
anthro-resources.html)  
  
![](up.gif)    Back to top of page  
[![](back.gif)](http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics/sociology_anthropology/index.html)
Return to Sociology-Anthropology home page  


Last revised April 4, 2001  
    


