Syllabus

**

PS 44

JAPANESE POLITICS: CONFLICT AND CONSENSUS

Winter Term 1998

**

Prof. Ted Gilman

388-6064

Political Science Dept.

email: [gilmant@union.edu](mailto:gilmant@union.edu)

Office Hours: Tue. & Thur. 3:30-4:30 p.m.and by appointment. |

![](16.gif)  
---|---  
  


This course provides an overview of political structure, process, and policy
in contemporary Japan. It begins with a brief historical narrative of postwar
politics, and proceeds to discussions of Japanese culture and society,
electoral politics, decision-making structures and processes, foreign affairs
and political economy. It is based on lectures and discussions, with plenty of
time for questions and answers.

Thematically, we will focus on the issues of conflict and consensus in Japan.
The Japanese are often portrayed as group-oriented people who shun conflict
and individualism. Is this image correct? We will study numerous examples of
conflict and consensus in Japanese political and social relations.

There are three types of readings in this course: books, reserve materials,
and electronic resources. Six books are assigned nearly in their entirety and
are available in paperback. They are listed here by the short-form title used
in the reading list.

_

Govt. and Pol_. Hitoshi Abe, Muneyuki Shindo, and Sadafumi Kawato, _The
Government and Politics of Japan_ (Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press, 1994).

_

Foreign Policy_. Gerald L. Curtis, ed., _Japan's Foreign Policy After the Cold
War: Coping with Change_ (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 1993).

_

Japanese Women_. Anne E. Imamura, ed., _Re-Imaging Japanese Women_ (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1996).

_

Democracy_ : Takeshi Ishida and Ellis S. Krauss, eds., _Democracy in Japan_
(Pittsburgh PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1989).

_

Common Sense_ : Steven R. Reed, _Making Common Sense of Japan_ (Pittsburgh PA:
University of Pittsburgh Press, 1993).

_

Dark Side_. Ikk o Shimizu, _The Dark Side of Japanese Business: Three
"Industry Novels"_ (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 1996).

All other readings, those marked with an asterisk (*), will be left on reserve
in the library. All assigned readings are required. They should be completed
prior to the start of class on the assigned day.

Electronic resources will be an integral part of this course. All students
must have an email account by January 9. There are many useful and interesting
resources available through the Internet, and I will periodically send you
relevant items which I treat as required reading. Furthermore, I will
introduce you to some useful resources for your written assignments available
on the WorldWide Web.



Daily news from Japan will be an important part of this course. Since no
American daily newspapers provide consistent and sufficient coverage of
Japanese politics, I **_require**_ you to check the web sites of the major
Japanese daily newspapers to keep up on Japanese current events. The URLs are:

<http://www.asahi.com/english/english.html>

<http://www.yomiuri.co.jp/>

<http://www.mainichi.co.jp/>

Again, keeping up on current events in Japan is required reading! Make these
sites part of your daily routine. If you want further information about Japan,
a good place to start is at the Japan Window:

<http://jw.stanford.edu/>

Grading for this course will be based on an in-class midterm examination, a
group presentation and paper project, a take-home final examination (10-15
pages), and bi-weekly email to be submitted by the students to the instructor.
The email assignments are as follows: The class will be divided into two
groups. On alternate weeks, each group will submit questions before the first
class of the week and short summary essays after the second class of the week.
The questions should address issues in the readings, online resources, or
current Japanese political events and affairs. Two to four questions and
comments must be submitted via email to the instructor no later than noon on
Monday. The essays (no more than one page in length) should summarize the main
points of the previous three class lectures and discussions. Summary essays
are due by Saturday at noon. These submissions will be used to construct class
discussion. The grading percentages are as follows:

Weekly email submissions 10%

Class participation 10%

In-class midterm examination 25%

Group project 20%

Take-home final examination 35%

Finally, I want to emphasize the fact that this class is an _interactive_
exercise. The more you participate, the better it will be. Japan is a
controversial topic that affords plenty of material for good discussion. Dig
in!

**

Boring Bureaucratic Stuff

**

All work must be completed in order to pass this course. No makeup or extra
credit work will be allowed. No alternate final examination time will be
offered. Attendance matters. For every unexcused absence, you will lose one-
third of a grade off your final grade. Come to class.



**

SCHEDULE AND READINGS

Week 1. (1/6 & 1/8)

_

Aisatsu_ (Greetings and Introduction)

The Japanese System

**_

Common Sense_ , "A Unique Nation," pp. 3-24.

*Karel G. van Wolferen, "[The Japan Problem,"](reserve1) _Foreign Affairs_ 65:2 (Winter 1986-87), 288-303.



**



Week 2. (1/13 & 1/15)

Japan Before WWII

The Postwar Political Soap Opera

**_

Govt. and Pol_., pp. 3-13 and 55-62.



**

Week 3. (1/20 & 1/22)

Cultural Explanations and Beyond

**_

Common Sense_ , "Culture as Common Sense," "A Structural Learning Approach,"
and "Making Common Sense of Permanent Employment," pp. 25-105.

_

Dark Side_ , "Keiretsu," pp. 83-277.



**

Week 4. (1/27 & 1/29)

Democratic Institutions

The Decision-Making System

**_

Democracy_ , T.J. Pempel, "Prerequisites for Democracy: Political and

Social Institutions;" and Krauss & Ishida, "Japanese Democracy in

Perspective," pp. 17-37, 327-339.

_

Govt. and Pol_., Chapters 2-5, pp. 14-52.

_

Democracy_ , Ellis S. Krauss, "Politics and the Policymaking Process," and
John

C. Campbell, "Democracy and Bureaucracy in Japan," pp. 39-64, 113-137.

_

Govt. and Pol_., Chapters 10-11, pp. 83-100.



**

Week 5. (2/3 & 2/5)

Protest Politics

Value Change

How People Vote

**_

Democracy_ , Patricia Steinhoff, "Protest and Democracy," pp. 171-197.

_

Japanese Women_ , Patricia Steinhoff, "Three Women Who Loved the Left: Radical
Women Leaders in the Japanese Red Army Movement," pp. 301-324.

_

Govt. and Pol_., Chapters 14-17, pp. 139-189.

_

Dark Side_ , "Silver Sanctuary," pp. 3-31.



**



Week 6. (2/10 & 2/12)

Women and Politics

The Politics of Futility: Opposition Parties

**_

Japanese Women_ , Nancy Rosenberger, "Fragile Resistance, Signs of Status:
Women Between State and Media in Japan," pp. 12-45.

_

Japanese Women_ , Sally Ann Hastings, "Women Legislators in the Postwar Diet,"
pp. 271-300.

_

Democracy_ , Margaret A. McKean, "Equality," pp. 201-224.

_

Democracy_ , J.A.A. Stockwin, "Political Parties and Political Opposition,"
pp. 89-111.



**

Week 7. (2/17 & 2/29)

The Politics of Success: The LDP

Japan's New Political Parties

Japan's Local Economic Disasters

**

*John C. Campbell, "[The Old-Fashioned Way: How the LDP Stayed in Power](reserve2)" (unpub. ms., 1993), 25 pp.

_

Democracy_ , Terry E. MacDougall, "Democracy and Local Government in Japan,"
pp. 139-169.

_

Govt. and Pol_., Chapters 8-9, pp. 63-79.

**



Week 8. (2/24 & 2/26)

The Government and the Economic Miracle

**

*Chalmers Johnson, "[The Japanese 'Miracle](reserve3),'" and "[A Japanese Model in MITI and the Economic Miracle](reserve4) (Stanford: Stanford University Press,1982), pp. 3-34, 305-324.

_

Common Sense_ , "Making Common Sense of Government-Business Cooperation," and
"What Should We Learn From Japan?," pp. 106-153.

_

Japanese Women_ , John Mock, "Mother or Mama: The Political Economy of Bar
Hostesses in Sapporo," pp. 177-191.

_

Japanese Women_ , Glenda S. Roberts, "Careers and Commitment: Azumi's Blue-
Collar Women," pp. 221-243.

**



Week 9. (3/3 & 3/5)

Foreign Policy

US-Japan Relations

**_

Foreign Policy_ , Michael Blaker, "Evaluating Japan's Diplomatic
Performance,"; T.J. Pempel, "From Exporter to Investor: Japanese Foreign
Economic Policy"; Norman D. Levin, "The Strategic Dimensions of Japanese
Foreign Policy", pp. 1-42, 105-136, 202-217.

_

Foreign Policy_ , John C. Campbell, "Japan and the United States: Games That
Work," and Timothy J. Curran, "Internationalization, Innovation, and the Role
of Japanese Multinational Corporations in U.S.-Japan Relations," pp. 43-61,
160-178.



**

Week 10. (3/10 & 3/12)

Japan's New International Role?

**_

Foreign Policy_ , Part IV, "Japan and Its Neighbors," pp. 263-322.

