![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif)  
** Hesiod  
[Original Electronic
Text](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/Texts/chunk_TOC.html#Hesiod) at the web
site of the Perseus Project.
![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif)  
_Theogony_  
From the Heliconian Muses let us begin to sing, who hold the great and holy
mount of [ Helicon](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Helicon), and dance on soft feet about the deep-blue
spring and the altar of the almighty son of Cronos," [5] and, when they have
washed their tender bodies in Permessus or in the Horse's Spring or Olmeius,
make their fair, lovely dances upon highest
[Helicon](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Helicon) and
move with vigorous feet. Thence they arise and go abroad by night," [10]
veiled in thick mist, and utter their song with lovely voice, praising
[Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) the
aegis-holder, and queenly [Hera](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hera) of [Argos](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Argos) who walks on golden sandals, and the daughter of
[Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) the
aegis-holder bright-eyed [Athena](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Athena), and
[Phoebus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Phoebus)
[Apollo](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Apollo), and
[Artemis](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Artemis) who
delights in arrows," [15] and [Poseidon](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Poseidon) the earth holder who shakes the earth, and
revered [Themis](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Themis), and quick-
glancing[Aphrodite](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Aphrodite), and
[Hebe](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hebe) with the
crown of gold, and fair [Dione](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Dione), [Leto](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Leto), [Iapetus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Iapetus), and Cronos the crafty counsellor, Eos, and
great Helius, and bright Selene," [20]
[Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth), too,
and great Oceanus, and dark Night, and the holy race of all the other
deathless ones that are for ever. And one day they taught
[Hesiod](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hesiod)
glorious song while he was shepherding his lambs under holy
[Helicon](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Helicon),
and this word first the goddesses said to me -- " [25] the Muses of
[Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus),
daughters of [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) who holds the aegis:

``Shepherds of the wilderness, wretched things of shame, mere bellies, we know
how to speak many false things as though they were true; but we know, when we
will, to utter true things.''  

So said the ready-voiced daughters of great
[Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus), and they
plucked and gave" [30] me a rod, a shoot of sturdy laurel, a marvellous thing,
and breathed into me a divine voice to celebrate things that shall be and
things that were aforetime; and they bade me sing of the race of the blessed
gods that are eternally, but ever to sing of themselves both first and last."
[35] But why all this about oak or stone?

Come you, let us begin with the Muses who gladden the great spirit of their
father [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) in
[Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus)
with their songs, telling of things that are and that shall be and that were
aforetime with consenting voice. Unwearying flows the sweet sound" [40] from
their lips, and the house of their father
[Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) the loud-
thunderer is glad at the lily-like voice of the goddesses as it spreads
abroad, and the peaks of snowy [Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus) resound, and the homes of the immortals. And
they, uttering their immortal voice, celebrate in song first of all the
revered race of the gods" [45] from the beginning, those whom
[Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth) and
wide [Heaven](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Heaven)
begot, and the gods sprung of these, givers of good things. Then next, the
goddesses sing of [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus), the father of gods and men, as they begin and
end their strain, how much he is the most excellent among the gods and supreme
in power." [50] And again, they chant the race of men and strong giants, and
gladden the heart of [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) within
[Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus), --
the Olympian Muses, daughters of [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) the aegis-holder.

Them in [Pieria](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Pieria) did
[Mnemosyne](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Mnemosyne)
([Memory](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Memory)),
who reigns over the hills of [Eleuther](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Eleuther), bear of union with the father, the son of
Cronos," [55] a forgetting of ills and a rest from sorrow. For nine nights did
wise [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) lie
with her, entering her holy bed remote from the immortals. And when a year was
passed and the seasons came round as the months waned, and many days were
accomplished," [60] she bore nine daughters, all of one mind, whose hearts are
set upon song, and whose spirit is free from care, a little way from the top-
most peak of snowy [Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus).

There are their bright dancing places and beautiful homes, and beside them the
[Graces](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Graces) and
Himerus (Desire) live" [65] in delight. And they, uttering through their lips
a lovely voice, sing the laws of all and the goodly ways of the immortals,
uttering their lovely voice. Then went they to
[Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus),
delighting in their sweet voice, with heavenly song, and the dark earth
resounded" [70] about them as they chanted and a lovely sound rose up beneath
their feet as they went to their father. And he was reigning in heaven,
himself holding the lightning and glowing thunderbolt, when he had overcome by
might his father Cronos; and he distributed fairly to the immortals their
portions and declared their privileges.

" [75] These things, then, the Muses sang who dwell on
[Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus),
nine daughters begotten by great [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus), Cleio and
[Euterpe](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Euterpe),
Thaleia, [Melpomene](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Melpomene) and Terpsichore, and
[Erato](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Erato) and
Polyhymnia and Urania and Calliope,who is the chiefest of them all," [80] for
she attends on worshipful princes: whomever of heaven-nourished princes the
daughters of great [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) honor and behold at his birth, they pour sweet
dew upon his tongue, and from his lips flow gracious words. All the people"
[85] look towards him while he settles causes with true judgements: and he,
speaking surely, would soon make wise end even of a great quarrel; for
therefore are there princes wise in heart, because when the people are being
misguided in their assembly, they set right the matter again" [90] with ease,
persuading them with gentle words. And when he passes through a gathering,
they greet him as a god with gentle reverence, and he is conspicuous amongst
the assembled: such is the holy gift of the Muses to men. For it is through
the Muses and far-shooting [Apollo](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Apollo) that" [95] there are singers and harpers upon
the earth; but princes are of [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus), and happy is he whom the Muses love: sweet flows
speech from his mouth. For although a man has sorrow and grief in his newly-
troubled soul and lives in dread because his heart is distressed, yet, when a
singer," [100] the servant of the Muses, chants the glorious deeds of men of
old and the blessed gods who inhabit
[Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus), at
once he forgets his heaviness and remembers not his sorrows at all; but the
gifts of the goddesses soon turn him away from these.

[Hail](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hail), children
of [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus)! Grant
lovely song" [105] and celebrate the holy race of the deathless gods who are
for ever, those that were born of [Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth) and starry
[Heaven](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Heaven) and
gloomy Night and them that briny [Sea](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Sea) did rear. Tell how at the first gods and earth
came to be, and rivers, and the boundless sea with its raging swell," [110]
and the gleaming stars, and the wide heaven above, and the gods who were born
of them, givers of good things, and how they divided their wealth, and how
they shared their honors amongst them, and also how at the first they took
many-folded [Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus). These things declare to me from the
beginning, you Muses who dwell in the house of
[Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus),"
[115] and tell me which of them first came to be.

In truth at first [Chaos](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Chaos) came to be, but next wide-bosomed
[Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth), the
ever-sure foundation of allthe deathless ones who hold the peaks of snowy
[Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus),
and dim [Tartarus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Tartarus) in the depth of the wide-pathed
[Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth)," [120]
and Eros (Love), fairest among the deathless gods, who unnerves the limbs and
overcomes the mind and wise counsels of all gods and all men within them. From
[Chaos](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Chaos) came
forth [Erebus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Erebus)
and black Night; but of Night were born Aetherand
[Day](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Day)," [125]
whom she conceived and bore from union in love with
[Erebus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Erebus). And
[Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth) first
bore starry [Heaven](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Heaven), equal to herself, to cover her on every side,
and to be an ever-sure abiding-place for the blessed gods. And she brought
forth long hills, graceful haunts" [130] of the goddess Nymphs who dwell
amongst the glens of the hills. She bore also the fruitless deep with his
raging swell, [Pontus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Pontus), without sweet union of love. But afterwards
she lay with [Heaven](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Heaven) and bore deep-swirling Oceanus,
[Coeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Coeus) and
[Crius](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Crius) and
[Hyperion](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hyperion)
and [Iapetus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Iapetus)," [135] Theia and
[Rhea](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Rhea),
[Themis](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Themis) and
[Mnemosyne](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Mnemosyne)
and gold-crowned [Phoebe](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Phoebe) and lovely
[Tethys](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Tethys).
After them was born Cronos the wily, youngest and most terrible of her
children, and he hated his lusty sire.

And again, she bore the [Cyclopes](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Cyclopes), overbearing in spirit," [140]
[Brontes](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Brontes),
and [Steropes](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Steropes) and stubborn-hearted
[Arges](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Arges),who
gave [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) the
thunder and made the thunderbolt: in all else they were like the gods," [145]
but one eye only was set in the midst of their foreheads. And they were
surnamed [Cyclopes](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Cyclopes) (Orb-eyed) because one orbed eye was set in
their foreheads. [Strength](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Strength) and might and craft were in their works.

And again, three other sons were born of
[Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth) and
[Heaven](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Heaven),
great and doughty beyond telling, [Cottus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Cottus) and Briareos and
[Gyes](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Gyes),
presumptuous children." [150] From their shoulders sprang a hundred arms, not
to be approached, and fifty heads grew from the shoulders upon the strong
limbs of each, and irresistible was the stubborn strength that was in their
great forms. For of all the children that were born of
[Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth) and
[Heaven](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Heaven),"
[155] these were the most terrible, and they were hated by their own father
from the first. And he used to hide them all away in a secret place of
[Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth) so soon
as each was born, and would not suffer them to come up into the light: and
[Heaven](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Heaven)
rejoiced in his evil doing. But vast [Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth)" [160] groaned within, being straitened, and she
thought a crafty and an evil wile. Forthwith she made the element of grey
flint and shaped a great sickle, and told her plan to her dear sons. And she
spoke, cheering them, while she was vexed in her dear heart:

" [165] ``My children, gotten of a sinful father, if you will obey me, we
should punish the vile outrage of your father; for he first thought of doing
shameful things.''

So she said; but fear seized them all, and none of them uttered a word. But
great Cronos the wily took courage and answered his dear mother:

" [170] ``[Mother](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Mother), I will undertake to do this deed, for I
reverence not our father of evil name, for he first thought of doing shameful
things.''

So he said: and vast [Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth) rejoiced greatly in spirit, and set and hid him
in an ambush, and put in his hands" [175] a jagged sickle, and revealed to him
the whole plot.  
And [Heaven](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Heaven)
came, bringing on night and longing for love, and he lay about
[Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth)
spreading himself full upon her.Then the son from his ambush stretched forth
his left hand and in his right took the great long sickle" [180] with jagged
teeth, and swiftly lopped off his own father's members and cast them away to
fall behind him. And not vainly did they fall from his hand; for all the
bloody drops that gushed forth [Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth) received, and as the seasons moved round" [185]
she bore the strong Erinyes and the great Giants with gleaming armour, holding
long spears in their hands and the Nymphs whom they call Meliaeall over the
boundless earth. And so soon as he had cut off the members with flint and cast
them from the land into the surging sea," [190] they were swept away over the
main a long time: and a white foam spread around them from the immortal flesh,
and in it there grew a maiden. First she drew near holy Cythera, and from
there, afterwards, she came to sea-girt
[Cyprus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Cyprus), and
came forth an awful and lovely goddess, and grass" [195] grew up about her
beneath her shapely feet. Her gods and men call
[Aphrodite](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Aphrodite), and the foam-born goddess and rich-crowned
Cytherea, because she grew amid the foam, and Cytherea because she reached
Cythera, and Cyprogenes because she was born in billowy
[Cyprus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Cyprus),"
[200] and Philommedesbecause she sprang from the members. And with her went
Eros, and comely Desire followed her at her birth at the first and as she went
into the assembly of the gods. This honor she has from the beginning, and this
is the portion allotted to her amongst men and undying gods, -- " [205] the
whisperings of maidens and smiles and deceits with sweet delight and love and
graciousness.

But these sons whom he begot himself great
[Heaven](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Heaven) used
to call Titans (Strainers) in reproach, for he said that they strained and did
presumptuously" [210] a fearful deed, and that vengeance for it would come
afterwards.

And Night bore hateful [Doom](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Doom) and black Fate and
[Death](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Death), and
she bore Sleep and the tribe of Dreams." [214] And again the goddess murky
Night, though she lay with none," [213] bare Blame and painful Woe," [215] and
the [Hesperides](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hesperides) who guard the rich, golden apples and the
trees bearing fruit beyond glorious Ocean. Also she bore the Destinies and
ruthless avenging Fates, [Clotho](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Clotho) and
[Lachesis](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Lachesis)
and Atropos,who give men at their birth both evil and good to have," [220] and
they pursue the transgressions of men and of gods: and these goddesses never
cease from their dread anger until they punish the sinner with a sore penalty.
Also deadly Night bore [Nemesis](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Nemesis) (Indignation) to afflict mortal men, and after
her, Deceit and Friendship" [225] and hateful Age and hard-hearted Strife.

But abhorred Strife bore painful Toil and
[Forgetfulness](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Forgetfulness) and Famine and tearful Sorrows,
Fightings also, Battles, Murders, Manslaughters, Quarrels, Lying Words,
Disputes," [230] Lawlessness and Ruin, all of one nature, and
[Oath](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Oath) who most
troubles men upon earth when anyone willfully swears a false oath.

And [Sea](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Sea) begat
[Nereus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Nereus), the
eldest of his children, who is true and lies not: and men call him the Old
Man" [235] because he is trusty and gentle and does not forget the laws of
righteousness, but thinks just and kindly thoughts. And yet again he got great
[Thaumas](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Thaumas) and
proud [Phorcys](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Phorcys), being mated with
[Earth](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Earth), and
fair-cheeked [Ceto](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Ceto) and [Eurybia](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Eurybia) who has a heart of flint within her.

" [240] And of [Nereus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Nereus) and rich-haired
[Doris](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Doris),
daughter of Ocean the perfect river, were born children,passing lovely amongst
goddesses, Ploto, [Eucrante](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Eucrante), [Sao](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Sao), and
[Amphitrite](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Amphitrite), and Eudora, and
[Thetis](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Thetis),
Galene and [Glauce](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Glauce)," [245]
[Cymothoe](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Cymothoe),
Speo, Thoe and lovely [Halie](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Halie), and
[Pasithea](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Pasithea),
and [Erato](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Erato),
and rosy-armed [Eunice](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Eunice), and gracious
[Melite](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Melite), and
[Eulimene](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Eulimene),
and Agaue, [Doto](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Doto), [Proto](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Proto), [Pherusa](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Pherusa), and
[Dynamene](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Dynamene),
and [Nisaea](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Nisaea),
and [Actaea](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Actaea),
and Protomedea," [250] [Doris](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Doris), Panopea, and comely
[Galatea](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Galatea),
and lovely [Hippothoe](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hippothoe), and rosy-armed
[Hipponoe](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hipponoe),
and Cymodoce who with Cymatolegeand
[Amphitrite](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Amphitrite) easily calms the waves upon the misty sea
and the blasts of raging winds," [255] and
[Cymo](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Cymo), and
[Eione](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Eione), and
rich-crowned Alimede, and [Glauconome](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Glauconome), fond of laughter, and Pontoporea, Leagore,
Euagore, and Laomedea, and Polynoe, and
[Autonoe](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Autonoe),
and [Lysianassa](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Lysianassa), and Euarne, lovely of shape and without
blemish of form," [260] and [Psamathe](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Psamathe) of charming figure and divine Menippe, Neso,
Eupompe, [Themisto](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Themisto), [Pronoe](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Pronoe), and Nemerteswho has the nature of her
deathless father. These fifty daughters sprang from blameless
[Nereus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Nereus),
skilled in excellent crafts.

" [265] And [Thaumas](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Thaumas) wedded
[Electra](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Electra) the
daughter of deep-flowing Ocean, and she bore him swift
[Iris](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Iris) and the
long-haired Harpies, [Aello](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Aello) (Storm-swift) and Ocypetes (Swift-flier) who on
their swift wings keep pace with the blasts of the winds and the birds; for
quick as time they dart along.

" [270] And again, [Ceto](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Ceto) bore to
[Phorcys](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Phorcys) the
fair-cheeked Graiae, sisters grey from their birth: and both deathless gods
and men who walk on earth call them Graiae, Pemphredo well-clad, and saffron-
robed [Enyo](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Enyo),
and the Gorgons who dwell beyond glorious Ocean" [275] in the frontier land
towards Night where are the clear-voiced
[Hesperides](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hesperides), Sthenno, and
[Euryale](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Euryale),
and [Medusa](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Medusa)
who suffered a woeful fate: she was mortal, but the two were undying and grew
not old. With her lay the Dark-haired Onein a soft meadow amid spring
flowers." [280] And when [Perseus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Perseus) cut off her head, there sprang forth great
[Chrysaor](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Chrysaor)
and the horse Pegasus who is so called because he was born near the springsof
Ocean; and that other, because he held a golden bladein his hands. Now Pegasus
flew away and left the earth, the mother of flocks," [285] and came to the
deathless gods: and he dwells in the house of
[Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) and
brings to wise [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) the thunder and lightning. But
[Chrysaor](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Chrysaor)
was joined in love to [Callirrhoe](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Callirrhoe), the daughter of glorious Ocean, and begot
three-headed [Geryones](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Geryones). Him mighty Heracles slew" [290] in sea-girt
[Erythea](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Erythea) by
his shambling oxen on that day when he drove the wide-browed oxen to holy
[Tiryns](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Tiryns), and
had crossed the ford of Ocean and killed Orthus and
[Eurytion](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Eurytion)
the herdsman in the dim stead out beyond glorious Ocean.

" [300] And in a hollow cave she bore another monster, irresistible, in no
wise like either to mortal men or to the undying gods, even the goddess fierce
[Echidna](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Echidna) who
is half a nymph with glancing eyes and fair cheeks, and half again a huge
snake, great and awful, with speckled skin, eating raw flesh beneath the
secret parts of the holy earth. And there she has a cave deep down under a
hollow rock far from the deathless gods and mortal men. There, then, did the
gods appoint her a glorious house to dwell in: and she keeps guard in Arima
beneath the earth, grim [Echidna](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Echidna)," [305] a nymph who dies not nor grows old all
her days.

[Men](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Men) say that
Typhaon the terrible, outrageous and lawless, was joined in love to her, the
maid with glancing eyes. So she conceived and brought forth fierce offspring;
first she bore Orthus the hound of
[Geryones](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Geryones),"
[310] and then again she bore a second, a monster not to be overcome and that
may not be described, Cerberus who eats raw flesh, the brazen-voiced hound of
[Hades](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hades), fifty-
headed, relentless and strong. And again she bore a third, the evil-minded
[Hydra](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hydra) of
[Lerna](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Lerna), whom
the goddess, white-armed [Hera](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hera) nourished," [315] being angry beyond measure with
the mighty Heracles. And her Heracles, the son of
[Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus), of the
house of [Amphitryon](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Amphitryon), together with warlike Iolaus, destroyed
with the unpitying sword through the plans of
[Athena](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Athena) the
spoil driver. She was the mother of Chimaera who breathed raging fire," [320]
a creature fearful, great, swift footed and strong, who had three heads, one
of a grim-eyed lion, another of a goat, and another of a snake, a fierce
dragon; in her forepart she was a lion; in her hinderpart, a dragon; and in
her middle, a goat, breathing forth a fearful blast of blazing fire." [325]
Her did Pegasus and noble [Bellerophon](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Bellerophon) slay; but
[Echidna](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Echidna) was
subject in love to Orthus and brought forth the deadly
[Sphinx](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Sphinx) which
destroyed the [Cadmeans](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Cadmeans), and the Nemean lion, which
[Hera](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hera), the good
wife of [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus),
brought up and made to haunt the hills of
[Nemea](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Nemea), a
plague to men." [330] There he preyed upon the tribes of her own people and
had power over [Tretus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Tretus) of [Nemea](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Nemea) and [Apesas](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Apesas): yet the strength of stout Heracles overcame
him.

And [Ceto](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Ceto) was
joined in love to [Phorcys](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Phorcys) and bore her youngest, the awful snake who
guards" [335] the apples all of gold in the secret places of the dark earth at
its great bounds. This is the offspring of
[Ceto](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Ceto) and
[Phorcys](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Phorcys).

* * *

_Works and Days_  
Or if you will, I will sum you up another tale well and skilfully -- and do
you lay it up in your heart, -- how the gods and mortal men sprang from one
source.

First of all " [110] the deathless gods who dwell on
[Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus)
made a golden race of mortal men who lived in the time of Cronos when he was
reigning in heaven. And they lived like gods" [115] without sorrow of heart,
remote and free from toil and grief: miserable age rested not on them; but
with legs and arms never failing they made merry with feasting beyond the
reach of all evils. When they died, it was as though they were overcome with
sleep, and they had all good things; for the fruitful earth unforced bare them
fruit abundantly and without stint. They dwelt in ease and peace upon their
lands with many good things," [120] rich in flocks and loved by the blessed
gods.

But after the earth had covered this generation -- they are called pure
spirits dwelling on the earth, and are kindly, delivering from harm, and
guardians of mortal men;" [125] for they roam everywhere over the earth,
clothed in mist and keep watch on judgements and cruel deeds, givers of
wealth; for this royal right also they received; -- then they who dwell on
[Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus)
made a second generation which was of silver and less noble by far. It was
like the golden race neither in body nor in spirit." [130] A child was brought
up at his good mother's side a hundred years, an utter simpleton, playing
childishly in his own home. But when they were full grown and were come to the
full measure of their prime, they lived only a little time and that in sorrow
because of their foolishness, for they could not keep from sinning and" [135]
from wronging one another, nor would they serve the immortals, nor sacrifice
on the holy altars of the blessed ones as it is right for men to do wherever
they dwell. Then [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) the son of Cronos was angry and put them away,
because they would not give honor to the blessed gods who live on
[Olympus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Olympus).

" [140] But when earth had covered this generation also -- they are called
blessed spirits of the underworld by men, and, though they are of second
order, yet honor attends them also -- [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) the [Father](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Father) made a third generation of mortal men, a brazen
race, sprung from ash-trees; and it was in no way equal to the silver age,"
[145] but was terrible and strong. They loved the lamentable works of
[Ares](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Ares) and deeds
of violence; they ate no bread, but were hard of heart like adamant, fearful
men. Great was their strength and unconquerable the arms which grew from their
shoulders on their strong limbs." [150] Their armor was of bronze, and their
houses of bronze, and of bronze were their implements: there was no black
iron. These were destroyed by their own hands and passed to the dank house of
chill [Hades](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Hades),
and left no name: terrible though they were," [155] black
[Death](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Death) seized
them, and they left the bright light of the sun.

But when earth had covered this generation also,
[Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) the son
of Cronos made yet another, the fourth, upon the fruitful earth, which was
nobler and more righteous, a god-like race of hero-men who are called" [160]
demi-gods, the race before our own, throughout the boundless earth. Grim war
and dread battle destroyed a part of them, some in the land of
[Cadmus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Cadmus) at
seven-gated [Thebes](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Thebes) when they fought for the flocks of
[Oedipus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Oedipus),
and some, when it had brought them in ships over the great sea gulf" [165] to
[Troy](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Troy) for rich-
haired Helen's sake: there death's end enshrouded a part of them. But to the
others father [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) the son of Cronos gave a living and an abode
apart from men, and made them dwell at the ends of earth." [170] And they live
untouched by sorrow in the islands of the blessed along the shore of deep-
swirling Ocean, happy heroes for whom" [173] the grain-giving earth bears
honey-sweet fruit flourishing thrice a year," [169] far from the deathless
gods, and Cronos rules over them;" [169a] for the father of men and gods
released him from his bonds." [169b] And these last equally have honor and
glory.

" [169c] And again far-seeing [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) made yet another generation, the fifth, of men"
[169d] who are upon the bounteous earth.  

" [174] Thereafter, would that I were not among the men of the fifth
generation," [175] but either had died before or been born afterwards. For now
truly is a race of iron, and men never rest from labor and sorrow by day, and
from perishing by night; and the gods shall lay sore trouble upon them. But,
notwithstanding, even these shall have some good mingled with their evils."
[180] And [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus)
will destroy this race of mortal men also when they come to have grey hair on
the temples at their birth.The father will not agree with his children, nor
the children with their father, nor guest with his host, nor comrade with
comrade; nor will brother be dear to brother as aforetime." [185]
[Men](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Men) will
dishonor their parents as they grow quickly old, and will carp at them,
chiding them with bitter words, hard-hearted they, not knowing the fear of the
gods. They will not repay their aged parents the cost of their nurture, for
might shall be their right: and one man will sack another's city." [190] There
will be no favor for the man who keeps his oath or for the just or for the
good; but rather men will praise the evil-doer and his violent dealing.
[Strength](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Strength)
will be right, and reverence will cease to be; and the wicked will hurt the
worthy man, speaking false words against him, and will swear an oath upon
them." [195] Envy, foul-mouthed, delighting in evil, with scowling face, will
go along with wretched men one and all." [200] And then Aidos and
[Nemesis](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Nemesis),with their sweet forms wrapped in white robes,
will go from the wide-pathed earth and forsake mankind to join the company of
the deathless gods: and bitter sorrows will be left for mortal men, and there
will be no help against evil.

And now I will tell a fable for princes who themselves understand. Thus said
the hawk to the nightingale with speckled neck, while he carried her high up
among the clouds, gripped fast in his talons," [205] and she, pierced by his
crooked talons, cried pitifully. To her he spoke disdainfully: ``Miserable
thing, why do you cry out? One far stronger than you now holds you fast, and
you must go wherever I take you, songstress as you are. And if I please, I
will make my meal of you, or let you go." [210] He is a fool who tries to
withstand the stronger, for he does not get the mastery and suffers pain
besides his shame.'' So said the swiftly flying hawk, the long-winged bird.

But you, [Perses](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Perses), listen to right and do not foster violence;
for violence is bad for a poor man." [215] Even the prosperous cannot easily
bear its burden, but is weighed down under it when he has fallen into
delusion. The better path is to go by on the other side towards
[Justice](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Justice);
for [Justice](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Justice)
beats Outrage when she comes at length to the end of the race. But only when
he has suffered does the fool learn this. For
[Oath](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Oath) keeps
pace with wrong judgements." [220] There is a noise when
[Justice](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-bin/encyclopedia?entry=Justice) is
being dragged in the way where those who devour bribes and give sentence with
crooked judgements, take her. And she, wrapped in mist, follows to the city
and haunts of the people, weeping, and bringing mischief to men, even to such
as have driven her forth in that they did not deal straightly with her.

" [225] But they who give straight judgements to strangers and to the men of
the land, and go not aside from what is just, their city flourishes, and the
people prosper in it: [Peace](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Peace), the nurse of children, is abroad in their land,
and all-seeing [Zeus](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/cgi-
bin/encyclopedia?entry=Zeus) never decrees cruel war against them." [230]
Neither famine nor disaster ever haunt men who do true justice; but light-
heartedly they tend the fields which are all their care. The earth bears them
victual in plenty, and on the mountains the oak bears acorns upon the top and
bees in the midst. Their woolly sheep are laden with fleeces;" [235] their
women bear children like their parents. They flourish continually with good
things, and do not travel on ships, for the grain-giving earth bears them
fruit.

  
![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif)  
[Return to the syllabus. ](http://history.hanover.edu/courses/211f97lu.html)  
[Return to the History Department.](http://history.hanover.edu)
![](http://history.hanover.edu/pictures/bars/aqua_thin.gif) **

