![Northern Illinois University
Logo](http://www.engl.niu.edu/fulbright/horz.jpeg)

|  ![Fulbright Program Logo](http://www.engl.niu.edu/fulbright/fulblogo.gif)  
---|---  
  
# GENERAL INFORMATION

## Institute Implementation: Collaborating NIU Units

The following units of Northern Illinois University have collaborated to
implement a high-quality program for the Fulbright scholars:

## [The Department of English](http://www.engl.niu.edu)

The Department of English is characterized by its integrated approach to the
study of the English language. Unlike many English departments, we have
integrated the fields of linguistics, literary studies, and rhetoric and
composition throughout the curriculum from the undergraduate to the doctoral
level. The 35 professorial faculty in English maintain an impressive record of
achievement and professional involvement. English faculty members have
received numerous awards, including two Presidential Research Professorships,
two Presidential Teaching Professorships, and eleven NIU Excellence in
Undergraduate Teaching Awards, more than any other department on campus. The
undergraduate program provides about 400 majors a broad education in
literature, linguistics, and writing. The graduate program of the Department
of English has offered the M.A. and Ph.D. degrees since 1962. We have
approximately one hundred currently active graduate students, many from
Illinois, but others from out of state and overseas. The study of American
literature has been the strongest area of the graduate program in the last
decade and our recruitment of new faculty in recent years reflects our desire
to maintain American literature as a departmental strength.

## [International Training Office
(ITO)](http://www3.niu.edu/depts/intl_prgms/ito.htm)

The International Training Office (ITO), a unit of the International Programs
Division, will be the major facilitating and administrative body of the
proposed program. ITO is the international training resource unit of the
university and has been in charge of administering certificate courses and
short-term training programs for international client organizations, both from
the government and the private sector, for the past 20 years. Over the years,
ITO has carved a niche as a facilitator of change and as an active partner in
developing the human resources potential of professionals from the
technologically disadvantaged areas of the world. ITO has enhanced the
capacities of public sector, private sector, and nongovernmental organizations
as well as individuals from many countries in the world, including Argentina,
Costa Rica, Chile, Colombia, Cyprus, Ethiopia, Indonesia, Kenya, Lesotho,
Madagascar, Malawi, Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Philippines, Saudi Arabia,
Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Thailand, and Venezuela.

### Support Unit: [NIU Libraries](http://libws66.lib.niu.edu/txtindex.html)

NIU's library system consists of the Founders Memorial Library and its branch
libraries including Faraday Science Library, NIU Hoffman Estates Library, and
the Law and Music Libraries. The university's collection contains over 1.6
million circulating volumes, 1.2 million government publications, and over 3.2
million microforms, maps, recordings, and audiovisual materials. The NIU
Library System participates in Illinet Online, and provides access to the
statewide library systems of universities in the state and to a variety of
electronic databases. A recent study of the holdings related to the variety of
disciplines within English Studies reports that the collection has more than
88,000 titles. The library has achieved major research collection status in
American and English literature of all periods. In addition, we have a strong
linguistics and English as a Second Language collection and ongoing
significant collection development in the subfields of more recent
departmental programs such as rhetoric and technical writing, women's studies,
African-American studies, critical theory, gay and lesbian studies,
bibliographical and textual studies, and the history of the book. In 2000, NIU
provided an institutional home for the prestigious editorial project The
Writings of Henry D. Thoreau, edited by Senior Editor Elizabeth Witherell and
published by Princeton University Press. Witherell is an adjunct professor in
English, and will describe the project to participants and offer a tour of the
facilities. The library's English subject specialist holds joint appointment
at the rank of Professor in both the Department of English and University
Libraries. He will be available to provide a tour of the library during
orientation.

### Support Unit: [Outpost Wilderness Adventure](http://www.owa.com/index.cfm)

Outpost Wilderness Adventure (OWA) is a small-group outdoor adventure program
located in the Tarryall Valley in central Colorado. OWA has been guiding
adventure expeditions since 1979 and has provided guides, expertise, and
facilities for Northern Illinois University's Outpost NIU program for the past
four years. OWA staff has extensive experience with clients from countries
other than the U.S.

  
  


[Home](http://www.engl.niu.edu/fulbright/)  
[Program Information](http://www.engl.niu.edu/fulbright/general) | [Travel
Information](http://www.engl.niu.edu/fulbright/travel) | [Residence
Information](http://www.engl.niu.edu/fulbright/residence) | [Contact
Information](http://www.engl.niu.edu/fulbright/contact.html)  
[Schedule](http://www.engl.niu.edu/fulbright/schedule) |
[Syllabus](http://www.engl.niu.edu/fulbright/syllabus) |
[Resources](http://www.engl.niu.edu/fulbright/resources) [  
Participants](http://www.engl.niu.edu/fulbright/participants) | [Discussion
Area](http://www.engl.niu.edu:88/~fulbright)  
  
---  
  
Sponsored by the

  
U.S. Department of State  
Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs  
Office of Academic Exchange Programs  
Study of the U.S. Branch
<http://exchanges.state.gov/education/amstudy/fasi.htm>  
---  
  
[![Valid HTML 4.01!](http://www.w3.org/Icons/valid-
html401)](http://validator.w3.org/check/referer)

