**

Study Guide: HIST 384, Ancient History (Exam 1, Spring 2002)

**

Study chapters 2-5, 7, 9-12, and 15-16 in Chester Starr, _A History of the
Ancient World_ , as well as internet readings for the topics covered in the
syllabus.

**

I. Terms (5 of 8 terms; 8% each; 40% total)

**

Terms will be taken from the hints for the essay questions below.

**

II. Essay (1 of 2 essays; 50% total)

**

TWO of the following will appear on the mid-term exam. You will write on ONE
of them. I will grade your essay based on coverage of relevant historical
facts, reference to appropriate primary sources, understanding of historical
debates and interpretations, overall organization and argument, and writing
ability (clear style, correct grammar). The hints below are to aid you in
studying, but will not appear on the exam.

1\. Compare and contrast the ethical systems of early Mesopotamia and
pharaonic Egypt. How have scholars accounted for these differences? Discuss
religious and legal codes of conduct, as well as evidence for general cultural
values.

**Hint:** Hammurabi, _Code of Hammurabi_ , Gilgamesh, ziggurats, kingship,
social classes, afterlife, negative confessions, Egyptian Book of the Dead,
pharaohs, Osiris, pyramids, temples

2\. Discuss the most important scholarly theories about the influences of
other cultures on the development of Greek culture from prehistoric times
until the fifth century BCE. On what issues do scholars generally agree and
disagree? What time periods are most controversial and why?

**Hint:** Martin Bernal, _Black Athena_ , Mary Lefkowitz, Mary (Molly)
Myerowitz Levine, archaeology, writing systems, linguistics, art history,
religion, Crete, Minoan, Mycenaean, Dark Age Greece, bull worship, Nilotic
art, earth mother, sky gods, geometric pottery, kouros and kore statues,
Egypt, Near East, Indo-Europeans

3\. Compare and contrast governmental institutions in Mesopotamia and Egypt.
Consider sources of governmental power, laws, taxation, diplomacy, and
warfare.

**Hint:** Hammurabi, _Code of Hammurabi_ , Gilgamesh, city states, _Sumerian
King List_ , Akkadian and Babylonian Empires, bureaucracy, diplomacy, warfare,
Old Kingdom, Middle Kingdom, New Kingdom, Dynasties, pharaohs, pyramids,
Hatshepsut, Akhenaten, labor duty, Hebrews, Exodus, Hyksos, Sea People

4\. Discuss the role of geography in the development of TWO of the following
cultures: Egyptian, Mesopotamian (Sumerian, Akkadian, Babylonian), Hebrew,
Greek.

**Hint:** river valleys, deserts, coastlines, islands, agriculture,
irrigation, ecological damage, nomads, religion, Nile River, Tigris and
Euphrates Rivers, Sahara Desert, Sinai Desert, city states, centralization,
Thera, invasions (Hyksos, Sea People, Indo-Europeans)

5\. How was the religious development of the early Hebrews similar to or
different from the development of other Mediterranean cultures?

**Hint:** Yahweh, El (Eli), monotheism, polytheism, scripture, Genesis,
Exodus, Moses, 10 Commandments, tabernacle, temple, David, Solomon, Israel and
Judah, afterlife, Egyptian deities, Mesopotamian deities, Greek deities

6\. Discuss the relationship between artistic and literary developments on the
one hand and political developments on the other hand in Greece from the end
of the Dark Age until about 500 BCE.

**Hint:** pottery, Protogeometric, Geometric, Orientalizing, Black and Red
Figure, epic poetry, lyric poetry, odes, elegies, drama, history, Homer,
Hesiod, Sappho, Pindar, Aeschylus, Euripides, Sophocles, Herodotus,
architecture, Dark Age, city states, monarchy, oligarchy, tyranny, democracy,
Athens, Sparta, Corinth

7\. Compare and contrast the development of governmental institutions in
Athens and Sparta.

**Hint:** city states, monarchy, oligarchy, tyranny, democracy, citizenship,
economy, Theseus, Draco, Solon, Pisistratus, Hipparchus, Hippias, Cleisthenes,
archons, Council of 500, ostracism, Messenia, Spartan kings, ephors, Gerousia
(council of elders), Assembly, barracks, women

8\. Discuss the evidence for and against cultural continuity in Greece from
the Minoan and Mycenaean periods through the fifth century BCE.

**Hint:** language, Linear A, Linear B, Greek alphabet, Indo-Europeans,
_Iliad_ , _Odyssey_ , Homer, religion, Zeus, Aphrodite, Athena, Hesiod, bulls,
myths, temples, art history, pottery, Minoan and Mycenaean, Protogeometric,
Geometric, Orientalizing, Red and Black Figure, cities, decentralization,
settlement patterns

**

III. Map (1% each; 10% total)

**

Be able to find the following places on a map of the Mediterranean and
surrounding areas. Use the maps on pp. 16, 29, 52, 84-85, 112, 126, 148, and
214-215 in Chester Starr, _A History of the Ancient World_.

Aegean Sea

Mediterranean Sea

Persian Gulf

Red Sea

Black Sea

Atlantic Ocean

Greece

Asia Minor

Syria

Palestine

Mesopotamia

Egypt

Upper Egypt |

Lower Egypt

Italy

Spain

Sumer

Akkad

Nubia

Libya

Crete

Cyprus

Sicily

Corsica

Sardinia |

Catal Huyuk

Jericho

Uruk (Erech)

Memphis

Babylon

Thebes

Mycenae

Pylos

Athens

Cnossos (Knossos)

Troy

Sidon

Tyre |

Jerusalem

Sparta

Byzantium

Carthage

Corinth

Euphrates River

Tigris River

Nile River

Nile Delta

Caucasus Mountains  
---|---|---|---

