**

American Poetry: Comparing Selected "Native" Poetic Voices

**

Fall 2001

English 3342-501  American Poetry

Dr. Roemer Office Hrs.: T/TH 12:30-2; MW by apt., 405/203 Carlisle.

300 Preston Please schedule appointments in advance; indicate your phone #.

T/TH 9:30-10:50 Phone: 272-2729; e-mail roemer@uta.edu

NATURE AND GOALS OF THE COURSE

This is not a survey of American poetry. If you are interested in a survey,
begin by consulting Jay Parini and Brett C. Millier's _The Columbia History of
American Poetry_ (1993), the poetry essays in Emory Elliott's _Columbia
Literary History of the United States_ (1988) and the multiple volumes of
Sacvan Bercovitch's _Cambridge History of American Literature,_ and recent
anthologies such as Allen Mandelbaum and Robert D. Richardson's _Three
Centuries of American Poetry_ (1999) and Cary Nelson's _Anthology of Modern
American Poetry_ (2000). You can find an introduction to the ways the American
poetry canon has changed at my Web site _Covers, Titles, and Tables: The
Formations of American Literary Canons_ ( <uta.edu/english/mal/e/roemer>).

The basic question "behind" this course is: what happens when we juxtapose
selected poems by two of the best-known American poets (Whitman and Dickinson)
and selected examples of Native American oral and written poetic performances?
To be more specific: How do the juxtapositions change or reinforce our views
of Whitman and Dickinson and the Native poets? How do the pairings: reflect
processes of canonization and exclusion; affect our concepts of "poetry" and
the "poet"; and suggest the power of cross-cultural and "within"-culture
poetic "influence"? By the completion of the course, I hope that each student
will be able to address these questions with regard to the poets examined as
well as to other poets they admire.

I divided the course into two interrelated sections. The first pairs Whitman's
"Song of Myself" and "Crossing Brooklyn Ferry" with selections from Washington
Matthew's translation of the Navajo Nightway. Although Whitman was fascinated
by chant forms and briefly worked for the Bureau of Indian Affairs, he did not
know Matthews' translation, which appeared after the poet's death in 1902;
and, to my knowledge, no Navajo singers knew of Whitman's poetry. Hence the
basis of comparison is not "influence." Rather the many similarities in form
and the numerous differences in function raise the questions stated above,
especially about what a poem "is" and "does." The second part of the course
does include the issue of influence, though not necessarily Harold Bloom's
concept of "the anxiety of influence." Dickinson influenced Momaday; Momaday
influenced Ortiz; Ortiz influenced Harjo; and all three Native poets knew
parts of Matthews' translation.

In some ways this course is cutting edge; in others it is old fashioned. The
cutting part reflects the current interests in "comparativist" American
Studies, in canon formation, and in ethnic studies. All these trends are
expressed in Kenneth Lincoln's new book _Sing with the Heart of a Bear:
Fusions of Native and American Poetry, 1899-1999_ (2000). The old fashioned
part will be reflected in our classroom focus on "close readings" of
individual poems, although our readings will differ from "New Critical"
readings, since we will be placing our readings within biographical, cultural,
and historical contexts. In your research paper you can be as new or old
fashioned as you please, though I will expect you to be able to justify your
approach(es). (See "Paper" below.)

REQUIRED READINGS (The books are available at the UTA Bookstore; the course
packet (CP) at the Double Image photocopy center at the University Center.)

"Poetic Forms and Literary Terminology, " _Norton Anthology: English
Literature_ (handout)

Matthews / Bierhorst, _Night Chant_ (handout)

Whitman, _Leaves of Grass_ (Norton Critical Ed.) We will focus only on "Song
of  Myself" and "Crossing Brooklyn Ferry."

Dickinson / Johnson, _The Final Harvest: Emily Dickinson's Poems

_

Momaday, _In the Presence of the Sun ;_ also selections from _The Gourd Dancer
_ and _In The Bear's House_ (in CP); Momaday Web site (see below)

Schubnell, "Momaday's Poetry" in _N. Scott Momaday_ (189-254) (on reserve in
the UTA Central Library)

Ortiz, _Woven Stone

_

Harjo, _She Had Some Horses;_ also selections from _Secrets from the Center of
the World, In Mad Love and War, _ _The Woman Who Fell from the Sky,_ and _A
Map of the Next World _(in CP)

Course packet of short readings (designated as CP)



TENTATIVE SCHEDULE OF TOPICS, READINGS, EXAMS, AND PAPERS

Introduction to the Course and to How We Define Poetry 8/28

Reading: "Poetic Forms and Literary Terminology" The degrees to

which this standard introduction to poetic forms is and is not

relevant to the texts examined in this class will be used as

catalysts for our discussion of how we define "poetry."

Note: The reading assignments are short at the beginning of the

semester. This would be a good time to decide: (1) which Dickinson

poem you would like us to discuss; and (2) what your

paper topic might be.

Crossing Over Chantways: Songs of Self and Hozho (Whitman & The Nightway)

Readings: Matthews / Bierhorst, _Night Chant_ (handout); Map & 8/30, 9/4,6,11

Diagrams, Witherspoon, Faris, Roemer, "Nightway

Questions" (all in CP)

Viewing: _By This Song I Walk

_

Readings: Whitman, "Song of Myself" and "Crossing Brooklyn

Ferry," Emerson, "The Poet" (CP) 9/13,18,[20],

9/25

Readings: Whitman and Nightway Compared -- Implications 9/27, 10/2,[4]

Decide which Dickinson poem you would like discussed before 10/9

(Indicate your selection in writing.)

**

First Examination (Nightway & Whitman) 10/9

**







Emily and Her Native Offspring (Dickinson, Momaday, Ortiz, Harjo)

Emily Dickinson

__ Readings: _Dickinson / Johnson, Final Harvest;_ also Lincoln

_

_ (compares Dickinson to Sitting Bull) & Miller (in CP) 10/11,16,18, 11/23

**

Second Examination: Dickinson 10/30

**

Introduction to Poetry in English by American Indians 11/1

Reading: Maddox (CP)

N. Scott Momaday

Reading: In the _Presence of the Sun;_ also Momaday

selections in CP; also Schubnell "Momaday's Poetry"

(on reserve UTA Library); also the Momaday entry included

on <www.english.uiuc.edu/maps> .

11/1, 6, 8, 13

Simon Ortiz

Readings: Ortiz, _Woven Stone;_ Scarberry-Garcia (CP) 11/ 15, 20, 27

Joy Harjo

Readings: Harjo, _She Had Some Horses;_ also Harjo

selections in CP; also Wilson's "Joy Harjo" (handout) 11/ 27, 29,

12/4, 6

Review for Exam 12/6

**

Papers Due 12/6

Final Exam (Momaday, Ortiz, and Harjo) 12/13, 8 am**

EXAMINATIONS

Each of the three exams will consist of two sections: a closed-book, short-
answer section; and an open-book essay section. Typically part two will
include two types of essays. One will focus on a series of interrelated
questions about one poem or part of one poem. The other will be a question
related to the issues raised in the second paragraph of the "Nature and Goals"
section of this syllabus. Grading criteria: I am particularly interested in
the logic, support, and focus of your arguments. I expect you to support
claims with specific relevant examples from the poems and to direct all your
arguments to the question asked. The class before the exam I distribute
detailed study guides. I use a "blind" grading procedure, i.e., I do not know
who I am grading as I grade.

SHORT RESEARCH PAPER

Approximate length: 2500 words (about ten, double-spaced pages). Although we
stress a comparative approach in this course, your paper can, if you wish,
concentrate on an important aspect of one poet, and you are free to adopt
whatever critical or theoretical approach you deem most appropriate for your
analysis (provided you can justify your approach).

Criteria: your paper should demonstrate your ability to: (1) select a focus,
argument, and approach that you can justify as being significant and (in the
case of the approach) appropriate; (2) integrate intelligently your own ideas
and the ideas of relevant critics; (3) support arguments adequately and
organize them in logical and convincing ways; (4) present you arguments in an
engaging fashion; (5) submit a final draft that is not marred by "mechanical"
problems (e.g., typos or spelling, punctuation, and grammar problems). Your
focus should be influenced by the length requirement. Too broad a focus
invites superficiality. An overly narrow focus can invite repetition and pose
problems in defining the significance of the topic. **Discuss your paper topic
with me well before mid-November.

**

Those of you who select Whitman or Dickinson can survey the scholarship for
your topic by first consulting James Woodress's _Eight American Authors,_
revised ed., which covers the scholarship through 1970. Then you can survey
the relevant parts of the Dickinson or Whitman sections of each of the annual
_American Literary Scholarship Volumes._ The advantage of these sources is
that they offer descriptions and evaluations of the articles, chapters, and
books. These can be supplemented with surveys of the _Walt Whitman Quarterly_
and the _Emily Dickinson Journal,_ and of Whitman and Dickinson bibliographies
and critical / reference works such as _The Emily Dickinson Handbook._ For the
American Indian poets, begin with relevant sections of Norma Wilson's _Native
American Poetry,_ Kenneth Lincoln's _Sing with the Heart of a Bear,_ and the
relevant essays and bibliographies in Kenneth Roemer's _Native American
Writers of the United States_ and A. La Vonne Ruoff's _American Indian
Literatures._ Another good beginning point is _Studies in American Indian
Literatures_ ( _SAIL_ ), which has published articles on all three poets and
offers an excellent Web site (<www.richmond.edu/faculty/asail>.) And of course
there are a variety of other web and home pages and listservs. The UTA Library
offers a valuable resource: the **Minority Cultures Collection** on the second
floor. The second floor Reference Librarians are also significant resources as
is the Library Web site <www.uta.edu/library/mavinfo/arts/htms>. Whichever
sources you use, it is crucial to have some idea of your focus and argument
_before_ your begin your searchers. If you don't, your search will probably be
inefficient and frustrating. I require the MLA format for the paper. I am
willing to look over outlines and drafts up to one week before the due date,
but, except for documented emergencies, I do not accept late papers.

IMPORTANT CLASS AND UNIVERSITY POLICIES

Class discussion is important. This is a cooperative enterprise. Hence class
attendance is important. Professors are not permitted to drop students for
excessive absences; however, in this class **for every five unexcused
absences, the semester grade drops by a half grade.** If you withdraw from the
course, please follow Graduate School deadlines and University policies.
Otherwise your transcript will be graced with an F. Plagiarism and other forms
of academic dishonesty will be handled according to University policies. For a
good definition of various types of plagiarism, see the "Writer's
Responsibility" section of the Graduate School's __ Web site
<www.uta.edu/etd/> .

APPROXIMATE GRADING WEIGHTS AND ENCOURAGEMENT

Each of the exams (20%); the research paper (40%). **Improvement and
consistent class participation can raise the semester grade.** Also I am very
willing to work with students with disabilities. At the beginning of the
semester, these students should provide me with documentation authorized by
the appropriate University office.

