|  ![](images/villagebanner.jpg) |  Assignments |
![](images/villagebanner.jpg)  
---|---|---  
  
* * *  
  


### **Week 1 Introduction to History**

###  

### **Week 2 Transformation of Antiquity to the 5th century**

6 Sept. _| Portfolio:_ Interpretations Summaries



8 Sept. _| Portfolio:_ Medieval Map

 Historians learn about government, administration, politics, regional
identities, urban patterns, social relations, cultural representations, and
gender relations through the study of maps and cartography. You will begin to
get a picture of medieval Europe by completing this map assignment. Print out
the outline maps and complete the map assignment by locating the terms below.
Place the majority of the terms on the European map, but some terms, such as
"Roman Empire in 400" and "Damascus" and a few others, belong on the
Mediterranean map. Cities can be marked with a dot. Place river names next to
the appropriate rivers. You should draw borders for areas (such as Champagne)
and use colors and/or shading to clearly indicate each term. Indicate
migrations with arrows showing the path of movement. Use whatever creative
coloring or shading techniques you wish, but aim for clarity. To locate the
terms for the map assignment, use an atlas and the maps in your textbook (p.
202, 211, 213, 216, 225, 245, 261, 267, 268, 270, 271, 272, 289, 290, 292,
293, 304, 308, 321, 325, 331, 337). I know that it looks like a lot of terms,
but many of them are quite basic terms that you already know. Prioritize the
readings for Friday. You can turn in the map assignment on Monday if necessary
with no penalty.



European Map

 ![](images/Medieval%20Outline%20Map)



Mediterranean Map

 ![](images/Mediterranean%20Outline%20Map)



Map Assignment Terms

|

**States or Regions**

|

**Cities and Sites, continued**

|

**Rivers and Bodies of Water**

|

**Other**  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
Roman Empire in 400

|

Rome

|

Atlantic Ocean

|

Franks migration  
  
Byzantine Empire in 527

|

Constantinople

|

Mediterranean Sea

|

Visigoths migration  
  
Islamic world in 750

|

Jerusalem

|

North Sea

|

Angles  
  
Carolingian Empire in 814

|

Mecca

|

English Channel

|

battle of Tours  
  
Kingdom of Charles

|

Damascus

|

Baltic Sea

|

Sicily  
  
Kingdom of Lothair

|

Milan

|

Black Sea

|

Corsica  
  
Kingdom of Louis

|

Venice

|

Adriatic Sea

|

Ireland  
  
Aquitaine

|

Toledo

|

Aegean Sea

|

Iceland  
  
Normandy

|

Paris

|

Rhine

|

Crete  
  
Flanders

|

Lyon

|

Rhone

|

Alps  
  
Brittany

|

London

|

Danube

|

Vikings (Norsemen, Danes, Swedes)  
  
Holy Roman Empire in 1378

|

Aachen

|

Elbe

|

battle of Agincourt  
  
|

Cluny

|

Thames

|

Alps mountains  
  
**Cities and Sites**

|

Citeaux

|

Loire

|

Pyrennes mountains  
  
Cologne

|

Strasbourg

|

Seine

|

Asia Minor  
  
Prague

|

Genoa

|

Po

|

Champagne fairs  
  
Budapest

|

Florence

|

Volga

|

Peasants' Rebellion in 1381  
  
Naples

|

Calais

|

Dnepr

|

Route of the Black Death to 1347  
  
Avignon

|

Vienna

|

|

Hanseatic League (area)  
  
Stockholm

|

Warsaw

|

|  
  
Moscow

|

Kiev

|

|  
  




###   **Week 3 Early Medieval Europe 5th-10th centuries**

13 Sept. | _Portfolio:_ History in the Media

> The history of Europe is alive and well in twentieth-century mass media!
Choose a depiction of an aspect of European history from one of the five
following media forms. This media work should deal with a period (medieval
Europe to Louis XIV) or topic (what is history?) covered this semester If you
are not sure an idea is appropriat--or if you have trouble coming up with
ideas--let me know, and I will help you find something to watch, hear, play,
or read. Bonus Originality Award: If you come up with a media work that none
of my students has ever used, I will give you a bonus +1 point.

>

> Once you have chosen a piece, examine the media product and critique it.
Question how the creators wrote and structured the piece. Try to figure out
their viewpoints and assumptions about history. Assess the effectiveness of
the piece at portraying history. Avoid getting wrapped up in the issues of
historical 'accuracy'--you are not a specialist who can really make a final
judgment on those aspects. Instead, analyze the production of the media
product and its premises. If you find one of our historical interpretive
schemas useful for understanding the media, you can certainly use it in your
analysis.

>

> Choose one of the following options (talk to me or e-mail if you need some
suggestions):

>

> _Historical Film_

>

> Hollywood loves history! Script writers and film directors have their own
perceptions and takes on history. Watch a historical film, then write a 1-2
page analysis of the viewpoint taken by the filmmakers on the historical
material covered by the film. Consider how the dialogue and filming techniques
produce a historical interpretation.

>

>  
>

> _Historical Song_

>

> Pick out a rock song, country song, folk piece, rap, metal-mania, or polka
that has lyrics dealing with something we cover in Western Civilization. Type
up the lyrics. Write a 1-2 page analysis of the lyrics, showing what view of
history the songwriter takes.

>

>  
>

> _Historical Comic Books and Cartoons_

>

> Pick a comic book or a book of historical cartoons (not just a cartoon
strip) to read. Write a 1-2 page analytic paper assessing the creator's
historical point of view. Analyze the connections between text and image in
the formation of this historical interpretation.

>

>  
>

> _Historical Game_

>

> Loads of computer games and board games deal with Western Civilization. All
of these games make valuations and assumptions about the development of
Western history. Pick a game and play it. Write a 1-2 page analysis of the
ways in which the game designers view Western Civilization. Hint: look at the
designer's notes in the game's guidebook for clues.

>

>  
>

> _Historical News_

>

> Be a historical new-hound! Pick out an articles or editorial from a current
(1999) newspaper, journal, or magazine that deals with an aspect of the
history of Western Civilization or that deals with historical interpretations.
Photocopy the article. Write a 1-2 page analysis of the historical viewpoint
of the article.

>

>  
>

> _Cable History_

>

> Watch a TV episode, documentary, or movie dealing with a subject that we
cover in class. Write a 1-2 page analytic paper assessing the assumptions and
viewpoints of the show's creators. Consider the use of visuals and dialogue in
the program.

>

>  

###   **Week 4**

18 September | _Portfolio:_ Manor Map

> This is a short assignment if you having been keeping up with the textbook
readings. Review the textbook chapters 8 and 9, focusing on the sections
dealing with agriculture, rural households, the peasants, and the nobles.
Agriculture was the main economic activity in medieval society. Ask yourself:
how did the agricultural system work? What sorts of labor were involved in
medieval agriculture?

>

> Then, draw a bird's eye view of a manor (large estate). For help in
identifying what buildings, people, animals, and things would be on a medieval
manor, see especially the textbook, p. 279-285. Label your drawing/map of the
manor to indicate the various components of a manor.



### **Week 5 Expansion of Medieval Society 11th-12th centuries**

25 September | _Writing:_ Saga Paper

> This is a short writing assignment intended to have you engage the Sturlson
text and get into some analytic writing. Read Snorri Sturlson, _King Harald's_
_Saga._ Then write an interpretive paper that relies on analytic and expositve
modes of historical writing. Refer to the Marius discussion of historical
writing modes for help, if necessary. Choose ONE of the following topics to
write about in a 3-4 page typed paper due 25 September. Use a thesis statement
to state an argument to answer the question, then build your analysis and
explanation in coherent paragraphs, using topic sentences to link paragraph
ideas back to the argument.

>

> 1\. Is traveling or fighting more central to _King Harald's Saga_? Compose
an argument to assert which interpretation of the saga makes more sense. Back
up you interpretation with explanation, analysis, and evidence (evidence being
quotes and/or paraphrasing of sections of text).

>

> 2\. Why does Sturluson characterize King Harald in the way that he does?
Create an interpretation of Sturluson's saga about King Harald that explains
what you think King Harald represented to the author (Sturluson) and what you
think Sturluson was trying to say about Viking life through his story about
King Harald. Use analytic and expository writing modes to develop your
argument using evidence (quotes and/or paraphrasing) from the text of _King
Harald's Saga._

>

>  

27 September | _Portfolio:_ Guild Rules

> For this assignment, read the Text, 291-316 and the guild photocopy. Develop
an understanding of life in high medieval towns, including town society,
government, culture, trade, and universities. Look carefully at the example of
Paris on pp. 310-311 to see what one specific high medieval city was like. Pay
particular attention to manufacturing and trade on pp. 295-298 and in the
guild photocopy. Figure out what craft guilds and merchant guilds are. Come to
class with a list of 3 written rules that a craft guild or merchant guild
might have had. Also, be prepared to discuss high medieval towns and guilds.



###  Week 6 High Medieval Europe

 2 October | _Portfolio:_ Rise of the Papacy

> .Read Text, chapter 9, and particularly 285-289 and 303-307, for this
assignment. Consider the status and power of the pope within the Christian
church structure and within European society and politics. Write a 1 page
typed analysis addressing the Rise of the Papacy: Did the papacy get more
powerful or not during the high medieval period? Why or why not? Support your
argument with some evidence and examples.



### Week 7 Late Medieval Catastrophes

13 October | _Portfolio:_ Feats of Joan of Arc

>  
  
 ![](images/stma_bar.gif)



 [French Revolution and Napoleon](index.html) | [Syllabus](syllabus.html) |
[Course Topics and Readings](readings.html) | **Assignments** | [Internet
Resources](internet.html) | [Bibliography](bibliography.html) | [Student
Projects](student.html)



 * * *


 All Design (C) 2000 Brian Sandberg



 Contact: [bsandberg@mail.millikin.edu](mailto:bsandberg@mail.millikin.edu)



 Date Last Modified: 7/10/00



  

