# Fundamentals of Accounting II ACCT 2312H

# Spring 2002

**Instructor** : Michael F. van Breda **Office Hours** : Tuesdays & Wednesday,
10:00 - 11:00  
**Office** : 372 Crow **Phone** : 768-3178 Additional times by appointment as
necessary.

![](images/email.gif):
[michael@vanbreda.org](mailto:mvanbred@mail.cox.smu.edu)

website:
[_http://faculty.smu.edu/acct2312/_](http://www.vanbreda.org/acct2312/)
blackboard:
[_http://coursesites.blackboard.com_](http://www.blackboard.com/courses/acct2312)

### **Required Text**

Ingram, Albright & Hill, _Managerial Accounting 2e,_ McGraw-Hill, 2001.

See <http://ingram.swcollege.com> for more material

### **Scope and Objective of Course**

ACCT 2312 is an introduction to the use of accounting information for
management purposes. These purposes include decision making, planning, and
control of operations. Upon satisfactory completion of this course, each
student should be able to integrate topics in cost determination, economic
analysis, capital budgeting, and management and financial control.

### **The Honor Code**

All work undertaken and submitted in this course is governed by the
University's Honor Code. The Honor Pledge is: "On my Honor, I have neither
given nor received unauthorized aid on this work." A violation of the Honor
Code will result in an "F" for the course and an "HV" on your transcript for
three years. _If you are unclear about this policy--either in general or in
its particular application--please see the instructor immediately._

### **Grading**

The course grade will be determined using the following point allocation:

Tests (100 points each)  |

300  
---|---  
  
Homework & cases  |

100  
  
Final examination (optional)  |

200  
  
TOTAL  |

600  
  
The final course grade is based on the total number of points, not an average
of letter grades for individual exams and cases. Pluses and minuses will be
attached to the final grade.

There will be no make-up exams in this course. In the unique case where it is
necessary to miss an exam, you must contact the instructor prior to the exam
to make alternate arrangements; in such prearranged circumstances, extra
weight will be added to your final exam score. If the instructor is not
notified in advance, you will receive a zero for the exam.

Tests will be on: February 12th , March 5th and April 25th.

### **In-class cases**

Several small cases might be worked during the semester in groups and their
grade included in your test mark for that section. The group solutions must be
returned on the day specified before noon. Points will be deducted for late
solutions.

The cases are designed to reinforce the topics covered in the course, and to
challenge students to extend their ability to use the course material in ways
beyond the basic applications covered in class. Group interaction and teamwork
will be vital in terms of being able to produce well-constructed and thorough
solutions.

No make-up of missed cases will be allowed. As with exams, in the unique case
where it is necessary to miss a case, you must contact the instructor prior to
the case to make alternate arrangements; extra weight will be added to the
remaining cases in the semester. If the missed case is Case #4, the extra
weight will be added to the final. If the instructor is not notified in
advance, you will receive a zero for the case.

### **Class participation**

Class participation and completion of assignments are keys to success in this
course. Both are essential to the master of topics. Readings, exercises and
problems for each class are to be completed by the student before coming to
class. Course lectures will address material in a way that assumes students
are prepared. Lack of preparation will certainly detract from the quality of
the classroom experience.

In accordance with departmental policy, solutions to certain assignments will
**** be on reserve. Many of the problems assigned will be done in class, and
students may see the solutions manual during the of office hours of either the
instructor or the teaching assistant.

### **Course assignments**

The end of each chapter generally includes three types of challenges:
questions, exercises, and problems. I encourage you to study all of the
questions to review your basic understanding of the chapter material. The
assigned exercises and problems have been selected to reinforce the most
important subject matter. To suit our specific progress and pace, I may
announce changes in both the problems assigned and the dates they will be
covered.

> > > > Chapter 1 E1-2, P1-8

>>>>

>>>> Chapter 2 E2-2, E2-4, E2-6, E2-8, E2-11, E2-18, E2-19, P2-1, P2-3, P2-16

>>>>

>>>> Chapter 3 E3-2, E3-3, E3-5, E3-16, P3-3, P3-9, P3-15

>>>>

>>>> Chapter 4 E4-6, E4-7, E4-8, E4-18, P4-16, P4-18

>>>>

>>>> Chapter 5 E5-6, E5-8, E5-10, E5-12, P5-7, P5-16, C5-2

>>>>

>>>> Chapter 6 E6-5, E6-8, E6-9, E6-15, E6-17, P6-4, P6-17

>>>>

>>>> Chapter 7 E7-3, E7-5, E7-14

>>>>

>>>> Chapter 8 E8-3, E8-4, E8-8, E8-14, E8-19, P8-16

>>>>

>>>> Chapter 9 Perma-Clear 9-2, P9-16

Note that there is a check list of answers to these problems available. The
full solutions manual will be in my office. I shall attempt to make as many of
the solutions to the set homework available in the BIC, or online, as
possible.





