SYLLABUS

POLS 478 International Conflict

Fall 1999

Instructor: Marc Simon   Email:  [
msimon@bgnet.bgsu.edu](mailto:msimon@bgnet.bgsu.edu)

Office: 123 Williams Hall  http://ernie.bgsu.edu/~msimon

Phone: 372-7386

Hours: Monday, Wednesday, and Friday 1:30-2:30, and by appointment.

  
  

**COURSE DESCRIPTION** :

The goal of the course is to learn about the causes of conflict, the ethics of
conflict, and how conflicts might be resolved without violence. This is not
just a course about war. Looking at our post cold war world, the recent
fighting in East Timor, Kosovo and dozens of other places, it is obvious that
if we study only war we would omit the majority of situations in which people
are killing each other lately. Therefore we will also study riots, terrorism,
revolution, and other expressions of conflict. Also, much of what we learn
will be applicable to interpersonal conflicts that you experience in your own
life. The course readings are interdisciplinary and include some sociology,
psychology, anthropology, and history.

Please note that this is a 400 level course designed with political science
majors in mind. While there are no prerequisites, this course is demanding. It
is harder and more time consuming than most 300 level courses. Do expect to
work; I'll try to make the work as rewarding as possible.

**TEXTBOOKS** : The following books are available for purchase at the usual
bookstores:

Joseph Nye, _Understanding International Conflicts_ , 2nd edition, Longman,
1997.

Roger Fisher, et. al., _Coping With International Conflict_ , Prentice-Hall,
1997.

In addition, I am assigning several readings which are available for copying
through the library reserve room. Also, it is _essential_ that you read a
good, comprehensive source of international news on a daily basis. I have
student order forms for two good options--The Christian Science Monitor and
The New York Times. These and other useful sources are available in the main
library. Also, you can keep up with world events with minimal effort by
listening to National Public Radio (91.3 FM, 820 AM) from 6:30-9am and/or
4-6:30 pm. For those who like cable, CNN's international reports are good too.

**COURSE REQUIREMENTS** :

We will have a midterm exam, final exam, and a two-part a research paper (each
part approximately 7-10 pages). In addition, class participation will also be
a part of your grade. This will involve attendance, a short oral presentation,
and short written assignments based on the readings.

I believe that good writing is crucial to your education. You may forget many
of the "facts" that you learn in this course minutes after the final exam, but
if you improve your writing, that will stay with you forever. So our exams are
essay exams, and the research paper is graded on both on the strength of its
ideas and the quality of your writing and grammar.

I encourage discussion so that we can all learn from each other. Students
should expect to come to class ready to discuss the readings _and_ current
international events. Finally, you must complete all exams and assignments to
get a passing grade in the course.

Weights: Percent Points

participation       10%    30

midterm exam    20%    60

Final Exam        20%     60

first paper         20%     60

final paper  _    _     _30%_   _    _ _90_

                        100%     300

RESEARCH PAPER: Your paper will consist of an analysis of a current or past
conflict--a war, riot, strike, rebellion, revolution. The first part of the
project, due November 1, will involve a descriptive account of the important
events of the conflict. The second part of the paper will use course concepts
and themes to _analyze_ the descriptive part. This is due December 10.

LATE POLICY: If there is an urgent reason why you cannot take an exam as
scheduled, a make-up will be given only if the instructor approves _in
advance_. Please call my office (372-7386) anytime and leave a message if I am
not in.

**ATTENDANCE POLICY** : We really do learn from each other. This is a
relatively small class, and we need you there. As an incentive, if you have
only 1 or no absences, you'll get 10 bonus points for your course grade. For
coercion, **if you miss _more than 4_** spot checks, **you lose 2/3 letter
grade** (20 points) **off your final course grade**.

**_*TENTATIVE COURSE OUTLINE AND READING ASSIGNMENTS_**

Key: Nye= _Understanding International Conflicts_

Fisher= _Coping With International Conflict_

**Topics** **Readings**

I: CONFLICT AND WAR: CAUSES AND PROCESSES

Aug 25 Intro to Course

Aug 27 Video: Road to Total War Dyer, chapters 3-4 (xerox)

  
  
Aug 30 Discussion

Sept 1 Realism Nye chapter 1

Sept 3 Realism, Anarchy, Security Dilemma

  
Sept 6 Labor Day-no class

Sept 8 Liberalism

Sept 10 Levels of Analysis Nye, chapter 2

  
Sept 13 Power Nye, chapter 3

Sept 15 Interdependence Nye, chapter 7

Sept 17 Video: "Deadly Game of Nations"



Sept 20 War Dyer chapter 7 (xerox)

Sept 22 Scientific Study of War handouts

Sept 24 Democracy, Liberalism, and Peace

  
Sept 27 Individual Level Brown, chapter 1 (xerox)

Sept 29 Personality web assignment

Oct 1 Basic Training Dyer, chapter 5 (xerox)

  
Oct 4 Discussion

Oct 6 Paranoia Barash, _The Caveman and the Bomb_ , chs. 1,4(xerox)

Oct 8 Societal Level: Riots Video: Eyes on the Prize: "Two Societies"

  
Oct 11 Societal Level: Riots Feagin and Hahn, _Ghetto Revolts_ , ch. 4 (xerox)

Oct 13 Guerrilla War Excerpt from Guerrilla Warfare by Che Guevara (xerox)

Oct 15 Terrorism **Exam 1 handed out**

  
  
Oct 18 Ethics:

Oct 20 Video Under Orders, Under Fire

Oct 22 Video conclusion **Exam 1 due in class**



Oct 25 Just War Doctrine Walzer, ch. 2-3 (xerox)

Oct 27 War Crimes Walzer ch. 19 (xerox)

Oct 29 Law Fisher ch. 15

  
II: CONFLICT RESOLUTION AND ALTERNATIVES TO VIOLENCE

Nov 1 Influence Schelling, _Arms and Influence_ ch. 1 (xerox)

**First part of research paper due**

Nov 3 Human Needs Theory

Nov 5 Training _Don't Shoot the Dog_ , chapters 1, 4 (xerox)

  
Nov 8 Sanctions Fisher 12-13

Nov 10 Nonviolence: Theory Readings from Gandhi TBA

Nov 12 Conflict Resolution Fisher chapters 1-2 (recommended), ch 3

  
Nov 15 Negotiation Fisher chapters 4-5

Nov 17 Negotiation Fisher, chapters 6, 9

Nov 19 Negotiation Fisher, chapters 10-11

  
Nov 22 In-class negotiation

Nov 24 **Thanksgiving**

Nov 26 **Break**



Nov 29 Ending War Dyer, chapter 11 (xerox)

Dec 1 Nuclear Abolition Schell article

Dec 3 Student Presentations



Dec 6 Student Presentations

Dec 8 Student Presentations

Dec 10 Review for Final Exam **Final Research paper due**

  
Dec 17 FRIDAY 1:15-3:15 **Final Exam**



