## **Syllabus: English 610-002--Proseminar in Teaching the Reading of
Literature**

* * *

####

Spring 2002

Wednesdays 4:30-7:10

Robinson B204

Seminar Leader: [Chris Thaiss](http://mason.gmu.edu/~cthaiss)

Office: Robinson A473

Phone: 703-993-1170

E-mail: [cthaiss@gmu.edu](mailto:cthaiss@gmu.edu)

Hours: M 9:30-11 and by appointment

Class Schedule*** Requirements ****Grades ****Texts

Description and Objectives

This is a course for teachers and prospective teachers. I see the course as
both practical (specific tactics for reaching specific objectives with
specific texts for specific students) and speculative (posing and trying to
answer basic questions: what is reading? what is literature? what does it mean
to "teach literature"?). I want these Wednesday evenings from winter to spring
to give us a chance to think, talk, and write about all those ideas that our
day-to-day working lives give us little chance to ponder. We'll read and
discuss some provocative essays by teachers; we'll reflect in writing and
conversation on our own encounters with literature; we'll consider our own
teaching of literature and the people we teach; we'll develop new teaching
ideas and present them to each other, with the class as our students. My goal
is not to explicate a way to teach literature, but to have us encounter,
imagine, and experiment with different ways. Here's a tentative schedule of
topics, presentations, and readings:

**Class Schedule**

1/23

PLEASE NOTE: We will meet for introductions and a brief overview of the
course, then, at 5:50 PM, we will re-gather in Lecture Hall I, where I will be
presenting a lecture to ENGL 325 (Dimensions of Writing and Literature) on the
history of rhetorical studies from the Greeks to the present. Though not
specifically designed for ENGL 610, this lecture helps to contextualize the
present curricular roles of writing and literature within trends in Western,
and particularly 19tb and 20th century American, thought.

1/30

What Is Reading? (Some Theories and Approaches)

Readings to be discussed: Phelan (CR) articles by Nolan, Olson; EJ (CR) essay
by Patterson; Young/Fulwiler article by Elbow. **Develop presentation
proposals; hand in first "position papers."**

2/6

What Is Literature? (What Isn't?) Standards and Mores

Readings to be discussed: Bishop and Greene essays from Young/Fulwiler. **We
will meet the first hour this week in Robinson A105, the English Department
computer lab, for an introduction to the Townhall electronic forum, on which
we will conduct a thematic discussion each week (see below).** Presentation
schedule will be decided.

2/13

A Potpourri of Critical Approaches

Readings to be discussed: DiYanni, _Critical Perspectives_ and George/Blanning
essay from Young/Fulwiler.

**Seminar presentations**

2/20

Applications of Critical Approaches

Readings to be discussed: TETYC (CR) essays by Jones, Carino, and Tucker

**Seminar presentations**

2/27

Web Resources for Teaching Literature

Readings to be discussed: EJ (CR) essays by Dreher, Elliott, Claxton/Cooper;
Young/Fulwiler essay by Schwartz.

**Seminar presentations**

We will meet for the first hour this week in Robinson A105 to browse and
discuss selected sites and databases.

3/6

The Reading/Writing Connection (Response Logs, etc.) Readings to be discussed:
Phelan (CR) articles by Mink, McKendy; Sommers essay from Young/Fulwiler.

This week I will be at the Sixth National Conference on Writing Across the
Curriculum in Houston, so the class will not meet. Nevertheless, we will carry
on our Townhall forum on the scheduled topic, to which I will contribute while
at the conference.

3/13 Spring Break

3/20

Text and Community: _The Big Sea_ by Langston Hughes

Readings to be discussed: have read the core Text and Community book and
perused materials on the [2002 T&C;
website](http://nmge.gmu.edu/textandcommunity/2002). These readings will be
the basis for our Townhall discussion.

Seminar presentations

3/27

Text and Community II: Discussion and Application of _The Big Sea_ and other
autobiographical works

Readings to be discussed: have reviewed essays from T&C; website and any
handouts on the uses of autobiography.

**Seminar presentations**

4/3

Models of Teaching: Language as Intellectual Artifact

Readings to be discussed: Handout from Gere et al, _Language as Reflection_ ;
Mandel essay from Phelan (CR); Coles essay from Young/Fulwiler.

**Seminar presentations**

4/10

Models of Teaching: Language as Social Construct

Readings to be discussed: Jenseth and Bean-Thompson essays from Phelan (CR);
Lovitt essay from Young/Fulwiler.

**Seminar presentations**

4/17

Models of Teaching: Language as Development and Expression

Readings to be discussed: Peters, Newkirk essays from Young/Fulwiler; Hogarty
and Kutiper/Abrahamson essays from Phelan (CR).

**Seminar presentations**

4/24

Issues in Teaching Literature: Censorship

Readings to be discussed:Handouts from Gere et al, pp. 270-275, and NCTE. I
strongly suggest your perusing the [NCTE censorship
website](http://www.ncte.org/censorship) before our discussion.

**Seminar presentations**

**Book summaries/ teaching plans, presentation descriptions, professional book
reviews, and second position papers due.**

5/1

Reading as a Writer: "Creative" Criticism

Readings to be discussed: Turk essay from Phelan (CR); Bloom essay from
Slevin/Young.

**Seminar presentations**

This schedule is highly flexible. I intend the list of class topics to be
provocative, and it may very well be that we will deal with parts of several
topics in more than one discussion. In addition to the readings I've listed,
feel free to recommend (and to distribute if you wish) to the class other
readings you have found particularly relevant. As such, discussion of readings
will involve only part of our class sessions. After the beginning of the
seminar presentations, this part will become even smaller, roughly one half of
our period.

**Requirements**

**_Reading/Teaching Log on[Townhall Electronic
Forum](http://townhall.gmu.edu)_** \--Each week I'd like you to write
reflectively about two things: the reading that you are doing and yourself as
a teacher or prospective teacher of literature. Each week I will give the
seminar a prompt that springs from our topic for that week or from our
discussions. I ask you to make two entries to the electronic forum each week:
one between Thursday and Sunday and one between Monday and Wednesday. In this
way, all of us will take part early in the week between classes and then
later. These later responses can be reflections on comments made by other
members of the seminar. I ask that your entries for the week total a minimum
of one full screen of text. Entries should always maintain professional
courtesy but should not avoid an honest, critical analysis of issues or of
comments by other members of the seminar. When it works well, this forum has
provided a great way to let us delve into important issues, share expertise
and ideas, and get to know one another better as professionals.

**_Position Papers on the Teaching of Literature_** \-- After our first class
and before our penultimate class, you will write 500-750-word statements of
your "position" as teacher or prospective teacher of literature: your goals,
your sense of the issues, your sense of the students' needs, your questions,
your doubts, your joys--anything that helps to define you as a teacher or
prospective teacher at the present moment. The second paper should take the
first as its starting point and explore changes that have occurred in your
position since the start of the course. I'll read your first paper after our
second class and your final paper before our last class.

**_Analysis of a Professional Book_** \--At the next to last class (April 24),
hand in as part of your folders a three-page analysis (about 750 words) of a
professional book you have read during the course. The book is of your choice
(I'll be displaying several possibilities at the second class). The only
restriction is that it be a book about literature--e.g., about teaching
reading, about an author, about a literary work--rather than a creative or
critical work on another subject. Please approve your choice with me. Write
the analysis as if you were reviewing the books for a professional journal
(e.g., _The English Journal_ , _The Reading Teacher_ , _The Whole Language
Newsletter_ ). Focus on specific benefits the book would have for other
teachers (or students, parents, policy makers, etc.). What does the book lack
that you feel it should have? What questions does it raise in your mind? How
might you use the book? If you wish, feel free to submit a discovery draft of
your analysis up to two weeks before it is due, for my comments.

**_Synopsis/Teaching Plan for Langston Hughes's_ The Big Sea**\--Write a one-
page, single-spaced synopsis/teaching plan for some aspect of the Text and
Community core text. More on format later in the course. These
synopses/teaching plans will be included in a class publication we'll be
compiling as a contribution to the [Text and Community
Program](http://nmge.gmu.edu/textandcommunity/2002). Final drafts of these
will be due with your folders on April 24.

**_Seminar Presentation_** \--On the first evening, I'll ask you to brainstorm
ideas for a 30-minute presentation that you'll make to the class sometime
between weeks 4 and 14. (On email between classes 1 and 2, I'll ask you to
write to me your tentative ideas for a presentation and I'll give you
feedback.) The presentation will actually be a demonstration of a technique
you have developed (or are in the process of developing) for teaching a
particular piece of reading to a particular group of people. If you are
currently teaching, you may choose something you have already tried, but on
which you'd like to work more; you may also experiment with something totally
new. If you are a prospective teacher, you may want to adapt a technique
you've seen used, or, again, concoct something completely fresh. The important
thing is to use us as your students for the exercise, so that we can get the
feel of this from the student's point of view. Also feel free to develop this
assignment as a one-hour collaborative presentation with another member of the
class. (My only caveat on collaboration is that the presentation must clearly
show equal contributions by the two collaborators.) Either before or after the
presentation, give us a bare-bones explanation of the context of the exercise
(the students with whom you've used it, where in your curriculum it comes,
your objectives); if it's a totally new exercise, give us your speculations
about the appropriate context.

Since 30 minutes is a very short time for an exercise, judge whether we'll
need to do any preparation before class. For example, we could do a few
minutes' reading during your presentation, but you'll need to hand out the
previous week anything requiring more than five minutes' reading. A short
story of a few pages, a poem, a scene from a play, a short essay, an excerpt
of a novel, a couple of newspaper editorials--selections such as these tend to
work well. (NOTE: if you choose _The Big Sea_ as the text for your
presentation, you can count on our having read the entire work.) What we do in
the presentation, how we do it, and why you want us to are all up to you. I
hope that by the end of our first-week email exchange you'll have a good idea
or two on which other members of the seminar can give you some feedback in a
brief period in our second class.

At our next to last class, along with the other material in your folder,
please hand in a one-page (about 600 words single- spaced) description of your
presentation. Include a statement about the context, a step-by-step
description of the exercise, and a concluding statement of your perceptions of
the results of the exercise: why it works and how you might like to modify it.
This one page will go into an anthology (besides the one we're compiling about
the Text and Community materials) that I'll run off for everyone and
distribute at the final class. (If you do your presentation based on Hughes's
autobiography, prepare for the Text and Community anthology a description of
another presentation that would also use this book.) I'll give you a format
for the page before you prepare it.

**_Visit to a Class of a Teacher You Admire_** \-- Sometime during the first
half of the semester, I'd like you to visit a class conducted by a teacher of
literature whose work you admire. I'd like you to take notes on this class and
submit to me sometime during the course (but not after April 24) a report (at
least 600 words) that summarizes and reflects critically on what you observed.
How was learning going on in the class? What did the teacher do? The students?
What techniques of this teacher would you adapt? What changes would you make
for your teaching situation?

**Grades**

I'll base your grade on holistic assessment of all the work you hand in; your
active, thoughtful participation in the seminar; and your presentation. Since
so much of the work is experimental and exploratory, I'll be looking most
closely for experimentation and exploration: speculative thought, trying out
different ideas-- including those you might feel initially uncomfortable
with--, asking questions, probing your assumptions and those of others,
writing with imagination and a sense of possibilities. I encourage you to
express your reactions and opinions in regard to readings, issues, etc., but
don't be satisfied (I won't) with just expressing your impressions. Look at
pros and cons and try to entertain alternative points of view. All the issues
we deal with in this course are controversial, and I'd like you in your
writing to try to see through the eyes of persons who hold different views
from those you bring to the discussion of each issue. Please don't hesitate to
ask for my feedback or that of others. Final letter grades mean the following:

B = completion of all requirements on time and according to instructions given
above; active involvement in class discussions of readings and issues; clear,
competent writing

A = completion of all requirements on time and according to above
instructions, plus clear, consistent evidence of imaginative intellectual
engagement in writing, discussion, and presentation;

C = completion of less than all requirements on time and according to
instructions.

**Costs**

In addition to cost of required texts, there may be a fee for photocopying of
the two class-produced anthologies.

**Texts**

DiYanni, Robert. _Critical Perspectives: Approaches to the Analysis and
Interpretation of Literature_. New York: McGraw- Hill, 1995.

Young, Art and Toby Fulwiler, eds. _When Writing Teachers Teach Literature:
Bringing Writing to Reading_. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann/Boynton/Cook, 1995.

Hughes, Langston. _The Big Sea: An Autobiography_. New York: Hill and Wang,
1993.

_Course Readings for English 610-Thaiss_. Packet available for purchase from
course anthologies office in Johnson Learning Center.

One book of your choice, as described above.

I also highly recommend that you join NCTE, if you are not already a member,
and that you begin regular reading of the NCTE journals, e.g. _The English
Journal_ , _College English_ , _Teaching English in the Two-Year College_.
Student memberships are available at a very low yearly rate. If interested,
see the [NCTE website (http://www.ncte.org)](http://www.ncte.org).

Top of Page



