# International Perspectives on Women and Gender:  
Global Feminisms

Women's Studies 301



# Syllabus

## Required Books:

Bonnie G. Smith, _Global Feminisms Since 1945._ New York: Routledge, 2000.

Chilla Bulbeck, _Re-Orienting Western Feminisms: Women's Diversity in a
Postcolonial World._ Cambridge University Press, 1998.

Hanan al-Shaykh, _The Story of Zahra._ New York: Doubleday/Anchor Books, 1986.

In addition, several required readings are available on Electronic Reserve
through the Parks Library. These are marked **ER** in the course schedule
below. To use the electronic reserve system and retrieve articles follow these
steps:

  1. Go to the [_Iowa State University library web page_](http://www.lib.iastate.edu). 
  2. Click on Classes  & Tours, and then e-Reserve. 
  3. Under Browse e-Reserve, click either on **By course** or **By instructor**. If **By course** , then click on **W** for Women's Studies, if **By instructor** , click **B** for Bystydzienski. Then click on either **WS 301** or **Bystydzienski**. The readings are listed under the last name of first author. Click on the name and download the reading. 

You will need to use a computer that has Adobe Acrobat reader software in
order to download the readings. The computers in the library have the
software, and it might be most convenient to access the readings there. You
can also print free copies in the library.

## Course Description:

In this course, we will examine the development and content of a worldwide
feminist movement. Its diversity, complexity and contested nature is what
characterizes the movement as consisting of multiple feminisms rather than a
single, unifying ideology and practice. The term feminisms refers to a variety
of activisms on behalf of social, political, economic and personal equality
for women as well as all oppressed people. We will begin the course by
discussing western feminisms and the seeming divide between so-called first
and third world women and feminisms. We will go on to examine in depth the
concerns and challenges facing women in an era of globalization in Islamic
countries (parts of Middle East, Africa and Southeast Asia), more generally in
Africa, and in Latin America. In doing so, we will trace some of the issues
which have become part of the global feminist agenda for women over the last
three decades. The course will conclude by examining the four UN world
conferences on women and the global agenda for women's rights as human rights.
In the context of globalization, we will consider whether the globalization of
feminism is yet another form of western imperialism, and what should be on the
global feminist agenda in the 21st century.

## Course Web Page:

WS 301 has a web page:
_http://www.iastate.edu/~womenstu/courses/page_301.html_ The syllabus is on
the web page as well as a number of links to internet sites on women's
worldwide organizations and initiatives. These sites can be used in
conjunction with the written assignments (see below).

## Course Requirements:

1\. _Class participation_  
This course is designed to promote class participation. Questions and comments
are always welcome. Class discussions will be conducted regularly. Attendance
and in-class participation will be worth **10%** of the overall grade.  
In addition, each student (as a member of a small group - 2-3 people) will be
responsible for conducting class discussion on one of the scheduled course
readings. The duties of a discussion facilitating group will involve providing
to the class an overview of the reading, generating questions for discussion
on issues related to the reading, and writing and turning in an overview (to
be done individually) of the assigned reading. This assignment will be worth
**10%** of the grade.

2\. _Written Assignments_  
There will be two written out-of-class assignments in the form of short essays
(4-6 pages, double-spaced, 12 pt. font) on questions and issues generated by
the readings and class discussions. These assignments may require the use of
web-based sources. Instructions for the assignments will be given in class.
Each of these will be worth **15%**.

3\. _Exams_  
There will be two exams, a mid-term and a final, in this course. The format of
the exams will be determined jointly by students and professor. Each exam will
be worth **25%** of your grade.

## Grading Scale:

96-100 A  
91-95 A-  
87-90 B+  
84-86 B  
80-83 B-  
77-79 C+  
74-76 C  
70-73 C-  
67-69 D+  
64-66 D  
60-63 D-  
below 60 F

## Course Schedule:

**Tuesday, Jan 15** \- Orientation to the course

**Thursday, Jan 17** \- Introduction  
Readings: Smith, Introduction, pp.1-10; Bulbeck, Introduction, pp.1-17.

**Tuesday, Jan. 22** \- U.S. Feminisms  
Readings: Smith, Chapter 7, Sara Evans, Decade of discovery: the personal is
political; and Leslie **Heywood** and Jennifer Drake, We Learn America Like a
Script: Activism in the Third Wave. **ER**

**Thursday, Jan. 24** \- U.S. Feminisms  
Video: Step By Step: Building a Feminist Movement

**Tuesday, Jan.29** \- First and Third World Feminisms  
Readings: Bulbeck, Ch. 1, Fracturing Binarisms.  
**Student-led discussion:** Cheryl **Johnson-Odim** , Common Themes, Different
Contexts. **ER**

**Thursday, Jan. 31** \- No class; Begin reading novel, _The Story of Zahra._

**Tuesday, Feb. 5** \- First and Third World Feminisms  
Reading: Uma **Narayan** , Contesting Cultures: Westernization, Respect for
Culture, and Third World Feminists. **ER**

**Thursday, Feb. 7** \- Women under Islam  
Introduction to Islam  
Guest Speaker: **_Prof. Robert Baum**_ , Religious Studies  
Reading: Nimat Hafez **Barazangi** , Self-Identity as a Form of
Democratization. **ER**

**Tuesday, Feb. 12** \- Women under Islam  
Readings: Smith, Ch. 1 - Egypt;  
**Student-led discussion:** Smith, Ch. 11 - Iran.

**Thursday, Feb. 14** \- No class. Read _The Story of Zahra._

**Tuesday, Feb 19** \- Women under Islam  
Readings: Anouar Majid, The Politics of Feminism in Islam. **ER** ; Bulbeck,
pp.29-33.  
**Student-led discussion:** Alaine S. **Hutson** , Women, Men and Patriarchal
Bargaining in an Islamic Sufi Order. **ER**

**Thursday, Feb. 21** \- Women under Islam  
Video: Beneath the Veil (Afghanistan)  
**Written Assignment #1 distributed in class.**

**Tuesday, Feb. 26** \- Women under Islam  
Reading: Bulbeck, Ch. 4 - Sexual Identities: Western Imperialism?  
Discussion of _The Story of Zahra._

**Thursday, Feb. 28** \- _The Story of Zahra_  
Conclusion of section Women under Islam.

**Tuesday, March 5**  
**Midterm Exam**

**Thursday, March 7** \- African Feminisms  
Readings: Bulbeck, Ch. 3 - pp. 101-112; Oyeronke Oyewumi, Family
Bonds/Conceptual Binds: African Notes on Feminist Epistemologies. (Hand-out)  
Video: The Desired Number (Nigeria)

**Tuesday, March 12** \- African Feminisms  
Readings: Aili Mari **Tripp** , Rethinking Difference: Comparative
Perspectives from Africa. **ER**  
**Student-led discussion:** Smith, Ch. 3, Gender and nation building in South
Africa.

**Thursday, March 14** \- African Feminisms  
Guest speaker: **_Mumbi Mwangi**_ , doctoral student and Women's Studies
Teaching Assistant.  
**Written Assignment #1 due in class**

**Spring Break - March 18-22**

**Tuesday, March 26** \- African Feminisms  
Readings: Smith, Ch. 5 - Kenya. Bulbeck, Ch. 3, pp.112-128.  
**Written Assignment #2 distributed in class.**

**Thursday, March 28** \- African Feminisms  
Reading: Bulbeck, Ch. 2, pp. 79-96.  
Video: TBA  
Conclusion to section on African Feminisms.

**Tuesday, April 2** \- Latin American Feminisms  
Reading: Lynn Stephen, Women's Rights are Human Rights: The Merging of
Feminine and Feminist Interests among El Salvador's Mothers of the Disappeared
(CO-MADRES). **ER**  
Video: Las Madres: The Mothers of Plaza de Mayo

**Thursday, April 4** \- Latin American Feminisms  
**Student-led discussion:** Charles **McKelvey** , Feminist Organizations and
Grassroots Democracy in Honduras. **ER**

**Tuesday, April 9** \- Latin American Feminisms  
Reading and **Student-led discussion:** Smith, Ch. 4- Brazil

**Thursday, April 11** \- Latin American Feminisms  
Video: Hell to Pay (Bolivia)

**Tuesday, April 16** \- Latin American Feminisms  
Reading: Sonia **Alvarez** , Latin American Feminisms Go Global: Trends of the
1990s and Challenges for the New Millennium. **ER**

**Thursday, April 18** \- Latin American Feminism  
Guest speaker.  
**Written Assignment #2 due in class.**

**Tuesday, April 23** \- Global Trafficking in Women  
Reading: Bulbeck, Ch. 5  
Video: Writing Desire.

**Thursday, April 25** \- Women's Rights as Human Rights  
Reading: Bulbeck, Ch. 2, pp. 57-79; Smith, Ch 14.  
Video: Beyond Beijing

**Tuesday, April 30** \- Women's Rights as Human Rights  
Reading and **Student-led discussion:** Smith, Ch. 12 - Human Rights are
Women's Right.

**Thursday, May 2** \- Conclusion  
Reading: Bulbeck, Conclusion.

**Final Exam will be given during finals week, May 6-10.**

