Professor Claudia Buchmann  
265 Sociology/Psychology Building  
Phone: 660-5630 or 660-5614  
Email: [cbuch@soc.duke.edu ](mailto:cbuch@soc.duke.edu%20) | Fall 2001  
Class: TTh 10:55-12:10  
A158 Levine Research Building.  
Office Hrs: To be announced  
---|---  
  
  
**Nations, Regions and the Global Economy  
Sociology 145.01**  



This course focuses on the changing global economy, its impact on distinctive
regions, and the ways nations and regions are responding to rapid
globalization and economic change. We will pay particular attention to recent
trends in global production and global financial systems. Then we will compare
various regions, examining their development strategies, responses to
globalization and unique challenges, given their position in the global
economy. Asia, Latin America, and Africa will be the primary regions of focus
in this section of the course. Finally we will critically examine the social,
political and environmental impacts of globalization and look at how the
global economy impacts selected segments of the population.

**Required Readings**  
There are 3 required books and several required articles for this course. The
books may be purchased at the Duke University Bookstore; they are also on
three-hour reserve at Perkins Library. Articles are listed as A1, A2, A3... in
the syllabus. Articles are on Electronic Reserve in the library (accessible
from the library web page).

**Books:**  
Philip McMichael. 2000. _Development and Social Change: A Global Perspective_.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.

Ezra Vogel. 1991. _The Four Little Dragons: The Spread of Industrialization in
East Asia_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Maier, Karl. 1997. _Into the House of the Ancestors: Inside the New Africa_.
New York: Wiley and Sons.

  
**Articles:**  
**A1:** Gereffi, Gary. 1995. Global Production Systems and Third World
Development. Pp. 100-142 in _Global Change, Regional Response: The New
International Context of Development_ , edited by Barbara Stallings. New York:
Cambridge University Press.  
**A2:** Korzeniewicz, Miquel. 1994.  "Commodity Chains and Marketing
Strategies: Nike and the Global Athletic Footwear Industry." Pp. 247-265 in
_Commodity Chains and Global Capitalism_ , edited by Gary Gereffi and Miguel
Korzeniewicz.  
**A3:** Figueroa, Hector. 1996.  "In the Name of Fashion." _NACLA Report on
the Americas_ 39:34-40.  
**A4:** Bales, Kevin. 1999.  "The New Slavery." Pp. 1-33 in _Disposable
People: New Slavery in the Global Economy_. Berkeley: University of California
Press.  
**A5:** Buchmann, Claudia. 1996.  "[The Debt Crisis, Structural Adjustment and
Women's Education: Implications for Status and Social
Development](deptcrisis.pdf)." _International Journal of Comparative
Sociology_ 37:5-30.  
**A6:** Zakaria, Fareed. 1994.  "Culture is Destiny: A Conversation with Lee
Kuan Yew." _Foreign Affairs_ 73:109-126.  
**A7:** Gereffi, Gary. 1994.  "Rethinking Development Theory: Insights from
East Asia and Latin America." Pp.26-56 in _Comparative National Development_ ,
edited by A. Douglas Kincaid and Alejandro Portes. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.  
**A8:** Castells, Manuel and Roberto Laserna. 1994.  "The New Dependency:
Technological Change and Socioeconomic Restructuring in Latin America."
Pp.57-83 in _Comparative National Development_ , edited by A. Douglas Kincaid
and Alejandro Portes. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.  
**A9:** Claudia Buchmann.  "Educational Inequality and Poverty in Sub-Saharan
Africa." _Prospects: Quarterly Review of Comparative Education_ 29:503-515  
**A10:** Simkins, Charles. 2001.  "Can South Africa Avoid a Malthusian
Positive Check? _Daedalus_ 130:123-150.  
**A11:** Freeman, Richard B. and David Lindauer. 1999. AWhy Not Africa?@ NBER
Working Paper number 6942. <http://www.nber.org/papers/w6942>  
**(Possible Additional Readings to be announced)**

**Course Requirements**  
Your course grade will be based on _class participation_ (which includes two
short  "current issues" papers), a _research paper_ , a _midterm_ and a _final
exam_.

In evaluating your _class participation_ , I will consider both your
participation in class generally and your contributions to the "current
issues" discussion. Four times during the semester we will devote a class to
the discussion of current issues related to the topics covered in that section
of the course. You will be in one of two groups. Each group will be
responsible for contributing material to two discussion sessions during the
semester. This will involve turning in a 1-2 page paper which links topics
covered in class to a related issue, current event, personal experience, etc.
(see course schedule for due dates). You are encouraged to turn in the
materials to which your comments pertain (i.e., newspaper or magazine article,
web page, etc.) with your comments. These papers will serve as topics for
class discussion.

_Mid-term Exam_ : A take-home midterm will be distributed on Thursday October
4th and will be due at the BEGINNING of class the following Tuesday, October
9th. While you may use your class notes and readings during the exam, your
answers on the exam are to be entirely your own.

_Research Paper_ : You will write a 7-9 page research paper that explores more
deeply one of the topics we cover in the course. Further guidelines for
research papers will be forthcoming. Due dates for parts of this project are
on the schedule. Once you have selected your topic, you will be divided into
"writing groups" of a few people. A first draft of your paper will be due on
November 8th. At this time you will distribute copies of this draft to your
writing group and hand in one copy of the draft. On Tuesday, November 20th
thorough comments on each of the other group member's drafts are due (one copy
to author, one to hand in). Technical comments (i.e., grammar, punctuation)
may be written on the drafts themselves; but the substantive and stylistic
comments must be typed in a separate document and number-coded in the draft.
Your goal is to help the authors improve their papers through comments and
suggestions. This draft process serves two purposes. As a writer, you have the
opportunity to have numerous people read and respond to your writing, which
can help you improve your written communication skills. As an "editor" you
learn editing skills. Editing is much easier to do with other people,s written
work, so practicing in this way can help you learn how to edit and improve
your own writing. Once you receive comments from your writing group you will
have a chance to revise your papers before they are due on Tuesday December
4th. This paper will be worth 30 percent of your final course grade (I will
consider your revisions based on comments to your first draft in establishing
this grade). Ten percent of your course grade will be based on the quality of
your comments on other students' drafts.  
[Research Paper
Resources](http://www.lib.duke.edu/reference/subjects/nations/index.htm)

_Final Exam_ : The final exam will be on Monday December 10, 2001 from 2-5
p.m. Alternative scheduling of the final exam will be considered for only the
most extreme circumstances.

All these requirements comprise the final grade as follows:  
---  
  | 2 current issue papers/class participation  
Midterm  
Research Paper  
Comments on drafts  
Final Exam  |

10%  
25%  
30%  
10%  
25%  
  
  
**TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE**  

_Date_ | _Topic and Readings_ |    | _Assignments Due_  
---|---|---|---  
  
T Aug 28

|

Introduction to Course

|   |  
Th Aug 30 | What is Development? | McMichael, Intro. |  
  |   |   |  
  | _**Development and Globalization, 1945-present**_ |  
T Sep 4 | Theories of Development | McMichael, ch. 1 |  
Th Sep 6 |

Film: Battle of the Titans

| McMichael, ch. 2 |  
T Sep 11 | The New Int'l Division of Labor | parts of McMichael, ch. 3 |  
  |   |   |  
  | **_Production Goes Global_** |  
Th Sep 13 | Global Commodity Chains | A1: Gereffi |  
T Sep 18 | Winners and Losers |   |  
Th Sep 20 |

Commodity Chains

| A2: Korzeniewicz | Group 1: Current Issues Paper due  
T Sep 25 | Slavery/Sweatshops | A3: Figueroa  
A4: Bales  
2 New York Times Readings handed out in Class  
  
Th Sep 27

| Current Issues Discussion #1 | McMichael, ch. 4  |  
  | **_Global Financial Networks_** |  
T Oct 2 | The World Bank and IMF | McMichael, ch. 5 |  
Th Oct 4 |

Debt and Structural Adjustment

| A5: Buchmann  
McMichael Ch. 6, parts  | **Take-Home Midterm distributed  
at end of class**  
T Oct 9 | Economic Crises in the 1990s  
Discuss Research Paper Options  |   | **Midterm Due at Beginning  
of Class **  
Th Oct 11 | Research Resources -- Class Meets at Perkins Library |  
  | **_Regional Responses_** |    |  
T Oct 16 | NO CLASS- FALL BREAK |   |  
Th Oct 18 |

The East Asian Dragons

| Vogel, ch 1-3 | **Paper Topic Due  
** Group 2: Current Issues Paper Due  
T Oct 23 | Continued | Vogel, ch 4-5 |  
Th Oct 25 | Current Issues Discussion #2 /  
Is Culture Destiny?  | A6: Zakaria |  
T Oct 30 | The People's Century: Asia  |   |  
Th Nov 1 | Latin America | A7: Gereffi |  
T Nov 6 |   | A8: Castells & Laserna | Group1: Current Issues Paper Due  
Th Nov 8 |   | Maier, preface and 1-43 | Draft of Paper Due  
T Nov 13 | Human Capital in Africa | A9: Buchmann  
Maier, 75-128  |  
Th Nov 15 | Current Issues Discussion #3 | Maier, 129-189 |  
T Nov 20 | Africa Continued |   | **Comments on Drafts Due**  
Th Nov 22 | NO CLASS- Thanksgiving Break |   |  
T Nov 27 | Africa | A10: Simkins  
A11: Freeman and Lindauer  |  
  |

_**Global Impact/Response**_

|    |  
Th Nov 29 | Anti-Globalization Movements | McMichael, ch. 7 | Group 2: Current
Issues Paper  
Due  
T Dec 4 |   | McMichael, ch 8 |  **Final Papers Due**  
Th Dec 6 | Current Issues Discussion #4/ Review and Wrap-up  |  
  |   |   |  
  |  **Final Exam: Monday December 10, 2-5 p.m.** |  
  
  

  

  

  



  
  



