# PAD 5935  
Theoretical Perspectives in Public Policy

Instructor: Professor Rick Feiock  
Office Hours: 626 Bellamy, T 3:00 - 5:00, and by appointment  
Telephone: 644-7615  
Email: RFEIOCK@COSS.FSU.EDU  
www: http://www.fsu.edu/~spap/faculty_html/feiock.html  

### Objectives:

This is a seminar in public policy for students in Public Administration and
Policy, and suitable for doctoral students enrolled in other programs which
share an interest in public policy. The course covers a variety of topics
related both to the substance and methods of public policy. We will examine
theoretical frameworks from a variety of disciplines. These include: welfare
economics, political science, political economy, and organization theory. We
will also emphasize the role of theory in empirical policy research. There is
an extensive literature related to each of these topics; the class will read
and discuss some of the important recent materials as well as relevant
classics.

A seminar is distinguished from a class in that students in a seminar are
expected to provide the major set of intellectual stimuli for consideration,
with the instructor guiding and assisting students and, during discussions,
assisting in the synthesis of diverse student input. The seminar will be
collegial in the sense that there is a genuine search for answers to some of
the more vexing intellectual problems associated with the study of public
policy. Ultimately, however, the success of the seminar as a learning
experience for all participants will depend on the commitment and
participation of each class member.

### Course Requirements and Grading:

As noted above, students will be expected to be full participants in shaping
the character of the seminar; that requires all students to come to class
prepared to discuss the readings for each session. To ensure participation,
students will be evaluated on their contribution to the class and on-line
internet discussion of the readings. Students will also prepare two written
products: an in-class mini-prelim exam and a theoretically based empirical
policy research paper. Students needing accomodation for a disability are to
meet with the instructor before the second class meeting. Student performance
will be evaluated as follows:

Participation 30%  
In-Class Examination 35%  
Research Paper 35%  

### Class Web Page:

http://www.fsu.edu/~spap/class/pthryS96.html

### Required Books:

E.E. Schatschneider, 1975. The Semisovereign People: A Realist's View of
Democracy in America. Dryden Press.

Steven E. Rhoads, 1996. The Economists View of the World: Government, Markets
and Public Policy. Cambridge University Press.

Arthur M. Okun 1975. Equality and Efficiency: The Big Tradeoff Brookings
Institution.

Charles Lindblom 1980. The Policy-Making Process. Prentice-Hall.

Mancur Olson 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory
of Groups. Harvard University Press.

Stella Z. Theodulou and Matthew A Cahn. 1995. Public Policy: The Essential
Readings. Prentice Hall. (T&C;)

Douglas C. North. 1990 Institutional Change and Economic Performance.
Cambridge University Press.

David Weimer and Adian Vining, 1992 Policy Analysis: Concepts and Cases,
Prentice Hall.

Assigned journal articles and book chapters have been compiled in a reader and
will be available for purchase in the Bellamy Copy Center. These readings are
designated with an (R) on the following list of readings and assignments.
Readings in the edited text by Theodulou and Cahn are designated (T&C;). Since
our classes are largely participatory, I expect you to complete the readings
prior to the class for which they are assigned. You should try to bring at
least one new researchable idea to class each week. We will sporadically ask
you for (oral) descriptions of these and will then very likely ask questions
such as: How would you do that? What makes that an interesting question? Is it
an important question? What contributions would this question make to the
scholarly literature?

* * *

## Course Outline and Readings

5/7 1. Introduction to Policy Theory: Course overview -no readings assigned

### WELFARE ECONOMICS APPROACHES

    
    
    5/14  2. The Potential of Welfare Economics
    
    Steven E. Rhoads,  The Economists View of the World:  Government, Markets and Public Policy. Chs. 1-5, 7-8.
    
    David Weimer and Adian Vining, Policy Analysis Concepts and Cases, Chs. 3 and 6 
    
    Harvey Averch, Private Markets and Public Intervention: A Primer for Policy Designers. 
    Ch. 3  (R)  
    
    
    5/21  3.  The Limitations of  Welfare Economics
    
    Steven E. Rhoads,  The Economists View of the World:  Government, Markets and Public Policy. Chs. 6, 9-12.
    
    David Weimer and Adian Vining, Policy Analysis Concepts and Cases, Chs. 4-5.
    
    Arthur M. Okun,  Equality and Efficiency:  The Big Tradeoff. all.
    
    

### POLITICAL SCIENCE APPROACHES

    
    
    5/28  4.  Theory, Concepts, and the Development of the Public Policy Field
    
    E.E. Schatschneider, The Semisovereign People: A Realist's View of Democracy in 
    America.  all.
    	
    Stella Theodoulou, "The Contemporary Language of Public Policy" (T&C;)
    
    Paul Sabaitier "Political Science and Public Policy"(T&C;)
    
    Theodore J. Lowi, "Distribution, Regulation, Redistribution: The Functions of Government"(T&C;)
    
    Robert H. Salisbury, "The Analysis of Public Policy: A Search for Theories and Roles"(T&C;)
    
    Robert Dahl, "With the Consent of All"(T&C;)
    
    Debra Salazar, Conflict Expansion: Public Policy Typologies and Rational Choice"(R)
    
    
    6/4   5. Agendas and the Policy Making Processes
    
    Roger Cobb and Charles Elder, "Issues and Agendas" (C&Z;)
    
    John Kingdon, "Agenda Setting" (C&Z;)
    
    Frank Baumgarner & Bryan Jones, Agendas and Instability in American Politics, Chs. 1-3(R)
    
    Charles Lindblom,  The Policy-Making Process. all.
    
    Charles Lindblom, "The Science of Muddling Through" (C&Z;)
    
    Charles Lindblom, "Market and Democracy-Obliquely"[PS, 1995](R)
    
    James Q. Wilson, "New Politics, New Elites, and Old Publics" (R)
    
    
    6/11  6. Group Processes and Public Policy
    
    Mancur Olson,  The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups. all.
    
    David B. Truman, "Group Politics and Representative Democracy"(C&Z;)
    
    Hugh Heclo, "Issue Networks and the Executive Establishment"(C&Z;)
    	
    Morris Fiorina, "Congress: Keystone of the Washington Establishment,"(C&Z;)
    
    Gordon Tullock, "The Costs of Special Privilege," in Alt and Shepsle, Positive Political Economy, 1993.(R)
    
    Theodore J. Lowi, The End of Liberalism: The Second Republic of The United States pp. 42-63.(R)
    
    Paul Sabatier "An Advocacy  Coalition Framework of Policy Change and the Role of Policy-Oriented Learning Therein," [Policy Sciences,1988](R)
    
    Denzau, Arthur, and Michael Munger.   "Legislators and Interest Groups:  How 	Unorganized Interests Get Represented," [APSR, 1986] (R)
    	
    
    
    
    
    ### POLICY ANALYSIS AND POLITICAL ECONOMY APPROACHES
    
    
    
    
    
    
    6/18  7.  Policy Instruments and Tools
    
    David Weimer and Adian Vining,  Policy Analysis: Concepts and Cases, Chapter 7
    
    Lester Salamon,   Beyond Privatization: The Tools of Government in Action.  Ch.2.(R)
    
    Stephen H. Linder and B. Guy Peters.  "Instruments of Government: Perceptions and Contexts," [JPP, 1989] (R)
    	
    Patricia Ingraham, "Toward More Systematic Consideration of Policy Design,"[PSJ, 1987] (R)
    
    Michael Hewlett and M. Ramash, "Patterns of Policy Instrument Choice" [PSJ, 1994] (R)
    	
    Kenneth J. Meier, "Regulation: Politics, Bureaucracy, and Economics" (T&C;)  
    
    
    
    6/25  8.   Market Models and Public Policy
    
    Charles Tiebout,  "A Pure Theory of Local Public Goods," (R)
    
    Paul Peterson,   City Limits, 1981,  Ch. 2 (R)
    
    Paul Trogen, "Extending the Tiebout Model to the States"(R)
    
    David Lowery and William Lyons, "The Impact of Jurisdictional Boundaries: An Individual Level Test of the Tiebout Model" [JOP, 1989] (R)
    
    Paul Teske,  Mark Schneider,  Michael Mintrom, and Samuel Best.  "Establishing The Micro Foundations of a Macro-Level Theory,"[APSR, 1993] (R)
    	
    David Lowrey and William Lyons, "The Empirical Evidence for Citizen Information and a Local Market for Public Goods" [APSR, 1995] (R)
    
    Paul Teske,  Mark Schneider,  Michael Mintrom, and Samuel Best, "Response to Lowery and Lyons" [APSR, 1995] (R)
    
    	
    
    7/2    9.  Bureaucratic Perspectives
    
    Donald Kettl, "Public Administration: The State of the Field"(R)
    
    Douglas C. North.  1990 Institutional Change and Economic Performance, all
    
    James Q. Wilson, "The Rise of the Bureaucratic State" (T&C;)
    
    Patrick Dunleavy, Democracy, Bureaucracy and Public Choice, Ch. 6
    
    Max Weber, "Bureaucracy" (T&C;)
    
    Terry M. Moe,  "The New Economics of Organization," [APSR, 1984] (R)
    
    Jonathan Bendor and Terry Moe.  "An Adaptive Model of Bureaucratic Politics," 
    [APSR, 1985 (R)
    
    Oliver Williamson,  "The Economics of Organization:  The Transaction Costs 		Approach," [ASR] (R).
    
    David Sappington and Joseph Stiglitz, Privatization, Information, and Incentives" (R)
    
    
    7/9   10.  Exam
    
    

### THE ROLE OF THEORY IN EMPIRICAL POLICY RESEARCH

    
    
    
    7/16  11. Policy Determinants, Policy Adoption, and Diffusion
    
    David Knoke,  "The Spread of Municipal Reform," [AJS] (R)
    
    Francis Berry, Sizing Up State Policy Innovation Research. [PSJ, 1994] (R)
    
    Robert M. Stein, Market Maximization of Individual Preferences and Metropolitan Municipal Service Responsibility," [UAR, 1989] (R)
    
    Paul Peterson, "A Unitary Model of Local Taxation and Expenditure Policies in the United States" [BJPS, 1979] (R)
    
    Richard Feiock and James Clingermayer, "Development Policy Choices: Four Explanations for City Implementations of Economic Development Policy" [ARPA, 1992] (R)
    
    James Ferris and Elizabeth Grady, 1991. "Production Costs and Transaction Costs and Local Government Contractor Choice," [Economic Inquiry, 1991] (R)
    
    James Clingermayer and Richard Feiock.  "Political Uncertainty, Transaction Costs, and Municipal Service Contracting Decisions," [PAR, forthcoming] (R)
    
    Michael Mintrom, "State Policy Signaling and Firm Level Employment Decisions" (R)
    
    
    7/13  12  Assessing the Impacts of Public Policy
    
    Evan Ringquist, "Political Control and Policy Impact in the EPA's Office of Water Quality" [AJPS, 1995] (R)
    
    Feiock, Richard, "The Effects of Economic Development Policies on Local Economic Growth," [AJPS, 1991] (R)
    
    James C. Clingermayer and B.Dan Wood, "Disentageling Patterns of State Debt Financing"
    [APSR, 1995] (R)
    
    Thomas Dye and Richard Feiock, "State Income Tax Adoption and Economic Growth" [SSQ, 1995] (R)
    
    Harold Wolman, John Strate, and Alan Melichor, " Does Changing Mayors Matter? [JOP, 1996] (R)
    
    Richard Feiock and Christopher Stream, "State Environmental Policy Instruments and the Tradeoff Between Environment and Growth" [R]
    
    Paul Peterson and Mark Rom, "American Federalism, Welfare Policy, and Residential Choice" [APSR, 1989] 
    
    Annette Steinacker "The Effects of Special Districts on Economic Development" (R)
    
    B. Dan Wood and James E. Anderson, "Bureaucratic Responsiveness and Administrative Design" (R)
    
    
    
    7/30  13. Distributional Consequences of Policy
    
    James Clingermayer  and Richard Feiock,  Distribution and Redistribution in 		Economic Development" [JOP, 1995] (R)
    
    Bartik, Timothy J.  1991.  Who Benefits from Economic Development Policies? (R)
    
    Kenneth Mladenka,   "The Urban Bureaucracy and the Chicago Political Machine:  Who Gets What and the Limits of  Political Control," [APSR, 1980] (R)
    	
    Barry Rundquist  and David Griffith.   "An Interrupted Time Series Test of 		Distributive Theory," [WPQ, 1976]  (R) 
    
    James Clingermayer,   "Distributive Politics, Ward Representation, and the Spread of 	Zoning," [Public Choice, 1994] (R)
    
    John Chubb,   "The Political Economy of Federalism," [APSR] (R)
    
    Rory Austin, "Minority Appointments to Southern School Boards: Do Electoral Structures Make a Difference?"
    
    
    Research Paper due.
    

