## German 112

> Spring 1999  
>  [Dr. Clouser](http://mld.ursinus.edu/%7Erclouser)  
>  Olin 214 ex. 2230

| Week of January 18 | Introduction to German 112  
Begin **Group** **Internet Project** **#1:** **Winterferien** **  
German in Review:** Chapter 6:  "Modal Auxilliaries"  
---|---  
Week of January 25 | Presentations  
test #1  
Week of February 1 |

Bruder Grimm: **" Rumpelstilzchen"**  
** German in Review: **Chapter 9: "Conjunctions"  
test #2  
  
Week of February 8 |

**Group Internet Project #2:** **" Stadtbesichtigung"**  
**German in** **Review** : Chapter 8: Reflexives: Pronouns  
  
Week of February 15 | Presentations  
Reflexives: Verbs  
Week of February 22 | Bruder Grimm: **" Rapunzel"**  
Review for Mid-term Exam  
Week of March 1 |

Mid-term Exam  
Mid-semester grades due March 5  
  
March 8-16 | Spring Break  
March 18-19 | **German in Review** : Chapter 12: Relative  Pronouns  
Week of March 22 | **Group Media Project #3** **  
SCOLA: Deutsche Nachrichten**  
Week of March 29 | Presentations  
test #3  
Week of April 5 | Bruder Grimm: **" Schneewittchen"  
German in Review: **Chapter 7:  "Passive Voice" ****  
Week of April 12 | "Passive Voice with Modals"  
test #4  
Week of April 19 | **Group Media Project #4: Deutsche Zeitungen und
Zeitschriften**  
Week of April 26 | **German in Review** : Chapter 10: "Subjunctive"  
Presentations  
May 3-4 | Last Days of Classes; review for Final Exam  
  
* * *

_Texts_ :

> **German in Review** , Sparks and Vail, Harcourt Brace, 1986, 2nd edition;

>

> **Kinder- und Hausm archen**, Jakob and Wilhelm Grimm, Reclam, 1978

_Determination of grades_ :

> Class participation & preparation of assignments:  20%  
>  Tests:  20%  
>  Conversation Hour:  10%  
>  Group Internet/Media Projects and Presentations:  20%  
>  Mid-term Exam  15%  
>  Final Exam  15%

* * *

_Course Goals and Objectives_ : learn to write, speak, read and understand
German better in both written and spoken media; improve cultural literacy;
improve oral presentation skills; develop ability to use digital and print
media in accessing cultural materials.

_Course Structure_ : Approximately one hour per week will be spent in the
International Learning Center on computer-assisted foreign language learning
and another hour per week with the German teaching assistant. Students are
expected to attend all classes, sessions in the International Learning Center,
and conversation hours with the teaching assistant and to prepare their
assignments carefully and hand them in or present them on time. Work,
including presentations, will be marked down for each day it is late.

****

* * *

**

Group Presentations for German 112

**

**Guidelines:** Groups will be formed based on student preferences. Each group
member will have a specific responsibility to gather information and data for
the report and to present a portion of the report orally in German. Before the
presentation, each presenter will hand out a fact sheet in German with sources
cited. The oral presentation will cover, explain, and embellish on the fact
sheet. After each report, questions may be asked. All students are responsible
for the facts and data presented in class in the oral reports; the information
generated by student presentations will be part of the material that appears
on tests, the midterm and final exam.

Some class time will be spent in the International Learning Center gathering
information for group presentations from the Internet. But additional time
outside of class will also be necessary to complete the report. Library
resources may also be utilized for the first two reports, and will be
essential for the second two media reports.

**

Sample Outline for the First Project: "Winterferien"

**

Groups should begin by selecting a destination for a winter vacation in
Germany, Austria or Switzerland based on group preferences. Specific tasks and
aspects of your "Winterferien" should be assigned to each member of the group.
For example, one presenter could be responsible for transportation to the site
of your vacation, air fare, departure and arrival times, train, bus and taxi
routes and fares, where to stay and where to eat, hotel or pension prices and
proximity to downtown, and menus and prices at area restaurants; presenter
number two could be responsible for the activities of the vacation: where to
ski or skate or luge, museums, theater, excursions to area tourist attractions
or other entertainment and when these attractions are open, what is availabale
to see or do at each site and what they cost; presenter number three could
explain the history of the area, its culture, customs and idiosyncracies.
Creative presentations are encouraged. All projects should be discussed in
advance with the instructor.

**

Sample Outline for the Second Project: "Stadtbesichtigung"

**

Groups shouldbegin by selecting a city of mutual interest in Germany, Austria
or Switzerland. Specific tasks are assigned each member of the group. For
example, one presenter may describe why a particular city was selected and
give an overview of its unique history and attractions, while presenters two
and three could focus on one or two specific cultural attractions and explain
in detail what is available to see and why these attractions are important.

**

Sample Outline for the Third Project: Scola (Deutsche Nachrichten)

**

Groups should begin by reviewing on-line German newspapers and broadcasts for
topical issues. Then they should select a specific news broadcast or news
program of special interest (available in the ILC) and request that it be
videotaped. Specific tasks should be assigned to each member of the group. For
example, one presenter may present the background of a specific problem or
event, presenter number two may explain what events triggered the story and
why it is important, and presenter number three may explain the implications
of what happened for international or domestic politics.

**

Sample Outline for the Fourth Project: "Deutsche Zeitungen/Zeitschriften"

**

Groups should begin by reviewing on-line newspapers and magazines (for
example, _Der Spiegel_ ) or newspapers and magazines in Myrin Library (for
example, _Die Welt_ ). After an article on a topic of common interest is
selected, read and analyzed, specific tasks should be assigned to each member
of the group. As in project three, one presenter may want to explain the
background of the story and why it is in the news now, the second presenter
may explain the importance of the story, and presenter three may want to
explain the implications of the story nationally and internationally.

Each group presentation may be accompanied by visual aids, either on computer
in the ILC or by photocopy or video in the classroom. Each presenter should
present before his or her report a fact or information sheet in German, with
pertinent information that will be discussed in the report. Questions are
appropriate after each individual report. Grades will be based on
thoroughness, clarity, creativity, presentation style and the ability to
answer questions following the report.  
  


