Professor Claudia Buchmann Spring 1999

337 Sociology/Psychology Building Class: MWF 10:30-11:20  
Phone: 660-5630 or 660-5614 326 Allen Bldg.  
Email: cbuch@soc.duke.edu Office Hrs: Wed. 1-2:30 and by appt.  
  
  

**Nations, Regions and the Global Economy**

**Sociology 145.01**

  
  

This course focuses on the changing global economy, its impact on distinctive
regions, and the ways nations and regions are responding to rapid
globalization and economic change. We will pay particular attention to recent
trends in global production and global financial systems. Then we will compare
various regions, examining their development strategies, responses to
globalization and unique challenges, given their position in the global
economy. Asia, Latin America, and Africa will be the primary regions of focus
in this section of the course. Finally we will critically examine the social,
political and environmental impacts of globalization and look at how the
global economy impacts selected segments of the population. ****

  
  

**Required Readings**

There are four books and several required articles for this course. The books
may be purchased at the Duke University Bookstore. Articles are listed as A1,
A2, A3... in the syllabus. All books are on three-hour reserve at Perkins
Library. Articles are on Electronic Reserve in the library.

  
  

**Books** :

Philip McMichael. 1996. _Development and Social Change: A Global Perspective_.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.  

Ezra Vogel. 1991. _The Four Little Dragons: The Spread of Industrialization in
East Asia_. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Maier, Karl. 1997. _Into the House of the Ancestors: Inside the New Africa_.
New York: Wiley and Sons.

Fukuyama, Francis. 1996. _Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of
Prosperity_. New York: Free Press.

**Articles** :

**A1** : Gereffi, Gary. 1995. Global Production Systems and Third World
Development. Pp. 100-142 in _Global Change, Regional Response: The New
International Context of Development_ , edited by Barbara Stallings. New York:
Cambridge University Press.  
**A2** : Korzeniewicz, Miquel. 1994. "Commodity Chains and Marketing
Strategies: Nike and the Global Athletic Footwear Industry." Pp. 247-265 in
_Commodity Chains and Global Capitalism_ , edited by Gary Gereffi and Miguel
Korzeniewicz.  
**A3** : Figueroa, Hector. 1996. "In the Name of Fashion." _NACLA Report on
the Americas_ 39:34-40.  
**A4** : Camdessus, Michel. 1997. "Making Globalization Work for Workers." IMF
Speeches, www.imf.org/external/speeches/1997/120297.htm  
**A5** : Buchmann, Claudia. 1996. "The Debt Crisis, Structural Adjustment and
Women's Education: Implications for Status and Social Development."
_International Journal of Comparative Sociology_ 37:5-30.  
**A6** : Zakaria, Fareed. 1994. "Culture is Destiny: A Conversation with Lee
Kuan Yew." _Foreign Affairs_ 73:109-126. ****  
**A7:** Gereffi, Gary. 1994. "Rethinking Development Theory: Insights from
East Asia and Latin America. Pp.26-56 in _Comparative National Development_ ,
edited by A. Douglas Kincaid and Alejandro Portes. Chapel Hill: University of
North Carolina Press.  
**A8** : Castells, Manuel and Roberto Laserna. 1994\. "The New Dependency:
Technological Change and Socioeconomic Restructuring in Latin America."
Pp.57-83 in _Comparative National Development_ , edited by A. Douglas Kincaid
and Alejandro Portes. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ****  
**A9:** Buchmann, Claudia. 1999. "State and Schooling in Kenya: Historical
Developments and Current Challenges." _Africa Today_. ****  

**Course Requirements**

Your course grade will be based on _class participation_ (which includes two
short "current issues" papers), a _research paper_ , a _midterm_ and a _final
exam_.

In evaluating your _class participation_ , I will consider both your
participation in class generally and your contributions to the "current
issues" discussion. Four times during the semester we will devote one class to
a discussion of current issues related to the topics covered in that section
of the course. You will be in one of two groups. Each group will be
responsible for contributing material to two discussion sessions during the
semester. This will involve turning in a 1-2 page "current issues" paper which
links topics covered in class to a related issue, current event, personal
experience, etc. (see course schedule for due dates). You are encouraged to
turn in the materials to which your comments pertain (i.e., newspaper or
magazine article, web page, etc.) with your comments. These papers will serve
as topics for class discussion.

_Mid-term Exam_ : A take-home midterm will be distributed on Wednesday, Feb 24
and will be due at the beginning of class the following Monday, March 1. While
you may use your class notes and readings during the exam, your answers on the
exam are to be entirely your own.

_Research Paper_ : You will write a 7-9 page research paper that explores more
deeply one of the topics we cover in the course. Further guidelines for
research papers will be forthcoming.

Due dates for parts of this project are on the schedule. Once you have
selected your topic, you will be divided into "writing groups" of a few
people. A first draft of your paper will be due on March 31. At this time you
will distribute copies of this draft to your writing group and hand in one
copy of the draft. On Monday, April 12, thorough comments on each of the other
group member's drafts are due (one copy to author, one to hand in). Technical
comments (i.e., grammar, punctuation) may be written on the drafts themselves;
but the substantive and stylistic comments must be typed on separate pages and
number-coded in the text. Your goal is to help the authors improve their
papers through comments and suggestions. This draft process serves two
purposes. As a writer, you have the opportunity to have numerous people read
and respond to your writing, which can help you improve your written
communication skills. As an "editor" you learn editing skills. Editing is much
easier to do with other people's written work, so practicing in this way can
help you learn how to edit and improve your own writing. Once you receive
comments from your writing group you will have a chance to revise your papers
before they are due on April 23. This paper will be worth 30 percent of your
final course grade (I will consider your revisions based on comments to your
first draft in establishing this grade). Ten percent of your course grade will
be based on the quality of your comments on other students' drafts.

___Final Exam_ : More information on the date, time and format of the final
exam will be forthcoming.

All these requirements comprise the final grade as follows:  

> 2 current issue papers/class participation 10%  
>  Midterm 25%  
>  Research Paper 30%  
>  Comments on drafts 10%  
>  Final Exam 25%

**TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE**

********_Date_ ****| ****_Topic and Readings_ ****| ****| ****_Assignments
Due_ ****  
---|---|---|---  
****W Jan 13 ****| ****Introduction to Course ****| ****|  
********F Jan 15 ****| ****What is Development? ****| ****McMichael, Intro.
****| ****  
  
  

_Development and Globalization, 1945-present_

M Jan 18 | Martin Luther King Day, No Class |  |  
---|---|---|---  
W Jan 20 | Theories of Development  | McMichael, ch. 1 |  
F Jan 22 |  |  |  
M Jan 25 | Film: Battle of the Titans  | McMichael, ch. 2 |  
W Jan 27 | The New Int'l Division of Labor  |  |  
F Jan 29 |  | McMichael, ch. 3 |  
| Production Goes Global |  |  
M Feb 1 | Global Commodity Chains | A1: Gereffi |  
W Feb 3 | Film: Winners and Losers  | A2: Korzeniewicz |  
F Feb 5 |  | A3: Figueroa | Group 1:Discussion Comments Due  
M Feb 8 |  | McMichael, ch. 4  |  
W Feb 10 | Current Issues Discussion #1 |  |  
F Feb 12 | Research Resources--Class Meets at Perkins Library |  |  
| Global Financial Networks |  |  
M Feb 15 | The World Bank and IMF | McMichael, ch. 5 A4: Camdessus |  
W Feb 17 | Debt and Structural Adjustment | A5: Buchmann |  
F Feb 19 |  | McMichael, ch 6 | Paper Topic Due  
  
**_Regional Responses_** __

M Feb 22 | The East Asian Dragons | Vogel, ch 1-3 |  
---|---|---|---  
W Feb 24 |  | Vogel, ch 4-5 | Take Home Midterm Distributed the end of Class  
F Feb 26 | No Class |  |  
M Mar 1 | Film: Japan 2000 |  | Midterm Due at Beginning of Class  
W Mar 3 |  | A6: Zakaria |  
F Mar 5 | Latin America  | A7: Gereffi | Group 2: Discussion Comments Due  
M Mar 8 |  | A8: Castells & Laserna |  
W Mar 10 | Current Issues Discussion #2 |  |  
F Mar 12 | No Class |  |  
  
  

_Spring Break-No Class Mar 15, 17, 19_

M Mar 22 | The New Africa | Maier, preface and 1-43 |  
---|---|---|---  
W Mar 24 |  | Maier, 75-104 |  
F Mar 26 |  | Maier, 129-189 | Group 1: Discussion Comments Due  
M Mar 29 | Developing Human Capital | A9: Buchmann, Maier 105-128 |  
W Mar 31 | Film: A Clash of Cultures |  | First Draft of Paper Due  
F Apr 2 | Current Issues Discussion #3 | Maier, postscript |  
  
  

_The Future_

M Apr 5 | Trust: The critical element for global success? | Fukuyama, ch 1-6 |  
---|---|---|---  
W Apr 7 | Low Trust Societies | Fukuyama, ch 7-10 |  
F Apr 9 | High Trust Societies | Fukuyama, ch 13-14, 16, 18, 20 |  
M Apr 12 | The United States | Fukuyama, ch 23-26 | Comments on Drafts Due  
W Apr 14 |  | Fukuyama, ch 27-31 | Group 2: Discussion Comments Due  
F Apr 16 | No Class |  |  
M Apr 19 | Global Impact | McMichael, ch. 7 |  
W Apr 21 |  |  |  
F Apr 23 | Current Issues Discussion #4 |  | **_Final Paper Due_** __  
M Apr 26 |  | McMichael, ch. 8 |  
W Apr 28 | Review and Wrap up |  |  
  
_Date and Time of Final Exam to be announced_

  
  
  
  



