![](../Images/Header3.gif)  
  
---  
[![](../Images/Buttons/admin_1a.gif)](admin.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/faculty_1a.gif)](faculty.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/grad_1a.gif)](graduate_p.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/ug_1a.gif)](under_g.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/search_1a.gif)](search.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/news_1a.gif)](news_e.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/site_1a.gif)](sitemap.html) |
[![](../Images/Buttons/help_1a.gif)](mailto:ethnicstudies@ucsd.edu)  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
# **ETH 253 -** **Mass Media and Ethnic Identity**

## **Spring 2002**

_Instructor:_ Jane Rhodes, Associate Professor

_Office:_ 229 SSB

_Contact_ : 858-534-6645; [jrhodes@ucsd.edu](mailto:jrhodes@ucsd.edu)

_Hours_ :  Wednesday 1-3 p.m.; Thursday 1-2 p.m.

Or by appointment

##### **Course Overview:**

The study of race and ethnicity in mass media is a terrain of contradictory,
and often oppositional, methods and arguments. This scholarship tends to fall
into two camps --for our purposes, social science and cultural studies. Each
approach is deeply suspicious of the other, and both often fail to understand
or account for the range of knowledge in the field.  A goal of this course is
to understand the theoretical and conceptual underpinnings of the array of
methods used to study race and ethnicity in the media. We will confine our
attention to television, film, newspapers and radio, the most common objects
of study.  Much of the scholarship in this area has been concerned with the
problem of representation--the images that have been produced about racial and
ethnic groups, the effects of these images on national culture, social life,
and politics, and strategies for altering or eliminating damaging stereotypes.
We will also consider the growing body of scholarship that investigates the
efforts of communities of color to communicate and shape their own
representations in mainstream and alternative venues. This course will
approach this material by examining the different traditions in media studies
and how effectively they address questions of difference, inequality, and
discrimination in both a U. S. and global framework.

_Required Texts (available at Groundworks Books)_

Robert Entman and Andrew Rojecki, _The Black Image in the White Mind: Media
and Race in America_ (Chicago)

Robert Ferguson, _Representing Race: Ideology, Identity and the Media_
(Arnold/Oxford)

Oscar Gandy, _Communication and Rac_ e _: A Structural Perspective_
(Arnold/Oxford)

Herman Gray, _Watching Race: Television and the Struggle for Blackness_
(Minnesota)

Ronald Jacobs, Race _Media and the Crisis of Civil Society: from Watts to
Rodney King_ (Cambridge)

Chon Noriega, _Shot in America:_ _Television, The State, and the Rise of
Chicano Cinema_ (Minnesota)

Edward Said, _Covering Islam How the Media and the Experts Determine How we
see the Rest of the World_ (Vintage Books)

Ella Shohat and Robert Stam _, Unthinking Eurocentrism: Multiculturalism and
the Media_ (Routledge)

Roger Silverstone, _Why Study the Media?_

##### **Assignments:**

The central component of this course is close and careful reading of the
assignments and active participation in class discussion. Each student will be
responsible for presenting and leading discussion on the articles assigned for
one week, and must complete a 3-5-page overview of the material. Students will
also prepare a 15-page paper due at the end of the quarter that addresses an
area of interest in the study of race, ethnicity, and media. This will require
the submission of a proposal, and a working bibliography, as well as the final
project.

________________________________________________________________________

### Schedule:

April 4  
_Introduction_

April 11 _  
Situating the Scholar in media studies_

 Roger Silverstone, _Why Study the Media_

Jane Rhodes, "The visibility of race and media history"

Herman Gray, "The endless slide of difference"

Hanno Hardt, "British Cultural Studies and the return of the critical in
American mass communications research

Robert McChesney, "Critical Communication Research at the Crossroads"

 James Carey, "Mass Communication and Cultural studies"

April 18  _The Social Science Framework_

Oscar Gandy, _Communication and Race        _

Romer, Jamieson and Coteau, "The Treatment of Persons of Color in Local
Television News"  

Greenberg and Brand, "Minorities and the Mass Media: 1970s-1990s

[proposal due]

April 25  _Race and the News Media_  

Entman and Rojecki, _The Black Image in the White Mind_

Christopher Campbell,"A Myth of Assimilation: `Enlightened Racism and the
News"

#### Teun van Dijk, "Elites, media and the reproduction of prejudice"

May 2  _Political Economy and the Culture of Race_

Herman Gray, _Watching Race: Television and the Struggle for Blackness_  

Douglass Kellner, "Television, Government and Business: Toward a
Critical/Institutional Theory"

Richard Campbell and Jimmie Reeves, "The Cocaine Narrative" and "Denouement"

Recommended: Meehan, Mosco, and Wasko, "Rethinking Political Economy"

May 9   _Communities of Color and Media Control_  

Chon Noriega, _Shot in America: Television, the state, and the rise of Chicano
Cinema_  

 Hamid Naficy, "Narrowcasting in Diaspora"

Catherine Squires, "Black Talk Radio: Defining Community Needs and
Identity"

[bibliography due]

May 16  _Circulating Race in the Public Sphere_

Ronald Jacobs, _Race, Media and the Crisis of Civil Society_

Stuart Hall, et. al., excerpts from _Policing the Crisis: Mugging, the state,
and law and order_

John Fiske, "Los Angeles: A Tale of Three Videos"

Recommended: Nicholas Garnham, "The Media and the Public Sphere"

May 23   _Race and Ideology_

Robert Ferguson, _Representing Race: Ideology, identity and the media_

Stuart Hall, "Signification, Representation and Ideology: Althusser and the
Post-Structuralist Debates"

Cameron McCarthy, "Living with Anxiety: Race and the Renarration of White
Identity in Contemporary Popular Culture and Public Life."

May 30  _Cinema, Racial History and Racial Formation,_

Ella Shohat and Robert Stam, _Unthinking Eurocentrism_

David James, "Tradition and the Movies: The Asian American Avant-Garde in Los
Angeles"

TBA

June 6 Discussion of class research

Edward Said, _Covering Islam: How the Media and the Experts Determine How We
see the Rest of the World_

[Return to Main Page](../index.html)  
  
---  
  

9500 Gilman Drive - La Jolla, CA 92093-0522 - 858.534.3276  
  
---  
  

[![](../Images/official.gif)](http://www.ucsd.edu/)  
  
---  
  

