[**Joseph L. Klesner**](http://www2.kenyon.edu/depts/psci/Fac/klesner.htm)

**Horwitz 3**

**Fall 2000  
  
**

###  International Studies 401:

  
  

### Senior Seminar in International Studies  

  
  

This is the capstone course for the [International Studies
major](http://www2.kenyon.edu/depts/inst/welcome.html). It is
interdisciplinary in approach to a number of theoretical and policy issues of
concern to students of International Studies. This fall the course will
address a variety of contemporary issues. It seeks to encourage students to
use theoretical and conceptual perspectives developed in earlier courses to
address themes of contemporary interest.  

**Requirements:  
**

Each student will write two critical review essays and will help to prepare
and present a team report on a current policy issue. These are explained
below. The critical reviews will comprise 40 percent of your final grade (20
percent each), the team report will count 30 percent, and seminar
participation will make up the other 30 percent. Part of your seminar
participation grade will be based on discussion questions which you would like
the seminar to address, based on the assigned reading. These discussion
questions will be due each week and will be created by means of a e-mail
discussion group. Students in the course will take turns leading the e-mail
discussions. The discussion questions should demonstrate that you have read
the assigned readings by addressing the significant conceptual issues raised
in that reading. I will read the discussion questions every week; although I
will not grade them individually, I will make comments where appropriate. This
component of the discussion grade will form 15 percent of the final grade.  

**[Critical Review
Assignments](http://www2.kenyon.edu/Depts/Inst/critical_review.htm) :  
**

Your critical reviews should be of about six-eight pages' length on books
(around 1,500 words) on topics covered in the course. In each essay you should
choose two (or more) books on similar topics to review. One book should
address your theme in the region or country on which you specialize, the other
should explore that theme in another geographical context. In a review you
should provide brief summaries of the works under review, but more
importantly, you should make clear to your readers the significance of the
issues under consideration by the books and the key issues on which they agree
and disagree, and you should render your assessment of the contributions of
the works to our understanding of the issues they explore. You are not
reviewing these books for stylistic devices, but for the substantive
contributions they make to our knowledge and understanding of key issues.
Perhaps the best way to learn what a critical review should do is to read some
examples. Critical reviews differ depending on the audience for which they are
intended. Some critical reviews are written to the intellectual community
broadly conceived. Examples of these can be found in journals of criticism
such as _The New York Review of Books_ and _The New Republic._ Others are
written to a more specialized scholarly audience. You might look at reviews of
this type in the _Latin American Research Review_ (to cite one such journal
with which I am very familiar). The examples I am citing will typically review
more works (as many as a dozen in a single essay) than you have been asked to
consider, but the manner of organizing those essays will be similar. I have
written a sample review which is posted on Kenyon's website at
[http://www2.kenyon.edu/depts/psci/review.htm
](http://www2.kenyon.edu/depts/psci/review.htm). The first review will be due
on October 16, the second on November 27.  

**Team Reports:  
**

The seminar will divide into five teams of three or four students each. Each
team will choose from among the policy issues as described in the outline
below (or another that is acceptable to the instructor), conduct research on
its issue, and then draw up and present to the seminar a policy paper of about
30-35 pages. Each paper will identify the issue, describe and evaluate past
U.S. policy toward it, and then recommend a new policy or defend the adequacy
of the existing one. The policy papers will be graded on the basis of their
thoroughness, thoughtfulness, balance, and feasibility. Extensive library
research will be necessary.  

The following is a **summary of the components of the final course grade** **:  
**

**Two Critical Review Essays 40%**

**Participation 30%**

Discussion in class 15 %

E-mail discussion questions 15%

**Team Report 30%  
  
**

**Three Important Announcements  
**

First, if you have a disability and therefore may have need of some type of
ccommodation(s) in order to participate fully in this class, please feel free
to discuss your concerns in private with me and also self identify yourself to
Erin Salva, Coordinator of Disability Services, at PBX 5453 or via e-mail at
[salvae@kenyon.edu](mailto:salvae@kenyon.edu).  

Second, The Kenyon College Course of Study has defined plagiarism in this way:  

Learning from another artist or scholar is commendable, but to use the ideas
(written, oral, graphic or artistic) or the phraseology of another person
covertly, so as to represent the material as one's own, constitutes
plagiarism.  

The _Course of Study_ has an extensive discussion of academic honesty which
you are responsible for reading and understanding. If you have any questions,
you should feel free to ask your instructor or members of the Academic
Infractions Board. Different disciplines have different needs and accepted
methods of referencing, and faculty can help you determine what is proper, but
it is the student's responsibility to be aware of Kenyon's policy on academic
dishonesty.  

Third, my office is 3 Horwitz House, my PBX is 5311 or 5826, and my home phone
is 427-2274. Do not be afraid to call me at home, but please, no late calls!
You can leave messages with Mrs. Furniss in the Political Science office in
Horwitz House (PBX 5308). I regularly use electronic mail and will communicate
with you via e-mail too. I check my e-mail many times a day, so it is an
excellent way to communicate with me. My e-mail address is
[klesner@kenyon.edu](mailto:klesner@kenyon.edu). My office hours for the first
semester are 12-2 on Tuesdays, 1-2:30 on Wednesdays, and 11-12 and 1-2 on
Thursdays. I am more than willing to arrange another meeting time if you
cannot make my office hours. Please call or leave a message on my door or by
e-mail if you need to arrange a meeting time.  
  
  

* * *

* * *

**Course Outline and Assigned Readings  
  
**

August 28 and 30

Introduction: Off-Campus Studies: The Experience of Being an Outside Observer  

* * *

September 4 and 6  

Globalization I: The Forces Producing Our Times  

**Reading:** Thomas Friedman, _The Lexus and the Olive Tree_ (New York:
Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1999), Chs. 1-12, pp. 3-263.  

* * *

September 11 and 13  

Globalization II: Consequences for the Developing World and for the U.S.  

**Reading:** Friedman, _The Lexus and the Olive Tree_ , Chs. 13-18, pp.
267-378.  

* * *

September 18 and 20  

Religion and Terrorism  

**Reading:** Mark Juergensmeyer, _Terror in the Mind of God: The Global Rise
of Religious Violence_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000).  

* * *

September 25 and 27  

Managing Conflict in the Post-Cold War Era  

**Read:** Donald Rothchild, _Managing Ethnic Conflict in Africa: Pressures and
Incentives for Cooperation_ (Washington: Brookings, 1997), Chs. 1-5, pp.
1-145.  

* * *

October 2 and 4  

Ethnic Conflict in Africa  

**Reading:** Rothchild, _Managing Ethnic Conflict in Africa_ , Chs. 6-9, pp.
147-280.  

* * *

October 11 and 16  

Military Regimes and Human Rights  

**Reading:** Elisabeth Burgos-Debray, _I, Rigoberta Menchu: An Indian Woman in
Guatemala_ , trans. Ann Wright (London: Verso, 1984).  

* * *

October 18 and 23  

Solidarity Activists, Human Rights Advocates, and the Promotion of Human
Rights  

**Reading:** David Stoll, _Rigoberta Mench u and the Story of All Poor
Guatemalans_ (Boulder: Westview, 1999).  

* * *

October 25 and 30  

Development I: What is Development? What is Poverty?  

**Reading:** Amartya Sen, _Development as Freedom_ (New York: Knopf, 1999),
Introduction and Chs. 1-4, pp. 3-110.  

* * *

November 1 and 6  

Development II: Development as Freedom?  

**Reading:** Sen, _Development as Freedom_ , Chs. 5-12, pp. 111-298.  

* * *

November 8 and 13  

Environment, Development, and Conflict  

**Reading:** Thomas F. Homer-Dixon, _Environment, Scarcity, and Violence_
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1999).  

* * *

November 15 and 27  

Immigration I: Who are the New Immigrants and Why are They Coming?  

**Reading:** Alejandro Portes and Rub en G. Rumbaut, _Immigrant America: A
Portrait_ , 2nd ed. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996), Chs.
1-3, pp.1-92.  

Team Report  

* * *

November 29 and December 4  

Immigration II: Immigration and American Society  

**Reading:** Portes and Rumbaut, _Immigrant America_ , Chs. 4-7, pp. 93-300.  

Team Report  

* * *

December 6 and 11  

Course Evaluation  

Team Reports

