SYLLABUS AHUM 107 SOUTHERN STUDIES (the "Billy Bob Show")

Professors: William S. Brockington (Billy) and Robert E. Botsch (Bob)

Spring 2000 3 Credit Hours 10:50-12:05 TT--CLAS 116

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

_CONSULTATION._ Office C-1  & C-7 (648-6851, ext 3223 or 3222; e-mail:
billb@aiken.sc.edu and bobb@aiken.sc.edu), office hours posted on door. Any
student who needs assistance should come by to talk with either of us about
his/her problems. Making an appointment is usually best. Please bring your
notes and tests when you come. If you cannot reach either of us, leave a
message with Ms. Gretchen Erb, 648-6851, ext 3498.

_TEXTS._ As Southern Studies is an interdisciplinary course, no single text
adequately covers the material. Therefore, your instructors have assembled and
written much of the material used in this course.

1\. Edward Ayers and Bradley Mittendorf. _The Oxford Book of The American
South_. New York: Oxford University Press, 1997. You buy this one at the USCA
bookstore. We will me making assignments out of this as we go though the
course.

2\. On-Line materials. The Billy-Bob show is moving into the computer age, as
as everything else in the South, we are doing it very slowly with a lot of
glitches along the way. The downside is that you have to go to a bit of
trouble to get to the materials. The up-side is that you don't have to pay $20
for the bound materials, but you may have to pay for printing if you want to
print a lot of it.

To get these materials, you go to the Web site and follow instructions there.
First you go to the _Academics_ section off the USCA home page. Then you click
to _History_ or _Political Science_ \--either will get you to the same place.
Then Find AHUM 107 and click on that. Then you will need the Username and
Password to get to the actual course home page. We will give you in class.

Once you get to the Web Site, you may note that Billy and Bobby are doing it
differently.

_Billy's Study Guide_ : Billy has a study guide for his part of the class that
you must look at in MS Word. To make the pages come out the way Billy wants
them, you need to set up 1" margins at the top and bottom and 1.3" margins on
the side, font size of 11 in New-Times Roman font. What we would suggest is
that you copy the study guide to a disk and then you can use it anywhere you
have a computer. Billy's assignments and homework questions are on the first
page for the day's assignment. Extra credit is also listed there.

_Bobby's Readings and Review Questions_ : Bobby has divided his materials up
into several parts. All of his materials are in html so that you can read them
on any Web browser with an internet connection. The Review Questions are the
only thing you really need to print. Click to and print the Review Questions
for each module as we get to it. Then read the material on-line (unless it is
something out of the printed Oxford reader) and answer the Study Questions as
you read. If you do this and fill in more of the answers as Bobby talks about
them in class, you should be in good shape for the tests.



_Use the Course Schedule (it is attached to this and is also at the Web Site)
as guide to tell you what reading you should have done for each class_. (The
one attached to this is tentative--the one at the Web Site will be changed
from time to time, so that is the official one.) You are expected to read the
material assigned BEFORE class so that you will understand what we are doing
in class on that date. If you are to comprehend fully the objectives of the
course and to understand absolutely the lectures and discussions that will
take place in class, you must read the material before coming to class. In the
past, we have had problems with getting all students reading the materials on
time, so we are doing some things to encourage you to do the readings on time
and reward you for doing them.

So that you will be able to comprehend more fully the reading material, each
reading assignment will be accompanied by some _study questions_. Answering
these questions should help you on the tests. Of course, you also need to use
Billy's Study Guide and Bobby's Review Questions. Doing these study questions
and turning them in on time will be a significant part of your grade.

_MODULES._ The primary focus of this course is the South since the Civil War
("The War"). It will be divided into sections, or modules, which are entitled:

a. The War - The Creation of the South

b. Class in the South - Agrarianism vs. Industrialism

c. Caste and the South - Attitudes of People towards People

d. A Microcosm Study of the South - SC & Aiken

In each module, history/literature along with such topics as jazz and the shag
will be presented by Billy and political science and other things like country
music and southern cooking will be presented by Bob, and other things like
religion will be presented jointly (by Billy-Bob). Occasionally guest
lecturers may also speak on other topics. Southern Studies is an
interdisciplinary course, i.e. instead of looking at the South from one point
of view, it will be examined from a number of different perspectives, each of
which give us a little different view of the "truth."

_TESTS._ You will have three (3) regular tests during the semester, one at the
end of the first three modules. Each test will have a mixed format: objective
questions (multiple choice, true/false) and subjective questions (short answer
or essay questions). The purpose of each kind of question is as follows.
Objective questions require you to learn specific factual information [related
to the items on your syllabus] which are the building blocks of knowledge and
comprehension. Subjective questions require you to synthesize information and
to present it cogently and coherently, thereby enhancing your ability to
communicate abstract concepts and ideas (in this case, the themes and trends
and of Southern Studies and evaluations). Each of those tests will be valued
at 100 points (total=300 points).

At the end of Module IV, you will take a final examination. This final
examination will count 200 points, with 100 being from Module IV and 100 being
on material from earlier in the semester. All content from the course will
also be part of the final exam--that is, your final is comprehensive.
Including the final exam, the total points possible on tests is 500.

_TEST PROTOCOL._ Each instructor (Billy/Bob) will make up part of the each
test and grade his own part. For each of tests and the final exam you will
need _two_ (2) Scantron Mini Blue Books, Form 886, which you may purchase at
the USCA Book Store. (That's the long form that has room for essays in it.)
You should go to the book store immediately after class and purchase eight.
Please be punctual as the test will require every available minute. You will
be given one-half of the test which, when you are finished, will be turned in
and exchanged for the second half of the test. You are to turn in both the
test forms and the answer sheets. Please remember that the USCA Honor System
is in effect for all work in this class. See your student handbook for an
explanation.

_MAKE-UP WORK._ If you know that you will be missing a test and you have a
legitimate and verifiable reason (e.g. school business), we will permit you to
take a test early. An unexcused absence on a test day will result in a zero.
For excused absences (these require a written excuse for some emergency lime
illness or death in the family--not oversleeping or a regular doctor's
appointment that can be rescheduled) make-ups will be all-essay format. They
will be given either on a Friday afternoon at 4 pm (probably the Friday
following the test) or at the end of the semester at the regularly scheduled
examination time.

_EXTRA CREDIT._ Students often want to know how they can get extra credit on
tests. We will allow it, but with guidelines.

1\. You can get up to 10 points extra credit for any Module (that 's for both
our parts of a test, not 10 for each part).

2\. You must do the extra credit BEFORE the test--don't ask for it later. It
is due no later than the CLASS BEFORE THE TEST.

3\. You must get your project approved before you do it. The guidelines are
that it must be a WRITTEN proposal so that we can initial and date it and tell
you how much we think it is worth. For example, you might want to watch the
movie "Normae Rae" and read two reviews of the movie and then write a summary
of the movie and the reviews, or you may want to do a book report on _All the
King's Men_ or _Organizing the Breathless._ Each of these proposals would be
worth up to 10 points depending on how well you did them. Quality counts as
much as quantity, but generally we would want about a 2-3 page TYPED report.

4\. The topic chosen must be directly RELEVANT to the material in the module
for that test. (Note--materials not assigned in the Oxford reader will make
excellent extra credit--but you have to show us how it is relevant in your
report.) Billy has some specific suggestions in his study guide.

_ATTENDANCE AND READING/WRITING ASSIGNMENTS_. Good news and bad news. The good
news is that unlike past years we are not requiring research papers or book
reports. The bad news is that in place of one or two big writing assignments
you will be expected to do a lot of little writing assignments. This has two
purposes: to encourage you to do the readings and think about them and to
reward you for attending.

Each day a reading assignment is due you will be given a _study question_ or
two to answer in writing that is based on the readings. Sometimes the
questions will be at the Web site and sometimes we will just write it on the
board at the end of the previous class--it is your responsibility to get the
question if you miss class. You should be able to answer these questions in a
couple of paragraphs or so.

On the day that the question is due you should place it on the desk at the
front of the room **_BEFORE_** class. At the same time you should pick up your
papers from the previous class.

The papers will be given one of three grades: "S" for satisfactory--meaning
you made an honest effort that indicated you had read and thought about the
material, even if you got it wrong, and it was neat and readable and had no
major grammatical flaws; "M" for marginal, meaning that it was a token effort
indicating you didn't do much reading or thinking; "U" for unsatisfactory
meaning that you probably did not turn it in or that it was so bad as to
deserve no credit at all or you were not there that day.

At the end of the semester we will _count up all the possible grades you could
have had, **drop your THREE lowest** , and average the percentage of those
grades for which you received S's, with each M counting as a half S_. For
example, suppose you could have written a total of 25 daily papers, and you
made 5 U's, 3 M's, and 17 S's. We would drop 3 of the 5 U's so that you would
have 22 grades (2 U's; 3 M's; 17 S's). Each M counts as a half S, so that you
now have 18.5 S's out of 22 grades, or 18.5/22 = .84, or 84 out of a total
possible 100 points.

Here is how attendance factors into this. We will _only accept daily papers if
you are in class that day and turn it in when you get there_. The reason we
allow you to drop 3 papers is to allow for a reasonable number of unavoidable
absences. As far as these absences go, we do not distinguish between excused
and unexcused absences--if you are not there we do not accept the papers--
period. Nor may you send the paper in with another student or drop it off and
then skip class. These 100 points, the equivalent of a test grade, are for
class preparation AND class attendance. So to get it you must be prepared and
be there. Theoretically, you could lose all 100 points and still make 500 of
the total possible 600 points and have a course average of 500/600 = 83%,
which would be a B for the course. Of course that is unlikely. If you made 75
on all tests, a more realistic grade, and did not turn in any daily papers,
your final grade would be 5x75=375 and then divide 375 by 600 to get 62.5%,
and your C+ turns into a D. On the other hand, if you keep up with the class
and make 100 on the daily papers--as you all should do--it can help you.
Suppose you have an 88 test average (a B+). That's a total of 5x88=440 points.
Add 100 for the daily papers to get 540 and divide by 600 to get 90%, or an A
for the course. A 76 test average can be improved to an 80, a 65 to a 70. _It
can help about a half letter grade_ \--plus you should do better on the tests
as well if you have read the material before the night before!

_GRADE SCALE._ Your final letter grade is based upon the total number of
points [the 500 points for the tests plus 100 points for daily papers] divided
by 600.

A=90-100 B+=85-89 B=80-84 C+=75-79 C=70-74 D+=65-69 D=60-64 F=59 and below

_YOUR FINAL GRADE._ We cannot post grades at the end of the semester. If you
want to know your grade before they are mailed by USCA, provide us with a
self-addressed, stamped envelope so that we can mail your grades to you. You
will not get you a grade orally, either over the phone or at USCA. Remember
that you may use the TIP (Telephone Information Processing system) number to
get your grade more quickly.

_WARNING._ There will occasionally be controversial topics and/or material
presented in class. Your professors will present many different points of view
(none should be seen as necessarily their own) to challenge you to consider
your own point of reference in an analytical and critical way.

_QUESTIONS._ Please feel free to ask questions at any time. We have plenty of
time for questions, and we encourage them. You may feel hesitant about asking
questions in the beginning, but we hope that this feeling will not last too
long. One question that needs to be dispelled immediately. Occasionally
students come to us with the rumor that this course will not transfer either
to another USC campus or to another college. This is absurd. This course is a
recognized course at a fully accredited institution of higher learning which
is within the greater USC system. Therefore, it definitely will transfer
within the USC system and it definitely will transfer to another accredited
(and most non-accredited) institution. However, you should note that this
course is a Humanities course. As such, it will not fulfill a history
requirement; but it will fulfill a humanities requirement for _any_ major. If
you have any question regarding how it will fit into your major, please ask
either of us. We will be glad to talk with anyone who mis-advises you
regarding this course.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

_COURSE OBJECTIVES_

From this course you will learn how to answer the following specific
questions.

1\. What is the South? What characteristics have differentiated the South from
other regions? Are these characteristics changing? In what way? What is the
significance of this change, or lack of it?

2\. Who is a Southerner? What are the qualities of sectionalism? Who speaks
for the South?

3\. Having thought about all of this, how do you feel about the South? How do
your feel about yourself as a Southerner or as a potential Southerner? How
will you express and live your "southernness" the rest of your life?

4\. With each set of readings will be a set of mini-objectives and/or study
questions. If you will learn the answers to those questions, you should have
little difficulty with the tests.

In a more general vein, it is hoped that SOUTHERN STUDIES will assist the
student:

1\. to learn that the Southern experience is not merely a chronological series
of cold facts, but a drama of personalities, places, and events, each with
greatness and pettiness, and each with a variety of interpretations [the
student will learn how and why specific events and persons impacted upon their
own and later times; the student will also learn how to relate those specifics
to broader themes];

2\. to learn that an understanding of the Southern experience will enhance
ones awareness of the modern South [the student will gain perspective, that
is, will be able to understand how present institutions, conditions, and
events relate to earlier events];

3\. to learn how better to communicate one's thoughts and ideas [essay writing
is critical to the development of communication skills];

4\. to learn that a study of the past can be informative, useful, and fun [the
study can be based on almost anything - films, novels, _and_ dull, boring
texts; this class will only rarely be dull or boring].



_LEARNING DISABLED STUDENTS._ If you have a physical or learning disability
which might affect your performance in this class, please contact the Office
of Disabled Student Services as soon as possible. Once an evaluation has been
made, appropriate accommodations will be determined.

_PLAGIARISM_. Rules regarding PLAGIARISM apply to all written work. Depending
on the nature of the work and the precise offense, the penalty for plagiarism
may be as light as a failing grade for the work or as heavy as an F for the
course. On the essays you will be writing on an almost daily basis, this
basically means you must use your own words, not ones lifted from the texts or
from the Web. If you use words that are not your own, you MUST place them in
Aquotation marks@ and tell us where they came from, e.g. (text, p.145). If
you're not sure how to do this, ASK!



_HONOR CODE_.The USCA Honor code is in effect in this course for all written
assignments and for exams. I believe in it and I will enforce it.



_JUNIOR WRITING PORTFOLIO._ Your instructors value good writing in this
course. Please remember that the written work that you produce in this class
can be included in your rising junior writing portfolio. For further
information on the portfolio requirement, please contact your USCA
_Undergraduate and Graduate Studies Bulletin_ or visit Dr. Lynne Rhodes,
Director of Writing Assignment, or Karl Fornes, Director of the Writing Room.





_COURSE SCHEDULE:_

The following is a tentative schedule for AHUM A107 (we reserve the right to
make changes in the schedule).

MODULE I - "THE WAR"

Jan 11 Course Orientation: The Syllabus (Billy Bob) What Is the South? (Billy)

Measuring your identity: A "Southernness" Index (Bob) 13 Themes of change and
continuity: A Different Dixie (Billy)

18 "The War" and the South (Billy)

20 Aftermyth of "The War" & the "Mind of the South" (Billy)

25 The Enduring Impact of the War on Southern Politics and Attitudes. Part 1.

The Birth of Southern Politics: A History of Failures, Factions, and Fools
(Bob)

27 Part 2. A Microanalytic return to _The Mind of the South_ (Bob)

Feb 1 Review: Mind of the South Today (Billy/Bob)

3 TEST I



MODULE II - AGRARIANISM VS INDUSTRIALISM, OR THE OLD SOUTH VS THE NEW SOUTH

8 Country Music (Bob)

10 Agrarianism vs Industrialism: The New South (Billy)

15 The Continuing Failure of Southern Class Politics \- (Bob)

17 The Agrarian Revolt against the Forces of Industrialism: Populists and/or

Demagogues and "The Strike of 1934" -- a documentary (Bob)

22 The War (WWII) and the South: The New South Comes of Age (?) (Billy)

24 Religion in the South--looking for the Rock of Ages in a sea of social
change

(Bob)

28 TEST II



MODULE III - CASTE AND THE SOUTH

Mar 2 The Language of Prejudice (Billy-Bob)

7-9 Spring Break

14 Black History: Lost, Stolen, and Strayed and the Civil Rights Movement
(Billy)

16 "Generic" Politics: The Politics of Caste, The Civil Rights Movement and
the

Courts (Bob)

21 Gender Issues in History (Billy)

23 Gender Bias in S.C. (Bob)

28 The Multicultural Southern Gourmet, or I'll Take My Stand Against the
Golden

Arches, or How Barbecue (sic) reflects Southern Culture, or the Triumph of

Southern Culture (Bob) and the Shag: The S.C. State Dance--A Feet-on

Experience (Billy)

30 Jazz (Billy)

Apr 4 TEST III



MODULE IV - A MICROCOSM STUDY OF THE SOUTH: SOUTH CAROLINA AND AIKEN

  6. S. C. History: an Overview (Billy)

11 SC Politics Today (Bob)

13 History of Aiken (Billy)

18 Aiken County Voters As a Microcosm of SC (Bob)

20 Issues Facing S.C. and Aiken: Building a Future on our Past (Billy Bob)

25-26 Reading Days

27 TEST IV and FINAL EXAM (100 points each)

