
    Sociology 417/517 - The Social Context of Southern Music 
    
    Text: Austin, Sounds of the South: The Sociology of Southern Music   
    ***************************************************************************
    
         The music of the southern region of the United States is a rich 
    tradition of popular culture.  The southern region has spawned several 
    genres of popular music: country, the blues, rock and roll, jazz and
    gospel.  The primary foci of this course are: country, blues and
    gospel; however, some attention is also given to the early days of rock
    and roll pre-Beatles) and southern rock (e.g. Allman Brothers, Lynard
    Skynard, etc).     
         This course is offered once each year, usually in the Fall Semester
    and is available for both undergraduate and graduate credit.  The course is
    recommended in the Southern Studies minor (History department) and as a
    core elective in the Recording Industry Management (RIM) major. It is also
    an excellent elective for sociology majors and minors.
         During the semester, there are several guest speakers from various
    components of the music industry (e.g., songwriters, music publishers,
    recording engineers, media personnel) and at least one field trip (to a
    state-of-the-art recording studio.
         Students considering this course should, however, be full aware that
    it is not a music course -- it is a SOCIOLOGY OF music course. The focus
    is on sociological theory and analysis using popular music of the southern
    region as a database.
    **************************************************************************
    
    I.  Course Objectives: 
        1.    To provide a socio-historical analysis of southern music
              as a form of popular culture. 
        2.    To examine the relationship between culture and popular
              culture. 
        3.    To provide an examination of the social production of
              popular culture as a vehicle for the analysis of social issues.   
     
    II.  Course Requirements:  
         l.   Attendance is, of course, required. 
         2.   Classes will begin promptly at 1:00 and students are
              encouraged to be on time.  The door will be closed 5 minutes 
    	  after class begins.  Please do not enter the classroom after the door 
    	  has been closed.
         3.   Examinations.  There will be three examinations during the
              semester, including the final exam.  Each exam will cover only
              new material (unless otherwise specified by your instructor) and
              each exam will count one-fourth of your final grade. Exams will
              be approximately 50% essay.  Make-ups will be given only when
              absolutely necessary and there will be one designated day when
              all make-up exams will be given.
         4.   Research Paper.  An independent research paper is essential to 
              the learning process in this course.  The paper will count
              one-fourth of your final grade.  A list of suggested topics is
              provided in class.  Specific requirements:  
              a.   10 page minimum (typed, double spaced), five reference
                   minimum. Books and journals as opposed to magazines and
                   newspapers).  
              b.   ASA style (provided in class)
              c.   Specifics regarding due dates for outlines and the finished
                   paper will be provided in class                  
         5.   Grading Scale:
              a.   Total points available = 400
              b.   A = 90% and above (360 points)
                   B = 80 - 89% (320-359 points)
                   C = 70 - 79% (280-319 points)
                   D = 60 - 69% (240-279 points).
                   F = below 60% (below 240 points)
                   I - Incompletes will be given only in those cases where
                       the failure to complete assigned work is due to              
                       circumstances beyond the student's control.      
    
    Unit I - The Folk Tradition.  This unit traces contemporary southern music
    the British folk tradition and its modern American counterpart; however,
    attention is also given to the black country blues and its African origins.
    The emergence of a native American balladry and style are of paramount
    importance in this unit.  The unit concludes with an examination of the
    nationalization and commercialization of the Southern musical tradition.
    
    Unit II.  The Production of Popular Culture.  This unit traces the song
    from the mind of the writer to the ear (more appropriately, the pocketbook)
    of the listener.  Along the way, critical industry decisions are made by
    publishers, producers, engineers and media executives which impact the
    song. Essentially, this unit examines the music business and the structural
    components of the music business.   
    
    Unit III - Sociological Themes in the lyrics of country music. Topics to
    be covered include: Alcohol, family and gender roles, racial and ethnic
    relations, religion, social class and work ethic, urbanization, aging and
    the elderly as these issues are treated in the lyrical content of
    contemporary country music.
    
    
                         TOPICS COVERED
    
    UNIT I:   The Formation of the Southern Music Tradition
              The British Folk Tradition                           
              Characteristics of the Folk Ballad
              Cultural Borrowing and Adaptation
              The African Musical Tradition
              The Rise of a Native Balladry
              Instrumentation in the Folk Tradition
              Selling the Oral Tradition: Comercialization 
                  Radio and Recording         
                  The Nationalization of the Folk Tradition
                  Hank Williams                                      
              Rockabilly and the birth of Rock and Roll
              The Nashville Sound
    
    UNIT II:  The Production of Country Music
              Role of the Songwriter
              Copyright Law: BMI and ASCAP                        
              The Recording Process  (Field Trip -- The RecordingStudio)
              The Role of the Media                               
              Live and in Concert                    
    
    UNIT III: Sociological Themes in the Lyrics of Country Music
              Alcohol and the Southern Music Tradition          
              Family and Gender Roles                      
              Family and Gender Roles
              Race and Ethnic Relations                           
              The Theology of Southern Music                      
              Class and Stratification                            
              Urbanization                                        
              Aging and the Elderly
    

