ARTS 1C Arts Core

Issues in Visual Arts and New Media

T/TH 3:30-4:50, Humanities Little Theatre

Stephen Barker

Arts 247B x7616

sfbarker@uci.edu

web page: http://e3.uci.edu/00s/03003/

office hours: TTH 12-1 and by appointment



_

VERY IMPORTANT:

_



[THIS SYLLABUS IS LINKED TO THE CENTRAL COURSE SYLLABUS FOR PROFESSOR DAVID
TREND. ALL COURSE READING CAN BE FOUND AT THE CENTRAL SITE, THOUGH THE CONTENT
OF EACH CLASS IN THIS SECTION WILL DIFFER SIGNIFICANTLY FROM PROFESSOR TREND'S
CLASS. BE SURE TO CONSULT THIS SYLLABUS FOR THIS SECTION'S GRADED ASSIGNMENTS
AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS; ASIDE FROM THE COMMON READING LIST, YOU SHOULD NOT
ASSUME THAT REQUIREMENTS FOR PROFESSOR TREND'S SECTION APPLY TO YOU UNTIL OR
UNLESS YOU SEE THEM HERE.



YOU WILL ACCESS READINGS BY GOING TO THE ARTSCORE WEBSITE, WHERE ALL READINGS
ARE HOT-LINKED; YOU WILL RETURN TO THIS WEBSITE FOR ALL ASSIGNMENTS AND
REQUIREMENTS HAVING TO DO WITH THE READINGS AND OTHER CLASS ASSIGNMENTS.]



.



**

Course description** : This section of Arts Core serves as an introduction to
ideas of significance to the UCI Studio Art Department. Rather than a survey
of techniques or methods, this class will address concepts behind the work of
many contemporary visual artists. We will discuss issues of **culture,
audience, media, identity, and social change**.



**

Objectives and requirements** : (1) To understand, analyze, and evaluate, in
depth, several theories of culture. (2) To apply

these ideas in discussing specific cultural objects, practices, or
relationships.



**

Course readings** : All readings are available on the web and linked from the
course web page. Read each assignment to prepare for the class on its
corresponding date. Readings for the week will constitute a central part of
each quiz and the final exam; readings for each Thursday are eligible for
inclusion on the quiz given on the day the reading will be discussed.



**

Grades** : Grades will be based on four quizzes (10 points each), one each
Thursday, and a final examination (60 points) on the Thursday of Week 5 (4
May); total point possibilities in the course = 100 (100-97 = A+, 96-93 = A,
92-90 = A-, etc.; below 60 = F). Quizzes will be given at the beginning of the
Thursday class, once only, and cannot be made up. The final exam will take the
place of the Week Five quiz and will consist of 30 questions (2 points each),
of which 10 will be on the week's reading and 20 will be comprehensive.



**

Website requirement** : You are required to 1) visit an art gallery or museum
and write a 1-2 page assessment of what you see there (we will discuss this in
class), and 2) to visit the website of either the Louvre in Paris or the
Museum of Modern Art in New York and write a 1-2 page assessment of the
website. Neither of these assignments will be graded, but both are required;
your final grade for the half-course will drop one whole letter grade for each
of these assignments not handed in. They are due by the last class (4 May),
but may be handed in directly to me anytime before that date. No late papers
will be accepted.



**

General resource site** : An excellent library of links pertaining to art,
culture, media, and the humanities is Voice of the Shuttle.

.



. . . REMEMBER THAT ALL READINGS ARE TO BE FOUND IN THE EEE ARTSCORE WEBSITE .
. . [EEE ArtsCore Website](http://e3.uci.edu/00s/03003/)

**



**_

syllabus

_**

 ** WEEK ONE

**

CULTURE**. What is the relationship between "art" and "culture"? What role
does creativity play in everyday life? The UCI Studio Art Department explores
these and other issues involving the context in which art works are made and
seen.

 April 4 . Course introduction

 April 6. Read: What is Culture? "Defining Culture"



WEEK TWO

**

MEDIA**. What role does the medium of artwork play? How are new media changing
what artists can do and say?

 April 11. Read: Howard Rheingold, The Virtual Community, "Introduction"

 April 13. Read: Ien Ang, "Stalking the Wild Viewer"



WEEK THREE

**

AUDIENCE**. Who are the different audiences for art and culture? What role do
institutions play in mediating the experiences of audiences? What happens when
the ideas about a work are more important than the work itself?

 April 18. Read: Whitney Museum, "Currently on View" and Beall Center for Art
and Technology,opening pages,

 April 20. Read: National Endowment for the Arts, "SPARC and Community: A 20
Year Partnership"



WEEK FOUR

**

IDENTITY**. Just as there are no singular definitions of art and creativity,
there is no single art world or community. More than ever before, the arts
today reflect cultural diversity and differences in identity. At the same
time, new interdisciplinary art forms are challenging traditions notions of
what art is.

 April 25. Read: Introduction to Postcolonial Studies, opening page and
Japanese-American National Museum, opening pages

 April 27. Read: Representation, opening page



WEEK FIVE

**

SOCIAL CHANGE**. Art can be an agent of change and controversy. It can embody
aesthetic trends or political movements. How does art function in a democracy?
What is the role of public policy in the cultural matters?

 May 2 . Read: Cultural Democracy, opening page

 May 4 . Read: Border Crossings, two or more: diaspora, la frontera, gender,
lesbian/gay, cyborgs, border incidents

  .



