|

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
[ ![](home.gif)](index.html)  
  
[ ![](faculty.gif)](faculty.html)  
  
[ ![](activities.gif)](activities.html)  
  
[ ![](links.gif)](links.html)  
  
[ ![](millsaps.gif)](http://www.millsaps.edu)  
  
[ ![](feedback.gif)](mailto:mcelvrs@millsaps.edu)  
  
  
  
---  
**Curriculum**  
**Requirements for a major:**

Students may complete a major in history with ten, four-semester hour courses,
including both semesters of History of the United States, Europe Since 1789,
Senior Seminar, and one course each in the European and Non-Western areas. One
core topics course taught by an instructor from the History Department may be
used to meet the requirements of the history major. Heritage may be counted as
one four-hour course toward the ten course requirement.

  
**Requirements for a minor:**

Students may elect a minor in history with five, four-semester hour courses,
including both semesters of History of the United States and European
Civilization since 1789.

  
**Courses: **  
(click course title for course syllabus)  

**[2100 History of the United States to 1877
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/History_2100.htm)** A survey of the
cultures and history of the peoples that lived in the area that became the
United States, from the Pre-Columbian era through European colonization, the
introduction of African slaves, the American Revolution, the early Republic,
the Civil War and Reconstruction.

**[2110 History of the United States since 1877
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/his2110_00.htm)** A survey of the main
developments in the United States and how they affected American men and women
from the end of Reconstruction through industrialization and urbanization, the
emergence of the United States as a world power, the rise of a partial welfare
state, and the Cold War, down to the present.

**[2120 Women (and Men) in America
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/women.html)** An interdisciplinary
examination of the history of women and the ways in which they have interacted
with men and male-dominated institutions over the course of American history.
The course will employ works of literature, art, film and music among its
means of exploring the changing lives of women and men in America. Offered in
alternate years.

**_2130 The African-American Heritage I (1)._** An interdisciplinary study
concentrating on the historic and contemporary experience of black people in
America, from colonial times to 1877. Offered in alternate years.

**_2140 The African-American Heritage II (1)._** An interdisciplinary study
concentrating on the historic and contemporary experience of black people in
America, from 1877 to the present. Offered in alternate years.

**[2210 European Civilization Since 1789
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/WesternCiv.html)** This course is a
survey of the major social, political, economic and intellectual developments
in European history from the French Revolution of 1789 to the revolutions in
Eastern Europe in 1989/1990.

**_2310 African History and Society (1)._** An interdisciplinary survey of
major themes in African history from the earliest records of human activity on
the continent to the struggles for South Africa. Literature, music, art and
popular culture will be studied as ways of understanding the complex
contemporary issues faced by Africans. Offered in alternate years.

**_2400 Middle Eastern History and Society (1)._** An interdisciplinary survey
of major themes in Middle Eastern history from the advent of Islam to the
Persian Gulf conflict and the Madrid Peace Conference. Literature, music, art
and popular culture will be studied as ways of understanding the contemporary
issues faced by men and women of this region. Offered in alternate years.

**[3100 The Old South
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/History_3100.htm)** A study of the
development of the southern region of the United States from the time of
discovery to the beginning of the Civil War. Offered in alternate years.

**[3110 Civil War and Reconstruction
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/History_3110.htm)** An examination of
the political, economic, military, diplomatic, and social aspects of the Civil
War and Reconstruction periods. Offered in alternate years.

**_3120 The New South (1)._** A study of the development of the South after
the Civil War to the present. Offered in alternate years.

**[3130 American Revolution and Establishment of Federal Union, 1754-1789
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/History_3130.htm)** An examination of
the political, economic, social and cultural events which led to the American
colonial revolt against Britain and the establishment of the Federal union in
the Constitution of 1787. Offered occasionally.

**[3140 Age of Jefferson and Jackson, 1789-1848
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/History_3140.htm)** A continuation of
American Revolution and Establishment of Federal Union, this course will
examine the political, economic, social and cultural history of the United
States from the Administration of George Washington to the conclusion of the
Mexican War. Offered in alternate years.

**_3150 American Social and Intellectual History (1)._** An exploration of
aspects of American thought, values and society from the colonial period to
the present, focusing on the ways in which Americans have viewed themselves
and how American ideas and values have differed from those of other peoples.
Offered occasionally.

**_3160 Topics in American Culture (1)._** An interdisciplinary exploration of
a particular topic in American culture. The history, literature, thought,
music, art and popular culture of a period (such as a decade) or aspect of the
United States will be studied. Topics will change from year to year, and a
student may take the course more than once if the topics are different.
Offered occasionally.  
[The Forties and Fifties  
](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/40s_50s_syl.htm)  

**[3170 The Great Depression
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/depression.html)** An
interdisciplinary examination of American history and culture during the era
of the Great Depression (1929-1941), utilizing literature, film, music,
painting, and photography, as well as more traditional historical sources.
Offered in alternate years.

**[3180 The Sixties (1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/60ssyl.html)** An
interdisciplinary examination of American history and culture during the
1960s, utilizing literature, film, music, painting, and sculpture, as well as
more traditional sources. Offered in alternate years.

**[3190 Our Times: America Since 1970
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/ourtimes.html)** An interdisciplinary
examination of American history and culture from 1970 to the Present,
utilizing literature, film, music, painting, and sculpture, as well as more
traditional historical sources. Offered in alternate years.

**_3240 Topics in European Culture and History (1)._** An interdisciplinary
examination of a particular topic, period, or region of European culture.
Topics will change, and a student may take the course more than once if the
topics are different. Offered occasionally. [The History of
Sexuality.](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/sexuality.html)

**_3250 European Women (1)._** This course examines the experience of women
and the meaning of gender in Britain, France, and Germany from the onset of
industrialization through the period following the Second World War.
Particular attention will be paid to the following questions: the impact of
industrialization on the European family; the Victorian construction of
separate spheres; the role of the state in defining gender roles and
regulating sexuality; and the impact of war on gender relations. Offered
occasionally.

**[3260 Britain Since 1750
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/british.html)** A survey of Britain
since 1750, this course charts the forging of a national identity through
Britain's varied experiences of war, empire, religion, and consumerism. It has
as its focus the centrality of empire to British domestic politics and
culture. Offered in alternate years.

**_3310 Topics in African History (1)._** An interdisciplinary examination of
a particular topic, period, or region in African history. The topics, which
include "The Shaping of South Africa," and "Listening to the African Past,"
will change from year to year. A student may take the course more than once if
the topics are different. Offered occasionally.

**_3410 Topics in Middle Eastern History (1)._** An interdisciplinary
examination of a particular topic, period or region in Middle Eastern history.
The topics, which include "The Twice-Promised Land" and "Islam in History,"
will change from year to year. A student may take the course more than once if
the topics are different. Offered in alternate years.

**_3510 Ancient History (1)._** A survey of the Mediterranean world from the
Bronze Age to c.200 CE, with a topical stress on Classical Greece, and the
Late Roman Republic, and the Early Roman Empire, and with a methodological
stress on reading, analyzing, and interpreting ancient sources in translation.
Offered in alternate years.

**[3520 The Middle Ages
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/medieval_syllabus_1997.html)** A
survey of the history of Western Europe from c.200 to C.1300, with a topical
stress on the religious, political, economic, social, and cultural
developments of the High Middle Ages, and with a methodological stress on
reading, analyzing, and interpreting medieval sources in translation. Offered
in alternate years.  

**[3530 Renaissance and Reformation
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/ren_ref_syllabus.html)** A survey of
Western Europe from c.1300 to c.1600, with a topical stress on the crises of
the Late Middle Ages, the intellectual and artistic developments of the
Italian Renaissance, and the religious and political developments of the
Protestant Reformation, and with a methodological stress on reading,
analyzing, and interpreting original sources in translation. Offered in
alternate years.

**[3540 Early Modern Europe
(1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/earlymodern.html)** A survey of the
history of Western Europe from the 16th century to 1789, with a topical stress
on the Scientific Revolution, Constitutionalism and Absolutism, the
Enlightenment, and the coming of the French Revolution, and with a
methodological stress on reading, analyzing, and interpreting original sources
in translation. Offered in alternate years.

**_3750 Mythology and Southern History (1)._** An examination of the ways
myths embody the values Southerners have most intensely cherished. The myths
of class, gender, and race that emerged from the Old South and the New South
will be discussed in an historical context. Offered in alternate years.

**[4750 Senior Seminar (1).](http://home.millsaps.edu/~mcelvrs/seminar.html)**
An examination of how history is written and interpreted and of particular
problems in history. May be taken by students who have two courses in history
and is required of all history majors.  
  
#####  
  

* * *

[Home](index.html) | [Faculty](faculty.html) | [Activities](activities.html) |
[Links](links.html) | [Millsaps](http://www.millsaps.edu/) |
[Feedback](mailto:mcelvrs@millsaps.edu)  
Copyright  (C) 1998 | Edited 1 April 2000 |

* * *

