**HISTORY 2111: AMERICAN CIVILIZATION I COURSE SYLLABUS  
Summer 2002  
**

**INSTRUCTOR:** Dr. Corey Lesseig **OFFICE:** Building A, Room 142

**OFFICE HOURS** :

  
_Monday_  
  
9:15-10:45  
12:00-1:00 ASC  
| _  
Tuesday_  
  
9:15-10:45  
  
  
| _  
  
Wednesday_  
  
9:15-10:45  
12:00-1:00  
  
  
|  
_Thursday_  
  
9:15-10:45  
  
  
| _Friday_  
  
8:00-10:00  
  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
**PHONE:** Office 285-6138 ; Home 449-3261

**E-MAIL:[ _coless@waycross.edu_](mailto:%20coless@waycross.edu) **

**TEXTS:** James A. Henretta, et. al. , _America:  A Concise History_;  James
Cobb, _Georgia Odyssey_

**COURSE DESCRIPTION** : Students in History 2111 will explore the origins of
civilization in that portion of North America now known as the United States
of America. The course begins with a detailed examination of the original
"American" native culture and the effect of European exploration,
exploitation, and colonization on the land and its peoples. Students will
devote the bulk of their time investigating the Americanization of the
European colonists, the Revolution and nation building processes, the early
Republic, and the geographic and demographic and demographic growth of the
United States in the first half of the nineteenth century, and finally the
cataclysmic Civil War that threatened to tear the Union asunder. Throughout
the entire quarter, special emphasis will be accorded to Georgia history
within the broader scope of the history of the entire United States.

**STUDENT EVALUATION** **
GRADING SCALE**

Exam Unit One 25 %
A 100-90

Exam Unit Two 25 %
B 89-80

Exam Unit Three 25 %
C 79-70

Daily Activities and  Research / Writing Projects 25 %
D 69-60

                                                                                                                                  F 59-00

**ATTENDANCE:** Students are expected to be presented for each scheduled class
session. Daily roll will be taken, and if a student misses twenty percent of
the class meetings, he/she may be dropped from the class roll with a grade of
"WF." Consult the **_Waycross College Catalog_** for additional information
concerning class attendance.

**MAKE-UP POLICY** :  Homework and quizzes **MAY NOT BE MADE-UP** . In the
past, I have been quite open, understanding, and lenient in my make-up policy.
This policy has been grossly abused by your fellow students at Waycross
College, thus, you snooze, you lose. You will be able to drop **two** of your
lowest "Activity" grades. Exams may be made up in the case of a valid medical
or personal reason. ONE day is allotted for make-up exams.

**LATE WORK** :  Much like the aforementioned make-up policy, my acceptance of
late work has also been abused. Therefore, **NO LATE WORK -- NO EXCEPTIONS**.

**PLAGIARISM:** Plagiarism, intentional or unintentional, is prohibited.
Plagiarism is the stealing and passing off as your own the words or ideas of
another person. Further, the **_MLA Handbook_** states, " **Plagiarism may
take the form of repeating another's sentences as your own, adopting** **a**
**particularly apt phrase as your own, or even presenting someone else's line
of thinking in the development of a thesis as though it were your own."**
Plagiarism violations will be handled according to the procedures outlined in
the **_Waycross College Student Handbook._**

**ADA STATEMENT:** ** _Waycross College is committed to providing
accessibility to all students in accordance with ADA / 504 guidelines.
Students should contact the director of Student Life regarding
accessibility._**

**ACADEMIC SUPPORT CENTER:** The Academic Support Center (ASC) was created to
offer supplemental assistance to students enrolled in all courses at Waycross
College. The ASC offers a variety of services at all levels, ranging from
personal tutoring in math, reading, and composition skills to providing
handouts and supplementary materials on writing research papers and critiques,
taking essay and objective tests, and developing effective study techniques.

**DROPPING A COURSE WITHOUT PENALTY:** **** In order to officially drop a
course without penalty, a student must obtain and fill out a drop/add form
from the Registrar's Office **before** the designated date published in the
academic calendar.

**COURSE OUTLINE AND LEARNING OBJECTIVES and CHALLENGES**

**UNIT ONE:  The Creation of American Society, 1450-1775**

_America:  A Concise History_ , pp. 2-155; _Georgia Odyssey_ , pp. 1-9.

**Chapter One**

1\. Describe how the "Columbian Exchange" affected the lives of Eurpeans and
Native Americans?

2\. Discuss Native American social structure and culture.

3\. Evaluate the motivations for European overseas exploration and
colonization.  

**Chapter Two**

1\. Discuss the motives for emigration to the various English colonies.

2\. Evaluate the importance of tobacco in the social, political, and economic
survival of Virginia.

3\. Differentiate between life in Massachusetts and Virginia colonies.

4\. Compare the colonization experience of Georgia with that of the other
English colonies.

**Chapter Three**

1\. Explain the concept of "deference" and how conditions in North America
seemed to foster a greater degree of social mobility.

2.Under stand the elements of mercantilism and its affect on the colonists.

3\. Evaluate the "unthinking decision."  How and why did Europeans bring
Africans to American colonies as slaves?  

**  
Chapter Four**

1.Analyze regional differences in settlement pattersn, labor conditions, and
religious identity between New England and the Chesapeake.

2\. Evaluate the effects of mortality, chattel slavery, and geography on the
southern colonies.

3\. Assess the effects of the "Great Awakening" and Enligtenment on colonial
America.

**Chapter Five**

1\.  Assess how the Seven Years' War changed the relationship between Britain
and her North American colonies.

2\. Analyze and explain the intellectual, political, and economic rationales
colonists offered for their dissatisfaction with British rule between 1763 and
1775.

3\. Why did the tension and disagreements between the colonists and Britain
reach the state of open rebellion?  

**Unit One
Exam..................................................................................................................................................
September 25 and September 26, 2002  
**  
    
    
**Unit Two:  The New Republic, 1775-1820**

_America_ **,** 158-275; _Georgia Odyssey_ , 9-19.

**                     Learning Objectives**

**Chapter Six**

1\. Evaluate the reasons for the colonist finally declaring independence from
Great Britain.

2\. Assess the strengths and weakn esses of both Britain and the colonists at
the outbreak of hostilities.

3\. Understand and explain the reasons for the colonial victory in the War for
Independence.

**Chapter Seven**

1\.  Understand the strengths and weaknesses of the Articles of Confederation
government.

2\. Assess the arguments of the Federalists and Anti-Federalists.

3\. Evaluate the "revolutionary" and "reactionary" elements of the
Constitutional Convention

4\. Analyze the differences between the different visions of the proper
functioning of the republic held by Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton.  

**  
Chapter Eight**

1\. Explain the policies of Republican presidents between 1801 and 1820 and
contrast these with the policies of the Federalists.

2\. Explain the origins and operation of the emerging market economy in
America.

3\. Discuss the causes of the War of 1812.  How was the was a "Second War of
Independence?"

**Chapter Nine**

1\. Discuss how the role of women changed in republican society.

2\. Describe how Protestant Christianity acted as a force for social change.

3\. Disucss the characteristics of African-American slave culture in the
antebellum South.

**  
Unit Two
Exam...................................................................................................................
October 23 and October 24, 2002  
  
Unit Three: Economic Revolution and Sectional Strife, 1820-1877**

_America_ **,** 276-455; _Georgia Odyssey_ , 9-19.

**                     Learning Objectives**

**Chapter Ten**

1\.  Evaluate the affect of industrialization on the American economy and
American social and political culture.

2\.  Describe the elements of the transportation revolution.

3\. Explain the various migrations in Ameica during the first half of the
nineteenth century.

4\.  Describe the various forces coalescing behind the banner of "Manifest
Destiny."

**  
Chapter Eleven**

1\.  Analyze and explain the rise of popular politics during the first half of
the nineteenth century.

2\. Explain the significance of Andrew Jackson.  What were the trademarks of
the "Age of Jackson?"  

**Chapter  Twelve**

1\. Describe the transcendentalist and utopian movements of the nineneenth
century.

2\. Discuss how and why abolitionism became such a powerful reform movement.  

**Chapter Thirteen**  

1\.  Evaluate the prophetic element of John Calhoun's warning that Mexico was
"forbidden fruit' for southern slave supporters.

2\. Discuss the expectations and motivations of various groups regarding the
Kansas-Nebraska Act.

3\. Explain the significance of the election of Abraham Lincoln.  

**Chapter Fourteen**

1\. Discuss the stated war aims and military strategies of both the Union and
Confederacy at the onset of the war.

2\. Evaluate the relative strengths and weakneses of each side in the
conflict.

3\.  Assess the outcome of the Civil War.  Why did the South lose?

4\.  Explain the significance of emancipation on the conduct and outcome of
the war.  

****

**Chapter Fifteen**

1\. Discuss the different visions of reconstruction held by Lincoln, Johnson,
Congressional Republicans, and southerners.

2\. Analyze and explain the expectations held by African Americans and the
realities they encountered during Reconstruction.

3\.  Assess the statement that Reconstruction was a "tragic failure?"  
  

**Final Exam..................................
.................................................................................................................TBA**

