SYLLABUS

Southern New Hampshire University

Distance Education

Introduction to the Humanities Part I, Prehistory - Renaissance

FAS 201 x7532

Term 6B - 2002

Class inclusive dates July 1- Aug. 23

Instructor Information:

o Hannah H. Judson

o h_judson@minerva.snhu.edu or hannahjudson@earthlink.net

Textbook:

Fiero, Gloria. The Humanistic Tradition, Volume One, Prehistory to the Modern
World, 4th Edition, New York: McGraw Hill, 2002.

ISBN 0-07-249382-8

Available from SNHU bookstore.



Course Description and Goals

This is the first half of a two-semester Introduction to the Humanities. It
may be taken independently of the second half, Humanities 202. Humanities is
both an elective course in the College Core and a basic survey required of
Liberal Arts students. Although it focuses on the visual arts of painting,
sculpture and architecture in historical context, it is an interdisciplinary
course, showing links among those arts and literature, music, religion,
philosophy, and science. Humanities 201 begins with the Egyptian era and ends
in the Renaissance.

Among the works you will experience in this class are several that have the
potential to be life-changing experiences. At the least, if you approach these
materials with good will and a desire to expand your mind you can expect to
come away with new perspectives and a greater ability to perceive cultural
achievements with critical thought and emotional response.

This is a Writing Intensive course, which means a minimum of 5000 words or 20
pages of written work will be produced. This does not included posting to the
discussion board. In addition to the weekly requirements of participation in
the discussion board, there will be weekly written assignments as well as one
research paper.

Class goals: By undertaking extensive reading and writing assignments and
participating in the ongoing classroom dialogue, the student will gain
knowledge of historical movements, fine arts and literature of the eras we
cover, as well as make comparisons between the past and contemporary art,
history and society.

Student Objectives:

\- Define major movements in art history

\- Illustrate how historical movements and the humanities and fine

arts are interrelated

\- Analyze, research and write about works of art



Course Structure:

On a weekly basis you will complete extensive readings, written exercises and
essays, participate in the group discussion, and study any assigned additional
materials. A 5 page research paper of a related topic is due week 6, (no
extensions). Additionally, you are strongly encouraged to visit a museum which
exhibits work from the periods we are studying, for the week seven writing
assignment.

The week begins on Monday and ends on Sunday night at midnight, Eastern Time.
Each week your written assignments are due at this time.

Reading: Give yourself plenty of time to complete, understand and enjoy the
reading assignments. The textbook for this class has wonderful reproductions,
which should be studied along with the text.

Writing: Through your writing you will be showing me the discoveries and
connections you have made between works of art, styles of art, historical
eras, philosophy, literature, music, and our own time. Each week you will be
assigned questions from the text. Some weeks will also bring one

"Writing About Art" exercise, exploring topics such as describing art with
formal design terms, comparing and contrasting works of art, discussing
political influence in an artist's work, discussing materials, and more.

I will expect your writing to be free of grammatical errors and well written.

Homework and papers that suffer from gross errors in writing may not be
accepted and will certainly be downgraded.

Sources must be properly acknowledged in MLA style according to the SNHU
source documentation handbook, available on-line. See the Academic Honesty
policy that follows below.

Finished assignments should be placed in the drop box on or before the due
date.

Discussion: I will post weekly discussion questions to the Blackboard
discussion forum. The class will also take turns leading discussion. You are
expected to visit the forum often, read the questions, answers, and other
postings, and offer your own questions, answers and comments according to your
understanding of the reading and illustrations.

You will be graded on the quality and quantity of your comments (3 per week,
minimum, and posted on at least two different days, preferably three or more).
If your postings for the week don't meet these minimum requirements, (three
postings on a minimum of two days) you will not receive any posting points for
that week.

Exceeding the 3-posting minimum will add points to your week's

discussion grade (assuming high quality). Fewer than the minimum will hurt
your grade. Postings are to be consistent, week to week. Don't expect to boost
your grade by sudden, end of semester activity. However, if you are away for
one week and can't post all three comments, it will be OK to make them up the
next week -- once. Be sure to give me advance warning.

Your goal is not to simply read the question and look for the right

answer. My questions are posted as a starting point for the dialogue. Respond
to one another's comments, ideas and points of view. Frequently there is no
"right" answer. Also, your postings should be of substance. I will delete
"clutter" from the discussion, i.e., postings that contain nothing more than
"I agree" or "well said."

Museum visit: You are strongly encouraged to visit a museum and view works of
art from the periods covered in this class, in order to complete Week Seven's
"Writing About Art" essay. The Museum of Fine Arts in Boston is the best in
New England for our purposes, but virtually any major art museum will do. If
you cannot make a museum or gallery visit, there is an alternate assignment.

Research Paper: You are asked to research further a topic of your own
choosing, relevant to this course. I would like you to inform me of your
intended topic by week 2, and also let me know the title, author and publisher
of 2 books (or other non-internet publications) you have found from which you
can begin your research. You may use the internet for some of your research
but at least 2 sources must be from printed matter. Papers are due week 6, and
should be the equivalent of 5 double spaced pages.

Timeliness: Homework and papers turned in after their due dates will be
downgraded. All assignments are made public sufficiently in advance that you
should be able to work ahead.

Grading Policies

Grades are based on the quality and timeliness of your written work and
discussion comments.

Homework and written assignments: 45% of grade

Discussion participation 25% of grade

Research paper 10%

Midterm Essay: 10%

Final Essay: 10%

A 95-100

A- 90-94

B+ 86-89

B 83-85

B- 80-82

C+ 76-79

C 73-75

C- 70-72

D+ 65-69

D 60-64

F 00-59



Assignments & Schedule

Due weekly:

\- Questions from the reading assignments.

These are mostly essay responses.

\- "Writing About Art" exercise (when assigned)

\- Participation in discussion (no less than three days per week)

Research Paper.

Topic and 2 published resources due Week 2

Final Paper is due Week 6.

Museum Visit: This is not required but strongly encouraged, for

completion of one "Writing About Art" exercise, due Week Seven.





Week 1: The First Civilizations

Chapter 1 pages 19-35

Chapter 2 pages 36-57

Chapter 3 pages 58-65



Week 2: The Classical Legacy

Chapter 4 pages 67-106

Chapter 5 pages 107-123

-Inform me of your topic, and two relevant published (non-internet) resources. 



Week 3: The Classical Legacy, Rome and China

Chapter 6 pages 131-159

Chapter 7 pages 161-172

-Where are you going for your fieldtrip? 



Week 4: The Middle Ages

Chapter 8 pages 175-190

Chapter 9 pages 191-218

Midterm Essay (10% of grade)



Week 5: The Medieval East and West

Chapter 10 pages 219-239

Chapter 11 pages 241-267



Week 6: The Medieval West

Chapter 12 pages 268-290

Chapter 13 pages 291-317

Research paper is due



Week 7: The Renaissance

Chapter 15 pages 349-372

Chapter 16 pages 373-375, 386 "Renaissance Women"-393

Chapter 17 pages 394-428



Week 8: A Brave New World

Chapter 18 pages 435-442, 457-472

Chapter 19 pages 473-486

Final Essay (10% of grade)



Attendance Policy

While Distance Education classes are generally asynchronous, they are not
correspondence or self paced. Students must attend (defined as logging in to
the blackboard classroom and interacting; posting questions, thoughts,
homework assignments, etc.) class during the first week, and at least three
times per week thereafter. Failure to attend during the first week will result
in an automatic withdraw. Extended absences, defined as failure to post into
the Blackboard classroom for more than five days, must be coordinated with the
instructor.

Academic Honesty Policy

Southern New Hampshire University requires all students to adhere to high
standards of integrity in their academic work. Activities such as plagiarism
and cheating are not acceptable and will not be tolerated by the college.
Students involved in such activities are subject to serious disciplinary
action. For further explanation on this topic, please refer to the Southern
New Hampshire University catalog.

Online Course Structure / Blackboard Tools

Your course is organized through Blackboard CourseInfo. Below are the tools in
your class, how we will be using them, and expectations associated with each.
Take time to acclimate yourself to the tools and contact me if have questions.

Announcements : This is the "home page" which will appear every time you sign
into the class. Any important weekly announcements will be listed on this
page.

Course Documents : We won't use this button.

Assignments : I place assignments in weekly folders. There are questions and
essay topics based on the week's reading. Occasionally I will place readings
or web sites to peruse which will augment the weekly reading assignment.

Communication: There are several sub-sections under this button.

"Send E-Mail" This is an email service within our course structure which
allows anyone in the class to send email to one classmate or to a selected
group or to the entire class. The email allows you to

communicate easily with classmates or with the instructor. Email

accounts are already set up for this course.

Discussion Board: This is a VERY IMPORTANT location and we will use the
"Discussion Board" on a regular basis each week. All of our weekly dialogue as
a class will take place in a weekly " Forum" within the Discussion Board.

Each week I will create a new Forum entitled "Week # Discussion" on the class
"Discussion Board" for that week's discussion. Each participant can post
messages on the Discussion Board. You can

also start a new Message Forum if necessary, and you can edit

own messages but not the messages posted by others.

Student Roster: This is a class list with email addresses.

Student Pages: This is a list of all members of the class. If you point and
click on people's names, you can see each person's individual Web page for the
course (see "Student Tools" button for how to create your personal Web page as
part of the course).

Group Pages: We will not have "sub-groups" in this class. Therefore there will
be no "group pages."

External Links: I will post various Web site links which will be used to
assist you with homework assignments. This is a "read- only" part of the
course.

Student Tools: The drop box is located here. You will pass in all work to me
via the drop box and I will return your graded work here.

Off Campus Library Services



Students with Disabilities

Southern New Hampshire University is committed to and concerned with meeting
the needs of students challenged by physical, emotional and/or learning
disabilities. At the beginning of each term, or as soon as you become aware of
a disability, we encourage you to request those accommodations, which you need
to meet your academic goals. To ensure that all of your needs are met,
Southern New Hampshire University recommends that you meet with one of the
following individuals who will assist you in making contact with appropriate
faculty members and support services staff regarding accommodations:











Off Campus Library Services

Off-Campus Library Services (OCLS) has been established to provide holdings,
materials, and services for faculty and students at continuing education
centers and in distance education programs. A barcode is required to access
materials. To obtain your barcode you can access a request form online. For
further information or inquiries please contact Off-Campus Services Librarian
Ed Daniels at [mailto:ocls@minerva.nhc.edu](mailto:ocls@minerva.nhc.edu) or go
to <http://de.snhu.edu/library/ocls.htm>

Fax: 603-645-9685 attn: OCLS Phone: 603-645-9605 ext. 2163

Technical Support

Support for technology and Blackboard software issues can be found at
http://www.dist-ed.nhc.edu/tutor/helpdesk/depfront.htm This site is a useful
resource with information and solutions to common technical problems.
Questions related to technology and Blackboard software issues should be
directed to de-support@minerva.nhc.edu or by calling the Computing Services at
603 645 9628.

