A  
CASCADE  
OF TALENT-  
OUR FACULTY AND STAFF

|

![](falls.gif)  
  
---|---  
  
* * *

GRACE ALBERT

Northern Michigan University B.A., Senior Secretary II, is usually the first
person you will encounter when you visit to the Psychology Department, whether
by phone or in person. You will quickly find her smiling assistance and
services invaluable. Her major interests are students, faculty and visitors to
the department. Her outside interests include gardening, doll houses, wee wild
animals and birds. She also enjoys being owned by her two cats (J.J. &
Patches), and camping with her husband , Albert.





PAUL ANDRONIS

University of Chicago Ph.D. and Associate Professor, is a specialist in
experimental and applied behavior analysis who serves as Coordinator of our
Behavior Analysis option, and teaches courses in the area. His research on
where novel patterns of behavior come from, and on animal behavior processes,
guide his interests in widespread applications of behavioral technology to
important social, clinical, and personal behavior problems. Paul and his wife,
Lynn, have two daughters, and a variety of interests that keep the family both
busy and enthusiastic. He particularly enjoys research, teaching, classical
music, fishing, and family activities. [<home page>](Andronishome.htm)  





ALAN BEAUCHAMP

University of New Mexico Ph.D. and Associate Professor, is a developmental
psychologist whose teaching interests include developmental and personality
theory, abnormal psychology, psychological testing, and experimental research
and design. His current research is focused on understanding how early
experience relates to both neuromaturation and cognitive development. He
enjoys hiking and cross country skiing with his wife, Kathleen, and son, Rory,
and is attempting to develop skills as a wildlife photographer.  





SHEILA BURNS

University of California at Berkeley Ph.D. and Associate Professor, is an
experimental psychologist whose teaching interests include human learning and
cognition, statistics, and personality theory. Her current research is
concerned with the factors which contribute to forgetting and the role of
general verbal, spatial and analytical skills in associative learning. She is
married to Charles Leith and shares extra-curricular activities with him and
their two children. She is especially fond of "hot" Mexican food and good
movies.  





CHARLES LEITH

University of California at Berkeley Ph.D. and Professor, is a learning
psychologist whose teaching interests include learning, cognition, thinking,
and perception. He has received national recognition for his research on the
various factors involved in discrimination learning. He developed many of the
key programs used in our computerized laboratories (which have received
international recognition as good examples of applied educational technology).
He shares many activities with his psychologist wife, Sheila, and their son
and daughter. His fascination with anything that flies--as long as he is not
in it-- has led to the construction and sometimes flight of many model hot air
balloons.



 MICHAEL MCGUIRE

Texas Tech University PhD and Post-doctoral teaching fellow.



BRADLEY OLSON

Texas Christian University Ph.D. and Associate Professor has teaching
interests that include social and clinical psychology, personality assessment,
and motivation. His research is in the domain of intrinsic motivation with a
specific interest in the effects of competition. He has applied his findings
in his work with the United States Olympic Education Center with various
sports including badminton, skiing, boxing, and speed skating. He attended the
1992 and 1994 Winter Olympics as a sport psychologist consulting the short
track speed skating team. He has also worked with various collegiate sports,
and was the sport psychologist for the 1993 Northern Michigan University
Volleyball Team, the NCAA champions in Division II. He also enjoys
participating in sports including basketball and horseback riding. [<home
page>](olsonhome.htm)





CYNTHIA PROSEN

University of Michigan Ph.D. and Assistant Professor, is an experimental
psychologist in sensory neural - physiological psychology. Her research
interests include auditory and neural sensory systems. At present she
maintains two research laboratories and is collaborating on a research project
with colleagues at the Salk Institute, Johns Hopkins University and Harvard
University. Her teaching interests include neuroscience, physiological
psychology, experimental design, child psychology, and gender. She enjoys a
myriad of outside interests with her husband Tom (a physician) and their three
children. Link to Prosen [Home
Page](http://vm.nmu.edu/CPROSEN:HTTP/HOME.HTML).  



JOHN RENFREW

Southern Illinois University Ph.D. and Professor, is a biopsychologist whose
interests include physiological psychology, behavior modification and
aggression. His research on brain stimulation and aggression has received
international recognition, prompting presentations in many countries including
a Fulbright professorship in Uruguay, and led to supervising the first
Fulbright Scholar to come to NMU. His wife, Ileana (a Ph.D. in Spanish) and
their two adult sons fully enjoy traveling, lecturing, and exchanging ideas
with people in other countries, especially in Latin America. His sedentary
entertainment involves reading and music, while his exercise includes biking,
sailing, and Nordic skiing. He is on sabbatical leave for the 1998-1999
academic year, in Spain.



MAYA SEN



University of Minnesota, Institute of Child Development Ph.D. and Assistant
Professor. My research interests include gender development in very young
children, how knowledge and attitudes about gender change throughout the
lifespan, people's attitudes towards and responses to gender-atypical
behavior, and the characteristics and adaptation of tomboys and effeminate
boys. I enjoy reading mystery novels, hiking in the mountains, and spending
time with my two cats, Leia and Zoey. http//vm.nmu.edu/msen/http/home.html





KAREN SUKSI

Colorado State University Ph.D. and Professor has teaching interests in early
child development.



YVES TURGEON

Universite of Quebec at Montreal PhD, and Post-doctoral teaching fellow.



HARRY WHITAKER

University of California at Los Angeles Ph.D. and Professor, serves as Head of
the Department (since July 1,1997). He is Editor-in-Chief and founder of two
journals, Brain and Language, Brain and Cognition. For his research in
neuropsychology and neurolinguistics he was elected a Fellow of Division 6
(Behavioral Neuroscience and Comparative Psychology) of the American
Psychological Association in 1986 and for his research in the history of
psychology he was elected a Fellow of Division 26 (History) in 1997\. PY300,
History of Psychology, is his major teaching assignment. His outside interests
include classical music, chess, backgammon, boating, science-fiction movies,
papier mache and taking care of his cat, "paintbrush." Click for his [<Home
Page>](WHIT.HTM) and here for a [<Link to History of Psychology
Laboratory>](http://www-
instruct.nmu.edu/psychology/hwhitake/content/PY300X.html)





RETIRED but not forgotten!

  
PRYSE H. DUERFELDT  
University of Iowa Ph.D., former Department Head and Professor Emeritus,
retired in May 1997.  
  
CONNIE HAMM DUNCANSON  
Southern Illinois University Ph.D., Professor Emeritus, retired in May 1997.  
  
HARLYN D. HAMM  
Southern Illinois University Ph.D., Professor Emeritus, retired in 1987.  
  
STEVE ANDERSON PLATT  
University of Illinois Ph.D. and former Professor of Psychology, retired in
June, 1998.  

* * *

[![\[Back to Psychology Home\]](go-home.gif)](PSYCHHM.HTM)

